THE ENCOVNTER AGAINST M. PARSONS, BY A REVIEW OF HIS LAST SOBER RECKONING, And
his Exceptions urged in the TREATISE OF HIS MITIGATION.

Wherein moreover is inserted:

1. A Confession of some Romanists, both concerning the particular
Falsifications of principal Romanists, as Namely, BELLARMINE, SVAREZ, and
others: As also concerning the General fraud of that Church, in corrupting of
Authors. 2. A Confutation of Slanders, which BELLARMINE urged against
Protestants. 3. A Performance of the Challenge, which Mr. PARSONS made, for the
Examining of sixty Fathers, cited by COCCIVS for proof of Purgatory; to show
thirty one of them to have been either Apocrypha, or corrupted, or wrested,
4. A Censure of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Pattern of a Protestant, by
one once termed the Moderate Answerer. 5. An handling of his Question of
Mental Equivocation (After his boldness with the L. COOK) upon occasion of
the most memorable, and feyned Yorkshire Case of Equiuocating; and of his
raging against D. KINGS Sermon.
Published by Authority.

JOB. 19. 2.

You have reproached me, and are not ashamed; you are fierce against me.

JOB. 6. 24.

Teach me and I will hold my tongue; cause me to understand wherein I have
erred.

LONDON

Printed for John Bill.

To the High and Mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, Earl of Chester, Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER, etc.
I Did think it a matter not altogether unseasonable, ( most Mighty Prince) if
presently after the solemnization of your Princely Creaetion with military
spectacles (wherein innumerable beholders did, in your rejoicing, congratulate
both the happy comfort of your Royal Father, our Gracious Sovereign, and the
hopeful joy of this whole land) I likewise should present unto you a kind of
military Encounter; which is, although less solemn, yet more serious, because
it oppugneth an Adversary unto your Highness, not in a counterfeit show and
semblance, but in deed and real practice: one, who labored to undermine the
right both of his Majesty's possessions, and of your future succession in this
land: then whom this Age has not found any Scribe more prompt and plausible,
or yet a more perswasiue and powerful Inchaunter.

For it is he who once durst exclude, in his Doleman, the Royal line of Henry
the seventh from the Crown See his book entitled Dolman, part. 2. cap. 5.
and cap. 10.
of this Kingdom, and interested the Infanta of Spain in the right thereof;
and yet found much credit with some: notwithstanding he, even the same he, no
so ner understood of our Kings peaceable and prosperous entrance into this
land, and joyful establishment in his Throne, but forthwith changing his Copy,
offered to give an assurance, that what soever had been See his Treatise of
Three Conuersions of England, in the Additions upon the news of the succession
of the King of Scotland to the Crown of England, number. 8. which Addition was
printed, Anno 1603.
written or done by any Catholic, which with some might brcede disgust, was
directed only to the end that his Majesty might be a Catholic, before he
should be a King. Which two how can they consist? for either must he have in
the former abused his Mistress the Infanta, or in the later deluded our
Sovereign King James. He likewise in his Mitigation protested and promised
loyal subjection in the behalf of all Romanists, and was held a credible
Proctor for his Clients; yet since, in this his last Reckoning (bringing in, as
it were, a sharp axe to behead Kings of a contrary profession) he proclaims
that none may be an head in Christian communion who is excommunicate, and
notwithstanding herein also he wanted not an applause; So potent a Mercury was
he.

Of him we hear it now daily noised by some that say, Our Adversary M.
Parsons is dead: which report may be believed but only in part; for although
it be possible that M. Parsons be dead, yet will not our Adversary die, as long
as his books, or cause shall live in the hands and hearts of his favorites.
As for me, at the first hearing of these news I knew not well whether rather to
rejoice, that he was not suffered any longer to delude the simple; or grieve,
that he was taken away before that he could see his own errors, which are
very foul, and in this Encounter fully discovered: I say no more, so far am
I from imitating his spirit, by insulting upon the Ghosts of the dead.

Concerning your self ( most Noble, and renouned Prince) it is the longing
desire of all them, who are like piously affected, as were Gods people, when
they prayed for the long life both of Nabuchodnosor, and also Baruch. 1. 11.
of Baltasar his son; that you would stand upon two guardes, the one is
Confidence in God, the other is wise and due Providence under God. For God, who
was for many years so powerful and glorious, in defending his truth in the
weakness of a woman (Q. Elizabeth, the King of Queens) in time of extreme
hostility, against a most potent enemy, even when he boasted of his Invincible
Navy, and made that godly and thrice noble Deborah to singe of the vast Ocean
after the old tune of the River Kishon, to wit, The River Kishon Iud. 5. 21.
swept them away, even the ancient River, the River Kishon: the same God can
preserve you from the practices of The malignant, for the Lord of Hoasts is his
name.

Notwithstanding know likewise ( worthy and mighty Prince) concerning
Providence under God; that it was the voice of the Tempter who said, He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee, leaving out the Luc. 4. 10.
next words, In omnibus vijs tuis, in all thy ways; by which clause were
signified the prescribed Rules of Gods providence, and use of the means which
he has ordained for man's preservation; the neglect whereof is not Confidence,
but Presumption, and, in very deed, that ver. 9.
Mitte te deorsum.

I need not to say much more, but that there daily sounds in the ears of
our Land and State, the report of two Accidents, which, by the mercy of God,
may be as it were, the sound of two warning-pieces, to awake all out of deaf
security; the one is the late bar barous and tragical end of that puissant
French King; the other, that Acheronticall Powder Plot, the very belch of
Beelzebub: therefore will your Highness stand attent unto the gracious voices
of the Highest, and dispose of your ways accordingly. That which belongs
unto me, I shall never cease to perform, even my humble prayers unto God for
his right hand of protection over you, both under, and after the most happy
government of our most gracious Sovereign.

Our Lord Jesus preserve you to the glory of his saving grace.

Your Highnesses in all (...) Observance, TH. MORTON.

To the Christian Reader.
IF peradventure thou have not known (good Reader) the book which is
inscribed, A sober and quiet Reckoning, wherein M. Parsons has bespotted his
Adversary T. M. with the black marks of Falsifications; I shall now desire
thee to take some notice thereof, and to compare it with this Encounter, and
then to judge what interest I may have in that saying, Aug.
Qui volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi. In the Reuiew of which
Reckoning I called to mind a short Lib. Verisimil. Theolog. etc. ex Gilb.
Cogn. lib. 1. Narrat.
History of a man, who farmed a custom and tallage, which was taken at a
bridge of all such passengers as were either diseased, or else notoriously
deformed: So it was that one, that passed over the bridge, who had distortum
vultum, was called upon to pay a penny; which the passenger refused to pay: The
Toller caps the fellow, and with that perceives that he had an other disease
on his head, called Alopecia, and therefore he demands of the party an other
penny; but the Trauailer resists, and struggleth with the Toller, yet being
not able to make his part good, is laid along on the ground, where, by some
disadvantage, he bewraied an other disease, which he called the Hernia, and
thereupon was charged to pay a third penny: there was no remedy, the custom
must be paid.

In some like sort shall my Reader (in the perusal of this Encounter) find
the matter to fall forth between me and M. Parsons, wherein may be observed,
that the more he contendeth and struggleth, the more he intangleth himself,
and bewrays his own diverse kinds of defaults. As first, to inueigh against
me, as a passionate and intemperate man, whom his own M. Brereley, and his
fellow in their book called, The Protestants Apology, etc. the second Edition
Praefa. to the Reader. page 10.
Apologists have held to be a man not intemperate: and for him to give that
censure, whom his own Quodlib. page 236.
fellow noted to be a man of a very violent and unquiet spirit; and who
himself, confesses as it were his own intemperancy, by wishing that in his
Mitigation he Reck page 669
had not used such asperity of speeches against me. This shows that he had
some cause to betake himself to a more sober and quiet Reckoning: wherein,
notwithstanding, he deals so violently with me, (as my Reader will easily
perceive) that he often falsifieth the Title of his book, not only by heaping
up more grievous Acerbities, then formerly he had done, but also by setting
against me Gretzerus to plow upon my back, who is a stranger and a Jesuit, and
so profuse and professed a railer, that Cum vnum ta^tum exemplum tuae
defensionis ( he speaks unto Gretzer) in Frisiam allatum esset, hocipsum
propter nefandam maledicentiam non inueniret emptorem. Lubbertus Replic. lib.
1. cap. 1.
whereas but one of his books was to be sold in West-Friesland, no man would
buy it, because of the horrible slanders and railings which are therein. In all
which kind of raging tempests, I have learned to cast this Anchor; Non qui
patitur, sed qui facit iniuriam, miser est: And so I leave this default of M.
Parsons to receive that name, which our Reader shall think to be most properly
agreeable thereunto.

In further examining of him he bewrayed an (...) both by absurdities in
Syllogizing; as concluding of Are, in stead of Make; and being earnestly
charged therewith, has not yielded so much as one of his barefaced groates
for discharge; And also by certain Grammatical quiddites, whilst as he makes
Vere, being joined with Celsus (as it signifies a proper name) to be no true
Latin; and the translating of Praesidium, Praeseruation, and not Defense, to
be false English; and diverse other the like crotchets has be enforced in this
his new Reckoning.

Thirdly, there appeared a far greater fault, even that (...) whereby he
charge me with no less then fifty wilful falsehoods; as though he had
learned of the Steward in the Gospel to Luc. 16. v. 6.
Sit down and write fifty, whom for that cause his Lord termed wise, but yet
unjust, unjust to his Master, and wise for himself. Such unjust wisdom have
I found to abound in M. Parsons, who both in his book of Mitigation, and in
his new Reckoning obiecteth wilful falsehoods so unconscionably, that he
himself (as is proved in this The marginall notes will point almost at every
one.
Encounter) is entangled in far more then fifty witting (except some had
rather I should say witless) untruths.

Of this kind of dealing I have more cause to complain perhaps, then some
others, because I find strange measures offered unto me by my Adversaries. For
M. Parsons his bent to traduce me has been such, as sometime to condemn me
for omitting words, which were by me expressly set down; being in one place so
violently transported with passiont, as to lay to my charge the word Fortasse,
for not translating it, perhaps, although in the very same place I translated
and englished it twice, Peradventure; which he could not but see, because once
in the same place he repeated it accordingly: But it seems that in leuelling
at me, as at his mark, he was only left-eyed.

Also (which is a profound step of malignity) he diverse times obiecteth for
wilful falsities the Omissions of such clauses, which, if they had been
alleged to the full, might have made much more for the advantage of my cause.
This was no more honest dealing then was that of the wife of Putiphar against
Joseph; He, for fear to bedrawnby her pulling him by the cloak to her unchaste
bed, hastened away, and left his Cloak, a pledge and token of his chastity:
she, upon his flight, cries out, and complains that he came to abuse her,
and for proof she says, Genesis 9.
Behold his garment; turning the same Cloak contrarily into an argument of
his villainy, and a Cloak of her own dishonesty.

Again, whereas upon the finding out of mine own Escapes, I gave my Reader
Aduertisments thereof in the end of my books, and added Corrections thereunto;
there my The Romish Apologists in their second Edition of their Protestants
Apology, concerning the testimony of Delrius And their Moderate Answerer in his
late pattern of a Protestant, about the legitimation of Q. Mary and Q.
Elizabeth.
Adversaries (yet I cannot accuse M. Parsons of this guilt) being directed to
my error by mine own Advertisement, do forthwith vpbraid me with it, never
giving any notice that it has been corrected. So dealt the enemies of
Sampson, who first plowed with his own Heifer, then (which is spoken of the
same men) Iud. 10. 20.
The Philistimes are upon thee Sampson. I pray God that they fall not upon the
imprecation, which was extended unto the imprecation, which was extended unto
the enemies of David, who not regarding his repentaence for his fault, and the
amendment of his life, did point only at his escape, saying, So, so would we
have it.

But yet M. Parsons is in another point no less inexcuseble, whilst (which is
his common guise) when four or six, and sometimes nine testimonies of his
own Authors are objected against him, for matter of a point in Controversy,
he singleth out some one alleg ation, wherein he labors by art to make at
least some show and color of misprision, and then dismisseth all the other
witnesses as dumb men, and passes over the whole cause it self without
mention at all; and so diverse times Altercando res non dirimitur, sed
perimitur. Can this be a tolerable manner of proceeding, in the disquisition
of any truth? This is not all, but (especially of late times) when our
Adversaries are muzzelled, as it were with the confessions of their own
Doctors, objected for the justification of our cause, they (as the Egyptian
Dogs are said to lap here and there of the river Nilus, and run their
way) do catch and snatch only at pieces, and carpe at some allegations,
crying out (although never so falsely) against Falsehood, and then behold The
Book, forsooth, is answered. In all these proceedings they are, I confess, in
their generation, wise, but still unjust Adversaries: And all unjust wisdom
(we know) is before God just nothing else, but miserable and damnable folly.

Fourthly and lastly, by much wrestling we have discovered two other evils, the
one is an Hernia, even the disposition of disloyalty in very extraordinary
manner brusting out, and betraying diuerswhere evident Symptoms thereof: And
the other is his Mental Equivocation, which we may call Alopecia; the rather
because M. Parsons himself does take an argument, for justification of it,
from the Fox, which, by instinct of nature, can turn and skip forward and
backward, to secure himself. Upon which occasion I have in one place entreated
my Reader to accompany me in the Hunting of this Fox.

Howbeit, thou may not imagine (good Reader) that this whole Encounter is
spent in vying and reuying of imputed falsehoods, or in our wrastlings
together, and laying one the other in the dust: but here are inserted many
other points of better consequence; as first, An answer to their challenge,
for (...) some Romanists to be (...) which is performed by examples in their
chiefest Writers, by the confessions and complaints of their own men; together
with an acknowledgment of their art in corrupting of books. Secondly, an
answer to the slanders which Cardinal Bellarmine fasteneth upon Protestants,
by imputing sundry Heresies unto them. Thirdly, an answer to a Challenge made
by Mr. Parsons, concerning the Romish abuses of the testimonies of Fathers, for
proof of Purgatory, and that by the confession of their own Writers; which is
amply discharged, both against the allegations of Bellarmine, and of Iodocus
Coccius. Fourthly, an answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled A pattern of a
Protestant; wherein the Author makes himself the Pattern of an arrogant,
ignorant, intemperate, and unconscionable man. Fifthly, there are diverse large
Tracts, in confutation of Mental Equivocation; especially in the answer to
his Appendix, wherein there is displayed the egregious forgery of an
Equivocation, in that memorable Yorke-shire case; together with a freeing of
the holy Scriptures, the Oracles of truth, from that profanation, which he
draws upon them, by pretending that they patronize this black art. Sixthly,
and lastly (to omit many other important coincidents) their doctrine of
Rebellion is handled; In consutation whereof (for this was the cause of all
their malignancy against me) I was contented to be condemned for a most false
accuser of them, upon condition that they by the events would not justify
their former Assertions. But alas, still they set their Practizes as seals to
their Positions.

Yet as when Bees begin to cast, men use to throw up dust in the air, to
hinder their sight, least they should fly from their homes, and set in some
other place, so deal our Adversaries; for whenever by any not orious
practice they become so obnoxious, as to cause their people to suspect their
doctrine, and to incl. ne to our Profession: then, for staying of their
departure, they in policy cast abroad in the air some forged Reports of some
strange Miracles wrought in the honor of their cause; thus the fame of Garncts
Straw was (...) to alley the smoke of the Powdertreason; and late the noise of
Devils ((...) it is said) carrying English Ministers away in a Coach, has been
raised to hinder the last sbrill sound of that Royal blood.

I return to my Encounter against Mr. Parsons his Reckoning, to let thee
understand (good Reader) that I have used him more calmely then, (I will not
say) my cause (for, alas, Who am I, that I may not be iniuried?) but
peradventure, then thou will think the Cause it self would permit: And
especially in the very entrance into the Answer unto his Appendix (when first
I heard of any certainty of his death) the point of my Style did begin, in a
manner, to die with him; for so I thought it my duty, least I might seem [
Caeco scandalum] to deal too personally against him, who could not answer for
himself.

Secondly, to my own self I say, Aug.
Non est intuendum quam amarum, sed quam falsum quod audio, and quam verax pro
cujus nomine audio.

Thirdly, to my Adversaries I say, that by their practices in carping at
allegations, whilst they sought to put out the candles, they have but topped
them, and made them shine more clearly; as may evidently appear by this
Encounter. Notwithstanding, whosoever shall intend to Reply unto this, or any
other book of mine, let him (if he expect to be answered) not carpe at pieces,
but proceed soberly and orderly from point to point in the cause; otherwise I
must say with the Apostle, Galat. 6. 17.
Let none put me from henceforth unto business.

Finally to thee (Christian Reader, if thou think thy self a Scholar) I say
with S. Hier. l. 3 Proem in Epist.
Ierom; Figas ipse stylum; tria, (vt dicitur) verba co^iungas; sudes paululum,
experiare temetipsu^, and ex labor proprio discas ignoscere labora^tibus. And
although thou be of another co^ditio^, yet for my justification, against M.
Parsons (who called me a Falsificator) I say as S. Aug. did in answer to
Petilia^; Me Petilianus Manichau^ esse dicit, loquens de me Conscientia, boc
ego iudico me non esse, loquens de mea Conscientia: eligite cui credatis.
He says (says S. Aug.) that I am a Manichee, speaking of my conscience, and
I say I am not so, speaking of mine own conscience, and now choose who^ thou will believe. Or eis (because the matter is put unto thy proof) I rather say
with S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
Try al things, and keep that which is good: Try this book, and my faithfulness by
it, wherein (least any may be suspected for my defects) I profess to allege no
testimony, that is noted in the margent, which I have not perused and examined
with mane own eyes. Thus I end, beseeching our Lord Jesus to illuminate thee
with the spirit of Truth, and to preserve us to the glory of his saving Grace.

(...) in Christ Th. Morton

THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTS OF THIS ENCOVNTER.
In the first Book.
CAP. 1. THe confessed Falsifications of their Icsuite Suarez. 2. and (...) 3
The errors of Baronius, ilib. Untruths of Boucher,. 4 Foul corruptions of
Gratian,. 5. and unjust dealing of Mast. Parsons himself,. 7. CAP. 2. An
examination of the sleeping Soldiers speech, [ His Disciples came and stole
him away.] by a fourfold conviction,. 1. An examination of M. Parsons his
Syllogism; noting his pitiful poverty in Logique, and his frauds
thereabout,. 2. CAP. 3. The Impossibility of their due subjection, proved by
four Arguments. His dissemblances and frauds therabout. In the end he
betrayeth himself,. 1. to 5. And Iastly, of the Exemption of Priests,. 5. CAP.
4. The hunting of the Fox, by winding out the subtle trick of M. Parsons his
Mental Equivocation: about of the speech of the woman Saphyra; showing
thereupon his unjust dealings; his pitiful plunges; and lastly the
desperateness ofall his defense CAP. 5. Of Falsities objected unto some
Romanists, especially in Popes, about the feyned Canon of Nice, fully handled.
P. R. his perverse dealing. CAP. 6. The credit of Gratian impeached by their
own Bishop. Mr. Parsons his triple falsehood. CAP. 7. The Contradictions of
Romanists, confuting one another about the Council of (...) in the point of
Images,. 1. Therein Surius his slanderous falsehood. Their Contradictions about
the Council of Francford concerning Images. Mr. Parsons his wilful falsehood,.
2. Their Contradictions about the Epistle of Epiphanius, concerning Images, and
M. Parson his unjust calumniation,. 3. CAP. 8. Card. Bellarmines manifold
Slanders againstProtestants, as first obiecting the heresy of the Pelagians
about Original and venial sins.. 1. Of the Nouatians in denying Penance:
Mr. Parsons his fraudulent dissemblance, precipitate rashness, fond and false
reprehension thereabout. 2. And of the Manicbees in the question of Freewil. M.
Parsons abuses the testimony of S. August. and S. Jerome in this point. His
heady taxation,. 3. Of Arianisme against Bullinger. M. Parsons makes Bellarm.
to betray the Catholic cause,. 4. Another heresy concerning the Souls going,
but not immediately to heaven. M. Parsons his ignorance of Bellarmines meaning,
with whom hesaid he did Consult,. 5. The heresy of an [ Only figure] in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. M. Parsons his unreasonable taxation. 6 CAP. 9.
Card Bellarmine his corrupt Allegations, 1. Rome by just consequence not the
Mother (...) Mr. Parsons his ignorance, his difsembling, his odd Cavil, his
deceitfulness, his strange lust to accuse his Adversary,. 2. The Authority of
Platina. M. Parsons his Answer, betraying thereby the authority of all late
Romish Writers,. 3. CAP. 10. Bellarmine his false allegation of Fathers, for
proof of Purgatory M. Parsons his dexterity in fraudulent dealing. His other
three Falsehoods. CAP. 11. M. Parsons his Challenge against T M. exacting of him
an examination of the sixty Fathers (alleged by Coccius, for defense of
Purgatory:) to prove that thirty one of them are either Apocrypha, or corrupt,
or wrested. The state of the whole Controversy, fet down and prosecuted at
large: And the notable and manifold abuses of Coccius revealed. CAP. 12. The
Falsehoods, wherewith M. Parsons was charged in the preamble, and his fond and
false accounts he makes. His fourefold falsehood committed against Calvin: one
whereof is most perfidious,. 1. About the latin Clause of Reservation. His
notable fraud in answering, containing a brace of untruths.. 2. Of the [
Chair of unlearned Doctors.] M. Parsons his two falsehoods in one 3. His gross
falsehood about Govdman, 4 His double untruth about Knoxe and Bucchanan: and an
other new falsehood besides. 5. About the question of (...) Mr. Parsons his
confessed error, but yet miserable excuse. His faithless dealing against
Calvin.. 6. His many falsehoods in one 7. Touching a Transition. His excellent
art in confessing a falsehood so, as not confessing it; and the
palpabilitytherof. 8. Concerning the testimony of Holinshed about Wiat. M
Parsons concealing his falsehood His other poor shift 9. About the Text of Esa.
29. His threefold falsity 10. The Citation of Carerius, whereunto answering, he
learnedly bewrays want of learning in a Grammatical quiddity. 11. Dolmans
testimony. M. Parsons his crafty concealment. His dis loyalty. His denying his
own writing. 12 The testimony of Frisingensis, concerning Pope Greg. 7. alias
Hildebrand. M. Parsons, a plain falsifier. His childish excuse. His absurd
Reasoning. His treasonable doctrine. His negligence in Story.. 13. The
testimony of Espencaeus, concerning Hildebrand. M. Parsons his palpable
untruth.. 14. CAP. 13. M. Parsons charged with falsities; about the question of
Mental Equivocation. His lost logic.. 1 Sepu'ueda his judgment, touching
mental Equivocation. M. Parsons his evident untruths.. 2. Azorius his
judgment concerning Mental Equivocation. The State of the question. M.
Parsons his manner of Equiuocating found to be lying His forgery to remove a
rub and note of a lie. His strong and strange delusion. He professes to
Equivocate with his friends. 3. The opinion of Eman. Sa about Mental
Reservation. The ob. of leaving out of the word perhaps, in translating [ Forte
potiori ratione,] being before his eyes repeated: Herein a desperate
falsificator. Another as vile a falsity. No certainty, what the opinions of
late Romanists are, because of their altering and corrupting of their books..
4. Obseru the like out of the. 5. and cap. 1.. 6. and ca. 14. 1. Maldonate his
opinion about Mental Reservation. M. Parsons his dissolute ignorance. His
frivolous distinction [ of principal and not principal intention to deceiue].
5. CAP. 14. An answer unto M. Parsons his objected untruths, which he has
(out of the preamb.) called into a new Reckoning. First, concerning Polydore.
M. Parsons his notable fraud. Popes change their Christian names.. 1. The Pope
choked with a fly. M. Parsons his fond cauillations: And fraudulent
concealment. The disastrous ends of other Popes. M. Parsons his crafty
falsehood, about Pope Anastasius death.. 2. Bouchers testimony of killing a
Tyrant. M. Parsons his nototious falsehood. Another inexcusable falsehood.. 3.
The testimony of Raynolds objected and answered. Mr. Parsons his scurrill sport
upon a word. His deceit. That the power of a King is immediately from God.. 4.
The testimony of Gratian objected M Parsons confuted by their own Cardinal.
5. The Gloss objected, and answered The doctrine of killing of Kings. Mr.
Parsons by silence, betrayeth his disloyalty.. 6. Gloss of the Extrauagants
objected and answered. His frothy Argument, Iugling; fraud. A bloody Gloss,
7. Bellarmin concerning the judgment of Calvin, about (...) M. Parsons his
unwise demand, 8. The text of Esa. 29. [ You are blind, etc.] objected and
answered.. 9. Carrerius his [ Vere or Vero] ob and answered. M. Parsons in a
manner confessing his former slander. His flaude 10. Dolman his [ Damnable
Sinner] ob. and answered, 11. Censure of [ All Priests, etc.] ob. and answered,
12. Otto Frisingensis about Pope Greg. 7. ob. and answered. What manner of
grauel M. Parsons casls.. 13. Fox and Holinshed ob. and answered M. Parsons
his falsity His figment. His lustful appetite to wrangle. A memorable example
of treacherous Bishops; from the exclamation of Rodulph, 14.
In the second Book.
CAP. 1. First answering M. Parsons his old objections of Falsehoods out of his
Mitigagation. He begins with a lavish falsity.. 1. Vasquez objected and
answered, 2. Azorius ob. and answered. M. Parsons his inordinate iangling about
words, 3. And extreme captiousnesse, 4. Tolet ob. and answered. M. Parsons
his solly, 6. Barclay and Bellarm. about the power of [ Gathering Synods] ob
and answered. M. Parsons his profuse fraud. And gross falsehood. And manisold
absurdities, 7. Salmeron (about the sovereignty of the King over Priests in the
old Testament) ob. and answered. M. Parsons his notable falsehood. He is
slatly confuted by. Salmeron, 8. CAP. 2. Carerius (about the same point) ob.
and answered. M. Parsons his egregious untruth, 1. Dolman objected and
answered. M Parsons his childish exceptions: And ignorance of his own book,
2. Once again Carerius ob. and answered. M. Parsons his open falsehood, 3.
Victoria ob. and answered M. Parsons his gross slander, 4. The Canon of
Gratian [ Si Papa] ob. and answered. Mr. Parsons his many idle impertinencies.
His great ignorance 5. His Object against Sir Fr. Hastings [about Dominum Deum
Papam] answered. M. Parsons his blind insolency, or persidious hypocrisy, 6.
Pope Leo ob. concerning the Oath of Alleagiance, and answered. M. Parsons his
choleric answer therein; his promise exacted. His ignorance in constructions,
7. Sepulueda touching Equivocation. M. Parsons his wilful salshood, 8. CAP. 3.
The opinion of Setus, concerning Mental Equivocation, falsely and grossly
abused by M. Parsons. The question there discussed by examples, 1. Cunerus ob.
and answered. M. Parsons his mere cauil, 2. Cassander ob. and answered M.
Parsons his idle, and fond collusion His faithless dealing. The name of Papist
odious, and yet glorious among the Romanists. 5. Royard ob. and answered M.
Parsons his excellent falsehood: And after that another notorious falsity, 4.
Again, Cunerus ob. and answered. M. Parsons unconscionably injurious ibid.
Sayr ob. and answered. M. Parsons snatcheth at words, and pretermitteth
materials, 5. CAP. 4. Cicero objected in the point of Mental Equivocation. M.
Parsons a watie gamster. His misconstruction of Tully. His excellent piece of
craft. He preiudiceth his conscience, 1. Barclay and Boucher ob. and answered
M. Parsons fine trick of fraud. His malicious falsehood, 2. Again, Barclay
ob. and answered. M. Parsons his shameless fraud, 3. CAP. 5. Heaps of
untruths objected, and answered, concerning [ Popes being Heretics, as
Popes, and therefore Deposed.] M. Parsons his marvelous perverseness in
reporting the judgment of his Authors, 1. His notable guile, and falsehood. His
cunning. A Romish mystery, 2. CAP. 6. Containing a brief Censure of a
Pamphlet, entitled [ The pattern of a Protestant] who has made himself a
pattern of singular Arrogance, untruth, ignorance and malice. Add heereunto
his slanderous untruths, when he played the Moderate Answerer, cap 7. 7. CAP.
7. M. Parsons obiecteth the omitting of the defense of some Protestants; as of
Calvin about Arianisme; which is answered. (the obseruable testimonies which
some Romanists give of Calvin) 1. And of my L. Cook 1. and 6. Omissions of M.
Parsons in not defending his Clients: Answer to manifold Slanders, 3. His not
defending the Popes Clergymen subject to Emperors. Constantines Donation, 4.
His neglecting the defense of the Moderate Answerer in his notorious Slanders,
5. An answer to his ob. of fresh lies. Therein his excellent fraud 7. CAP. 8.
His objected Uaunts answered. His Strangers Censure against T. M. requited. His
Jesuit (...) censure justly contemned, 1 The Challenges made against M.
Parsons avouched, and performed, 2. CAP. 9. M. Parsons his Appendix confuted.
His most memorable Yorkeshire-Case for Equiuocating finely, maliciously, and
impudently forged: As is manifestly proved by many uncontrollable conuictions,
1. His fire edge against Doctor King abated, by examples of Jesuitical
Equiuocators, 2. CAP. 10. A confutation of Mast. Parsons his defense of Mental
Reservation, from the speeches of Christ, recorded in the 8. cap. of Saint
John, and first distinguishing between Verbal and Mental Equivocation, 1.
That in General the Scripture allows not Romish Reservation, 2. The eight
speeches of Christ taken out of the cap 8. Ioh objected, and satisfied, 3.
Scriptures which M. Parsons ob. in his Mitigation, answered; as Ioh. 1. 21.
maith. 9. 10. Ioh. 6. Esa. (...). 4. An old ob. in the Mitigation out of Ioh.
7. 8. [ I will not go vpyet,] answered. M. Parsons his gross ignorance
touching the state of the question.. 5. CAP. 11. Against mental Equivocation,
proving it to be a lie; by the confessions of their own Doctors; by examples
from Fathers, Heretics and Pagans, 1. Evidences of the impiety of it, by
Cases, 2. and by Effects, ibid. His foul untruth. ibid.
THE ENCOVNTER AGAINST Mr. PARSONS.
The first Book.
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the Reueiw.
SECT. I.
1. THis Encounter consists of these two parts, the first is a Reueiw of
Master Parsons his last Reckoning; the second of such points as concern his
Treatise of Mitigation: and the issue of them both will be (God willing) the
reasonable performance of my former Challenge.

2. And because the first part (which is his Reckoning) is spent especially
about the charge and discharge of Falsifications, which have been reciprocally
objected on both sides, concerning matters of maine Consequence; I thought it
requisite to Encounter him first in these: and in this Introduction and
Entrance to repel his maine assault, who has made falsifying to be a
substantial distinctiue note of discerning between Protestants, and his
Catholic writers; and by some particular Instances to take away the fiery
edge of his former presumption, after that we have seen that which follows.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning in the behalf of all Romish Writers.
BEcause this is a matter of great importance, I mean to stay my self
Reckoning. ca. 3.. 1. pa. 119. 120.
upon this point, and to show that it is indeed a substantial sign
distinctiue between all Sectaries and us at this time; and that in matters of
Controversy, our Writers shall never be found guilty of these kinds of false,
iying, and malicious Equivocations, where not only P. R his presumption.
untruth is uttered, but it is willingly also uttered, the Writer knowing that
he writes an untruth: which manner of dealing, argues two points, the one,
that such a writer has no conscience, that utters that which God sees to be
false, and falsely meant in his heart; and the other, that his cause has no
ground of substantial truth, which cannot be defended without such wilful
lies. In this then, if it please you, insist a while, and let Mr. Morton bring
forth in Print, any Catholic Author that wrote against Protestants, since
these heresies began, that has been taken in this impiety: I mean, that
has set down in Print any such falsitie as cannot be excused either by
ignorance, oversight, negligence, error of Print, translation, diversity of
Editions, or the like: but that it must needs be presumed that he knew the
untruth, and yet would set it forth; of this kind, I say, let him show me but
one example among all Catholic Writers of our time, and I will in my
Conscience greatly mistrust and discredit that Author, whether it be an other,
or my self: but if he show me two or three in any Writer in this kind, I shall
be hardly able ever after to believe him more. And whereas the number and
variety of Catholic Writers is so great, as the world sees, it were no
great labor to show it in some, if that spirit does reign among them, as it
does among Protestant Writers.

SECT. II.
The Reuiew; yielding diverse examples of Romish Falsificators, even by the
judgment of their own Writers; faithfully related. The first party accused
is their Jesuit Fr: SVAREZ.
3. MAster Parsons will not esteem any Writers to deserve better the name of
Catholic Writers, then the Jesuits: who are, as it were, the natural
brethren of his own Order; nor can he account any Jesuit a more worthy Writer
then is their Jesuit Suarez, public Reader in the University of Salamanca,
whom their Jesuit Posseuin Appa. rat. Tit. Fr. Suarez.
Posseuine has Registered among the most famous Authors of these times; nor may
he judge any Writing of Suarez, more obseruable then are those his Varia
Opuscula Theologica, approved by the University of omplutum, vnde the hands of
eight Doctors See the beginning.
works, which have been approved by a whole University.

4. This Jesuit Suarez comes now to be convinced for a Falsificator, but not
by Protestants: because Mr. Parsons has a License and Faculty to call their
accusations Ltes and Falsehoods, although they be never so just: therefore must
we seek out of the Romish School, some one approved witness, who has made
a privy search into the writings of the foresaid Jesuit; and has also
discovered some of his wilful transgressions in alleging of Authors.

The Accuser is Fr: Cumel.
5. Our witness shall be Franciscus Cumel, variarum disputationum. etc. 1
ugduni. 1609.
Fr. Cumel, Professor also of Divinity in the I niuersitie of Salamanca; See
all these Encomia, in the beginning of his work.
commended by Diego Nuncio, and Antonius Soto-Mayor for one, in whose Memory
The Church ( say they) which is the Spouse of Christ, may congratulate her own
good, in that she had so singular, and every way so absolute a Teacher, who in
these his last works has excelled not only other ancient and modern
writers, but also himself: unto whose commendation Rob. Bertelot, and A.
Priqueu do subscribe: Him has also Ant. Hereros, Public professor in the
(...) of Pintia, greatly extolled in his commendatorie Epistle, calling this
Cumel the very heart of the University wherein he was Professor, whose name was
honored ( says he) by Pope Clement the eight. And yet again is this Doctor
further magnified in the Epistle Dedicatory by Fr. IIdefonsus, who reports
Cumel to have been an admirable man, both for learning and wisdom, Insomuch
that Kings did consult with him in their most weighty affairs, and that
Scholars, when they desired to have the most hard Questions assoyled, resorted
unto him, as unto the Oracle of Apollo.

6. Let us now hear what this so honorable a witness and Oracle will say,
concerning the dealing of the former lesuite, in a matter of high moment, such
as is the power of Gods effectual Grace in acting man's will unto good: from
the efficacy of which Grace of God, the same Jesuit (in the opinion of Cumel)
did somewhat detract, for the unjust advancement of the power of man's will. It
will be my part not to examine or discuss: but only to report the saying of
Cumel, which I will do as faithfully, as if the whole cause depended here upon.

The Accusation it self.
7. F. Cumel Dispu. Variar. Tom. 3. page 126. col.1.
Saint Hieroms testimony ( says Cumel) Dolose ciatatur ab Aduersarys (
speaking of Molina, Suarez, and some other Romish writers) that is, Is
fraudulently cited: And, Page 128. col. 2.
Capreolus is cited craftily by them: Page 129. col. 1.
I am grieved to see how fraudulently they cite Driedo, urging that which he
spoke, by way of argumentation, or objection, for his own judgment, whereas
Driedo uses many Arguments to disprooue that opinion. But we shall be
contented to dismiss Molina and those others, let Cumel and Suarez meet upon
the Stage alone, and so shall we be better able to discern the disposition of
the party accused.

8. Ibid. page 267. col. 2.
Suarez ( says Cumel) does not entirely, and faithfully, relate the sentence
of Molina: And Page 15. col. 1. in margin.
expounds Molina, but in a sense contrary to his meaning: Ibid. page 137.
col. 2. in margin.
Suarez cites the sentence of Soto, leaping over a part of it, and suppressing
those words which made against him. Ib. pa 133. (...)
I do observe ( says Cumel) that Suarez alleged Driedo, whose sentence and
words make plainly against him, as I have showed; so that I cannot tell with
what spirit he is cited of Suarez: and much less do I perceive to what end
Stapleton is alleged, whose words do more expressly make against them. Ibid.
page 195. col. 1.
Suarez has taken out of the testimony of Saint Thomas the word,
Praeordination, and put in stead of it, Subordination, and expounds S. Thomas
sinisterly. Ibid. page 124. col. 2.
Suarez produduceth for his proof the testimony of Chrysostom, [ Ad Heb.
hom. 12. super cap. 7. vbi ait, Nostras non antecedit voluntatates, ne liberum
laedatur arbitrium,] cutting of that which went immediately before, and that
also which immediately followed: because he perceived that the sense and opinion
of Chrysostom did not favor his opinion at all. Ibid. page 131. col. 2.
Suarez urges Pope Clement in his third Epistle, saying that he has these
words; [ Si aliquid esset, quod audientes fidem vel ad credendum, vel ad non
credendum determinatret extra arbitrium eorum, meritum and libertatem tolli.]
Which words he has printed in new and distinct Characters and Letters, as
though they were the very words of Pope Clement, when as indeed that most holy
Pope never delivered those words, neither are they in that Epistle.

9. And thus does Cumel proceed against Suarez, in censuring his falsifications
in these and other allegations, wherein Cumel seems to discern nothing but
wilful frauds in that their Jesuit Suarez; whom notwithstanding they magnify
for one, Epist. Dedicat. in Tom. 3.
Who, by the judgment of all the most learned men, (as they say) seems to
have abundantly satisfied Heretics (so they call Protestants) and
Catholics, in the doctrine of the Sacraments in the new law.

10. Seeing now (good Reader) that Fr. Suarez, one of their chief order (which
is the order of Jesuits,) and the choicest writer which is now living in that
Society, in a few Chapters of but one so primarily an authorized Book,
concerning one only Controversy, has committed so many falsities, which
their own so much approved Doctor Cumel cannot free from wilsull frauds and
corruptions; what multitudes of falshoodes shall we think may be found in all
the huge and vast Volumes, which he and other Jesuits have published,
concerning all other questions of Controversy, if that any ingenuous Cumel
might be permitted to ransack all their Allegations?

11. Although this one so singular an Instance, being deprehended by such an
Accuser in so many and so notorious falsities, does sufficiently encounter Mr.
PARSONS his demand, who offered to be contented but with one example of any
one, who has committed but three such inexcusable defaults: yet lest that
Master PARSONS his modesty may give him leave, and his wit power to answer me
according to the Greek Proverb, (...) which is, to turn an unity into a
Cipher, and to make account that one only example is as good as none at all;
therefore have I thought it further more requisite to single out Duo magna
lumina, that is, the two great lights of that Church, Cardinal Bellarmine, and
Cardinal Baronius, and to show the wonderful Eclipses and spots of falsehood,
which their own Doctors have discerned in these two.

The party accused is Cardinal BELLARMINE, In behalf of whomMaster PARSONS
has challenged me in this Reckoning, viz.
IF you have seen how little able Mr. Morton has been to perform Reekon.
cap. 3. 5. 6. page 149. 150
his promise before, for wilful falsities committed by any of our Writers
hitherto; much more shall you see now, when leaving the multitude of other
Authors, he singleth out Cardinal Bellarmine alone to deal withal: who as he
has written much, so were it not marvel if in so many Books, he should have
left some things, whereupon his Adversaries might probably wrangle. But as for
wilful untruths, it is so far from his known and confessed integrity, as
Mr. Morton could never have made choice of an unfitter match for this point.
Nor can it be thought that he chose him, upon hope to find any such advantage
in him indeed, but only to honor himself, by contending with such an
Adversary, and to cast some clouds, at least in the minds of the simple sort,
upon the shining beams of Cardinal Bellarmines estimation, by obiecting the
name of wilful falsities unto him. But as when the said clouds are driven away
from the air, the force of the Sun is more sensibly felt: So Cardi,
Bellarmines works, being cleared here from Mr. Mortons calumniations, will be
more highly esteemed by every judicious Reader, as not lending any least true
advantage unto any impugnation of the Adversary. And this is all the hurt that
he is like to receive by this Assault.

SECT. III.
The Reuiewe.
12. I Shall desire Mr. Parsons to forbear a while the examination of the
exceptions, which I have taken against Cardinal Bellarmine, until we come to
discuss that point; when it will appear how feeble a Boreas Mr. Parsons is in
dispelling of clouds: and for the present to have so much patience, as to
understand, what and how foggie a mist of insinceritie, some Authors of their
own profession have spied in the writings of this their Bellarmine, whom Mr.
Parsons prefers for sincerity before all others of his side.

His three Accusers.
13. The first Accuser is Desensio Iohannis Marsi'y in fauorem (...) 8.
propositiones contmentis, (...) scripsit illustrissimus and (...) Bellarminus.
(...) 1606.
Ioh. Marsilius, who begins his defense against Bellarmine, with prayer unto
God, and to the blessed Virgin; who mentions Bellarmine. with all reverend
respect, by the appellation of Most illustrious Lord; who is authorized in this
his answer under the public approbation of the State of Venice. The second
is (...) P. (...) An. 1606.
P. Paulus, as select a Writer as Marsilius, and equally approved. The third
is Guil. Barclaius, who yields unto Bellarmine this dignifying Title of (...)
aius de (...) Pape Ad Clementem 8. Pontif. cap 37.
Most famous Cardinal and most learned Divine, in that book which he
Dedicated to Pope Clement 8. The exceptions that they take against Bellarmine,
are concerning one only Controuetsie of his: which is the defense of the
Papal power, in censuring of Temporail States.

Their Accusations.
14. For his abuse of the testmonies of Schoolmen he is thus noted. (...)
desens. page 280.
He erreth ( says Marsilius speaking of Bellarmine) in expounding Thomas
contrary to his meaning, whose Catholic Doctrine, in all matters of Divinity,
I do profess. Page 285.
He erreth in saying that the Author ( whom Bellarmine impugneth) held that
Christ was constrained by necessity to pay Notable falsifications of Bellar.
confessed.
tribute, but the Author affirms the contrary, to wit, that Christ as the
Son of God, was not bound to pay tribute, yet did it for avoiding of
scandal. Page 297.
He erreth in denying that Sotus did marvel at the Canonist, (viz. For saying
that the Pope is the Lord of the whole world, directly in temporal things.)
For Sotus does expressly name certain Lawyers, or Canonists, and calls their
opinion in this point commentitious, or fabulous, complaining and maruelling
that Syluester departed from the judgment of Thomas: yea and the same words
of Sotus were read in the first Books of the Lo. Cardinal himself ( viz.
Bellarmine) which if he will not acknowledge, it skilleth not, for we find in
his ( viz. Bellarmines) books six hundred alterations. Page 322.
He erreth in saying that Navarre writ, that [The Popes authority was not
merely temporal,] as though he had confessed the Popes authority to be
temporal, and accessorily spiritual; but Nauar never writ this, but held
plainly the contrary. page 324.
He says indeed that the Papal power may use natural things, which are
instituted by Christ, for supernatur all ends, such as are water in Baptism,
and money for Alms: but does he ever speak of I emporall power? he never so
much as dreamed hereof. Ibid.
But it is no rare thing (as we have seen) for his illustrious Lordship, (
meaning Bellarmine) to cite Authors for an opinion, whereas they affirm the
plain contrary. Page 361.
He erreth in saying absolutely, that Sotus and Couarruvias affirmed that which
they spoke with condition, viz. Ordinary. P. Paulus Apolog. page 569.
He Bellerminus plane contranum Gersoni tribuit, etc.
abuses the testimony of Gerson (says the second Accuser) noting that to
have been spoken against the due reverence unto the Pope, whereas contrarily he
spoke in favor of the Pope.

15. Let us pass over their School, and come unto the testimonies of Fathers
and Councels; whereunto the first Accuser ( Marsilius) proceeds, saying of
Bellarmine, that Marsil. defens. page 222.
He erreth in affirming that Chrysostom (expounding that place of Paul, Romans
13. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers) speaks of power in
general ( as though he did as well imply spiritual power, as temporal
(according as Bellarmine himself does interpret the text) whereas S.
Chrysostom speaks plainly of Princes and Magistrates. And because he (
namely Bellarmine) brings no reason for his Answer, it will not be amiss to
demonstrate his error by reasons: for that which the Apostle calls [ higher
power] Chrysostom interprets to be Princes and Magistrates, who make
politic laws, and who sustain the burden of the Commonwealth, unto whom
the Apostle commands men to pay tribute; and, which does preoccupate all
means of evasion, Chrysostom shows that obedience unto these powers is
commanded unto Monks or Priests, yea although he were either Apostle,
Prophet, or Evangelist. Page 288.
He erreth in cyting falsely the place of S. Hierome, who says the plain
contrary: Page 289.
It grieueth me to see things imputed unto holy Fathers, the contrary whereof
they affirm: Jbid.
And he offends also in cyting the place of S. Augustine. Page 346.
He erreth in alleging the Council of Colen, for that Council determined
nothing thereof, but according to the Gloss, etc. Finally, P. Paulus Apol.
page 602.
See, good Reader ( says their P. Paulus) the cunning of this Author ( namely
Bellarmine) saying that the fifth Roman Council under Pope Symmachus, did
allow, as her own Decree, that sentence of Eunodius [Aliorum hominum causas,
etc.] whereas that sentence shall not be any where found to have been
specially approved, or so much as named in that Council. And Ib. page 606.
He has added of himself ( speaking of a Decree of a Council of Laterane,
under Pope Alexander the third) these words, [Quod nullus sit in terris Papa
Superior,] That is, Because there is none in earth Superior unto the Pope.

16. Because a third witness is requisite, for the better establishment of any
Accusation, we may admit the testimony of Barclaius in this cause: who albeit
he commends Bellarmine, for his saithfulnesse, in respect of the dealings of
others, yet Barcla. de potesta. Papae. c. 37.
It cannot be denied (says he) but that Bellarmine, by following Sanders and
others rashly, has not a little erred in three points of his defense of the
Popes temporal authority: and thereupon could not But marvel (as he himself
says) that men, who are for their Learning so famous, do so negligently set
down their judgments in writing, as though they had not read the Authors
which they commend, or had not understood them at all, or else had (...) their
meaning: which fault is frequent in this age. And among other errors of
Bellarmine, he Ib. cap. 32.
observes him to follow Gratian in a singular corruption, to wit; whereas an
ancient Conc. Agathen. Anno 506. can. 32.
Council decreed Can. 32. [ Ne Clericus quemquam praesumat apud secularem
Iudicem, Episcopo non permittente, pulsare] Gratian contrariwise delivers it
thus: Clericum msllus praesumat pulsare, etc.

17. These few faults are more then enough, to have been discovered by their
own Authors, out of one Controversy of their Cardinal Bellarmine. As for
other notes of his contradictions, whereof he is conuinceable, See hereaster,
cap. 8.
I remit them unto their proper place. In the interim seeing that Card.
Bellarm. (who, in Mr. Parsons his estimate; is the most Sincere Author of all
other Romanists) has been thus deeply charged by their own Doctors of so
much insincerity, our Reader may conceive thereby how little confidence any may
yield unto their other less confiderate or conscionable Doctors.

I proceed, and (because the fellowshippe which Card. Bellarmine had with
Card. Baronius, will not permit them to be divided) I add

An Accusation made by the foresaid Marsilius, against their Cardinal BARONIVS.
18. Cardinal Bellarmine aduanceth Cardinal Baronius in this manner: Marsil.
quo supra, page 357.
That most worthy and learned Baronius ( says he) does demonstrate by most
clear evidences, that there was never such (...) granted unto Emperors, for
the electing of the Pope. Ibid.
But I have answered ( says Marsilius) that Baronius has no authority in the
Question of Immunities: I have heard, that as he has taken a liberty to mend
the Fathers, Canons and Historians, so he will correct the Councels after his
(...) and for his own purpose; and to assume unto himself a license hereunto,
which God forbid! Certain it is, he shall not be able to mend the text of S.
Paul, of Chrysostom, of Thomas, of S. Augustine, and others: so that we need
not to regard the novelties of his illustrious Lordship. Again he says that
Ibid. page 300.
The answers of Card. Baronius are not unlike ( meaning, unto the answers of
Card. Bellarmine) who whilst he cannot find an objected argument, able to be
assoyled by History, he says that these words have been inserted into the
books. In brief, Ib. page 354.
I will say no more ( says he) of Card. Baronius, but that he is an Historian
yet Living, whose works are suspected, where he entreats of the Immunity (
namely, of the Clergy,) who, when he wants other support, does dislike all
Historiographers; and when he admits any, he singleth out the words which
make for him, but those which make against him, he says, were inserted by
others, as it here happened in the story of Luitprandus, whose book has been
the space of 700. years approved in the Church: but he rejects the
authority both of this, and of other Writers of his time. Seeing therefore that
his Annals ( or Chronicles) have not that estimation in the world, as he
supposed; and that there is a book which will come forth shortly, entitled,
The Errors of Baronius, wherein there are discovered more then twenty several
errors, which he has committed in denying this one most ancient History,
concerning Pope John ( to wit, John 12. whom the godly Emperor Otho deposed) I
shall not need to say more of his authority.

19. Neither shall I need to add any more to this which has been said,
because our Reckoner Mast. Parsons knows (although we should not reckon by
the strict rules of proportion, but by the remiss principles of probability
only) that if twenty errors may be found in the compass of three sheets of
paper, set forth by Baronius, then may we presume that many hundredth untruths
do lie lurking within his whole Annals, which contain twelve huge volumes,
which, in all probability, may bewray some apparances of unjust dealings.

SECT. IIII.
The loose dealing of their Jesuit Boucher, by the accusation of Barclaius
their own Romish Doctor.
20. WHereas M. Barc'a. cont. Monarchom. 1. 5. (...) 6. page 360.
Boucher obiecteth the testimony of Bodine, to prove that It is lawful for a
private man to kill a lawful King, if he shall tyramize over his subjects, M.
Barclay answers, saying, The Author in the Bodm. 1. 2. de Repub. cap. 5.
same Chapter does plainly contradict you, and the words themselves do
openly pronounce, that you have belyed his judgment. And after that he made
the matter manifest, by alleging the Author at large, he shuts up the
point, saying, What a mischief means this manner of handling Authors? and
so proceeds on to urge him to confess either his wilful falsehood, or else
his rashness, in giving credit to other men's Notes. In the next place he
charge Boucher for alleging the Barcla. 1. 6. c. 20. page 490.
Supposititious and bastardly Tracts, which are falsely fathered upon Tho.
Aquinas, to wit, the books de Regimine Principis, which although they be
vulgarly received as his yet are they fraught with such dotages and fooleries,
as if they were written to move laughter, as L. 1. de feud. Tit. 1.
Cuiacius has said. Finally (not to diue any deeper into this puddle-water of
falsities) Barclay is offended with Boucher, for bringing in the sentence of
Barcla. 1. 6. c. 24. page 510.
Sarisburiensis laymed and corrupted, which ( says Barclay) you must say you
have delivered from the relation of others, or else you must needs loose your
credit by the crime of forgery.

21. And now may our Reader judge, whether M. Parsons have not (as I once said)
lauishly hazarded the credit of the chief Pillars of the Romish Church, upon
a Triple falsitie, as it were upon a Trey-trippe, even by the confessions of
their own Doctors. Something will be expected to be said concerning Gratian.

SECT. V.
The Falsehoods which are confessed to swarm in Gratian, the ancient compiler
of the Decrees of Popes, Fathers and Councels.
22. Afterward the zeal, which Mr. Parsons has, for the defense of the
Romish Authors, transported him to justify their Gratian also, especially in
one point, wherein notwithstanding his guilt Sec hereaftes ca. 5.. 3. etc.
will appear to be most transparant. But now in general their own Ant.
Augustin' Archiepiscopus Tarraconens. de emend. Gratiani. lib. 1. Dialog. 1.
page 5. Paris. 1607.
Antonius Augustinus, an Archbishop in Spain, has lately written a book
professedly for the purging of Gratian, whose faults he says are Ita multa,
etc. So many that they cannot be declared in one day: many false inscriptions
of Authors; ascribing many words unto Gregory, Ambrose, and Augustine: which
are no where to be found, or not in them; producing also true Authors, but yet
so, as oftentimes bringing in contrary sentences.

23. Afterward he proceeds to unfold many particular gross, and dangerous
untruths of Gratian, the Compiler of the Decrees of Councels, and Popes, and of
the Testimonies of Fathers; a work which for diverse hundred years was
admitted for the public directorie of the Doctors of the Romish Church.

24. Here, here had been a large field of falsities, for Mr. Parsons his pen
to galloppe in, and to play his Rhetorical curuets, if that his Holy itch, (as
he calls such his desire to be meddling with Protestants) had not moved
him, rather to calumniate the manisest truths of his Adversaries, then to
acknowledge the Falsifications committed by the Principal Authors of his own
side. If peradventure these confessed corruptions in these their particular,
but yet public and famous Books, seem not to our Reader sufficient to prove
Mr. Parsons his Distinctiue Note to be notoriously calumnious, we have further
to acquaint him with that which follows.

SECT. VI.
A general practice of fraud in the Romish Church according as it is confessed
by their own Doctors.
25. THe general practice of deceit, which now comes into our view, is of
two kinds: the first is their professed abuse of Authors, as is manifest, both
by corrupting of their Books, and also by perverting their meanings. For
evidence whereof we have, concerning the former, the confession of their
forenamed Marsilius. Defens. Marsil. Cont. Bellar. page 331. A dangerous Art
of corrupting of Authors.
It is a matter known unto all ( says he) that those things which were written
in the behalf of Lay Magistrates, have been, and still are razed out of the
Councels, Canons, and Books of other Doctors, yea out of the very Breuiaries
and Missals: insomuch as it may be feared, lest that in process of time, that
unlimited power of the Pope in temporal affairs will be established. So that
he that will compare the Books that were written in the year 1530. or 1550.
with the writings, at this day, whether they write of Councels, or of other
things be shall easily find where the Vintage is: So that it is a marvel,
that after this harvest, we found any clusters of grapes, for the defense of
our prince Whereby in tract of time it will come to pass, that none will give
credit unto any writings, and that the Church of God will be overthrown. Which
I speak ( says he) upon this occasion, which is offered by the Lord
Cardinal, as also wishing very earnestly, that books be not depraved: which
I say with all humility, and reverence. Marsilius pursues him further,
saying, Ibid. page 338.
It need not be marvelled why we cannot allege many for this opinion, he
shows two reasons: the first is, Because this question is but new: the
second, because if any write freely, he is forthwith compelled to retract
himself, as it happened to the Lord Cardinal ( Bellarmine) himself; or else such
things are blotted out of their books; or else threats are cast out: insomuch
that Sotus could say upon the conclusion of this matter, It becomes a servant
to think much, and say little.

26. Can there be any greater fraudulencie then this, or in this fraud, a more
pernicious tyranny, against either the living, or the dead, then thus to tie,
as it were, cords unto their tongues, and compelling them to speak contrary to
their meaning, so far sometimes, as to change Index Belgieus per Iunium.
page 17.
visible into Invisible? Besides they do further so profess to deal with
Index Belg. apud Pappum. page 12.
Ancient Authors, as either to suffer many errors (so they call the opinions,
when they are objected against them in dispute) or to extenuate them, or to
excuse them, or else by some new devised comment to deny them.

27. The second kind of deceitfulness has been, belike, sensible enough at
Rome, seeing that their own learned Doctor Espensaeus was forced to complain
thereof. Cl. Espencaeus Tract. 6. Epist. dedic. ad card. castil.
When Pope Paulus 4. (says he) did seriously affirm that he intended to
choose me into the order of Cardinals, I do religiously swear, that as often
as I thought upon the report of obteining the red Hat freely (which others
hunted after for money, who were repulsed) I give immortal thanks unto God
that he suffered not, I will not say, so much good, but so much evil to happen
unto me: Quid facerem Romae? mentirinescio. What should I do at Rome? I cannot
lie. Now if Rome, which will seem to be the Metropolis of all sanctity,
become the Exchange of lying, we may suspect that Mr. Parsons, after his so
long residence in that place, may happily have received some taint. This we
may try by the confession of his own Romish Authors, after that we have first
heard what he will say for himself.

SECT. VII.
Mr. PARSONS his protestation of his own Integrity.

Master PARSONS Reckoning.
As for falsities, they may proceed of diverse causes, and in diverse Reckon.
page 215.
degrees, and with sundry circumstances of more or less fault, so that there
may be a falsitie without a falsehood, where of my meaning is not in this place:
but whosoever shall be found in a wilful and witting falsitie, or rather
falsehood, that is known to be such by the vtterer, I do think it to abhor
so much from the nature it self of an honest and civil man, as of what
Religion so ever he be, he will not commit it once, much less thrice. As for
my self, I stand confident, Idem page 214.
that he will never be able to bring any such fraud against me, much less
thrice three.

The Reueiwe.
28. Mr. Parsons has truly expressed the Character of an honest man, to wit,
that he does always abhor all wilful falsehood, and he will needs Canonize
himself, and be registered in the Calender of honest men. But words are but as
letters, and deeds as seals: so that if Mr. Parsons protestation be
contradicted by his conversation, then his writings (whereof we are to speak
in the Chapters following) may be presumed to be no truer then his other
actions. And if in his moral behavior he be a true man, then their twenty
and eight Seminary Priests were black Saints, who in their Declaratio (...)
and turbationum, quae inter Iesuitas and Sacerdotes in Anglia ortae sunt. Ad
Clementem. 8, Pontificem exhibita a Sacerdotibus.
Appeal made unto Pope Clement the eight, against the factions of the Jesuits,
speaking of Master Parsons, note, Page 23.
Patrem Robertum praecipuum, etc. that is, Father Robert Parsons the chief
Author of these factions: And for a man, Page 40.
Dissembling to forewarne our Messengers (say they) whom we sent unto your
Holiness, that they might escape the hands of them that laid watch to catch
them, when notwithstanding he was the principal plotter to have them
intrapped; and who, in taking their Examination, appointed a Jesuit to write
down their Aunsweres, but so, as altering their words at his pleasure.

29. This, and much more to this effect, was delivered to the Pope against Mr.
Parsons, by a grand Inquest of their own Priests, in their joint Appeal unto
him, with whom they account it a damnable sin to lie or equivocate. The sum
whereof one of their Priests in his Quodlibets has expressed, saying of Mr.
Parsons, that Quodlib p. 236
He is the abstract and quintessence of all coggeries, and forgeries, etc.
Quodlib. ibid.
This is that worthy excellent, that lies, dissembles, and equiuocates at every
word. Notwithstanding I desire the good, Reader, that these imputations which
are cast upon him by his own brotherhood, may not any whit prejudice his
integrity, but rather to suspect them to be lies, except that they may be
reasonably verified by the Reueiw of his Reckoning.

30. Hitherto wec have heard the censure of their own Doctors, branding
Authors of their own order with the black mark of often falsifying; and also
displaying the general practice of their Church, in corrupting of Authors
sentences, contrary to their meaning. So that this Introduction may serve for a
reduction of Mr. Parsons into a more Sober Reckoning, who does pronounce his
brethren to be free from that Malady of falsifying; not so much in confidence
(as it may seem) of their fidelity, as for the better palliating of his own
guilt, whilst he would be thought religiously, and honestly to detest that
vice, which throughout the Reueiw of this Reckoning I shall orderly detect.

CHAP. II. Consisting of two Inquiries.
SECT. I.
The first.
1. WHether Mr. Parsons has not greatly obscured and abused a place of
Scripture, which serves for an infallible conviction of the Jewish
infidelity, and for the proof of Christ his resurrection, by defending the
probability of that answer, which the Mat. 27.
Soldiers gave, when they said, [ Whilst we were asleep, his Disciples came
and stole him away.] Which answer Preamb. page 3. 4. etc.
Iludged to be fond and senseless, and am therefore called by him unto a new
Reckoning. This is a matter of some moment, therefore I neither may, nor will
refuse a trial herein. I objected Saint Augustine, etc. The sum of his
answer follows.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Answer, that S. Augustine argued well against the Soldiers by a Reckon.
cap. 1.. 1 page 7. and 8.
Dilemnta, that if they were asleep, they could not tell by any certainty
that Christ his Disciples stole him away, and therefore they did fondly to
testify the same for certain and true. But Saint Augustine says not, as you
say, that the devise was against common sense, for then it would not have been
believed so generally, for so many years after, as even in the time when S.
Matthew writ his Gospel: nor could the Priests, Doctors, and principal Jews
of the Synagogue, which had not only common sense, but worldly wisdom also,
either have devised this shift, or have given money to have it published; or
would they have suffered the same to have been proposed to the Goueinour
Pilate, for contenting him, who being a Roman, and a wise worldly man, would
never have harkened unto it: or admitted the same, if the proposition had been
against common sense. -- I grant that the Soldiers could not know it for
certain, that the Disciples had stolen him away, but by probability only;
which probability notwithstanding, was very great, for that his enemies would
not have adventured to have done it with so great a danger. Ergo, it is likely
that they were Friends, Followers, Scholars, and Disciples. -- I grant that
the Priests and Soldiers lied therein, but yet I hold that this lie, was not
senseless, nor against common sense.

The Reueiwe, by a threefold Conviction: the first is from Authority.
2. Saint Aug. Tom. 10. Hom. 36.
Augustine, by a Dilemma, brought the Soldiers unto one of these extremities,
viz. either to say that Christ is risen, and consequently to confess that they
were not a sleep; or else (if they would needs be thought to have been a
sleep) to grant that they answered they knew not what: which were, we know,
very senseless. Saint (...) in Mat. 28. Hom. 91. col. 714. Tom. 2.
Chrysostom shows that the infatuation of the Jews herein was great, who,
concerning this answer of the Soldiers [ He was stolen.] (Which Mr. Parsons
calls Greatly probable) says that it was falsum, and minime probabile, that
is, false, and no way probable. The same Father calls the Priests, who were
the diuisers of that answer, Impudent and audacious fellows; whom Mr.
Parsons would have esteemed to have been wise and politic. Yea, and I
ansenius, their own Iansen. Concord. Euang. in eum locum.
Bishop, says that the speech of the Soldiers was Valde absurdus etc. that
is, Very absurd: notwithstanding, that it was believed of most of the Jews,
the speech being divulged among them, (as Saint Matthew notes of his time)
even unto this day: His reason is, because They, by their own malice, were
delivered up into a reprobate sense. Showing that the Evangelist Matthew, did
record the general belief, which the Jews gave unto the Soldiers answer,
as a special Argument of their infatuation and senselessness; which Mr.
Parsons has urged to prove that they answered, not without wisdom and
policy.

The second Conuincement.
3. If we first consider the persons, who said that they were a sleep, Saint
Matthew in the former Chapter, does tell us, that after the burial of Christ,
the chief Priests and Pharisees came unto Pilate, saying, Mat. 27. verse. 62.
etc.
We remember that this Seducer, whilst he was alive, said that after three
days, I will rise again; Therefore they desire Pilate to command that the
Sepulcher should be kept until the third day, lest perhaps (say they) his
Disciples come and steal him away, and tell the people, that he is risen, and
so the last error shall be worse then the first. Pilate said, you have a
Guard, go guard it as you know, and they departing made the Sepulcher sure
with the watch, and sealed the stone. Here we see that the Priests and
Pharisees, who accused Christ; the Soldiers also, who apprehended and
crucified him, do all conspire together to have a diligent watch kept at
Christ his Sepulcher, and that but for three days, lest his Disciples should
come and steal him out of the grave, and consequently, the people might be
thereby (as they thought) more strongly and dangerously Seduced: yet now, after
all their zeal, care, and providence, lest his Disciples should come and
steal him away: they date report that His Disciples came and stole him away;
could this report seem probable?

4. Secondly, if we could probably suppose that they were asleep, yet we know
that the answer implied two things: the first is a negative proposition, viz.
He is not risen: the second is an affirmative, viz. His Disciples came and
stole him away. If any in regard of the negative part, had demanded of them,
saying, how know you that he is not risen? and heard them answer, saying, We
know that he did not rise, because We were asleep; could he judge this
Answer to be sensible?

5. Thirdly, if we consider the affirmative part, His Disciples him away, any
might have easily replied, saying, What his Disciples? They were the men, who
for fear ran away from him, when they should have saved him from death,
would they hazard themselves, for the stealing away his body after that he was
dead? Improbable. And add hereunto the reason taken from the wisdom of those
worldlings, it will make their Answer incredible, because (as their Iansenius
has noted from Scripture) these believers of the Soldiers were now delivered
up into blindness; so that whilst they would seem wise, they were found
fools. As for example: The Soldiers said they were asleep, and persuaded men,
that Christ is not risen; the Disciples of Christa while after professed, that
they saw Christ, and preached that he is risen; yet these Scribes, Pharisees,
Pilate and others (whom M. Parsons has renouned with the title of wise, and
politic men) did rather believe Soldiers Sleeping, then the Apostles Seeing.
And is not this also senseless? Let me add the Collection of their own
Jesuit Salmeron: Salmeron Jes. Tom. 11. in eum locum Matthew.
Who can believe (says he) that all the men appointed for the watch had beenc
asleep? Or how could they discern that the Apostles took away his body,
seeing that they were all asleep? By these interrogatories implying that the
answer was senseless.

The third Conuincement of Mr. PARSONS, from his own Contradiction.
6. We have heard Mast. Parsons arguing, that The Priests, Doctors, and
principal Jews of the Synagogue were worldly-wise men, and inferring
hereupon, that therefore they may not be thought to have devised any fond or
Senseless Answer: notwithstanding the same Mast. Parsons says, that They did
fondly to testify the same to be certainly true. Which is all one, as if he
had said with one breath, it was not possible P. R. (...) himself,
for these wise men to do senselesly and fondly, who notwithstanding did
fondly and senselesly: Could he justly call this a Sober Reckoning, wherein at
the first assay he has so fondly thwarted himself?

7. Shall we sum up this first part of the Reckoning? When we compare
Reasons, there are three objected against his one, which also is such an one,
as is contrary to the purpose of the Evangelist: Secondly, when we number
authorities, three are produced against none: Thirdly, when we examine Mast.
Parsons his own words, concerning the wisdom and fondnes of the Jewish
Priests, we find his confession to undermine his former consequence.

8. These three Observations will easily prove, that if according unto M.
Parsons his poesy of his Reckoning, taken out of Dan. 5. 27. ( viz. You are
weighed in the balance, and are found to want weight) we be both balanced; he
will be found to be at least three drammes too light, even in this first point
of our Reckoning, and in the most cases following to have little weight at all.

9. The next Preamb. p. 5.
point of this Reckoning concerns M. Parsons his falsehood, in not
acknowledging the Clause of Reservation to have been set down in Latin:
which, for avoiding of tedious repetition, I See hereafter
reserve unto a more proper place.

SECT. II.
The second Inquiry.
10. COncerning a Syllogism, for the which M. Parsons Preamb page 7 etc.
has been charged with intolerable arrogance and ignorance; and now he
comes to reckon for this, but so miserably, that the Reader will pity his
perplexity, both in charging me, and in discharging himself. First of the
sum of his charge.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, by charging his Adversary.
P. R. (says T. M.) called that a Syllogism which I named in a more general
Reckon. page 22. and 23.
term a Reason, and not a Syllogism: now there be many forms of Reasons,
besides Syllogismes, neither did I indeed intend to make an exact and formal
Syllogism, but only such an argument, which by due inference and deduction
might prove my Conclusion good. So he. And is not this a strange evasion in
him that professes such skill in Logike? for that the art of Logike, to my
knowledge, admits but four kinds of reasoning, to wit, Syllogismes,
Enthymemes, Inductions, and Examples: but this of Mr. Mortons can be none of
the latter three sorts (as himself, I suppose, will confess) Ergo, it must be
the first, which is a Syllogism, and consequently it is a mere shift Ibid.
page 24.
to say here, when he is taken tripping, that he called it not a Syllogism but
a Reason: -- For there are three distinct propositions, and the first is called
the Mayor.

The Reuiewe.
11. Although there be but four general and ordinary heads of arguing, yet
ought you to have remembered that Logicians do acknowledge a kind of
Reasoning, which they call a Prosyllogisme, having the premises consisting of
superfluous terms, which notwithstanding may serve to make new Inferences, and
is neither right Syllogism, Enthymeme, Induction, or Example, albeit all
Scholars do hold it to be a tolerable manner of arguing, and yet admits a
Mayor.

12. As for my confused manner of reasoning, it should never have been called
into question, if that I had either intended to make a perfect Syllogism, or
thought to have met with so captious and sriuolous an Adversary; who talks
of often Blushing, whereof himself may have a necessary use in his next
Answer following, which he makes in defense of his own Syllogism, wherein
he thought to express his best skill. I will be but brief in the examination
of his Trifles.

13. Master Parsons undertook to make up a Mitig. pa. 475.
True form of a Syllogism, and a good form of reasoning, according to the
rules of Logique: yet after his great travel he brought forth such a misshapen
creature, as he is ashamed of, as we shall prove. But first how will he
answer to his absurdities? The sum follows.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IT is sufficient that they ( namely the words, Competency of God) be Reckon.
page 28.
necessarily and vertually included and understood by the Hearer. And for the
words, Expressly or implicatiuely, they were necessarily understood in the
Mayor proposition.

The Reuiew.
14. You dare not (Mr. Parsons) answer your own Sophisters thus, for they
would readily reply, saying, Sir, you undertook to make a Syllogism
according to the rules of Logique: (...) Aristotle, that Oracle of Reasoning,
and all Logicians Mr. Parsons his pitiful poverty in Logique.
define Syllogizing to be a form of arguing, (...), etc. which (...) of the
parts, which are expressly set down. So that he that will say, that it is a
perfect form of a Syllogism, wherein any thing belonging thereunto is but
vertually understood, may as well prove that the picture of a man's face, which
has neither eyes nor nose, and say that it wants neither eyes nor nose,
because any may suppose, that they should be on the face.

15. But the most capital fault remains, which is the changing of the verb
[ Maketh] competent Judges (which is the Mayor proposition) into [ Are]
competent Judges, in the conclusion. I expected that Mr. Parsons should shape
us some pecce of an answer to this. Observe (good Reader) what he says, and
thereby thou may discern, what a cunning Reckoner I am matched withal.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning for another error.
LAstly then, his third and final quarrel against this reformed Syllogism,
Reckon. page 29.
is proposed by him thus: Thirdly (says he) there should be but one Minus
Extremum, which is, [Sweare by God;] to which he has adjoined another, to wit,
[expresly or implicatiuely, etc.]

The Reuiew.
16. Lastly and thirdly, M. Parsons? then you will persuade your Reader that
this (concerning the words, Expressly, etc.) was the Last quarrel, as you call
it, against your Syllogism. This is as egregious a fraud, as he could easily
have committed, for in the Preamble, after that I had noted his Three errors,
I added a fourth expressly thus: Preamb. p. 10. Mr. Parsons his notorious
untruth which any English Reader may perceive.
The fourth ( said I) is in the verb and copula [Maketh] which is altered in
the Conclusion into [Are;] then the which there cannot be a greater absurdity
in Syllogismes. This was (we see) the deepest charge and the most ugly
deformity in his Syllogism, which I expressed to the full, and made it
palpable by the like example of changing the verb [ Maketh] into [ Are] thus:
Preamb. ibid.
Every man, in framing his own will and Testament [ maketh] his own
Executor: but P. R. frames his last will and Testament, Ergo P. R. [ is] his
own executor. And now Mr. Parsons does nimbly skippe over the fourth and
principal part of my challenge. I will not upon this advantage prosecute him
with his own terms of Witting fraud, cousenage and gross lying: I am glad
to perceive in this his dessembling, that he has so much grace as to be
ashamed of his ignorance. I took upon me to reform Mr. Parsons his Syllogism
by one more perfect, which he would gladly reprove. The sum of his answer
follows.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IF his own new Rule may take place, that every distinct clause must Reckon.
page 31.
be held for a distinct Terminus, it will not only have two, but four or five
termini at least, and so will the Reader find by looking only upon it. And I
would prosecute the matter more at large, but I see we have spent too much time
about these trifles.

The Reuiew.
17. Is this all the Reckoning which you can make, to call a matter in
question, and to put us off only with Ifs and Ands, M. Parsons free disposition
to carp at that he cannot correct
viz. If you would prosecute it at large, etc. Heretofore, wheresoever you
thought there was a cause of some reprehension of a Syllogism, you could take
the pains to read a Lecture, instructing your Reader in the knowledge of the
parts and terms of a Syllogism, setting before him a scurrill example
fraught with ridiculous scofferie: yet now, after you have bin more then
ordinarily provoked, to prove your Syllogism legitimate, or else to admit of
mine for your better instruction, you reserve the disquistion hereofvnto your
Reader. I say no more but that you are wise.

18. And so it might have become you to have been, in not reprehending my
Reprehension of your subdiuision, which stood Prcam. pa. 11
thus: Alying Equivocation, is that which is known to be such unto the
speaker, and this is to be subdivided, for it is Either a material lie, which
is when the thing spoken is a lie in it self, but not so understood of the
speaker. Or, A formal lie, when the speaker does know it to be falls Here M.
Parsons exacteth that I should have said Reckon. p. 37.
A material lying Equivocation,A formal lying Equivocation; and the omission
hereof he terms craft: but he will find out his own folly (I doubt not)
after that he has more soberly considered, that these words, Alying
Equivocation, being His irregular taxation.
subdivided into these members, Material, Formal; the Reckon. p. 35. To
equivocate falsely and formally is the worst kind of lying Equivocation. Here
lying Equivocation, is the Genus of his Formal, and Mental.
Genus, viz. [A lying Equivocation,] does necessarily infer the members, and
betoken the Material lying Equivocation, as for Example: Every man is either
Sober, or Distempered. Will any say that it is a crafty Division, because it
was not expressed thus, Every man is either aSober man, or a Distempered man? I
pray you (good Master Parsons) give me not such Reckonings, which, when they
come to be scanned, must make me be indebted unto you for correcting of your
ignorance, even in Triuiall points and in plain Dunstable highway.

The four next charges.
19. The four next points, wherein M. Reckon. pa. 41. etc.
Parsons has been charged with falsehood, as first concerning the allegation
of the text of Esaias; secondly the testimony of Carerius, about Vere and Vero;
thirdly, the testimony of Dolman, alias Parsons, about the admitting of a King;
fourthly, the testimony of Otto Frisingensis, about Pope Gregory the seventh,
alias Hildebrand, are by him repeated afterward in their more proper places,
whether we also See hereafter, cap. 10.
refer them, that we may avoid superfluous repetitions, and find and
examine all matters at their own proper homes.

CHAP. III. About the Question of Rebellion; especially concerning the Title of
M. Parsons book of Mitigation.
SECT. I.
The Preface of M. PARSONS.
HE brings in a scornful fixion, in stead of sound arguments, Reckon. c. 2.
p. 76
by feigning a ridiculous conference or Colloquie in a Stage Play between the
Mitigator and Moderator: wherein he himself may seem to play the Vice, etc.

The Reuiew.
1. In that Colloquie was set down not my fixion, but, that I may so speak,
the faction of M. Parsons and his fellow: for both M. Parsons did pream. p. 30.
commend the Moderate Answerer for his learned Answer; and the same Moderate
Answerer did condemn all others, as insufficient, who being without the
Kingdom of Great Britain, should (as M. Parsons does) attempt to write of
these our English cases: by implication, censuring M. Parsons to be no better
then the Dauus in the old Comedy, that is, a busy and troublesome body. Such
an one as their own Priest has expressed M. Parsons to be, calling him a
Quodlib. p. 21 and 120.
Great Polypragmon: So that he shall not need to seek abroad for a Vice. Well
it were if he played that part in jest, and not in earnest, that so he might
prove only ridiculous, and not obnoxious also, as we shall presently
demonstrate.

The third Inquiry.
2. Whether Mr. Parsons did not betray his cause, even by the title of his
Mitigation? saying, Pream. p. 34.
It is not possible for his Romish Clients to live in obedience and subjection
under his Majesty of Great Britain. This I judged to be a Title maruelously
prejudicial unto them, in whose behalf he published his Mitigation. Let us
see how soberly M. Parsons will discharge himself.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis Inference is a mere cauilling of a seditious spirit, for that Recko.
page 79.
my writing answers directly unto the purport of his seditious Book,
saying, that it was impossible for Catholic subjects to live quietly in his
Majesty's Kingdom: My answer being then contradictorie to Mr. Mortons
assertion, containing so much as was needful to have been said unto his
negative; he saying that it was impossible, and I aunswering that it was not
impossible.

A Reueiwe.
3. Soberly and quietly, good M. Parsons, and so shall you beter remember that
which I told you Pream. pa. 35.
before in the preamble, and which you have forgotten: to wit, that howsoever
this answer (if it were true) might confront your Adversary T. M. against whom
you writ (who said that It is impossible forthem, whom you have inspired, to
perform due subjection) yet could it not satisfy the States of our land, to
whom you writ, Mr. Parsens in Straits.
who seek in a dutiful Allegiance, not a constrained, but a voluntary; nor a
suspicious, but a religious possibility of subjection, which always
(according to the Oath of Allegiance) infers an impossibility of being
rebellious: nor can they be contented with your may, but with a must be
subject, as then I told you out of the Apostles doctrine, commanding Romans 13.
Every soul to submit it self unto the powers that be: explained by Saint
Augustine: The Apostle saying (says he) that [It is necessary that we be
subject,] lest that any might not perform this in love, but as of co^straint,
he adds Not for fear of wrath, but for conscience sake,] that is, not
dissemblingly, but dutifully in good conscience, in love of him (that is God)
who commands subjection: as in another place he commands servants to obey
their injurious Masters, but not with eye-seruice, as only pleasing men, but
as pleasing God. If this kind of subjection was challenged of Christians under
Paganish Kings and heathenish Masters, how could you but give cause of
jealousy unto our kingdom by that your Title, which will promise no more but
that [ It is not impossible to live in subjection?] In the end, for want of
better demonstration of your good intention in that Title, you run to a
similitude.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALthough this [It is not Impossible] do contain but in generality, Reck.
page 79. 80.
yet does it suppose all necessary conditions, that are to be required for
performance: As for example, If a Noble woman should resolve to depart from her
husband; saying, it is impossible for me and you to live together, the
difference of our natures and conditions being considered, and that her husband
should answer again, It is not impossible: does he not answer sufficiently
and to the pur pose? For he understands the other circumstances included, If
you bear your self like a wife, have respect to both our honors, and the
like.

The Reuciwe, manifesting the absurdity of Master PARSONS his Similitude.
4. Whereas the question is, how a subject should manifest the truth of his
loyalty unto his King, Mr. Parsons gives us a Similitude, how an Husband, who
is the Lord, shall make faith of his behavior unto his wife, who is the
subject. This is an absurd elusion rather then an illustration, changing the
case, by altering the Sex: For an husband has a liberty to make his equal
conditions, and the term of possibility may become him: but it is otherwise
with a wife, who stands in the obligation of subjection to her husband.

5. I propounded unto Mr. Parsons a contrary similitude, to wit, Preamb. p. 35.
If a wife, to mitigate her husbands jealousy, occasioned by her loose
behavior, should seek to satissie him by saying, be contented good husband,
it is not impossible for me to become an honest woman hereafter: whether her
husband would take this for a just Mitigation. This any one may know to be an
agreeable and proportionable Similitude, which Mr. Parsons has not answered
unto; but concealed, that he might more liberally (which by his leave, is a
piece of fine craft) call my assertion vain and impertinent: as follows.

Mr. PARSONOS Reckoning.
Vain therefore is the cauillation of Mr. Morton, saying, that there Reckon.
ibid.
is nothing else proved but a possioilitie.

The Reueiwe.
6. These words, It is not impossible, by true equipollency, do they signify
any more but, It is possible? and so e contra. As for example, he that should
commend Mr. Parsons saying, It is not impossible for him to write moderately,
says no more, according to the rule of equipollency, but, It is possible for
him to write moderately. I wish, that Mr. Parsons, had looked better to his
book of Modals, before that he had made me this raw Reckoning. We now come to

SECT. II.
The first Argument of the Impossibility of due subjection.

The charge against Mr. PARSONS
7. HE said that Mitiga. p. 24. n. 22. and Preamb. page 37.
Christ together with the commission in spiritual affairs, gave unto Peter's
successors a charge and oversight of temporalities in like manner, with
authority to proceed against temporal Governors, for defense and
preservation of his spiritual charge; whether directly, as commonly Canonists
teach, or indirectly, as Divines hold, there is no difference, but in the
manner of speech: for in the thing it self, both parties do agree. Here is
an advancing of a power in temporal affairs over a King, which I thought
could no more possibly consist with the Civil Oath of Allegiance in our land,
whereby all foreign Jurisdiction in such cases is excluded, then can temporal
Supremacy, and no Supremacy.

Mr. PARSONS Reckoning, for his discharge.
WHereto I answer, that in belief and Doctrine they cannot Reckon. page 81.
be reconciled, but in civil life and conversation and practice of due
temporal obedience, they may be no less (for any thing touching this point)
then if they were al of one Religion, if such Make-bates as these would cease
to set Sedition.

The Reueiwe.
8. I have written nothing for moving, but for removing of Sedition, which the
Title of your Mitigation did but only palliate and cloak, as now in your
answer you further bewray. They may agree, (say you) although not in
Doctrine, yet in conversation. If I shall reply and say, that you will not
agree with us in the Doctrine concerning Civil Conversation, Ergo, you will
not agree with us in Civil Conversation: can you possibly shape me any
sensible answer? For seeing it is your doctrine to excommunicate and root
out all Protestants as Heretics, whenever there is an opportunity to
proccede against them by arms or otherwise: Shall any look for Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Can any expect a Civil practice from such
uncivil and brutish positions and doctrines?

SECT. III.
The second Reason of Impossibility and charge against Master Parsons.
9. IT was demanded, how far it pleased Mr. Parsons to extend the Papal
power in temporal affairs, against such as do contradict his spiritual
Jurisdiction? He (...) p. 83. out of Mitig. page 77.
told us that Two Protestant Prmces were excommunicated consured, and molested
by the Sea Apostolic, Q. Elizabeth of England, and K. Henry then of Navarre,
now of France: the first of these two for the violent change of Religion which
she made in the Realm, with deprivations and imprisouments of Catholic
Bishops, Prelates, and Clergy, etc. The other, for fear he, coming to the
Crown of France in that disposition, wherein he then was presumed to be,
should attempt the like change in that great kingdom, etc. These examples
(said I) are both plain and pregnant. A Protestant Queen must be deprived for
resisting the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Pope, and a Protestant King must
be also deposed, least peradventure he may make any resistance. Now, we see,
that the same Papal authority is by the laws of Great Britain as
expressly excluded; their Religion suppressed, their Clergy exiled, and
Protestants Religion (according to former proceedings) continued. All which
does argue as great an Impossibility of dutiful Subjection, as it is for
Hinderance and Sufferance; Change, and Continuance of the same Religion, to be
matched and married together. Thus then, and now I am ready to take his
Reckoning.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
His two next reasons of Impossibility are so obscurely and intricately set
Reckon. page 82.
set down, as if he understand them himself, it is much, in my opinion: for
as for me, I see not, I confess, what inference can be made out of them,
though I have purused them over with much attention, more then twice; and the
same, I suppose, the common Reader will say, when he has in like manner
considered of them: for they concern only the Excommunication of Q.
Elizabeth, and of king Henry the fourth of France, which censure was
promulgated by two several Popes of this our age, and consequently the
doctrine is dangerous (says he.) But I have showed now, that more then three
times so many Protestant Princes were tolerated by other Popes. How then do
these examples infer so general a necessity of disobedience in all
Catholic subjects: yea and an impossibility of the contrary, that they can
be obedient.

The Reuiewe.
10. When he has the matter so fully and plainly laid before his eyes, and
is challenged to make an answer, he tells us that he cannot see. Is this a
Sober, and not rather a sorry Reckoning? Notwithstanding it was (I must needs
say) M. Parsons wisely fainetls himself ignorant.
a point of wisdom in him, neither to see this himself, nor to let it be
seen of others, according to that of the Comedian, Non sapis, si sapis; that
is, A wise man must sometime not see that which he sees. In which Art, our
Adversaries are not altogether unexperienced, for their own Marsilius notes
this to have been practiced by Cardinal Bellarmine, Who, according to his
fashion (says Marsil. Defens. cap 8.. errat. 7. page 380. Dissembledignorance.
Marsilius) faigneth himself to be ignorant of the force of an argument,
which he cannot answer. Wherein they play with men, as the Philosopher, of
whom we read, when hearing of a riddle, which he could not unfold, and being
urged by one that said, (...) that is, Loose this Difficulty, loose it;
Answered saying, Soft a while, Sir, for were it not great madness in me, if I
should seek to loose that, which whilst it is bound does so greatly vex and
torment me?

11. Thus it fares with Mr. Parsons: for the reason of this Impossibility was
taken not only from the Excommunication of Princes: but from the Preamb. p. 38.
Deposing of them, and so the Reader might have easily discerned, if Mr.
Parsons, to inure his pen to deceitfulness, had not craftily concealed that
point. This deposing of Kings from their Kingdoms inferred, as I then said, as
much an Impossibility as King, and no King. And this consequence diverse Romish
Doctors Seehereafter.
will readily confess to be most true.

12. When furthermore we demand of Mr. Parsons (seeing they teach an
eradicatio^ of Princes, who will stand excommunicate) how it comes to pass
thatsome Protestant Princes have not bin molested? He, by way of preoccupation,
tells us that Mr. Parsons allows of safety of Potestant Kings only by a
Toleration.
such Protestant Princes were tolerated-by other Popes. Are not now al
Protestant Princes much beholden to Mr. Parsons who allows the^their Crowns
only upon the Popes Toleration? He thought that I was somewhat Obscure in my
former reason, but I suppose that his Clients will judge that he has been
too plain in this answer, in saying, that Protestant Princes have been but
tolerated by other Popes: to wit, only so long (as others have professed)
until they have power to resist: who sees not this answer to be
intolerably treaherous, allowing no better Toleration of such Kings, then kings
oftentimes do in tolerating of Rebels, which is Tolerare dones possint
tollere. So that, in very deed, the answer which Mr. Parsons offers, for
confutation of the objected Impossibility of due subjection, does more strongly
confirm it.

SECT. IIII.
The third Argument of Impossibility. The charge against Mr. PARSONS.
13. THis was Preamb. p. 38.
taken from the practical Bull of Pius Quintus, in Anathematizing our late
Queen, in depriving her of all Regal dignity, in absoluing her subjects from
their Allegiance; and from Mr. Parsons too tender a touch of that desperate
Powder Treason, calling it a Temerarious fact, etc. For both which he is to
Reckon.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I See not what inference can be made. Reckon. page 82.


The Reueiw.
14. If Mr. Parsons see not, that by dissoluing of the Oath of Allegiance,
there is excluded all possibility of due subjection, Dissembled ignorance.
the fault is to be imputed rather to his will, then to his wit. The Proverb
is, that Blear'd eyes will not see the sun: And who sees not that this
concealment is guilefull? which kind of aunswering may be called Quiet
indeed, but no Reckoning at all.

The fourth reason of Impossibility: and charge against Master PARSONS.
15. Whereas, by their Doctrine, it is in the Popes pleasure, to award his
censure of Eradication of Protestant Kings, and of their faithful subjects: it
seemed to me to imply an Impossibility of their dutiful subjection. He
answered that Mitig. p. 95. (...) 8
There is nothing in this but a May, which being de futuris contingentibus, all
remains in uncertainty: which answer I judged to be prodigious.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IDoe not deny, nor ever did, that due providence and provision Reckon. page
85.
ought to be held of future contingents, but my saying is, that it must have
due limits, lest it become hurtful, to wit, vain and vexing Jealousy.

The Reueiwe.
16. It is no rare thing in Mr. Parsons to say and gainsay, according as he
finds the season to fit. Before he made no more of the dangers, which may
ensue upon the Popes malice against Protestants, but as a man would do of his
dream, which he never considers, before it be past. For now that May shall
be something: but when they speak of subjection to Protestant Kings, his May
is but a meteor, as we shall see.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Say moreover that every May, is not a Must. Reckon. page 85.


The Reueiwe.
17. I believe you, for this your position [ Romanists may possibly be
obedient subjects,] does not by your doctrine infer necessarily that they
must be obedient, as by ordinary experience has been too truly seen: but
yet your may for the eradicating and rooting out of your opposites does, by
your doctrine, necessarily infer a must, as often as you may find power to
perform it, as has been proved from the Preamb. p. 41.
doctrine of your Card. Bellarmine, saying, that such Protestant Kings must not
be suffered to reign: From your Doctor Sanders, saying, They must be rooted
out: From your Doctor Bouchier, saying that This must be done by all means
possible: and from the Bull of Pope Urban, practicing the same, and saying, Not
only Lutheran Kings, but also all their favorers must be destroyed.

18. All these were in that Reason expressly urged, the Authors cyted, and now
M. Parsons has fraudulently concealed, Mr. Parsons most strange fraud.
as though this his Answer ( viz. May be, does not infer a Must) had not
been so much as thought on before. Here, if ever, it concerned M. Parsons to
satisfy; but he deals like a close, subtle Merchant, who is loath to
acknowledge his debt which he cannot possibly discharge: Is this good
Reckoning? Is it not an argument both of a desperate cause, and of a guilty
conscience? Notwithstanding, in the end, as though he had cleared the whole
Reckoning, and that nothing could be objected against him, he adds two other
pleasant, but yet prodigious conceits.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Truly in this point I see not, what probabilities may be in reason, Reckon.
p. 87.
to persuade his Majesty that his Catholic subjects would not live quietly
and confidently under him, if they might be used as Subjects, and have that
Princely and Fatherly protection from him, which both laws do allow to
freeborn subjects, and they may hope and expect from his benignity, where no
personal or actual delict shall have made them unworthy thereof.

The Reuiew.
19. If your Catholics ( M. Parsons) may be used as Subjects? Let me entreat
you for some few minutes of time, to take upon you the face of an ingenuous
man, and tell us whether you think them to be used as Subjects, or no? It is
likely you are of the same mind you were, when you said that The letter of a
Catholic touching the Oath of Allegiance. p. 42.
His Majesty's mild and sweet respect toward Catholics at his first
entrance, was soon by art of their enemies auerted, long before the
Conspiracy fell out, for that not only all the most cruel Statutes and
penal laws made by Q. Elizabeth were renewed and confirmed before this, with
addition of others, tending to no less rigor and acerbity, but also the
exaction of the same was put in practice with great severity: Nor were men's
goods and persons only afflicted, but the lives also of sundry taken away for
cause of Religion, before this Powder Treason fell out. Page 43.
But to proceed a little further in the narration of some points of heavy
persecution, which ensued soon after his Majesty's being in England, much
before the Powder Treason was attempted. So you go on, reckoning us your
Pressures, which you call P. 43. 44 46.
Violence intolerable; New angariation; yea an huge Sea of Molestations and
Exagitations. One word more. What, I pray you, do you think of the Powder-men,
who lived at liberty in great ryote? Mitig. page 50
They were half a score young Gentlemen, put in despair by apprehension of
public persecution, without demerit of the persecuted. Well then, it is
plain that youacknowledg no Probability of quiet Subjection in your
Catholics, to wards his Majesty, further then that they are used M. Parsons
betray eth himself in the point of Allegiance.
as Subjects: but (say you) they are vexed with intolerable violence, new
angariations, and persecutions, without their demerit. You need say no more,
your Reader will easily understand your conclusion, which gives us a fare-wel
unto all voluntary subjection. Thus we have unmasked M. Parsons, that we might
see his bare face.

20. I willingly omit, as frivolous, his next descant upon a Rec kon. pa. 87
Red-rose. and a White: for albeit there is Now no difference of Titles
between the Red-rose, and the White; yet is there odds between loyal
subjection, and treasonable Positions and practices, which end in blood as
red as any Rose.

SICT. V.
An Addition unto the former Impossibilities.
21. Unto the former Argument I pream p. 42.
added,as an assistant, your professed Covert of Mental Reservation, used by
you in your examinations for a cloak of much perfidiousnesse, which works an
Impossibility of discovery, and consequently adds unto the former
Impossibilities.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, concerning the privilege of Priests and their
exemptions.
THat we may equivocate before incompetent Judges, and that Reckon. page 89.
the Lay-Iudges in England are incompetent to examine Priests, may be as well
used for an argument to prove, that Laymen and Priests cannot live together in
Spain and Italy, and other Catholic countries, for that there also Laymen
are incompetent Judges in Clergie-mens causes, and so are Clergymen
themselves, if they have no lawful Jurisdiction, or proceed not lawfully.

The Reuiew.
22 Thus you answer only for justification of your Priests, we see by this the
notable prerogative of a Romish Priest, to wit, whenever he comes to be
examined before a LayMagistrate, AEquiuocating a Priestly prerogative.
he is privileged to Equivocate, because Lay-Magistrates (according to M.
Parsons doctrine) are unto them Judges incompetent.

23. But by what law, M. Parsons, can you plead such an exemption? by Diume
law? some of your side have so taught, but your more sober Authors dare
confute them, as we read in their Marsilius, to wit, Ioh. Marsil. Defens.
aduers. Bellar. c. 3. p. 199 and 200. etc Exemption of Priests, (...)
The Exemption of Ecclesiastical persons in temporal and criminal matters,
Medina rest. q. 15. a most sound and Catholic Author says, is not
prescribed in any place of Scripture, and concludes that it is not by Divine
law; Couarruvias lib. pract. ca. 31. conclus. 2. is of the same opinion who is
also a solid, and Catholic Author: Victoria also, and Sotus consent
thereunto; and so did formerly ( meaning Bellarmine) the L. Cardinal himself.
So he. It must therefore follow, that all such Exemption proceeded from humane
indulgence; and may upon humane necessity be altered again: neither is that
prerogative universal: therefore it may be that M. Parsons, when he named
Spain and Italy, saw some cause to pretermit France.

24. Howsoever their case may be in other Countries, yet the odds between
them and ours is far different, because the Romanist do acknowledge a power
spiritual in their Bishops, and account them to be competent Judges, both to
examine, and also (upon just cause) to deliver their Clerks into the hands of
secular Magistrates, and so unto execution, according to the nature of their
demerit: but in England they hold both lay and spiritual Governors to be in
like cases altogether incompetent; and therefore the Argument of Impossibility
is more in England then it can be either in Spain or Italy: yet this was the
best shift that Mast. Parsons could make, to confound two cases of England and
Spain. which are no less different then England and Spain.

CHAP. IIII.
A brief Discourse, concerning Mental Equivocation; proouing that M. PARSONS,
by one Grant, has overthrown his defense of Mental Reservation.

SECT. I.
1. MAster Parsons, for the justifying of Mental Equivocation, has borrowed,
as he calls it, a Reason from the example of the Mittigation cap. 9. p. 403.
Faxe, which creature, when he is in danger of hunters, is taught by the
instinct of nature to wind and turn, to trip it backward, and forward, and
all to deceive the Hunters, and to secure himself: So (says he) may man use
the art of Mental Reservation in some cases.

2. This being M. Parsons his own example, he may not be offended with me, if
I entitle the discussing of this point, The hunting of the Fox, especially
knowing that their own Priest has made bold to write thus against him:
Quodlib. p. 288
If you can procure Charles Pagets book (says he) against Father Parsons,
you shall find the Fox so uncased, and left so naked of all honesty,
wisdom, and judgment in these points, etc. But first we will prepare our
selves to the sport.

Mr. PARSONS, his Reckoning.
SEe what ostentation and vaunt he used at his first entrance, as Reckon. c.
2.. 11. page 91.
though he would do great matters indeed; for thus he begins: That P. R.
has flatly overthrown his desence of Mental Equivocation; which is made so
evident, as that no wit of man can possibly excuse him. This, you see, is
confidently spoken of himself, and his wit: but his Reader will find as great
want of wit and discretion in this brag, and in the Medium here chosen to
overthrow my whole Treause, as ever perhaps he found in any man, professing wit
and learning.

The Reuiew.
3. I have seen your Reckoning Master Parsons, wherein with the sweat of your
brains, you have forced your wit to defend a desperate cause with no small
confidence. In the which cause, there is more need of Grace then of Wit, but I
am willing to join issue with you, and to stand unto the trial of any
indifferent Reader. Let us begin at a beginning.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE begins his Confutation thus: How now would my Reader Reckon. p. 92.
hear this noble Equiuocator confuted? By Fathers? or by his own Doctors? or
by sensible Reasons? This will be no hard matter to perform, as I hope (God
willing) to avouch in due time. So he. And this, you see, is no otherwise then
if a bare and broken Debtor, having been long called upon to pay his debts,
should step forth at length in a vaunt before a multitude, saying to his
Creditor, Come Sir, What sort of gold will you be paid in? Will you have it in
Spanish Pistolets? Portugal Cruzadoes? French Crowns? Zechnies of Venice?
Dallers of Germany? or English Angels? And his Creditor shall answer him,
Sir, any kind of coin would content me, although it were but half-faced
groats, or single-pence, so I might have it. And that then the other should
reply, as M. Morton does here, Well I hope, God willing, to pay you in time,
and so leave him, with less probability of payment then ever before. And were
this now substantial dealing for satisfaction of his creditors? And does not
Mr. Morton the very like, that asking here the Reader whether he would have
Fathers, Doctors, or Reasons for proof against me, produces never a one, but
says, that he hops to do it in time?

The Reueiwe.
4. Take heed, M. Parsons, your Reader will suspect that you will turn a
Trapezita and Bancker, for you are so skillful in coin, as though you had
served some apprentishippe in the trade: but I fear rather that you will turn
a Coyner, yet not of money, but of fantastical conceits, for which cause you
have been noted by your own fellows for Quodli. p. 236.
The abstract quintessence of all coins and coggeries, one point whereof you
have bewrayed even in this your ridiculous figment: For after my demand, Pream.
p. 43.
How my Reader would have the Equiuocator confuted? Whether by Doctors, or
Fathers, or Reasons? I added, that for the present I thought it a more glorious
Victory to confute him, (that is, M. Parsons) by his own Assertion. Wherein I
dealt with M. Parsons, not as with a M. Parsons was justly dealt withal.
Creditor (for alas what credit is there in an AEquiuocator?) but as a man
would do with a cousener, whom although I might have convinced by witnesses
and sound Arguments, yet I thought it sufficient for the present (especially in
a Preamble) to confute him, as Christ did the Luc. 19. 22.
Seruus nequam, by the words of his own mouth.

5. Notwithstanding M. Parsons (a sober Reckoner forsooth) has called this
kind of dealing an Reckon p. 93.
Art of Mountebankes. But, I hope, he will have cause to say I deal not
unhonestly with him, when I pay him with his own coin, that is, whilst I
confute him with his own Answers, albeit they are sometimes (I confess) more
bare then halfe-faced groats.

SECT. II.
The state of the Question.
6. Pream. p. 43.
COncerning the answer of Saphyra in the Act. 5.
Acts of the Apostles, who being demanded by Saint Peter, whether she Sold
the land for so much, answered, yea for so much, reserving in her mind (as it
was supposed) To give in common, or, To tell it unto you. M. Parsons upon
supposall of this her Reservation, answered notwithstanding, that she lied, and
that No clause of Reservation could free her speech from a lie. I was right
glad to hear our AEquiuocator confess thus much, and hereupon have adventured
to call his doctrine of Mental Equivocation the Art of lying: And so (I hope)
I shall prove it to be, before that we have ended this piece of our Reckoning.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BBut first how does he prove, that she had this meaning of Reservation Recko.
page 97.
in her mind? it is but Mr. Mortons imagination to ascribe it unto her, for it
may more probably be thought, that she had never any such cogitation, to make
her speech lawful by Reservation, but absolutely to lie, which is most
conform to the text it self of holy Scripture, etc.

The Reuiew.
7. This first objection M. Parsons himself knows to be an idle (...) for as
much as we were both of us contented to suppose, that this woman did use a
Mental Reservation, and also to grant, that (notwithstanding this her
Reservation) her speech was a Lie.

8. The reason why I thought she used a Mental Reservation Every one that
lies has in his mind some crochitiue (...)
in this clause [ With purpose to tell it unto you, or such like] is this:
because every one, in suppressing a truth, does thereby purpose not to tell it
unto him, whom he would deceive, and therefore cannot choose but retain that
clause of Reservation, [ To tell it unto you, etc.]

9. Howsoever, Mast. Parsons could not but understand, that a true argument may
be grounded upon a bare supposition, as when the Apostle said, Gal. 1. 8.
If an Angel from heaven shall preach otherwise, then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed: It would not have become any to repile
upon the Apostle, saying, How do you imagine that an Angel from heaven can
preach false doctrine? because the foundation of his exhortation was not an
Assertion, that an Angel from heaven could preach otherwise, but a
supposition, that If, or, Although an Angel from heaven should so do:
Wherefore we agreeing in the supposall, to wit, that she used a Mental
Reservation, let us see whether our next Reckonings will agree.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
BUT not to cut him off so short, and put him to a nonplus on the Reckon. p.
97. 98
sudden, I am content to do him this pleasure, as to suppose with him that the
poor woman might have some such reservation in her mind, as M. Morton
imagines, to wit, that as the Priest says truly, I am no Priest (with
obligation to tell it unto you:) so she might mean, that I have sold it for
no more (to acquaint you withal) and then I say, albeit we should admit this
supposall, it is denied by us flatly, that these two examples were alike, as
now I have declared.

The Reuiew.
10. I thank you that you are pleased, not to recall what you have already
granted: I hope that you will be furthermore so good, as to declare more
plainly, why, albeit the Priest and the Woman used the same kind of
Reservation, yet the one may be thought to have spoken a Truth, and the other a
Lie?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THere was obligation in Saphyra to answer the truth, and in the Reck. page
98.
Hearer lawful authority to demand it, for that he was lawful Judge: but
neither of these two things is in the Priest, that is unlawfully examined by
the incompetent Judge. For that as the said Judge is no Judge, and consequently
has no authority to demand matters prejudicial to the party examined: so
has the other no obligation to answer directly to his intention or
interrogatory. And what has now Mr. Morton to reply to these so evident and
important differences, that make the one answer lawful, the other a lie.

The Reueiwe.
11. Then belike I have not understood you all this while.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
SVrely it is a pitiful thing to see how he is puzeled in this matter.
Reckon. quo sup. page 98. 99.
First he begins with the person of the woman, that is, the speaker, that
did unlawfully Equivocate unto Saint Peter comparing her to the person of the
Priest, that lawfully says unto an incompetent Judge, I am no Priest, and
finds no greater difference between theme: but first, that she is a woman,
and he is a man; and then that it is as possible for a Priest to lie, as for a
woman to tell truth. But he dissembleth the maine difference now mentioned that
she had obligation to tell the truth without Equivocation, and he not, which
is the substantial difference indeed. Here then is no plain dealing to
faulter so manifestly in the most principal point that most imported.

The Reueiwe.
12. Here is no plain dealing indeed, and that will my Reader presently
understand: for Mr. Parsons does charge me with Dissembling of the maine
difference, to wit, That she had obligation to tell the truth without
Equivocation, and he not, this being the very principal point. And yet within
the compass of a few leaves following, in this his Reckoning, he contrarily
confesses, videlicet. Reckon p 106. Mr. Parsons falsehood.
He himself (to wit T. M.) does often here repeat, that I do hold the
answer of the Priest to be true, and hers to be false; for that his was made
to an incompetent Judge, and hers to a competent, so as she was bound to
answer directly unto Saint Peter's meaning. Here Mr. Parsons confesses that
I repeated and acknowledged this (...) difference concerning the Bond,
wherewith the woman was tied, and the Priest was not: nay I did further tell
him, that whether the judge be competent, or not competent, it alters not the
property of a lie, because that truth, which (in his opinion) is supplied by
Mental Reservation, is not suspended upon the understanding of the hearer
whatsoever he be (who may conceive or misconceiue of the speech) but upon the
agreement which the outward speech has with the mind of the speaker. What
answer will he make unto this?

Mr. PARSONS Reckoning.
WHat is this to the purpose? I grant that the truth of my answer, Reckon. pa.
100.
made unto a judge, depends not upon the understanding, conceit, or capacity
of the said judge, but upon the meaning of the speaker, which meaning
notwithstanding is to be measured by the competencie or incompetencie of the
Judge. For if the Judge be competent, then is the aunswerer bound to answer
to his intention, and to have that meaning in his answer, which the Judge
has in his demand: but if he be not competent, then all this obligation
cease, and the speaker is free to have what meaning he list in his answer
(so that in his own sense it be true.) And this for the reason now touched.

The Reueiwe.
13. I know you are not sparing in repetitions, be so courteous as to tell us
one thing more, that we may know whether you understand your self, or no, and
then we shall proceed.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALbeit the simple difference of persons themselves, to whom we Reckon. page
102. and page 35.
speak, alters not the truth or faisitie of our speech: yet some respect or
relation in those persons ( but especially of being a lawful, or unlawful
judge) may and does alter the same wholly, making the one speech truth, and the
other falsitie. And thus much for aunswering the force of Mr. Mortons second
argument.

SECT. III.
The Reueiw, confuting the former Paradoxe, and last refuge, which Mr. Parsons
has, viz. The bond which a man has to tell a truth to one does alter that,
which is otherwise a truth, into a lie.
14. THat which you lay down as the sole foundation, to condemn the Woman,
and free the Priest from lying, is only the obligation or bond of duty,
which she had to speak directly unto her lawful Judge, whereas contrariwise
he was not bound to deliver a direct answer unto a Judge incompetent. So that
the Thesis, which you give us, is this, viz: The same speech made unto one,
unto whom I am not bound to speak directly, is true, by virtue of mental
reservation; which speech being delivered unto an other, unto whom I am bound
to answer directly, is a lie, by reason, forsooth, of the obligation, which I
have not to deceive him: which doctrine I think to be a new and naughty
Paradoxe void of all ground of truth, or light of antiquity. Now therefore let
us follow our Game.

The first Reason, for the confutation of Mr. Parsons, is taken from the use of
Verbal Equivocation.
15. If such be the virtue of a Bond of duty unto a competent Judge, that it
can make that outward speech to be a Lie, which (by reason of Mental
Equivocation) was a truth, as it was spoken unto a Judge incompetent, unto whom
I was not bound to make a direct answer: then must there be the like virtue of
the same Bond in Verbal Equivocation, to alter the property of the same true
speech into a lie, which is impossible.

16. As for example. In this outward speech [ I took away the Popes Bull,] the
word Bull is equivocal, that is, of a double signification, equally betokening
the Popes written Bull, which is his public instrument, under his seal of
lead; or his natural Bull, which is an horned beast, feeding in his pastures
about Rauenna. It chances that the Popes written Bull, which was publickely
fastened upon a pillar, for all the people of Rauenna to take notice of; was by
some body rent and taken away: much questioning there is, who this party might
be; Sempronius is guilty to himself of this trespass: he is inquired after,
concerning the Bull, by a servant of his own house, to whom he is not bound to
make a direct answer, saying: Sir, did not you take away the Popes Bull?
meaning the written one. I took not (quoth he) the Popes Bull, meaning, the
fourefooted Bull. This later sense is true, and the speech (yea even in Mr.
Parsons his judgment) is likewise true. Afterward the same Sempronius is
demanded the same question by a competent Magistrate, unto whom he is bound to
answer directly, and yet he makes the same answer, I took not away the
Popes Bull; in the same sense, as before, understanding the horned Bull. And
shall not this same sense have the same truth? Shall it now become a lie?
Impossible.

17. For albeit, that the Obligation and Bond of duty, wherewith a man is tied
to answer unto the one directly, though not unto the other, have a force to
alter the speech, which was lawful, being spoken unto the incompetent hearer
(such as was his servant,) to be unlawful, sinful, and damnable, when it
was spoken to a Magistrate, justly examining him, because the examinate is
bound in conscience, not to delude the Magistrate, who is the Minister and
Official of God in that business: yet this difference of Competent A
necessary distinction of truth.
and Incompetent, does not change a true speech into a lie. For there is a
double kind of a true speech, the first is direct, the second indirect, as is
plain in the former Verbal Equivocation of the Bull, which being understood
of the natural Bull, is a truth, because that word Bull in that sense agreed
with the understanding of the Speaker, but yet an indirect truth, because it
accords not unto the intention of the hearer. So that, that which Mr. Parsons
calls the principal difference, consisting in being Bound, or not Bound, is
nothing else but the singular fallacy of Mr. Parsons, by confounding of two
truths, and by not distinguishing an indirect truth from a lie.

18. To make this yet more familiar unto my Reader. A boy in the School, who
shot at a Heart, which was in the Park of a neighbor Knight, is asked thereof
by his schoolefellow, (unto whom he is not tied in any bond of duty, to yield
a direct answer) and he answers, I shot not at the Knights heart, meaning,
the heart which was in the Knights body: which sense although it be not
direct, yet even in the judgment of Mr. Parsons, it is true: the same boy is
asked the same question of his Schoolmaster, (who has charge over him to
instruct and correct him, and with whom he is bound to use no collusion) and he
answers; I shot not at the Knights Heart, using the same indirect sense,
(...) before: Afterward the fact is discovered, the Boy is whipped, and that
justly; but why? Not because he spoke less truly unto his Schoolmaster then
unto his Schoolefellow, but because he spoke not more directly, when he was
challenged thereunto by the bond of duty and obedience.

SECT. IIII.
Another Reason, taken from Master PARSONS his Confession concerning the Clause
of Reservation.
19. MAster Parsons is content to repeat my next Reason where I said, That
Recko. pa. 105. out of Preamb. page 47.
In mental Equivocation P. R. says, that the Clause of Reservation mixed with
the outward speech, makes but one proposition, which is as true in the mind of
the Speaker, as if it were wholly delivered in the outward speech. As for
example: I am no Priest, mixed with this clause conceived in mind, To tell it
you, is as true, in the judgment of P. R. as if it had been without
Reservation fully expressed with the mouth, saying, I am no Priest, to tell it
you. Now then, Say P. R. (for I mean to fetter you in your own shacles) the
woman when she said to S. Peter, I have sold it but for so much, if she had
reserved in her mind this clause, To give it unto you, either had it been, by
virtue of Reservation, a truth, or else (notwithstanding that Reservation) it
had been a lie. If the clause of Reservation might have made it a truth, then
has not P. R. said truth in concluding, That no clause of Reservation could
sauc it from a lie. If contrariwise the trick of Reservation could not save it
from a lie, then does not the reserved clause, To tell it you, being mixed with
the outward speech, I am no Priest, make up one true proposition, and
consequently it must be concluded of the Priestly Equivocation, as is here by
P. R. confessed of the woman's, viz. that no clause of Reservation can save her
speech from a lie. For if she had said unto Saint Peter in plain words, I have
sold it but for so much, to give it in common, or such like, this every one
knows had been a true speech: yet the saying, I sold it for so much, with
mental Reservation, reserving in her mind. to give it in common, Or, To tell
it unto you, was, notwithstanding this Reservation. even by the judgment of P.
R. a flat lie. Thus far Mr. Parsons in repeating my argument, which if he
have answered sufficiently, then shall I conceive better of his evil cause.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning for his own discharge.
THis is his (...) and greatest argument, whereof, as presently you Reckon. pa.
106.
shall hear, he vaunteth exceedingly, conquering me first in his margent,
writing there, An (...) conviction of P. R. and then again, A plain
demonstration: To say nothing of the fetters and shacles in the text it self.
And I have thought good to lay forth his whole Discourse, as it lies together
in his book, that hereby you may see with what manner of substance he fills
up Paper, and what sort of shacles he has to fetter men withal, which are as
strong as the nets of cobwebs: for that in this place his whole Discourse and
argument is founded upon a manifest false ground and principle, to wit, upon
the mere mistaking, or fond supposition, that the two aunsweres of the Priest
and the Woman, viz. I am no Priest, with obligation to tell it unto you, And, I
sold it for no more, with obligation to give unto you, are of equal falsitie,
which we still deny, and he cannot prove: and yet himself does often here
repeat, that I do hold the answer of the Priest to be true, and hers to be
false, for that his was made to an incompetent Judge, and hers to a competent:
so as she was bound to have answered directly unto Saint Peter's meaning. Which
being so, what needed all this long obscure speech of Mr. Morton, which might
have been spoken in four lines: for I grant that the aunsweres of the Priest
and the Woman, do make each of them in themselves, being mixed with your
Reservation, a whole perfect proposition, as if they had been uttered without
Reservation.

The Reueiwe.
20. You are exceeding tedious, M. Parsons, when will you come to the answer
of the former argument, which was grounded upon your own Grants? The first was
this: that The clause of Reservation, mixed with the outward words, does make a
whole perfect proposition or speech, which agreeing with the mind of the
Speaker, is as true (said you) as if it were wholly uttered with the mouth. Now
the woman's supposed Mental Equivocation had been a true speech, if it had
been wholly uttered with the mouth, thus: [ Sir, I sold it but for so much, to
deliver in common, etc.] which, being concealed by a Mental Reservation, Mr.
Parsons has called a Lie. Whereupon I have inferred (and that necessarily)
that the Mixture of the Clause of Reservation with an Outward speech, does not
of it self make the speech true, and consequently their doctrine of
Equivocation, and Mental Reservation is not only a lying Doctrine, but also a
Doctrine oflying. By this time we have him in such straits, that he must either
deny his answer of Obligation, or else condemn his former position of
Reservation: I doubt that Master Parsons will play us some trick or other of
his foresaid Schoolmaster Raynard the Fox.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IT is evident that the woman's proposition, that shehad sold her land Reckon.
pa. 107.
for no more, with Obligation to give it unto Saint Peter, or, to be spent in
common (this being the true effect and substance of her Answer) was a lie,
whether it had been uttered wholly together in plain words, or part in
speech, and part in Mental Reservation; and Master Morton does childishly
suppose and affirm, that every one knows, that it had been a true speech:
for albeit the words of S. Peter in the text of the Acts of the Apostles be,
Tell me woman, if you sold it for so much? Act. 5.
and her answer was, yea for so much, yet is it evident by the drift and
circumstance of the place, that S. Peter's meaning was, whether they sold it for
so much, and no more; and therefore if she did equivocate, as M. Morton will
have her, her secret meaning must needs be, that she sold it for no more, so
as she was bound to utter it, Or, give it unto him, Or bring it to the common
purse. All which was false and a lie, in respect both of her vow, to bring the
whole to the common purse, and for that S. Peter was her lawful and competent
Judge, and she obliged thereby to tell him the truth.

The Reuiew; revealing an intolerable trick of Sophistry, used by M. PARSONS,
in perverting the whole State of the Question.
21. Mark now (good Reader) for we now come to vncouch this creature:) It was
supposed that the woman said, I sold it but for so much, reserving in her
mind, To give into the common purse, Or, To tell it unto you, that is, but for
so much, with any purpose to tell unto you, or, to give in common: which words
if they had been delivered with the mouth, had (as every one sees) been most
true. Now Mast. Parsons finding himself driven to an extremity, puts into
her Reservation M. Parsons pitiful plunge.
the word, Bond, or, Obligation, as though she had answered thus: I sold it
but for so much, with this Reservation, So as bound to tell it unto you, Or,
With Obligation to give in common, inserting the word Bound, in her
Reservation, which, being delivered with the mouth, makes a false speech: for
she could not say without a lie, that she was not bound to tell S. Peter what
she sold it for. And thus Mr. Parsons has altered the whole subject of the
Question, falsely supposing a Reservation, which uttered with the mouth is
false; and that wittingly, because he even in this Reckoning, where he
repeateth the State of this question, as it was first laid down by me,
confesses, that I spoke of Reckon. p. 105.
A mental Reservation, mixed with the outward speech, which in the judgment
of P. R. is as true in the mind of the speaker, as if it were wholly (...) in
the outward speech. But now, by instancing in that proposition, which is in the
outward speech, a flat lie. Thus, as we see, M. Parsons has changed the point
in question, which is the most absurd and base kind of Sophistry that can be
used.

22. This may appear by a like example. Two Disputants are met together, the
question to be decided is, Whether it may be lawful to license Titius to have
a Concubine (by Concubine understanding a Woman, who is not his married An
example.
wife.) After much debating of the question, the Answerer is so miserably
plunged, as, for his last Refuge, to say, that he only desended it to be
lawful to license Titius to enjoy a Concubine, to whom he, For thus does
Bellarm. understand the word l. 2. dc Conc. c. 8. S. 11.
, is married. Would not the hearer abhor or scorn such Sophistry as this,
whereby the Question about a woman unmarried, is changed into the Question
concerning a married wife?

23. Yet thus deals M. Parsons with me in this present Example: For our
question was of a speech, used in mental Reservation, which being uttered with
the mouth, is a true speech, as when a man shall say to a competent Magistrate,
I know no such thing, with any purpose to tell it unto you: This, I say, is a I
am no Priest such as I should be, Or such as I desire to be, Or the like.
Mitigat. c. 8. number. 55. p. 344.
true speech, when it is wholly and fully uttered with the mouth: and of this
kind of speech is our question propounded, as M. Parsons himself knew right
well; yet now has he turned it, as if he had said thus, I know no such thing,
as bound to tell it unto you, which spoken unto a lawful Magistrate, is
certainly a lying speech.

24. If M. Parsons use to change the question in this manner, he may dispute
indeed, but like a vain man, who only beats the air: And if I should
follow him in this course, we might well be represented by that Emblem of one
man milking an he Goat, and another holding under a sieve, resembling A simile.
two such Disputers, whereof the one obiecteth nothing to the purpose, and the
other answers he knows not what.

25. Although he be now in our hands, yet will we be content to give him more
play, and try if he in another course can shift for himself. To this end I
will yield so far unto M. Parsons, as to suppose with him that the
Reservation which the woman made, was such as he has now pretended, to wit, [
I sold it but for so much] reserving in her mind as bound to tell it unto you
and also that No clause of reservation could save this her speech from a lie:
All which being granted, yet do I now auerre as confidently as before, that
this second Position is the overthrow of his whole defense of Mental
Reservation, as will now appear.

A third Reason of Confutation by a Dilemma.
26. After that M. Parsons had Reckon. p. 113.
confessed such a Reservation Reckon. p. 113.
of the woman, which no clause of a second reservation can save from a lie, and
thereupon was challenged to grant, that the manner of a Romish Priests
reservation is likewise a lie, and so the trick of Mental Reservation to be
but a lying devise: He had no other refuge in the world, but to forge a manner
of Reservation of his own, by putting in the word Bound, as if the woman had
answered, I sold it but for so much, conceiving in her mind, As bound to tell
it unto you. Which speech he calls a lie, and says, that no clause of
Reservation can save it from a lie.

27. Now therefore I am to pose M. Parsons, and if he answer this, I shall
not call a Mental AE quiuocatora liar. My question is this: If unto that
proposition [ I sold it but for so much, as bound to tell it unto you, she had
added such clauses as these, saying, I sold it but for so much, as bound to
tell it unto you (Saint Peter) meaning, As you are a private man: Or, As bound
to tell it unto you, meaning, with any intent to kill you: Or, as bound to tell
it unto you, meaning [ with any desire to steal a man's cloak: and a thousand
such like additions to the former clause of Reservation: My question is, I say,
whether every one of these additions do make the supposed speech of the woman
true or no? For if the woman's speech standing thus, I sold it but for so much,
as bound to tell it unto you (by reserving further in mind) as you are a
private man; make not the speech true, then is there not any case of
Reservation, which is not a The miserable straights of Mr. Parsons defense.
lie, and so farewell all Mental Reservation: but if those clauses being added
to her speech, do make the first clause true, then has Master Parsons
deceived us, in saying that her speech was such, Which no clause of Reservation
could free from a lie. This being the maine and substantial point, indeed, I
crave leave to convince M. Parsons by another Argument.

A fourth Reason, which is taken from his own description of Mental
Equivocation.
28. We will leave the woman's supposed manner of Equivocation, and argue from
M. Parsons his description of Mental Equivocation. Mitig c. 8. n. 55. p. 344.
I say ( says M. Parsons) that in Mental Reservation the speech agrees with
the mind of the Speaker, for that I truly and really mean, that I am no
Priest, in the sense which I speak it, which may be what pleases me, or that
which I lust to frame to my self, so as I mean, I am no Priest, such as I
should be, or such like. Here M. Parsons (speaking in the person of an
Equiuocating Priest) does tell us, he may make a Mental Reservation of any
thing that pleases him, or what he list to frame in his imagination: so that
it does agree with his mind, which is as liberal a grant, as I could require.

Now then let M. Parsons think with himself that some Priest is called in
question before the Pope, by whom he is asked, Whether he kept a Concubine, or
no? The Priest although he kept a Concubine, yet answers the Pope, saying [ I
have kept no Concubine] reserving in his mind [ for the use An example.
of your Holiness.] I would be so much beholden unto Master Parsons, as to
tell me, whether the Priest lied in his Answer, or no? And so we shall make a
short Reckoning.

29. He has told us, that all indirect Reservation in a lawful question, and
before a competent Judge, is a lie: because of an Obligation and Bond, which
the party has to answer directly: he has said also that whenever Mental
Equivocation is true in the mind, it is as true, being uttered with the mouth.
Wherefore if he shall answer, that the Priests Mental Equivocation was no
lie, then is he compellable to forsake his last refuge of Bond and Obligation
to a competent Judge, which he said does make the speech a lie. But if he
answer that the Priests Reservation in the mind was a lie, which (as is
apparent) being fully declared with the mouth, is not a lie, then does not the
mental Clause of Reservation make a true mixed proposition, and consequently
his maine ground of Mental Equivocation is quite overthrown.

30. Finally the sum of all this is thus much, that if the same speech, which
being uttered fully with the mouth, is true; shall (as it is mixed with
Reservation of the mind) be The desperateness of Mr. Parsons defense.
judged a lie: then Mental Reservation and the Doctrine thereof is an Art of
lying. But if that reservation make the proposition true, then the Bond of
speaking directly to a competent judge, cannot make the speech a lie: And so
his last Evasion by an Obligation to tell a truth, is a false and lying
Assertion. So that if he will but look again to his legs, he shall find
the Shacles of his own Confessions to stick so fast to his heels, as
although he be the most nimble heeled of all his Order, yet he shall never be
able to shake them off. Thus much may serve for this present, concerning
Mental Equivocation. We shall add other conuictions in their due and proper
places.

31. In the Interim I am to satisfy for my self, because Mr. Reckon. p. 103.
Parsons obiecteth against me a contradiction forsooth, for that I called the
woman, unto whom Saint Peter swear, an Examiner incompetent; and yet elsewhere
say that the same Maid was competent enough, to hear a true Oath. Upon these
two strings of Contradiction (as they may seem to be) he makes himself
Music, by a mere cauillation. For although Mr. Parsons Cavil.
that I had expressly named that Maid a Competent Judge or Examiner (as I did
not) yet Mr. Parsons knows that the same word may be taken properly, and
improperly: properly for him, who by office, has authority to exact an Oath,
and to censure the person: but improperly, for every one that has liberty
only to hear and to understand the truth of an Oath: what can be more
familiar? How often does Mr. Parsons in this Reckoning require his Reader to
Judge indifferently between us? And yet I suppose that he holds not every
Reader of his Book to be properly a Judge. This distinction is sufficient to
break his Fiddle, and to hinder his frivolous descant upon words.

CHAP. V.
Of Falsities objected unto some Romanists, and first unto certain Popes,
alleging a false Canon, for proof of Appeals unto Rome.

SECT. I.
1. MAster Parsons, before he came to the matter, had leisure to make a Preface
unto his after Reckoning, thus.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HIs hatred howsoever it was not against this or that particular Reck. c. 3. p.
117.
man, or against their persons, yet was it against their cause, and that in
such a bloody sort of Sycophancie, as included all the persons of that
Religion: and therefore in fawning upon two or three in external words and
countenance, either in person, or elsewhere, whilst in his chamber he sought
by writing his spiteful, infamous, and virulent, lying Books to oppress them
all, and cut their throats, this measure was not good, but may be justly called
a malicious measure. And yet was this Master Mortons measure, for so much as no
man did ever write so maliciously, to my knowledge, as he; not in so odious
argument, and jealous a time.

The Reuiewe.
2. Master Parsons being thus raging in his Quiet and sober Reckoning, how
would he (shall we think) behave himself in his furious and drunken fits, if
he should fall into such distempers? As for my self, I can say truly, as in
the presence of God, that when I heard the Romish Doctrines crying (in "their
general Allarumes against Protestants) Depose, kill, root them out, etc. (as
I then fully proved in one paragraphe,) and besides had considered the
practiced Treasons, Rebellion, Massacres and Invasions, together with that last
Nouem. 5. 1605.
Powder-furnace, the invention of the bottomless pit; which all of them, as so
many blazing comets, presented themselves unto me, I could not forbear but
discharge my duty unto God, and my Country, to the Discovery of such
mischievous Positions and Practices, not with purpose to incite unto, but to
prevent even gulfes and floods of Christian blood; which that hateful doctrine
does destinate unto Protestant States, Wherein I did but only awake men out of
security, according to that of the Poet, Vt iugulent homines, Horat. lib. 1.
epist. 2.
surgunt de nocte Latrones, Vt teipsum serves, non expergisceris? Which being
the voice of God in nature, what spirit is that which shall call it a measure
malicious?

3. But who is M. Parsons, that he should thus inueigh against Virulencie and
Maliciousness? Look upon him (good Reader) as thou maistsee him described by
their own Priest, and then tell me what he differs from an Edomite. Quodlib.
p. 238 and page 243. and Important Consider. pertotum.
What has he to do (says a Priest, speaking of M. Parsons) to ballast his pen
with gastfulgoars of English blood? or to imbrew a Priestly hand in Princes
bowels? O monster! etc. And again, Ibid. page 234.
He became with others (namely An. 88.) the trumpeter of invasion, Mr. Parsons
bloody disposition.
blood, cruelty, and destruction. The same Author proceeds in decyphering M.
Parsons his lineaments, bestowing many pages in setting forth his bloody and
cruel disposition: yet this is the Sober Reckoner, forsooth, who dare exclaim
against Virulencie and Maliciousness, calling elsewhere my Discovery of the
Romish cruelty a mere Barking. Wherein I am dealt with no otherwise then was
a Lawyer in the days of Tully by certain Catilinarian Conspirators, who
called him a Barking dog: but he answered, You may not be offended with me,
if when I see thieves and murderers, I cannot choose but bark.

SECT. 11.
The first Inquiry.
4. I Have Preamb. p. 51.
said, that I may not deny even this my Adversary his commendation of
Modesty, who being ashamed (we may think) of the Romish Frauds and
Falsifications of former times, will insist only upon such men's examples, as
have professedly written of late against Protestants. It were to be wished that
his fellow Jesuit Costerus had kept himself within the same precincts: but
he makes a more general challenge, thus; Nemo hactenus vel Princeps, vel
Praesul, vel Scriptor fuit, qui mendacy vel malae fidei Romanos arguerit. That
is: Never yet (says he) Did any Prince, or Prelate, or Writer accuse the
Romanists of falsehood. I am hereupon called by Master Parsons to a shrewd
Reckoning, the sum whereof is, as follows.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning, in charging his Adversary.
NOw I must demand of the Reader, what he understands Mr. Recko. page 121.
Morton his purpose to be in this place? Is it not to show that Costerus was
less modest then I, forasmuch as I said, If in any one Catholic writer of
Controversies in our age, there might be found but two or three Examples of
wilful lying, I would never trust him more. but that Costerus went further
saying, That no Prince, Prelate, or writer had ever hitherio accused any
Romanists of falsehood. Is not this Mr. Mortons plain meaning (think you) as
both his words and drifts do show? Yes truly. Which being so, I would ask
him why he did clip the Latin words of Costerus, who says, But neucrthelesse
there was no Catholic man bitherto, (to wit, the time assigned, when Bishops
of Rome were Saints and Martyrs) whether Prince, Bishop, or Writer etc. Which
two words, Neuertkelesse, and Catholic man, demonstrate that Costerus spoke
not of Roman Writers, but of Roman Bishops and Popes.

The Reueiwe, and charge.
5. The words of Coster are, Nemo Catholicus: and by Romanos, id est, Romans,
he meant the Roman Popes, yet spoke M. Parsons idle cauilling.
he it indefinitely Romanos, And Coster in the words following descends as
low as Pope Damasus, who was no Martyr: and the instances, which I gave
against Coster, were only about Popes, and taken from the Council of
Affricke, which consisted of 203 Bishops, among whom Saint Augustine was a
principal Actor. All which Catholic Bishops, took exception unto the
challenge of three Popes, viz. Sozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, who, upon the
false pretense of a Canon, in the name of the Council of Nice, exacted Appeals
unto Rome: where it is plain that I instanced in no examples, but only in
Roman Popes. If I had urged any exception taken by any, but by those whom they
will confess to have bin Catholic Bishops; or against any Roman Writers,
saving only against Roman Popes, then might he have had just cause to note
me of wilful falsehood, both in respect of the word Catholic, and in the word
Romans. But seeing that I have not committed any such error, what meant Mr.
Parsons to be so violent? It may be that I have offended him, by saying that
Coster was less modest then he. I crave pardon for this fault, and hereafter I
shall judge otherwise of his immodestie.

SECT. 111.
A second Inquiry, concerning the false Canon suggested by those Popes.
NOw he begins with three ancient Popes, Zozimus, Reckon p. 125.
Boniface, and Celestine, that lived in the time of S. Augustine, and were much
commended by him for holy men, but are accused by Mr. Morton for falsaries, as
though they had forged a Canon of the first Council of Nice, in favor of
their own supremacy, to prove thereby the lawfulness of Appeals to be made
to them, and to their Sea from the Bishops of Africa: which Canon was not
found in the ordinary Copies then extant of that Council.

The sum of Mr PARSONS his Reckoning for their own discharge.
First of all, howsoever this matter passed, it appertains little or nothing
Reckon. ibid.
at all to our purpose, or to the question now in hand of Modern Catholic
Writers, nor does it prove wilful falsehood in those three ancient Popes, if
they cyted the Canon of one Council for another of equal authority (as indeed
they did:) for that it might be ascribed either to the variety of Copies (when
no print was yet extant) or to oversight, forgetfulness, or to some other such
defect, rather then to malice and voluntary error.

The Reuiew.
6. What a pace do you use to gallop, when you fear that any danger lies in
your way? For you saw in the Pream. p. 51.
Preamble how three Popes, Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, at the Council of
Carthage in Affricke, did claim a right of Appeals unto Rome, by virtue of a
Canon of the Council of The Council of Africa against Appeals to Rome.
Nice, as they pretended. And when all the ancient Copies of that Council had
been diligently sought, it appeared by the testimony of three Patriarchs,
viz. of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, that Jn quibus etc.
That Canon concerning Appeals unto the Bishop of Rome (as their Lindane
speaks) could not be found in those Copies: Or, as the Council it self
speaks, Lib. conc. de Actis conc. Carthag. 6.
Istius Concily Affricani seu Carthaginensis ducenti tres Episcopi tribus Papis
restiterunt, and Canonem Concily in defensionem primatus sui falsum esse
deprehenderunt. And a little after: Concludunt tandem nemini licere ad Romanum
Pontificem prouocare. That is, Two hundred and three Fathers in the Council of
Carthage resisted the three Popes, and found that the Canon of that Council,
brought for the defense of their Primacy was false. Therefore in the end they
concluded, that it should not be lawful for any of Afric to appeal unto the
Bishop of Rome.

7. Where you perceiving both the authentical Records of ancient Churches,
and the diverse oppositions of so many Bishops of that Council, conuincing
the falsehood of that objected Canon, does this appertain nothing to the
purpose trow you?

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, about the former point, in charging
his Adversary.
BUT now to the former old, idle, worme-eaten objection against Reckon. p. 128.
the Pope, for counterfeiting the said Council of Nice, Although it has been
often answered at large by other writers, yet nothing will serve those men, but
still they bring it in again, as though it had never been answered before.
Which false dissimulation is here also used by Mr. Morton, who says not one
word of any answer that ever he saw used thereunto.

The Reuiew.
8. Would any Sober man ever have used such taxation as this is, to call it a
false Dissimulation sometime to propound plain Histories, without particular
notice of the Answers, which our Adversaries do use to make? Mast. Parsons
could M. Parsons double injury, one to his adversary, the other to himself.
not have been more injurious either unto me, or else (to omit all other his
fellows) unto himself. For first I professed not a full Treatise, but only a
Preamble unto a Treatise; and elsewhere Apologia says part. 2. l. 3. c. 18.
And more exactly in the Catholic appeal, l. 4. c. 8. etc.
I have particularly set down the Answer of your Authors, together with a
large reply thereunto. How then could I deserve this reproach? And (that which
exceedingly argues unshamefastness in him) the matter which I alleged out of
his own Authors, was no more then that which both he and others will confess
to be true, to wit, that the Bishops of Carthage, did renounce that pretended
Canon as false.

9. Secondly, Master Parsons in his Three Conuersions, Cap. 2. for the proof
of Transubstantiation, etc. did M. P. is confuted by himself.
cite within the compass of four leaves the (...) of some Fathers, as namely
of Ambrose, Cyprian, (...) Nissene, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Irenaeus,
Augustine, Theophilact, etc. without acknowledgement of the Aunsweres, which
Peter Martyr, Zanchius, (...) and others, who are cyted by Bellarm. upon this
Argument.
Protestants have made unto every particular testimony. Will he hereupon
suffer Mr. Parsons to fall upon M. Parsons, and to condemn him for a false
Dissembler, because he pretermitted the Answers which Protestants have made?
So shameless and lucklesse does this his Accusation prove. What yet more?

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
THere were diverse other Canons made in the Council of Nice, Reckon. page 131.
and. 130.
which are not now extant, and the Canon questioned of, was in the Council of
Sardis, which was an Appendix of the Nicene Council, which the Popes did
mistake: These things have been discussed by six of our Authors, as Card.
Bellarmine, Barenius, etc. whom if Mr. Morton had seen, as I suppose he did,
though not perhaps to his contentment, why then, if he meant plainly, as often
he protests, had he not either mentioned them, or else refuted them, or at
least wise told his Reader that there had been such Answers, although not
sufficient to overthrow the Objection, etc.

The Reuiew.
10. We may reckon unto the worlds end, if that in every asseueration (which
is obiter, although plainly used) all Objections His perverse dealing.
and Aunswers of all Authors must be necessarily produced. And to exact this
in a Preamble, and, as it were, a preface unto a Treatise (which I called an
Encounter) is as disproportionable, A Simile.
as was the little City of Myndas, and the great gates thereof, which
occasioned the Diog Laert.
Philosopher to cry, Shut your Gates (ye Citizens) lest that your City run
out.

11. But because he has laid such heavy load of false dissimulation upon me
(as though for the terriblenesse of the Answers, I had been afraid so much
as to mention them) I shall desire him to know, that he could not have
ghessedmore falsely: for I have already produced his Authors, discussed their
Objections from point to point, Catholic appeal. l. c. 8.
where (if he will be pleased to look) he may peradventure satisfy, or at
least assuage his earnest appetite; wherein the great objection out of Sanders
is likewise answered. I pass on unto the next Taxatiou.

CHAP. VI.
Of the small credit of their Gratian, and of the far less credit of M.
Parsons in his defense, by his multiplication of frauds.

SECT. I.
The Charge.
WHat can be said (said Pream. p. 52.
I) for the defense of Gratian, Bellar. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 24.. tertio.
Who ( as Card. Bellarmine witnesses) citing a Canon of a Council of Mileuet,
wherein it was decreed that none should appeal beyond the Sea, did add of
himself this exception Except it be unto the Apostolic Sea of Rome; when as
that Council, in forbidding Appeals beyond the Sea, did especially intend to
forbid Appeals to Rome? Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereunto I answer, that if they be no better then this, they Reckon c. 3..
2. page 107.
are not worth the alleging, but only to entertain time, and to show your
fraud in dealing. For first Gratian did live diverse hundred years ago; but
we talk of Writers of our time, and of such only is our Question and
Controversy: wherein you finding your self barren would now extend your
Commission to all Catholic Writers of all ages past, which is a miserable
shift.

The Reueiwe; noting his idle, but yet peevish opposition.
2. Thou supposest (gentle Reader) by this taxation, that I had cyted Gratian
an old Writer in stead of a new; or that I had insisted upon such reproves of
Gratian, and other old His crooked affection.
Writers: But I alleged Gratian only, and that only in that one place,
adding withal, that Preamb p. 52.
I might allege many such like falsehoods, but the nature of a Preamble (said
I) will not suffer me to pursue old forgeries, and P. R. does challenge me to
instance only in new Writers. Therefore it was but a piece of M. Parsons his
hateful zeal, to conceal my purpose, and then to call this dealing a
miserable shift. The second part of his Reckoning is more rigid.

SECT. II.
M. PARSONS his Reckoning, charging his Adversary with shifting.
SEcondly, there be so many other shifts and tricks, in cyting these Reckon.
(...) 127.
few words, as do make demonstration that you can cite nothing in simplicity
of truth, without some wilful corruption, as here where you say it was
decreed (in the Council of Mileuet) that none should appeal beyond the Sea,
you cut off craftily the words before cyted of the said Canon, Inferiores
Clerici, the inferior Clergymen, as though the prohibition had been for all
(as well Bishops, as Inferior Clergymen) which presently we shall show to be
false.

The Reuiew, revealing the singular fraud, which Master Parsons uses.
3. I cyted not Gratian, but the objection of Calvin out of Bellarmine, and
his immediate answer thereunto, where the words, Inferiores Clerici, are not
mentioned: and so, to M. Parsons other falsehood.
make me a falsifier, M. Parsons has falsely foysted upon me those two words
of Gratian, Inferiores Clerici. Judge, good Reader, whether this be a fit man
to talk of Simplicity of truth.

4. Again if the words [ Inferiores Clerici] had been cut off, yet could not
this necessarily in true sense argue any fraud; as though, where the Inferior
Clerks were forbid to appeal unto Rome, it should consequently follow, that
the Superior Bishops were upon some occasions necessarily to appeal thither,
because (as it is in the body of the Councels set forth by Surius) the Bishops
of Affricke in their Epistle, writing unto Celestine Bishop of Rome, and
entreating him not to receive into his communion such as had been
excommunicated by their Church, argued thus: that Conc. Affric. in Ep. ad
Caelest. Surius Tom. 1. Conc. page 590. col. 2.
If this were so decreed concerning the Superior Clerks, how much more ought
it to be observed concerning Bishops: Which consequence is flat contrary to
this of M. Parsons, who still roaueth and raueth about impertinencies, to draw
me from the point in question, which is only this, whether Gratian did falsely
corrupt the Canon of the Council of Mileuet. And now we desire him to reckon
for this.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THirdly where you say that Gratian did add of himself this exception Reckon.
P. 127.
to the Canon, you would make your Reader think he had added these words, as
the words of the Canon it self, which he did not, but as a commentary or
Explication of the Canon in a separate place, and so is now extant, in a
distinct letter: and consequently your note in the margen, that Gratian is a
falsificator, falls upon yourself, Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. c. 24.. 3.
which do falsify his meaning. For that the most that can be objected to
Gratian in this place, is that which Card. Bellarmine says, he mistook the
true meaning and intent of that Canon of Mileuet, as though it had been meant
of Bishops, as well as of inferior Clergymen, which is far from the proof
of wilful false meaning, which may be very probably objected unto M. Morton
in this and many other places. For that it cannot be well thought but that he
must know that he dealt injuriously and calumniously with Gratian in this place.

The Reueiwe.
5. O the wickedness of this man's malice! Could he note me of wilful
falsehood, yea or of falsehood at all in this matter? The words of Gratian,
(says M. Parsons) as they are now extant in a distinct Letter, are not added
as the words of the Canon, but as a Commentary, etc. Is this it? But I am sure
these words of Gratian here spoken of, in his Decretum, printed An. Dom. 1519.
at Paris; and another Edition at Lions, Per Hugonem de Porta, Anno. 1548.
(which two only I then had by me) are not distinguished in a different letter:
which M. Parsons well knew, who therefore opposes only their new Editions of
Gratian (in saying, so it is now extant) which neither freeth their ancient
Editions nor Gratian himself from falsehood: and yet with an hard face durst M.
Parsons impute unto me herein the note of Falsehood. And not so only, M.
Parsons falsehood in imputing of falsehood.
but does furthermore repeat and register this in a peculiar Chapter, among
those, which he calls Reckon. pa. 630
New and fresh lies of M. Morton. How can I expect any conscionable dealing
from a man so peruersly malignant?

6. Furthermore I am right sure that the words of Bellarmine are these; See in
the place above cyted.
Gratian added unto this Canon this exception, viz. [ Except perhaps the
Appeal be made unto Rome.] Which exception flatly contradicts the
principal purpose of the Canon, which forbad (says Bellarmme) Appeals beyond
the Seas; which Decree the Affricane Bishops made principally, because of Rome.
Here, (M. Parsons) your Gratian has need of your help, for he yet lies
under an arrest of a notorious falsification.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe most that can be objected unto Gratian in this place, is, that he Reckon.
(...) supra.
mistook the true meaning and intent of that Canon of Mileuet.

The Reueiwe.
7. Let it be so, yet so to mistake it, that when that Decree was principally
made to forbid Appeals unto Rome, he should expound it to forbid Appeals,
excepting only unto Gratians gross crrour.
Rome. If M. Parsons should chance to find such a mistaking in any Protestant,
O what an hue and cry would he make?

8. Neither was this the error of Gratian alone, for Bellarmine (speaking not
of your old, but of your new Romish Writers) says that (...)
Aliqui respondent cum Gratiano, etc. Some there be (says he) who answer (the
objection of Calvin) together with Gratian, etc. Wherefore you may put down
this in your Reckoning, as a point confessed by Bellarmine, that Some amongst
you have no other shift, in answering, but so to expound a Canon of a Council,
as if it allowed that, which principally, purposely, and plainly it did
forbid: then the which there cannot be a greater appearance of (...)

9. Now that the Reckoning is made up, we may recount the gains which M.
Parsons has gotten, by his defense of Gratian. First he has falsely put
Gratian upon me, in stead of Bellarmine, with an intent to prove me a
falsifier. Secondly, to the same end he presents a new Edition of Gratian,
notwithstanding that he knew that the sentence stood, as I delivered Mr.
Parsons is thriee guilty of falsehood.
it, in the ancient Copies of Gratian. Thirdly, after all his plea he would
clear his Clyent Gratian from faithlesnes, in expounding a Canon of a Council
flatly contrary to the purpose of the Council it self. Fourthly, he finds
now Some other of their new Romanists entangled in the same falsehood with
Gratian. Fifthly, by laboring to free Gratian from one untruth, he has
occasioned me to See above, c. 1. Sect. 5.
reveal the manifold guilt of Gratian in his false inscriptions, false
allegations, and false Additions in such abundance, that (as their
Arch-bishoppe has confessed) they cannot be declared in a day. And thus Mast.
Parsons (I confess) has every way gained in falsities.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Contradictions among other Romish Authors, one confuting another:
first about the Council of Eliberis.

SECT. I.
1. THE Question Pream. p. 53.
was, whether the Council of Eliberis did forbid the use of Images in
Churches? Protestants say it did: our adversaries oppose against Protestants
other expositions, but yet so, that they, are still extremely Adversaries
among themselves.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, in discharging his Romish Writers.
THe state of the question is to prove that these Authors lied voluntarily:
Reckon. cap. 3.. 3. page 135.
you accuse them that they have different expositions upon the said Canon of
the Council of Eliberis, some understanding it one way, some another: but how
does this prove that they erred wilfully? If you prove not this, you prove
nothing. And now I would ask you, when diverse ancient Fathers in your
commentaries upon the holy Scriptures, do set down different expositions of
hard places, every one thinking that he goes nearest to the truth: may you by
this condemn them all of wilful falsehood? Are not you ashamed to come forth
with these ridiculous proofs?

The Reuiew, aunswering his Objection.
2. Hardly can any absolutely charge another with wilful falsitie, because
there are so many infirmities in a man (besides the corruption of his will) to
draw him into error, as ignorance, negligence, desire of brevity, besides
other their objects in reading, such as are falts in print, obscurities of
sentences, Independences, and (which is not the least) often transscriptions of
sentences of Authors out of one written Notebooke into an other, and such like:
so that in such cases we are compelled to stand most commonly upon
probabilities.

3. Neither do I take the exception unto their diverse Expositions (to
answer your frivolous objection concerning the Fathers) but unto the manner
of their Expositions, whereunto some of them were drawn, being (as was Preamb
page 53. 54.
confessed) oppressed with the force of their adversaries objection: one kind
saying that the Synod forbad only an Image made to represent God, which kind
of Images (says another) were not then in use. Secondly others answer that
it was because they seemed to the Heathen to commit Idolatry: Which (says an
other) agrees not with the exposition of the Canon. Thirdly, others affirm
the cause to have been, because they did commit Idolatry: Which (say others)
is not agreeable. Fourthly they Forbadde (say some) only Images to be painted
on Walls: whereunto others oppose, saying, that This agrees not with the
Canon. Fifthly, Others, as it were, oppressed with the objection, thought it
their best refuge to deny the authority of the Council.

4. Finally, after that twelve several testimonies had been alleged, against
which Mr. Parsons (notwithstanding his eagerness) could catch no shadow of
exception, he in the end fixes his teeth upon one, which was the citation of
Senensis, as saying, Elibertina Synodus omnino vetuit Imaginum cultum, that is;
The Synod of Eliberis did absolutely forbid the worship of Images. And this is
called by him an Absolute lie, for thus it pleases him to work upon it.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, charging his Adversary with falsehood.
HE makes the Latin Text of Senensis to speak in like manner, Reckon. p. 139.
Omnino vetuit Synodus Elibertina Imaginum cultum: But in him you shall not
find the word, Omnino, absolutely, wherein stands all the force of the
matter. And the fraud cannot seem but wilful, nor can it any way stand with
the intention of Senensis, who says and affirms only (according to the
interpretation which he best allows among many other) that the meaning of the
Council was this, to forbid the use of Images for a time, least the new
converted Spaniards not being wellinstructed, seeing Images upon the walls,
should think there were no difference between them and the Heathen Idols. For
avoiding whereof, it seemed good to the Council, for a while, to remove the
use of Images, which of it self they held for lawful and pious. This is the
opinion of Senensis.

The Reueiwe, satisfying the former exception, both concerning the words and
sense.
5. [ The word, Omnino, is not there,] no truly, nor yet the other words in
their order, Whereby you might well know, and now conceive that it was only an
error of transcription, which is incident unto any that writes, when the same
words, which were set down by me in the Roman Character, as a general note
of Sene^sis his meaning, are by the Transcriber altered into an Italian
Character, whereby they seemed to be the very words of the Author himself. If
you will not credit me upon my word, yet be so charitable as see my Catholiq
Appeal l. 4. c. 27.. 2. lit. (m)
book (which was published before I hard of your taxation) where, upon the
same occasion, I have cited this testimony of Senensis in the very words as
they lie in the Author himself. Ratio cur prouinciale Concilium, etc. Unto
which citation there can be no exccption taken at all.

6. We come to the sense. Your Jesuit Vasquez a Spaniard, speaking of the
interpretation which I gave concerning this Canon, cites this sentence:
Vasques Jes. li. 2. de Adorat. disp. 5. c. 2. n. 120
Seeing that it is forbidden (says he) by the law of nature to worship Images
as God, and the people at that time were prone to Idolatry, the Fathers of
that Council thought it a present remedy, if Images were taken from among
them, and says that, Martin of Ayala, and Senensis do embrace this
interpretation. The words of Senensis are, that the Fathers of that Council,
Thought that they could not otherwise heal the present disease (namely of
Idolatry) then by forbidding Images. Which shows that not only Images
representing God, as some answered; as some Images painted upon walls, for
fear of contempt by Infidels, as others conceived; nor the forbidding of them
to be painted in tables, as some else fancied, but as Senensis says, There was
no other remedy, but to remove them, that is absolutely not to use them.

7. Albeit, Images were forbid only for that time, whilst the people of Spain
was prone to Idolatric: yet when are not people naturally so addicted? I would
to God you could excuse your own people, who (to omit ancient times) how
prone, nay how much plunged they have been in Idolatry, your own Polydorus
de Invent. rerum. l. 6. cap. 13. printed Ann. 1558. and Cassander Consult. Art.
1.
Authors by their complaints have acknowledged: and what their disposition is
at this day, the Image at Loretto, and other such like, if they could speak,
would relate to your conviction. It suffices, that Images are to be absolutely
removed, whenever there is great danger of Idolatry. And understand by the
way, you that object [ omnino] so sinisterly; See hereafter chap. 12. 1.
your own plain and inexcusable bodge in putting in [ omnes] unto the
sentence of Calnine, flatly contrary to his meaning.

SECT. II.
Their next Contradictions about the Council of Francford, concerning the
worship of Images.
8. Diverse were objected in the Preamble, which required some reasonable
Reckoning, but Mr. Parsons turns all into a seorne.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHat is this to the purpose then, to prove that these Authors Reck. c. 3. 4 p.
141.
did err wittingly against their conscience? Do you not see that still the
poor man runs quite from the purpose, and has nothing to say to the effect
he should say?

The Reueiwe.
9. You were loath to express the particulars, least your Reader might
perceive what silly Reckonings you use to make. I am therefore constrained to
call them to your remembrance. Preamb. pa 56.
There we heard your Surius prael. in Syn. Francof.
Surius, charging Protestants of so Incredible impudency, and maruelling that
they (...) appear in the presence of any honest man, because they corrupted
the Council of Francford, as though it had condemned the second Council of
Nice, for decreeing the Surius his slanderous falsehocd.
worshipping of Images, when as by the just judgment of God their fraud was
made manifest, for they forgot to raze out Constantinople, and to place in the
stead thereof the Council of Nice. So far Surius. A man would think, that
so deep an accusation as this should not want some color, and yet behold, The
sentence of Surius cannot stand, says their Vasques de Adorat l. 2. cap. 5.
number. 225.
Ietuite Vasquez, which he proves (as his own words are) from all Historians.
Yet this so impudent a slander against Protestants, when it is objected unto
Mr. Parsons, he makes a quiet Reckoning of it, and passes it over as nothing
to the purpose.

10. Others have devised other aunsweres, such as were Binius in banc Synod.
pa. 429. and Coster. Enchirid. cap. 13.
Alanus Copus, Saunders, Suarez, who say that The Council of Francford did not
condemn the second Council of Nice. Notwithstanding the Bellar. l. 2. de
Council. c. 8. and Baron. vt resert. Binius Comm. in Francf. Synod. page 391.
Cardinals Bellarmine and Baronius do acknowledge that that Council of Nice
was condemned in the Council of Francford. And yet Mr. Parsons will have this
also to be to no purpose.

11. Again, a third sort (to wit, Vt refert Bellar. quo supra.
Platina, Blondus, and Sabellicus) granting that the Synod Francford condemned
the Synod, which the Greeks call the seventh general one; not for decreeing
that Images should be adored: but that they should be removed: which is flat
contrary to the words of the Synod of Franckford, as is acknowledged by their
Jesuit Vasquez. quo supra.
Vasquez, Quam pro adorandis imaginibus fecerunt, which was made for adoring of
Images. Nevertheless Master Parsons will not think this to be any thing to
the purpose.

12. Their last refuge is this, that Bellar. quo supra. Baronius apud. Binium
quo supra
The Synod of Francford was deceived, in thinking that the Synod of Nice
decreed any unlawful worship of Images, and so did err in condemning it.
Which last answer served me to make a demand, which I am now to reckon for,
with Mr. Parsons.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ANd Mr. Morten does fondry insult, when he bids his Adversary Recko. page
142.
P. R. to tell him in good earnest, if the Fathers of the Counsel of
Francford, judging that second Council of Nice, confirmed by the Pope, did
err in defending the use of Images, did they err in faith or no? Whereunto I
answer, etc.

The Reueiwe.
13. Soft Sir, whereunto will you answer? I propounded a full Argument,
adding that If the Council of Francford did err in faith, in condemning the
other of Nice, then your Bellarmine and Baronius have deceived us, who said
that it erred but in fact: but if it erred not in faith, when it condemned that
Council, which the Pope consirmed for the worship of Images, then to condemn
the definition of the Pope, for the worship of Images, is no error of Faith.
This your simplicity would not express, but make an abrupt answer, saying,
that it was an error of Fact, not of Faith, Let us hear it.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe Fathers of the Council of Francsord erred in Fact, and not in Reckon.
page 142.
Faith, being informed that the Council of Nice, had determined that which it
did not, to wit, that divine honor was given unto Images; for if they had
been informed of the truth, they would not have contradicted it, as neither if
they had known that the Rope had confirmed it, would they have doubted of the
authority thereof.

The Reueiwe.
14. Then, belike the Fathers of the Council of Francford did not know that
Pope Adrian had confirmed the second Council of Nice.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
IT is a witting error in M. Morton to say that they of Francford knew Reckon.
quo sup.
that the Council of Nice, was confirmed by the Pope. But Mr. Morton would
deceive us by craft and subtlety.

The Reueiwe.
15. Except that Master Parsons had prostituted his conscience unto injurious
dealing, he would never, against his perfect knowledge, have thus accused me
of Witting craft and deceit. For first he was not ignorant that Adrian the
Pope did confirm the second Council of Synodus Septima ( which is called
Nicaena secunda) ab Adriano approbata fuit. (...) les. l. 2. disp. 7. c. 5. n.
233
Nice, as their Jesuit Vasquez did witness. Secondly, he Pream. pa. 58.
saw me further allege out of the same Jesuit that The Council of Francford
could not be ignorant of the decree of the second Council of Nice, because
that the Legates of Pope Adrian were present in that Council, as all Histories
do write (says he) and the subscrptions do demonstrate. These two, viz. that
Pope Adrian did confirm the second Council of Nice in the Decree of Images:
And then this, The Council of Francford could not be ignorant of the
confirmation thereof; being M. Parsons wilful false imputation of falsehood.
both put together, do infer that The Council of Francford could not be
ignorant that the Pope had confirmed the Decree of the second Council of Nice.
How then could he call such proofs (which are taken out of their own
Authors, and laid so visibly before his eyes) a witting error, craft, and
deceit? whereunto although I shall not answer, as the Archangell did unto the
Devil, saying, Iud. verse. 9.
The Lord rebuke thee; yet must he give me leave to say, God forgive thee: for
I pointed directly in my See the place of Vasquez above cited.
Preamble unto this place of Vasquez, which Mr. Parsons subtly concealeth,
and according to his wont, faceth out the matter with a false imputation of
falsehood: yet least he might seem to have erred without reason, he uses an
Argument.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
FOr the Caroline Books themselves, even as they are set out by the Reckon.
page 142.
Centuriators, do use that for a principal argument on the behalf of the
Council of Francford, to impugn the Nicene Council, for that they supposed
that the said Ni^cene Council was not confirmed by Adrian the Pope, wherein
they were deceived by false information, I mean, those of Francford: but Mr.
Morton would deceive us by craft and subtlety.

The Reuiewe.
16. He talks of craft, telling us of the Caroline Books (mentioned by the
Centurists) how they Supposed that the second Council of Nice was not
confirmed by Adrian, without quoting the direct place: wherein he has committed
as great a falsehood, as may serve to give him his own true denomination. For
if we shall consult with the (...) 8. cap 8. (...) 639.
Centurists themselves, they will tell us, that Pope Adrian did rule by his
Legates in the second Council of Nice, which he afterward did approve:
whereunto the Legates of the Pope do require a subscription, but the Decree
goes against the sentence of Pope Adrian, and concluded that the adoration of
Images is wicked, and condemned that Council, which Pope Adrian held to be
universal. And more then to that purpose, I do not find. I proceed.

SECT. III.
The Contradictory aunsweres of Romish writers, about the Epistle of
Epiphanius, against Images.
17. THe matter Pream. p. 59.
is, whether Epiphanius did not condemn the worship of Images? Their
contradictory aunsweres are many and memorable.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IT is to be noted, as before, that whatsoever difference of opinions Reckon.
p. 159.
there be, or may be among Catholic Writers of Controversy, about the true
meaning of Saint Epiphanius in this place, yet is it nothing at all to Mr.
Mortons purpose, who is bound to prove that they wrote against their own
knowledge and conscience, which I suppose were hard to do, for that every man
must have bin presumed to have written according as his judgment gave him, and
consequently that all this, which M. Morton has so studiously gathered
together, is nihi' ad rhom bum, nothing to the purpose: and therefore I could
not but laugh, when I read his conclusion of this Instance, saying, That if P.
R. shall desire 500. (instances) of this kind, I bind my self (says he) unto
him, by a faithful protestation; which I believe, yea if it were 5000. in a
weeks warning.

The Reuiew.
18. It is well, that your Church is so richly fraught with such
Contradictions, which if they seem not unto you very ougly, why did you
conceal them? The Epistle of Epiphan. Epist ad Ioh, (...)
Epiphanius is objected by Protestants, wherein he is said to have seen
hanging in Church an Image, as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, and to have
taken and rent it, as being an abuse contrary unto the authority of holy
Scriptures. Will you see what tripping and skipping your Authors make, to free
themselves from this objection? One thus; Waldens. Tom. (...) Tit. 19. cap. 157.
Epiphanius did it in a zeal, but not according to knowledge, all for fear of
the error of the Anthropomorphites, who sought to have an Image of God; but it
is confuted by Lib. 2. de Adorat. disp. 5. c. 3.
Vasquez, as being repugnant unto the text, which names the Image of a man. A
second thus: Vasq. ibid. c 4.
It was the Image of no Saint, but of a profane man. But the text says, As it
were of Christ, or of some Saint: and therefore this answer is rejected by L.
2. de triumph Eccles. cap. 9.
Bellarmine, as less common and true. A Alphons. de Castro Haeres. Tit. Jmago.
third is displeased with Epiphanius, and therefore censureth the fact to be
erroneous: but Quo (...)
Vasquez, upon another conceit, says, that Epiphanius did well in renting the
picture. A Alanus, and Sanderus, vt refert Vasq. quo supra and (...) Enchirid.
Cap. 13.
fourth sort betake themselves unto this refuge, saying that The words of that
Epistle of Epiphanius are counterfeit: but the cause, why they were glad to
make this shift, is made plain by their Vasquez, Vasquez quo supra, cap. 4.
They, being oppressed (says he) with the difficulty of the objection,
returned this Answer. But what if it be not a counterfeit Epistle? Now comes
their Jesuit Valentia in the last rank, saying, Valent. Ies.
Yet we answer that the Church is of greater authority then Epiphanius. Very
good: but Epiphanius condemned the use of Images, as being contrary unto
Scripture, which he spoke according to the judgment of the Church of his time.

19. These so many, so contradictory and so violent Answers, so really
confuting one another, for the avoiding of but one objection, what can they
possibly bewray, but distorted wits, especialy seeing that it may be presumed
of the most, that they were driven thereunto by force, as men oppressed (as
some are said to have been) with the difficulty of the O biection?

20. Notwithstanding, M. Parsons denies not, but plainly confesses, that five
thousand such like instances of their contradictorie Answers may be collected
out of the Romish Writers in a week: and these kind of contradictions seem
to him to be a matter to be laughed at. Can there be any Sobriety in such a
Laughter? or could he have more prejudiced Admirable (...) of contradictions
confessed by M. Parsons, to be amongst their Doctors.
the Romish profession? For if our Adversaries in satisfying of the Arguments
of Protestants, in points of this nature, be thus enforced to thwart and
contradict one another, what can more bewray the desperateness of their cause?
Now follows the last contradiction about this Question.

Whether part of the Epistle of Epiphanius were counterfeit?
21 Pream. pa. 60.
Bellarmine, Valentia, Suarez, among other Reasons, to prove it was fictitious,
do use these two; one is because, that Bellar. l. 2. de Eccies. triumph. ca. 9.
Of the Epistle of Epiphanius unto John Bishop of Jerusalem, being almost
wholly translated by S. Hierome in his Epistle to Pamachius, has not in it
that part, Cum venissem Anablatha, concerning that Image. This Answer was
confuted by their Vasquez Ies. l. 2 de Adorat. disp. 5. c. 3. p. 244
Vasquez, who shows this Reason to be Infirm.

22. An other answer is Pream pa. 61.
used from Senensis, to wit, Senens. bibl. l. 5. Annot. 247.
Because Damascene said that that Epistle was counterfeit. Which is a mere
falsitie, and so acknowledged by your Vasquez, showing that Vasquez. quo supra.
p. 241.
Damascene spoke not of the Epistle of Epiphanius, written unto John of
Jerusalem (which conteyneth the History of the Image) but of the Epistle which
Epiphanius writ unto Theodosius. Where we still see, that their great Doctors
have committed two notablevntruths, to prove one, Two notable untruths.
viz. The History of the Image to be counterfeit. Now let us see how M.
Parsons will reckon hereabout.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Wish the Reader, that whereas Card. Bellarmine is here calumniated Reckon.
p. 148.
about Epiphanius Epistle, translated by S. Hierome for denying the last clause
thereof to be his, he repair, for the solution thereof, unto Card. Baronius,
who mere largely detecteth the fraud, then is expedient Tom. 4. Ano. 392 fine.
for me at this present to relate; especially for so much as I am to pass to
other particular calumniations against Card. Bellarmine, in his very next
Example or instance.

The Reuiewe.
23. Whither hasten you so fast, M. Parsons? Let us have one word more, I pray
you, before we end this Reckoning: Tell me but with what reason you said, that
I have calumniated Bellarmine? That which I objected was the testimony of M.
Parsons froward Calumniation.
your own Jesuit Vasquez, who bestows a particular Chapter, in confuting
the Objections which are used by Romish Authors, for proof that that part of
the Epistle of Epiphanius was supposititious and counterfeit; promising to Vasq
Ies. l 2. de Adorat. (...)
Show Singulas rations, etc. That is, That all the Reasons, which some Doctors
of late do use, for the disabling of that Epistle, are infirm, and of no
validity. Thus we still see Romanists M. Parsons unjust Calumniation.
contradicted by themselves; Card. Bellarmine his debt does hang still on the
score vndischarged; and so does Mast. Parsons his calumnious and unjust
dealing, in obiecting calumniation against me.

CHAP. VIII.
Instances against Card. Bellarmine his Slanders, The first whether Caluinists
be Pelagian Heretics, in the point of Original Sin.

SECT. I.
The Charge.
1. FIRST I Preamb. p. 63.
asked with what conscience Bellarmine could charge Calvin with the Heresy of
the Pelagiani, etc. Bellar l a. de Eccles. Misit. c. 9.. Pelagiani
Pelagians, who denied that there was any original sin in Infants,
especially being the children of faithful Parents? For as he could not be
ignorant that Hic proprius etc. Valet Ies de mig pecc. c. 2.
This doctrine of denying original sin was (as their own Jesuit
confesses) the proper heresy of the Pelagians. And not so only, but says
furthermore that Caluinus, etc. Idem. ib. in princ. etc. 8. and in Tom. 2. disp
6 q. 11. punct. 1.
Calvin and all other Protestants are so far from denying original sin,
that they do monstrously extend the nature thereof, even unto persons
regenerate: so it could not be but he must have understood, that Calvin was a
greater Adversary unto the Pelagian, then is any Romanist that can be named.
Hereunto M. Parsons answers.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEllar mine is guilefully abused by M. Morton, in setting down his Reckon.
ca. 3.. 7. pa. 155.
opinion, as though he had said that Calvin had denied with the Pelagians,
that there is any original sin at all in Infants, though less in the
children of the faithful, cyting his Latin words in the margent peruersly
thus: Pelagioni doccbant, non esse in hominibus peccatum originale, and
praecipue in (...) fidelium; idem docent Caluinus and Bucerus. The Pelagians
did teach, that there was not original sin in men, and especially in the
children of the faithful. The same do teach Calvin, and Bucer. Thus he.

The Reuiew.
2. Bellarmine his words stand thus: Pelagiani, etc. That is, Bellar. loco
supra citato.
The Pelagians taught two things, First, that there is no original sin,
especially in the children of the faithful; and of this first he adds,
Primum, etc. That is, This first opinion Zuinglius, Bucer, and Calume do
plainly teach; which words M. Parsons cut off: Bellarmine adds, that
Zuinglius did absolutely deny original sin in every man, but Calvin and
Bucer only in the children of the faithful, who are ( say they) holy, and
saved without baptism. Where we see, that Bellarmine, speaking of these two,
the first that There is no original sin; the second, A Calumnious Taxation.
that There is no original sin in the children of faithful Parents; does
make both to be the heresy of the Pelagians.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning
I Ask T. M. with what conscience could he falsify Bellarmine, in making
Reckon. ib.
him say that which he did not, for that he says not absolutely that Calvin
denied all original sin in all Infants, but only in the children of the
faithful.

The Reuiew.
3. Why does P. R. object this? where have I said that Bellarmine affirmed
absolutely, that Calume denied all original sin in all Infants? but I have
alleged him pertinently, as I have shown; and do now further auerre in the
behalf of Calvin, that Bellarmine, by affirming that Calvin did deny
original sin in any kind of Infants, whether they be the children of
Infidels or Christians, does slanderously traduce Calvin, to draw him
violently into the error of Pelagianisme; which heresy Calvin abhorred and
detested as graceless and damnable: which M. Parsons himself might have
seen, if he had not looked upon him only with his left eye; as will now
perfectly appear.

Evident proofs that Calvin has been slandered by Bellarmine; and
Protestants are generally freed from Pelagianisme in this point by their own
Vega, and that according to the judgment of the Council of Trent.
4. Bellarmine has delivered his judgment upon Calvin, saying that Calvin
denied original sin in the children of the faithful: which I take to be an
unconscionable Slander.

5. For first Jnstit. l 2. c 1.. 4. and. 5.
Calvin spends four Sections in confutation of this doctrine, proouing that
every child of Adam is borne in orginall sin, from the example of David,
saying, that he was borne in iniquity, and conceived in sin: and as if
Caluins judgment.
he had sought to stop the mouth of all Slanderers, he expressly confuteth
the Pelagians doctrine, even in this very point, Quod autem, etc. That is,
Ibid.. 7.
But that the cauelling Pelagians do say ( says he) that it is not likely,
that children should draw any corruption from godly Parents, from whom they do
rather receuse purity, it is easily confuted, for they ( that is, the children)
do not descend from their spiritual, but from their carnal generation.
Wherefore as Saint Augustine says, whether the Parents be guilty, and in the
state of Infidelity, or being in the faith, be absolved, both of them beget no
free children, but guilty. Furthermore in that they partake of the parents
sanctity, it is the special blessing of God, which does not hinder but that
the universal course of mankind goes before, for guilt is from nature, but
sanctification proceeds from spiritual grace. Wherein we see, that there is
as much difference between the Pelagians and Calvin, as there is between
nature and Grace.

6. Secondly, to consult with his Accusers: although that Bellarmine and
Valentia (but not Reckon. p. 155
In the very same place by me alleged, as M. Parsons pretends, but about
three leaves after) do object the former heresy, Denying original sin in
the children of faithful Parents: yet do they not allege any such words out
of all his works. The only reason, which Bellarmine has, is, Because he
says that the children of faithful parents are sanctified and saved without
baptism: but Bellarmine elsewhere, reckoning up the opinion of some of his
own Doctors, concerning some children unbaptized, says thus; Bellar. l. 1. de
bap c. 4.. quintum.
Caietane, Gabriel, Gerson, Catharine, and some other Catholics say, that it
is contrary to the mercy of God, that all children, which die without Baptism
should perish. Among others who were of the same opinion, are reckoned
Tilmannus, Sigebergensis, Caluines judgment justified by Romanists.
Tho, Elisius, and See Cassander himself, de baptismo Infantum.
Cassander, all affirming that although Infants want Baptismo aquae, that is,
the out ward baptisine by water, yet, through the mercy of God, they are
baptized Baptismo flaminis, that is, with the baptism of the spirit of
sanctification; and consequently with Calvin do confess that the children of
the faithful, dying before baptism, are sanctified and saved. Notwithstanding
all this, Bellarmine notes Calvin for a Pelagian Heretic, and terms his
own Doctors Catholics, which is a direct argument of a distorted and corrupt
affection.

7. The second Accuser Valent. lib. de pecc. orig. c. 7. in princip. unto the
end of the Chapter, and Tom. 2 de pecc. orig. disp. 6. q. 12. punct. 1.. 4.
Valentia comes nearer to the point, when (speaking of Protestants Kemnitius,
Melancthon, Calvin, and all others) he says: Qui omnes, etc. Who all every
where, although they differ in word, yet they agree with a joint consent,
affirming that original sin is an hereditary corruption and prauity of
nature, which makes us. guilty of the eternal warth of God, and is the
fountain of all wickedness in men. Which manner of speech may be applied to
the judgment of Illyricus, only differing from him, in that he teaches the
hereditary corruption to be form substantial, but these others do teach, that
original sin is contained only in the defect of absolute perfection and
justice, which ought to be in man. And much more to this effect, as to confess
that Calvin placed Original sin principally in the Defect of perfect
righteousness in our first conception, which defect is properly a sin; and
the Sinner to be damned; which sin he holds to be Remitted in baptism,
not that it is not, but that it is not imputed. So that in the children of the
faithful Parents, in respect of their natural original, wherein there is a
Defect of perfect righteousness, they are sinful and cursed; yet, through the
covenant of Grace, they are the children of Adoption. If this be not
sufficient, our next witness will make all clear.

8. Vega, a Doctor greatly commended by the Jesuit Praef. in libros Vegae.
Canisius, and a principal Actor in the Council of Trent, does, in expounding
the meaning of that Council, yield unto us this his ingenuous and judicious
confession; Vega. l. 2. de Iustif. c. 6. Et probauit. Protestants judgment
concerning original sin, justified by their adversaries.
The Protestants (speaking of all that he had read, (and his reading of
Calvin he shows almost in every Chapter) do teach in their Confessions,
Apologies, and other books, the doctrine of original sin, constantly and
consonantly with us: but they, who were condemned at the Council of Trent, were
Pelagians, Armenians, Albanenses, who denied original sin. Do you hear
this, M. Parsons? Calvin and Bucer are accused by Bellarmine for dissenting
from your Church, by denying original sin in the children of faithful
Parents. Here your Vega tells you, in effect, that it is a mere slander:
for speaking of Protestants, without exception, he says that They do
consonantly agree with your Church in this question of original sin, and
that even according to the meaning of the Council of Trent. How then may your
Cardinal be thought to have dealt honestly or conscionably with Calvin? But
they have decreed to draw Calvin within the compass of (...) and to this
purpose they proceed to another Question.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, concealing Venial Sins.
WHereas Card. Bellarmine did charge Calvin and Oaluinists with Reck. c. 3..
7. page 158.
two principal errors of the Pelagians, the one, that which now has been
handled, Of denying Original Sin in children and Infants of the faithful; and
the second, Of the denying of the difference of mortal and venial sins, and
holding that by every least sin we loose our justice, and consequently that
all sin is mortal, Bellarmine cyting for the same the testimony of S.
Hierome, who ascribes Hierom. 2. l. cont. Pelag.
that for Heresy unto the Pelagians. And whereas in like manner he proves the
same heresy not only to be held by Luther and Melancthon but also by Calvin
in diverse parts of his works, as 1. 2. Instit. c. 8.. 85. and 1. 3. c. 4..
28. etc. M Morton taking upon him to clear Calvin in the former charge about
original sin, though so unluckily as you have heard, says never a word
against this second, about the distinction of venial and mortal sins,
whereby it is evident in all probability, that he admitted that for true, and
consequently yielded secretly that Calvin sts do agree with the Pelagians in
this heresy, though he storm sharply against (...) as you have heard, for
charging Calvin with any point of Pelagianisme at all. And this fraud or
frailty he commits commonly in all the rest of the Heresies objected,
denying the one weakly, and by his silence granting the other, as now by
experience you shall find.

The Reueiwe.
10. Which by experience your self shall find to have been both vnsoberly
and unluckily objected by your self: for in my last Catholic Appeal. 1. 5.
cap. 22. 3.
Book of Catholic Appeal, both this and the rest of the Heresies objected
by Bellarmine, have been proved to be very slanderous. Concerning this
particular, The sum of my answer is this: First, There appears no such
words in Saint Hierome,: nor does Saint Augustine in his Catalogue of Heresies:
nor yet the Romish Authors Castro, Prateolus, Lindane, or others, in their
discussing of Heresies, observe any such heresies in the Pelagians.

11. Secondly, sins are said to be Venial in two respects, Sins, how
venial and mortal.
either in their own nature, or else by Gods grace and indulgence. In nature
all sins are mortal, albeit not all equal. By Gods mercy, (who does not
deal with his regenerate according to his exact justice) many kind of
infirmities may be called Venial. In which respect only, your Roffensis is
Apud Vasquem Tom. 1. in 1. Tho. 2 disp. 42 c. 1. n. 4. p. 929.
noted to have judged of them accordingly, calling them Venial, but not in
their nature; but only through the mercy of God, who does not impute them unto
damnation. And what the impossibility of contrary doctrine is, has been
likewise Cath. Appeal quo supra.. 4.
manifested at large. Neither does Gerson or Almain accord unto your common
opinion, as Bellar. l. 1. de Amiss. great. c. 4.. His erroribus.
Bellarmme himself does confess. The cause of Calvin standing thus upright,
the slander which is cast upon him, will prove no Venial sin.

SECT. II.
The second slander used by Card. Bellarmine.

The Charge, concerning the Heresy of the Nouatians, in denying Penance.
12. Preamb. p. 63.
BEllarmine Makes Protestants guilty of the Heresy of Nouatianorum, etc.
Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 9.. Nouatianoru^.
The Nouatians, in taking from the Church all power of reco^ciling men unto
God, but by Baptism, whereby he means no Sacrament, but Baptism. When as his
own Authors note that Nouatianorum, etc. Castro. l. 12. Haer. 3. Tit.
Paenitentia Vega li. 13. de Iustif. c. 2. p. 486. Moldon. Ies. in Ioh. 5. 4.
The Heresy of the Nouatians was this, viz. to deny any man, who should sin
after Baptism, all hope of remission of sins, although he should repent. Yea
and also Bellarmine himself, in behalf of Protestants, confesses els-where,
that Non Negant, etc. Bellar. l. 3. de Iustif. c. 6. and saepe alias.
They require repentance and faith in Christians, that they may be justified
and obtain Remission of sins. Neither does he note any difference between
us and the Romanists, Non de etc. Bellar. l 1 de (...) c 8.. vt (...)
about repentance, as it is a conversion unto God with detestation of sin, or
as it consists in outward signs of sorrow, weeping, confession, and outward
chastisements; yea and almost all of them allow an outward rite of absolution.
But the only controversy between us is, Whether Penance be properly a
Sacrament.

Here I am called to a severe account, the brief whereof follows.

The sum of Mr PARSONS his Reckoning.
Here he will make a difference between Card. Bellarmine and Reckon. cap 3..
8 page 160.
other Authors about the Heresy of the Nouatians: but all is full of fraud.
His drift is to argue Bellarmine of falsitie, for affirming that Protestants of
our days do join with the old Heretics, the Nouatians, in taking from the
Church All power of reconciling men unto God, for these are Bellarmines words,
and to contradict Bellarmine he cites the words of Alphonsus de Castro,
saying that the heresy, etc. But these are not contrary: for the Nouatians
taught both points, principally that there was no power in the Church to
reconcile them, who fell after baptism, especially into grievous sins, as
testifies Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, and others; and this first part was against
the keys of the Church and power to remit sins, and herein all Authors do
agree. But the second part of this error went further, as some do gather out
of the ancient Fathers, as testifies Suarez (although others be of a contrary
opinion) which was to deny furthermore, besides the Sacrament, all virtue of
Penance whatsoever, whether private or Sacramental. Bellarmine does not
ascribe unto Protestants the denial of private repentance, either inward, or
outward, by sorrow and tears, but their denial of Penance, as it is a
Sacrament. And for M. Morton to infer that forasmuch as Alphonsus de Castro
says, that the Nauatians did deny all power of Penance, therefore Bellarmine
said not truly, that they denied the Sacramental use thereof, is a most absurd
manner of reasoning, called a disparatis, for both may be true, the one
excludes not the other.

The Reueiwe.
13. If I shall give you leave to make my Reasonings, it is not unlikely but I
may have them absurd: you must therefore suffer me to make mine own account,
which I will bring into the true form of reasoning thus:

Whosoever does hold the heresy of the Nouatians, in the denial of remission
of sins, does (according to the judgment of Alphonsus de Castro) deny That
there is any hope in any man, sinning after Baptism, to obtain remission of
sin, although he shall repent: But Protestants (as Card. Bellarmine
consesleth) do not deny all hope of remission of sins, committed after
Baptism, if sinners repent. Ergo, the Protestants hold not the Doctrine of
Nouatians.

14. Is not this conclusion established in the Mayor by Castro, and in the
Minor, by Bellarmine, which in the conclusion is fully contradictory unto his
former assertion, where he said, Protestants hold the Heresy of the Nouatians?
Neither is the argument taken a disparat is, but a contradicentibus, and
stands thus: Nouatians deny all hope of remission of sins committed after
Baptism, and Protestants confess some hope of remission of sins committed
after Baptism. This reasoning, I hope cannot be called absurd.

15. Nevertheless (passing over this private Penance, as it is a virtue which
every man must use, for the obtaining of Remission of sins) let us proceed
unto a second consideration of it, as it is a power of reconciliation by virtue
of the Keys of the Church. Concerning this, Protestants are confessed to admit
a power of absolution in the Church, after Baptism, and Almost all of them
(says Bellarmine) do allow an outward rite thereof: for the reconciliation,
in respect of notorious sinners, which the Nouatians did deny. But as for the
form of this Reconciliation, as whether it be a Sacrament, or no, it was never
called into question, or censured to be the heresy of the Nouatians. Therefore
Bellarmine by devising a new heresy, which he calls Nouatianisme, that
Bellarmines slander.
he might draw Protestants into the guilt of an heresy, has committed a
gross and inexcusable slander. And if Mr. Parsons shall answer this, I shall
be contented to wear his badges, and terms of disgrace.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
PRotestants are not accused by Bellarmine, for denying all Penance Recko. quo
supra.
in general, but for denying a Sacramental Penance.

The Reueiwe.
16. If you had spoken in Bellarmines Dialect, you would not have said the
Denial of Sacramental Penance, but the Denying of Penance to be a Sacrament.
Now I showed out of your own Authors Castro, Vega, Maldonate, that they, in
censuring the error of the Nouatians, did never note this to be the Nouatians
heresy, viz. [ The denial of Penance to be a Sacrament.] Neither could you,
M. Parsons, prove this out M. Parsons fraudulent dissembling.
of any one of them, albeit you have given your diligence to find it out. And
this I take to be a sufficient conviction: for although the denying of All
power of Penance does imply a denial of All Sacramental power, yet because
the former was an heresy, it does not follow that the latter must be also
heretical. For the Sadduces denying the Resurrection of men's bodies, which is
an heresy, of heresy, do consequently deny, that in the Resurrection men's
bodies shall have their paradise upon earth, which was the opinion of some: yet
the denying of this is no heresy, nay it is an heresy not to deny it. After
that M. Parsons had thus bemudded the water, he sought to catch an Eele, which
is no sooner taken, but slippeth from him, because he, like one of the wise men
of old, took her by the tail. Shall we see how?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
LEt us see briefly how many false tricks he uses in this place. The Reckon.
p. 163.
first of all may be, that whereas Card Bellarmine, to prove that our modern
Protestants do symbolize and agree with the old Nouatian heresies, alleges
two particular Instances; first, in denying the power of the Church to remit
sins, by the Sacrament of Penance: secondly, in denying the use of holy
Chrisme, in the Sacrament of confirmation: M. Morton having nothing to say to
the second, replieth only to the first by an Equivocation, as you have heard.
And yet if the second only be true, Bellarmine is justified in noting
Protestants of Nouatianisme; and therefore to deny the one, and dissemble the
other must needs proceed of witting fraud, granting that which is chiefly
in Controversy; to wit, that Protestants do hold in somewhat Nouatianisme.

The Reueiwe.
18. That which in my Preamble was, for breuity sake, M. Parsons precipitate
and rash in divination.
remitted to a further Treatise, no man of discretion would conclude to be
therefore omitted craftily, as though it could not be justly confuted. Yet such
is the intemperate and, indeed, unfortunate peremptorinesse of M. Parsons, for
I have Ctholicke Appeal. l. 4. c. (...) And to prove that such like Denials do
not make an Heretic, see the Audiani in the same book.
elsewhere noted, that Bellarmine, even in this second point, has committed an
injury not only against Calvin, but even against the Nouatians themselves;
where this, and the rest of the heresies, which are objected, are handled at
large. Whereby the discreet Reader will perceive, that there was as little
fraud in my omission, as there is much folly in Mr. Parsons his Inference and
Collection.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of falsity.
THe second fraud is, that when Bellarm. says, that this was the principal
Reckon. page 162. 163.
error of the Nouatians, the word [ principall] importing that they had other
errors besides, is craftily cut off by M. Morton.

The Reuiewe and discharge.
19. True it is that Bellarmine did note two errors in the Nouatians, the one
was principal, and the other was of less importance; I, for breuity sake,
proved Card. Bellarmine a Slaunderer in the principal, and M. Parsons is
offended with M. Parsons his childish and rash objection of craft.
me, that I have spared his reputation in the less principal; and calls it
a point of craftiness to omit the examination of that in a Preamble, which I
have discussed Catho. Appeal. quo supr.
elsewhere in a full Treatise. So loose and lucklesse a man is M. Parsons
continually in his imputation of craft.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of falsity.
WHere Bellarmine said, that There is no power in the Church to reconcile
Reckon. page 162.
men unto God, but only by baptism: These last words also, [ but only by
baptisme] were by Mr. Morton, and by the same art shifted out of the Text, for
that they have relation to the Priests of the Church, to whom it appertains
by public and ordinary office to baptize: and in this the Protestants are
accused by Bellarmine to concur with them in denial of Penance, as it is a
Sacrament.

The Reuiew, and discharge.
20. M. Parsons his palate is so distempered, that it turns every thing that
it tastes into craft, which unto me seems to be an argument of his
selfe-guiltinesse in points of craftiness. I alleged the sentence thus:
Nouatians deny all hope of remission of sin after Baptism. This was
sufficient for the acknowledgement of a power in Baptism for remission of
sin. How could he call this a Shifting? has he any reason for it? Yes he
has one, I pray you mark it (good Reader) His fond and false conjecture.
for it is pretty: The words were shufled out of the text (says he) for that
they have relation unto the Priests of the Church, to whom it appertains by
public and ordinary office to baptize. He might as well have said, that I did
it in envy unto our own Protestant Ministers, unto whom I held The public
office of baptizing to appertain. Such is the exceeding impotency of this
professed Cauiller.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of falsity.
THirdly, he does bring in guilefully the foresaid testimony of Castro, Reckon.
p. 163.
Vega, and Maldonate, as contrary to Bellarmine, whereas they speak of another
thing, to wit, of Penance in another sense.

The Reuiew, and discharge.
21. Castro, Vega, and Maldonate did indeed speak of His loose and unjust
reprehension.
Penance and Absolution in another sense then Bellarmine did: for they never
judged it to be an Heresy of the Nouatians, to Deny Penance to be a
Sacrament. Neither was there ever any ancient Father or Romish Writer, whom
Mast. Parsons could produce, who so conceived of the Nouatian Heresy, as
Bellarmine has done, who rather then Protestants should not be Nouatian
Heretics, has feigned a new Heresy, which was never imputed to the
Nouatians: which is, I must needs say, a craft and fraud intolerable.

22. The fourth traducement has been answered before, and the last is more
childish then any of the rest, which is the alleging of Luther truly in that
sense, which I have already justified to be most true.

SECT. III.
The third charge against Bellarmine, for his Slander against Calvin, in the
Question of Free Will.
22 Pream. pa. 64.
THE Manicheotum, etc. Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccles. c. 9.. Manichaeorum.
Manichees ( said he) did condemn the nature of men, depriving them of
Free Will, and ascribing the original and beginning of sin unto the nature
of man, and not unto his Free Will: yet has he observed that Johannes
Caluinus, etc. Bellar. l. 1 ae Great. primi (...) c. 1.. In codem.
Calvin teaches, that man in his first creaticn had Free Will, whereby in his
integrity he might, if he would, have attained unto eternal life.

This contradiction in this point is no more then this, to charge Calvin with
that which he did not believe. Is not this singular falsehood? And yet behold a
more notable then this.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of folly.
Whereunto I answer, if it be more notable in folly then this, or Reckon. ca.
3. 9. pa. 167.
else in fraud; it is notabler indeed. For to accuse a man to hold that which
he holds not, is no contradiction, but (...) false accusation, nor always
falsehood, for it might have been error. And this for the folly.

The Reuiew.
23. Wisely, forsooth, M. Parsons; Bellarmine is supposed to have written
knowingly what was the opinion of the Manichees concerning Free Will, and as
knowingly, to have acknowledged the contrary opinion of Calvin: and yet
notwithstanding did he ascribe unto Calvin that opinion of the Manichees. Can
this but imply a contradiction? But you say, this might have been by him not
in falsehood, but upon error. so any thing, wherein you have charged me with
falsehood, might have proceeded only from error. Is not this a rare
Bellarmines flaunder.
point of wisdom, so to excuse and free Bellarmine from falsehood, as that
your own Accusations of falsehood shall be of no force? Where is the Folly now?
But now to the fraud.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of fraud.
Calvin granting free will to have been in man before the fall, Reckon. p.
167.
and lost after the first sin of Adam, may concur with the Manichees in
this, that after the fall of Adam, as now we live, we have free will, and so does
Card. Bellarm. take him, and prove out of his works, This then is an egregious
fraud, and chiefly to delude in this place his Reader with ambiguity of
different times. Reckon. ibid. page 168.
The Manichees taught that man after Adams fall had no free will, as both S.
Hierome and S. Augustine do testify in the sentence of Mr. Morton here set
down (though craftily he covered their names) and Bellarmine proves Calvin
to hold the same, out of his own words and works. What answers M. Morton?
Calvin (says he) is confessed by Bellarmine to grant free will in man before
the sall of Adam in his first creation. Yea but the question is after the fall.

The Reuiewe, demonstrating the Slander.
24. What is this? Do those Fathers speak os Free Will after Adams fall?
Either M. Parsons understands not Bellarmine, or else Bellarmine understood
not those Fathers, sor I am Two Fathers notably abused by M. Parsens and
Bellarm.
sure they spoke of the Manichees denying free will in man's first creation:
First S. Augustine writing of this heresy of the Manichees, who taught that
there were two first causes of man's nature: God, the Author of the good part,
and an cuill Spirit Author of the evil part of man's nature: and so Aug. Tom
6. de Haeres. c. 46.
Peccatorum originem non libero arbitrio voluntatis, sed substantiae tribuu^t
gentis aduersae: qua^ dogmatizantes esse hominibus mixtam, omnem carnem non
Dei, sed malae mentis perhibent esse opificium etc. That is: They ascribed the
original cause of sin not unto the free will of man but to the substance of
an aducrse and contrary Nation, which they taught to be mixed in man, telling
us, that all flesh is not the workemanshippe of God, but of an evil Ghost.
Heete is a manisest mention of the nature of man in his first workmanship, and
an exposition of the (...) of the Manichees, ascribing the beginning of Evil,
not unto the freewill of the created nature, but unto the eternal cuill
Creator, which was the Author of that evil.

25. So likewise Saint Hierome in the place alleged. (...) dagian.
It was (says he) the Doctrine of the Manichees, to condemn the nature of
man, to take away free will, and also the help of God. What he futhermore
means by condemning the nature of man, wherein they acknowledge no free will,
he shows, where he condemns the Manichees, for saying that Hier. in Jsaiam
There was two created natures of man, one of the children of perdition, the
other of the good ones. But if, as they say, the children of perdition were of
most wicked nature, how is it said that that is found, which first was lost,
how is the prodigal child said to have been lost, except first he had been
in some safe estate? All this concerns Free Will in the first creation. If
you did not see this, Mr. Parsons, when you imputed Fraud unto me, you have
erred: if you did see thus much, and yet would besprincle me with note of
Fraud, then you cannot avoid the shame of a calumniator under any pretense of
error: but I must pardon you, for this is but a piece of your occupation. Which
that it may be more evident, you proceed.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ANother fraud, though somewhat less perhaps then the former, Reckon. page 168.
was, that in setting down the charge of Bellarmine against Calvin, he
recounteth the same as in Bellarmines own words, which are the words of S.
Hierome and S. Augustine. And why, think you, did Mr. Morton conceal these
two Fathers names? the causes are evident, first least the denial of
Free Will, defended by Protestants, should be pronounced Heresy by two so
grave Fathers: the second for that it would have marred his sleight of thinking
that there was meant Freewill, in respect of the first nature of man.

The Reueiwe, confuting M. Parsons and his fellows, by the confessed sentences
of Fathers.
26. Bellarmine alleging the former sentence out of the Fathers, to wit, The
Manichees condemned the nature of man, denying freedom of will, did add of
his own; which was the Doctrine of Calvin. The former I granted for a truth,
according to their proper sense: but Bellarmine his application of that heresy
unto Calvin, I cordemned (and that justly) for a slander. All the Iniuirie
which I did, was not unto Bellarmine, or unto you, M. Parsons, but unto my own
cause, to wit, even because I did not allege the sentence in the names of
those Fathers, whereby the lavishness of the slander might have been made
more manifest, as from the Testimonies of those Fathers has been already
proved.

27. And for a more perfect conviction both of Mr. Parsons, and his Client, it
will not be impertinent to set down the confession of their own Jesuit
Maldonate, Maldon. Ies. Comment. in Luc. 15. ver. 13.
Many Fathers ( says he) by the substance, which the Prodigal child lost (
Luc. 15.) did understand Free Will, as Saint Augustine, Bid ( he might have
added Saint See above.
Hierome) Euthimius, and Saint Bernard. So Maldonate, who disliking these
speeches, faineth an exposition of his own: but the sentences of these Fathers
The fathers judgment concerning free will.
do grant a loss of Freewill, by Adams fall. And how ordinary is that
sentence of Saint Augustine: Man, by abusing his Free Will, lost both it, and
himself? yea and the Schoolmen thought ( says Epist. dedicat. ante libros
Hilary.
Erasmus) that Saint Augustine in some places yielded too little unto man's
Free Will. Now let any judge whether of us two is the man of Fraud. But I must
not escape thus.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and fourth charge of Fraud.
WHereas Card. Bellarmine does allege two points, wherein Reck. page 169.
the Protestants of our time, but especially Calvin, do con curre with the
Manichean Heresy; the one, that which has been said of the denying of
Free Will, the other in reprehending and condemning Abraham, Samson, Sara,
Rebecca, etc. and other Saints of the old Testaments, as Saint Augustine
testifies, that the Manicheans did; and Bellarmine shows that Calvin does
hold the very same, proved by multiplicity of places quoted out of his works:
M. Morton passes over with silence this latter proof as unanswerable, yet will
have us think that Bellarmine did iniure Calvin, in noting him with the
Manichean Heresy: which is as much as if a man having two writings to show for
a suit in Law, the Attorney of the Adverse part should suppress the one,
which is most plain and evident, and cavil about the other.

The Reueiwe.
28, This is pretty (Mr. Parsons) but yet I must needs say, His heady taxation.
it is both witless and lucklesse: for be it known unto you that I could not
think that second objection of Bellarmine unanswerable, which I have already
Cath. Appeal, l 5 c. 19.
answered, and proved to be as wicked a slander as any of the rest: I may
not deny your Palate a taste of that answer.

29. First I proved out of your own Doctors, that the Heresy of the
Manichees, was not the noting of the Idolatry of Abraham, etc. Secondly, that
to say with Calvin, that Calvin. Instruct aduers. Libert. c. 3.
Abraham had once been an Idolater, is no Heresy, but a truth, and by your
Jesuit Pererius Jes. in Genesis 11. l. 16. Disp. 17. n. 255, etc.
Pererius confessed to have been justified by many Romish Doctors, and other
Authors, such as Genebrard, Masius, yea and by Jewish Rabbis, and Philo:
afterward by Lindane out of Suidas and Saint Augustine. To which of all these
dare you (who are so bold with Calvin) ascribe the note of the forenamed
heresy of the Manichees? Therefore it cannot be, but that this your Holy itch,
(as you have named it) does proceed from a malignant humor.

SECT. IIII.
The fourth slander used by Bellarmine. The charge.
30. Pream. pa. 64.
He accused Bullinger of Henr. Bullingerum, etc. Bellar. praef. in contr. de
Christo.. Henrice^. and Greg. Valent Ics. lib. devnit. and Triait. c. 9.
Arianisme,

because of this sentence, [ Tres sunt non statu, sed gradu, etc.
Notwithstanding'he knew that this was the very sentence of Tertullian. And is
therefore elsewhere expounded as orthodoxall and justifiable by Tertullianus
etc. Bellar. l. 1. de Cluisto. c. 10. Respondeo 2.
himself. Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of abuse.
MAster Morton does offer him (that is, Bellarmine) great abuse, for Recko.
page 172.
he never allows any where of the whole sentence, as it stands in the Book
against Praxea, but only of the first two words, Non statu, (...); saying;
that per gradum: he vnderstandoth ordinem personarum.

The Reuiew.
31. The Antitrinitarian Heretics objected, for proof of their error, the
whole sentence of Tertullian, which is this; Tres sunt non statu, sed gradu;
non substantia, sed forma; non potestate, sed specie differentes. And now Mr.
Parsons tells us, that Bellarmine cutting off the latter part of the
sentence, answered only the first two words, Non statu, sed gradu: so that
when Mr. Parsons would free Bellarmine from a slander, he does in effect
accuse him of singular fraud, in cutting ost the chief part of the sentence of
Tertullian, as though it M. Parsons makes Bellarmine to betray the Catholic
cause.
had been unanswerable, and so (as much as that testimony of Tertullian could
work) betrayed the Catholic cause unto the Arians. Whenever I happened to
cut off any sentence, although altogether impertinent, Mr. Parsons pursues me
as vehemently, as he would do a man that had cut a purse: here has he taken
his Lord Cardinal Bellarmine cutting off that part of the Sentence, which did
most principally concern the cause, and yet does he profess himsefe an
Advocate in his behalf. Surely, this proves that Mr. Parsons was nothing
less then Sober (for spitefulness is a kind of drunkenness) when he made
this Reckoning, who, that hec might charge me with abusing of Bellarmine, has
himself so far abused Bellarmine, as to make him a fraudulent Abuser of
Tertullian.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning, and second charge of Fraud.
MAster Morton brings in Valentia in his Margent, approving, or at Reckon. p
171.
leastwise, not improuing the same sentence of Tertullian thus: Sic scribit
Tertul. Tres sunt non statu sed gradu, non substantia sed forma, non potestate
sed specie. This is a Fraud, for Tertullian is not so much as named by him in
the place alleged, but Bullinger is reprehended for using the same sentence,
Tressunt, etc. Which Mr. Morton would have his Reader think he had allowed.

The Reuiewe, and discharge.
32. Here is only a Marginall note, not insisted upon in M. Parsons lavish
wrangling.
the Text, so much as by name, nor any inference to be justly made out of it,
but intimating only that Valentia knew that this was the Sentence of
Tertullian, which probably he did: So that in this there is no occasion or just
suspicion of fraud: And now the only error was the As is plain in the first
part of my Apolog. Cath. page 149. whence the sentence was transcribed.
misplacing of a marginal quotatio^. For the senteuce, which I alleged was
thus Verbatim set down in the Sea in the beginning of Tertul. Basil. An. 1521.
Admonitio ad Lectorem, de quibusdam Tertulliani dogmatis
Author of the Preface unto Tertullian: Sic scribit Tertullianus aduersus
Praxeam, Tres sunt non statu sed gradu; non substantia, sed forma; non
potestate, sed specie differentes. Which being observed, may acquit me not
only of fraud, but even of any fault, except that which will happen sometime
to the most vigilant Writers. Let us return to Bellarmine.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEllarmine expounded the first words of Tertullian, saying Per gradum Reck.
p. 173.
intelligit ordinem personarum: Tertullian in this place by Degree understood
only the order of persons, and not a different degree of perfection: But the
whole sentence of Tertullian he never defended nor admitted, but held it rather
for erroneous in Tertullian, and heretical in Bullinger: And now, you see what
notable advantage M. Morton has gotten out of this his so notable objection.

The Reueiwe.
33. If I had gotten no advantage before, yet now have I gained much by this
Reckoning: the first is this, that Bellarmine, whom I was to prove a
falsificator, may be convicted of falsehood by your confession, for to cut off a
necessary part of a sentence of Tertullian, where the whole was objected, does
argue fraud in the highest degree. Secondly I find in your Answer, that
which may be observed in many of your fellows, that Protestants are condemned
by you for Heretics Three obseruable points.
sometimes, when they speak the very language of ancient Fathers. Thirdly I
discern in you, Mr. Parsons, either ignorance not to understand, or malice not
to acknowledge the truth of this doctrine of Tertullian, which has been thus
M. Parsons ignorance of the judgment of Tertullian.
cleared by the Author of the Admonition, concerning the opinions of
Tertullian, praefixed before his works, expounding the forenamed sentence,
Tres sunt, etc. thus; Tertullian (says he) calls that a State, which the
Schoolmen call the substance: that he calls a Degree, which they call Notion:
that he names a form, which they term properties: and he takes that to be
Species, or kind, which they note to be the manner of being. Will not now M.
Parsons blush to perceive his malady detected, whilst that he chose that
Tertullian should be rather condemned, then that (as I may so say) his son
Bullinger a Protestant should not be condemned? Here is malice.

SECT. V.
The fifth slander used by Bellarmine.
34. Preamb. p. 65.
BEllarmine said of Protestants (said I) that Secundum errorem, etc Bellar. l.
1. de beat. Sanct. c. 4. Paulo^ post initium.
They teach that the souls of faithful men departing this life, do not go
directly unto heaven. In another place he together with his fellow Jesuit,
has publickely recorded that it is a common Octaus obiectio, etc. Bellar. l.
1. de Imag. c. 8. 14. 13.
Objection of Protestants proving from Scriptures, against the doctrine of
Purgatory, that the souls of the faithful presently after death, go directly
unto heaven.

Hereunto Master Parsons does answer.

Octaua ob. and Gregor. de Valent. de Purg c. 8. and Rhemists Annot. in Apoc.

Mr PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Have consulted with Bellarmine, at leastwise with his book, and he Reckon.
page 164. 165.
answers that the word, Protestants, twice here repoated, is not found in
him in the place by you cyted: for that he ascribes not this heresy unto all
Protestants in general, but only unto three in particular of our time, viz.
Luther. Cornelius Agrippa, and John Calvin. So as M. Morton has made him to
tax all Protestants, and to say, They do teach, etc. Whereas he taxes only
three particular men Neither have I yet read any other that defends the same.

The Reueiwe.
35 Neither did I say that Bellarmine did accuse All Protestants, as you
infer, but only Protestants, as you confess. In whom then is the fraud?
But you say he noted Calvin and Luther by name. As though in them he did not
often condemn Protestants in general, although not in universal. And because
you say you have consulted with Bellarmine, or with his book; I must tell you,
that either your outward or inward sight has deceived you, for if you shall,
for your better M. Parsons is ignorant of Beliarmines book, with which he
says, he consulted
information, consult again with the 4. cap. of the same book,. Primus, you
shall find these words: At secundum errorem Caluinistarum, non ad Deum ibant
(namely, the Martyrs,) sed ad inferos, aut ad alium locum extra coelum. That
is, According to the error of the Caluinists, the Martyrs went not unto God,
but unto some other place without heaven. Do you not see that Calumists are
here generally charged with this error? And in the margent I said Caluinists.
After that you have examined this, it may be you will confess that by your
former Consultation you made no Sober Reckoning.

36. Furthermore, I never read (say you) of any other, but the aboue-named
Luther, Agrippa (who was no See his book Devanit Scient. cap. 6. ve. sus
finem, where he calls the Protestants Heretics. And, as some note, was
commended by Pope Leo the tenth, l 1. Ep. 38. See the book of Pope loan, page
104.
Protestant) and Calvin that defended the same: and yet your Bellarmine has
not feared to charge not only Calvin, but also Caluinists, for defending this
doctrine. Do thou not see (good Reader) what an unhappy Proctor M. Parsons
is become in Bellarmines behalf, who will seem to have consulted in this M.
Parsons his answer entangleth Bellarmine in an higher suspicion of slander.
point with Card. Bellarmine, and yet yields no better satisfaction, then
that which may be a confutation both of him and of his book? If the Card.
should know this, it may be M. Parsons should hear that Luc. 26. 2.
non eris vltra villicus: and be presently put out of this office of Reckoning.
Let us come nearer unto Bellarm. his accusation of Calvin.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Calvin chiefly maintained this error, saying that the Saints do Reckon.
page 175.
expect without in a certain Porch or Entry, until the consummation of the
world: From whence Bellarmine infcrreth that, The Saints by Caluines doctrine,
are shut out of Heaven.

The Reuiew, discovering the manifold frauds used by Bellarmine, and the
integrity of Calvin in this Article of entrance into Heaven.
37. This I say and auerre to be an ungodly and unconscionable slander, and so
may you know, if you will have the patience but to hear either the accused, or
the accuser speak: first Calvin, who is the party accused, delivers unto us,
as part of his Creed, saying, Credimus quod, etc. Calvin. aduers. Libertin. c.
22.
We believe that which Paul speaks, viz When our earthly house is destroyed,
we shall have a permanent house In Heaven; therefore do we desire to flit out
of this life, that we may be with the Lord, and enjoy all good things. For if
the souls of the faithful, as soon as they are out of this body, do live
with God, and enjoy the happiness of that Kingdom, yet the perfect felicity
(whereby Calvin means that which is the consummation of blessedness both in
body and soul, which cannot be until the general Resurrection) God has
referred until the second coming of Christ. What better Comment would any
require of one Article of faith, concerning the direct passage of souls into
the real Kingdom of God in heaven? Thus much the accused party for himself.

38. But what if Bellarmine, who is his Accuser, shall also free him from
excluding the souls of Saints out of Heaven? Si quis petat, etc. Bellar. l. 4.
de Christo c. 9. Si quis.
If any (says Bellarmine) do ask Calvin where the souls of the just were,
before the coming of Christ? he answers that they were in Heaven, although
they saw not God, nor shall see him til the day of judgment. By which Bellarm
might know he meant the perfect sight of God both in soul and body (as he
himself expounds Irenaeus, Lib. I. de beat. c. 4.. Quod ergo) until the day
of judgment. Here is a plain confession, that Calvin taught a local
presence of the souls of the faithful, who, before Christ's coming, entered
into Heaven: And would he then exclude the faithful of the new Testament from
the same hope? No; for Calvin himself reasons thus: Quod si Latroni, etc.
Calvin upon the text of the penitent thiese.
If the thief upon the Cross had entrance into heaven, much more will Christ,
now, after he has conquered death, put out his hand out of his Throne to
apprehend us, and to gather us into the fellowshippe of life, seeing he
received the thief into his bosom, and did not abandon him into purgatory.
Who sees not now the wilful Slander, which Bellarmine has committed against
Calvin?

39. Furthermore that his malice herein may better appear, we shall find
that first he depraueth the sentences of Calvin notoriously, by wresting his
obscure sentences, rather then by acknowledging his most plain conclusions.

40. Secondly, by perverting the testimony alleged out of Calvin: for whereas
Calvin said: Instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 20.
Christus solus ingressus est Sanctuarium, Christ only entered into the
Sanctuary of heaven; distinguishing the Sanctuary of heaven from the Atrium;
Bellarmine Bellar. l. 1: de Eccles. Triumph. c. 1.. Eundem habet.
makes his conclusion to have been, Christum solum esse in caelo, that is,
Christ only to be in heaven, as though there were not in heaven (as Christ
speaks) many Mansions; and that he, who is not in the chief place of heaven,
were therefore excluded out of heaven. This is another falsehood.

41. Thirdly Calvin speaks of a porch of Heaven, by allusion Bellarmine
depraueth the sentence of Calvin.
unto the people of the old law (who stood in the Porch, whilst only the high
Priest went into the Sanctuary to offer for the people) and says, that so
Instis. que supra.
Christ our high Priest is only entered into the Sanctuary of Heaven, that he
may offer up the vows of the people, which stand in the Porch a far off;
meaning the people of the militant Church in this life, of whom he said, Sic
membrorum omnium adhuc in terra laborantium vnus Mediator Christus, That is,
Christ is the only Mediator for his members, which travel in this earth. And
now to change the Atrium of Saints in this world, into the Atrium of Saints in
glory, is to turn earth into heaven, which is another injury.

42. Lastly, if we shall suppose that Calvin by Atrium, had meant the place of
souls departed, and had said that the souls departed could not enter into the
Sanctuary, yet Bellarmine knowing other plain and justifiable sentences of
Calvin, might have affoorded his obscure places as favorable an exposition,
as he allowed S. Bernard, who taught an Atrium also, to wit, Bellar. l. 1. de
beat. sanct. c. 5.. (...)
Dicit quidem Bernardus, etc. Bernard indeed says, that the Saints shall not
see God before the resurrection, and until then to remain in Atrio, That is,
in the Porch: Whereby he meant not (says Bellarmine) to deny the simple
vision of God, but that perfect vision which shall be both in body and soul
after the resurrection. Here again we may discern a malignancie in our
Romish Writers, who when they find Fathers and Protestants agreeing in the
same terms (as before was observed in the testimony of Tertullian) yet do
they justify the sayings of the Fathers as holy truths, and reject the
sentences of Protestants as damnable heresies.

The same slander fastened by Bellarm. upon Luther.
I Have consulted with Bellarmine, at least with his book, and he ascribes
Reckon. quo supra p. 174.
this heresy unto Calvin and Luther, etc.

The Reueiwe.
43. He does so indeed: Bellar. l. 1. de Eccles. triump c. 1.. Secundum errorem.
Luther (says Bellarmine) held the same error in his Lectures upon Genesis,
as Fredericus Staphylus does cite him. Who accuses Luther? Bellarmine, a
professed Reader against him: but by what witness? even by Staphylus, a
Romanist, and a professed Rayler against Luther: Lastly, from what place? From
his Lectures upon Genesis where I can find nothing for defense of that error,
but much for the confutation thereof. For Praelect. in Genesis cap. 25. where
(after that he had affirmed, that the souls of the just after death, do not
go either into Hell, or into Purgatory, but into peace) he says Iustos omnes,
etc. That is: That all the just, when they depart out of this life, do go to
Christ, and are received into his bosom, even into Paradise; which Paradise he
there calls Heaven. Therefore the former accusation doubtless, came not from
heaven.

44. It may please the Reader to observe, that whereas I See here after, l. 1.
c. 12.. 13.
happended to produce the testimony of Tolossanus, a Romish Author, cyting
Frising ensis against the violent and turbulent practizes of later Popes, M.
Parsons held it to be a fraudulent injury to allege the Relater Tolossanus,
and not Frisingensis, M. Parsons partiality.
who was the Author himself. But now M. Parsons in this place, sees
Bellarmine cyting Staphylus, the professed enemy of Luther, by whose testimony
Luther is noted of Heresy, and yet he thinks that Bellarmine has done
honestly. Here is good Reckoning.

The sixth slander used by Cardinal Bellarmine against Calvin.
45. Preamb. p. 65.
Bellarmine challenges Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccles. c. 9. ad finem.
Calnine for as he calls it) an ancient Heresy alleged by Theodoret,
affirming that there is only a figure of Christ's body in the Eucharist. And
yet in another place affirming, both Quae sententia. etc. Bellar. l. 1 de Euch.
c. 1. initio.
That that opinion is not ancient, nor yet now to be found in Theodoret; and
also that Docet Caluinus etc. Bell (...). Secundo docet
The foresaid doctrine of Calvin does teach, that in the Eucharist there is to
be exhibited unto the faithful, not only a figure of Christ's body, but also
the body and blood it self, by which meat souls are nourished unto eternal
life. Or, as another Jesuit testifies for Calvin, Docet Caluinus, etc.
Valent. Ies. Tom. 4. disp. 6. (...) 3. punct. 1.. Item.
That our souls communicate with the body of Christ substantially. Here is no
more odds in this Accusation, then ancient and not ancient; heresy and not
heresy.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THE objected contradiction in this place is, that Bellarmine confesses k
Reck. cap. 3.. 12. page 181.
Calvin to hold, that together with the Sacrament of the Eucharist, God does
exhibit unto the faithful not only a sign of Christ's body, but also the
body and blood it self, yea and as Valentia adds further, that aCluine
confesses that our souls do communicate with the body of Christ
substantially. Whereunto I answer, true it is, that in words al Cuine does
affirm as much in some parts of his works, but denies it again in others,
and thereupon do both Bellarmine and Valentia convince him of most eiudent and
palpable contradictions in this matter. Which proves no contradiction in
Bellarmine, but in Calvin himself.

The Reueiwe.
46. So do you pursue many testimonies of Calvin to no purpose, for there is
a real eating of Christ's body spiritually, and not only bodily: all the
question is, whether in the Sacrament we receive only a Sign of Christ, and
not the very body it self: So said those ancient Heretics, and so Calvin
is traduced by Ballarmine to have affirmed. This matter would be better
examined. A Syllogism would set all straight.

Mayor. No man admitting more then a Sign of Christ's body to be received in
the Eucharist, does concur with the ancient Heretics, mentioned by
Theodoret, who defended receiving only of the sign of Christ's body:

Minor. But Calvin, by the confession of Bellarmine and others, taught, that
we receive in the Eucharist more then a sign of Christ his body:

Ergo, Calvin taught not that ancient Heresy mentioned by Theodoret.

47. The Mayor will not be denied: the Minor is this, that Calume taught that
we receive more then a sign, even a Seal also, as M. Reck. P. 182. lin. vlt.
Parsons notes; by virtue where of Calvin says, that We receive the very
body and blood of Christ, as Bellarmine himself confesses: not only
Sacramentally, but (as Valentia witnesses) Substantially communicating in our
soul with the body of Christ. So that in the conclusion (which is
contradictory unto Bellarmine his assertion) we see in Bellarmine a manifest
contradiction. Neither shall Master Parsons with all the art he has, avoid
this, until he can show some place in Calvin, wherein it is said, that We
receive only a sign of Christ's body in the Eucharist, and not his body:
which neither he, nor any of his Disciples shall ever be able to perform.

48. A second contradiction is as plain, wherein, as he would charge Calvin
with an Ancient Heresy mentioned by Theodoret, and yet says, Ne glorientur
Caluinistae suam sententiam esse valde antiquam, That is, Least the Caluinists
might boast that their opinion is very ancient (towit, as were the days of
Theodoret,) etc: so does he hereby confess that it was not so ancient. But so
ancient, and not so ancient, make a contradiction. And yet whilst I do
accuse others, I am called to a coram my self.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of fraud.
Mr. Morton has commonly alleged no instance of fraud in his Reckon. p. 177.
adversary, but with some fraud in himself, and none perhaps with more, then
in this sixth and last objection in that kind, concerning the testimony of
Theodoret for real presence, for that here be so many foul faults and
wilful corruptions, as truly if after so many admonishments I should use the
same, it would make me ashamed to look any man in the face.

The Reuiew.
49. I am right glad to hear that M. Parsons has a face, which can possibly
be ashamed. For I shall put his face to the trial, even in these his objected
falsities. What is the first?

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE mentions Calvin to be challenged by Bellarmine for his beresie, Recko.
page 179.
leaving out Zuinglius, who is equally challenged with Calvin. This is one
trick.

The Reuiew.
50. When Card. Bellarmine, in slaundering two parties, did contradict himself
in his Accusation of one, was it not sufficient M. Parsons silly wrangling.
to prove, that he had wilfully transgressed his conscience from the apparent
contradiction in that one, except it were proved that he did contrary himself
in his accusing of them both? Would any Sober brain note this for a Trick of
fraud? Nevertheless Bellar. l. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 9. and l. 1. de
Eucharist. c. 1.. edidit. etc.
seeing that the doctrine of Calvin and Zuinglius were (according to
Bellarmine his opinion) in this point both one, will M. Parsons deny that in
Calvin, Zuinglius is absolved?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THen he omitteth wholly the mention of the seventh general Reckon. p. 179.
Council, which so long ago confuted the same heresy. And this is another
trick.

The Reuiew.
51. It did indeed confute that old Heresy, whereof Calvin His fond
impertinency.
(by the judgment of Bellarmine) was not guilty: and therefore this is a point
of your own idle trickishnesse, to put this Council into your Reckoning. What
yet more?

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
FVrthermore he concealeth in like manner the name and authority Reckon. ibid.
of old S. Ignatius, who in his time (which was immediately after the
Apostles) held the denying of the Real presence to be an heresy: and this is
a third trick.

The Reuiew.
52. Bellarmine himself has Bellar. l. 1. de Eucharist. c. 1.
said, that the contention in the days of Ignatius, concerned rather the
incarnation of Christ, then the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And yet has M.
Parsons the power to face out the matter, as though the omission M. Parsons
Ignorance of the objected heresy.
of the name of Ignatius were a fraudulent Trick. Know furthermore that the
Heretics spoken of, held that Christ had not a natural, but a fantastical
body; and that therefore in the Eucharist his body could not be exhibited in a
figure, but only a fantastical body: and so made the Eucharist, a figure of
a figure.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereas Card. Bellarmine says, Quae sententia, etc. Which sentence Reckon.
ibid.
is cyted by Theodoret in his Dialogue out of the Epistle of Ignatius ad
Smyrnenses where now it is not to be found, meaning that it is not found in
the Epistle of Jgnatius, M. Morton says that it is not found in Theodoret; and
upon this falsity of his own, will needs frame a contradiction in Bellarmine.

The Reueiwe.
53. From these words [ Where now it is not to be fiund in Theodoret] I did
not draw any note of contradiction against Bellarmine, this is Mr. Parsons his
wilful untruth, as the Reader will judge. But yet say, I pray you, (Mr.
Parsons) if I had so censured Bellarmine, whether had it been a greater fault
in him, to have abused the Dialogue of Theodoret, or Epistle of His wilful
untruth.
Ignatius?

54. I know you will be muttering within your self, saying thus: If I shall
answer, that the corruption of Theodoret is worse, then will T. M. note me of
gross ignorance, because Ignatius was S. John's Scholar, and therefore far
more ancient and worthy then Theodoret. But if I say that it had been a
greater offense to corrupt Ignatius, then will T. M. M. Parsons aim is either
false or frivolous.
reply, that I show my self malicious in condemning him of wilful falsehood,
for charging Bellarmine with a less offense, (that is, the corrupting of
Theodoret) when as he might rather have challenged Bellarmine for a greater
fault, even the abusing of the Epistle of Ignatius. The last Accusation was
false, this is frivolous, both malicious. When will he end this part of his
Reckoning?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEfore I enter into this other Examen, there occurreth unto me Reckon. page
183.
a consideration worthy to be pondered by the Reader, which is, that all these
six objections made against Card. Bellarmine for imputing old heresies unto
Protestants, are taken out of his fourth book of the notes of the Church, cap.
9. where he charge the Protestants of his time with twenty several condemned
old heresies, yet M. Morton thought good to set upon fix: Which M. Morton
picking out only a few, and leaving all the rest as not excusable, and
underhand by his filence grants that they are held by Protestants. Which how
markable a point it is, I leave to the Reader to judge.

The Reuiew.
55. Good Reader, know that Mr. Parsons has required thy judgment, in a
matter which he holds worthy consideration, and ponderous. His consequence is
this: M. Morton Mr. Parsons unreasonable exaction.
has chosen only six Objections of Heresy (which he calls Slanders) of
twenty: Ergo, by his silence he does in effect acknowledge the rest fourteen
Heresies, to have been justly objected against Protestants. Now I also desire
thy further consideration, to judge, whether this Reckoning of his be either
sensible or conscionable.

56. For first, the Treatise was only a Preamble unto a Treatise, and as it
were the foot to the body of this book, yet does M. Parsons exact, that I
should have either set down all the rest of the slanderous accusations, which
Bellarmine has used against Protestants, or else to confess them to be no
slanders. But has not the Apostle demanded from reason, that if 1. Cor. 12. 17.
All the body were an eye, then where should be the hearing? So say I, if all
had been a Preamble, to what end had been an offer of a large Encounter?
Would any think Mr. Parsons to be in his sober wits, if when he sees the
picture of his Fathers face only, he should thereby conclude that his Father
was all face, and no body? And yet does he quarrel with me for not setting
down all things in the Preamble, and as it were the Preface of this Encounter.

57. Secondly, it is also an unconscionable, or at least an inconsiderat
Consideration, which Master Parsons urges: For even all those other Fourteen,
and diverse more heresies, objected by Bellarmine, against the Protestants, have
been by me particularly examined discussed, and proved to have been so many
inexcusable slanders, even in that Book of Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. Noto. 6.
Apology, whereof Master Parsons himself has taken particular notice: but
more fully and exactly in my lass Catholic Appeal, the fifth Book whereof is
spent in the confutation of these and otherslaunders, which our Romish
Adversaries have falsely objected against Calvin, and other Protestants. Thus
we see that his Ponderous Consideration, being put into the balance, is found
to weigh no more then does a vain and fantastical conceit.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning three other corrupted Allegations of Cardinal Bellarmine.

SECT. I.
The charge concerning Saint Cyprian in the point of Tradition.
1. Preamb. p. 66.
SAint Cyprian stood upon written Tradition: Bellarmine said that he did it in
defending an error, Therefore no marvel ( says he) though Cyprian erred in so
reasonning; for the which cause Saint Augustine does worthily refute him. In
which place S. Augustine seems to be so far from confuting him, for
reasoning so, that he says: That which Cyprian warns us, to run unto the
fountain, that is unto the Traditions of the Apostles, from thence to derive a
Conduict to our times, that is chiefly and doubtless to be performed.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis was no good form of arguing in him, but in this necessity, Recko. c. 3.
13. pa. 187.
for defending this error: for first Saint Augustine does of purpose refute the
same, and Saint Cyprian does elsewhere yield and allow the unwritten
Traditions: I grant that S. Cyprian says (as Saint Augustine also does) that
when any Tradition or Doctrine can be clearly showed out of Scripture,
Optimum est, It is questionless the best way of all: But when there is no
Scripture for proof of it, then (says S Augustine) Consuetudo illa, etc. that
is, The custom which was opposed against Cyprian, must be believed to have
proceeded from the Apostles, as many things else, which the Universal Church
does hold, and therefore are well believed to have been commanded by the
Apostles, albeit they are not found written.

The Reueiwe.
2. What Saint Augustines judgment was concerning the sufficiency of
Scripture, as it is defended by the Protestants, he has often unfolded, saying
that Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
Amongst all things which are contained plainly in Scripture, all those things
may be found, which concern faith and manners of life. And again, Lib. 2.
depeccat. merit. and remiss. ca. 36.
Whenever there is a case of greatest difficulty, and we have no clear
proofs of Scriptures for our conclusions, so long must man's presumption keep
silence. And even of this question of not rebaptizing, he does refute it out of
Scriptures Contra Donatist. l. 1. c. 7. Tom. 7.
By (as he speaks) certain proofs, (and not by conjectures, as Bellarmine
calls them) before the definition of a Council. And here also although
Bellarmine be in part justifiable, yet look unto the sentence of Cyprian, and
you shall find his reasoning negatiuely from Scripture (which is condemned by
Bellarmine) to be justified by Saint Augustine, although it be there applied
by him affirmatively.

SECT. II.
The second exception against Bellarmine.

The charge concerning S. Peter's Ordination.
3. THe sum of the exception stands thus, Bellarmine defended that, Bellar.
l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 23.
Saint Peter only was ordained a Bishop by Christ, and that the other Apostles
were ordained Bishops by Saint Peter: and endeavored to prove this out of the
testimonies of Anacletus, Clemens Alex. Eusebius, Cyprian, Leo, Augustine. But
these Fahers ( says their Relect. 2.. 2. number. 8.
Victoria) do not intend that which the Authors of this opinion do pretend. As
for other writings which are attributed unto Clement, and Pope Anacletus, which
are both many and great, they are ( says their Cardinal Cusanus) Cusanus l. 3
de Concord. c. 2.
Apocrypha, wherein they, who extol the Roman Sea (which is worthy of
allpraise) do above that which is convenient or meet, either wholly or partly
rely, We are now to Reckon, first for the matter it self, and then for the
manner of deliverance of it in my Preamble.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALl this which Mr. Morton all adgeth here, if it were granted, as Reck.
page 195.
it lies, contains nothing but two different opinions, between learned men
in a disputable question. Whether Christ did immediately, and by himself,
consecrate all or some of his Apostles Bishops, or one only with authority to
consecrate the rest? Turrecremata and Bellarmine do hold the one for more
probable, but Victoria, Cusanus, and some other do allow rather the other. What
wilful falsehood is there in this? Or is it not singular folly to call it by
that name?

The Reueiwe.
4. If all this were granted Mr. Parsons? Then I can tell you, you must either
renounce the judgment of Bellarmine, or else recant your own Reckoning: you
have granted first that Recko. p. 193.
Bellarmine did prove out of Turrecremata, that Christ did make only Saint
Peter Bishop, with authority to consecrate the rest: Secondly, that Page 194.
Victoria thinks the contrary opinion to be more probable, and answers the
argument of Turrecremata, saying, that the Fathers cited for the same; Reuera
non significant id, quod Authors huius sententiae volunt, That is, That in
truth they do not signify so much, as the authority Mr. Parsons crooked
dissimulation.
( Mr. Parsons should have said Authors) of this opinion would have them:
Lastly, that Cardinal Cusanus here cited, does to the like effect, answer
the same arguments.

5. In all these confessed points consists the maine matter of my former
exception: Notwithstanding this evidence, Mr. Parsons says, If it were
granted, etc. What trick shall we call this? Yet thus much being granted,
mark Master Parsons, what will follow hereupon, viz. that the Church of Rome
has lost her supposed Motherhood: For Bellar. lib. 1. de Pont c. 27.. Secund
rat.
Bellarmine presuming that all ancients held the Church of Rome to be the
Mother Church, adds in these words, Quod non videtur, etc. that is, Which
seems not to be true (says he) except Rome by just consequence is not the
Mother Church.
in that sense, because Peter, who was the Bishop of Rome, had ordained all
other Apostles Bishops, either by himself, or by others. See this, and blush
at your ignorance, Bellarmine reasons thus: Except Peter did ordain the rest
of the Apostles Bishops, your Church of Rome cannot be truly called the
Mother Church: but that Peter ordained the rest of the Apostles Bishops, Mr.
Parsons does hold it to be a matter disputable: their Cusanus thinks it to be
improbable, their Victoria concludes Mr. Parsons ignorance.
pro certo, that Certamly Peter did not ordain them Bishops. The conclusion
will follow of it own accord, which is this, viz. It is therefore but
Disputable, or Improbable, yea an Incredible doctrine to say, that the Church
of Rome is the Mother Church. When Mr. Parsons shall consider this, I think he
will repent him of this Reckoning.

6. May I be furthermore so bold with Mr. Parsons, as to demand: why he did
translate [ Authors eius sent entiae, that is, The Authors of this opinion]
into The authority of this opinion? I say, what authority had he for these
tricks, for of his purpose we will make no question: For he was loath that the
opinion of Bellarmine should be held by any certainly false; or that such
Authors as were Anacletus, Clem. Alexandrinus, Cyprian, August. Leo, should be
thought to write against his opinion. The matter being thus clear, for their
conviction, M. Parsons (according to his old guise) diuerteth his Readers eye
from the matter unto the manner of delivery, and first thus.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE alleges the sentence thus: that Saint Peter was the only Reck. p. 192.
Bishop, and that the other Apostles took their Orders from him. Where he
should have said, Peter was ordained Bishop alone by Christ, he changes
Episcopal Consecration, into holy Orders.

The Reueiwe.
7. Seeing that Peter only is said to have been ordained Loose and absurd
cauils.
Bishop, who can imagine any ordainer but Christ? And the question being only
of ordaining a Bishop, how can the word Holy orders betoken any other orders,
but those which are Episcopal, that is, the Orders of Bishops? Except Mr.
Parsons transgress so much, as to deny the orders of Bishops to be Holy:
which shows the exception, here used by M. Parsons, to be but an arrant
quarrel.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereas he says, that Bellarmine labors to euince from the Recko. page 193.
testimonies of Anacletus, Clemens Alex. etc. the proof of this prerogative;
he abuses him egregiously, for that Bellarmine does allege this opinion,
that Christ having all his Apostles Priests, did make only S. Peter Bishop,
with authority to consecrate the rest, as the opinion of Turrecremata,
alleging diverse manifest reasons and proofs for the same.

The Reuiewe.
8. Bellarmine contended to grace the Pope in Peter, and Peter with many
prerogatives above the other Apostles; The two and twentieth is this above
mentioned, viz. Peter alone was ordained Bishop by Christ, and the other
Apostles by Peter. This Bellarmine holds to have been Saint Peter's
prerogative, and then goes about to defend it: but how he is contented to
reason from Cardinal Turrecremata, alleging and allowing the same arguments
and testimonies of Fathers as his own, and in the end making the same
conclusion which Turrecremata did, All this Mr. Parsons cannot deny, and yet
behold forsooth an Egregious abuse of Bellarmine; but why? because Bellarmine
does allege the reasons of Turrecremata. As if Mr. Parsons seeing some
dissolute Rusfian, A Simile, illustrating Mr. Parsons deceitful peeuishnes.
borrowing a sword of an other, wherewith he does wilfully kill a man, forthwith
to be apprehended, and in due time condemned and executed, should run upon
the judge, and revile him, saying, he did not the murder, for he borrowed the
sword: So it is, Bellarmine did borrowe the reasons of Turrecremata: but did
use them and apply them for the proof of his own conclusion, which by other
Romish Doctors has been condemned as false.

9. Therefore in this so senseless an accusation, the bent of Mr. Parsons
malice does show it self, who furthermore urges the leaving out of the word
Reckon. 194.
[ fortasse] in the testimony of Cusanus, when as he could not be ignorant
that Concord. Cath. l. 3. c 2.
Cusanus does immediately after prove them to be Apocrypha and counterfeit
Epistles, which are attributed unto Anacletus and Clemens. For first, There is
no mention (says he) of them His malignant lust of accusing his Aduesary.
in any writings of antiquity. Secondly, The Epistles themselves being but
applied unto the times of those Saints (namely of Anacletus and Clemens) they
do bewray themselves: meaning that they are Apocrypha. Thirdly by their
Contents; among others this, that The writer of the Epistle of Clemens, Popes
Epistles forged.
feineth Clemens to have written this Epistle unto James Bishop of Jerusalem,
after the death of Peter, whereas it is manifest (says Cusanus) that James
suffered Martyrdom eight years before the death of Saint Peter. So that you
cannot be so much, offended with me, for leaving out one word, as I am offended
with my self, for omitting the large proofs of Cusanus, which do make the
matter without all Peradventure.

SECT. III.
The third Exception against Bellarmine, concerning Platina.
10. Preamb. pa. 67
BEllarmine cyteth the testimony of Extat. apud, etc. Bellar. l. 4. de Pont. c.
13. Extat.
Platina for the commendation of Pope Hildebrand: and in another place finding
Platina objected in the question of Confession, answers for disabling of the
Author, saying, that Being urged, etc.
Platina had no public authority to pen the lives of the Popes from public
records: which is notably false, Platina himself in his Epistle Dedicatory to
the Pope, writing thus: Tu Theologorum, etc. Platina praef. operis.
Thou (O Prince of Divines, and chief of Bishops) have commanded me to write
the lives of the Popes: whose History is therefore greatly commended by Balbus
as being Que Platina, etc. Balbus de coronat.. Post mortem.
True, and taken out of public Monuments.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge of fraud.
Calvin cyting Platina thus: Eorum Annals dicunt. etc. Bellarm. answers
Reck. cap 3.. 15. page 197.
that neither Platina did write those lives of the Popes by public authority,
nor out of public Records: and adds immediately, which M. Morton has
fraudulently cut off, Vt Annals nostri dici possint, That they may be called
our Annals.

The Reueiwe.
11. As though the denying that Platina had written them by public authority,
did not effectually enough deny them to be Annals nostri, that is, such
Annals, or Histories, whereby you will be tried. This is the point, speak
somewhat to the purpose, for your Clyent expects your excuse.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ANd albeit Platina says in the Preface of his History unto the Reckon. page
198.
Pope Sixtus the fourth, who lived somewhat above 100. years past, that he had
commanded him to write the Popes lives, yet this proves not that his
collection is an authentical History of our Church, or so well performed by
him, as all things therein contained must be held for exact truth and we bound
to accept of the same, which is all, in effect, that Card. Bellarmine avouches.

The Reueiwe.
12. Master Parsons, let me fore-warne you, that this Answer be not heard of
at Rome, even for your Clyents sake, if not for your own. May not Rome call
any writing of men Mr. P. by his answer has betraide the authority of almost
all Romish Writers.
Nostra, that is, Ours, except they be Exactly true; and which the Reader is
bound so to accept of? By this answer you are compellable to grant that you
have no Histories at all in your Church, which you may justly acknowledge: for
how shall you be able to call any Authors, either Annals nostri, or
Pontifices nostri, or, Patres nostri, or, Iesuitae nostri, if in all things
contained in their books, there must be necessarily required an Exact Truth?
But M. Parsons was forced to answer somewhat.

13. The point in question is, why Calvin might not as well object the
testimony of Platina against some Romish assertions, as Bellarmine might do for
their defense; and whether his rejecting of Platina, as an Author not rightly
authorized, were either reasonable, or conscionable? But now hear what M.
Parsons does judge of Platina.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe censure of Bellarmine is true and prudent, concurring with the Reckon. p.
196.
judgment of diverse learned men of our time, especially of Onuphrius Panuinus,
who writing observations upon the history of Platina, does offentimes note the
said History concerning Popes lives, of diverse defects, both in Chronology of
times, and truth of matters set down by him. And I doubt not but whosoever
shall have read the work of Onuphrius and of Balbus here cyted in commendation
of Platina, will greatly prefer the judgment of the first before the latter
in matters of History.

The Reueiwe.
14. Must then Onuphrius be suffered to crowde out Platina, who is but a
Commentator upon Platina? Or shall Onuphrius The authority of Platina.
be the Historian, whom you will acknowledge for authentical, and whom you
presume to be so Exact, that he may not be rejected? How is it then that your
Baron. Anno. 44 number. 54. de Simone Mago. and Anno 253. n. 2. and Ano. 337 n.
73. and Anno 1001. n. 9. and Ao 1071 n. 15.
Baronius and Onuphrius can no better agree? If Balbus his commendations of
Platina bear no credit with you, I will try how Barklaius may prevail: he
speaking of Platina, says, Barkl. de potestate Papae. c. 39.
Huic ego authori, etc. I will rather credit this Author Platina herein, then
any other Historians, although they be more ancient, because he writ his
History at the command of Sixtus quartus, and of other Popes. Here Barcklauis
prefers Platina before others, because of the Popes authority, M. Parsons
notwithstanding the Popes authority prefers Onuphrius: not that M. Parsons
is less Papal, but because he is more partial whenever any witness does
contradict his conceit.

CHAP. X.
Concerning Card. Bellarmine his false Allegations, for proof of Purgatory, in
discussing whereof, the doctrine of Purgatory is discovered.

SECT. I.
The first charge, concerning his cytation of Ambrose.
1. Preamb. p. 68.
WHereas he professes to bring in Lib. 1. de Purg cap 6.. Deinde.
Apertissima loca, that is, Most evident places out of the Fathers, for proof
of Purgatory-fire already described, he produces such testimonies, which by
his own consequence do not concern the questioned Purgatory: as first
alleging Jbidem, l. 2 de Purg. cap. 1. Ambrosius.
Ambrose upon the Psalm. 118. Sermon. 20. and yet Ambrose in that Psalm. 118.
says, All must pass through those flames, whether John or Peter, only Christ,
who is justice it self, shall avoid them. Of the which place of Ambrose,
Bellarmine says, Bellar. ibid.. Add.
Ambrose understands not the fire of Purgatory, but the fire of Gods
judgment.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEllarmine in the first place of Ambrose, saying, See Ambrose upon ps. Reckon.
c. 3.. 16 page 202
118. Sermon. 20. signifies, that that Father has something more for proving
Purgatory: and in his second book cyting the same Sermon of Ambrose upon the
place of Genesis, [God has placed a sword of fire, etc.] says that it is
rather to be understood of the proouing fire of Gods judgments. What
contradiction is this? May there not be different sentences and senses in the
same Sermon?

The Reuiewe.
2. Yes, there may, but when as in examination of that Sermon of Saint Ambrose,
your self cannot find any place, which speaks of any fire, but that of Gods
severe judgment, which Bellarmine has said is not the fire of Purgatoric, you
thereby confirm that which I have said, that Bellarmine cyted Ambrose in a
sense different from his meaning.

SECT. II.
The second charge, concerning his cytation of Hilarie.
3. Preamb. p. 68.
BEllarmine cyted Lib. 1. de Purg c. 6.. Hilarious.
Hilary in Psalm, 118. upon these words [Concupiuit anima, etc.] We ( says
Hilary) must undergo that indefatigable fire, in the which we must pass
thorough the grievous punishments of purging of souls, This he Reckoned among
his most plain places, for proof of Purgatory-fire: and notwithstanding
elsewhere alleging the same text, says of the Comment of Hilary, that Lib.
2. de Purg c 1.. Idem videtur:
Hilary does therein insinuate, that the blessed Virgin ought to have passed
through the same fire, adding a little after, that Jbid.. Add.
He ( that is Hilary) therein by Purgatory, understood not the fire of
Purgatory.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereunto is answered, that both are contained in that Reckon. p. 203.
Discourse of Hilary, both the proouing fire of Gods judgments after death,
and the purging fire of Gods justice.

The Reuiew.
4. You should have answered for the same place of Hilary which was objected:
otherwise if you shall labor to prove that Bellarmine meant, that both these
fires were understood in that one place, where he himself confesses that the
fire of Purgatory is not understood, this would be as hapless a work, as if
you had sought by contradicting Bellarmine, to free Bellarmine from
contradiction.

SECT. III.
The charge of many false Allegations together.
5. Preamb. p. 69.
YEt again, among his Bellar. l. 1. de Purg. c. 6. Deinde sunt.
manifest places for Purgatory, he alleges Vt Origenes hom. 6. in Exodus
Saluus fit, si quid forte plumbi habent admixtum: etc.
Origin, Basilius in Isa. 9. Quod depascatur and deuoret ignis Purgatorius: etc.
Basil, Lactantius l. 7. c. 21 Perstring entur inge, atq, comburentur: etc.
Lactantius, Hieronymus in fine Comment in Isa. Quoru^ opera in igne probanda.
etc.
Hierome, (...) Psalm. 36 Non exuremur, tamen vremur, etc. HaecomniaBellar. l.
1. de Purg. c. 6.
Ambrose: all which are acknowledged expressly by Origenes dixit, Omnes homines,
except Christo, aliquo modo vrendos esse igne conflagrationis diuini iudicy.
Et Hilarious vna cum Ambrosio Originem secutus est. Eodem pertiuere videntur
quae Basitius annotauit: Adeandem opinionem apparet allusisse Hieronimum; and
long ante Hieronimum quoque, Lactantium. Sixtus Senens. Bibl. l. 5. Annot.
171. Lactanti is l. 7 c. 21 Perstringentur, inquit, etc. Loquitur de ijs, qui
in resurrectione sunt igni tradendi. Suares les. in part 3. Thom. q. 59. art.
6. Disp. 57. sect. 1.
Sixtus Senensis, from the evidence of the contexts, to have spoken only of
the fire of the day of judgment, and consequently, as Bellarmine has taught
us, Not of the fire of Purgatory.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Would demand of M. Morton, why we should ascribe more unto the Recko. page
205.
judgment of Senensis in censuring these places of the Fathers, then unto
other learned, that think the contrary: They are all acknowledged (says M.
Morton) expressly by Sixtus Senensis from the evidence of their contexts to have
spoken only of the fire of the day of judgment, and consequently not of
Purgatory. This is now properly to help a Die indeed: for that Senensis does
not talk of any such evidence of the contexts, but speaks rather doubtfully,
and by conjecture, saying of Origin, that his opinion (that both good and bad
should be purged by fire) is confuted by S. Augustine in his books de Ciust.
Dei, but yet for excusing the same from error he says; Tu vide an Origenis
verba interpretari queant de igne vltime conflagrationis. Do thou (Reader)
consider whether the words of Origin may be interpreted of the fire of the last
conflagration, or not; so as he did not expressly acknowledge from the evidence
of the contexts, (as M Mortons shifting and lying words are) that these
authorities must needs be understood of the last combustion of the world, but
rather leaves it as uncertain to be considered by the Reader.

The Reuiew.
6. I said indeed that Senensis by the evidence of contexts acknowledged the
testimonies alleged, to have spoken of the fire of the day of judgment, and
consequently (according unto Bellarmines doctrine) not of the fire of
Purgatory. This you call Shifting, Lying, and helpint the Die; but the perfect
Cogger will presently appear. For first I alleged diverse testimonies, which
might have licensed me in a generality to say by the evidence of contexts,
seeing that M. Parsons could take exception but only to one.

7. And the truth is, that I cyted Senensis his Biblioth. l. 5. Annot. 171. who
writes thus: Ambrose seems to agree with Origin, who says that all (Christ
only excepted) must be tried, and, in a sort, burnt in the fire of the
conflagration of Gods judgment: Where Senensis expressly affirms, what his
judgment is concerning the sentence of Origin. To confure this M. Parsons
fingular dexterity in falsehood.
M. Parsons setcheth a skip out of Senensis, Annot. 171. backward unto his
Annot. 170. where Senesis says of Origin, Vide an. etc. O confuter! Origin
spoke of a fire through which Apostles, Martyrs, and every one, Except Christ,
must pass. So that this could not be the Romish Purgatory-fire, for neither
Senensis, nor any Romanist durst ever say, that Saints and Martyrs did ever
take their voyage unto heaven by hell. Thus then the [ Vide] of Senensis
brings no doubt in the cause, for it is still plain by the contexts, that by
it is not meant your Purgatory-fire.

8. Finally, to Mr. Parsons (demanding why I should ascribe more unto the
judgment of Senensis then unto Bellarmine?) I answer, because Bellarmine did
write in his heat of altercation, but Senensis in the calm of contemplation.
By which distinction, Senensis himself discerns between the more and less
justifiable sentences of holy Fathers. Albeit indeed I do yield to Senensis,
especially because of the evidence of his proof.

SECT. IIII.
The next Charge against Bellarmine.
9. Preamb. pa. 69
IT follweth in the Preamble. Lastly, he professes to confirm the Doctrine
of Purgatory Purgatorium ex Patribus Graecis and Latinis probamus. Bellar. l 1.
de Purg. c. 6.
out of most of the Greek and Latin Fathers: And an other Jesuit says more
largely Omnes veteres Graeci Patres agnouerunt Purgatorium, and Scriptis suis
luculentissime prodiderunt. Salmeron Ies. Comm. in 1. Cor. 15. disp. 15. in
fine.
Of all the Greek Fathers, which is an Assertion as false as peremptory, even
by the confession of their own Bishop, saying, that Legate qui vesit Graecorum
veterum Commentarios, and nullum quantum opinor, aut rarissimum de Purgatorio
sermonem inueniet: Sed neq^, Latinisimul omnes huius rei veritatem conceperunt.
Roffens. Art. 18. aduers. Lutherum.
There is very rare mention of Purgatory in the Greek Fathers; and that the
Latin Fathers did not all at first apprehend the doctrine thereof.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis is understood by him as well of the name of Purgatory, not Reckon. page
207.
then so much in use, as that the most Ancient writers, next after the Apostles
time, when many things were not discussed so exactly (as in process of time
they were) did not so clearly handle that matter: Nemo iam, dubitat orthodoxus
(says he) an Purgatorum sit, de quo tamen apud priscos illos nulla, vel quam
rarissima fiebat mentio. No rightly Art. 18. con. Luth.
believing Christian does now doubt, whether there be Purgatory, or no, Of
which notwithstanding there was none, or very rare mention made among those
Ancient Fathers. Whereof he gives diverse reasons, and indeed the same may be
said of sundry important other Articles of Catholic Religion: For so much as
in the first Primitive Church, when the said Fathers were under Persecution,
and occupied in other weighty affairs against Heretics and Persecutors,
they had not time, nor occasion to discuss many things, which the holy Ghost
did afterward make more clear to the Church by success of time: And yet does
not B. Fisher say, that there was no knowledge of this Article of Purgatory,
in the very first Fathers; but only his meaning was, that the name, nature,
and circumstance thereof was not so well discussed, and consequently the thing
more seldom mentioned by them, then afterward by the subsequent writers. And
he after proves it out of many Greek and Latin Fathers, and out of
Scriptures.

The Reueiwe.
10. Their Bishop Roffensis confesses, that among the Greek Fathers, there is
Rarissima mentio, that is; Most rare mention of Purgatory. M. Parsons
translateth Rarissima, very rare, which is but a trick of a nibler. Again, M.
Parsons will have us to understand Rosfensis so, as though he had only meant
that, The name, nature, and circumstances were not so well discussed or
mentioned by ancient Grecians. But Roffensis speaking of Purgatory it self,
says that, Roffen. Art. 18. cont. Luther.
Aliquandiu incognitum fuit, -- and sero cognitum vniuersae Ecclesiae, etc.
This is the confession of their own Bishop Roffensis: That is, Purgatory was
for a while unknown, and not, till of late, known to the universal Church.
With what assurance can the Romanists call the Doctrine Catholic, that is,
Universal, Romish Purgatory no Catholic Do. ctrine
which was not known universally in the Primitive Church of Christ? Yet has
Rome adopted this Article of Purgatory, and suffered this Creeper to come into
her new Bulla iuramenti annexa Conc. Trid.
Creed, under the title of a doctrine necessary to salvation. But more of
this hereafter.

SECT. V.
The next Charge.
11. Preamb. page 69. 70.
IF any shall but observe in this one Controversy, the number of witnesses
brought in for confirmation of this their new Article, in the name of Ancient
Fathers, which are (by the confession of our Adversaries) merely counterfeit,
as Clemens his Constitutions, Clemens his Epistles, Athanas. in Quaestion.
Eusebius Emissenus, Josephus Bengorion, Hieron. in Proverb. August. ad fratres
in Eremo, the Liturgies of S. James, and others: All which, as they are urged
for proof of Purgatory, so are they rejected by their own men (I desire to
be challenged for proof hereof) as Forged, or Corrupted, or Apocrypha, etc.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE cannot be trusted in any thing he says: For these are not so Reck. page
210.
much as named by Bellarmine (except only the two fitst in a word or two) much
less are they brought in for principal Authors in the Catalogue of Ancient
Fathers, whose Authorities he sets down for proof of Purgatory. So as
this is one deceitful untruth, to make his Reader believe, that these are our
chief Authors, whereas Bellarmine besides these, does allege twenty, viz.
Ten of the Greek Church, and as many of the Latin.

The Reuiew.
13. But if this Answer of M. Parsons be fraught with gross untruths, what
faith shall any man give unto him? First, I named not Bellarmine in that place,
but spoke in general of the ordinary practice of our Adversaries, in
alleging corrupt and counterfeit writers. Secondly, I called not the M.
Parsons triple falsehood.
foresaid Authors either chief, or principal, as M. Parsons pretends. And
lastly, in saying that Bellarmine names but the two first of the foresaid
Writers, viz. Clemens his Constitutions and Athanasius, is a notable falsehood:
for Bellarmine alleges Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg. c. 6.. Euseh Emiss.
Eusebius Emissenus, Ibid. c. 7.: Tertia ratio.
Josephus Bengorion, and Ibidem cap. 5. Accedant.
S. James his Liturgy. So that I know not what M. Parsons meant by his denying
of this, except happily he laid some wager of falsifying, and meant to win it.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and Charge against his Adversary.
SEcondly it is an other manifest untruth, to say that our Doctors do confess
all these Authors to be merely counterfeit. Recko. pa. 211
For albeit some of them be excepted against, or called in question by some
Writers, whether they be the true works of the Authors, whose names they
bear, or not, and thereof all reputed Apocryphal, that is, hidden or (...)
Yet it follows not that they are merely counterfeit, for that they may be
ancient works, and not to be contemned, though not of those Authors.

The Reueiwe.
14. M. Parsons is so transported with passion, that he has forgotten the
last clause, which I used concerning these Authors, to wit, that they are
either forged, or corrupted, or Apocrypha; and so Apocrypha, as being sometime
not Obscure only, but even to be contemned. Whereof in these and others, I
shall give him such a taste, before we end our Reckoning, as may, I think,
soon set his teeth on edge.

SECT. VI.
The last Charge.
15. Preamb. p. 70.
IF he shall furthermore mark (said I) how true Fathers and Scriptures are
instanced in, for proof of the same Article, whereof (when I speak of
Fathers) most of them; (when I speak of Canonical Scriptures) all of them are
found, by the judgment of their own Doctors, to be tortured, wrested, and
forced, as it were, to say that which they never meant, etc.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis now, whether it be not such a wilful and witting Lie, as before Reckon.
pa. 211
I described for a formal malicious Lie, such as the Writer did know to be a
Lie, when he wrote it, I am content to remit my self unto any judicious and
civil Protestant in the world. For if our own Catholic Doctors do find
this in their own judgment, how do they believe Purgatory to be true? Why
do they not change their opinion, and become Protestants? Can M. Morlon
answer any thing unto this lewd and wilful absurdity, and did he not know
that he lied when he writ this?

The Reuiew.
16. What means our Quiet Reckoner to revel so turbulently? M. Parsons
unquiet Reckoning.
Will he needs falsify his own title? The Assertion which I made, and which
he calls a Formal malicious Lie, is put unto the trial in the next
Chapter, where it will be avouched to be an obseruable, just, and
incontrollable truth. The reason, which he opposed, I shall now confute in
this Section, and compel him to repent his loose terms, by an instance,
which will manifestly discover a Romish malladie.

17. The Doctrine of Indulgences has been of late put into their Roman
Creed in their Council of Trent, by the Bull of Pope Paulus the fourth. This
their Doctors will believe, albeit they confess, concerning Indulgences, that
Roffens. Art. 18
There is not found any express sentence, either in Scriptures, or in the
writings of Ancient fathers; and that in the beginning of Indulgences, being
their novelty
the Primitiuc Church there was no use of them, nor yet did they come in use,
until the fear of a fiery Purgatory had brought them out. Who, while they
plead for Indulgences, do it in this manner, viz. Alfonsus lib. 8. aduerl.
Haeres. Tit. Indulgenti. e.
Indulgences are not therefore to be contemned, because the use of them seems
to have been but of late in the Church, for many things are known by
posterity, which the ancient writers were ignorant of. Which we take to be a
kind of crack in their cause, especially seeing that, for want of better light
of Antiquity, they are glad to collect an Antiquity of them from the Stations
used anciently at Rome. Now what Stations.
were these Stations? Their Onuphrius does tell you. Onuph. in Platinam,
interp. vocum Ecclesiast.
The word ( says he) comes of Stando, standing, because the people in their
solemn Conuents did stand: For the ancient Bishops of Rome upon some set
days, especially in Lent and Holidays, did go unto diverse Churches of Rome,
where a Sermon was made unto the people there standing, and saying Prayers,
they did afterward communicate with the Clergy and people of Rome in the
Divine Sacraments. In all which, there is no sent of Romish Indulgences.

18. Again, we find them observe, that Agrippa de vanit. Scient. cap. 61.
Pope Boniface the eight (about the year 1300.) was the first who extended
Indulgences unto Purgatory: Which is the Indulgence whereupon we dispute.
Besides, they tell us, that the invisible spiritual Treasury of the Merits of
Holy men, is the Bellar. l. 1. de Indulg. c. 2. in the Argument of the Chapter.
Foundation of Indulgences: Notwithstanding, Maironis and Durand, two of your
principal Schoolmen even of later times, As Bellarm. confesses, ibid
Doubted of the truth of such a Treasury. And lastly, that some, whom they
call Catholics, judged no otherwise of these kind of Indulgences, then of
Greg. Valent. Ies. de Indulg. c. 2.
Godly deceits. Here we see more then a glimpse of that light, which we
profess, acknowledged by your own Doctors. I must hereupon make bold to
demand of Mr. Parsons, why their Doctors, having so great an appearance of the
novelty of this Article, did notwithstanding still yield unto the practice of
their Church? When he shall answer this, then may he easily satisfy himself,
concerning his last demand.

Master PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEllarmine has alleged ten several testimonies out of the Scriptures Recko.
page 213.
of the old Testament (with the expositions of the ancient Fathers upon them)
which are confessed by Procestants to be Canonical, excepting the Maccabees,
and Toby which were notwithstanding Canonical in S. Augustines time, by the
third Council of Carthage, in which himself was present. And out of the new
Testament he alleges five other places, with the expositions in like manner
of the Fathers upon them, that understood them to mean of Purgatory. And will
our own Doctors say that these fifteen places are all tortured and forced
against their meaning? and all the Fathers expositions violated against their
own judgment? If our Doctors will say so, they must be M. Mortons Doctors,
and not ours.

The Reuiewe.
19. It is a thing superfluous, Actum agere. This which I say of the principal
places of Canonical Scriptures, wherein your Doctors do most insist, I have
proved Cath. Appeal. l. 1. c 2.. 1?.
also, from the mere literal Expositions of your own Doctors to be enforced
And as for the objection from the Council of Carthage, it is satisfied, ibid
l. 4. c. 18.. 1.
beyond compass, and want not a supply of like Answers unto other Scriptures,
which have been omitted. But I shall not need to insist upon places of
Scripture, the rather because I am not so greatly provoked by M. Parsons
heereunto, who has reserved his maine violence for the trial of Fathers.

20. Yet notwithstanding, one confession of Bellarmine may not be so easily let
pass, which has not been mentioned in my Appeal, to wit, Bellar. l. 1 de
Purg. c. 4.. Est igitur.
Cum nusquam in Scripturis fiat mentio ignis, vbi aperte de Purgatorio agitur,
nihil dubium est, qum Cyprianus ad hunc locum respexerit. That is, Seeing that
in no place of Scripture, where Purgatory is plainly handled, any mention is
made of fire, it is not to be doubted, but that S. Cyprian had respect unto
this place of Scripture, to wit, 1. Cor. 3. where it is written, He shall be
saved as it were by fire: Which is a sufficient confession, that there is not
in any place of Scripture any mention of fire, wherein there is any plain
proof of Purgatory, except in these fore-cyted words of 1. Cor. 3. And can he
say that this only place is plain for Purgatory No place of scripture wherein
fire can plainly (...) Purgatory fire.
fire? By no means: for Bellarmine confesses hereof, that ancient Expositors
do not agree in the interpretation of fire in this place: Some understand by
fire the Tribulations of this life, some the eternal torments, some the fire
of the last day, and some the Purgatory fire. How shall our adversaries presume
of any plain place of Scripture for proof of Purgatory-fire, seeing that this
their only plain place is thus obscured and perplexed with four different
Interpretations?

CHAP. XI.
The earnest challenge which M Parsons has made, that I should disannull the
allegations of the testimonies of those Fathers, whom Iodocus Coccius has
cyted for proof of the Romish Purgatory.

SECT. 1.
Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
COccius produces upon the point of threescore Authors, Reckon. p. 218.
within the compass of the first six hundred years, that confirm the common
faith of that Church in those days, to have held Purgatory, and (...) for the
dead, for Catholic doctrine, and for the practice also of praying for the
souls departed. TO WHAT END DO YOU SAY THIS M. PARSONS? Reckon. p. 212
To the end that T. M may have somewhat to do, I do earnestly challenge him
herein, requiring at his hands, that of the first 60. mentioned by Coccius
within the first 600. years, he do really and sincerely (...) 31. at least,
which is the major part, to be so tortured, and so granted by the judgment
of our Writers; or else he fails wholly in his cause.

The Reueiwe.
2. There is none, I think, but will hold it a point of wisdom in M.
Parsons, to set me rather to combat with Coccius, then to suffer me to
Encounter himself, by manifesting his own singular falsifications; which
notwithstanding, by his leave, I must perform, before we end our Reckoning. In
the mean time, I willingly yield unto his present challenge, wishing that I
had him in a good Obligation by oath, that he will as willingly accord unto the
evidence of those things, which shall be revealed. And now I enter the Lists.

That the testimonies of Fathers, and other Antiquities, alleged by Coccius
Thesaur. Tom. 2. l. 7. Art. 5.
Coccius, for defense of Romish Purgatory, are, for the most part, either out
of books falsely fathered, and unwarrantable; or else, out of true testimonies
falsely applied. The trial of both which depends upon certain general
Observations. The two first.
3. For my more plain and expedite discharge of this Challenge, I shall
request the Reader to pass along with me, in reuiewing some confessed
Observations, which will make Counterfeit, Apocrypha, corrupted, wrested.
clearly for the conviction of Coccius, whereunto the particular testimonies
must have a necessary relation; which may be thus distinguished: The first
Observation is, that the Authors and testimonies which shall be confessed to
be either forged, or corrupted with heresies, or else Apocrypha, may not be
thought to be of sufficient credit.

4. The second Observation may be taken out of their Jesuit Suarez, where he
says, that Suarez (...) Tom. 2. in Thom. q. 59. art. 6. sect. 1. disp. 57.
Veruntamen.
They that think that the souls of men are not judged in death, nor that they
receive either pain, or reward, but are reserved in secret receptacles unto
the vniuer salliudgement, they do consequently acknowledge, non purgarj, i. e.
That men are not purged before the general resurrection and judgment:
whereupon it must follow, that they are to be purged in the day of the
Conflagration, etc. but to say The opinion of receptacles ofsoules: without
both heaven and hell.
that some souls of the just are not purged, until they be united with the
body, and so receive pur gation in the fire of conflagration, both in their
bodies and souls; although it do not contradict the principles of our Faith,
yet is it utterly false and erroneous. So Suarez. His Consequence is plain:
They that taught secret receptacles of souls void of pain or of reward, until
the day of the general resurrection, do deny the Romish doctrine of Purgatory
torment, before the last day; but diverse Fathers (by our Adversaries
confessions) taught such kind of Receptacles of souls of all the faithful,
as namely, Lactant. l. 7. Inst. cap. 1. as Suarez notes, ibid. q. 54. art. 4.
sect 3.. Quarto loco.
Lactantius, so says Suarez: And Scnens. bibl. 1. 6. Annol. 345. and Renatius
Laurentius Annot. in Tcrt. de Testimonio anima pa. 519. says, Omnes fere
antiqui in ea fere sententia erant, vt putarent animos iusiorum non esse omnino
beatos ante resurrectionem.
Senensis, where he relates the sentences of diverse Fathers, who seem to have
inclined to the same opinion, after that he had excused some by name, he
leaves Irenaeus, Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Origin,
Lactantius, Theodoretus, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Euthymius unto the descretion
of his Reader, thus far to excuse them, if he cannot acquit them, because in
their days the Church had not defined any thing, concerning that Article.
Which is, by Suarez his consequence, to grant that, in that ancient time,
Romish Purgatory was no Catholic doctrine of faith.

The third Observation is concerning the diverse significations of the word Fire.
5 We are furthermore necessarily to consider the confessed Diverse acceptions
of the word Fire.
differences of the word Fire, used in the testimonies of Fathers; as first by
Fire understanding the Ribera Ies. in Mala. 3. nu. 18.
Holy Ghost, which purifieth and purges the soul from sin: And of this
Bellarmine confesses, that it Bellar. l. 1. de Purg.
Does not signify that Purgatory fire, which is now controuerted: Or
secondly, signifying the Idem l. 1. de Purg c. 1.. Quarta.
Tribulations of this life, whereof he likewise confesses, that It makes not
for the now questioned Purgatory. Or, (...) betokening The severe judgment of
God (even after death) by only trying and examining the actions which men have
committed in this life: which (as our Bellar ibid. c. 4. Superest.
Adversaries accordingly confess) does not concern the question of Purgatory
fire, which they hold to be not only an Intellectual fire of trying and
examining, but also of tormenting and purging, because the Trying and examining
judgment is in regard of the works, by judging them unprofitable, but the
purging and tormenting fire does seize only upon the Workers. Or, Fourthly,
noting fire of conflageration in the day of Doom, when all the world shall be
on a flame: which, as Bellarmine acknowledges, is not that Purgatory fire,
which he in the name of their Church undertook to defend, because, as some
think, all metals, as well Gold and Silver, as Wood and Siubble, that is, as
well the godly Saint, as the less sanctified, must pass through the fire of
conflagration: Or, Lastly, specifying the fire of Hell of the damned, which is
eternal, as it is only a Tormenting fire, but not purging: for the purging
fire (says Bellar. l. 2. de Purg. c 6. Octaua est.
Bellarmine) is temporal, and not eternal.

6. If then Coccius shall be found to abuse the testimonies of Fathers so
notoriously, as to mistake the fire of the Holy Ghost (which purges the soul
by sanctification) in stead of the fire of vexation: or the fire of Tribulation
(which is in this life) in stead of fire after death: or the fire of Gods
judgment (which is only in the examination of works) in stead of the fire of
torment: or the fire of conflagration (which is only in the last day) in stead
of fire presently after death: or the fire of the damned in Hell (which is
eternal) in stead of the fire which is temporal: then, I suppose, Mast.
Parsons will be ashamed of his choice, in making Coccius his Champion in this
cause of Purgatory.

The fourth Observation, in remoouing our Adversaries Objection, taken from
Prayers, Sacrifice, and Oblations for the dead.
7. The general and most popular Argument, wherewith our Adversaries use to
underprop the ruinous structure of their Purgatory, is this, that Bellar. L.
1. de Purg. c. 11. De quarto.
The Fathers (says Bellarmine) prayed for the dead, Ergo, they believed
Purgatory: and from this he says, that Purgatory is evidently collected;
wherein M. Parsons is peremptory, saying, that Reckon. 218.
To pray for the souls departed does necessarily suppose Purgatory: and this
seems to be the scope of Occius in most of his allegations, wherein
Sacrifice, Prayer and Oblation
nothing will be found more frequent for the proof of their Purgatory, then
only the offering prayers, Oblations, and Sacrifice for the dead.

8. For consutation of our Adversaries Consequence, it will be sufficient to
appeal unto our Adversaries confessions, who do readily grant that Prayers,
Sacrifices, Commemorations and Oblations have been used for the dead, without
all respect of their Purgatory torment: as first in regard of the souls of the
Damned, whom Bellar. l. 2. de Purg. c. 6
Bellarmine denies to be in Purgatory, and there is good reason thereof,
because the fire of the hell of the damned is a fire of Satispassion only, and
not of Expiation. And yet not withstanding we read that some Ancients prayed
for the damned ones (especially such as died in the profession of Christian
faith) whether it were for their absolute deliverance out of hell, which was
the error of See hereafter Sixtus Senens. bibl. l. 6 Annot. 47. In his
Origin, or else, as some Ibidem, cites some Doctors who thus thought.
others Suarez. Jes. Tom. 4 in Them. disp. 47.. 1.
have done for the mitigation of their torment, which, even in the opinion of
our Senensis quo supra.
Adversaries, is rejected as erroneous: so that from prayers made for the
damned, to conclude that there is a Purgatory fire of them who are to be saved,
is, by M. Parsons leave, but a wide and wild consequence, and an abuse of such
testimonies, because in case of bearing witness, both a condemned opinion and
a condemned person are equally incompetent.

9. The second state of souls departed is of the Saints in Blessedness, who
are not in Purgatory, and yet have some Fathers offered both Sacrifice and
Prayers for them: for of Sacrifice Bellarmine confess th: Bellar. 12. de Purg.
c 18.. Ad primum.
Sacrifice (says he) was offered for Saints: but how? Not (says he) that we
may ask any thing for them, but that we may give thanks to God for the glory,
which he confirred upon them. And this prayer was found in their Romish
Missall, to wit, Grant O Lord, we beseech thee, that this Prayer may profit the
Soul of blessed Leo. Bellarmine will have us to understand that these kind of
requests were Jbidem,. PraetereaSccundo and deinceps, Add tertio.
Possibly for the glorifying of the bodies of the Saints (albeit the Prayer is
said to be for his soul) in the day of Resurrection.

10. This confession likewise strangleth Bellarmines evidence, and M. Parsons
his Consequence, except they will judge it no impiety to think, and that
necessarily, that Pope Leo and other glorious Saints, are tormented in
Purgatory. Furthermore, Cassander con. sull. Art. 24. See more fully confessed
hereafter. n. 55.
It was an usual custom ( as says Cassander) that oblations were made for
Martyrs, when as thanksgiving was used for them, and when the mystical
action, wherein Christ his body is presented, there was mention made of them,
as it appears out of Cyprian and Augustine, and as it is expressed in the
Greek Liturgy, saying that the unbloody Cultus incruentus.
worship is offered for the Virgin Mary, and for the Apostles, and Martyrs.
And all the good, which their Suarez will acknowledge to accrue unto the
blessed Saints by our Suarez Tom. 4. in Thom. disp 48 4 nu. 10.
Oblations and Sacrifices (which are, says he, our giving of thanks for them)
is not any degree of essential glory, but only an extrinsecall, such as they
knowing our Prayers do retoyce thereat. By this also Master Parsons his
necessary consequence ( concluding from offering of Prayers and Sacrifice for
the dead, a Purgatory torment of them) is found to be a notable falsehood, and
delusion, by confounding Prayers of thanksgiving, with Prayers of
supplication; and the state of the Blessed with the condition of men tormented,
and in effect heaven with hell.

11. The third respect of souls, mentioned by the Fathers, is when the Soul
enters either into the Examination of Gods severe judgment, or else thorough
the flame of the conflagration of fire in the last day, through which all
Souls must pass with their bodies: In both which respects, we hear some
Fathers praying for the dead departed, albeit neither of these conditions do
imply the Romish Purgatory, as Bellarmine See above number. 5.
has confessed.

12. If therefore Coccius shall be found to cite, for defense of their
imagined Purgatory, Prayers made for the damned, in stead of Prayers for the
Godly; or made for the Blessed, to prove that men are Tormented; or Sacrifices
and Prayers of Commemoration and Thanksgiving, in stead of Prayers of
Deprecation; or Supplications for the perfect consummation of happiness, in
the eternal rest of both body and soul, in stead of Prayers for redemption
out of an hellish Prison, and other such like incongruities and abuses; Then
must M. Parsons wish that he had made some other challenge. And now I betake my
self unto the particular Examination of his. Allegations: First of Liturgies,
and then of Fathers.

SECT. 11.
Coccius his Allegations of ancient Liturgies, for proof of Romish Purgatory,
abused.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
COccius alleges ten Liturgies, as that of Jerusalem, Rome, etc. All Reckon.
pa. 218.
which were in use in the Churches of the Christian Countries, above the space
of a thousand years agone, in all which there is Prayer for souls departed:
All which do necessarily infer Purgatory.

The Reuiew.
13. This Consequence for Purgatory we have See above, number. 7.
proved to be so drousie, that it may seem to need a Purgatory fire to
purge it, which may be further confuted by the same Liturgies. But first seeing
Cardinal Bellarmine, in answering unto an objection taken out of the Liturgy
of Jerusalem, passing under the name of Saint James, (which Liturgy Coccius
rangeth in the forefront of his battle) could say that Bellarm lib. 4. de.
(...) cap. 13. (...) obstat.
All things which are contained in the Liturgy of Saint James, and others, are
not taken from the example and precept of Christ, for it is manifest (says he)
that many things have been added by others; They may be as justly excluded by
us, with an Earemarke of Apocrypha: Which were no hard matter to euince by many
reasons, if M. Parsons his Challenge would suffer me to use that weapon, and
not force me (as he has done) to insist upon the Collections from the
confessed principles of the Romanists.

14. Notwithstanding, to admit for the present these Liturgies alleged by
Coccius, I will begin at the last, the Liturgy of the Armenians, because it
may best explain the rest. In it we read thus: Give eternal peace, O Lord,
unto all that before us have departed in the Faith of Christ, the Holy Fathers,
Patriarchs, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, etc. Pray ye unto the Lord for the
Souls that rest in peace. Here is a Prayer we see, for Peace upon souls,
even Apostles, Martyrs, etc. whom it proves to be in Peace: Which cannot
signify any thing, but the desire of the consummation of blessedness in their
bodies and souls, at the day of the general Resurrection; And plainly
demonstrateth, that M. Parsons his former consequence, which from the Prayer
concluded a Purgatory punishment, is marueilously false, because in this
Liturgy we hear of Prayers for the peace of Apostles and Martyrs, whom no
Christian heart can fancy to be in Purgatory Torment. The Liturgy of
Alexandria, attributed to Saint Mark, and praying for Requiem, that is, Arest
for the Souls of Fathers, and Brethren, who are a sleep in Christ; being
mindful of our Ancestors, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. may
seem to admit the former Exposition. So likewise the Liturgy of
Constantinople, ascribed unto Saint Chrysostom, carries this tenor: Be
mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, who have sinned, and pardon them, for there
is none but they have sinned, excepting thee, O Lord, who can give rest to
them that sleep. The Liturgy of AEthiopia is for all that rest in a true
faith: Of Cappadocia, for all that sleep in the hope of the Resurrection unto
eternal life: Of Rome, Give place of refreshing for all that rest in Christ;
and so we may think of the rest. Yet may not any conclude upon these Prayers,
that All Souls, that are departed in the faith of Christ, were therefore in
Purgatory.

15. Will Coccius (trow we) be more circumspect in cyting the Fathers? I must
try this; and because M. Parsons has begun to Reckon up ten Liturgies, I
will bring in the Fathers also by Decades, or tens, and see, whether I can
satisfy M. Parsons in his exacted number of thirty and one.

SECT. 111.
The Greek Fathers abused by Coccius, for proof of Romish Purgatory.
THE FIRST DECAD.
16. THe first Father, whom Coccius produces, is Clemens Epist. 1. Quotidiana,
etc. Senens. Bibl. li. 2. Tit. Clemens
Which Epistle Card. Turrecremata rejected, as being doubtful, says their
Sixtus Senensis, adding from himself, that It is not possible that Clemens
should have written this Epistle unto S. James, etc. And Bellar. l. 3. de bonis
operib. c. 11 Caeterum non.
Bellarmine noting the same error in the fifth Epistle of this Clemens, calls
the Author fictitius Clemens, that is, A forged Clemens. Where was the brains
of M. Parsons, when he set me a work to prove some of these witnesses to be,
as I called them, Knights of the Post, seeing that this Clemens, (as he might
have well known) is dubbed such a Knight by their own Doctors, and yet this
Clemens happens to be the chief of this Inquest.

17. The second witness is Clemens his Constitut. lib. 8. cap. 41. Oremus,
etc. who may pass for an Author of the same Knighthood, for although their
Jesuit Turrian, labored to free these Books from exception: Yet does the
Jesuit Posseuin Jes. Apparat. Tit. Clemens.
Posseuine, call his Reasons rather Conjectures then Arguments: And the Episc
August. de (...) Gratiani Dialog. 6. page 47.
Sixth Council noted these eight Books to have been corrupted by Heretics,
as their own Bishop testifies: The same does Cardinal Baron. Anno 102 number.
9. and An. 32. number. 18. and 19.
Baronius affirm, and in answering an objection taken out of these Books,
calls his answer Honestum confugium.

18. The third Author is Dionysius Areopagita, Hierarch. cap. 7. part. 2.
Postea, etc. Which Books Cardinal Caietane, and many others (says Senensis
Biblie. l. 6. (...) 229.
Senensis) did make doubt of, whether they were the Books of Dionysius
Areopagita. Cardin. Caiet. in Act. 17.
Neither durst S. Gregory (says Caietane himself) affirm these to be the
same Dionysius his Books; Wherein there was one point of Doctrine, Ribera Jes.
in Heb 1. number. 99.
Which S. Gregory would not allow (as witnesses their Jesuit Ribera) lest
that he might seem to contradict the sacred Scriptures. In brief, Erasmus
Annot. in Act. 17.
Guilielmus Grocinus, Divinity Reader in S. Paul's, reading Lectures out of
these Books, before the end of his Lectures, concluded that they were not the
proper works of that Dionysius. Therefore may we dismiss him as a (...)
Although, if we shall allow him for a legitimate Author, we shall not loose,
but gain by the Reckoning: for Dionysius shows that such Prayers (although
made for the remission of the sins of the dead) were rather protestations,
that their sins were now forgiven, then Supplications for their forgiveness:
where he will have every Christian to hope confidently, that after his death,
he shall not change this life for a worse Hierarch. Eccles. Haec quidem.
estate.

19. The fourth is Hermes, Visione 3. De triumph, etc. who presses in to bear
witness, albeit their own ancient Pope Gelasius, has taken sufficient
exception against him, Bellar. l. 1. de verb Dei. c. 20.. Vox igitur.
Who calling these Books Apocryphal (says Bellarmine) which were set forth
either by Heretical Authors, or else by such as were suspected of Heresy,
Ibid.. Nec minus.
did reject Hermes as Apocryphal: which Author also Baron. (...) 159. number. 56.
Prosper rejected and judged to be of no authority. And is not this enough to
deserve such a Knightship?

20. Origin is the fifth, who follows Hermes at the heels, whose name (...) it
be famous, yet Senens. Bibl. li. 6. Tit. Origenes. Caeterum.
His works (says Senensis) were corrupted with innumerable heresies, by the
fraud of ancient Heretics, who sought to broach their impious Doctrines,
under the favor and grace of the name of Origin: which writings, if in any
thing they seem to loose credit, then especially where he entreats of the
State of Souls departed: in which respect, Driedo lib. 4. de varijs dogmat. c.
1. fol. 109.
Origin was (says Driedo) reprehended of ancient Fathers; And in the same
regard is he rejected by Bellarmine, even for holding that, Bellar. l. 2. de
Purg. cap. 1.. Primus, and. Secundus.
All (except Christ) whether good or evil, must be purged; and that all the
wicked, yea the devils shall in the end be saved, viz. after that for a long
time, they have suffered the extreme pains of Hell. Notwithstanding, if we
should admit Origin for a competent witness, yet his testimonies do not reach
home unto the Romish Purgatory. The first, Hom. 14. in Leuit. Some sins are
so light, that they are compared to stubble, which cannot continue long in the
fire. The second, Hom. 25. in Number. Thou see that every one that passes out
of this life, needs a purification ( meaning by fire) for I dare say that
none can be clean, as the Scripture speaks. The third in Psalm. 38. He
talks of Caldrons of decoction. In the fourth, Hom. 12. in Hier. 12. God is a
consuming fire, and will consume that which is matter for fire, as Wood, Hay,
Stubble: etc. I answer, that the Answer, which their own Senens. bibl. l. 5.
Annot. 171 and Annot. 230.
Senensis gives unto other places of Origin, may satisfy these which are now
objected (for the Tenure of all is alike) vide Origin in Ps. 36. All men
(Christ only excepted) must pass through the fire of conflagration. And
again, In Psalm. 118. All men must be tried by fire, whether it be John the
Evangelist, or others. And yet again, in Hier hom. 31. All that have sinned
after Baptism must be purged by the fire of conflagration Suarez Ies. Tom 2.
in Thom qu. 59. Art 6 (...) 1.. Tertia sententia.
Wherein ( says Suarez) Origin seems to allude unto his own error, etc.
And Bellar. l. 2. de Purg. c. 1.
Bellarmine lighting upon these words of Origin in Luc. 14. After the
resurrection every soul must suffer a purging fire, says, that These words of
Origin will not admit any commodious exposition. Still we see that the fire
which Origin speaks of, being that fire of conflagration in the last day, is
not the Romish Purgatory.

21. Eusebius Coccius calls him Alexandrinus Presbiter, Turrian, Episcopus:
but Baronius numbering up the (...) of that See, neuermen tions any such B. The
truth is, they know not what to make him.
Alexandrinus marches next after Origin whom Photius Patriarch of
Constantinople, and their own Authors Trithemius, Posseuinus, and others have
left out of their Catalogues. But that we may feign a dumb man to speak,
what will he say for their Purgatory fire? He talks of a song of a general
Requies pro defunctis, namely, that which has been given to blessed Saints;
but these come not into that fire as See above, sect. 1. n. 4.
has been confessed.

22. The Council of Nice Can. 65. Arabico, is the seventh witness. Who will
not reverence the name of so famous a Council? But in what Canon shall we see
any mention of the fire of Purgatory? In Can. 65. But what language? For it is
not in the Greek, or Latin Councels: In the Arabicke, says Coccius. But when
came these Arabicke Canons into the public light? Not (for ought that I can
find) until 1500. years after Christ, which afterward their Jesuit Turrian
published to the world: But what credit are they of? Card. Baron. Anno 325. n.
180
Because our Elders (says Baronius) seem to have been ignorant of these
Canons, at what time the authority of them had been most necessary, as namely
when the Controversy of Africa was on foot, (meaning that solemn rejecting
of Appeals unto Rome) I leave these to be discussed rather by some others. This
confession of their Cardinal lays a shrewd suspicion of forgerie upon them:
And their Bishop Augustinus Episcopus Tarraconensis de Emend. Great. Dial. 20.
Tarraconensis, speaking to the same point, says, that the Jesuit Turrian
could not persuade him, that these are the true Canons of the Council of Nice.
We see the zeal that Coccius has for this Article, who leaving the ordinary
Canons of Nice, runs into Arabia to seek for some spark to kindle a
Purgatory fire: And yet, when all is done, there is nothing in that Canon but
Fiat Oration pro eo, which proves no more the fire of Purgatory, then that the Sea above, sect. 1. n. 7.
Blessed souls are purged in that fire.

24. Eusebius Caesariensis, vitae Constant. l. 4. cap. 60. and cap. 71.
[Prayers are made for the soul of the Emperor Constantine,] is the eight
witness: This is the testimony which Coccius uses for proof of Romish
Purgatory; as though Eusebius and the faithful of those times had thought,
that the Soul of that godly Emperor could be then deteyned in torment of
Purgatory fire, before it could ascend into blessedness. But Coccius Tom. 1.
l. 5. Art. 2. cyting Eusebius. Caesor. out of his lib. 1. cap. 1. de vita Con.
stant.
Coccius himself elsewhere does both know and acknowledge the confession of
Eusebius, concerning the soul of Constantine, to wit, When as I think (says
Eusebius) how that his most blessed soul does enjoy life with God, and that he
is honorably invested in immortality of the blessed world, I am surprised with
an amazement, and cannot speak. And again, Coccius in the same place adds a
second testimony of the same Eusebius, out of Lib. 3. de vita Constant. cap.
45. where it is said of the same Constantine, that His soul being now
dissolved from the bands of this slesh, is assumed unto immortality, and an
Angelical nature, and unto our Savior Christ Jesus. Which testimony of
Eusebius Coccius brings in to prove, that The souls of holy men, after
their departure out of this life go directly into heaven. Mark now, good
Reader, the distorted wit of this Coccius, who in one place instanceth in the
Soul of Constantine, to show that souls are detained in a Purgatory torment,
before they can ascend unto blessedness: and yet in another place, singleth out
the example of the Soul of the same Constantine, to prove by the testimony of
the same Eusebius also, that the Souls of holy men are not kept in places of
anguish and affliction after their death, but are presently Assumed into the
kingdom of happiness: I wish Mr. Parsons to look unto his Coccius, whom he
has chosen to be the witness of all these witnesses, and let him tell us
whether such kind of dealers, deserve not to be nailed to the post.

25. The ninth witness must be Athanas. Quaest. 34. which, in the judgment
of their Sixtus Senens. Biblioth l 4. Tit. Athanasius.
Senensis, Seems not to be the book of Athanasius, but is, as their Jesuit
Posseuin Appar. Tit. Athanasius.
Posseuin confesses, a (...) that is, Falsely inscribed Athanasius. Coccius,
belike, was in doubt that this feigned witness would be in danger to loose his
(...) and therefore he sought to corroborate his sentence with another testimony
of Athanasius, cited by Damascen.

26. The tenth witness is Damascen. Sermon. De defunctis, citing Athanasius out of
his books, De is qui fide dormierunt: but this witness also is one of the
Post, concerning whom Bellarmine says, that Bellar l. 2. de Purg. c. 8..
Contra hoc, and. Prima quia.
It may be easily proved to be none of the books of Damascen. Here again we
see what little credit is to be given unto Coccius in impannelling his Jury,
who will have a forged book of Damascen to confirm a forged book of
Athanasius, and all to defend a forged Purgatory, which may well become both
Coccius to do, and M. Parsons to approve.

Greek Fathers abused by Coccius, for defense of Romish Purgatory.
THE SECOND DECADE.
27. The first witness following after Athanasius, is Basil. cap. 4. in
Esaiam, Qui abluit, etc. where he tells us of a Reserved trial and
examination, which shall be made by fire in the life to come: whereinto
Flagitia, that is, Criminal sins must enter, such as a man does purposely
commit, which must be punished with the fire of judgment. And again, In cap.
6. There is a purifying fire. And yet again, In cap. 9. There is an
expurgation, according to that of the Apostle [ He shall be saved, yet as it
were by fire.] Al these testimonies are of the same stamp, therefore that
answer, which their own Senens. Bibliot: l. 5. Annot. 171. Suarez Tom. 2. in
Thom. q. 59. art 6. disp. 57. sect. 1.. Ex hac. does expound these places, De
divine igne, and not of Purgatory-fire
Senensis gives unto two places, may satisfy for all three, viz. The speech
of Basil in Esa. 4. upon these words [ He shall purge Jerusalem in the spirit
of judgment, and in the spirit of heat, etc.] where he says, that this is
referred unto that trial and examination, which shall be in the world to come,
etc. as also his speech upon Esa. 9. saying, that the Prophet shows that
earthly things must be delivered igni punitiuo, that is, unto the punishing
fire for the good of the soul, etc. These speeches do seem (says Senensis)
to imply that which the former sentences did, (to See above, sect 1. number. 4.
wit, the sentences of Lactanctius, and Origin) viz. the fire of conflagration,
which shall be in the last day, which, by the confession of Bellarmine does nor
make for Romish Purgatory.

28. The second is, Ephraem Orat. aduersus superbiam. Do thou consider the
fire (says he) which we must pass through? What fire, trow we, is this he
shows? in 1. Cor. 3. The day of the Lord will declare every man's work, which
day shall be revealed by fire. This fire is so plainly the fire of
conflagration in the last day of judgment (and consequently not the Romish
Purgatory-fire) that Bellar. l. 1. de Purg. c. 4. Tertio quia Grecus.
Bellarmine discussing the meaning of that Scripture 1. Cor. 3. The day of the
Lord shall be revealed by fire] says that Omnes veteres, etc. that is, All the
ancient Writers seem to understand by this the day of their last judgment,
and their opinion ( says he) herein seems unto me most true. Then may we say
that Coccius his inference from that fire of the last judgment, to prove a
fire of Purgatory, before that day of judgment, is most false. The second
place of Ephraem, Paraenet. 49. is of the same stamp; only, Transitus per
ignem. The last testimony is out of Ephraem his Testament: but read Trithemius
de Illust. Scriptoribus, and especially the Jesuit Posseuin, Posseuin. Ies.
Apparat. Tit. Ephraem.
who reckoning almost an hundred Tractats of Ephraem, did omit his Testament.

29. Cyrill of Jerusalem enters in the second place of this scene, who in
Cateches. 5. mystag. says, that Prayer is offered in the dreadful Sacrifice
for the help of Souls: which he illustrateth by a similitude of making
Supplication for one that is cast into exile, by the displeasure of a King:
which shows the State of souls in exile, not in a fiery Furnace; and in
paena damni, and not Sensus; it is the not fruition of blessedness, but yet
not the sense of Torment, and therefore concerns not the Romish Purgatory, as
may appear by the Sea above, sect. 1. n. 4.
second confessed Observation.

30. Greg. Nazianzene is the fourth of this rank, who Orat. 10. in Laudem
fratris defuncti, Prays God to receive the soul of his brother Caesarius.
This is the only testimony, which Coccius produces out of Nazianzen: upon
this kind of prayer, by M. Parsons and Coccius his conclusion, we are to
believe that Nazianzen thought, that the Soul of that Caesarius might then
have been in Purgatory torment, and not in heavenly blessedness: But alas for
the crookedness of contentious spirits! for Coccius Thesaur. Tom. 1. l. 5.
Art. 2.
Coccius himself uses the very same Orat. 10. of Nazian. in Laudem fratris
Caesary defuncti, which is, in praise of his brother Caesarius then departed,
to prove a quite contrary conclusion, to wit, that the Souls of the
faithful, after they be departed, do go immediately into heaven: Albeit the
words of Nazianzen be in manner of prayer, thus: But thou, O divine and sacred
man, I wish thee to penetrate the beauens, and to rest in the bosom of
Abraham, to behold the Qxire of Angels, and the glory of the blessed Saints,
etc. Not that he doubted of his present blessedness, for in the same Orat. he
says thus: Credo, etc. I believe that every generous soul is precious in Gods
sight, and, as soon as it departs out of the body, goes presently unto the
Lord, and receives blessedness. Even as he does in his next Oration, which
he made in the commendation of his sister Gorgonia, then dead: Equidem non
dubito, etc. I doubt not (faith he) but that thou now enioyest the Quire of
Angels, and the contemplation of the blessed Trinity, etc. Which was the so
undoubted doctrine of Nazianzen, concerning the souls of all the godly, who
depart in the faith of Christ, that Nilus the Greek Bishop does use a sentence
of Nazianzen, for the confutation of Romish Purgatory, viz, Nazian. Sermon. de
Pasch. speaking of the state after this life, says (says Nilus Episcopus
Thessal. de purg. igne.
Nilus) (...) i. c. That there is no Purgation.

31. The fifth is, Gregory Nissen. in Orat. Quodnon sit dolendum ob eorum
obitum, qui in fide decesserunt; And li. de anima, and resurrect. he makes
mention of Purgatory fire after this life etc. This witness reaches beyond
the Romish Purgatory, and further then the Romanists themselves will allow: for
if a Greek Bishop may be thought fit to understand what was the judgment of
Greg. Nissene, concerning the state of the dead, then let us listen unto Nilus,
Nilus quo supra.
who tells us that Greg. Nissen seemed to favor that opinion, which defended
(...) that is, a Redint egration, which sinners (meaning the damned) shall
find after the end of their punishment, and calls that punishment a
Purgatory furnace: therefore we answer (says Nilus) that those were the
pernicious Comments of certain Heretics, who accorded unto Orlgen, and did
to that end abuse that singular light of the Church ( viz. Greg. Nissene) to
make him seem to be a Patron of their opinion. Secondly we say (says Nilus)
that although that holy man (Greg. Nissene) did hold that opinion, which being
questionable in his time, was afterward condemned by a Council, yet he is not
to be followed in his error; which error was condemned in See Origin rejected
by the Romanists above 3. n. 21
Origin. And that his books are not free from such like corruptions, it is
herein very credible, because that Niceph. Calixtus l. 11. c. 19.
Nicephorus, speaking of his Book De anima, suspecteth that Certain
Heretics had infused some Origenicall opinions into it. Seeing then that
either the witness Nissene himself was in the error of Origin; or else his
Books were infected therewith; An erroneous witness, may not be admitted for
a competent Author of truth. For if the blind lead the blind, beware the
Ditch. That next place, which they take out of Damascene, we See above number. 26.
have seen already nailed unto the post for forged stuff.

32. Timotheus Alexandrinus, comes in for a sixth witness, in his Resp.
Interrog. 14. Oblatio non est facienda super eum, qui sibi mortem intulerit:
But such sentences do not infer Purgatory, as See above, sect. 1. number. 7.
has been proved. The Books themselves of Responsa, and Interrog. here
cited by Coccius; are not admitted by their Jesuit Apparat. Tit. Timo. Alexan.
Posseuine, who brings in Gennadius to report, that this Timotheus was
condemned by the Council of Calcedon, and to have been exiled for an
Heretic; What dealing is this of our Adversaries, to object him, whom they
themselves do reject?

33. Epiphanius approaches in seventh place to yield his testimony, who
says nothing but Prodesse orationes mortuis, which (as See above, sect. 1.
number. 7.
has been proved) contain not in them any spark of tormenting fire.
Besides, it may concern our Adversaries to examine this witness more
strictly, least whilst they labor to draw from him their pretended truth,
they draw upon themselves an error condemned by the practice of the Church
(which is to pray for the mitigation of the pain of the damned, with whom we
have no communion) because Epiph. Epist. ad Joh. Hieros.
Epiphanius, albeit he accounted Origin after his death an Heretic, and an
enemy of the Church, by whose doctrine some were made meat for the Devil,
yet did he pray that Epiphan. lib. Anchorat. p. 347
God would pardon him.

34. Chrysostom, being the eight witness, is hayled in by the heels to
speak nothing to the purpose: For either his speeches may signify only
Prayer for the dead, which does not necessarily infer any Purgatory
torment; or Prayer for them who are in joy, which confuteth Purgatory; or
else Prayer for them, who died in their sins, in the state of damnation,
which is far beyond Romish Purgatory; and which kind of Prayer our
Adversaries themselves do think to be transgressions, rather then devotions.
These we shall show by examining the several particulars in order.

35. The first, Hom. 6. de Sacerdotio. cap. 4. He speaks of Prayers, for the
sins of all both quick and dead. Whereas (according to our former
Observations) Prayer for remission of sins may have diverse respects, besides
the deliverance out of the torment of Purgatory fire immediately after death,
as namely, remission from Poena damni only; or from the Judgment of
Examination, which is not of purgation; or if of sense, yet of that which is
the Fire of conflagration in the body at the last day, and not presently and
lingeringly after death.

36. The second, Hom. 32. Why do thou entreat the Priests to pray for the
dead? I know thou will answer, that thou do so, that he may obtain rest,
and find the Judge merciful unto him. But if Coccius hadhad the leisure to
have stepped but one foot further to the words next following, he should have
seen Chrysostom confute his Inserence, As thus: Do thou therefore weep and
cry? Do thou not see how contrary thou art to thy self? For seeing thou
think that the Soul departed is gone into flourishing and delightful
Meadows, Why do thou raise up such tempests, meaning, of tears? Will M.
Parsons judge that this place can prove a Purgatory torment? Will he erect a
fiery Furnace upon flourishing meadows?

37. In the rest of the testimonies we may observe that which Senensis
observed in Hom. 33. in Matthew. Senensis Biblio. lib. 6. Annot. 47.
Chrysostom (says he) may seem to have fallen, after a sort, into the
opinion of them, who thought that Prayer for the dead might profit the very
damned. We say more, that he does more then seem to have been of that
opinion, as the places themselves, which Coccius has pointed at, do easily
bewray: For Hom. 16. in Ioh. The party, whom Alms and Oblations are said to
profit after death, is called a Sinner, and such a sinner, as Did often offend
God; and such an offender as did transgress in malice, therefore he says: His
malice is cut off by death, but the just is placed in safety, and freed from
future fear. And Hom. 21. in Act. Apost. Wishing to Diminish the punishment of
the dead, he describes such a dead party, as spent the most part of his life
vainly, serving sin and the devil.

38. In Hom. 41. in 1. Cor. There is, we confess, the approbation of Prayer
for souls, that they may receive some comfort: But what kind of Souls they
be, the place does manifest, where Chrysostom divides them only into two
Orders, Them who lived well in this life, and them who lived ill: And the
Sinner, for whom the Prayers are required, was such an one, Who had power
(namely in his life) to expiate his sins, and would not; and who by death Was
hindered, lest he should multiply sins. Like as is more plainly manifested in
the next place, In Epist. ad Philipp. Sermon. 3. Moral. Where he tells us, that
much profit redoundeth unto the dead by our Prayers for sinners departed: But
will you know what color these Sinners were of, verily as black as Murrians,
for they were such, in Chrysostom his estimate, Who dying in the abundance of
riches, which in their life time they never used for the comfort of their
souls. And the last place, Hom. 69. ad Pop. Antioch. does not differ from the
rest. I ask therefore, with what conscience do our Adversaries cite these
testimonies, which (because they are erroneous) they themselves will not
justify and embrace.

39. Palladius Hist. Lausiac. cap. 40. Possesses the ninth place, but (as if
Pallidus were his name) being afraid to be known; and no marvel, seeing that
their Jesuit Posseuine doubts not to say of him, that he was Posseuin.
Apparat. Tit. Palladius.
spotted with Origenicall impieties. The same Palladius (who writ the Historia
Lausiaca) their Cardinal Baronius Baron. An. 388. number. 103. and 107
proves, both out of S. Hierom, and Epiphanius, to have rotted in the
contagious heresy of Origin, etc. which Baronius further Anno 400. number. 61.
collecteth out of that Historia Lausiaca, which are the Books of Palladius,
which Coccius here produces for proof of their Purgatory. Which may disable
the credit of Coccius, who in impannelling the Jury, could make no better
choice.

40. Synesius, Epist. 44. is the last of this Decade, in whom there is no
mention of Prayer for the dead, nor yet of any pain after death, excepting
that which is paena immortalis; That is, eternal: But our Adversaries dream
not of any other Purgatory pain, but that which is See above. sect. 1. number. 5.
Temporal: And thus much of these ten witnesses. I refer unto the judgment
of my Reader, to discern, whether they be not either counterfeit, or
Apocryphal, or corrupt, or else violently urged beyond their proper aim.

Witnesses among the Greek Fathers, abused by Coccius, for defense of Romish
Purgatory.
THE LAST DECADE.
41. Atticus Patriarcha Constantinop. Epist. ad Cyrillum Alexand. Here is a
solemn Preface, what will this first witness say? There is mention to be made
of Bishops departed, etc. at the time of the Communion, on the mystical Table.
But we See above, sect. 1. number. 7. and more fully hereafter, nu. 47. and 48.
have observed from our Adversaries, that Commemoration does not infer any
Supplication, nor yet Supplication any tormenting purgation.

42. Johannes Cassianus, Collat. 2. cap. 5. is called upon by Coccius to speak
for Purgatory: But he may not be admitted into the number of witnesses,
because he has long since been impeached of falsehood by Pope Gelasius, who
reckneth this Book among the Gratian. Did. 15.
Apocrypha writings, which is a thing that their Card. Baronius will have us
observe: Baron. Anno. 433 number. 30.
See (says he) the censure of Gelasius, wherein the same works of Cassianus
(speaking of the Collations here mentioned by Coccius) are rejected, as being
no way Catholic. Yet are not Coccius, and his assistant M. Parsons, ashamed
to shake this Knight by the hand, and to make him one of their choice witnesses.

43. In the third place, Socrates steppeth forward, in his Lib. 7. Hist. cap.
25. to tell us how See this largly consuted hereafter by their own
confessions. number. 47. and number 48.
that In solemn Prayers there was mention made of Bishops after their
departure. But I demand of M. Parsons, how often he has heard mention made of
the names of Holy men and women departed out of this life at S. Paul's Cross,
and els-where by our Preachers of England, in their Prayers of thanksgiving
for their former grace, and present joy; and not as of requests to free them
from any Purgatory torment? Yet so it is, Socrates must serve their turn to
fill up a number.

44. But what shall we say to Theodoret? He first ( Lib. 5. Hist. cap. 36.)
records the Act of Theodosius, who prays to God to pardon the injuries,
which his Parents had committed of ignorance. We read that Isaacke said unto
Abraham, Gene. 32. 7.
Father, behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for the burnt
offering? I may inuert the speech and say, here is the Sacrifice of Prayer, but
where is the fire, for we have already See above, sect 1. number. 7.
proved, that Prayer for remission does not necessarily infer any Purgatory
torment. The second place aleadged out of Theodoret is Hist. Sanct. Patrum de
Iacobo Nisibita: But this is not found in their Posseuin. Ies. Apparat. Tit.
Theodoretus.
Posseuine, among the works of Theodoret. The third place is noted to be in 1.
Cor. 3. Quiequid interuenit, etc. Which words (as Coccius, in the place objected
Coccius himself confesses) being cited by Aquinas (for Purgatory) are not
now found either in the Greek or Latin Copies of Theodoret. May we not then
judge them worthy the post? No doubtless says Coccius; for Mark (for he will
give us a reason) the words were rased out (says he) by some Greekishenes, who
misliked Purgatory. If this were sensible, then the Latins likewise misliked
Purgatory, for the Sentence (says Coccius) is not now found in the Latin
Translations of Theodoret: So that M. Parsons is to make his choice, whether
he will confess that one sentence of Theodoret to be forged, for proof of
Purgatory, or else both the Greek and Latin Churches, to have been false
Registers of the Books of Theodoret.

45. The fifth Author is Basilius Seleucius, Conc. de Exsuscit. Lazari,
speaking of Sacrifice offered for those, who offended God in many things; using
the same strain of speech as Chrysostom See above,. 3. number. 37.
had done, by extending Prayer unto the souls of grievous and mortal
offenders. Which doctrine the stomach of the Purgatorians will in no wise
digest.

46. What will become of the testimony of their sixth witness, whom Coccius
names Diadochus, de perfectione Spirit. cap. 100? All that he will say, is
that Men fearing death a little, enter, as it were, into judgment to be
Examined by the fire of judgment, etc. But their Cardinal Bellarmine See
above, sect. 1. number. 5.
has told us already that this fire does differ from the fire of Purgatory:
For the fire of Judgment is but a Trying and examining fire; and that fire of
Purgatory is a purging and tormenting fire.

47. But now let every man give room, for two Emperors do approach, and seem
to offer their testimonies for Purgatory: The first is, Justinius Imp. Epist.
ad Hormisdam, who says; That we may not contemn all the memories of the dead,
That is: The Commemorations of their names, as their Cardinal Baronius Anno
520. number. 53. and 54. making the subject of the Letters of Justinus, and of
Justinianus the same: Now number. 34. he shows the cause, as I have related.
Baronius teaches, showing that hereby was meant the tollerating of the
mention of the names of some in the Catalogue of orthodoxall Bishops, who died
in the schism of Acatius. Now if Commemorations of Bishops and Saints
departed, do necessarily conclude them to be in Purgatory fire, then See
above sect. 1. number. 4. and sect. 2. number. 13.
how shall we celebrate the names of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
yea and of the glorious vessel of Grace, the Virgin Marie, to praise God that
they are in rest and blessedness? What injury will not these Purgatorians do
unto other Authors, who dare offer such violence unto the sentence of so great
an Emperor?

48. The nex Emperor is Iustinianus, Nouella de Monachis. He is also without
due reverence thrust in, and urged to speak nothing to the purpose, saying
only that There are Funerals performed for the dead, which are called their
Memorials. To what end is this? Let M. Parsons stretch this out with his teeth
as far as he can, yet shall he not possibly make Memorials of the dead,
reach so far as the Purgatory fire, for the afflicting of their souls as
has been shown, and will be See in the Section following.
hereafter more apparent.

49. Procopius Gazeus, Ad cap. 6. Esaiae is the ninth Author, upon whom M.
Parsons must serve a Latitat, before he will appear: For their Sixtus
Senensis, speaking of these Commentaries, says that Sixtus Senens. Biblioth.
lib. 4.
They have not as yet been turned into Latin, but are kept in the Venetian
Library. And when he is suffered to speak the best that he can, it is no more
but this, that There is a celestial place of Purgation of men's souls, even by
the Seraphins. This celestial and heavenly Purgatory must needs be
spiritual, by the force of the Holy Ghost, and not by any hellish torment; but
differs as much from the real fire, which is our Adversaries furnace, as
does Heaven from Hell.

50. The tenth and last man of their Greek witnesses is Johannes Climachus,
(who lived about the year 580.) Gradu. 4. de Insomnijs. All that the
testimony has, is but the Celebration of service for the sleeping of ones
soul: which does make no more for Purgatory, then to pray that the soul of
him that sleeps may, in the end, be joined with the body, and made partaker
of the consummation of bliss.

51. Because M. Parsons in his Challenge has allotted unto me but the compass
of six hundred years, I will not transgress, to proccede in discovering many
base counterfeits and corrupt Authors, whom Coccius has brought to serve his
stage. I now desire the Christian Reader to ponder and apply the Observations
and Grants of our Romish Adversaries, noted See above, fect. 1. number. 4.
above in the first Section, and to apply the allegations of Coccius unto them,
and (seeing that M. Parsons did earnestly desire that I should demonstrate the
abuse of one and thirty Fathers, whether Greek or Latin, within the compass
of six hundred years after Christ) to try whether I have not satisfied him
already, even in the Greek Authors, for besides the ten Greek Liturgies, we
have found Greek Authors (if we shall admit Damascen for one, who fell in
obiter into Coccius his Catalogue) thrice Ten, which by being examined,
according to the confessed principles, conclusions, animaduersions, and
observations of our Adversaries themselves, appear to be either foysted, or
corrupted, or discredited, or wrested, to prove that which cannot be euinced
from them, which we may so much the rather suspect, because that their own
Bishop Roffensis, Art. (...) S. Cor. (...)
Roffensis went so far in his time, as to confess that There was none or
very rare mention of Purgatory in the Greek Fathers; and that the doctrine
thereof was hardly known in those times: and more absolutely their Invent. l.
8. c. 1.
Polydore Virgil granting that It was not acknowledged by the Grecians unto
this day. Which shows that their Salmeron and Coccius, in alleging more then
all the Greek Fathers, for proof of that doctrine, have done this with a
Greekish (according to the Proverb) with a deceivable faith. Thus much of the
Greek Fathers.

SECT. IIII.
The testimonies delivered in the name of the Latin Fathers, abused by
Coccius, for proof of Purgatory.
52. THis book grows big and corpulent; if I should deal as particularly
in the Latin, as I have done in the Greek Testimonies, I might complain of
an -- Amphora exit: therefore will I insist only upon those allegations, which
may be best satisfied from the principles of our Adversaries, and leave the
rest, remitting my Reader to the Confutations which other Protestants have
yielded unto them.

53. Tertullian is made the Captain of this band, whom See above, (...) 7.
some of our Adversaries have noted to have held, that the souls are in
sequestered receptacles, wherein they neither receive pain, nor their reward of
blessedness; which doctrine (in the judgment of their Jesuit Suarez) does
consequently gainesay the doctrine of Purgatory fire. And this answer in
general, might satisfy their particular objections out of Tertullian;
notwithstanding we shall examine these.

54. The first is, De testimony animae, aduersus Gentes, cap. 4. Thou prayest
for the bones and ashes of the dead, that they may have refreshing, and wishest
that he ( the departed) may rest well with them, who are apud inferos. The
party whom Tertullian brings in praying thus, is not a Christian, but a
Pagan, and the purpose which Tert. has to allege that, and other opinions of
the Heathen, was not to approve them, but to prove out of them that there is an
Immortality of the soul, even as he does from another absurd opinion of
theirs, in calling wicked men devils, and thereby confessing that there is a
Devil, and consequently a Tormenter, and therefore also a Day of judgment.
Concerning the truth of this answer, my Reader may consult with their own
Renatus Laurentius in his Argument, and Annotations upon this book.

55. The second, Tert. de corona militis, ca. 3. We make Oblations for the
dead; and ( this part Coccius has cut off) for their birth-dayes. Must
Oblations for the dead once a year necessarily imply a Purgatory torment? or
will our adversaries allow the whole testimony of Tertullian? Neither of both:
for their Renatus Laurent. Annot. in Tert. l. ad Martyrs. Oblations and
Commemorations.
Renatus answering unto places of S. Cyprian, l. 3. cap. 6. and l. 4. cap. 5.
That saying of Cyprian ( says he) that Oblations are offered for Martyrs, if I
be not deceived, signifies the commemorations, and remembrance of them
according to the custom of those times, which was, after the repeating of the
Creed, to give up the names of godly men departed, in a scrowle, to lay it on
the Altar there, to be recyted not without some praise and commendations of
their virtues, which shined in them, whilst they were alive. What can be more
plain to infringe the necessity of this consequence, which is, from Oblations
for them to infer a Purgatory punishment and torment of them? That which
Tertullian adds concerning the yearly celebrations of their Birth-dates, Was
( as both Rhenanus Arg. in Tert. de corona.
Rhenanus and Renatus upon the place it self.
Rhenatus acknowledged) an Heathenish custom, and for a time only by
indulgence tolerated in the Church, but afterward condemned by the Council
of Nice.

56. The third, De anima, cap. vlt. speaking of a little offense, which (as the
uttermost farthing) must be paid in that mora resurrectionis, That is, in the
time of the delay of the Resurrection: Coccius should have considered that
Tertullian is reckoned by their Senens. bibl. l. 6 Annot. vlt. and. l. 5 Annot.
233. and Ribera. Ies. in Apoc. 20. ver. 4.
own Doctors among the erroneous Chiliasts, who held that the Saints should
live a Thousand years in this world in all spiritual delights, at what time
men should rise (as Ribera expounds them) according to their merits, some
sooner then others. Therefore if we take [ Mora resurrectionis,] in the last
day, for lingering and delay in the time of their resurrection, this, we see, is
twelve score wide of Romish Purgatory.

57. The fourth, De Monogamia, cap. 11. and De caestitate cap. 11. are books
which both Pammelius and Rhenanus in Tert.
Pammelius and Posseuin Ies. Apparat.
Posseuine confess to have been written when he was a Montanist, even against
the Church. And the testimonies themselves talking but of Prayers and
Oblations, and refreshing, will not carry level to the scope that Coccius
aymeth at, as by many examples we have proved.

58. The next Author, concerning whom I may have some direction from our
Aduersaties, is Zeno Veronensis, in whose testimony, In Sermon. de Resurrect.
there is no mention either of Fire or of Purgatory. And the book it self is
of so small credit, that their Notaries of ancient writings, viz. Trithemius,
Senensis, Posseuine, Baronius, and others, do not so much as vouchsafe this
Author the naming.

59. The third is Lactantius, lib. 7. Instit. cap. 21. Perstringentur, etc.
That is, God will examine the just wtth fire, and the sins of men shall be
burned. Which testimony also Bellarmine urges to prove their Purgatory fire
after death, not considering that Lactantius speaks ( as their Jesuit Suar.
Ies. Tom. 2. in Thom. q. 59. Disp. 57. sect. 1.. Tertia sententia.
Suarez confesses) of the fire in the day of the resurrection; Which is (
says their Senens bibl. l. 5. Annot. 171.
Senensis) the fire of conflagration in the last day; Which is not ( says
Bellar. see above.
Bellarmine) that Purgatory, now controuerted. And Suarez. Tom. 2 in Thom.
disp. 57 sect. 1. Veruntamen.
Suarez does furthermore call this a false erroneous opinion, to think that
there shall be some just men in the day of the resurrection, who being not
perfectly purged of their sins, must be joined to their bodies, and so
purged with fire in their bodies and souls, before that they can be blessed.

60. Hilarious Pictauiensis in Psalm. 59. where he speaks of purging of sins
with fire, alluding unto that of 1. Cor. 3. of many That shall be saved, as it
were by fire, according as elsewhere, In Psalm. 118. upon those words [My soul
has desired thy iudgements] We ( says he) must pass through that
indefatigable fire, wherein we must undergo those grievous punishments, for the
expiation of the sins of our souls, and is objected by Bellar. l. 1. de
Purg. c. 6. ad finem.
Bellarmine for confirmation of Romish Purgatory: notwithstanding the same
Bellarmine repeating the same place of Hilary in Psalm. 118. upon the same text,
[My soul has desired thy judgments, etc. where Hilary says, that All
(except Christ) yea, the Virgin Mary must pass through the fire, Bellar. l. 2.
de Purg. c. 1.. Add.
shows that Hilary seems not to mean the Purgatory fire, but the fire of
Gods judgment, through which indeed all Saints must pass. And their Senens.
bibl. l. 5 Annot. 171.. Hilarious vna.
Senensis will have us understand that herein Hilarious followed the opinion of
Origin, who taught that all, except Christ, must pass through the fire of
conflagration at the last day: which opinion Bellar. quo. sup.. Hec sententia.
Bellarmine condemns for a manifest error.

61. S. Ambrose his worthiness moved Coccius to be plentiful in alleging
diverse testimonies out of him: but (if I be not much deceived) very
unfortunately. The first place is his Orat. de exitu vitae Theodosy, praying
thus: Thou Lord give perfect rest unto thy servant Theodosius, let his soul
come where it may not feel the sense of death. What then? did Ambrose think
that the soul of this godly Emperor was now in a Purgatory fire? This is
indeed, Coccius his aim, and M. Parsons his consequence, but behold (good
Reader) the vertigo of these men, for in the beginning of that Oration Ambrose
professes publicly of Theodosius, that He has not lost his Kingdom, but
changed it, being assumed into the Tabernacles of Christ: which testimony
destroys Purgatory. What then meant Ambrose (will some say) by this Prayer
for Theodosius after his death? surely nothing, but as he meant in praying for
other Emperors Gratian and Valentinian, which was (as their Salmeron lib. 1 in
part. 3. Comment Epist. Pauli, disp. 6. Est ergo.
Jesuit Salmeron confesses) To pray for their speedy resurection.

62. A second place is Epist. 8. ad Faustinum, wherein there is only Prayer for
the soul departed: which breath (as we have heard) is not strong enough to
kindle a Purgatory fire.

63. We descend unto a third testimony, which is Orat. 1. praeparans ad
Missam: Epist Erasmi ad Lectore^, initio Tom. 4 operum Ambrosij. And albeit he
seem commendable unto Erasmus, yet not knowing what age he was off, he can
challenge no place here.
which I judge (says Erasmus) to be none of the Writings of Ambrose: and
therefore we may dismiss it for a (...) Nevertheless the testimony it self
cannot euince the Romish Purgatory, as may appear by comparing it with the Sea
above, number. 5.
third observation.

64. The last place is the Author of the Comments upon S. Paul's Epistles,
which pass under the name of Ambrose, teaching that A man must suffer a
purging fire, lest that he be tormented in the fire eternal: but he tells
not what purging fire he means, whether the fire of the spirit, or the fire
of tribulation in this life, or the fire of examination, or the fire of
conflagration (as he means in Psalm. 118. by the confession of Senens. bibl.
l. 5. Annot. 171.
Senensis) by all which the Romish Purgatory is excluded. And although Coccius
could fashion his own meaning out of that place, yet may it be as lawful for
us to answer in this case, according unto the judgment of their Jesuit
Salmeron, who proves those Comments by many Arguments to be none of S.
Ambroses: Salmeron Ies. Comment in Epi. Pauli in genere disp. 19. p. 61, 62.
etc.
Which (as he censureth) are infected with the errors of the Pelagians.

65. Prudentius in Hamert. in his verses prays that A light kind of fire may
burn him, and not the eternal: which he might do, understanding other fire,
besides the Romish Purgatory. But the same Prudentius in his verses says,
that the damned Ghosts have sometimes paenarum sub styge ferias, That is,
Play-dayes and remissions from the pains of hell: therefore could Bellarmine
say no less, but that Bellarm. lib. 2. de Purg cap. 18. Ad quintum.
Prudentius did herein play the Poet. And so say we, Terms of Poesy do not
always besit the Virgin Theology.

66. Hierome cap. 66. in Esa. As we believe all torments of them, that deny
God to be eternal, so do we think that the sentence of the Judge, will be
moderate and mixed with clemency against the ungodly Christians, whose works
must be purged with fire. And again, In Cap. 7. Micheae: The soul, after that
it has endured torments, and is delivered out of darkness, upon the payment
of the last farthing, I shall see the justice of the Lord. S. Hierome upon
those words of the Prophet Amos, cap. 3. [Behold he will call fire unto
judgment, and will devour the depth, and also eat up a part,] Says thus (
says Senens. bibl. l. 5 Annot. 171.
Senensis:) The fire does devour all kind of sins, as wood Stubble, Hay,
and afterward does eat up part] that is, it seazeth upon the Saints, who are
the peculiar people of God, for it is time that judgment begin at Gods house:
if any man's work burn, he shall have a loss, but he himself shall be
safe, yet so as by fire: when as we shall all be in sin, and stand before the
truth of judgment, God will have mercy upon us, and raise us in the time of
resurrection. Which Sentence Senensis expounds of the fire of Conflagration:
and other purgation of fire, then this, we find not in S. Hierome.

67. The other place is out of Hierom in cap. 1. Nahum. He indeed compares
Temporal punishment with eternal, but they are the temporal in this life,
such as the punishment of the man who gathered sticks (for this is one
example) and not of the Romish Temporal punishment in Purgatory.

68. Ruffinus Ad Psalm. 37. who lived Anno 390. and is alleged out of a
Comment upon the Psalms, which (for ought that does appear in their own
Somti' Epist. before Ruffinus upon the Psalms.
Sonnius, or by their Jesuit Posseuin Jes. Apparat.
Posseuine) came not into public Print, before the year 1570. which may
serve for a note of an Apocrypha book.

69. The next Allegation of Coccius, which may be controlled by our adversaries
confessions, is out of Paulinus Nolanus his Epist. 18. and Epist. 19. We
demand some evidence for the antiquity of these Epistles, Card. Baron. Ano.
431. number. 198.
Baronius answers, that They were preserved by the industry of S. Amandus a
Bishop: But what appearance have they for this? The Epistle (says he) of
Paulinus written unto Amandus: But how shall we know this? This (says he) is
in the Vatican Index, and has not as yet been put in Print: That is, as we
may lawfully interpret it, these Epistles ascribed unto Paulinus, are but
Apocryphal. That which is further drawn out of the Paraphrasis of Paulinus, in
Psalm. 1. speaks of The fire which tries the work, which Bellarmine has
distinguished from his Purgatory fire, because this Tries the worker.

70. Pope Sixtus De malis doctoribus and operibus fidei (which Coccius calls
Sixtus tertius: but Posseuine shows to have been Sixtus secundus) Our
apparitor Coccius calls into the Court to bear witness for Purgatory: but
he no sooner appears: but their Jesuit Posseuin Ies. Apparat. Tit. Sixtus
secund.
Posseuine does pull off his Vizard, and finds him to be a counterfeit,
lurking under the name of that holy Pope. There were (says Posseuine) three
volumes of Pelagians, written in the name of Pope Sixtus, the second of them
was De malis Doctoribus and operibus fidei, which Baronius observes to be
fraught with Pelagianisme, whereof Lindane has complained. And thus we see
also Coccius unmasked in his allegation of Pope Sixtus, for still he abuses
his Reader with the Aequiuocating names of false Authors. But what else may we
expect from Aequiuocators?

71. Sedulius upon 1. Cor. 3. says that S. Paul did compare the examination of
judgment unto fire, because it shall be proved in the Purgatory fire of
judgment. But if we ask their Suarez how we may call Examination a fire,
Suarez Jes. Tom. 2. in Thom. disp. 57. sect. 1.. Circa primum.
he will inform us that it is so to be understood as is that of Dan. 7. [A
stood of fire went out at his mouth] which was the judgment of God, and
fignifieth nothing but that sentence which Christ shall pronounce, which like a
fercible fire shall separate and discern the wicked from the good. If then
this signify nothing but the sentence, how can it argue any Purgatory
punishment?

72. Caesarius Arelatensis, upon 1. Cor. 3. viz. He shall be safe, yet as it
were by fire, distinguishes between the Which word is in Caesarius, in the
Edition set forth by Bigne in biblioth S. Patrum, Tom. 7.
perpetua paena, and paena Purgatoria. And although he talk of Purgatory
punishments, by tribulations in this life, yet that which is here mentioned, is
a Purgatory-fire after death; but when? not until the last day of
Resurrection; which as it does not disprove, so it does not prove the Romish
Purgatory fire, as has been confessed. That he meant the Fire of the day of
the Last Resurrection, it is not denied by Suarez Iesuita Tom. 2 disp 57. sect
1.. Tertia sententia, and. Veruntamen
Suarez, by whom he is reprehended as Erroneous for holding, that Some souls,
which are not sufficiently purged before the resurrection, shall in that day be
purged with that fire. Not to stand-vpon the disabling of this witness, to
prove him Apocryphal.

73. It were but expense of time to prosecute other Allegations, which Coccius
has pyled up as Billits, to use for the making their pretended Romish
Purgatory fire to burn more bright, wherein there is only either praying for
their peace, as in Arnobius lib. 4. contra Gentes, or only Oblations or Prayers
for the dead, as that of Bacchiarius, De recip. Lapsis; and Victor Vticens. de
persecutione Vandalica; and Martinus Bracarensis, de Graecorum Synodis, cap.
69. and Conc. Carthag. cap. 79. or the public remembrances, commemorations,
and Memorials of some in their public prayers, in testimony of the faith of
those servants of God, and thankfulness unto God, as Conc. Carthag. 3. cap.
29. and Conc. Vasens. cap. 2. and Conc Valentinum Hispaniae, cap. 4. All which
in an orthodoxal sense have bin applied (as we have seen) unto Martyrs and
other Saints of blessedness, who are many thousand miles separated from all
breath and sent of that fiery furnace of their Purgatory: which their Coccius,
according to his common error aymeth at, who will not be found excusable in
his last two witnesses.

74. The second Council of Arles, cap. 15. decreeing that The Oblations of the
dead should be received, except they were known to have murdered themselves.
Concerning these kind of Oblations, we read in more ancient Canons, as Can.
3. and 4. of the Apostles, wherein it was ordained, as Binius Annot. in eos
Canones.
Binius expounds them, that No Oblations should be received of the Church
from any departed, except they had in their lifetime professed the Catholic
faith, and lived a godly life. And in the Council Apud Binium part. 1. col.
(...) 60.
Vasatense, 1. cap. 1. it was decreede, that Whosoever did withdraw from the
Church the oblations of the dead, they should be separated from the Church as
Infidels. In these we see Oblations of the dead, which they by their Wills and
Testaments left to the Church, to be bestowed in charitable uses, which
Coccius alleges for proof of Oblations for the dead, to infer that loose
and dissolute Consequence for the state of such souls in a fiery Purgatory.
And are not the holy and glorious Saints much beholden unto Coccius, who from
their Oblations of Charity must likewise conclude, that they are in affliction
and torment?

75. Primasius is the last witness, whom I find within the precincts of the
first six hundred years, and he lib. 5. in Apoc. 19. speaking of Martyrs,
says of them (as of others) that The souls of the godly, who are departed,
are not now separated from the Church, which is the Kingdom of Christ:
otherwise (says Primasius) we should not at the Altar have a remembrance of
them in the communion of the Lords Body. Now all the Romanists do, together
with us, profess to the glory of Gods grace, that Martyrs and holy Saints are
in the Tabernacles of rest and blessedness, where there is no Tears, but all
joyful songs of Alleluiah: whom notwithstanding we believe to be joined with
us by a spiritual Communion, we praising God for their holiness in their
lifetime, and for their happiness after death, as they likewise in general
do pray and praise God for the Elect. Therefore it cannot be, but M. Parsons
himself will be offended with his Apparitor Coccius, who uses no other
sentence out of Primasius, to prove that some souls are in the fire of
Purgatory, saving that whereby it must necessarily follow, that Martyrs and
the Inhabitants of Paradise are in misery.

76. Thus have I (as I hope) abundantly performed my Task, offering unto Mr.
Parsons, our fierce Challenger, his choice of above fifty Testimonies in all,
to take out one and thirty Instances of abuses of Fathers, used for the proof
of their Purgatory: To the satisfying of his Earnest Appetite from the
confessed Observations, Principles, and Conclusions of our adversaries
themselves: and yet I did not examine all the sixty. This Combat being ended,
I return to my Encountor with M. Parsons.

CHAP. XII.
The falsehoods, wherewith M. Parsons has been charged in my Preamble (part
whereof follows in the thirteenth Chapter) and his defense thereupon in his
Reckoning.

SECT. I.
1. HE has been deeply charged with gross untruths, and yet does insert
himself in the Catalogue of sincere writers.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and profession of sincerity.
I Say for my self, if he have found thrice three palpable falsities, Reckon.
pa. 214.
such as cannot be excused by any oversight, and error, but such as must
needs be judged malicious and wittingly untrue, I do not desire any pardon or
relaxation from my first promise, that I be never credited more; yea if it be
but thrice, which is the measure that I offered unto others. Hitherto we have
seen no one alleged and proved: and truly I do confess, that if I did
persuade my self, or doubt that M. Morton or any other could prove any such
one untruth uttered by me, I should be much troubled in Conscience therewith:
But for that I am sure I never had such meaning, I stand very confident, that
he will never be able to bring any one example, and much less thrice three.

The Reueiwe.
2. If that M. Parsons be an honest man, then his fellow Priest has played no
honest man's part, who has branded him in the forehead, with singular marks of
Quodlib. page 236. See above
Forgeries and Lies. Nevertheless, I stand not upon his Conscience, but
contend by due proof to lay open his foul spots of falsifications, formerly
objected against him in my Preamble, which in this Reckoning he labors to
wash off, with like success as the Ethiopian does his blackness, As we
shall see.

A Charge against M. Parsons of Rashness.
3. In the Preamble, I said that I would not urge him with Preamb. page 71.
his own contradiction, who in his Preface to his Reader says, He knows not
the name of T. M. and yet in his Epistle Dedicatorie unto both the
Universities, which is set before the Preface, he mentioned the name of Tho.
Morton at the full; which is a note of rasnnesse.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
But what if this be no contradiction at all, and M. Morton did know Reckon.
page 227
it to be so? First the Dedicatorie Epistle of every work is wont to be the
last thing that is written, or Printed, which M. Morton will not deny.
Secondly, I do expressly signify in my said Epistle Dedicatorie, that the said
Epistle was written after the Preface and Treatise thereof, etc. Thirdly, to
convince him indeed and most apparently of witting and willing fraud in this
point, I must tell the Reader, I did in the place here cited of the third
Chapter of my Treatise, set down clearly and perspicuously when, and by what
occasion I came to understand, whom the two Letters T. M. did signify, which
before I understood not. Reckon. pa. 229
And now let the Reader judge between us, whether it be likely that M. Morton
knew my Dedicatorie Epistle, wherein I take notice of his Name, were written
after the common Preface, and first two Chapters of the Treatise, or no; and so
let him consider of his idle objection.

The Reuiewe.
4. Albeit the matter be of no moment, yet seeing that M. Parsons is so
vehemently urgent, I shall entreat the indifferent Reader to do him justice,
after that I shall be vouchsafed to speak. I observe in all this defense, that
there is an Epistle Dedicatorie (wherein the name, Tho. Morton, is mentioned)
which gives notice of a large common Epistle (wherein M. Parsons said that he
knew not the name) prefixed before a Treatise; and in the third Chapter of that
Treatise, the occasion is expressed of knowing the name; often telling us that
the Dedicatorie Epistle was written after the common Preface, saying
furthermore that he was Mitig. cap 3. page 89.
Forced by sickness, to lay aside that which he had written; and hence
infers, that in the Preface he said truly that he knew not that name. In
all M. Parsons inconsiderate taxation.
which his Answer he has forgot the principal verb, viz. [ Printed:] For
if the Preface, wherein he says he knew not the name; were, as he also says,
laid aside in his writing Papers, and not Printed till afcerwards he knew the
Name at full, then ought he to have Corrected the Preface (because now he
knew the name) before it were committed to the Press: Otherwise, that part of
the Preface, to wit, [ As yet I know not his name,] although it were true in
his papers when he writ it, yet must it needs be a Lie in Print, and a
special Argument of great rashness. And Rashness being the fault which I
imputed unto M. Parsons, he was too inconsiderate to put this in his Reckoning,
for one of the falsehoods which were objected against him.

5. Nevertheless, lest that I might disturb the Order of M. Parsons his
Reckoning, I thought good to fill up this his first place, with a perfect
falsehood indeed of his own (not yet mentioned) which is such as may persuade
any man of Conscience, that M. Parsons his Conscience has taken such a leake,
as is able to drown his soul, except he repent, which I will unfold in the
next Paragraphe.

A four fold falsehood committed by M. Parsons against M. Calvin, in the end
of his last third Chapter.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
FInally, John Calvin himself, treating of this matter, confesses that
Reckon. cap. 3. page 219.
the use of Prayer for the dead (which supposes Purgatory) was practiced in
the Primitive Church above one thousand three hundred years agone: Ante mill
and trecentos Annos (says he) vsu receptum Calvin. lib. 3. Instit. ca. 5.. 10
fuit, vt precationes fierent pro defunctis: It was received in use above a
thousand three hundred years past, that Prayers should be made for the souls
of them that were departed. And a little after: Reckon. pa. 220
where John Calvin in the former place cited, after his confession of the
received use of Prayer before one thousand three hundred years, says, Sed
omnes, Calu. vbi supra.
fateor, in errorem abrepti suerun: But all of them, I confess, were carried
away with error.

The Reueiwe.
6. M. Parsons has singled out of all the books of Mr. Calvin this one
place, which he presents to his Reader for a spectacle of contempt used by M.
Calvin against ancient Fathers, and has laid this down, as it were, for the
vp-shot of his whole Reckoning of that his third Chapter. But see (I beseech
thee, good Reader) what a knot of falsities he has tied together in this one
accusation. First, these words Ante mill annos, etc. are propounded only as
an Objection of Romish Doctors, thus: Cum ergo obijciunt Adversary ante mill
and trecentos annos etc. That is, Whereas my Adversaries (says Calvin) do
object unto me, that prayers for the dead were wont M. Parsons perfidious
forgery
to be used in the Church a thousand, three hundred years since: Secondly,
when he comes to answer, he says, Ipsivero veteres, etc. But those
ancients were carried away with error: Where M. Parsons, to make M. Caluines
answer more odious, put in Omnes veteres, that is, All ancient Fathers erred
therein, as though Calvin had condemned them All in this point.

7. Thirdly, Calvin a little after in the same Section, yields a fuller
answer, saying: Verum ne glorientur Aduersaris nostri, quasi veterem Ecclesiam
erroris sui sociam habeant, etc. But least that our Adversaries ( iaith
Calvin) may boast, as though they had the ancient Church a companion in their
error, I say that there is a great difference between them, for those ancients
used a memory of the dead, least that they might seem to have altogether
neglected them, but yet did also confess, that they did not doubt of the State
of the dead: As for Purgatory ( says Calvin) they held it to be an uncertain
thing. Besides, we might easily produce diverse testimonies of ancient Fathers,
whereby the use of those prayers is manifestly confuted. Thus far Mr. Calvin;
signifying that he was not destitute of the judgment of Antiquity, for the
oppugning of the doctrine which was objected against him: which part of the
answer Mr. Parsons has wholly concealed.

8. Lastly, Calvin ( says M. Parsons) confesses that the use of Prayer for
the dead (which supposes Purgatory) was practiced, etc. Never taking notice
that Calvin denies that consequence, holding that Prayer for the dead does
not infer Purgatory.

9. Is not here as great a manifestation of witting malice, and falsehood (for
ought that can appear to any Reader) as an Adversary could possibly use?
First to allege Caluines A quadruplicitie of M. Parsons falsehoods.
objection, in that sense wherein it was objected, as if it had been his
Assertion: Secondly, by cogging a Die in deed, in foysting in the word All:
Thirdly, by concealing Caluines more absolute answer: And lastly by implying a
consequence, which is by Calvin plainly confuted. What will now become of M.
Parsons his Confidence of his own sincerity, who boasts that there cannot
be brought against him any one example of such a falsitie, much less thrice
three, seeing that here are at least three gross falsehoods in this one? we
further enter upon the falsehoods wherewith he was charged in the Preamble.

SECT. II.
The second Charge of the Clause of Reservation.
10. HOw could M. Parsons, without some Equiuocating Preamb. page 5. and page
72.
"fraud, affirm that the Clause of Reservation was not set down by me in
Latin, except only once, seeing that it was expressed in Latin above twenty
times?

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe truth is, that my meaning was according to the meaning of Reckon. page 14.
M. Mortons assertion, promising that he would always so set down the clause
of Reservation in Latin, that the simple Reader should not understand it, no
more then simple men could understand Aristotle's Philosophy; in which manner I
found it put down, but once indeed thoughout the whole Book, to wit, in the
place before mentioned, that is to say, wholly in Latin, for thus he writes,
coming to the said clause of Reservation: Loquar enim Latin, ne Jdiotae ansam
sibi arripiant nequiter (...) [vt quis (...) illud detegere.] (...) words he
Englisheth not, and consequently might be some veyle to the ignorant, not to
understand him. But in all other places, though he put in oftentimes, I know
not this, or that, Vt tibi dicam, vt tibi reuelem, etc. Yet does he so utter
in English all the rest of the cases professed, as the simpliest man may
understand the same, and consequently I hold them for uttered in English, and
not in Latin.

The Reuiew of the former Reckoning.
11. The only shadow of excuse, which M. Parsons has, for covert of his
former untruth (when he said that The clause of Reservation was set down in
Latin but once, notwithstanding it be found in Latin above one and twenty
times) is to point at one place, which he says is only and wholly in Latin,
thus: Loquar enim, etc. But here he craftily M. Parsons his notable fraud
cutteth off the words, which go immediately before, for thus it stands in
the Book. Full Satisf. Part. 3. page 48.
A Catholic being asked, whether a Priest be in such a place, may,
notwithstanding his perfect knowledge to the contrary, answer, [Hee is not
there, vt (loquar enim Latin, ne I diotae ansam sibi arripiant nequiter
mentiendi) quis teneatur illud det egere.] Where it is as apparent that the
mental Equivocation in this place (for the Parenthesis is no part of the
sentence) being this, [ He is not there] Vt quis teneatur detegere, cannot be
said to be wholly in Latin, more then [ I am no Priest,] Vt tibireuelem; Or, [
I am no Priest,] Vt tibi dicam: Which M. Parsons does know to have been
twenty times repeated in that Treatise.

12. Wherefore by this Reckoning I am justly occasioned to charge M. Parsons
with two untruths, the first for his former saying, that The clause of
Reservation was put down in A brace of untruths.
Latin but once: The second is for now excusing it. by instancing in one
place, as though it were put down wholly in Latin, where not withstanding the
first part of the mental Equivocation is as much in English; and the latter
part (being the clause of Reservation) no more Latin, then are the twenty
other examples of mental Equivocation, which I did particularly recount. And
thus we see that which we may readily observe in his other answers, to wit, how
fruitful falsehood is, for still one untruth does engender another. Has M.
Parsons no more to say for himself?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Answer that small guilt can be found (though the error were granted)
Reckon cap. 4. 2. page 230.
where no malice or interest can be presumed. For to what end or profit should
P. R. err willingly in a matter that imports him and his cause so little
etc.?

The Reuiew.
13. Then belike, he would be thought to have wronged me in jest: but who
knows not that even iesters have as His ridiculous evasion.
well teeth in their heads, as reuilers? Solomon does characterize such like
fellows: Pro. 16. 17.
As he that faineth himself mad casts firebrarnds, arrows, and mortal
things: so deals the deceitful man with his friend, and says, Am not I in
jest? As for Mast. Parsons he has entitled himself an Adversary, and as
all men know, he uses to jest uncharitably enough.

SECT. III.
The third charge against M. Parsons, concerning the Moderate Answerer.
14. WHere I said particularly of one of your Doctors, Preamb. p. 72.
surnamed the Moderate Answerer, that He sets himself in the chair of the
unlearned Doctors, reprehended by the Apostle, etc. because of his shallow
Answers, which he made with an If, etc.

Mr. Parsons in all snuff and fume rages against me, as though I had said
that All Romish Doctors were unlearned. This I called a falsehood.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Remit my Reader, for trial of this, unto the ponderation of the text Reckon
cap. 4.. 3. page 233.
it self of his said Epistle [To our deceived Brethren] and to his inferring
words applied to our Priests, in calling them an erring Priesthood. And here I
demand of M. Morton in sincerity, whether he did mean of our Doctors in
general, or no?

The Reuiew.
15. And I answer in as good sincerity, that I meant no more to persuade that
All the Romish Doctors were Unlearned, then that they were All learned. But is
not this subtly done of M. Parsons, by asking to seem to doubt of that, which
a very Child might have understood, by a plain distinction; of one ignorant
Priest, which was the Moderate answerer. Mr. P. subtle and crafty
interrogatory.
But the High Priests of the Jews, did not ignorantly but unconscionably, and
wilfully delude the people, saying that Christ was stolen out of the grave,
unto whom that miserable people performed blind obedience. As for that Title
of Seduced Brethren, it can make no good consequence to prove that I thought
Seducers to be unlearned; no more then if M. Parsons would say, that because
Eve a silly woman was Seduced by the Devil, therefore the Devil, who deceived
her, was no subtle seducer. Seeing therefore that M. Parsons (after so clear a
conviction of his error (which any English Reader may perceive) does still
persist in aunswering, that he committed Reckon. p. 234. Two of his falsehoods
in one.
No error at all, but gave a true explanation of my meaning, he, by this
denial of one falsehood, has made up two.

SECT. IIII.
The fourth charge about Goodman.
16. COncerning the seditious doctrine of Goodman, I answered, Full satisfact.
part. 2 cap. 3. and Preamb. p. 73.
that If I should justify him, my heart should condemn my self, and
furthermore called his seditious positions Wicked and false: yet did M. Parsons
inform his Reader that I did particularly justify Goodman.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
MY words were these, that he ( T. M.) takes upon him more fondly Reckon.
cap. 4.. 4. page 235.
in the second part of his Reply, to make a public justification of all
Protestants for rebelling against their Princes in any Country whatsoever, but
more particularly in England, and therein does he justify Cranmer, Ridley, and
others, that conspired against Q. Mary: Kuoxe, Buchanan, Goodman, in Scotland,
as his justification is a more condemnation of them, then if he had said
nothing at al. Which I spoke, because he said [ If I shall justify Goodman,
although the examples of your Priests might excuse him, yet my heart should
condemn my self.]

The Reueiwe.
17. I thought M. Parsons had been a professed Divine, M. Parsons dissembling
his understanding of a triuiall phrase of speech to cloak his gross falsehood.
and had read in Scripture that the Prophet does vpbraide Jerusalem and
Israel, saying that they did Justify Sodom by their iniquities, that is,
(must M. Parsons say, if we admit of his own Comment) God does commend Sodom
for her iniquities, because the Scripture says, that other wicked Cities do
justify Sodom: whereas every triuiall Scholar, and almost vulgar man, who
has been exercised in the Scriptures, knows that it is spoken only by a
Comparison of two ungodly people together, wherein Jerusalem is brought-in to
justify the other, yet not so, as to acquit Sodom of sin, but even to
aggrauate the ungodliness of Jerusalem, as which exceeded Sodom in her
wickedness. Thus, said I, Although your Priests by their Examples (namely, of
more bloody positions) might justify Goodman, (as being less seditious then
they are themselves;) yet if I should not condemn Goodman, my heart should
condemn my self. What can be more plain to express my purpose in condemning
Goodman, whom notwithstanding M. Parsons, to his no small shame, did say I
Justified? Therefore this untruth also must still remain upon his score with
the rest.

SECT. V.
The fifth charge against Mr. Parsons about Knoxe and Buchanan.
18. Mr. Parsons has likewise signified unto the Reader, that I justified
these also, albeit I Full satisfact. part. 2. cap. 4.
judged their doctrine Seditious, and worthily condemned by a Parliament in
Scotland.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning
WHereunto I answer, first by the very words of his defense Reckon. cap. 4..
5. p. 240. and Preamb. p. 74.
in the former objection, set down about Goodman, he seeks to clear all
other, saying;

If I should justify this Goodman (though your examples might excuse him) yet
my heart should condemn myself: But what do you profess to prove? All
Protestants teach positions rebellious: prove it: Here is Goodman, etc. By the
example of all the rest, J answer, there is but one. By which answer it is
evident he clears all the rest. Nor do I find that M. Morton did use these
words which he now does, [ Their Seditious doctrine was condemned in
Scotland:] Nay, as I noted before, by saying that one Goodman had held
positions seditions, he thought to justify and clear both these two.

The Reuiewe.
19. I marvel by what privilege M. Parsons is imboldened thus to face out a
matter so manifestly false, as the meanest English Reader may see. For
concerning Knoxe and Buchanan, I said that Full satisfact, part. 2. cap. 4.
An Act of Parliament calld-in the books of Buchanan, censuring all such
contempts and Innouations, Adding that, you may not call that the doctrine of
the Church of Scotland, which the general current of the Church and M. Parsons
outfacing of truth.
State did condemn in public Parliament, such is the seditious doctrine of
resisting and deposing of Kings. But yet thus it became M. Parsons to cover his
former faithless dealing His double untruth.
with a shameless denial, which (lest it should not be manifest enough) he
makes more visible by a palpable untruth: and yet again.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NAy, as I noted before, by saying that only one Goodman had held Reckon. ib.
p. 241.
positions seditious, he thought to justify and clear both these two, and all
other their companions from just reprehension. Whereby you see how idle an
objection against me this is of wilful falsehood.

The Reueiwe.
20. Be pleased (good Reader) to look upon the place it self, and if M.
Parsons have dealt sincerely in this point of Reckoning, then discharge him in
all the rest. I writ thus concerning Goodman: Full satisfact. part. 2. p. 103.
Here is one Goodman who in his public book does maintain them. I have no
other means to avoid these straits, which you object by the example of one,
to conclude All Protestants rebellious, then by example of all the rest, to
answer there is but one. Particularly entreating of the examples of English
Protestants, whom the Moderate Answerer A newfalshood of M. Parsons, in defense
of an old.
had objected, and spending the whole third Chapter for the justifying of the
English Writers, excepting Goodman, whom I there held worthy of condemnation.

21. After, in the fourth Chapter, entitled [ The objections against the
Church of Scotland] I answered (as is aforesaid) for the condemning of Knoxe
and Buchanan: whereas there is not so much as any intimation of these two in
the other place: Was there ever man so distortedly squint-eyed, who could look
Northward and Southward in one moment, as M. Parsons has done, who could not
distinguish the speech, which particularly concerned England, from that which
was applied only unto Scotland. He held it sufficient, if I could show but
Three plain falsehoods for his conviction, here we find in this one charge
Three, which are not of the least size.

SECT. VI.
The sixth charge against M. Parsons, touching Mast. Campian.
22. THe testimony of M. Campian was Full satisfact. part. 1. p. 20. and Preamb
p. 75.
brought to accuse M. Calvin; concerning his doctrine of calling Christ (...)
and censuring it to be monstrous: Unto the which crimination used by M. Campian,

and by six other Romish Doctors against Calvin, I opposed the judgment of
Card. Bellarmine, who justifies the sense of Calvin, as being Catholic: yet
did Mr. Parsons so relate the matter, by changing Campian into Bellarmine, as
though I had foolishly brought in Bellarmine to be contrary to himself: This I
took to be a witting falsehood.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BEcause upon the word [ your Iesuite] M. Morton placed the letter ( r) Reckon.
p. 243.
for reference in the margent unto Campian, and upon the next Author put down
the letter ( t) upon the quotation of Bellarmine to the same effect, rescuing
the opinion of Calvin and Beza; the letters being very small, the one was
taken for the other, and the name of Bellarmine set down in the text, in stead
of Campian: the difference importing nothing at all, yet does M. Morton make a
great matter of it, as though it had been done of malice, when as for me to
change voluntarily these two names, Cuibono?

The Reuiew.
23. Here M. Parsons confesses his error, but says that he did it not
voluntarily, or upon an evil intent But alas the good man's meaning bewrays
it self, by the manner of his own Accusation, wherein he spared not to note
me for a Mitig. cap. 6. n. 53. and. 54. p. 230.
Shifter, by intending to deceive the Reader: Nevertheless perceiving his own
ungracious shift discovered, he will have me to take it for a reasonable part
of a Reckoning, to answer, M. Parsons confessed error.
Cui bono? that is, What good would it have been for me (says he) to have
done this willingly? When as he should rather have asked, Cui malo? that is, To
whom he might work a mischief hereby; especially seeing that he does bewray
almost in every page, that it is his cordial good to traduce me, and His
miserable excuse.
make me odious, as if I were (God forgive him) the vilest shifter and
falsificator that has been heard of. And yet the poor man thinks to be
excused by the littleness of the superior letters ( r. and t.) who See
hereafter,. 11.
notwithstanding was himself so Eagle-eyed, in discerning in vero, and vere,
the two little vowels, o, and e.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, concerning CALVINES (...)
But now for the thing it self, albeit Bellarmine in the place here Reckon.
page 243. and 244.
quoted do show, that, according to the Exposition of Josias Simlerus a
Caluinist, the words of John Calvin, in a certain sense may have a true
meaning, yet simply and absolutely does he condemn the same as Heretical,
saying, Caluinum existime, quoad modum loquendi, sine dubio errasse. I do
think without doubt, that Calvin did err in Bellarm. l. 2 de Christo. ca. 69.
his manner of speech. (A little after the relation of the sentence of the
Book) Whereby it appears that Bellarmine, neither is contrary to himself,
neither to Fa. Campian, and other Catholic writers before mentioned: for that
all of them do agree, that the manner of Caluines speech is heretical,
dangerous, and to be avoided, though in some strained sense it may pass.

The Reuiewe.
24. Heresy (as Mr. Parson knows) consists not in words, but in sense: for
these words of Scripture, Job. 14. 28.
My Father is greater then I, are used both by Catholics and Heretics; but
by Catholics in a true, by Heretics in a false sense. Now where I produced
Romish Authors, condemning the foresaid sentence of Calvin (concerning (...))
judging the sense thereof Heretical, etc. and opposed Bellarmine against them,
justifying the sense of Calvin as Catholic: M. Parsons faithless dealing
against Calvin.
M. Parsons endeavors to reconcile his Romish Authors, as though they all
agreed to condemn Caluines manner of speech, and to allow his sense. I should
marvel that Mr. Parsons durst seek to delude his Reader with so open
falsehoods, but that his disposition is now habited by use.

25. For the accusations of the Romish writers against Calvin, were Full
satisfact. part. 1. cap. 7.
thus specified by me. First Rat. 8.
Campian, calling the Doctrine of Calvin portentum: Next, their Annot. in Ioh.
I. 1.
Rhemish Translatours, calling it Blasphemy: After Lib. 3. de Notis verbi Dei.
Posseuinus, calling it Atheism: Then Stapleton. Prompt. ser. 3. post. Dom.
(...)
Stapleton, calling it a wicked Heresy, which Feuardentius (says he) does
not ably refute. And can these agree with the judgment of Cardinal
Bellarmine, who justifies the sense of Calvin to be Catholic? And for M.
Parsons his further conviction, I shall desire my Reader but only to hear the
words of Bellarmine himself in the Bellar. 1. 2. de Christ. ca. 19.
place alleged. Genebrard ( says he) and Lindanus, and Canisius, ( all
Roman Authors) did attribute unto Calvin this Heresy: Neuethelesse, when I
do examine the matter ( says Bellarmine) and do diligently ponder the
sentence of Calvin, I dare not pronounce that he was in this error.

26. Do you not hear Genebrard, Lindanus, and Canisius, pronouncing Calvin
an Heretic for that opinion, for which Bellarmine says, that he himself
durst not condemn Calvin? How then could M. Parsons say truly, that these
writers do agree? Herein he offers no small injury unto Bellarmine, whom
whilst he would reconcile unto others, he makes to be an Adversary to
himself, as though Bellarmine had condemned Calvin in that, wherein he
justified him, according to the Index of his Book: Tom. 3. Edit. Lugduni, Anno
1596.
Caluini sent entia (...) explicatur, and defenditur, That is: The sentence of
Calvin concerning (...) is explained and defended. But especially he wrongeth
his own conscience, by an inexcuseable falsehood.

SECT. VII.
The seventh Charge.
27. M. Parsons in his Mitig. cap. 4. number. 14. and Treamb. page 76.
Mitigation brought me in as Confessing, in effect, all that my Adversary the
moderate Answerer had objected against Protestants: when as contrariwise there
was scarce any thing See full satisfaPart. 2.
objected (excepting the above named examples of Goodman, Knox, Buchanan, and
Muntzer,) which I did not particularly consute. These and almost every
particular instance I then prosecuted, oftentimes by the confessions of their
own Doctors, whom M. Parsons in his Answer durst not so much as touch by any

mention. And could such like confutations be, In effect, a confessing of all?
This seemed unto me to be a large and lavish falsehood. Let us see what account
Mr. Parsons will make for this.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALthough he used all possible Art that he could to answer, yet Reckon. pa.
247. 248.
are his Answers such, where he does answer (for to sundry chief points he
says nothing at all) as do easily show that in substance he confesses all,
and cannot deny what is objected; and where he seeks to deny any thing,
there he intangleth himself more, then if flatly he confessed the same. And
in proof hereof, I spend a dozen leaves at least, in refuting all his Answers,
proouing that they yield not a full, but a faint satisfaction.

The Reueiwe.
28. This you have now affirmed, and that in Print, even in Roman letters. But
I appeal unto any Reader understanding English to judge hereof, what Full
satisfact. Part. 2.
I have done in confutation of the moderate Answerer, the particular instances
Mitig page 112 where his Discourse of 12. leaves begins.
there objected do fully manifest, which concerned either England, France,
Geneua, Germany, yea, or the loss of Rhodes, and part of Hungary, which
(according to the report of their own Histories) befell through the
couctousnesse of Pope Adrian. Secondly, what Mr. Parsons has not Answered in
his Dozen leaves of his Mitigation, unto the second His many falsehoods in one.
part of the Full satisfaction, consisting of twelve Chapters, will be as
evident: Wherein any may observe the diverse Arguments then used, for the
defense of Protestants, which Mr. Parsons passed over without Answer; the
Summarie points whereof are these.

29. Full satisfact. Part. 2. p. 97. 98.
First the general Doctrine of Protestants, by (as Bellarmine confesses)
expounding the place of Saint Paul, Romans 13. to signify that the Pope, and all
Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be subject unto Princes. Ibid. page 99.
Secondly, that the English Protestants (by the confession of the Jesuit
Salmeron,) Do acknowledge a Sovereignty of Kings in cases Ecclesiastical.
Thirdly, the express Doctrine of Jbid. page 108.
Calvin, and of Jbid. page 109.
Beza, advancing the Authority of Kings. Fourthly, the justifying of the
Protestants in Jbid. page 111.
France, from the testimonies of Romish Historians. Fifthly, (to omit some other
proofs) acquitting Ibid. page 121. and 123.
Luther, by his own express Doctrine, and by other evidences, confuting the
Ibid. page 127.
slarders, which the moderate Answer cast upon him, which M. Parsons nimbly
skipped over, in favor of his shinnes; playing the very Mare-maide, a woman
above water, talking largely, and promising a confutation of all points, but
when he comes to the principals, -- Atrum desinit in piscem, as mute as a
Fish, as might be manifested by many examples. In the Simile.
mean time we may reckon this his last Assertion, in the number of his grauida
mendacia, because this one falsehood is big with many other falsehoods in the
belly thereof.

SECT. VIII.
The eight Charge, concerning a Transition, asking [haue you ought to say to
their practice?]
30. I Mitigat. cap. 4. page 131.
Was accused by M. Parsons, to have dissembled the practices of Calvin and
Beza, which were objected by the moderate Answerer, and to have used this
Interrogation, [ Have you any thing to say to their practice?] in an
hypocritical dissemblance, as though nothing had been objected against them,
to the end that I might pass them over, and answer nothing at all:

Preamb. pa. 77
Albeit it be most evident by the place it self, that I used that
Interrogation by way of a Transition only, to the end that I might more
emphatically and effectually, both note and confute the objections against
Calvin and Beza, which immediately I also performed. Therefore M. Parsons in
accusing me of Dissimulation and hypocrisy, did me no little injury, and now
comes halting in with a strange manner of Reckoning.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Am so equal and easy to be entreated in this matter, or rather so Reckon.
cap. 4.. 8 page 2 q 8.
indulgent, as I am content to accept of his interpretation, professing
sincerely notwithstanding, that I understood him in another meaning, when I
wrote my Book, the words themselves leading me thereunto: Howsoever it be,
there can be no least matter of malice framed against me. True it is, he
endeavors both before and after to Answer unto diverse proofs of seditious
practices, objected by his Adversaries against Calvin and Beza.

The Reueiwe.
31. In this part of his Reckoning I shall desire my Reader to observe these
two points: M. Parsons his manner of Confession, and protestation, for they are
remarkable. He confesses now that in that place I Endeauored both before and
after, to Answer unto the seditious practices objected aagainst Calvin and
Beza, and yet accused me in his Mitigat. cap. 4. page 131.
Mitigation, for concealing the whole matter, rating and reuyling me, and
calling my Satifaction in this point Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, so far
forth as to make me a man not to be true sted hereafter. But why? for concealing
and dissembling forsooth such objections against Calvin and Beza, which now,
upon better consideration, he confesses I did not dissemble, but expressly
mentioned, and also endeavored to answer them.

32. Thou see then (Christian Reader) how vile and heinous The excellent Art
of M. Parsons, in confesing his witting falsehood so, as though he would not
confess it.
an opprobrie M. Parsons laid upon me, even of [ Not to be trusted hereafter;]
and upon how frivolous and false a pretense, according as he has here plainly
confessed. I call the Confession plain, because he grants I did not
conceal them.

33. Notwithstanding, mark I beseech thee, in what manner he conueigheth this
his Confession, which he begins thus: I am so equal and easy to be
entreated, or rather so indulgent, as I am content to accept of his
interpretation, etc. See now, after that he had been charged with egregious
impudency, by his false imputation of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, and being
at length ashamed of his own discovered nakedness, although he cannot deny
his error, yet does he not cast away all the Fig-leaues of covert, and
although he cannot but yield, yet will he seem so to yield, as only upon an
Entreaty, forsooth, which indeed he does upon a Charge and Challenge; and to
be only content to do that, which he does by constraint; and to have
condescended only in the way of Indulgence, which he does through the evidence
of his own guiltiness. I suppose that Theophrastus did never show a more
lively Character and Picture of any vice, then is this Character of a smooth
and subtle Reckoner, which is exemplified in this confession of M. Parsons,
who so acknowledges his most manifest error, as if he did not, or would not
acknowledge it, which makes me to hold his Protestation to be less credible.

34. His Protestation is, that He then understood the matter otherwise; that is
to say, otherwise then he does now in his more Sober Reckoning: which
doubtless (if he had bin then truly Sober) he could not have understood
otherwise, as may The palpabilitie of M. Parsons falsehood, against which he
does now protest.
be made evident by a like example of a Lawyer pleading in this manner: The
debt which your Clyent challenges of the defendant, is of two sorts, the one
is upon Bills, the other upon Bonds; I have answered unto all that you can
challenge by virtue of Bills, what have you to say to the Bonds? The Bonds, you
say, were made upon due considerations, and before diverse competent witnesses:
whereunto I answer, that the considerations are unlawful, and the witnesses
are insufficient, and (that which will discover the inualidity of the Bonds
most) they are razed and interlined. Thus the Pleader for the defendant.
Presently starteth up a Lawyer for the contrary part, and desires to be heard
for the Plaintiff. My Lord (says he to the Judge) the last Pleader concerning
the debts challenged by virtue of Bonds, has said thus: What have you to say
for the Bonds? as though nothing had been said thereunto: Did we not allege
that there were fair instruments, that there were due considerations, that
there were sufficient witnesses, etc. What a notorious dissimulation and
Hypocrisy was it then in him, to conceal our alleadgements? Or how can your
Lordship suffer such a one to plead in your presence? His Adversary stands
up, and replieth, saying, Your Lordship sees the impudency of this fellow,
for I have both mentioned the Bonds, the witnesses and considerations; and have
particularly answered and disabled these his objections. In the end the
perverse wrangling Lawyer perceiving his own folly, makes the same Apology
for himself, which M. Parsons has done. Well, I am so equal and easy to be
entreated in this matter, or rather indulgent, as I am contented to yield unto
your interpretation; protesting sincerely, that I understood you in another
meaning. Would not such a protestation, joined with such a confession, move
either laughter or indignation? Such is the case between me and M. Parsons in
every degree, and yet will he be thought to have dealt sincerely.

SECT. IX.
The ninth Charge, touching the testimony of Holinshed.
35. WHereas I Full satisfact. part. 2. page 102. and Preamb. 80. etc.
related only Holinshed, to prove that there was not any Scruple of Religion
objected "against Wyat in the Oration of Q. Mary: Mitig. p. 128.
M. Parsons, to prove me a falsificator, leaving the Author Holinshed, put
"in his place M. Fox, and concludes against me, that The Minister lies
openly. He now bestirreth himself in this case.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THough the History of Holinshed does relate the pretense of Wiat Reckon. pa.
252.
to have been against the Queens marriage, concealing and dissembling the
point of Religion in that place (which elsewhere he confesses, as after shall
be seen) yet John Fox, a more ancient and authentical Historiographer then
he, does plainly set down, that together with the pretense of marriage, the
cause of Religion was also pretended, etc. And it cannot be presumed, but that
M. Morton had seen and read this, yet durst affirm, that there was no mention
of Religion at all in Wiats pretense: Which is the first lie.

The Reueiwe.
36. Do you see the falsehood of this Reckoner? he is charged to have put upon
me the testimony of M. Fox, as though I had cyted it contrary to his meaning,
which I did not indeed so much as mention: And now at length perceiving his own
fraud to be laid open, whereunto he cannot answer one word, he does only
endeavor to bring me into his own predicament of falsifying by another trick,
so, as if in reckoning M. Parsons not able to deny his former falsehood, does
conceal it.
he meant to play some stoppage of debt. But I asked M. Parsons why he did so
faithlesly and maliciously change Holinshed into Fox? he answers just
nothing: This is Soberly and quietly Reckoned. Thus much for my charge against
him. Let us hear what he has now against me.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
AND the same M. Fox also shows, that in the Oration of Q. Reckon. p. 252.
Mary, that their pretense of marriage seemed to be but a Spanish Cloak, to
cover their pretended purpose against Religion. And this testimony of M. Fox
must needs have been known to M. Morton, and consequently here is a second
lie.

The Reuiew.
37. Holinshed is a professed Historian, and writ a large and determinate
Story of all memorable things, which were done in the days of Q. Mary, and
other Kings of England after her reign: but the subject and matter of the
Acts and Monuments written by M. Fox, is the passions and Martyrdomes of the
faithful, both of ancient and latter times, not only in England, but also in
other Countries; as for other matters of History, he relates them but obiter,
not professedly, nor yet so copiously, as Holinshed has done. Wherefore it is
as great indiscretion in M. Parsons to challenge me to neglect His indiscretion.
Holinshed, and in a point of History to take my Certificate from M. Fox, whom
then I had not; presuming that I must needs have seen and read that sentence
in him, to draw me thereby into suspicion of a wilful falsehood: wherein he
has given us the perfect length of his own foot, because mala His
precipitate jealousy.
men's, malus animus, that is, according to the English Proverb, As a man uses
himself, so he museth and judges of others. For could any but a selfe-guilty
mind censure another so peremptorily, that he must needs have seen a book,
which might have bin wanting, and was not (as I have showed) so needful to be
seen? But I leave this to M. Parsons more sober consideration: wherein it may
be, he will be contented to think that he has done me an injury. What yet
more?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Whereas he says that no Minister of the Gospel was brought Reckon cap. 4. 9
page 253.
in question, as a Commotioner in that cause, it is both false in it self, and
cautelously set down, for it being notorious that al Protestants in England
did concur in the rebellion of the D. of Northumberland, who can doubt but that
in the second also of Wiat they had their hearts there, although not so fully
their hands. And that Cranmer and Ridley with others, were not brought into
public judgment for trial, the same Master Saunders yields a reason, for
that Q Mary being a zealous Catholic would have them rather called in
question for heresy, which is treason against God, then for conspiracy or
commotion, which was a treason against her person.

The Reueiwe.
38. In the Part. 2. p. 101.
Full Satisfaction you have bin answered, concerning Mr. Cranmer, Ridley, and
others, that they could not be challenged of any crime of treason, Full
satisfact. ibid.
where of you might not as well make the State parties, which accorded unto the
testament of K. Edward 6. in the behalf of Lady Jane, as their own Historian
Thuan. Tom. 1. 1. 9. An. 1553. page 954.
Thuanus does report: what better reason can there be for their discharge, then
is this confession, to wit, that they were not called in question of Treason in
the days of Q. Mary? As for the Answer made by Saunders, it is nothing but
his unseasonable figment: For where was it ever heard, that any State put a man
to death for heresy, whom they might cut off for treason? For although M.
Sanders odd evasion, about Heresy and Treason.
heresy be a more heinous crime, yet the Heretic recanting is received
again into favor: but a Traitor notwithstanding his repentance, is to give
satisfaction of the law, by suffering death. The Church deals as a Mother,
the law as a Judge. Neither can the former Answer consist with Christian
policy: for if a man be both a Traitor and an Heretic, it would be less
prejudicial unto Religion, to execute him for Treason, then for his opinion,
because even the ashes of but one burnt for an Heretic, does breed some
worms of like nature. Finally, common wit and understanding of a man will
teach him, that whosoever is both guilty of heresy and Treason, he should be
accused and convicted of them both, that by the heynousnesse of his Treason,
his Heresy might seem M. Parsons poor shift.
more odious. By this we see unto what poor and miserable shift M. Parsons is
brought, which he knew he must either have used, or else have marred his whole
Reckoning.

39. He furthermore adds, that he has since Reckon. ibid.
Took the pains to search Holinshed more diligently, and has found that he
does more expressly affirm, that the Commons and many of the Nobility conspired
to raise war both for the marriage, and for the cause of Religion. He may the
more easily excuse me, if I did not so readily meet with that, which cost him
so diligent pains to find out; which I had less cause to inquire into,
seeing that in the large Oration of Q. Mary against Sir Thomas Wiat, reported
by Holinshed, there is no such scruple, concerning Religion, to be found, which
is all that I undertook then to avouch. For as for Wiats intention, how good
soever it might seem to be, I did not justify it, because (as I then said)
Lawful things must be performed by lawful means: signifying that his taking
up of arms against the Queen, could not be warranted by presumption of any
good intent. We proceed to our other accounts: of the Three charges next
following M. Parsons gives us a brief note.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IN sign that M. Mortons matter now grows barren, in obiecting of Reckon.
cap. 4.. 10. page 260.
wilful falsities against me, he begins to huddle up diverse of them
together, but of so small moment, and so fully answered, and confuted before,
as it is evident he seeks but some show of number to help himself for some
ostentation.

The Reueiwe.
40. It was not barrenness, but the briefnesse of a Preamble, which occasioned
me to remit other your falsities unto a further discovery, as before we end
our Reckoning, will abundantly appear. For this present we are now to recall
those charges, which you have handled in your first Chapter, which I promised
(for one more orderly paslage) to reduce unto their proper places, and
therefore I now begin with the Answer unto the next charge.

SECT. X.
The tenth charge, concerning the text of Esaias 29.
41. I Set down for the poesy of my Preamble, the text of Esaias, 29. 9. Ye are
blind, and make others blind. This Preamb. p. 23. etc.
M. Parsons so canuased, as intimating (as I said) that I had forged a Text of
Scripture; and that the words were by me "falsely alleged, which I proved in
him to be a slanderous and unconscionable taxation. He is to Reckon unto me
for this also.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, concerning a Text of Scripture.
I Do not say that he has forged a Text, but that the sentence of his
Reckon. p. 43.
Poesy against Catholics, pretended to be taken out of this place of Esaias,
29. 9. is falsely alleged, corrupted and mangled, the same not being found
there either in words or sense.

The Reuiew, noting Mr. Parsons his apparent falsehood.
42. What call you forgerie M. Parsons? Is not the corrupting M. Parson forgeth
an excuse apparently false.
of a Writ, so that it be not the same either in word or sense, plain forgery?
or can there be any greater then is the corruption of holy writ? Therefore
the action which you laid, is an action of forgerie. But whom did you note to
be the corrupter? your own words are these: Mitig. pa: 88. and in his Rec.
kon. pa. 42.
I cannot well pretermit, for ending of this Chapter, one little note more of
rare singularity in this man (namely, T. M.) above others, which I scarce ever
have observed in any one of his fellows, and this it is, that the very first
words of Scripture, illeadged by him in the first page of his book, for the
poesy of his Pamphlet, are falsely alleged, corrupted, and mangled, though
they contain but one only verse of Esaias the Prophet: and then may you imagine
what liberty he will take to himself afterward, throughout his whole
Discourse. Adding much more bitterness of Calumniation. But this is sufficient
to show, that I have been thus bedawbed with his vile and false imputations of
rare singularity above all my fellows, and that for falsifying and corrupting
a Text of Scripture: And yet does not this honest man blush to tell us that
he had not accused me of forging a Text of Scripture; nor is he ashamed to
note me of rare singularity above all my fellows: for alleging this
translation of the Text, which stands so in our English Bible, common unto
me, with all my fellows. This last point calls for a better Reckoning.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Neither did I see, or look for the English translation. Reckon. quo supra.


The Reuiew.
43. Does this dealing agree with that property of an honest man, whom you
would seem to be, Not to look the common English translation, which might
have freed me Mr. P. bent to slander his adversary.
from the slander of so rare singularity in corrupting a Text, if yet there
had been in it any corruption? As this does but a little lessen your fraud, so
does it much aggrauate your malice, which was bent to make me obnoxious above
all my fellows. I have not done with you yet, for we must Reckon for a third
falsehood of yours, where you affirm that the sense of the Text is so
notoriously corrupted.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, concerning the sense of the Text.
I Said that the 9. verse of Esaias 29. is falsely alleged, corrupted and
mangled, Recko. p 43. n. 67
the same being not found there, either in words or sense. Ibid. p. 44. n. 69
And now, for your conuincement in this place, I mean to stand upon the
original Texts themselves, and the verse by you alleged, to see whether your
poesy against us may be framed thereof. First then the Hebrew has it thus, as
both Pagninus, Vatablus, and others do set it down: Be astonished and wonder,
shut up your eyes, and let them be shut, be ye drunk, but not with wine, do
you recle, but not with Sisera. Or otherwise: They have shouted and cried, are
drunk, but not with wine. And the Greek Septuagint thus: Doc you faint, etc.

The Reueiwe.
44. Belike M. Parsons being angric with himself, for his M. Parsons pertinacy
in his error.
former boldness with the Hebrew Text, meant now to redouble his own
disgrace upon himself, by saying that Pagnine, Vat ablus, and others (who
follow the Hebrew) have not anything agreeable to our English Translation, [ Ye
are blind and make men blind,] either in word or sense. For he could not but
remember, that I Preamb. p. 14.
alleged, for defense of the English, the words of Pagnine, printed Anno
1528. reading the same verse thus: Excaecati sunt, and alios excaecauerunt,
that is, They are blind, and have blinded others. I cited also their own
Doctor Hector Pintus upon the same verse, who shows that in the Hebrew it is
read thus: Your Priests shall be blind, and make others blind: Besides
Vatablus himself, who reads the Text thus: Be ye astonished and wonder,
Oblinite vobismetipsis oculos, that is, Daube up your eyes. And in his
Annotations upon the same words, he paraphraseth thus; They have blinded
themselves, and made others blind. So that (for we are to deal only with the
Hebrew text, which differs not in sense either from the Greek or Latinc) our
English is hereby sufficiently confirmed.

45. Therefore M. Parsons in the vp-shot of this Reckoning is become chargable
for three falsehoods; the first is his former false accusation, in challenging
me of corrupting a Text of Scripture: the second is his now-denying that he
meant to note me for forging a Text: the third, by urging the English His
threefold falsity.
Translation, as being altogether different from the Hebrew in sense, which, by
the judgment of their own Hebritians, is very consonant. And thus our
Conscionable Reckoner forsooth, who would seem not to be guilty of Three
falsehoods thoroughout all his books, is often displaid to be guilty of Three in
one Section.

SECT. XI.
The eleauenth Charge, concerning Carerius.
46. WHether M. Parsons did justly Preamb. pa. 15
charge me with altering of the Title of a Book of Carerius de "Potestate Romans
Pontificis; and with changing of vere into vere?

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NOw M. Morton will clear himself, and produces to this purpose Reckon. page
47.
an other Edition, Printed at Colen, that has these points as he cites them.
Which Edition, though I have not seen, nor heard off before, yet do I think
it meet to give credit unto his affirmation, nor will I do him that injury
as to doubt thereof, especially for so much as he says that he has showed
the same to many friends of his, naming also the year and form in which it
was Printed, all which being granted, and that in this latter Colen Impression,
the Addition of (...) Haereticos, etc. may have been added, which was not in
mine, yet does this infer nothing against me, nor my charity.

The Reuiewe.
47. Except M. Parsons first prove himself to be of better credit, then
either I have reason to presume of, or his own fellow See above, lib. 1. cap.
1. etc.
Priest will acknowledge, who has charged him with loose Equiuocating, lying,
and cogging, I shall not greatly desire his credence. It may be, that he has
seen some Colen Edition, clearing me of his former imputation of M. Parsons
his rash and peremptory Assertion.
falsehood, and that afterward he believed his own eyes, and became ashamed of
his former rash presumption, to say so omnisciently that, There is but one
Edition of Carerius, and thereupon has he been moved to use more sobriety
in censuring of Titles and terms. But what will he say further unto the
matter it self?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, for a Grammatical quiddity.
But now for the second point objected of vere, for vero, though M. Morton
Reckon. page 47. number. 74.
do allege in like manner for his excuse, the authority or rather the error
of his Colen Edition, yet cannot he so easily discharge himself thereof, for
that the very contexture of speech must needs argue to his conscience, that it
should be vero and not vere, for that otherwise their should have been no apt
sense, nor any coniunctiue Particle, to connect the testimony of Celsus
Mancinus to the former. The great letter C. also in the beginning of Celsus (if
this be not in like manner altered in M. Mortons Edition from the original)
must needs have showed unto him, that it was no Nowne Adjective, but a proper
name of a man, and consequently must be joined with vere, and not with vere.

The Reuiew.
48. Good M. Parsons, if I should say I were ashamed of your ignorance, you
would say that I spoke it in choler: Therefore I will but only propound unto
you your error, and then will you (I think) be ashamed of your self. You
have said that Celsus being no Nowne Adjective, but a proper name of a man,
could not be joined with vere. But I do contrarily affirm that there is no
proper name, which does both betoken a man's person, and also signify some
property M. Parsons learnedly bewrays his want of learning in a Grammatical
quidditie.
and quality agreeable unto that name, but it may be used both Substantiuely
and Adiectiuely with vere, as Celsus was, which was the proper name of
Mancinus, and Adiectiuely signifies Lofty.

49. For you know that Pius signifies godly, and it was the name of many of
your Popes: If I should say of your Pope Pius Secundus, iam audiamus Pontificem
vere Pium, would you say that I had offended against my Grammar? Nay, is not
every such citation a singular elegancie of speech? Lend your ear (amongst
infinite examples of this kind) to your own Doctor Barkley, who speaking of S.
Ambrose, Barclaius contra Monarchom. li. 3. ca. 5. p1. 137
says; O Dominum Antistitem vere Ambrosium, cuius ex dictis (...) tanquam ex
sacro quodam penario, tam suauem capimus Ambrosiam, That is: O that Prelate,
truly Ambrose, from whose writings and works, as out of an holy Storehouse,
we may take the sweet Ambrosia of Evangelical truth, so he. M. Parsons, I
think, will not compare with Barkley in Grammar learning, and though he
should, it would be but according to the proverb, Sus Mineruam. This word,
Jacob, which signifies a supplanter, was the proper name of a Patriarch, the
younger Son of Isaac, unto whom his brother Esau spoke, saying: Was he not
truly called Jacob, for he has supplanted me twice? I now demand, if Esau
had said unto him, behold one truly Jacob, would M. Parsons his learning,
Gene. 27. 36.
license him to condemn that speech of incongruitie? Although I have M.
Parsons now at this advantage, yet will I not (in requital of his own
scurrilitie, about the Syllogism) send him unto the School again to learn
his Grammar, but rather hold it sufficient to have thus admonished him hereof.

SECT. XII.
The twelueth Charge, concerning Doleman, alias Parsons.
50. THe inquiry is, Pseamb. pa. 22
whether Doleman, alias Parsons held it to be a damnable sin for any of his
Catholics to suffer any Protestant Prince to succeed in the Crown. This is
your own case, M. Parsons, and it will therefore concern you much to make up a
straight Reckoning, if you will free your intention from Treason. Your Answer
in your Mitig. cap. 2. page 72.
Mitigation was this. Is there any word peculiar of a Protestant Prince, or of
his successor? Nay, does not the text speak plainly of making a King where
none is, etc. How then can this malicious cauelling Minister, etc. This you
spoke in your less temperate mood: but since I have Preamb. pa. 23
told you thatthe material subject of that Book, was the Succession to the
Crown of England, after the decease of Queen ELIZABETH, where you spoke
expressly of an Heir apparent, and in particular and by name took exception
against our now Gracious Sovereign King JAMES, to debar him from the
inheritance of Great Britain: I must expect of you a more solemn account.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HIs last words ( Of damnable sinner) were spoken as well against Catholics,
Reckon. p. 1. 51. number. 82 and p. 1. 263. where he calls this the eleventh.
as Protestants, and meant more principally of Election, then of Succession.

The Reueiwe.
51. Mr. Parsons in his Mitigation would not be known to have meant any more
then of making a King by Election: Now he is brought to confess that he
understood it (although M. Parsons relenteth somewhat from his former Tenet.
less Principally) of Succession also. Which I confess is a more Sober
Reckoning. Now yet whereas there is as good a right for an heir to succeed in
the Crown, as there is for a King to possess it, M. Parsons reason of not
making or admitting the right heir apparent (who, by the laws of England, is
King immediately after his Predecessor has yielded up his last breath) did
necessarily infer, that he meant indeed by not making to mar a King, which
I proved by a Syllcgisme, which did sufficiently manifest his meaning. viz.

Treamb. pa. 24
Mayor. Every man is a damnable Sinner, who admits any to the Crown, whom
he thinks faulty in Religion:

Minor. But every Romish Catholic, (in the opinion of Mast. Parsons) thinks
all Protestant Princes faulty in Religion:

Ergo. Every Romish Catholic, who admits a Protestant to succeed in the
Crown, is (in the opinion of M. Parsons) a damnable Sinner.

Let us, if you please, Reckon likewise for this.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALl this Syllogism, I say, is as well verified of Protestants as Catholics,
Reckon. (...). 54.
and consequently the force of this Argument, concludes nothing at all against
us, more then against himself and his. For as for the Mayor proposition, no
Protestant of sense, I think, but will grant, that it is a damnable sin to
admit any Prince, if it lie in his hand to prefer or hinder, whom he thinks
to be faulty in Religion, for that otherwise we must say that Protestants
have no Conscience concerning Religion, if they will advance wittingly any one,
that will in their opinion destroy the same. And then I make the Minor, But
every true Protestant thinks Romish Catholics faulty in Religion: Ergo,
every true Protestant that admits a Catholic Prince to succeed in the
Crown, is a damnable sinner. And then what shall we say of the Dolphine of
France, when he comes to years to succeed in that Crown, after the death
of the king his Father? Will the Protestants receive him, or no?

The Reueiwe.
52. The Mayor was indeed propounded generally, but according to the evident
scope of that book of Dolman, it was intended only against Protestants: for
their Dolman (alias Mr. Parsons) himself, being of the Roman Religion, did
profess it to be a damnabe^ sin to admit of King James, and so of other
Protestant Princes, notwithstanding the right of their inheritance, to succeed
in the Crown, which is all that I have affirmed of Dolman, for the which
notwithstanding he has made so loud and a lewd clamor, saying How is this
fellow to be trusted in these his Assertions, etc. But yet now grants in
effect my former Assertion.

53. True it is, that in electing a King a man is bound in conscience to use
his liberty for the good of religion: but religion Difference between
Election and Succession.
it self teaches us that in admitting a Successor, (who according to the
laws of that Kingdom has a right unto the Crown) the liberty of election
cease, and the necessity of admittance (by the doctrine of Protestants) is
laid upon us, be the party never so adverse unto us in faith; as it appeared
in their admittance of the now King of France, even when he revolted from their
Religion, whom the Romanists would not admit, whilst that he was a Protcstant
in profession. And this difference of comparison, between Protestants and
Romanistes, will continue until the Romanistes have taken out this Lesson of
Primitive and Catholic Doctrine, to wit; Diversity of Religion does not
change the natural right of Inheritance, which Rule prevailed in the mostpure
times, (as Barkley their own Barckley in two Books, the one Contra
Monarchomakos The second, De potestate Pa. p. e, handles this at full, and
concludes expressly against the Doctrine of the Jesuits. See also the
confession of others, Full satisfact. part. 3. cap. 8 etc.
Doctor prooneth) even when Christians were winnowed and purged with
persecution, at what time the Apostle exhorted them, saying, Romans 13.
Let every Soul be Subject unto the higher powers. And Even then (says your
Cunerus,) when the Martyrs, by reason of their multitude, were able to conspire
against their Persecutors, yet chose they rather to suffer for the obedience
and honor, which they were commanded to perform unto Kings, then to resist,
if it happned that they could not save themselves by flying. This was the true
victory of Christians. There is one thing more which you will have me Reckon
for.

M. PARSONS Reckoning, in Charging his Adversary.
ANd to prove this to be an exaggeration, That all Priests do utterly
Reckon. page 51.
(...) the Succession in all Protestant Princes, I alleged contrary examples
in all the Protestant Princes, that ever succeeded in England since the
beginning of the world, who are known to be but three in number, King Edward,
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, who were admitted both by Priests and
Laymen: Ergo, all Priests do not utterly abolish all Succession, in all
Protestant Princes, etc. And consequently, some moderation must be granted on
our side, against this odious exaggeration.

A Reuiewe, showing how M. Parsons is fettered in his own Assertions.
54. Is this an honest kind of Reckoning, to tell what you alleged and to
conceal what I replied? namely, that it is a silly sophistry for you, in a
question of right, to oppose for His crafty concealment.
your discharge only a matter of fact, which is no better reasoning then to say
that certain Robbers were honest and quiet Subjects, because they suffered
three stronger men A Simile.
then themselves to pass securely on the way: For you know M. Parsons, that
your not resisting, where you want force, is done with that reservation (as
your Doctors Preamb.
have taught) Vntiil there be sufficient firce to resist. Otherwise tell me, I
pray you, when you object that three Protestant Princes were admitted
peaceably, How is it (which you could not deny) that Mitig. page 77. number. (...)
Henry King of Navarre was resisted, lest that coming to the Crown of France
in that disposition, wherein he was presumed to be, (namely a Protestant) he
should attempt the change of Religion in that great Kingdom? Here the case of
Religion (we see) was the same in K. Edward of England, and King Henry of
France, and yet behold, resisting the one, and not resting the other: Can you
imagine any other reason of this difference, but the having and not having of
Power to resist? Therefore in this Reckoning you have been wisely crafty, by
concealing an Objection, which you could not satisfy.

55. I doubt I shall but trouble you in asking you another Question, but you
must pardon me, for the cause it self does challenge thus much. The three
Protestant Princes, who were (as you say) so peaceably admitted to the Crown,
were they admitted voluntarily on your part, or no? If they were admitted
voluntarily, then (by your own former Doctrine, M. A Dilemma.
Parsons) all your Catholics were damnable sinners, who admitted any to the
Crown, whom they thought to be of a faulty Religion: If they were not
voluntarily admitted, then are you See above.
a fraudulent AEquiuocator, in answering that They were admitted peaceably,
(reserving, as it may seem, in your mind) because our Catholics had no
power to resist. We draw to a conclusion.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHerefore to come to knit up this Reckoning briefly with Reckon. page 53.
M. Morton, we see first that he has not been able exactly to verify any one
of his two former propositions out of his own Syllogism, concerning Dolemans
Assertion, but that he has used exaggeration and calumniation in them both,
and that whatsoever he has urged never so boldly to incite his Majesty
against us, may with much more reason and force of argument, be retorted
against himself and his.

The Reuiew, confuting M. Parsons, from the judgment of his fellow Priest.
56. I have bin earnestly and sharply censured by M. Parsons as one false,
calumnious, and malicious, because I noted his book, which he named Dolman, to
be a Treatise, very seditious and rebellious, and (as though he, goodman, had
meant nothing but well therein) he durst in his Mitigation plead for his
Dolman, and now again forbeareth not to revive the justification of that book
in this his new Reckoning; Albeit he could not be ignorant of the judgment,
which one Romish Priest with the consent of many more had passed upon him:
Quodlib. p. 107 and again, page 310.
Parsons his books (says he) were seditious, as his Philopater, speaking most
rebelliously against her Majesty, and the whole State and Nobles of this land;
his Dolman intituling most traitorously the Spanish Infanta to the M. Parsons
false and treasonable dealing, discovered by his own fellow.
English Crown. Thus we see his will was extremely Traiterous.

57. The same Author does furthermore display a fine piece of witt-craft,
which M. Parsons uses to practice. Quodli. p. 286.
In the most of Father Parsons seditious books, which he has published, (says
the same Priest) he has either concealed his name, or given the^ such a name,
as pleased him to devise: and one of his said books being set out by him under
the name of M. Dolman: Now that many exceptions are taken against it, he
(Goodman) was M. Parsons can deny his own writing.
not the Author of it, his name is not Dolman, and gladly would he shift and
wash his hands of it, but all the water betwixt this and Rome will not serve
his turn so to do, although by the common opinion of the Jesuits, he may by
lying and Equiuocating make a fair show. So their Priest. And now I ofter the
matter to our indifferent Readers to judge, whether Mr. Parsons, being thus
blazoned by their own Priest, as a man notably Seditious (even in their book
called Dolman) and a lying Equiuocator, may be thought to have been either in
answering and quallifying of the objected rebellious position, a just
Mitigator; or else in this book a conscionable Reckoner in charging me with
falsehood.

SECT. XIII.
The thirteenth charge, against Mr. Parsons; concerning Pope Gregory 7. alias
Hildebrand, the first Pope that deposed an Emperor, from the testimony of Otto
Frisingensis.
58. I Prcamb. p. 27.
Said in the Text that Gregory the seventh was the first Pope, who dcpriued any
Emperor of his regiment, as says your Otto Frisingensis: Adding in the
Margent, Vt refirt Tolossanus, that is, According as he is alleged by
Tolossanus. Mr. Parsons supposing that the testimony of Otto Frisingensis is
alleged contrary to his meaning,

notes me for the falsificator, whereas not I, but their own Romish Doctor
Tolossanus was the reporter of the testimony of Frisingensis. I would only
know whether it were not a malicious trick in M. Parsons to charge me with the
error (if yet it were an error) of my Author Tolossanus?

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, in the discharge of himself.
IN the English Text, which was written for the deceiving of the Englishcommon
Reckon. pa. 61.
reader, was nothing laid at al of Tolossan', but thus in disgrace of Pope
Gregory the seventh. I read and read again (says your Otto Prisingensis) and
I find that Pope Gregory the seventh called Hildebrand in the year 1060. was
the first Pope that ever deprived any Emperor of his Regiment. Only in the
margent he sets down in Latin the words of Frisingensis, with cyting the
book and Chapter, and then adds, Ut (...) Tolossanus lib. 26.

The Reueiwe.
59. That is to say in plain English, that not I, but Tolossanus M Parsons, a
plain falsifier.
cyted Frisingensis contrary to his meaning: And so is Mr. Parsons found to
have falsified in accusing me offalshood. And now consider (good Reader, I pray
thee) that he has no color for the excuse of his former slander and error,
but to say that the reported Author Frisingensis was in the text, to deceive
the English Reader, and that Tolossanus the reporter was set down in Latin in
the margent: which any man of Sobriety would be ashamed to allege, for were
not Frisingensis and Tolossanus both Latin Authors, and therefore
indifferently His childish excuse.
known and unknown to the English Reader? How then can this excuse Mr.
Parsons fraudulency, for he understood that these Latin words, which were set
down in the margent, viz. Vtrefert Tolossanus, do signify (being Englished)
As Tolossanus reports: so that the very childishness of this excuse of his
false dealing, does more fully bewray both his folly and falsehood.

60. As for me, I could not think it necessary to seek for Frisingensis, when
I had at hand so good a Reporter, as is their own Doctor Tolossanus: and yet
when al is said, Frising Chron. lib. 6. cap. 35.
Frisingensis says, that that Pope Gregory the seventh was the first who
either excommunicated or deposed an Emperor.

Mast. Parsons charge against me, about the same matter.
61. In the second part I am chargeable to answer Mast. Parsons, who asks,
that seeing Tolossanus said that Gregory the seventh was the first who
excommunicated, and deprived an Emperor of his Regiment, why I alleged the
word Deprived only, and left out Excommunicated? I readily Preamb. quo supra.
answered that it was because the question ( Satisfact. 3. c. 11.) was only
concerning Emperors and kings, who had been deposed from their gouernements
by Popes, and not, who had been excommunicated: And for so answering am called
to a new Reckoning.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
YEa Sit, think you to escape so? and yet know that deposition of Princes is
an effect of Excommunication, and can never happen Reckon. p. 64.
by Ecclesiastical authority, but where Excommunication is gone before?

The Reueiwe.
62. Yes Sir, I may lawfully answer So. For although Excommunication go
before deposition and Eradication, yet was His absurd reasoning.
it lawful for me to entreat of Deposition, without mentioning any precedent
Excommunication. For if being asked how A Simile.
many thieves were hanged at Tiburne the last week, I had truly answered
five; forthwith some captious Constable should quarrel with me, saying, Yea
Sir, dare you say so? will you tell us that any were hanged, without mentioning
that first they were condemned, for condemnation goes before execution? Even
so childishly has Mast. Parsons cauilled in earnest, who still holds on his
pace.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
AND I would ask M. Morton in good earnest out of his Divinity, Reckon. p. 64.
when a Christian Prince is lawfully Excommunicated, and shut out from all
society of Christian communion, and he persist impenitent, how can he be head
of a Christian Commonwealth, for so much as he is no member, nor has any
place, or part at all in the whole body, the head-ship being the chief part of
all others?

A Reuiew, discovering the rebellious humor of Mr. Parsons.
63. If Mastr. Parsons had not asked me in earnest, I might have taken him to
have been but in jest: but now by this his M. Parsons will needs behead a
King, whom he accounts an Heretic.
serious demand, our Christian Reader will easily perceive, that he has cast
Divinity in a new mould: for a King, by his doctrine, cannot be Excommunicated,
but forthwith he must as it were be be-headed, and removed from his Kingdom:
we now have found out the whole portrayture of M. Parsons body by his finger,
which writes and teachethth; at A King persisting A necessary observation,
concerning Excommunication and Eradication.
in Excommunication may be no more a King among Christians. No King, or
Queen, or Prince, or Counselor, or Judge, or Magistrate, being
excommunicate, may, by Mast. Parsons censure, have any communion among
Christians, but must be rooted out. Behold our Romish Mitigator! Behold our
Sober Reckoner! Does not this smell strongly of fire and Gunpowder, whenever
opportunity shall serve for the performance of such their exploits?

64. But to answer directly to the question, moved by M. Parsons, not from his
own doubt, but for his Readers delusion; because otherwise he could not be
ignorant, that their Archpriest M. Blackwell had answered that point to the
full, M. Blackwell exam. page 41. from Medina in prima^ secunde p. 513. q. 96
art. 4 M. Parsons fully confuted by his fellows.
showing first out of Soto, from Medina, that Excommunication is not a
privation of any proper good, which the transgresser does possess, but of the
common good, which he was to receme from the Church, as namely, the spiritual
communion with them, and the participation of Sacraments.

65. Secondly he alleges Ludouicus Richeome, a Jesuit, saying that Ludouic.
Apolog. p. 175.
Excommunication is not thundered against Princes, that they should be removed
out of their Dominions, or that the raines should be loosed unto subjects, or
they be freed from the Oath of fidelity.

66. Thirdly, he adioyneth the testimony of Aquinas, saying Aquin secunda
secundae. q. 11. art. 3.
Aliud est Excommunicatio, and aliud Eradicatio; Which, ( says M. Bl.) is set
down in the Canon law of an Epistle of Pope Vrbane, thus: Liquido, etc. that
is, It does plainly appear that Excommunication is one thing, and eradication
is another, for he which is excommunicate, as the Apostle says, to this end is
excommunicated, that his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord, for
Excommunication is a correction and no extirpation.

67. Finally, the holy Scripture, speaking of the Excommunicate, says: Matthew.
18. 17.
Let him be unto thee as a Publicane and an Ethnicke. I demand then, was there
no Magistracy acknowledged in Ethnickes, by Christians in the days of the
Emperor Julian the Apostata? or shall not Christian children or wives
acknowledge natural duty unto their Parents and husbands, as unto their
Heads, if they being excommunicate, shall prove contumacious? Grace does not
extinguish nature, but perfect it. And this may briefly serve for an Answer
unto your irrelegious and rebellious demand, which has been exactly confuted
by your own Doctors.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ANd Tolossanus here alleged by Mr. Morton produces in another Reck. p. 64
and 65
example both of Excommunication and of deposition above an hundred years
before this of Frisingensis, saying, Antea quidem Gregorius tertius etc. Before
this, Gregory the third being made Tolos. de rep. l. 6. c. 13. n. 20.
Pope upon the year 759 did deprive Leo the third Emperor of Constantinople,
both of his Empire, and the communion of Christians, for that he had cast holy
Images out of the Church, and defaced them, and held a wicked opinion against
the blessed Trinity. And that Tolossanus in this says truth, is testified also
by Zonaras a Greek Historiographer in the life of the said Emperor Leo
Jsauricus.

The Reueiwe.
68. Tolossanus in another book reports this, and Zonaras testifies this,
Ergo, (by Mr. Parsons his consequence) it must be True: which argues his own
inconsideration and rashness, because first the matter is not so true, but
that their own Barclay de potestate Papae cap. 40.
Barkley durst judge it incredible: and secondly their witness Zonaras seems
to their Baron Ano. 726. number. 26. M. Parsons negligence in Story.
Baronius to be so insufficient, in reporting the behavior of this Pope
Gregory toward the Emperor Leo, that he rejects him as a man Ignorant of
the affairs of the Latin Church; and one, who in Malice against the Church of
Rome, does object that the Pope was the cause of the rent of the Empire in the
West. Thus far Card. Baronius: which shows how little we are to regard M.
Parsons his judgment, who respects not so much how rightly, as how readily
he may shape us an Answer. And that Gregory the seventh called Hildebrand,
was the first Pope, who set the Emperors at such defiance, it will now further
appear.

SECT. XIIII.
An Inquiry into the judgment of Espencaeus, concerning the case of Pope
Hildebrand.
69. THE last point, Preamb. p. 29.
which is to be inquired into, is, whether the Author Espencaeus did not
accord unto the same judgment concerning Gregory the seventh (who, to yield
unto M. Parsons computation, was Pope about the year 1066.) to think that he
was the first Pope that did depose an Emperor.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, obiecting fraud unto his Adversary.
ESpencaeus here is handled injuriously and fraudulently, for that Reckon. page
66. and 67. Espen. l. 2 Digress in Ep. ad Timoth
these words against the Pope, are not the words of Espencaeus himself, but
related of him out of an angry and paffionate Epistle, written by certain
Schismatic Priests of Liege, that were commanded by Pope Paschalis to be
chastised by Robert Earl of Flanders, for their rebellious behauior, in the
year 1102. which Priests, together with Henry the Schismatic Bishopp, wrote
a passionate inuectiue against this act and Commission of Pope Paschalis,
inueighing against Pope Hildebrand (who was not long before deceased) for the
like Reckon. p. 67. and in Espen. cap. 6. p. 274. Edit. Paris 1561.
cause, All which M. Morton concealeth, and cyteth the words of Espencaeus
himself. Your Bshop Espen. (says he) (...) of Hildebrand, etc. which he could
not but know to be false, if he read the book and place by himself cyted, for
that Espen. does not only in the beginning of his citation use this sentence,
Extat in secundo Tomo Conciliorum Edit. Colon. Cleri Leodiensis ad Pascalem 2.
Quaerimonia; There is extant in the second Tome of Councels, a complaint of the
clergy of Liege to Pope (...) 2. But in the end also of al his speech, which
contains a long Discourse, he concludes thus, Hactenus Leodiensium and verba
and sensa, etc. And presently for himself says, that he will not meddle with
the Controversy of fighting between Popes and Emperors. Reckon. ibid.
Now for M. Morton to come and avouch this as affirmed by Espencaeus, whereas
he must needs know that he says it not, but relates it only out of others.
without approouing the same, is to add preuarication unto preuarication, and
never to make an end of wilful lying.

The Reueiwe.
70. Let me entreat your patience, Mr. Parsons, but to hear my answer, and
then I doubt not but you will wax more calm and sober, and consequently a
far fitter Reckonner, to see more clearly, whether of us is the true liar.

71. You have said that Espencaeus did but only relate it, and not approve of
it. You may not now fetch skippes as you use to do, to escape from your own
sayings: Hear now the words of Espencaeus in the very same place, which M.
Parsons has cyted. M. Parsons palpable untruth.
Espencaeus: He, speaking of the same Epistle of the Clergymen of Liege,
begins thus: Querimonia grauitatis and subiectionis plena, that is, A
complaint (says Espencaeus) full of gravity and of subjection. Neither could
you be ignorant of these words, for they go immediately before the words
which you have mentioned out of Espencaeus. Has he then only related it
(good Sir,) has he not also commended it?

72. Espencaeus proceeds to show the cause of the displeasure of Pope
Paschalis against them. Quod, etc. That is, Because they were obedient unto
their Bishop Henry, who stuck unto the Emperor. In the end, I forbear (says
Espencaeus) to use any discourse about the temporal contentions, which fell
between the Popedom and the State imperial from that time, (Mark, I pray
you, when) even after a thousand and an hundred years after Christ. He meant
therefore to note his beginning of the Papali turbulency to have been at that
time. May not now M. Parsons perceive how bold he has been with himself, to
affirm that Espencaeus did not approve the Epistle of those Priests, but
seemed rather to hold them Schismatic? And how to this end he quoted the
Author, book, digression, page, place, and time of impression, as though he
had studied to set himself upon a public Stage of reproach for his open
leesing? Which that my Reader may know to be spoken of me in true sobriety, I
propound further unto him the express judgment of the same Espencaeus out of
two places of his works.

73. The first place is in the Page 273. of his book above cyted.
page going immediately before, where comparing the more ancient times of the
Church with the latter, concerning the Clergies disposition to war-fare in
their own persons, says thus: Et tales (...) fuerunt in (...) Deipopulo
Sacerdotum inermium and pacificoru^ erga seculi Dominos fideles and infideles,
mites and barbaros victoria nonminus gloriosae qua^ incruentae, etc. j. e. such
indeed were the victories of unarmed and peaceable Priests among both sort of
people (namely of the old and new Testament) toward their temporal Lords,
whether they were faithful, or Infidels, gentle or barbarous: Which their
victories were no less glorious, then unbloody: Namely, achieved by tears
and Prayers: But what afterward? Quibus, etc. For after that lawless
necessity had exercised not only the mind, but also the hand of the Clearg ie
to fight, it came to pass that they, with time (which corrupts all Bloody
Popes.
things) did play their part, as soon as they had adjoined unto ministerial
places secular Seigniories, and that some less peaceable Vicars of our Lord
God, did wage War not only against the Barbarous, but even against the
Princes of the same blood, sometime of the same Country, yea and of the same
faith, giving examples full of infinite scandals, and no way warrantable by any
Scriptures or Canons. And then beginning at the year 770. when Adrian and
other Popes raised War against the Sarracens and Lombards, he descended unto
Pope Vrbane the second, Who although he would not judge them to be murderers,
(speaking of Ecclesiastical men) who had killed certain Excommunicate
persons, yet did he inioyne them Penance. And at length he fasteneth upon the
foresaid Epistle of the Priests of Liege unto Paschale the second, condemning
the practice of Hildebr and, alias, Gregory the seventh, which Epistle he
commended, as we have heard. He has compared former unarmed Bishops, with the
Souldierly Romish Popes of aftertimes, and judges the ancient sort peaceable,
and the other to have carried themselves after an heathenish and slanderous
manner.

74. Therefore (M. Parsons) when you say that Espencaeus did only relate the
passion of other men against Pope Gregory: Good Sir (to return your own
Rhetoric upon you) will you stand unto this? Is it true? Is this sincere,
seeing that Espencaeus both condemns all such bloody Prelates, and approoueth
of the Epistle of those Priests against Gregory himself? Is this good
dealing? Nay is it not altogether perfidious?

75. Elsewhere the same Author Espencaeus expresses his judgment more fully,
concerning this point of Subjection, saying that Espen. Comm. in Tit. 3. 1.
Digress. 10. pa. 513. Paris. 1568.
The Apostle does teach all the faithful to be subject unto the powers,
saying, [Let every soul be subject, etc.] that is, as Chrysostom speaks,
Whether Prophet, or Apostle, or Bishop, let him be subject: And accordingly
does Euthymius, Theod. Theoph. and other Greek Fathers teach: And Saint
Bernard does collect as much out of the same sentence, [Let every soul, etc.]
When, writing unto the Archbishop of Sans, he says; Be you subject also, he
that offers to exempt you, does offer to tempt and deceive you. Thus far
Espencaeus.

The former Assertion, concerning Gregory the seventh, confirmed by the
testimonte of their own Archpriest, and others.
76. Exam. page 54.
M. Blackwel your late Archpriest, alleged to the same purpose Bish.
Vincentius (who received his testimony from Sigebert, Anno 1088.) saying (with
relation unto Gregory the seventh, and to him who succeeded next but one, to
wit, Vrbanus.) Vt pace, etc. That is, That I may speak it (says he) with the
favor of all good men, Haec sola nouit as, ne dicam haeresis; That is, This
mere novelty, that I say not Heresy, was not as yet sprung in the world,
that the Priests of him, who says unto the King [Apostata,] and who makes the
Hypocrite to Reign for the sins of the people, should teach Subjects that
they owe no subjection unto wicked Kings, that albeit they have taken an Oath
of fidelity unto such an one, yet they are not bound in Allegiance unto him,
and that such as should take part against their Kings, may not be said to be
perjured: So he. Barcla. De pot. Papae. cap. 9.
Barkley out of Otto Frisingensis defends that, There is not found any
example of deposing an Emperor of his State in any age, before Gregory the
seventh. Which made their late Pope Apologia. P. Pauli.. Videre non. page 624.
Paulus, to acknowledge no violence used by any Pope, until A thousand years
after Christ. At what time There were not wanting some (says Cardinal Cusanus
Card. Concord. Cathel. l. 3 c. 41. page 812
Cusanus) yea, even among the Cardinals, besides a Council at Rome, who
defended Henry the Emperor from the Excommunication of Hildebrand.

77. I forbear to urge the Epistles of the Priests of Liege, which M. Parsons
calls a Passionate inuectiue against Pope Paschalis; Lest it might drive the
old man into passion. Albeit, whosoever shall Read that Epistle, he shall
find the commendation of Espencaeus to be most true, who calls it A complaint
full of gravity, etc. He might further have added, and of Religious piety.
But Mr. Parsons has not yet done with Espencaeus.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
YEt Espencaeus proves by sundry examples out of Scriptures, Fathers, Reckon
page 67.
and Councels, that in some cases it is lawful for Priests to use Temporal
Arms also.

The Reueiwe.
78. It is true, and amongst others, he Jbid. page 275.
produces the example of Dudechine, a Priest, who went to War against the
Turk, with Conrade the third, and of Turpinus Bishop of Rhemes, who warred
under Charles the Great, and of Delbodus, who took Arms against the Sarracens
under Henry the Emperor. All these, in their Wars, stood with their
Emperors, none is found to have carried Arms against their Emperors:
Therefore this observation, which M. Parsons M. Parsons his military
Discipline.
uses, seems very idle, except it be to bewray his own disposition (whom
their Quodlib. p. 236
Priest has noted to be of A furious, chollericke, and passionate humor) in
desiring, like a tall Soldier, the use of a Jack and a Spear.

79. By this Reckoning it appears, that M. Parsons is become a fower-fold
Debtor, First, unto the State, by his Treasonable Doctrine, in teaching an
eradication of Princes Excommunicate: His manifold untruths.
Secondly to himself, by a wilful falsifying of the judgment of Espencaeus:
Thirdly unto me, by foysting upon me the related Historian Frisingensis,
instead of the Relator Tolossanus, with a malicious purpose to prove me a
falsifier: Lastly, to the cause it self, in not acknowledging the novelty of
their new Doctrine of Deposing of Kings and Emperors.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, in censuring of Espencaeus.
Claudius Espencaeus was a Parisian Doctor, and a Writer of small Reckon. ibid.
account, whom he calls a Bishop, but I never heard of his Bishoppricke.

The (...) showing the Eclipse of M. Parsons his judgment in this censure.
80. Mr. Parsons is fallen forth with Espencaeus, and good reason, for he saw
right well that Espencaeus does, in effect, call the Doctrine of M. Parsons
and his fellows, Rebellious: and therefore now must he be esteemed A writer,
but of small account. Wherein our Reader may observe, what small account any
man is to make of M. Parsons his judgment, who Reading Espencaeus, does so
greatly debase him, especially seeing that their own learned Authors have
affoorded him a better approbation: For Espencaeus is called by Medina (says
Cumel. Tom. 3. var. Disp. page 131. Col. 1.
Cumel) A most learned man; whom Cardinal Bellarm. l. 1. de Cleric. cap. 22.
Bellarmine himself uses to allege among your Doctors of account. And
Espenc. Epist. Dedic. ad Card. Castil. ante Sex Tract.
Espencaeus himself can further assure us, with a protestation of truth, that
when he was in possibility to be chosen a Cardinal, he thanked God that he
missed it, concluding with this Epiphonema; Quid Romae faciam, mentirinescio?
That is, What shall I do at Rome, seeing I cannot lie? Do you hear this, M.
Parsons? We know where your dwelling is, and your Book shows you in every
Page to be truly Romish: So hard a thing it is for you to tell a perfect
truth. The last Charge will require a Chapter of it self.

CHAP. XIII.
Containing the last charge of falsitie against M. Parsons, about the judgment
of Romish Writers, concerning Mental Equivocation; containing a large
Discourse hercof from their doctrine.

SECT. I.
First in general.
1. MAst. Parsons his falsitie Preamb. p. (...) 2. and Mitigat. page 279. and
281. and 284.
was the imputing unto me an acknowledgement of the Universal use of Mental
Equivocation in the space of four hundred years.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
FIrst, I said no more in my Treatise, then that Mr. Morton had manifestly set
down, that for these last 400. years he granted the lawfulnes Reckon. cap.
4.. 11. page 265.
of Equivocation to have bin taught in our Schools. And consult (says he) with
the ancient Logicians from the beginning of the world, till within the
compass os these last 400. years, and less, that ever any Logician did allow
your mixed proposition, partly mental, and partly verbal, and I will etc. Out
of which exception, for these last 400 years, it is evidently deduced, that he
grants the use of such mixed propositions (which are properly Equivocations)
whereof the one part is uttered, the other reserved in mind, as before has
been declated. And thereof I inferred further by evident consequence, and
sequel of reason (though he specified not the same) that for so much as our
Catholic Schools were then over all Christendom, and none publicly known
or in use but they, (for those three hundred, or at least these four) it must
needs follow that the same doctrine, during that time, was generally received
in the said Schools, Universities, etc.

The Reuiew.
2. Here is new Logique, which Mast. Parsons has sent us from Rome over the
Alps, to wit, Mental Equivocation was not used before the last 400. years,
Ergo, In the last 400. years M. Parsons has lost his logic
it was used Uniuersally in all Uniuersities, Chaires, Schools; by all Divines,
Casuists, etc. This he calls an cuident deducement; he should rather have
said an impotent Seducement, for so it is; and all one as to reason thus: the
Moon was not this year in the Eclipse, before the last month, Ergo, it was
in the Eclipse every week, every day, and every hour of the last month, which
is most ridiculous. Ex nihilo nihil fit (M. Parsons) none can ever deduce an
affirmative conclusion from a negative proposition, be then ashamed of your
Evidence. And so may you be likewise of your next shift, in telling us that you
did not seem to persuade your Reader Reckon ibid. page 266.
Expressly and by name that I granted the general use of Mental Aequiuocation
in All Schools, Chaires, Universities, Tribunals, and the like, for these 400.
years, but only by Consequence. For what can be more expressly assumed than
was this, where you said, Mitig. p. 284.
Seeing it has been admitted (say you) so long time in Christendom, as our
adversaries do confess, and that it has been received so universally and
generally both by Prelates and people: and if it have been so publicly taught
by all learned men, and contradicted by none, (This was an Antecedent, and not
a consequence, for that follows in the next words:) it ought to be a great
argument to discreet men, that it has some ground of truth? Neither is it
sufficient to infer a matter by Consequence, for the devil made a
consequence when he said, Matthew. 4.
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: but this was a lying
consequence. And what froath, rather then force M. Parsons consequence has, I
have already showed. In the next place we are to discuss the Authors, who
seem to except against M. Parsons his art of Aequiuocating.

SECT. II.
The first Instance of the charge, from their Doctor Sepulueda, against their
Mental Equivocation.
2. GEnesius Preamb. p. 83.
Sepulueda made against you: what say you to him?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mr. Morton finds out but one Author that contradicts the Reckon. pa. 267.
same Equivocation in all the time by him appointed, even Genesius Sepulueda,
and that only in some particular cases, though granting and defending it in
others.

The Reuiew.
3. Here are but two things you will have us to observe: one is, that Sepulueda
allows The same your mental Equivocation in some cases; the other is, that
this Author was found to be but one: in both which I spy a litter of manisest
falsities. For first, what is the Mental Equivocation which you defend? tell
us; See above.
It is a mixed proposition (say you) partly uttered with my mouth, as I am no
Priest,] and partly reserved in my mind, as in this clause, [ To tell it unto
you.] But what if this clause be such (for this is the chiefest point of this
whole dispute) as that it will not agree with the outward words in the common
interpretation, and use of speech, as thus; I am no Priest, reserving in your
mind, as bound to drive a Cart? The first part uttered with the mouth, [ I am
no Priest,] cannot possibly, in the common apprehension of man, signify or
imply this clause which follows [ As bound to drive a Cart.] Do you think
then that such a clause (for I shall need to ask no more) which is not
comprehensible by the outward words, does therefore make the outward speech
true, because it is true in the mind of the speaker? See above
Yes (say you) for that I truly mean that I am no Priest in the sense which I
speak it, which may be what pleases me. This being the very Besis and
foundation of your doctrine of Mental Equiuo cation, I now make bold to
auerre, that every such speech, in the judgment of Sepulueda, is a lie.

4. For so he censureth every such kind of reserved clause, where the
Sepulueda de ration. dicendi tellimon. cap. 3. page 468.
objection is made concerning one, who is called in question by a Judge to
bewray another man's secrecy, which he ought not to reveal, and shall answer
thus, [ I know nothing of it,] keeping this reservation in mind, [ As bound to
tell it unto you.] Here we find a mixed proposition, part in word, and part in
mind; secondly, here the Judge is incompetent, demanding that which the party
is not bound to reveal; thirdly, here your Clause of Reservation is the same,
wherein you principally insist: so that if this be not lawful, you must
necessarily fail in your former defense. Come we now to our Author Sepulueda.
Unto this objection of Philetus and lover of himself, he opposes his own
judgment in the name of Theophilus, that is, A lover of God, saying, Ibid.
cap. 5. page 471.
If you Philet us be prepared to answer so, then you tell me in brief that
you are prepared to periure your self. Hercunto Philet us replyeth: I do not
lie, seeing that the reserved Clause, viz. [ That I S. pulueda condemns Mast.
Parsons Equivocation for a lie.
ought to tell it unto you, agrees with my mind. Then Theophilus returns
upon him, saying: Who taught you to trisle so finely? Who did first show you
such a lurking hole for perjury? And in the end concludes, concerning the
former Aequiuocation: That the speech is a lie, because the signification
thereof does dissent from that which lies secret in the mind: for thou say
(says he) that [ thou know nothing at all thereof] and every one that
hears thee, does so understand thee, notwithstan ding thou art guilty to thy
self, that thou do know it, although with purpose not to reveal it.

5. All this you saw, M. Parsons, and therein could not but perceive that
Sepulueda has flatly contradicted your Mental Equivocation, notwithstanding
have you dared to say that M. Parsons wilful untruth.
he does defend the same in some cases. What shall any man think of you, when
you talk of rectitude of conscience? Certainly this pretense is nothing but a
Pharisaicall cleansing, as it were, of the outside of the cup: for when we
look within it, there is nothing but foul cob-webs of falsehoods and folly.

6. Although the examination of the former observation does argue a distorted
mind in you, yet in the second you do excel your self, where you say that I
find but One Author M. Parsons second untruth.
Sepulueda contradicting your Acquiuocation, especially knowing that if this
Sepulueda, then I do not bring him in alone, seeing that he goes accompanied
with all those Authors, upon whom the same Sepulueda does ground his former
conclusion: which I signified unto you in my Satisfact part. 3. p. 82. out of
Sepulueda de rat. occulta ca. 19.
Full Satisfaction, out of the words of Sepulueda, saying; But that you may
know (says he) how long it is since that Comment of Divines did prevail for
the excuse of a lie, in bearing false witness in another man's case, I think you
can find none before Gabriel, who durst publicly defend it, That is, the
trick of Reservation, M. Parsons AEquiuocation not ancient.
for he speaks of it. He tells us furthermore, concerning the same
Equivocation, that he found it Sepulueda quo supra in praefat. Aquinas.
Defended by some public Readers in Spain, albeit (says he) it is condemned
by the most ancient and principal Divines: Ibid. cap. 15. Scotus.
Amongst whom I reckon Aquinas. As for Scotus, he acknowledges this denial of
Secrecy (namely Equiuocatingly) to be a sin, only he made doubt whether it
be mortal, or venial. And Ibid. cap. 18. Henricus de Gandauo.
Henricus de Gandauo, a most learned man, says, that in such a case it is
lawful for the Examinate not to answer the Judge at all, but to deny the
secrecy, to answer falsely, and by art of words to lie ( calling Equivocation
a lie) he houldeth it unlawful. Ibid. cap. 19. Gabriel.
Gabriel himself denies that he can escape the guilt of, at least an
officious lie, and therefore a sin, who uses that artificial manner of
denying with the mind: his reason is, because his words are taken according
to the common understanding, in the which sense they are not true. Which
sentence of Gabriel being true in such a speech without an oath, how much more
true is it, if it be used in anoath? for by an oath an officious lie becomes
pernicious, because of the neglect of the reverence of God, who is witness
unto a man's oath. Thus far Sepulueda.

7. Whence we understand the fraudulent dealing, whereunto Mr. Parsons
accustometh himself, who informed his Reader, that I could find but only
Sepulueda contradicting their Equivocation in all the time appointed, and yet
all these were within the compass of four hundred years: Aquinas living
about the year 1210. Scotus Anno 1300. Biel Anno 1462. Henricus de Gandauo
Anno 1293. Mr. Parsons has yet one note more which he would have observed. I
would pray my Reader not to deny him his best attention.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NOte, by the way, the lavish immodestie of M. Morton, citing that Reckon.
Ibid. page 267.
learned Doctor Gabriel Biel, out of Genesius (...) by the contemptuous title
of Lewd Sophister: Whereas Sepulueda, styles him in the same place, Theologum
Doctissimum, a most learned Divine.

The Reuiew.
8. Then, belike, I have made Sepulueda call Gabriel a lewd Sophister: will
you be so good as but to look once again unto the place, which is in the
Preamble, page 83. M. Parsons dent falsehood.
and I doubt not but you will find out your own error, or rather recognize
your notable falsehood. For I named not Gabriel a lewd Sophister in citing the
testimony of Sepulueda, but some eight lines after I made bold to censure him
so of my self, which any one, who is not wittingly captious, will plainly
discern. What then must we note you for, M. Parsons, for noting this by the
way, but a man that was by the way when you made that note.

9. If you further ask me a reason of so censuring Gabriel, I shall tell you,
he attributes unto the power of nature so much, as does detract from the power
of the spirit of Gods grace. If this reason be not sufficient, take an other,
viz. Although Gabriel held that the Equivocation above mentioned is a lie, and
consequently a sin: yet I think Sepulueda quo supra.
none before Gabriel Biel (says Sepulueda) durst affirm that a lie, in
bearing false witness in an other man's behalf, is excusable. Be he therefore
as learned as you will, yet might he be said to play the part of a Sophister,
who excused a lie, which none did ever before him.

SECT. III.
The second instance, against Mental Equivocation, is from the judgment of the
Jesuit Azorius in his Instit. Moral. part. 1. lib. 11. c. 4.. Meatamen. And
upon occasion hereof, the Doctrine of Equivocation is more exactly examined.
First we propound the state of this Question, as it is defined and defended by
M. Parsons.

The Charge of T. M. against M. Parsons.
10. THe second Preamb. p. 84.
falsity of P. R. is his affirming that Mental Equivocation (for hereupon we
only dispute) has been universally received of all Universities and people in
Christendom,

and not contradicted by any. The first witness conuincing this Mitigation of
falsehood, is Azorius, etc.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and Charge against his Adversary.
THe opinion of Azorius is falsely objected by M. Morton, as making Reckon. cap.
4.. 12. page 269.
for him, whereas it makes wholly against him.

The Reuiewe.
11. Here is a (...) a maine gulf of difference between our two judgments. I
affirm that Azorius does condemn the AEquiuocation, which M. Parsons has
defended: M. Parsons says that Azor has been falsely objected, and that he
makes wholly against me. Upon this point has M. Parsons diverse times raised
up his most clamorous inuectiues against me, in this his book of Reckoning: will
it please thee (gentle Reader) now to audit our accounts?

First, we are to set down the state of the Question.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
But now let us see notwithstanding further what Azorius says against Reck.
ibid. p. 269.
Equivocation in general, for to this effect he is brought in, in this place,
as though he held that al Equivocation were to be rejected as lying: for proof
whereof he cites two places out of the self same leaf and page of Azorius.

The Reuiewe.
12. All AEquiuocation, M. Parsons? thus you say, and therefore put this in the
number of my new and fresh lies (as you call them) saying, Reck. cap. 9. page
643.
Here follows a notable conviction of falsehood against him, for alleging
Preamb. p. 84.
Pa. 84. of his Preamble the Jesuit Azorius, as condemning all use of
AEquiuocation, etc. And yet you know that before the propounding of the
testimonies of Azorius, and other Jesuits, in the very same page of the
Preamble, I restrained our whole dispute unto Mental AEquiuocation M. Parsons
untruth.
only; for hereupon only (said I) we dispute: which word, only, was repeated in
the Preamble more then seven times; And yet can you with a wide mouth say,
(without exception) that I would have Azorius to speak against All
Equivocation. Are you not like to make a good end of your Reckoning, who have
thus falsified in the beginning?

13. In all disputes it is necessary we know the point in question: we contend
therefore about Mental AEquiuocation only. It is in the second place as
necessary to know,

What is the mental Equivocation, which M. Parsons does defend.

14. Mitigat. c. 12. n. 3. page 484.
True Equivocation ( says M. Parsons) may be either verbal, or mental:
Verbal is that, when word or speech has either naturally, or by peculiar
custom of particular language two or more significations.

This is truly and plainly said of the Verbal Equivocation, tell us as
distinctly what the Mental is. Jbidem.
Mental Equivocation is,

when any speech has or may have a double sense, not by any double
signification or composition of the words themselves, but only by some
reservation of mind in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made different from
that sense, which the words that are uttered, do bear or yield without that
Reservation. Do not now forget, I pray you ( M. Parsons) that you distinguish
Mental Equivocation from Verbal, by this note, to wit, that the double sense,
which is in the Mental Equivocation, is not in the words themselves, but only
by some reseruatio^ in the mind of the speaker, which meaning is different from
that sense, which the words uttered do bear: very well, we shall afterward
try whether Azorius do justify this manner of Equivocation or no.

15. In the next place, seeing that the outward speech, and the inward mental
Reservation are so different, we demand whether you think the same kind of
Mental Equivocation to be true or no? Mitigat. c. 8.
These words of a Priest [I am no Priest] mixed with this reservation [To tell
it unto you] or such like, agreeing with the mind of the speaker, is as true
as if the whole proposition were uttered with the mouth without reservation,
thus; I am no Priest, to tell it unto you. We must remember this also, in
discussing the judgment of Azorius, to know whether he did allow that every
such speech, which being uttered wholly in the mouth, and agreeing with the
mind of the speaker, be likewise true, when it is half reserved in the mind
of the speaker in the same sense: for if it be not equally true, then your
mixture cannot qualify the outward speech, to make it a perfect truth.

16. Lastly, what kind of Reservation will you allow, and before whom? Reck.
page 100.
So that the party, to whom the answer is made, be not a competent Judge, the
speaker is free to have what meaning he list, so that it be true in his own
sense. Mitigat. p. 344
Although it agree not with the Hearers under standing; as [I am no Priest]
reserving in my mind, [such as I should be] or such like, whatsoever it
pleases me. So he. This last assertion I must nail unto the hinder part of
your head, that you may remember it: Therefore, if it please you, let this be
the Reservation in the mind, [ with purpose to tell it unto you,] and let us
try whether Azorius will condemn this kind of Reservation for a lie or no,
even when it is used before a Judge incompetent. Now comes in the combat: I
will be first the party defendant, and answer your charge.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge against his Adversary.
Mr. Morton skipping over four rules Azorius uses, for they make Reck. page
270.
expressly against him, runs only to the fifth and last, whereof he says,
that it bitteth the nail on the head. And is it so, Sr.? what say you then to
the precedent four? why say you nothing to them? what part of the nail do
they hit, if the last only strike the head? Jbidem. page 270. and 271.
In the first he resouleth that a Priest may AEquiuocate, and say he knows
nothing, when he is de maunded any point about Confession. In the second he
resolves that whenever any man is demanded by an incompetent Judge, even in
an oath, whether he has committed this, or that sin, he may by AEquiuocation
deny the same even in an oath. Ibid. page 271.
As if a man be wrongfully compelled by a Judge to swear to pay a sum of
money to his Adversary, he may swear, though he have no intention to perform
it, as being against law having this Reservation in his mind, that he will pay
so much as by law he is bound. And other three or four such cases are there in
the explanation of this Rule.

The Reueiwe.
17. Azorius never uses the name of AEquiuocation: and in his explanation of
his first and second rule, does fully abandon M. Parsons his doctrine of
Reservation, thus: Azor Inst. Mor. Tom. 1. l. 11. c. 4.. Secunda Regula.
Ratio vtriusque Regulae, etc. that is: The reason of both these Rules (says
Azorius) is not that which some do yield, saying that it is lawful, when we
swear, to take the words in our sense, which we feine unto our selves, and
not in the sense, which the hearers do understand. Yet is this the reason
which M. Parsons has Azorius his meaning.
laid do wne, for the defense of his Mental Reservation before a Judge
incompetent, saying. I may feign what I list, although not agreeing with the
understanding of the hearer. But Azorius alleges a reason against this
infatuation. Because (says he) whenever the words are of a doubtful
signification, and we are asked any thing against the law, then is it lawful
for us to take them in that sense which we like, albeit the hearers do take
them in an other sense. Which does again confute M. Parsons his doctrine: for
he defends an Amphibologie of speech, which may have a double sense only by
the reservation in the mind of the speaker, which sense is different from the
words of the mouth. But Azorius admits not any ambiguous or doubtful
sense, which is not incident unto the outward words themselves, and whereof
the hearer is not by some outward circumstance of speech, capable and
apprehensible.

18. This may be made plain by comparing examples together. A Judge is
acquainted with a man's cause, which he An Example.
is to determine; the party, whose cause it is, comes to the Judge for
aduife: Now it is known that a Judge is not to give counsel in any case,
wherein he is to execute the office of a Judge: yet the party being instant and
urgent, saying, Sir, do you not know how I shall free my self in this cause;
the Judge answers, Friend, I know nothing of this matter: meaning, that
howsoever, as he is a Lawyer, he know his cause, yet now, as a Judge, he is not
to acknowledge it: And this double sense is in the speech it self, and, by
circumstance of the person, may possibly be apprehended by any discreet hearer:
and is to be called a Verbal AEquiuocation, according unto the former
definition, which M. Parsons himself has delivered; and not a Mental.

19. Such like is the example, which Azorius has offered concerning a Priest,
who knows some secret revealed unto him in private Confession, as he is a
Priest, and therefore as a Priest is bound in conscience and by his calling,
not to reveal any such secrecy (except the concealment may be pernitiously
damnifiable unto persons, and States, as some of them do hold): In such a case
Azorius says, that he may answer, I know not, because he knows it not but
as a Priest, which is, that he knows it not, to reveal it: but why? by
virtue of an Only reservation mental? (so has Mr. Parsons defined): No, but
because, as Azorius says, The words themselves, according to their vfe, have
this ambiguous signification in themselves: so that it is not now to be called
absolutely Mental, but a verbal Ambiguity.

20. Sepulueda has made the case verycleare, showing that it is allowed by the
Sepulucdo de rat. dicendi testimon. cap. 3.
common consent of Christians, that a Priest, who knows the crime of any, as
he is a Priest, that is in confession, may not disclose it: then his answer,
in saying I know not, does issue from the common interpretation of the words
themselves, to signify, that he is not to take knowledge of any such matter,
to tell it unto any: which interpretation issues from the outward circumstance
of his calling, because he is a Priest. So that still the odds between M.
Parsons and Azorius is thus much: M. Parsons speaks of an Equivocation, or
ambiguity of speech, which consists not in the outward words: but Azorius
judges contrarily, as we have heard, and M. Parsons shall better see, to his
no small rebuke, before the end of our Reckoning. After this Azorius adds a
third rule.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
BY the third rule he proves the like in other cases, as when injury Reckon.
p. 271. (...) 272.
is offered, to use ambiguous words, and to take them in our sense, as far
as the words will bear: as the wife being asked of her husband, whether she
be an Adultresse: and of a man fallen into the hands of thieves, etc. and in
the case of a man demanded whether he came from a place suspected to have had
the plague, etc.

The Reueiwe.
21. Azorius explaneth himself in this third Rule, as in the former, saying,
that We may use words ambiguous, taking them in our sense, which the words
themselves will yield; and not (as M. Parsons holds) in whatsoever sense we
list, whereunto our mind shall agree: which meaning sometime is such, as the
devil himself cannot by any circumstance of the speech possibly understand.
Such as this is: where a man demanded of his friend, whether he has any money,
to answer no, referuing in his mind, To lend it unto you: which although it
be a true proposition, being delivered with the mouth, yet spoken half in the
mouth, and half reserved in the mind, does not make a true proposition, but
is a very lie, as Azorius Encount. p. 216
hereafter will tell us; even because the outward words cannot by any
congruity of speech import that same Clause, To lend it unto you. And if this
shall appear in Azorius, it will be no hard thing for our Reader to discern,
whether of us does perform a true Reckoning.

22. Notwithstanding, I speak not this to justify all the examples which
Azorius gives; but I insist in his general rule, which is, that the Outward
speech do carry in it a double sense: for we must measure the examples by the
rule, and not the rule by examples, and so interpret Azorius his examples,
that he thereby do not contradict himself.

23. The fourth rule concludes directly, that in the case, when no injury is
offered unto us, we may not use any speech; but in a sense which is understood
of the Hearer. This rule challenges plain dealing, without any Equiuocating
at all. And now descend we unto the last rule, which I said did hit the nail
on the head, which M. Parsons laughed at; but it will in earnest hit him on the
head, albeit he do use all the wit in his head to avoid it.

Acharge against M. Parsons.
24. The first rule of Azorius ( Preamb. p. 85
said I) is this: Quinta regula, etc.
If the words we use are not according to their common signification among
men, ambiguous or doubt full, and have only one sense, Azor. Jes. Jnst. part.
1. l. 11. c. 4, in fine cap.
We ought to use them in that sense, which they have in themselves: neither is
it lawful for us, although we be examined against right and justice, to detort
or turn our speech, by our inward conceit of mind, because it is not lawful
for us to lie: but he does lie, who understands his speeches otherwise then
they do signify in themselves. The difference between our Mitigator and this
Jesuit is no more then this: first P. R. defends an Equivocation, which is,
when the speech has no double sense in the outward words themselves, but
only in M. Parsons AEquiuocation found to be a lie.
some secret reservation in the mind of the speaker. But Azorius says, that
we ought not to use any sense of speech. which is not in the words themselves,
but only in the inward thought of him that speaks. Secondly P. R.
maintains, that his mental Reservation is a truth: but Azorius concludes,
that it is a lie. And can there be a greater contradiction between M. Parsons
and Azorius then this is?

I pray thee, good Reader, let us hear M. Parsons his defense, and so shall we
easily discern his spirit, and conjure it.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, for his discharg.
You see that Azorius forbids only, that words, which have Reckon. p. 272.
273.
but one only natural sense and signification, and are not ambiguous, or of
diverse sense, should be used by the speaker in any other signification, then
naturally, or by common use among men they do yield: As for example, if one
that had an Horse, and not an Ox, should be demanded whether he had any Horse,
he should say, No, meaning that he had no Ox, for that he conceived an Ox
for an Horse; this were not lawful, says Azor, in the use of words, because
the word Horse has but one proper meaning amongst men, and cannot signify an
Ox: and consequently cannot be so taken, but by a lie. But if the word Horse
had a doubtful or double signification, fignifying as well an Ox as an Horse,
then might a man use the amphibologie of the word, to avoid any injury offered
him by an incompetent Judge, as Azor himself determines. Who would think
then that a Reckon. ibid.
man of common sense, or of any mean modesty, and care of his credit would
have alleged Azor so confidently against his Adversary, as M. Morton does?
and that which is most ridiculous, so to insult against him, as he does against
me here, saying, P. R. maintains that his mental Reservation is a truth, but
Azorius concludes that it is a lie. And can there be any greater contradiction
then this? etc.

The Reueiwe.
25. Often have I called the indifferent Reader to audit A wicked forgery used
by M. Parsons, to shift himself from the note of a lie.
our Reckoning, but in this so strange a knacke of Sophistry, I would make
bold to appeal unto the Priests and Professors of Aequiuocation, to judge of
Mr. Parsons his practice in this point. The words of Azorius are these: When
the words are not of any doubtful signification, but have but one only sense,
we must use them in that sense, which they yield: (his reason) because he does
lie, who takes them in another sense then they signify: Which M. Parsons
expounds by an example of one, that has an Horse and not an Ox, and being
demanded whether he have an Horse, he should say no, meaning, that he has no
Ox.

26. But Azorius does not make any mention of an Horse or an Ox, or of any
such examples, which being uttered wholly with the mouth, do make no true
sense. For this outward speech used without mental reservation, viz. I have no
Horse, meaning, I have no Ox, is doubtless a lying mixture. But Azorius uses
only such examples, which being delivered outwardly with the mouth have a true
sense; and yet being used with a mixture of reservation, are in his judgment,
a lie. I must crave patience of thee (Christian Reader) to suffer me to enlarge
my self in discussing the judgment of Azorius, because M. Parsons his fraud
will be more notoriously apparent, and his defense of Mental Equivocation
receive (as I may so say) a deadly wound.

27. Azorius begins his dispute thus: Azor. part. 1. Inst. Moral. l. 11. c.
4.. Quinto.
Some (says he) speaking of the same Romish Doctors) propound this general
rule, and say, that it is no lie, although the words (which a man uses in his
promise by an oath) be not of an ambiguous M. Parsons uses a strange and
strong delusion to abuse his Reader.
and doubtful signification, but that the speech is made true in our secret
understanding. This is the state of the question, which Azorius intends to
determine by his five rules aforesaid, namely concerning a Speech, which some
Romish Doctors do hold to be true in the secret understanding. But there was
never man of any sober understanding, who could fancy that to be true in the
secret understanding of man, which M. Parsons has propounded, viz. I have no
Horse, meaning no Ox, which is M. Parsons his proper devise.

28. Secondly, the example which immediately follows in that place of
Azorius, and was used by the Patrons of Equivocation, for the manifesting of
their meaning, is this: Azor. ibid.
As for example (say they) if thou require any sum of money of me, and I
having so much money, shall answer [I have it not] reserving in my mind [To
lend it unto thee,] although they say (says Azorius) that this outward speech
has no ambiguous sense, but that I therem do absolutely signify, that [I
have it not] yet I conceive in my mind [I have it not to lend:] Therefore, say
they, I do say the truth, and do not sin by perjury. This is the immediate
example, which is set down to pattern the former question, concerning an
Ambiguous speech by mental Reservation; which Azorius is about to decide, and
to tell us whether this kind of Reservation be a lie, or no. Can there be any
affinity between this example, and M. Parsons his Horse and Ox?

29. Thirdly (which amplifieth his conviction mre fully sons) Mr. Parsons does
iumpe both in doctrine and example with those Romish Patrons of mental
Reservation, whom Azorius in this place does professedly confute. Of Mr.
Parsons his doctrine we have often heard: Now let us us behold his example set
down in his Mitigat. cap. 9. page 403. number. 80. where it pleased him iocantly
to pose me thus: I would ask M. Parsons example of mental AEquiuocation,
proved a lie out of Azorius.
Tho. Morton this case, that if a man in England, whose favor he much desires
and esteems, and yet he would be loath to lend money, for that he knew him
to spend much, and not to hold payment of his debts to be necessary to
salvation; If this great man demand of him, whether he had five hundred pound
to lend him, and supposing that he had them, but loath to lend, or loose them,
what would he do or answer in this case, if there were no other means, but
either to confess that he has them, and thereby loose them by lending, or
deny that he has them, and thereby incur a lie, and damn his soul? Has
the God of nature left no lawful manner of evasion by reason and force of wit
in such an encumbrance? He that has given unto the Hare and Fox sharpenes of
sense, by leaps, turnings, and windings, by going back the same trace they
came, to deceive dogs? I doubt not but that Tho. Morton would answer the
Nobleman, he had them not, though they lay in his Chist, understanding by force
of AEquiuocation [That he had them not to lend, Or, not so as he could spare]
Or, some other like reservation, which we say that without a lie he might use.

30. We see yet that M. Parsons does conspire together with those other
Aequiuocators, of whom Azorius spoke both in the position and example. Now if
Azorius call both their former conclusion, and this very same example a lie,
then I think I may lawfully ask M. Parsons, what kind of creature he
himself may be judged to be, who doubting of Azorius his sincere judgment,
has foisted in this aliant, and fond example of an Horse and an Ox.

31. Azorius therefore, after he had repeated those Doctors reasons, whereby
they sought to confirm their own position, he says, Meo tamen iudicio, etc.
But in my judgment, they extend that Rule further then is meet, for there can
be nothing so false, which cannot be freed from all lying, if we keep any
thing, as we list, concealed in our mind: for by this means whatsoever a man
shall demand of us, we may answer by denying that we have it, yea though we
have it, understanding in our mind [That we may give it,] What soever we shall
do, What soever we shall see, What soever we shall think or purpose, we may by
this means deny, that we have either done, or seen, or thought, or purposed
it; namely in this sense, [That I may tell you.] Therefore I think otherwise,
which I will specify in certain Rules. Thus far Azorius.

32. By this it is manifest, that taking the same example of denying that I
have it, with reservation, [ To lend or to give it,] Azorius matcheth it with
the vilest kind of lying, saying that, if this kind of speech be true, there is
nothing so false, which may not be freed from a lie. And in the end,
(concerning the same objection) he answers by the fifth Rule, saying, (as we
have heard) That if the words, which we use, be not ambiguous in their own
signification, and common use of men, we must use them in that sense which
they yield; neither is it lawful for us, although we be asked against right
and equity, to wrest any thing into a different sense, by the inward conceit of
our mind, for it is not lawful for us to lie; but he lies, who takes words
otherwise then they signify in themselves. Such as he judges M. Parsons his
speech concerning not lending of money, to be; M. Parsons calls the Speech
qualified by only mental Reservation a truth; Azorius contrarily calling this
speech a flat lie. So that this being the true, real, direct, and professed
resolution, determination, His abuse of his Reader.
and conclusion of their Jesuit Azorius, M. Parsons must needs be thought to
have wilfully injured this Author, and also to have abused his too credulous
Reader, whom by this his own fiction of an Horse and an Ox, he purposed to
make as wise as an Ass.

33. And now I cease to marvel why M. Parsons propounded for his Schoolmaster
the nature of the Fox, by using windings, turnings, and skippings forward and
backward, seeing he has showed himself so excellent a proficient in that
art: only this is to be wondered at, that seeing the Fox does use this M.
Parsons professes to AEquiuocate with his friends.
guyle only in flying from Dogs, which are mortal enemies unto him, M.
Parsons professes the practice of his craft in the case of lending money to
his friends and favorites. We proceed to the next witness against Mental
Reservation.

SECT. IIII.
The next witness against Mental Equivocation, is the Jesuit Emanuel Sa:
concerning whom it was my Charge against M. Parsons.
34. MY Adversary the Moderate Answerer ( Preamb. p. 86.
( said I) to qualify the hatefulnes of the Equiuocating Sect, did tell us
that Mod. Answ. cap. 10.
A Jesuit famous amongst the Casuists, Emanuel Sa, in his Aphorisms, writes
of this matter in these words: Quidam dicunt, etc. Some there be who say, that
he who is not bound to answer unto the intention of the examiner, may answer
by reservation of some thing in his mind, to wit, [That it is not so, viz.
that I must tell it unto you] although others do not admit this manner of
answering, and peradventure upon better reason then the former. Whereby it is
manisest ( says that Moderate Answerer) that all Catholics do not allow of
Equivocation. Thus far that Answerer: confessing hereby that diverse Catholic
Authors have contradicted this Equiuocating forgery, which P. R. has avouched
no Catholic writer did ever contradict.

The sum of Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, charging his Adversary with falsehood:
First concerning a word.
LEt the Reader stand attent, for that Mr. Morton may not escape, Reck. c. 4..
13. page 276.
until he have satisfied somewhat. Reck. page 279.
Mr. Morton has here committed many falsehoods both against Emanuel Sa, against
the Moderate Answerer, and against my self Against Eman. Sa: thus Reck. p. 276.
about the 20. line.
Sa adds unto his sentence, forte potiori ratione non admittunt, that is,
Perhaps this latter opinion is the better. Which word ( perhaps) Mr. Morton
craftily lest out.

The Reuiew.
35. I beseech thee (good Reader) stand attent, and do M. Parsons right and
justice, and let not me escape until I have satisfied. Thou have heard, the
first Accusation is of craft, for omitting the word, perhaps, in translating
the sentence of the Jesuit Sa, viz. forte potiore ratione; which M. Parsons
has (I must needs say) truly rendered into English thus, [ Perhaps with
better reason:] I likewise confess, that in my translation of those words, I
used not the word, perhaps, for How desperate ly M. Parsons can falsify.
I rendered them thus, [ Peradventure with better reason:] which translation I
expressly then set down both in my book of Full Satisfact. Part. 1, cap. 27.
page 86. and in my last Preamb. page 86. about the 24. lin. which M. Parsons
also has alleged in his margent, where it is Englished thus, Although others
do not admit this manner of answering, and [peraduenture] with better reason.
Which M. Parsons himself was not ignorant of, for in the 275. page of this his
Reckoning, about the 30. line, he acknowledges that I delivered the words
thus: Others do admit this reason, and that [peraduenture] with better reason.
If it shall please any reader, who can but spell English, to examine these
places, he shall find them so as I have now alleged. How then can M. Parsons
escape the accusation of a crafty and malicious accuser? will he say that in
translation perhaps, and, peradventure, are different, and not sinonimically
and significantly the same? So may he deserve to be reckoned among the wise men
of Gotham, who could not see wood for trees, or to shake the fellow by the
hand, who said that pepper is hot in operation, but cold in working. I should
call this manner of dealing of M. Parsons monstrous, but that it is ordinary,
as we have proved, and will now further manifest.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and second Charge against his Adversary.
THat which Emanuel Sa spoke of a particular case before a Judge Reck. page 276.
incompetent, he takes universally against all AEquiuocation. without
exception. Reck. page 277.
Which Mr. Morton could not choose but know to be a fraud, for that in the
next lines Eman. Sa does resolve two other cases, wherein a man may AEquiuocate.

The Reuiew.
36. Here he says that I have taken Sa as speaking universally against all
AEquiuocation, and yet knew that our whole dispute is by us both restrained
Miligat. cap. 8. page 321. and as I repeated it. Preamb. page 43. M. Parsons
witless falsity.
only unto mental AEquiuocation: which is evident by the very place, ( Preamb.
page 86) mentioning expressly Mental AEquiuocation. Therefore this accusation
of excepting against all AEquiuocation, is a witting (except he had not have me
rather call it a witless) falsity. Secondly, I delivered that sentence of Sa
out of the testimony of my Adversary the Moderate Answerer, as M. Parsons
himself knows and Reck page 278. number. 79.
confesses: if therefore there were an error, why does M. Parsons let his
own companion escape, and run upon me for his debt, who never undertook His
singular fraud.
to be surety for so loose a fellow as that man is, to promise for him that he
would not deal falsely? His reason is, because I could not (says he) but know
this to be a fraud. If it were a fraud, more shame for the Moderator: but if
it be no fraud, what shame will it be for our sober Reckoner: who even in
saying that I could not but have read Sa, bewrays his lavish presumption,
because probably I might have rested upon so plain and sufficient a testimony
of that my Adversary.

37. Notwithstanding, I may not deny but that I did read Sa in the place cited
Tit. de mendacio, where the case is thus put: If a man demand the whole debt,
whereas thou owe him only a part, thou may deny that thou owe him, viz.
so much as he demands. Weigh the sense of the words themselves; and the
ambiguity, and we shall easily discern that that which they call Equivocation,
is not only in the secret reservation of the mind, but sufficiently implied in
the outward speech it self, so that the hearer may collect out of the words
the secret sense, and so it is a verbal Equivocation, and not Mental. Nay,
when one asks the whole debt, and I deny that I owe it him, who is there
almost but will understand that in that speech is signified, that] owe not that
whole debt which is demanded? Neither does the judgment of Sa in other cases
differ from the former opinion of Azorius, by whom the Mental Equivocation, as
it is described by M. Parsons has been condemned for a lie: Only Sa
delivers his judgment with a forte, or, peradventure, (I cry you mercy M.
Parsons, I should have said, perhaps) and Azorius does resoluedly show that
your doctrine of Equivocation is concluded in a lying case. But I demand
whether M. Parsons will stand to the judgment of their Jesuit Sa, or no?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Indeed in the last edition of his book at Rome, An. 1607. his whole Reck.
page 276.
last sentence was left out, as though he had changed his opinion.

The Reuiew.
38. Or rather that your booke-gelders have changed his writings, according
unto your new professed occupation, in A due suspicio^ of craft among the
Romanists in altering and corrupting the opinions of their own Jesuits.
corrupting of your own Authors, whenever they chance to say any thing
which sounds prejudicial to your cause: which caused your own Doctor to
complain; and that not without some indignation, that none can be suffered to
write freely among you, but forthwith, as it happened See above cap. 1.. 2. and
6.
(says he) unto Card. Bellarmine himself, he is compelled to recant it; or
else such things are blotted out of their books, etc. Which bookish massacre
being so generally practiced, God knows how fatal it may prove. The like to
that of Sa will probably befall one day unto your Jesuit Azorius, who holds
the same with Sa, yet (without all perhaps) determinately: and so the books
being changed, it must happen in process of time, that these allegations,
which we now use out of him, will be noted for lying slanders, even as I have
been already dealt withal by M. Parsons, about the testimony of See herafter
Cap. 14.. 1.
Polydore, when he charged me with falsehood in citing him out of his old
Editions, which they themselves have professedly and publicly altered, and
indeed corrupted. Can such dealing stand with terms of common honesty? But
M. Parsons will lay some accusations against me, for he has vowed that I may
not escape.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE cites the foresaid authority of Eman. Sa, alleged out of his Reck. page
278. and 279.
Moderate Answerer for a shadow, dissembling that he had looked upon the
Author: but could not do this hansomely enough, for he does egregiously abuse
his foresaid adversary, by making him seem to deduce out of that particular
case an absolute denial of all Equivocation, making him to conclude thus, that
all Catholics do not allow of Equivocation. But Mr. Morton let me pose you
here: Is it true that your Adversary said so far, and no further to the
purpose in hand? Or is it not rather true that you cut him off, and would not
suffer him to say any further? for your Adversary did fully clear the matter,
if you would have suffered him to tellon his tale, for these are his words: [
Whereby it is manifest that all Catholics do not allow of Equivocation, where
he is not bound to answer the Judge or Examiner proceeding unjustly, and not
according to law and equity.] Whereby is evident that he alleged not Sa, as
denying all Equivocation, but in particular cases, where he that is demanded
is not bound to make answer.

The Reueiwe.
39. The Moderate Answerer says that Sa allowed not Equivocation, etc. and I
reported no more: for if my Reader can find that I added All Equivocation,
then will I be contented with the adiunct of a detestable liar. What else? I cut
off, His rude cauil.
forsooth the Answerers tale, not telling that be meant of such cases, wherein
a man is bound to answer, Grave crimen: this his meaning was sufficiently
expressed in the very que stion it self, as I alleged it, standing thus:
Preamb. p. 86.
Some there be that say that he who is not bound to answer, etc. Here the case
was manifested to hold only, Where the party is not bound to answer, in which
cases M. Parsons does justify Mental Reservation: but Eman. Sa tells us,
that some Romish Doctors do not admit this doctrine, and perhaps (says he)
with better reason. We shall need no more, for now I have our Raynard in the
straits; what are the cases (Mast. Parsons, for I mean to pose you) wherein
you would have your Eman. Sa seem to admit of a mental Reservation? Either
must they be when the party is bound to answer unto a competent and lawful
Judge, which kind of mental Reservation, you have held to be unlawful,
Dilemma.
and a lie: Or else it must be understood in case that the party is not bound
to answer unto the Judge, because the Judge is incompetent; and in this case
Eman. Sa (as you know) does not allow of your Mental Reservation. Therefore as
I did not conceal the case you speak of, so have you no cause to have it
revealed, because it makes fully against you, who defend a Reservation, when a
man is not bound to answer, as before an incompetent Judge. Now therefore,
after you have gained attention of your Reader, consider what arrerages come
upon you by this Reckoning: first your falsehood, in taxing the omission of the
word perhaps: Secondly in obiecting the word All: thirdly, imputing a
concealment of the Case: and lastly, the loss of your cause, by the judgment
of Sa, and together with him by the judgment of Some other Romish Writers.

SECT. V.
The next witness against M Parsons his described mental Equivocation, is the
Jesuit Maldonate.

The Charge against M. Parsons.
39. MAldonate ( Preamb. p. 87.
said I) a principal Jesuit and Casuist resolves thus: Maldon. Ies. Commen.
in Luc. vlt. verse. 28.
Whosoever does endeavor by feyning to deceive another, although he intend to
signify something else, yet doubtless he lies. Mr. Parsons How will satisfy
for this?

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning against his Adversary.
HE styles Maldonate a Casuist, who is never known to have read or written of
Cases in his life, but Scholasticall Divinity he Reckon. cap. 4.. 14 page 283.
professed many years in Paris, and left very learned Commentaries upon all
the four Evangelists, though the Roman Index (...) Anno 1607. do mention,
that certain cases of conscience published by another, and Printed at Lions,
Anno 1604. were falsely ascribed to him.

The Reueiwe.
40. Rather will M. Parsons play small play then sit out: and now the Gamster
thinks that he has taken a blot; for Maldonate, forsooth was no Casuist. If
this be an error, then mark (good Reader) what guides have misled me: First
(a Casuist being one who discusseth cases of conscience) the very Title of the
book Anno 1605. in the name of Maldonate M. Parsons dissolute and vast
rashness and ignorance
is this: A brief Sum, containing most difficult Questions of Cases of
conscience, necessary for every Priest, when he hears confessions. Which
book was set forth Permissu Superiorum, that is, By permission of the
Superiors. Secondly, in the Epistle Dedicatory the same Maldonate is, by name,
commended by the Collector of these cases (a Friar) in these words: When I
sought for a man, who had explicated the difficulty of some cases of
conscience, I could find none among the most learned, who had performed this
better then Maldonate: which argues that he was to be esteemed a most
singular Casuist. Lastly, your own Jesuit Tit. Ioh. Maldonatus.
Ribadineira in his Catalogue of Iesuiticall-Authors, An. 1608. expressly
recounteth among the works of Maldonate, the foresaid Summa Casuum
Conscientiae.

41. Will Mr. Parsons charity give him leave to say that your Friar Martin, and
the other Superiors who suffered it to pass, and your Jesuit Ribadineira also
were herein Gross deceivers? Then indeed must I confess, that I have been
grossly deceived. But seeing that he knew that Maldonate was thus esteemed of
by these Romanists, his charity toward Observe the little credit which may be
given unto new Romish books.
his own friends might have a little assuaged his malice against me, whilst
that he charge me by the Grossness of other men's deserts. And we may
furthermore observe what little credit is to be given unto their Romish
books, which come under the name of their Writers, seeing that the books of
Jesuits are falsely inscribed. Let us leave titles, and examine the truth of
the matter it self.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Does Maldonate say any thing in this sentence, that is not conform to our
common doctrine of Equivocation? No truly: for we grant that whosoever does
indeauor by feyning to deceive Reckon. page 283. 284.
another, does lie. Insomuch that it agrees well with the definition of a lie,
set down in St. Aug. Mendacium est falsa vocis significatio cum intention
Lib. de mend. c. 4. and lib. con. mend. ca. 12.
fallendi: A lie is a false signification of speech, with intention to deceive:
which two clauses of the definition of a lie, I do prove and demonstrate for
diverse leaves together in the 8. Chapter of my former Treatise, that they
cannot agree with the nature of Equivocation, and by consequence that
Equivocation is no lie. Not the first clause, a false signisication of speech,
which is when the speech does differ from the meaning and sense.

The Reuiewe.
42. Least that Maldonate might seem to make against you, you answer not
directly to these words, Although he intend not to signify aliquid praeterea,
that is, Something else, which indefinitely signifies something Else,
whatsoever it be. Now apply your last example unto this Rule. If your friend
demand of you to lend him some money, which you know that you have in your
Chest, yet you are provided to answer, I have it not, meaning, to lend it:
This your Azorius called a plain lie, and this is it which Maldonate does
intend, who in this exception against any Reservation, which is only mental,
does imply all, saying, [ Although he feine to himself something else.] Let us
see whether your second devise will stard you in any stead.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NOt the second of intention to deceive: for that the first and principal
Reck. page 284.
intention of him that is forced for some just cause to Equivocate (for
otherwise he may not use it,) is to deliver himself from that injury which is
offered him, and not to deceive the Judge or hearer, though consequently that
do follow. And this I prove to be so clear, as that by this are justified all
Stratagems in war, which are indeed nothing but Equivocations in fact, that
otherwise should be unlawful and sinful.

The Reueiwe.
43. What have we to do with Stratagems of war? for only actions (which is
when there is no word or promise going before, which may be contradicted by
their own actions) Stratagems not properly lies.
in themselves, do neither affirm nor deny: We speak of the speech of man,
which does either affirm something, or deny something: and a lie, or truth
(we know) does properly consist in affirmation or negation. Draw nearer to the
Question.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NOt the second clause ( of intention to deceive) contained in S Augustines
Reck. page 285.
definition of a lie, does in no case truly enter into Equivocation. For that
he which uses lawful Equivocation, has not his first and principal end to
deceive the hearer, but to avoid the hurt, which he is subject unto, if he did
not Equivocate; albeit thereby it follows that the other be deceived, which
is without all fault of him which speaks doubtfully. Which I do demonstrate
by many examples out of the Scriptures and Fathers; whereby it is evident that
this permission of others to be deceived by our speech, when we do in effect
but conceal a truth, is lawful, and used by Saints, yea God himself, and
consequently can be no lie.

The Reuiew.
44. You shall never be able to prove your Mental Equivocation, which you
have described, from Scriptures or Fathers. And here you have no way to avoid
the second part of S. Augustines definition, which is, an Intention to deceive
another, but by distinguishing of the intention, as principal, and M. Parsons
frivolous distinction.
less principal; because his principal end is to avoid hurt, his less
principal is to deceive: yet we see that when man does intend to Equivocate,
that he may avoid lying, he does, for avoiding hurt, intend to deceive. And if
this were a good answer, what sin is there almost, which M. Parsons might
not justify by this distinction? The thief, whilst he robs a man of his
money, does not principally intend to rob, because his principal end is to
enrich himself: For if he were not moved by the desire and hope of gain, he
would never commit robbery. So likewise he that deceives any by lying: As for
example, the damnable couple in the Act. 5.
Acts, who lied in denying the just price of their sale of the land before S.
Peter. If any should doubt, whether in that speech to lie or to gain something
to themselves were their more principal end; it may be easily discerned by
this, because they did not seek advantage that they mught lie, but they did
lie for their advantage: What can M. Parsons say now? (for I must pose him)
Will he answer that by such lying a man does not lie, because his principal
end is not to lie? Then will it follow that a man lies not, when he lies. Or
did he lie notwithstanding that his less principal end was to lie, or
deceive? Then does not his distinction help you, for freeing his mental
Equivocation from a lie. As yet Maldonate is against him, and this M. Parsons
saw in his Mitigation, otherwise why did he skippe over this place, where it
was particularly objected against him.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, in charging his Adversary.
HOw did I willingly pretermit to answer him, when as he said Reckon. page
285. 286.
nothing against me, but with me, and for me, as I do show by diverse distinct
numbers, citing him also number 75. page 399. and this very place here quoted by
Mr Morton, together with another of Toletus to the same effect? What means, I
say, Mr. Morton to deal so vnsincerely in such sort as every child may see his
fraud? And if any man will doubt, whether Maldonate did defend Equivocation in
such cases as we do, wherein somewhat is rescrued in the mind of the speaker,
more then is specified in the words, let him read him in his Commentaries
upon the Gospels, in the places that contain such reseruations.

The Reueiwe.
45. I have dealt most sincerely: for that, which I charged you with, was only
the above cited testimony of Maldonate, which you (as I said, and you cannot
deny) did pretermit, as a timorous weakling does willingly pass by his
ouer-match: yet now to scrape some acquaintance with him, leaving his positive
rule, you are glad to seek into his Explications of Scriptures, wherein you
may see for your purpose; what? even the man in the moon. But of this
hereafter.

CHAP. XIIII.
Containing those objected untruthes, whereof I cleared my self in the
Preamble; which M. Parsons does examine again, and call into his new
Reckoning. First, in the testimony of Polydore.

SECT. I.
My former discharge.
1. I Made bold to cite Polydore, to show that Popes of later times had their
names changed by Antiphrasis, that is, a contrariety, as being unciuil to be
called Vrbanus, etc. Upon this M. Parsons grew very violent, saying, The
Minister has neither simplicity nor truth, but a a Mitigat. Epist. dedic. n.
18.19
lost conscience, by calumniations fraught with deceitfulness and malice,
laying this observation upon Polydore, and citing no place.

The Charge against M. Parsons.
2. Since that I Preamb. p. 90. Excellent fraud in abuse of their own Authors
See a little after. number. 5.
have both cited the direct words, and alleged the place, which his fellows
have put out of their new Editions, and yet since has M. Parsons (...) charged
me with not citing of that, which, least it should be cited, they themselves
have blotted out of the book: and now he reckons both for the Author, and
for the testimony it self.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I had not that part of Polydore, Deinuentoribus Rerum, by me. Reckon. cap. 5..
1. page 295.


The Reuiewe.
3. Had you not Polydor by you, M. Parsons? we shall try th's by your answer
in your Mitigation. Mitigat. Epist. Dedicat. number. 18. and. 19.
Let the judicious Readeriudge (say you) whether the Author thereof be a
Minister of simple truth; Polydore says only that sometime Popes, as other
Princes, have had names, which have been different and contrary to their
nature. Is this the tenure of an answerer, who saw not Polydore; to say that
Polydore says only, etc. But it may be M. Parsons, although he cannot free
himself from fraud, will escape the guilt of a lie by Equivocation, saying
that he saw not Polydore, meaning, with his heels: otherwise to charge me with
so infamous a falsehood, in alleging Polydore, when as yet he himself had not
Polydore by him; does in effect tell us that M. Parsons, in answering, is
sometime by himself. What further concerning the book.

Mr. PARSONS Reckoning.
ALbeit the words, which he says he has cited out of Polydor. de Reck. page
296. 197.
Jnuent. lib. 4. cap. 10. be not in any of our books now commonly extant, yet
he says that they are in the Edition of Basil An. 1570. and that two years
after by Pope pius Quintus the Index Expurgatorius did put out these words:
but he tells not what Index it was, for I have one containing both the
Flemmish and Spanish Index, Printed at Basil An. 1544. wherein this observation
is not found, which M. Morton says was Printed Anno 1570. which was 26. years
after. Whereof must needs be inferred, that either M. Morton deals not
sincerely with us in this matter (which yet I will not be so vnfreindly as to
suspect) or that his Edition of 1570. (which hitherto I cannot see) has
received this addition about the Popes changing of their names after the
foresaid Edition of 1544.

The Reueiwe.
4. Can M. Parsons possibly not suppose me to be insincere in this point, who
has challe^ged me for so egregious a falsificator in so many passages? either
is he more credulous then he ought to be, or else am I more credible then he
has decyphered me to be. Howsoever, I have little reason to credit any of his
Reckonings: and even in this very place he is intolerable, for the books of
Polydore which have not that sentence in them have (as he knows) been much
purged; as their own book, which is entitled, Index librorum prohibitorum,
that is, The Catalogue of books which have been prohibited, does expressly
show, telling us that, Index libror. prohibit. Tit. Polydor. Virg.
The book of Polydore, De Inuentoribus Rerum, is permitted, which was purged
by the command of Pope Greg. 13. in the year 1576. How could he then but
suspect, that such a sentence as this was blotted out?

5. Again, I cited in the margent the Index Belgicus, which was printed
Lugduni An. 1586. ( page 195.) wherein these words, Extraa iocum, etc. and
nine lines following are commanded to be blotted out. Which every one that
will may find in the ancient books of Polydore, and yet (as M. Parsons
confesses) is not in your new Editions: which shows that their new devise of
purging of books has licensed them to belie the old.

M. PARSONS charging his Adversary.
But let us hear the words themselves, which M. Morton sets Reck. page 297.
down as found in his Tolydore: Primus honos, etc. This is the first honor
given to the Bishop of Rome after his creation (says he) that if his name be
not fair, he may change the same: as for example (which yet be not spoken but
in jest) if before perhaps he had been an evil doer, he may be called
Bonifacius, that is a good doer; if he had been fearful, then may he be
called Leo, a Lion; if rusticall, then Vrbanus, or civil, etc. and the first
Author or beginner of this custom is said to have been Pope Sergius 2. whose
name having been before Os porci, which signifies the mouth of an hog, it
was permitted unto him (says the supposed Polydore) for the avoiding the
obseenitie of his former name, to change the same. These two things, that the
first occasion of changing names should have been from Pope Sergius 2. has no
substance at all, Platina delivers it upon report, (...) confuteth it.
Besides it is to be noted that Os porci is a surname of a family, which no Pope
is wont to change, but only his Christian or proper name, as of late when
Hypolitus Aldobrandinus was called Clemens 8. he changed not the name of
Aldobrandinus, but of Hypolitus.

The Reuiewe.
6. Well, I am content to leave your Authors in their conflict. Can you show us
a reason, why he that will change his Popes change their Christen names.
Christian name, will not also change his natural name or surname? Saul Jewish
was changed into Paul Christian; Peter never left his name which Christ gave
him. Now for the Pope to reject his name which he received in Baptism as a
token of his Christendom, this seems to be a profane mystery.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
POlydore says only (and in a jest) that some might be named by Reck. page
300. and. 302.
changing their names: Non extra iocum dictum sit, that is, let it not be
spoken without a jest. And Polydore says only, Liceat mutare, they may change
their names, but says not that it was practiced by any.

The Reuiew.
7. For Hystorians to report things in such manner, does not imply that the
matter was fabulous: Ridendo dicere verum, Jesting.
quis vetat? a man may laugh and tell a truth, as I might do, in telling M.
Parsons that I cannot without a jest observe the differences of translations,
which he has invented in [ Let not] and [ May not,] as though there had been
craft herein. For I beseech you, Sir, when the Apostle, speaking against
unlawful separation of the wife from her husband, says, 1. Cor. 7. v. 10.
Let not the wife depart from her husband; if he had delivered it thus: A wife
may not depart from her husband, had these two differed any thing in sense? But
why do I hinder M. Parsons his sport, whose disposition is even to play with a
feather?

SECT. II.
His second charge against his Adversary, about the pope that was choked with
a fly.
THe Preamb. p. 91. 8.
mistaking of the name of the Emperor Henry 2. in stead of Frederick 1. who
was excommunicated by Pope Adrian; which M. Parsons will have to proceed from
maliciousness.

My discharge.
9. The only question was whether Pope Adrian, who excommunicated the Emperor,
was choked with a fly, or no, this was the maine; but whether he
excommunicated H. or F. is but on the by, in respect of the scope of our
dispute. Cardinal Bellar. in his Correctorio. page 170. and page 192.
Bellarmine erred often, in citing of Authors, and has lately corrected those
escapes, as alleging Ambrose, in stead of Augustine; Cyprian in stead of
Cyril; Innocentius in stead of Clemens; and in such like errors their Gratian
does superabound: And yet may we not judge so uncharitably, as to impute these
faults unto perfidiousnesse.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IF Mr. Morton had not seen, nor read Nauclerus (as he says) how Reck. cap.
5.. 2 page 308.
did he presume to set down his Latin words so precisely, as his Reader could
have no probable cause to doubt, but that they were his own proper words? Was
not this crasty perfidiousd aling? This answer of Mr. Morton does more
entangle him in falsehood.

The Reuiew.
10. Did ever sober man make such a question? how can one set down precisely
the words of an Author, which he himself has not read? Any child can
answer, that this may easily be Fond cauillations.
done, by reciting the sentence out of a writer, who has collected it out of
the Author himself, which is usual in all that write. If I should ask M.
Parsons this, did you never deliver any testimony from an other man's writing,
which was true? he would say that this is but a fond question, and yet it is
Cosen germane to his own, nor is it much unlike unto his next taxation for
setting down, out of Nauclerus, Many Italian writers, in stead of, so many
Italian writers as he could see; as though all the writers which Nauclerus
could see; were more then many.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
So to conclude this Account, etc.

The Reuiewe, showing how M Parsons has slipped over a piece of a former
Charge, wherein he was accused of an evident falsehood.
11. I do not marvel why M. Parsons makes so great have to conclude, before
he have satisfied the Reckoning; leaving a piece of debt on the score seeing
that he had just nothing to pay. For as he cannot but remember that he said
that Mitigat. cap. 2. page 79.
Nauclerus rejects this story as false, and confuteth it by all Writers,
especially of Italy: so may he not forget what Preamb p. 93. in sine.
I answered him from Nauclerus his own words, viz. that he does not reject it
as false, but was brought by differences of story of Adrians fly, to doubt
whether side rather to choose or believe. Thus was M. Parsons his censure of
Nauclerus His fraudulent concealment of his falsehood
his judgment, confuted out of the words of Nauclerus himself. This his
fraud he passed over without mention: belike he either esteems of so petty a
fraud, as of a fly, and therefore neglected it; or else he feared that if he
should mention it, it would prove like Pope Adrians fly, to choke him,
because he was not able to swallow it down.

SECT. III.
The disastrous ends of some Popes.
12. EXamples hereof I Preamb. p. 94.
related out of Vrspergensis: among others, the example of Pope Anastasius,
reported by your own Doctors (said I) to have been struck with the hand of
God, and so to have perished. Citing for witnesses Platina, Supplementum Chron.
Liber Pontificalis, and Turrecremata. M. Parsons redily swalloweth all the
first three Cammels, and straineth a Gnat, to wit, the testimony of thelast
Author Turrecremata.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and Charge against his Adversary.
IT follows in your Narration out of some of our Doctors as you Reck. page
313.
say; Been legitur Anastasium Diuino nutu percussum interijsse It is read that
Anastasius the Pope was strooken with the hand of God and perished: you cite
for it Ioh. de Turrecrem. lib. de summa Eccles. de Anast asio. Which citation
is so set down, as I persuade my self that in his next reply he will have
this evasion, to say that he saw not the work himself: for there are four
books of Turrecrem. de summa Ecclesiae, and one only has more then an hundred
Chapters, yet does Mr. Morton neither specify Book nor Chapter; which
always, you must imagine has some mystery. Turrecremata lib. 2. Summae
Eccles. cap. 103. spoke only by way of answering certain objections of them
that brought in the example of Anastasius, etc.

The Reueiwe.
13. My Reader will be so indifferent as to observe the place and words of
Turrecremata lib. 2. Eccles. cap. 103. Item nec facit ad propositum, etc.
Neither (says he) does it make any thing for the purpose, which some
adversaries say of Anastasius ( out of the Cap. Anastasius, Did. 19. and in
Glossa) because although we read there that some honest men departed from
Anastasius, for that he had communicated with Photius and Acatius, yet do we
not read that he was condemned by the whole Church; but, Been legitur quod
fuerit diuino iudicio percussus, and ita a Deo depositus, that is: It is well
said that he was struck with Gods judgment, and so deposed by God; meaning, by
a sudden death, accordingly as it is in the Gloss, whereunto he has
relation. Which is not spoken by Turrecremata as we see, only by way of
answering an objection as M. Parsons pretends, but very asseuerantly: And
therefore our Reader may discern in M. Parsons a mystery, and the iniquity M.
Parsons his admirable craft and falsehood.
and falsehood thereof. So little cause had I to conceal the right Chapter,
which M. Parsons (least the truth might be acknowledged) did, asit may seem,
wittingly ouer-passe, only that he might guilfully latch me within the
suspicion of fraud and deceit.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Must advertise the Reader, that the whole current of other Writers Reck.
page 314.
do deny this matter about the inclination of Pope Anastusius to recall
Acatius, affirming that the said Acatius was dead diverse years before
Anastasius was Pope, as do (...) Niceph. Calixtus, Euagrius, Anastasius
Bibliothecari is Liberatus, Gelasius, and others: all which, or most are named
in the first part of the Decree of Gratian, which is cyted also by M. Morton,
and so if he looked upon it, he abuses us greatly in dissembling the matter:
and if he did not, why does he air it?

The Reuiew.
14. And I do earnestly entreat our Reader to mark M. Parsons Aduertisment,
and he will perhaps wonder at his importunate desire, to have the witness of
Gratian produced; for thus we read in Gratian, Did. 19. Cap. Anastasius:
Anastasius the second, a Roman by birth, lived (says he) in the days of M.
Parsons lavish untruth.
K. Theodoricus, at what time many of the Clergy separated themselves from his
Communion, because he without a Council of Bishops and Priests, and Clergy of
the Catholic Church did communicate with Photius, who had communicated with
Acatius; and because he meant secretly to call back Acatius, he was stricken
with the hand of God. That is (says the Gloss) whilst he rid on an Ass, his
bowels burst out, and he ignominiously fell down. Had you any reason to ask
why I pretermitted these testimonies? And yet furthermore where it is objected,
that Acatius was dead before Anastasius was Pope, this is answered in the
Gloss upon the Chap. going before, beginning thus: Secundum, etc. He (namely
Anastasius) would call again Acatius after he was dead, that prayers might be
made fir him in the Church. By this time you see the unluckiness of your
importunity, requiring an Answer to that which was answered by your own
Gloss about the same place of Gratian. Which if you saw, then have you (to use
your own words) abused your Reader greatly in dissembling the matter. If you
saw it not, then Why did you cite the book which preuenteth your Answer, and
causes you to repent of your rash imputation of dissemblance?

15. Again, Other examples of like nature were Preamb p. 94.
cyted, as that of Pope John 10. who, by the practice of an infamous and lewd
woman, was thrust into Peter's chair, and afterward by the unchaste daughter
Theodora choked with a Pillow: and of John 12. who when he was in daliance
with another man's Wife, was stricken in the temples of his head by a Devil:
and of Pope Urbane, by a nickname called Turban, who ( says Urspergensis)
rebelled against the Emperor, troubled the Church, and was struck by the hand
of God.

These cytations have been right, and your answer is by opposing other
Historians, who commended these Popes lives, unto Historians, who condemned
them; and all is to teach your Reader to dance in a round.

SECT. III.
The third Objection, concerning the testimony of Boucher.
16. COncerning Preamb. pa. 95.
Boucher a Romish Doctor, who held it lawful for a private man to kill a
Tyrant in the case of public enmity, either against the Church, or the
Commonwealth, which I judged to be a rebellious position, I must now answer
according to my charge.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning, and charge against his Adversary.
But it is granted by Doctor Boucher (says M. Morton) that when the Reckon.
cap. 5. 3. page 321. 322.
Commonwealth has condemned and declared any Tyrant for a public enemy, he
may be slain by a private man. Whereunto I answer, that then he is no private
man, for that he does it by a public authority of the Commonwealth, as does
the executioner that cutteth off a Noble-mans head, by order and authority of
the public Magistrate: so as in this M. Mortons distinction serves him to no
purpose, for that neither for private, or public injuries can a private man,
as a private man, that is to say, by private authority kill any Prince, though
he were a Tyrant, for any cause either private or public whatsoever So as in
this principal charge M. Morton remains wholly convicted, as you see.

The Reueiwe.
17. Boucher calls him a private man: Take the case as M. Parsons has
propounded it, that a private man, after the public sentence of the
Commonwealth, is no private man, but a public and just executioner: by the
same rule he must imply, that when the Pope (whom they make Supreme in such
cases) has excommunicated a King, and commanded Arms against him, then every
man may use Marshal-law, and justly murder that King. What is this but to put
into the hands of men dagges, and knyues, and poisons for execution of their
hateful designs? But we return unto Doctor Bouchier. Lib. 3. de abdicat.
Hen. 3. c. 16 page 267.
The case may be so urgent (says he) that the public judgment need not be
exspected, because where the crime is notorious, it is sufficiently condemned
without further judgment. And he brings in the place of Deuteronomy. 13. Thou shall
presently slay them, even before the public judgment of the Church
published. By this I convince M. Parsons of notorious falsehood, M. Parsons
notorious falsehood.
who defended that Boucher did not allow the killing of any King, but after the
public judgment of the Commonwealth. Here we see a case, wherein Jack Straw
and Wat Tyler, and every Rascal is armed for this purpose: even before
public judgment. The answer which M. Parsons will give us in this his Sober
Reckoning, is worth our attention.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
DOctor Bouchier in his fourth book has a whole Chapter to Reck. page 322.
prove that in some urgent cause the matter may be prevented, as when the thing
is so notorious, instant and perilous, as the said public judgment cannot be
expected: then for subjects to use poena priuatiua, to withdraw their
obedience, and only to defend themselves; and not positiua, that is, the
positive punishment of actual Rebellion, or (...) offensive: So as considering
what here is in the Question, he (that is, T. M.) must needs be condemned of
a Nihil dicit, or a falsum dicit.

The Reueiwe.
18. Iucunde dictum, and ioculariter. M. Parsons is a jolly but yet a iugling
fellow: for although D. Bouchier de iusta abdic. l. 4. c. 2.
Bouchier does use the distinction of privative and positive punishment, yet in
the Ibid. c. 3. p. 354
next Chapter he shows that The judgment of the Church may be prevented, by
the notoriousnes of the crime: but how prevented? M. Parsons excusable falsehood.
by only a privative punishment, or only by arms, for defense? No, he is not
contented with a Buckler of defense, but he puts a sword in men's hands for
to kill even before judgment, saying that they are taught out of Deuteronomy. 13.
Statim interficere, Presently to kill; adding the examples of Phinoes killing
the Israelite, Number. 25. and of Mattathias killing the Kings Captains, 1.
Machab. 2. Next he seeks to establish the Act of killing by a Canon, That
he who falls into a crime, which is condemned by the Canon, may without
further judgment be held condemned by the sent ence of the Canon. Thus far of
the proceeding by Ecclesiastical censure.

19. In the Cap. 4. p. 358.
fourth Chapter he enters the same question concerning execution before
public judgment. Shall we think (says he) that secular men in their
proceedings in judgment ought to be more religious, or cautelous, then the
Ecclesiastical, as that they ought to expect that public judgment (as
Politicians teach) before that they may set upon a Tyrant by arms? Immediately
to prove that they ought not to expect any public judgment, he says that
in such a case If public judgment may not be had, the safet ie of the
Commonwealth is to be sought by other means whatsoever, even as against an
armed theife. And if any, whom he calls Tyrants, shall happen to be slain in
such insurrections, Who (says he) will deny, but they are justly slain? In
the fifth Chapter he gives an instance in Henr. 3. King of France, who was
murdered by Jacob Clement a Friar: which fact Bouchier in the cap. 23. of the
same book does highly commend as meritorious. Is here M. Parsons, either
falsum or nihil? Is it nothing to arm Subjects against Kings, before public
judgment? Is it nothing so to arm them, as, if they kill such Kings, to hold
the fact lawful and meritorious? If there had been any tincture of truth in
you, you could not have objected falsity unto me against so many and so plain
instances and examples.

20. I call them plain, because Bouchier is challenged by your own Doctor
Barclaius, even for the same matter: Barcl. l. 5. con tra Monarchom c. 6. p 361.
Thou teach (says Barclay unto Bouchier) there, that it is lawful to kill
Henry the third, King of France. It had been therefore safer for M. Parsons
his conscience, to have answered Nihil, then to have answered Falsum, that he
is convicted by the judgment of their own Barclay: which is likewise the
censure of their own Priest in the Quodl. p. 296.
Quodlibets, saying, that In the Treatises de tusta Abdic. Henr. 3. they
affirm that it is lawful to kill a Tyram, for so they termed that King,
although there be neither sentence of Church, nor Kingdom against him. The
case thus standing, we may think that Mr. Parsons his guiltiness concerning
the matter, did drive his pen awry to wrangle (...) about words.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe adding these words ( which I say by common consent) is an accessory Reck.
page 323.
untruth, for excuse whereof he runs to other Chapters, wherein he says
that Bouchier avouches, Mirum esse in affirmando consensum, that there is a
wonderful consent in allowing this doctrine. But these are other matters upon
other occasions, etc.

The Reuiew.
21. If this was spoken of other matters, which were impertinent, why did you
not name them? I suspect you have found some reason: for, indeed, in his third
book and cap. 15. his position is this, viz. That it is lawful to kill a
Tyrant; which (says he) it is marvelous what a great consent it has not
only of profane, but even of our own Authors. Which is the very ground and
basis of all his former conclusions. And could you, M. Parsons, with any truth,
signify that this was upon other impertinent matters?

SECT. IIII.
The fourth testimony of M. Raynolds.
22. THe testimony of M. Raynolds, and the censure thereof M. Parsons calls
again into question so rigidly and scornefully, as if both his wit and malice
had conspired together, by virulency and scurrility, to make the matter
incomparably odious; telling us that at the hearing of the word Suggestion
Reckon. cap. 5.. 4. page 326.
he imagined, and that (as he says) truly, that I would have confessed the
Devil to have been my Suggester: wherein the Iouiall and Iocular old man
meant only to make himself and his Reader sport, and intended in this play,
as it M. Parsons unseemly scurrility.
were, not to be without a Devil and a vice; the first only to be imagined,
but the other to be acted by himself, and all this to provoke unto laughter.
But the Greek Proverb, (...) that is, The old-wife danceth, is verified in
him: for our Reader may easily perceive how little this first part of M.
Parsons his play does become him, if he shall but consider how Pope Alexander
the third, Decret. l 1. de Rescript. Tit. 3. cap. 5. Praua insinuatione
suggestum, etc.
acknowledged himself to be subject to wrong Suggestions and Informations: And
that their own secular Import. Consider. page 8.
Priests have no other way, to excuse the violent proceeding of their Pope Pius
Quintus against the Q. of England, then by telling us that he was stirred up
by wrong Suggestions. Would it now become M. Parsons, who is a Romish Priest,
by the strength of his imagination to think and that Truly (as he says) that
these Popes would confess hereupon, that they received sometimes their
intelligences, Insinuations and Suggestions from the Devil? Or would not any
Priest at the first hearing of this asseueration of M. Parsons saying, Truly,
etc. acknowledge that in this first word he had committed a True-lye?

23. Afterward he himself offers (by I know not what suggestion) to spell
two dumb Characters, bewraying thereby his personal malice; especially
considering that the common letters in themselves might as easily represent
Robert Cowbucke, as any other, in the which name M. Parsons himself was
presented to Pope Clement the eighth, by the P. Robertus Personus, alias
Cowbuccus, Iesuita praecipuus etc. Declarat. motuum and perturb. inter.
Iesuitas and Sacerdotes. page 23.
Declaration of more then twenty Priests: Yet after his trifling hereabout he
comes to debate the matter it self.

Mr. PARSONS Reckoning.
Hear, Ipray you, his last shift: Though not the place alleged (says
Reckon. page 331. and 332.
he) yet the scope of M. Rainolds his whole book does convince him of
rebellious doctrine, as will more plainly appear in the Encounter. Mark now
whither he is fled de. He confesses that in the place alleged by Mr. Raynolds
(whereabout only stands our Controversy) his drift was not to abase, but to
exalt Princes authority, and confequently he must grant that he abused him in
that crimination. But he says that the scope of his book is otherwise, which
he deferreth to prove, until he make his larger Encounter, which I suppose,
will require a large time.

The Reuiewe.
24. I rather suppose that you will think this Encounter came too soon, when
you shall perceive how you are charged hereby with manifold abuses, both of
loose lying, and also of close and injurious dissembling, of which kind you
have given us a present example. For whereas (in my Page 102.
Preamble) I added a reason, why M. Raynolds might have been presumed to have
Abased the State of Kings, to wit, because in his Chapternext following he
teaches, that Subjects may depose them; and albeit Saint Peter taught
Subjection unto Nero a Pagane and Savage Tyrant, yet M. Raynolds holding it to
be naturam generosiorem, that is, a more generous and noble disposition to kill
Tyrants, among whom he reckoned K. Henry the eight: I hereupon inferred, that
the scope of M. Raynolds his book was to profess a doctrine rebellious:
notwithstanding all which, M. Parsons conueigheth the matter, M Parsons
exceeding craft and deceit.
so cunningly and craftily, as though I had deferred all proof until a Large
Encounter should come forth. Therefore I may more then imagine, that this his
Dissimulation was suggested unto him by no good spirit.

25. Thus much of my Accuser, for now I enter upon the Accusation it self, by
performance of a more perfect discharge: to which purpose I shall desire Mr.
Parsons, that we may both betake our selves unto our second thoughts, to
consider more exactly the doctrine of Mr. Raynolds; so we shall discern the
censure which was given upon that Author, how that notwithstanding his
commendation of secular government, he meant to abase the authority which is due
unto a King, as may be evidently euinced by just proofs. I shall but only
desire M. Parsons to understand my Answer, and then he shall need to require
no more for this piece of his Reckoning.

A proof of M. Raynolds his abasement of the Royalty of Kings, both out of his
own doctrine, and out of the confessions of his own Doctors.
26. M. Raynolds his doctrine, in that place alleged, is plainly this: that
in choosing any State of Government, whether it be Reynolds in Rossaeo, p. 18.
Monarchical, or Aristocraticall, or Democraticall; The consent of all people
is the voice of nature: and that every such Election, by the consent of the
people, is Approved by God; for although terren principality ( says he) be
called by the Apostle (1. Pet. 2.) An humane creature, because it is conferred
upon certain persons, by the suffrages and voices of the people;
notwithstanding because that same election of Princes does issue from nature,
which God has created, and from reason which is infused into man, therefore
does another Apostle plainly pronounce, saying (Romans 13.) That there is no power
but from God, and that he that resists the power resists the ordinance of
God.

27. This is the sentence which in outward show (as I confessed) does establish
the dignity of Kings: but when we expound M. Raynolds by himself, he will
appear not to have intended their due advancement: for in the very same
Chapter he Page 10. M. Raynolds sentence of detraction from Regal authority.
says; when the People have created a King, the Majesty of the King does
depend upon the will of the Commonwealth, which ordained him: Insomuch as that
Page 85.
They may depose their Kings: and for example he produces Page 539.
Henry of Navarre, the now King of France, whom whilst he was a Protestant M.
Raynolds held to be an Heretic, and worthy to be Excommunicated by the Pope;
and consequently to be Deposed by the French Catholics. Do we not now see
The Evidence.
plainly what kind of Creature M. Raynolds his King must be, viz. such an one
who shall not have predominant power absolutely in himself, but dependantly of
the people, by whom he may be created, and uncreated, as if the power were
formally still in the people, and but only instrumentally in the King. Can any
deny but such a King fancied by M. Rainolds is but a slavish creature; and that
in his pretense of commending the power of a King he intended closely to
diminish and depresse his authority?

28. Least perhaps any may doubt of this collection, I shall A confirmation
from their own Doctors.
in the next place corroborate it by the ingenuous and evident confession of
their own Doctors; their Doctor (...) cont. Monarch. lib 3. cap. 3.
Barclay (writing against these kind of positions, and (as The Author of the
Book entitled, verisimilia Theologica, Iuridica, etc. page 155.
one observes) against this their Rossaeus, alias Reinolds, has bestowed a
whole book upon this argument, proving especially that Barcla. quo supra.
A King, although he be constituted by the people, yet being once constituted,
he has afterward power to rule the people, and not to be subject unto them.
Jbid. lib. 4.
Who (says Barclaius) although he be unworthy of his Kingdom, in respect of
the Majesty of God, upon whom the Kingdom does depend; yet in respect of the
subjects he is always superior, as long as he is a King. And again he else
where adds that Lib. 4. cap. 4.
Kings, who are lawfully constituted, albeit they fall to be cruel, yet are
they above all laws and judgments of man, and cannot be hurt of any, without
public miury and treason. And answering unto this argument of Boucher (which
is the same which Master Reinolds urges) to wit; The Commonwealth, which is
the same as the people, (which made the King) is superior to the King, and the
public authority does remain in them. This reason (says he) I have proved
many ways in many places to be lying and false. His principal argument, to
confute it, is that which their own Marsilius has lately urged against
Bellarmine: Marsil defens. cont. Bellarm. page 212.
If (says he) there remain a power in the people to depose Princes, then
Princes are no Princes, but subjects. Now let M. Parsons gather his five wits
into one Senate, and answer, whether this confession do not plainly discover,
that the intendiment of M. Reinolds was to make a King a Subject, which is as
sensible an abasement of a King, as can be imagined.

29. Although this may suffice both to repress M. Parsons his insolency, who
insulteth so deformedly upon the former allegation, and also to reprove my
negligence, who deferred this Answer and Discharge, until the publishing of
this Encounter, yet will I not forbear to enlarge my self in this argument,
and by a further answer unto his next objection, to euince the foresaid vile
estimate, which M. Reinolds had concerning the State of Kings and all Temporal
Estates.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
But what says he for his (own) defense? Upon this presumption, Reck. page
328.
if true (says he) that Mr. Reinolds had spoken this to the debasement of
Kings, it could be no falsehood in me to add the particle [but,] especially
being acquainted with the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, who that he might
disable the authority of a King, in comparison of the dignity of a Pope, does
defend that Kings being chosen by men, are not immediately created by God: and
yet the Pope, being elected by Cardinals, bath his authority immediately from
God. Reck. page 329.
Whereunto I answer, that well he might say so, for that Christ both God and
Man did institute in particular and immediarely the supreme authority of S.
Peter, and his Successors, when he gave to him, and by him to them the keys
of heaven: but he instituted not the authority of Kings immediately, but left
by each people to be governed by what sort of government they liked best,
albeit where that form of government, or of any other (as of Dukes,
Commonwealths, or the like) was once lawfully introduced, he commanded due
obedience to be performed thereunto. And although the Popes be chosen by
Cardinals, who are men, yet is not their office, power, or authority chosen by,
or appointed by those men, as in Kings, but immediately is of God, so as this
hole will not serve M. Mortons turn for his excuse.

The Reuiew.
30. I say with our Savior Christ that the Foxes have holes, and so has M.
Parsons, Mitigat. p. 403.
who has taken an example from the instinct of nature in the Fox, for
justifying his Mental Equivocation; whose difference between the Popes and
Princes authority from God, by Bellarmine his distinction of mediately and
immediately, has been proved of late by their M. Parsons and Bellarmines
sophistry.
own Marsilius to be a mere sophistical fallacy, and indeed no better then a
Fox-hole, into which they do creep, who seek by such a distinction, to
diminish the Regal power, in respect of the Papal. I shall need only to
collect the sum of the confutation, because I presume, our Reader will not
like too long Reckoning. Marsil. (...) cont. Bellar. c. 3. page 201.
Nauarrus, a most sound Catholic ( says Marsilius) houldeth that the power
Laique is immediately from God, infusing in people a natural instinct to have
a government: And of Gouernements established, The Apostle Power of a King
immediately from God.
S. Paul says (Romans 13.) that the powers which be, are of God. Seeing also
that the lay Prince can make laws, which do bind his subjects consciences to
observe them, therefore is their authority not of man, but of God; whereupon
the Apostle. adds, [He that resists the power, resists the ordinance of
God;] and although the manner of obtaining a Kingdom be from man, ( This
proves M. Rainolds contrary estimate of a A necessary distinction between
Title and Power.
King to have been but base) yet the authority and power is immediately from
God. A similitude whereof we have in the generation of every man, for although
it be necessary that the bodily Organs, instruments, and other natural
dispositions be first perfected, before the soul is infused, yet will not any
therefore deny, that God does immediately infuse the reasonable soul of a man
into his body. As for his illustrious Lordship ( meaning Cardinal Bellarmine:)
he erreth, first by not distinguishing between Bellarmine confuted by
Marfilius.
the Title of authority, and the authority it self, ( An evident conviction
both of Bellarmine and M. Rainolds.) For the title unto an authority is not
without the means of man, but the authority it self is immediately from God,
as has been expressed by the former similitude. Secondly, he erreth in saying
that all, which dwellwithin the Princes territories, are not immediately from
God Subjects unto him, and yet all Christians are immediately subject unto the
Pope; for as the Prince is not a Prince without either right of his birth, or
by election, etc. So the Pope is not Pope but by the election of Cardinals.
Thirdly, he erreth in saying that when the Prince dies, the authority
remains in the commonwealth; especially, where as the succession is by
election; but when the Pope dies the power Papal remains not in the
Cardinals, who are to make an election, nor in the Church; But the Doctors of
the famous College of the Sorbonists in Paris do defend the contrary.
Fourthly, he erreth in making this difference between Prince and Pope, to wit,
that the Title of the Prince is but mediately, and the Title of the Pope is
immediately from God; if by the Title, he understand the manner of obtaining
the authority, he erreth: for both the manner of the one, and of the other are
equally humane, neither will the Conclauists themselves suffer me to be
convinced of a lie in this point. Thus far their own Marsilius.

31. As for Bellarmine his imagination, who thinks that in the vacancy of the Sea of Rome, by the death of the Pope, the keys or supreme authority, is
neither in the Council, nor in the Cardinals, but in the hands of Christ, it
is no better then a dream, wherein he saw the keys, as it were, flying up
into heaven. For when the Sea was often void of a Pope (as their Historians
record) the space of three or four years, and sometime also for Card. Cusan.
Concord. Cathol. lib. 3. c. 41. Post Marcellinum Papatum vacasse septem annis.
Seven, or Sunt qui scribunt, post morte^ Nicolai primi Sedem vacasse annis
octo mensibus septem. Platina in vita Nicolai primi.
Eight years together, as some have thought, dare any Romanists conceit, that
their Church was all that while destitute of the keys of spiritual
Jurisdiction?

32. Finally, because M. Parsons plaieth the flesh-flye, delighting himself
with sucking of but seeming corruptions, I must direct him unto the examples of
his own friends above mentioned, to wit, Suarez, Bellarmine, Baronius,
Boucher, Gratian, etc. in whom their own Doctors have spied diverse vlcerous
putrefactions of true and notorious falsifications, by See above. cap. 1.
alleging authors flat contrary to their meanings; with which loathsome
matters his corrupt appetite may satiate it self. One example of this kind,
offers it self out of Bellarmine, which I may not let pass: whom P. Paulus
has confuted for abusing a sentence of Gerson, by so inuerting the sense
thereof, as P. Paulus Apolog. pro Gersone cont. Bellar. page 569. Bellarmines
apparent and confessed falsehood
that which Gerson said in favor of the authority of the Roman See, the
Author (meaning Bellarmine) changing the words, does interpret as spoken in
contempt. Is this to dispute, (says P. Paulus) or to deceive? I know not what
the Author, (to wit, Bellarmine,) can answer. And when M. Parsons has
considered this, let him tell us in good earnest whether he will stand unto his
own Reck. page 328.
Rule of Penance, against any one who shall be found guilty of so notorious a
falsehood, that he never be trusted hereafter? I forbear to mention his own
falsifications, because he exacteth an example of any one, who has the degree
of Prelacy in their Church.

SECT. V.
The fifth charge: concerning the testimony out of Gratian, for paying of debts.
33. TO show that, by their doctrine, they will plead freedom from paying of
debts unto such persons, whom they shall excommunicate, the Gloss of a Canon
was alleged by R. S. and mistaken; but yet only in part, for their Jesuit
Tolet Preamb. p. 105
expounds that Canon, and an other of non-payment of debts, which are made by
promise. And now M. Parsons begins to play his prizes, and to have about
with two at once.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WE may see how poor men in substance our Ministers are, who Reck. page 335.
double thus.

The Reueiwe.
34. Has R. S. mistaken this one place? and has never any Romish Priest been
found so culpable, as to mistake an objection for the resolution? We See above.
Cap. 1.
have heard the complaint, which their own Doctor Cumel made against certain
Romish writers, such as were the Jesuit Suarez, and others, saying, Romists
overtaken in the guilt, which they impute to others.
I am grieved to see how falsely they allege Driedo, urging that, which he
spoke by way of argumentation, or objection, for his own judgment. And M.
Parsons himself, who is the accuser, must necessarily run upon his own
blade of reproach, who See above. Cap. 12.. 8.
called an Interrogation, made for the more sensible introduction of the
matter, a crafty and hypocritical silence and dissimulation.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mr. Stock alleges the Canon it self, making his Inference thus: Reck. p.
339. 340
This is the decree, which in general carricth as much, or more as is set
down. (...) that he says, that it carries as much in general: but
generalities are not sufficient to avouch particulars. This Canon does prohibit
obedience to be exhibited to excommunicate persons, until they do conform
themselves: it speaks nothing of debts; how shall we try it? first by the
words themselves, wherein there is no mention at all of debts: and for that
cause it is probable that Mr. Stock was ashamed to English them, as M. Morton
before to recite them Secondly, by the Commentary, or Gloss, whose words are
plain, Licet excommunicatio tollat obligationem, quoad fidelitatem, non tamen
quoad alios contractus: albeit excommunication do take away obligation of
fidelity, or subjection toward the person excommunicated, yet not in other
contracts: so as if I do owe to an excommunicate person, money, I am bound to
pay him. Thus does the Gloss expound the Canon, and the scaberd does agree
with the sword, and both of them do hurt Mr. Morton, and M. Stock, though
never so good fencers in a badde cause.

The Reueiwe.
35. Although we two should seem too weak for this M. Parsons, who makes
himself greater then an Hercules: yet it may be we shall ouer-match him, when
we adioyne unto our small force the help of their own Card. Tolet, who citing
these two Canons, to wit, Nos Sanctorum, and Canon Iuratos says Tolet.
Instruct. Sacerd l. 1. c. 13.. Sixtus. M. Parsons confuted by their Card.
Tollet.
These Canons do proceed concerning debts, yet not debts which are real
(meaning, by Bill, or Bond) but debts contractea by promise. This exposition of
their own Cardinal, and sometime Jesuit, does not only ward M. Parsons his
blow, but also drives it to his own pate, by controwling the audaciousnesse
of his answer, wherein he denied that there is signified any non-payment of
debts in this Canon.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mr. Stock goes further to allege an other beginning of a Canon, Reck. page
340. 341.
Absolutos senouerint, which was made by Gregory the ninth. Wherein the very
same thing is decreed, as in the other; wherein Greg 9. Decret. l. 5. Tit. 7. c.
16.
there is no mention of debts, although, by occasion of this decree, a certain
Gloss, whichi of Bernardus de Buttono Parmensis, does probably hold that to
such a man there is not obligation of payment of debt (at leastwise of such
debts as are only contracted by promises, but are not real debts) so long as
he remains in that case. And to this effect also speaks Tolet in the place
here cited by M. Morton, and we have heard before how the other Gloss of
Bartbolomaeus Brixiensis held it for probable, though the contrary for more
true, upon the Canon, Nos Sanctorum.

The Reuiewe.
36. Well then, their Card. Tolet, and Roman Glossers have held it lawful for
men to withold their debtes contracted only by promise (which may pass
without witness) from persons excommunicate. But why only these kind of
debts made only by promise? Is there, in respect of God, The mystery of non
payment of debts made by promise.
more justice in a man's letters, then in his words? in his hand, then in his
tongue? in his specialties by bills and bonds, then in his obligation by
promise? no, but it is rather, as it may seem, because the Creditor has not
so good cuidence before men, to claim his debt by word, as he has by writing;
wherefore the Romish Canon sauoureth rather of humane craft, then of good
conscience; and is far unworthy the title of Nos Sanctorum. But let us
proceed.

SECT. VI.
The sixth charge taken by M. Parsons against R. S. about another Canon.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WE must call him (namely R. S.) back again for cyting the Reck. page 374.
Gloss apud Gratianum, that is, in the Decrees collected by Gratian, which is
not there, but in the Decretals of Pope Greg 9. gathered by Raymundus
Barcionensis. And the (...) of that Gloss was Bernardus de Buttono.

The Reuiew.
37. This exception, taken from the difference of Glosses upon the Popes
Decrees, which were gathered by Gratian; and between the Gloss upon the Popes
Decretals, whose Author was Bernardus de Buttono, is not worth a button:
seeing the argument, which was used by Mr. S. consisted not upon the authority
which the Collectors, or Glossers had in themselves, but from the common
approbation, which they received in the Roman Church. The matter, which
principally was to be insisted upon, follows in the next Inquiry.

An Inquiry by a logical Rack.
38. Whereas the Canon of killing of Heretics is mentioned among the Popes
Decretals, authorized by Pope Gregory the ninth in my Preamble, I demanded of
M. Parsons Popes Canon; of killing of Heretics.
in this manner: Pream. p. 107.
If Romish ones applying this Canon ( of niurthering their kindred, etc)
against Protestants, when the Pope shall iudicially denounce them Heretics,
whether it may be called a Massacre, or no? I have now my Mitigator upon a
Logic rack; either he must say, that it is no bloody massacre, but Catholic
justice: and then what shall his A Dilemma.
Reader think of his Mitigation otherwise then of Judas his lips in kissing,
and yet betraying his Master? and if he hold it an excerable mischief, then
how shall he justify the application of this Canon, when the Pope shall extend
it against Protestants? He cannot answer directly, but he must manifest
himself either a Traitor to his Country, or a preuaricator to his cause.
Pream. p. 108.
Yet consider how zealous P. R. is in authorizing that Canon: to what end can
this be, but that Protestants, being in their opinion Heretics, may have all the penalties, which are awarded against Heretics, executed upon them (as
Boucher and others defend before or at least (as P. R. holds) after
denunciation of sentence? And consequently Protestants may be by these Romish
ones, without exception of sexs or kindred, or friendship, as it was by
execution in the cruel Massacre in See Thuanus hist. lib. 52.
France, and by intention in the powder treason, utterly consumed at once. Do
not these demands require a plain, full, and satisfiable account? yet now
mark, and marvel at his answer.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereunto I answer, that the demand is foolish, and not Reck. page 349.
worthy the answering at all: for that the like odious demands may be made
about the execution of all criminal laws. And it is a token that M. Morton is
at a nonplus, when he seeks to entertain time in these impertinencies.

The Reueiwe.
39. At a Nonplus Mr. Parsons? surely if I were not so then, yet may I now be,
but never for want of Argument in this case, but by reason of astonishment to
see such an Answer as this is, whereby any Reader (who has any apprehension
of a consequence) may see and groape, and sensibly feel the beating of your
rebellious pulse. For whereas the book of the Discovery of Romish positions
and practices for rebellion, was written only to manifest in how desperate a
State all Protestant Kings stood in, whenever the Romish power might prevail
against them: and your Answer hereunto in your book of Mitigation, intended
wholly to mitigate the bitterness of the objected positions, and to assuage
the jealousy of the State, by pretending a possibility (but yet only a
possibility) of a peaceable conversation in this Kingdom. Yet now, where a
demand is made, whether it be not the full intendment and resolution of all
Romish Professors, to execute your Canon of Killing Heretics upon
Protestants, whenever M. Parsons his ungodly silence betrayeth his whole
pretense of their loyalty in the States of Protestants.
an expected possibility of effectuating such an exployt, shall be offered: and
when hereby being urged and importuned to give us a plain and direct Answer,
even as you will be thought not to have justified either the Massacring of
Protestants in France; or that late barbarous, or rather Traiterous and
hellish Powder Treason in England; yet now we can have no other Answer for our
satisfaction, but to say that the Demand is foolish, odious, and impertinent.

40. This Reckoning is able (I confess) at the first to drive a man unto a
nonplus, through an amazement to hear so prodigious an Answer: Yet so, that
therein he may see sufficient matter (if there were none other argument in all
the book) to prove M. Parsons (when he takes upon him the name of a
Mitigator, and Sober Reckoner) to be no better then the deceitful
Apothecarie, who writ Apium upon a box of Opium: And what is this his
concealment else, but a kind of confession, justifying the former book of
Discovery; the scope whereof was only this, to prove the Romish doctrine to be
a profession of Conspiracy in Protestant Kingdoms?

41. This matter may be illustrated by a similitude, viz. M. Parsons A
Similitude.
and some other are to travel together, and their way lies through a desert,
much haunted with thieves; the honest man is desirous of M. Parsons his
fellowship in that travel, swearing unto him that for his part he will be true
unto him, and hazard his life in resisting all violence, that shall be offered
against them in the journey, and exacteth of M. Parsons the like promise,
saying: Sir, will you swear to be true unto me likewise, or if your heart
will not serve you to fight, will you promise not to betray me? and then he
should hear M. Parsons answer only by calling that demand odious, foolish
and impertinent, might he not justly suspect that he had met with a
treacherous companion, and forthwith desire his less Acquaintance?

42. So likewise the whole Controversy, which M. Parsons and I have taken in
hand to debate, is only this, whether the Romanists will by Oath profess so
full a league of friendly and Christian conversation with Protestants in their
Kingdoms, as to defend each other from foreign invasions, and to appease and
suppress to their power, all intestine seditions and rebellions against the
public State; or else, at least, not to conspire together to the cutting of
throats: yet now M. Parsons answering in the name of all Romanists, will allow
us no better satisfaction, then (as we have heard) to call the Demand odious,
foolish and impertinent.

43. By this time we have a reasonable understanding of M. Parsons his
Answer, who hearing us as it were questioning, and demanding of him, saying:
Sir, whether will you kill us, if you had us in your power, or no? thought it
was not for his purpose to answer no, for then must he condemn their Romish
positions and practices, which have sounded out so many allarums of war and
bloodshed; neither durst he say yea, for then he must recant his former book
of Mitigation, and cancel the sum of this his present Reckoning, which does
make, at least, some semblance of a peaceable conversation; and therefore he
thought it a point of wisdom to call it foolish, as though he would teach us
to be as wise as doves,, whilst he and his Accomplices may remain as innocent as
Serpents. Here M. Parsons may be served indeed with a Nihil dicit, but such
an one, which conteyneth in it an Omnia dicit, for it is all one as a
confession of all the former charges of seditious doctrine, which I hane
objected against them.

44. I should pass on to that which follows, but that I may not deny M.
Parsons the due commendation of his wit, who finding himself plunged with the
former Demand concerning their real shedding and spilling of blood, does call
this objection impertinent, and presently diuerteth his Reader to a verbal and
idle contention about the difference of these two phrases Shedding and Spilling
(which may be used promiscuously:) as though his question about words were
pertinent, and my Demand about deeds were Impertinent.

45. I added in the Preamb. p. 108.
Preamble that M. Parsons affirmed the aforesaid Canon to have been in the
Council of Carthage, where (said I) there is no such thing to be found: and
hereupon am called to a further examination.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IT is most apparent, and may be inuincibly proved against him: for Reck. page
351.
first the Canon it self begins thus: Si quis Episcopus, etc.

The Reuiew.
46. Our question was about Shedding of blood, which was objected as out of
their Gloss. Preamb p. 106.
This Gloss (said M. Parsons) or Commentary of the Canon law, is upon a Canon
beginning, Si quis, etc. which Canon is taken out of the Council of Carthage:
where indeed there is mention of Dis-inheriting of children, His extrauagancie.
but no word at all concerning Shedding of blood: accordingly as I then
intended to prove, as may well appear.

SECT. VII.
The seventh Charge.
47. NOw comes in the citation of the Extrauag. in a general implying the
Gloss, whereunto I have Pream. p. 111.
answered that Greg. 13. ad futuram rei memoriam, etc
Gregory the thirteenth has ratified the foresaid Gloss and Annotations, with
privilege and authority, equivalent and answerable to the authority of the
Decretals, and Extrauagants themselves. Now follows the brief of

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis is a shameless assertion, to say that the Glosses and Annotations
Reckon. cap. 5. 7 page 355.
have been equally warranted by Pope Gregory, as are the Constitutions. Pope
Greg 13 prefixed an Epistle before the Decretals of Gratian with this title, Ad
futuram rei memoriam, wherein he gives license to Paulus Constabilis Magister
sacri palaty to reuiewe the same, and to print it exactly, according to the
Roman example. From whence M Morton would infer, that he commanded them to
be printed without corruption, therefore he made them equal.

The Reueiwe.
48. The former Decree of Greg. 13. stands thus, concerning Decrees, and
Glosses, the Sextum, Clementines, and Extrauagants; Which we commend (says
Pope Greg.) unto our beloved son, to be reuiewed and allowed: And a little
after: Which The authority of the Romish Gloss upon the Decrees, and
Decretals, etc.
we command to be printed and published that the body of the Canon law may be
faithfully and incorruptly printed, according to the Copy which is printed at
Rome, for the better help of all faithful Christians whomsoever. In this
Constitution here is mention of Decrees, Glosses, Sextum, Clementines, and
Extrauagants, where we see that Glosses do possess the second place: And was
the Pope thus religious to provide for All faithful Christians, least any of
them might possibly be poisoned with a corrupt Text, and would he not have the
like care that the Gloss should be perfect, which being false (according to
the Proverb) does corrupt the Text.

49. In the same Constitution Greg. says, as follows: We provide that this
body of the law may pass purged, sound, and safe, that it may not be lawful
for any man to add any thing, or change it, or ioyn any interpretation unto
it: Thereby forbidding only new Interpretations, for the old Glosses and
Interpretations do stand still warranted jointly with the Text and body of the
Canons. If therefore the Pope thought those Glosses mentioned in the
Constitution to be corrupt, why did he authorize them? if he judged them to be
perfect, how did he not authorize them? And who can conceive any inequality in
the Popes approbation of these things, seeing that both Decrees and Glosses,
etc. are without any note of difference warranted in the same Constitution at
the same time, Anno 1580. by the same power of Pope Gregory 13. and to the same
end for the help of faithful Christians.

50. Nevertheless it is an hard thing (I confess) for any man to understand
precisely when, and how the thing is plenarily and fully authorized by the
Popes Decree, for in their last Council of Sess. 4.
Trent it was decreed, that there should be One authentical vulgar Edition of
the Bible, which none might presume to reject: yet that which was called then [
The vulgar Edition] has since that time been twice diversely corrected: The
dubious authority of their vulgar Romish Translation of the Bible.
once by Pope Sixtus Quintus, and after by Pope Clement the eight, even with
contradictory approbations. Neither seems it unto their own Jesuits to be so
perfect, but that they dare reprehend it: their Jesuit Mald. Ies. in Matthew. 6.
5.
Maldonate, saying of one place that It is to be corrected by the Greek; the
Jesuit Ribera Ies. in Heb. 4. 2.
Ribera affirming of another place, that It ought to be according to the
Greek; their Jesuit Salmeron Ies. (...) Iac. 5. 16.
Salmeron affirming of another place, that Without doubt this word were better
left out: besides the diverse other corrupt pieces of that Translation, which,
by the confession of some other Romish Doctors, have occasioned corruption in
doctrine, as Catholic appeal, Lib. 4. cap. 18.. 3.
elsewhere has been discovered. But M. Parsons is ready to pose me.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IF Queen Elizabeth did approve the Printing of the English new Testament with
Bczaes notes, did she thereby equal the said notes with the Text of the
Testament it self? Who would reason so, or who would go about to abuse his
Reader and himself, that had care of conscience or credit?

The Reueiwe.
51. This Simile is dissimile, and an unlikely comparison, for our Adversaries
know right well, that we do not attribute unto either King or Queen that
infallibility of judgment, M. Parsons his frothy argument.
which they do unto the Pope; so that the disproportion of this comparison
appears herein, because we discern between Scriptures and the Annotations,
(by whomsoever they be approved) as between the word of God, and Man's opinion.
But the Romanists, who hold the judgment of the Pope in all things, which he
shall publicly decree for the good of all Christians, to be divinely true,
must therefore intertaine with equal faith the Decretals and Glosses, because
they have been reuiewed and approved with the same authority. I hasten to
hear my next Charge.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE was charged with adding the words of Apostata Princes, not Reck. page 357.
found at all in the Gloss, yet may the matter in the Gloss be extended unto
them. He also cut off the last words of the sentence, Nisi (...) What need
these nibblings?

The Reueiwe.
52. Nay rather what need these iugglings, which M. M. Parsons false iuggling.
Parsons uses, who knowing that the words of Apostata Princes were not my
Additions, but the Satisfact. part. 3 page 34.
Objection of M. Parsons own fellow, the namelesse Author of the Apology of
the English Catholics, cap. 5. as I did Preamb. p. 111.
show him, and he could not deny: yet does he wilfully run upon the same
strain, a note beyond true sobriety, especially seeing that he also confesses
that in true sense the Gloss did extend unto Apostata Princes.

53. In the Preamb. page 111. 112.
same place I furthermore justified the relating of testimonies of Authors,
according to their sense, without His notable fraud.
the precise repetition of their words, by the example of their own Pope in
his alleging of Scripture Deuteronomy. 13. but M. Parsons (which is fraud indeed)
has peremptorily condemned me, without confutation, yea or so much as mention
of that answer.

54. Finally, I was so far from iniurying the Gloss, in hope of any
advantage, that now (considering the perverseness of my Adversary) I cannot but
be offended with my self for loosing my best advantage, in not expressing the
In Extrauag. comm. lib. 1. de Mayor. and Obed. cap. 1.
Gloss to the full, because the words following will sufficiently manifest
the Gloss to be (which was the matter intended) both sacrilegious and
rebellious. As Jesus by his nature all right (says the Gloss) might enter into
judgment, and pronounce the sentence of deposing an Emperor, or any other A
false and bloody Gloss in the Extrauagants.
person, so also may his Vicar, meaning the Pope. Which assertion is so grossly
false, that their own late and learned Doctors do greatly abhor it, as
hereafter will fully appear.

SECT. VIII.
The eight Inquiry.
55. CAmpian, Genebrard, Canisius, and diverse other Romish Doctors with maine
force fell upon Calvin, and laid unto his charge no less then impiety,
heresy, and blasphemy, because of his opinion of (...) Bellarmine, howsoever
he condemned the phrase, did notwithstanding justify the meaning of Calvin,
and judged it to be Catholic. Which I Preamb p. 112
produced to the just reproof of their malice, who have so unconscionably
traduced the doctrine of Calvin.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Handled this matter before: albeit Bellarmine teach, that in some Reck. page
358.
sense it may be truly said that Christ is God of himself, yet absolutely
does he condemn the speech of Calvin herein. Reck. ibidem. page 363.
Seeing Bellarmine condemned Calvin, quoad modum loquendi, in his manner of
speech, which he proves Heretical by four sorts of arguments; Why had not M.
Morton so much as mentioned this condemnation by Bellarmine, seeing it imported
the matter so mightily? Which is sufficient to argue the faulty mind of the
corrupter.

The Reuiewe.
56. Surely M. Parsons is a mighty Questionist: Calvin called Christ (...)
Bellarmine condemned the phrase of Calum, but justified his meaning against
some Romish Doctors, who had wickedly imputed Heresy and Blasphemy unto M.
Parsons his unwise dema^d. Calvin his judgment justified by Bellarmine.
to Caluins judgment: And M. Parsons asks why I mentioned not Bellarmines
condemnation of the phrase, as well as his justification of the meaning? I
answer, I was to deal with the kernel, and left the shell for him to
exercise his teeth withal; and knowing that Heresy consists not in the
word, but in the sense (as I have See above. cap. 12. n. 27.
proved) I omitted the contention about that word: which notwithstanding might
have been justified, against Bellarmine, by the equivalent Danaeus Resp. ad
Bellar. contro. 2. lib. 20. cap. 19.
phrases of ancient Fathers (...) and such like, which argue M. Caluins
adversaries to be but mighty wranglers, as has been more amply proved See
above.
heretofore, where M. Parsons is found to be the corrupter not of Authors
words, but of their confessed meanings in this point: who being unable to
oppose any material thing against me, riotteth about the omission of Hoc
errore, This error, albeit the question were only of This error, and none
other: and then for saying Illos, for, Illum, although I was licensed thereunto
by Bellarmine himself, who joined both Calvin, and two other Protestants, as
namely Beza and Simlerus, together, whose judgment in the same point he did
likewise approve. So that a man would imagine, that M. Parsons was scarce
either hic, or ille, when, for want of matter of exception, he reeled upon
illos and hoc.

SECT. IX.
The ninth Charge.
THis is about the Sea this above. cap. 12.
Text of the Prophet Esaias Chap. 29. verse. 9. They are blind and make others
blind.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I Noted him only for false alleging, corrupting, and mangling this Reck page
364.
place: the Reader will see my reason, by looking upon the Text: And how little
he has been able to say for himself, in justification of his fancy, may be
seen in the Chapters before mentioned, and so we pass to an other, as
trifling as this.

The Reuiew.
57. M. Parsons noted me (as he says) for false alleging, corrupting, and
mangling that text of Scripture, and has shown himself thereby a notorious
malicious man, as I See above. cap. 12. number. 41.
have fully euicted: showing first that I corrupted not the Text, but alleged
it as it is found in our common English translation. Secondly, proving that the
same translation is justifiable both in words and sense. And whereas M.
Parsons in his Mitigation did vehemently pursue me, saying, Mitigat. p. 88.
I cannot easily pretermit, etc. Now in this Reckoning he is willing partly to
pretermit his own error, calling the matter a trifling, as he uses to do,
when he is deprehended in a voluntary deceit.

SECT. X.
The tenth Charge.
THis is See this above. cap. 12. number. 47.
touching two words of some affinity, vero, and vere: whereof we have
discussed before.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis is also a Colewort twice already sodden, whereof I spoke but a Reck. cap.
5.. 10. page 365.
word or two in my Treatise of Mitigation, censuring it for a trifle: and now
M. Morton has so stretched out the matter, for that he may seem to have some
little patronage for his error, by the later error of an other print.

The Reuiew.
58. Now since that M. Parsons has seen, by the last Preamble, his own rash,
vile, and slanderous accusation detected, he can be contented that his Reader
may thinkje, that he censured me for that pretended abuse only in a word, or M.
Parsons former grievous slander partly confessed and thoroughly discovered.
two, that is, not rigorously, but remissely, as a man of sobriety would do
any Trifling matter: but I, who tasted his gal cannot so easily forget the
bitterness of his inuectiue; who made his exclamation against me thus:
Mitigat. p. 234
And where is now the assurance of his upright conscience protested in his
Epistle Dedicatory? Where is his simplicity in Christ Jesus? where is his naked
innocence? can this be ignorance? can this be done but of a guilty conscience?
what may we believe of all that he says, when he sees himself entangled with
such foolish treachery? Thus far M. Parsons. And could thou conceive
otherwise (good Reader) by this hue and cry, but that I had been guilty at
least of some perjury or sacrilege, or blasphemy, notwithstanding now he
confesses that it is but a trifling matter, and is willing to think that it
was urged against me upon a false surmise? Here we see that his trisling
coleworts were first sodden in vinegre and gall, even in the bitterness of his
maliciousness, but now he is content to mingle oil with it, being in part
ashamed of his former cookery.

59. Nevertheless, whereas M. Parsons has not prosecuted any one taxation
against me, either in his former book of Mitigation, or in this his new
Reckoning with more variety and virulency of words, then he has done this his
Trifling, rash, and lying slander, every word peircing to the very soul,
saying, Where is his conscience? where is his simplicity in Christ Jesus? where
his innocence? here is his guiltiness, and M. Parsons exquisite fraudulency
in covering his falsehood.
here his treachery: yet now shameth not to say (as though he had not greatly
urged that point against me) that he passed over the matter in a word, or two.
Much like as one, who after he had peirced a man into his brains, and stabbed
him at the very heart with many a mortal wound, should excuse himself, saying,
I gave him but a Trifling blow, or two.

SECT. XI.
The eleauenth Charge.
60. COncerning the doctrine of Doleman, houlding it a damnable sin for any
Romanist to admit a Protestant Prince unto the Crown. Which I have answered,
and (as I hope) satified: but yet M. Parsons has found out some other odd
ends to be reckoned for.

Mr. PAROSNS his Reckoning.
I Deny that either the true words or sense of Doleman was related by Reck.
cap. 5.. 11. page 366.
him, and consequently he cannot be excused from a witting falsehood.

The Reuiew.
61. Who is this that accuses me? M. Parsons: in whose behalf? in the behalf
of Doleman, alias, M. Parsons: for what? for accusing Mr. Parsons to have held
it a damnable sin for any of his Catholics to admit any Protestant unto the
Crown of England: which notwithstanding was proved M. Parsons defends that
book which has been accounted rebellious by their own Priest.
by the force of a Syllogism, concluding thus, Ergo Dolman, alias, M. Parsons
held it a damnable sin for any Romish Professor to admit a Protestant to the
Crown. But since that M. Parsons took a surfeit of his own foolish
Syllogism, the consequence of Syllogismes could not well relish in his mouth.
Secondly this sense is so evident, that their own Priests have called that
book entitled Dolman, a Important Consider. in the Epist. Dedicat. And see
the like confessed above.
Traiterous, Seditious and most infamous book against the English State, which
is so evident, that whosoever shall but read that book, may see that if M
Parsons his own conscience could be heard speak, we should need neither the
confession of their own Priests, nor the consequence of M. Parsons to make up
the conclusion.

SECT. XII.
The twelfth Charge.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THis imputation was about false dealing on M. Mortons behalf, in Reck. cap.
5.. 12. page 367.
setting down in general, that All Popish Priests do abolish the succession
of all Protestant Princes, upon the pretense of prerogative in Pope and people.
Wherein he is convinced of diverse falsehoods, handled before by us, in the first
Chapter.

The Reuiewe.
62. I answer, that if I have been justly convicted, nay if I have not been
injuriously traduced by M. Parsons in this matter, then shall I subject my self
unto him, as worthy to be condemned in all. We both remit our selves unto our
See above.
former Reckoning about this point.

SECT. XIII.
The thirteenth Charge.
63. IT concerns the testimony of Otto Frisingensis against Gregory the
seventh,

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHich was alleged quite contrary to the words and meaning Reck. c. 5. P. 367.
of the Author Frisingensis, so that he was enforced to lay the fault partly
upon Doctor Tolossanus, partly to abuse the testimony of Claudius Espencaeus,
and to make him say and auerre that which he does not, but relates out of
others. And in no one imputation hitherto was he more grauelled then in this,
as the Reader may see by turning unto the place it self.

The Reuicwe.
64. I have much cause to thank M. Parsons for this so plain dealing, in
saying that I have not been grauelled hitherto in any one imputation more then
in this: because hereby our Reader may more easily conceive of Mr. Parsons his
former Imputations, and thereby conjecture of them that follow, how sick and
feeble they are, by my answer unto this: wherein I What kind of Graueller M.
Parsons is.
shall show what kind of Gravel Mr. Parsons uses to cast in my way; for if
in this point I stand not clear, then let our Reader hold me guilty of all
the other Imputations, wherewith M. Parsons has besmeered me.

65. The sum of the Answer, which I See above, cap 12. Sect. 13.
have delivered at large, is this: First that I cyted truly the testimony of
Tolossanus, whom only I pointed out in the marginall note, to be the Author
of that testimony, neither has M. Parsons excepted against it. Secondly, that
M. Parsons, with fine fraud concealed my Allegation, that thereby his
imputation of falsehood might carry the better pretense; and now since the
discovery of his craft and malignancy therein, he finds no better evasion
then to say, that my marginall cytation was not in English, as though that
would be any excuse for Mr. Parsons, who understands Latin: Thirdly, that
Cl. Espensaeus does expressly approve the Epistle of the Priests of Liege,
wherein Pope Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand is noted and reproved, as
being the first Pope who perturbed the Imperial States of Christendom, by
presumption of deposing the Emperor from his dignity: Lastly, that M. Parsons
in this his new Reckoning, in saying that Espensaeus did not approve that
Epistle, has committed an irrecouerable untruth, which will be unto his
conscience, as gravel would be to his mouth, until he spit it out by true
repentance.

SECT. XIIII.
The fourteenth Charge.
65. THe crimination, which Mr. Parsons urged against me was this: Mitig. ca 6.
n. 37. page 215.
His words ( says he) are these: Pope Hildebrand ( says our Chronographer)
was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italy, for that he had defamed the
Apostolic Sea with Simony, and other capital crimes; and then cyteth for
proof hereof, Lambertus Schaffnaburg. Anno 1077. As if this our Chronographer
had related this as a thing of truth, and not rather as slanderous objection,
cast out by his Adversaries, that followed the part of Henry the Emperor.

The discharge.
66. My discharge Preamb. p 120 Lambertus Scassnaburg. hist. (...) An. 1077.
(...) sin.
was taken from the words of Shaffnaburgensis, Which are these: After that the
fame had gone thorowut Italy, that K. Henry had set foot within the coasts,
All the Bishops of Italy did flock unto him, congratulating his coming,
because he came with a resolute courage to depose the Pope ( to wit, Gregory
7.) Afterward he shows their reasons: That they feared not the Popes
excommunication, whom all the Bishops of Italy for just cause had
excommunicated, who had by violence obtained the Sea Apostolic by Symoniac all
heresy, had defiled the same by murders and adulteries, and other capital
crimes.

67. Thus the Bishops of Italy (by the testimony of Shaffnaburgensis) behaved
themselves against Hildebrand, and this was the only matter, which I proposed
as worthy of proof: for as I then said, Preamb p. 120.
The point now in question is, whether this Author Lambertus Schaffnaburg. did
think that those Bishops of Italy had condemned this Pope Gregory (for whether
they did it justly or unjustly, is the second question) for such crimes, or no?
I have affirmed that Schaffnaburg. was of this opinion: but P. R. denies it,
calling my assertion impudent impiety. Let us be judged by the evidence of the
Author himself. Which is a plain conviction of M. Parsons his slanderous
dealing, who now strugleth to free himself from this blot, but (alas!) as a
bird in the lime, to his further intanglement.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
WHereunto I answer, that this is not the point in question, Reckon. cap. 5.
page 376.
whether Lambertus did think, that they had excommunicated him, or no? Neither
did we ever join issue thereupon, as does appear in my charge before set
down: though Lambertus is not found any where to affirm that they did
excommunicate him, but only relates that some of his enemies in their fury,
rage, and passion did object such things against him: but the true question is,
whether Lambertus supposing such a thing had been done, were of opinion, that
it was justly or iniustly, rightly or wrongfully done, for otherwise he should
impertinently be brought in for the condemnation of Pope Gregory: for so much
as if he had been wrongfully and injuriously so condemned, it would have been
more for his praise, as by the examples of S. Athanas. S. Chrysoft. and other
holy men so condemned by multitudes of either bad, or deceived Bishops, may
appear.

The Reuiew.
68. Does M. Parsons know what he says? has not a Reader liberty to justify
any thing by the acts of men, testified His mere quarrelling.
by an Historian, albeit the same Historian do in his judgment condemn them?
We read of certain Princes who accused Daniel, for transgressing the Kings
commandment, in praying thrice a day unto God, and not only unto King Darius
(according as the King had enjoined:) had it not been lawful for the godly
Jews of those times, to have collected Dan. 6.
from the report of those Princes, concerning Daniel, that he was a devout man,
in praying unto God? Would M. Parsons, if he had lived in those days, have
said that this observation had been deceitful, because the enemies of Daniel,
who were the Reporters, disliked that act of Daniel, and did therefore accuse
him to the King?

69. M. Parsons himself is pleased sometimes to make use of the relations of
M. Fox, and Holinshed, when they record any matter, which may serve his
purpose, never regarding whether they that report such things do also reprove
them. But of all other men, the late Romish Apologists are they, with whom this
kind of practice is most frequent and familiar, who repeat many testimonies of
Authors favoring your cause, but out of the relation of Protestant Writers;
notwithstandiug the same Protestants in the same places, do expressly reprove
and refute the alleged Testimonies. Wherefore if M. Parsons will make good
this part of his Reckoning, then must he allow us a new Index Expurg. for the
cancelling of the principal arguments of their late Catholic Apology.

70. When will M. Parsons vain vein of cauelling be spent, that we may come
unto the point? which is, whether the Bishops of Italy did oppose themsclues
against Pope Gregory the seventh, as has been said, for (by your leave M.
Parsons) this was the issue; for the argument which I used in confutation of
your rebellious doctrine, was taken from the authority of the Italian Bishops
(according to the confession of your Historian Lambert Schaffnaburg.)
withstanding the Popes rebellious practice; and not upon the opinion of the
Reporter, in censuring the opposition of those Bishops.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
But he mentions All the Bishops of Italy; the word, A l, is frandulently
Reck. page 374.
urged by him, as you will see. so that scarcely he deals sincerely in any
thing:

The Reueiwe.
71. If I have not dealt sincerely in this word All, then will I confess that
I have been guilty of insincere dealing in all the rest: I hope M. Parsons
will be so good, as to acquit me in his charge following.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
ALbeit these words be in Lambertus, Certalim ad cum omnes Italiae Reck. page
374.
Episcopi and Comites confluebant, All Bishops and Earls of Italy did flock
unto him yet that they were certain Italian Bishops and Eatles that dwelt
about the Alps, is evident by the narration it self: for the very next
precedent words, left out by M. Morton, are, Superatis asper. rupib. iam intra
Italiae fines consistere, certatim ad cum omnes Italiae Episcopi. After that it
was understood that the Emperor had overcome the high rocks, and was within
the borders of Italy, all the Italian Bishops and Earls flocked unto him. And
what sort of Bishops these were, he expounds within a few lines after,
saying, Qui se iampridem ab Ecclesiastica communione suspenderat: they hated
Pope Gregory, as him that had suspended them from Ecclesiastical Communion And
a little after setting down the clause of suspension, especially of Clergy
men, to have been of them whom Pope Gregory had forbid marriage, to wit, some
of Lombardie about the Alps: and though Lambert call them Italiae Episcopos,
that is, the Bishops of Italy, yet does he not mean all the Bishops of Italy.

The Reuiew.
72. I grant that the word Al uses to be taken in Authors in a double
signification, to wit, either betokening a Generality, that is, All for the
most part; or an Universality, that is, every one, as every scholar knows.
M. Parsons will persuade his Reader, that I used and urged the word All in the
larger extent: now if this may be evidently proved to be M. Parsons both
adverse and perverse exception against me, I suppose our Reader hereby will
discern, that if his charity and his truth be put in true balances, they will
weigh both alike, just M. Parsons miserable fraud and falsity.
nothing at all. For I was so far from arguing from the word All, either
universally, or generally, that in reasoning from that testimony I left out the
word, All, and said indefinitely, The Bishops of Italy. And this M. Parsons
himself was not ignorant off, who reports my words in his Mitigation, thus,
Mitigat. p. 215.
Gregory was excommunicate by the Bishops of Italy: And (although I could not,
in repeating the testimony of Lambert, but sometimes use his word, All,) yet in
my inference and conclusion I pretermitted the word, All, and was contented to
say, The Bishops of Italy did excommunicate the Pope. Hactenus de me, nunc de
re.

73. The Comment which M. Parsons makes upon Lambert, by restraining the
words, All the Bishops of Italy, unto His fabulous figment.
the Clergy men, who were married, as though all the Bishops of Italy, there
spoken of, had been married, is his own false and fabulous figment. The case
stood much alike, as if our future Historiographers, in setting down the story
of the first coming of our dread Sovereign King James into England, should
say thus: And when that his Majesty was arrived at Barwicke, and after
approached toward Newarke upon Trent, the Nobles of the land went to meet
him for to congratulate his, and, in him, their own joy. I think that the
Reader would hold it to be a fond comment to collect hereupon, that by Nobles
of the land, were therefore meant only the Northeren Lords, because the
meeting spoken off was beyond Trent. I am almost weary with pursuing M.
Parsons, he is so extrauagant, but yet I may not give him over, for then I know
he would insult in his slanderous vain, as follows.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mr. Morton corrupts the Text of Lambert, by putting in Quia, for, Reck. page
378.
Qui, and saying that the Bishops of Italy did excommunicate the Pope [ Quia]
because he had defiled the Apostolic See by Simony and other crimes, (as
though that had been a cause) in stead of Qui, that is, who had defiled the
Apostolic See.

The Reuiew.
74. What a lustful appetite has M. Parsons to slander his adversaries? For
if I should say that the Judges of England do condemn Romish Priests [ Qui]
that is, Who are found M. Parsons lustful appetite to wrangle.
guilty of treason, has it any other sense then this; The Judges of England
do condemn Romish Priests, [ Quia] that is, Because they are guilty of
treason? And that it is so in Lambert, I desire no other evidence then the very
words of the Author himself, where he says that the Pope expostulating the
matter, said that the Emperor and his favorites had accused him of attayning
unto the Sea Apostolic, by Simonicall heresy, and defiled his life with other
crimes. Now then whether Simony and other crimes were objected for a, Quia, and
cause of excommunicating him, let any Reader judge; and consequently whether M.
Parsons his charge of corruption, proceeded not from his own corrupt
affection. Howsoever, this I dare say, that the alteration of Quia was not
voluntary, but accidental, even as contrarily it happened unto the Latin Romish
translation in Matthew. 6. v. 5. Qui amant, for, Quia amant: as their own Jesuit
Maldonat. Ies. upon the Text.
Maldonate does confess.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mr. Morton alleges Abbas Urspergensis as writing that Gregory Reck. page 384.
was an usurper of the Sea, and intruded by fraud, etc. but urspergensis
related that such words were uttered, against Pope Gregory, by the enemies of
the Pope, by the commandment of Henry in a form of a Council or Synod of
thirty Bishops of Brixia: but that urspergensis did affirm any thing of it or
approve the same, is not found, but rather the quite contrary: for in the very
same place and page, he shows how these things were contradicted by Anselmus
Bishop of Luca then living, a man (says he) most excellent, learned, and
fearing God, etc. So Urspergensis.

The Reueiwe.
75. What estimate Urspergensis had of the Papal claim, especially over
Kings, M. Parsons his own conscience can tell, who has Mitigat. cap. 2. number
46. page 80.
called Vrspergensis a Schismatic writer, because of his opposition against
the Popes usurped jurisdiction at that time, even as now he likewise judges
these thirty Bishops to have been Schismatic, which condemned Pope Gregory
the seventh for his like usurpation. Whether therefore Vrspergensis meant to
yield rather unto the Decree of those thirty Bishops, or unto the single
testimony of Anselmus, I remit it unto M. Parsons his second consideration to
judge off, after that he has observed that, which follows a little after in
the same Author Vrspergensis, where he writes concerning Rodulph Duke of
Burgundy ( Vrsperg. quo supra.
whom Pope Gregory the seventh, as Sigebert writes, caused to proclaim
himself Emperor, and to take arms against the Emperor Henry the fourth)
that the same Rodulph in a battle against the true Emperor, having his right
hand cut off, and looking A memorable example of treasonable practice by
Bishops.
upon it, spoke unto the Bishops who were by him, and with a sigh said; Behold
my hand wherewith I plighted my faith to Henry my Lord; behold I leave both the
Kingdom and this present life; see you unto it, who have made me ascend unto
his throne, whether you have led me the right way, who have followed your
admonitions. Afterward he tells us of the Emperors going to Rome, and of
the Romans yielding unto him, and abdicating Pope Gregory, because he refused
to appear before the Emperor: and in the end, In a Synod at Mentz all the
rebellious Bishops were judged to be deposed. How will M. Parsons like this?

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE tells us that Seuerinus Binius confesses, that Bishops in a Reck. page
385.
Council at Worms declared Gregory the seventh to be deposed; and an other
at Papia to have excommunicated him, and an other at Brixia to have deposed
him. How can M Morton cite Binius contrary to his own judgment, who calls
these Councels Conciliabula, that is, factious and schismatic conspiracies?

The Reueiwe.
76. I cited Binius, but not contrary to his meaning: This is M. Parsons
deceitfulness: for in the margent I expressed His deceitful opposition.
his meaning to the full in these words, Although Binius (said Preamb. p. 121.
I) called these Councels Conciliabula; that which was to be euicted from
Binius, was his acknowledgment that such and so many Assemblies of Bishops
(which carried the general name of Councels) had condemned Pope Gregory. As
for the censure of Binius, a late Romish Doctor of this present age, and a
professed Proctor and Advocate for that See, it ought to carry no more weight
in this cause, then may the censure which Doctor Stapleton Doctr. princip. lib.
13. cap. 15. page 547.
Stapleton uses against the Council of Basil, when he calls it
Conciliabulum Schismaticum, according unto our Adversaries guise of rejecting
all other Councels, as often as they conclude any thing against the pretended
authority of the Pope. As for the authority of the four Councels against Pope
Gregory, we may be better directed by Sigebert and Benno, and other
Historiographers, who lived in or about those times of Gregory, and justified
those Councels.

THE SECOND BOOK OF ENCOVNTER, against M. Parsons, Answering his Reckoning of
old Falsehoods, which were objected in his Book of Mitigation: and are again
by him repeated in his sixth Chapter of his new Reckoning.
CHAP. I.
Containing an Answer unto his first eight charges.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe sixth Chapter contains a Recapitulation Reckon. cap. 6. page 392.
of many manifest untruths, wherewith M. Morton being charged, did willingly
pretermit to answer them in his last Reply, and thereby left a suspicion that
he could not answer them.

The Reuiew.
SECT. I.
1. SUspicious men are malicious, if the Proverb say true, which M. Parsons (I
fear) does now verify, who knowing that I was in hand with an The Protestants
Apology for etc.
other book, which was of greater moment than are all his libellious
Treatises, if they were bundelled up in one, does notwithstanding importune me
to turn, as it were, a porch into a palace, and make a Preamble a full
Encounter: yet a word more of the Preamble.

M. PERSONS his Reckoning.
In his Preamble, he has chosen out both the fewest Accusations, Reckon pa. 392
and the weakest of all the rest, although he professed to single out such as
were most vehemently pressed and urged: I thought good therefore to set down
other untruths laid against him in my Treatise (of Mitigation) which he has
concealed. Let us run over them, if you please.

The Review.
2 With a good will, Master Parsons, but first I would try whether I did
single out the Weakest accusations, and such as were not so vehemently pressed.
A brief Recapitulation would make a clear Reckoning for the accusations which
you then urged, although falsely, yet fiercely thus. In the first, This is (said
you) a malicious lie of a lost conscience. In the M. Parsons begins this
second part of his Reckoning with a lavish falsehood.
second, thus: Is not this persidious dealing, and open treachery? In the
third, He has no conscience at all in cousening. In the rest we hear of
nothing but of Egregious abusing of testimonies: of Many frauds in one
quotation: of Many false tricks of a crafty Minister, of Rare singularity,
and the like scarce ever observed in corrupting a text of Scripture: of a
manifest lie and cousenage: and of Where is his syncerity in Christ Jesus: of
foolish treachery. In the eleventh; How can the malicious lying Minister expect
to be trusted hereafter. In the next, Consider how falsely and calumniously this
Makebate does reason. In the thirteenth, Can any thing be morefraudulently
alleged. In the last, It is a fraud and impudency, or rather impudent
impiety; will ever any Reader credit him hereafter? These and other such like
Emblemes and flowers of M. Parsons his Rheterique may give our Reader a sent
and sense of his extreme Vehemence, which is strong and rank, and Prove that I
singled not out his weakest Objections, as he falsely pretends, and as scquel
of this discourse will make more manifest.

SECT. II.
M. PARSONS his Reckoning and sum of his first charge.
FOr proof that hersie may be without obstinacy, he cites in Reckon cap. 6.
page 393.
his margent Vasquez Jesuit, whose words are, Malitia huius peccati in
intellectu, non in voluntate perficitur, that is, The malice of the sin of
heresy is perfected in the understanding. Which our Minister understanding
not, has fondly slandered the learned man Vasquez, by making him patronize his
absurd doctrine, whereas Vasquez does expressly establish the contrary, defining
heresy to be an error in faith with obstinacy.

The Reuiew.
3 I Full Satisf. part. 1. page 3. M. Parsons fraud.
alleged nothing out of Vasquez, but his ownesentence, viz. Malitia. etc.
Heresy is consummated and perfected in the understanding; and knowing that the
formal perfection of every thing gives the Denomination unto the subject, I
did infer not as his (for this indeed had been an injury) but as mine own
consequence, viz. that we may conclude of Heresy, as it is an error in the
mind, without respect of Obstinacy, which is a perverseness in the will.
Which liberty of arguing, from an Adversaries proposition, against his
conclusion, is granted unto any, by the law of all schools, especially
whenever the proposition, and conclusion may seem to be repugnant. As for
example Bellar. Ricog. operum. pa. 81.
Bellarmine, in defense of Transubstantiation, says that the counersion of the
bread into the body of Christ, is not wrought by production of the body of
Christ out of the bread, but by Adduction of the body unto the bread: Some
Romish Authors apprehending this position of Adduction, did plainly conclude
against Bellermine his conclusion, saying that so it shall not be a
Transubstantiation, but a Transtocation. Playing upon his Antecedent by their
own conscequence. Thus much for my conscience.

4 Concerning the cause I have no way offended, but in distinguishing of
Heresy, in respect of a double Court, Poli and fors, that is, of Inward before
God, and outward in respect of the Church. And the whole controversy then
between us being about the outward appearance of an Heretic, I hold, in that
respect, Obstinacy to be the property of an Heretic; which is, for the cause
it self, as much as any Romanist would require. If therefore this first point
have in it (as M. Parsons says) more difficulty than many others, laid
together, then may we prognosticate that M. Parsons will be in others
manifoldly absurd, for in this first he seeks nothing but a knot in a rush.

SECT. III.
The sum of M. PARSONS second charge in Reckoning.
To make us odious by severe censuring of heretics, he brings Reckon. pa.
398.
out of Azorius this sentence: If a man doubt of his faith willingly, he is
certainly an heretic: but by our Ministers leave Azor adds more, He that
doubts willingly, and pertinaciter, that is, obstinately, he is thereby an
heretic. So we see the most substantial word [ obstinately] to be craftily
conveyed away, etc.

The Reuiew.
5 M. Parsons knows right well that I needed not to omit this word,
pertinaciter, to make his Professors odious, who multiplied other far more
odious positions than this, such as were the accounting of every one an
obstinate heretic, that maint eineth anything contrary to the Church of Rome:
together with their Bulla coena upon Maundie-Thursday, curssing and
excommunicating all heretics (among whom they reckon Protestants) jointly with
all their Favorites or His inordinate iangling about words.
Commenders of their behauiors, which, for the odiousness of them, he
cunningly pretermittcd, and yet notes me of craft, for the omission of
pertinaciter. As though the defending of an untruth wittingly and willingly
did not emphatically enough implie that it was done obstinately, according to
the saving of our Savior Christ, in condemning the obstinacy of the jews,
notwithstanding he did say no more but How ost would I have gathered you, etc.
but you would not? Finally, because I am willing to satisfy M. Parsons to the
full, if he be offended for want of pertinaciter, let him put in his Reckening
pertinacissime, if he will, it shall not displease me.

SECT. IV.
The sum of the third charge of M. PARSONS Reckoning.
THe case was, whether a man coming from Couentrie, Reckon. pa. 399.
which is held to be infected with the plague, which the man himself dwelling
in a part of the city, which is not infected, and is asked at the gate of
London, whether he came from Couentrie, the Keeper intending to ask him
concerning a place infected, whether he may answer No? The Questioner says he
may, M. Morton says No, and cites Azorius, as though he had said of this
case, Nihil tam falsum, etc. where he says that we may not feine words of our
selves in an oath without circumstances, etc. But Azorius in his third Rule;
speaking of this case of a place thought to be infected, and is not, resolves
that such an answer is lawful.

The Reuiew.
6 M. Parsons can not deny, but after that Azorius had propounded diverse
objections concerning Equiuocating clauses, whereof that of this Case was one,
he does apply unto them two kind of answers. The first is a general, in the
words that I did allege, Nihil tam falsum, etc. telling us that We may not
feine, etc. Wherein I then insisted, and so The odds between M. Parsons and
Azorius concerning Equivocation.
much the rather, because I saw there is the foundation of M. Parsons Defense
of Equivocation overthrown, where Azorius calls it a lie for a man, when he
is demanded whether he have any money, and having it shall answer, I have it
not, reserving in his mind, to give it unto you; which kind of Equivocation
M. Parsons holds for a truth, as you have heard. But let us take the
Resolution of Azorius, as it is delivered in his third Rule, and his reason of
the approbation of that case, does confute M. Parsons ground of Equiuocating:
for Azor restrains a man's speech unto the use of words which are ambiguous in
a sense, which the words themselves will bear. But M. Parsons allows such a
speech of words, which have no ambiguitie in themselves, but according to that
sense, whatsoever it be, that the speaker shall conceive in his mind, so that
by mixtion it may make a true proposition: as for example, I have no money,
meaning, to lend it unto you, which Azorius, as I have often said, condemns
for a lie.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
The sentence, which he allegeth truly in the margent, [si ab aliquo Reckon.
pa. 402.
loco peste minime infecto, etc.] This he translateth falsely into English thus:
[If he come from a place which is infected,] which alters the whole case.

The Reuiew.
7 I durst almost swear that M. Parsons is not persuaded His extreme
captiousnes.
that I either would, or did falsify in this place, for the English being
this: Azor answering, (concerning the place infected with the plague) said,
etc. which thus spoken, by the way of parenthesis, could not be false, because,
as the case was propounded, the place was called infected, vz. according to the
opinion of the Demander: and it was also called not infected, in the judgment
of the speaker, and therefore by either of them might have been indifferently
used, especially by the way of pareuthesis. And that I would not so far
transgtesse, the Margent may bear me witness, wherein Azorius own express
words are set down.

8 But such and so great good will M. Parsons does bear me, that he had rather
produce me for a falsificator, than acknowledge the truth of the thing, or (if
it had been Escapes in Bellarmines books, wherein the particle NON is wanting.
an error) to judge it an escape of the pen, or of the print. Therefore am I
urged to present him with a number of confessed escapes of Bellarmine, which
abound in his sentences, even by omissions of that kind, against which Master
Parsons now does so lauishly inueigh. As for example, Bellar. Recog. lastly
printed. page 127.
In whom there are two persons (says Bellarmine) in stead of NON. etc. that
is, There are not two persons. And Page 144.
To have doubted, in stead of, NOT doubted. Page 153.
To signify Continency, in stead of, NOT to signify Continency. And Page 159.
Twice, for, NOT Twice. And Page 162.
The wall, in stead of, NOT the wall. And, Page 178.
It shall be perpetual, in stead of, It shall NOT be perpetual. And, Page
185.
Let it be rejected, in stead of, Let it NOT be rejected. And Page 186.
They might have obeyed, in stead of, They might NOT have obeyed. And, Page 188.
If our heart shall condemn us, in stead of, If it shall NOT condemn us: And
(not to labor upon trifles) many such like erroneous omissions of the Negative
NON. Which seen, I doubt not but M. Parsons will now play Ployden, and grant
that such errors may accidentally happen without falsifying and iugling.

SECT. V.
The sum of M. PARSONS his fourth charge.
HE would prove out of Azorius that Equiuocating in an Reckon. pa. 403
oath is perjury, when as Azorius puts down many examples, wherein the
swearer may take an oath in his own sense, though false in the sense of him
that exacteth the oath.

The Review.
9 The diverse examples, which you name, have been already discussed, but
there is one example, which proves M. Parsons his description of Equiuocating
a flar lie, and consequently perjury in an oath See above, lib. 1. c. 4.
One may in equiuocating (said M. Parsons) reserve in his mind what it
pleases him, so that the clause reserved do agree with his mind. If this be
true, then may this Equivocation go for current, viz. I have no money
(reserving in my mind, although I know that I have money) to give it, for it
agrees with the mind; and is notwithstanding condemned by See above, Ib:
Azorius for a perfect lie. Therefore wheresoever the outward words do not
carry that ambiguity of sense, wherein they are used (for of this kind only
we do dispute) it is, in Azorius his judgment, to be reckoned for a lie. Yea,
and so must the examples of (...) be also, if they do not accord with his own
Rule. It might therefore have become M. Parsons to have spared his bitter
Invectiue against me, until he have first reconciled himself with Azorius.

SECT. VI.
M. PARSONS his fifth charge. The sum of his Reckoning.
HIs next falsehood is, in that he would prove out of Tollet, Reckon. pa. 407.
that affected ignorance does not excuse one, but does rather argue him to be
an heretic. Now all that be learned know that affected ignorance is the most
culpable; but Tollet sasth that Ignorantia crassa etc, that is, Gross
ignorance does not exeuse aman from heresy, which is different from affected
ignorance: for the grossly ignorant is when one cares not to be informed, but
affected ignorance is when one does purposely fly to be informed. So that
besides his impertinencie, here is discovered his impundencie. This was then my
conviction against him, and was not this worthy of some consideration in his
Answer?

The Reuiew.
10 Yes verily; for it is worthy a double consideration, His folly.
the one is, to note heerin M. Parsons his folly, and the next his malice. The
first, that he who has so often bewrayed his own gross ignorance, both in
ordinary Grammar learning and in Logike, even then, when he made most
ostentation of his skill: should now note it for a point of impudency to fail
in distinguishing such subtleties of their school, as are, Not to care to
inform a man's self, and, To fly to be informed.

11 But that he should stamp upon this also the title of His malice.
falsehood, it argues that he does look upon his Adversaries writings with an
oculus nequam: for if any will ask M. Parsons, whether Affected, or Gross
ignorance be worse; he will answer (as he has done) that the Affected
ignorance is most culpable. Now then, in as much as I said not that the
Romanists meant to draw Protestants into the sentence and condemnation of
Heresy, and consequently into their extreme Censures, and vengeance against
them for Gross ignorance, which is the less fault, but for Affected
ignorance, which M. Parsons calls The most culpable (albeit the word, Gross
as he shows did allow me to aggrauate their malice against us) with what
mind could he call this difference a falsehood, whereof the matter it self
freeth me so clearly? For as I have been but too favorable to our
Adversaries, in lessening their malice, so have I not been unfaithful to the
cause, for M. Parsons will not deny this to be their doctrine, that Affected
ignorance in matters of faith does argue a man to be an heretic. Thus much for
his Gross wrangling. From Card. Tollet he proceeds unto Card. Bellarmine,
and does object Barclay by the way. I will first take this rub out of the way.

SECT. VII.
The sixth charge about the authority of calling Councels.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
LEt any man read the book and chap, of Barclay, and he Reckon. pa. 410.
will wonder at the impudency of this vaunter: for he speaks no one word of
gathering Councels, or comparison of spiritual Barkl. lib. 6. advers. Monarch.
c. 26.
authority between the Pope and Emperor, concerning their gathering of
Councels or Synods, but of a quite different subject, of taking arms by
subjects against their lawful temporal Princes. And what will our Minister
then answer to this manifest calumniation so apparently convinced out of Doctor
Barcley.

The Reuiew.
12 The Minister will answer, that M. Parsons was scarce sober, when he called
either my allegation a calumniation, or his answer a conviction: for in that
place (of Full Satisfact. M. Parsons his prosu. e fraud.
part. 3. chap. 10. page 27.) I did not produce the testimony of Barkley for
the point of Gathering of Councels, but for the general matter of Temporal
subjection due unto Emperors by all persons. Which Argument Barkley
prosecureth at large in the place alleged, being lib. 6. cap. 26. page 521.
confuring the common answer, which is used by the Romanists, which is this;
that Although Christ, and John Baptist, and other Apostles did not teach that
wicked Kings ought to be removed in the first plantation of the Church among
Infidels, yet afterward this was the doctrine, when Kings should become
noursing Fathers. Their own Barkley in the sentence which was alleged
confuteth that thus: This ought to be unto us ( says he) a weighty argument
to know that neither any of the holy Fathers, or any orthodoxall Writer, for
the space of a full thousand years and more (although the Church did abound
with troops of armed soldiers, and the number of tyrants was great) is red to
have taught any such thing either in word or writing. Adding, concerning the
times of Emperors, which professed Christ, although heretically: Why did not
then those excellent Pastors and Fathers excite the people against Valens,
Valentinian the younger, Heraclius, and other wicked Princes?

13 Who yet again in his late book, Depotestate Pontificis, writing
professedly against Bellarmine (by whom the Pope is held to have a supreme
power Indirectly in temporal causes) does cap. 34. argue thus: The Pope has
not now greater power over temporal Princes than he had before he was a
temporal Prince: but before he was a temporal Prince he had no temporal
authority any way over Kings, therefore now he has no such power any way over
them. This Confession of their Barkley must needs choke the Romish usurpation.
By which my Reader may observe the impotencie (I forbear to quit him with his
own word of impudency) of this calumniation, and his notable falsehood, in
dissembling the opinion of Barkley. Now we come to Card. Bellarmine.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
He uses here afar greater immodestie, or rather perfidie, Reck. page 413.
in mine opinion.

The Reuiew.
14 These are fearful terms: Will you stand to them? Let us then try your
exceptions which concern first words, and then matter; but first let us
examine the materials, the sum whereof follows.

The sum of M. PARSONS Reckoning.
The drift of Bellarmine is wholly against M. Mortons assertion, Reck. ibid.
for that he denies that even the Emperor had any spiritual authority for
calling of Councels, but only that they could not well in those days be made
without them, and that for four several causes. The first: because the old
Imperial laws made by the Gentiles were then in use, whereby all great
meetings of people were forbidden, for fear of sedition, except by the
Emperors knowledge and license. The second, because the Emperors being then
Lords of the whole world, the Councels could not be made in any city, without
their leave. The third, for that the Councels being made in those days by
public charges and contributions of cities, and especially of Christian
Emperors themselves, it was necessary to have their consent and approbation
in so public an action. And the fourth and last cause, for that in those
days, albeit the Bishop of Rome were head in spiritual matters over the
Emperors themselves, yet in temporal affairs he did subject himself unto
them, as having no temporal state of his own, and therefore acknowledging
them to be temporal Lords, he did make supplication unto them, to command
Synods to be gathered by their authority and license. But since those times
(says Bellarmine) Omnes iste causae mutatae sunt All those causes were
changed, The Pope himself being now a temporal all Lord also, as other Kings
and Princes are, which was brought to pass (says he) by Gods providence, that
he might have more freedom and liberty to exercise his Pastorship.

The Reuiew.
15 This relation of M. Parsons is very true, and my drift was only to show how
that Popes were anciently subject in temporal matters, which is Bellarmins
flat assertion: wherein then have I abused his meaning?

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
Let us consider the variety of sleights and shifts, which this Reckon. ibid.
our Minister hathvsed, first having said that general Councels were not
gathered without the Emperors cost, he adds presently of his own [and with
their consent,] which is not in the Latin.

The Reuiew.
16 I will not trouble M. Parsons his patience with any M Parsons gross
falsehood.
quittance of like language, although I am often provoked thereunto by his rigid
and unconscionable taxations, whereof this must needs be one. For the Latin
words of Bellarm. are these: Bellar. lib. 1. de Cont. c. 13.. Habemus ergo.
Non poterant aliquid facere inuito Imperatore, that is, They (viz. the Popes)
could do nothing without the Emperors consent. Yet this devout old man
fears not to say that I added these words of mine own, albeit he himself
confesses the necessity that then was to have the Emperors consent. This is
my kind Reckoner. But let him proceed.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning. Reckon. ibid.

Then he cutteth off the cause of the Popes subiecting themselves in those
days, touching the temporality, which was, because they had no temporal state
of their own.

The Reuiew.
17 I always thought it lawful for me to make use of an Adversaries
confessed conclusion, such as this is ( Popes were Plain 'iangling about words.
formerly subject unto Emperors) without the expressing of his causes,
especially seeing that the causes (whatsoever they were) are likewise confessed
to have been since changed. Was little David to blame for cutting off Goliath
his head, with Goliahs his own sword, because he did not first tell what
metal was in it, and who was the maker thereof? Ridiculous. And as fond is
his next exception.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
Bellarmine said that Popes made supplication to the Emperors, Reckon. ibid.
to command Synods to be gathered, which T. M. translateth that they [would
gather] Synods; as though Bellarmine did affirm that Empersrs had right to do
it.

The Reuiew.
18 As though Emperors may not be said to do that, which they commanded to be
done: Iosuah commanded the Tribes of Israel to be assembled, and yet it is
Josh. 24. 1. M. Parsons manisold absurdities.
written that He assembled the Tribes of Israel. Or as though the Emperors had
not right to do that which the Pope did by Supplication entreat him to do.
This were to reach the Pope The power of gathering of Synods.
a box on the ear. Or as though Bellarmine did absolutely deny that Emperors
had any right to gather Councels, who says that it cannot be denied but that
Tortus alias Bellarminus, in Resp. ad (...) page 144.
In Concilys generalibus indicendis, etc. that is, That the Emperor had some
authority in appointing of general Councels, and that sometimes They were
gathered by Emperors. Or as though Bellarmine: (in denying that the Emperor
has chief power herein) might not be confuted by a Doctor of the same
chair, Card. Card. Cusanus Concord: Cath. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Cusanus confessing in express terms that The first eight general Councels
were gathered by Emperors; but the Bishop of Rome (like as did other Patriarks)
received the sacred command to wit of the Emperors) to come unto the Synods.
Thus does M. Parsons his impotent calumniation vanish into a fancy which (if
he should spy in an other) he would call a frenzy.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
Then where Bellarmine says, Omnes istae causae etc. All Reckon. page 414.
these causes were changed, he fraudulently cut off the particle, [ istae,
These] which includes areference unto these four causes, as though all causes
and matters were now changed.

The Reuiew.
19 If I would be as captious as M. Parsons uses to be, I could tell him he
must go to the school again to learn to M. Parsons his carping vein.
English Istae: which signifies Those and not These: but I will not imitate
him in trifling. To the matter: There were but four causes which Bellarmine
did, or could note for the Change of the Popes Subjection, and every one of
Those, he says, were changed; does he not therefore say that All causes were
changed? If M. Parsons shall say that his horse is lame of his four feet, and
hear some by stander confirm A similitude.
it, saying, that indeed his horse is lame of All his feet, he would not (I
suppose) thereupon call him a fraudulent fellow, seeing that All the feet his
horse has are but four, for I will not imagine that Master Parsons his horse
is a monster? I will now cease to insist any longer upon these his foolish
wranglings.

20 The cause stands thus: we see that Popes then anciently A strange change
in pa pall presumptions.
acknowledged Subjection unto Kings in a maine point, which is, authority of
Commanding a Council to be gathered: but now (as it is confessed) the case is
changed. Then Christian Emperors were humbly entreated to lend their help:
now they are imperiously commanded. Then they obeyed them in Temporal affairs:
since they challenge authority to Depose them, which as their Barckley
maintains is contrary unto the disposition and the Doctrine of the Christian
Church, both in, and long after Times of the Apostles. From Bellarmine he
holds it not amiss to pass to the Jesuit Salmeron.

SECT. VIII.
The sum of the seventh charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Master Morton will needs shake Salmeron by the sleeue, Reckon. page 415.
and show him a trick of his art, telling us that he allowed that the King was
supreme in [spirituall] affairs and ordering Priests: citing Salmeron for
proof hereof; which is not ably false, for Salmeron proves the quite
contrary.

The Reuiew.
21 Here I am constrained to shake M. Parsons by the M. Parsons notable
falsehood.
sleeue, and tell him in his ear that he has played me a feate of that art,
which he calls not ably false; by opposing unto me the sentence of Salmeron,
concerning the authority of the Kings of the old Testament In spiritual
affairs, and again, in spiritual matters: seeing that the title of that
Question, concerning the authority of Kings over Priests, was in the very Full
Satisfact. part. 3. page 2.
place now objected expressly, and noted only to be In civil causes, and not in
spiritual affairs. Is not this indeed a notable falsehood? But he will still
be like himself.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
Summarily thus: Whereas Salmeron said by supposition, Reckon. ibid.
vbiid euenisset, If it had happened that Kings had prescribed some things unto
Priests, it had been no marvel, for so much as the Synagogue was earthly:
which supposition the Minister left out, that he might more cunningly shift and
avoid it.

The Reuiew.
22 I will not contend with M. Parsons about the words, vbi id euenisset, to
examine whether it signify, by way of supposition, If it had happened; or
without supposition, Whereas it had happened, seeing it may indifferently
carry both senses. The question is, whether Salmeron (whom M. Parsons
commends for a learned man, who has writ many volumes, and was one of the
first ten of the order of the Jesuits) did suppose only, and not affirm
that Kings in the old law had supreme authority over Priests, or no? Who can
better decide this contention than Salmeron himself? First look to the same
place, and he says in the words following; Salmeron. Ies. Part. 3. Disp. 12 in
epist. Pauli in genere.. Sed contra.
Itaq cum populus etc. Seeing that the people of God does consist of a body
and of a soul, the carnal part in the old Testament had the chiefdome, and
was so appointed for signification of spiritual things. A little after,
speaking of the old Testament; The law (says he) is abolished, and the
subjection of Whether the Prince or the Priest was supreme in the law of Moses.
Priests unto Kings. These terms exceed the degree of supposition.

23 But howsoever Salmeron may seem to reele, and stagger in that place, both
by Supposing, and by affirming; by doubting, and yet by concluding,
notwithstanding if M. Parsons had had a desire to know the resolute, and
determinate judgment of Salmernon in this point, he might have easily
understood this express sentence of Salmeron. Salmeron. Ies. Tom. 12. Tract.
63. page 428.. Sed nunc.
Nunc omissa. etc. That is, Now omitting the spiritual power (says he) in
the law of nature, or in the law of Moses, which was less in the M. Parsons
flatly confuted by Salmeron.
old Testament, than is the Regal and Kingly, and therefore the high Priests
were subject unto Kings, as also among the Gentiles etc. Let M. Parsons ponder
this sentence, and he shall find that this his learned man Salmeron, one of
the first ten of M. Parsons his order, does confute many score of Jesuits,
who since have held the contrary; This also shows how absurdly ignorant M.
Parsons is of the judgment of Salmeron. I am almost tired with his
verbosities, and verbal skirmishes, and therefore having obtained the cause, I
pass over his canuasse of the word Synagoga, and the other of Populus Dei, and
proceed unto the Materials.

CHAP. II.
Containing an Answer unto other eight charges.

SECT. I.
The sum of the eight charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
OUt of Salmeron, and Carerius patched together he Reckon. page 420.
makes this Romish pretense, that the old Testament was a figure of the new in
Christ, and that therefore the spiritual power (as Popedom) must be the chief,
or substantive etc. and answers, calling this rather babish Grammar, than
sound Divinity, and says that the earthly elements were figures of the
spiritual and he auenly things in the eternal and celestial Jerusalem: Will
he therefore conclude by sound Divinity, that it was not a figure of things
upon earth, which should be fulfilled in the new Testament? Was not Manna a
figure of the Eucharist, and Circumcision a sign of our Baptism? And Saint
Paul. 1. Cor. 9. applies that of Deuteronomy. 25. Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of
the Ox, that labors, unto Preachers maintenance of the new Testament. and
1. Cor. 10. All these things happened unto them in figures.

The Review.
1 I answer, that some of these Instances were ceremonial, Ceremonies of the
old law how figures of the new.
and some examples of Gods extraordinary punishments. For the first, I deny
not, but that Circumcision, Manna, and the Rock were types, and had analogy
with the Sacraments, which are antitypa, and both conspire together in one
Christ, as the archetypon of all, and therefore both are spiritual: for the
which cause the Apostle shows of the Israelites that they in their Elements
1. Cor. 10.
Eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, meaning
Christ; which was, as S. Augustine expounds it, The same which we do, namely
Christ.

2 The second, concerning the Ox, had the same moral equity in the old law,
for the maintenance of the Priests and Levites, as it has now in the Ghospel
for the Preachers. And as touching the third, we may say that the diverse
miraculous judgments of God in former time upon Fornicators, Murmurers, and
Idolaters in Israel, are figures unto the after-Christian world, that if we
find not the like visible vengeances. yet are we taught to make true
consequences from them, to wit; that if we dwell securely in like sins,
although we feel not the like outward plagues, yet we shall be sure to be
tormented in the end, because the God, who has been just visibly, will be
everlastingly just, to punish transgressions and sins.

3 In the next place he exaggerateth this difference of translation, to wit,
The old Testament is a figure of the new in Christ, in stead of this (as M.
Parsons will have it) The earthly kingdom (of the Jews) was a shadow of the
spiritual government, that was in the Church of Christ. Both which are no more
disferent, in effect, than figure and shadow, for M. Parsons confesses that
the proposition is true, that The old Testament was a figure of the new in
Christ. The next exception is of some importance.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
There follows in the Consequent or second proposition ( that Reckon. page
422.
therefore in the new the popedom is the substantive) which is no less
corruptly inferred in our name; than was the Antecedent affirmed: for that we
do not infer, nor yet the Author Carerius in the said second Prop. or
Consequence by him alleged, that for so much as the old Testment is a figure of
the new, therefore in the new the Popes spiritual authority is the substantive
etc. For that this were a weak inference, as every man sees. Nay Carerius
makes no inference at all in this place by him alleged, but only uses that
similitude which before you have heard, of the Sunstantiue and Adjective.

The Reuiew.
4 What is this? does not Carerius make that Inference M. Parsons his egregions
untruth.
M. Parsons? yea and does he not make any inference thereof at all? Thus you
have written, but with what conscience? For Carerius propounding this position,
by way of objection, viz. Carerius depotestate Romans Pont. lib. 2. in (...) and
cap.
The Pope has not, by the law of God, any temporal power, nor can he command
secular Princes; a ground of which position was this, That one and the same
person cannot be both a Politic and Ecclesiastical: this foundation he labe
labors to confute by many examples of the old. Testament, from the which he
concludes thus: Hinc inlege, etc. Hence (we see) that in the old law the
Kingdom was the Substantive, and the Priesthood the Adjective: but in the new
law of the Gospel Priesthood is the Substantive, and the kingdom is the
Adjective. Which is brought in to prove, that the power Politic, as the
Adjective, and the Power Ecclesiastical, as the Substantive may be both in one
man. And is not this an Inference? And thereby further intimating, that as in
the old the Temporal was the Substantive, that is, the superior; so under the
Gospel the Ecclesiastical is the Substantive, and superior. And is not this
That inference which I speak of; And finally the special drift of that book
of Carerius lib. 2. de potestat. Pont. c. 9. p. 127.
Carerius is nothing else but to establish a Monarchical power of the Pope
both spiritual, and temporal throughout the world.

SECT. II.
The ninth charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THere follows against Dolman a like slight.

The Reuiew.
5 Dare Dolman yet again show his face? Quod lib pa. 152. and 288.
Which book M. Parsons made (says their Priest) and is a seditious book,
most trecherously intitling the Infanta of Spain to the English crown. Could
M. Parsons so often countenance this Troiane horse except he had meant to play
the part of a Sinonicall dissembling Mitigator? But to the point.

The sum of M. PARSONS charge.
He alleged Dolman to say, that the Commonwealth has Reckon. pa. 424.
authority to choose a King, and to limit him laws at their pleasure. Which if
it were truly alleged, yet is there not here any mention of people, or
Democratical state, but only of the Commonwealth, which includes both the
Nobility and people. Secondly Dolman speaks not of choosing a form of
government, Dolman. part. 1. page 13.
be it Democraticall or other, but speaks (as by his words we see) of a power
of a Commonwealth that is deuoide of any certain government, to choose them
what form of government they like, with limitations they think most expedient.

The Reuiew.
6 Upon this his conceit he complains of Falsehoods both in alleging the
words of the Author, which are not in him, and also in inferring from them,
which the words themselves will not M. Parsons his childish exceptions.
bear. First of the words. Dolman said, The Commonwealth has power to choose
her government, I said, To change her King. If she can change her Government,
may not she alter her Governor? And Dolman says in the margent of the same
place, that The Commonwealth limiteth the Governors authority. And is not a
King a Governor?

7 Concerning the sense M. Parsons seems to persuade us that Dolman (that is,
M. Parsons himself) did allow unto M. Parsons wilful ignorance in his own
books.
a Commonwealth only a power to choose a government, and not to depose a
Governor. Is he not like to bewray his ignorance in reading other men's books,
who is thus unskillful in his own? For in his Dolman we read, that Dolman.
lib. 1. c. 3. P. 32.
The Commonwealth has authority not only to put back a new Inheritor upon
lawful considerations, but also to dispossess them that have been lawfully
put into possession. And again, Page 38.
The Commonwealth (says he) may cut off their heads, if they infect the rest.
Here M. Parsons plaieth the nimble Barber, and can teach people to polle the
heads of Kings. It is no marvel why his own fellow exclaimed against this
book, calling it Treacherous, as though he had sentenced the Author to be
worthy to have his head shaven for his doctrine. As for the word,
Democraticall, which M. Parsons misliketh, I would but ask whether every
Commonwealth were not included, where Commonwealth in general was expressed?
After this he returns unto Carerius his Paduan Doctor, whom I propounded as
affirmmg that Full satisf. part. 3. page 2.
The high Priest of tho old Testament was Suprema in civil causes.

SECT. III.
The sum of the tenth charge, of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
HE makes Carerius say, that The high Priest was Supreme Reckon. p. 426.
in civil causes, which words, Civil causes, he puts in of Lib. 2. de
potestate Romans Pont. c. 18.
his own: for Carerius has them not either in words, or sense, but teachcth
the plain contrary in all his discourse, to wit, that he means, in matters
belonging unto religion and Priest hood, and not of temporal Principality, or
civil causes, as this Minister does beue him: Neither could Carerius mean so,
except he should be contrary to himself, and therefore that clause was
perfidiously thrust in by the Minister, etc.

The Reuiew.
8 Except M. Parsons had a dispensation to traduce his Adversary by wilful
untruths, I would not think that he could deal thus unconscionably: the
matter is, whether Carerius named, or meant that the Priests of the old law had
a superiority over Kings in Civil matters. M. Parsons denies it, I have
affirmed it, and shall now demonstrate it out of Carerius. M. Parsons his
egregicus and open falsehood.
And because M. Parsons calls to witness All the discourse of Carerius, I
shall crave so much leave of my Reader, as to suffer me to passefrom the
fountain down the river of this discourse.

9 Carerius in his book ca. 9. lays down this position, that Carerius lib.
2. de postate Romans Pont. cap. 9.
The Pope has by divine law most full power throughout the world, Tum in rebus
Ecclesiasticis, tum in Politicis, that is, both in Ecclesiastical and Civil
things. And concludes the Chapter in the same terms of Both in
Ecclesiastical and Civil things. And this is the express and direct subject
of that discourse, which he labors to prove (professedly against
Ballarmine) from Canonists, from Decrees of Popes, from Reasons, until he come
to the 13. chap. concluding therein, as before, that The Pope has power over
the whole world in Ecclesiastical and Civil matters. Carerius lib. 2. cap. 18.
He pursues the same point unto the 18. chap. wherein we now insist, where he
seeks to remove an Objection, which was made against his former conclusion
of the Popes authority in Ecclesiastical and Civil matters. The objection is
this Ib. number. 13.
The Kings of ludah did depose the Priests, Ergo, The Emperor may depose the
Pope. Mark now (good Reader) the answers of Carerius. His first is, that In
the old Testment the jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Civil were both one, and
was gouerued by the King, who had power over Priests to put them to death.
This, you will say, is contrary to my assertion; it is true, I consesse it: but
now hear his last answer in the same Chapter. There (as though he would recant
the former, and be contrary to himself) he thus assirmeth. I say (says he)
that even in the old Testment the high Priest was above the King, which I prove
out of Number. 27, where it is said that at the word of the high Priest Iosuah the
Prince and all the people was to go in and out. The objection being concerning
both Ecclesiastical and Civil power of the high Priest, and that the King
might put him to death (a civil censure): The answer being of the Princes and
peoples going in and out (civil acts): and the whole scope being about
Ecclesiastical and civil matters, M. Parsons must, to his own shame,
necessarily acknowledge that I have not been contrary unto Carerius, but
Carerius has been contrary to himself. To this Paduan Doctor M. Parsons
joyneth a Dominican.

SECT. IV.
The sum of the eleventh charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
VIctoria (says M. Morton) says that Priests, besides that Reckon. pa. 428.
Victoria Relect. 1. de potestate (...). 7. and not the 4. as it is alleged by
M. Parsons.
they are Ministers of the Church, they are likewise members of the
Commonwealth, and a King is as well a King of the Clergy, as of the Laity,
therefore the Clergy is subject in temporal things, for such a matter is not
ruled by any power spiritual. Aplaine demonstration. So he. And so I say, it
is a plain demonstration, but of M. Mortons falsehood and abusing the Reader, to
make him belecue that Victoria favored him in this matter of the exemption of
Priests, whereas in the very place here cited Victoria says that
Ecclesiasticiiure exempti sunt, that is, Ecelesiasticall men are by law
exempted and freed from the civil power, so as they may not be conuented
before a secular Judge either in criminal, or civil causes.

The Review.
10 I have called my proof, taken out of Victoria, a plain demonstration, to
consute the now pretended Romish exemption of Priests, which M. Parsons calls
a plain demonstration of my falsehood, as though I had abused the sentence M.
Parsons his gross slander.
and sense of Victoria: wherein if M. Parsons have dealt justly, then think
(good Reader) that he can not do me an injury. I shall easily acquit my self
both by the evidence of the place of Victoria, and by the confession of their
own Doctor, in his like exposition of Victoria. First, the text stands
thus: Victor. Relect. 1. 7. Prop. 4.
The persons of Clergymen (says Victoria) are not altogether, nor in all
things exempted from the civil power, neither by humane, nor by divine laws.
And after, in The excemption of Priests.
the Prop. 8. If the liberty of Clergymen (says he) were to the manifest
destruction of a Commonwealth, so that Ecclesiastical persons should
riotously work the slaughter of Laics, and the Pope would not remedy it,
then secular Princes might provide for the good of their Laics,
notwithstanding the privilege of the Clergy.

11 This is so contrary unto the claim that the now Pope has made of a power
to exempt Ecclesiastical persons, notwithstanding the contrary opposition of
Magistrates, that their own Doctor (in his Defensio Marfilij aduers. Bellar.
c. 3.. Prima prop.
confutation of Bellarmine about this point) does produce the judgment of many
scholasticall writers, as Ibidem,. Pro tutela.
namely, Medina, Couarruuias, Sotus, Victoria; unto whom (which is our second
point) he adioineth himself; who, although he say it is lawful to exempt the
Clergy; yet does he not defend an absolute necessity. And thus the Argument
proves to be a Demonstration of M. Parsons his ignorance. Another
Demonstration of his idleness he will give himself in his next Addition: the
sum whereof follows.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
We shall further find so many monstrous corruptions, intermissions, Reckon.
p. 1. 429.
and geldings, as is a shame to behold: for whereas Victoria says that
Clergymen aliquo modo subjiciuntur Regi, that is, in some sort are subject to
the King, he leaves out these words, In some sort: And instead of saying that
Clergiemen, for so much as appertains unto temporal affairs, are not
governed by Ecclesiastical power, he says: that the Clergy is subject to
civil authority in temporal things, for such matter is not ruled by any
spiritual power: whereby he would have his Reader to imagine, that no
spiritual power may have authority to govern temporal matters.

The Reuiew.
12 I did effectually enough translate the words, In some His vein of
contentiousnesse.
sort, when I expressed the sort to be In temporal things, and not in
spiritual. In the second place, if the other two translations be compared, I
think the Reader shall find that as much may be collected out of M. Parsons
his translation as out of mine; which makes me partly to take up the Orators
complaint, who was afraid to deliver an Oration to the vulgar people, Because
(says he) they will not understand the meaning; or to the learned, for they
will understand more than is meant. I may reckon M. Parsons among the learned
sort, for sure I am that I intended not any such persuasion. From private
Doctors he thinks good to pass unto an Archbishop and Martyr, Boniface.

SECT. V.
The sum of the twelfth charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe Canon, as it is alleged by M. Morton, is this, [Though Reckon. pa. 432.
a Pope should carry many people with him into hell, no man may presume to
say, Why do you so?] I marvel with what conscience, or if not conscience, with
what forehead at least, these men can write things, which they know, or may
know to be merely false and forged? Is not this a sign of obstinate
wilfulness, and that neither God nor truth is sought for by them, but only to
maintain a faction, with what slight and falsehood soever.

The Reuiew.
13 What is that whereof M. Parsons his head is so full, that he should require
a forehead in his Adversaries? Here is a Parturiunt montes, we shall see many
ridiculous mise by and by. The first follows.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
M. Morton cites the Canon of Gratian, Si Papa, in the Reckon. page 432.
name of Pope Boniface, in stead of Boniface a Martyr, who was never Pope, but
a virtuous learned Englishman, who lived 850. years agone, and was Archbishop
of Mentz in Germany. Which escape; besides the ignorance, tastes also of much
profane malice and impiety.

The Reuiew.
14 Can there be any thing spoken in prejudice of any Pope, which will not
prove unsavory in M. Parsons his palate? If I have erred in mistaking the
Inscription of Gratian, you might the more easily pardon me, knowing that
Gratian himself is charged by your own Epist. Taracon. De emend. Great. Dial.
1. page 5.
Bishop for applying false inscriptions to the testimonies which he alleges.
But let us take him for that Boniface the Martyr, and not Boniface the Pope,
yet has this Canon been always allowed by many Popes: and what difference of
judgment can there be in an Author, and in an authorizer of any work? Neither
may any hold it an Impiety, to except against the saying of The Martyrs have
been men of imperfection.
some Martyrs, for diverse Martyrs have not been without the tincture of some
errors, otherwise S. Cyprian should not have held until this day the title of
a Saint. Victorinus erred in the question concerning the state of souls, and
is therefore taxed by Cardinal Bellarmine, who says that Bellar. l. 1. de
beat. Sanct. c. 5.. His add.
Victorinus was a Martyr, yet (as S. Hierom says) he wanted learning. How will
this answer of S. Hierom, and Cardinal Bellarmine relish with M. Parsons: must
both these also be noted of Impiety? See the next.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
The Sum. He shows from the Canon, that the Pope is Reckon. ibid.
not to be reprehended, etc. but concealeth that the same Canon pronounces
damnation upon such a negligent Pope: and that such a one is to suffer eternal
punishments.

The Reuiew.
15 I was only to prove what prerogative was ascribed unto the Pope in this
life which was, Non iudicandus, nisi a fide deuius: it concerned me not to tell
that a wicked Pope must be judged and condemned after this life, whereof none
can doubt, but an Atheist. Yet more.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
In repeating the Canon thus: [No mortal man shall, or may Reckon. ibid.
presume to reprehend him] there he ends; in which short there are many
frauds; for first he leaves out, istic, here in this life: then praesumit,
does presume, he translateth, may presume: and lastly he leaves out the
reason, because the Pope is not to be judged.

The Reuiew.
16 That is to say, I would not imitate M. Parsons in idle M. Parsons many idle
impertinences.
and impertinent superfluities: for he that says, No mortal man may presume
to reprehend a Pope, must needs understand in this life, except M. Parsons
have some divine power and commission to send a Mortal man (for in heaven
there is not any reprehensible) to reprehend some Pope in hell. Thus much of
the first fraud.

17 The second is as childish: for the sentence is, as M. Parsons calls it, a
Canon; and the property of a Canon is directory, prescribing what may, or may
not be done; and the next words explain the meaning, The Pope must not be
judged. This shows M. Parsons his folly. The third is yet more frivolous,
for the assertion being naught, the reason cannot be good, which is this: The
Pope cannot be judged, which conclusion has been condemned by their council
of Constance, and of Basil, both which held that Popes are subject unto the
judgment of a Council even for manners. These former exceptions, were but
little my se: now the great one leapeth out.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, summarily.
But the greatest corruption, which most imports the simple Reckon. page 435.
Reader, is this, that he translateth the former sentence thus: Though he
should carry many people into hell, yet no mortal creature may presume to
say, Why do you so? But in the Latin, neither in the Canon it self is there
any such interrogation at all, as why do you so? And therefore I may ask T.
M. why do you lie so? Or why do you corrupt your Author so? Or why do you
translate in English, for the abusing of your Reader, that which neither your
self do set down in your Latin text, nor in the Canon it self, by you
cited, has it at all? Is not this wilful and malicious fraud? Wherein when you
shall answer me directly and sincerely, it shall be a great discharge of your
credit with those, who in the mean space will justly hold you for a Deceiuer.
I find the same objected by Sir Francis Hastings and afterward by Matthew
Sutcliffe, but I find the same confuted at large by the Warnwoord. Page 432.


The Reuiew.
18 And I must tell M. Parsons, that seeing the Canon M. Parsons his wyld
retorique.
does not allow Any mortal man to reprehend a Pope in this life, except he
deflect from the faith; consequently it will not permit a man to say, in way of
reproof, Why do you so? As every Barber, Baker and triuiall man knows, by
the common phrase of speech: and therefore I may well echo against M. Parsons,
and say, Why do you trifle so? Why do you riot so? Why do you rage so?

19 But it may seem that M. Parsons is thus earnest, because His zeal for the
Pope without knowledge.
he thinks it would be no small stain to their Pope, if he should be
known either to say, or to allow any to teach that None may reprehend the
Pope, saying, Why do you so? Oh fie! this is more than ever M. Parsons heard
of. I would therefore entreat this our great. Doctor to turn his eye unto the
Gloss upon the Extrauagants, where it is said, in the behalf of Popes
dispensation, Extrauag. de Concess. Tit. 4. cap. 2.
Nec est qui audeat dicere, Domine, cur it a facis? that is, Neither is there
any, that dare say, Why do thou so? Where (as though this point M. Parsons
his gross ignorance, or else peevish malice.
were worthy the sight of al passengers) there stands in the Margent as it
were a finger pointing unto it, saying, Let no man say to the Pope, Domine cur
it a facis? My Lord, why do you so? Therefore must I ask you once again, Why
deal you so rashly, in writing you know not what? or, in obiecting malice in
such a matter, why do you reproach me so maliciously?

20 Furthermore, because I find M. Parsons making mention of Sir Francis
Hastings, and of his own book of Warnwoord, I must furthermore be so saucy
as to pull him once again by the sleeue, and ask him by way of digression
whether he be not the man that denied that this salutation, [ Dominus Deus
Papa] is found in the Gloss of some Canonist?

SECT. VI.
M. PARSONS his Warn-woord, against Sir Francis Hastings his Wast-woord,
concerning, Dominus Deus Papa.
SIr Francis Hastings says that the Canonists say roundly Warn-woord, Enc. 1.
cap. 2. Page 30. number. 10.
in the Gloss, Dominus noster Deus Papa, Our Lord God the Pope: but if it were
so, why does not Sir Francis either roundly or squarely quote us the text? Sure
it is, that I cannot find it, though I have much sought for it; and hard it is
to believe that any such text may be found. But yet here to help out S. F.
with some part of his credit, and for very compassion I will add a conjecture
of a friend of his, how he might chance to have been deceived about Dominus
Deus noster Papa, if he cite it upon his own reading, for that perhaps he
might find it written thus, D. noster D. Papa, both D. D. signifying a double
Dominus, which some cauilling Heretic espying, and judging it inconvenient to
repeat Dominus twice, would needs enforce the second D. to be set for Deus.
This my conjecture is confirmed somewhat by the similitude of a like fond
chance, whereof I have heard as happened in the Subscription of an English
letter, written from certain Mariners to the Lord Admiral in these words: To
the right honorable, our good L. the L. Admiral, which second L. a simple
fellow interpreted to signify the Lady Admiral, saying that the first L.
signifying the Lord himself, the second L. must needs signify also his Lady.
If I miss in this conjecture or comparison, S. F. is cause thereof, that cited
not the text, thereby to clear all matters, and to deliver both us of this
doubt, and himself of new suspicion of imposture.

The Reuiew.
21 I like you well, M. Parsons howsoever the matter go, you can make your
self mirth with your own fancies M. Parsons blind insollency, or else
perfidious Hypocrisy.
and conjectures, as though there were no such thing as Sir Francis alleged
out of their Romish Gloss, when as yet there can be nothing more apparent, for
in the Extrauagant at the word significasti, Tit. 14. cap. 4. the Gloss says
plainly in the very same words, Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, that is, Our Lord
God the Pope, even, as it is set out by their best approved edition of the
Extrauagants. But so it pleased M. Parsons rather to bewray his own ignorance
of the common Romish Gloss, than to lose his jest of Lord, and Lady, although
it be but a silly one God wot: for what man could be so simple and indeed
stupid as to think there could be any congruity of speech in such a
superscription as he has feigned, viz: To the right honorable our good Lord,
the Lady Admiral; wherein, as it were, by a strange metamorphosis, the sex is
changed, a Lord, being turned into a Lady? What then shall we think of M.
Parsons his wit, who has so unjustly imputed unto Sir Francis a suspicion of
Imposture? If he sported thus in dissemblance, he must be judged to have been
malicious; if in ignorance, has he not been ridiculous? I return to our
Reckoning; wherein from Boniface an Archbishop he passes to a Pope Leo.

SECT. VII.
The thirteenth charge, concerning the Oath of Allegence. The sum of M.
PARSONS Reckoning.
POpe Leo (says M. Morton) writing unto a true Cntholike Reck. page 436. 437.
Emperor said, You may not be ignorant that your Princely power is given unto
you not only in worldly regiment, but also in spiritual, for the preservation
of the Church. As if he had said, not only in causes temporal, but also in
spiritual, so far as it belongs to the outward preservation, not to the
personal administration of them; And this is the substance of our English
Oath. And further neither do our Kings of England challenge, nor subjects
condescend unto. In which words you see two things are contained: first what
authority S. Leo the Pope above 1100. years agone ascribed unto Leo the
Emperor in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical. The second, by this man's
assertion, that neither our Kings of England challenge, nor do the subjects
condescend unto any more in the Oath of supremacy, that is proposed unto them.
Which if it be so, I see no cause why all English Catholics may not take the
same in like manner, so far forth as S. Leo allows spiritual authority to
the Emperor of his time. Wherefore it hehooueth that the Reader stand attent to
the deciding of this question: for if this be true, which here M. Morton
avouches our Controversy about the Supremacy is at an end. Reckon. page 439.
Heerupon I urged him very earnestly, that this assertion might be maintained,
saying, among other things: Me thinks such public doctrine should not be so
publicly printed and set forth, without public allowance and intention to
perform and make it good. If this be really meant, we may easily be accorded:
if not, then will the Reader see what credit may be given to any things they
publish, notwithstanding this book comes forth with this special
commendation, of published by authority, etc. Which words in my judgment,
should have moved M. Morton to leave somewhat to the matter in this his
Answer, and not to have passed it over so stily, as though never mention had
been made thereof. But every man will guess at the cause, and so we shall
expect it at some other time.

The Reuiew.
22 I will take no longer Time than this present, and upon the issue heerof
will I appeal unto the Reader, to judge according to the just appearance of
truth. That which I thenauerred has been since published in print by one of
far more exact judgment, than that I may be worthy to say, that he has
published the same. And this passed under the approbation and priuelege of our
gracious King, who is the Lex loquens, and can best interpret the sense of the
Oath. The Reverend B shop of Chichester in Tortura Torti, page 380.
We yield ( says this reverend Prelate) nothing to our King, which belongs
unto Priestly function, neither does the King affect it: he justly challenges,
and we acknowledge due unto him those acts which appertain unto outward
policy, for the care of religion, which is, according to the law of God, to be
both keeper, and protector of the tables of the law of God, by punishing of
blasp hemous idolatrous, and false Prophets, in restoring religion unto her
ancient purity, governing all kind of persons (within his Kingdom) as well
Ecclesiastical as Laics, yea even unto the deposing of a Priest upon his
demerit. This is as plain a profession, and with as good Authority, and from
as worthy a pen, as the M. Parsons his promise challenged.
State, which made the Oath, could perform.

23 What say you now, M. Parsons? Will you, as you said, Accord unto this Oath?
Then must you renounce the Breues of your Pope: if you will not Accord, then
are you, Pope Leo subject unto the Emperor.
in these offers, but wretched AEquiuocators. And the rather, because Card.
Cusanus Concord. Cathol. li. 2. c. 20.
Pope Leo (as your Car. Causanus observes) submitted himself unto all the
punishments, which were contained in the laws of the Emperor Martianus. Upon
which consideration the same Cardinal made bold to complain of afterPopes,
Popes degenerate.
who have degenerated from the humility of their Ancients. In his next
exception there is nothing but verbality, that is, a lavish trifling about
words.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
These words, Debes incunctanter aduertere, he translateth, Reckon. pa. 437
Thou may not be ignorant, he should have Englished it thus: Thou ought resolut
ely to consider.

The Reuiew.
24. By M. Parsons his Grammar, Incunctanter, is, resolutely. I think the
Boys of his College will correct this, and tell him that, Incunctanter, is,
without delay. There is no M. Parsons his ignorance both in Latin and in
English constrution.
reason we should expect true Latine-Grammar of him, who fails so absurdly
even in his English Grammar: for Resolutely to consider is a phrase (I think)
which an English ear will hardly endure. It had been better thus, To consider
resolutely, and yet this is absurd: for our English is, To resolve
consideratly, and not, To consider resolutely; because in this the cart draws
the horse.

25 I am ashamed of these impertinencies, whereunto I am constrained by Master
Parsons, who delights so much in friuolousnesse, that Reckon. page 438.
he reprooueth me for translating the word, Praesidium Ecclesiae,
preservation of the Church, and must have it, forsooth, Englished, Defense of
the Church, as though defense were not preservation, and preservation M.
Parsons his ridiculous exception against translation.
Defense. It seems that M. Parsons means to claim some kindred with that
wise Asynonomist, who once said, that Pepper is hot in operation, but cold in
working: and to shake hands with that miserable comforter, who used A
similitude.
no other reason to comfort a young scholar, that had been expulsed out of the
College, than to tell him that he was but Expelled only, and not expulsed.

SECT. VIII.
The fourteenth charge, in the point of Equivocation, out of Sepulueda. M.
PARSONS Reckoning.
BUt what says this Doctor Genesuis Sepulueda? He will Reckon. pa. 440.
tell you (says Master Morton) that this sense (of this text of Scripture)
which you conceal is not only contrary to the sentence of all Fathers, but
also against all common sense. And is this possible? Will Sepulucda deny all
those Fathers, alleged by me before for our interprotation, to be Fathers?
Will he say, that their exposition is contrary to all common sense? does not
Genesius himself in the very chapter here cited allege both S. Hierom, and S.
Augustine for this interprotation, and allows the same? What shameless
dealing then is this of our Minister, to charge Genesius with such folly or
impiety, which he never thought off? For Genesius denies not either the
sense or interpretation of the place, and much less says, That it is contrary
to the sentence of the Fathers, and least of all, to commonsense: but denies
only the application thereof for use and practice to certain cases, wherein
he admits not Equivocation. etc.

The Reuiew.
26 The (...) part. 3. page 5.
Text of Scripture is Mare. 13. 32. Of that day and hour knows no man, no
not the some himself etc. Sepulueda allows the interpretation which the
Fathers give hereof, but not in the sense which the Equiuocators do urge, and
therefore he admonishes his Reader to take heed lest M. Parsons (...) by his
(...) presumption.
that upon this interpretation there be brought in a doctrine of Equivocation,
which in his former chapter he did condemn for a lie, as I See above lib. 1.
c. 13. number. 5.
have proved at large. Therefore the falsehood is of M. Parsons his part, who
will not distinguish the interpretation which Sepulueda admits, from that
Equiuocating sense, which he abhors. After this M. Parsons returns to his
word-bate.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Secondly be makes Sepulueda discredit the Fathers, which Reckon. p. 441.
he himself alleges, Englishing ancient Fathers, for, ancient Schoolmen;
and adds, consensum, of his own, leaving out, hominum, to make it sound
common sense.

The Reuiew.
27 If there had been in M. Parsons any sense of common M Parsons wilful
falsehood.
shamefastness, he could not have said, that I made Sepulueda discredit the
Fathers: for Sepulueda said, I will tell you (Equiuocators) that the sense, which
you conceit, is contrary to the sentence of Ancients. Was this to discredit the
Fathers, nay was it not greatly for their credit to profess simplicity, and
to condemn your Equiuocating subtletie? And such like is his next Cavil: for
Setulueda Tract. de (...) etc. page 469.
Sepulueda does as expressly name these ancient Fathers, Hierome, Augustine,
Basil, as well as he did the ancient School Doctors. His other untruth.


CHAP. III.
Containing an Answer to the next five charges.

SECT. I.
The sum of the xv. charge, in the point of Equivocation.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
He quoteth Sotus, but all is treachery, falsehood, Reck. page 442.
and lying in this Impugner of Equivocation, for first by subtle Doctor all
understand Scotus, and not Sotus.

The Reuiew.
1 I Called your Sotus the subtle Doctor: you say that this epithet belonged
unto Scotus. I have heard that two Gentlemen, the one English, the other
Scottish, met together, the one sitting on the one side of the table, and the
other A Similitude.
on the other side. And when the English man asked, Quid interest Scotum and
Sotum? What therewas between a Scot and a Sot? The Table, quoth the Scot.
There was wit in this. But if we ask M. Parsons what odds there is between
their Scotus the Franciscan Friar, and Sotus the Dominican? he will answer us,
Subtletie. Is not this a great His vain vaunt.
piece of learning for M. Parsons to vaunt of? And yet, if we may believe
Sotus, even Scotus also will condemn your manner of Equiuocating for a lie.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning, and sum of his charge in the point of Equivocation.
He will never be able to show out of Sotus, that all Equiuocators Reck. page
444.
are liars; this assertion is an incredible impudency, because Sotus says,
that in some cases it is lawful to equivocate, (...) lib. de legend. secretis,
nu. 3. q. 3. conclus. 4.
as where he teaches a man, that is asked unjustly, to answer, Nescio, Qui
iure intelligitur, Nescio, vt dicam, aut Nescio eo modo, quo iure debeam
dicere, etc. Reck. pa. 445.
This wrote I in my former book, and bauing convinced so evident
falsifications, as here have been laid down, quite contrary to the meaning
and sense of the Author alleged, I marvel that some little place had not been
allowed for somepiece of Answer to this also among the rest. But belike M.
Morton was not ready.

The Reuiew.
2 I was as ready then, as now, to tell you that herein you play a kind of
Scotus and subtle Sophister with me, wilfully abusing both your own
knowledge, and your Readers ignorance, by not acknowledging the principal
point in question, which was not against Verbal, but only against that Mental
Equivocation, which has been described by your self to be lawful, whenever
the speaker shall reserve any thing in his mind, which according to his
understanding does agree with the outward words of his mouth, be the clause of
reservation whatsoever it pleases him to imagine; As to say, I am no Priest,
meaning, with purpose to tell it you. All such kind of mixed propositions you
in your Treatise of Mitigation do absolutely defend: Which (I say again and
again) is by Sotus rejected as mere lying; which I shall easily prove out of
Sotus his positions and examples, from the same book wherein you have insisted.

3 If we would know what kind of Equivocation Sotus will allow, let us consult
with him in his positions. First, Sotus de legend. Secret. memb. 1. q. 3.
concl. 1. page 295.
He that is injuriously examined may use all kind of Amphibologies, or
doubtful speeches, so as they may be understood in some usual sense withont a
lie. He admits not Equiuocating in any sense, which is not by the use
signified in the outward speech it self: and of this kind is (in his
judgment) the Sotus falsely and grossly abused by M. Parsons.
word, Nescio, in the cause before mentioned, whereof Sotus says, Ibid.
conclus. 2. page 299.
Words do carry that signification which the people apprehend; and Christian
people, when they hear a Priest (who is asked whether he know such a man's
sin) answer, Se nihil scire, do understand his meaning to be, that he knows
it not extra confessionem: which makes a verbal Equivocation, or
Amphibologie, the knowing of a Priest being of two sorts, In confessione, and
Extra confessionem. So that the man which is asked, whether he knows that
which he heard only by relation from another, may (in the opinion of Sotus)
answer Ibid. pa. 300
NESCIO, because a man properly knows that which he comprehends by strong
reason. And this Amphibologie is verbal, for Nescio has a double sense in it
self, according to the understanding of men, properly signifying that which I
do certainly not know; and improperly that which I know but uncertainly, and by
report: And thus, says Sotus, Ibid. pa. 301.
the Priest may answer, NESCIO, because he had it but by relation of the party
confitent, who might (peradventure) have lied. Ibid. Conclus. 4. page 304.
Except the matter be manifest, and so he proceeds to approve Ibid. pa. 307.
Nescio, in such a case to signify, by the intendment of the law, Non scire,
vt dicam, or, vt debeam dicere. To conclude, Ibid. Conclus. 4. page 304.
Sotus never allows any other Equivocal sense, which is wholly infolded in
the clause of Reservation, but that only which the outward speech it self may
(in his opinion) carry in the common use, according to the apprehention of the
discreet hearer: which, in the opinion of Sotus, is a verbal Equivocation. And
this matter may be demonstrated by his examples.

4 First, Ibid. Conclus. 4. page 314.
If a Tyrant ask a Priest, whether Peter killed John, which the Priest knew in
confession. whether he may answer, He killed him not, reserving, That I may
tell you, Sotus Sotus his examples.
resolves that this answer cannot free the Priest from a lie: for (says
Sotus) It were a most foolish exposition to say, M. Persons falsehood in not
acknowledging the judgment of Sotus by whom his AEquiuocation is proved a
stark lie.
Non occidit, Vt dicam, because facta ordinom immediatum non habent ad hoc,
quod est, Dicere. Let us compare our new AEquiuocators with Sotus. M. Parsons
admits any Reservation, which being mixed with the outward speech, makes a
true proposition, as, I am no Priest, conceiving in my mind, To tell it: which
differs not from that of Sotus, He murdered him not, reserving, That I may
tell it you: which Sotus cannot excuse from a lie. A second example. When a
party is Unjustly, demanded, concerning a fact which he had committed, Whether
he may answer, Non a concerning a fact which he had committed, Whether he may
answer, Nonfeci, I did it not: Scotus (says Sotus ibid. Conclus. 5.
Sotus inclines to the negative part, And I (says Sotus) cannot be persuaded
that it is lawful to answer, Non feci, neither can I perceive, how it can be
excused from alie: for if any way this might be, then especially by
understanding in his mind, Vt dicam, That I may tell you. But this sense were
most violent: for the fact has not any such order to the speech. Yet does this
mixed speech make a true proposition, which uttered in part with the mouth (in
the judgment of Sotus) cannot be excused from a lie: and consequently M.
Parsons his art of AEquiuocating is an art of stark lying. Another example.


5 An other example: we have often heard of the story of S. Francis his
sleeves, which for the time we will suppose to be true: He, when a malefactor
was pursued by ossicers, being asked whether he saw the malefactor pass by, or
no? Answered, Non transiuit hac, that is, He passed not this S Francis his
lying sleeue.
way, (meaning, as Sotus reads it, per sinum, as others, per manicas) through
his sleeue: This example our AEquiuocators use to urge, to the end that they
may cover their lying device with S. Francis his sleeue: but if we believe
Sotus, that sleeue is too short to hide so long a lie: for Ibid. p. 318.
This device (says he) will not content me, because although he that is
unjustly asked a question, be not bound to answer unto the intention of the
demandant, yet is he bound to hide a secrecy in such words, which are true in a
sense which is received either among the people, or else among wise and
discreet men. Here Sotus judges a Mental Reservation, agreeing with the
mind of the speaker, to be no better than a lie, even because the outward
speech will not carry the secret sense, in the understanding of discreet
hearers. Which is the whole and only point, which in my dispute against the
Romish AEquiuocation I undertook to prove. And lest that any might think
that their AEquiuocating device were any way sanctified by touch, as it were,
of S. Frances his sleeue, Sotus opposes against that a contrary example out of
S. Augustine, as follows.

6 An other example. Ibid.
S. Augustine reports another example: There was a Bishop (says he) whose
name was Firm, Another example out of S. Augustine.
but himself was firmer in his resolution, who hiding a man that was pursued
by officers, and being asked, who it was, answered only thus: I may neither
lie, nor yet betray the party: and thereupon he himself was carried to be
tortured, who suffered torment, yet through his patience he obtained favor of
the Emperor for the deliverance of the man that had fled unto him. This being
by Sotus opposed unto the former example of S. Francis does teach us that he
would not allow our AEquiuocatours pretense, who would have readily answered
that question by saying, Nobody, meaning, To tell it unto you: and S.
Augustine his Firmus in these days would be hissed out of their schools for a
simple and witless fellow even as our AEquinocatours would (if they had lived
in these days) been driven out of Christendom for graceless mont-bankes. But
hear what follows.

7 An other example. Before he delivers this example, Another example,
confuting Romish AEquiuocators.
he propounds a Conclusion, which is principally to be observed. In the case
of a man who is wrongfully questioned about a most secret fault, Ibid. (...) 7
P. 319.
If (says Sotus) he cannot find words, whereby, through an Equivocation,
which is in the common use of men, he may cover his fault without a lie, he
ought rather to die than lie. Still we find, that whatsoever the AEquiuocation
be, it ought to be such as consists in the common use of the words
themselves. And therefore where the question is, concerning a guilty person,
who killed Peter and is examined thereabout, Whether he may answer, I have not
killed him, conceiving in his mind another man of the same name Peter, being
one whom indeed he killed not: Such an answer (says Sotus) cannot be without a
lie, because according to the received use of all men, an affirmation and
negation in proper names are so taken for the same man, as if this only had
been thereby signified, viz. for that Peter, of whom the question was asked. How
then shall their AEquiuocating Priest avoid the guilt of a lie, who being
asked, whether he were a Priest, Answered, No, meaning, A Priest of Apollo, the
heathenish God. And being demanded whether he were ever beyond the Sea,
answered, No, meaning, the Adriatique Sea. We see that here also their Sotus
meeth with their AEquiuocator, to prove him alier.

8 The last example. Ibid. pa. 322
But what shall the guilty miserable The last example to the same purpose.
woman do, when her husband shall constrain her by violence to confess
whether she had committed Adultrie, or no, and she cannot find any
amphibologie, to hide herself in? I answer (says he) That the iniquities of
men are more than that we can prevent them: therefore in such a case it is
better to die, than to transgress by lying. This had been but a fond
Resolution, if he had thought that Nescio, vt dicam, would have served the
turn, which to free the speech from a lie, notwithstanding is the (...) in the
profession, and practice of our Equiuocators, and whereby it is most easy to
prevent all guiles of the most subtle Interrogatories. In brief; in the
shutting up of this Treatise he grants that Words which have not a true
sense, according to the signification, which is received into common use,
cannot be excused from a lie. Which conclusion, with all these premises, I
leave as a Glass unto M. Parsons, and other Professors of Mental
Equivocation, to look their faces in, and at their leisure to tell me what
they see. From the Spanish Doctor Sotus, he goes to a Flemmish Doctor Cunerus.

SECT. II.
The sum of the sixteeneth charge of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
CVnerus is no less injuriously alleged than the former: for Reckon. page
444. 445. Cunerus de offic. Princ. cap. 13.
Cunerus saying, In religione concordiae sola est ratio vt omnes, etc. that is,
This in religion is the only way of concord, that all men with apious mind
do wholly conceive and practice that which is taught in the Catholic Church
of Rome: Master Morton translateth; This is the only true religion, which is
taught in the Church of Rome. What dealing is this? etc.

The Reuiew.
9 Any man may perceive what kind of fish M. Parsons M Parsons a mere Carper.
is, who can thus carpe at words, peruersly concealing the plain intention of
the Author Cunerus: he intending to prove the Hollanders to be Rebels against
the K. of Spain, who were Cunerus. page 131.
not possibly to except concord, except first they would consent in one
Religion, and that there is no true religion but that of the Church of Rome,
Whereunto (says Cunerus, page 133.
Cunerus) a Christian Prince is sworn to be a defender of the faith, namely of
that Romish, and therefore he will have that King, as Sara, to cast out Agar and
her son, so to remove out of Holland all of the contrary profession of
Religion. If then he allowing no possibility of Concord, without consent in
religion; and no Religion, but that which is Romish, does he not evidently say
that the Romish is the only Religion? I am vexed with M. Parsons his vanities,
and desire something material. Peradventure we shall find it in the next
instance.

SECT. III.
The seventeenth charge. M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
NOw we come to another abuse perteining to two menindifferently, Reckon. pa.
446.
to wit, Cassander a Germane Schoolmaster, and Bellarmine a Cardinal: but we
shall ascribe it rather to the Germane for this present, for that we have had
diverse examples about Cardinali Bellarmine before.

The Reuiew.
10 Shall I attribute this omitting of my Abuse of Bellarmine M. Parsons idle
and fond collusion.
unto M. Parsons his remissness, or rather to his barrenness, and indeed
fondness? who offers to Reckon for an abuse of Bellarmine, and yet will not
tell what it is. Wherein M. Parsons abuses Bellarmine (in my opinion) bringing
him upon his stage, to no other end than (as Cato went into the Senate) to
carry him out again. But what of Cassander? I would hear first something of
the man, and then of the matter.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Finding my self weary with prosecuting the labyrinth of his intricate Reck.
page 448.
iuggling tricks, I will draw to an end, adding only one example more in this
place. First to pretermit that he goes about to deceive his Reader by the
opinion of gravity, and learning in George Cassander of Bruges, who was but a
Grammarian in his days: and that he was a Catholic, who is consured for an
Heretic primae classis in the Index of prohibited books: and not only for
heresies of his time, but also Quod dicit Spiritum S. minus aduocandum, and
adorandum esse. etc.

The Review.
11 It were good you knew how to make an end, and better it had been for you
in your reputation, that you had His shameless falsity.
not begun at all with this taxation of Cassander, it is so notoriously
shameless: for (I beseech you M. Parsons) what great cause have you to
contemn a Grammarian, how Cassander his estimation.
much less to say that Cassander was but a Grammarian? As though he had been
unworthy of any better esteem, whom See Cassander his book De Consult.
printed at Colen, 1577. where are the letters of the Emperor Ferdiand, and
Miximilian
both the Emperor Ferdinand, and Maximilian King of the Romans sent for (about
the time of the Council of Trent) and made singular choice of him, before any
other Doctor, with whom they might consult, concerning the weightiest points of
controversy in Religion, and in that respect was he commended by the Emperor
for a man of singular learning, and godliness, and entitled, Theologus, that
is, a Divine: and by Maximilian he was extolled for a man godly, learned, and
discreet, and been versatus in sacris literis, that is, One very conversant in
holy Scriptures, of whom we have need, says Miximilian.

12 Who may not hereby perceive with what eyes M. Parsons looked upon this so
rare and excellent a Divine (as His envious detraction against Cassander.
the testimonies of those Prince, and his own writing show) in whom
notwithstanding he can see nothing but a Grammarian? Which sauoreth of an
envious detraction, even as his next exception does taste of vanity, in
alleging their Index Expurgatorius as though it were evidence enough to prove
one no Catholic. Those that have red that Index Their Index Expurgatorius.
know that it often purges out of Authors more good blood, than gross
humors. And whether any such words be in Cassander, concerning, the holy
Ghost, or in what sense he speaks them, I have not yet observed: this is
plain, that his whole works do magnify the Deity of the holy Ghost, and
also do enlarge man's duty in the worship of the blessed spirit of Grace.

13 Afterward M. Parsons anatomizeth, as it were, the whole text of Cassander,
cauilling about unnecessary, and impertinent terms: for the scope of all was
to show that Protestants ( in the opinion of Cassander) were hold to be Uera
membra Christi, that is, The true members of Christ; and that Princes were to
seek to establish a peace of religion between, them, and the Romanists. To
what end then are M. Parsons his other skirmishes? where with he beats the
air? Only onething excepted, which concerns Cassander, to know what
profession he was of, seeing M. Parsons can not abide his Acquaintance, as will
further appear,

M. PARSONS his Reckoning. The sum.
Thirdly he does most notably cogge, in thrusting in the word, Reck. page 450.
and 451.
a nobis, meaning thereby to make Cassander seem a Catholic, and to speak in
the behalf of Catholics. And then he translateth Catholics, Papists, as
though Cassander, if he were a Catholic, would call us Papists.

The Reuiew.
14 By M. Parsons his censure Cassander is not to be called a Catholic, nor
yet may Catholics be called Papists. First of Cassander. That my Reader may
know that M Parsons his faithless dealing with Cassander.
I was as far from coggery, as M. Parsons is from true modesty in his
denials: I shall but desire him to observe that Cassander in the same book of
Consult. Art. 7. in defense of the Romance Church, Canssand. Cansult. Art. 7.
says; Verum, nil tam grave in Pontifices NOSTROS dicipotest, quod non in
Saccrdotes Iudaici populi conueniat; that is, Nothing (says he) can be spoken
against OUR Popes, which might not as well be objected against the Priests of
the Jews. Thus he inserteth himself in the number of 'Papists. Secondly, he
was held to be a Papist of Protestants, as by Osiander in his Papa non Papa,
epist. ad lectorem
Osiander, and As Netuius confesses in his defense of Cassander.
Beza. Thirdly, some Romanists themselves have acknowledged him in their
public writings for theirs, as namely, In his defense of Cassander.
Bartholomeus Neruius, and Thuanus hist. part. 3. Anno. 1572. page 107.
Thuanus, who reports of him, that he was the instrument to draw Baldwine
unto the Roman religion. Notwithstanding as Mable of Windsor, that thought
that there is no other part of the world which she saw not within the compass
of her Horison, so M. Parsons cannot discern a Catholic except he be
within the circumference of his own seditious doctrines: in brief, this
denial that Cassander was a professed Romanist, is an inexcusable falsehood.

15 If M. Parsons be disposed to see a notable coggery indeed, he need but
turn back again to a See above lib. 1. c. 12. number. 6.
testimony of his own cited out of Calvin, where to make Calvin an Adversary
unto all the ancient Fathers, in the point of prayer for the dead, M. Parsons
himself has foisted in the word [ Omnes] All, of his own, against the
express meaning and resolution of M. Calvin, in that very place. This is
properly Coggery to foist in a word which agrees not unto the truth of the
matter; whereof we have See above. lib. 1. cap. 1.
seen diverse examples in Suares, Bellarmine, and Gratian.

16 Howsoever it gives us some cause of admiration, that M. Parsons is ashamed
of the name of a Papist, seeing that the word [ Papists] comes of Papa, that
is, The Pope, The name of Papist held both as glorious and odious among the
Romanists.
to whom M. Parsons professes subjection, as a matter necessary to Salvation;
how can he then abhor his own surname? His fellow Anast. Coche. let Palastrit.
houoris etc. p. 9. and 6.
Cochelet is more zealous in the defense of that title, We are Papists (says
he) and confess it and glory in that name. And Doctor Stapleton Doctr. prine.
li. 4. c. 2. ad fincm.
Staplet on makes Papists and Catholics to be Synonmies. But why do we busy
and abuse our Reader with discourse about such impertenencies?

SECT. IV.
The eighteenth charge. M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
DRawing to an end, I am forced to join diverse together, Reckon. page 452.
whereof I accused him in my former writing to have corrupted two Authors
jointly, Royard a Friar, and Cunerus a Bishop.

The Reuiew.
17 Be not offended if that which you deliver in gross, Two together, I utter
by retale, yet so, as to keep your own order, which is to let your Friar
Usher your Bishop.

M. PARSONS his Reckonig.
It is not credible to him, that has not compared the books Reck. page 453.
themselves, how he has abused diverse Authors: As for example, Royardus the
Franciscan Friar is brought in with commendation of an honest Friar, for that
he says; That a King, when he is made by the people, can not be deposed by
them again at their pleasure: which is the same doctrine that all other Friars
and learned Catholics do hold, so long as he contains himself within the
nature of a King: for that otherwise (which is the question in controversy)
Royard himself says, Parendum ei non esse, That he is not to be obeyed. But
this is not to be Dominic 23. post. pentecost. Con. 2.
judged by the people and their mutiny, as Protestant Doctors do teach.

The Reuiew.
18 This M. Parsons has brought in for a choice example, among (...) of (as he
says) an incredible abuse of my Authors: therefore I desire my Reader to
esteem of those diverse others, by this, wherein he does particularly, insist,
and it will prove M. Parsons to be an incredible Accuser: for the sentence of
Royard Full satisfact. part. 1. p. 30.
stands thus: (...) Sermon. 2. in dom. 23. post. Peutecost.
Although there be in the people a freedom of election, yet, after they have
chosen a King, they have no power to remove the yoke, but stand in necessity
of subjection. M. Parsons has surueyed the sentence, and can not take any
exception to the citation of it, wherein he saw that Friar Royard preached unto
the peoplea Necessity of subjection, so far, as Not to remove the King,
whom they have once chosen. Which conclusion, as M. Parsons knows, does
condemn the now positions of their Jesuits, and especially M. Parsons his
Dolman proving them indeed to be no better than rebellious. How will M. Parsons
avoid so plain a witness of their own Friar? Mark, I pray thee, Christian
Reader, (for this trick he fetches out of the bortome M. Parsons egregious
falsehood, misciting the judgment of Royard.
of his budget) by a false repetition of the sentence, as if it had been thus:
That a King, when he is made by the people, can not be deposed by them again
at their pleasure: whereby he turns Royards necessity of subjection of the
people, and their not having any power to remove the yoke, into not removing
him only at their pleasure. Is this good dealing? but the necessity of his
cause did constrain him to this shift, because there was no other means to
make this Royard. sermon. 1. Dom. 1. Aduentus.
Friar and himself friends and professors of the same doctrine, but only by
abusing the sentence of Royard, and making it not to be the same.

19 His next guile and cunning is, by inquiring into another Tome of Royard, to
find out (if he might) some sentence M. Parsons next wilful and notorious
falsitie.
to counterpoise the former: which pains needed not, if he could have shifted
himself honestly of the former, without notorious fraud. But at length, after
much fishing, all that he has catched is but this poor gudgeon. A King,
says Royard, must not be obeyed, when he commands any thing contrary unto
godliness, which (says M. Parsons) is the controversy: which is his godless
falsitie, for look the place in my Full Satisfact. part. 1. page 31. the
controversy, there set down, was not whether people are bound to obey the
unlawful command of their Kings, but whether they have power to depose them.
The Apostles being commanded, not to preach the Gospel, answered, Royard. dom.
23. post Pentecost. sermon. 2.
Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge you: yet did they not teach the
people to reject such Commanders, and to hold them for no Magistrates. And
Royard in this place, now cited by M. Parsons, insisteth in the fact of S.
Ambrose, who obeyed not the Emperor, but reprehended him; but yet did not
Ambrose teachmen to depose him. I would propound an argument to M. Parsons, but
I doubt he will stumble upon it, and fall and break his forehead. It should be
this: If the Popeshould command him any thing, which is directly against Gods
commandment, would M. Parsons obey him? He would not, for then he should make
the Pope his God: but in not A Dilemma.
obeying him, would he seek to depose him? He would not; for he has taught,
that for wickedness of manners the Pope may not be judged by any. Whereupon it
follows, that these two, viz. the not obeying, and the deposing of Kings, are
not the same controversies.

20 Therefore may I easily allege against M. Parsons the saying which a
Philosopher used against a fond Disputer; A. Gellius. A similitude.
Hic homo sine controuersia doctus est; This man without controversy is very
learned, for in controuerting he shows no learning or very little. To
conclude, M. Parsons has showed us two singular knacks of leger-demaine; the
one is, the wilful perverting of the testimony of Royard, changing a
necessity of not removing the yoke, into not removing at their pleasure; which
are two contrary senses: the second, by changing the state of the Controversy,
to wit, the Deposing of a Kings person into Disobeying the Kings unjust
command. We leave the Friar, and draw near the Bishop.

The sum of the charge. M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
He cites Cunerus, though brokenly, testisying that it lies not Reck. page
453. Full Satisfact. part. 1. pa. 30. Cunerus lib. (...) offic. Princ. c. 5.
in the peoples hand to reject their Prince at their pleasure: But Cunerus
says nothing against vsbut against the Rebels of Flanders, and altogether for
us, who notwithstanding this exact obedience, which we require of subjects to
their lawful Princes, has aspeciall Chapter expressly proouing that in some
causes the Commonwealth and the Church have authority to restrain and remove
them. What falsehood is this, to allege Authority flatly against their meaning?
does this become a Minister of simple truth? is this for a man, who so much
abhors AEquiuocation? So I said to M. Morton at that time, when I expected
he would return some answer to my demand: The like I do repeat again now,
and will attend what may come from him hereafter.

The Reuiew.
21 I am sorry that I have been so long in your debt, and therefore now upon
the second sight of your Reckoning I hope to make all strait by an answer which
will be, I doubt, less acceptable unto you, in giving you to understand that
you are, M. Parsons, in this Reckoning, a most unconscionable person, in
imputing unto me matter of falsehood herein. For the doctrine which I Full
Satisfact. part. 1. page 29.
there sought to refell, was the opinion of your Jesuit Sa meron in epi. Pauli
in (...) disp. 12.. I am de.
Salmeron. If a Catholic King ( says Salmeron) shall fall to be an Heretic,
or an Apostate, reason wills that among Catholic people he be removed from
the government of the Commonwealth: but why? Because the power was first in
the people, then in the King, and is derived from M. Parsons is unconscionably
iniutious.
the King to the people. This reason I confuted by the testimonies out of your
own Doctors, the first was Royard, who said, that the people had not any power
to remove the yoke: the second testimony was out of Cunerus, which stands
thus: Cunerus lib. de offic. Prnic. 6. 5
Some say that the authority of Princes depends upon the courtesy of the
people, as thinking, that they, who gave consent to choose a King, have power
likewise to depose him. But (proouing this from Scriptures) wheresoever a King
is established by the consent of the Kingdom, this ordinance is of God, and
the people must obey. Which flatly contradicts the former Conclusion of
Salmeron. And further than this I did not meddle with the opinion of Cunerus.
Therefore in this charge you have played either the Equiuocator, or the flat
(aposiopesis;) or both.

22 Furthermore, to satisfy your expectation to the full, if I had stepped a
degree further in alleging Cunerus, your own Barckley would even out of
Cunerus have justified my Conclusion: for he (under standing, by people, Barcl.
lib. 5. contra Monarcho. c. 12. p. 385.
All them who are associated together under one civil law, in one
commonwealth, of what kind, age, wisdom, dignity, soever they be) does prove
out of Cuncerus, Lib. 3 c. 12.
That the King has not his authority only from the consent and covenant made
between the people and the King, but from the ordinance of God: and that he
Observe a necessary doctrine, and forcible enough to confouud the rebelleously
affected.
that resists this authority, does violate the constitution of God. And (out
of his 7. Chapter) That the Scripture every where witnesses, that albeit Kings
do sin, yet may they not be resisted with arms, or violence, but are to be
judged of him, who is greater than all Kings, which is that wisdom and truth,
which cries, Hear, o Kings, and understand. etc. Which he illustrateth by an
example of Ioas, an idolatrous King of Judah, who most cruelly put the Prophet
Zachary to death, and was slain by the hands of his own servants in his
bedchamber: who after that fact were justly slain by Amaziah the King and
next Successor unto Ioas in the Kingdom of Judah. It will therefore stand M.
Parsons upon (if he affect truth) to compare this of Barckley and their Cunerus
together and try how he can reconcile either Barckley with Cunerus or else
Cunerus with himself. M. Parsons his next passage is unto our Countriman Sayer.

SECT. V.
The sum of the nineteenth M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
OUt of Sayer he alleges this sentence: An obstinate Heretic Reckon. pa.
454. 455.
is he that is presumed to be, as he that is manifest: but Sayer speaks not
of heresy, but only of him, who may be excommunicated by a Judge, for
contumacy, in not Sayer. lib. 1. (...) consc. c. 9.
appearing; which is a different thing from obstinacy or pertinacy, and this
whether he be an Heretic or Catholic. And he defines contumacy to be
nothing else but a certain disobedience, whereby he is not obeyed that sits
in judgment: and putting down two sorts of contumacies, either manifest, or by
presumption; manifest, if a man being cited does refuse openly to appear or
obey the Judge: by Presumption, when he is presumed to be contumacious, and so
may excommunication, if it be a spiritual court, proceed against him, as if
contumacy were manifest. Is Master Morton so simple in Divinity, as not to
discern between Contumax, and Pertinax, whereof the one is a disobediency
toward Superiors, the other is a tenacity of opinion, as has been defined?

The Reuiew.
23 If M. Parsons would be so equal, as to allow me that, which he in his own
defense has alleged and pretended for himself, which is, the excuse of lapse
of memory concerning terms, then can I not be inexcusable herein, because at
that time I could not see the book of Sayer. And although every Pertinax be
not a Contumax, yet every Contumax is Pertinax. If I had dealt with Sayer, as
their Jesuit Suarez is confessed to have done with a testimony of Aquinas,
when in stead of See above lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 1.
preordination he put in Subordination, which are flat contrary, then might it
well have become M. Parsons to call it (according to this Reckoning) The most
faithless deceit, and corruption that ever any honest man put to paper against
an Adversary. For this change of terms does fully contradict the Authors
meaning, which he did, because the word of Aquinas would have overthrown his
whole cause.

24 But if we take the testimony of Sayer, which M. Parsons M. Parsons
maliciously snatcheth at words and shadows, and wittingly loses the
substantial matter.
will acknowledge to be truly his, it will sufficiently prove the principal
matter, which I then intended, which was especially to know in what case
Protestants may be thought to stand, by the principles of Sayr, and whether
they may not lie under the Romish excommunication, and so be made liable to
their cruel censures, before any public and parsonall praemonition by name.
Shall we hear Sayer discoursing upon the nature of excommunication? Sayer de
casib. consc. lib. 1. ca. 12.. Primo sieve.
There is an excommunication (says he) of man, and an other of law: in
excommunication by man the party inobedient must first be admonished; The
doctrine of Sayer is prejudicial unto the State of Protestants.
but in excommunication by the law it is sufficient that the admonition be
general, which is made of him, who is the Author of the law, whereupon it
happens, that he who offends against the admonition of the law, does thereby
fall presently into excommunication. Ibidem,. Quartus est.
There are certain cases, wherein the personal citation and admonition is not
necessary, to wit, when it is not given against any particular person, but
generally, which is when it is given for future offenses, such as are all the
censures which are given by law, for that the law does always admonish, lest
that any commit a crime which it forbids: in which case there is not any
other admonition necessary. Again, Ibil.. Primus est.
When a man has been often moved to repentance, seeing that now his
contumacy is manifest, he may without any further admonition be excommunicated.
Let then these rules be but applied against Protestants, whom they call
Heretics, and what shall we need more for the knowledge of Sayr his judgment
concerning the cause it self? M. Parsons would rather have pondered the
matter, than canuassed words, if he had not been stronger in raging than in
reasoning.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing an Answer to other three charges.

. I.
The twentieth charge, concerning the point of Equivocation, according the
judgment of Cicero.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
FRom Christians and Countrymen he passes to Reck. page 457.
Heathens, and commits such notorious falsehoods against one of them, even
then, and there where he speaks of faithful dealing, against
perfidiousnesse, as may tustly make any man admire, what he did suppose his
judicious Reader would think of him, when he should see the fraud disclosed.

The Reuiew.
1 I doubt that you will play the part of some Heathen rather than of a
Christian, before you dispatch this piece of Reckoning. The Story was thus
delivered. Reck. pa. 457.
There was a man ( says Master Morton) who together with nine other prisoners
being dismissed out of the prison of Carthage, upon his oath, that he within a
prefixed time should return again: as soon as he was out of prison, he
returned, as though he haed forgotten something, and by and by departs home
to Rome, where he stayed beyond the time appointed, and answered that he was
freed from his oath. But see now the opinion of his own Countriman Cicero,
concerning this Equivocation of return. This was not well done (says Tully)
for that craft in an oath does not lessen, but make the perjury more heinous.
Wherefore the grave Senators of Rome sent this cousening mate back again to
the prison of Haniball, their enemy, from whom he had escaped. etc. This
example of sincerity in that Heathenish Rome I objected against the now
Christian Rome, to confute the ordinary doctrine and practice of Equiuocating.
The exceptions, which M. Parsons takes, are partly for the method, partly for
the meaning of Cicero.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Mark then the deportment of this man in this one point, and Reckon. pa. 458.
if you knew him not before, learn to know him by this. First then I would
have some Grammar-scholar, that studieth Tullies offices, to turn to the
places here quoted, and comparing them with that which this Minister sets
down in English, consider how they hang together, and how he picketh out one
sentence in one place, and another in another, and leapeth forth and back to
make some coherence of speech, contrary to the Authors order, sense, and
method, as is ridiculous to behold, and fit for the cousening mate, of whom he
talks in his text.

The Reuiew.
2 I did think that M. Parsons could not have so soon forgot his gross
absurdity in syllogizing, which I commended unto the examination of his
Scholars, and whereof he has been so much ashamed, as that being charged for
changing the Copula, which in the Mayor was [ Maketh] the Judges competent,
into [ Are] competent Judges in the conclusion, M. Parsons plaieth both fondly
and falsely upon a wrong string.
which was the great blot and loss of his whole game. Therefore I presumed that
he would be wary, in calling young Scholars any more to witness between us.
The place is known in Tullie his offic. lib. 3. it begins at, Sic december.
etc. and ends at, Ad Hannibalem ducerentur: If I have mis-reported the
substance of the Story, or made any excursion out of the due compass thereof,
then let his Scholar-boies (for I desire not to trouble men with these
triflings) hold me worthy of his taxation. As for the calling of the place
Carthage, which Tully names Castra, quorum erant potiti Poeni, that is, The
camp, which the Carthaginians did hold, and wherein the man was kept prisoner,
it cannot help or hinder the point of Equiuocating. Now come we to the matter.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
The most notorious cousenages, that he poruerteth all Cicero Reck. page 459.
his meaning, words, sense, and discourse in this matter, alleging them quite
contrary to himself, as before you have heard him do many other Authors, so
he belieth and corrupts them all, both divine and profane. And if in this
one point he can deliver himself from Punicafides, I will say he, plaieth
the man indeed.

The Reuiew.
3 If I shall free my self from the note of cousenage, then M. Parsons is a
wary Gamster.
all that M. Parsons will allow me in the conquest is only the reputation of
a man: this is an excellent gamster, he will cast at me, and adventure nothing
himself. But, good M. Parsons, if you will say that I have played the man,
when I have freed my self from this slander of cousenage, what will you give
me leave to call you, if the cousenage shall fall upon your self? May I not
think, that you play the part not of man, but of that animal the fox, which
you propounded unto your Equiuocators, as a natural example for their
imitations? Let the wager be but indifferent, and I shall not refuse the
Trial, whereunto I proceed.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
First, I say that if they swear absolutely to return again, if Reck. Ibid.
they obtained not their suit, they were bound truly and sincerely to perform
the same. And secondly, that they being now justly by law of arms prisoners of
Hanniball, they were bound to swear sincerely to his intention, and not to any
other reserved meaning of their own, as in the former Chapter has been
declared.

The Reuiew.
4 Very good, they were Prisoners by the law of arms, A comparison between
Heathenish and sum Romish prisoners.
and might not therefore violate their oath: some of yours who have been
prisoners by the law of the land, according to the law of nature in cases of
mere treason, sometime (notwithstanding their oaths unto their keepers to be
true prisoners) have made use of their heels and after their escape have found
intertainment and security in the now Rome. Neither may you answer, that such
men swear not absolutely, but equiuocatingly, for so (you know) did that
faithless prisoner, whom the Senate therefore sent back again in a vengeance
unto Haniball. All this while we hear nothing of Mental Reservation.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
This very doctrine also teaches Cicero by light of nature, in Reckon. pa.
459. 460.
these words perfidiously cut off, and left out by this Minister in the very
same place, out of which he takes the rest. Est (...) (says he) ius etiam
bellicum, fidesque iurisiurandi saepe hosti seruanda: quod enim ita iuratum
est, vt men's couciperet fieri oportere, id seruandum est: quod aliter id si non
feceris, nulium periurium est. There is also a law of arms (says he) and a
faith in our swearing to be observed often times, even unto our enemy. For
that which is so sworn by us, as our mind does conceive that it must be done,
this is to be observed: but if it be otherwise sworn, that is no perjury, if
he perform it (...) Behold here the very same distinction, which Catholic
Divines put down of swearing according to the intention and understanding of
the swearer, or of him, to whom it is sworn: and that the former is, that
binds and makes perjury, if it be not performed, and not always the
second, to wit, when any violence or force is used.

The Reuiew.
5 Behold here a strange and strong delusion: M. Parsons collecteth from those
words, [ That which is sworn, as M. Parsons his misconstruction of Tullies
offices.
our mind does conceive that it must be done, that is to be observed: but if
it be otherwise sworn, that is no perjury, if he perform it not,] that
Cicero did understand some reserved clause conceived in the mind mixed with
the outward speech, to make up one full proposition, such as is their Priestly
Equivocation, I am no Priest, conceiving inwardly, with purpose to tell it unto
you: which kind of mixture never came unto the fantasy of Cicero, or yet of
any heathen Writer. But his meaning may be easily explaned, thus: That which is
sworn as our mind conceiueth, must be done: that is, when we swear unto any,
to whom we conceive that we owe faithfulness, albeit they be even our hostile
enemies, unto whom (as he speaks in the words immediately going before) there
is a faithfulness due, according by the common law of arms, That oath is to
be observed, and may not be broken: but if we swear otherwise, that is, unto
them unto whom we think that there is no fidelity due, such as are Pirates,
that oath, although it be not performed, yet is it not perjury, that is, in
the exterior Court of men, because Pirates, and such perfidious kind of men (of
whom he speaks in the next words) who are transgressors of the law of
Nations, have no authority to judge it perjury.

6 If this exposition, concerning the outward Court of man, do not satisfy M.
Parsons, I shall not refuse to join issue upon the inward Court of the mind
and conscience. And the proposition of Sin aliter in Tullie truly resolved
stands thus: If I swear any thing, thinking in my mind that I ought not to
do it, this is no perjury, although I shall not perform it. If our
Equiuocators will allow this proposition, then must they say that no man can be
perjured in swearing any thing, which he thinks to be unlawful; but this is
incredible: If they will condemn it, then must they A Dilemma.
also condemn M. Parsons for a profane man, who esteems of this impious
doctrine, as of a Catholic truth, especially seeing they can not find their
clause of Mental reservation in all this: for when a man swears with his
mouth, saying, This I will give thee, and in his mind shall conceive, yet I
will not give thee this, because I ought not; these are two diverse, and partly
contradictorie propositions, and make not a mixed proposition, which is the only
point that the Equiuocators do defend. This will be more manifest by the
example following.

Mr. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Which Cicero does express in the very next immediate words, Reck. page 460.
by the self same example, that Azor used before: Si praedonibus pactum pro
capite precium non attuleris, nulla fraus est: ne si iuratus id non feceris,
etc. If thou should not pay the price or ransom unto public thieves, which
was agreed between you for saving of your life, it is no deceit, no though you
had sworn to perform it, etc.

The Reuiew.
7 Methinke I do perceive an (etc.) there: Yea M. Parsons? can you play the
gelder so openly, to cut off the words which follow, and are of so great
importance? to wit M. Parsons his excellent piece of craft, in cutting off
words of Cicero, which are of most importance.
these; Nam Pirata non est ex perduellium numero definitus, sed communis hostis
omnium: cum hoc nec fides esse debet, nec iusiurandum commune. That is, For a
Pirat is not to be reckoned in the number of enemies (meaning such, with whom
we ought to keep fidelity, for Perduelles in this place is no more than
(...)) but is the common enemy of all, with whom there ought not to be common
faith, or oath. This verifieth my former exposition, concerning the outward
Court of man, supposing that the meaning of Cicero is, that seeing Thieves and
Robbers are outlawes, the oath which shall not be kept with them can not be
perjury, and so censured by any law ofman: for when there is no Ius, which is
to be violated, there can be no periurium. And in all this there is no note of
our Equiuocators mixed clause of Reservation, which the sequel will more fully
explain.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
It follows in Cicero: Non enim falsum iurare peierare est, Reckon. pa. 460.
461.
sed si ex animi tui sententia iuraueris, sicut verbis concipitur more nostro,
id non facere, periurium est: site enim Euripides, Iuraui lingua, mentem
iniuratam gero. That is: It is no perjury to swear false, (in any sort
whatsoever) but if you swear a thing which you determine in your mind, and do
utter it in words according to the common custom of speech, and do not
perform it, this is perjury: for well and fitly to the purpose says the Poet
Euripides, I have sworn with my tongue, but my mind has not sworn. So he.
And consider now, I pray you, the punica fides of our Minister against our
Roman faith. He says that Cicero and other Heathenish Romans shall rise up
against us at the day of judgment, for that they condemn all reservation or
doubtful sense in an oath, and do condemn it for perjury: where as Cicero
affirms, that there is neither perjury nor fraud therein. And the same
Philosopher allows the very same example of swearing, with a reserved
intention, to a public thief without either meaning or obligation to perform
it.

The Reuiew.
8 This is soon said by you of Cicero, and may as easily Cicero can not
patronize M. Parsons Equiuocating, except M. Parsons do profess and justify a
lie.
be confuted out of Cicero, who held that the oath, which he spoke of, is
false, and also that notwithstanding the falsitie thereof, it was lawful to
use it against thieves, who are lawlessemen: which piece of Philosophy our
Christianity did never allow.

9 For proof that Cicero thought that to be lawful, which Christians call a
lie, we need not the conjectures of your Sotus, who says, with a peradventure,
that Sotus de tegend. secret. membr. 3. q 3.
It was the opinion of some Philosophers, that it is lawful to lie, for the
avoiding of some grievous evil, which they called a merciful lie, whereof
there is mention in Plato Tom. 3. de Repub. and in Cicero pro Q. Ligario. Of
Plato there can be no difficulty, for he allowed Physicians to lie unto their
Patients, to the end that by cordial words they might better revive them.

10 As for the knowledge of Cicero his judgment in this case, Cicero himself
will suffice in this present place: for The proof.
first (as we have heard him say) It is not perjury to swear false, thereby
confessing that that oath, although made unto a Pirat or thief is false,
because the promise unto the thief was to give him something, but his
intention was not to give him any thing; Can there be a greater falsehood in
speech? Yet he calls this no perjury, because this being done to thieves,
who live under no law of men, there is no law of man that will in that case
condemn a man of perjury. But if contrariwise the like oath should be made
unto men, who lived under a common law, Cicero calls it perjury, because in
this case words are conceived more nostro, that is, according unto humane
fashion of speech, which amongst civil men in the outward Court exacteth a
performance, and not to do this is periuric. I would but demand of M. Parsons,
If one of his Equiuocators should make such an oath to a thief, which he
means not to perform, whether therein he swear false, or no? If he shall
say, No; then is he condemned by Cicero, who says that it was falsum iurare,
that is, to swear a false thing. If he say yea, then is not that true which
they swear, and consequently (how soever it stand in the outward court of man)
it being false, it must be in it self, and in the in ward court of our
conscience a flat perjury.

11. The second Argument issues out of his application of the verse of
Euripedes, alleged by M. Parsons; I have Cicero his plain lying is brought in
by M. Parsons to the countenancing of his AEquiuocating
sworn with my tongue, but my mind has not sworn. So he, says M. Parsons,
whence he collecteth thus: Cicero affirms that there is in such an oath
neither fraud nor perjury. So he; thereby to confirm the art of Meant all
Reservation in an oath; which is as absurd a collection, as could have been
made, for the oath, signified in this verse, we see a swearing with the tongue,
and a not swearing with the mind, that is, the tongue is divided and
distracted from the mind; the tongue promising and saying [ I will give thee
this] the mind denying and gainsaying thus [ I will not give thee this,] which
in Christianity cannot but be a maine lie, according unto the vulgar
description used by S. Augustine, Aug. supra.
Mentiri est contra mentem ire: It is a lie, to go against the mind.

12 Shall we compare the Equiuocatours art in this? In Cicero's oath we see
two propositions, the one is in the mouth, and affirmative, I will do this;
the other is in the mind and negative, I will not do this; and in both there
is a flat contradiction between the tongue and the mind, which is downright
lying. But the Equiuocators are refined falsificators, for that they may avoid
the infamy of a lie, which must needs be in two contradictory propositions,
they have invented a trick, to put two propositions in one, as thus, the mouth
saying, I will give thee it (which he inteudeth not to give, and supplieth in
his mind) but only in conceit, or such a like clause, which he shall fancy to
himself. If therefore the Equiuocatours will defend Cicero his reservation,
then must they profess flat lying, affirming with their mouth, that which they
deny in their mind. But if they will maintain only their mixed proposition by
Mental Reservation, they must seek another Parron for it than Cicero, who
never fancied any such conceit. Notwithstanding Cicero is thus far more
righteous than the men of this generation, for he admitted no use of his manner
of falsehood, but against Thieves, Pirates, and such as were perfidious even
unto humane society, living without the law of Nations: But our Equiuotors can
profess and practice their art of delusion among Christians, yea and (as M.
Parsons has taught us) in deceiving our dear friends. We pass now on to M.
Parsons his Conclusion: for that which he obiecteth out of Azorius is but a
twice or thrice sodden colwoort.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Truly when I read it over together with many other points Reck. page 461.
before mentioned, and do cousider how weighty matter of accusation they do
contain, and how much I do insist upon them, to make the deformity thereof
appear in the Readers eyes, and those also of M. Morton, if it were possible,
and thereby to draw from him either some sound answer, or a simple confession
of his errors, so far as such they may be called: or rather of his witting
fraud, to beguile his Reader, which were the best and truest form of answer,
if almighty God would give him light to see the same (though I will presume
that he sinned not wholly against his conscience theerein, but framed rather
his conscience so, as he might think it lawful perhaps to streine truth, for
helping such a cause as his is) yet I cannot but marvel, that he would pass
over with silence all these grauer matters, and betake himself to slighter
things in this his last Answer.

The Reuiew.
13 What sound conscience can M. Parsons have in himself, who judges that any
man can think he may lawfully M. Parsons, by censuring other men's consciences,
has prejudiced his own.
in his conscience streine the truth? if M. Parsons measure us by the footings
of his own kind, who justify evil acts, that are done with good intentions,
such as were they that called the lies of Indulgences Godly deceits, he is
deceived: he must be contented to enjoy the company of his own fellows, and
not to range into other coasts for trial hereof, because among true Christians
Truth will be as much ashamed to be supported with a lie, as an honest Matron
will blush to attended upon with an arrant strumper.

14 As for my self, here I set my hand, and by this my Answer, and in this
the inward thought of my heart to wirnesse (for a testimony between us in that
day) that I am persuaded that Mental Equivocation (as it is described and
professed by M. Parsons, and practiced by some of his fellows) is a perfect
lie, and that this Siren or Mare-maide, which is half woman, and half fish, I
mean their Mixed proposition, which they will have to be part in the mouth, and
part in the mind, will never be proved out of Cicero, or any Mental
AEquiuocation cannot possibly be proved out of the Testimony of any Heathen.
Heathenish Author. Which point I insisted upon in my Full satisfaction, but
have not received from M. Parsous the least shadow of satisfaction heereunto,
out of the writing of any Heathen Philosopher, except only the now alleged
sentences of Cicero, who, according to his own confession, held a false oath
to be lawful, which is more than our AEquinocators will seem to dare to
defend; and that which they defend Cicero (if he had heard of it) would have
called, a lie. And so I leave it.

SECT. II.
The one and twentieth charge. M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THat you may know that this number of 20. is not precise, Rock. page 462.
but that many others may be added also, if a man will run over my said
Treatise, I have thought good to note more. One is concerning D. Barkley a
Scottish man. The first in that he relates a certain cholerique speech of the
said D. Barkley used against an argumont of D. Boucher, as though it had been
spoken against Bellarmine, whom it concerned not, etc. Which is a wilful
corruption.

The Reuiew.
15 I should be very sorry but that M. Parsons might easily object more than a
score, yea or twenty score accusations of this kind, wherein in the Reader
shall not find my corruption, but his own wilful and slanderous crimination.
For he that will but view the place, Full Satisfact. part. 3. P. 7
shall not find in the translation so much as mention of either Bellarmine or
Boucher; but I said only that your D. Barkley calls your assertion M.
Parsons his fine trick of fraud.
most false: which in the margent I noted to be the assertion of Bellarmine,
mentioned not in Barkley, but in the 3. cap. Supra, to wit, in the same book
of my Full Satisfaction, as it there plainly appears. Notwithstanding, if I
had brought in Barkley to confute Bellarmine by name, Barkley himself would
have justified me, who does expressly and professedly write against See a little
hereafter,
Bellarmine upon the very same point, as I shall show. Shall we leave their
persons, and speak of their Assertions?

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Nor indeed is Bellermines manner of speech contrary to that Reck. page 462. 463.
which Barkley will have to be the meaning of the History: for that Barkley
does not so much stand upon the things in controversy for Priests authority,
but upon the manner of proof, by the examples alleged by D. Boucher, of
Jeroboam, Ozias, Athalia, and some other Princes, in whose punishment God used
Priests for means and instruments. Non ignoro (says he) ius esse Ecclesiae in
Reges and Principes Christianos, nec quale ius sit ignoro, sed id tam alienis
argumentis ostendi, prorsus ignoro: imo non ostendi planescio. I am not
ignorant (says D. Barkley) that the church has right over Christian Kings and
Princes, nor am I ignorant what manner of right it is: yet do I not see how the
same may be proved by such impertinent arguments; nay I know rather that it
cannot be so proved. Which words going but very few lines before those that T.
M. alleges, he could not but see and yet left them out, and then begins
against us his English text thus: Your own Doctor calls this your assertion
most false, and contrary to the direct history of the Bible, to wit, That Ozias
was deposed of his kingdom by Azarias the high Priest. And this is the first
abuse, as to me it seems, inexcusable.

The Review.
16 No marvel though you think this, or any other thing, inexcusable, that
passes from me, whilst as you M. Parsons his mahcious falsehood.
look upon it through your wonted spectacles of rancor and despite, otherwise
you could not have been so grossy ouerseene, as to think me heerin
reprehensible at all, much less inexcusable: thereby bew raving our incredible
malice, as by comparing the Authors sentences will be most clear and evident.

17 Full Satisfact. part. 3. page 4.
Bellarmine his assertion was this: King Ozias, for exercising the Priestly
office, was deprived of his kingdom. So he. This assertion Ib. page 5.
Barckley called False and contrary to the direct history of the Bible, and
ancient Interpreters, because it Bellarmine fully confuted by Barkley.
is manifest (says he) that Ozias died a King, and that his son, during his
leprosy, was only Rector. Again, Bellarmine from the same example of Ozias,
collected that Bellar. lib. 5. de Pout. ca. 5.
The high Priest had power to deprive the King of his kingdom. Contrariwise
Barckley says, that Barcl. lib. 5. contra Monarcho. cap. 11.
It is most false to say that Ozias was deprived of his kingdom by the high
Priest; saying and proving, that it is either great indiscretion, or else
impudency, to affirm it, because it is confuted by most evident Scripture.
Can there be a greater contradiction between East and West, true and false,
than there is between East and West, true and false, than there is between
these two opinions of Bellarmine and Barckley?

18 Notwithstanding, in M. Parsons his seeming, Barckley, his odds is not so
great. And why, I pray you, M. Parsons? Barc. ib. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Because Barckley does acknowledge a manner of right in the Church over Kings.
What a wilful intoxication is this? We speak of the power coactiue of
deposing of Kings, which Barkley denies to be justifiable: M. Parsons opposes
Barkleis confession of a spiritual power of excommunication. Nay, I say yet
more: Barkley was so far from agreeing with Bellarmine in this point, that he
writ a large Chapter against him by name, to confute his many rebellious
positions made against the authority of Kings; and among others he does
particularly answer this his objection concerning Oziah, Barcla. de potestate
papae. c. 37.
I have shown (says he) that this is most false. And now I leave this fraud
of M. Parsons to be named by himself, presuming that he that he that called my
true Allegation Inexcusable, will not want a proper Epithet best befitting his
own guiltiness.

SECT. III.
The sum of the two and twentieth charge. M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe second is about an authority of S. Ambrose, craftily cut Rock. page 463.
464.
off from the speech of the said D. Barkley by M. Morton, whereof my accusation
in my former Treatise was this, viz. But yet if I would examine ( quoth I) the
particular authorities that be alleged about this matter, though nothing
making against us, as has been said, and consider how many false shifts are
used by T. M. therein, you would say that he were a Doctor indeed in that
science, for that a sever all Treatise will scarce contain them. I will touch
one for example sake. He cites D. Barkley, bringing in the authority of S.
Ambrose, that heresisted not by force his Arrian Emperor, when he would take a
Church from him for the Arrians: but he sets not down what answer his
Doctor Barkley does allege in the very same place, which is, Allegatur
Imperatori licere omnia, etc. It is alleged, that it is lawful for the
Emperor to do all things, for that all things are his (and consequently that
he may assign a Church unto the Arrians.) Whereto I answer (says S. Ambrose)
Trouble not your self, O Amb. l. 5. ep. 33.
Emperor, nor think that you have Imperial right over those things that are
Divine. Do not exalt your self, but if you will reign long, be subject unto
God: for it is written that those things that belong to God, must be given to
God: and to Caesar only those things that belong to Caesar. Palaces appertain
to the Emperor, but Churches to the Priest. Theright of defending public
walls is committed to you, but not of sacred things. Thus D. Barkley out of S.
Ambrose in the very place cited by T. M. which he thought good wholly to
pretermit and cut off, and yet to make a flourish, as though D. Barkley had
cited S. Ambrose to prove that the temporal Prince and Emperor was in no
case, nor in any cause spiritual or temporal to be withstood, or resisted.
And what will ye say of this manner of dealing? Out of what conscience may it
proceed?

The Reuiew.
19 Surely, either my answer proceeded out of a better conscience, than that
which M. Parsons bewraieth in this accusation, or else I must confess it is a
black and ugly conscience indeed. For the matter in question being this, Full
Satisfast. part. 3. page 24.
Whether it be lawful for Catholics to raise tumults against Heretical
Magistrates, even when they have force to resist, which is the now general
doctrine of Romish writers (as there appeared) I, for confutation hereof,
alleged Barkley, who writes thus of S. Ambrose. Barcla. lib. 3. (...) cap. 5.
S. Ambrose (says he) was sufficiently armed both by the power of the people,
and soldiers, and strengthened by the might of Christ, yet would he not defend
his Church with violence, no not against the fury of an Heriticall Emperor.
The whole question being not of resisting by disobedience, which is not obeying
a wicked command, but of resisting by violence, by bearing arms against M.
Parsons his shameless fraud.
his person. This causes me to wonder at the palenesse of M. Parsons his face,
who blusheth not to insist in that example and Author, wherein both he and all
his Accomplices, who like Heralds proclaim Arms and violence against the
majesty of Kings, to depose them, are so literally, so largely, Our Romish
Adversaries fally confuted by their own Barkley.
and so really confounded. For thus it follows in Barkley: Ambrose does so
handle the matter (says he) that he neither betraieth Gods cause, nor yet
violateth the Majesty of his Prince: he resisted by not doing that which the
wicked King did command: yet be (...) suffering patiently that which was
decreed in the Emperors Edict: Ambrose would not excite any to arms, not
because he could not, but because he ought not, as he himself did confess.
And in the shutting up of the point: These have I therefore written (says
Barkley) to shut up the mouths of such, who say that the ancient Church did
tolerate evil Princes, because at that time they were not of sufficient power
to resist, and abstained only until they might find strength to resist.

20 Which confession of Barkley may serve for a muzzle for Alan, Rainolds,
Coster, Creswell, Bellarmine, Symancha, and my good friend M. Parsons, who do
generally profess a violent resistance of them, whom they call Heretical
Kings, as soon as they may presume of their own force. Notwithstanding, M.
Parsons his Conscience could dispense with himself to persuade us that nothing
in this part of Barkley makes against them, when as (wherein I dare appeal
unto any Reader of what profession soever) neither M. Parsons, nor any Jesuit
can have a greater Adversary in this cause, not only in that place, but even
throughout that whole book.

CHAP. V.
Containing an Answer to the last charge of an heap of Falsehoods at once.

. I.
1 THe Full Satisfact. part. 1.
Question was, whether our Adversaries do offer greater indignity unto Kings,
than unto Popes, by their Doctrine of Deposing of Heretics. The Moderate
Answerer held that they Do not: I went diameter, and affirmed that They do
offer more prejudice unto Kings, because they teach that Kings, when they
command obedience unto Doctrines, as Kings, they may become Heretics, and
thereby they are made by them liable unto the censure of deposing. But for
Popes, they resolve otherwise, to wit, That Popes, as Popes, can not be
Heretics: and they understand, that a Pope then speaks as a Pope, whenever
he determines any doctrine to be a truth, and propounds it to be believed of
Christians, whether he define so in a Counsel, or Gretzorus Ies. Colleq.
Ratisb. Sess. 1. Sieve solus aliquid definiat, est eius infallibilis authoritas:
cum e Cathedra vt Pontifex definit, non est errori obnoxious.
Alone without a Council. Whereupon I inferred this mine own Consequence (as
the Characters should have distinguished) that by this doctrine, A Pope cannot
be deposed; and so their disparity between Kings and Popes, is easily euicted.

2 The Antecedent, viz. Popes as Popes cannot be Heretics, I undertook to
prove to be the Romish Tenet, from the confession of Bellarmine, Greg.
Valentia, Salmeron, Canus, Stapleton, and Costerus. And now M. Parsons is
desirous to be heard speak, this being his last Charge: He has rammed his
piece full, and shoots haile-shot, pretending, that in these Allegations, I
have committed Ten Falsehoods.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Reckon. p. 467.
He cites other four or five Authors in the Margent, to wit, Greg. Valentia,
etc. all which in the very places by him cited are expressly against him. And is
not this strange dealing? Let Canus, that goes in the midst, speak for all
the five, Who. etc.

The Reuiew.
3 Not so M. Parsons: for albeit I shall not refuse to hear Canus speak, yet
is there no reason that he should be therefore the spokes-man for the rest,
because he is in the Midst. You are too prone to imitate the Spirits which
were called Uentriloqui, and spoke out of the bellies of parties. But both the
Rules of Art in discoursing, and the law of Conscience in accusing, do
challenge you rather to begin at the beginning. I may not suffer you to be
irregular. I affirmed that it was the Doctrine of your forecited Authors, to
profess that Popes, as Popes, cannot be Heretics. Upon this Antecedent I
built this Consequence, that by the same doctrine it must necessarily follow,
that then As'Popes they cannot be deposed for Heresic. What will you M.
Parsons, say unto the Antecedent? What is that which you will now conclude from
Canus?

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
That Popes may be Heretics, as Popes, and consequently Reck. page 467.
may be deposed.

The Reuiew.
4 If the foresaid Authors do affirm that Popes, as Popes, may be Heritikes,
nay, if they do not absolutely deny it even in the very same places which I
have alleged, then let your brand of Impudency stick fast in my forehead.
First, Bellarmine. Bellar. l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 2.. Secunda opinio, and. ex
his.
The opinion of them (says he) who say that the Pope, as Pope, may be an
Heretic, and teach an Heresy, est opinio erronea, and haeresi proxima: that
is, Is an erroneous opinion, and next unto Heresy. Yea, he is so far from
yielding to M. Parsons, that in his sixth Chapter he says: Pie credendum, M.
Parsons marvelous ignorance or perverseness, in reporting the judgment of his
own Authors.
etc. that Ibid. cap. 6.
It is piously to be believed, that the Pope cannot be an Heretic, not only
as he is Pope, but even as he is a private man, by believing obstinately any
thing that is contrary unto faith. And Carer. lib. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 23.
Carerius does follow Bellarminc verbatim, yea Syllabatim, saying, Opinio est
erronea etc. and Pie credendum, etc. concluding that A Pope, as Pope, cannot be
an Heretic. Seeing then that Bellarmine does confute M. Parsons even in
terminis, it is not to be marvelled, that M. Parsons chose rather Canus than
Bellarmine, to speak for all the rest.

5 The second is Greg. de Ualentia, who is most peremtory in this point.
Valent. Ies. Anal. l. 8. c. 3.. Respondeo quid.
They that shall say (says he) that the Pope can according to his public
person (that is, as Pope) err in faith, in things controuerted in the Church,
those men do most grievously err in faith. Salmeron defends the same
position, calling this the Salmeron. in 2. Gal. Did. 24.. Deinde.
Singular prerogative of the Pope, that as Pope he cannot err in determining
any thing against faith. Stapleton walks in the same path. Stapleton (...)
princip. l. 6. c. 1.
The Pope (says he) as a private man, may err, but in discharging his
function (that is, as Pope) he cannot err in the matters of faith. Costerus
will not be behind his fellows. Costerus Enchirid. cap. 3.. Fatemur.
We do constantly deny (says he) that the Popes of Rome can teach (that is,
as Popes) others an heresy. Only Canus remains, whom M. Parsons would have
to speak for the rest. In good time: for he will not be found differing from
the rest. Canus. loc. Theol. lib. 6. c. 7. and. 8.
The Pope of Rome says Canus) cannot err in defining Controversies of faith:
which is all one as to say, that although the Pope may fall into heresy, as he
is a private man, yet as he does prescribe any doctrine to be publicly
believed in the Church (that is, as Pope) he cannot be an heretic. And thus
the Antecedent is clearly ratified by all the five witnesses, whom I alleged.
I proceed now to the Consequence.

The Consequence.
6. The Argument stands thus: He that can not be an heretic, as Pope, can
not as Pope be deposed for an heresy. But the Pope of Rome (according to the
doctrine of the former witnesses) can not be an heretic, as Pope. Ergo, As
Pope (according to their principles) he can not be deposed for heresy. M.
Parsons opposes heerunto as follows.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Reckon. page 446.
The four witnesses by him mentioned, to wit, Bellarmine, Carerius, Azorius,
and Gratian do expressly hold, that Popes both may fall into heresies, and may
also be deposed for the same, by the Church. And their words are guilefully
alleged by T. M. as sounding to the contrary, and are spoken of manners only,
and not of faith.

The Reuiew.
7 Does this Assertion, Popes may be heretics, contradict the former, Popes as
Popes can not be heretics? Is not this an excellent fallacy? Good M. Parsons
remember your M. Parsons notsble guile and falsehood.
own rules: A Priest having a secrecy, as Priest (that is, in Confession) may
not reveal it: but hearing a secret, as not Priest, but as a private man (that
is, out of Confession) he An example how Pope as Pope.
may sometime lawfully discover it. Were it not a fond cavil for any to say,
that the first, A Priest as Priest may not reveal a secret, is a lie, because
the other is a truth. vz. Hearing it as no Priest, he may reveal it? Have you
not yet learned to distinguish of the two kind of persons in the Pope, as well
as in a Priest? the one public, as Pope, the other private, as a particular
Doctor? Nevertheless, although all my dispute was concerning the public
person of the Pope, to prove that by their doctrine the Pope as Pope can not be
an heretic, yet shall I be contented to step a little nearer unto M. Parsons
his apprehension, and to examine what their doctrine is concerning the Pope, as
he is a private Doctor, especially in these two points: the first is his fault,
vz. heresy; the second his punishment, which is, to be deposed. Of the first
thus.

Whether Bellarmine hold simply, that any Pope can be an heretic.

. 11.
8 I leave the former respect of Pope as Pope, etc. the cleerenesse whereof was
such in Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. that itmay I ceme to have dazzled M.
Parsons his brains, insomuch that he started back from that place alleged,
and recolled unto Bellarmine his second Book de Pontifice, seeking theresome
matter of objection against me.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Reckon. page 466.
Bellarmine confesses out of Gratian Can. Si Papa. Did. 40. that an
heretical Pope may be judged and deposed; and more, that in the 8. general
Council Sess. 7. Pope Honorius was deposed Bellar. l. 2. de Pout. c. 30.
for heresy.

The Reuiew.
9 Does then Bellarmine speak this upon his certain belief, that either a
Pope can be an heretic, or else that Honorius M. Parsons his cunning.
was truly deposedfor heresy? Both which, M. Parsons, as it seems, would
make us believe. But Bellarmine in the same place says, that it is Bellar. l.
2. de Pont. c. 30.
probable, and easily to be defended (which he before held to be See above lit.
e.
piously believed) to wit, that a Pope cannot be an beretike. And elsewhere more
exactly answering unto an objection taken out of the foresaid Can. Si Papa,
which was this, Bellar. l. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 7.
Seeing that that and other Canons teach that the Pope cannot be judged, except
he be found to err infaith; Ergo, the Pope may err in faith, or otherwise
such Canons should be in vain: he uses two answers, but as A strange
mystery.
though the sirst were too feeble; Secondly, I say (says he) that such Canons
do not mean that a Pope may err, even as he is a private person, but only
that the Pope cannot be judged. And because it is not altogether certain,
whether the Pope may be an heretic or no, therefore, for more cautelousnesse,
they added that clause, Nisi haereticus extiterit, that is, except he be an
heretic. By this it appears that Bellarmine will not think, that any Pope
can be an heretic, either as he is Pope, or as he is a private man. Pope (...)
judged an heretic by a Council.


10 Concerning Honorius, Bellarmine in the clause of the same sentence, which
M. Parsons has alleged, held it for probable, that Honorius was not an
heretic: in whose defense he bestows a large Chapter, wherein he is so bold
as to say, that the foresaid Bellar. l. 4. de Rom Pont. (...) 11.
Council was deceived, in judging that Honorius was guilty of heresy. Could
M. Parsons be ignorant of this?

11 By this time we may discover a strange mystery of A similitude
discovering a Romish mystery.
strong delusion, which I shall first show in a mirror. Cambyses King of
Persia, being so farretransported with unnatural lust, as to desire to marry
his own sister, demanded first of his Councellers, whether such a match were
warrantable by the law of the Persians? they return him this answer: There is
no Persian law which will allow you such a marriage, but yet we find (say
they) a law which does license the K. of Persia to do what he list. So some
Romish Authors likewise, although they say that a Pope being an beretike may
be deposed, yet have they also taught, that the Pope can not be an heretic:
which is all one as to think that, as Pope, he may not be judged an heretic,
and if not judged, then how shall he be deposed? For if he shall happen to
teach an heresy, (seeing that we may not belecue that he can be an heretik)
let him teach what he list, he may not be suspected of heresy; if not
suspected, then not judged, or condemned, and then consequently not deposed for
heresy, which is our maine Consequence. And for a further confutation I add
as follows.

That their position, concerning Deposing a Pope, is but a cunning delusion.

. III.
12 Bellar. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 26.
Bellarmine does consider two capacities in the Pope, the first is in respect
of his Temporal Princedome; the other in respect of his Spiritual Pastourship
and Popedom. Concerning his Temporal state, Ibidem.
The Pope as other Princes (says Bellarmine) may ackno wledge no superior in
Temporal matters: but in examining the Spiritual Jurisdiction, We say (says
he, answering in the name of the rest) that the Pope can not be judged upon
earth by any Prince Christian, whether he be Temporal or Ecclesiastical, no
nor yet by all assembled together in a general Council: meaning, that he can
not be deposed Bellar. l. 2. de Conc. c. 18.
coactiuely. Be it that this is spoken in respect of matter of fact, and not
offaith, yet when (supposing that a Pope may be an heretic) we shall demand
how a Pope may be deposed, what will our Adversaries answer? For either must
the Pope relinquish his Popedom, together with his Temporal Princedome
voluntarily, or else by violence: but not voluntarily, because M. Parsons about.
Obstinacy (that iron sinew) being a property of heresy, the Pope will not
voluntarily remove, A Dilemma.
especially, out of so rich a Chair. Neither may he be removed violently and
by coactiue force; For what Romish Author will justify violence in deposing a
Pope by any example? and yet diverse Alphonsus de Castro. lib. 1. bares. cap. 4.
and cap. 2.
Popes have been heretics, yea even as Popes.

13 From these premises our Christian Reader may understand, first the truth
of my former assertion, to wit, that the Romish Doctors believe that The Pope,
as Pope, can not be an heretic. Secondly, the vanity of M. Parsons his
objection, that being heretics they may be deposed, seeing that they must not
believe that any Pope can be a pertinacious heretic. Thirdly, the necessity
of my consequence, vz. They that hold that the Pope can not be an heretic,
must grant that he can not be deposed for heresy. And lastly, the disparitie
between the state of Kings and Popes, issuing from the former considerations,
because thus Kings shall (by this doctrine) be deposed for heresy, but Popes
may not. And what a (...) and gulf of difference do they furthermore make
between these two states, whilst as they justify the examples of diverse
Popes, in deposing of many Emperors not for heresy, but for other causes, and
yet deny that the Pope may be deposed, Carerius lib. de potest. Pont. l. 1.
cap. 24.
Although he should do any thing prejudicial to the universal state of the
Church, as their Carerius taught: or Azor. Ies. Instit. Moral. l. 5 c. 14 Sed
certe.
Although (as their Jesuit Azorius spoke) he should neglect Ecclesiastical
Canons, and pervert the laws of Kings: or Did. 40. Can. Si Papa.
Although (as it is in Gratian) he should carry infinite multitude of souls
headlong with him into hell. And now we see the height of Papal prerogative,
and therein the depth of Antichristian tyranny.

CHAP. VI.
Containing a brief Censure upon a late little Pamphlet, entitled, A PATTERN
OF A PROTESTANT; which was written by a namelesse Libeller.

1 IT is now almost four years since my Book of Full Satisfaction was
published in answer unto the Moderate Answerer: in all which time I heard
nothing of this fellow, who Endymion -like seemed unto me to have slept a
drowsy sleep; yet now at length he begins to rowze himself, and to tell
us his dream of a Pattern of a Protestant; or as though some man had served a
Latitat upon The Pamphleter his Latitat.
him, because he had formerly betrayed his Romish cause: Therefore he holding
it a shame at least not to say something, he comes in clamorously with a
scurrilous libell, which the wise Reader will discern to have been penned
rather for the vexation of his adversary, than in any hope of the reparation of
his broken cause. To whom first I make this answer, viz. that I owe him no
answer.

That there is no Answer due unto this namelesse libeller, even by the doctrine
of the Romanists themselves.

. I.
2 Cardinal Bellarmine Bellar Resp. ad Libellum in scriptum, Responsio
Doctoris Theologi ad Epistolom sibi scriptam. etc. in principio.
censuring a Venetian Doctor, who printed a book, without prefixing his name
before it, tells him that The Council of Trent Sess. 4. does exact, upon
pain of excommunication, that no books concerning Divine matters be printed
without the Authors name, and the Approbationof the Ordinary both set down in
the title page of the book. But this Libeller does not afford us so much as
the least letter of his name, and therefore ought he first to seek an
absolution for his contempt against their Churches order before that he can
justly expect of me an Answer to his calumnious Pamphlet. Again, the same
Cardinal elsewhere notes that Bellar. lib. 4. de Rom Pont. c. 13.. Johannes.
Author sine nomine est sine authoritate, that is, An Author without a name is
without authority: by which reason I am licenced to dismisle this railing and
scolding libeller, as a man (if yet he be a man and not a woman) of no credit.
Nevertheless, seeing that this Cipher will stand for a digit and be thought to
be somebody, I will answer something to him, lest I may seem to contemn him:
yet not much, lest any may think that I do greatly respect him; but especially
lest that by but repeating his lavish language, and frivolous exceptions, I
might abuse both my Readers patience, and mine own more serious intentions.

Only I crave his license, that I may give him some attribute, because
otherwise I shall seem to dispute with the man in the moon. And what can be
more proper unto him than M. Pamphleter or Libeller? Of whom I would first know
what esteem he is off.

The Pamphleter.
I in a book called the Moderate Answer made an offer of a Page 62.
public trial at the time of the Convocation, and Parliament, and the greatest
assembly of Protestant Bishops and Doctors, and to A rare pattern of singular
arrogance in this Pamphleter.
them all: And I hope, M. Doctor, that you did not with discretion say that my
self, who made this offer, and was one of them that was assigned to be one of
the three Catholic Disputants to perform it against you all, either feared
scratcing or biting of you, or your best biting dogs.

The Censure.
3 I cry the man mercy, I took him for an infamous and senseless libeller,
but I perceive by the testimony which he bears of himself, that he is a
famous and learned Challenger, one assigned among the three Worthies to dispute
with all Bishops and Doctors of our profession. But when we would know who this
worthy Disputer is, and where we may find him, his name is Nemo, and his abode
is Nusquam, who (if we shall not trust him) will never deceive us. We have
heard of his authority, shall we hear something of his honesty?

The Pamphleter.
Because I will not accuse another in mine own guiltiness, I Page 16.
must try whether he could object any thing against me: He being charged by a
Catholic Author to challenge, if he could, any one Catholic Writer
offalsification; although I was then fresh in his memory, yet he left me out of
his Reply.

The Censure.
4 The Challenge which M. Parsons made was that I should note but any one man
of that profession, who might be found guilty of falsehoods, by wilful abuse of
his Authors. I therefore for my Adversaries better satisfaction thought to
single out Bellarmine, one of the tallest Firre-trees of their A pattern of an
absurd disputant.
Libanon, which so ouershaddowed this Pamphleter that I could not see him; and
now the shrub boasts that he (forsooth) was therefore freed from all taxation
of false dealing. Could this be one of the Three select Disputants, that
argues so absurdly? Before I end this Censure, he will know that it was not
the syncerity of his dealing, but the obscurity of his place and person that
made me omit him in that Reply: as may appear both by his present
unconscionable challinge of me, and also from his former dissolute and
immoderate Answer unto the book of Discovery. In his present Pamphlet he
signifies first what he will not, and then what he will do. Of the first.

The Pamphleter.
I will omit all things, whereof he has been by others admonished, Page 6.
and. page 32.
intending only to take the leauings of his Roman Adversary ( meaning, M.
Parsons) and not to burden M. Morton with any thing that he charge him
withal.

The Censure. SECT. II.
5 I thought at the first that the libeller had been M. Parsons his Page, but
now I perceive he is but his Gleaner, The first fruits of the Pamphleters
falsshoods.
whom indeed he follows at the very heels, and sometime (by his leave) he
lurcheth out of his sheaffe: for he begins his charge with manifest
falsehoods, and flatly contrary to his promise he urges ( Page 37. and 38.) my
sentence concerning the Nature of Heresy, which was objected by M. Parsons.
Secondly ( page 14.) of the Not satisfying of his Objections: Thirdly ( page
28. 29. 30.) he excepteth against the saying, That all Popish Priests hold that
doctrine of Rebellion: Fourthly ( Page 12.) he reprooueth that (...) all which
were objected by M. Parsons, and have been already answered in this Reckoning.
It is likely that the Pamphleter will deal justly with me, who thus grossy
falsifieth his own absolute promise? We have heard what he would not do,
(although he does it.) In the next place let us see what he intends to do
although he can not do it, namely, to charge me with falsities; and this
indeuoureth to perform both by the testimonies of others, and by his own
demonstrations. Of the first as follows.

The Pamphleter.
His own Brethren in religion have charged him with abuse of Page 6. and. page
19. and. 13. 14.
authorities, which he has committed in his book against me, even the
Consenters unto the book entitled, A Christian and modest offer of a most
indifferent Conference; who give this censure against him, saying that the
matter is pitifully shifted off.

The Censure.
6 In the Full Satisfact. page 105. my words were these, concerning the Kings
Majesty's censure of an Annotation upon 2. Chro. 15. 16. His Majesty (said I)
being so divinely illumiuated, could not take exception to the note, for any
offense thereby given, but only in suspicion and iealouzie of some offense,
which by some weak ones was taken thereby. This is the point, wherein I dare
appeal unto any Reader to judge whether either the Libeller could call this a
falsehood; or that other Offerer of a conference, (whose humor was crossed in
that answer) call it a pitiful shifting, wherein notwithstanding they noted no
falsification. Yet the Pamphleter is not content to His fraudulencie.
object this (such is his rankor) once or twice, but often does he inculcate
it, that thereby he might interest me in his own property of wilful falsehood.
Beside this testimony, he insisteth upon demonstrations: some are general,
and others are particular. First of the general.

The Pamphleter.
I had in my book 2000 lines, and M. Doctor made show to Page 18. 19.
cite my very words, and wholly; yet does not so much as mention 400. How then
could he call it a Full Satisfaction?

The Censure. SECT. III.
7 Pauperis est numerare pecus. What a fond Pamphleter His idle and miserable
taxation.
is this, who reckons the number of the lines of his whole book: it had been
well he had as willingly reckoned his lies, who says untruly, that I pretended
to cite all the words of his book. No, for I thought it a sin for me to report
all his lavish, scurril, and brawling terms; or else to repeat all his idle and
tedious repetitions, who now (to the end that he might be as fond as he has
been false) would have his Reader think that there can not be a Full
Satisfaction given to a man's book, except all the lines thereof be wholly
cited. Whereby he can not but condemn his father M. Parsons in his answering
of the same Full Satisfaction; but much more his L. Cardinal Bellarmine, who
in his Answer unto his Majesty's Apology did not cite, as I am persuaded, 2000
lines, yea and his own distressed and distorted answer unto the little
Discovery of Romish positions. Who would trouble himself with such babisme as
this Pamphleter uses? Pass we from generals, and let us try him in some
particulars. The first.

The Pamphleter.
The Doctor answered, that enquiring into the Acts which Page 10. and 11.
are extant concerning the proceedings of King Henry 8. against Q. Mary, and
Q. Elizabeth, he found not any act whereby, after that they had been disabled,
they were restored unto the right of succession: wherein he is confuted by
Bish. Barlow, who excuses the first disinheriting of them, and shows the
legitimation of them again.

The Censure. SECT. IV.
8 In the end of the same book of Full Satufact. in the end of the book, in a
baife sheet of paper, called An Advertisement, etc.
Full Satisfaction, I expressed as much my self in a particular Advertisement
unto the Reader in this behalf, which has been published now these three
years, wherein I satisfied for the integrity both of my cause and conscience:
yet not withstanding this their choice Disputer and Moderate Answerer, or
rather their immoderate Pamphleter, durst object this corrected error unto me,
which he has also singled out, and set in the first His profound malice.
place, for the most notoriously black note of falsehood. This kind of dealing
I find daily among the Romanists: I might find more ingenuitie among the
Pagans. As for B. Barlow, he does not so much as point at me.

The Pamphleter.
Enter again, M. Doctor, and excuse your self, if you can, why the very first
chapter being entitled, A general censure of his slanderous Pamphlet, proving
that no argument therein can conclude the Authors intent, is omitted without
any memory at all? Tell me, was this integrity?

The Censure.
9 I now enter, Sir Phamphleter, to your blush, if you be not past shame,
giving you to understand that both your His aparently wilful falsehood.
fourth and last Arguments are mentioned and satisfied expressly in the same
Full Satisf. part. 2. page 97. and 99. As for the rest, they were more general
insinuations, and were afterward confuted in the answers unto other
particulars.

The Pamphleter.
At the first beginning he misquoteth the place of my Answer, Page 33.
citing the second section, where there is no such thing, as he cites of the
consequence, Full Satisfact. page 1.

The Censure.
10 The quotation is in the margin of the Full Satisfact. page 1. and is taken
out of the book of the Moderate Answerer His shameless untruth.
cap. 2.. Wherefore. And if I have mis-cited him, let my Reader suspect me in
his other taxations: but if I have dealt expressly and directly therein, then
may we quote this fellow for a loose and leaud calumniator.

The Pamphleter.
He cites me disputing against the naked proposition [All Page 33. and 34.
Protestants are, in the censure of Catholics, heretics and excommunicate]
absolutely concealing of what heretics we entreated, whether they were
denounced, or not denounced.

The Censure.
11 This likewise is a godless untruth, for to show what His godless untruth.
kind of Heretic was understood, I spent professedly a whole chapter, vz.
Full Satisfact. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 5.

The Pamphleter.
He charge me to say that [Not any Protestant is judged by Page 35.
us an Heretike] where the restriction [ any] is his own corruption, and
makes the same particular, which was general.

The Censure.
12 The Pamphleters words were these: Mod. Answ. cap. 2.. For first.
[ Not one Protestant, etc.] mark, Not one, and, Not any: Can this choice
Disputer find any ods between these two? I wonder what he meant by this? Must
I be at pains to teach a puppie to His babish falsitie.
speak English?

The Pamphleter.
He entitled his 2. Chap. ( of Full Satisfact.) thus, [Conteining Page 35.
five arguments of the Moderate Answerer]; but why in true dealing contained it
not eight?

The Censure.
13 As though I had answered but five of those Arguments. If the Libeller had
but turned over the leaf following, Notable falsehood.
he might have seen ( Full Satisfact. cap. 4. page 5.) this Sixth and Seventh
Arguments both directly expressed, and also largely answered, the whole Chapter
being spent only in the Confutation of these two Arguments. Could either I have
dealt more justly with him, or he more falsely with me? Oh, but where is the
Eight? Yea marry, this would be known; for in his book there the Seventh is
the last: therefore he complains of his Printer, that set down the sixth
twice. I say, that if his Printer did it wittingly, he was wiser than the
Pamphleter, because both they do consonantly implie one argument.

The Pamphleter.
And in these citations you further behave your self with Page 36.
this sincerity, M. D. first, you cite my Answer to be in these words: No man
doubting in faith, but only such as be obstinate: No ignorant believer, or
deceived of Heretics, but he to whom the truth has been made known: nor
only internally affected, but he that is a manifest Professor is subject to
the censure of excommunication for Heresy. Now sir, I must tell you, that
there is not any such proposition in the places you cite from my Answer, as is
manifest in my Answer, etc.

The Censure.
14 What you have pointed at in the Margent, suffer me to draw into a more
particular view. The Propositions of the Pamphleter are contained in the Meder.
Answer. cap. 2. A multiplicity of his untruths.
my Citations in the Full Satisfact. cap. 2. His propositions stand thus:
Ignorance even vincible excuses from heresy: And, The ignorantly-seduced
Protestant is not an Heretic, except, when the truth of the Catholic doctrine
is made manifest, he resist: And again, He is not properly an Heretic, who is
deceived of Heretics, and believes Heretics. The second, Both sufficient
knowledge of truth proposed, and an obstinate pertinacy in not embracing it,
with such defense of the contrary is required in Heresy. The third, He that
desires to be ignorant of the truth, and so professes Heresy inignorance
(though therein he sin grievously) yet is he not an Heretic. The fourth A man
doubting in his faith is not properly an Heretic. The fifth, All Heretics (as
internal) be not subject to the sensure of excommunication.

15 And what have I now abstracted from these, to show what kind of men are not
subject to the censure of excommunication, in the opinion of the Pamphleter?
First, that No man doubting in faith, etc. in his fourth: Secondly, Only such
as be obstinate, etc. which is his second: Thirdly, No ignorant believer, etc.
which is his first and third: Fourthly, None deceived of Heretics, but he to
whom the truth is made known; which is also in his first: Fifthly, None only
internally infected, but he that is a manifest Professor, is subject unto the
censure of excommunication, which agrees with his fifth. And now I leave the
scanning of these to the sight, not (as he says) of All (for who almost will
vouchsafe the sight of such triflings) but of any, who shall cast his eye
hereupon, to judge whether there has been in my Citation the least note of
Insincerity.

The Pamphleter.
My Proposition was only this, [No Protestant or Heretic Page 40.
not excommunicate by name lies subject unto any penalty pretended,] when as
my sincerily dealing Adversary (as before) cites me to say, that such, are not
subject to any Penalty at all: which is his corruption, and not my proposition.

The Censure.
16 This will be soon tried, for in the Full Satisf. cap. 4. His quarelous
vein of traducing his Adversary.
page 5. I delivered his proposition thus: No Protestant or Heretic, not
excommunicate by name, lies subject to any penalty pretended. What shadow then
had this insincerely dealing Libeller thus to traduce me, as though I had
falsified in this Citation? Who again is so dull, as not to understand, that
seeing all kind of outward penalties were implied in those which were
pretended, it must needs follow that he that is not subject unto the pretended
penalties, is not subject to any at all.

The Pamphleter.
I said that no Protestant in England is excommunicate by Page 40.
name; which word (In England) for which our Controversy was, he leaves out.

The Censure.
17 This is as easily tried as the former: for ( Full Satisf. cap. 4. page 5.)
I repeated the Pamphleters sentence expressly thus: No Protestant or Heretic
not excommunicate by name His palpable falsitie.
( as none in England is) lies subject, etc. I locked up the word, England,
within the (...) of a Parenthesis, lest it might not be seen; and yet he
blusheth not to say, that I have left it out. What shall we judge of the temper
of this fellow, who being in England can not see England?

The Pamphleter.
He ingeminates this sentence, [Protestants are no Heretics,] Page 42.
when as I never spoke or thought any such absolute assertion.

The Censure.
18 We shall need no more but to set down the words. The objection in my
Discovery was this: They who by your slanderous doctrine make all Protestants,
in your opinion Heretics, so odious, as unworthy of civil society, etc. the
Pamphleter made this answer: Mod. Answ. cap. 2.
No learned Catholic so reputeth the Protestants, or any one Protestant in
this kingdom. But he says that this was not to grant absolutely, that no
Protestant was His quarrel about his own ambiguitie.
an Heretic: Very good, I then perceive his meaning is, that he granted it not
absolutely, but equiuocatingly. Well, let him enjoy his art, for me; I envy
him not, although this be the best faculty that he has.

The Pamphleter.
You said that our general assumption was this, that [All Protestants Page 43.
are heretics and excommunicate;] but must needs grant that this citation is
false, because the word, General, you know, comprehends all, and excludes
none.

The Censure.
19 Good Reader, I pray thee do not laugh at the Pamphleter, His ignorance of
his common Grammar tules.
phleter, nor send him back to his English Rules, where thou have red, that
There be excepted from this general Rule as follows. But this noble
Disputant, forsooth, calls the general Assumption false, which can admit any
exception at all.

20 I should proceed to censure Page 34.
his difference between these words, Heretic and Excommunicate, and Heretic
or Excommunicate, and to confute it by their Bulla coena; and g Page 49.
then to show how inconsideratly he vpbraideth us with the sentence of a
kinsman of his own, (as we may guess by his name, but more by his distemper)
even M. Broughton; because that passionate man did condemn their vulgar
translation far more; and lastly, his loose Argument to prove the Heresy of
Arrianisme, out of (...) seeing that Bellarmine h Page 52.
has justified Caluins sense therein; And I think that he himself has need
to reform his Argument, lest that he be thought thereby (which is an heresy
indeed) to have divided the Essence and substance of God; and lastly, I should
have repelled his Page 53.
objection of Trinus-vnus, whereby, after the naming of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, I complexiuely comprehended the Unity in Trinity, according both
to the sense of our Christian Article, and also to the form used by
Antiquity; together with the confutation of some other his dissolute
exceptions. But these few are sufficient to pattern out this Libeller. Hitherto
of his falsehoods in his Pamphlet. One word or two of his Moderate Answer.

The Pamphleter.
He did not object any falsehood unto me in his Preamble, when Page 16.
he was charged to note some falsifications in Catholics.

The Censure.
21 I did not in that little Preamble infist in the Pamphleters untruths and
falsehoods, Ergo (by his Logike) I could not prove him to be guilty of
falsehood. This is the consequence of this famous scholar, who was chosen to be
one of the Three (if we believe himself) who should Dispute against all
Bishops and Doctors of the Protestant side. But if I ask from what topicke
place this Argument is fetched, I think he will hardly show any, except it be
ab absurdo; because the reason is apparent, why I did not meddle with his
falsities, for as then I was to deal only with their Achilles Bellarmine, so
that I might well neglect this Gleaner. Besides, that I could have ranged this
fellow among the guilty persons, is as evident by the sixth Chapter of this
Encounter, which is spent in repeating the manifold errors and slanders,
which this man committed against Protestants, and were so inexcusable, that his
Patron M. Parsons, when he * See above cap. 6.. (...)
should have satisfied for them, suffered them all to stand still upon this
libellers score; whom (wishing unto him (...)) I leave fantastically disputing
with his own shadow. And now return unto M. Parsons his Reckoning.

CHAP. VII.
Containing an Answer unto the seventh Chapter of M. Parsons, concerning the
objected Omissions, in not defending them, wom he calls my Clients.

. I.
1 AFter that M. Parsons had played the part of a Promoter, in calling into
question concealed falsities, (as he untruly termed them) he proceeds to
ransacke the foresaid Omissions; in which his Accusation I find nothing but
preposterous and superfluous heaping up of the rags of his old Wardrobe,
called the Mitigation, and all to the end he might make up a grosse-bellied
bocke: wherein he exacteth of me to satisfic for all incommodious speeches,
which have passed from some Protestants, which is a charge that neither I did
assume, nor could M. Parsons by his Commission impose it upon me, who is
delighted with the irksome jar of some hot spirits, that rage against Calvin,
especially in the point of Arrianisme.

The sum of M. PARSONS Reckoning in this point, concerning Calvin.
1 produced at that time somewhat largely and particularly Reck. page 477.
eighteen examples, partly out of the old, and partly out of the new
Testament, maliciously perverted by Calvin in favor of Jews and Arrians,
against the truth and certainty of Christian Religion, leaving out twenty
more, which Doctor Hunnius does handle, etc,

The Reuiew.
2 When we do but consider what is the malady of adnerse criminations, that
may serve for a part of an Answer, which Bellarmine uses in like case, Non
multum resert quid irati homines dixerint. For as when the air is ouercast
with clouds, the very Sun becomes invisible unto mortal men; so passionate
affections sometimes send such gross vapors into the brain, that the hatred
to the true Speaker hinders a man from discerning of the truth of the speech.

3 And unto this defect may we partly impute the Accusation M. Calvin
injuriously abused both by Hunnius and by M. Parsons.
which Hunnius, and in him now M. Parsons do prosecute against Calvin, as
though he had in any sort favored Arrianisme, which I judge to be an
intolerable untruth, as both the writings and seal of Calvin will perfectly
demotistrate. Than the which what greater evidence can any justly require?
First by his writing; for ( Institut. lib. 1. cap. 13.) he has published a
large and accurate Confutation of that damnable heresy of the Arrians from
above thirty testimonies Calvin a professed Adversary unto Arrianisme.
of Scripture, both out of the old and new Testaments. Secondly, (which I call
his seal) his public Act, when he with the whole Senate of Geneua (as
Bellarmine confesses) did burn Michael Seruetus a Spaniard for Arrianisme.
Bellar. lib. 1. de Christ. in praef.. Primi agminis.
How then will they not (shall we think) impute many falsehoods unto Calvin
against whom they object a favoring of Arrianisme, albeit they were not
ignorant that Calvin did both confute the heresy, and (as much as lay in him)
burn the Heretic? Could there be any pretense of reason for this Crimination?

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Hunnius says that M. Calvin has perverted mankind by Reckon. p. 477.
his detestable desire of wresting the Scriptures, overthrowing the bulwarks
of Christian Religion, which it has against Jews and Arrians.

The Reuiew.
4 Lorinus a late Jesuit has this saying: Ioh. Lorin. Ies. in Act. Apost. cap.
19. page 785.. Perplacet.
That modest sentence of S. Hierom (says he) does please me very much, and
agrees most fitly with my purpose, whereas speaking of that common exposition
upon the Dried bones mentioned in the Prophet Ezechiel, which exposition under
stands by those bones the resurrection: but he thinks that this agrees not
with the literal sense, but that the Prophet by that aenigmaticall speech did
revive the hope of that people: Notwithstanding they that interpret this place
otherwise ( says S. Hierom) may not be offended with us, as though we denied
the resurrection, for we know that there are found many other much more strong
testimonies than these. And when he ( says S. Hierom) had brought forth some
testimonies, he adds: by which it is manifest ( says he) that we deny not
the resurrection, but only affirm that these words are not meant of the
resurrection, and by the paraeble of the resurrection to have Prophesied of the
restitution of the people, which was then in captivity: Neither shall we
presently give an occasion unto Heretics if we deny that these words are not
understood of the Common resurrection.

5 Thus far S. Hierom, whose testimony pleases their The Argument taken
against Calvin confuted.
Iesuire, who commends it for a modestsentence. Let it not displease M.
Parsons that we apply it unto Calvin, who although he do not admit of some
common exposions of Scriptures, which have been brought for the confutation of
Arrians, and Jews, because that they being literally expounded, do not (in
his judgment) directly make against the enemies of Christ's Divinity.
Notwithstanding they that interpret those places otherwise ought not to be
offended with him, as though he favored the opinion of the Jews and Arrians,
which he confuteth by many other more strong testimonies of Scriptures, out of
both the Testaments. By which it is manifest that he denies not the Divinity
of Christ, nor yet properly may be said to have given occasion unto Heretics
so to do. And this is as much as any temperate Adversary can require to be
answered generally in his behalf.

6 How it may please M. Parsons and some others to esteem of the learning and
judgment of M. Calvin, we shall The singular estimation which some Romanists
gave concerning the judgment of Calvin.
have less cause to regard; seeing that even his Adversaries have not left him
altogether destitute of commendations: for their D. Stapleton writing an
Antidote against his doctrine does grant Stapleton. (...) in Antidot. in Matthew.
Calvin in his commentaries to be so diligent an Interpreter, according to the
letter, so moral, so sweet, that even men Orthodoxall (he means Papists)
desire greedily to read him, whom I have heard sometime wish (says he) that
those things being purged out of him, which are contrary unto the Church and
faith, he might be suffered to come in public, for so (say they) his
Commentaries might be very profitable. If his Adversaries did not except
against him, but as they were his Adversaries, to wit, so far as he held any
thing, which was against their Doctrine, otherwise approouing of his works as
profitable unto the Church, especially in expounding of Scriptures, what
indifferent Reader is there, but will conceive that he, who was generally so
exact in interpreting Scriptures, had likewise some measure of light in
discerning of the controuerted Articles of religion? Elsewhere we find Card
Bellarmine writing unto Iustus Baronius, and moving him to endeavor some
Confutation of Caluins Institutions, (after that he had set out the
difficulties of such an enterprise, and excused himself) uses this for oue
Argument os persuasion, Iusius (...) Ep (...) lib. cap. 8.
Because others had begun such a work unluckily, and had more unluckily
finished their task. Confessing in effect, that Horantius, and all other
Romish Authors, who had formerly written in Confutation of Caluins Institutions,
have been lucklesse and successelesse in their labors. Is not this a Testimony
of great honor unto Calvin, especially proceeding from Bellarmine so great an
Adversary, both by the worthiness of his place and learning, and also by the
aduersnesse of his opinion? Such luck have all they who shall have (...) in
respect of men's persons. After Calvin, M. Parsons snarleth at another person of
honor.

SECT. II:
The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning. concerning the Lord Cook.
ALbeit perhaps M. Morton may say, that his meaning was Reck page 500.
to take in hand the defense of his Client Sir Edw. Cook, in his other
promised Reioynder, and therefore said nothing of him now in this his
Preambling Reply: yet having now seen him very hardly charged in two several
books, the one of the Catholic Divine in answering to the fifth part of his
Reports: the other the Treatise of Mitigation, with the like imputation of
untrue dealing, as are laid against M. Morton himself, it seemed that it had
been a point of friendship (if not of duty) to have said somewhat for
preventing and staying, at least, the Readers prejudice, as in his Preface he
said he did for himself, especially for so much as he had seen now, and read
all those placcs, which he borrowed out of M. Cook, to furnish one whole
Chapter of his Full Satisfaction, fully answered and confuted by our Catholic
Divine in his foresaid book, which M. Morton might have least wise mentioned,
among so many other points of less importance, which he handles, if his heart
had not served him to take upon him the whole Defense.

The Reuiew.
7 M. Parsons may remember what he said in his Preface of Mitigation, that
diverse Catholics did itch to be meddling with M. Autturney (now Lord chief
Justice of the Common Pleas) for the confuting of his fifth part of Reports,
which M. Parsons himself has now begun to impugn. If I have not been so
forward to undertake Reply, it is not that I would be wanting in any part of
Duty, but because I was not infected with M. Parsons his unseemly disease, to
busy my self in an improper Element, especially in points which concern so
honorable and judicious a Personage; who would have exercised his quill in
some large Reply, if his Lordship had thought M. Parsons worthy of any other
Answer than the condemnation of a Nihil dicit.

8 Notwithstanding, it will not (I think) offend his honor, nor yet greatly
please you, M. Parsons, that I, upon this provocation, do paint out your unjust
Assertions, which you call Demonstrations, against his Reports, especially
concerning the Histories of two Kings, which now fall under mine eye. The first
is of K. M. Parsons in his Answ. unto Sir Edw. Cook. c. 6. number. 10. p. 151.
Alfred, wherein you may be charged with a nimium dicit: the second is touching
K. Edgar, whom you will have to have Subordinated his temporal Sword unto the
spiritual jurisdiction of his Prelates, after that manner of Subordination,
which you require in Princes M. Parsons eiteth from (...) in Hist. Aug. Srcul
9. cap. 5. ex Asserius Me. (...) but in that Asserius set out by M. Comden
Fran. cof. 1603. I find no such speech.
at this day. When as it is plain that King Edgar speaking in that Oration
against sturdy Monks, who did contemn verba, did tell the B B. Veniendum^
esse ad verbera, that is, That they were to be humbled by Strokes: and to this
end he says to the Prelates, Vobis istud negotium comitto, I commit that
business to you; which shows that that part of authority, which the King
acknowledged to be in the B B. was not by his Submision, but his Commission
unto them. What shall we think of the validity of his Ten Demonstrations,
seeing he is so insyncere in these Two, which he specified as the most
principal?

As for his exception against me, for not Defending all those, whom he calls
my Clients, I may justly answer that although I were worthy of reprehension in
this case, yet M. Parsons is the most unworthy man of all other to reprehend
me, because I find diverse of his Clients of great name in their church, whom
he has betrayed by his silence.

The Omissions of M. Parsons, in not defending his Clients.

. III.
9 I had no little cause to wonder at the boldness of M. Parsons, in calling
so clamorously upon me that I should satisfy for other men's debts, even in a
little Preamble, whereas he, in publishing a large volume, in answer of my Full
Satisfaction, has passed many whole chapters over untouched, and seeing there
many of his own friends up to the ears in debt, did like the Jewish Priest
and Leuite smoothly pass by without the supply of a farthing for their
relief. The examples are abundant, I will single out some few.

10 Their Full Satisfact. part. 1. pa. 20.
Loduick of Orleance (in his book, Page 48.) was heard railing upon the Realm
of England, that it is An Isle of men, who eat man's flesh. This M. Parsons
read, but M. Parsons his conniuency at the slander against his Country.
pretermitted. It will be hard to determine whether hereby he have been more
injurious to his friend Loduick, whom he suffers to lie under the arrest of a
cursed slander, or to his Native Country, which he suffers to be so
ignominiously traduced, as though the Inhabitants thereof were no better than
Cannibals.

11 Secondly Page 12.
there was displaied the Cruelty of their Inquisitors by their Agrippa (De
vanit. Scient. cap. 69) noting The extremity of the inquisition.
them to be so rigid in their examination, as not to allow men Conference, but
to answer them only with fire and faggot, who maintain their cause by the
word of God.

12 Page 64.
There also Arnalaus in a Parliament at Paris was heard to accuse the Jesuits to
have been the causes of the great tyranny which was practiced among the poor
Indians. Page 115.
There their own French Historian noted the cruelty which was used in France,
telling us how Twenty thousand Protestants were slain in one month by the
fury of the Catholics. Cruel Inquisitors, ciuell Iesuus, cruel Catholics
(as it is confessed by their own Authors.) All whom M. Parsons leaves as
desperate debitors wallowing in their own guilt.

13 Thirdly, Page 112.
there was unfolded by their own Historian the slanderous disposition of some
Romanists, who bare false witness against Protestants in open Court,
assirining Slanders against Protestants.
that they in the night season Put out the candles, and every one took a woman
at his pleasure; only upon a persuasion, That such an Accusation is good
against an Heretic, be it true, or false. This is a foul matter, and belike
M. Parsons his fingers were so clean, that he would not touch it.

14 Fourthly, their common doctrine being this, that a King being an Heretic
and excommunicate may be deposed, was proved to be a rebellious doctrine by
many arguments, A Confutation of their common seditious positions.
which M. Parsons would not so much as look at: and to the same purpose was
alleged the confession of their own Jesuit Page 31.
Acosta (out of his second book de Indorum salute, cap. 5.) affirming that
after that a King is established in his throne, his power is from God, and the
people owe him subjection, even as did the people of Israel unto Jeroboam (3.
Re. 11. and 12.) albeit he was an Apostata from the faith of the true Church.
This M. Parsons thought not good to account for, lest this example might have
convinced him and his fellows of seditious and pernicious doctrine. And there
also we Page 62.
read of the example of the elder Romish Clergy, brought in to condemn the
later brood of sedition: but this also had his pass.

15 Fifthly, Full Satisfact. part. 3. ca. 20.
by the testimony of their Cardinal Tolet ( Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 5. cap.
66.) we were taught that although their Priests and others may in their
examinations, A Rack confessed to be the best remedy against some Equi
uocators.
before Magistrates, whom they hold to be incompetent, use Equivocation,
rather than to reveal any trespass of an other: yet If they shall be brought
unto the rack to be tortured, they are no further bound to conceal the
truth. Whereupon it follows, that in such cases their most competent Judge
will be a rack. M. Parsons saw this Rack; but only saw it: for, in his
discourse of Equivocation, he came not near it by a mile.

16 Sixthly, Ibid. part. 3. page 39.
Cardinal Bellarmine did interpret the place of S. Paul, Romans 13. [ Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers] to implie the Spiritual power, as well
as the Temporal: Scripture perverted by Bellarmine.
but was confuted by their Espencaeus (in Tit. 3. 1. Digress. page 513.) from
the judgment of ancient Fathers, no one allowing that interpretation. The
place of a Cardinal should have moved M. Parsons to have yielded some piece of
an Answer for his dearest friend, if the truth of the cause would have so
permitted.

17 But how will he answer for others, Ibid part. 1. page 43.
who leaves himself in the lurch? who together with Carerius, thought that No
king is to be acknowledged to be a king, before he be anointed. Which Paradox
was firmly and freely confuted by A paradox.
their Barkley (in lib. 3. cont. Monarchom. cap. 2.) I let pass diverse such
particular persons, and choose rather to observe his want of duty, or else of
ability, in answering for his headfather the Pope.

M. PARSONS his notable Omissiens, in forsaking the necessary defense of Popes.

. IV.
18 The Oration of Pope Ib. page 75.
Xistus Quintus is famous for commending Jacob Clemens, who was the murderer
of Henry 3. King of France; and for that cause was that Pope propounded as the
Patron and indeed pattern of all rebellious Doctors. Which doctrine was
likewise objected to the Pope Xistus his oration.
Moderate Answerer, but he very moderatly forbear even to taste or touch it.
After him M. Parsons the Mitigator beheld the ugly spectacle, and swallowed
this whole Camel. Now at length he comes in with a new Reckoning, but does
not reckon for this his grandfathers debt. Page 77.
Boucher also was brought in by Barkley ( lib. 6. contr. Monarchom. c. 28. page
536.) commending the act, and rejoicing thereat, whom the foresaid Barkley does
therefore condemn (page 535. and 539.) of treason, for patronizing that fact,
and by doctrine persuading men thereunto.

19 There came in also a Page 91.
Canonist, who reported the perjury of Pope Gregory 12. whom M. Parsons
suffered to die The perjury of a Pope.
in debt, never opening his mouth to free him either a toto, or a tanto. After
this the Full Satisfact. Part. 3. page 17.
Bull of Pope Paulus 3. against Hen. 8. and another of Pius Quintus against Q.
Elizabeth, were heard bellowing out a Fullness of Apostolical authority for
Sense of Scripture perverted by the Popes.
the rooting out of Nations, and of Kingdoms, according unto that of Hier. 1.
Behold, I have appointed thee over Nations, to root them up, and to destroy
them. Which Papal exposition of that text was an impudent glosing. M. Parsons
can Mitigat. cap. 5. page 171.
say nothing but that it was spoken by allusion unto that text of Jeremy, which
poor ragge can not possibly cover so great a shame: for the text of Jeremy was
expressly cited in their Bulls for confirmation of their authority, by way of
interpretation, accordingly as their Carerius (lib. 1. depotestate Papae) had
done. But it was confuted by the true and proper expositions of Lyra, who said
that the Prophet Jeremy did not destroy, but only denounce they should be
destroyed: By S. Gregory, who notes not destruction by fighting, but only by
preaching: But especially by S. Bernard (lib. 2. de Consid. ad Eugen.)
reproving the Pope for the abuse of this place, by turning the spiritual and
ministertall rooting out of sinners into a Temporal dominion. Here M. Parsons
imitated the Egyptian dogs, Lambunt and fugiunt, they used to lap a little at
the river Nilus, and forth with to run away, and all for fear of a Crocodile.
So here the Mitigatour took a bite. but spying Lyra, Gregory, and Bernard
make against the Popes, and perceiving that his Answer of Allusion was but an
Illusion, he speedily took his course another way.

20 For further demonstration of the novelty and impiety of the Papal claim
in temporal affairs, for the refusing of Emperors, and deposing of Kings
from their Sovereignty, Full Satisfact. Part. 3. page 18.
there was produced the example of Christ, who thought his temporal Dominion
superfluous for him, as Bellarmine confessed: then the example of the Page 19.
Apostles, who were subject unto Heathenish Emperors: after that Page 21.
the examples of All Christians for the first two hundred years, who albeit
sometime Antiquity of Subjection of Clergy men unto Tempo. rall States.
they had equal force, yet they professed subjection unto temporal
Magistrates, whereby the doctrine of Christians became glorious, as Tolossanus
confessed. And unto these were Page 22. unto Page 26.
added the answerable Testimonies of Tertullian, Cyprian, Nazian. Athanas.
Ambrose, Basil, Gregory. Here the maine question of Allegiance was handled,
and proved from Antiquity, here, if ever, the Pope did need his help. But
such was the desperateness of the cause, that M. Parsons would not come off
not with so much as a barefaced groat, in part of payment.

Finally, their Ibid. page 29. and 31. and 32.
Sanders intruded himself, 'auouching the Donation of Constantine, wherein all
the kingdoms of the Western world were said to have been conferred by the
Empetour Constantine upon Pope Syluester, Anno. 300. and The Donation of
Constantine counterfeit.
unto him Carerius assented; and all for the magnifying of the Papal
jurisdiction in temporal things. Which other of their Doctors did thus far
confute, as to grant that The most ancient Histories and Authors of best
credit, and such as did purposely record the Acts of Constantine, did not make
mention of that Donation. So Canus ( loc. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 5.) Which Pope
Pius Secundus did count to be a counterfeit Donation: so Balbus lib. de
Coronat, seeing that Pope Boniface 9. Anno. 1400. was the first that challenged
the Donation of the City of Rome, says the same Balbus. Add we heereunto how
Page 32.
Carerius pretended that the Emperor must necessarily have the Popes
Confirmation: which dealing their Lupoldus, and Balbus both Bishops, did prove
to be most false. I supposed if his ability had been answerable to his charity,
he would not have suffered Jesuits, Priests, and Popes to languish under these
Arrests, yet all this while we hear not of our friend the Moderate Answerer.
Will M. Parsons neglect him also?

The Omissions of M. Parsons, in neglecting his peculiar Client the Moderate
Answerer: leaving him in the conviction of many foul errors and slanders.

. V.
21 This Moderate Answerer is the man that writ against the book of Discovery
of Romish Positions, and Practices of rebellion, whom therefore M. Parsons has
particularly commended for one, who acquitted himself learnedly: So that this
man might seem to have a peculiar interest in M. Parsons his partonage. Shall
we now try how he is often left in the lurch to shift for himself. I may not
insist in all points, yet some few I may not omit.

22 The Moderate Answerer answered for his Catholics in general, that they
taught not Full Satisfact. part. 3. page 33. and34.
A power simply over Kings in temporal affairs, which was proved to be a
singular falsehood out of their Bozius, and especially out of Carerius, who
challenged the Common consent of Canonists, and Divines to the contrary. Page
57.
He, under the names of two or three Authors pretended that their Doctors
Defended not violent deposing of Kings, who are, in their opinion, Heretics:
which is a most prodigal untruth, and so proved to be by the testimonies of
their Modern Doctors, such as were Rainolds, Parsons, Alen, Coster,
Bellarmine, and others. Page 66.
He propounded a Canon teaching that No Clerks may take arms, neither by their
own, nor by the Popes authority: as though any such Canon were now in force;
which was proved to be a loose ouerlashing by their Rainolds, Alan, and by
Page 67.
Sanders. Page 86.
He in the name of all Romanists, did teach that they Allow Magistrates, who
are Protestants, to be as competent Judges in all temporal causes, in as ample
manner, as if they were of their own Religion, before whom, judging according
unto law, they may not equivocate. Wherein he was contradicted by Rainolds, who
absolutely denied that Protestants have any authority over them; and by
Cardinal Allen, and M. Parsons, who taught that Priests may equivocate before
them, because they be Tyrants. In these the Answerer needed M. Parsons, his
help, but it would not be; belike he judged that the Answerer, for modcrating
of matters, had erred immoderatly.

23 Furthermore, he was directly noted to have Full Satisfect part. 2. pa. 106.
slandered an Author, as though he had taught Subjects to fight Notoitous
slanders.
against their Kings; and was confuted by the words of the Author himself.
There followed his lbid. pa 107. and 109.
slanders against Calvin, and Bezu, and confoted from the confessions of them
both. He Page 114.
pursued Beza yet more extremly, to make him Slancer against Calvin and Bezae.
guilty of the death of the Duke of Guize, suborning Pultrot to kill him:
wherein he was confuted by the testimony of their own Historian. He Page 120.
objected a Conuenticle held at Cabellion, wherein he said it was decreed by
Protestants that All the families of ancient houses, and all civil government
should be taken out of the World: where he was charged to show his Author or
else to confess his slander. These four gross slanders are so many debts,
and the debtor Non est soluendo, had nothing to pay, therefore M. Parsons was
loath to meddle with him for the discharge of his Reckoning.

24 He staid not here, but fell afresh upon Luther, making him Page 121. and
123.
say that Among Christians there is no Magistrate, no Superior: which wicked
falsehood was expressly controlled by the contrary doctrine of Luther, out of
his Tom. 1. in Slander against Luther.
Genesis c. 9. where he condemns the Pope and his Clergy, for shaking off the
yoke of temporal government. But not contented with this, he Page 126.
imposes again upon Luther the cause of the loss of Belgrade, and Rhodes by
the hands of the Turk, his entrance upon Hungary, together with the death of
King Lodouick. and Buda conquered, citing for proof thereof Munster, and
Pantaleon, which points were examined, his allegations were proved
falsifications: and the cause of the ruin of Hungary, and of Bohemia, the
(...) of Rhodes, together with a thousand such Evils, was attributed unto the
Covetousness of the Pope of Rome, by their own Historians.

25 Lastly, Page 127.
he makes Luther to be of the same opinion and practice of Rebellion, with
Muntzer: which was proved to be an ugly falsehood by their own Author Peter
Frarer, who confessed that Luther writ against that Muntzer, and his Accomplices,
and exhorted all Christians to persecute those rebellious ones unto death.
Could there be any fouler slanders than these, or more plainly discovered?
Notwithstanding this Moderate Answerer has behaved himself thus, yet has he
been said by M. Parsons to have acquitted himself learnedly. But what shall I
say; but like Patron, like Client? Thus much for Omissions.

An Answer unto M. PARSONS eight Chapter: concerning the L. Coke.

. VI.
26 M. Parsons directs his eight chapter of his Reckoning only unto my Lord
Coke concerning the Reck. pa. 529.
Municipall laws of England, which Argument he himself did before prosecute
under the name os a Catholic Divine. wherein he seems to be so conversant,
as if he had turned his Divinity into humane Policy; yet peradventure so
unskillfully, that the verse of Nauita de ventis etc. may be inuerted upon him
thus; Nauita de terris, de ventis narrat arator. After a long intermission (as
he calls it) of his affairs, by interlacing a Treatise against the Lord
Coke, (whereunto he expects no Answer from me) he calls again upon me in
his next Chapter.

An Answer unto M. PARSONS his ninth Chapter, concerning the Fresh lies, as
helyingly calls them, and recapitulateth.

. VII.
The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
IN this ninth chapter is laid together another choice number Reck. page 625.
of new and fresh untruths of later date in the last Reply of M. Morton: and
albeit those that are to be touched in this chapter have been, for the most
part, handled and discussed before, yet thaet they may be more effectually
represented unto the eye and memory of the Reader, by putting the principal
of them together in a rank, etc.

The Reuiew.
27 At the sirst reading of this inscription of a new chapter of new and fresh
lies, I thought that M. Parsons would have brought in some new charges, which
have not hitherto been mentioned; but by his next words, telling us that These
for the most part have been handled before, I do perceive that his fresh
criminations are stale, and smell rank both of (...) (by intituling twelve
leaves New and fresh lies) and also His excellent fraud.
of plain falsehood, by saying that they have been handled, but only for the
most part: for I see none at all now alleged which he has not already handled
in his former Reckoning, but yet with unwashed hands and heart, as my Answer
has particularly disclosed. And now I make bold to call M. Parsons to a
summary account of his own charges.

A brief Recapitulation of the manifold frauds and falsities of M. PARSONS,
which have been discovered in this Reckoning.
28 Upon the sight of his repetition of falsehoods, which he has untruly
imputed unto me, I have been provoked to requite his injurious dealing with a
summarie recognition and recapitulation of the principal untruths, which I
have truly laid unto his charge, and have already handled: which now I need
not touch, but only point at, according to the marginall Notes of this
Encounter.

29 The first book cap. 2. one falsehood, cap. 4. another, cap. 6. two, cap 7.
two, cap. 8. two, cap 10. four, cap. 12. fifteen; and then many other in one:
and after that eleven more, cap. 13. six, cap. 14. also eleven. Then in the
second book, cap. 1. many in one; and again, three more: cap. 2. seven, cap.
3. four, cap. 4. two, cap. 5. diverse in obiecting heaps offalshoods; besides
his manifold guiles and frauds, and ridiculous vanities, wherewith almost every
page is bespangled, which might make up as many more notes of insinceritie, if I
would but use M. Parsons his art of Reckoning. But the former kind, which have
been pointed at, being both so many and so manifest untruths, may ferue for M.
Parsons his conviction, for I may well spare the confession of their own
Priest, who notifieth M. Parsons how prone he is to forge and falsify.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing an Answer unto M. Parsons his tenth chapter.

. I.
M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
THe tenth and last Chapter contains his new challenges, protestations, and
vaunts, wherein he has inwrapped himself in the bands of further absurdities.

The Reuiew.
1 THe particulars of this last part of your Reckoning are not of any such
nature, that they may require any large Discourse. I will therefore be brief,
taking them as I find them distinguished into matters which more specially
concern me, and your self. First of the first.

The sum of M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
He protests for his own sincerity and diligence in reuiewing Reckon. cap.
10. page 651.
his books, yet is forced to confess in his own defense sometime that he did
not see the Author that he cites himself, but received it of some others,
etc. He has taken in hand Bellarmine, to pick out matter out of him, that
might seem to bear some show of untruth, but has been able to find no one,
as we have made it plaiue in the third chapter. Thirdly, the Reckoning being
now made up, and especially in our last three precedent chapters, he had
objected against him foureteen falsehoods, which he chose to answer, but could
not: and then twice foureteen, which he willingly pretermitted: and lastly, a
number of new lies, uttered in discharge of the former.

The Reuiew.
2 I stand in the same protestation still against all wilful transgression.
And to the first I answer, that I never heard before, that the citing of
testimonies upon credit could be named Insinceritie, the examples of which
manner of dealing are infinite even in our Adversaries themselves: whereof one
example does even now offer it self from Cardinal Baronius. He (writing of
the manner of the martyrdom a Baron. Not. ad Martyrol. Romans Ian. 12. f.
of Zoticus) complained that he was wrong informed by one that writ letters
unto him, Testifying that he had found them in the Acts of Zoticus, but
afterward reading the Acts my self (says Baronius) I fouud no such matter in
them. And so likewise both Bellarmine and Boucher See above lib. 1. cap. 1.
have been by their own friends noted to have offended in this kind. Neither
yet were the escapes, wherein M. Parsons insisteth, so inexcusable on my part,
as he would enforce.

3 To the second, I say, that if my Reader will be pleased to examine the
fatshoods which were See above li. 1. per totum.
viged against Cardinal Bellarmine, he shall find that the objections are no
picked quarrels, but plain conuictions, as has been proved, and whereof I
shall give the Reader a Synopsis in the next Chapter.

4 To the third I need say no more but that I have answered those particulars
to the full, where the Reader may find just cause to abhor the vileness of
your calumnious, false and unconscionable Reckoning.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Fourthly, I shall set down the words of a stranger, by which Reck page 654.
it is manifest what stuff is contained in his Latin books of Apology: his
words are these: Quid Mortoni editionem retardarit, etc.

The Reuiew.
5 Here he has objected against me a stranger and Adversary in Religion to
be my Accuser, to prejudice my sincerity; M. Parsons marvelous
incircumspection through his greedy humor to calnmniate.
never regarding that it is as easy for me to return upon him, not a
Stranger, but his own contrymen; nor Adversaries in profession, but his
fellow soldiers and Priests, who have bespotted him in their public writings
dedicated unto the Declaratio motuum and turbationum inter Iesuitas and
Sacerdotes. Ad Clementem Pont.
Pope, and The book of Important considerations; and the book of Quodlibets.
others, with more ugly marks of a lying, slanderous, libellious, treacherous,
and bloody behavior, than I have read objected unto any man of what profession
whomsoever, in this latter age. But I am not delighted with fingering other
men's ulcers, nor will I vex M. Parsons with repetitions thereof.

6 As for my self, as yet I can say no more unto his Stranger, but that he is
a Stranger unto me, and when I shall be better acquainted with him by his
book, I shall (God willing) answer him, although not acccording to his
acerbitie of words, yet according to the truth and equity of the cause;
whereby I shall be better occasioned to set abroach in Latin the formerly
confessed falsehoods of Bellarmine, Baronius, Boucher, M. Parsons, and others.
But why has not M. Parsons Englished that Epistle of the Stranger?

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I have thought good not to translate this Epistle into English, Reck. page 656.
for that there be some words therein more sharp than I would willingly use
against an Adversary, whom I seek rather to pacify, and satisfy with reason.

The Reuiew.
7 When Rabshakah came against Judah, blaspheming God, and vilifying their
King, the Elders requested him not 2. Kings. 18.
to speak in the vulgar language of the people, but in a strange tongue: but
Rabshakah would not yield unto them. M. Parsons will seem to be more
favorable, he will not English it, why? They are too sharp. Here, I
confess, I M. Parsons his praetence of favor.
know not his meaning, why he should spare me in this, who has shown himself
thorowout his Reckoning more sharp and galfull, then any other Adversary has
been. Unto this Stranger he is pleased in his courtesy to adioyne the censure
of Gretzer a Dutch Jesuit against me. But if it would have likewise pleased M.
Parsons to have red the places wherein he takes exception, and to have
examined them, I durst bide his own censure between me and Gretzer: whose
dispraise I account an honor unto me, both because I see him with as high
contempt vilify those learned and godly men, with whom I may not make any
shadow of comparison.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
I cannot let pass to set down the judgment of an other learned Reckon. pa.
656
Stranger extant in a printed book of his in defense of Card. Bellarmine, whom
M. Morton chiefly pretends to impugn, but so weakly and absurdly as the
said learned man gives a very Gretzer in defens. Bellar. page 435.
contemptible censure of the whole work, saying: Hoc opus merito suo inter
stulcissima. etc.

The Reuiew.
8 And I cannot but thank you that you would honor Gretzer his Cocoethes and
(...) salt humor in dispraising his Aducisaries.
me with his Contemtible Censure, for so I do esteem it, especially knowing
the Author to be James Gretzer, who is a superlatiue Contemner of all his
Adversaries, whereof some were far more learned than himself: Censuring D.
Whitakers thus, Mendax Spiritus; Mendax Confessio; Mendax Historia; mendacia
omnia; delirat, non argumentatur. Censuring D. Lubbertus thus: Si quis velit
octo mendaciorum millia, facise possit ex eius pagellis colligere, is
febriculosa sua phantasia delirauit. Vix vllum reperi, qui in mendacijs cum eo
comparari queat. Censuring Lamb. Danaeus thus: In toto eius Responso ne
micaquidem boni, and ingenui, et eruditi Viri; adeo omnia mendacijs et
nugamentis horrent. Censuring Franciscus Iunius thus: Tu mendaciter omnia;
omnia falso; omnia imperite. Censuring AEgidius Hunnius thus: Euidenter
apparet, Hunnius nihil aliudfuit, quam os and lingua sine mente; Delirat.
Censuring Dr. Reynalds thus: Nihil aliud est quam mendatiorum quidem minime
pertusus sacculus. Censuring the Phoenix of this age Joseph Scaliger thus:
Potius Onologias quam Chronologias condit: In respect of all these I do
confess my self to be worthily contemptible. But yet who knows not, that
this kind of censure, without proof, is but the language of Canaan, mere
railing? which this Gretzer does not practice only, but even also profess.
And every one can understand that the dispraise of an Adversary, and the praise
of a man's self are both but stinking breathes.

9 Here again (as before) I could requite M. Parsons with an other kind of
censure, passed upon him not by his Adversaries in religion, but by his own
brotherhood, whereby they make him not contemptible only but even the most
execrable man of his profession: but Non est crimen proprium nescire alienum. I
therefore answer for my self, desiring M. Parsons to loooke into Gretzer, and
to examine the places wherein he does insist in Confutation of any thing that I
have written, and judge between us, and acccordingly to esteem of Gretzers
Censure. In the mean time I shall answer unto the censure which M. Parsons
himself has made against me.

M. PARSONS his Reckoning.
Neither will I allege any thing injuriously against M. Mortons Reck. page 659.
person, which I do love from my heart in the true love of Christ our Savior,
wishing his best spiritual good, as mine own; and do esteem him also for
the good parts that God has bestowed upon him, though I do pity the evil
employment thereof in the cause he defends.

The Reuew.
10 You shall not need ( M. Parsons) to do that you have M. Parsons
greatpretence of charity toward his Adversary.
abundantly done, which is, To allege matters injuriously against me.
Notwithstanding I do embrace your tender of love, and shall (I hope) not be
overcome in this contention, by affecting your eternal good, even as mine
own; neither shall I further esteem of my self, than that my imploiment may
be for defense of a cause, which I ought to love a thousand times above my
self. Hactenus de me. Now I come to you, M. Parsons.

SECT. II.
Concerning the Challenges made against M. PARSONS.

M. PARSONS Reckoning.
Mr. Morton has lost himself through vehemence of Passion Reckon. pa. 659
in this place, where he censureth his Adversary in four several challenges,
which I have thought good to set down together, and not to answer them
severally, as I did in the former Paragraph, for that indeed there is in them
nothing but excess of intemperate heat in contumelious speech: etc.

The reuew.
11 If M. Parsons would have confidered either his own desert, or my
behavior, he would never have complained of contumelious speeches. For neither
am I so lavish, but that their own Apologists, (whom he greatly commends)
have allowed me the Title of The Apology for the Romans Church, the 2. edition,
in the Praef. to the Reader, page 10.
A man not intemperate, neither yet used M. Parsons to be so moderate, but that
his own fellow could note him, from the mouth of Cardinal Alan, to be a man
of a Quod lib. page 236.
Uery violent, and unquiet spirit. Yea, and M. Parsons himself also has
wished that Reck. pa. 669.
He had not used such asperity of speech against me. Wherefore I pass over
personal and offensive terms, which notwithstanding were only expressed in
Latin, and I come to the Material points to try, whether I have been able
to perform my challenge against him or not.

There were four principal parts of the challenge against M. Parsons.
1. The Discovery of Romish Positions and practices of Rebellion to be just. 2.
His Treatise of Mitigation to be falsely so entitled. 3. His Mental
AEquiuocation to be an Art of lying. 4. The Romanists to support their causes
by lying.
The Performance of the first part of the Challenge.
12. As the presence of light dispelleth darkness, so Uerum est Iudex sui, and
obliqui. Seeing now therefore, that after M. Parsons has made his full
Reckoning, and that answer has been made to all his exceptions, we find that
their former See these points above cap. 7.
Bulls, and practices of their Popes (such as were Pope Greg. 7. Paulus 3.
Sixtus Quintus, Pius Quintus) and that the sentences of their own Doctors
(such as were Card. Bellarmine, Boucher, Carerius, Bozius, Rainolds, Allen,
Simancha, Costerus, Sanders, Creswell, Dolman) do, without exemption, defend a
rooting out of all Princes, who shall not subject themselves under the Pope of
Rome, whenever there is a sufficient power to prevail: Albeit it does no
less manifestly appear, and that by the confession of their own Authors,
that in the time of the old law, the High Priests were subject unto Kings; And
in the new Testament that Christ, and his immediate Disciples did not affect,
or exercise power over Kings in Temporal things, and (as for the succeeding
Fathers, such as were Tert. Cyprian, Chrysostom, Athanasius, Ambrose, Leo,
Augustine, and Gregory the Great) that they (as it has been likewise
confessed) did profess their subjection unto the Emperors of their time,
according to the doctrine maintained in our Church. All these Considerations
cannot but justify the first part of my Challenge, concerning the Discovery of
seditious Romish Positions, and Practices of Rebellion.

The discharge of the second Part.
13 As for the decyphering of the disloyal affection of M. Parsons the former
Mitigator, what can be more pregnant then are his own clauses, who permits
a subjection unto Protestant Kings with a Lib. 1. cap. 3. 4.
May, and of a Possibility, instead of a Must, and Necessity? who also allows
his Catholics to acknowledge their loyalty unto our king only, so long as they
are Ibidem.
Used as Subjects, and then complains that they are not used as Subjects? Who
teaches that they who are Cap. 12.. 13. number. 63.
Lawfully Excommunicate by the Pope, and persist obstinate, may not be heads in
Christian Communion? who can afford no more grievous epithet unto the horrible
plot of the Gunpowder Treason, than to call it A temerarious fact,
notwithstanding it were a fact, which both heaven and earth do detest, and at
which hell it self (as it were) stands all aghast? who being urged to answer
whether their part would not eradicate Protestants, if they had power to
execute their will, could find no better evasion then to say that the question
was Cap. 14.. 5. number. 36.
Impertinent? Finally, who defends the book of Dolman, als. Parsons, which
has been condemned by their own Priest, as most Ibid. Sect. 11. number. 61.
Rebellious against the English State? How shall not this be held a just
performance of the second part of the Challenge?

The discharge of the third part of the Challenge, against Mental
Equivocation; as it has been described by M. Parsons.
14 The Mental Equivocation, which M. Parsons has propounded, as justifiable
in the judgment of all Schools, Chaires, and Universities, is in sundry
places of this Encounter largely Especially lib. 1. cap. 4. and ca. 13. and
lib. 2. ca. 1. and. 3. and. 4.
discussed, and proved to a lie, not only from Reason, but also from the
judgment of Romish Doctors; such as were These Six lib. 1. c. 13.
Sepulveda, Aquinas, Gabriel Biel, Scotus, Henricus de Gandauo, Azorius, and
Sotus: and was never justified for true by any Lib. 2. cap. 4.
Heathenish man; whereof there will be occasion to say much more in the answer
to the Cap. 9.
Appendix following; wherein the Reader will find (I hope) a due satisfaction
to this question.

The performance of the last part of the Challenge, to wit, that the great
Support of Romanists is by lying Devises.
15 What would any Reader require, for the due performance of this discharge?
The dispositions, which their Writers have to falsify? Then see above their
Lib. 1. (...) 1.
Suarez condemned by Cumel; their Ibid.
Baronius reproved by their Venetian Doctor; their Ibid.
Boucher controlled by Barclay; their Ibid.
Gratian corrected by their Archbishop Tarraconensis; their Ibid.
Bellarmine condemned by Marsilius, by P. Paulus, and Barclay; and lastly their
M. Parsons, and their Moderate Pamphletter confuted in this Encounter.

16 Would he furthemore have it shown unto him, wherein they have abused the
Fathers? he need but look back again unto the former Chapters, where Cap. 1
and 9. and 10.
Bellarmine is deprehended in that guilt; where their cap. 11.
Coccius (whom I was challenged by M. Parsons to examine) is convicted of above
40. transgressions, in producing Fathers in the defense of but one doctrine of
Purgatory.

17 Does he desire to understand some thing of their slanders against their
Adversaries? then let him see the 11. which Cap. 8.
Bellarm. did injuriously object against Protestants; besides others committed
by Cap. 7.
Surius, and the Lib. 2. cap. 6.
Moderate Answerer; and M. Parsons, as has appeared through out this whole
Encounter; towhich may be added a memorable slander about a Yorkshire case,
discovered hereafter in the next Chapter in Answer to his Appendix.

18 What shall we speak of the foundation of some doctrines of theirs by
Deceitful See the Catholic Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 3. c. 19.
Apparitions of the dead; and the seals of their superstitions, their false
Ibidem, l. 3. cap. 17.
Miracles? or else false doctrines themselves, like unto their doctrine of
Ibidem, l. 1. cap. 2.. 20. etc. and lib. 2. c. 15. and l. 4. c. 25.
Indulgences, which have been confessed by some to be but a kind of Deceits?
To omit their fictitious Canon of See above in this Encounter, lib. 1. c. 5.
Appeals to Rome in spiritual Cases; the more fabulous lib. 2. cap. 7.
Donation of Constantine, in behalf of their Temporal power.

19 Peradventure he desires to be acquainted with some corruption of books,
which a man may call the Falsities of Falsities; then let him but remember the
complaint, which their own Marsilius has made against their practice of
Razing something out of the Sea above lib. 1. ca. 1. number. 18.
Councels, Canons, and Historians: some experience whereof we have taken in M.
Parsons his exceptions against Lib. 1. ca. 13.. 5.
Maldonate, Lib. 1. c. 14.
Polydore, and Ibid. c. 13.. 4.
Eman. Sa. As for their manner of Mental Equivocation, we have proved already
to be but an artificial lie: whereof something more remains to be spoken now
in Answer unto M. Parsons his Appendix, and as also touching his imagined
Yorkshire Case of Equiuocating.

CHAP. IX.
Containing an Answer unto M. Parsons his Appendix, which he has inscribed
thus.

AN Appendix concerning a case of Equivocation lately Reckon. pa. 671.
written out of England, wherein resolutionis demanded about the false Oath of
two Ministers: Whether it may be salued by the license of Equivocation, or no?
Together with a note out of D. King his Sermon, preached at the Court 5. of
Nouemb. 1608. so far forth as it touches Equivocation.

The Reuew.. I.
1 At the very entrance into this Appendix I first understood of the late death
of M. Parsons, and shall therefore a little rebate and blunt my style, because
I love not, quasi cum laruis luctari, to insult too personally upon the dead.
To this purpose I shall omit the ordinary Apostrohe of speaking to him in the
second person, by challenging him to his face, and shall use his name only so
far as both the state, absence, and condition of this cause shall permit or
require.

2 This his Appendix comprizeth first a vilde slander against a Protestant
Minister, by pretense of an ugly Equiuocating Case, supposed to have been
acted in Yorkshire: And secondly a transgression (as it may seem) against the
truth of Christ the Son of God, whom (in the Taxation, which he uses
against the Sermon of D r. King) he feineth to have patronized and practiced
that form of Equivocation, which he himself has professed and defended in
his Books. The point of slander, about the Case of Yorkshire, seems to
contain three parts of Oratory. 1. An Exordium, or Preface: 2. A Narration or
declarion of the Case; and lastly a determination and Conclusion thereof.

The Preface, which M. PARSONS uses for an introduction of the pretended
Yorkshire Case.
Ireceiued, gentle Reader, not long since by a letter of the eight Reckon pa.
671
of November Anno. 1608. from a friend of minc dwelling in the North parts of
England, acertaine Aduertisment about a case of Equivocation fallen out in
those parts, wherein my said friend requested my judgment, whether the same
were tolerable, or excusable, or not? And for that it seemed he had some right
to urge me in the matter, in respect of the Trcatise written by me of that
argument against M. Morton I thought my self the more bound to yield him some
satisfaction to his demand.

The Reuiew, discovering the forgery of this Case by four probabilities, taken
out of M. PARSONS his Exordium.
3 Because this case is made so notorious, that the relation thereof, if it be
true, must needs bewray exceeding mischief on the side, or else on the other
side extreme malice, if it shall appear to be false: I shall entreat thee (
Good Reader) to observe and ponder the circumstances of this Preface, which M.
Parsons has commended unto thee; and to consider, first, Who it is that
inquireth whether this pretended Equivocation be Tolerable, or not? M. Parsons
has told us that he is his Friend; and in that (according to his profession)
great friend unto any Protestant. Is it not therefore altogether improbable,
that his conscience should be so tenderly scrupulous about that which was his
adversaries sin, and none of his own?

4 Secondly consider What the doubt and difficulty is, which the Friend of M.
Parsons does desire so earnestly to be decided: The only thing that he would
know (poor soul) is, whether when a lawful Magistrate proceeds iudicially
in examination upon Oath, it may be held Tolerable for any to abuse and delude
this Judge by Equiuocating in Oath, or no? But shall we think that M. Parsons
his friend or any Christian would make question and doubt whether that be
Tolerable, which every conscience of man, yea of the very Pagans, by the only
light and instinct of Nature, can presently condemn as most intolerable?
Would he have us to think that his Friend could be so sottish as to make
question about a point so utterly unquestionable?

5 Thirdly, Whither now will his Friend travel for means to remove this great
perplexity? We see that he now posteth over the Alps as far as Rome, by his
letters, for satisfaction in this case. But what? Is there no balm in Gilead?
Is there no sufficient Counsel in any Jesuit, or secular Priest within
England, that can resolve this so silly and senseless a doubt? and to untwine
so loose a thread? shall we think this probable?

6 Lastly, when all is done, Whom will the good man make choice of in Rome,
for the deteiminer of this point? whom, but his friend M. Parsons? and good
reason, because Reckon. See above.
It seemed ( says M. Parsons) that he had some right to urge me in this
matter, in respect of the Treatise written by me of that matter against M.
Morton, and I thought my self the more bound to yield him some satisfaction to
his demand. But how could his Friend be ignorant of M. Parsons his judgment in
such a Case? We may try this by his last Conclusion. Reckon p. 674.
I do infer ( says M. Parsons) for resolution of the case, that this was no
true, or proper Equivocation at all, but rather a flat lie. and open perinry;
as by that we have treated before with M. Morton in the second chapter of this
book may appear more largely: but much more throughout diverse Chapters
together in my former Treatiss of Mitigation. Let us put his former M. Parsons
convicted by his own mouth.
Reason and this Conclusion together, and hence I infer a notable absurdity,
viz. that Master Parsons his Friend must bethought to have sent many hundred
miles unto M. Parsons, to answer a doubt by his letters, which he had largely
and sufficiently unfolded and assoiled publicly by his book a year before.

7 These four particular circumstances, viz. 1 Who, 2 What, 3 Whither, 4 and
Whom, implying these sower Improbabilities, the 1. to seek to be informed in
conscience concerning a sin, that did not concern him: the 2. about a Case,
wherein there could be no doubt: the 3. by delaying time, and consulting far
off, whereas he might have been presently resolved at home: and 4. in urging
M. Parsons to satisfy that, which he had satisfied; do all (in my apprehension
more then coniecturally tell us, that this Case was devised either by M.
Parsons his friend, or else by himself, tather than derived from the practice
of any Protestant. And this will be found to be not only (as in this Exordium)
probable, but even demonstrable, by examination of the Narration it self.

The Narration of the pretended Equiuocating Case of Yorkshire.
The Case then in offect was this. A certain Minister in Yorkshire Reck page
672.
named Wh. (for I think not good to set dewne all the letters thereof)
dwelling at a town called Thornley, if I miss not the name.

The Reuiew, showing the manifold falsehoods of this declaration.
8 Upon the discovery of the falsehoods of this Narration, it will easily
appear that M. Parsons had rather cause to blush at the noting of the two
first letters of the Ministers name, then the Minister himself need to be
ashamed, to be named to the full, who is willing to reveal himself to be
that Ed. Whitakers, Rector of the Parsonage of Thornhil (for that is the right
name of the place) who had a suit with M. C. about the Tithe of a Closse: but
how? M. Parsons has related the Case in the behalse of the Defendant, shall
not we be heard speak for the Plaintiff? Qui partem alteram audit, part
inaudit a altera, ( says Seneca) iniquus erit, aequum licet iudicauerit: that
is; He that in judgment hears one party speak, and neglects the other,
albeit he happen to judge justly, yet is he an unjust Judge. Now then behold we
the first untruth of this fabulous devise.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
He being married and laden with many children, and thereupon Reck. ibid.
not content with the ordinary Tithes, that were wont to be given, and paid in
that Parish:

The Reuiew.
9 This is spoken to make the Minister seem to have been a man contentious,
who notwithstanding dare profess of himself, that for Thirty years space,
(for so long has he been Rector of that Parsonage) he troubled not any of
his Parishoners for Tithe, except the now questioned. M r C. and that
especially for the Tithe of one Closse. From this he passes to another untruth.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
He began to urge one of his Parishioners to pay him other Page 672.
Tithes also out of a certain Closse or Field that was pretended not to have
paid Tithes before to other precedent Incumbents. Whereupon this Minister
devising with himself, how he might further his own cause, resolved upon this
mean, among others, to deal with another Minister, which immediately before
had possessed that Benefice, entreating him as well by request, as by offering
him a piece of money (as hither is written) to assist him in this behalf, by
lending him the aid of an oath, that he had received Tithes before that time
out of that Closse or Field.

The Reuiew.
10 The Playntiffe answers, that The Minister, which immediately before had
possessed that Benefice, was dead, before I was instituted unto it; being about
twenty years, before this action began. Therefore M. Parsons, without a
miracle of raising the dead man unto life, could not make good this part of his
accusation. But he goes onaudaciously, without fear of other pits of errors
and falsehoods, which are in his way. The third follows.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
Whereat though for a time the second Minister did seem to Reck. ibid.
stick much, saying that he could not do it with the peace of his conscience;
yet afterward it seems by the earnest persuasion and inductions of the other
Minister, his repugnance of conscience was so mortified, as he yielded to the
others entreaty; especially for that he told him him he had so great
friendship and acquaintance with those that must be Judges and examiners of the
cause at York, as he doubted not but their two oaths would caris it away.

The Reuiew.
11 M. Parsons had a great mind to bring some Minister upon the stage for all
spectators to point at him, insomuch that he has fancied such a man to be that
Minister, as was dead and buried twenty years before the beginning of this
Suit, as was said. And now the Plaintiff furthermore answers, that No
Minister was ever used in this cause, either as witness or as aider, or any
way else. But it is known what a Priestly Itch M. Parsons had to traduce
Ministers: which kind of dealing might proceed from a Conscience that was
mortua, but not mortificata. Although these former falsehoods may much prejudice
M. Parsons his Report; yet shall I desire my Reader to forget these
circumstances, and to judge according to the issue of the Case it self, for
now we lanch into the maine.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
To York Assizes then they went, where having taken their Reckon. p. 673.
Oaths, and pleaded the case,

The Reuiew.
12 Then, belike, both the Ministers did Take their Oaths in this Case: but
the one did not swear, neither, indeed, could he swear by the law of nature,
because he was The Transparancy of the forgery.
dead; and the other could not swear by the order of the Common Law of the
land, which admits none in those Courts to swear in his own Cause. Which
Circumstance makes the forgery of this Case to be such a Pellucidum mendacium,
that is, so transparent an untruth, that a man may see through it. But we have
longed all this while to hear the issue of this cause, and what success it
had.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
At length they found not that success, which they expected: for Reckon. ibid.
that the whole Town and Parish of Thornley offering themselves confidently to
swear and depose the contrary in behalf of the Defendant (to wit, that Tithes
were not accustomed to be paid out of that place) the Ministers had sentence
given against them, with no small note of public perjury.

The Reuiew.
13 The four former falsehoods were notable, but this, as the Master-lie,
exceeds them all: for at the Assizes at York, when the Nisi-prius between
M. Whit. and M. Co: was to be tried, and verduit ready to be given M. Co: was
Non-sute, and afterward sought for an other Prohibition, still to hinder the
Rectors proceedings. The truth hereof I have confirmed not only by M. Whit.
his protestation, but also by the most credible testimony as well of the then
Judge in the Court of York, who kept a note of the passages in this cause, as
of a Counsailor at Law, of M. Co: his part, who advised his Clyent to forbear
that course of prosecution. The wisdom of which his Counsel was largely
verified by the event. I forbear to mention a public Instrument under seal,
which notes that M. C. sought for a Prohibition against M. Whit. after the
Assizes at York. We may guess what complexion M. Parsons his friend was of,
who blushed not to say, that M. Whit. had sentence given against him at York.
Furtheimore, because M. Parsons has adventured to talk of Success, I hold
it not inconvenient to add as follows.

The memorablenesse of the Suite between M. Whit. and M. Co: about the Tithe
of that Closse, and the Success of the whole business.
14 It was to be sentenced before the Ordinary at York, but before the
sentence was pronounced, M. C. got a Probib. (by Judge (...)) dat. 8. Feb. An.
R R. Eliz. 37. Out of the Kings ben h. And a Consult ((...)) Dat. 7. May An.
Reg. Eliz. 39.
Prohibition at London, wherein M. Whit. obtained a Consultation, because M. C.
had been Nonsuit in a former Probib. (lud. Anderson) 30. Ian. An. Eliz. 40.
out of the Common Pleas. And then a Consultation Dat. 24 Maij, An. 40. Eliz.
Prohibition at York. Nevertheless he procured a third Prohth. (lud. Popham)
5. (...) An. Eliz. 40. out of the Kings Bench. And then a Consult ation by
Judge. Popham, Dat. 12. Feb An. 41. Eliz.
Prohibition, and was again by another Consullation remitted to his Ordinary
at York. He stirs up to London for a fourth Prohib. (Iud. Anderson) Dat.
23. Ian. An. Eliz. 44. And a Consult. 14. Maij, Anno. Eliz. 44
Prohibition, and after that, a Prohibit. (Iud. Anderson) Dat. 23. Iunij, An.
44. Eliz. and Co^sult. Dat. 3. Nouem. An. Eliz. 44.
fifth and a Prohib. or Supersedeas (Iud. Anders.) Dat. 12. Feb. An. Eliz. 45.
And yet was there granted a Consolt. Dat. 27. Maij, Reg. Iac. An. 1. by Judge
Anderson.
sixth; which were all frustrated by so many Consultations, because he failed to
make dew proof of his Suggestions, within the times limited by the Statute.
After the three last Prohibitions he procured an Iniunction out of the
Chauncery against M. Whi: but upon Information giucn to the Court it was
speedily dissolved. Is not this a strange case, which continuing the space of
nine years, was so often tossed like a Tennis-bal between London and York?
But in the end the matter was so vexatiously carried on M. C. his part, as that
he was taxed to pay 300. pounds costs, whereof M. Whit. received two hundred
pounds, and after that his foresaid Tithes, and has enioied them ever since.
Here we see not only one Success, but The success of the cause.
even as many successes as there were Consultations, which were six; and as
there were pounds, which he got for charges, amounting to above two hundred
pounds; and as the value of the Tithe is, which he recovered. And now let them
laugh that win: for herein we see this Proverb falsified. Notwithstanding
M. Parsons still boasts and makes sport in behalf of his Defendant, and
plaieth merrily upon a slanderous figment, as follows.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
One that was a particular friend of M. Wh. demanding the Reck. page 673.
reason how they could swear, or rather forswear in such manner, the thing
being known to be so notoriously false? He answered, that they in their own
sense did swear truly (behold then the Case of Equivocation) and that so they
were ready to prove it, if they had been urged by the Judges therein, to wit,
that their meaning in swearing was, that the former Incumbent had received
Tithes out of that Closse or Field, or without that Closse or Field, namely, in
other Closses adjoining, though not in the Field. And with this Equivocation of
( Out) and ( In) they thought themselves cleared, both for deceiving the
Judges, and their Parishioners.

The Reuiew.
15 This, in his marginall note, he calls a fraudulent and lying
Equivocation: who, if he be alive, might be put in mind by a most grave,
godly, and famous Treasurer of learning Sir Tho. B. that there was such a jest
as this set abroach in M. Parsons his time in Oxford, by one, who merrily
maintained that the testimony, which he alleged, was out of Aristotle; that
is not credible (said his fellow:) the other brought for his defense, a book
which was not Aristotle, where the alleged testimony was extant, and
therefore (said the Sophister) is it found out of Aristotle. May we not think
that M. Parsons has turned a jest into an earnest, and translated the
booke-case into the Close. case?

16 When we remember the diverse improbabilites in the A Recapituletion.
Exordium, of a friend busily inquiring about a sin, which did not concern
him; and questioning about such a Case, which no Christian could doubt of; and
sending for resolution to Rome, which might have been had at home; and
consulting thereabout with M. Parsons by private letters, which had been before
largely satisfied in his public books: but especially when we recognize the
falsities of the Narration and Declaration it self, wherein a Minister is made
a witness, who was dead twenty years before; and some Minister is objected,
whereas no Minister was any way used in that cause; and they are said to have
been forsworn, who were not, nor could not be sworn; and the sentence is
affirmed to pass with him at the Assizes, who was so (...) as to become
Non-sute, and so to forsake his cause, and in the vp-shot was constrained both
to pay the Tithes that were sued for, and to repay the charges of the suit: How
can we but think that this Equiuocating by out and in, came out of M. Parsons
his Equiuocating brain, wherein the Mitigation, for defense of a worse kind
of Equivocation, by Mental Reservation, was formerly engendered? What remains
now, but that we understand what Determination M. Parsons has passed upon this
forged Case?

The Conclusion and determination of the former Case.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
Their Conspiracy together, by way of money, corruption, and Reck. pa. 673.
674.
bribes, was detestable. Their guilesull deceiving, their lawful Judges, that
were competent in the cause, and proceeded iuridically, was abominable. The
scandal given to them that knew they swear falsely, was impious. The obligation
they had to answer The resolution of the case
directly unto the sense and meaning of the said Judges, was indispensable: all
which points are different in a lawful Equivocation. Whereof I do infer,
for resolution of the case, that this was no true or proper Equivocation at
all, but rather a flat lie, and open perjury.

The Reuiew.
17 Although such a speech (in judgment) being but a Verbal Equivocation in
the inward court of a man's conscience, might go for an indirect truth, as has
been See about.
proved yet in foro fori, and outward court of man's Judicature, wherein the
secret thoughts of men cannot be discerned, it may be censured for a lie. And
whether it be a lie, or not a lie, yet being a deceit and delusion against a
Magistrate in an Oath, none can deny but every such practice is Detestable
abominable, indispensable, and impious both before God and man. And thus far
(supposing that the case had been such) I yield unto M. Parsons his Censure
and Conclusion.

18 But now, after the examination of the Third part of his Accusation, I
cannot see how M. Parsons could have chosen a more extraordinary and famous
case, wherein to betray their own malice against Ministers, and to make
themselves most notoriously infamous, by devising this Equivocation of out and
in, which may persuade any indifferent Reader to cry out upon such dealing,
and to retort his Retorique upon our Adversaries, saying that such their
guilefull defaming of Protestants is detestable, their obiecting of perjury,
where there was not so much as an Oath, is abhominablc, their abusing of their
Readers credulity is impious; their transgression against their own Conscience
is indispensable; and whatsoever lie there is in it is to be attributed not to
the supposed Actor, but to the suspected Author and Inuenter thereof.

19 Finally, for as much as our Adversaries will seem to make such kind of
Equiuocating hateful, it might have become them to have condemned their own
Mint and Doctrine of Equiuocating, before that they had slandered others by
false accusation in that, whereof some of themselves stand convicted, by the
the confessions of their own fellows; as now, by occasion of M. Parsons his
Challenge I am urged to discover.

A Confutation of M. PARSONS his proof of Mental Equivocation taken from the
speeches of Christ, in Ioh. 8. upon an occasion, which he took at D. Kings
Sermon.

. II.
M. PARSONS his Appendix, and Challenge.
I would demand of this new Prachant-Minister, that is so Reckon. pa. 675.
hoate and vehement in his calumniation, when he, or his can prove that any
one Jesuit in the world amongst so many thousands as are extant, has ever
practiced, patronised, published, or persuaded any such Equivocation as this,
which was used by the Ministers of Yorkshire? When would either Master
Southwell, or M. Garnet, whom they are wont to accuse for this dostrine, have
taken such an oath for deceiving of their Neighbors, as those Ministers did?
Was this out of the infirmity of the flesh, and pusillanimity, or rather out of
covetousness and iniquity? Was it with the faces of Jerusalem and Judah, or
not rather of Sodom and Gomorrah?

The Reuiew, yielding confessed Examples of Jesuitical practice, in lying
AEquiuocations.
20 Thus the old man still venteth his choler adust, raging, and reuiling a
learned Doctor, whose studies have soared some what above M. Parsons his
reach: whom if he may term a Prachant Minister, then may we venly think that
there is no Preaching Priest amongst the Romanists. But we lean comparisons.
M. Parsons is therefore so bitter against him, because he thought their Eq
(...) do carne the faces of Sodom and Gomorrha by paironizing, publishing, and
persuading (...) whole world the lawfulness of their (...) and (...) who from
henceforth (said he) may ease the (...) Crete from their (...) insame, which
the Apostle (...) upon them, that the Cretensians are liars, etc. These (...)
and M. Parsons calls hot and vehement calumniations, (...) outcries, idle
(...) and flat lies: And in the end exacteth of him an answer unto his reasons,
for the defense of the Art of (...) which are set down in the Mitigation. In
the which challenge who sees not there is more windy (...) then sober (...) if
either he considered the admirable, and indeed (in his kind) kingly (...) of
that our Doctor; or the untempered mortar, (...) M. Parsons has dawbed up a
defense of his mental Equivocation, even by reason of the mixture of
absurdity and impiety, whereof they consist? As may be seen especially in
his reason taken from the examples of Christ in Scripture. But first he
desires to be satisfied in some I esuiticall examples of like nature.

21 If I should propound the example of their Priest, who being deprchended and
conuented before a Magist are, and asked whether he were a Priest or not?
Answered no meaning, No Priest of Apollo: secondly, whether he had been beyond
the Sea, or no? Answered, No, meaning the Adriatique Sea; or other such like
Delphicall euasions used by M. Garnet in his examinations, which were so ugly,
that the Examiners were thereby driven into wonder and horror; M. Parsons or
some for him would readily reply that the Magistrates in England are no
competent Judges of their Priests; and that in so great an hazard, as was his
liberty, or life, he might lawfully Equivocate. But I See above, lib. 1. ca.
3.. 5.
have already proved. that the authority of our Magistrates over a Priest is
most just: And it is also without question, that a man is no more priuileged to
Equivocate, in danger of loss of (...) or of life, then of loss of goods; and
therefore if M. Parjons could condemn the Equivocation of out and in for a
lie, then this Equivocation of a Priest Romish, and a Priest (...) may not
pass current for truth.

22 But what need we our own collection, for the manifestation of their
lesuiticall delusions, seeing that we may be sufficiently enabled hereunto by
our (...) We have often heard of the complaint of a College of Romish Sce
above, lib. 1. cap. 1. (...) 28.
Priests against M. Parsons for his coosenage, and crueitie against some
English Messengers, which were sent from them unto the Pope: together with a
description of M. Parsons his former disposition, which was To cogge and
Equivocate at every word.

23 Besides this, their Quodlibettarian Priest declameth against the lesuits,
because of their Quodlib. page 32. and 33.
Abuse of Equivocation, making it indeed (says he) nothing but an Art of
lying, cogging and foisting, and that without all respect of matter, time, or
place; and consequently tending unto flat Atheism: So that Examples of
Equiuocating Romish Priests.
( says he) it shall be as hard to convince them of any errors in matters of
faith, as it was to convince Arius, who subscribing to the Councels decrees,
swearing that it was true, as it there was written, (meaning in the paper kept
close in his bosom, or sleeue) just like to the Jesuits Equinocating, or
counterfeited periuries. And, for example, he brings in one Ib. page 66.
James Standish a Jesuit (...) who abused the Pope; when being asked of his
Holiness, whether the matter of the setting up of the (...) in England was
done by the consent of all the rest of the Priests in England, or not?
answered, (but falsely, for scarce one of the secular Priests in England, in
respect of the whole number, knew of it) that, [It was,] reserving to him (...)
this part, vz. [As I presuppose, or presume] as since he has confessed. And
the like practice of Jesuits he there notes with Ca. Caietane, in offering his
Lordship the names of Priests, as consenting to that which they did not, and
excusing the matter by their secret reservation, scil. If all would consent Can
any presume that they will fear by Equiuocating to abuse their neighbors, who
make so bold to collude with their ghostly father, and supreme Pastor, the Pope?

24 By this we find, that there is, in this point of Equiuocating, some odds
between the honesty of Protestants, and Romanists, seeing that M. Parsons
could not produce an example of any one Protestant, who has so equinocated;
except that of Out, and In, which (upon due examination) appears to have
been either the lying suggestion of his friend, or else the false invention
and forgery of his own brain. And who is there among all Protestants that
ever put pen to paper, to justify M. Parsons manner of Mental Reservation? But
as for our Adversaries, their profession herein is so rank, and their
practice so rife, that one of their own brotherhood had cried out upon
theirlyes and coggeries. Yet this deuellish Doctrine were less dangerous, if
it did not transform it self into the resemblance of more than an Angel of
light, by pretending the example of our Blessed Savior Christ, as follows.

CHAP. X.
Short answers unto the particular Instances, which M. PARSONS used out of 8.
chap. of S. John, for color of their Romish AEquiuocation. And first by way of
Introduction.

. I.
M. PARSONS his Appendix.
IFinde the speeches of our Savior so frequent every Reck. page 682.
where in this manner of concealing of secrecies, or things not sit to be
plainly uttered, by this doubtful and ambiguous kind of speech, as in one
only chapter of S. John's Gospel, I find Christ to have used the same above
Ioao. 1.
7. or 8. times at least setting down certain propositions, that of
themselves, and as they lie, are in the common Hearers earo false, though true
in the speakers meaning, by some Mental Reservation. Which Reservation though
he uttered not in words yet is necessarily understood: and this is properly
AEquiuocation in our sense and Doctrine.

The Reuiew, showing the distinction between Verbal, and Mental Equivocation.
1 It is sit, before we seek to satisfy others, that first we labor to
understand our selves, by setting down the true differences which are between
us. To this end I distinguish of (...) or Amphibology (as they are largely
taken) into Verbal, and Mental.

2 The Verbal is (as has been said) when any speech has (...) diverse
ambiguous and doubtful senses, according to the outward use of the words in
themselves, and not only by the in ward reservation of the mind: which
doubtfulnesse of a speech consists sometime in one word, sometime in a whole
sentence.

3 An example of the Verbal AEquiuocation, or ambiguity of speech in one word,
may be these: one spying a man of little wit, and perceiving that he had big
and strong legs, said that he was a man of good understanding; wittily
changing the more usual sense of the word, Understanding, as it signifies wit
and judgment, into the less common acceptance thereof, wherein it agreed
unto a man's legs. (...) much different was the answer of a Market-man unto
one, who being desirous to know what prices good horses bare, asked him, Homgce
Horses at the fair? Sir (quoth he) some amble, and some trot; merrily playing
upon the verbal ambiguity of the word, Go.

4 As there is a Verbal Amphibology, and doubtful sense in particular words,
so is there also in the composition of whole sentences, and that in infinite
varieties; as it happens often by the diverse disposal of the word of a
speech. As when the man said that he met this morning a cart full of stones
empty: which words, taken according to the common reading, do yield no sense,
but that which is senseless; but being rightly distinguished, it is the same,
as if he had said: I emply, (that is, fasting) this morning met a Gart. Or as
an other (...) saying, I saw Paul's steeple on horseback; meaning, that being
on horseback, he saw Paul's steeple.

5 But of all Tropes, or figures in Rhetorique, there is none that comes
nearer unto Mental Reservation than do these two; Ironia, and Apiosiopesis:
For first in Ironia, or jesting and derision, the meaning, which is conveyed by
the words, sometimes is quite contrary unto the natural property of the words
themselves: as may be decerned in that contention, which the Prophet Eliah had
with Baals Priests, wherein he is 1. Reg. 18.
said to have mocked the Priests of Baal, saying to them, Cry aloud, for he is
a God, either he talks, or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey, or
else it may be he is a sleep, and must be waked. But in this there was not
Romish Mental Reservation, which lurketh wholly in the closet of the speakers
breast; but a Uerball ambiguitie, whereof the hearer was capable; to understand
that the Prophet now contending against Baal, to prove him to be no God, did
mean, by calling him God, and attributing unto him properties, which cannot
agree unto God (as talking, iourneying, sleeping) but to scorn and deride him,
and indeed to call him No God. Like hereunto was the Answer which the Prophet
Michaih made unto Ahab, when he answered him, saying, Ibid. cap. 22.
Goc up to Ramath Gilead, and prosper: which Ironie the King himself perceived
right well; whereby the Prophet (says In Luc. vlt. (...) 28.
Maddonate) did not (...) him, but shows that he was deceived.

6. The 2. figure, which can best claim any alliance with Mental Reservation,
is (...) or Reticentia, which M. Parsons brings in to pattern their Romish
Reservation. This is such a speech, as is abruprly broken off in the half. We
have an example in the 3. of Genesis where God now casting Adam out of Paradise,
says, Verse. 22.
But now left, man do put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life,
and eat and live for ever; Reserving the rest, but not as inconceiuable unto
the Reader, which in the generality was this. I will take an other order with
him. For here, by a known figure, called Anthropomorphia, God is brought in to
speak like a man, when he is in anger and passion: Now the voice of man's
extreme passion and perturbation is always abrupt and broken, even as he is
described by the Poet to say; Quos Virg.
ego. Which kind of sentences do, according to the fashion of man's speech,
betoken the intendment of some kind of revenge, and cannot any whit
countenance the Romish Mental (...) which is not all implied in the outward
form of the speech, as we shall presently demonstrate.

That the Scripture allows not the Romish Reservation.

. 2.
7. S. Augustine (as he is cited by the Jesuit Salmeron Ies. Tom. 1. Prelegom.
12. Can. 15. ex Aug. Tom. 3. li 1. de Trin. cap. 12.
Salmeron) says that Scriptures, because they speak unto men, do use no
kind of speech, which is not usual among men. Whereby I make bold to assume,
that there is no speech in Scripture, whether it be proper or figurative, but
it accords unto the use of the outward words and the meaning may possibly be
apprehended by an intelligent Reader, who can justly observe the phrase of
speech, and the due circumstances thereof. As for M. Parsons his Mental
Reservation it is inapprehensible, because he says that Mitig. cap. 8. page
344.
The clause of Reservation may be what it pleases a man; and what soever he
list to frame to himself: so that it agree with his mind, in a cause wherein
he is not bound to make any direct Answer. For example sake, let us take this:
If a Priest being asked by a Protestant Magistrate unto whom he thinks he is
not bound to answer directly whether he be an Anointed Priest? and shall
answer, saying; I am not anointed Priest, secretly referuing this clause in my
mind, not Anointed, on my elbowes, or not Anointed with Tar or Oil de Baye:
is not this reservation merely Mental, and no-way implied in the outward
speech, but unsearchable, and altogether degenerate from the proper or
figurative use of man's speech? Can he possibly find us any color for this Art
of falsehood, and coggery, out of the Gospel of truth.

The Examination of places of Scripture, objected by M. PARSONS out of John 8.
The first is out of the vcrs. 15.

. III.
M. PARSONS his Appendix.
The place then which I mean is the 8. chapter of S. John's (...) Reck. pa. 683.
Gospel, where Christ our Savior entering into a large speech with the Jews,
uses first thesewords, which I have examined before in my said Treatise of
Equivocation: Ego non iudico quenquam, I do not judge any man: which seeming
to be contrary to that other saying of himself within a very few lines, in the
same Chapter, I have many things to speak, and judge of you: and further in
the same Gospel three Chapters before; For neither does my Father judge any
man, but has given to me his Son all judgment: it does not appear how the
proposition can be true, but by some mental reservation in the mind of our
Savior; which being examined by the ancient Fathers what it might be, S.
Chrysostom with Leontius Thcophilus, and others do think the said secret
meaning or Reservation of our Savior to have been this: I do not judge any
man in this my first coming, but do reserve it for my next at the day of
judgment. Other Fathers gather another, as though he had secretly meant: I do
not judge any man, as you the Scribes and Pharisees do, according to the
flesh, and outward show, but in truth: Yet neither of these Reseruations being
uttered, they do make the speech to be ambiguous and E, quiuocall, as cannot
be denied.

The Reuiew.
8 There is no Mental Reservation in this speech of Christ, which the outward
words themselves do not imply; for if we understand the sentence, [ I do
iudgeno man] according to the first exposition, which signifies that he did
not now judge men, in this life, it is explicable enough by this and other
Scriptures: For else where it is plain that he came into the world as a Jesus,
to Save the world, and not as a Judge, to condemn it. And to this purpose the
text says (as In humc (...)
Caietane observes) Non iudico, not, Non iudicabo, that is, I judge noman, it
says not, I will judge no man, so that there is no shadow of Repuganancie in
this with the other speeches of Christ.

9 Again if the second exposition be consulted with, concerning the manner of
judgment, it does not exclude the former; and is also sufficiently apparent by
the outward words: for in the words going before, he told the Pharisees,
saying, You judge according to the flesh; but I judge no man, namely ((...)
says In (...) locum.
Maddonate) according to the flesh, whereby Christ distinguishes his manner of
judgment from the Pharisees; because they, as men, judged According to the
flesh, that is, (as In (...)
Tolet expounds) according to external and outward sense: but Christ judges
immediately, without help of sense, and is therefore God. We see then that the
sense of Christ his speech was intelligible, by virtue of the words themselves:
But the sense of the Priest is not so, for if he shall say, I am no Priest,
meaning of the old law, is there any wit of man that can diue into the depth of
this Reservation?

The second place, verse. 32. M. PARSONS Appendix.
In the same place he says to the Jews: If you persevere in Reckon. pa. (...)
my sayings, you shall truly be my Disciples, and know the truth, and the
truth shall free you: Which freedom, or deliucrance the laws understood from
temporal bondage: and therefore answered answered him. that they were the
seed of Abraham, and had never been in bondage to any. Which error of the
Jews proceeded from the ambiguous speech of our Savior, reserving in his
mind, and not expressing in his proposition what bondage he meant: for that
his reserved meaning indeed was if the bondage of sin,

The reuiew.
10 There was a Verbal ambiguitie, because there is a double freedom, the one
from corporal bondage, the other from Spiritual, as from sin and hell. The
Jews spoke of the one, Christ diuerteth their thoughts to the consideration of
the other, and explaineth his own meaning in the 24. verse; He that sins is
the servant of sin: As if he had said (says Card. In cum locum.
Caietane) Behold what the servitude is, whereof I speak, etc. Which is a case
familiar even unto the Pagans themselves (as their Bishop Iansen. Concord
Euang. eund. locum.
Iansenius wellnoteth;) insomuch that Diogines used to say that There is no
difference between Servants, and vicious Lords, but the vowels and Sillables
of their names, except only this, that servants do serve their Lords, and
Lords are slaves to their own vicious affections. This being so conceiuable a
sense of these words, freedom, and servitude, even by the common use of the
outward words themselves among men, how can it confirm a Mental Reservation,
which is such a Couchant in men's hearts, as which by no use of the outward
speech can possibly be decerned; as when a man shall say, I am no Priest;
conceiving in mind this clause, With a Club-foote.

The third place is out of verse. 50. M. PARSONS Appendix.
The like may be obserned in those words; Ego non quaero Reckon page 684.
gloriam meam, I do not seek my glory; and yet does Christ most justly seek
his own glory that is aue unto him: and so in the verse immediately going
before he (...) this unto them, Vos inhorastis me: you have dishonored me; and
in another place to his Disciples he says, Vos vocastis me Mr. and Domne John
13. v. 13.
and been dicitis, sum etenim. You have called me Master and Lord, and do well
therein, for that I am your Master and Lord indeed. And in another place,
Creditis in Deum, and in John 14. v. 1.
me credit, You do believe in God, belecue also in me, which is the highest
honor he could exact: And consequently there must needs be some Mental
Reservation in this other speech, when he says, he seeks not his own glory,
which the Fathers do endeavor to seek out in their Commentaries.

The Reuiew.
11 This is a Verbal Equivocation in the word, Glory, admitting a double
sense, one is the Glory of his Office, so in the other places objected, but in
this place it is taken for the glory of Revenge, as the words which immediately
go before and which follow immediately after do import: for before it is said,
You have dishonored me, but I seek not mine own glory, that is, Vindictae, to
take vengeance upon you As their own Upon this place.
Authors Tolet, Salmeron, Maldonate, and Iansenius do acknowledge. What then?
shall they be therefore unpunished? No, for it follows in the same verse
There is one (that is, the Father) that seeks and judges, that is,
Reuengeth, says their Moldonate. How can this Verbal Equivocation, which is
exlicable enough by the force of the outward words of the same verse.
countenance the unsearchable depth of their Mental Reservation, such as is
this; I have no head, reserving in my thought, horned like an Ox.

The fourth place is out of the verse. 51. M. PARSONS his Appendix.
It follows in the same place? Amen, Amen. I say unto you Reckon. pa. 684.
if any observe my words, he shall never see death: Which the Scribes and
Pharisees, (though otherwise learned in their law) Verse. 51.
understood of corporal death, and in that sense gave an instance of Abraham,
and the Prophets that were dead, notwithstanding they had observed the words
and commandments of God, and consequently in their sense Christ's sentence
could not to be true: but our Savior had another intention and meaning
reserved in his mind, by which reservation the truth of the sentence was
justified, to wit, that they should not die in soul.

The Reuiew.
12 This is a Verbal AEquiuocation in the word, Death, which in it self does
equally signify a Temporal, and an Eternal death: but in this place is
applied only to the Eternal, as may appear by the Text, He shall not see death
inaeternum, that is, everlastingly, For these words, in aeternum (says In hunc
(...)
Caietane) are added, to distinguish it from the temporal Death: and so also
Ibid.
do their Tolet, Maldonate, and Salmeron expound it. By virtue of the which
word, Everlastingly, the foresaid meaning of the speech is made intelligible;
And is therefore injuriously produced for the justification of his Mental
Reseruatian, which is incomprehensible, because it lurketh in the bottomless
pit of man's secret thought, as for example to say; I have not my Crown shaven
(reserving in my mind as follows:) With a pair of Pincers.

The fifth place, Verse. 54. M. PARSONS his Appendix.
It follows yet further in the same place: If I do glorify my Reckon pa.
684. 685.
self (says Christ) my glory is nothing: Which yet I think no man will grant
to be true according to the letter, as it lies. For albeit Christ should set
forth his own glory, yet may it not be said, that this glory published by
himself is nothing, or vain. Wherefore some reserved sense must here also be
sought out, which according to the opinion of sundry expositours is that he
meant this according to the opinion the Jews, who esteemed that nothing which
came from Christ himself. As also a little before in the 5. chap. he used the
like speech, saying, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true.
Which sentence I think our Ministers themselves will not hold to be true in
the sense, which here it bears: for then should they condemn our Savior of
falsity, as often as he affirms any thing of himself: and then must we of
necessity run to some reserved sense in Christ's meaning, which is the thing
that we call Equivocation, so reviled by our Ministers.

The Reuiew.
13 Their Jesuit Salmeron. Ies. Tom. 1. Prolegom. 11. Can. 22.
Salmeron publishes this for a Canon, for the direction of every Reader of
Scripture, viz. that sometime. It was the fashion of Christ, in giving Answers
unto men, to accomodate and apply his speech rather unto their meanings, than
to their words: and for example thereof he produces the second place which now
M. Parsons alleges, taken out of the 5. chapter of S. John, verse. 31. If I
bear witness of my self, my witness is not true: That is (says he)
according to your understanding, who take me to be a mere man. And of the
first place, concerning the Glorifying of himself, M. Parsons confesses that
Christ spoke according to the opinion of the jews; or, as says Iansen.
Concord. in eund. locum. Ioh. 8. 54.
Iansenius, this sentence is to be understood as others be, as if he had said,
If I as a man (according to the opinion which you have of me) do glorify my
self, my glory were but vain. which shows that in the speech of Christ the
Equivocation was only Uerball, in the word, Glorify, which of it self might
signify a just and divine glorifving of himself, as he was the son of God,
which was not intended in this place: or else an human and worldly (...) of
himself, after the fashion of men, which he called Vain. According unto this
Sense he spoke, and applied his meaning unto the meaning of the Jews
themselves, as has been confessed. Which fashion of Christ's applying his
speech unto the understanding of the hearer, is so far from justifying of their
Mental AEquiuocation, that it does clearly consute it, because in it there is
reserved such a meaning, as neither man, nor Angel does understand, by any
circumstance of speech, as when the Romish Priest answered that he was No
Priest, meaning of Apollo or Baall, and such like. Was it not then a strange
adventure of M. Parsons, from a speech spoken and applied to the hearers
meaning, to seek to infer a Mental Reservation, wherein there is infoulded a
meaning, which does not, nor cannot accord at all unto the understanding of the
I Iearer?

The sixth place, Verse. 55. M. PARSONS his Appendix.
Furthermore in the very next verse, talking of almighty God, Reckon. pa. 685.
he said to the Jews, Non cognouistis cum, you do not know him: which seems
untrue in it self, for that the Jews did profess Verse. 55.
to know him, and serve him, above all the people in the world. And in the old
Testament it is often said of them, that they, of all other people, did best
know God: and therefore some other reserved meaning must Christ our Savior
needs have had, then these external words do insinuate. Which Reservation
Saint Chrysostom. S. Aug. S. Bid. and Theophilact upon this place do think to
have been this in Christ his secret meaning, that they did not know God, as
they ought to know him, by serving him as he would and ought to be served,
according to the speech of Saint Paul to Titus Confitentur se nosce Deum,
factis Tit. 1. 16.
autem negant, They confess to know God in words, but do deny him in deeds.
So as here also an Equivocation of speech was used by our Savior.

The Reuiew.
14 There is a double sense of Not knowing of God, taught openly in Scripture,
the one is in respect of the intellectual part of man, when Gods will is not
rightly believed, so the Gentiles are often said Psalm.
Not to have known God, and to have had No knowledge of his ways; and
contrariwise of the Jews the Scripture says, Psalm. 75. 2.
In Jury is God well known. The second sense, of Not knowing God, is in
respect of the practical and actual duty, when he that believes and
professes the true and sincere worship of God, does notwithstanding wilfully
and rebelliously transgress his will, in which consideration Saint John says,
He that says he knows God, 1. Epist. 2.
and yet keeps not his Commandment is a liar. We see then that this phrase
of Not knowing God, has a double sense, but yet through Verbal Equivocation,
and both of them agree with truth: for some of these with whom Christ spoke,
did not truly and intellectiuely know God, because they knew him not Sub
ratione Patris aeterni, as Card. In hunc locum
Caietane says. And concerning the practical acknowledgement there, Card. In
eund.
Tolet is direct, saying that Christ speaks here of a knowledge which does
not only signify the act of understanding, but which also comprehends the
act of the will and affection, in imitation of God; in which regard 1. Reg. 2.
the sons of Heli the Priest are called the children of Beliall, who know not
God: And our Savior in the same verse of S. John, saying by an Antithesis and
opposition. But I know him, and keep his Commandment, does expound himself,
and reuealeth his meaning, signifying that They knew not God, because they kept
not his Commandment, as their Card. Ibid.
Tolet notes; and their Bishop Concord ibid.
Iansenius says that this is Apparent: which is utterly contrary unto M.
Parsons his Mental Equivocation. As for example, I have no money (meaning
secretly,) to lend it unto you: this Reservation, to lend it, is locked up
close, lest it should be revealed, and cannot naturally be implied in those
outward words, I have no money: and has been called by the Ies. Azorius a
flat See about.
lie. Therefore there is as little affinity between Christ's sentences, and M.
Parsons his Reservation, as between light and darkness: truth and a lie.

The seventh place, verse 56. M. PARSONS Appendix.
Again, in the ensuing verse, which is the 56. Christ said to Reck page 685.
686.
the Jews: Your Father Abraham did (...) to see my day, and saw it, and took
joy thereby. Which words in the common sense do seem to import, that Abraham
had lived with Christ, and had seen the day of his birth, and life, and taken
great joy thereby: and so did the Jews understand his meaning to be, not only
the common people, but the Scribes and Pharisees also, when they said unto him,
Thou have not yet fifty years of age, and have thou seen Abraham? Wherein
notwithstanding they were greatly deceived, for that Christ had another
reserved meaning in his mind, which the holy Fathers do labor greatly to
expound unto us, what it was, and in what true sense our Savior said that
Abraham had seen his day: whose different opinions, reasons, and conjectures I
will not stand to relate here; It is sufficient for me to have showed, that
this was an Equivocal speech of our Savior, whereby the hearers being
deceived, the truth of the speech may only be defended by a reservation in the
mind of the speaker.

The Reuiew.
15 In this there is another Uerball Equivocation, in the word See, for some
saw the day of Christ's being in the world only by Revelation, as Abraham, and
the Patriarks; as Esaias, and the Prophets; as Job, and all the believers before
Christ: And some saw the day of his being in the flesh sensibly, as Peter, and
the other Apostles; as Mary our Lords Mother, holy Joseph, Simeon, and other
holy men, and women, yea and as Caiphas, and other unbelieving Jews. That
Abraham is meant to have Seen the day of Christ's birth spiritually, through
Revelation, their Card. (...) cum locum.
Tolet will not deny: but the Jews that scorned him mistook this sense, and
conceited only a sensual Seeing with bodily eyes.

16 Who now sees not M. Parsons his fraud, who calls that a reserved sense,
which was (that I may so say) a sense conserved in the outward words
themselves, and sufficiently manifest, if the scornful Jews, who were now
blinded with malice, had not perverted them into a sensual Construction. For
what phrase in the old Testament is more familiar and notorious, then to call
that Seeing, which is perceived only spiritually? for the which cause the
Prophets were called 1. Reg. 9.
Seers. And shall the misconceit of incredulous hearers make the sense of
Christ to be mentally reserved? As for M. Parsons his manner of Reservation,
when a man shall say, I keep no Priest in mine house, meaning; with any intent
to bake him in a Pie, or etc. It is so far of from a Verbal Equivocation,
which may be employed by the outward words, as that no man without Revelation
from God can comprehend it. But I hasten.

The last place, Verse 58. M. PARSONS Appendix.
And finally in the next verse after this again Christ uses Reckon p. 686.
687.
a greater Equivocation than any before, saying unto them, Amen, Amen, antequam
Abraham fieret, ego sum. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, that before Abraham was
made, I am: which being an earnest speech; and as it were an oath, as elsewhere
we have noted, the Jews understood it as it lies, that Christ was borne in
the flesh before Abraham: and so it seems that he should have meant according
to his former speech, when he said that Abraham desired to see his day, and saw
it, and rejoiced thereat: Which was understood of his incarnation or day in
flesh, which Abraham in says and spirit did see, and rejoice. But yet here
when he says that he is before Abraham was made, he must needs mean of his
Divinity, and in that he was God: which S. Aug. upon this place does
excellently note to be by the difference of the two words, Abraham fieret, and
Ego sum, the one belonging to the creature, says he, the other to the Creator.
So as more then our Equivocation is used by our Savior in this one sentence.

The Reuiew.
17 But does any Author say, that in the word, Sum, as it is here used (that
is) I am, there is any Equivocation? for seeing that Christ (as Saint Aug. and
Almost all other Authors This faith their les. Maldonate upon this place.
have noted) did distinguish the Creature, (man) by fieret, was made, from the
Creator, which was his Godhead, by the word, Sum, I am, he did not infer,
but remove the ambiguitie of that phrase: Nay I add further; the word, Sum, in
this speech of Christ seemed even unto these incredulous Jews to be so far
from doubtfulnesse, and so plainly to signify his Deity, that they accounting
it to be blasphemous, took up Stones to cast at him; which their own Upon the
same place.
Doctors have also observed, as Card. Tolet: Because that Exodus 3. (says he)
God said, Sum qui sum, that is, I am, that I am, the Jews knew that Christ did
not only prefer himself before Abraham in respect of time, but also publish
himself to be God. Which is likewise the observation of Ibid.
Caietane, saying that because Christ did hereby manifest his Divinity,
therefore it is added that They took up stones to throw at him. This sense
being so evident unto the hearers, shows that there was not so much as a
Verbal Equivocation; much less M. Parsons his Mental Reservation, which the
hearer does not only not know, but cannot possibly guess what it is: As for
example, if one should say, I am no Priest, reserving in his mind, As fit to
keep Swine. We see by this time the manifold ridiculous absurdities, which M.
Parsons has enforced in this fond Appendix, whereof notwithstanding he does
not a little boast, as we shall see.

M. PARSONS his Appendix.
And if we lay all these Equivocal speeches together which Reckon. p. 687.
are 8. or 9. at least contained within a piece of one only Chapter of our
Saviors talk with the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, we shall be able to make
some guess, how many might be found thorowout the whole new Testament and
Bible, if we would examine the same particularly, as we have done this: and
thereby see how true M. Mortons bold assertion was in his book of Full
Satisfact. That no one jot in all Scripture, no one example in all Catholic
Page 49.
Antiquity could be found for the same. His terms also of heathenish,
hellish, heinous, and impious Equivocation, with other infamations of his
brother Minister King, may appear what substantial ground they have.

The Reuiew, showing the absurdities of M PARSONS his Collection.
18 If all the speeches, which M. Parsons inforceth for Instances to pattern
and to justify his fashion of Equiuocating, may be called Mental
Reseruations, then may we grant that not only eight, but even all the
sentences, yea and almost every word of this, and all other Chapters may be
proved to be Mentally Equivocal. And for demostration sake (because I will not
profane the sacred Scripture with such idle crotchetting) I think good to
descant a little but upon any one sentence, which M. Parsons can utter, and
try, if that almost every word may not imply a kind of Reservation. As for
example, suppose M. Parsons should have delivered this speech saying, I will as
long as I live go unto the Church to pray unto God. Which in the understanding
of any man of sense is sensible enough, yet the first particle is I meaning a
man, and no woman: the second word will, meaning, with a resolved and not a
dissembling will: 3. As long, meaning the length of time, and not the length of
body: 4. As I live, meaning, a life animal in this flesh, and not Angelical
out of the body: 5. Go, meaning, by walking, and not by danceing: 6. Unto the
Church, meaning of Catholics, and not of Heretics: 7. To pray, meaning,
mediately by Saints and not immediately by my self, 8. unto God, meaning, the
God of Christians, and not any God of the Pagans. What can be more plainly
spoken then the sentence aforesaid, and yet how many meanings suppressed, which
may not therefore be called Mental Reseruations, otherwise M. Parsons might as
well infer that he never promised any lawful thing unto any man never took an
oath by any lawful authority of man, without some Mental reservation, the use
whereof he himself has judged in all such cases to be detestable. I shall
have further occasion to unfold the grosenesle of his Inference more at large
by other examples, after that I have satisfied some other objections.

SECT. IIII.
An Answer unto some other places of Scripture, wherein M. PARSONS has
insisted in his book of Mitigation, for the defense of his Mental
Equivocation.
19 I doubt how my Reader might censure me, if after the Confutation of M.
Parsons his former Instances out of Scripture, I should inquire into his other
book of Mitigation, to seek al other examples, to prosecure them, because
this would breed tediousness: I therefore will but choose out some of his
choicest places, and so hasten to a Conclusion of this Treatise.

The first text, which M. PARSONS urges in his book of Mittigation, is taken
out of John I. verse 2:

M. PARSONS his Mittigation.
We shall begin with an example so clear, as it shall be like to Mitigat. e.
19.. 2. p. 359.
that of ours in all points, if we change only the names of persons, and
conditions of men that spoke and heard. As that example of S. John Baptist, who
being examincd and demanded by them, that were sent unto him from the Jews,
whether he were a Prophet, or no? he denied it: Propheta es tu? and spondit
non: Are you a Prophet, and he answered No, and yet he meant not absolutely to
deny himself to be a Prophet, for that it had been false both in respect of
that his father Zacharias had prophesied of him in his Nativity, calling him
the Prophet of the highest, Luck. 1. as also in respect of Christ's testimony,
who Matthew. 11. called him more than a Prophet, etc. Here then you see a
Proposition uttered by the Ghost, that of it self is ambiguous, and of a
doubtful sense, and according to the ordinary sound and sense of the words
uttered, seemethfalse, no less then our Preposition, I am no Priest. For as
this may be refusted by them that know me to be a Pricst, and as Th. Morton
still urges (though fondly) is contrary to my knowledge and conscience, that
know my self to be a Ptiest, etc.

The Reuiew.
20 Maldou. les. upon the place (...) these points to the full.
Maldonate the Jesuit (and, as it seems M. Parsons out of him) collecteth
out of Fathers three diverse meanings of the Jews in their question: the first
was, whether he were that singular Prophet, which they fancied should come
together with Christ, and he answered, I am not, which was true according to
that their sense. Secondly, some thought that the Jews meant by their demand
to know, whether he were any one of the ancient Prophets, who were long before
Christ? And he answered, satisfying them truly according to that their sense,
saying, I am not: Thirdly some taught that the Jews by their Interrogatory
thought to know, whether he were any Prophet at all by his proper Osfice? Now
John albeit he was a Prophet by Grace and power, because he was sent by God,
and did exhert, reprove, and convert sinners, yet was he not a Prophet by
ordinary Osfice: and applying his Answer to this sense, said, I am not, and
that truly, because John did not Prophecis: and thus the answer agreed to that
their sense. Observe, (good Reader against Mitig. p. 361.
M. Parsons his Observation) that the Answer of S. John, who is the speaker,
does accord (by the judgment of all Authors) unto the supposed several
understandings of the Jews, and Questionists, who were the hears:
Contrariwise Romish Priest being demanded by a Magistrate, whether he be a
Priest, returns this Answer, [ I am not a Priest,] only with this reserved
sense, With purpose to tell it unto you; which death flatly thwart the intention
of the Magistrate, and Questionist M. Parsons is like to make a lucklesse end,
who is so unfortunate in this beginning.

The second place objected out of Matthew. 9. 20. M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
Our Savior Christ coming to raise the Arch-Synagogue Mitig. p. 365.
his daughter, found the people in tumult, weeping and lamenting for the death,
whom he repressed, saying, Recedite, non est enim mortua puella, sed dormit;
Depart, for that the maid is not dead, but sleeps; and yet is it certain
that naturally she was dead, by separation of her soul from her body. So as if
this Proposition be taken strictly as it lies, without any Mental Reservation
by our Savior, it cannot be true neither in it self, nor in the sense of the
hearers, no more than in our proposition, I am no priest. The meant all
Reservation in our Savior, according to S. Augustines explication and other
expositions, was that albeit she was dead in their sight, and unto hamane
power: yet unto him, and unto his divine power and will to raise her again,
she was not dead, but only a sleep.

The Reuiew.
21 Christ wrought many among them, wherein he did demonstrate his Divine
power, as among others, in curing the woman which had a Bloody issue, whom he
healed even in the way as he came to the house of this Archisinagogue. In
respect of which his divine power, even they that are dead are said to be cut A
sleep, which is a most frequent and ordinary phrase of speech in Scripture. To
this purpose their Card. Tolet. in hune locum.
Tolet commenting upon this Scripture, alleges those places out of the old
Testament, where they who dyed are said to have Sleept with their Fathers: And
out of the new, 1. Cor. 11. Many fella a sleep, from the which Metaphor and
truth (says he) the Apostle does gather an argument of consolation unto all
Christians, teach them not to mourn as men without hope, ignorant of the
resurrection 1 Thessalonians. 4. In regard of which his Omnipotent power, whereby this
woman was now speedily to be raised, He does comfort those who now wept, as he
spoke of Lazarus John 11. saying, Lazarus sleeps, and I must go and awake
him: But here they, who did deride Christ as though he had utterly denied that
the maid was dead (because they were destitute of the light of faith,) did
measure Christ's power by their own. So he Now then the Metaphor of calling
Death a Sleep, being so familiar unto all the Religious of those days, the
divine power of Christ being by many miracles made so famous and manifest among
them: we may judge (seeing that the raising of a dead woman to life was no more
difficulty then the awaking her out of a sleep, which he intended presently
to do) that both his denying her to be Dead, and his affirming that she was but
a Sleep were but Verbal amphibologies, which all they might have understood,
who were not Scornful and incredilous contements of his sayings. But the
Priests Equivocation, as this; I am no Priest, meaning, as ordained to kill a
Calfe, or such like, is so far beyond the horizen and sight of any man's
capacity, that he may sooner claspe hold of the man in the moon, then by any
intimation of words, or circumstance of speech reach unto such a reserved
conceit.

The third, fourth, and fifth, places out of John 6.

M. PARSONS his Mittigation.
In the Gospel by S. John, speaking of the eating of his flesh, Mitting. p.
366. 367.
If any shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and yet S. Paul says
to the contrary, 1. Cor. 11. He that eareth and dirnketh unworthily, does eat
or drink his own judgment, or condemnation. By which words of S. Paul it is
made manifest, that the former words of Christ cannot absoluted be true,
without some Meant all Rescruation or restriction his understanding, for that
not all that eat and drink, but they only that do it worthily, have life
ever lasting. Secondly, there is discovered what this reservation was, to wit,
Digne; worthily. And Page 367.
Ioh. 16. If you ask my Father any thing in my name, he will give it you,
rescruing, if we ask not male, as S. lames expounds it, Iam. 4. So Mar. 16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Reserving; if he believe
according to Gods commandment, as Christ expounds it, Matthew. 28. etc.

The Reuiew.
22 If we had no other scantling of M. Parsons his judgment, then this, we may
guess what was his indiligence in the Study of Divinity, seeing he could be
ignorant of that, which is a most general Canon and Rule always to be
observed in Scripture, and so acknowledged by their Jesuit Salmeron Ies. Tom.
1. Proleg. 15. reg. 31. Pa. 294
Salmeron, to wit; When as any Promises are propounded, they are so to be
understood, that not so much the effect, as the virtue and nature of the thing,
whereunto the Promise is annexed, be signified thereby: and so are we to
interpret that of S. Mark, Marc. vlt.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; (viz. so far as belongs
unto the nature and faith of Baptism.) And again that of Ioh. 6. He that
eats my flesh has life everlasting, namely, so much as the nature of faith
and the Sacrament does teach, which has a virtue of helping forward unto
eternal life, if there be not some thing to hinder the effect, or some
condition awanting, which albei: it be not in that place, yet is it expressed
elsewhere, as Joel 2. where it is said, whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved, wherein there is understood, that the prayer be made
with a lively faith, as it is (...) explaned. And Matthew. 7. it is said,
cueryone, that asks, receiuet (...) understanding this condition, if he ask
those things, which are right and profitable as S. James shows, Ia. 4.
saying, you ask andrecciue not, because you ask amiss, to consume them upon
your Concupiscences. Thus far their Jesuit Salmeren. Was there ever any man so
simple, as not to know that in all Acts which are prescribed of God this Digne,
that is, the necessary manner of doing it according to Gods ordinance is
understood, although it be not literally expressed? For when the Master of the
family gives his servants bread and meat, for their food, and says, Eat this
fair will cherish your hearts, will any say that this is not a speech direct
enough, but had a reserved sense as namely this, If they did eat it moderately,
and not in greater bits, then which they could digest, or If they mixed it not
with poison, which bread then might prove their bane. If all such Clauses,
which might be supposed must be called Reseruations, then is there no speech,
but it may contain a thousand Reseruations.

23 The truth is, that whenever there is any good thing commanded, the speech
is plain, direct, and perfect enough although the word, Worthily, be not
expressed; because the necessary condition of every good Act does ordinarily
conueigh unto every hearer this understanding, that it must be done digne
worthily, or duly; for that bonanon sunt bona, nist been agantur, that is,
There is no good action, which is not well or worthily done: and therefore the
word, worthily, or duly, being so naturally, commonly, and necessarily implied
in such speeches, it evidently euinceth, that this makes nothing for M.
Parsons his manner of Reservation, which is so intricate a fox-hole, as which
neither man, nor devil, who goes inuisibly, can creep into. For this speech,
[ To kiss the Popes foot, is a ceremony befitting the honor of his person,]
every Romanist will think to be an Assertion true and plain enough, without
any word, Worthily; albeit to kiss the Popes foot currishly, as the dog
did, that bit him by the toe, were a dishonor unto him. But M. Parsons his
Mental Reservation is clean contrary, and so intricately hanckled, that
neither man, nor devil can find the right end of the thread, or guess what
can be meant thereby; as when a Priest being demanded, whether he be a Priest,
should answer, No, reserving in his mind, such an one as is chaste, or such an
one as can hope to be Pope, and any like clause of speech.

24 In like manner might I descant upon his Mitig. p. 367.
Asking and receiving because in Matthew. 7. Ask and you shall have, the
condition whereof is expounded by S. lames, viz. so that we ask not Amiss.
Which condition (and the same may be answered concerning others) is so
necessarily understood by every hearer, that though it be not expressed in
outward words, yet is it discernable in the common notion and sense of the
hearer at the first sound of every such sentence. As when the Father shall say
unto all his children, Ask me blessing, and I will bless you; and all shall
fall down upon their knees, and ask his blessing, yetso, that one among the
rest, whilst he is craving his blessing, should turn his face another way,
and play with a dog; Another should put out his tongue, in scorn and
contempt of his father; a third should ask only to be blessed with some groats
in his purse; would that Father use the form of blessing toward these
fondlings, and not first correct them for their rude and untoward behauiours?
or would M. Parsons excuse them, because the Father expressed not the manner of
Asking, to wit, that they ought to have done it dutifully, and decently, as it
becomes children? would he call these kind of conditions Reseruations,
because they were not literally delivered in words, which are as it were,
ingrafted in the common sense of every man, and so generally implied by the
ordinary and accustomable acceptance of speech, according to the understanding
of all hearers, except they be as ignorant as Infants, or Idiots? whereas the
Reservation we dispute against, is (as M. Parsons says) what a man list to
frame to himself; and consequently may surmount not only the ordinary
capacity of mortal men, but even the subtilty of the Angels in heaven: as to
say, I am no Priest, meaning, Whose name is Tom Tyler, or Watt Miller, or so
forth in infinitum

The last Instance out of Esaias 38. M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
I should utterly weary my Reader, if I would follow all, or the Mitig. p. 368.
greatest part of that which may be said in this behalse, for that always
commonly all Prophecies that are (...) and do threaten punishment, (...) still
some secret reservation, if they repent not: as that of I say to Ezechias: Haec
dicit Dominus, dispone domui tuae quia morieris tu, and non viues: This says
our Lord, dispose of thy household, for thou shall dye, and shall not live, and
yet he lived sifteene years after. If therefore the Prophet had been
demanded, Shall not Ezechias live any longer? and he had answered, No, upon
what had fallen the negative No? if only upon words uttered, it had been
false, for he lived longer, but if upon that together with the Reservation in
the meaning of the holy Ghost it was true. And the like may be said of the
prophecy of Jonas, Adhuc quadraginta dies, and Niuiue subuertetur; There
remain but forty days, before Niniue shall be destroyed, and so infinite
other places. Wherefore in this Tho. Morton was greatly over seen, in making
of a confident Challenge, as befoer you have seen,

The Reuiew.
25 I rather think the Reader has been already wearied with multiplicities
of such idle and fond Instances, which prove nothing less then the point in
question, as has hitherto appeared; and may now, by discussing this last
place, be further discovered. It is an ordinary Rule in Divinity, acknowledged
by their Jesuit Ribera Ies. in Ionam, cap. 3. Number. 27.
Ribera, that The threatenings, which God uses, do contain in them a secret
condition, Except they repent. Whereof Saint Chrysostom. speaks thus: If (
says he) men were not changed, such prophesies would take place; but because
men are changed, therefore the prophecy, although it be not fulfilled, yet
does it not fail, for that God does preserve his common law, which he has
made, to wit, If a Nation shall repent of her sin, I will also repent of the
evil, which I thought to bring upon it. Still we see that the error, which
has blind-foulded M. Parsons, is, that he does not distinguish the Sensum
consignatum, a sensu reseruato, that A necessary distinction.
is; sense employed in the very speech it self, by reason of the common and
ordinary use thereof, from the reserved sense, which is such as neither the
common acception of words do conueigh, nor the most intelligent (God only
excepted) can possibly conceive, or apprehend.

26 This point may be thus explained. (...) Stephen Apal. pro Herodoto, li. 1.
(...) 3.
An Ambassador being sent unto the Pope from a Prince in Germany, after that
he had taken his leave, and was dismissed of the Pope in these words, [Dic
dilecto filio nostro salutem] that is, [Commend me unto my beloved son your
Master] he fourthwith (doubting least the Pope had called his Master a bastard)
answered all in a sum, My Master (quoth he) is no Priests son. The word,
Son, in the Popes speech signified a spiritual, and not a natural sonship
and filiation, as both the person of the speaker, and the ordinary use of that
salutation did import, and therefore was a sense implied in the speech, and not
reserved only in the mind, as in their other Priestly Equiuocating is usually
practiced, as to say, I am no Priest, (reserving in mind) as willing to
endanger my self, by confessing that I am a Priest.

27 This likewise must be observed, that we are not to call a speech ambiguous,
or else reserved, because it is not understood by the giddy and indiscreet
hearer, as by the former example is manifest, and may be made more conspicuous
and evident by this that follows of a Mother, who chid and rated her daughter
for her rude and rurell carriage toward her affienced lover, especially for not
thanking him, after that he had drunk unto her; and therefore her mother, for
her better preparation and direction how to behave herself more orderly at
their next meeting, spoke thus unto her daughter; Can thou not say unto him,
(quoth she) the next time he drinks to thee, [I thank you] thou great fool:
the daughter, silly body, not discerning the true distinction of the points of
that speech, did upon the next occasion of his drinking unto her, answer, I
pledge you, thou great fool. Such like absurd and foolish examples I am,
beyond my inclination, forced to produce, that thereby I might better display
the folly and absurdity of M. Parsons his defense of Mental Reservation, which
he oftentimes foundeth upon the rotten post of the Jews infatuation, and upon
their misconstruction of the sayings of Christ.

28 Besides these foresaid objections, M. Parsons in Mitigat. cap. 9. page 387.
his 9. chap. calls and challenges me to make a better Answer concerning an
other saying of Christ, wherein he does triumph intolerably.

. V.
An Answer to an old objection, which has been taken out of that saying of
Christ to his Disciples; I will not go to the seast, my time is not yet come,
John 7. Verse. 8.
29 MVch ado have we had about this text, as well concerning the Reading, as
touching the Sense thereof. We must begin with the first.

The sum of M. PARSONS objection, concerning the Reading.
But what does he accuse us of, in effect? forsooth that we Mitig. p. 388.
have left the Greek text, which has (...) nondum, not yet, and do follow
your vulgar Latin, which has only (...) that is, non not, the difference of
which word makes a maine dinersitie Joan. 7.
in the matter, if you mark it well, for if the true text be nondum, I will
not yet go up, then is there no doubt or difficulty at all of the sense, for
that Christ said plainly that he would not go up then, and so his going up
afterward had been no contradiction any way to his former speech of not going
up, as here our Maldonate cited by Morton does confess: but on the other side,
if the matter were so plain, by reading nondum in the Greek why do the
Fathers labor so much to find out the secret meaning and reserved sense of
our Savior in this sentence, and seeming contradiction of his? (...) page 389
390.
For if that word had been in all Greek books, and so held for the true
text, there had been no question, or Controversy, as Expositers confess: yet
to grant with Maldonate, alleged by Th. Morton, that very many Greek Copies
had so informer times, and have it at this day, neither does our vulgar deny or
dissemble it; for albeit it have non, and not nondum, yet does it expressly,
signify in the margent, that diverse Manuscripts have nondum, and so does set
it down for Varia lectio, yea the Rhemes English Testament it self does
express that translation also in the margent, I will not go up yet.

The reuiew.
30 I can say no less, nor need I say much more then that which is confessed
by Romish Doctors upon this place: First, their Jesuit Maldonate, Almost
enumerable Greek books (says he) read (...) (not yet) (...) but especially
the Vaticane Bible, the most ancient and famous of all in the world, and
Nonnus, Chrysostom, Euthemius very grave Authors do both read it so, and
also expound it; and so am I persuaded that it is red of Theophylact. And (...)
which is the reading of Chrysostom (says their Card. Tolet) is most
legitimate. And there is that witnesses (says Iansenius) that some ancient
Latin Copies has it Nondum, that is, not yet. Their Jesuit Sa. making no
further question says, that The Greek (...) it, I ascend not yet, and the
Siriac, I ascend not now. And lastly Card. Caietane correcting the Latin by
the Greek, says it has not, instead of not yet. We have now seen his
egregious Cavil.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
And do we contradict this? your very next immedicate Mitig. p. 391.
words do clear us from this your calumniation, for it follows in your
speech: your Latin text (say you) does sufficiently betoken the same sense of
the Greek (not yet) and so do two of the principal Doctors of your Church,
Tolet and Iansenius paraphrase. And is it so? how then are we so blinded with
the love of our Thais, as rather to snatch at any meaning, then take that which
is meant? How say you that our Helena, the Latin Translation, is embraced by
us before the Greek, if our Latin do not only betoken the same sense of the
Greek, as here you confess, but sets it down so as Varia lectio in the
margent, as before has been showed; yea and that two of our principal
Doctors do follow the same in their paraphrases? Is not this to accuse and
defend, affirm and deny, and to speak contraries with one and the same breath?

The Reuiew.
31 No, their is no contrariety in my Assertions; but this objection of
Contradiction is so vain, that it may be blown away with one breath: for in
the Greek text there is a double Nondum, the first is, I will [not yet] go
vppo, viz. to the feast; the second is the reason hereof, because mine hour is
[not yet] fulfilled. The first [ Not yet] which does demonstratiuely expound
the meaning of Christ, is wanting in the Latin; and the second [ Not yet]
which does also prove, but less manifestly the same meaning, remains in the
Latin text; and therefore may it be said to have in these diverse respects
both fully, and not fully betokened the same sense. Hitherto of words.

The Sum of M. PARSONS his Objection, concerning the Sense.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
If the matter were so plain by the reading of nondum in Mitig. page 388.
the Greek, why do the ancient Fathers labor so much to find out the secret
meamng, and reserved sense of our Savior in this sentence, and seeming
contradiction of his? For S. August. and S. Bid after much search, do think
his meaning to have been, that he would not ascend to that feast with an
human spirit, to procure any wordly honor, etc. Strabus, and other
Expositors do interpret that he would not go up to exhibit his Passion,
Eucherius, that he would not ascend on the first day of the feast. Mitigat. 389.
Wherefore seeing these and other Fathers do labor so much to find out the
meaning of Christ in this sentence, it is not like that the matter was so
clear as T. M. would make it, by the clause Nondum. For if that word had been
in all Greek books, and so held for true text, there had been no question or
Controversy, as our Expositors confess.

The Reuiew.
32 How many, how ancient, and how famous Copies, in stead of, I will not go
up to the feact, have, I will not yet go up to the feast, (whereby the whole
doubt is thoroughly dissolved?) yea and how true that reading is we have
received from the Confessions of their own Doctors. Why some Fathers (and why
not then much more Porphyrius, whom M. Parsons obiecteth?) wereignorant of such
Coppies, what better reason need be given than that it so chanced that they
had them not?

33 But we are in the second place to inquire, (supposing the Greek word (...)
(which in Latin is Nondum, and in English not yet, were not in the sentence)
whether the same sense may be easily gathered out of the Text, or not: For if
the words of the Text it self do sufficiently betoken the meaning of Christ
to have been, that he thought not to go up yet, vz. at that time, then is
there no Seeming contradiction in that sentence, and consequently no color or
shadow of any Mental Reservation. To this purpose I Full. satisfact. part. 3.
cap. 11. page 79. 80.
produced the judgment of Tolet, their late Cardinal, and sometime Jesuit,
saying that [ I will not go vp] does signify, I will not go up yet; which he
proves from the words that follow immediately in the Text, [ for my time is
not yet fulfilled:] That is, (says Tolet) The time when I ought to go up. And
accordingly their Bishop Full. satisfact. ibid.
Iansenius The word Not, which is in the Latin, signifies plainly Not yet,
which sense (says he) is sufficiently shown by the words following, vz.
[because my time] namely wherein I must go to the feast, [ is not yet
fulfilled,] that is, not yet come: And this he calls the genuous and natural
sense of the place. Which being granted, the sense of Christ, even according
to M. Parsons his judgment, is sufficiently expressed and not reserved, and
consequently here is no footing for his Reservation. In the third place we are
to satisfy for the different opinion of some Fathers.

M. PARSONS his Objection.
To show one point of manhood in this his flight, he takes upon Mitig. pa. 339.
him to answer one of these six Arguments alleged against him, which is the
fourth, concerning the ancient Fathers that labored to secke out Christ's
reserved meaning. You shall see him insinuate two points; first is that the
ancient Fathers did suppose that whatsoever meaning was in these words, They
(the said kinsmen of our Savior) did understand them, as well then, to wit,
before the Gospel was written, and before the holy Ghost was given, as the
said Christian Fathers did afterward by the learning and light which they had
by the spirit and tradition of the Church: which proposition if he were put to
prove in the presence of learned men, I doubt not but that he would quickly be
in a poor and pitiful plight.

The Reuiew.
34 That which I said was only concerning the sense of this place of
Scripture, whereof I affirmed that the Fathers thought their expositions,
whatsoever it was which they judged to be true) to be as well known unto these
disciples of Christ, as to themselves: which M. Parsons makes to be a general
assertion, concerning any other sense of Scripture whatsoever. If it may be
lawful for him to deal thus injuriously, viz. by perverting a particular Case
into a general, and to cast me into a pit of his own making, none (I
confess) need to doubt but my plight must be pitiful: but if my Reader
shall consider that he has cut of the Reason which I then produced, to prove
that the Brethren there mentioned did know that it was the meaning of Christ
not to deny absolutely but that he intended to go up to the feast, viz.
Because otherwise they should have been scandalized and offended, as to think
that he had contemned the feast, which, by Gods ordinance were yet alive, and
in force, (as their In locum con.
Iansenius affirmed, whereunto their trouersum.
Tolit does expressly accord) then may he easily discern that M. Parsons was
herein more spiteful then I was pitiful; But we proceed unto the chief
observation.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
The second thing which by this answer he would have us understand, Mitig. page
393. 394.
is, that if these brethren, or kinsmen of Christ, did any way conceive our
Saviors meaning, then was there no reservation at all, for that as he says,
our joined reservation is always supposed to be a clause concealed, and not
understood. But this is a greater foolery then the first, for that there may
be areseruation in the speakers mind, though understood to some of the
hearers. As for example, in our proposition being demanded, whether I be a
Priest, and say, no, reserving to my self, as often before has been
declared, that I am no such, or such Priest, as I ought to utter the same to
you, though some of the Examiners should guess at my reservation, or know the
same certainly, for that otherwise they know I am a Priest, this does not make
that this proposition in it self, and in my meaning is not a reserved, or
Equivocal proposition, for that they understand it.

The Reuiew.
35 This is the last and chiefest point of all this Controversy; which if he
have wisely and truly satisfied, then shall I ingeiously confess, that my
whole exception against M. Parsons his Mental Equivocation is, indeed, no
better then mere foolery. But the truth is, that my exception against his Art
of Equiuocating is not because the Mental Reservation, which he teaches, is
not understood of some hearers, M. Parsons gross ignorance discovered in the
very state of the question.
but because it is so couched, that it cannot be possibly understood of any
hearer: for The Clause of Reservation (says M. Parsons) may be what a man list
to say to himself, Now their Priest, who lists not be apprehended, will list
to frame to himself such a crotchetiue conceit, which shall go as invisible
as an Angel of darkness, by whom it is hatched: As for example, to say, I am
no Priest, (meaning,) That ever worshipped the Idol Bell: or, I am no Priest,
(meaning) whom you love: or, I am no Priest, (meaning,) That is willing to be
hanged: or, I am no Priest, (meaning,) that can tell fortunes: or, I am not a
Priest, (meaning,) whose name is Cutbert: or, I am not a Priest, (meaning,) for
ought that you shall know. Thus then seeing that the reserved Clause may be
according to M. Parsons doctrine, whatsoever a man list to fancy, so that it
agree with his mind, allthough it be not employed in the outward words, it is
as infinitely variable, and therefore as certainly unsearchable, as are the
fancies and thoughts of men, which only God can see, judge, and revenge.

36 Knowing therefore that the Equivocations, which have been objected by M.
Parsons out of Scriptures, are not properly Mental, but Verbal, because the
meanings which he calls Reseruations, were implied in the words of those
sentences, and in the circumstances thereof; but the reservation, which M.
Parsons professes and we condemn, is an only mental reservation, which has
no more affinity in sense with the outward words, than this; I am no Priest,
(meaning,) like a Goose that goes bare-foote; so that he that from the hearing
of the first part, which was the outward speech, could have but coniectured at
that referued meaning of a Goose, might pass for a Magnus Apollo I shall
refer this first point, concerning the palpabilitie of Romish reservation
unto the wisdom and judgment of our Reader, to award the note of foolery
unto whether of us it shall seem, in his discretion, more justly to appertain
The second thing, which I promised to show, is the impiety of the same
doctrine.

CHAP. XI.
A discovery of the impiety of their pretenses for Mental Equivocation. First
proving it to be a lie.

. I.
IN the former Sections has been unfolded the gross absurdities of M.
Parsons his proofs (which he presumed to collect out of Scripture) in so
copious and perspicuous a manner, as that I might fear the imputation of some
folly, for prosecuting of such fooleries with so great seriousness. Therefore
now my present endeavor must be to show his defense to be no less graceless,
then it is senseless, the impiety whereof becomes so much the more
notorious and execrable, as it durst more boldly seek refuge at Gods sanctuary
even the holy Scripture, and there to catch hold at the examples of Christ his
speeches, as it were at the horns of the Altar. But I have done my best to
pull it from that hold, by the joint help of their own Doctors; and now am I
to pursue and to demonstrate the impieties of the foresaid defense, drawing all
into these two general heads. The first is in respect of the cause it self,
to prove it an Art of lying, and the second is in respect of the Cases, which
issue from thence: to show them to be dangerous and unjust.

M. PARSONS Mitigation.
He says out of Saint Augustine, that we may not leave off truth to be liars,
as the Priscillianists did; which appertains Mitig. page 373.
nothing to our purpose: for they indeauored to confirm the lawfulness of
lying out of the words of Christ, which we do not; but show out of Christ's
speech, when he said John 15. All things whatsoever I have had of my Father,
have I made known unto you,] he did not lie, or falsify at all, but reserved
somewhat in his mind not uttered, which joined with the words, make the
proposition most true. Page 372.
Meaning by [Whatsoeuer] whatsoever he thought convenient.

The Reuiew, proving M. PARSONS his Reservation a lie.
1 Their Card. In John 15.
Tolet does acknowledge the general Rule of interpreting such speeches, to wit,
of Interpreting such general propositions of Scripture, by restraining them
unto the circumstances of things, whereof they are spoken, as of the persons,
the time, and the scope, and end of which they are spoken: So here, in
revealing all things to his Disciples, it must be understood, all which might
concern them, as they were now Disciples, and which were necessary for their
present State. But the Priestly Reservation is without all compass of due
circumstance, being (as M. Parsons says) whatsoever it pleases a man to
fancy to himself, so that it agrees with his mind. And so this mixed
proposition must go for current; viz. I am no Priest, (reserving in mind) for
ought that you shall know: where he answers, as though he would let a man
know that he is no Priest, and yet reserueth in his mind, that he will not be
known, whether he be a Priest, or no: is there any circumstance of time, or
place, or person, that can sensibly or reasonably imply any such reserved
sense? Certainly no, more, then if he had answered thus; I am no Priest,
(concealing in his mind,) for ought that you know: or, I am not a Priest
(meaning secretly,) that wants a nose. If M. Parsons, or all the subtilists
Equiuocators themselves should hunt by all circumstances that are, to find this
reserseruation of a Nose, I suppose that they could never smell it out.
Wherefore I now proceed to my purpose.

The proofs to show the Mental Reservation to be a lie, by the judgment of
all kind of Professors: and first by their own Doctors.
3 We have often heard what kind of Mental Equivocation M. Parsons does
patronize, viz. Any mixed proposition partly delivered with mouth, and partly
conceived in mind; so that the reserved clause do agree with my mind, be it
what soever I please to fancy to my self.

4 First this kind of Equiuocating has been condemned (...) See above lib.
I. cap. 13. S 2.
ned for a lie by their own Sepulueda, who produces, for confirmation of his
assertion, most ancient Divines (as he calls them) citing by name Aquinas,
Scotus, Henricus, and Gabriel.

5 After him approaches their Jesuit Azorius, and whereas M. Parsons professes
such a Mental Equivocation, wherein the speech has a double sense, not by the
signification, or composition of the words themselves, but only by
somereseruation in the mind; See lib 1. cap. 13. 3. um. 14. and 24.
He (the foresaid Jesuit) proclaims that every use of words in any sense,
which they have not in themselves, is a lie: And after iumping upon the same
example of Reservation, which M. Parsons used and urged for proof of Mental
Equivocation, to wit, When I am asked of one, who is no good play master,
whether I have so much money, or no, I may answer (though I have it) No, (with
this Reservation) to lend it unto you: this their said Jesuit does contrarily
See ibid. Sec. 4.
call a flat lie.

6 Emanuel See ibid.
Sa another Jesuit followed Azor, but yet so haltingly, as though he had had a
thorn in his heel, and was afraid to confess a truth; being but half of
that opinion. Therefore I omit him, and seek after See above lib. 2. cap. 3. 1.
Sotus, who comes on more resolutely to the point, calling this speech [ I
know not (mixed with this restriction and Reservation) To tell it you] an
arrant lie: And concerning Amphibologies used in words, which the outward words
themselves will not bear, he concludes them to be no-way excusable from lies.
Can there be a greater impiety, than to bring Christ his speeches for the
authorizing and patronizing of such clauses of reservation, which their own
approved Doctors and professors have condemned for stark lies?

Secondly, by Fathers.
7 Among Christians I held S. Augustine most singular, (yet when I name him,
limply also S. See Full fatisfact. P 3. 80. Full satufact. part 3. Page 65. out
of S. Aug. lib. contra mendacium cap. 18.
Gregory, and Barnard, who follow him in his book Contra Mendacium:) He
supposing some old man To be dangerously sick, who if he should but hear of
the death of his Son, were like to ieopard his own life; yet so it is that
his servant, who knows that his son is dead, is earnestly demanded to tell
him the state wherein his son is, whether he be dead, or alive, what shall
the servant answer in this case? he must answer (says S. Augustine) either
that he is a live, or dead. or else say that he knows not: but so say that he
liuoth, or knows not are both false, and the only true answer is that his
son is dead. From this determination of S. Augustine I made bold to collect,
that if ever S. Augustine had thought Meant all Equivocation (as namely to say
this Your son is a live, Reserving in mind, for ought that you shall yet
know) he would surely have allowed of it in this Case, especially seeing that
thereby he might both have freed the old Father from dying, and his own tongue
from lying. It were good that we heard P. R. his Answer unto this

M. PARSONS his Answer.
To this I answer, that this case is not like those, for that here Mitig. page
460. 461.
is no just demand, no force, no compulsion, no injury offered, and
consequently no right of using such evasion for just defense, for so much as
this is in common conversation, from which we have exempted before the use of
Equivocations, albeit we have heard also out of the same S. Aug. himself,
Aliud est mentiri, aliud veritatem celare. It is one thing to lie, and another
thing to cover a truth without lying. S. August. speaks against the first,
and so do we, and consequently this example proves nothing.

The Reuiew.
8 O noble Answerer he that See above l 1. Cap. 13. number 29
taught the use of Mental Reservation, in Case when a man Asks whether his
friend have so much money (where there is only a demand without compulsion,)
for fear of getting his displeasure, if he should have directly denied him
that sum; would now seem not to admit of the like evasion in the Case of a
Servant commanded to answer directly concerning the death of his masters
Son, where there is more then a doubt of shortning his masters life. Who
sees not that M. Parsons if he had returned a direct answer, does now touch
birdlime, wherein the more he struggleth, the more he is entangled, answering
nothing to the purpose? For the question is not, whether it be lawful to Cover
a truth, but whether this manner of covering it, by Mental reservation, be
tolerable, or no; which S. Augustines wit gave him not so much as to dream
of, whose sanctity, doubtless, would have called it craft and impiety; whose
definition of a lie is this, Mendacium est falsum dicere, cum volunt ate
fallendi, that is, A lie is to speak a false thing with purpose to deceive the
hearer. I pretermit another memorable Full satisfact. part. 3. page 66.
example, repeated by S. Aug. of the Bishop Firmius, which See above l. 2. cap.
3. number. 6.
has been alleged by their Sotus, for the confutation of the foresaid manner
of Mental Reservation.

9 In the last end of the book of Part. 3. page 102.
Full satisfact. I added to the like purpose an example delivered by S. Tom. I.
de^^^liere septies icta.
Hierome, which may be unto us a mirror of ancient simplicity; Of a wife
accused by her husband, and tortuted to draw out a confession of guilt: but she
lifting up her eyes to heaven, said, thou Lord Jesus, who searches the heart
andreines, art witness that I do not deny truth for fear of death, but
therefore refuse to lie for fear of sin. The Jesuits, who have instructed
the adulterous wife, being asked of her husband, to free herself by a Mental
Equivocation, would they not have condemned this woman for want of wit, and
have given her other ghostly counsel, teaching her the use of the same Art,
for the avoiding of death, and escaping a lie? May we not guesselby the
constancy of this godly woman, and by S. Hieroms commendations of her, that
those times were not practiced in this kind of Alchymie, which abstracteth
such a Clause of Reservation, as surpasses the understanding of any, but of
him who only is able to search immediately into the thoughts and
understandings of men? as when a man says I have no money, concealing this
Clause in his mind, Which I mean to turn into buttons. The example of this
woman may seem to be more forcible, because M. Parsons in his Treatise of
Equivocation, in answering some other points, buried this in his sober silence.

Thirdly, by Heretics.
10 We read in S. Aug. contra mendacium, ad Consent. paulo post initium.
Augustine of the heresy of the Priscillianites, who were herein (as he says)
worse then any other Heretics, because they thought it lawful for them to
dissemble themselves to be Orthodoxe and true professors and to conceal their
own Religion by lying: and for proof that it was lawful to lie, they used to
allege the example of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and the speeches of
Christ himself: Nec se aliter arbitrantes ( says S. Aug) veracem suam
ostendere falsitatem, nisi veritatem dicant mendacem, that is, They thought
that they could not defend their falsitie, unless they taught that truth it
self was a liar. Let now our judicious Reader but think with himself, seeing
that lying was condemned of all other professions, as well Catholics, as
Heretics, whether the Priscillianists would have used lying, for the Covert of
their heretical religion, knowing that the Art of Equiuocating by a mixed
proposition, called Mental Reservation, is as close and invisible a conueiance
for any thing that a man would hide, as the most diabolical lie that man can
invent? As for example, by protesting unto the hearers, saying, We believe no
such doctrine, secretly conceining in their minds, to letyou know of it: or,
we believe as you do, Reserving this Clause in their mind, But that we do
not believe you.

11 We are to add unto this the practice of Consentius, and some other
erroneous ones, who albeit they were faithful professors, yet, that they might
discover the Priscillianists, who for fear did secretly profess the heresy
of Priscillian, and yet publicly renounced it, holding it lawful in that case
to lie; did Cretizare cum Cretensibus, and held it lawful by lying to wind
out these liars; to the which purpose they dislembled themselves to be
Priscillianists. These erroneous ones are vehemently condemned by S. Contra
Mendar.
Augustine, as those who Did evil, that good might come thereof. The discovery
of Heretics he calls good, but to do it by lying, he terms evil. They
saw no other means to vnearth these Cubbes of that Heretic Priscillian, but
only by dissembling, and lying; Nevertheless S. Aug. pleads for syncerity
thus, Veritate occidenda mendacia, teaching that lies are not to be slain, but
by the truth. But o the wit of our Equiuocators! they would have corrected S.
Augustine, and directed those erroneous, and taught them (if the Case would
suffer it) how to dissemble themselves to be Priscillianists without lying, and
yet with as fair a subtletie, as the most profound lying that can be imagined,
and that is, by Mental Reservation, as thus; To say that we are
Priscillianists, Reserving in our minds, for ought that you shall know, or, We
are Priscilianists, reseruiug in our minds, Only in pretense that we may
betray you, or such like. Does not their want of this kind of Evasion tell us
that Consentius, and those other erroneous, although otherwise faithful
Christians, (who did by lying seek to find out liars,) either were ignorant
of this mystery of Mental Equivocation, or else held it to be no better then
plain lying.

12 What shall we say unto the Arch-heretike Arius? he (as I Full sasufact.
part. 3. page 91'
then delivered out of Socr. l. 1. Hist.
Socrates) being compelled by the holy Emperor Constantine to deliver his
Subscription to the Council of Nice, and to avouch His integrity by an oath,
he used this Art and slight; his own (heretical) opinion he closely kept
under his left arm; and then swore (laying his hand upon his lift side) that
he so believed, as he had written. Here we may obseruethat this execrable
Heretic used only a Verbal Equivocation, which although it be not an
absolute lie, (as See about.
has been shown) yet could not the use thereof, in dissembling the true
faith, be but most sacrilegious and abominable: Notwithstanding, he making
conscience (as it seems) of a lie, rather answered by a Verbal ambiguitie,
then told directly that he believed the Article of that Council. We are to
mark, that the whole obscurity was in the double sense of the word, Writing,
for that he had written one tenor of Confession, which he propounded openly
unto the Council; and another had he written, which he kept closely under his
arme-hole, and by virtue of that Verbal Equivocation he made his evasion. I
would but therefore demand why this godless and perfidious Heretic should
have taken the pains in inuenting and writing a contrary form of
Subscription, and to keep it about him, (which by a privy search might have
been discovered) if it had been known in those days that a Mental
Reservation would have served the turn, to avoid a lie; especially seeingthat
by virtue hereof he should not have needed either to strain his wit for
invention of a Verbal Equivocation, nor stir his hand, forputting it in
writing: because he could not have wanted secret and unsearchable Reseruations,
as his fancies, which may be called Mill Artifices, would have presented to
his thoughts, which are innumerable, among others, this; to have said to the
Council, I believe that, which I have there written, (understanding in his
mind) That it is false. Here is the mixed proposition, which by M. Parsons
learning must be as true now, being partly uttered, and partly reserved, as if
it had been wholly expressed in the outward words, which I have proved to be an
execrable lie, both by See above.
Reason, and by the Sea above.
Confession of their own Doctors; and now euince the same from the practizes
even of these Heretics, viz. the Priscillianists, and this Arius, they
defending lying, for want of other means to hide his heresy, this other using
only the dangerous and discouerable Verbal Equivocation, for fear of lying:
And therefore (if I be not deceived) do both bear witness that the Iesuicall
Art of Mental Reservation was either not known in those days, or else known
to be no better then mere lying.

Fourthly, by Pagans.
13 M. Parsons was earnestly entreated, yea aad challenged to produce out of
the Schools of all Pagans and Heathens, of what sect soever (who were, for
number, infinite and, for natural light, and learning excelling the children
of light) that did expressly acknowledge any Truth in his mixed proposition, by a
Mental Reservation, as for example, thus: If one shall promise to his Keeper,
that he will be true prisoner, not to run away, (meaning,) on his head: Seeing
M. Parsons (I say) was extremely provoked to allege but one testimony out of
the innumerable Authors that have written either Ethics, Logic, or
Metaphysics, who ever justified this mungrell kind of proposition, yet could
he not instance in any one, excepting only in See above Lib 2. cap. 4.
Cicero, who notwithstanding speaks only of such a speech, which he himself
calls false, and is indeed as false, as is this promise, I will pay you
money, meaning secretly, that I will not pay it, which the Romanists themselves
will grant to be a foul lie.

14 How then shall it not be held an impiety, to make Christ a Patron of that
kind of Reservation, which when it seemed to be most needful, yet was not
acknowledged for a truth by so worthy and learned Christians, by so great
Heretics, by so innumerable Pagans, and lastly by diverse learned Romanists
themselves? Thus much concerning the Impiety of Mental Reservation naturally
inherent in it self. In the last place we are to point at some accidental
impieties, which, by reason of some Cases, and Effects, do incidentally follow
thereupon.

SECT. 2.
A further evidence of the Impiety of the doctrine of Mental Reservation by
the Cases, and some Effects, which incidentally follow upon it.

First of a few Cases.
M. PARSONS his Appendix.
EXcept they will condemn our Savior himself of all these Reckon. pa. 687.
objected impieties, they cannot condemn the manner of speech used by him,
especially in so grave and weighty matters: and if they permit the same in him,
then can they not condemn the same, in us, who have so good a warrant and
president for the same, especially seeing we do restrain our use thereof with
many limitations, as in our Larger Treatise of that matter is set down, to
wit, that it may not be used in matters of Religion, where confession of our
faith is required. Mitig p. 548.
Among Cases reserved, Confession of faith is expressly, and in the first place
excepted.

The reuiew.
15 Often have I distinguished between M. Parsons his Verbal, and Mental
Equivocation, the first is when the words themselves carry in them a double
sense, according to the use of speech; as that saying of Christ (objected by M.
Mitig. p. 347
Parsons) wherein he said unto the Jews, Ioh. 2. 19.
Dissolve you this Temple, speaking of his body, and I will raise it up again
in three days: the ambiguity lies in the double sense of these words,
Dissolve this Temple, which might signify either the ruinating of the
material Temple, out of which Christ cast the money changers, and so the Jews
understood it; or else Christ's own body, metaphorically called a Temple,
because the Call. 2.
Deity dwelt in it bodily, and naturally; which was said to be dissolved,
because death is a dissolution: and so Christ meant it: which albeit it was not
understood of the hearers, yet was it vnderstandible and intelligible; First
because the phrase of calling a body a Temple, and of death a Dissolution, was
familiar unto the religious of those times, which therefore we find to be so
ordinarily used in See 1. Cor. 3. 16. and 6. and 2. Cor. 6. 16. Pbil. 323.
Scripture: insomuch that their Iusuit Maidon (...) this place.
Maldonate says that Christ, in saying, Dissolve this Temple, vsedwords which
agreed better unto an human body, than unto the fabric of the other temple,
becanse 2. Tim. 4. 6. and 2. Cor. 5. 1.
to dissolve and to raise again are more agreeable to the body, when the bond
of the Soul of man is burst in sunder, etc. Yea Christ his body (says Iansen.
Concord. upon the place.
Iansenius) was more properly a Temple, because the temple was but a figure of
his body. And they might have understood him, if they would, (says their
Cardinal Tolet upon the place.
Tolet) because when he said, This Temple, (and not the Temple of God) it is
certain that by the gesture of his hand he did demonstrate his own body:
words are better determinated by outward gestures and signs, than by
Scripture. So he. And there is reason for it, for if they could not have
understood it, then had not their Accusation against Christ been a slander,
when they laid this saying against him, thus; Matthew. 26.
This man said, I can destroy the Temple of God, and buildit up in three days;
For the which these (because of their perverse sense) are called false
witnesses. But the Mental Equivocation may have such a sequestered and reserved
a meaning, as by no circumstance of speech can be made intelligible, as this: I
am no Priest, meaning, Who can be unknown to God. This is that kind of
Mental Reservation and evasion which M. Parsons allows, concerning which he
professes that it may not be used in matters of faith, and yet pretends to
euince it from Scripture, which is the Rule of our Faith; and from the speeches
of Christ, the Author of our Faith; and sometimes in such sentences, which
concern Articles of Faith, as in that: See above, cap. 10.
He that observes my word, shall never see death, and such like.

16 And here I appeal unto the indifferency of any judicious Reader, to
judge, whether M. Parsons be not guilty of the folly and impiety, which I had
laid unto his charge, by the force of this distinction, of a sense Implied in
speeches, and a sense absolutely Reserved in the mind: the first kind I
grant to be, if he will, more then a thousand times used in Scripture; but the
second of his manner of Reserved could never find any Iota in all Scripture, to
countenance so vile a device. Which although I have confuted by many Reasons,
yet now I will adventure to turn his own weapon upon him. First thus:

17 If the Reservation, which he defends, be not to be piously and lawfully
used in matters of faith, then was it an impiety in him, to ground the truth
of that doctrine upon sentences of Scripture, which concern the doctrine of
faith. Secondly thus:

18 If I should pass through all the Articles of our Creed, to search such
kind of Reseruations, as M. Parsons did in the spceches of Christ, as namely
thus, first I, meaning I, a man, and not a woman, 2. Believe, meaning truly,
and not fainedly; 3. in God, meaning the God of Christians, and not the Idol
of the Pagans; 4. the Father, meaning, by adoption, and not by natural
generation; 5. Almighty, meaning, that can do whatsoever he will, not that
will do whatsoever he can; 6. maker of heaven, and earth, meaning, with his
word, and not with any hands: so might I pass throughout every Article of our
Christian Creed, to collect from every joint, and word thereof, all such like
unexpressed meanings, as M. Parsons did from the speeches of Christ.

19 Here I may argue thus: If all such sentences, which according to the
custom and use imply meanings, which are not expressed, do exemplify and
prove the Romish Mental Equivocation, then is there a Mental Reservation in
every Article of our Faith; and so it is vnp ossible but to Equivocate mentally
in the Confession of our Faith. But if these implied senses do differ from the
Romish reserved sense, then was it both wicked and absurd, to seek to draw
that exorbitant and inapprehensible doctrine of Equiuocating, from such
sentences of Scripture which are no more Equivocal, then be the doctrines of
our Faith.

20 The second Case is in the examination concerning their Priesthood, where
the Priest being asked, Whether he be a Priest, is licensed to answer,
according to their daily practice, saying; I am no Priest, with this
Reservation, as purposing to tell it you. Now then, knowing that they hold
ordination of Priesthood to be a Sacrament, which impresseth in the soul an
indelible Character, and which herein (as they say) excels al other
Sacraments, in that it aduanceth a Priest a degree above all other Christians;
the end whereof they make a real Offering up of Christ as a Sacrifice for the
quick and the dead; I Full Satisfact. part. 3. page 92.
took upon me to argue, in effect, thus: Seeing every Christian will hold it
to be an impiety to Equioucate in denying his Baptism, therefore may he
judge it likewise a wickedness for a Priest to Equivocate in denying his
Priest-dome. Unto which I expected an Answer of M. Parsons; but only expected
it. From Cases we pass to Effects.

The Impious Effects of the new kind of Romish Mental Equivocation. The first
effect.
21 The first is, because if this kind of Equiuocating be admitted, man's mouth
is stopped for giving either man, or devil the lie, because still they may
answer, that they did not lie, for that they conceived a secret unsearchable
Clause of Reservation in their mind: as when he said unto Eve, Genesis 3. Though
you eat, you shall not die, reserving secretly (that we may suppose thus much)
dye Martyrs, or die Eating, or dye In your beds, or what not? M. Parsons
perceiving the consequence, returned an Answer.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
This is childish: And is not this goodly stuff? fill for a book? Mitigat. p.
456.
fit for print? are these suffered to pass without controlement in England? If
the Devil be the Father of lies, and consequently of them that do lie, of
what kind will he prove to be to this Minister, that has been taken now with
so many notorious lies? etc.

The Reuiew.
22 Thus he runs on with a personal and unconscionable Inuectiue against
me, even unto the end of the Paragraph; not yielding one Syllable, in Answer to
the point of Argument. It may be he would have said something, if he had not
run himself out of breath; or else Aquila non capit muscas, he held it to be
too Childish, and unworthy his Answering: I am rather persuaded that he
perceived the full force thereof, which must be this, viz. That if this new
manner of Mental Equivocation may be once got by heart of people, and serve to
make a speech true, no man shall have any need of a lie, for covert of any
guilt, because this Mental evasion will be both as easy, and as secure as any
lie; and consequently he shall be accounted the liar, that shall give any other
the lie. I suppose my Reader will hold this to be an Argument, yea and
peradventure so forcible, that the proverb may be inuerted against M. Parsons,
as thus, Musca non capit Aquilas; and therefore made he a shift to control
that, which he could not confute. Which will be apparent by the next point.

The second Effect.
23 Perjury being generally held to be a lie in an Oath, it must follow that
the same Clause of secret Reservation, which freeth a man from lying, may
deliver him also from the brand of Perjury, and so shall never any, who is
experienced in this manner of Equioucating, be possibly condemned of perjury,
whatsoever the words be, that he utters with his mouth: And so the witnesses,
which were suborned against true Naboth, and against chaste Susanna, and against
the Just one, yea and against very Justice it self our Lord Christ, (supposing
that they knew the trick of Equivocation) could not be absolutely condemned of
Perjury; And so all Tribunals must cancel, and extinguish the Title of
Perjury, in their proceeding against unjust witnesses. This also I Full Satisf.
part. 3. page 96.
held to have in it some pith of an Argument, but M. Parsons would not so much
as mention it; It may be he contemned it.

The third Effect.
24 Again Jesuits and other Priests are not all soul, as we may guess by
their doctrine of Equiuocating, which they profess for the safety and security
of their own bodies, one branch of which doctrine is this: Tolet Ies. and
Card. lib. 5. Instruct. Sacer. cap. 66.
When any is put upon the rack, (says their Cardinal, and sometime Jesuit,
among his general instructions, which he gives unto Priests) and does reveal
the crime of an other, although he be not examined justly and according to law,
yet herein he does not sin, because none is bound upon so great bodily harm
to himself, to preserve the good name of an other. Therefore (said Full
satisfact. Part. 3. Page 99.
I) when as you make all Protestant Magistrates Incompetent, with whom you
think it lawful to Equivocate in your speeches and oaths, when you are
questioned about other men, you do, in effect, teach your Adversaries to use
that (...) with you, as though the only competent Examiner of you must be the
Rack. This Argument M. Parsons saw, but yet only saw it; and what marvel? for
guilty persons are not willing to come near to the Rack.

The fourth Effect.
25 This I noted to be the profanation of an Oath, the end whereof in thus
described by the B. Apostle, Heb. 6. 16. Men verily, swear by him that is
greater, (meaning, God) and an Oath for confirmation is among them an end of
Strife: showing that the consecrated End of an Oath is for such a Confirmation,
as may make an end of Contention. But the Manu-script (...)
Treatise Mental all Equivocation maintained, that a party examined, if he be
urged to swear that which he ought not, that then he may swear, but with a
secret intention of Equivocation; and if he be further swear without all
Equivocation, he may swear That he does not Equivocate, by a third
Equivocation, or Reservation; and so on, often as he shall be asked the like
question. Here we see allowed Equivocation upon Equivocation, as it were Cogge
upon Cogge; which doctrine once professed is so far from making an End of
Contention, that indeed it makes it endless, because all men, who are
instructed in this Art, being (...) in their own Causes, may, by multiplying
his Reseruations, delude his hearer, and leave him in a perpetual suspense and
doubt, that whatsoever the swearer protests in outward speech, may through a
Mental Reservation prove as deceitful, as was Judas his All-haile. M. Parsons
answers both to therelation of the testimony, and also to the Consequence
taken from thence.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
I doubt not but T. M. has egregiously abused, both this and Mitigat. p 479.
other places, in the Catholic M. S. Treatise, against which he In answer to
the argument taken from the End of an oath. objected in the Full Satisfact.
part. 3. page 88.
writes, by setting down cortaine palpable absurdities, which it is
impossible should be there, as sets them down: Which I must presume of,
until I finds contrary, by viewing that Treatise it self, which I shortly
hope for.

The Reuiew.
26 Mark (good Reader) and marvel with me at this man's wit; he will seem now
to grant that it were a palpable absurdity, and impossibilitic. to teach a man
sometime to swear, by multiplying Equivocation upon Equivocation, when he is
urged thereunto; and therefore will only be thought to suspect, that I have
abused M. Garnets Treatise, by misreporting his direction, which I alleged
most faithfully. And for my justification herein I appeal unto M. Parsons
himself in the same book of Mitigation, wherein a little before the end (
page 553.) he confesses saying; And now at this very Instant comes to my
hands this Catholic Treatise it self of Equivocation before mentioned. So he.
And now that it is come to his hands, does he charge me with abuse of the
Author, by misciting the foresaid sentence? no truly, he does not challenge me
for any one falsification, in relating of it, or any other testimony out of
that Treatise; which may seem not to need our Censure, seeing the eyes even of
this great Proctor for Equivocation can discern in it palpable absurdities.
Thus much of the Relation of that sentence. Now concerning the Consequence
taken from thence.

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
The end of an Oath, which is to put an end of contention, is not hindered
Mitigat. p 479.
by the use of an Equivocation, when law permits the same.

The Reuiew.
27 Law never permits any such guilefull Equivocation in an Oath, as was
Full satisfact. part. 3. page 87.
proved both out of their old School by the testimony of Lombard, but
especially of Aquina 2. 2. qu. 69. art. 1. Arg. 2.
Aquinas. If a Judge require any thing ( says he) which he cannot by order of
Law, the party accused is not bound to answer, but either by Appeal, or by
some other manner of means may deliver himself: But in no case may he tell a
lie, or use falsehood, nor any kind of craft or deceit, etc

M. PARSONS his Mitigation.
This is plainly to be understood, when a Judge is competent, and Mitigat. page
478. 479.
proceeds competently, otherwise when he proceeds not according to the
form of law, etc. And a little after. And in this very place of S. Thomas
Aquinas the said Doctors words are, that if a Judge, though otherwise lawful,
shall require any thing, which by order of law he cannot, the party accused is
not bound to answer at all (and much less directly to his meaning) but may
either by Appeal or by other means deliver himself by evasion, though he may
not speak a lie. So S. Thomas. And what wise man does not see, that this
makes quite against Tho. Morton? first, if it be lawful to the defendant not
to answer at all even to a lawful and competent Judge, when he proceeds not
according to form of law, then much less is he bound to answer or swear
directly to his intention in that Case; but may use any lawful evasion, by
doubtful speech, or otherwise, which is directly against our Adversaries
conclusion: so little does he discern when he alleges authorities flatly
against himself.

The Reuiew.
28 If this Answer of M. Parsons make not flatly against him, then shall I
think it no injury, that he put me in his vile Reckoning of falsehoods. The
Testimony of Aquinas was produced to prove, that although a man may refuse to
swear, where he sees great inconvenience; yet whenever he does swear, yea
although it be before an unlawful Magistrate proceeding unjustly against us,
(because in our Oath we are to respect rather God, by whom wesweare, then man,
unto whom we swear) we are bound in conscience to avoid that Equiuocating
trick, for fear of profaning his sacred name. M. Parsons answers in general
unto this foresaid Testimony of T. Aquinas, and the sentences of some others,
that we are chargeable to avoid subtlety in swearing, when the lawful Judge
proceeds competently, that is, lawfully; when as, indeed, the very words of
Thomas, (as both I alleged them, and as M. Parsons himself does relate them)
M Parsons his palpable (...)
stand thus: If a Judge. though otherwise lawful, shall require any thing,
which he cannot by order of law, then etc. That which is not done by order of
law, is not done (as every one knows) competently, as M. Parsons answers,
but incompetently.

29 Secondly; for my better warrant, I had the confession of their own
Genesius Sepulueda, who speaking of the same testimony of Aquinas, and speaking
professedly against their Equiuocators manner of Equiuocating, says; Genesius
(...) in Theoph. c. 18.
Coula Thomas more plainly deny their opinion, who teach that a guilty person
may (...) a truo accusation by Art of words? M. Parsons resolves contrarily.
Mitig. p. 478.
If a Judge proceed not lawfully, in exacting an oath, then he that swears
may swear to his own, and not to the intention of the Judge. We may now
perceive, that M. Parsons has answered Thomas so aduersly, as if he meant to
have slowen in his face. I hasten to the last Effect.

The last Effect.
30 If my Reader require a more full satisfaction in this question of Mental
Equivocation, he shall need but to consult with some former Sections of this
Encounter in the first book, cap. 4. there is the hunting out of this Fox; in
the cap. 10. the Confessions of Sepulueda, Azorius, and others: In this second
book and cap. 3. the Confession of Sotus; and cap. 4. the opinion of Cicero;
and c. 14. the judgment of Maldonate: Al these largely discussed.

31 The last Effect is the infamy, which redoundeth unto the professed
Equiuocators, both in their speeches, and in their books: for there is no doubt
but M. Parsons and his fellows, who durst seek to justify their Mental
Equivocation by Scriptures (the writings of the holy Ghost) will not spare to
Equivocate in their own writings, either for the discrediting of their
Adversaries; or for the (...) of their own deformities; or else for the
speedier advancement of their cause; presuming that although they report and
profess some things, which in outward words are merely false; and may by
their outward sound help forward, to the building up of the Romish Church, yet
that in such cases they ought to mortify their falsehoods of the outward speech
with their exorbitant, secret, reserved, and inapprehe^sible conceits: And then
what credence may such writers expect of their Readers?

32 S. August. writing against some professors of the true religion, and yet in
one point so far erroneons, as to think that they might dissemble themselves
to be heretics, only to the end that they might, by lying more easily discover
those Heretics, called Priscilianists, who concealed their heresy by lying,
and by pretending that they were Orthodoxe and Catholics; He reasons the
matter thus: Aug. contra mendac. cap. 4.
Thou will say (says he) that I therefore lie, that I may catch a liar, viz.
The Priscilianist: Then he makes the Priscilianists to answer saying: But how
shall I know whether thou do it rather least thou should be catched of me. By
and by S. Augustine returns to the Orthodoxe, Can he persuade a man (says
he) that he will not lie, that he be not catched himself, who lies that he
may catch another? Do thou not perceive whereunto this evil practice does
lead, to wit, that both they may seem to be worthily suspected of us, and we
of them, and every one of each another; and so it shall come to pass, that
whilst that our belief is taught by lying, no man shall know whom to believe?
Which reward of not being believed is of all men most due unto Mental
Equiuocators, such as teach men to say to their friends, I have no money,
meaning, to lend it unto you; and to their Adversaries, I am no Priest,
meaning, with purpose to tell it unto you, etc. which speeches, when their
Cases happen to be truly known, to wit, that the one had money, and the other
was a Priest, do carry nothing else in their outward sound (which only can be
understood of man) but the evident appearance of a lie, and are indeed, in
themselves, (as has been both proved and confessed) no better than flat
lies; yet could M. Parsons have no other remedies, whereby to mortify his
manifold untruths, which unjustly and unconscionably he did heap upon me:
Notwithstanding, I do earnestly pray, if he be yet alive; or if he be dead, I
wish that such his Calumniations be never laid unto his charge.

Laus Deo.

