A Daily EXERCISE for LADIES and GENTLEWOMEN.

Whereby they may learn and practice the whole Art of making Pastes,
Preserues, Marmalades, Conserues, Tartstuffes, Gellies, Breads, Sucket Candies,
Cordial waters, Conceits in Sugar-vvorkes of several kinds.

As also to dry Lemonds, Orenges, or other Fruits.

Newly set forth, according to the new approved Receipts, used both by
Honorable and Worshipful personages.

BY JOHN MVRREL Professor thereof.

LONDON: Printed for the widow Helm, and are to be sold at her shop in S.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1617.

TO MY MVCH HONORED THE TRVLY VIRTUOUS, Mris. ELIZABETH BINGHAM, wife of
Nicholas Bingham Esquire.
AS there is nothing new under heaven; so, nothing old (beside the Old of
days) can please Soul, or Sense: Yet on old Grounds are new Descants daily,
as full of rarietie, as variety: that does please; the pleasure of Man
consisting in nothing more, than in every thing; that is, in change: variety
standing more aloof from sacietie, than uniformity, in whatsoever sensible.

We alter our Fashions and outward Habits daily; the whitest Ruff being not
long since thought the purest wearing; then the blew; and now the yealow: So,
our Cookery, Pastry, Distillations, Conserues, and Preserues, are far
otherwise now, than not long since they were; Daily Practice and Observation
finding out either what to add or detract from old Forms in either of these
kinds; or to make new much more pleasing and profitable. These are all, (or,
at least, the most) of the newest Strain; approved and beloved of those that
try them. What else they are I refer to your judgment, and my self to your
good favor; ever remaining,

The humble lover of your manifold virtues, IO: MVRREL.

The general Table of this Book: Whereof the first contains Pastes,
Preserues, Marmalades, Conserues, Tartstuffes, Gellies, etc.
Pastes.
TO make Paste of Regia, against Consumption. 1 To make Paste of Genua. 2 To
make Paste of Pomcittron. 3
Marmalades.
TO make Marmalade of Quinces. 26 To make Marmalade red of Quinces, commonly
called Lump-Marmalade, that shall look as red as a Rubie. 27 To make Marmalade
of Wardens. 28 To make green Marmalade of Pippins. 29 To make red Marmalade
that shall look very orient. 30 To make Dia Setonia of Quinces. 31
Conserues.
TO make Conserve of Violets. 32 To make Conserve of Barberries. 33 To make
Conserve of Roses. 34 To make Conserve of Gelliflowers. 35 To make conserve of
Cowslips. 36 To make Conserve of Marigolds. 37 To make Conserve of Damsons. 38
Tartstuffes.
TO make Tart-stuffe of damsons to keep all the year. 39 To make tartstuffe of
Prunes. 40 To make white tartstuffe. 41 To make yealow tartstuffe. 42
Gellies.
TO make Quiddeniock. 43 To make Crystal Gellie. 44 To preserve Pippins to
lie in quaking Gellie. 45 To make Gellie of Pippins, of Amber color. 46 To
make Gellie of Pippins as orient red as any Rubie. 47 To make Leach of Almonds
of diverse pleasing colors. 48
Breads.
TO make red Ginger-bread otherwise called. Leach Lumbar. 49 To make white
Ginger-bread. 50 To make Italian Biscuit. 51 To make Ginetoes. 52 To make Prince
Biscuit. 53 To make French Macaroones. 54 To make Naples Biscuit. 55 To make
Shelbread. 56 To make Countess Cakes. 57 To make a fine Sugar Cake. 58
Rough Rock Candies.
TO make rock de Cittron. 59 To rough rock Candie Orenges dried with Sugar. 60
To rough Candie sprigs, or branches of Rosemarie. 61 To rough Candie all
flowers. 62
Sucket Candies.
TO sucket Candie green Lemonds: 63 To sucket Candie green Ginger. 64 To
sucket Candie Walnuts. 65 To sucket Candie Peaches, or any green Plumme before
it be stoned. 66
Cordial Waters.
TO make Aqua Coelestis. 67 To make Cinnamon Water. 68 To make Dr. Steuens
water. 69 To make Balm water. 70 To make Angelica water. 71 To make Wormwood
water. 72
Conceits in Sugar-works.
TO make March-pane Paste. 73 To make a March-pane. 74 To make any conceit in
Marchpane stuff. 75 To make any other small conceits in Sugar work or Almond
paste, or Sugar plate paeste. 76 To make Snailes, Snakes, etc. 77 To make
Shoes, Slippers, etc. 78 To make letters or knots, etc. 79 To make Walnuts both
shell and kernel. 80
Sugar-Workes of another sort.
TO make Sugar plate paste. 81 To make Paste of sundry flowers. 82 To make
Pennet. 83 To make Cinnamon sticks by Art. 74 To make Callishones. 85 To make
Muscachones. 86 To make Muscadinaes. 87
The Table.
To make Troses for the cold. 88 To make Cinnamon Letters. 89 To make Canalones
in spices. 90 To make Ruskilians. 91 To make Gentillissoes. 92 To make
Nouellissoes. 93 To make Lozenges of Violets. 94
To dry Fruits.
TO dry Orenges or Lemonds. 95 To dry white Peare-Plums. 96 To dry black
Peare-Plums. 97 To dry Pippins as clear as Amber. 98 To dry Apricockes orient
and very clear. 99 To dry Pears without any Sugar. 100
Physical Receipts.
TO make sirupe of Violets. 101 To make sirupe of Liquorice. 102 To make sirupe
of Roses solutiue. 103 To make sirupe of dry Roses. 104 Against the trembling
of the heart. 105 Against the rising of the mother 106 An almond milk. 107
Against looseness of the Body. 108 A Receipt for a vomit. 109 Against
extreme coughing. 110 Order of Colors. 111 Colors edible, 112 To color
Leach. 113
FINIS.
GEntle Reader, if any shall be desirous to buy any of the moulds wherein any
of the forms specified in the Book following are made, they may have them
also where these Books are to be sold.

Farewell.
Of Pastes.
To make Paste of Regia against a Consumption.
1 TAke two Quails, two Roales, two Partridges, a dozen of cock Sparrowes, the
brawne of a Capon, roast these ready to be eaten; take the flesh from the
bone, and beat it fine in an Alabaster mortar, with two ounces of the pith of
Veale growing in the back, a quarter of a pound of Pistaceas, half a drachme
of Ambergris, a grain of Musk, half a pound of white Sugar-candie beaten
fine: put all these into an Alabaster mortar, beat it to a perfect Paste, now
and then putting in a spoonefull of Goats milk, put in two or three grains
of Bezar, when you have beaten all to a perfect Paste, make it up in little
round cakes, and so bake it up on a sheet of paper.

To make Paste of Genua, as they do beyond the Seas.
2 Boil fair yellow Peare-Quinces tender in their skins, and so let them
stand until the next day, till they be cold, then pare them, and scrape all
the pulp from the coare, then take as much pulp of yellow Peaches as the pulp
of Quinces does weigh, and dry it upon a little chafingdish of coals, always
stirring it, then boil the weight of both these pulps in double refined Sugar,
and so let it boil, always stirring it until it come to a candy height, with
as much Rose Water as will melt that Sugar, and put in your pulps, always
stirring it in the boiling, until it come from the the bottom of the Posnet,
then fashion it upon a pie plate, or a sheet of glass, some like leaves, some
like half fruits, and some you may print with moulds, set them into a warm
Oven after the breadis drawn, or into a Stoue, the next day you may turn
them, and when the stuff is through dry, you may box it, and keep it for all
the year, but be sure it be through dried before you lay it up in store.

To make Marble Paste of Pomecittron, an excellent Cordial paste.
3 TAke the yellowest Pomecittrons that you can get, pare them, and cut them in
quarters, and take out the meat, and as soon as you have cut and pared a
piece, throw it into a basin of cold water, then set on a Pipkin of fair
water, and so soon as it boyleth, take out your pieces, and dry them in a
fair cloth, and put them into the seething liquor, and let them boil until
they be tender, but shift them three or four times in the boiling to take away
the bitterness, power them into a Colender, and dry them again in a fair
cloth, and stamp them in a stone mortar, then boil the weight of the pulp in
double refined Sugar unto a Candy height, and put the pulp into the boiling
Sugar, and so let it boil leasurely, always stirring it, and when it grows
stiff, power it on a plate or sheet of glass reasonable thin in a broad
cake, and stoue it, the next day cut it in lozenges, and turn them upon a
sheet of white paper, then wash your glass or plate, and lay them on again
until they be through dry, box them and keep them all the year. If you
please wrap a grain of Musk in a paper, and let it lie in the bottom of the
box, it will add to the pleasure.

To make Marble Paste, called the Italian Chippe.
4 TAke Violets, Cowslips, and Cloue-gilliflowers, dry them and beat them to
fine powder, mingle them with double refined Sugar, cearsed through a tiffanie
or a lawne Sieue, make it up into Sugar plate, with a little gum dragon steept
in Rose water and milk, when you have made your plate, then roll every piece
thin and lay each upon other, and so roll them up in round rowles, as you
would roll up a leaf of paper, then cut it end ways, and roll it as thin
as a paper, and so it will look finely sheckled like a piece of Marble. In
like manner you may make Purslane dishes or trenchers of that stuff.

To make Paste of Apricockes or Pear plums.
5 TAke the fairest of these fruits that you can get, and take out the stones,
then boil them softly betwixt two dishes without any liquor, and when they be
soft, dry them somewhat dry, then take them off the fire, and put them upon a
sheet of white paper, then boil the weight of the pulp in double refined
Sugar unto a Candy height, with as much Rose Water as will melt it, and put
your pulp into the hot Sugar, and if you please: put a grain of Musk into the
boiling, and so let it boil until it be somewhat stiff, then fashion it upon
a sheet of glass in what form you think fit, and so let it dry in a Stoue
or warm Oven, the next day turn it and put it into the Oven or Stoue again,
and when it is through dry, it will look as clear as Amber: so you may use
all kind of Plums.

To make Paste of Pippins, after the Genua fashion, some like leaves, some like
Plums, with stalks and stones.
6 TAke and pare fair yellow Pippins, cut them in small pieces, stew them
betwixt two dishes with two or three spoonefuls of Rose Water, and when they be
boiled very tender, strain them, then boil the weight of the pulp in double
refined Sugar unto a Candy height, and if you please put in a grain of Musk,
and a quarter of an ounce of fine white Ginger searced, and so let it boil
until you see it come from the bottom of the Posnet, then fashion it on a
sheet of glass in some pretty form as you think best, and stoue it either
in a Stoue, or in a warm Oven. If you desire to have any of it red, color it
with a spoonefull of Conserve of Damsons, before you fashion it upon your
glass or plate, and that will make it show as though it were made of red
Plums. If you put a stone betwixt two halfes, will show like a Plum, you may
keep Cherrie stalks dry for the same purpose.

To make Paste of Eringus rontes.
7 TAke half a pound of Eringus roots newly candied, the youngest that you can
get, cut them in short pieces like dice, then stamp them in a mortar fine,
blanch and beat into fine Paste a quarter of a pound of Iordane Almonds, take
three spoonefuls of Damask Rose Water, one spoonefull of Aqua Coelestis, a
grain of Musk, two grains of Ambergris, a grain of Bezar stone, then
take half a pound of Pistaceus (which being cracked and pild, will not be above
an ounce and a half) when you have taken off the husks, beat them fine, and
put them to your Paste, beat all together in a fair Alabaster mortar then beat
the weight of your pulp in fine Sugar Candy, and put it to the pulp, and so
beat it again, then take it out and set it on a chafingdish of coals, and dry
it, always stirring it until you see it turn somewhat white and dry, then lay
it in little lumps upon white paper, and so dry in a Stoue, and keep it all the
year.

To make an excellent green Paste without any coloring.
8 QVoddle green Apples reasonably tender, pill off the outward skin, and
throw all the bark of the Apples into a Posnet of seething water, and so let
it boil as fast as it can until it turn green, then take them up and
strain the pulp, then boil the weight of it in Sugar to a Candy height, and
put your pulp into the seething Sugar, and let it boil until it grow stiff,
then fashion it on a pie-plate, or a sheet of glass, and pint it on mowlds,
and dry it in a Stoue or a warm Oven some ten or twelve days, that it be
perfectly dry, and then you may keep it all the year.

To make Almond Paste.
9 BLanch and beat Iordane Almonds in a stone mortar, put in now and then a
spoonefull of Rose Water to keep it from oyling, and when they be very fine,
put about a pound and a half of fine Sugar to two pound of Almonds, half a
drachme of Musk, and as much Rose Water as will serve to beat it to a perfect
Paste, which you may easily guess by your own discretion beginning with one
spoonefull, and so adding as you shall see fit.

To make Paste of Enula-campana roots an excellent cordial Paste, and good
against the cough of the lungs.
10 LAy the youngest of these roots in water, and then boil them tender,
shift them three or four times to take away their bitterness, pill them, pith
them, and beat them in a mortar, with the weight of eighteen pence of these
several sirups, videlicet, Maydenhaire, Isope, and Horehound: when you have
beaten all this fine, draw them through a strainer, with the pap of two roasted
Pippins, and a grain of Musk, then dry it a little on a chafingdish of
coals, until you see it begin to be somewhat stiff, then boil the weight
thereof in double refined Sugar unto a Candy height, and put the pulp into the
Sugar, let it boil with continual stirring, until it be somewhat stiff,
then drop it on a plate or sheet of glass, dry it and keep it in a Stoue.

Preserues.
To preserve Peare-plums green.
11 Boil a pound and a half of Sugar, with as much water as will melt it,
with a pound of the best Peare-plummes that you can get, your Plums must first
be washed and dried in a fair cloth; let them boil softly the space of an
hour, and then take them up, and put them into a silver or an earthen dish,
when they be almost cold, put them into the Sugar again, and let them boil
until they be tender, and the corner of the stone sweet, then take them up,
and cool them again as before, until they be almost cold, and whilst they
be a cooling boil your sirupe something thick, and between hot and cold, put
them up and keep them, they will be green.

To preserve other Plums green.
12 TAke your Plums while they be hard upon the trees, scald them in fair
water, and take them up, and cover them in a preserving pan with Sugar, and
boil them tender, and then take them up, and boil the sirup by it self
until it be somewhat thick, then between hot and cold pot them up.

To preserve Cherries.
13 TAke the weight of your Cherries in Sugar, and with a silver spoone bruise
as many other-Cherries in a posnet, boil them until the sirup be somewhat
red, then strain that liquor through a cushion canuas into another fair
posnet, then divide your Sugar into three parts, and put one part into the red
sirup, and so soon as the Sugar is melted take it off the fire, and scum it
clean, then cut the stalks off the Cherries something short, and cross them
one by one with a sharp knife on the end, then put the Cheries into the red
liquor, and make them boil as fast as they can, until they rise up frothie,
then take them off the fire and scum them, and then put in the second part of
the Sugar into them, and set them on the fire again and let them boil as fast
as they can, and when they boil up, take it off and scum it, then put in the
third part of Sugar, and yet again set it over the fire, and when it rises up
frothie, take it off and scum it very clean, then set them on the fire until
it be something thick, you may know when they are enough by dropping a little
on a sawcer on the bottom of it, if it be thick like gellie; then take them
off the fire, and power them into an earthen platter, and being between hot
and cold, put them up in a gally pot, or put them in gallie-pots to keep all
the year, but put a piece of white paper on them, and cover them with a piece
of parchment or soft leather.

To preserve Quinces red.
14 PAre and core yellow Peare-quinces, parboile them in fair water, then
clarify your Sugar, and take to every pound of Sugar an Ale-pint of water, and
when your Sugar is clarified, strain it into a preserving pan, and put your
Quinces into that hot Sugar, and so let them boil close covered, now and then
stirring them, and turning them to keep them from breaking, and when you see
your Quinces tender, and look very red, take them up, and boil the sirupe by
it self, until you see it some what thick, then between hot and cold, pot
them or put them in glasses as was said in Cherries.

To preserve Wardens.
15 PArboile your Wardens reasonable tender in fair water, let them stand
until they be cold, then pare them and prick them with a knife two or three
pricks in every Warden, and so cover them in clarified Sugar, with a piece of
whole Cinnamon, a slice or two of pared Ginger, and three Cloves, boil them
leasurely close covered, until they be red and tender, then boil the sirupe
by it self.

To preserve Pippins green.
16 GAther green Pippins especially from the water-boughes, and in the shadow;
quoddle them in two several waters, and to every one of these Pippins take a
pound of Sugar, clarify it well and very clear, and put in your Pippins, and
let them boil leasurely, and they will turn green as any Leeke. Take them
now and then off the fire, and turn them with a spoone, and set them over the
fire again three or four times, always turning them, and warming them, and
when your Pippins bevery tender: take them up, and boil the sirupe a little by
it self, then betwixt hot and cold pot them. If you please you may put in a
grain of Musk, and a few Cloves, it will much increase the pleasure.

To preserve Pippins of the color of Amber.
17 PAre and bore a hole through a pound of Pippins as small as a wheat straw,
cover them with Sugar in a preserving pan (the Sugar being first clarified)
with a grain of Musk, and a piece of Cinnamon, so let them boil leasurely,
uncovered, when they be tender, take them out and boil the sirupe a little by
it self, then pot the Pippins blood warm, and keep them.

To preserve Barberries red.
18 TAke out the stones from the fairest Barberries, that you can get, and take
four times their weight in Sugar, then take as much juice of other Barberries,
as will dissolve the one part, then put it into a skillet, and dissolve this
part of Sugar upon the fire, then put in your Barberries, and let them boil
up, then beat the second part of your Sugar, and put it in, and make it boil
up again, and put in the rest, and cover it close, and let it boil until
they be enough, then take them up and scum them, and so let them stand, and
between hot and cold not them up.

To preserve Barberries white.
19 STone the fairest Barberries that you can get, take four times their
weight in sugar, then take as much fair water as will dissolve one part, and
put it in a skillet on the fire, and when it is dissolved put in your
Barberries, and let them boil up, then put in the other of your parts, beat it
first and put it in, then let them stand, and boil up again always
uncovered, and put in the rest, boil it, and scum it again, cool it and pot
it.

To preserve Pippins red.
20 BOre a hole of the bigness of a wheat straw quite through a pound of
Pippins, cover them with Sugar in a preserving pan, put in a piece of Musk, a
piece of Cinnamon, and so let them boil close covered very leasurely until
they be tender, then boil the sirupe by it self, cool it and pot it, and the
Pippins blood-warme.

To preserve white Peare-plums.
21 TAke a pound of the best Peare-plums that you get, and with their weight in
Sugar, set them on the fire with half a pint of fair water until it be
dissolved, then take it off, let it cool until it be but blood-warme, put in
your Plums, and let them stand about a quarter of an hour upon a soft fire,
and let them stand until their skins be broken, then take them off and scum
them, and let them stand until they be cold, then set them on the fire
again, and boil them a pace until they be soft, then take them off again,
and scum them, cool them, and pot them: if your sirupe be too thin, boil it
a little by it self.

To preserve Orenges or Lemonds rindes.
22 Drive off the uttermost skin of your Orenges with a rasp, cut them in
two, and take out the core quite and clean, and let the pills lie in water
three or four days, then boil them tender in six or seven waters, least
their bitterness be distasteful, then take them up, and dry them in a very
fair cloth, and put them to as much Sugar clarified as will cover them: let
them boil softly over the fire half an hour at least, and rest in that
sirupe three or four days, after that time heat them thoroughly, and take them
out of the sirupe, and strengthen it with fresh Sugar boiled therein half an
hour, cool it, and being blood-warme, pot up your fruit in it.

To preserve green Peaches before they be stoned.
23 SCald your Peaches, being so young that you may thrust a pin through
them, rub off the furre with a piece of course linen cloth, then prick them
with a sharp knife, and boil them tender in as much clarified Sugar as will
cover them, then take them up and boil the sirupe by it self, until it be
somewhat thick, and being blood-warme with cooling, put in your fruit and pot
it.

To preserve green Walnuts before they be shelled.
24 TAke your Walnuts also when they may easily be pierced with a pin, pare
them thin, and lay them a week together in brine, then parboile them very
tender in seven or eight waters, then take them up, and dry them with a fair
cloth, and stick in every one two or three Cloves, and cover them in
clarified Sugar, and boil them a good hour close covered, then power them
into an earthen pot, and let them stand a week, and then warm them again,
and power them into a Colender, to let the sirupe drop from them; then boil
the sirupe by itself until it be somewhat thick with fresh Sugar, and being
but warm pot them.

To preserve Damsons.
25 TAke two pounds of the fairest Damsons, and one pound of hard Sugar, half
a pint of fair water, set it on the fire until it be dissolved in a
preserving pan, lay your Damsons in milke-warme water, and put them into the
dissolved Sugar, make a soft fire, and when it begins to boil: scum it
continually an hour long, but let it boil softly uncovered, for breaking the
Damsons, then take them out, and lay them in an earthen or silver dish, and let
your sirupe boil alone, and when they be almost cold, put them in again, and
let them boil softly, until the kernel be both sweet and tender, crack the
stone, and try, then take your Damsons up, and betwixt hot and cold pot them,
and put them in glasses.

Marmulades.
To make Marmulade of Quinces.
26 PArboyle yellowe Pearequinces tender in their skins, and let them stand in
a Tray all night, until they be cold, then pare them as thin as you can, for
the best of the Quince grows next the skin, then scrape all the pulp from the
core, for it is grauelly, and therefore go not too near: then beat the weight
of the pulp in double refined Sugar, with one grain of Musk, and three grains
of Ambergris, and as much Damask Rose Water as will dissolve the Sugar,
boil it to a Candy height, then put in your pulp, always stirring it still
till it come from the bottom of the Posnet, box it, and keep it till occasion
call for it.

To make rough red Marmalade of Quinces, commonly called lump-Marmalade, that
shall laoke as red as any Rubie.
27 PAre ripe and well colored Peare-quinces, and cut them in pieces like
dice, parboile them very tender, or rather reasonably tender in fair water,
then power them into a Colender, and let the water run from them into a
clean Basin, then strain that water through a strainer into a Posnet, for if
there be any gravel in the Quinces, it will be in that water: Then take the
weight of the Quinces in double refined Sugar very fine, put half thereof into
the Posnet, into the water with it a grain of Musk, a slice or two of Ginger
tied in a third, and let it boil covered close, until you see your Sugar come
to the color of Claret wine, then uncover it, and take out your Ginger, and so
let it boil until your sirupe begin to consume away, then take it off the
fire, and pomice it with a ladle, and so stir it and cool it, and it will
look thick like tart-stuffe, then put in your other half of your Sugar, and
so let it boil, always stirring it until it come from the bottom of the
Posnet, then box it, and it will look red like a Rubie, the putting of the
last Sugar brings it to an orient color.

To make Marmulade of Wardens a most cordial Marmulade.
28 BAke the best Wardens that you can get in an Oven with wheaten bread, or
longer time then that, let them stand in an Oven in an earthen Pan, but
beware they be not burnt, then cut them in small pieces like Dice from the
core, and beat them in a stone mortar, then take the weight of the pulp in
fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy height, and put the pulp into the Sugar
boiling hot, with a little beaten and cearsed Ginger, and a grain of Musk,
and so let it boil, always stirring it until it come from the bottom of the
Posnet, box it, dry it and use it.

To make Marmulade of Pippins.
29 PAre green Pippins, cut them in pieces, and boil them tender betwixt two
dishes, when they be tender strain them, then melt the weight of the pulp in
Sugar with Rose Water, and boil it to a Candy height; put in two or three
spoonefuls of Cinnamon water, a thimble full of beaten Cinnamon, two thimbles
full of Fennel seed beaten together, throw all together in the boiling Sugar,
etc. as in the last.

To make red Marmulade of Pippins, orient and clear.
30 TAke the quantity of a pound of the aforesaid pulp, and put to it two
spoonfuls of Conserve of Bullice, and so stir it together, and your pulp will
look as red as a Cherrie, boil the weight thereof in Sugar unto a Candy height, with two or three spoonfuls of Cinnamon water, then put in the red pulp
into the hot Sugar, and do as in other Marmulades.

To make Dia Setonia of Quinces, a cordial for the stomach.
31 TAke the juice of good, large, and ripe Quinces, being well washed, and
clean wipt with a fair cloth, take out the core, and cut the rest in small
pieces, and stamp them like crabs, and strain them even as vergis, to every
pint of that liquour take half a pound of white Sugar-candie, and a grain of
Musk, boil it as thick as Quiddeniock, pot it, and use it.

Conserues.
To make Conserve of Violets.
32 Pick clean the blewe single guard in Violets, stamp half a pound of them
fine in an Alabaster mortar, very fine, put two or three ounces of Sugar-candie
to the beating of them, and so soon as your Sugar comes unto it, it will have
a very pleasant color, then lay it on a white paper, and boil the weight of
it in Sugar unto a Candy height, and put in the pulp, and let it boil a walme
or two, and cool it with a silver spoone, and being almost cold, pot it and
use it.

To make Conserve of Barberies.
33 IN the heat of the day gather the fairest red Barberies, pick them clean,
and put them into a deep pot, and set in boiling water until they be tender,
then strain them through a cushion canuas. and boil thrice their weight in
double refined Sugar to a Candy height, and cool it a little, and put in your
pulp, and boil it half an hour, cool it again until it be blood-warme,
and then pot it up.

To make Conserve of Roses in the best manner.
34 CVt off the white of red Rose-buds, stamp them very fine in a stone mortar,
beat their weight in fine Sugar, and put it to your flowers, and beat them
together in a stone mortar a whole hour together at the least, until they be
very fine, then boil it in like quantity of Sugar unto a Candy height, and
put your pulp into the boiling Sugar, when it has boiled a while, cool it
again with your spatter, and wring in the juice of a Lemond.

To make Conserve of Gilliflowers.
35 GAther red Cloue-Gilliflowers in the heat of the day, clip them very short,
one leaf into eight or nine pieces at the least, for the shorter you clip
them, the sooner they will be beaten fine: then beat them with the quantity of
half their weight in double refined Sugar, until the pulp be enough, which
you may easily know both by taste and feeling, then boil the same quantity of
the same Sugar to a Candy height, with as much Rosewater as will melt it, and
put your pulp into the boiling Sugar, stirring it continually until it be
thick, then pot it and keep it for use.

To make Conserve of Cowslips, good against Melancholy.
36 GAther them in the heat of the day, and clip only the yellow flower, then
take twice their weight in fine Sugar, and beat the flowers with one half of
it, until till the pulp be very fine, and boil the other part to a Manus
Christi height, and put the beaten flowers into the boiling Sugar, and let it
boil with continual stirring, until it grow something thick, cool it until
it be but warm, and pot it.

37 TO make Conserve of Marigoldes being the same virtue, with the last
Conserve, is to work with Marigolds altogether, as with the Cowslip, without
any difference.

To make Conserve of Damsons.
38 TAke a pottle of Damsons, prick them, and put them into a pint of
Rose Water, and as much Claret Wine, cover them, and let them boil in an other
vessel of hot water two hours or more, then incorporate them well together
with a great spoone, and when they be tender, cool them and strain them, and
set the pulp over the fire, and put thereto a sufficient quantity of Sugar,
guessing it by your taste, and let the pulp boil until it look of a Damson
color.

Tart-stuffes.
To make an excellent Tart-stuffe of Damsons, to last all the year.
39 TAke a pottle of Damsons and good ripe Apples pared and cut into quarters,
put them into an earthen pot, cover your pot with a piece of course Paste, and
bake it in an Oven with Manchet, and strain it through a strainer, season it
with Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and Rose Water, and boil it thick.

To make an excellent Tart-stuffe of Prunes.
40 PVt six fair Pippins pared and cored unto two or three pound of Prunes,
and a pint of Claret Wine, stew them tender, and strain them, season them with
Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar, and a little Rose Water.

To make white Tart-stuffe.
41 TAke a quart of sweet Cream, the white of ten Eggs, strain them, and
boil the stuff with quartered Nutmegs, a piece of whole Mace, a grain of
Musk, then boil it with continual stirring, when it grows thick like
Curds, hang it on a nail in a cloth, to dreine out the Whay, then take out
the wholespice, and strain it, season it with Sugar.

To make yellow Tart-stuffe.
42 Drive the yolks of ten Eggs through a strainer, with a quart of sweet
Cream, season it with Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar, and a little Rose Water, and
let it boil, with continual stirring, until it be thick enough.

Gellies.
To make Quiddoniock.
43 TAke out the kernels from eight Pear quinces, the fairest and yellowest
that you can get, boil them in a quart of spring water unto a pint, put in a
quarter of a pint of Damask Rose Water, and one pound of fine Sugar, and so
let it boil until it come to a deep color, then drop a drop on the bottom
of a sawcer, and if it stand; take it off the fire, and let it run through a
gelly-bagge into a Basin, over a chafingdish of coals to keep it warm, and
fill your boxes with a spoon, but cover them not till they be cold. If you
would have it printed, then you must have moulds of the very same bigness with
your boxes, wet your mould with Rose Water, and let it run into them, and
when it is cold turn it into your boxes, or else if they should be dry, your
Gellie would not come out.

To make Crystal Gellie.
44 TAke a knuckle of Veale, and two pair of Caluesfeet, flay the feet, and
take out the fat between the claws, wash them in two or three warm waters,
and lay them all night in fair water in an earthen pan or pot, the next day
boil them tender in clear spring water from a gallon to three pintes, and let
that liquor stand in an earthen Basin, then pare off the top and bottom, and
put to it some Rosewater, season it with double refined Sugar, and put to it
half a dozen spoonefuls of oil of Ciuamon, and as many of Ginger, and
likewise of Nutmeg and Mace, one grain of Musk in a piece of lawne tied in a
third, put all this being boiled into a silver or earthen dish, and when it is
cold slice it and serve it in on glass Plates.

To preserve Lemonds to lie in quaking Gellie.
45 First, purge away their bitterness, by boiling, and shifting them seven
or eight times in the boiling, then boil a pint of Apple-water, and a pound
of Sugar, and scum it, and take it off when you scum it, then put in your
Lemond rindes into the hot liquor, and boil them leasurely in that hot sirupe,
until they be tender, and being almost cold, pot it.

To make Gellie of Pippins of Amber color.
46 PAre and core eight Pippins, boil them in a quart of spring water, from a
quart to a pint, put in a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, one pound of Sugar,
and boil it uncovered until it come to a deeper color, drop a drop on a
piece of glass, and if it stand, then it is enough, then let it run through a
gellie bag into a vessel on a chafingdish of coals, and while it is warm
fill your moulds or boxes with a spoone, and let it stand till it be cold.

To make Gellie of Pippins as orient as a Rubie.
47 PAre and core eight Pippins, boil them in a quart of spring water to a
pint, put to it a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a pound of fine Sugar,
boil it still covered, until it be both red and ready: in all other things
do as in the Amber-coloured Gellie, remembering always that your moulds be
laid in water two or three hours before you use them, and drop or knock out
the water, but wipe them not, if the Gellie will not easily come, but warm the
bottom never so little, and it will come out as you wish.

To make Leach of diverse colors.
48 LAy half a pound of Iordane Almonds in cold water, the next day blanch
and beat them in a stone mortar, put in some good Damask Rose Water into the
beating of them, when they be very fine draw them through a strainer with a
quart of sweet milk from the Cow, and set it on a chafing dish of coals,
with a piece of Isinglasse, a piece of whole Mace and Nutmeg quartered, a
grain of Musk tied in a piece of lawne, when it grows thick, take it off
the fire, and take out your whole spices, and let it run through a strainer
into a broad and deep dish, and when it is cold, you may so slice it and
serve it in. If you will color any of it, Saffron is for yellow, green Wheat
for green, Turnsoll is for red, and blew bottles in corn give their own
color.

Breads.
To make red Ginger-bread, commonly called Leachlumbar.
49 GRate and dry two stale Manchets, either by the fire, or in an Oven, sift
them through a Sieue, and put to it Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, Liquorice,
Anis-seed: when you have mingled all this together, boil a pint of red wine,
and put in your mingled bread, and stir it, that it be as thick as a
Hastie-pudding; then take it out, and cool it, and mould it with Cinnamon,
Ginger, Liquorice, and Aniseseede, and roll it thin, and print it with your
mould, and dry it in a warm Oven.

To make white Gingerbread.
50 TAke half a pound of March-pane-Past made with Almonds, Rose Water and
Sugar, and a spoonefull of Aqua-vitae, season it very hot with Ginger mould it
up stiff, roll it thin, and print it with your moulds.

To make Italian Biscuit.
51 BEat and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar with 2. grains of Musk,
four of Ambergris, then steep gum-dragon in Rose Water, and the white of a
new laid Egg, beat it in a stone mortar to a perfect Paste, then rub, dry,
and dust an ounce of Anise-seede, and work it into the Paste on a sheet of
paper like to little Manchets, or print it with moulds, and lay it upon
Marchpane Wafers, and bake it in a warm Oven, it will be light and white.

To make an excellent Bread called Ginetoes.
52 TAke half a pound of fine Wheat flower, an ounce of powder of
Pomecittrons, an ounce of powder of Lemonds, a quarter of an ounce of fine
cersed Ginger, the weight of six pence of the finest Basil, Marioram beaten
into powder, make all this into a perfect Paste as stiff as for Manchet, with
a little Ipocras made warm, the yolks of three or four new laid Eggs, a
sawcer full of sweet Cream, a piece of sweet Butter as much as an Egg, and
then roll it in long rowles, and tie them in some pretty fashion like Sumbals,
then throw them into seething water, and they will presently fall down to the
bottom, watch them, and so soon as you see them rise to the top of the water,
take them up presently with a scummer, and bake them upon sheets of white
paper, and when they be three or four days old, throw them into boiling Sugar
of a Candy height; then take them up, and dry them upon leaves made of
Basket-makers twigges in a warm Oven.

To make Prince Biscuit.
53 Dry a pound of very fine wheat flower in an Oven two hours, after the
bread has been drawn, or the Oven being warmed, but not heated for the
nonce, the flower were best in an earthen Pipkin covered, least it loose the
color, put to it a pound of double refined Sugar beaten and cearsed fine, then
take ten new laid Eggs, take away five of their whites, strain these Eggs into
a Basin, with a spoonful of Rose Water, and six spoonfuls of scalded Cream,
when you have all in the Basin, first put in your cearsed Sugar, and let it
dissolve by beating it into your Eggs, then put in your flower by little and
little, until both the flower and the other things be incorporated, beat it
well together an hour at least, and you shall at last see it turn white, then
you must have coffins of white plate indude with butter as thin as you can,
so as it be touched in every place, then take an ounce and a half of sweet
Anise-seed, and one of Coriander, dried rubd and dusted, put the Anise-seed in
the batter, and the batter into the coffins, and bake it an hour at least if
you will, you may make Cracknels of the same batter, drive it thin upon the
Plates, and when you take it off, roll it thin like a Wafer, and dry them
again in the Oven.

To make French Macaroones.
54 VVAsh a pound of the newest and the best Iordane Almonds in three or four
waters, to take away the redness from their outside, lay them in a Basin of
warm water all night, the next day blanch them, and dry them with a fair
cloth, beat them in a stone mortar, vntillthey be reasonably fine, put to them
half a pound of fine beaten Sugar, and so beat it to a perfect Paste, then put
in half a dozen spoonefuls of good Damask Rose Water, three grains of
Ambergreece, when you have beaten all this together, dry it on a chafingdish of
coals until it grow white and stiff, then take it off the fire, and put the
whites of two new laid Eggs first beaten into froath, and so stir it well
together, then lay them on wafers in fashion of little long rowles, and so bake
them in an Oven as hot as for Manchet, but you must first let the heat of the
Oven pass over before you put them in, when they rise white and light, take
them out of the Oven, and put them in a warm platter, and set them again into
the warm Oven, and so let them remain four or five hours, and then they will
be thoroughly dry, but if you like them better being moist, then dry them not
after the first baking.

To make Naples Biscuit.
55 BEat and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar, a quarter of a pound of
Almonds, beat them as fine as you would do for Almond milk, strain your
Almonds with a sawcer full of sweet cream, and two or three spoonefulls of
the best Rosewater, then take your aforesaid powder of Sugar, two or three
grains of Musk, four of Ambergris, put in three or four spoonefulls of
baked flower, and so beat it in a silver basin into batter with a silver
spoone, and put it into little long coffines, and set them again a drying in a
dish, until they be ready, box them and keep them.

To make shell bread.
56 Beat a quarter of a pound of double refined Sugar, cearse it with two or
three spoonefulls of the finest, the youlkes of three new laid eggs, and the
white of one, beat all this together in with two or three spoonefulls of
sweet cream, a grain of musk, a thimble full of the powder of a dried
Lemond, and a little Annise-seede beaten and cearsed, and a little Rose Water,
then baste Muskle-shells with sweet butter, as thin as you can lay it on
with a feather, fill your shells with the batter and lay them on a gridiron or
a lattise of wickers into the oven, and bake them, and take them out of the
shells, and ise them with Rose Water and Sugar. It is a delicate bread, some
call it the Italian Mushle, if you keep them any long time, then always in
wet weather put them in your oven.

To make Countess cakes.
57 TAke half a pound of March-pane paste vnbakte, and put it into a stone
mortar with the youlkes of four new laid eggs, two or three spoonefuils of
Rosewater, as much sweet cream, season it with Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs,
beat your eggs, spices, and nutmegs well together, then strain it with a
thimble-full of Coriander; the spices being so mingled do season, and yet are
not seen, then grate a Manchet and beat all together in an Alabaster mortar,
and power it on two little round plates, dry them for all the year.

To make a fine Sugar cake.
58 BAke a pound of finewheat flower in a pipkin close covered, put thereto
half a pound of fine Sugar, four yolks and one white of eggs. Pepper and
Nutmegs, strain them with clouted cream, and with a little new Ale yeast,
make it in past, as it were for Manchet, bake it in a quick oven with a breath
fire in the ouens mouth, but beware of burning them.

Rough Rock Candies.
To make Rock de Cittron.
59 Roll into little bals half a pound of raw Marchpane Paste, flat them
like Figs, then take prefer^ed Pomecittrons, bl^unch^ Almonds, green Ginger,
cut each of these fruits an inch long, and prick them into the Marchpane
stuff, and set them in an Oven, dry them, and ise them like a Marchpane, cast
on Carrawaies, etc.

To rough-Candie Orenges with Sugar.
60 TAke a deep earthen Basin, and five round wires, according to the bigness
of the Pan, lay your Orange rindes on the lowest wire, and lay another wire on
it, and then lade that wire also with your fruit, and lay on the third wire,
and lade it also, and so with the rest, then cover all with Sugar boiled to a
Candy height, and set the Pan upon a soft mat or cushion seven or eight
hours, then pour out all the Sugar that will run from the wires. and let them
drop an hour after, until it have quite done, then take them out, etc.

To rough-Candie sprigs of Rosemarie.
61 LAy your Rosemarie branches one by one upon a fair sheet of paper, then
take Sugar-candie beaten small like sparks of diamonds, and wet it in a little
Rose Water in a silver spoone, and lay it as even as you can upon every branch,
and set them a drying a good way off from the fire, and in one hour they will
be dry, then turn them, and candie the other side, and when both sides be
thoroughly dry, box them and keep them all the year they will appear to the
eye in their natural color, and seem to be covered with sparks of diamonds.

To rough-Candie all manner of flowers in their own colors, tastes, and smells.
62 GAther what flowers you will in the heat of the day, when the Sun has
drawn away all the moisture from them, and use them altogether as the
Rosemarie. The like practice may be with whole Mace, Nutmegs, sticks of
Cinnamon, or any other dry fruit.

Sucket-Candies.
To Sucket-Candie green Lemonds.
63 VVAsh this fruit with seething water, dry it, and put it in a warm Oven,
the next day throw them in hot double refined Sugar, boiled to a Candy height,
boil them a walme or two, take them up and dry them in an Oven, the next day
box them.

To sucket-Candie green Ginger.
64 VVAsh it, as was showed in the Lemonds, dry it in the Oven, the next day
cover it in clarified Sugar, boiled to a Candy height, etc. but remember that
both must be first preserved.

To sucket-Candie green Walnuts, before they be sheld.
65 FIrst, preserve them as has been showed before in the twenty four
Receipt, and then, as the Lemonds and the Ginger, they must be washed from their
sirupe, and handled as they.

Peaches, or any other.
66 Green Plums may be sucket-Candied after the very same manner, remembering
that they be first preserved.

Cordial Waters.
To make Aqua-Coelestis.
67 TAke six ounces of Cinnamon, of Cloves one drachme, of Nutmegs one drachme
and a half, of Cubebs two drachmes, of Calamus roots one drachme, bruise them
all, and keep them in a fair paper: then take Betonie and Sage flowers, of
each a handful, Marioram and Penniroyall of each a handful, bruise them also:
then take of these powders, Aromaticum Rosarum three drachmes, Diambre
Diamargariton frigidum, Diamoscum dulce, of each a drachme and, put all these
into a gallon of spirit of wine, and steep them three days and three nights
very close coucred, and shake them well together every morning and evening,
then distill them in your Limbecke, and hang an ounce of Saunders in the water.

To make Cinnamon Water.
68 TAke one pound of Cinnamon, the best you can get, bruise it well, and put to
it a gallon of the best Sack, and steep it three days and three nights, and
distill it as before.

To make Doctor Steuens Water.
69 TAke one drachme of Rose-leaues, Borage, Buglosse, Violets, and Rosemarie
flowers, of each a drachme and a half, of Spicknard a drachme, of Cinnamon two
ounces, of Ginger an ounce, Cloves and Nutmegs of each half an ounce, of Card
amous a drachme and a half, Galingall two drachmes, Cubebs a drachme, Pepper
three drachmes, Annise-seede, Carraway-seedes and Fennel, of each an ounce,
Lignum half a drachme, Coral and Pearl in fine powder, of each a drachme,
bruise these and put them in a pottle of Aqua-vitae and a quart of excellent
good Sack, using the same as before is showed in Aqua-Coelestis.

To make Balme-water.
70 TAke five ounces of dried Balm, Time, Pennie-Royall, of each three ounces,
of Cinnamon four ounces, of Cardamon one drachme, grains half an ounce, sweet
Fennel seeds an ounce, Nutmegs and Ginger of each a drachme, Galingall,
Calamus, and Cypress, Cubebs, and Pepper of each two drachmes, of Calamus
roots half a drachme, of Diptimus one drachme, bruise these things, and put
them into a pottle of Sack, and steep them twenty four hours, and use them
like the rest.

To make Angelica-water.
71 TAke a handful of dried Carduus, of Angelica roots three ounces, of Myrrh
one drachme, Nutmegs half an ounce, of Cinnamon and Ginger, four ounces of
each, Saffron one drachme and a half, Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingall and Pepper,
of each a quarter of an ounce, Mace two drachmes, Grains one drachme, Lignum
Aloes. Spicknard, Iunius adoratus, of each a drachme, Sage, Borage, Boglosse,
Violets and Rosemarie flowers, of each a handful, bru^s^ them and steep them
in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and then etc.

To make Wormwood water.
73 TAke four ounces of Wormwood, Sage, Bertonie, and Rue, of each a
handful, Rosemarie tops a handful, Cinnamon three ounces, Nutmegs half an
ounce, Cloves and Mace, of each half a drachme, Ginger an ounce Galingall,
Cubebs, and Spicknard, of each a drachme and, of Scordium half a handful,
bruise these and put them in a pottle of Sack, and a pint of Aquavitae, steep
them 24. hours. etc.

Conceits in Sugar-Workes.
To make March-pane Paste.
73 CEarse the finest and the whitest refined Sugar, to every third spoonful
thereof take a blauncht Iordane Almond, stamp them in a smooth mortar, and now
and then put in two or three drops of Rose Water. It must be extremely much
beaten before it will be a perfect past, at the least an hour.

To make a March-pane, to ise, and garnish it, according to Art.
74 BLaunch and beat two pound of Iordane Almonds in a stone mortar, putting
in now and then a spoonful of Rose Water, to keep them from oyling: when they
are beaten fine, put to them a pound and a half of the finest cearsed Sugar,
and now and then a spoonful more of Rose Water, as your self shall see
requisite, incorporate them, which with much labor must be effected: when you
have brought them to a perfect paste, then roll it to what breadth you will,
but it must be thin, make a bottom to it with Wafers, set an edge to it round
about, and pinch it then bake it, and ice it with Rose Water and Sugar beaten
like batter, and spread it on with a fea her, and so put it again into the
Oven, or baking-pan, when you see it rise white, and shining like ice, take it
out again, and stick in your standing conceits, as namely golden Marigolds,
and long Comfits, or such like, cast on Biskets and Carrawaies, and lay Bay
leaves under it, appearing with the leaves end without the Marchpane round
about.

To make any Conceit in March-pane-stuffe.
75 MOuld some of your aforesaid stuff with cearsed Sugar, and make some up
like little square pies, fill them with dry suckets, cut in small pieces, or
dry Marmulade; cast on them colored Biskets and Carrawaies, gild them and
serve them to the board, you may make some of it like collops and bacon, to do
which you must have both red and white past, and roll them both and cut it
overthwart and lay one on another like bacon, the red must be colonied with
Rosa Paris and Saunders.

To make any other conceit as Buttons, Beads, Chains, etc.
76 Having fashioned your buttons made of this stuff all of a bigness, either
with your hand and knife, or in a mould, if with a knife, then you may turn up
the ridges and the nib, like the threads of silk buttons, and the groundwork
is white of it self, if you will have them green and white, then temper
sap-green with gum-Arabick water on the top of your pensill, and strike it
down the ridges of the button, not touching the button on the creases. If you
will have them silver, then strike them down with shell-siluer, the like may
be done with shell-gold. If blew, then Azur being first steept in vinegar; for
else it is very dangerous, the vinegar kills the strength of the blew: If
you would have them red, then use Rosa-paris on the top of your pensil: when
these buttons be ready and dry, you may set them upon a card of Sugar plate,
and fasten them with Gum-dragon steept in damask Rose Water and the own paste
tempred very soft; serve it in on plates of glass, or keep it as long as you
will.

To make Snakes, Snailes, Frogs, Roses, Cheries, etc.
77 TAke single mouldes carved inward, according to the form of the things
named, or any other, what you will, then take double refined Sugar, and as much
water, or rather Rose Water as will dissolve it, and boil it to a Candy height: then take your mouldes, having steept them two or three hours before
in cold water, and fill them with the hot Sugar, and when it is cold turn it
out of your moulde, and dry it with a fair cloth, and it will have the true
form graued or carved in the mould. But for your Cherries, strawberries, and
such like, take double mouldes, wet them in water, and fill them with hot
Sugar, then take a small birchen twig, dried before in a feather-makers or
diers fat, and prick them in the nose of the mould into the hot Sugar, and when
they be cold, take them out and dry them, and they will be as though they
grew upon staulkes; then color them as is showed in the order of colors in
the end of this book, but if you will make Roses you must make them of Sugar
plate past (mentioned in the fourscore and one receipt) rolled very thin, and
then you must cut the leaves single with an instrument of tynne made for the
same purpose, and then fasten one leaf upon another, as in the last receipt
was showed, and stick them on the top of a birchen-twig, pilde and dipped in the
fat, and they will be white Roses, but you may color them as is elsewhere
showed. In like manner, you may make Burrage, Cowslips, Primroses,
stock-Gilliflowers, Marigoldes, etc. keep them dry.

To make Shoes, Slippers, Keys, Knives, Gloves, etc.
78 ALL these and such like things, you may make of Sugar plate paste, cut them
with your knife, but fashion and finish them only with your hand and pincers,
but if you want handines, or have no leisure, then you must have mouldes of
tynne, and having fitted your paste, cut it with the mouldes, dry them
leysurely, etc.

To make Letters, Knots, or any other Iumball for a banquet quickly.
79 YOu must take single mouldes carved inward, either in wood or stone, with
the true form of what you would have, lay them in cold water: then take double
refined Sugar, and as much Rose Water as will dissolve it, boil it to a Candy height, then take the mouldes out of the water, shake out the water, but wipe
them not, and fill your Letters or Knots with the hot Sugar, and when they be
cold and hard, turn them out, and wipe them with a fair cloth.

There is also another way to make these or such things, thus: Take dry single
moulds, dust them through a Lawne or Tiffanie Sieue, then take Sugar-plate
paste, or Almond paste, wrought unto a good temper, and fill your mould, then
cut it off smooth and even, with the top of your mouldes, and turn it out, the
rest of your stuff you may make in long Iumballs about the bigness of a Goose
quill, and then you may knit it in double knots, or turn it in form of
capital letters, or like claspes and eyes, or wax-lights

To make a Walnut, both shell, and Kernill.
80 MAke a paste of fine cearsed Cinnamon and Ginger, mingled with twice so much
Sugar, cearsed also very fine, and a little Musk, print it in a double moulde,
made in like unto a Wallnut with shells, then close them together with gum
dragon steept in Rose Water, and if you will have a Kernill in it, then you
must have another double mould for the Kernill, but you must make the Kernill
of white Sugar plate, and when it is thoroughly dry, you must ouer-lay it with
a little saffron that it may be like the skin of the Kernill.

Sugar works of another sort.
To make Sugar plate paste.
81 TAke a pound of double refined Sugar, put thereto three ounces of the best
starch, if you dry the Sugar after it is in powder, it will the sooner pass
through the Lawne sieue: then cearse it on a fair sheet of paper, and sweep
it on a heap with a feather or a wing, and in the midst of the heap, you
must put a lump of gumme-draggon, about the bigness of a wallnut, first
steeped in Rose Water (a little porringer full of Rose Water, is enough to
dissolve an ounce of gum, which gum must be very clean pict from all
dross and strained through a canuis strainer,) temper this gum with the
white of an egg, and with the Sugar, a little at once, until you have wrought
up all the gum and the Sugar into a stiff paste: you must always in the
working have some of the gum, and some of the Sugar, and before you moulde it
in the moulde, you must first dust your moulde with cearsed Sugar.

To make paste of diverse sorts of flowers as Violets, Cowslips, Marigolds,
Roses, Gilliflowers, etc.
82 MAke a powder of these flowers, being dry, taking only their sweet
leaf, and put thereto fine powder of Cinnamon and a little Musk, if you have
it, mingled well together then boil the weight of the powder in fine Sugar,
with as much Rose Water as will dissolve it. If your work be with Marigolds,
put to it a little Saffron, boil it, and to your work add the pap of a
Pippin dried on a chafingdish with coals in a silver or earthen dish, and
sprinkled with Rose Water, and wrought into Paste, then bray some Sugar-candie,
but not to powder, wet Gum-dragon, and with the same make it stick in your
paste, and so it will seem to be rock candied, cut the paste with a knife
steept in Rose Water.

To make an excellent Pennet, good against cold.
83 BEat four ounces of Sugar Candy unto fine powder, put to it a thimble-full
of English Liquorice, beaten and cearsed, three drops of Chimicall oil of
Anise-seed, a grain of Musk, beat all this to paste, with Gum-dragon steept
in Damask Rose Water, and when you have beaten it to perfect paste, roll it
upon a sheet of white paper into rowles, about the bigness of a wheat straw,
and cut it in pieces about an inch long.

To make Cinnamon sticks by Art.
84 TAke a quarter of a pound of fine cearsed Cinnamon, and half an ounce of
fine cearsed Ginger, mingle it with half a pound of fine cearsed Sugar two
grains of Musk; beat all together into a perfect paste, with Gum-dragon
steept in Rose water, in an Alabaster or stone mortar, roll it thin on a
sheet of paper, dusted through a cearse with beaten Cinnamon, and then wrap it
about Reeds, and when it is almost dry, draw it easily off the Reeds, and dry
them thoroughly.

To make Callishones.
85 TAke half a pound of Marchpane paste, a thimble-full of Coriander seeds
beaten to powder, with a grain of Musk, beat all to a perfect paste, print
it, and dry it.

To make Muscachones.
86 TAke batter made as for Prince Biscuit, in the 53. Receipt, put to it two
spoonfuls of Cheese-curds, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and a grain of Musk, beat
all into the batter, and take a batter spout, and spout it in long rowles on a
sheet of paper, dusted through a Sieue with fine Sugar, and before they be
dry, tie them in some pretty knots, and so dry them, and then guild them.

To make Muscadinaes, commonly called kissing-Comfits.
87 TAke half a pound of double refined Sugar, beaten and cearsed, with two
grains of Musk, three grains of Ambergris, and a drachme of Orice powder,
beat all to a perfect paste in an Alabaster mortar, then sleeke a sheet of
white paper with a Sleek-stone, and roll your Sugar paste, then cut it in
little Lozenges with a roll, and dry them in a Stoue, they will serve to
garnish a Marchpane or other dishes. If you will have any red, you must mingle
it with Rosa Paris, if blew, then with blew bottles.

To make Troces, against the cold.
88 BEat two ounces of Sugar-candie to fine powder, put to it a little juice of
Liquorice, juice of Horehound, of Mayden-haire, beat all into a perfect paste,
and roll it as small as Wheat strawes, cut them an inch and. long, dry them,
etc.

To make Cinnamon Letters.
89 TAke paste made as for Gemillissoes, color it with Cinnamon, and roll it
in long rowles, as near as you can all of a bigness, and thereof make fair
capital Roman letters, according to some exact pattern, cut in thin board
or white plate, gild them and make a cross in the beginning of them.

To make Canalones in Spices.
90 TAke half a pound of sifted Sugar, put thereto a grain of Musk, Cinnamon
and Ginger, a little powder of a dried Lemond, beat all this to a perfect paste
with Gum-dragon steept in Rose Water, roll it thin, and print it with a
shallow mould, then roll it upon Reeds very thin, dry them leasurely, and
keep them dry.

To make Rushilians.
91 TAke a pint of bakt flower, an ounce of Cinnamon, a quarter of an ounce of
beaten Ginger, a grain of Musk, mingle these with a pound of beaten Sugar,
then take six yolks and sweet butter, two or three spoonefuls of sweet Cream,
make all this into a perfect paste, and it will look of Cinnamon color, then
cool it in small rowles, and make it in letters or knots, dry them in a baking
Pan.

To make Gentillissoes.
92 BAke and cearse a pound of double refined Sugar, beat it to a perfect
paste, w th the whites of two Eggs, and Gum-dragon steept in Rose Water, one
grain of Musk, and as much Ambergris, roll it in fine rowles and bake it.

To make Nouellissoes.
93 TAke the paste of your Gentillissoes, roll it thin and fine with red
Almond past, pinch it with your nippers, and bake it as in the Gentillissoes,
always provided that you put Musk and Ambergris in.

To make Lozenges of Violets.
94 TAke Violets, Cowslips, Rosemarie flowers, or any other in the heat of the
day, shred only the beautifullest of the blossoms upon a trencher, with a
sharp^ knife, in as many pieces, and as fine as possibly you can, and then beat
them as fine as may be in an Alabaster mortar, with the pap of a Pippin, and a
grain of Musk, then boil double refined Sugar to a Candy height, and put
your beaten flowers into the boiling Sugar, and boil it a little longer, for
the flowers will bring the Sugar back again, and when you see it something
thick, power it on a sheet of glass, and cut it into little Lozenges like
Wigs, some you may drop.

To dry Fruits.
To dry Orenges and Lemonds.
95 RAspe the skins of these fruits, cut them in halfes, and take out the
cores, lay the rindes presently in fair water two or three days, to take away
their bitterness, then boil them five or six times, in several waters for
the same purpose, and when they be tender take them up, and dry them in a fair
cloth; then cover them in clarified Sugar, and boil it leasurely two hours,
then take them off, and put them in an earthen Pipkin, and let them so remain
four or five days, or longer the better, when you will dry them, set them on
the fire again until they be through hot, drain them, and the whilst boil
fresh Sugar to a Candy height, then put them in, take them out, and lay them
on a basket-makers lattice, and dry them in a warm Oven in one night, and they
are ready.

To dry white Peare-Plums.
96 GAther the fairest of this fruit before they be thoroughly ripe, prick
them with a Penknife, and cover them in clarified Sugar, heat them on the fire
until they crack, then take them up, and put fresh Sugar to that sirupe, and
boil it a good deal higher, now and then taking it off and scumming it
clean: then put in the Plums again, and warm them again in the hot Sugar
about half an hour, then pour them into a pot or glass, and let them
remain 3. or 4. days in that hot Sugar, then warm again these Plums, and
set them a cooling; then boil as much fresh Sugar as will cover them unto a
candy height, and put the plums into that hot Sugar, and so let it boil
leysurely a quarter of an hour, now and then turning them, for that will make
them take Sugar, then take them up between hot and cold, and lay them on a
sheet of glass, and so dry them in a stoue, or in a warm Oven.

To dry black Pear-eplums.
97 GAther this fruit also in a fair sunshine day about two or three of the
clock, when the sun has taken off all the outward moisture from them, which
otherwise would hinder the work.

In all other practice do as in the white peare-plum has been showed.

To dry Pippins clear at Amber.
98 PAre this fruit, and cut out the coare, and so soon as you have prepared a
piece, cast it into a basin of fair running water, then boil the weight
thereof in clarified Sugar unto a Candy height, then dry your Pippins with a
fair cloth, and boil them apace in the hot Sugar, and ever when you see any
froth, take them off the fire and scum them very clean, then turn them and
set them on again and boil them apace; then (as before) take them off and
scum them, and set them on the fire again, and do so half a dozen times at
at the least and when your Sugar is at a Candy height, take out your pippins
and put them in a warm Oven, and let them stay two or three hours, and they
will be dry.

To dry Apricockes orient and very clear.
99 TAke fair large Apricocks well colored, but not too ripe, pare and stone
them, and cover them in clarified Sugar, boil them leysurely turning them, and
scumming them very often: then take them off the fire, and let them stand all
night in that sirupe, the next day warm them again, and when they be hot,
take them out, and set them a dreining again, then boil other Sugar a little
higher with the Apricockes leysurely, now and then turning them, and scumming
them, and let them stand in the sirupe until the next day; the next day warm
them again, and then lay them a dreining, then boil other Sugar to a Candy height, and put the Apricockes into the boiling Sugar, turn them until you
see the Candie grow about them, and lay them on a sheet of glass, and set
them into a warm Oven after the bread has been drawn, and let them stand
about three hours, the next day take them out and turn them, and do so a
week at least; for they will be very long a drying

To dry Pears without any Sugar.
100 PAre your Norwich Pare, or any other of the best that you can get, but
leave the staulke and the peep on, prick it with a penknife, and put them into
a earthen pot, and bake them a little in an Oven, then put them upon straw or
bents, into a white plate or latten-pan into an Oven presently after the
drawing of the bread, do so a week together, or longer, and the fruit will
last the longer.

Physical Receipts approved by very worthy Physicians of this Realm.
To make sirupe of Violets.
101 PIck and weigh the flowers of violets put them in a quart of water, and
stew them upon hot embers until the flowers have made the water as blew as
themselves, then boil that infusion unto a sirupe with four pound of
clarified Sugar upon a gentle fire with scumming now and then, if the fire be
too hot all is mard.

To make sirupe of Liquorce.
102 SCrape eight ounces of Liquorice very clean and bruise it, take an ounce
of Maidenhaire, one ounce of Annise-seede, and as much Fennill-seede, steep
these in four pintes of rain water and boil it to a quart, then boil the
liquour, with one pound and a half of Sugar.

To make sirupe of Roses solutiue.
103 Pluck the leaves of damask Roses, and put them to a gallon of hot water,
and set it on embers in a great vessel of boiling liquor, the more leysurely
it boiles, the better it is, and when the leaves look white, take them up, and
put in fresh, and do so three or four times, and when the water is red, to
every pint put the white of an egg, and a pound of clarified Sugar, boil it
to a sirupe: the thicker it is the better.

To make sirupe of dry Roses.
104 TAke four ounces of red Roses dried, and infuse them in a quart of fair
water upon hot embers, until the Roses have lost their color, then take a
pound and a half of clarified Sugar, clarify your liquour and Sugar with two
Eggs, and boil it to the height of a sirupe upon a very soft fire, for if it
be over hot, the sirupe will be of no use.

Against the trembling of the heart.
105 LEt the Patient drink three or four spoonefuls of Claret wine, half so
much Damask Rose Water.

An excellent medicine against the rising of the mother, taught and tried by
diverse.
106 TAke the bigness of a Pease of Methridate, and mingle the same with
Conserve of Roses, as much in quantity as a Walnut, and let the party eat so
much every morning fasting, and every evening as much for the space of three
days together, or as long as need requires.

An Almond milk made for the cooling of the liver and blood, it was taught by
a Doctor of very good note, for a great personage.
107 TAke Suckorie roots, Asparagus, and Marsh-Mallowes, of each the weight of
eighteen pence in silver, Fennel roots as much, the tops of the flowsing of
Borage, Buglosse, and Scabious, of each a handful, boil this in a pint and a
quarter of (...) water unto a pint, (...) make the milk.

A remedy against looseness of the Body.
108 TAke a pint of red wine, and half an ounce of beaten Cinnamon, boil it
on the fire, and thicken it with the yolks of four raw Eggs; brew them well,
and drink every morning half a pint, and every evening as much. It is best
in the full or change of the Moon, but good always.

(...) Receipt to make a vomit.
109 Stamp three or four leaves of Assara, Tobacco that grows in the
Gardens, and strain it with six spoonfuls of Ale, and drink it fasting,
fasting half an hour after or longer: then take warm Posset-drinke, and
keep your self walking until the vomit have done working; if it work not as
you wish, then take more Posset-drinke, and still walk till it has done
working, and keep a good diet at least that day after.

To stay (...)
110 TAke sirupe of Liq^^rice, of May denhaire, of Horehound, of Isope, of each
a like quantity, Conserve of a Fox lungs, of Ale-campane (if the party be
enflamed the Ale-campane must be left out.)

(...) ordering of Colors.
111 SAp-greene, Rosa-Paris, blew Bise, yellow Smalt, all these colors must
be ground with thin gum-Arabicke water, and are fit to garnish, but
perilous to eat.

Of Colors that may be eaten.
112 A White Rose dried, and ground with Alome water, makes a fair straw
color.

(...) in the heat of the (...) dried, and power (...) his own color (...)
and a little gum Arabicke water.

The second bark of an Elder, ground with gum-water and a little Alome, makes
a fair green.

Other Colors to color Leach.
113 YOur Saffron water makes a yellow: juice of green Wheat in the blade,
makes a green: Turnsoll gives a red, and the white is of it self.


