METROPOLIS CORONATA, THE TRIVMPHES OF Ancient DRAPERY: OR, Rich Clothing of
England, in a second Years performance. In Honor of the advancement of Sir
JOHN IOLLES, Knight, to the high Office of Lord Mayor of London, and taking his
Oath for the same authority, on Monday, being the 30. day of October. 1615.
Performed in hearty affection to him, and at the bountiful charges of his
worthy Brethren the truly Honorable Society of Drapers, the first that
received such Dignity in this City. Devised, and written, by A. M. Citizen,
and Draper of LONDON.

Printed at London, by George Purslowe. 1615.

METROPOLIS CORONATA: OR, The old Drapery and Clothing of England, triumphing
a second Year.
Having in our last years discourse of Himatia Poleos, sufficiently approved
the true antiquity, and primary Honor of Englands Draperie, here in the
City of London, first granted by King RICHARD the first, and seconded by his
brother King John, by enstalling that famous noble Gentleman, Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwine Knight, in the first dignity of L. Mayor of London, wherein he
continued (by yearly election) the space of twenty four years and an half,
and longer had done, if he had longer lived: Seeing likewise, that Drapery
triumphs now two years together, by succession of two Lord Majors in one and
the same Society: I held it not fit (finding my self not barren of invention,
in a Theme of such scope and large extendure) to run again the same course
of antique honor: but rather to iumpe with the time, which uermore affects
nouelty, in a new form of this second years triumph, prepared for that
honorable and worthy brother of Drapery, Sir John Iolles, Knight and Alderman,
on the day of his entrance into so high a dignity.

On Monday, being the 30. of October, 1615. according to ancient and most
honorable custom, the L. Mayor being to pass by water to Westminster, in
company of his worthy Brethren, and attended by all other Companies in their
several Bardges made fit for triumph, after such manner as formerly has been
observed: The first device that welcommeth him to the water, is an invention
proper to that nature, and thought apt to conduct him in his passage. He being
both a Draper and Stapler, and these two professions (in former times)
appertaining to the Brethren of Londons Drapery, trading only in wools and
woollen cloth, the then chief riches of the kingdom: both these mysteries
meeting together so conveniently in one man, I did account it as a sin in me
to sunder them, and therefore made use of that Creast or Cognizaunce of the
Golden Fliece, given by ancient Heraldrie to them both, and remaining still in
firm force with the Draper, as their Escutchion of Arms makes manifest.

In a goodly Argoe, shaped so near as Art could yield it, to that of such
ancient and honorable fame, as conuaied Jason and his valiant Argonautes of
Greece, to fetch away the Golden fleece from Cholchos; we make use of that
memorable history, as fit both for the time and occasion. Therein aloft
sits Medea, whose love to Jason, was his best means for obtaining the
Golden fleece: And therefore, as still witnessing the fiery zeal of her
affection toward him, she sits playing with his loue-lockes, and wantoning
with him in all pleasing daliance, to compass the more settled assurance of
his constancy: His noble Companions, as Hercules, Telamon, Orpheus, Castor,
Pollux, Calais and Zethes the Sons of Boreas, are seated about him in their
several degrees, attired in fair guilt Armours, bearing triumphall Lances,
wreathed about with Laurel, Shields honored with the Impresse of the Golden
fleece, and their heads circled with Laurel, according to the manner of all
famous Conquerors. This Argoe is rowed by diverse comely Eunuchs, which
continually attended on Medea, and she favoring them but to pass under the
fleece of Gold, had all their garments immediately sprinkled over with gold,
even as if it had showred down in drops upon them, and so they row on in
Iasons triumph.

Having thus borrowed the help of this well known story, to honor the day
of our London Jason: we do Poetically infer, that Neptune having declared
himself kind in their coming hither, and Thamesis shown her self as
gracious, in passing over her watery bosom, To make his triumph more maiecall,
they lend the assistance of their Sea Chariot, wherein they use to sport
themselves on their watery regiment, it being shaped like to a Whale, or the
huge Leuiathan of the Sea. Therein is placed the shadow of Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwine, to grace this days honor, both by water and land, and by him are
seated eight royal Virtues, bearing the Ensigns of Arms of eight honorable
Drapers and Staplers, with beautiful shields, that declare each man's name, vz.
Poultney, Cromer, Aeyre, Wotton, Sidney, Bulloin, Capell, Champion. Many more
we could have brought to acco^panie them, but neither place nor time might
afford it: only these are remembered for their high deseruings, as our
Chronicles (at large) do more amply declare, Fame triumphing in the top, and
Time guiding the way before. No sooner is my Lord and his Brethren seated in
their Bardge, and such silence obtained as the season can best permit: but
Fitz-Alwine saluteth him in this manner.

Sir Henry Fitz-Alwines Speech on the Water, at the three Cranes.
IT is now a complete year,
Since in the borrowed shape I bear
Of old Fitz-Alwine, I was raysde from rest.
On that days Triumph fully was expressed
The honor due by grave Antiquity,
Then given to Londons Draperie,
By Royal RICHARD, who in me, K. Richard the First.

First stilde the name of Maioraltie:
Which I held four and twenty year,
As in good Records may appear.
In all this time my laboring soul,
Not quitted from the high control
Of divine Poesy; has waited still
Upon her great commanding will;
By information, that another
Of mine own band, a Draper Brother,
Was to succeed in dignity;
Of Londons famous Maioraltie,
This was a motive of such might,
That made me houer day and night,
To honor this solemnity,
With whatsoere remains in me.
Two Drapers to succeed each other?
I being their first advanced Brother*
To both must my affection prove
Of cordial and sincerest love.
Then Sir, as I am taught to know ye,
So do these goodly Ensigns show ye
Draper and Stapler; so was I,
And both but one Society
In those grave times when woollen Cloth
Served best for King and subject both.
The Draper and the Stapler then
I tell ye were right worthy men,
And did more needy souls maintain,
Then I fear will be seen again.
But times must have their revolution,
And each their several execution.
But pass we them; And come to say
What Honors now do crown this day*
The Golden Fleece being the crest
Of ancient Drapery; we digest
The story of the Golden Fleece,
Fetched by the Argonautes of Greece
From Cholcos in resemblance here,
Where Jason and those Greeks appear,
Which in that travail did partake,
Both for his love and honors sake.
Medeas powerful charms preuailde,
And all those dreadful Monsters quailde,
That kept the Fleece in their protection,
Which then was won by her direction.
By way of Moral application,
Your Honor may make some relation
Unto your self out of this story,
You are our Jason, Londons glory,
Now going to fetch that fleece of Fame,
That ever must renown your name.
An Oath of Faith and Fealty
Unto his sacred Majesty,
That makes you his Great Deputy
Or Image of Authority.
No Monsters dare confront your way.
Imagine then, as well you may,
That all this fair and goodly Fleet,
Do in mere love (on purpose) meet,
Like to those Argonautes of Greece,
That then fetched home their Golden Fleece,
To tend the Argoe where you ride,
Behind, before, on every side
With all applauding melody,
That best this day may dignifie.
Neptune and gracious Thamesis,
To honor such a day as this,
Have sent out of their watery store
Their own Sea Chariot, which before
They nere would part with. But as now,
Their sacred Deities allow
Our use thereof, which we employ,
To make more full this day of joy.
Eight Royal Virtues take the pain
Eight honored Ensigns to sustain
Of eight Lord Majors, as you may see
Described by their Heraldrie,
Drapers, and Staplers Brethren kind,
Leaving rare monuments behind
Of their affection to this City,
For the poores good whom they did pity.
Poultney, Cromer, Air, Wotton,
Sidney, Bullen, Capell, Champion.
Time checks me, that I may not tell
Their several deeds. Nor fits it well
In serious business to delay:
On then a Gods name, lets away.
The Speech being ended, the Companies witnessing their joy for his taking
water, and the same further confirmed by a gallant peale of Ordenance: we
wait on my Lord so far as conveniently we may, evermore having care of our
further employment in the land service, the time being so short, and our
preparation requiring such decency in order: yet much abused by neglect in
marshalling, and hurried away with too impudent hastiness, albeit so advisedly
set down in project, that nothing but mere wilfulness can misplace them.

The Shows appointed for service on the LAND.
FIrst, a fair and beautiful Ship, styled by the Lord Majors name, and
called the Ioell, appearing to be lately returned, from trafficking Wool and
Cloth with other remote Countries; vshereth the way for her worthy Owners
service, and is well governed by her Captain, Master, Mate, etc. Neptune, who
has been auspicious to all her adventures, and Thamesis, by bringing her
always safely within her own bounds, being mounted in triumphall manner, the
one on a pelletted Lion, the supporter to the Drapers Arms, and the other on a
Seahorse, belonging to the Lord Majors Armorie, do both (with their presence)
approve this days delighting. Then follows a goodly Ram or Golden Fleece,
the honored Creast (as already has been said) to Drapers and Staplers, having
(on each side) a housewifely Virgin sitting, seriously employed in Carding and
Spinning Wool for Cloth, the very best commodity that ever this Kingdom
yielded. The Argoe succeeds this Fleece or Ram, according to our former
description: and then, in stead of Neptunes Whale on the water, comes another
Sea-deuice, termed The Chariot of Man's life, answerable in all respects to
Times relation thereof; as also that other Monument of London and her twelve
Daughters, at this time employing Metropolis Coronata, the Kings chief City
and Chamber, most desertfully crowned, as being the ancient Mother of the whole
Land, and first receiving honor, by the triple imperial Crowns of Draperie.

After all these shows, thus ordered in their appointed places, follows
another device of Huntsmen, all clad in green, with their Bows, Arrows and
Bugles, and a new slain Dear carried among them. It sauoureth of Earl Robert
de la Hude, sometime the noble Earl of Huntington, and Son in Law (by
Marriage) to old Fitz-Alwine, raised by the Muses all-commanding power, to
honor this Triumph with his Father. During the time of his outlawed life, in
the Forest of merry Sh^^wood, and elsewhere, while the cruel oppression of a
most unnatural covetous Brother hung heavy upon him, Gilbert de la Hude, Lord
Abbot of Crystal Abbey, who had all, or most of his Lands in morgage: he was
commonly called Robin Hood, and had a gallant company of men (Outlawed in the
like manner) that followed his downecast fortunes, and honored him as their
Lord and Master; as little John Scathlocke, Much the Millers son,
Right-hitting Brand, Frvar Tuck, and many more. In which condition of life we
make instant use of him, and part of his brave Bowmen, fitted with Bows and
Arrows, of the like strength and length, as good Records deliver testimony,
were then used by them in their killing of Dear.

Now, because after my Lords landing, protraction of time necessarily required
to be anoyded, in regard of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, and other great personages, invited guests to this solemn Feast:
such speeches as should have been spoken to him by the way, were referred till
his Honors return to Saint Paul's in the afternoon. And then, another man,
of no mean sufficiency, both for knowledge and exquisite use of action, who
had in the morning guided and directed Neptunes Whale, made in the form of a
Triumphall Chariot on the water, and held the same office in the other Chariot
upon the Land of Man's life: near to the little Conduit in Cheapside, he
delivers this brief speech (importing a narration of the other devises) to
the Lord Mayor in manner following.

The Speech of Time in the afternoon, at the Lord Majors going to PAVLES.
Honorable Lord, Time has nothing else to tell you, but the brief meaning of
these several inventions. The water-deuices have already sufficiently spoken
themselves. This Ship, bearing your own name, and called the JOEL, trafficking
Englands Drapery with all other Countries, as by the goodly Ram or golden
Fleece of England appears, where two Houswifely Virgins sit carding and
spinning, is (after many happy voyages) returned to honor the day of her
worthy Owner, being safely brought home by Neptune and Thamesis, who (mounted
on a Lion and Seahorse) vouchsafe their attendance on your triumph. And in
stead of that Sea Chariot, which waited on the Argoe in the morning, they bring
another, graced with the same Royal Virtues, and Ensigns of Arms belonging
to those honorable Drapers. On the top is placed a Sphere or Globe,
intimating the world, created for the use of man, and such expense of time as
is allotted him. It is supported by the four Elements, Water, Earth, Air, and
Fire, as their figures and Emblemes do aptly declare. It runs on seven
wheels, describing the seven ages of man; his Infancy, Childhood,
Adolescency, or Stripling estate, Youth-hood, Manhood, Age, and Ages
extremity, or decrepit condition: all of them subjected to the power of the
seven Planets, as on each wheel they bear their Characters. It is drawn by
two Lions and two Horses of the Sea, figuring what swift motion hastneth on the
minutes, hours, months and years of our frailty: and the whole frame or body
guided by Time, as Coachman to the life of man. That other goodly Monument or
Pageant, with the glorious Sun in continual motion over it, appertaining to
the Drapers Armory; presents ye London in the supreme place of eminence, and
the twelve Companies (her twelve Daughters) all seated about her in their due
degrees, only Drapery is nearest to her, as being the first and chiefest
honored Society before all other. As supports to Londons flourishing
happiness, and continuance of the same in true tranquillity: four goodly
Mounts (as strong and defensive bulwarks) are raised about her, bearing
Emblemes of those four especial qualities, which make any Commonwealth truly
happy. Learned Religion, Military Discipline, Navigations, and Homebred
Husbandry.

For thus, my Lord, I truly understand,
No greater Cross can hap to any Land,
Then lack of Scholars, Soldiers, Sailors, Husbandmen,
Long may we have them all, Time says Amen.
Evening hastening on speedily, and those usual Ceremonies at Paul's being
accomplished: darkness becomes like bright day, by bountiful allowance of
lighted Torches, for guyding all the several shows, and my Lord homeward. The
way being somewhat long, the order of march appeared the more excellent and
commendable, even as if it had been a Royal Mask, prepared for the marriage
of an immortal Deity, as in the like nature we hold the Lord Mayor, to be
this day solemnly married to Londons supreme Dignity, by representing the
awefull authority of sovereign Majesty. No sooner comes he to his own
Gate, but there our supposed Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine, on behalf of the
honorable company of Drapers, who made no spare of their bounty, for full
performance of this days solemn Honor; speaks this ensuing speech.

Fitz-Alwines Speech to the Lord Mayor at Night.
NOw honored Lord, since day is done,
And you to your own house are come,
With all delight that we can make ye:
Me thinks we should not yet forsake ye,
But that strict Time will have it so,
And parts us, whether we will or no,
All then my Lord that I shall say,
Is, that your Honor would well weigh
Your worthie-minded Brethrens love,
Who have in firm affection strove;
How best they might renown this day:
In honoring you. And I dare say,
That never men did more desire
To stretch their love and bounty higher
Then they have done, and could afford
For such a worthy minded Lord,
Which they by me humbly commend
Still at your service: So I end.
Afterward, as occasion best presents it self, when the heat of all other
employments are calmly ouerpast: Earl Robin Hood, with Friar Tuck, and his
other brave Huntes-men, attending (now at last) to discharge their duty to my
Lord, which the busy turmoile of the whole day could not before afford: they
show themselves to him in this order, and Earl Robin himself thus speaks:

The Speech spoken by Earl Robert de la Hude, commonly called Robin Hood.
SInce Graves may not their Dead contain,
Nor in their peaceful sleeps remain,
But Triumphs and great Shows must use them,
And we unable to refuse them:
It joys me that Earl Robert Hood,
Fetched from the Forest of merry Shirwood,
With these my Yeomen tight and tall,
Brave Huntsmen and good Archers all:
Must in this Iouiall day partake,
Prepared for your Honors sake.
No sooner was I raysde from rest,
And of my former state possessed
As while I lived: But being alone,
And of my Yeomen seeing not one:
I with my Bugle gave a call,
Made all the Woods to ring withal.
Immediately came little John,
And Scathlock followed him anon,
With Much the honest Millars Son.
And ere ought else could be done,
The frollicke Friar came tripping in,
His heart upon a merry pin.
Master (quoth he) in yonder brake,
A Dear is hid for Marians sake,
Bid Scathlock, John, or honest Brand,
That has the happy hitting hand,
Shoot right and have him. And see my Lord
The deed performed with the word.
For Robin and his Bow-men bold,
Religiously did ever hold,
Not emptie-handed to be seen,
Were It but at feasting on a Green.
Much more then, when so high a day
Calls our attendance: All we may,
Is all too little, it is your grace,
To wink at weakness in this case.
So fearing to be ouer-long,
End all with our old hunting Song.

Friar. But good Master ere they sing,
Favor me to move one thing.
A boon, a boon, for Friar Tuck,
Who begges it with a lowly ducke.

Rob. What is it Friar?

Friar. Since we are thus raysde from our rest,
In honor of this famous feast,
And for his sake that may command,
(Next to my Master) heart and hand,
Of me and all these good Yeomen:
Ere we return to ground again,
Seeing jolly Christmas draws so near,
When as our service may appear,
Of much more merit then as now,
Which does no larger scope allow,
Then that which is already done;
Your love, my Lord, so much has won
Upon the Friar and his Compeeres,
As we could wish to live whole years,
To yield you pleasure and delight,
Be it by day, or be it by night.
For we have choice delights in store,
Command them, and I crave no more.

Rob. You hear (my Lord) the Friars motion,
Out of mere love, and pure devotion.
You see beside that all my men,
(For any season, where or when,)
Second his suit. May it please you then,
Not to dislike his kind request,
Earl Robin frankly does protest,
We will all strive to do our best,
When any occasion shall require,
The offer of our merry Friar,
For such a worthy minded Lord,
Robin Hood seals it with his word.

Friar. Thanks my dear Domine,
And to you noble Homine,
For to this Indenter,
Friar Tuck subscribes Libenter.
Now lest we offer wrong,
Fall to your Sing Song.

The Song of Robin Hood and his Huntes-men.
NOw wend we together, my merry men all,
Unto the Forest side-a:
And there to strike a Buck or a Doae,
Let our cunning all be tride-a.
Then go we merrily, merrily on,
To the Green-wood to take up our stand,
Where we will lie in wait for our Game,
With our bent Bows all in our hand.
What life is there like to Robin Hood?
It is so pleasant a thing a:
In merry Shirwood he spends his days,
As pleasantly as a King a.
No man may compare with Robin Hood,
With Robin Hood, Scathlocke and John:
Their like was never, nor never will be,
If in case that they were gone.
They will not away from merry Shirwood,
In any place else to dwell:
For there is neither City nor Town,
That likes them half so well.
Our lives are wholly given to hunt,
And haunt the merry Greene-wood:
Where our best service is daily spent,
For our Master Robin Hood.
FINIS.

