THE SPRINGS GLORY.

VINDICATING LOVE by temperance against the tenent, Sine Cerere and Baccho
friget Venus.

Moralized in a Mask. With other Poems, Epigrams, Elegies, and Epithalamiums
of the Authors THOMAS NABBES.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for Charles Green, and are to be sold by Nicolas
Fussell at the sign of the white Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

Optimae spei Iuveni
Domino BENEDICTO ROBERTS, filio natu minori NICOLAI ROBERTS Armigeri, amoris
ergo, and observantiae erga parents, sequentia poemata humillime dedicat

Thomas Nabbes.

To his intimate and learned friend Master THOMAS NABBES on his ensuing Poems.
LEt those who to the world often publish forth
Their own deserts, in praising others worth,
Throng for a room; and pride themselves to be
Ranck'd in the front of thy learned poesy.
It shall suffice me (who have never yet
Studied to humor others, nor have sweat
Like some, two hours in plodding jests, which may
At the first sight their author's wits betray)
To have a meaner room: for I nor come
To beg the reader mittigate thy doom;
Nor with intent to praise thy work or thee:
For that would seem a plain Tautologie.
Those, whose diviner souls Phoebean flame
Has thoroughly kindled, such as have a name
In The list of Phoebu's darlings, will admire
The eager flames of thy poetique fire.
None will dislike ought here, but such dull things
Whose souls are out of tune; When Phoebus sings
Some bayards will be bold to judge his strain
Harsh and unpleasing; yet applaud the vain --
-- Confused sound of some hoarse pipers voice,
And say it is rare, and makes an excellent noise.
If that it chance some fancy not thy strain
They Are dull and ignorant; the wiser train
Will praise thee for it, and utter still with fame
The often mention of thy honored name.
Let critiques censure, and these lines condemn,
Secured by thine own bays* their rage contemn.
C.G. Oxon.

To his honored friend Master THOMAS NABBES.
HAd I the massy wealth of Cheops, then
I Would raise a Piramid unto thy pen
That should for State put down the empty fame
Of Mausoleus tomb, blot out the name
The Suns Colossus had in that same day
When it bestrid the spacious Rhodian bay.
Let Momus prate; thou art above him far:
The curre that barks at, cannot hurt the star.
But why should I presume? for me to praise
Thy winged raptures, rhapsodies and lays
Were with dark Lantern up and down to run,
And show th'admiring world the glittring Sun.
Robert Chamberlain^.

THE SPRINGS GLORY; Within an Arch of agreeable workmanship, a Scaene of Winter
presents it self, the Trees and Earth covered with Snow, and in the middle
thereof a prospect of a fair house as the Mansion of Christmasse.
Venus and Cupid descend. Venus. WIthout good meat and drink must Venus freeze?
Must I derive my flames and my desire
From Ceres and from Bacchus? shall the fire
That burns in hearts, and pays me solemn rites
Kindle from fullness and gorg^d appetites?
It shall not Son. Learn of thy Sea-borne mother
Never to borrow power from any other.
The virtue that is our own, who dares to claim?
Are not both Gods and men by thy sure aim,
When at their bosoms thou direct'st a Dart.
Wounded with passion past the cure of art?
Did not the god of Medicine himself want;
(When he was s^ruck by thee) a sovereign plant
To heal his hurt? nor did it rancor by
Abundance of choice cates and luxury?
'Twas merely thy effect. Why then should we
To Ceres or to Bacchus deity
Assign our rights?

Cupid. In part we must; for they
Are aiders in our work, and therefore may
Share in the attributes of power. If wine
Did not the spirits and the blood refine,
Making them warm and active, I should throw
My shafts at rocks of ice, and from my Bow
The winged arrows of desire would fly
With empty and succeslesse battery.
If Ceres bounties flowed not, where should I
Find any flame to light my torches by?
Fullness and ease assist me more then all
The helps I have besides.

Venus. And therefore shall
They be preferred? Thou art a foolish boy.
Their base effects are lust; they love to joy
In what is sensual only. Our pure heat
Borrowes no activenesse from drink or meat;
It moves more in the soul. God Bacchus shall
Have his due attributes, and Ceres call
The plough, crookt sickle, flayle and many more
Her own admired inventions, and the store
She gathers for men's use. But should the mind
Make these her only objects, what a blind
And dangerous issue of effects would grow
From such a seed! high spirits strive to know
More then a common eye sees, and aspire
Still upwards like the Piramide of fire,
When earth tends to its center. We must move
More then the sense; else it is not perfect love.
To them Ceres and Bacchus. Here Is Ceres and Lyaens.

Ceres. We are told
By Maia's son that you intend to scould
With me and Bacchus.

Venus. I have cause to chide.
You Would rob me of my titles, and beside
Make it a gluttons tenent, there can be
No love without you.

Ceres. And your Deity
Has summond us for this: it is very good.
I must confess you made your father wood
To ravish fair Europa. Having seen
Traynes of Arcadian Virgins on the green
Tread their chaste measures, or with nimble pace
Through the Parthenian groves, and thickets chase
A well-breathed Stagge, one of them straight-wayes must
Be tempted to her ruin by his lust:
And this employment Venus still is thine.

Venus. Ceres is madd still for her Proserpine:
Whose rape has made her queen of the Abyss.
Who to be so rewarded would not kiss
The black lips of hells king? and to his bed
Bring the short pleasures of a Maydenhead?
Repine not at it then.

Ceres. I must whilst day
Has any light, or heavens bright eye a ray.
It was your sons great act to boast of; he
That suffers not th^infernals to go free
Of his diseases.

Bacchus. Rather Ceres mine:
For if the God had never tasted wine,
Not all the heat of his infernal fire
Could e're have thawed him into one desire;
Or kindled the least flame in his cold breast
Without my virtue.

Venus. It Is an idle jest.
Does Bacchus think he can with heat of wine
Light the bright flame of love, that is divine,
And burns not from such causes, but takes fire
From th'elementall part of pure desire
Unmixt with grossnesse? Thy effects are foul;
And motions of the sense, not of the soul.
Subscribe then to our power; my son and I
Must have the attributes.

Ceres. Let him lay by
His quiver rather. Ceres means to be
The Queen of Love, and Bacchus deity
Include all that is Cupids.

Venus. First I Will leave
To be immortal, and my self bereave
Of all that I can claim above the sky,
Or under heavens archt roof, if destiny
May give it confirmation. Take a Dart
And aim it at her proud imperious heart
To show in thy revenge what thou can do.

Cupid. I must not Mother. We Will refer it to
Another trial, and if Bacchus can
Confirm what he so saucily began
To argue, by example, we will deny
Nothing that is due unto his deity.

Bacchus. Content.

To them Christmasse and Shrovetide Enter. Christmas is personated by an old
reverend Gentleman in a furred gown and cappe, etc. And Shrovetide by a fat
Cook with a drying pan, etc. And see occasion has complied
Even with our wish. It cannot be denied
But these share both our bounties; have free use
Of all our gifts: and if you will not refuse
A trial from them --

Venus. Let them speak, whilst we
To their dispose refer the victory.

Shrovetide. I say Christmas you are past date, you are out of the Almanac.
Resign, resign. Let the Oven give place to the Drying Pan, and Mine't-pies
yield superiority to pancakes and Fritters.


Christmas. Resign to thee! I that am the King of good cheer and feasting,
though I come but once a year to reign over baked, boiled, roast, and
plum-porridge, will have being in despite of thy lard-ship. Thou art but my
fagge-end, and I must still be before thee.


Shrovetide. But thou will never be beforehand. Thou art a prodigal
Christmas; and Shrovetide has seen thee many times in the Poultry.


Christmas. Do scorn my liberality, thou rasty bacon, tallow-faced scullion?
Though thou be as fat as a Flemming, I Will have Lent choke thee with a
red-herring.


Shrovetide. I Will arm my self for that. In three days I can victual my
garrison for seven weeks: and it shall go hard but I will domineere in Lent
despite of the thin-chapt surgeon that makes men skillitons.


Christmas. As how?


Shrovetide. At any Noblemans house, I can lick my fingers in a privy kitchen.
Though I be out of commons in the hall, there is flesh to be had sometimes in a
chamber besides a Landresse. The very three-penny ordinary will keep me in an
upper gallery, and I can be invisible even in the pye-house. Should all fail,
the wenches I got with child shall long, and have the Physicians ticket.


Christmas. Thou get children!


Shrovetide. Yes more then Christmas, and better too: for thine are all
unthrifts, whores, or murderers. Thy son In and in, undid many a Citizen.
Thou have a Daughter called my Ladies hole, a filthy black slut she is; and
Put is common in every Bawdy house. It Is thought Noddy was none of thine own
getting, but an Aldermans, that in exchange cuckolded thee, when thou wast a
Courtier. Thou have one son bred up in the Country called Christmas gambolls,
that does nothing but break men's necks; and many more that would undo the
Commonwealth, were it not for the Groom porter.


Christmas. Do see these sirrah?


Shrovetide. Ceres and Bacchus: I am their worshipper. Were Stews tolerated,
and Venus the Grand Bawd of them, without good meat and drink, your young
Factors would never be able to break their Masters or Mistresses, nor your
shee-silke-worme in Cheap care a button for her foreman.


Ceres. Venus being overcome, I hope will yield,
Now she is vanquished in the open field,
And her weak forces scattered: nor can they
Gather new head to make a second fray.

To them Lent enters. He is figured in a lean Man, his habit like trouses,
and what other anticke devices may be thought proper* Venus. Yes: with this
champion; and his fresh supply
I Will wage new war, and call back victory.

Shrovetide. This leave thin-gut starveling, begot by a Spaniard* and nursed at
the lower end of Friday-street.


Lent. Why thou Helluo of hens and bakon, th^^ ^^rder houst of collops and
eggs; thou that make the kitchen proclaim its employment through the
neighborhood, with the sent of thy Lard and crumpets, what can thou boast
often?


Christmas. Children, children, thou parcht starveling: thou can^t g^t nothing
but Anatomies.


Lent. Children! I get more (I maintain not their lawfulness) then Christmas
and Shrovetide. Oh the virtue of Oysters, Lobsters, Sturgeon, Anchoves, and
Caveary. Why thou grout-headed bladder, puffed with the windiness of pared
apples coffered in batter: for every Brawne or hog, either Christmas or thy
self have demolisht; I have a thousand Herrings, despite of the Dutchmens
wastfull theft, let them rob the four Seas never so often. Besides, I couple
more then the Parson of Pancrace: I mean City woodcocks, with Suburb-wagtailes.


Christmas. Thou couple!


Lent. Who more? Is not S. Valentines day mine? are not Codds mine, thou
codds-head, and Maids mine? put them together thou will find they are things
--


Shrovetide. Thou art a thing of emptiness, and Lent was ever a Jack by
conversion.


Lent. Such a Jack as can come aloft, and do Venus more credit then thy
fullness. Do not I share of Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; the Innes I lie at in
my progress. Yet no cuckold can deny but Aries and Taurus should follow
Gemini. And it follows, or should, that I having two fathers my self, should
get most children.


Chri^tmas. Who were thy fathers prithee?


Lent. Devotion and Policy; and I have begotten Hypocrisy on a holy sister,
that despite of all Informers would have flesh, her belly full. Let Christmas
and Shrovetide eat and drink; I Will be for Venus, though I feed upon nothing
but herring-cobbs.


Venus. Who Is now the conqueror? Will Ceres now
Subscribe unto my power? and Bacchus bow
To Cupids awefull strength?

Ceres. Not till it is
Confirmed by better evidence then his.

Lent. Then mine ^ Observe.


Here the Scaene suddenly changes into a Prospect, with trees budded, the
earth somewhat green, and at one side an old Barn, out of which issues a
company of beggars, with a Bag-pipe. See you these good fellows, that prefer
the warm Sun, before the scrapps which niggardly Christmas and Shrovetide
feast them with; and would get a better race under a hedge to people New
England, then the Seperatists that possess it. Whilst they entertain ye, I Will
summon the Spring, and she shall moderate.

The Beggars dance. Exeunt. After the dance, is heard the ^hirping of birds;
and whilst the following Song is singing, the Scaene again changes into a
pleasant Arbor, in which the Spring in a green robe wrought over with flowers
presents her self. The Song.
See, see a Metamorphosis,
The late gray field now verdant is.
The Sun with warm beams glads the earth,
And to the springing flowers
He gives a new and lively birth
By th'ayde of gentle showers.
The Lambs no longer bleate for cold,
Nor cry for succor from the old:
But friske and play with confidence
Like Emblemes of true innocence.
Chorus.
The cheerful birds their voices straine^
The Cuckow's hoarse for want of rain.
The Nightingale does sweetly sing,
To welcome in the joyful Spring.
Spring. Thus break my gloryes forth that late lay hid
Within the icye earth, and were forbid
By Winters nipping cold to show their heads
Above the snowy covering of their beds.
The winds not rugged now, but calm and fair,
Sweep flowery Gardens, and perfume the air.
The woods shrill Choristers (whose frozen throtes
Late wanted motion,) now have found their notes;
Strayning their little organes to sound high,
And teach men art from Natures harmony.
Come you to welcome me?

Ceres. Yes lovely Maid;
And to have judgment from you, who most aid
In Loves great work.

Spring. Is there a strife between
The goddess of desire, and plenties Queen?
Will they subscribe, I Will moderate.

All. Content.


Spring. First hear my reasons; then my sentence: bent
Against neithers honors, for I must comply
Wi^^ ^^th as vertu^^. Venus Deity
Is powerful over all; and Ceres gives
Each that has being that by which he (...)
Yet many times excess perverts the end
Of pure intentions; and extremes extend
Their powers to undo those acts are free
In their own natures from impuritie*
Love ought to be Platonic, and Divine*
Such as is only kindled, and does shine
With beams, that may all dark effects con^roule
In the refined parts of the glorious soul.
Men do abuse your gifts, when they delight
Only to please their sensual appetite,
And heat the blood from ^ulnesse; whencethere grows
No perfect love, but such as only knows
The coursest difference, and therefore must
Presume to own no other name but lust.
In me let Temperance teach you to apply
Things to their best ends; and to rectify
All motions that intend effects, beside
What may run clear and current with theside
Of purest love: in which let all your jarres
Be reconciled, and finish your stern wa^res.

All. Thus we embrace in p^^ce.


S^^i^g. And I (...) Spring
Will lead a moderate measure. Chirpers sing
Your choysest airs; and as our ears they great,
Unto the Music we will apply our feet.

The Spring leads them a measure; after which they retire back to the Scaene.
Epilogue.
That of all the seasons am the least,
Though first in time, and usher in the rest,
Impart my pleasures freely, ^ut desire
You Will not abuse them with excess. My quire
Shall sing as every fair one does ^ecome
A chaste Bride, her Epithal a^i^m.
Though they are short be plea^'d with these, to you
I yearly will return and bring you new.
The Spring being received into the Scaene it closes.

The end.
An Encomium on the le^den Steeple at Worcester, repaired after a long time of
neglect in the year 1628. by the then Deane, who is now the right Reverend,
and right Honorable the Lord Bishop of London, and Lord high Tr^^surer of
England.
IF e're the Thespian Maidens did inspire
A breath of raptures warmed with sacred fire,
Let them assist. And you whose songs have raised
The^ fames above their ^oines, and so praised
Th'Aegyptian Pyramid; The Deli^n Fane;
Th'Ephesian Temple holy to Diane;
With Romes vast wonder; Mansoleus shrines;
The Suns G^^oss^s; thus to make them shine
In their dead a^^res, may you G^nij^
Pass all by transmigration into me.
But chiefly thou blessed The Founder canonized for his sancti^y.
Saint, now made divine,
Crowned with rewards of glory sweetly shine
On these submissive vows. Let me invite
Thy holy freeness to accept the ^uite
Of his devotion, who does only show
His will to pay what thousands ab^er owe.
And thou rare fabric, who do comprehend
Proportionsbeauty in a perfect end
Of all her elements, which formed stand
On thy octaedra base, let no black hand
Blot out thy name; for thou deserve the skill
Of all that ever climbed the Muses hill.
Since thy Hi^^a's strength for many an age
Has conquered storms, and the (...)
Of bur^ing (...)
Have taught prev^^^ion to their (...) frien^
I Will sing thy fame; and tell the One that begged the Steeple to have sold the
timber and lead; which was opposed by the Citizens.
Northern spy
That would have raised himself by beggary
^
How into rounds he might co^vert thy squares*
Transgressing thus a Geometrick rule,
He proved himself ^ true proportioned fule.
When from thy altitude I do survey
The distan^ risings of th'unequall way
That leads beyond perceptio^^ warry eye;
Th'exalted mountains joining to the sky:
The confluence of so ^any various ^eames
Do drown my seeing (...) ga^e^ with their (...)
And stupifie the s^^se. Sometimes ^^aine
I view the subject regious* wh^^ my (...)
With a (...) labors; and (...)
Beyond all comprehension, till the Si^^^^
Seems to decline, and with his g^lden chin
To kiss thy bowl, and fire himself therein*
When freed from this (...) I descend
To contemplate thy wonder^ every end
Gives new beginning to a second birth
Of artfull prodigies to fright the earth:
And make thy fo^me seem a demonstrative
Of those Platonic worlds in ^^mber five*
Containing angles inf^nite ^n show
As those small puncts, from whose concretion grow
What else may be divided. Let such dreams
(Raised from opinions fanci^) be the theames
Of their fanatic founders; whilst to thee
I attribute no immortality,
As part of what must perish* such a trick
Would make me seem ^ wilful heretic
Against Natures doctrine and de^ase thy glory
By false allusi^^^ (...) thy st^ry
Be drawn from what thou art: a perfect frame
To figure out the greatness of his name,
That did at thy erection justify
By miracles his blessed At the building thereof ^ workman falling from aloft
lay for dead: Whom the Founder passing by revived and made whole by praying
over him. Recorded in the window of the Cloister.
sanctity.
A pile exalted stands thy bulk within,
(Which does uphold thy superficial skin)
Of consecrated Oaks: Olympian Jove
Had none so fair in's Dodonean grove.
In these each regularitie does design
By a transverse, or a perpending line
Some principle of Art; which shows the eye
Of understanding what is Geometry.
As thou do climb thy form contracts each side
Into a point, which makes a Pyramide:
And then a Globe corrects thy high ascent
From joining with the fiery element,
Fearing your correspondence. There does sit
The watchful Cock (of care an Emblem fit)
To guard thee from surprizals, and to show
From what bad coast the envious winds do blow*
Who with their batteries have assayl'd thee long;
And would enforce thy chastity (though strong)
To a base prostitution; and unite
Thee with thy A steeple joining to it, upon which it seemed to be falling.
sister steeple by their might
In fatal ruins. But thy conquests prove
Time has been kinder: and (for age may love
Fair beauties, raising heates from cold desires)
He means to claspe thee in his latest fires.
Thy The outside being all lead.
ponderous outside now weighes down my skill,
Though it sustain it self. Some learned will
Disposed it so for fear the weight might crack
The earths strong axletree, or sinewed back.
So had our glory with the rest been lost;
And all in new confusion had been tossed:
Unless thy beauty once again might move
A reconcilement by the power of Love
That he might thee enjoy. But why in vain
Do I dilate what is greater then the strain
Of my weak powers; ^ince what I so desire
To comprehend I only can admire.
Yet I will be thy champion to defend
Thy fame against opposers, and contend
With Some that writ base libels upon it.
those that Satyr thee; that vainly spend
Their froth collections for the hated end
Of scorn and laughter, and neglect to pay
Their talents lent them by the King of day.
And though The repayring thereof neglected, till the Deanes coming thither.
some lately strove to rust thee more
Then times continuance ever did before.
Virtue has sent good spirits from her clime
Who will preserve thee to the length of time:
Repair thy breaches, and adorn thy brow,
And make thee shine again to us below.
And for these vows which I have paid thy worth,
Oh might I beg, that when my soul goes forth
Of this foul earth, to climb above thy head,
And that the rest be reckoned with the dead,
Thou would preserve my dust within thy womb:
So should poor Irus have a Celsus tomb.
Upon the losing of his way in a Forest parting from his company to go home,
toward the evening.
YOu that have ever wandered in the dark,
And thinking to hit home, still mist the mark,
Listen, whilst to the world I do relate
A sad disaster, which the will of Fate
Disposed me to through error. Gently blew
The murmuring winds, and where the earths sweetness grew
It scattered choice perfumes: which did invite
To satisfy our senses appetite
My self and others. Th'instrument of heat
Clothed in his glory, from his azure seat
Directed cheerful beams. So forth we went
To suck the purer air, and Southward bent
Our wanton course: when spungie clouds began
(As if the Sun had squeezed them) to drop rain.
This made us to retire: by which we see
All things are subject to incertaintie.
The golden tressed ruler of the day
Had now for his bright beams made open way.
Our number then increast, and so together
We journied with delight; but knew not whether.
A house at length did entertain us, where
We drank no English Ale, nor German Beer,
Nor Welsh Metheglin; having stayed a while
A Perry.
pleasant juice was brought, made us beguile
Time with more words then matter. Weary now
And surfeited with pleasures, have did blow
The sails of my desires, nor would I stay
For any guide to teach me lose my way.
Th'inflating liquor having made me blind,
I that came in before went out behind.
Here Error first began the Tragic jest:
I took the North for South, the East for West.
Darkness increast; and night the aid to harms
Hugged the worlds fabric in her Ebon arms.
When (oh the fate of darkness) 'cause 'twas night;
Or misled by that Error, or some sprite;
Or the conceited mischief which men call
The king of Fairies Poast; or whether all
Had met in counsel to contrive my harm;
Or witcht to it by some other envious charm;
I mi^t the path, straying through unknown places;
And always backwards went with forward paces.
Oh thou that art my life's commanding light
Th'ascendent in my birth, was it thy might
And powerful influence did direct my will
To be the better means of a worse ill?
And An Astrologer in the company that maintained a nuncius inanimatus to be
effected by the beams of the Moon, and many other ridiculous things.
Hermes thou whose understanding eye
Sees all the secrets of Phylosophie;
Thou cunning Moule that know to work thy way
Through thickest mysteries to the cleerest day
Of radiant knowledge, was not this days fate
Writ in thy book of Moons predestinate
For grief and danger? Yes, thou knew'st 'twas writ;
And by prevention could have hindered it.
But 'twas my error only: had she shone
I should have read it plainly in the Moon:
For such thy powerful art is, it can bind
The stars in characters to speak thy mind.
Now being thus from loving friends divided
Into a desert Forest was I guided,
Where horror did present a thousand fears,
But none of meeting Lions, Wolves, or Bears.
Yet there were diverse beasts; and never a one
But I would have been glad to feed upon.
Yet my sharp hunger I was forced to brook:
Unless the devil there was never a cook.
And here some thoughts of him made me suppose
That every tree I saw had cloven toes.
And when I spied the glimpses of a hill,
I durst have sworn that walked, and I stood still.
A Salamander I did often expect;
A Pigmie or a Sylvan to direct
My knowledge to some treasure: but my mind
Was vainly bent on what I never could find.
My friends that now had mist me, scatterdly
Were gone abroad with lights to search for me.
But all in vain: their showtes I did mistake
For Owls; and thought each light a flaming Drake.
So that by shunning of their guidance thus
I proved my self the ignis fatuus.
Meeting a ragged colt, I feared the elfe;
And then I thought 'twas time to bless my self.
But every thing I met with ran away
As if I were a greater sprite then they.
Armed with a mighty staff, but patience none,
In silent language I began to moan
My sad mishap; which could not answered be
By any there, but with like silencie.
But ^ow at length it won my cruel fate
To be a little more compassionate.
Hearing a dog bark I lift up mine eye
When through the foggy air I could descrye
A ragged chimney, and a roof that had
Two trusse of straw upon it: this made me glad.
He that this weather-beaten Mansion owned A Smith^ hou^e.

Being newly gone to bed, sweet slumbers crowned
His labor with sound rest: the fire was then
Newly put out; for had it burning been,
Mixed with the noise of hammers, who can tell
But that I might have taken it for hell.
Only the doors were fast, and Hilax voice
Was a shrill treble, not a hellish noise
Like Cerberus. By this arrived, I heard
The people snorting: Then I greatly feared
A sharp repulse. But using gentle words,
With, Friend I am a servant of my Lords,
I entered; where the rest of night I nested,
And m'almost tired spirits warmly rested.
And after Chanti^lo^re had summond day
I paid some thanks, and homewards hit my way.
And sure 'twas left behind; else in this fit
'Twas ten to one but I had lost my wit.
Upon excellent strong Beer which he drank at the Town of Which in Worcester
shire where Salt is made.
THou ever youthful god of wine,
Whose burnisht cheeks with rubies shine;
And brows with ivye chaplets crowned,
We dare thee here to pledge a round.
Thy wanton grapes we do detest*
Here Is richer juice from barley pressed.
Let not the Muses vainly tell
What virtue's in the horse-hoofe well,
That scarce one drop of good blood breeds,
But with mere inspiration feeds:
Oh let them come and taste this Beer,
And water henceforth they will forswear.
If that the Paracelsian crew
The virtues of this liquor knew,
Their endless toils they would give over,
And never use extractions more.
It Is Medicine; meat for young and old;
Elixir; blood of tortured gold.
It is sublimed; it is calcinate;
It Is rectified; precipitate:
It is Androgena Sols wife;
It is the Mercury of life.
It is the quintescence of Malt;
And they that drink it want no Salt*
It heales; it hurts; it cures; it kills:
Men's heads with proclamations fil^.
It makes some dumb, and others speak;
Strong vessels hold, and cracked ones leake.
It makes some rich, and others poor^*
It makes, and yet marres many a scor^:
On a black speck in form of a star under a fair Ladies eye.
WHat prodigy is this to fright
The well-pleased sense from its delight?
To see a Star whose light is turned
Into sad black, as if it mourned:
When placed in such a heaven, where
Nothing but gladness can appear.
It Is Merope, who yet does hide
Her glory being stellified.
And blushing at her mortal choice
When all her sisters do rejoice
By Gods embraced, has left the sky
To steal more luster from this eye.
But coming near that globe of light,
By chance the lids close in the sight,
And so prevent the theft, whereby
She is ecclipst eternally.
Nor will she ever more in heaven
Be seen to make the number seven.
Only if this fair one were
But fixed a constellation there
Whence she descended, 'twere a grace
To be a dark star on that face
Above the other six we see
Shine on the Monsters crooked knee.
An Elegy on the death of the hopeful Mr. WILLIAM ROBERTS, aged 11. Son to
the Worshipful NICHOLAS ROBERTS Esquire.
WHat subject has Death brought for my sad Mu^^
To practice art, and sorrow on? to use
(Her lightsome lays, and spritefull airs laid by)
Some mixture of Cromatick harmony:
It Is a sad subject, and requires each tone
And cadence to be finished in a groan.
Words such as we from grief can only hear,
Strayning the heart strings that restrain them there*
It Is a sad subject now, that living might
Have been an equal object of delight
With any one that fancy could devise
To please the inward, or the outward eyes.
A youth in whose sweet face each grace did dwell,
As if there were their Acidalian well:
And that they left Boetias cooling streams
To warm their naked beauties in his beams.
A youth whose colors, symetrie and eye
Made up a form to paint a Cupid by.
Yet ('against the tenent) Natures livelier part
Should still excel the workmanship of art.
A youth whose fair and glorious mind became
The Mansion of all virtues that have name.
And by his inclination did express
More age in's youth, then manyes age possess.
But now Deaths ashye hand has changed the hew
Of those bright cheeks where Roses lately grew:
And triumphs over his earth, that yet will be
In spite of Fate more conqueror then he.
Come Libitina then; deck thy sad brows
With wreathes of funeral Yough, and Cypress boughs.
Command thy flaming altars to be dressed
With spice stolen from a dying Phoenix nest.
Let every tear that falls upon his urne
Into a Pearl (and that most orient) turn,
'Till they have raised a pile, whose costly frame
May make forgotten Mansoleums name.
But why should empty wishes thus be spent?
His corpse enough enrich his monument.
And the long sacred clay is hallowed more
By holding of his relics, then before.
You then whom nature, or respects do tie
To Express affection by the outward eye
Weep not for's loss so much, since it has given
A shrine more to the earth, a Saint to heaven.
An Epigramme on an old unhandsome, yet lustful woman; who was discovered to
wear drawers of black taffata.
THe divel's in it: did ever Witch
In mourning cloth her wrinckled breech
Unless the Incubus were dead
That had her withered may denhead?
Why that part veiled? the face left free,
That has no less deformity?
A pox on both, the reason's smelt:
She Would have one seen, the other felt.
That neither sense into mislike might grow,
Though she be light, she keeps all dark below.
On a fair Lady, whom a mean Gentleman hearing her sing, and play, fell in
love with.
IM sure in heaven. No mortal ear
Did ever such sweet Music hear.
A voice as if each ravishing note
Were relisht from an Angels throat.
Applied to cords are struck so clear,
As if each finger moved a sphere.
So full expressing every part.
That concord need no other art.
Besides, my instruments of sight
Are dazzell'd with a glorious light.
The Sun's but shadow to her eye;
And day more dark then midnights sky.
Yet midst this heaven there is a hell:
The spice she breathes I may not smell.
Nor dare to quench my longing sipp
One drop of Nectar from her lipp.
Nor touch her hand; much less what is hidden,
And by a stricter law forbidden.
But might I purge my earth to move
In her high orb so far above
My pitch of flight; or but aspire
To rarifie it with her fire,
I Would in a perfect heaven be
In spite of my mortality.
An Epithalamium on the hopeful happy Marriage of Master BVRLACYE, and Mistress
ALICE BANKS married in December. 1637.
UP grey-ey'd morning, comb thy golden hair,
And with thy blushes stain the freckled air.
Rouse the forgetful Sun from Thetis bed,
And bid him shake the tresses on his head;
That flames of light may usher in his way,
And give beginning to a glorious day.
Upon the God of Unions altars see
What piles are kindled of rich spicery.
As when the Phoenix in her pregnant death
Expires her soul with her Panchaian breath.
Me thinks thou art lazy Phoebus. If thou please
To dwell so long with our Antipodes,
Remain there still: thy radiance we will supply
With brighter beams shot from the Brides fair eye:
That shall create a day where thy light fails
In darkest bottomes of Cimmerian vales:
And through all seasons their effects dispense
Above the power of thy weak influence.
December shall translate himself to May,
And with the Summers sweetes checker her away.
And it is his hope her lasting course will bring
A change in time for him to lead the Spring.
The Northern air that moved with waving ice
Melted, as if 'twould quench the sacrifice,
And clowd the days pomp. But from those cold showers
Shall grow new issues of most fragrant flowers,
Warmed into life, and taking perfect birth
Where her soft steps do fructify the earth.
As she does pass the birds shall streine their thro^^s.
And beat the air with artificial notes,
Forgetting wildness. Yea, sad Philomel
Shall cease the story of her fate to tell,
And tone delightful airs, such as are song
To Victory by a triumphing throng.
Now Sir to meet your joys, your self address,
Clothed in the glory of a happiness,
Which beauty, cha^titie, and constant love
Make absolute, and is confirmed above.
Take to your soft embraces a pure frame
Where all the virtues dwell that have a name.
When every sense is filled, in them you will find
Endless delights to feast the immortal mind.
Being possessed of all that chaste desire
Can warm your active souls to with his fire,
Enjoy them without change: to such as you
The repetition will present them new.
Whilst all men's zealous wishes are to see
Those pleasures blessed in a posterity.
On a Mistress of whose affection he was doubtful.
WHat though with figures I should raise
Above all height my Mistress praise:
Calling her cheek a blushing rose,
The fairest June did e're disclose.
Her forehead Lillies, and her eyes
The luminaries of the skies.
That on her lips Ambrosia grows,
And from her kisses Nectar flows:
Too great hyperboles; unless
She loves me, she is none of these.
But if her heart, and her desires
Do answer mine with equal fires,
These attributes are then too poor.
She is all these, and ten times more.
An Elegy on a lovely young child drowned at London Bridge, in the year 1335.
Where Is funeral Goddess? why does she delay
The solemn rites belong to this sad day?
Slights she so small a Hearse? will she deny
The dues belong to every memory?
Come and attend them, whence thou shall derive
A glory great as Fate did ever give
Thy last respected Deity: shall have
As much true honor by his little grave,
As if it were some great Colossus tomb
Swelling a Mountain from the earths stretched womb*
And thou unruly stream that did deprive
His parents of their chiefest joy alive,
What sin of his made thee the instrument
And means, of such a seeming punishment?
His innocence never tempted heaven; his face
Might move some wanton God to an embrace.
Which makes me think thy amorous Geneus might
Attempt him from us for his Catamite.
If so, you were good waters, and do win
Eternal songs for hindering such a sin.
But this suffices not. Eyes flow amain,
As if they meant to drown him once again.
Or fearing you ashamed of what you have done
Should into Neptunes boundless bosom run,
To hide your selves leaving the channel dry,
Their flood of tears should that defect supply.
Or else congealed to Pearls, a shrine should be
To keep his ashes, and his memory.
A PRESENTATION Intended for the Prince his Highness on his Birthday the 29 of
May, 1638. annually celebrated.
A Curtain being drawn, an Alehouse is discovered, out of which Time drives
certain ignorant, and yet Great undertaking Almanack-makers. Time. ANd must I
still be vexed! shall my gray age
Be played upon, as if I were a Page
To your fond Art, not Nature: did not live
But by the stipend which you yearly give.
Your owne's but forty shillings, and that price
Binds you to order me by sage advice
With Ticho Brach, and Ptolomy, so far
You dare out-doe a learned Albumazar.
And with Predictions cheat the faith of men,
That make your books their gods; and from your reign
Or drought foretold inhaunce the price of grain,
This is the end of your high practice.

1. Alm. We
Do all by just rules of Astrology.

Time. Starre-gazing idiots, you Astrologers!
That understand not what the name inferres.
You have not enough Grammar to conceive
The words true Etymon; and therefore leave
Your vain replies, lest I apply them to
Another use.

2. Alm. What would Time have us do?


Time. Not fright credulity with this years wonders;
Eclipses; tempests; frosts; snowes; storms and thunders.
And you that sad fates sadly do report
In borrowed Latin from the Innes a court;
Let not great Princes; Statesmen, and whole Nations
Suffer this year by your Prognostications:
As if you could the fates of all men teach,
When your conjecture has obtained the reach
Of probability: for which your ears
May stand in time as fixed stars on the spheres
Of some round pillory. 'Twill teach you how
It Is judgment to be silent, though you know.

3. Alm. Why Astraregunt homines.


Time. It Is true:
Stars govern men; but Time shall govern you;
And regulate your studies: or he will be
No longer ruler over his Pentarchie.
You shall not stuff your annual books with rimes
Bought of the Ballad-mongers of the times;
In which (and that shows little Poetry)
He must enveigh against wine and venerie.
Prescribe the fittest time for cutting corns:
And when the Pigges should fear the gelders horns.
These are your ^abours; and by such as these
Each of you shows himself Philomates.
You likewise think it is grace your years works are
Fixed on the backside of some chalkie bar,
Where Is your own score, perhaps for Ale or Beer
You will not pay 'till the Platonic year.

4 Alm. Time Satyrs me.


Time. Indeed Time cannot lie:
You know his Motto: (...).
It Is well that you can make the country Squire
For two pence yearly a Chronologer.
Tell him how long it is since the world began;
And since the Conquest every Monarchs reign.
Then with this store enabled he is complete;
Can welcome friends with talk as well as meat.
Before poor tenants have their rent to pay
The Landlord's skillful in the quarter day:
Knows every Terms returns, and when he is ti'de
By a Subpaena on his mare to ride
To London; where he only learnes to boast
How much his journey, and his law-sutes cost.

2. Alm. Time knows that we are scholars.


Time. So you are;
And learned ones too: whose speculations dare
Reach at sublime things, when you cannot spy
What snakes of folly at your own feet lie.

3. Alm. What would Time have us then?


Time. I Would have you be.
Not vain prescribers of men's destiny;
But Registers of actions, such as may
Challenge deserv'dly a peculiar day
To every owner. You me thinks should show
The executions done by The English bow,
When black Prince Eaward bravely did advance
His Ensigns through the very heart of France.
I will have all the world observe this day,
So glorious by the birth of him, that may
Fill volumes with his acts, and challenge more
Then all the great Heroes went before.

4. Alm. Such things as those Historians ought to day.


Time. Be nothing, or be you Historians too.
Practice a reformation, or (fond Elves)
Changed into Satyrs you shall lafh your selves. Exit.

1. Alm. Is the gray dotard gone?
We are then alone:
Good fellows every one
Let Us call my hostess Ioane.

2. Alm. Well said rithmer* thy halting verses will hardly support the fat
cripple any longer that begs with them. Would we had some Ale.


3. Alm. Hang this Time that would alter our profession, which is of equal
antiquity with him. Suppose we have abilities; must we use them as he please?
No: let us inspire our selves with Ale, and compile an everlasting Ephimerides.


1. Alm. Where Is the stock-boy?
Do not mock boy:
Lest I knock boy
Your learned block boy*

3. Alm. Have thou none left of thy six years before hand? If the Stationers
refuse to trust, our books shall never more credit the Company with rubricks
in the title.


2. Alm. We Will try all the houses in the Zodiac; and if they will not trust,
we will pull'downe the signs.


3. Alm. Here is the sign of the Moon, the rendevous of our fraternity. If
the worst comes to the worst, we will pawn Time for the reckoning.


4. Alm. By your favor we may more easily spend him.

Hostess enters.
3. Alm. Here comes she will fill us the comfortable liquor.


2. Alm. By the dozen?


3. Alm. By the score boy. Wilt not Hostess?


Host. No indeed sir. I Will hazard no more upon your next years Almanac. You
say there is a man in the Moon drinks Claret; keep him company. The woman at
the Moon will keep her Ale for better customers.


3. Alm. Shall we have no Ale then?


Hostess. Not a cockle-shell full without money beforehand.


3. Alm. Here Is two groats; fetch every man his pot, and before we drink a
health we will curse thee.


Host. The Fox will fare the better. Exit.


3. Alm. May thou have always pennilesse guests like us, 'till thou pawn
thy petticoate to pay the Brewer, and thy glorious shelves shine not so much as
with an earthen platter. Instead of Shoelane hangings may the walls of thy
house be painted with chalk; and the figures of no more value then cyphars.
May thou weekly be subject to informers, and thy forfeited license be put to
the last use of wast paper.


Host. Host enters with drink, and exit presently. Stop your mouth sir.


3. Alm. Have thou brought Ale? cry thee mercy. Here Is a health to the Prince,
whose Birthday Time would have should be the whole subject of an Almanac.


4. Alm. Let him give the conceit to a Poet; it may be worth a day to him.


They drink, and are transformed into Satyrs, bornes growing out of their
heads. 3. Alm. Time enters. Ha! has Circes given us an enchanted cup; or are
our wives turned City Witches? These are fine jestes.


Time. It Is your own idle humor makes you beasts.


3. Alm. Forgive us Time.


Time. Nay dance a Horne-pipe now.
That done perhaps I Will crop your well-growne brow.

They dance: at the end whereof their horns fall away. 3. Alm. Ha! we are men
again.


Time. Hence: since you slight all counsel that is mine,
I Will employ others in my great design.

Time drives them forth. A Symphonie of Music with chirping of Birds, singing
of Nightingales and Cuckoes. The Scaene changing into a pleasant Garden, ^ime
brings in May, attended by Flora and Vertumnus, who sing the following Song.
The Song.
On, gently on; the sky is fair:
Arabian winds perfume the air,
As they the Eastern gardens sweep,
Or Amber floating on the deep.
Such sweets do here the sense bewitch.
The Phoenix pile is not so rich.
Chorus.
Here is a presence, from whose (...)
An influence awes all destini^s.
A Su^ue that can with on^ bright ^^y
Make where it shines (...)
Sing, sweetly sing. The chirpi^g bi^^^
Have got new notes, and better words.
What Nature wants Ar^ does supply,
And makes it perfect harmony.
Such ^ounds do^ here enrich the ears*
Above the Music of the Sp^^^^^s.
Chorus.
Here are presented to the tuft
Ripe fruits and early, that will last.
For such we banish Nect^r hence,
Here Is perfect May in every sense.
Time. Welcome to Time thou comfort of the earth,
T^^t ^ith the warm do we giv'st a lively birth
To all her glories, which cold win^er late
Wrapped in his clouds of ice: she desolate
Vngarnisht then, wore nothing on her head
But snow and barrenness, nor was her bed
Covered with green: then heavens crystal eye
Seldom peep out of his bright canopie.
But now thou have unto the infant Spring
Given perfection; and thy blessings bring
The ^^^mers hopes on. Thou Times Queen shall be
Whilst Flora and Vertum^us wait on thee.
Thou own'st a glory yet tran^e^ (...) the (...)
Of these, as day light does the (...) ^ime of rest.
This day, that makes Time young, in hope to see
A thousand revol^tio^ (...) be (...)
Dissolved, to gaze o^ Trophies shall ado^^^
The Princes lif^, and (...) wa^ this day home*
Go my delig^^ (...) the (...)
Of all thy pleasures; to his graciou^ ^ye
Present the (...)

May. I (...) that are
Worthy his high acceptance^ they are far
Inferior to the things that should set forth
The fullness of his glory and his worth.
The pastimes which belong to me are rude,
Fitter for course ones, and the m^ltitude^
Yet (so the (...) may be pardoned) they
Shall enter to delight him as they ^^y.

A Morisk Dance. Time. He Is pleased with this Greatness^ and goodness (...)
At such proportion in his Pri^cely frame,
That every part of hi^, his heart, his eyes,
Express them in a due equallitye.
I have another to present him, then
We Will yield ^o change.

May. I Will never change whilst more
Keep registers of Time. And though it b^
Custom, that they do chiefly welco^e (...)
At my first entrance, this shall be my day
As the only one that trownes the pride of May.
I Will wear no other flowers upon my head
But the Deluce; with Roses, white and red;
And the stout Thistle: each of which implies
An Emblem full of sacred Mysteries.
The Lilly and the Rose are beauties flowers:
They deck; the Thistle shall defend his bowers.
The white and red Rose thornelesse, signify
A gentle rule: The Lilly, soveraigntie.
The Thistle strength and power to quell his foe^
That rudely dare attempt to gather those*
Besides, these several flowers do appertain
To Nations subject to his future reign.
And this is all poor May can strame her powers
To do; to make her Garland of his flowers.
And cause men yearly on this day to see
His name preserved unto posterity.
Time has some rich thing to pre^ent.

Time. I have
(As Time is powerful) summond from the grave
Eight Princes all of Wales, whose histories
Shall be instruction, and their memories
Present Heroic actions so this mind,
That though their fortunes were not always kind,
Their virtues he shall strictly imitate,
And make those virtues awful over Fate.
Vertumnus you, and Flora you be gone.
And if their ayrie forms are quite put on
Let them appear; whilst lovely May and I
Listen to th'Birds and Natures harmony.

Another Sympho^^^ with (...) the Scare is varied into a glorio^^ ^xpr^ssi^n of
(...) in which appear the eig^t (...) eight Princes of Wales, distinguished by
the several (...), and inscriptions on their Shields. Who whilst the following
so^g i^ singing, approach the Presence salut^ the Prince, then place themselves
in a figure for the Dance. The Song.
From The Earth whom^ honor long has slept*
And ^oblest dust (as treasur^ h^^e)
By hallowing clay has made it shine
More glorious then an Indian mine,
These brave Heroic shadows come
To sport in this Elysium.
Chorus*
For theirs and this do both agree
In all but the Eternity.
From the air, or from the Spheres above
As they in perfect concord move.
Let Music sound, and such is may
Equal his hope that rules the day.
Thus do we welcome you to night
Unto our Mansion of delight.
Chorus.
For yours and (...) do both agree
Inall but the Eternity.
The Dance ended they retire, (...) speaks the Epilogue. Time. OLd Time leaves
all his blessings that he may
Here with this presence; and will every day
Confirm possession. Sadly sets the Sun
After his days course cheerfully was run.
The Moon looks pale; the Tapers dimnly burn:
The fear of your departure makes them mourn.
Sweet rest attend ye all: Good night it is late,
Many birth-dayes may you thus celebrate.

Time being received into the Scaene it closes.

The End.

