A PARAPHRASE OF THE CIV. PSALM. BY DAVID MVRRAY.

Edinburgh, Printed by ANDRO HEART, ANNO DOM. 1615.

To his sacred Majesty.
THat princely Prophet whose celestial Vain,
In sweetest Measures, and soule-charming Lays,
To his dear Harp so fealingly bewrayes
Man's perfect Way to Pleasure and to Pain:
Bequeathed the Skill of his Skie-fostered Brain,
(Whilst he himself crowned with immortal Rays,
Of endless Glory rests, not fading Bays)
Here Phoenix like to be renewd again.
And as from that Arabian Birds sweet Ash
One still proceeds of like admired Wing:
The sacred Fury of best Isreal's King
To Britanes Monarch does so fully pass,
By which inflamed He sings, that Heavens Decree,
None worthy DAVID'S Muse, and Harp but He.
Your Majesty's humble servant, David Murray.

A PARAPHRASE of the CIV. PSALM.
MY Soul praise thou Iehouahs holy Name,
For he is great, and of exceeding Might,
Who clothed with Glory, majesty, and Fame,
And covered with the garments of the light,
The azure Heaven does like a Courtaine spread,
And in the depths his chalmer beams has laid.
The Clouds he makes his chariot to be,
On them he wheels the crystal Skies about,
And on the wings of Aeolus, does He
At pleasour walk; and sends his Angels out,
Swift Heralds that do execute his will,
His words the heavens with fiery lightnings fill.
The Earths foundation he did firmly place,
And laid it so that it should never slide,
He made the Depths her round about embrace,
And like a Robe her naked shores to hide,
Whose waters would o'rflow the Mountains high
But that they back at his rebuke do fly.
At the dread voice of his consuming thunder,
As these retire, the mountains in the Sky
Do raise their tops, like Pyramids of wonder,
And at their feet the pleasant valleys lie,
And to the floods he does prescribe a Bound,
That they Earths beauty may no more confound.
The fertile Plains he does refresh and cheer
With pleasant Streams which from the Mountains fall,
To which (to quench their Thirst) all Beasts draw near,
Even to the Ass whom never Yoke did thrall:
And on the Trees by every crystal Spring,
Heavens Quiristers do sweetly bill and sing,
The thirsty Tops of Skie-menacing Hills
He from the Clouds refreshes with his Rain,
And with the Goodness of his Grace he fills
The Earth, withal that does therein remain,
He causes her both Man and Beast to feed
The wholesome Herbs, and tender Grass to breed.
The fruitful Yuie strict-embracing Vine,
To glad Man's Heart he has ordaind and made,
And gives him oil to make his Face to shine,
And to increase his Strength, and Courage breed,
The mighty Trees are nourishd by his hand,
The Cedars tall in Lebanon that stand.
On whose wide-spreading, high and bushie Tops,
The flightering Birds may build their Nests in peace,
And in the Fur that pitchie Tears forth drops,
He has preparde the Storke a dwelling Place,
The Mountains are unto the Goats refuge,
And in the Rocks the Porcupines do lodge.
He has appointed Seasons for the Moon,
To fade, to grow, whiles fair to look, whiles wane,
And makes bright Phoebus when the Day is done,
In THETIS Lap to diue his head again:
He clouds the Skies, and does in Darkness pight,
Over all the Earth the Courtaines of the Night,
Then all the beasts from out the forest creep,
To seek his pray the Lion loudlie roares,
The Serpents hiss, the Crocodile does weep,
As if she would bewail them she deuoures,
And when the Sun returns they all retire,
And in their Dens do couch them selves for fear.
And then does man in safety freely go,
To ply his work with diligence till Night,
Thy wondrous wonders who, O Lord, can show?
The earth is filled with thy Glory bright,
And thou have stored the Deepe-wyd Ocean Sea,
With Fish, Beasts, Monsters, nomberles that be.
There do the Winged Wooden Forts forth go,
To climb the glassie mountains with their Keeles,
There Liuiathan wanders to and fro,
And through the waltring Billows tumbling reeles,
Who in that Liquid Labyrinth enclosed
Does play and sport as thou him have disposed.
All living things, O Lord, do wait on thee
That in due season thou may give them food,
And thou unfolds thy liberal hands most free
And gives them every thing may do them good:
Thy blessings thou so plenteouslie distills,
That their abundance all things breathing fills.
But if thy face thou do withdraw in wrath,
Thy creatures all then languish, grieve, and murne,
Or if thou angry take away their breath,
They perish straight and into dust return:
But when thy Sprite thou sends them to renew,
All fresh does flowrish, Earth regaines her hue.
In his most glorious works let God rejoice,
Who makes the Earth to tremble with a look,
Let men admire and Angels with their voice
Extol his Name whose touch makes Mountains smooke;
To this thought-passing speech-expreslesse, Lord,
While Breath extends will I still praise afford.
He will receive my humble suit in love,
And in his favor I shall ever joye,
The wicked from the Earth he will remove,
And wholly heauen-dispising worms destroy.
But whilst they buried lie in endless shame,
My Soul praise thou Iehouahs holy Name.
D. M.

FINIS.

