Of the communion gospel, and the scriptures of. god, are untrue? God forbid.
Priest. Truly young man, I am sorye for you. I am affrayde that I shall be
feign to put you up to my Lord: then are ye undone. Prentyse. Do as ye shall
think best. Fare ye well master person: God open your heart.

Be ashamed of your doings ye Papystes.

Of the lawful and unlawful usury amongst Christians, added by Wolfgang
Muscul unto the end of his book upon the Psalms.

The Preface.
Amongst other evils of this present time, also pestilente usury is so far
grown and toward the vengeance of God, that I may think it altogether in
vain too speak any thing against it, yea, though it were spoken with much
earnestnes, and singular endeuer.

For we have known by experience, that this evil did then specially increase,
when as in our time it began to be openly blased and reproved by the
preachinges and writings of godly learned men: that almoost even as the
disease of the Canker, after cuttinge grows and spredeth more hurtfulli tha^
before so after just and deserved reprouinge is this becomen incurable and
most noisome.

Wherefore I might well be thought to loose my labor, and as it is said by a
proverb, to wash tyle stones, if I were not bonden by promise, and forced by
letters of my brethren.

Therefore that I may in any wise keep promise, and please my brethren, I will
so far speak of usury, as may be profitable unto them that be godly,
and as yet not so much infected with this pestilente disease, as is paste all
hope. I know at what times, and by what persons there has been disputations
concerning usury, not only in Germany, but also in the schools of other
contries: but I will not meddel with scholerly shredinges, that be as fast
entangled one with an other, as the nature of usury it self is inwrapped
together, but I will simply utter those things, which are mete to be spoken,
without any cumberous contention.

First I will tell what usury is. And then that it may be seen, if it can be
lawful unto Christians, I will co^ferre it with the doctrine of Christ, and
with the profession of Christen religion.

Of the lawefull and unlawful usury.
Vvolfgang Musculus.
What is usury.
LEst that any man might accuse me as a mainteiner of usury, I will bring a
definition of usury, not now devised of my felse, but long ago setforth by
them, whose godliness in Christ's church has gotten such authorite, as can not
be roted out by usurers, or by their defenders.

Hierom upon Ezechiel in his.6. book does write thus. Some me^ think usury
to be only in monei, the which thing godly scripture foreseing does take away
the overplus of every thing, so that you may not receive more than thou have
given. Also other, for money put too usury, are wont to take littell gifts of
diverse sorts of things: and they do not understand that the scripture
calls usury and overplus, whatsoever thing it be, that they take more,
besides yt which they did give. These be Hiero^s saienges. Ambrose of Nabuthe,
says. Many fleinge the precepts of the law, when they have delivered their
monei unto marcha^tes, do not exact usury in money, but of their wares they
take in valor as of vsures. Therefore let the^ hear what ye law says. Thou
shall not take usury of meats, nor of any other thing. Therefore meat is
usury, and apparel is usury, and whatsoever comes too the stock is
usury, and what name soever thou will give it, usury it is. So says Amb.
Augustine also upon the.36. Psalm. defines usury after this sort. If thou
commit usury to a man (that is to say) if thou lend thy monei, of whom thou
lokest too receive any thing more than thou haste given, not only money, but
any thing more than thou have given, if it be wheat, if it be Wine, if it be
Oil, if it be any manner of other things, if thou look to receive more than
thou haste given, thou art an usurer, and in that too be disalowed. Thus
says he. Therefore, according unto these men's sayings: Usury is, not
oneli to take, but also to hope and look for any thing, besides that which is
called the stock: that is to say, besides that which is given, under what
name so ever it be cloked. For the change of the name, does not take away the
wickedness of the vice which abides.

And it is euidente in the.18. of Ezechiel, that that is usury, what soever is
taken besides the stock, when as the Prophet says: He lends nothing upon
usury, he takes nothing over. For as D. Kimhi does well declare, what it is
to lend upon usury, it is expounded by that which follows, where it is
added: he has taken nothing over. And so is it read in the.25. of Leuit.
Thou shall not take of him usury, and any thing over, but thou shalt fear
thy God. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, thou shall not give thy
meat to receive more over. Also Cesars laws in the book of usury, in like
manner call usury, whatsoever is taken besides the stock: howbeit they suffer
the use of it after a sort, of the which we shall speak afterward. It is
called vsura in latin, because for the use of money a certain reco^pense is
received, whereby there returns some vantage unto the usurer. The Grecians
call it Tocon, as a chylding or generation of the money stock. In Hebrew it is
named Neschech, of biting, because at ye last it biteth him, which pays
va^tage. Thus much is now said, to show what vsurye is.

Wether usury be lawful or not.
WE do seek here too know not of usury of vsuries, which the Jews do use,
of the which no man doubts, but that it is unlawful and abominable, and in
no wise to be suffered: but of simple usury, by the which more is taken than
given, whether it be much or littell, whether it be done in money, or in
other things. For this usury some men suppose not to be unlawful of it
self, but except it too be made unlawful by unlawful circu^sta^ces. I deny
not that there may be fond a kind of vsuri, which is not unlawful, but
profitable: such is that usury, which is called earth usury, by ye which
much more is received, tha^ was by sowi^g to ye earth committed. This usury
does he give, which gives unto all me^ all things, and ^ not wtsta^ding, has
never ye less. That vsuri is so given, that it hurts nothing the geuer, and
much profitteth the receyuer, and is not to be condemned of covetousness, but
rather by reason of great good will and excellent well doing is much to be
praised.

Behold, here is a kind of usury for the, lawful, profitable, and godly, by
the which Abraham and Isaac became rich. By this some times thirty fold, some
times sixty fold, and some times an hundredth fold, without sin is both
given of God, and also received of man. This usury did our forfathers much
use, which now is rekened vile, and forced too give place unto the damnable
usury of money. And there is an other certain usury, by the which without any
sin, a man may take an hundredth for one. This Christ hi^ self in ye sted of
his father, as a shuerti does promise unto his faithful, saying: And eueri
one, which shall leave house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or sons, or fyldes, for my name, shall receive an hundredth fold and
possess life everlasting. Mat.19. Behold an other and a heavenly kind of
vsuri, unto ye which we be called and not feared from it. But I pray you, see
how many there be, which set their minds to ye gethering of heavenly riches,
with so great gains?

By these examples of usury it is proved, not to be unlawful of it self, to
restore more tha^ you have received, or else to receive more than thou have
given: but whether ye sam sort of usury, which in our time has ye vpperha^d,
and of ye which at this time we speak, have the same reason, yt the usury of
ye earth, or ye heavenly usury has, by ye which God him self is ^ greatest
usurer of all other, this now must be spied with simple and pure eyes:

They, which defend customable usury, do devise many things which they may
shewforth, and whereby they may be bold to sai, that it is not unlawful. They
bring ye law out of the book, called ye code in ye treatise of vsures, by ye
which is permitted, yea ordained ye hundredth, and the half of ye hundredth
etc. and they think yt ye authorite of ye civil law makes yt, which they do,
either not to be usury, or if it be usury, not to be unlawful usury: we
au^swer yt the law maker was forced of necessite, not to defend usury, but too
set some stai of exceeding covetousness, ye which thing ye text of ye law it
self proves, for it takes away great hurtfulnes of usury, and apoi^teth
certain measures, over ye which nothing may be claimed. His desire was without
dout, yt such charity might preuail among christians as should leave no place
unto usury: but for because yt covetousness did grow past measur, he judged it
needful yt it should be kept in by latises or railes, and therefore he cut away
ye hurtfulnes of usury, even unto ye midst of it. Wherefore ye law does not
maintein usury, and make it lawful, but rather witnesses yt charity among
christians was waxe^ cold, and most filthi and abominable covetousness growe^ so
far yt it must be kept under, by ye authority of ye Emperor. And so as ye
law of divorce, made by Moises, did not excuse ye Jew before god, which used ye
law as to be giltles of breaking wedlock: likewise this civil law does not
make vsuri so lawful yt a christian man may use it without offense before god.
As Christ spoke unto ye Jews of ye law of divorce: It was not so from ye
beginning, and for ye hardness of your hearts, Moses did suffer a byll of
divorce, and so sent them back unto the first beginning of lawful wedlock,
unto the which they ought to conform the^ selfs: eue^ so in this case or cause
of usury, we christians must look unto ye pureness, beginnings, righteousness
and equite of christian religion, which is to be seen Math.5. and Luc.6. and we
must not look unto the civil laws. For they are not made for christie^s,
which have no need of civil laws, to ye end yt they there by should be
stayed from their covetous desire, lest that the break and leap over the
border of measure. For they are so gyded by the spirit of love, yt they love
their neighbor heartily, and are ready to bestow upon him, not only their
money, but if need be, even their life also. Where as this love prevails,
there can be no place for any coueteousnes: nor there is no reason or cause
for any such laws to be established by the which coueteousnes may be
measured. Wherefore the mind of the lawemaker was not too mainteyne him, which
in lending requires usury, but too provide for him yt boroweth: le^t yt
because he is oppressed with need, he should be forced to borow monei, and then
by the insatiable covetousness of usurers, he should be utterly pilled and
spoiled, when as charity is so cold, that he can find none, that will lend
freely without usury. Wherefore yt law, made by a christian Emperor, concerning
usury, is a plain proof, that love of neyghbors was waxe^ cold, to the great
shame of the christian name: and so it is far from excusing of vsurye, in any
such sort as to make it lawful. Christians are in case, partly by ye inward
gyding of ye holy ghost and partly by the light and authorite of gods word, to
be called from all those things, which dysplease god: so yt they need not by
any co^straynt of Emperors laws either to be forced or feared. Cyuyl laws do
not forbid al things yt be unlawful before god: and what things they forbid not
those things they punysh not: howbeit thereby it cannot be proved, yt al things
ar lawful before god, which are not forbidden unto us by civil laws. They do not
forbid anger, indignacio^, vnpacyence, envy, hate, pride, evil lusts,
covetousness and such other as the Apostle calls the deeds of ye flesh, and
says yt they do shit out of ye kingdom of god al those, yt have such minds.
Gala.5.
Wherefore no man that does any such thing is therefore excused a fore god,
because he is not condemned by any civil law.
Again ye civil laws do not command al those things, yt are requisite unto
true righteousness. No civil law commands faith, hope, love of god and thy
neibor, patience in aduersite, ge^tilnes, meknes, lowlines and modesty etc.
Whereupon not with standing no man should suppose, yt he is not bou^de^ unto these,
because yt if he be otherwise disposed, he is by no civil laws condemned.
Furthermore they suffer so^e things for certain causes, which yt not wtsta^di^g
before god be unlawful, and by gods word ar condemned. They do suffer the^ not
as in the^selfs right and lawful, but yt worse things may be shut out and
displaced. So thus far also they suffer usury, yt a measure of covetousness may
be limited. They do not ponish whordo^e, nor take not away ye stews: yet
therbi no whormo^ger is excused before god, nor yt of ye Apostle is not made of
none effect Ebr.13. Wedloke is honorable and holy but whoremongers and
adultrers the lord shall judge. Like wise al those threatnyngs, which in holy
scripture condemn usurers, be not therefore made of none effect, because they
be not condemned by civil laws, but ye end of civil laws is to be
considered: and we must not think that they are made to make men ryghteous
before god, but to keep men some what in a tolerable order, living together,
and that the malice of man should be restreyned within some border. These
would I knitte up in few words, for an answer unto them, which by the
pretense of civil laws do so defend ye usury of our times, yt they deny it to
be unlawful before God.

How a man should lend according unto the doctrine of Christ.
Forasmuch as in this place we demand, whether that usury be lawful or
unlawful, not before ye world but before God, and yt therefore the pretense of
civil laws, or of any ordynaunces of man, can have no place in this
question the cause of Christian professyon constrayneth us to hear even Christ
Gods son, and to learn of his mouth, how Chrystians should lend and not
sin in the sight of ye lord. For of this ought we to be well persuaded, that
no thing can be lawfully do^e, which strives against ye doctrine of our
savior. Wherefore we must consider how usury agrees with Christ's word. But first
I do protest, that I speak not unto ye children of this world, but unto
faithful men, which be persuaded yt the doctri^e of Christ is so godly, and
co^teineth such a rule of true godliness and righteousness, that all they must
needs displease god, which do not heartily yield and apply themselves unto it.
Math.5. Thus we read, look not from him, that would borowe of thee. And
Luke.6. lend, lookyng for nothing thereof. And if you shall lend, from whence
ye hope to receive, what thanks have ye? For sinners lend unto siners that
they may receive like. By these words Christ did teach his, how they ought to
behave themselves in this case, he puts a difference betwixt the^ and ye
children of this world. First he co^man^deth that they do not deny him yt
would borowe. Understand so, that there be abilite for to le^d. For he which
has not himself, how can he be able to lend unto others? Hedoth not permit
and suffer unto his, which have the substance of this world, a liberte to lend
or not to lend. That is to say, he shows yt they are strangers from ye
kingdom of god and from true righteousness belo^gyng unto the children of God,
which deny to lend unto him yt needs and asks. Therefore he warns his, yt
they do not yt, if they will belong unto him, and be in the number of gods
children. This commandment ye children of this world do not acknowledge, nor
they are not thereto forced by civil laws, but they will be at liberte to lend
or not to lend: and they do not think that they sin, if they do deny him
that asks, when as they may help him. Wherefore if we have pleasure in the
profession of Christ's religion, we must take heed to be otherwise minded,
than they be.

It is a sin great enoughe, if we deny our help unto him, that would
borowe. But truly it is far to much, if, like as infidels, we do not
believe any ^sine to be done of us, when as upon a brother, that would borowe,
we do not best owe the duty of charity, as though those were tryfles that
Christ says: Deny not him that would borow of thee. They say, these are no
commandments, but counsels. Unto the Jews it is commanded plainly Deu.15.
after this manner. If one of thy brethren, which dwells within the gates of
thy cite, in ye land which the lord thy God shall give unto thee, come unto
pouertye, you shalt not harden thy heart, nor pull in thy hand: but thou shall
open it unto the poor, and lend that, which thou see he needs. How then can
it be, that Moses law should have more perfect ryghteousnes, than the gospel
of Christ? and that we may freely do, ^ leave undone the work of ch^ which
thing was not free unto the Jews.

And then also if it had been spoken instead of a counsel: deny not him that
would borowe of thee, how is it mete for Chrystians, that Christ's counsel, so
earnestly given, they may cause to be taken up or down, to or froo and to
think that it being condemned shall not be punished? He says I speak unto you
which hear. Therefore they, that will be hearers of Christ, are bound to obey
his counsel, and they can not wynd themselves from it without sin and loss of
their salvation: even as ye sick cannot neglect the counsel of the phisicio^
without ye damage of their health. But in ye.25. of Deuteronomy. It is manifest that they
sin contrary to gods will, which deny a br^ askyng to borow. Lest yt (says
he) he cry against thee unto the lord, and it beco^e sine unto the. Afterward
Christ prescribes unto his how they ought for to lend. Lend (says he)
lokynge for nothing thereof. The which many so understand, yt no profit, no
lukar, no gain, beesides yt which was lent, should be looked for, and receued:
and this is yt which is specialli required of him, which desires to keep his
hands clean from vnpure usury: but that is not ye full menni^g of Christ,
which requires of us by this place, yt we also lend unto them, of who^ we
can not hope to receive any thing at all, which does sufficiently appear, by
the words that he adds, when he says: if ye shall lend whereof ye hope to
receive again, what thanks have ye? For so sinners do lend unto siners to
receive like. See, he says not to receive usury, overplus, some what besyds
the su^me that was lent, but to receive like. Wherefore also here he puts a
difference betwixt his, and those yt do not belong unto him: for he requires
his not only to le^de without profet, sei^g yt siners do yt so^e times but also
with their own damage and loss of lent money, to help their neighbor and
brother, and so to lend, that they may purchase unto themselves favor of
God.

Therefore here is a difference to be made betwixt the heathen and the
Christian. The heathen lends first unto those, that be able to restore that,
which they have received. Then unto those, which some times have lent or be
able to lend. Thirdlye unto friends and kindred. Fourthly unto those, of whom
some kyndnes may be looked for. By these kinds of leandyng sin is not
committed, howbeit as yet the righteousness of the kingdom and sprite of Christ
is not expressed. Wherefore they that be Chrystyans do thus lend.

First unto them, that be not able to restore. Then unto them, yt never did
lend any thing, nor can not give again. Thyrdly not only unto friends, but
also unto enmyes, not only unto kinsfolk but also unto others and strangers.
Forthly, whereas no thanks geuyng, much less any reco^pe^ce, can be looked for.
And in doing these things they declare them selves to be in deed his
children, which brings forth his son over the good and the bad, and
raynneth upon the thankful and unthankful: which also Christ requires of his,
saying: that ye may be the children of your father. etc. Bring therefore unto
this rule of Christian righteousness those, which lend upon usury, and see
how far they be from the rule of Christ's word, which is so set unto all
Chrystyans, yt except they do conform themselves unto it, they ought to be
rekoned among sinners, and not among Gods children: yea they be not so just
as sinners. For so much righteousness is attributed unto sinners, yt the lend with
out usury, and that they desire to receive nothing in the sted of lukar, but
only yt which they did lend. Therefore by this conference, we, which look
unto ye righteousness of Christ's kyngedo^e, unto ye prescriptio^ of christ's
words, and unto the professyd of christian religion may easily judge how
unlawful usury is unto the^, which have yielded them selves unto christ, and
would be taken to be chrystyans. It is not belongyng unto us to judge others.
It belongs to a Christian to answer to his profession, and not otherwise to
judge of things, whether they lawful or unlawful, but acording to the
prescription of Christ's doctrine: and not so to behave himself in the trial
of righteousness as before a worldly judge, but as in the sight of god, that he
may be quitt of unrighteous. Wherefore agreably with holy scriptures and
Christ's words we conclude, that that usury, which marvelously in this last
time has grown in the church of Christ, is not lawful but damnable and very
far from the profession of Chrysts rightwisnes. How wicked a thing usury is
to be seen in it self, any man may easily judge except only such men, as
think the savor of lukar to be sweet, of what thing soever it is gotten, the
eyes of whose minds be utterly blinded with the love of couetousues. First,
the vice of covetousness has ever been judged most vile, not only amongst
Chrystyans, but also amongst heathens. And that is the rote of vsurye. Take
away ye love of money and covetousness, and we shall have no usurers in Christ's
church. Secondarelye, who does not see, how wicked a thing it is, to hunte
for gain, gotten by the labor and sweet of others? For usury, which is
given, comes not of the care and travel of the usurer, but of him, that
pays, foenus, vantage.

Thirdly, this is far from equite, that the usurer, without any loss or
danger of his money, receives lukar, so yt he is in danger of no damage, what
soever chance of ye dice comes: but ye miserable man, which paieth usury, is
forced to bear ye loss of misfortune and chance. He has all the hurt that
happens, the usurer has no thing but the gain that is taken, and the stoke
that is saved.

Fourthly: This is also more over, that how great usury, and how many years
so ever the detter paieth, yet not wtstanding the whole stok remains and is
nothing lesned or worn by occupyinge. But how sore these things do grieve
ye mind, and decay the abilite of ye payer, I need not to give any
aduertiseme^t, seeing by experience ye thing is evident. When he that is in such
case, perceaueth that this pestilent evil can not be ouercome^, the^ being
utterly discouraged he forsakes wife and children, and leaves what other
goods so ever he has unto ye insatiable violent covetous usurer. So.1. Sam.22.
We read that they did, which oppressed with det co^ueihed themselves unto David
an exile. Such sightes, when as magistrates wink, godly men behold daily
before their eyes with sorrow and sighinge. And that which is most grievous, in
the sa^e season when as such usurers ought to have no place amongst citizens,
then do they inioye honors in the church and in the city.

But the usurer replyeth.
IT is (says he) common in every man's mouth: He yt is willing has no wrong, I
send for no man. I force no man to take money of me. They come of their own
accord, they take my money, and do not ask it of any other co^dicio^, but only
of usury? What do I in this case offend? Let them leave me my money to my
self, if the damage of vsurye be so grievous unto the^. I answer, these are ye
sayings not of a christian man, but of a very heathen, yea of him that has no
mind of man.

Need is a sharp shaft. These wretches forced by need come unto thee, of whose
wretchedness thou cruelly and filthely takeste thy vantage. The usurer
replieth agi^e: But when as they received money of me upon condition of usury,
they were glad and did give thanks. What iniure can this be, which causes
gladness and thanks geuyng: I answer, that these wretches rejoice and give
thanks, not because they do feel a benifite, but because they suppose yt by
this damage of vsurye, they may ease ye grievous necessyte, which does
oppress them presently. Surely they desire rather simpli to borow money, tha^
to take it upon vsurye. But for because so great inhumanite prevails, yt they
can no where find such liberalite as lends freely, they are glad to take money
upon usury: but this kind of gladness at ye last turns into greatest
heaviness. And when they fle from charibdis, they fall into scilla, from ye roke
into ye gulf. Chrysostom does well compare this gladness of taking vsurye
money, unto the bitynge of a serpente called aspis: for even as he, which is
bitte^ of the Aspis, does gladlye fall onslepe, and by the swetnesse of deadly
slu^ber dies, because in sleping ye poison passes to every member: so he yt
takes money of the usurer is presently glad, as though he had a benefit,
howbeit vsuri, having spedy passage to all yt he has, turns all into det.
And Cato ye elder, being demanded what it was to take vsurye, answered, the
same yt it is to kill a man. Thirdly they, which seem to have some taste of
Christ's gospel, do bring that, not by thee which they may amend the^ selves,
but by ye which they would cloak their ungodliness: but al ye su^me of ye law
and the prophets, as Christ witnesses, stands in this, yt what I would
should be done unto me, ye same I do also unto others. Unto mi self I would
wish no other co^dicio^, but for one hundredth florens, to repay every year
five. What sine is it for me the^ to take so much of others? For I my self
take upon this condition so often, as need is. So many I give to others, and
again so many I take of others. I answer, it is most ungodliness to abuse
Christ's word, which are so compared to maintain not covetousness but brotherli
love. Thou as is evident, do ye same toothers, which you requirest of others.
If you do this of a charitable sprit, set thiself in ye place of ye pore and
nedye, and cloth thiself with the affection of his need, thinking, what you, being
in his case, would that ye rich should do unto the, whether yt they, should
le^d unto the with usury or without usury? Undoubtedly you would rather without
usury. For yt should be more profitable unto the, tha^ if you sholdest be
burdened with chargeable usury. Wherefore that saying of christ: Do unto others,
as thou would yt others should do unto the, yt must you understand to be so
spoken, as what you woldeste wish do^e unto thee, being in such case as thy
neighbor is, ye same must you do unto him, with ye same fre^dly loving
affection, with ye which you art mi^ded toward thyself. Search thyn own
conscience and judge indifferently whether you may say truly yt thy pore nedy
neighbor is so loved and helped of thee, as you placed in his case would be
loved and helped of others. Wherefore seeing you can not truly say this of
thyself, what avails it deceitfulli to dali with ye saying of Christ our
savior? Also you geuest usury unto others, and take of others. I hear this,
and I beseech the tell me for what cause you geuest: and for what need: for ye
sa^e, for ye which they do give of who^ you take? No, no. They bear ye
da^age of usury forced by need you bear no da^age, but for hope of greater
gai^e, not for need but for covetousness, geuest.v. for an.c. to gain x. xv. xx:
and you so geuest and take, as many sacrifici^g priests ar wo^t to offer a
halpeny to keep up in ye church ye gains of offering, and to provoke the
people to offer by their e^sa^ple: and by yt wai for laie^g down one penie they
take up ten. So very well do usurers and Symoniaks agree, because they are both
carried by one sprite of covetousness. Forthly wha^ as ye usurer feleth himself
in a strait, and seth no way to defend vsurye, he turns toward other arts
and says: if usury be such a thing, ^ I do sin if I take, then I know what
I will do. I will lend no part of my money unto any man. I will keep it unto
my self, le^t that I should be an vsurar. I answer, this is that escapyng of
vsurye, for the which ye Emperors laws would not utterly forbid usury. Wilt you
keep thy money to thy self? Before the court of ye world ^ is lawful, but it is
unlawful before ye court of Christ, by whose co^mau^deme^te you art bou^de^, not
to deny him yt would borow of thee, but to lend, loki^ge to receive nothing:
wherefore if you boest either of these, you declareste the self not to be a
Christian. Whether yt thou wtdraw lendyng unto thy brother, ^ asks when you
art able, or whether yt thou so lend as to take again: you synneste alyke,
both against Christ and against thy next brother. If thou lend nothing at al,
you sinnest not in usury: howbeit ye rote of usury, which is covetousness, thou
norishest in thy heart, and art a transgressoure of Christ's word. If thou
lend upon usury, then you synnest against the commandment of Christ. And to
be short, as much as lies in thee, you destroyest thy neighbor as well by not
lending as by lending upon usury. If you wtdraw lending, you art worse tha^ a
hathen sinner: for sinners do lend unto sinners, yt they may receue like. If
you do lend for usury, so art you worse tha^ many heathen, which by ye law of
nature keep themselves from yt vice. Fifthly ye covetousness of ye vsure^ will
reply after this manner: if I lend without usury yt, which is mi^e own ca^ not be
restored unto me: for ye pore has nor so much, yt he may render again ye
hole sum. But if he shall give every year a certain usury, the^ su^me part
of my money shall be restored unto me I answer. Thou know ye pouerte of thy
brother to be so great, yt he ca^ not render ye borrowed money: why the^ do
not you yield unto ye words of christ? by ye which Lu.6 he says: and your
reward shall be great in heaven. And ye shall be the children of ye most
highest. And Luk.14. And it shall be re^dred unto thee in the regeneracion of the
rightuous. How doeste you receive nothing, when as for earthly gain ^, which
lasts ever, shall be rendered unto thee? Therefore this pretense is utterly
contrary unto Chrysts doctrine, which teachesh even therefore to do good unto
ye poor, because he has nothing to give again, that the heavenly reward
may be purchased. And thou even for the self same cause wilt not lend unto ye
pore, because he has not so much as to restore that, which he has received
of thee. Therefore either you doeste not believe that Christ's promise is true: or
else you do more desire temporal gain, than eternal, earthly than heavenly.
Sixthly. All yt I have (says he) I have gotten with great care and travel,
wherefore then should I bestow them upon others in vain? What is it to me,
that others do not so take heed unto their own, as I do? What owe I unto
the^? I answer: Christ bestowed no small things, redemyng thee upon the cross
with his blood: and for thy sake he beca^e poor to make thee rich. The^ what is
it to Christ yt we take no better head unto our salvation: And beesydes these,
what thou owe unto thy brother, hear the Apostle: Ye owe nothing unto any
manne says he, but that ye love one an other. To.13. Thou owe therefore unto
thy nedy brother love, and also unto god you owe thy self, and not only
money. Wherefore because Christ has loved us and given him self for us,
therefore we ought to bestow our lives for our brethren 1. Io.3. We do all
much fail in this thing, yt without the affection of true love, we look upon
the slenderness and humilite of our brethren, and not rather upon the will of
god and his manifest commandments, albeit I keep in silence the unmeasurable
worthynes of our free redemption. Is the pore man vnworthi, unto who^ you
sholdst give freely? But Christ is not unworthy, which requires this of thee.
The pore has not deserved this benefit. Christ has deserved it. Is not the
poor able to restore that, which he receaueth? Christ is able to restore an
hundredth fold, and to give life everlasting, as he also has promised Mat.19.
Sixthly because covetousness is the most toughest wrangeler, the usurer as yet
replieth, saying: how should I live? How shall I provide for me and mine, if I
must so lend yt I receive nothing? I answer, it is said of ye lord: first seek
the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these shall be cast
unto you. And the gentiles seek all these things. Therefore neither does this
w^ ge^inge waywardness belong unto Chrystians: neither ought we to fear, lest
^, by helpyng nedye brethren, we do not well provide or see to our own
things. For thus we read Pro.11. Some distribute their own and become rycher,
some catch that, which is not their own, and be ever in need The soul, which
blesses, that is to say, which does good, shall be filled with fatnes: and he,
which gives drink, shall be satisfied with drink. And Esa.58. Break unto the
hongery (says he) thy bread and ye nedy and wa^derers lead into thy house.
When you see the naked clothe him, and do not despice thy flesh. When as thou
shalt have powered forth thy ^oule unto the hongry, and refreshed the afflycted
soul, then shall thou be as a watered garden, and as a well of waters that
never fayll. And the Apostle.2. Co.9. He has dispersed, and given unto ye
pore, and his ryghteousnes abides for ever. He, which ministers sede unto ye
sower, will also give bread to be eaten. Therefore a fa^thful man should not
fear falling into pouerte by helping the^ yt be poor. Howbeit I would not
damn it if ye Apostles saying might have place: so yt ye abu^da^ce of ye rich
should help ye lack of brethren.2. Co.8. But if of necessaries there were not so
ready giving unto others, yt might be tolerable, so that ye weakness of faith
be not excused but confessed. But who ca^ allow this in ye church of Christ, yt
in so great riotous wast of al things lack, is not feared, but whereas ye
nedines of brethren should be releued there it is feared? If we followed that
(...) rule, which is written.1. T^ 6 after this sort: having what to eat,
and wherewith to be clothed, let us be contented, litell place should remain
unto this fear. Nature (as he says) is sent away with a little, but glotony
beggeth vnmeasurably. See yt honost labor be exercised, idelnes avoided,
ryoteousnes laid a side, and the abuse of al things shut forth: and we shall be
without care under the protection and prouydence of God, and there shall be no
need to fear ye necessite of penury. Now when as so great coostes are
bestowed upon proud and beautiful buildinges, upon riotous apparel, upon al
manner of dainty meats, howebeit I speak not of innumerable other things not
necessary, what marvel is it yt pouerte is feared, if the gain of vsurye
should fail? Suerely he must stand in need of many things, which fedeth and
clotheth those, that be his, most deliciously and gorgiously.

He stands in need of many things, which is purposed to leave great riches
unto his heyrs. He, that needs many things, uses also many means, by right
and by wrong, to come to his purpose.

These things being taken away, it will not seem very hard, neither to cast
away these detestable usuries, neither by any mea^ to succor nedy brethren.

Of the usury of them, which give their monei for usury, either unto
merchants or unto Princes.
Hitherto we have considered yt vsuri, by the which the pore is bonde^ unto ye
rich, and the goods of ye bare and nedy are supt up: and of that kind of
lending, by the which Christ commands us to succor nedy brethren.

Now must we speak of those, which have monei by inheritance or gotten
otherwise, and lend it unto rich men, merchants or princes, upon condition
too receive every month, or every year, some usury, the stock in the mean
time abiding whole, to be restored when they will call for it. Here springs a
question, what sin is committed in this kind of usury. They say neither is
burdened, neither he yt gives, nor he that takes usury: but by good
provision they have both profet. He, that gives vsurye, does use his stock
well, and gains so much of it, yt with out any loss he can give usury.

On the other side, he that takes usury of his monei: he gathers as it were
a yearelye fruit, without any dekey of the stock, which by these mea^s he may
reserve hole unto his heirs. When as therefore here is no hurt, how can here
be any sin against charity? and there be none, how may this usury be
called unlawful?

I answer. That this must needs be granted: that there is not so great
sin in this kind of usury, as in that, by the which usury is taken of the
pore, which cruelty is forbidden, not only, by the laws of Christ, but
alsoo by the laws of nature.

For it is plain cruelnes, to seek after lukar, out of the labors, and
calamites of the poor. Wherefore this usury, of the which we shall speak
now, differs much from that, which by no means can be tolerable. Howbeit,
in the mean season it is not too be supposed, yt there is nothing, which can
be reproved in the usury of rich men. For the righteousness of a christen man
does not rest in that he does burden no man in any bargayn or business.
Wherefore we must se, which be the circumstances of this usury, for the
which it may not be commended.

First, this I suppose is sure: yt there is in both, as well in hi^ yt gives,
as in him that takes usury, a respect of private profet. For neither the one
for brotherly love le^deth out his money unto a rich merchant, but for too
receive of it yearly or monethlye gain: nor the other is so ready to give
usury, that he would give it, if he could keep it with his own advantage. For
as he says: The love of money grows as much, as the money it self grows.
Notwithsta^dinge he gives usury without wranglinge, lest that he should be
forced too restore the whole stock, or to be noted of evil credit.

There be many notable examples of this matter. Therefore, saying that the rote
also of this usury is the love of private profit, I do not se, how it can
agree without blemish unto christians, which ought to be furdest from love of
private profet. Let no man seek those, which be his own, says the Apostle,
but those which belong unto others.

The love of private profet, with the loss of others, is so evil that it ought
not to be suffered amongst the gentiles: and to gape for gain, although it be
without damage to others, yet is it a thing of it self that ought to be far
from christians, even as to live delicatelye and idely, although a man do so
live, not hurtinge nor hinderinge others. Wherefore as they sin, which live
delicately in the houses of princes, of noble and rich men, albeit they feel
or perceive no hurt of it: so a christen man sins, coveting private profet,
albeit he go so about it, that he seek for his own gain, not of the need of
poor men, but of the wealth of the rich.

Moreover he, that takes usury, must take good head, whether he serve his
own lack of believe or not.

For it is not enough for a christen man, so too deal with his neighbor,
that he can not complain: but he must also consider, what faith he has
toward God, and how all things, which he does, agree, or disagree with
sincere faith.

And to come to the trial of this matter, let him think in him self, which
takes usury, that it is better to take to him self his own monei, and to put
away the gain of usury. But if he fail in faith, then shall he soon fall
in these thoughts. If I should live not upon usury, but upon the stock, it
could not sufficientlye discharge my necessary expe^ses, throughout all my
life, and then what could be left after my death unto my children and
successors? where upon should they live, if I should spend all?

But these be thoughts not of faith, but of mistrust: and arguments of a mind
so given to usury, that he supposes, no way can be for him to live, if he
must forsake usury.

But they make this objection: That the Lord must not be tempted, as though it
were a tempting of God by sure trust, according to Gods word, to hang upon
his providence, and to forsake yt kind of living, in the which men live
idely, seking by usury to have all things necessari. If it be a tempting of
the Lord, not to live upon usury: what excuse is there for so many godly
fathers, prophets, apostles and others, both of the old testament and of the
new, as did rather suffer poverty and hunger, tha^ embrase vantage of usury?
Does Christ teach this too tempt the Lord, when he co^man^deth them not too
gather treasure unto them selfs: and to lend, lokinge for nothing thereof? To
tempt the Lord, is to trust unto ye Lord, where as nothing is promised of the
Lord: and to neglect the trades of living and doing, which he teaches, and
too use other.

But I find no where, that the Lord has promised too norishe and keep us by
usury in idelnes. Wherefore, this is rather a temptinge of God, to live in
idelnes, and also to co^secrat children unto idelnes: and then to trust, that
money yelding yearly usury can be able continually to give them enough, lose
rue not only for necessares, but also for superfluous pleasured.

Wherefore also their reason is but vain, which too cloak their usury say:
when as for usury I do commit my monei of trust unto others, then do I let
it forth to danger. For it may chance that the merchant, which uses my money
about his marchaundyse business, either by misfortune, or else by his own
negligence fall into pouerte, and so my whole stock be lost.

Wherefore whiles fortune favors, it is not far amiss that I take usury of
him. So is the usurer tossed in vncertentes, and casts his goods into
ieoperdy, far unlike unto them, which trusting to God occupye the^ selfs
honestly.

Gameners also ieoparde their monei in vncertente, and yet no wise man does
allow the love of Gamening in a christen man. After this sort, when as they will
not be such as tempte God, they confess by word and deed, that they cast
their monei into uncertain success and dangers, when they let it forth for
vsuri, and so they tempt God.

Thirdly, thou should consider, how that rich marcha^t or prince behaueth
him self, which pays thee usury. Thou think it is a sufficient excuse
for usury, that he is not so poor, as by payinge of usury to hinder him
self. But if thou make a good rekeninge, thou shall perceive besides these,
other things to be considered.

But if he labor, by the abust of thy monei, to get great riches, either unto
pride and riot, or else unto the practice of tirannye and wars, to lay waste
and oppress other contries, and also his ^ne: then I pray the, how can thou
glory, that thy taking of usury is blame less: saying that for it thou art
made to serve other men's sins, in making thy money subject unto such men's
lusts? Think thou, that thou may frelye let out thy money unto any use,
so that it be don to thy nown gain? Is not money letten out of usurers the
greatest cause of riotteousnes daily incressinge in this our age, of pride
more than is amongst the Heathen, of shameful idelnes of many thousands, of
so many bloody wars and spoiled subjects? If thou be a christen man, how
can thou keep no rekeninge of these things?

There is as it were a certain co^spiracie betwixt them that give, and them that
take usury. For they lay their labors together, whereby they serve, on either
side, their own gains or affections, and so they join together one with the
other to commit sin.

It is a heavy thing, if any man alone, and by him self do sin: but how
much more weighty ought it to be thought, if any man for private gain do so
bestow his diligence toward his neighbor, as to norishe him also in his
naughtines?

Fourthly also this is to be considered, how this kind of usury lets the
works of charity. As concerning that money, which yt usurer has unoccupied,
and needs not to be bestowed upon any necessary household affairs, that it do
not remain idell and unfruitful, but that he may take some profitte of it,
he supposes yt it ought to be let out unto some use. Therefore he lets it
forth unto usury, and this way he thinks that he does well provide for his
own profet. But I beseech you when shall he, being of this mind, help his
neighbors round about him, that be pore and nedi? That, which he takes up of
usury, he appoints partly unto necessary uses, and partly unto the gain of
usury, to increase his stock yearly by such gains, as he can get. Whereof,
can a man think, that he will give unto the pore: whereof will he freely and
without usury lend unto the pore that asks: of that, of the which he
finds him self and his: No, I suppose: wherefore should I give, says he,
unto others that, which I need my self? Paul says: that your abundaunce
may fille up their want. Here is no abundance, all that I have is necessary.
I must take heed too beautefie this estate, which I ^eceyued of my ancetors, I
must regard mi name and my honor, I must, as mere is, keep my wife and
children not beggarly and barely, but liberally. Here is need, not of a littell
and common sum of money, but of a great and notable. Will he give of that,
which he appoints unto usury? No, no. These he thinks be holy things,
not too be touched. What then remains, but that in such a man yt works of
charity be suppressed by diligence to get monei: especially if this usury be
thought not unlawful, so yt a mind, possessed with love of monei, ca^ be nipped
with no feli^g of sin, but as in a lawful matter thinks there is no danger.

And so we hear these aunswers, when as any thing is asked to be borrowed of
such men: I would lend say they, if I had money in a redines, but at this
time I have no monei, wherefore ye must be content, albeit so I lend nothing.

So they neglect and excuse a deed of charity. But why have they no money at
hand? Therefore, because part is appointed unto household and daily charges,
part to enrich and incresse the stock,

And hereof we se it comes often to pass, that they which be so minded upon
usury, do not out of hand pay the hire, which they owe neither unto smiths,
neither unto tailers, neither unto shomakers, but suffer it certain years to
grow into great sums, lest that they should be constrained to cut of any
portion of monei, belonging either unto usury, or unto the family:
howesoever those work men, unto the which they be indetted, in ye mean time
be^ at home with need oppressed. What thing can be devised worse than this is?

Therefore, if those be well weighed, which I have heretofore recited, that is
to (...), how this usury is the nori^ente of pri^te profet, and serves
incredulite and mistruste unto such abuses, as monei let out unto usury
serves, and how that the deeds of charity be distroyed, by desire, to gather
monei: I think that it is evident enough, that this usury, which is exercised
amongst rich men, as though it were lawefull, can not be allowed of them,
which know what is required of ye professors of christen faith, which bear
such a badge of brotherly charity, and of contempt of riches earthely, that
without them, they can not be counted to be christians.

Of the usury of wydowes and the fatherles.
THey, that be tutors either of widows or of the fatherles move here a
question, concerning such money as is not their own, but remains by
enheritance unto widows and orphans, whether it be lawful for them to let
out that monei unto usury, and deliver it to be used of them, which without
their own hinderaunce may yearly repay some usury. They say the monei is
not ours, but we be trusted with it. That, which we do, is not for our own
gain, but for the widows and fatherless. Wherefore we are not in this too be
blamed, as though by taking usury, we seek our own. For we seek not our
own, but the profet of others, widows and fatherles: and so we fulfill the
work of charity, and we do as we are bonden by promise unto them.

I answer: I know that this was a custom amongst our fathers, before
pestilente usury had defiled the church, that yt was permitted unto widows
and orpha^ts, which was permitted unto none other. All usury was called evil,
except that of widows and of ye fatherles. At the last, all the gates were
opened unto this evil, and gain of usury granted too any man. But how well
widows and orphans were provided for, the corruption of the times following
does evidently witness. There could have been brought no evil more noysomme
into the church of Christ, by the which afterward the goods of widows and
fatherles began miserably too be wasted. For when as the fire of usury has
eaten up all the wealth of a family, after the death of the father of the
family, what remnant remains unto widows and fatherles, that may be let
out unto usury.

Should it not have been better for the provision of widows and of ye
fatherles, if liberte of usury cold no where have had any place among
christians? Now, because gain of usury is crepte in under ye pretense of
widows and orpha^ts, unto them can not come of ye usury of these times any
so great gaynes, as hurt and hinderaunce, that is spronge out of that
sufferaunce of our ancitours.

Furthermore, it is euidente enough by reason of that suffera^ce that usury
was not therefore suffered unto widows and fatherles, because it was lawefull:
for if it had been taken as lawful and fauteles, wherefore should there have been
any suffera^ce and permissio^? but for that, which was unlawful unto others,
was thought yt i^ such sort it might be suffered unto wydowes and fatherles,
when as charity the mother of all liberalite, began in the church, not only
to wax cold and fruiteles, but utterly dead and vanquished.

But, and if the apostles precept, concerning widows.1. Timo.5. had been kept,
certainly they might far better, and more christian like have been provided
for, than by sufferance of unlawful usury.

If a young woman were a wydow, she should be occupied with some honest labor,
and being of a basse stock, she should be either a waiting, or a bond
servant unto her ancientes, until such time as God did give good occasion of
convenient marriage. If she were old, she should live simply of her own, so
long as her own gooddes did last: and after that they were spent, she should
be fond of her kinsfolk, or if they were not able, then should she live upon
the church goods, according to the custom of the Apostolical church. When as
at the beginning of the growinge of the church by faithful contributors
church goods were laid together, how were they the^ disposed? They were
divided, according unto every ma^s need, and were not let out unto vsurye for
gains. That simplicite did well agree with faithful christianite: and did much
comme^d yt charity, by the which badge Christ's scholars are known. But now in
this usurers world and season, how faithfully the need of widows and
fatherles is provided for, it is by over many examples daili declared.

Howbeit, that usury might easily be suffered, by the which it is thought that
ye need of widows, fatherles and power hospitals be provided for, if the
confuse heap of other vsuries and unlawful bargens might be utterly taken
away, either by the authorite of gods word amongst them, that will be taught
to fear God, or else by the power of the magistrates, which ought in these
assembles, summoned by the Emperor, not to be lest regarded: if, as is
pretended tended, so there be indede any seki^g of ye reformation of christ's
church.

Wherefore it is hartelye to be wished, that if all usury ca^ not utterly be
ba^nished out of Christ's church: yet at the least yt this usury be not
suffered, by the which the substance of pore men be miserably, co^trari unto
christian charity, pilled and piked, yea, supt up and devoured: I mean yt
usury, which the rich does require and take of him, whom he knows to be
unable to bear the hinderaunce of usury, and unto whom through the
affection of true love, according to the sentence of Christ our savior, he
ought either by geuynge or lendyng to streach forth his hands, not too
spoil, but to help.

Against this kind of usury: The Canonist have appointed certain penaltes
besides gods ponishement, which the usurers deserve. First that they be noted
of infamy, with infamye of the law, and that also by the civil law as well as
by the canon law. Furthermore that they be not admytted unto the communion of
ye church. Thirdly that they be imbarred of burial belonging unto Chrysts
church.

Fourthly that their testamentes and wills be of no^e effect by any law, with
many others such kinds of just penaltes. But these have remained in papers,
and in the mean season usurers in the church have honors with unlawful gotten
goods. And such vnshamfastnes has prevailed unpunished, yt many magistrates,
princes, and other great personages do give liberte unto the Jews, in their
dominions to exercise not only simple vsurye, but also that, which is named
usury of usurers and they do not only give license, but they also let out
houses, and bargen with the^ for certain exaction, what they shall yearly pay
for liberte to exercise usury, and most unrighteously they force their
subjects to be bound to pay such vsuries. And here is settled that
bishoplike correction, which pardons raue^s, and plageth doves But here we
make an end of this co^sideracio^ of usury. For as I said of the first it
might well be though great folly, to be much occupied in such a matter, that,
being like unto the gowte, can be helped by no hands of any surgery. This
evil is waxen so bygge, yt after ye admonition of many good men it is beco^e
incurable. For it has corrupted even the crowns of the heads of those,
which ought by their autorite to have wtstande such corrupcyon, and to have
kept and ordered the other lower members in the trade of true righteousness. It
is Christ's saying: If the salt be unsavory, what shall be seasoned therwyth?
also: Ye are the light of the world. If the light, which is in you, be darkness,
how great shall the darkness of the bodi be? There remains nothing else, but that
we look for the hand of the Lord, which soon shall remove out of the
church all kind of corrupcion. The Lord come at once, and deliver his Amen.

An aduertismente of the translatoure. T. L.
LOncernyng lendyng, here may any man easelye see, who, what, to who^ and to
what end Christ has taught and commanded to lend. First he that has
received any talent at the Lords hands, he him self must put it forth.
Math.25. Luke.19. For if he do not occupy it, then shall it be taken from him
and he be condemned for not using of it. Also he that has, must dyspose of
that, which he has, unto him that lacks. Luke.3. And the end of doing good
and lendyng unto him, that lacks and needs, must not be to hope or look for
glory, gain or any thing thereof unto him self. Luke.6. So he yt has but
only to find his wife, children and family, or but only a sufficient stock for
his own trade in his own vocacion: he must, as the sower lends his sede unto
ye good ground, so with diligence lay forth and lend, he himself his own
stock to his own occupying. And he, yt besides such a stock has any more he
must reserve and keep ye residew to be in a readynes to be given in alms, or
sent to releue others yt be nedy. And this being done to ye end yt god may be
glorified, and the nedye releued, without any lokynge for of glory or gain
worldly to himself, he shall be sure to find this a very profitable and godly
usury: but if any man for worldly police, private profet or vain glory, do
pull from the finding of his family, from the maintenance of his own exercise
in his own trade, or from the charitable relief of the nedy, to lend unto the
rich and welthy, that is uncharitable, unlawful and ungodly. I do not think
that bying and sellyng, lendynge or geuyng, or any indifferente bargeynynge
amongst welthy rich men is evil: but as concerning vsurye I advertise al
them, that be wise and well learned in other matters and yet cannot, or will not
see their own danger in this case, yt they would call too remembrance the
example of coueteous Balam, which being so wise a Prophet, that he could se
many things long before to come unto others yet by love and lokinge for the
reward of wickedness, became much more dulle and blind than a very Ass, to see
in his own ways his own danger. Nu.22. And I also aduertyse the^, which give
cou^fel concerning usury unto such others, as would have an easy living upon
other men's labors, yt they make no cushens to lay under their elbows Eze.13.
And that they be well advised before they answer such, as by the idol of
covetous gaynes in their hearts do provoke ye lord, to make the^ answer so
agreeable unto the filthi meaning of their own minds, as is appertaynyng unto
the utter perdicion of both the asker and the answerer. Ez 14. And finally I
advertise every pryuate person, yt they learn of Acha^ ye son of Carmy not
by ungodly gains to polute ye whole finding of their family, ye hole stoke of
their trade any ye hole abu^da^ce of gods providence in their hands, yea I
advertise every Christian congregation as they desyer to stand in the profession
of Christian religion against their enemies before god, yt they remember the
word of god, my ^essyng yt Alcan, by ioynyng vn^ gaynes unto his own stuff,
had poluted all the Israelits so yt they could not stand before the face of
their enemies nor have god to be with them, until they had utterly ro^ed out
that ungodliness from amongst them.

The lord grant, that charitable alms may utterly banysh al covetous gains
from amongst faithful Christians. AMEN.


