A RELATION OF THE ROYAL, MAGNIFICENT, AND sumptuous Entertainment, given to
the High, and Mighty Princess, Queen ANNE, at the renowned City of Bristoll,
by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen thereof; in the Month of June last past,
1613.

TOGETHER WITH, The Oration, Gifts, Triumphs, Water-Combats, and other Shows
there made.

LONDON: Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at the great South-doore
of Paul's, and at Britaines-Bursse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Abell Kitchen, Mayor; and the Worshipful,
Christopher Carry, and John Barker, Sheriffs of the City of BRISTOLL; health.
RIght Worshipful and VVorshipfuls, considering that the Libraries of the
Greeks and Romans are plentifully stuffed with the records of their own
atchieuements: whereby they have not only preserved their names, but have also
gotten thereby an everlasting fame unto all posterities: therefore having so
fit an occasion to manifest my love, and so worthy a subject to express my
duty, I have thought good to tempt your acceptance in this small presentment
of her Majesty's royal Entertainment: which although it be not beautified with
refined words, nor yet sufficiently adorned with Poetical terms as the
worthiness of the subject requires, yet resting on your favorable censures,
and therewithal, desiring you that even as the skillful Geometritian, who at
the games of Olimpus by the bigness of Hercules foot gessed of the stature of
his whole body: even so by the outward view of this small treatise you would
vouchsafe to measure the willingness of mine inward intent, if that my power
were correspondent to my ready heart. I have therefore adventured, under your
favorable protection, for to lay open unto the whole world, the truth of this
forepast Triumph, for three chief and especial causes.

First, that such a memorable example of sincere affection, by true and loyal
Subjects expressed to their Sovereign, should not be forgotten. Secondly, that
it might be a mean to stir up all succeeding ages in imitation of the like,
to show both dutiful obedience, and ready service, unto their gracious Prince.
Thirdly, and lastly, that it might stop the slanderous mouths of backe-biting
and detracting Sichophants, who by secret Libels or open raylings oppose
themselves always against the truth: envying all those by the splendour of
whose admired virtues, their hypocritical shows of fained piety are eclipsed.

For, as the Sun obscures all lesser Lights,
So Virtues luster dampes all Enuies sleights.
Finally, if you but daigne to show a favorable aspect upon these
Orphan-Lines, I will neither fear the distaste of the Cinick, nor the sole
conceit of the Censorious: for although many carpes are expected when curious
eyes come a-fishing, yet our patience shall suppe up, and make room for better
services, when Zo-ilus with his barkings, or Momus with his detractions, waits
to serve the Table: mean while prostituting these rude Lines to the sole
approbation of your judicious Censures, and my self to your Service, I rest

Yours humbly devoted, ROBERT NAIL.

To the Christian Reader Health.
MOst gentle READER (here hehold) I preffer unto thee
The Prentice Mitte, though simply dight: accepted let it be:
Expect not hear refined phrase in these my Verse I sing,
My Muse has never drank as yet of the Castalian Spring;
Nor seen Parnassus lofty pride (as Poets now adays)
Who by vnequalized works have won immortal praise.
No selfe-conceite of learned skill, nor yet desire of praise
Has now enforced my barren Muse, from silent sleep to raise
Her artlesse pen, to write this Theme, the which the Muses nine
To blaze their fame and worthy name, shall all in one combine,
Here shall thou find the simple truth, though clad in poor array,
Which will not blush to show her face when falshoode shall decay.
Here may thou see that pearl of price (true Loyalty, I mean)
With heart and hand by Bristoll-men presented to their Queen.
A worthy subject is my task, if that my slender skill
Could counteruaile the worth thereof according to my will.
To courteous Readers who by chance shall these my Lines peruse,
My Prentice years, and want of age, will want of Art excuse:
But for the scandalizing sort I pass them not a straw,
Who, like the Spider, poison suck, whence Bees their honey draw:
Which carping Curs of Momus kind to Aesops Dog I like,
Who would not eat the Hay, nor let the Horse to taste a bite:
But to the partial Readers hands these lines I recommend,
The Maiden fruits of all my works, as to my special friend;
Aecept it therefore in good part, I humbly thee require,
Which if thou grant, I have obtained the sum of my desire.
ROBERT NAIL.

To the Author, and his Book.
FRom hidden Embers of obscurity
The glorious Lamp of light most clearly shines,
Whose splendour bright shall still admired be
By the suruiuors of succeeding times,
Such loyal hearts adjoined with true love,
Inspired by the God of heaven above.
Whose worthy virtues are by thee displaid,
And truly penned; for truth no painting seeks,
Nor Poets skill does she implore for aid;
But for her badge Simplicity she keeps,
For evermore she does desire the light,
Triumphing fearelesse over Enuies spite.
Hence Greeks and Romans with your painted styles,
And glorious shows of former triumphs won:
For Bristoll has out-stript your fame the whiles,
Whose praise immortal shines as the Sun,
The truth hereof we with our eyes have seen,
In entertainment of our gracious Queen.
JOHN PAIN:

THE QVEENES Majesty's Entertainment at BRISTOLL.
IF ancient Records of renown unto our years declare
What deeds by our forefathers times, of old achieved were;
If they for us such care have had, that their successors be,
By writing of their famous acts, that we the same might see:
Shall we to our suruiuors then our selves ungrateful prove,
By not recording things which may succeeding ages move
In imitation of the like, to get a glorious name;
And to enroll themselves in Books of neuer-dying fame?
The monuments so much renowned that mighty Monarchs rear,
Piramids and Colosso's great do moulder down and wear
In tract of time; so that no form nor fashion they retain,
Whereby the Passengers may say, Here once they did remain:
But virtuous deeds, which by the Muse preserved are for aye,
Shall still abide when date of these is passed clean away:
For virtues fame immortal is, and never shall it dye,
Though under ground, consumed to dust, a thousand years we lie.
Great Peleus Son, by Hectors death, had never famous been,
Had Homer graced him not with his immortalizing pen.
Shall I let sleep in silence then what these mine eyes have seen,
Bristols renowned praise, set forth in welcomming our Queen?
The grave and ancient Counsel first, in gowns of Scarlet dye,
Attended on (each by a Page) did ride triumphantly,
With foot-cloaths were their Horses decked; no cost they thought too much
For to express their willing hearts, their love to her was such,
To Bristols utmost ancient bounds, marched on this gallant Train,
To meet her Grace, for whose approach, with joy they did remain:
Next after them the Companies, each after their degree,
With joyful hearts, marched on to meet her Gracious Majesty.
Simile.
Like as the dry and thirsty ground, by Phoebus burning dart,
With extreme heat, for long time vexed, and pierced to the heart,
With yawning throat, wide gaping seems, the moisty clouds to call,
That with their watery drops they would into her bosom fall,
Thereby to cool her thirsty throat, and arm her breast so well,
That Phoebus stinging darts she may with moisture cold expel:
Even so all sorts, both old and young, with hearts and voice did crave
The wished presence of her Grace in complete joy to have.
And last of all, though last, not least, chief subject of my Verse,
Three bands there were, whose worthy praise my Muse cannot rehearse;
The first in white and violet clad, the second black and white,
The third with white and scarlet was, in martial order dight:
But least that curious carping fools, obiecting, thus may say,
Renowned valor seldom lurkes, where is apparel gay.
(I answer them) Nay, this has been by flying fame enrolled,
That Bristoll Bands in all attempts, have been of courage bold:
For as to please her Princely sight, they spared not their goods;
Like so, for to protect her Grace, they will not spare their bloods.
The hardy Pilot never is, but in a storm, descride:
The perfect gold not known from brass, but when by touchstone tried
Even so, when storms shall threaten wrack, and blustering billows beat,
Then shall appear, and not till then, where is true valors seat.
But haste, my Muse, for too-too long the time thou have delaid;
To bad men, more will not suffice; to good enough is said.
No sooner did her Graces Train approach our Cities bound,
And that her Harold began draw near, with blast of Trumpets sound,
Submissiue prostrate on his knees, the Mayor then fell down,
And the Recorder by his side, a man of great renown,
With grave aspect and perfect voice, his silence then he brake,
These words unto her Princely Grace, or not unlike, he spoke.
The Oration to her Majesty.
THE rarest Iemmes, that mortal men, to Princes can impart,
(Renowned Lady) true Love is, proceeding from the heart:
This is the gift that God requires, this is the perfect band,
The seal that revnites the force and sinews of our Land;
This Bristols Iemme, set clearly forth, in every subject true,
On whom your Grace shall bend your face, or daigne to take a view,
Prostrates it self in lowly wise unto your Graces sight,
To serve our Sovereign King and Queen, with all our force and might.
Bristoll a City of renown, has never traitor been
To Sovereign Rule, or Regal Reign; or false to King or Queen,
With thankfulness records still full many a favor great
Inioy'd by famous Kings and Queens that ruled Englands seat:
But to your gracious Majesty, as to our Sovereign sweet,
For preservation of our weal, we render praises meet;
Our liberties by you preserved, and many other things;
You are the fruitful root from whence our hopeful branches springs
Ungrateful should we then be thought, and justly be condemned,
For pretermitting duty bound, unto your Grace descended
From ancient Christian Kings, adorned with outward graces, blessed
With inward Princely virtues rare, which far surpass the rest:
With Royal Imps blessed from above, to reign and rule this Land,
As long (we hope) as Sun and Moon, in Firmament shall stand.
Yet this respect of Princely gifts could not our City move
For to inuit your Majesty; was it for want of love?
Far be it from their loyal hearts! nay, rather did they fear
Too mean for such a Princely Guest, your entertainment here
Expected, should approve it self, unto their grief of mind,
When as your Princely Grace the same should insufficient find.
But now with double bands of love indebted to your Grace,
We find our selves most strictly bound, since that unto this place
(Of your accord and Princely love) you have approached near,
To make our City by this means more famous to appear:
Most humble thanks I yield therefore, unto your Majesty,
In name of all these Citizens, whose service till they dye
Devoted is unto your Grace, as to their Sovereign good,
Not fearing (if occasion were) to seal it with their blood:
Requiring pardon of your Grace for what amiss you find,
Imputing it not to neglect, but to the want of time:
Accepting this our token small, a pledge of loving hearts,
Who will continue subjects true until their lives depart;
Treading the steps of Princes great, as by records we find,
Who never did respect so much the gift as giuers mind.
This done, Bristoll, which to our joy and great content has been
For evermore accounted still the Chamber of the Queen
Of England, is and ever will, as yet has been to fore,
Unto Queen ANNE, our gracious Queen, much bound for evermore.
And I this Cities worthless mouth, which tasted have full often
Your Princely favors bountiful, on me bestowed for naught
Of worthiness in me you found, for which I will entreat,
For you and all your Royal Train, unto the Mercy-seate
Of God, that he may bless you still, and send you long to reign
Unto his glory and our good, the truth for to maintain.
The end of the Oration.
THe grave Recorder having then concluded this his speech,
The Mayor he his Present gave, and did her Grace beseech
For to accept it in good part, as pledge of their good will,
Which to her Sovereign Majesty they would continue still;
A rich imbrodered Purse it was, most sumptuous to behold
In outward show, the inside was crammed full of massy gold.
In gracious wise the Queen received the present he her gave,
And rendered thanks, more thanks then they of her could wish or crave
And lastly, all the Magistrates in order passing by,
With reverence did (as duty bound) salute her Majesty.
When she had passed thus along unto the City gate,
Attended on by great and small, and many a noble state,
There first her eyes beheld what erst her heart could not conceive,
Through sudden admiration rapt, scarce could she credit give
Unto her sight; for since she first set foot on English ground,
Such brave courageous hardy men, at once, she never found.
Admiring at this sudden sight, she viewes these martial Bands,
How each in his assigned place, in order firmly stands
On either side of Bristoll streets firm joined like a wall
To guard her Grace unto the Court, lest ought might her befall
Through rashness of the multitude, which might her grace annoy,
By pressing on for to behold, their love, their life, their joy.
First stood a rank of hardy Pikes, much like a thorny Wood:
Next after them the nimble Shot in order ready stood.
Here waves the Ancients in the wind, there stands the Fife and drum,
Attending when her Majesty would through their squadrons come:
All to their Captains Colors were with scarfes and feathers bright
Adorned, not wanting ought was fit to please her Princely sight.
Each man for Martial discipline does a Commander seem,
As though in wars from tender years, they exercised had been.
Like some great Princess who intends to purchase Jewels rare, Simile

Which by some foreign Ieweller to her presented are:
First, through his Casket does she look, with curious searching eye,
Where she may to her hearts content some precious Iemme descry:
The first she sets her hands upon seems glorious in her sight,
A second does more better please her curious appetite:
The third anon she does behold, which does the rest excel,
So that each latter choice does seem the former to refell.
That quite confounded in her mind, she knows not which to choose,
But still she thinks she takes the worst, and does the best refuse:
Even so our gracious sovereign Queen, as through the street she past
Each several object pleased her well whereon her eyes she cast.
But as amidst these armed Troops, she passing forward went,
Each Martialist unto her view, did seem more excellent:
So that, protesting, thus she did unto her Nobles say,
Brave Bristoll-men from all the Land, has borne the price away.
For this their famous enterprise their credit I will raise,
Renowned Fame shall spread their name, and glory sound their praise.
No thundering shot nor rattling drums, throughout the streets were herd
Whiles that her Grace to Court-ward went, most strictly was observed
The Proclamation former made, wherein did plain appear
The reverend Counsels Providence, the Soldiers Love and fear:
But when she was conducted safe, with all her Noble train,
Unto her Royal Court, whereas with joy she did remain,
And in her Presence Chamber placed, there for to take a view
Of all the Royal pastimes made by this brave Martial Crew,
Who marched along on Bristols Key, with Ensigns brave displaid:
And opposite against the Court each Band in order staid,
Expecting when by sound of Drum they should commanded be
For to discharge their rattling Shot before her Majesty.
Thus ready ranged stood these Bands, expecting naught but time,
That temporizing space (I mean) wherewith we must refine
Our outward acts, and all our deeds, whereby we shall be tried
As perfect gold which in the fire is seauen-times purified.
Had Hanibal of Carthage known what triumph great he lost
By times neglect, when he had slain the mighty Roman host,
If he forthwith had marched to Rome with his victorious bands,
Romes lofty pride no doubt had stooped to his unconquered hands:
But when (prevented by report) he came too late to speed,
An answer fit he then received for this his sloathfull deed;
O Hanibal, full well thou know a victory to get,
But how to use it once obtained, thou have not learned yet.
Music with time, as native twins, afford sweet harmony,
Arions Harp (time not observed) resounds harsh melody.
Each herb and plant, each fruitful tree their times appointed know:
A time there is for Husbandmen to reap, a time to sow;
Therefore I say attend on time while time attends on thee:
For time once lost, for gold nor gain cannot attained be.
This precious Jewel Time (I say) did these our Troops attend,
That their foresight no slanderous tongues in ought might disco^mend
But when at length (by tokens made) was time convenient found,
Two thundering Peales of shot were heard, which seemed to shake the ground:
And next, for half an hours space, the roaring Cannons cry,
With fiery smoke did seem to choke, and quench bright Phoebus eye.
The ayrie Regions were inflamed, as if that Phaeton
(As Poets feign) had ruled again the Chariot of the Sun.
But when the Cannons were discharged, and that the skies waxt clear,
And Phoebus with his glistering beams began brightly to appear,
A joyful shout by thousands made, which thither did repair,
In token of contented joy, resounded in the air.
The Bells most joyfully did ring, with Musickes simphony,
And still these words (God save our Queen) re-ecchoed in the sky.
In ancient Writers do I find when ( Romes rare pearl of price)
Pompey was chosen chief of Seas, by Senators advice,
Thence to expel the roysterous rout of brauing Pirates might,
Such was his fame through triumphs won in all the Romans sight,
That all applauding his renown with clamorous shouts and cries,
So did they pierce the thin vast air extant beneath the skies,
With horrid noise, that flying Fowls, amazed, fell to ground
Through great astonishment and fear of this their thundering sound.
Much more should we do for our Queen, inflamed with ardent love
Of her attractiue virtues rare, proceeding from above,
And for King James our Sovereigns sake, whom God preserve and keep
From all detested treacheries, both waking and asleep:
For he our Albion Thesius true, has curbed our enemy,
Romes Minotaure, a restless foe to Britains Progeny.
Nay, mighty Jove, in mercy great, has closed this monsters Jaws
From hurting of his Daniel dear; or tearing with his Paws
The holy Saints and Martyrs all, whose blood did often imbrew
This Monsters black bloodthirsty throat (which innocents he slew)
But now (thanks be to God therefore) we are escaped free,
By our most gracious Sovereign King, from this our misery,
Who rules us with most gentle love, from all oppressions free,
Defending us by peace, from strife, and former tyranny.
Licurgus-like with Argus eyes he does prescribe his laws,
To free poor Codrus innocence from Craesus greedy jaws:
To all his friends, he succor sends which are oppressed by might:
Protecting Irus from his foes, and does maintain his right,
When glorious Titan dives in west, and hides him from our eyes,
For to enlight the darksome night, pale Cinthia does a rise,
Like so bright Sell declined with us, when by Impartial death,
The vital thread was cut in twain of Queen Elizabeth:
Yet did no dusky night succeed, for in Elizaes room,
As from the Phoenix ashes does another Phoenix come:
For why, no sooner Britain had her former bright eye lost,
But straight another did begin to shine from Northeren cost,
With hands vpheld, may we therefore give thanks unto our God,
Who like a father did forbear, to strike us with his rod.
Sending to us in mercy great, such an Athenian King,
Whose learned fame and Piety, throughout the world does ring:
Another Cicero for wit and learned Eloquence,
A valiant Caeser bountiful, for rare Magnificence:
For to conclude, he does maintain Gods true and perfect word,
Which cutteth sin from off our souls, as a two-edged sword:
But soft my Muse, attempt thou not so high an enterprise,
His virtues rare for to behold does daze thy tender eyes,
So great a task shall rest for men of most approved praise,
As none but Eagles fix their eyes on Solls resplendant rays:
The Soldiers having thus with joy, this first days triumph done,
Which did delight her graces sight and all that looked there on:
Returning back before the Court, each band in good array,
With thundering shot their leaves they took, and homewards marched away.
Thus did her graces Court excel, with great renown and fame,
Where thousands for to see her face, to Bristoll flocking came:
Whereas her Gracious Majesty, their kindness to requite,
In open view her self did show to all the peoples sight.
It wear too long for to rehearse, the brave pastime and sport,
Which by the Citizens were made, for to delight her Court,
Their love by proffered service shown to guard her Majesty,
But mine intent is to conclude each thing with breuity:
And for to imitate aright, in this the curious Sun, Simile.

Who does intend for her delight a Nosegay sweet to frame:
She crops not rudely of those herbs, on which she seaseth first,
But does select the rarest sort, rejecting those are worst,
Like so few words will beautify what does from truth proceed,
For too much matter Pell-mell mixed, does a confusion breed.
Wise Caliepie, Queen of Eloquence, assist my stammering tongue
To finish this triumphant show, which now I have begun:
Lest that my Muse, for want of aid under her burden fall,
As Vines vnpropped oftentimes upon the ground do crall.
No sooner had swift Phoebus steeds, began their course to run, Sunday

Shining with most resplendant rays upon our Horrison,
But that each Soldier did prepare, to guard her Majesty
Unto the temple of the Lord with great solemnity:
Not clad in arms as erst they wear, with thundering shot that ror'd,
But with good hearts to sanctify, the sabbath of the Lord,
Who has six days allotted us to purchase worldly wealth,
The seventh alone he has reserved, for good of our souls health:
That we this day might praise his name and rest our selves from sin,
As God did rest when he had made the world and all therein:
Quite from the Court unto the Church this worthy guard was seen,
In ranckes close standing one by one, to safe conduct the Queen,
But when the Mayor grave and wise, in most triumphant sort,
With all the reverend Council came on foot unto the Court:
In seemly wise attired all with gowns of Scarlet dye,
For to attend unto the Church her gracious Majesty,
Who mounted like fair Cinthia bright, into her sumptuous Coach,
Drawn by four milke-white coursers brave, and next her did approach
The Ladies on their trampling steeds, like fair Diana's train,
Hunting in the Arcadian woods, (as do the Poets feign.)
Foremost of all in their degrees, unto the Church did go,
The reverend Senate, two and two, all marching on a row:
Lastly on foot (before her grace with all her Noble train,
Of Lords and Knights) into the Church the worthy Mayor came,
The Queen then set in chair of state with all the residue
(In their degrees) the Mayor and Shriefes, and the Nobility,
Where learned Docter ROBSON did, a godly Sermon frame,
In setting forth Gods mighty works, and lauding of his name,
Which Sermon being finished, she back returned to Court,
Guarded a long from Church again, in most triumphant sort.
The reverend Mayor and the Shriefes their love for to express,
Did feast with most delitious cheer, and dainties numberless
Her Noble train; who did admire, as though Earth, Air, and Sea,
Withal their dainties had conspired, Bristoll to dignifie,
Whose true affection to her Prince, and peerless Progeny,
Does rest vnparagond, as yet, unto posterity,
With their true love set forth in part, before the worlds bright eye,
Their hearts, their hands, their life, their lands, to please her Majesty:
And to content her Princely grace, shall evermore be pressed,
For whose most heavenly gifts divine we from above are blessed
By mighty Jove, who through his love, has sent us such a King,
That turns our blustering winters blasts into a gladsome spring.
Dear mother England, with salt tears bend thou thine aged knee,
And render thanks unto thy God, who has delivered thee,
When most undoubted was thy fear, then did he comfort bring,
Shrouding thee safe from Tigers paws with his all-couering wing:
For what a terror had it been, unto thine heart to see
Through sudden strife, thy streets exempt from popularity,
When children fatherless each where, should in the streets be found,
Thy fathers childlesse sighing sore, and in deep dolours drowned,
Thy trusty friends bereaved of life, sisters rapt from the brother,
No kinsman left for to lament or to inter each other,
Thy Virgins bathed in tears thy youth amazed themselves to see,
Through grief of heart bereft of strength and of validity:
Thy lofty towers tumbled down, as in the Romans ire,
Jerusalem was brought to ground, by famine, sword, and fire?
But since that God has now vouchsaft, not for our merits sake,
But of his mercy and great love, these judgments just to take
From us, who have by sin deserved to taste the bitter cup,
Filled with the dregs of Gods just wrath, and for to drink it up:
Let us give thanks to God therefore, that naught but thanks does crave,
Who has us raised from death to life, as Lazarus from grave,
Continuing still unto our joy, the perfect Lamp of light,
His sacred word, our spiritual food, and heavenly souls delight.
Now bloody Mars is tied in chains with fierce Bellena bound,
His arms and Adamantine coat, lies rusting on the ground:
Grizely Thanattos who did still his ghastly steps attend,
Has lost his stinging force and might, (by bondage of his friend:)
Harsh discord thirsting after blood, with sweet concord is drowned,
Whiles peace with plenty in our streets does every where abound:
Now may the Lambs securely feed, from Wolf, and Tigers claws,
Since Pan our watchful Shepherd has shut up these monsters jaws,
For all these benefits therefore received by our King,
We will express our thankfulness and love, (we owe to him
And to his royal Progeny) unto our Sovereign Queen,
Whose like throughout the worlds vast bounds cannot again be seen.
But soft my Muse, let Ancors fall, strike sails, thy swift course stay,
Welcome to shore, remember that this is a Sabbath day:
What twixt Euterpes mirth and sad Melpemens tragic style,
(Thy senses luld) thou had almost spleeted thy bark ere-while
Upon the rock Oblivion called: moreover hark give ear,
Mundayes triumph implores thine aid to make his fame appear:
Variety and change does best content man's appetite,
Each object fair seems foul if still presented to our sight,
Sweet Orpheus music cloyes our ears, if that it common be,
Our nature is so apt and prone to mutability:
By good advice therefore it was provided that her Grace,
With all her traime might not dislike their tarying in this place,
For every day she soiourn'd here, in most triumphant sort
A several pastime was ordained, for to delight her Court,
And as at her first entrance here she did with joy behold,
A martial troop of warlike men, of courage stout and bold:
Like so, for Mundaies pastime was prepared for her sight,
Betwixt two galleys and a ship, a bloody water fight,
But yet a while I must look back, ere farther I proceed,
Least that my Muse should taxed be for too too hasty speed,
This water fight (by fame diuulg'd) full many a thousand drew,
Both far and near for to behold, and take a perfect view,
Of Turks and turkish galleys both, described in lively wise,
By worthy Brutes who often have seen, their habit, form, and guise:
Nay, many a Christian Merchant man, has too too often known,
(Though by constraint) to Christ his flock their love and kindness shown,
When with the loss of all their goods, (O barberous cruelty!)
These cursed Turks (more dear then life) from them their liberty
With endless bondage have restrained, for gally-slaues condemned,
There bound in chains for to remain till death their lives does end:
We Christians much more pity show, to dumb and sencles things
Then they to Christians will afford (such deadly rancour stings,
There cankered hearts with pride puffed up, inflamed with rage and Ire,
That nothing can aswage their wrath, nor quench this burning fire,
But Christian blood by their cursed hands powered upon the ground,
By Christ redeemed, then when naught else sufficient could be found,)
We for our Cattle houses frame, against cold winters showers,
Naked they row, when the angry skies their stormy blasts down powers:
We give our cattle prouender, of sundry sorts of grain,
They scarsely bread and water give, their lives for to maintain,
We do not press our beasts with work, beyond their strength and force,
With restles rowing they oppress their slaves without remorce,
And when they have their utmost done, their tiranizing Lords
Barbarian-like, torment their flesh with scourging whips of cords:
For why, no words can ought avail, neither can sighs suffice
To mollify their stony hearts, once bent to Tirannize.
Woe worth the sins of Christendom, which have incenst Gods ire,
In judgments just for to lay wast, by famine, sword, and fire,
Europe, his chosen Heritage, (which does Christ's name adore)
By letting in proud Ottoman, that Erimanthean Bore,
Whose cursed race, has raised their names by Christian Princes fall,
While among themselves they disagree'd through civil strife and braule
Witness the Graetian Empire lost, by Christian Kings neglect,
To these accursed Infidels whiles each seems to respect
Their several discords and debates, not knowing that the flame
Once kindled in our neighbors house, will make us fear the same.
Of all things which God did create, of Birds, Beasts, Fish, and Foul,
The Lord into man's face alone did breath a living soul,
That he which bears the form of God imprinted in his face
Should frame himself in heart thereto, as God has given him grace:
But man corrupted at the first, by sin, through Adame fall,
Has ever since a rebel been, and proved worst of all.
For why? each beast observing kind, his nature does express:
But man the Laws of God above, and Nature does transgress.
No Tiger seeks a Tigers blood his greedy maw to fill,
In Natures School this learned, they keep inviolable still:
But man to mankind often proves most cruel, fierce, and fell;
Yea, Christians unto Christians are (I tremble for to tell)
As bad, nay, some more worse then Turks; who through their civil broils,
Present the Turks occasion fit to glory in their spoils.
When Christian Princes disagree, and each against other rise,
Then do the Turks with might and maine their ruin straight devise,
For how can we expect good fruit where evil is the tree?
Or credit Turks, who mortal foes unto all Christians be?
Ye Christian Kings and Potentates, join both your hearts and hands
To chase this off-scumme Scithian-brood from you and all your lands.
Unite your Forces Christian-like from Europe to expel
Proud Ottoman, too dangerous a neighbor near to dwell:
Whose Moony Standards still attend, expecting but a prey,
To satisfy their greedy lusts, impatient of delay.
Christ is the head of Christendom, and we the members be,
Joined in one through faith in him, with perfect unity:
Even as the members of a man, the head, the hands, the feet,
Each in his office does his part, the body for to keep
In perfect health: like so should we yield helping hands to others,
Whom God has made through faith in Christ, more near and dear then brothers.
When Amphitrites flowing waves began to fill their banks,
Full forty thousand eyes at least, expected when our ranckes
From Court-ward would conduct the Queen unto the Rivers side,
For to behold by worthy Brutes this water-combat tried:
Who came accompanied at length with all her noble Court;
The Mayor with the Council road, to show her Grace this sport.
One of the Bands in warlike wise marching triumphantly,
Guarded unto the water side her gracious Majesty.
The other two on either side were of the River placed,
Whose thundering Shot resounding shrill, this famous triumph graced
Where placed in her Royal Tent, bedeckt with Flora's pride,
She did attend to see the end of this brave combat tried.
O that I could in these my verse, to Virgils vein aspire,
That all ensuing ages might this glorious act admire,
Thereby to kindle in their breast a like desire of fame,
By loyal tokens of their love to equalize the same!
But since that wishes are but vain, whereby to purchase skill,
My want of wealth in learning shall, and not my want of will,
Condemned be: therefore, my Muse, fear not for to indite
This worthy triumph as it was performed in order right.
Foremost of all an English Ship came stemming with the tide,
And right before her Graces Tent at Anchor did she ride,
Her Colors were the bloody Cross (to Britains foes well known)
A worthy Captain was her guide, whose skillful Art was shown:
Her Soldiers brave resolved hearts no danger could impair.
Her Flags and lofty Pendants seemed to beautify the air:
But whiles at Anchor there they lay, they began discry from far
Two Turkish Galleys well prepared, most mighty men of war:
They saw how close they plied their Oars, to board her if thy can,
Then every mate begins to stir, minding to play the man:
Each one betakes him to his Arms, to entertain this guest.
In emulation which of them should guard his Quarter best.
Some runs here, some runs there, all wants for to supply,
As honey Bees in Summer time, when Phoebus gins to fry:
Their fights hung forth, their Musket Shot, and Murderers each one
Were ready prim'd expecting naught but when the Turks would come
Whose Moony Standerds at the last, they plainly began descry,
Full well provided both for arms, and for artillery.
Their Admiral had all her men apparrelled in blew,
The other red, so near they did resemble Turks in hew,
With Targs and Cemitaurs, so that had sharp eyed Licuus seen,
He would have judged that these men Turks natural had been,
But when by swiftness of their Oars they did approach them nigh,
Amain, amain, your top-sailes strike, these fained Turks did cry:
Oh! hoy! so! hoy! From whence your ship? Of England. Whither bound?
For Bristoll port. What will ye yield, or else sink and be drowned?
We Will fight it to the utmost man, the Christians did reply:
We had much rather lose our lives then lose our liberty.
Then did the Fife and Drums begin deaths fierce alarm sound,
The thundering shot with horrid noise, did all things else confound:
But when with Musket Shot they had on each part done their best,
Their sharpe-edg'd Cemitaurs they drew, for to perform the rest.
At once both Galleys fell aboard (a Turkish stratagem)
Seeking by numbers to suppress our neuer-daunted Men,
Who with like courage did sustain the fierce Barbarians force,
Confronting them with their bright swords: who without all remorse,
Pressed on with might and maine. So that to the beholders eye,
Each against their opposite did show their utmost cruelty.
Like as the waters whose swift course is stopped by a bay,
Which though not long, yet for a while, their fury does delay,
Till re-vniting of their force, they cast it to the ground,
So that no mention of the same remains to be found:
Even so these Turks were for a while repulsed with disgrace
By Christians, till their numbers failed for to supply each place:
Whereas the Turks on all parts did their victory begin,
Though not by valor yet by force their chiefest hope to win.
On either part no slacknesse found, but each man firmly stood.
That Amphitrites silver waves were stained with crimson blood.
This fight so bravely was maintained, that winged Victory
Now on the Christians, then on Turks, did look impartially.
The Bands which by the River stood, on each side did their best,
With thundering shot to aid their friends, by numbers thus oppressed.
Mean whiles the Turks with high applause their victory pursued,
Longing to see their Turkish blades with Christian blood imbrued.
But trust who list (until deceived) Fortunes inconstant chance,
Which mighty Monarchs casts down, and meaner does advance:
When greatest hope of good success, when health and wealth is highest
Then woeful wrack, disease, and want, with grief approaches nighest.
For whiles upon these Turks attempts she sweetly seemed to smile,
Bending her brows, she turns her face, intending greatest guile.
The Christians well perceiving that their forces naught auail'd
To daunt these proud insulting Turks which fiercely them assailed.
With fained fear retyring back, they chaste them clean away,
(By fiery force) deprived of this their misconceiued prey.
Like as the greedy ravening Wolf, with pinching hunger pressed,
Leaving the Woods, through hills and dales, disdaining quiet rest,
He fearelesse rangeth up and down, not ceasing till he find
The harmless flock of tender Lambs, the object of his mind:
Where ready pressed to seize upon his long desired pray,
And satisfy his greedy lust, impatient of delay,
The Mastiue dog pursues his theft, whom hastily he flies,
Amazed with fear, being dispossessed of this his wished prise:
Even so these Turks prouokt by thirst of honor and renown,
Striving for to adorn their heads with a victorious crown:
Whose Laurel Branches ( Fames desert) are not by cowards gained,
But by true valiant noble hearts with sweaty brows obtained.
When that they thought all dangers past, which might themselves oppose
To their designs, then were they made a spoil unto their foes:
For oft-times when we glory most in Sunshine of delights,
Then Winter storms our joyful course with sharp affliction bites,
Some of these Turks incenst with rage, not fearing this mischance,
Were mounted up into the shrowdes, their prowess to advance,
Where thirsting for to win renown, withal their force and might,
Against the fury of their foes maintained an eager fight:
But when their fortune once declined, the Christians they forsook,
Leaping into the Brinish waves, and so their Galleys took:
But yet these drops that cooled their heat, quenched not the burning fire
Of fierce revenge for their disgrace, but more inflamed their Ire.
And wrathful rage: remembering that how much more hard the pain,
So much more excellent shall be the triumph they obtain.
Thus armed with hope, (for hope is swift, and flies with Swallows wings,
Of mighty Monarchs it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings,)
The second time they did attempt, although unto their cost,
To re-obtaine from Christians hands, their former honor lost.
Then might you see the fiery bals like Comets blazing bright,
The dusky smoke of powdered shot, which dimmed and daz'd their sight.
The moony Targs advanced on high from harm to guard their heads
The Christians valor in defense, which naught their fury dreads:
The fierce aspect on either part sufficient to affright
And terrify great Mars himself, the dauntlesse God of fight.
For to conclude, they came aboard, where entertained they were
By these brave Brutes, with Martial strokes, until the former snare
Once more had dispossessed their hope the victory to win;
Constrayning them (to get aboard their Gallyes) back to swim.
Amidst their fight one of these Turks, thirsting to get renown,
Ere that the Christians him descri'd, had took their Colors down.
Wherewith unto the Bowspret got, he leapt into the maine,
And took his Gally with triumph of this his glorious gain.
The valiant heart which once has felt the utmost force and might
Of envious Fortune, courage takes, and thriues in her despite,
That by his resolution bold he does abate her ire,
Who sought to work his ouer-throw by famine, sword, or fire:
Even so these Christians having once repulst this furious foe,
Whose first assault might seem to threat their wrack, and dreadful woe,
Their valiant hearts were more inflamed by Turks disgraceful foil,
Hoping their Trophyes for to raise by those Barbarians spoil,
Who four times twice did board their ship, with lofty shouts and cries,
And four times twice they were repulst from this their wished prise.
So that through fear discouraged, they took themselves to flight,
And left some of their brave consorts by Christians took in fight,
Which captives brought before her Grace, on bended knees did crave
For mercy, which her Majesty with pardon freely gave.
Lo here behold by this triumph, as in a mirror plain,
How mighty Jove against all foes our quarrel does maintain,
Confounding all their privy plots, and close Conspiracies,
Who for to undermine our state, against us do arise.
Their vain attempts and boundles thoughts, he turns to their decay
Entrapped in the selfsame snare, they did for others lay,
For God which bounds the raging Seas, has bounded their desire:
And turns to smoke their proud attempts whereto their thoughts aspire.
This brave exploite thus finished, the Queen with all her train
Attending on, her Princely Grace, to Court returned again.
By which time Phoebus began to hide his Chariot in the West,
And each thing living took themselves unto their wonted rest.
But when that Philomell began her sugared notes to sing
At fair Auroraes first approach, which present comfort brings.
By chasing hence the darkesome night with her deluding dreams,
And bringing in the joyful light by Sols all-searching beams.
When every man with joyful heart, his sleepy bed forsakes,
And to his daily labors eke, himself again betakes:
The utmost date expired was upon this present day,
Of our most gracious Queens abode in Bristoll for to stay.
Wherefore the reverend Counsel came unto her Princely Court,
For to attend her Majesty, prepared in seemly sort:
Whereas our Queen most graciously vouchsafed to thank them all,
Both Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, who on their knees did fall,
And humbly kissed her Royal hand, such favor did she show,
And love, for love, which to her Grace, in duty, they did owe.
And furthermore, for to express her love to loyal hearts,
And bounty by rewarding all according to deserts,
A Ring with Diamonds beset, most graciously she sent
Unto the Mayor as a pledge of her most kind intent,
In ought she might for Bristols good, in rightful cause obtain,
By suite preferred unto King JAMES our gracious Sovereign.
Such tender love has now possessed her Graces Princely breast,
That she for Bristols weal will be for ever ready pressed:
For as the fixed Stars move not within the Firmament,
So love by virtuous deeds obtained is always permanent.
In solemn wise her farewell took, through Bristoll streets she past,
Where (as at her first entrance here) a worthy guard was placed:
The Mayor; with the Council grave, before her Grace did ride,
Her Courtly train of worthy Peers attended by her side.
The streets on either side were pressed with numbers infinite,
Who in her gracious countenance had fixed their delight:
Whose joyful hearts expressed were, when they beheld her face,
And with loud voices did cry out, The Lord preserve your Grace!
Thus road they with her Grace as far as Bristols bounds extend,
Where this their joyful Journey was compelled to take an end.
In humble wise the Mayor then his lofty Steed forsook,
And of her Grace on bended knees, prostrate, his farewell took,
And all the rest her Subjects true did seem to change their cheer,
And mourn her absence as the child that loses parents dear.
The Martial Bands in number three, by three brave peales of Shot
Expressed their love, that cursed hate might not their honor blot.
Thus have you here impartially presented to your view,
A pattern of most loyal hearts unto their Sovereign true,
Who not alone in hearts but hands, have manifested plain
Their love unto our gracious Queen, which Envy cannot stain,
Although that virtue seldom scapes, through Envy, free from blame,
For why detraction will not spare to blot Diana's name:
Yet virtue by how much the more hid from the worlds bright eye,
By cursed hate, so much the more it mounteth upon high,
Whose Rose-bound head for her deserts, shall gain a glorious crown;
Incompast with a threefold Wreath, Love, Honor and Renown,
Therefore let Envy fret and fume, and spit her poisoned bane,
For virtuous deeds shall still enjoy a neuer-dying fame.
FINIS.

