ZELAVTO. THE FOVNtaine of Fame. Erected in an Orcharde of Amorous Adventures.
Containing A Delicate Disputation, gallantly discoursed between two noble
Gentlemen of Italye. Given for a freendly entertainment to Euphues, at his late
ariuall into England. By A. M. Servant to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Oxenford.

Honos alit Arts.

Imprinted at London by John Charlevvood. 1580.

VERO NIHIL VERIVS


To the Right Honorable, his singular good Lord and Master, Edward de Vere,
Earl of Oxenford, Viscount Bulbeck, Lord Sandford, and of Badelesmere, and
Lord high Chamberlain of England. Anthony Monday, wishes all happiness in this
Honorable estate, and after death eternal life.
AFter that the English Prince (Right Honorable and my very good Lord) had
taken view of the seemelye Portrature of Gridonia, her tender Infant lying by
her, and leading two Lions in her hand: he presently left the Court, and took
himself to travail. When the princely Primaleo^, heard pronounced before his
famous father the Emperor of Constantinople, the sorrowful Letters sent by
the Lady of the Lake, how his best belooued brother was lost in the
unfortunate Forest of England: he abandoned all his Courtly delights, and never
ceased wandering, till he became prisoner in the same place. So my simple self
(Right Honorable) having sufficiently seen the rare virtues of your noble
mind, the heroycall quallities of your prudent person: thought, though
ability were inferior to gratify with some gift, yet good will was ample to
bestow with the best. When all the brave Gallants and worthy Gentlemen in
Room, presented unto the Emperor Jewels and gifts of great value and
estimation: a poor Citizen amongst the^ all brought a handful of Flowers,
and offered them to the Emperor, the which he received graciously and with
great affection, and gave him a great reward. Why (quoth one of the Gentlemen)
how durst thou presume to give so poor a present, to so puissant a person? Why
(quoth the Citizen) how durst they be so bold to give such great gifts? Quoth
the Gentleman, they are of great credit, and beside, their gifts worthy the
receiving. And I am poor (quoth the Citizen) and therefore I give such a
mean gift, yet has it been gratefully accepted: And although they descend of
such noble Linages: yet do they owe dutiful alleageaunce unto the Emperor,
and as poor as I am, I bear him as true a heart as the best: Even so my poor
gift has been as faithfully delivered: as the richest Jewel that was by them
presented.

And lo Right Honorable, among such expert heads, such pregnaunt inventions,
and such commendable writers, as prefer to your seemly self, works
worthy of eternal memory: A simple Soul, (more imboldened on your clemency,
then any action whatsoever he is able to make manifest) presumes to present
you with such vnpullished practices: as his simple skill is able to comprehend.
Yet thus much I am to assure your Honor, that among all them which owe you
dutiful service, and among all the brave Books which have been bestowed:
these my little labors contain so much faithful zeal to your welfare, as
others whatsoever, I speak without any excepcion. But least that your Honor
should deem I forge my tale on flattery, and that I utter with my mouth, my
heart thinks not: I wish for the trial of my trustiness, what reasonable
affairs your Honor can best devise, so shall your mind be delivered from
doubt: and my self rid of any such reproach. But as the puissantest Prince is
not void of enemies, the gallantest Champion free from foes, and the most
honest liver without some backbiters: even so the brauest Books has many
malicious judgments, and the wisest writers not without rash reports. If then
(Right Honorable) the most famous are found fault withal, the cuningest
controlled, and the promptest wits reproched by spiteful speeches: how dare so
rude a writer as I, seem to set forth so mean a matter, so weak a work,
and so skillesse a style? When the learned are deluded: I must needs be
mocked, and when the skilfullest are scorned: I must needs be derided: But yet
I remember, the wise will not reprehend rashly, the learned condemn so
lightly, nor the courteous misconster the good intent of the writer: But only
such as Aesops Dog, that brags but dares not bite, hid in a hole and dare not
show their heads, against all such, the countenance of your Honor is
sufficient to contend, which makes me not fear the force of their envy. The
Surgeon more douteth the hidden Fistule: then the wide wound, the woorthiest
warrior more fears the secret assault: the^ the boldest battle, A little
hook takes a great Fish, a little wind falls down big fruit, a small spark
kindles to a great fire, a little stone may make a tall man stu^ble, and a
small wound kill a puissant person: Even so the hidden enemy may sooner harm a
man: then when he tries his quarrel face to face, and the least report of a
slau^drous tou^g (being lightly believed) may discredit him to his utter
undoing. But for my part I fear not, let the^ prate at their pleasure, and
talk till their tou^gs ache, your Honor to please, is the chief of my choice,
your good will to gain is my wished reward: which shall be more welcome then
Cressus abundance, and more heartily accepted then any worldly wealth. The
last part of this work remains unfinished, the which for breuity of time,
and speedines in the Imprinting: I was constrained to permit till more limited
leisure. Desiring your Honor to accept this in mean time, as a sign and
token of my dutiful goodwill. Not long it will be before the rest be finished
and the renowned Palmerin of England with all speed shall be sent you. Thus
praying for your prosperity, and the increase of your Honorable dignity: I
commend your woorthye state to the heavenly eternity.

Your Honors most dutiful servant at all assayes. Antony Monday.

To the well disposed Reader.
I May be deemed (courteous Reader) more wanton then wise, and more curious
then circumspect: in naming my book by such a vain glorious title, for some
will suppose here are rare exploytes of martial minds to be seen: which when
they have proved, they find it to faint. Othersome will desire for Venus
dainty dalliances: but Juno deals so justly in this cause, that their also
they miss their mark. Then how (will some say) can Fame be so furnished: and
both of these absent? the matter (say I) shall make manifest what I have
attempted: and then if I be found faulty, I will stand to your gentle
judgments. That man is very wise that never offends in folly, that man is
very valiant that never meets with his match, and that man is very circumspect
that never talks awry, the righteous man offends seven times a day: then
needs must the negligent be found very faulty. It is a good horse that never
stumbleth, and he a severe servant that never displeases his master, then
bear with my rudeness if I chance to offend you: my good will did labor in
hope for to please you.

Again, some will be inquisitiue, why I am so willing to welcome Euphues into
England? he being so excellent: and my self so simple? If Euphues so wisely
does wish you beware, and to prevent the perilles that heedelesse heads may
have, wishing youth likewise to frame their fancies so fit, that no crooked
chances do happen to harm them: Then like that Lilly whose sent it so
sweet, and favor his friend who wishes your welfare. And although my wit be
so weak: that I cannot welcome as I would, and my skyll to simple to gratifye
so gentle a gueast: I trust my good will shall plead me a pardon, and my honest
intent be nothing misliked. Thus hoping to have your courteous consentes, which
is the reward I cheifest require, I wish my works may prove as profitable
to you in the reading: as they were delightful to me in the writing.

Your friend to command A. Monday.

A delicate Disputation gallantlye discoursed between two noble Gentlemen of
Italy. The Argument.
NOt long since over the famous and stupendous City of Venice, governed
Gonzalo Guicciardo, elected Duke by the most worthy Orlando Fiorentino. This
aforesaid Gonzalo, (renowned for his princely government, obayed for his
singular wisdom, praised for his pollitique suppressing of proud vsurpinge
enemies, and honored for his humilytie to his subjects in general) was not
only accounted as a second Mutio among his friends and familyars, but even
among his very enemies was also esteemed as a prince worthy of eternal
memory. And nature the more to agrauate his joys in his hoary hairs: gave him
a Son called Zelauto, whose singular humanity, whose puisance in feats of
arms, whose dexterity in wit, and whose comelye shape in personage, caused
him through all Venice to be greatly accounted of.

This gallant youth Zelauto (more desirous to advance his fame by traue^lyng
strange countries: then to lead his lyngring life still in the court of his
famous father) one day by chance took courage to open the hidden thoughts
which long incombred his careful breast, and having espied his father at such
convenient leisure, as served best for his avail, yielding his obeysaunce as
duty beseemed, entered into this discourse.

If (Right worthy and renowned Father) nature had adorned me with such rare
and excellent quallities, as might procure an hearts ease and joy unto your
princely estate: then would duty cause me to keep my mind in silence, and
fear (of displeasing your aged heart) bid me restrain my vowed attempt. But
since I am destitute of that which my heart desires, and willing to gain the
same by painful industry: I hope I shall purchase no ill will of your person,
nor displease the minds of your subjects in general. First weigh and
consider by your gracious aduisement, that a youthful mind more desires the
fragrant fields: then the hidden house, Custom confesses, yea, and law of
Nature allows, that it is more permanent to a princely courage, to seek the
renowned mansion, of the most illustrious and sacred Lady Fame: then to drown
his youthful days in gulfs of gaping greef, in sile^t sorrows, in vain
thoughts and cogitations, and also in trifling and idle exercises, which makes
him more prone unto vice then virtue, more apt unto lewdnes: then contented
living, yea, makes him so friuilous and fantastical, that nothing but
libidinous thoughts, beastly behavior, is his whole exercise. For then every
blasing beam, and every sugared countenance of a woman allureth him, that
floting on the Seas of foolish fancy, and having abid one lusty gale of wind,
wherewith the Bark of his body, is beaten against the Rocks of his Ladies
looks, then the poor patient falls into so extreme an ecstasy, that one
word will kill him, and an other revive him. Thus is he enclosed amid these
subtle snares, while in the warlike feeld he might enjoy his liberty, and
their win fame which should last eternally. These and such like crabbed
conceits (dear Father) urges me to crave your leave and license, that I may
a while visit strange Countries, In which time, I doubt not but to atchieue
such exploytes, that at my return it will be treble joy to your Princely ears
to hear them recounted.

Son Zelauto (answered the Duke) this your discourse is both commendable,
and allowable, for I like well of your intent, and with all my heart give
consent that for a limited time you shall seek adventures, which time shall
amount unto.vi. years, and on my blessing I charge thee, not to break that
appointed time. In the mean while, if God call me (as my life is uncertain) I
frankly and freely give thee all is mine. Wherefore look well to thy self,
that good report may be heard of thee, which unto me will be great
contentation. But now as touching what aid and assistance thou will have with
thee: speak, and it shall be granted. Good Father (answered Zelauto) none but
only one to bear me company, which I know will be sufficient. Well (quoth the
Duke) receive here my blessing, this portion of money, and this knight to
bear thee company. And I pray God in all thy ways to guide and protect thee,
and so you may depart when you please.

Zelauto accompanied with his knight, departed from the Court of his famous
Father, and took shipping to go unto Naples, from thence, he travailed unto
Valentia in Spain, and chauncing into the company of certain English
Merchauntes, who in the Latin tongue told him the happy estate of England, and
how a worthy Princes governed their common weal, and all such things as
could not be more praised then they deserved. The which Zelauto hearing, craved
of them that he might sail with them into England, and he would liberally
reward them. They being contented, and having laden their Ships with such
necessaryes as they best desired: within few days hoysed sails, and away
they went.

This young youth Zelauto being come into England, and seen the rare and
virtuous usage of the illustrious and thrice renowned Princes, with the great
honor and favor which he obtained among her worthy Lords: purposed to stay
still there. But yet remembering, that although he saw one place: many others
were as yet unseen, after a year expyred, he took shipping into Persia, and
so departed. In process of time he had visited many strange Countries,
sustained many and wonderful iniuryes among the Turks, which after shall be
declared. And returning homeward, happened on the borders of Sicile, where
Fortune was favorable unto him: that unawares he happened on the cave of a
valiant Knight, who was a Christian, and having committed an heinous offense:
fled out of his own Country, and inhabited there in a silent Cell, among the
woods. This Knight being named Astraepho, and hearing the trampling of one
about his den: took his weapons, and came forth. He being greatly abashed
at the sight of Zelauto, for that in ten years space he neither saw man nor
woman: but had lived there a savage life: forgetting all points of humanity
said. What varlet, art thou come to seek my death? thou art welcome, and
therewith all struck at Zelauto, who alas through tediousness of travel, and
long being without any sustenaunce: was constrained to yield, and falling on
his knees submitted himself to his mercy, which Astraepho seeing, said as
hereafter follows.

The Fountain of Fame, distylling his dainty drops, in an Orchard of Amarous
Adventures.


Astraepho, having conquered Zelauto, says.
WHat so sudden and strange Metamorphesis is this? Art thou a Knight, that
professest thy self a Soldier under God Mars his Ensign: and so soon
conquered? What do thou think that this thy submission, shall hinder me of
my pretended purpose? Thy death it is I seek, and more honor shall I obtain
by the slaughter of such a wretch: then to let thee live any longer time.


Zelauto. Most worthy sir, if ever any jot of clemency consysted in your
valiant breast: then respect I crave, the distressed case of your poor
vassaill. And meruayll not though in force I am not able to resist against you,
for that the great miseries which I have sustained in these my tedious
trauayles, has quite bereued me of my manly might.


Astraepho. The Lion does easily conquer his yielding pray.
A bad excuse (say they) is better then none at all, you plead now
simplicity, through the defect of your valiancie, and by such sophistical
Sillogismes, to beguile me craftily, no, no, poor wretch, hard was thy hap
to light in his hands: who seeks the subuertion of thy state, and to cause
thee yeeld^ thy neck to the rigor of his manly might. Long delays need not,
differ not with dalliance, for I am bent to thy utter ruin.


Zelauto. Where as Fortune is so adverse, small hope is to be had.
Small hope has the siely Lamb, in the ravening laws of the greedy Woolfe, to
escape with life, little comfort has the pensive prisoner at the point of
death, to shun so hard a lot. So I (poor soul) in the hands of a Tirant
(who more regards blood, then bounty, more respects death then delyuerie,
and more vaunteth of villainy, then any valiancie) what succor can I have in
this my sorrow? what hope in this my so hard hap, to crave life it avails
not, to desire a respit it booteth not, and to strive against the stream, were
but a presuming boldness, if I wish for death I gain it, if I wish for life, I
lose it. What shall betide thee poor distressed Zelauto? hap weal or woe, hap
life or death, hap bliss or bale: I will adventure by fair words to entreat
him, Zelauto at last by fair words, does seek to win favor.
and so it may happen to stay his rigor. Good sir, if ever humanity harbored
in that noble breast, or if ever pity pronounced her puissaunce on your
princely person: then respect (I pray) the disstressed case of your conquered
captive. Small honor shall you have by my death, and no Fame to vaunt on a
naked man. My life can little pleasure you, and my death less, therefore seek
not to shed his blood, who at your will and pleasure voweth both heart and
hand at your courteous commandment.


Astraepho. In deed I confess, After many clowdy showers* yet shines a fair
day.
that small honor is his due that vaunts on so prostrate a pray, and therefore
somewhat has thy words satisfied my former desire, for in deed, a strange
and wonderful sight it is to me, to see a man that have seen none these ten
years passed, therefore pardon what is spoken, there rests the greater
amends to be made.


Zelauto. Sir, Zelauto right glad of his delyuerie, yields thanks.
more bound unto you in duty, then ever I am able to perform: I yield you all
thanks possible that rests in so poor a person, and I doubt not but that
God has appointed all at the best, for these five years and more have I
visited strange cou^treyes: and never yet did I happen on any such adventure.


Astraepho. And have you ben a Traueiler sir? then unfold I pray you what has
been the mishaps, that the frowning Fates unto you has allotted, and first tell
I pray you, of what soil, what Parentage and kindred you are of, and what is
your name.


Zelauto. Sir, as necessity has no law, so need at this present urges me
to speak. In this your Cave (I am sure) you are not destitute of victuals,
the which I want, wherefore if it shall please you, to refresh his hunger, who
is ready to faint: I will discourse unto you afterward my whole adventures at
large.


Astraepho. Alas sir, if such simple fare as I have may seem to suffice your
hunger: come near, and we will go to dinner, and afterward will we discourse
of such matters (as perchance) may be profitable to both.


Zelauto. With right good will sir, and a thousand thanks for your courtesy,
extended unto me in this my unlooked for mishap. And it may so fortune, that
after our conference had together: we may with our pleasant talk well content
each other.


Astraepho. Well sir, approach this my homely Mansion, and I desire you to
accept the goodwill of your poor host.


Astraepho and Zelauto goes to dinner, and their talk after they had well
refreshed themselves.


Astraepho. Honest talk passes away the time pleasauntly.
NOw Sir, how like you of your homely entertaynment? where no better is, bad
may su^fise, and to a contented mind nothing is prejudicial. You see how
poor folks are content with pottage, Rich men may go to dynner when they
will, and poor men when they may.


Zelauto. Sir, A friendly gratulatio^ for courtesy received.
he that will look a given Horse in the mouth: is unworthy of the gift, your
fare has suffised me, and you have vanquished him, who would have murdered me.
What dayntie delycates is to be looked for in desert places? it suffiseth the
Courts of Princes to have their delycate fare, and to poor Travelers, the
homeliest dyshe is welcome, they look for no after service, and in steed of
sauce, they use their hungry appetite, Ne ob diuitias laudaris virum indignum.
we sit not to have our Table taken up, we chop at noone, and chew it soon.
They in their superfluity, we in our want. They in their prodigality, we
spare for an after extremity. Who more covetous then they, that have all at
their pleasure? and who more freendly then they, that have a little, and impart
thereof to their friends. They spend, we spare, they use excess, and we
hardness. And therefore says Tullie: We ought to have great respect, Cicero
in partitionibus Orat.

least that the hydden vice:
That does upon the virtues tend,
does slily us intyce.


The elder Cato also upon this says. Cato Senior.
By two things I increase my wealth,
by tylling of my ground:
The other by good husbandry,
that I therein have found.
For why, the one abundance bringes,
as much as heart can choose:
The other does me wisely teach,
how I the same should use.
Thus sir may you see how sparing is commended: and now somewhat will I speak
as concerning inordinate spending, and laciuious excess, which has the
persons that used it, greatly abused.

Lucullus, Lucullus.
for his sumptuous buyldings, and his inordinate expenses, thought among the
Romans to be magnified, for that he thought to excel all his predecessors.
Pompey.
But Pompey hearing thereof, and greatly desirous to see if all were as the
common brute did blase it abroad: iorneyed until he came unto Lucullus
Mansion place, where seeing that the thing it self excelled the common report,
in derision said unto Lucullus.

These gay and gorgious buyldings here,
An excellent privy nyp given unto Lucullus.
be set with Stories brave:
And open windows, that the air,
free entrance in may have.
For Summer they delightful are,
and gallant to behold:
But when that Hiems does approach,
her blastes will make you cold.
Truly, in my opinion, his words stood with great reason, and ought also
greatly to be esteemed of, for fancy is so fickle, that each tryfling toy
(though it be not profitable, if it be pleasant) is now a days most desired.
As Lucullus, he was all in his prodigallitie, but nothing regarded in the end
the myserie. Aesculapius son to Apollo.
Farther we read, how Apollos son Aesculapius, for his prodigal mind, and
insatiable desire of rytches: was cast into the bottomless Limbo, among the
Fiendes, and Devils of hell. And diverse other (which were too tedious to
rehearse) which got their goods wickedly, and spend it laciuiously. And
therefore I will say with Tullie. Tullie.
Male parta, male dilabuntur.


Zelauto does return to give his friend thanks for his lyberalyty.
But now Sir, returning to our contented feast passed, for my part, I am to
yield a thousand thanks, and to show you the like courtesy if I come in
place where ability shall serve me, And wish you not to think, but as it was
lyberally and courteously bestowed: so was it gratefully and heartily accepted.
And now may I well say, that he which never tastes necessity: knows not
what want is. Need has no law, necessity breaks stone Walls.
For whiles I tasted on our Courtly iunckets, I never thought I should have
been driven so near, but now, this state contenteth me far better then my
former, which was nothing but vanity.


Astraepho. Sir, this your pleasant discourse, is both pithy and profitable,
and sauoureth of the sense which proves perfect in ye conclusion. A promise
made, may always be claymed for a due debt.
But now as touching our talk before dinner, I must not forget your promise,
for that you said, I should understand the sum of your myseries, your
adventures happened in travail, your name, Country, and parentage, which
told: I shall declare the better some of my strange adventures.




Zelauto. Zelauto accords to his freendly request,
Indeed sir, promise is due debt we say, and according to promise, I will
unfold that which is both strange, and lamentable, wherefore give me leave I
desire you, and you shall hear, the perilous Pylgrimage which I poor soul
have passed.

Zelauto tells his first trauayles.

Gonzalo Guiciardo, Duke of Venice.


First sir, as concerning my Country, Parentage and name: I give you to
understand, that I am son to the worthy Gonzalo Guiciardo, who is Duke of
Venice, and by name I hight Zelauto. Long time had I soiourned in the Court of
my noble Father, not knowing the use and order of foreign Countries,
whereunto my mind was adicted, wherefore at the last, I ventured boldly, and
told my Father what in heart I had attempted: the which he well lyking of:
gave his consent, His traveling to Naples. Banditie, called Outlawes, do
wound Zelauto.
and so I and an other Knight (whom my Father gave me for companion) traueyled
toward Naples, and in our travail: we met with certain Outlawes, whom we
call Banditie.

These cruel fellows set upon me, wounded me very sore, slew my
Companion, dispoyled of my apparel and money, leaving me for dead. But God
more merciful then these Uillaines were tyrannical, His hard escaping to
Naples.
would not suffer me to perish in their hands, but they (being gone) gave
me the power to creep on all four to Naples. When I was come thither: I knew
not what to do, because I was freendlesse, moneylesse, and dispoyled out of my
Garments. His bold entrance into an Inn.
At last, having espied an Osteria: I boldly entered, putting my self in the
hands of God, to whom I referred the paying of my charges.


Here Zelauto tells what happened to him in the Osteria, and what
freendshippe he found with Madonna Vrsula, Madonna della Casa.
Madonna Vrsula, the Mistress of the house.
BEing come to this Osteria, I entered, and the first person that I saw, was
the Misteresse of the house, who was named Madonna Vrsula, a very proper,
pleasant, kind and courteous Gentlewoman. At my coming in, Her freendly
entertainment.
you are welcome Gentleman (quoth she) Is it your will I pray you to have
lodging? I answered, yea surely, until such time as my wounds be healed, and
my self better refreshed. With that quoth she to one of her maidens. Magarita
la donizela.
Margarita, conduct this Gentleman to the best Chamber, make him a good fire,
and carry up with you a Boccall of win and a manchet, in the mean while, will
I make ready his supper. A freendly and gentle offer.
And Gentleman (quoth she) what thing so ever it be that you want: call for,
and if it be to be gotten in Naples for love or money, you shall have it. Here
was yet good entertainment, after so hard mishaps, my grief and sorrow was
not so great before, for the loss of my companion, my money and apparail: but
her cheerful words did as much revive my heart. And so yielding her great
thanks I went up into my Chamber, where against my coming, I found a very
great fire, my Chair ready set for me to sit down with my Cushion, and my
boots pulled of, warm Pantofles brought unto me, Madonna Vrsula her return to
Zelauto.

An Italian courtesy.

She commands her maid to depart, and begins her talk.


and a clean kertcher put on my head. So having sitten there about the space
of half an hour: up came the misteris of the house, who taking a glass,
fille^ it with Wine, and came unto me saying. Sir ( Per licentia vostra) I
salute you. So causing an other glass to be filled with wine: she gave it me,
whom I pledged as courteously as I could. Then took she an other Chair, and
sat down by me, commanding her maiden servant (who attended there) to give
place, who making courtesy to me and her misteris, departed. Then began she to
talk with me in this order as follows.

The talk that the Misteris of the house had with Zelauto.
GEntleman, as I very well esteem of your courteous and civil demeanor:
Madonna Vrsula her talk.
so am I desirous to know of whence you are, and what misfortunes has
happened unto you, that you are so grievously wounded. Pardon me I pray you, if
I demand the thing which you are not willing to utter, and also because on so
sudden acquaintance, I enterprise to question with you: Zelauto his reply.
Gentlewoman (quoth I) the good opinion, and great liking that you have of me,
is as yet undeserved, and as yet you have seen no such civility in me as
deserves to be commended. But yet I am to yield you thanks for your good
liking. A feigned excuse to color the matter.
And as touching my mishaps, and this strange adventure which has happened,
and if you please to attend the discourse: I will tell you all. I am of Padua,
and there my parents dwell, and being minded to see the use of other
Countries: I left my Parents, being well stored with money, and a Gentleman
also which bare me company.



Being come here into the kingdom: among the woods we encountered with
certain Banditie, who set upon us, slew my companion, left me for dead, and
spoiled me of all my money and apparel. So God helping me: I have hardly got
hither with my life.

Thus have you known some part of my mishaps, Her encouragement given a fresh
to Zelauto
now consider thereof by your good construction. Sir (quoth she) your hap
has been hard, and little do your Parents know of this your sudden
adversity. Be not discouraged therefore, here shall you abide until such time
as your wounds are healed, and that you have perfectly recovered your health,
and beside what money you want: you shall be well provided thereof. Therefore let
not this mishap dismay you, a friend in necessity: is better then a hundred in
prosperity. Signor Giouanni Martino, a merchaunt in Naples.
But are you not acquainted with any here in Naples? Yes (quoth I) I have
letters to Signor Giouanni Martino, from my Father, for the recovery of money,
as now I stand in need thereof.

Well Sir (quoth she) pardon my boldness I pray you, and first try your friend,
Madonna Vrsula her courteous promise.
and if he fail: you know where to speed of money, and of a greater matter if
need require, In the mean time, I will see how near your supper is ready,
and will come again and bear you company. How like you now Sir of the freendly
entertainment that I obtained at this Gentlewomans hand, and also of her
proffered courtesy?

Astraepho. Certainly Zelauto, Astraepho tells his judgment on this matter.
you are much bound unto that Gentlewoman, for in my opinion, you might have
gone to twenty Osteriaes in Naples and not have found the like freendship.
But proceed I pray you, how sped you with your friend for your money, and how
did your hosts deal with you?


Zelauto. You shall hear Sir. Zelauto proceeds in his discourse.

She returns demanding if he will go to supper.


After she was departed out of the Chamber, there came up two modest Damsels,
and they covered the table. At last came she up again. Sir (quoth she) do you
not think it long before you go to supper? No (quoth I) in good time yet, you
need not make such have. Well Sir (quoth she) anon here will a Surgion come,
who shall dress your wounds, and look unto you till you be perfectly healed.



They go to supper.
Then was our Supper brought up very orderly, and she brought me water to wash
my hands. And after I had washed I sat down, and she also, but concerning
what good cheer we had: I need not make report. For all things was in as
good order, and as well to my contentation: as ever it was in my Fathers Court.

She proffereth to play with Zelauto.

A Surgeon comes and dresseth his wounds.


After Supper (quoth she) Sir but that you are so ouercharged with travel, and
faint with your wounds I would play a game or two with you at the P^imero. But
we will refer that till to morrow at night. Then came in the Surgeon and
he dressed my wounds, and water was brought to wash my feet, my Bed was
warmed, and so I went and laid me down to take my rest.


In the morning Zelauto sends for Signor Giouani Martino, of whom he should
receive money, and how he sped and of his farther freendship that he had with
Madonna Vrsula.
Now when I had well and sufficiently reposed my self all night, and in the
morning finding my self more strong and forceable, In ye morning Madonna
Vrsula comes to see Zelauto
then before I was: I thought to have risen, But up came Misteris Vrsula
again, and coming to my Bed side, she said. Gentleman, have you taken quiet
rest this night or no? Yes surely Misteris (quoth I) I never slept so soundly
in all my life before, and credit me, I find my self very well amended.
Wherefore now I will rise. No not yet Sir (quoth she) you shall first make your
Collation in bed, with such things as I have ordained, and have your wounds
dressed again: They fall in talk again.
and then shall you rise. I thank you good Misteris Vrsula (quoth I) and
surely it seems very strange unto me, that on a stranger you should bestow
such courtesy? Sir (quoth she) on the virtuous and well disposed, no one can
bestow courtesy sufficient. As for my part, to such Gentlemen, as upon some
occasion are fallen into want and necessity: I think it a great point of
humanity, to bestow on them freendly hospitality. And therefore I follow
the mind of Lactantius, Lactantius de vero cultu. Chap. 12. Inholders and
Tauerners for commodity.
who says, there is a kind of hospitality, which is used for a private gain
and secret commodity, and for no love favor nor freendship at all. Of which
sort I am none, I refer that to common Inholders, and those tippling
Tauerners. Let them entertayne for their commodity, and I for courtesy. I
remember how Caesar does commend in his Commentaries, the great favor and
freendship that the Germans showed to strangers. Caesar in his Commentaries
comme^deth the Germans. Abraham Genesis. Sodom and Gomorra. Rahab delivered
from death for ye same.
For not only would they defend them from their enemies: but also entertain
them with meat, drink, clothing and lodging. The Scripture also makes
mention, how Abraham, received into his house (as he thought) men, but he
received God himself. Lot also received Angels in the shape of men into his
house. Wherefore for his hospitality Lot escaped the fire of Sodom and
Gomorra. Rahab, for the same likewise, with all hers was preserved from the
terror of death.

And what says Saint Ambrose? Who can tell if we welcome Christ or no, S.
Ambrose as touching ye entertainme^t of strangers.

Zelauto answers her learned discourse.


when we give freendly entertainment to strangers? Therefore sir seem not to
be offended I pray you, though I preach on this fashion, for both love, duty,
faith and charity, does bind me to welcome you hither courteously. Alas good
Misteris (quoth I) I see well your great courtesy, but I know not how to
requite the same. Sir (quoth she) what you are not able to do: God will do
for you, and it is sufficient for me to receive thanks at your hands, for
greater is my reward in heaven. And with that she departed to fetch me my
breakefast. Now sir, tell me I pray you, if the memory of this rare and
virtuous woman is not worthy to be rehearsed?

Astraepho. Astraepho unfolds his judgment again.
Now credit me Zelauto, she surpasses all that ever I heard of, both for
promptnes of wit, virtue of the mind, and excellency in qualities. But I pray
you could she repeat these Authors whereof you have showen, so readily?


Zelauto. Yea Sir, and a great many more, which I am not able to rehearse. For
surely the rare excellency that I did behold in her: made me so amazed, that
I could not attend all her discourses.


Astraepho. Astraepho desires to hear more of this matter.
Now for Gods sake proceed, and let me hear more of this: for surely she is
worthy of eternal remembrance, in my judgment.



Zelauto now goes to break fast.
Then came up two Damsels, the one brought a pretty little table covered, and set
it on the Beds side, and the other brought such necessaries as did belong to
that we went about. Then came she her self, and brought me such meat, as I
never did eat the like before: and what other cheer was there I refer that
to your judgment. But then (quoth she) to one of her Damsels. Go and fetch me
my Lute, and I will recreat this Gentleman with a pleasant song, She sends
for her Lute.
the copy whereof she gave me, and for a need I could rehearse it.


Astraepho. Astraepho desires to hear her song.
Now good Zelauto let me hear it, for I am sure it is worthy the rehearsal.


Zelauto. Since you are so desirous: you shall, wherefore attend it diligently.


The Song which misteris Vrsula sung to her Lute, to Zelauto.
Zelauto reherseth it
AS Love is cause of joy,
So Love procures care:
As Love does end annoy,
So Love does cause despair*
But yet I often heard say,
and wise men like did give:
That no one at this day,
without a love can live.
And think you I, will love defy:
No, no, I love, until I die.
Love knits the sacred knot,
Love heart and hand does bind:
Love will not shrink one jot,
but Love does keep his kind.
Love makes friends of foes,
love stays the common wealth:
Love does exile all woes,
that would impair our health.
Since love does men and monsters move:
What man so fond will love disprooue?
Love keeps the happy peace,
Love does all strife alay:
Love sends rich increase,
Love keeps wars away.
Love of it self is all,
Love has no fellow mate:
Love causes me, and shall,
Love those, that love my state.
Then love will I, until I dye:
And all fond Love I will defye.
FINIS.
Zelauto. How like you now Sir of her Song? is it not both pithie and
excellent, does it not bear a singular and great vnderding withal?


Astraepho. If I should speak all I think, you would hardly believe me,
Astraepho amassed at her singularity knows not what to say.
for surely, her song contains great and learned points of wisdom, and
requires a more expert and learned head then mine to define thereon: And
certainly it amazeth me to hear that such excellency should remain in a
woman. But I pray you proceed, and let me hear more of this matter?


Zelauto. After she had ended her song: Quoth she, Gentleman I trust you are
not ignorant of the meaning of my Song, for perhaps you might allege some
points of lewdnes or lightness, Zelauto goes on with his tale.
that a woman should so much commend Love, but my intent therefore I refer to
your good construction. And now sir since you have refreshed your self: let
the Surgeon use his cunning to your wounds: and in the mean while, The
Surgeon comes and dresseth him again.
I will send for Signor Giouanni Martino, and then we shall see what he will
say to you. I thank you good Misteris Vrsula (quoth I) and I pray you let him
be sent for.



So after that the Surgeon had dressed me and was departed: The coming in
of Signor Giouanni Martino.
in came Signor Giouanni Martino. Who seeing me, kneeled down and kissed my
hand, the which Madonna Vrsula, marueiled at. Then quoth I to him in his ear,
I pray do not use any such courtesy whereby I may be known, for because I
would not be known to any, but if they demand of you who I am: say that I am
of Padua. Well sir (quoth he) your mind shall be fulfilled in all things.

Then I gave him Letters, which when he had read* he departed and brought me
seven hundred Crowns, saying, spend these whiles you are here, and at your
departure you shall have more.

Then spoke Madonna Vrsula to him. Sir, do you know this Gentleman. Yea
forsoothe (quoth he) his Parents are of great credit in Padua, wherefore I pray
you let him want nothing. Well sir (quoth she) he has wanted nothing yet, nor
shall not, if you had not spoken. But now dynner is ready, and I will desire
you to bear him company: Yes (quoth he) that I shall, wyllingly.

Well sir, to be short, there had I passed ten or twelve days, and was perfect
whole, Zelauto would needs depart from his hosts. Her sorrow for his
departure.
and then I would needs depart. Which when she saw, she was very sorry and
pensive. But yet (quoth she) although Sir you do depart: I hope if it be your
Fortune to journey this way again homewarde, you will take up your homely
lodging here. And in token that you shall remember me: take here this
Jewel, and wear it I desire you for my sake.

I yielded her a thousand thanks, recompensed her servants, paid my
charges. So on the morrow morning I departed, accompanied with a Gentleman,
who was an especial freende unto Signor Giouanni Martino. Zelauto departs
from Naples.
And thus have you heard the whole discourse of my first travail.




Astraepho. Surely here has been a gallant discourse, and worthy the
memory, Zelauto comes to Valentia in Spain, and trauayleth with Ge^tlemen
to Civil, from thence to Lysbone, where he happens on certain Enlyshe
Mercha^ts with who^ he talks as concerning their Country. Their answer.

Zelauto goes with the Merchants to S. Lucas, so toward England.


you are much bound in courtesy unto that Gentlewoman. And I would it were my
fortune once to happen on such an hosts. But whether iourneyed you then from
Naples?


Zelauto. Sir (as I was about to tell you) in few days I arrived at Valentia
in Spain, where it was my chance to meet with certain Gentlemen, who
travailed unto Civil, and with them I went, there I remained and my companion
three days. From thence I went to Lysbone, where as I lodged in the house of
one Pedro de Barlamonte* There lodged also certain English Merchauntes, whom I
being very willing to talk with all: one night desired them to take part of a
Supper with me. They spoke the Latin tongue very well, and so of them I
questioned about the usage of their Country, and that of long time I had heard
great commendation thereof: Also of a maiden Queen that swayed the Scepter
there. I asked them whether it was so or no? They answered it was, and gave me
to understand so much of their Country: that I would needs, go with them into
England, who in deed were very willing, and so they having ended their
Merchandise: we iourneyed ^o S. Lucas, and within few days I took shipping
into the so famous bruted Realm of England.




Here Zelauto tells how with certain English Merchauntes he sailed into
England, and what happened unto him.
Astraepho. Why then you stayed but a while in Spain.


Zelauto. No sure, for after I and my Companion had heard of the fame of
England: we could not settle our minds to stay there, but thought every day
a year until we might come into England.


Astraepho. Astraepho requires to know of England.
And is England so famous? I pray you declare unto me what you have seen there
that deserved so great commendations.


Zelauto. That I shall, wherefore I desire you to give ear unto this
discourse, for it is both strange and excellent.

After as we were departed from the coast of Spain, in a three weeks space we
arrived upon the coast of England, Zelauto came into England and landeth at
Dover.
and landed at a certain haven that in their language they call Dover, the
master and his mate, with two or three other of the ship bare us company into
the town, where we came to an Inn (as they call them) and being set down,
one of them called for drink, He drincketh English Beer, and merueyleth at
the Language.
which was such as I did never see the like before, for they call it Beer, and
such a language they speak, as is both strange and wonderful, for I know
not to what I should best liken it. Well said I to my companion, now we are
here, what shall we do? We know not what they say, nor they can not
understand us, I think it were best to hyre some of these that are in the
ship which speak the Latin tongue to conduct us until we come to some of our
Countrymen, whereof they told us was a great many there, Zelauto traueth of the
master for a guide.
he was very well contented, and so I desired the master that we might have
one of his men to guide us, who in deed very courteously consented.

And then he sent to his Ship for one Roberto, Roberto a very merry fellow
appointed for a guide to Zelauto.
a very merry and pleasant fellow, and he spoke our language very well, he
gave him very great charge, that he should use us well, until we came to their
chief City, which they call London, and then as soon as we came thither: to
bring us to some of our countrymen. So we contented the Master, got up on
Horseback, and so rode to London.


Zelauto and his companion being come to London, through the means of Roberto
their guide, they are brought to the house of one Signor Giulio di Pescara, who
entertained them very courteously.
OUr merry Companion, Zelauto is come to London to the Royal Exchange.
having brought us to London: showed us many fair and comely syghtes, as first
he had us into their Bursse, where abooue were so many fine Shops full of brave
devises, and every body said, a mad term that they had, What lack ye, what
lack ye. I merueyled what they meant by it, then I asked Roberto what they
said. So he told me, that they asked me what I would buy, if I would have any
of their fine wares. And surely in that place were many very proper and comely
Women: Then he had us, and showed us a very fine Uaute under the same, where
there was a great many Shops likewise. So then it began to wax something toward
the evening, and then he conducted us to the house of one Signor Giulio,
Zelauto is brought to Signor Giulio di Pescara, of his Country.
a Gentleman of Pescara, where we had very gallant entertaynement, and so well
esteemed of, as if we had been in our own Country. This Giulio had married an
English Woman, who in deed, was so gentle of nature, so comely in qualities,
and so proper in personage, that sure me thought she excelled. Of her likewise
we were very gently welcomed, and a very gallant Chamber prepared, with all
things so necessary, and servant to attend on us so dillige^tly, that sure it
was not in vain that England had such excellent commendation. Zelauto lyketh
well of the service in England.
My Companion said, he was never so quiet, and so well at his hearts ease: as
he was there, being but so little time there. For in deed (to say the truth)
I wa^ted nothing, but every thing was ready at half a words speaking, and
with great reverence also.

Zelauto comes acquainted with Ge^tlemen of the English Court.
To the house of this aforesaid Signor Giulio, resorted diverse Gentlemen, which
were of y^ Court of England, who showed us such courtesy, as it is
unspeakable. But all this while I would not be known what I was, but told them
that I was a Gentleman of Naples, and my name was Zelauto, and that I came for
my pleasure to see the Country. These Gentlemen, some of them did pertayne to
men of great Honor, in the said Court, whom I likewise came acquainted with
all. But to recount the rare and excellent modesty, the virtuous life adorned
with ciuilytie, the hautie courage and Martial magnaminitie, and their
singular qualyties in general, though I had the gallantest memory in the
world, the pregnanst wit, and the rarest eloquence to depaynt them: I know my
self were unable to do it.

He chances to see the noble Queen of England.
It was my chance within a while after I was acquaynted with those worthy
Lords of Honor: to come in presence where their virtuous Maiden Queen was.
But credit me, her heavenly hew, her Princely personage, her rare Sobriety,
her singular Wisdom: made me stand as one bereft of his senses. For why,
before mine eyes I saw one that excelled, all the worthy Dames that ever I
have read of.

Astraepho. But stay Zelauto, did you see that peerless Paragon? and is she
so rare and excellent as you make her to be?


Zelauto. Oh Sir, never can my tongue give half a quarter of the praise, that
is due to that rare Arabian Phaenix. Were Mars himself alive: he would stand
aghast at her Heavenly behauior. And as Timon, Timon.
when he drew the mournful portrait, of King Agamemnon, for the loss of his
Daughter, could not set forth his face correspondent to the sorrow that is
contained: Agame^non
left the same covered with a veil to the judgment of others. So I, because I
am unable to paynt forth her passing praise, according as desert deserves: I
remyt her under the veil of Eternal memory, to the grave judgment of others.


Astraepho. What now Zelauto? why, the Goddesses and the Graces them selves,
could but deserve this commendation, and I am sure she is none.


Zelauto. Were it possible for a Goddess to remain on the earth at this day:
credit me, it were she. For thus much I will tell ye. It is not to all
Countries unknown, how well her Grace does understand and speak the
languages, that of her self without any interpretour: she is able to answer
any Ambassador, that comes to her Majesty. Also, it is not unknown, how
her Princely Majesty made the mind of the valiant Marquis Vitelli (Ambassador
sent from the King of Spain) to be marvelously moved. Marquis Vitelli,
Ambassador of Spain.
This Vitelli, has been known a excellent warrior, and yet the rare
excellency of this Queen had almost put him clean out of conceyt. That as he
said him self: he was never so out of countenance before any Prince in all
his life. Sappho, Corinna, Eriune, Praxillae Telesilla, Cleobulinae
Pithogareans, Diotima, and Aspasia.


It is in vain of the Grecians to vaunt of their Sappho, Corinna, Eriune,
Praxilla, Telesilla, Cleobulina, nor yet the Pithegoreans brag of their
Diotima, and Aspasia, for their lives, this is she that excels them all: and
therefore will I say.

O decus Anglorum virgo clarissima viuas:
Donec terrigenis Praebebit lumina Titan.
O Virgin Queen, the rarest gem,
Jove grant thy happy race:
That while Dan Titan gives his light, Titan.

Thou may enjoy thy place.
Let all true English hearts, pronounce while they have breath:
God save and prosper in renown, our Queen Elyzabeth.
Viuat, vincat, regnat, Elyzabetha.



Astraepho. Zelauto, these your words does agrauate an exceeding joy in my
mind, and causes me to thyrst with Tantalus, Tantalus.
until it be my Fortune to see that happy Land, that thryse happy Princes,
whom (if she be) as you make report, would cause both men and monsters to
adore. But I pray you Sir proceed, and let me hear what happened unto you in
that Country?


zelauto. Sir, after I had stayed there a while (to show this gallant Princes
pastime) certain of her worthy and famous Lords assembled in a Tourname^t,
The Pageant with all languages before ^e Queen.
the brauest sight that ever I saw, and with this gallant troop, there came a
Pageant as they call them, wherein were men that spoke all Languages. O sir, I
am not able to speak sufficient in praise thereof.

At an other time, there was a brave and excellent devise which went on wheels
without the help of any man. The Pageant with Apollo, and the nine Muses.
Therein sat Apollo, with his heavenly crew of Music. Beside a number of
strange devises, which are out of my remembrance. But yet I remember one
thing more, which was a brave and comely Ship, brought in before her
Majesty, wherein were certain of her noble Lords, and this Ship was made with
a gallant devise, The Ship before her Ma^^stie.
that in her presence it ran upon a Rock, and was dispoyled. This credit was
the very brauest devise that ever I saw, and worthy of innumerable
commendations.


Astraepho. Oh admirable Princes, whose singular virtues, mooues the minds of
such noble Personages, Astraepho falls into admiration with him self.
by daily deeds to demonstrate, and by usual actions to acquaint her Princely
estate with such myraculous motions, as you zelauto make report of.


Zelauto. If I were able to rehearse all that I have seen: then I know you
could not choose but say your self, that she is well worthy of far greater,
if possible there might be such: as for example these things I have told you,
which are yet in my remembrance may make the matter manifest, both the
Pageants, and also this seemly Ship whereof I have spoken.

In Countries cause, I mount upon the Seas,
with shiuering shot to daunt my furious foe:
It does me good all strife for to appease,
to keep my Land free from all foreign woe.
God save my Prince, that keeps a Navy huge:
In time of need to stand for her refuge.



Astraepho. Why? The admiration of Astraepho at the passed tale of Zelauto.
is there any Prince that can wish or desire to live in more worldly pleasure,
then that famous and illustrious Queen? Or can there be more virtues resident
in an earthly Creature, then her noble life makes so ample mention of? Surely
in my opinion it were impossible: for credit me, the rare rule of her virtuous
life: makes her Land and People in such happy estate. Wherefore good Zelauto,
conceal not any of this matter from me, for surely I think my self happy to
come to the hearing thereof.


Zelauto. Since sir, Astraepho^ earnest request, compels Zelauto to proceed
to deeper matters.
you seem so importune on me, and that my homly Tales do so much delyght you:
give ear, and I will read you here one of the rarest devises that ever you
heard of. Which was a comely sort of Courtiers, prepared in a Tournament to
recreate the mind of their Princes and Sovereign.


Astraepho. Where want of sufficiency remains, to counteruayle your ever
approved courtesy: accept in token thereof always at your commandment my
dutiful service and loyalty, and attendaunce shall not want, till I have
heard these discourses.


Zelauto takes out of his Scrip a Book, wherein he reads a gallant devise
presented in a Tournament, which he saw in England.
FIrst sir, Zelauto to pleasure his friend, tells him an excellent and brave
devise done in England.
to make the matter ye more playner unto you, at ye Tylt met an armed Lady,
with a Courtly Knight, well appointed at Arms, who menacing his manly might,
as though he came to Combat, began to look about if there were any defendour.
The Lady not minding the invincible courage, and lofty look of the Cha^pion:
gased upon the renowned Princes, who was there present, debating with her self
in inward thoughts, the sodayn adventure which had happened her, and having
long looked on this sumptuous spectacle, at length with her self, fell into
these words.



The Lady being driven into a great admiration at the presence of this
peereles Princess, uses her talk in this order.
WHat does the Gods delude me? or has the infernal ghosts enchaunted me with
their fond illusions? Wake I, or sleep I? See I, or see I not? What chance
has convicted me? What sudden sight has attaynted me? Is this a Goddess, or
a mortal creature? If this be the seemly she, that the Trumpe of Fame has
so blasted abroad: if this be the second Saba, to astonishe the wise Solomon?
then have thou well employed thy pains to come and see her. For Report running
through the Orcades, The Orcacades, the golden America, the East and UUest
Indias.
the golden American country, and the rytch inhabited Islandes of the East and
West Indias, rattling in every ear this rare rumor, of a gallant and renowned
Maiden Queen, that governed her Country woorthily, her people peaceably, and
rightly bare the title of inestimable dignity, said in this manner.

BY West, a famous Region,
with Sea encompast round:
With wealth adornd abundantly,
as like has not been found.
And every thing so plentiful,
in such good order framde:
That this the Isle of happiness,
by title true is namde.
There, there remaynes the seemlyest Queen,
that ever nature bred:
In Virtues gifts excelling far,
of all that we have read.
And more then this, Diana so,
does rule her royal reygne:
That hitherto a Vestall pure,
she constant does remain.
Adornd with vvisdome woorthily,
and learning in each case:
That Fame records her Memory,
abroad in every place.
Saying, the Queen of Anglia,
the rarest gemme alive:
From all the Creatures on the earth,
the honor does deprive.
Wherefore arise ye noble rout,
that long this sight to see:
You gallant Lords and Ladies all,
in Court where ere you be.
And you shall see that seemly Saint,
whereof I tell you news:
Whose view, the Gods, and mortal men,
will force to stand and muse.
FINIS.
WAs ever so brave a brute blased of the Imperial Alexander? Was his life so
meritorious, The Lady does suppose that no one deserved rightlye such condign
praise as this peerless Princess. The Lady doubts whether this is the
Princes or no, and at last looks and espyeth the Champion.
that it deserved such rare renown? Was puissant Pompey, ever so honored? Or
Julius Caesar, so magnifically adored? Or did they all deserve half the
estimation, that by title true this seemly she may claim? No sure, well may
their deeds be noted, as a pattern to our eyes: But their lives shall never
be regystred, where her Fame is enrolled. But I, the most unfortunate creature
alive, here in a soil unknown to me, to stand in such great hazard and
doubt: Because I know not rightly, whether this be she or no, yet does my
mind persuade me, that it were impossible to find her mate. But yet if I
knew that this were she: I would fetch the rest of my company, that they
might be pertakers of my long desired joys. But stay, what comely Champion is
this so bravely mounted, ready to encounter with his mortal enemy. I will
attend to see what his coming is, and wherefore he stands thus to hazard him
self to Fortune.

The Champion seeing that the Lady had ended her talk, presumes nearer, and
speaks to her, The Cha^pion speaks to the Lady, dysdaining her talk passed,
and yields her great rebuke therefore.
as follows.
IT may be fair Lady, that either you hope to purchase praise, by extolling so
much this renowned Queen: Or else you look for a private commodity to
counteruayle your bold attempt, which of them you do, I know not, nor which
you are lykelyest to gain, I ca^ not conjecture: only this I am to answer,
that (of my self) I think no praise can deservedly patronize you: without it
were more merited, and as for commodity, you are like to get it where you can,
He alleges that women are apt to praise their Sex.
for our charity is now waxen cold.

In deed I must thus allow, you Women (for the most part) are given to praise
your own Sex, and though there be no desert: yet will you praise for your
pleasure. What heroycall words you used, are not yet forgotten, and what
peremptory brags you made, He uses threatening words, thinking thereby to
allay the courage of the Lady.
yet stick on my stomach. You commend this Princes to excel all other, and
you seem to say, that none more rightly does deserve it then she. If you of
your self are able to avouch what is spoken, and of sufficient force to stand
to your boasting? doubt not but you shall be dealt with all before you depart,
and be constrained to remember your self better an other time.

Have I condemned my peerless Pollinarda: He seems to extol his Lady
abooue the Princess.
and advanced the Fame of this Princes? Have I left my native Country,
wherein abound choice of delycate Dames, hoping that this should surpass them
all? And is it now come to no better effect? I see Report tatleth as pleases
her, and makes those fools that think them selves most wise. Pack up to
Hungaria, as wise as thou came hither, and all thy winnings, put in thy purse
to spend when a dear year comes.

The Lady hearing the Champion in such unlawful order to contempne the party
in presence, makes him an answer, thereby to cool his courage.
Sir Knight, The Lady repliet^ to the Champio^, because he seemed so much to
commend his Polinarda.
neither dismayed through your presumptuous words, nor yet encouraged through
any vain hope, yet greatly agreeued at this your rude behavior, for my part I
am one who comes to see as well as your self, yet dislyke not so much with my
self as you do. Seem you to be offended at any thing passed, and extol you
your Pollinarda abooue this gallant Gem? I know it were impossible she should
make any comparison, and I know this so virtuous: that she can not be her
equal. The Lady bids battle to the Champion in defense of her cause
Wherefore if your heart be hardened, that you dare abide the breakfast that I
shall bestow on you, and your mind so misbeleeuing that it will not be
reformed: I will assay my courage in defense of this Princes, and force you to
confess you have chosen too hard a choice.

The Champion perceiving the Lady so wylling to stand to her words passed, and
that by force of Arms she would mayntaine her cause: replyeth.
The Cha^pion takes the offer of the Lady, wylling to enter Combat.
LAdy, if your courage be so correspondent, and your manhood so equivalent, that
you dare seem to avouch your preter presumption, though small honor I shall
gain by conquering a Woman, and no victory to speak of, it shall be to
vanquishe you: yet will I teach you how you shall behave your self an other
time, and how to beware to make your choice so hard.

The Lady replyeth. The Lady prays for asistance.
AS for that sir Knight, we shall deal well enough. Now God assist me in this
my enterprise, and as I know my quarrel good and lawful: so hope I the
victory shall be lawdable and gainful. Think not sir Knight, although God
has given the greater courage, the more magnanimity, and the bolder behavior
to your Sex: he has utterly rejected the weaker vessels.

She applies her gifts equivalent to his kifts.
In steed of your courage, he has endued us with comely conditions, and in
place of magnanimity, he has graffed womanly modesty: and for your bold
behavior, he has bestowed on us bountiful beauty. So that aspect our
beauty: your boldness is blunted, respect our modesty: your magnanimity is
but mean, and our comely conditions, will soon quayle your courage, and as
how. A Gentleman void of of Virtue: his behavior is wurse then a Beggar, a
mean person adorned with virtue: Uertulesse Gentillytie is wurse then Beggerie.
is a precious Jewel abooue such a Gentleman. Therefore may it rightly be
said, and sufficiently avouched, that vertulesse Gentillytie: is wurse then
Beggerie.

You sir for example, The Lady charge him with greater matters then he looked
for.
if any jot of Gentillytie, or any sign of humanity, seemed to be extant in
you: you would use your talk with more discrecion, and demonstrate that which
I perceive is not in you. Is it your bold behavior that does purchase you
praise? Is it your melancholy magnanimity, that makes you ever the more
manfull? Or is it your craking courage, that will make you ever the sooner
commendable? No, The Lady here learneth him a lesson.
in steed of these place honest humanity: and then I warrant you shall not
seem so haughty, for bold behavior, use knightly courtesy: and then your
deeds will appear more worthy, for your mysused manhood, frequent decent
magnanimity: and then your Fame shall be wytnessed accordingly, and for your
craking courage, use Courtly civility: then shall you be honored, where now
you are nothing esteemed. But as your Country is barbarous: so is your
behavior, and as an Ape clothed in a coat of gold, by his conditions is an
Ape still: So good talk ministered to one that cares not therefore: is even
better well spared then evil spent.


The Champion incensed with great anger, comes nearer the Lady, saying.
AUaunt presumptuous peasant, The Cha^pion scorning the Ladies good talk,
answers.
seem thou to use chyldishe words to me? Think thou I will be taught of
such a Uarlet as thou? No, I Will soon cool your courage, therefore delay no
longer, but defend thy self.

The Lady. SInce neither freendly council, nor wisdom of thine own self is
able to warn thee, but that thou wylt hazard thy ha^ in hope to convince me:
defend thy self manfully, and I as womanly, so that begin when thou please,
for I am perfectly provided.




The Champion rydeth to the one end of the Tylt, and she to the other, and
there they deal according as the order and custom is thereof, after half a
score Staves be broken: the Champion was thrown beside his Horse, to whom the
Lady came thus saying.
The Lady having vanquished the Champion says thus.
WHat Sir, is Miles Gloriosus, or triumphing Thraso, who thought it were
impossible to pull his pearched plumes, or to cease his corragious
countenance: now brought to so bad a banquet? Was this he who thought him
self nonothing inferior to Alexander, as puissant as Pompey, as hautie as
Hanniball, Hector or Hercules, as courageous as Caesar, as stout as Sampson or
Scipio: And now foiled at the hands of a Woman? Where is now thy bravery?
Where is thy vain vaunting? Where is thy presumptuous, peremptory
persuasions? Where are now all thy manly motions? Now dashed amyd the dust? now
sent to seek succor, and thou and all thy might now subject to my valiancy?
How say thou, wylt thou revolt thy former words, and content thy self to
yield submission to this peerless Princes: or dye the death which thou have
rightly deserved?

The Champion seeing himself in such a pitiful plight, and that all this
while he had maintained a wrong opinion, desired the Lady he might stand up,
and then spoke as follows.
REnowned Princes, The Cha^pion ashamed of his bold presumption desires that
they would hear his sorrowful discourse.
and you most worthy Lady, as my fact is so faulty, that I can crave no
forgiveness, and my deed so desperately done, that it deserves due
discipline: yet am I to desire you to permyt me a little patience, and to
ponder my words at your courteous pleasure. First, where folly so guided me,
and self will so blinded me, that I was lead with every lewd report, and
every tatling tale, I not minding the rare virtues resident, in the Princely
person whom I have so haynously offended: let my tongue run at liberty, where
now I repent me.

Next, He repents that he praised so much his Polinarda.
thinking mine own manhood sufficient to contend both against Men and
Monsters: made me to commend my Polinarda, whom I now perceive is far
inferior. Let therefore my cause be construed at your clemency, let pity
plead my case, though I be nothing worthy, and I vow while life lasts to
her such dutiful alleageau^ce: that I hope you will count my service worthy
commendation. In so doing, that valiant train which I brought with me, who
are not far hence attending my coming: shall and will be all contented to
serve at your pleasure.

The Lady seeing the dutiful show of submission in the Knight, comes to
him, saying.
The Lady comes to the Champion, pronouncing him pardon, in hope of his
amendment.
WEll sir Knight, in hope that your after service shall prove so permanent as
here you have avouched, and that you ever hereafter in this peerless Princes
cause, will both live and dye. I dare pronounce that you are pardoned, and
that your offense shall be no more remembered.

Caesar got him such a noble name, through his great compassion, and that made
Cicero so much to commend him. Cicero in Oratione Pro rege Deiotaro. Alcander
who put out Licurgus eye. Eusebius.
Licurgus, when he had his eye put out, by the negligence of Alcander:
commanded that his first offense should be forgiven, he would be more
heedefull in the next. Eusebius, wounded to the death with a stone, thrown
from the hand of a Woman: on his death bed forced his friends to swear, that
they would not harm her for it. I may likewise allege the words of Virgill
to thee: Forsan et hoc olim meminisse iuuabit: and that the sentence of
Euripides will bid thee beware: Virgill. Euripides.
Dul^e est meminisse malorum. Now is thy first fault forgiven, in hope of
amendment, so that rather praise shall be purchased by pardoning thine offense:
then that rigor should rule to exact on so penitent an offender. Therefore
behold, when Justice says strike: Mercy by mildness does stay the sword,
and when a crime is co^mited deserving death: Pity does woork on the
offenders behalf. Therefore while thou lyuest, homage her whose merciful
mind, will not revenge with rygor: for that Virtue has caused her to pity
thine estate, and thou and all that are her dutiful Subjects: say, God save
our most worthy Queen. Therefore go your way, and fetch the rest of your
train, and so will I bring with me all my noble Ladies, and then will we go
together, to procure some farther pastime.



After they had both brought their traynes, they fell to a fresh Tournament,
and so ended this Devise.
Zelauto. Now sir, have I not wearied you with this long and tedious discourse?
Tell me I pray you how like you of it? Is it not worthy to be carried in
remembrance, because it is such an excellent devise?


Astraepho. Credit me sir, it is the proprest devise that ever I heard of, and
if it shall please you to bestow the same on me: I will give you as gallant a
discourse to carry with you.


Zelauto. Sir, any thing I have is at your commandment, and I would it were
so dear a gift, as I could find in heart to bestow on you.


Astraepho. I thank you for your good will heartily. But do her noble Peers
and Lords that are about her, often use to recreate her person with such brave
and strange devises?


Zelauto. Sir, those gallant youths do, and have bestowed abundance in the
pleasing of her Majesty, and are so well contented therwithall: that surely it
surpasses any man's wit to give them praise according to their desert.


Astraepho. But did you ever come in acquaintance with any of those noble
Gentlemen?


Zelauto. Zelauto tells how much bound he was to a noble Lord in the English
Court.
Yea Sir, and am much bound to one of them in especial, who sure in
magnanimity of mind, and valor of courage, represents in that famous Land,
a second Caesar, to the view of all that know him. And a little before I
departed out of that worthy Country, I wrote a few verses in the
commendation, of that virtuous Maiden Queen: and also I wrote a few other in
praise of that noble Lord, to whom I am bound for his singular bounty.


Astraepho. I pray you Sir, if those verses be not out of your remembrance:
let me hear some part of them?


Zelauto. That you shall, Zelauto writ verses in the praise of the Queen.
wherefore mark what I wryt in the praise of the English Queen.


Zelauto here tells to Astraepho, the verses that he wrote in the
commendation of the English Queen.
QVEL. CHE. MI. MOLESTAVA ACCENDO. ET ARDO


IF eyes may judge, and mind may full suppose,
the Virtues rare, that I of late have seen:
Then pen at large, may perfectly disclose,
the seemly honor of a Virgin Queen.
Whose perfect praise deserves to be unfold:
And blasde abroad in trumpe of beaten Gold.
The Graces three attendant stand at beck,
Diana does her royal raygne support:
Virtue does stand, all vice to countercheck,
and Modesty bears sway in all her Court.
Truth rules aloft, repelling dark debate:
Justice does sway the sword of her estate.
Prudence does stand, on right side of this Queen,
and Temperaunce a Garland holds before:
Then Fortitude stands jointly them between,
and Trial he does guard her evermore.
Peace on the left side, Plenty on the other:
Thus seemly they adorn the Queen their mother.
Sobriety does bear the flagge on hye,
Virginity stands clothde in Vestall white:
Her train behind borne by Humility,
Pity likewise, waytes on this worthy wight.
Thus every thing stands in so good a frame:
That far and near, does spread her golden Fame*
FINIS.
Astraepho. Astraepho merueyleth at this rare report.
Zelauto, believe me, I never heard in all my life so many Uertues resident in
a mortal creature. But certainly as I know your judgment is excellent in such
matters: so I confess again, that had I not heard it of you, I would not have
believed it. But now Sir, I pray you let me hear the verses which you wrote in
commendation of that noble Gentleman, whom you praised so much likewise.


Zelauto. That you shall, Zelauto writ verses in the praise of a noble Lord
and I would I were able by pen to praise, or by pains to requite his singular
great courtesy.


Here Zelauto rehearses the verses that he wrote in the praise of a certain
Noble Lord in the English Court.
IF ever Caesar had such gallant Fame,
or Hanniball, whose martial life we read:
Then in your Honor, I esteem the same,
as perfect proof in virtue and in deed.
My pen unable is your praise to paynt:
With Virtues rare, that does your mind acquaynt.
What I have found, I need not to express,
what you have done, I far unworthy was:
But Nature yet does cause me think no less,
but that with love you did respect my case.
And such great love did in your heart abound:
That strange it is the freendship I have found.
Wherefore for aye I Honor your estate,
and wish to you, to live Argantus life:
And all your deeds may prove so fortunate,
that never you do taste one jot of strife.
But so to live, as one free from annoy:
In health and wealth, unto your lasting joy.
FINIS.
Astraepho. Surely, belyke Zelauto you have found great freendshippe at that
noble Gentleman's hands. But referring all other matters aside, tell me what
became of your Companion, that went with you into England?


Zelauto. Truly he was so far in love with the Country, that I could not get
him from thence when I departed. And in deed so would I likewise have stayde,
if my Fathers commandment had not been such, which caused me to hasten away,
because I would see other Countries.


Astraepho. Then you did depart shortly after, and left your Companion there?


Zelauto. Zelauto takes shypping into Persia.
Yea Sir. And from thence I took shypping to go into Persia. But many were the
myseries that I poor soul abode among the tyrannous Turks.


Astraepho. Astraepho seems to tell Zelauto of his bold h^^arding himself
in such order.
But durst you seem to wander so far as to put your self, in hazard of life
among those cruel and bloody Turks. You remembered not belyke your Fathers
commandment, who wylled you to guide your self so well: that your return
might be to his eternal joy, but rather as desperate, having a youthful head
and a running wit, would venture on your own destruction.


Zelauto. Zelauto excuses his boldness as well as he can.
In deed Sir, who minds not the after misery: wadeth often so far that he
is clean over shoes, so I more upon pleasure then any other cause: put my
self to God and good Fortune on that behalf, yet was I not unmindful of my
Fathers precepts, for that I purposed nothing, but found it to my profit.


Astraepho. They go to supper.
Well Zelauto, it draws now toward night, and we have well spent this time in
talk. Let us now go in, and provide something for our Supper. And to morrow
we will discourse of your other adventures at large.


Zelauto. I am well contented Sir, and a thousand thanks I yield you for your
courtesy.


The Author.
THus has Zelauto and Astraepho passed one day in talk together, and now are
gone to provide such necessaries as are needful to suffice their hungry
stomachs: how they spent the next day: the matter ensuing shall make
manifest. Thus yielding my self (gentle Reader) unto thy courteous
construction, and not to a rash Reporters reprehension: I wish my works
might procure thee as much pleasure, as my good will is to work thy welfare.
Vale.

Honos alit Arts. FINIS.
A. Monday.

Zelauto. His Ariuall in Persia, his valiant aduenturing in the defense of a
Lady, condemned for her Christianity, his prosperous Perigrination among the
tyrannous Turks, with the rest of his Knightly deeds.

The second part of the Fountain of Fame.

Written by A. M.

Honos alit Arts.

The Author, to the courteous Reader.
WHo but beheld the one side of Ianus: would hardly judge that he were so
rare misshaped. And who but viewed the upper part of a Siren: would think she
were a whole woman incorporat. So who but reads the beginning of a book: can
give no judgment of the sequel ensuing. The Friar in the middle of his sermon,
cried the best was behind: and I having told you a piece of a tale, say the
finest follows. So, if that you behold Ianus perfectly: you shall see his
deformednesse, and if you see all parts of the Siren: you shall find the
alteration, likewise if you read all the book: you shall not be deluded by
(the best is behind) but so to reprehend mine excuse. The Printer (you will
say) has painted it full of Pictures, to make it be bought the better: and I
say the matter is more meritorious, and therefore you should buy it the sooner.
So, if you will be ruled by the Printer and me: you shall at no time want any
of the Books.

The homelyest house, may be hansome within: the simplest Garden, may have
Flowers worth the smelling, and a weather beaten Bulwark, may hold out the
bold blows of a well wintered Soldier. Many a good Captain, may go in a
plain coat, and many an honest man, may walk simply arayde. Therefore, the
homlynesse of the house, does not reprehend the hansomnesse, the symplenesse
of the Garden, condemn the sweet sent of the Flowers, nor the Bulwark disbase
the stoutnes of the Soldier, likewise, the plain coat of the Captain does
not diminish his manhood: nor the mean array of the Citizen, impair any of his
honesty: Neither does the bluntnes of my Book, altogether condemn me: nor
the mean method of the matter, diminish any jot of the good will of the
Author, you can have no more of a Catte but her skyn: nor of me more then I am
able to do. Well, I will not trouble you with wresting many words, nor hinder
you from hearing that which ensues: you have free entrance into the Orchard,
pluck where you please, love where you like, and fancy where you find fyttest.

FINIS.
Your friend. A. Monday.

The second part of the delycate Disputation between two noble Gentlemen of
Italy.
Astraepho. NOw Sir Zelauto, Astraepho in the morning begins to talk with
Zelauto, desiring him to accept in good part his homely entertainment.
you have seen, the whole courtesy, that I your poor freende can show you, to
feast you with Fortunes fare (I call it so) because as to day I have it, and to
morrow it is uncertain, therefore it comes by sudden chance, and also to
lodge you in my careful coutch, hard and unpleasant, the furniture thereto
belonging all of moss and leaves, yet well does it content me, because I have
used my self thereto, to you I know it is strange, and no marvel, because
the Princely pleasures that is in your famous fathers Mansion, as yet stick
upon your stomach. My self, having remained here full fourteen years and
more, have clean forgot, my preter delights, my wanton conceyts, and my lays
of Love. Now to the sprouting sprayes I commend my suit, the Hills, the
Dales, the Rocks, the Clyffes, the Cragges, yea, and the gallant Echoes
resound of this solitary Wyldesse, they and none but they can witness of my
woe. In Court I served, to my small auayles, I sued to a self wylled Saint, I
complained, He shows how he needs not to accept of coin, for because he
has Nobody to ba^ter withal.
and it was not regarded. But here I live as Prince within my self, not foe
to any, nor none to me. I adore my God. I feast my self as well as I can, as
for my garments, though they be homely, yet are they healthful, for Silken
suits, are not to wander among the bryery brakes withal. What care I for
money, I have Nobody to bater withal, my Host asks me no money when I rise
from breakfast, dinner or supper, then what should I do with it? If in your
careful Cities, Money in Citie^ causes much mischief discencion among the
commons, discord among friends, and such like injuries.
you as little regarded, your coin as I: you should not have so much
extorcion, so much brybing to Officers, so much wra^gling and iarring among the
common sort, so much encroching one upon another, and to conclude, you should
not have so many devilish devises freque^ted, therefore I do not aspect for my
private commodity, I live not here by pride or by usury, but I take all
contentedly, so to no man am I enemy. This homely discourse, for a mornings
good morrow I trust will suffice, now must I desire you to proceed in your
promised affairs, touching the rest of your mishappes.


Zelauto. Zelauto yields innumerable thanks for the great courtesies that he
has found, being but in deed a stranger.
Courteous Sir, if my slender ability, were of such and so great a puissaunce,
as might but seem to counteruayle the large and inestimable courtesy, that I
have found at your hands undeservedly: I might then then the bolder behave my
self in your company. But as where nothing is to be had, the King loses his
right: even so I having nothing* yield my self to your courteous consideration
(always remembered) that if it shall please God to send such success, as of
long I have looked for: I doubt not (though not able to satisfy the whole,
wherein I am indebted) yet to recompense the greatest part as near as I can.
And this by the way to assure your self, though loathe to spend so much lyp
labor in promysing you preferment, doubt not but in heart I will remember you,
and that to your contentment.


Astraepho. Astraepho desirous to hear the rest of his trauayles: reme^breth
him of his former promise.
Sir Zelauto, here needs no such thanks, if I could bestow so much of you, as
my poor heart would wyllingly afford: I doubt not but then you would thank
me. In the mean while, take as you find, welcome your self though you be not
bidden, shut up the sack when it is but half full, and give God thanks for
all. But proceed I pray you as touching your promise, for I greatly desire to
hear what after happened you.


Zelauto. I shall satisfy your aspectation wyllingly, but give ear I pray
you, and mark it attentively, for you shall hear the tenor of a strange and
tragical Commedy.


Zelauto remooueth his Thought to haste out of England.

Here Zelauto tells how he departed from the royal Realm of England, and
arrived at Zebaia in Persia, and of the great courtesy that he found with his
Host Manniko Rigustello, Zelauto his coming to Zebaia in Persia, to the house
of one Ma^niko Rigustello, who lodged Christians.
and also of his wife named Dania.
BEing departed from my Companion, and from that thrice renowned Realm of
England, after many hard and diffy^ill passages: I arrived at Zebaia, a gallant
and brave City in Persia. Being come thither, alas I wist not what to say,
the people so gased upon me, as though they would have eaten me, so at last I
entered into the sign of the Gorgons head, which is a house of lodging for
Strangers. When I came in, I found my Host and his Wife sitting by the fire
at supper, I saluted them in their own language as well as I could, mary mine
Hostess was a Florentine, The hosts of the house a Christian a Florentin.
and she did quickly perceive what countreyman I was, wherefore she rose up,
and very courteously bad me welcome, so presently I was had up into a Chamber,
and a good fire made, then I sat down and communed with mine Hosts.

The talk between mystres Dania and Zelauto in his Chamber.
The hosts and Zelauto conferreth together about his coming to that place,
and informs him of ye laws and orders of that City.
Sir (quoth she) as the sight of a Christian in this place, is a thing of great
lyking unto me: even so are you welcome, although as yet unacquainted. But
neither to stand upon the niceness of Rethoricall gloses, nor to trifle the
time with long and doubtful delays, this I am to inform you, we are here
subject under a Law, to which Law, will we, nyll we, we must obey, the Law
does thus far stretch in charge, that no Christian must abide in ye City
abooue ten days, if longer, to their own peril, in which time, the Host
must be sworn for his good usage, and to see if that he keep due and decent
behavior in his house. Now Sir, you having taken up your lodging here: my
Husband is upon his good lyking to give his word for you. The hosts
proffereth herself to be his friend.
Think not Gentleman that I speak to discourage you, for you shall find your
self here as well used as in your own Country, I am my self a Christian
borne, and will stand your friend in more then I will now make my vaunt of:
therefore (by the way) I give you first to understand our Laws, of other
matters we shall the better discourse afterward. Gentlewoman (quoth I) I
would that my simple and mean behavior, Zelauto gives her great thanks for
her courtesy.
might once be worthy to deserve, the courtesy of such a freendly
entertaynment, and surely in the informing me of the Laws and Customs of your
City: you have done me no small pleasure, for otherwise, I might have by some
one occasion unwittingly violated them. But now since you (on mere courtesy)
has done thus much for me: I am to yield you a thousand thanks. Well sir
(quoth she) then if I might be so bold, She demands of what country he is,
and wherefore his coming is, and whether he minded to make his journey.
I would enter into a little talk with you. Truly Gentlewoman (quoth I) you
are not so wylling: as heartily welcome, therefore say what pleases you.

Then sir (quoth she) since your patience has pardoned my rash attempt: I am
the bolder without blushing to crave such courtesy at your hands, as to
rehearse of whence you are, from whence you come, what moved you to visit
this place, and whether you mind to travail. Suspect no subtle Sophistry in
this my demand (good sir) but rather impute my boldness to country
behavior, Zelauto reposing a good belief in his hostess, because she was a
christian, opens to her of whence he was, and how he had traueyled* other
countries, and how he meant to traueile, till his time were expyred. She
answers him very honestly and ciuilly, so it drew at length to supper time
and to one that wishes your welfare.

Genlewoman (quoth I) to dissemble were no part of freendly familiarity, to
lie, would impair my name and credit, to tell truth also, may here
perhaps to return to mine own endamagement, but buylding my assurance on
your Christian fidelity, and hoping you will not seek to work my harm
wilfully, but will rather adiuuate me in my necessity: to you will I unfold
the sum of my secrets. First I am a Venetian borne, and my Father, if living
(as I hope he be) thereof is Duke, my youthful mind being addicted to see
forrayne Countries: left my Father, and took my self to travail. So after
the view of other Countries: Fortune has sent me hither, where I must be no
long abyder, because four years and more are fully expyred, and my time does
amount but unto six years, and to answer whether I shall go from hence: I
can not, because I must crave your good and freendly direction in my voyage,
that I may escape from mine enemies: and safely return home into my Country.

In deed sir (quoth she) I can not blame you, to keep your self so secret,
if you be descended of so noble a house, and for my part, you shall be injured
by no way, but rather advanced, and if life, goods, or what ever else may
pleasure you: be hold, for they are ready at your commandment. By this time
it waxed somewhat dark, and supper was ready, so the meat being served up
into my Chamber, the Host came, and he, his wife and I, supped altogether.



The talk which Manniko Rigustello the host, Dania his wife, and Zelauto had
together at Supper.
The Host being at supper with Zelau. knowing he was a Christian, and had a
good mind to the same him self, enters into talk with him.
MAnniko Rigustello the Host, sitting at the Table, and seeing that I was a
Christian, he being one him self that of long time endeavored to become a
Christian: desired me, (if I could) to rehears^ some part of the Scripture,
whereby he might receyne comfort and consolation, for the want of which he was
long time troubled and vexed in his spyrit. Quoth I, though not so able as I
would I were, yet will I reveal such things unto you, as I have no doubt but
you shall be comforted thereby, and I will help to mitigate your wounded
conscience, by the sweet and blessed promises of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, a sovereign medicine against all ^railties of the vile and voluptuous
^^eshe.



Here Zelauto rehearses to Astraepho the comfortable talk that he used to
his Host Manniko Rigustello, and of the conversion of his Host.
AFter that God of his infinite goodness and mercy, had framed all things
according to his heavenly will and pleasure, The creation of man. Gene. 1.
as first the day and night, next the trees, the earth, the sea, the fishes,
the fowls, and all living beasts: then made he Man the Image of his own
lykenes, and gr^ffed into him reason and understanding, Man^ made a governor.
The beasts to labor for him, and to be his food likewise. Man, what a loss
he had.
whereby he excelled all the creatures of the earth, insomuch, that he gave him
the domination over all other creatures, as the Ox both to labor for him,
and to be sustentation to his body likewise, the Horse to bear his weary
carkase, after his tedious labor, and other creatures beside for his behoof
and nourishment.

But man amyd all his gallant joys, received so sharp and so heavy a fall:
Man, cast out of Paradise.
that for ever he lost his paradisall pleasures. Before, living at liberty,
wanting nothing to his prosperity, was now driven into such a perplexity, that
he must eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, till the ground by his
weary labor, beside, sustayning the wrathful countenance of his heavenly
Creator, that before was bent toward him so loouingly: now cast out utterly,
ashamed to come before his Majesty, God yet would not leave us succorlesse,
but sent his Prophets to preach to us, then his Christ to pay the rau^some of
our sins and what grievous torme^te^ he did abide for us: yet we do not seek
to amend our naughty living, but daily sin more and more.

Zelauto tells him what cruelty they use to a poor member of Christ's body,
when they take him.

Through want of knowledge of God comes this great tira^ny*

To know God, is to do as we would be done unto.

To know God, to worship him only.

To know God, to believe in his Christ.

To know God. brings life everlasting.


so horrible was his sin and iniquity, that the quantity of his loss to us
is unspeakable.

But what of that, did God for ever after leave us desolate? did he send us no
comfort to succor us? Yes, yes, his Prophets to preach to us, lastly, his
dear Son to ransom us, who when we were at the brinke of utter destruction,
paid the price of his precious blood, to redeem us. What mockings? what
scoffinges? what raylinges? what spytting in the face? what whipping? what
crowning with thorn? what nailing on the Cross? and what tyrannous torments
did he meekely, patiently, loouingly, gently, yea, and wyllingly suffer for
our sins. But alas how little do we regard it? we that know there is a God,
and a punishment due to our sins: seek not to amend our lives. You that live
in darkness, and not able to attain to so clear light: how wilfully, how
wantonly, how wickedly you lead your lives because you will not know this.
When you catch a Christian, a member of that sweet body that suffered all
these torments: then triu^phe you, what merciless torments he must abide,
alas, my heart bleedeth for to think on, how tyrannically you can find in
heart to use him?

And whereof grows this great cruelty you use? only for want of the
knowledge of God. If you knew what God is: you would then consider with your
selves, how you should do to an other man as you would be done to your self.

If you knew God, you would never call on such a vain thing as Mahomet is:
but on the true God, he which lives and reygneth everlastingly. If you knew
God: you would then believe in his Christ, (whose name you can not abide) and
then you would consider what and how many grievous torments he suffered for
you, and then would you rather seek to increase the members of his body: then
to make such havoc and spoil of them as you do. So that if you knew God:
you should be partakers with his dear children, in the kingdom of heaven.

Manniko Rigustello the Host reasons with Zelauto. Sir (quoth the Host) by
this your talk, The Host moved in mind at the talk of Zelauto: enters
into farther communicatio^ with him. The Host desires to know how he might
likewise become a Christian.
I am greatly moved in mind. First, to consider the blindness in which I
have lived: Next to think on the happy and blisfull life that you Christians
have. But sir, I have co^muned with a great many that have come hither, and
they in deed have told me part of that which even now you said, and have
hartned me very much, but none that ever came so near the quick as you do:
well letting that pass, I am to desire you to infourm me how I might attain
to so sweet a comfort as you have. If my applyable pains may aid me to
purchase it: I vow no occasion whatsoever shall hinder me.

Zelauto. I am right glad (quoth I) to hear that you have so good a zeal and
intent to the Christian faith, Zelauto glad to hear the Hosts good zeal, yet
desires him to cease of that talk till some (...)there more conuenie^nt time.
and my diligence shall not want to council you therein, but as of two
extremities, the least is to be chosen, and of two euilles the wurst to be
shunned: So hold I it best, that at this time we leave to confer of these
matters, least that when we least of all think, the enemy come to subvert us.
At this time, if you please, let us use such delightful talk (used with
moderation:) as may well recreate us: and no fault be found therewith, yet
think not (I desire you) but that I will satisfy your requests, in whatsoever
you please, and you shall find me to do more for you, then now I mind to
make protestation of. So if you are well instructed, and I deuoyde of my
peril: you shall win your whole wishing, and I purchase no disprofite. How
say you sir, are you contented to grant to that I have spoken?


Manniko Rigustello, the Host. The Host is well contented with the reply of
Zelauto, and falls with him into other talk.
In deed sir, you say truth* little said is soon amended, and where the
hedge is lowest, the beasts go over soonest: therefore we will cea^^e this
talk at this time, and reason thereof between our selves secretly. Therefore
tell me I pray you, what was the cause of your coming into this Country,
being such a soil, wherein they rather desire your death, then wish your well
fare? and whether mean you from hence to travail?

Zelauto. Zelauto tells to the Host the cause why he went thus in travail.
Sir (quoth I) you know that a youthful mind is still ventrous, and desirous
to see new sightes, and fashions every day, wherefore I being one more
addicted to pleasure then profit, and more desirous of nouelles, then to
continue still in one song: hazarded my self to all chances, whatsoever, and
hitherto I have out stood them (I thank God:) well enough. What shall follow
I know not* what is passed has been sufficiently discharged, but whether I
travail from hence, is utterly unknown, thus you know at large the cause of
my trauayles.

Mica Sheffola the Nephew of the Soldane came in ^erie sad and heavy.
We had now sitten at supper not fully half an hour, but there came in one, a
very goodly Gentleman, who was Nephew to the Soldane of the City, named Mica
Sheffola, this Gentleman sat down at the Table, and gave a very gretnesse
sigh* at length looking on me, the blood rose abundantly in his face, and the
tears began to trickle down his cheeks. My Hostess. Dania seeing the
pensive plight of this Gentleman: ran to him, The Hosts of the house takes
the Gentleman about the neck to comfort him.
and took him about the neck saying. Alas good sir, what means these
mestiue motions? What harm is happened that makes you so heavy? Or what cause
procures you to lament in this sort? O tell me good sweet sir, and if any
help lies in me: credit me, I will do it to the very uttermost of my power.
Ah good Dania (quoth he) I know right well, if thou could remedy the
matter* thou would do it wyllingly, but the case so stands, that it is
far from thy power to pleasure me, or any that I know, that is able to do
so much for me. Then looked he on me again, and feign he would have spoken,
but yet he was half afraid, which I seeing, and hearing him say, that a man
might pleasure him in the cause of his so great sorrow, I said.

Gentleman, Zelauto seeing the great sadness of the Gentleman speaks unto
him.
Art and inuencion of man has framed for every sore a salve, for every
malladie a medicine, and for every disease a cause or remedy for the same.
Likewise God, as he has framed the mouth: so has he sent meat to sustain
the same with all, and as he sends sickness to man, so does he send him
health again.

Man of him self is placed among a multitude of myseries, sometime ready to
fall into this evil, then into ye, yet is he not left desolate. As God sends
him myserie: so sends he joy again, a while he scourges, and then he
cease, a while he lowreth, and then he laugheth.

The Physician first ministers a sharp Salve to search the deapth of the
disease, Zelauto seeks by many and sundrie-examples to cause the Ge^tleman to
leave his great and sodayn sadness.
and then he the better and sooner heals his cure? The Prince a while
frowneth upon his Subject, to declare his authority, and to make him to obey?
but afterward he uses his dealinges mercifully. The master quickens up the
dull mind of the Scholar with sharp words* and stripes of the rod at the
first: but afterward he looueth him, and makes much of him.

Even so Sir it maybe, that some sodeyne chance permitted by God has
happened, as to deprive you of some of your dearest friends, He applies his
former allegatio^s to the Ge^tleman.
or else that some unlooked for mischaunce has happened, which procures your
pensiveness, souseth you in sorrows* and makes you moan in such mestiue
manner. I^ so it be, think not but he which has sent this Cross: is able to
take it away again, and that he which causes you now to lament: will at
length cause you to laugh.

He shows him how his great lamenting does but bring all his senses out of
quiet.
Therefore never wrap your self in woes, nor waste your days in wayling: For
that can but cause the unquietness of the mind, distemperature of the body,
and likewise bereave you of your senses. Pardon my presumption (Sir) I pray
you, in that I s^eme to meddle in this matter, which to me nothing pertains,
and that I perturbe your patience with my frivolous talk. I doubt not but it
is as well taken: as it is meant by me and spoken, and as courteously
construed, as my poor self pretended. I would be very loath to have any heavy,
although I can procure them small pleasure, and I would be sorry to see one in
sadness: if by my means I might move him to mirth.

He courteously offreth him self, to pleasure him by any means that lies in
him to do.
Therefore Sir (although you be to me a stranger, and I have no commission to
examine you in this case, yet as a friend that wishes you well, and would
willingly, work your well fare,) if you please to unfold the cause that
molesteth your mind, and what you think is best remedy therefore: I promise
you on my fidelity, though it were to encounter with any enemy, to procure
you a remedy: I would hazard it wyllingly. In sign and token whereof, that my
deed shall make manifest my word: I offer you the hand of a true and
faithful Christian.


Mica Sheffold the Soldanes Nephew replyeth to the courteous offer of Zelauto.
WHen the Gentleman had well po^dered my tale, and being one (as I was
informed by my Hostess before) that I need not to doubt of, because he was a
good Christian him self, but he durst not be known thereof: took my hand and
courteously kyssed it, and then began to say.

The Ge^tlema^ kisseth Zelautoes hand^, and then begins freendly to talk
with him.
Sir, I am glad of your Christian company, but sorry for your being in so
succorles a soil, and although you be a stranger: yet to me the welcommest
man alive. I have noted well your freendly talk, and wish I were able any way
to requite it, nevertheless you shall find me more your friend then I entend to
boast of, and I will awarde any extremity, that may here seem to hurt you,
in hope when you have heard it: you will do your good will to help it.

It is so sir (as your Host can credibly witness) that I am Nephew to the
Soldane Neoreo, The Ge^tleman opens the cause of his sadness to Zelauto.
who governs this City, and one, who with him am able to do you a
pleasure, but at this time, Fortune has frowned so frowardly: that she has
dashed the chief of my desires in the dust. I have a very gallant, godly and
virtuous Gentlewoman to my Sister, who because of her Christian belief, His
sister for her christian belief appointed to death.
and constant auouching of the same: is condemned by the Law, and to morrow
she must loose her life. Yet has the Soldane thus much granted, that if any
one whatsoever, dare venture him self against a Champion by force of Arms to
set her free: she shall upon his good success be restored at liberty. To
take this case in hand I know no one dare be so bold, there are many which
wyllingly would: but that they doubt to be suspected thereby, my self dare
wyllingly venture the cause: More of her friends but for fear of suspicion
dare ve^ture to stand in her quarrel.
but that if I should conquer the enemy, mine Uncle the Soldane would
conspire my death by some means, so that seeing no way to adiuuate this
extremity, I am fully persuaded she shall dye the death. And to request you
herein, I willingly would not, for that I know it were the loss of your life:
which (on my Christian fidelytie) I would be loathe to hear of, much less to
be the procurer thereof* Wherefore (good sir) tell me the best council you can,
what may be done in this doubtful matter?

Zelauto. I having heard the Gentleman's sorrowful tale, Zelauto deuiseth what
were best to be done in this doubtful case.
and considered the distressed case of that famous and worthy Lady: thought,
that if I lost my life in defense of my faith, my Captain Christ would
purchase me the greater reward. Again, if the Lady were so constant, to abide
such merciless torments as her own kyndred, and the residue of her enemies
would wyllingly lay upon her, Zelauto thinks it a great shame for ^uer unto
him, if he should not apply his pains to set the Lady free.
and all for the zealous Christianity which remained in her virtuous breast: I
should deservedly reap a great reproach, if I could and would not seek to
mittigate her miseries. Therefore wholly committing the cause to Gods
omnipotency, and not accoumpting of my life, to set forth his glory: I
enterprised the matter courragiously, in assured hope to foil the enemy. And
if that afterward my death by any means should be conspired: I would refer
all to the will of the almighty, for that death were unto me aduau^tage, and
life nothing meritorious. The learned say: Summa virtutis Potestas est.
Cui come^ virtus non est, is animo facile cadit a fortuna percussus. The mind
therefore adorned with virtue: will never be timorous of that which shall raise
his eternal honor, for after death is the glory of a man's preter days
wytnessed, as it is rightly said: Viuit post funera Virtus; and even so I
encouraged, Mors non est fo^midanda.
through the good hope I had sustained: I made no accoumpt of this miserable
mortality, but addressed my self to set the Lady at liberty, and so turning
to the Gentleman, I said.

Zelauto replyeth to ye demand of the Gnetle man.
Sir, as I am wylling to work your well fare. So am I doubtful of my
destruction, and as I may pleasure you to your perpetual profit: so may I
hinder my self to my helpless harms: You say your self, the adventure is so
adverse: that on both sides it brings death, though the Lady enjoy her
liberty: the Conqueror must abide captive, therefore neither can the Lady like
her delyuerie: nor her Champion his hard choice.

Again, if I (being a Christian) should conceive so good a courage, as to
venture on my valiancy, to redress her emminent myserie: I doubt least a
farther inconvenience might be to her allotted, and to me a death, that (albeit
dying) should still live, this is to be doubted, and if it might be possible,
worthy to be prevented. But now Sir to assure your self, what a Christian
courage can comprehend, and to satisfy the sorrows, that you and your
friends have sustained, thus much (more for your freendly favor, then any
gain I hope for, yea and more for the good lyking that I have conceived, then
for any riches wherewith you are able to reward me) I dare hazard my self to
defend your Sister, and stand to the peril that my presumption may procure me.
Wherefore if it shall please you, (...) to pray for the (...) able to lend me:
I will (...).

When the Gentleman (...) heard the freendly offer which I made him, and upon
so small acquaintance* (...).

(...) thy Sir, ^
(...) words of a Turk, may so perfectly pierce your heart (...) ^
(...).

(...) ^
(...) shall be victor: He gives to Zelauto his hand to be a Christian, and
with him to taste of any troubles.
It shall be very hard but I will reskew you from their rigor, and my self
take part of your pains whatsoever. And here in token, my words shall turn
into deeds, I give you the hand of a Turk, changed to a Christian, With you
to live and lack, with you to be true and trusty, Vsque ad mortem.

Sir (quoth I) neither do^ my deeds de^erue half the good report you have
uttered, nor my simple self worthy to wear such commendation. Zelauto
desires him in the morning to bring his armor, and he will discharge his
promise.
But as the (...) being touched, follows so far as it can: so I being
praised, presume as far as honesty may hold me. What I have promised, I
purpose to perform, and what you have offered, I shall still a^^^^mpt of: in
the morning set ^e brought (...) defense as shall serve the turn: and I am
here your Champion ready to the Combat.

Our Host having sitten all this while, and heard what words had passed
between us* right joyful that I would adventure for the Lady, The Host
renders thanks to Zelauto.
said thus. Now surely Gentlem^n, were the uttermost of my (...) able to
answer your singular courtesy, or any action (whatsoever) I your poor friend
could perform: you should not find me so forward to utter the same, as I
would be in the verifying thereof, but in token that I would discharge what
here I have spoken: I, and all mine rests at your commandment. Then turned
he to the Gentleman saying. The Host speaks to Mica Sheffola.
And you Sir (for your part) have good occasion to think your coming
fortunate (...) and your time not ill bestowed: when you find a friend so
ready to grant your request. I should think you very much discourteous, and
that small humanity harbored in you, if you should seem to be obliuious of so
courteous an offer, but I know your wisdom will (...) the (...) so wisely:
that my simple self need not to make mention thereof, yet as one that wishes
your good ^redite should be blased by your good deeds: and that so noble a
Gentleman should not be lightly remembered: I was so bold to interrupt your
patienee with my frivolous talk, and to occupy the time, better then to
stand idle.

With that, The Hostess speaks to Zelauto, and to Mica Sheffola.
my Hostess Dania, courteously kyssing my hand, began to say as follows.
Worthy Sir, neither would I wish you to sur myse my words spoken of
flattery: nor that you should suppose I speak otherwise then my mind serves
me, neither you noble Sheffola to misconster my meaning; but to accept as my
talk shall give occasion. First, the outward apparaunce of this gallant
Gentleman's humanity: makes ample discovery of true nobillitie. Next, the
hauty courage that consists in his valiant breast: argues that his Parents
are of hye degree, The Hostess her great good will to Zelauto.
for we all being strangers, and you most of all: his seemly self to take
upon him to discharge so great a task, as the loss of his own life to
succor your Sister: m^ thinks you are unable to counteruayle his courtesy,
who forces not his life to defend Christianity. Therefore Sir, for ever
command me and mine, farther then now I mean to make mention of.

M^ friends (quoth I) your good will I see is great, Zelauto thanketh his
Host and Hosts for their good opinion.
and your affection so fervent: that you imbolden me to perform that which I
have made vaunt of, wherefore you Sir, may depart when you please, and fail
not to send such things as are needful, and that very timely in the morning.

Sir (quoth he) your mind shall be fulfilled, to the uttermost that you have
required, Mica Sheffola dep^^teth from Zelauto and goes to the prison to his
sister.
and now will I go to the prison to my solytarie Sister, to comfort those
cares that this hard hap procures, so shall I drive her from doubt, and
procure her to prayer, that her Champion may prove so valiant, as to
vanquishe her enemies. In the mean time I commit you Sir, to your God, who I
pray to strengthen you in your attempt, and so mine Host and Hostess both
fare well.

The Gentleman being thus departed, Zelauto confirms the Host in ye
Christian faith.
and the hour of rest app^oching* I entered with mine Host into a Chamber,
secretly between our selves, and there exhorted him in the best manner I
could, so that my dillygent labor bestowed: brought him to a good belief, and
that he was fully pretended to live and dye in the good counsel I gave him.

Well, all that night, I went not to bed, but on my knees with heaued hands,
made my peti^ions to my God almighty, to sheelde me safe from the tyranny of
my mortal enemies.

Mica Sheffola returns in the morning, with the Armor for Zelauto.
In the morning, the Gentleman returned again, and brought with him a verse
gallant Courser, a coat of Complet Armor, a Sheelde, and other necessaries.
When he was entered my Chamber, very courteously, he said. Albeit (worthy
Sir) I can not comprehend my long expectation in all points, but that I fail
in the fulfilling some part thereof: I doubt not but you will respect the
brevity of the time, and allow a reasonable excuse, containing nothing but
truth. And though this furniture is not so (...) as I would it were, nor my
entrance so honestly discharged, as it might have been: I hope you will deem
the one as far as might could maintain it, and accoumpt the other but for
want of good manners: nevertheless, if you bear with my boldness on this
behalf, perchance it may be hereafter a sufficient warning.

He shows the great courage of his Sister to the death.
First Sir, yester night after I departed, I went to the prison to see my
Sister, whom I found nothing fainting, though fear were so nigh: nor in ought
to dismay at the terror of death, but rather rejoicing, that her race was so
near run, and to leave mortality for eternal felicity, saying unto me. O
brother, neither molest your mind with any (...) ones, nor subdue your self
with any sorrows for I go to gl^rie, leaving you here in a world of myserie,
wherefore I would the hour were at hand to translate this Trag^die* then
should I have my with, and they suffice them with tyranny. But since it can
not be so soon as I would, but perfor^^ I shall stay till choir.

Mica Sheffola hearing the joyful words of his Sister rejoiced.
When I beheld my Sister, (...) courage, from mourning to mirth, and from
pensiuenes to perfect gladness: what joy I conceived, is not now to be spoken
of, for the wyllingnesse that she had to the death, caused me perfectly to
believe, that their excessive torments should not any and attaynt her: but
that in the fullness of her faith, she would withstand their practices
whatsoever, and then I said unto her. The words he spoke to his Sister.
Dear Sister, as I am right joyful of this your Christianlike courage: so
wish I you may remain unto the end, but thus much comfort is sent you, and
thus much good hope to harten you: that there is a Christian Champion in this
City, will adventure lym and life in defense of your constancy, and thus
much he has wylled me to tell you, that this night you must pass in prayers,
for his safe success. Wherefore keep this secret to your self, for it is
unknown to any^ and least I should be in ought suspected: I will bid you adieu
good Sister. With that the Iaylor came to attend o^ talk: and I seeing that
departed. Then went I in to the Soldanes Armorie, and from thence brought the
best (...) find, and here is mine own Sheeld, Lance and (...), which I
doubt not but will like you well.


Zelauto hearing the discourse passed by Mica Sheffola, and having finished his
Orisons: unto him very courteously replyeth in this manner.
SIr, Zelauto after Mica Sheffola had ended his discourse: says unto him.
the good will I wish you, and the dutiful courtesy I am ready to offer you,
I trust shall suffice for to bid you good morrow. These weapons which you have
brought, and this Armor h^re present: shall (through the assistaunce of my
God) either set at liberty your godly Sister: or be bathed with my blood in
the open feelde, for this I will assure you, and without vaunt be it spoken: I
never in all my life went about any thing so wyllingly, as I now go ^o the
Combat for my conscience, and were he as great as Goliath, as stout as
Sampson, Zelauto so armed with so good a courage, that he doubts not but to
speed well.
and as monstrous as the Mino^aure^* I will be so bold as bestow a few
blows, not doubting but they shall be indifferently delivered, and that the
Soldane him self shall say; he that will buy her better then I: is worthy to
have her when he has done.

And if afterward, by traiterous treason, he seek to bereave my life: yet
shall he know, that no man deserves it better then I. But I pray you (quoth
I) do you know the other Champion against whom I must wage battle? is he
any man of accoumpt, or of such estimation, as to fight in this quarrel taken
in hand?

Terolfo the Soldanes son, is he yt must fight against Zelauto.
He answered me, that it was the Soldanes Son, named Terolfo, a man of
synguler courage, and one that had adventured very woorthily in his time,
both by Sea and Land, in very great affairs.

Mary all the better (quoth I) the more noble the man is: the more famous will
the fight be, and right glad I am that it is the Soldanes Son: for then if I
dye, I dye at the hands of a valiant Champion. And about what time think^ you
(quoth I) that it will be when she shall be conducted forth to death?

Zelauto demands at what time the Lady must suffer death
Sir (quoth he) very early; because they are very wylling to dispatche her,
least any other should seem to take opinion of her faith, and it will not be
long now, for the Officer^ were gone to the prison to make her ready, and the
Trumpet sounds on the Castle, for any Champion that will come, the Stake is
made ready to burn her at, and wood, and all things ready brought. The
Soldane him self, and all his Lords are ready, wherefore I know it will not
be long hence now.

Well (said I) the time is welcome, whenever it comes, and if it shall
please you to help to arm me: it shall not be long before I am ready too.

Manniko Rigustello, and Dania his wife comes up into the Chamber to Zelauto,
and there helps to arm him.
THen presently came up mine Host and his Wife, The Host and his wife comes
up to Zelauto.
who after they had courteously saluted me: they and the Gentleman, helped to
arm me. After I was ready, I heard a great noise of Trumpettes. Sir (quoth the
Gentleman) now comes this sorrowful sight, The order how the Lady was lead
unto her death.
here comes the seelly Lamb lead unto her slaughter. I looked out, and
there came the Soldane and his Lords, before him a great guard of Armed men,
some on horseback, some on foot, and next before the Soldane, rode one on a
very gallant Steed, a valiant and comely Champion.

After the Soldane and his Lords, came the innocent Lady, in a fair white
Roabe down to the ground, about her were the Tormenters, that should pain her
to death, then after them a company of ancient Matrones all in black, to
mourn the Ladies death, and after them came all the brave Ladies and
Gentlewomen of the City, all to see the execution of this poor innocent.

All these being past, The departure of Mica Sheffola.
the Gentleman took his leave of me till I came to the place, which was not
far of. Within a while I lystened, and heard the Trumpette sound very
shryll, then it stayed, and sounded the second time, up came mine Host and
said. Sir now it is time, hye you quickly or else never.



The coming of Zelauto to the place to fight for the Lady.
I got up on Horseback, and by that time I was come out of the doors, the
Trumpet sounded again* Then rode I with all the possible speed I might, till
I came to the place, and when the Soldane and all his company saw a defendour
come in such haste: they were all abashed. There was great inquiry what I
should be, and from whence I came, the brave Ladies and Damoselles, they were
exceeding joyful, and when I was entered the myddest, I saluted the Soldane as
well as I could, and likewise the Champion, then made I obeysaunce to all the
company beside, who thronged near to hear what I would say, and then began I
to frame my talk this order.

The words of Zelauto to the Soldane.
If right worthy Soldane, and you also noble Lords, by the verdict of your
wisdoms, shall license me to yield to liberty, what I have to say, and be
not offensive at any thing here spoken: I shall think you show me nothing
but Justice and equity, and then I shall accoumpt your Fame the more worthy.

Quoth the Soldane, The Soldane answers Zelauto.
thou have free leave to speak, and liberty to do what thou can: but what
will follow we can not assure thee. Why (quoth I) offering no injury to any
person present, nor wishing to be no otherwise dealt with all, then my deeds
deserve: I trust you shall find no occasion of any offense, but that what I
say, may be well borne with all. Well (quoth the Soldane) if all be well, it is
the better for thee: if any thing ill, stand to your own adventure.

Zelauto being come to the place where he must defend the Ladies cause, who
stood there before him ready bound to a stake, and having talked with the
Soldane, as touching pardon for his bold attempt: thus begins to make his
Oration, in the presence of them all.
AFter I had well pondred the sharp reply of the Soldane, Zelauto now sets
a good face on the matter, not fearing the Soldane.
and that since I was entered before them all, it behooued me to set a good face
on the matter, and not dismay my self with any of their devilish dealinges:
neither esteeming the fury of the Soldane, nor craving the courtesy of any
his companions; advanced my self forward, and said.

Since neither promise may be proffered to purchase my pardon, nor license for
that I shall yield unto liberty; neither dismaying through doubt of your
dealing, nor fearing the cheifest ^orte of your fury, I pronounce in presence
what my mind gives occasion: and will mayntaine the same with the loss of my
life.

Zelauto his Oration.
Behold (invincible Soldane) you noble Lords (and you renowned Matrones) a man,
both dead and a live, a live to advance the cause of this Lady: and dead (in
that my victory) returns loss of my life. But yet remembering life is
uncertain, and death is so that each man may make accoumpt thereof: I naught
esteem the likelihood of my life, but arm my self, as one willing to the
death.

Yet by perfect proof we see, that the tallest Tree, abydes many a bitter
blaste, the brauest Bulwark, by force is battered, the hautiest Heart, subject
to a fall, and the proudest person (at last) makes his Cabben of clay: even so
your potencie may soon be perverted, and the uttermost of your tyranny, clean
disapoynted. See here the guyltlesse doomed to death, see here the lewdest
suffered to live, behold where truth is turnde out of all, see here where
falsehood boasts in his bravery.

But since rashness in speech makes me run too far: the knowledge of my
self calls me back again, I confess it is not my part to disalowe of your
dealings, nor to contemn the principality, which now you profess: yet may I
reprehend the abused aucthorytie, ruled by rigor and not by indifferency. You
will say, that Princes are not to profess partiality, and that the Subject
should not meddle in the swaying of his dignity: yet ought the Prince to deal
uprightly, and not to pinche that party, that avouches most ^ayth and
dutiful loyalty. Admit that the Prince may so far over run him self, that
by ambicious heads, double dealers, and privy enemies, he condempneth the
man, that most does honor him: yet is not his death to be prosecuted so
hastily: but to be considered of with wisdom and discretion.

This Lady for example, no stranger, but of your own blood, and no enemy to
your Majesty: but rather one that wishes you inestimable dignity, she by you
is condemned, for wishing you well, and she committed to this mortal death:
that seeks to save you from eternal death. What heart so hard, can commit
such cruelty? and what beast so brutishe, but deals more naturally. If to
your own blood, you will deal^ so tyrannically: how will you deal with me
poor wretch of so mean estimation? Me thinks that though the extremity you
use to the uttermost: Nature yet should move with an inward affection, and
though that justly she deserved the death: yet should natural kindness
procure you to pity. Also among so many gallant youths, none so ventrous to
defend her cause, nor none so inflamed with affection, as to mittigate her
myserie. Me think noble Ladies, that some one of you ought to have stood her
defender: if no man had the courage to hazard his life. Admit that the estate
of your Country consisted on this Ladies well fare: would you seem so
slothful, as to suffer your whole Country to perish, rather then to make
apparaunce of your manhood?

King Codrus being advertised by the Oracle, Codrus yielded him self to dye
for the sauegard of his people.
that except he were slain: his people should not vanquishe their enemies:
armed him self like a Soldier, placing him self in the forefront of the
army, and there by his death, set all his people at quietness. Behold what
great affection was in this noble Prince, who more esteemed the sauegard and
happy society of his people: then his own life.

Aglaurus, Aglaurus by throwing himself from the walls of Athens, redeemed his
Country.
to shun the emminent danger yt was like to fall upon Athens, seeing his death
only might set it at liberty: threw him self headlong from the walls of
Athens, and so ended the strife, where else it should have been conquered. But
now attend you noble Ladies, and you modest Matrones: let the excellent example
of Iphigenia cause you to remember what care you ought to have in the
preventing of such dangers as may happen, and by some one of you may be easily
escaped. She (I say) seeing that her death would appease the rigor of her
enemies, Iphigenia, yielded her self to be sacrificed.
yielded her self to be sacrificed. Oh admirable virtue* oh singular
constancy, her match as rare to find in these parts: as to see golden
Goats to feed on green mountains, yet wish I that all Women would prosecute
her rare rule of life, and that some one Iphigenia among you, would hazard your
hap to set free this Lady.

But least in wishing you to be warriors, I should seem to ^hroude my self,
and that you should think I come to prate, rather then to put my puissance in
practice: I will cease to trouble you with overmuch talk, and utter the cause
wherefore I come. First, I come to sue and entreat, if I may have good
success, which is, that you would spare the life of this famous Lady: and not
cut of her days in her gallantest prime, that you would remember the race she
is descended of: and work no wurse to her, then you would to your own
selves. Next, if you^ Laws be so extreme yt they may not spare punishment, and
eke you your selves so wilful, that you must needs work her wrack: I think
it sufficient that you put her in exyle, with express charge in pain of death
never to return: so may your rigor be very well assuaged, and she for her
pains indifferently penaunced. Thus in your Land shall you ever hereafter be
magnified: and all people will laud your Princely dealinges. And lastly, if
neither of these peticions may seem to take place, but yt you must needs
execute the uttermost of your cruelty: Here am I by fore of Arms to defend
her quarrel, and against this your Champion will live and dye in her defense.
This is the cause of my coming, and this the duty I have to discharge.

The Soldane stricken into a great quan ^arie.
With that the Soldane began to look on his Lords, and they on him, the Ladies
and all that were present, was stricken into a great maze, some for joy clapped
their hands, and some on the other side began to weep: the poor distressed
Lady stood all this while bound to the stake, and the Tormentors ready to make
the fire. At last the Champion began to come nearer unto me: and the Soldane
having taken good aduisement of my words, said as follows.

The Soldane after he had well pondred the passed tale of Zelauto: made his
reply in this order, as follows.
The Soldane replieth to Zelauto.
SIr, as we have well advised our selves of your words: so are we to give
answer, as we shall think best, and as your talk seems to give occasion.
We are not to condemn you for that you have spoken: nor yet to commend you,
least you should receive a private pride in your self, also your manhood we
are not to reprove, nor yet of your qualities we are not to accoumpt: although
both of them in you have made a seemly show, but as your manhood may miss,
when you think most surest: so may your qualities be so crafty, as at last
may deceive your self. And where you have alleged, that natural affection
should work in us, especially toward them of our own Parentage: I answer,
that were she mine own Child, making an offense: she is worthy to be
beaten, and so she, altring from all her friends, Kinskolke and faith: in our
judgments she is worthy to taste the sharpest torments. Farther, you said
that she does it as an example in wishing our weal: we answer, That they
which speak us fair and love us not: We will speak them as fair, and trust
them not, and she that would take no warning when she might, now if she
would, we will not accept of it. But belyke* you are of the same opinion your
self: and that makes you hear so much with her in that respect, if you be,
choose you, the wurse will be your own in the end.

To (...) up the whole estate of your talk it were needelesse, and to trifle
the time we do not intend, our answer is this, neither pity shall procure
us to consider of her cause, nor exyle shall be granted, to her for her
offense: but only the death whereto she is adjudged. Now win her and wear
her, show the best of thy manhood: but take heed of the end.

When I perceived the Soldane so fully bent, to bathe his hands in her
guyltlesse blood, and that nothing but her death might seem to suffice him:
Zelauto talks to the Lady bound to the stake.
I went to the Lady, and thus I used my talk. Lady* neither can I warrant you
life: or my self able to vanquishe your enemy, but how ever it be of the
death I do assure my self* wherefore neither faint with fear, nor forgette
your faith, but as you seem to be constant unto the death: so frame your
peticions, the better shall I speed. If I redeem you, it is the cheifest of
my desire: If I dye my self, God will receive my soul. Thus neither trusting
to the one, more then the other: or more accoumpting of life, then I do of
death: I enter the feeld to fortify your faith, and hazard my hap, as shall
please God to speed me.

With that the Lady (whose comely and sweet countenance me thinks I yet
behold) made answer unto me as here I shall tell you. The Lady replyeth to
Zelauto.
Most noble Sir, I may think my self happy to have so good a Champion: and
coumpt the feelde won, how ever it speed: if you foil my enemy, I have
that I look for, yet if you dye your self: my state is far wurse then it
was before, rather had I to abide the brunt, and you to sheelde your self:
then to end two bodies lives, where one may suffice, so shall the enemy gorge
him self with my blood: and your good will be nevertheless esteemed of.
Therefore good Sir, content you, and escape hence if you can, for I am prepared
to abide what it shall please them to lay on me.

Now credit me Sir, these her words did so greatly encourage me: that had it
been against Men and Monsters, yea, the furious feendes, I would have ventured
what ever had betyde me: Zelauto speaks again to the Lady.
So then I said unto her. No Lady, what I have promised, shall be presently
performed, they shall not say, that a Christian will eat his word: but that
he dare venture against the proudest of them. And so fare well good Lady, for
here goes your worthy Knight, who before he returns, will either subdue
thy enemy: or loose his life in the feelde.

Terolfo the Soldanes son speaks to Zelauto.
When the Champion saw I was returned: he came unto me saying* Sir, as you are
a Knight at Arms, and here profess the same: so now according to the order
and custom of the Law, I am to desire your name.

Truth Sir (quoth I) and of my name I am not ashamed, my name is Zelauto,
Zelauto his replye.
and I come to maintain the cause of this Lady. Now am I to request as much
of you.

Terolfo his reply.
Sir (quoth he) my name is Terolfo, I am son to the Soldane, and here am
chalenger, on the behalf of my Father. I trust you will pardon what shall
pass between us here in this place.

With all my heart (quoth I) and I am not in doubt, but you will do the like,
Zelauto forgiueth Terolfo.
for if I am ordained to dye in this place: I frank and freely forgive him
that does the deed, so it be but one man.

And if you Sir (quoth he) are the man to dispatch my days: Terolfo forgiueth
Zelauto.
with all my heart I forgive you my death.

Then were the Coursers sent abroad to make room, the men appointed to judge
the fight, every thing in order appointed, that belongs to the matter, we
went about, he fetching his course one way, and I an other, and so we began a
fierce and terrible fight.



Then began a valiant and fierce Combat, between Zelauto, and the Soldanes
son Terolfo, which was so excellently well handled on both sides: that it
was doubtful to whom the victory should fall, but yet at the last, after
many fierce assaults, Zelauto kylleth him in the open feeld, and so redeemed
the Lady from death, and what happened to him afterward.
WE endured so long in dangerous and doubtful fight, that he had small hope
to vaunt of any victory, or I any likelihood to boast of the bargain, but
credit me, he for his part very valiantly behaved him self, and deserved
rightly to be well esteemed of, for neither any fear could enforce him to
faint: nor weariness of war^e cause him leave of, but stoutly and
courageously, behaved him self manfully.

Zelauto kills Terolfo in fight.
At last, it was my fortune to strike the stroke that dispatched him, the which
was as great a grief unto me ^ as to any of his familiar friends, for gladly
would I have conquered him, and saved his life: but not both vanquish him, and
bereave his life. But as you know your self, a man in such affairs, deals
as best he can, for the sauegarde of him self, is his cheifest desire: even so
I was wary least the lot should have lyghted on me, and so valiantly ^lew him
before his father and all his friends.

But to see what leaping, what clapping of hands, what throwing up of Cappes,
The Ladies and common people rejoice at the victory of Zelauto.
and what great joy was made of the Ladies and the common people, would have
rejoiced you to hear. Then was the Lady let loose, and I commanded to come
before the Soldane, who was not before so willing to the death of the Lady: as
he was now sorrowful for the ill success of his son.

When I was come before him, he said. We confess (Sir Knight) that you have
done the deed manfully; The words of the Soldane to Zelauto.
and that you are worthy a greater reward, then here you are like to gain:
but yet since you have ^ereaued my Son of life, we must therefore deal the
more hardly with you. And as the rewar^ you must have for your victory, is
death ^ even so we will you to take it patiently, and not to s^riue, least
farther harm do arise unto you.

If you had saved the life of my son* we could then have permitted more
pity, then now we can, or if you had wounded him, yet that he might have
lived: your freedom had been soon ^bought, where now all the riches of
India is not able to do it. Your self was not altogether ignorant before,
how that the redeeming (...) life: was the death of the party whatsoever, and
we infourmed you, that in such sort you might behave your self, as no man
should molest you, you have now dealt so with vs^ that (...) freendship may be
found, and beside, your (...) utterly condemn (...) Yet will we somewhat use
you honestly in the matter* you shall not presently feel the (...) of your
pain: but for the space of four days, life shall be granted you, in which
time, dispose your self to dye, for there is no other means ca^ be made for
you^. Thus do we not deal with you as sharply as we might ^ nor use (...)
otherwise then the Law^ was appointed, she has her life, ^
let her goo where s^e please and (...) your death, which we are sorry (...)
yet can not it be (...)

When I had well advised my self of this sharp sentence^ and that no remedy
there was, but Law must proceed, then looking on all sides, and beholding the
trickling hears of the modest Matrones. the (...) and Gentlewomen (...) for
me, the commmon people also using such pitiful (...) that it grieved the^ in
fierly to hear such woeful (...) taking heart (...), and drea^ing no myserie,
but trusted in my Christ assuredly: and thus I answered the Soldane.

(...) of the deed that (...) ^
moves of these (...) as of sufficiency (...) other I must needs abide the
death, and there is no remedy: then behold me as wylling to the loss of my
life, as I was dillygent to discharge the Ladies distress. It is not my life
that I do accoumpt of, nor yet my death that will return your advantage:
This Ladies well fare is all my desire, and my dying for her, to cause you
work no more injury to her.

But since the death of your Son is the cause of your choler, and that if he
had lived, the better might have been my hap: I trust you are not ignorant
what belongs to the Law of Arms, and what passes between us in sight
ought to be pardoned. I was as unsure of my life as he, and I was as hopeful
of victory as he: If then both parties do their dillygence as beseems
them, what harm either of them sustain is not to be accoumpted of. Therefore
if for his death you deal with me extremely: I must needs say you use
extremity, and no Law or Justice.

And for the four days of respyte you have granted, I am to thank you, for
that it is more of your clemency: then of my simple deserving, yet in the
mean time I accoumpt my self but a dead man, for that your doom is passed,
albeit Law is to execute.

Zelauto gives his fare well to all the Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Wherefore, you noble Ladies, you verteous Damoselles, and you dear Lady, in
whose defense my death is obtained, from my heart I bid you all farewell,
wishing as well to your sweet selves, as to mine own poor heart, and if my
time had not been cut of so soon as now it is: you should have seen that
which now I am not able to unfold. In your causes I live and dye, and for your
sakes I have thus much attempted, therefore to you all I bid farewell. And to
you all in general, whose wylles I see should not want to work my well fare,
I would my abilytie were as sufficient to pleasure you: as I would be wylling
with my pains to profit you.

Then the Soldane and all his train departed, and I was conducted with a dozen
Officers, Zelauto and his Host were lead to prison.
with their Halberds to my lodging, where when I was unarmed: both mine Host
and I were lead to the prison, such a multitude of people following us, and
such good report every one gave me: that credit me, I went as wylling to the
prison, as to my lodging.

At the prison gate I saw Mica Sheffola (the Ladies Brother, Mica Sheffola
awayted for Zelauto at the prison.
for whom I adventured) awayting my coming, who had provided for me, the best
and pleasauntest Chamber in the prison, and got me the liberty of the Garden,
to walk at my pleasure, and at last rounded me in the ear saying. Good Sir,
fear no danger, for God and I will hence deliver you, but I am sorry for your
Host, because he is already apprehended unto the Soldane, The Host
apprehended and must dye.
and his Majesty told unto me even now when I departed from him: that to
morrow he shall be executed before the prison. I dare tarry no longer for
fear of being suspected, I have provided all things for you here, and to
morrow I will come again, about the hour he must dye.

Alas me thought these were far wursser news, then the other, I could not
speak to mine Host, because he was haled and pulled in so violently, and
laid in a deep dungeon by himself, and clogged with so many Irons, as he
could possibly bear.

Well, The Hostess comes to the prison to Zelauto.
in the after noone, my Hostess Dania came to speak with her Husband, but
could not, then came she up to me, informing me of all that Mica Sheffola had
told me. I demanded of her, how he was known? She answered, that for the
words he used in my cause, and other suspicious talk. Well (quoth I) you
were not best to tarry here long, least you be suspected likewise. No Sir
(quoth she) I will bid you fare well till to morrow, and then shall you see
my poor Husband miserably martyred.

In the morning returned Mica Sheffola, bringing me a great deal of Gold to
spend in the prison, Mica Sheffola returns in the morning.
and demanded of me, how I was used in the prison? I answered, very well I
thanked him, for his sake I wanted nothing. Then he desired the Iaylor to let
me into a Chamber toward the street, that I might see mine Host put to
death, the which I thank him he did.

Then (quoth he unto me) without the City, I have provided for you ^ lusty
G^urser, and Armor to defend you with all, soon at mydnight, at the dead
time of the night, shall you be let into the Garden, and there clymbe over to
me, and I will receive you, for I have gotten the keys of the Soldanes
Treasury, and soon at mydnight will I steal from thence so much as shall
serve you in your travail: A dear freende of mine, and one as good a
Christian as my self shall go with you, to conduct you on your way from all
your enemies, thus will I fulfill my promise unto you, and yet not work my
self any discredit: An notable devise to help Zelauto out of prison.
so that you be ready at the how^e appointed* for the Iaylors Wife will let you
into the Garden, and so on the back side of the City you shall escape away
safely. Then a mighty hole shall be broken in your Chamber, as though you had
stolen out into the street: I dare tarry no longer, remember your self
soon, and so God be with you.

Now surely me thought it was the greatest freendshippe that ever I found at
any man's ^andes in all my life, especially, I being a prisoner, and he to
defraude his own Uncle in such sort to pleasure me with all.

The Host brought fo^rth to death.
Well, at length my Host Manniko Rigustello, was brought out in his shyrt, and
such a multitude of people was there to see him: as was the other day to see
the Lady. Then went he up upon the Scaffolde, where they would not suffer him
to speak* but presently laid him upon an Ingine that they had made: and so
wrested him to death, very cruelly and tyrannically.

When he was dead, one member of him was thrown this way, an other that way,
so that all his members was dispersed about the streets, a very grievous and
dolesyght to see. Thus was my poor Host martyred and mangled, and I remained
in great sorrow to think thereupon.

The Gentlewoman of the Prison came up to Zelauto, and to expel the thoughts
that troubled his mind: conducted him into the Garden, and showed him the
Monuments of Brisaro de Saroto, who sometime was conqueror of that City.
Remaining in these pensive plightes, yet greatly encouraged through the
comfort that Mica Sheffola gave me: Oriana the Mistress of the prison came up
to Zelauto.
at last came up into my Chamber the Gentleman's wife, who kept the prison,
being named Oriana, a very gallant and courteous Gentlewoman, who in the
Italian language, thus saluted me. Ditemi per cortesia Gentilhuomo, come sta
vostra S.? I answered. Carrissima mia Signora, sto been, sempre al commando
vostro* evi rendo mill gratie. After much conference passed between us
together (quoth she) shall it like you so well Gentleman, as to walk with me
into the Garden.

Gentlewoman (quoth I) if I would deny so small a request: I were to be
accoumpted very discourteous. Not so (quoth she) for perhaps other occasions
may so hinder you: that you have not the leisure which I seem to require, and
then I might be accoumpted more careless then cyrcumspect, in entering so
rashly to perturbe your patience. You do well good Gentlewoman (quoth I) to
frame your self so faulty: else should not I have known how to accuse my
self.

Well, we walked into the Garden, where she gave me to understand of that
which Mica Sheffola had told me, Oriana tells Zelauto, how at night she
will co^uey him over the garden wall
and that she at the myddle of the night, would convey me into the Garden, and
so over the wall to him. I gave her great thanks for her courtesy, as it did
chiefly behooue me. At last, she opened a great door, where as we entered into
a very fair Hall, and there was the Monuments of a notable Champion.

In life I wun the type of hye Renown:
And now in death I wear dame Honors Crown.


Lo Sir (quoth she) the redoubted Monuments of Brisaro de Saroto, She
shows him the Monumentes of Brisaro de Saroto.
who conquered this City eleven times, and framed the good orders, that now
here are used. Gentlewoman (quoth I) it seems that he has been a noble
Champion, and I thank you heartily for making me pertaker of the sight thereof.
With other familiar talk we passed out the time till supper, then went I to
supper, She comes up bydding him to prepare him self.
and afterward I laid me down upon my bed. About the third hour of the night,
came she up, and told me that Mica Sheffola had entered into her Garden with a
great deal of Treasure, and there he had left it, desiring me to provide my
self within an hour.



I thanked her heartily, and told her, I would be as ready when she came to
fetch me: as she was wylling to come for me. I could not lay mine eyes
together for the joy I conceived, to think how God had blessed me, in sending
me such friends among all mine enemies.

Within an hour after, she came up very softly again, saying: Come a way Sir*
your friend faryeth your coming. It was no need to bid me make haste,
considering I should escape so hard a plunge.

Zelauto with Oriana the Mistress of the prison went down into the Garden, at
the myddle of the night, and was conveyed over to Mica Sheffola, and so
escapes from his enemies.
WHen I was come down into the Garden, finding a Ladder ready set for me to
clymbe over: I took leave of the Gentlewoman, and so went over the wall, there
stood Mica Sheffola at hand to receive me. Quoth he, for the love of God let
us make all haste possible, for the Trumpettes has sounded the third watch,
and now will they come without the City: and if we speed not the faster, we
are like to be taken.

We trudged apace till we came out of all danger, and at last we came where
one heelde a lusty Courser for me, Zelauto goes with Mica Sheffola away.
and Armor lay ready for me to put on, and a little before was a Companion for
me, who awayted the coming of any body, to give us warning thereof. When I was
Armed and upon Horseback (quoth he) though I have not recompensed with as
much as I would: yet have I done what possible I might: there is one before
shall live and dye with you, he will conduct you toward Constantinople. Thus
wylling to prevent all dangers that may happen, and wyshing you prosperity in
all your affairs: a short fare well shall suffice, and so to God I commend you.

Zelauto departs from Mica Sheffola.
Well Sir (quoth I) I will not trifle out the time with long and tedious
thanks, I am bound to pray for you, commend me to mine Hostess Dania, and to
the good Gentlewoman Oriana, that conveyed me over the wall, and so we both
parted.



Within a while I over took my Companion, who was as honest, virtuous and
civil a Gentleman as ever I rode with all in my life. He and I rode together
toward Constantinople, in which journey befell diverse other accidents. Thus
have you heard my first adventures in Persia: now tell me your judgment
thereof.

Astraepho. My judgment is too slender in such a myraculous matter, Astraepho
gives his censure on this passed tale, and goes to provide dinner.
but sure you have had the best Fortune that ever I heard any, so near the
death: and yet to be delivered, now credit me it is excellent. Well, now will
I go to get our Dinner, and will leave you here till I come again, in which
time you shall peruse a proper Devise that I will show you. How say you, are
you contented?


Zelauto. Sir, right joyful of your courtesy, also glad to accept your offer,
and after Dinner we will discourse of the rest, if you please.


Astraepho. With all my heart Sir, wherefore come in and I will give it you, I
believe you will like well of it after you have read it.


FINIS.
The Author, to the courteous Readers.
GEntlemen ( and right courteous whatsoever) I must needs confess, that the
painful Pylgrimage of Zelauto, has been so tedious unto you in the perusing,
that neither could you gain any delight in the discourses: nor such method of
matter as you looked for, but even plain Dunstable way, he has told you an
old Canterbury tale. Yet on your judgments I am not to define, for that
they are diverse: nor to suppose you will like, without I were better assured,
for the one may show the rashness of a vainglorious head: and the other a
presumption to conster any man's behavior. Antisthenes says, that as of the
Serpent, the Physician receives part of his remedies: so the wise man of his
very enemies (contrary to expectation) shall obtain some profit. Diogenes
being by a malicious and spiteful tongue, reprehended of a fault long before
committed: made answer. I remember the time when I was such a one as thou art
now: but such an one as I am now will thou never be.

Likewise Gentlemen, ambicious heads, are apt to send forth spiteful
speeches, and if they can possible catch a hole in a man's coat: the same will
they lay every day in his dishe: But such secret Serpents in bewraying their
behavior, can not hurt him whom they wyllingly would: but confound them in
their craftyest inventions. Aristotle says, that he which receives a false
piece of coin, does but sustain a reasonable loss: but he that trusts a
feigned friend in steed of a true, may endammage him self to his utter
undoing, few such fr^ends God send me: and as much good money as shall please
him. But now in the mean while Gentlemen, while such coin may be current, and
such friends found: I send you Astraephos delycate discourse, to make merry
with the bad banquet you have had. And though I have no Cumfettes and Carawayes
to bestow upon you: judge my good will is nevertheless, if might could
maintain it. Thus of a little take a little when you come thereto: and of a
little leave a little how ever you do.

FINIS.
Yours to use to his power. A. Monday.

Astraepho. A Delycate Devise by him delivered to Zelauto, wherein is gallantly
discoursed, the Amorous life of a Scholar, and the brave behavior of a
martial Gentleman, the one at last by love as well convinced: as the other,
who always professed him self a Subject to the same: neither frivolous nor
fantastical, but delyghtfull, and to no man prejudicial.

The third part of the Fountain of Fame.

Written by the said Author A. M. Servant to the right Honorable, the Earl of
Oxenforde.

Honos alit Arts.

The Author.
COurteous Gentlemen, in the mean time as Astraepho is providing his Dinner,
and has left Zelauto at home to peruse at his pleasure on an Amorous
discourse: I will seem so sausie, as to molest his studies, and desire him to
let you be partakers of this Delycate discourse. I hope I shall not need to be
all day in craving: nor he so discourteous to deny my request, if he should, I
must confess he offers me great injury, in taking so much pains for him: I
deserve to crave a mightier matter. Well, I will assure my self to speed in
my purpose, and you shall have the hearing of the Dayntie Devise. If after you
have read it, you find it worth his hyre, and that it has pleased you, which
is my whole wish: I shall then provide a Peach for all prating Parasites: and
keep a sweet Fig to gratify my friend with all.

Honos alit Arts. FINIS.
A. Monday.

The Amorous life of Strabino a Scholar, the brave behavior of Rodolfo a
martial Gentleman, and the right reward of Signor Truculento a Usurer. Cap. 1.
THe Records of ancient antiquity, unfolds in apert, and lively manner the
happy and prosperous estate, of the flourishing and famous City Verona, whose
Accademies so woorthily governed, and the Scholars so effectually instructed:
that it caused Sir Vincentio of Pescara, to send his son Strabino, there to
be trained up in such virtuous educations: as was meet for one of his tender
time. This Strabino, a galla^t and lusty youth, of form well featured, of
audacitie expert, in ma^ners well nurtured, but from Martial affairs wholly
inclined, and to love one severely enthraled: fell at length in acquayntaunce
with one Rodolfo, a Gentlema^s son of the City, who more used the Schole
for his pleasure, then any profit, more for a pastime to talk^ and confer
with his friends: then for any mind he bare to his book. And this Rodolfo
was one that greatly gave himself to Martial exercises, a disdayner of love,
and a reiecter of the company of Women. Between these twain were joined such
a league of Amytie: that neither bitter blastes should procure the breach
thereof, nor any accident whatsoever, move them to mislike one of the other,
but even brotherlyke were united, till term of life were utterly expired.
Strabino usually frequenting the house of his friend and brother Rodolfo, who
had a Sister in all points so well proportioned: that the looks of her Amorous
countenance, infected in the heart of Strabino, such a restless rage, a
^orting torment, a Fever so fantastical: that none but only she must be the
curer thereof. Now are his books rejected, and his fancy followed: his study
banished, and the Gentlewoman dutifully served Who (alas) although he were her
superior: of her was regarded, as her far inferior. He lykes, he looues, he
sues, he serves, he runs, he waytes: she lowres, she frowns, she disdaynes,
and utterly rejects his company. Which when he saw, that his proffered
pains were esteemed as trifles, his continual courtesy, regarded as light as
a feather, and his affectioned service, clean cast out of memory: walked into
the feeldes, and thus discoursed with him self.

Alas Strabino, ill hap had thou to light on this lucklesse lot, to love
where thou art disliked, to serve, where thou art nothing regarded, and to
fancy where love is extinguished. What moved thee to make her thy Goddess
that regards thy pains as light as a May game? What moved thee to make her
thy Mistress: who scorneth the good will of so trusty a servant? What, is
there no more Women in the world but one? Is there none can please thee so much
as she? Art thou framed of such ylfauored metal, that all will mislyke thee?
In Pescara thou barest the cheifest praise: in Verona thou art nothing esteemed
of. In Pescara thou wast looued, in Verona thou art rejected: but alas I
remember, who trusts to a Woman's will, were as good lean on a broken staff,
for when she pleases, then she looueth: and when she is displeased, she hates
like a Tode, therefore well may thou remove thy fancy: and set as light by
her, as she does by thee. But alas Strabino, if thy deeds might answer to
thy words, then there were some hope of health: but thou art so surely tied,
that impossible were it for thee to get loose when thou please, thou say
thou will do this and that, but alas, if thou could, thou would,
therefore never speak against thy conscience. for y^ were no credit. I love
her so intierly, that I can not refrain me: I fancy so forcibly, that I
cannot remove me. She is the Saint whom I serve, she is the Goddess whom I
adore, and she it is must ease my pain, else shall I never be helped. Thou
have not yet tried her: therefore never speak the wurst of her, though thou
have showen thy self by sundry signs: yet can thou not say she refuses
thee, because thou have not opened ye state wherein thy well fare stands. Thou
art to blame to use these words against her that never offended thee, and thou
deseruest small courtesy, for thy so rash judgment. She is sister to thy
friend: he is gentle of nature, so may she be: he is courteous in conference,
so may she be: he looues thee well, so may she do, therefore never conster
things at ye wurst, before thou have occasion. Think thou she knows the
secrets of thy heart, that never talked with her? How were it possible she
should love thee, when she knows not whether thou loouest her or no?
Persuade thy self to speed of thy purpose, faint heart never wan fair Lady,
and a half hearted Soldier is terrified at the first allarum: first prove
her, then praise her, when thou have tried, then thou may trust: hye thee
home in hope, and finding her at convenient leisure, show her thy suit. Thus
the poor oppressed Strabino returned to ye Mansio^ of his Mistress, and
finding her sitting at her Sa^pler in the garden: he took heart a fresh, and
went and sat down by her, framing such devises, as she might have occasion to
speak unto him, who when she saw how merrily disposed he was, said. Surely sir
Strabino, I have wanted your company all this day, for I have sitten here very
solitary, and lackt such company as might procure some pleasure, and now you
are come: I hope we shall pass ye time more merier, then hitherto I have done,
and therefore you are welcome heartily.

Strabino hearing the courteous words of his Lady Cornelia: was surprised with
such inward joy, that he neither minded his former fear, nor yet the present
peril that might happen to him, but wholly depending upon his dutiful
alleageaunce, and embracing in mind and thought her supposed lyking: hazardeth
his heart to stand unto the hap, and yields him conquered wholly to her
clemency. Wherefore, he neither distracting his senses with any several
motion, nor occupying his brain upon manifold matters: desires pardon for
that which his lyppes shall yield unto liberty, and her good construction in
his actions whatsoever.

Sir (quoth she) if we talk of familliarity, perforce I must use you freendly:
if upon nouelles, I will handle you as nicely: if upon present proof, I will
use you pleasauntly: if upon all, I will accoumpt you as a merry companion, so
that look what is spoken in decent or honest wise: doubt you not but it shall
be as honestly entertained, therefore say as pleases you.

Strabino, and Cornelia, courteously conferreth together. Cap. 2.
LAdy (quoth Strabino) I muse why the Gods, framing you first to be as a
comfortable companion unto man: you should so much digress as to be the only
instrument of our sorrowful sadness, rather a woorker of our woe: then one
that wishes our well fare. For this is perfectly known (I speak not upon had
I wist) that you Women, for the most part, are so coy of your conditions, and
so curious in your co^ceytes: that you neither esteem the quantity nor
quallitie of affection: nor yet the only perfect ground of our prosperity. For
admit that a while you bear us in hand with many an Amorous countenance, many
a gallant gloss of firm faith and fidelity, yea, many a subtle surmise of
pure love and affection, have you once gotten that which you would have, to
fleece our purses to pranke you in pride, that you may sweat in your Sylks,
while we go threadbare, you on your Pantofles, when we have scant a good shoe
to our foot, you at your delycate iunckets, when we are glad to rise with
empty bellyes, and you so much in your bravery, that you bring us to utter
beggerie: In faith, then fare well frost, more such have we lost.

Nay now, since he can hold out no longer: fare well he, in faith he was a
good fellow while he had it, but now since he has no more ink in his pen:
let him go shake his ears, a new customer, a new. So long time was he fed
with fancies: that after he cursseth his folly. So long looued in looks: that
at length he lamenteth his loss. So long held up with wanton and wily
words: that in the end he cursseth such paltrie fables. A cold suit, and a
hard penniwoorth have all they that traffic for such mercha^dize. On the
other side, let a man hold up you at rack staves, diferre you of with
doubtful delays, allege unto you many defectes of abillitie, and besides
that, keep that from you which most willingly you would have: In faith, then
he is a cou^terfayt cranke, a shamlesse sheepbyter, a worldly miser, he is no
good fellow, that will not lay his penny by theyrs, a craking Companion, an
eve dropper: with such and so many floutes they have, that it is wonderful to
hear.

What great reproach is this to such wanton Women, that regard more an ell of
pleasure, then an ynch of profit? more desirous of loathsome liberty, then
they care for contented living? What makes so many young Gentlemen crack their
credit, loose their good name, mortgage their lyuinges, barter away all they
have: but such careless company? When before, they were in good and honest
commendation among all men: now are they glad to hide their heads for shame.

I speak not this (dear Lady) to the reproach of all Women: for that were
mere impudency: but I speak in the contempt of all such as daily frequent
it, as these Cortizans which abide in the brothell house here in Verona, and
besides them, many a one that bears a gallant grace through the City: takes
a snatch now and then, which by right deserve a greater reproach, then they
that so daily use it. For by such means is vice intruded among the virtuous,
making many that (God knows) are well disposed lyuers, to be lightly
accoumpted of, only by using the company of such careless creatures.

Sir Strabino (quoth Cornelia) your discourse has been delyghtfull, yet
sauoureth it sharp some where, belyke you have been bitten, or stung by some
of these Waspes: and that makes you so expert in bewraying their qualities,
for the mother would never have sought her daughter in the Oven, but that she
had been there her self, and he that is galded, has good occasion to kick.
You have been bartering, and found all so dear in the market: that no butter
will stick on your bread, or belyke you have sauced some body: and paid
sweetly for it.

But what makes you to exclayme against women in this order? have you looued,
and not been looued again? have you sought for honny, and caught the Be by
the tail: or have you never looued, and wholly given your self there against?
if so you have, the harder is your hap, for far unable are you to stand
against the decree of the gods, and have you not read of diverse that have
repugned against love: which have been enforced to fancy their inferiors?
Take heed Strabino, least in your denying to love some gallant Lady: you be
not procured to fa^cie some poor Fachine here in Verona. If you have looued,
and not been looued again: you are to move your suit, and if it be to such a
one who is free from all other, and may well be your match: there is no doubt
but after many sharp showers, a gallant gale of wind will blow in the Sky,
that will send your joys on heaps to you. I give you the best counsel that
I can, and I would my proffered pains any way might pleasure you. If either my
word, counsel, credit, or ought else may prevail you to her whom you
like: credit me, you shall not find me so ready in promising, as I will be in
the performaunce thereof.

Now Gentlemen, judge you what sundry and several quandaries assailed the
assaulted mind of poor Strabino, to hear such courteous talk pronounced by
the person whom he most honored and obeyed. Yet doubted he, that if she knew
the very original and only help for his heaviness: she would be as slow to
perform, as she was ready to promise, but yet buylding still on good hope of
her bounty: he proceeded into farther talk.

My hope is (quoth he) my good Lady and Mistress, that what has passed in my
presumptuous talk, you will conster it at the best: but sure as yet I am free
from that which you have supposed, only this I am to confess, that I love and
like, where I am neither refused nor yet entertained, wherefore I ca^ not
condemn upon no occasion: nor I can not praise before it be deserved. So that
I am neither to vaunt as victor: nor yet to yield as altogether conquered. And
why I have enuyed against these sort of Women, I can yield you some sufficient
reason: I have known diverse of my friends, that have wasted out their web of
youthful time, in frequenting company with such wilful Women. As for example,
one dear freende of mine, who was tossed, turmoyled, and utterly made hauock of:
among those whom he thought had looued him dearest, yea some that were of good
name and credit, that sucked him dry: and then matched them selves with other.
Therefore I say, it is hard to know who a man may trust now a days: for you
Women are so crafty, that a man cannot tell how to deal with you.

In deed Sir (quoth she) though we be crafty, you men are more deceyptfull.
It behooves us to stand upon our reputation, and to make the matter nice and
coy to some, for when they have once caught us: they will use us as they list.
What sorrow and care is it to be a married Wife? that which God has ordained
to be a comfort and solace between man and woman, is made now a thing of most
contempt: for when we be married, then comes our cares all at once: how many
frowning looks? how many crabbed countenances? how many sharp words?
beside, how many continual greefes and sorrows of the mind? If our Husbands
be a little displeased: all ye house must be out of quiet. If he frown, then
what is next hand, flies at the face of his Wife. If he see her but merrily
disposed in any company, then is he ielous: if she look on any man, then she
lusts after him. Then is she watched and spied, in every place where she
goes, to catch her in a tryp, the which urges her sooner to do it, when
before she never thought it. What terror, and what devilish minds are these
of men: who when they come to wooing, then plead they simplicity: then yea
forsoothe, and no forsoothe, this shall be and that shall be, when God knows,
when it comes to perfection: it is neither so, nor so.

Can you blame Women, if they be so loathe to grant to your requests? and can
you think them so hard, when you your selves are harder then the Adamant? Can
you say Women are ordained as a plague unto men: when as you your selves plague
them so cruelly? O deep dissemblers, O prating Parasites? What subtle
Sophisters? What fair mouthed fellows are these? What painted sheathes, fair
without and foul within? Who would think that you could bear such a double
heart about with you. I hope you shall be feign to say at length, Ars deluditur
art. Henceforth therefore never envy at Women: when you are wurse your
selves, nor never play the Crauens, as Cocks of your own dunghyll: the shame
will redound where it is worthy, and you shall be forced to cry Peccaui. Ah
Syrra, though you have all the learning, God has leant us some wit, that we
should not be to much deceived. Therefore never vpbrayde us with such
Rhetorical gloses, nor never fall out with those who are your best friends: If
you like us, love us: if not, let us alone.

Strabino, half driven in fear of incurring his Ladies displeasure, and
doubting least his talk had bread some cause of melancholy: calls up his
wits together, to make amends for his former fault. For thought he, if now I
coming to speak for mine own avail, and to gain the good will of my best
belooued, should seem to apprehend or reprehend in such causes as willingly
she would not: it might mar all my matter, and throw all my good Fortune
into the fire. Wherefore, eue^ as the child when he has made a fault, comes
creeping on his knees with bitter tears, willing to kiss the rod* and so to
pacify the ire of his Parents whom he displeased, or as the Ape when he has
nipt one to the quick, and seeeth the whip holden up in sign of correction:
comes with chattering the teethe, holding up the ten bones, so to content his
masters displeasure conceived: Even so meekely and mildly comes Strabino to
the loouing lap of his Lady, and in sign and token of humility, utters
these words. Dear Lady and Mistress, not so well satisfied and contented
with your reasonable reply: as sorrowful for suffering my tongue so rashly to
offend you. Rather impute it therefore to obliuiousnesse of my self: then to
any willingness so incur your anger. More honor truly shall it be to you,
quietly to put up the chollorike words of an impudent Scholar: then to menace
your anger, where as sorrow sufficient is retained. It is a good Horse that
never stumbleth, he is very cyrcumspect that speaks always without a fault,
and he is very upright that never commits crime. I must confess my tongue
ran before my wit, and my mouth uttered that which my heart never thought. But
the best is, my boasting bravery, can blemishe none of your bounty: nor my
frantic foolishness, impair any of your virtuous credit. But all is well
that is well taken, little said is soon amended, and so I pray you pardon
your penitent, and sorrowful offender.

Sir Strabino (quoth she) for this fault, you have already obtained pardon, it
was not so grievously taken as you thought for: nor it was not so fault worthy
as now you grant it. I am not to exact the uttermost of any man: nor I am not
to conceive an anger before just cause be offered, for you know, that what talk
so ever we use, that does not stretch beyond the bounds of honest and
allowable reason: by promise is to be esteemed of no effect, therefore I
discharge that Obligation of his full strength and virtue, and stick to the
promise passed. Mary, yet am I on the other side, to think well of you, that
stood in such awe of displeasing her: who was far more afraid of incurring
your anger. We women are not to be too captious nor to quarrellous, neither to
hasty, nor to slow, for it were no point of ciuillitie to handle our friends
churlishly, and it were mere folly to quip them upon no greater occasion.
First, we are to understand the efficient cause that urges them to speak, and
to way it thoroughly in the wayghts of modesty: and so to give answer, that we
be neither found to scripilous in the one, nor to coy in the other. I know you
are my friend, and so I esteem you, and as my friend I make accoumpt of you,
then never think that I your friend will seem to conster your meaning at the
wurst: nor yet to condemn you upon no greater occasion. I can not deny but
that some are very apt to anger, to receive a matter ill, be it never so well
spoken, that does demo^strate a great error in her that uses it, whatsoever:
and condempneth her of impudency, for her so light belief. Soft fire (they
say) makes sweet malt, a wise Woman will way all with discretion: but a
fool will be hasty, and to troublesome to deal with all. Wise Cato says,
Bridle thine anger with modesty, and judge not of a matter too rashly, for as
there is great commendation in the one: so is there great shame follows the
other. It is a seemly thing for every one to use their anger with discretion:
because (perchance) it may redound to their discredit. Thus Strabino suffice
your self, that the coals of my anger were soon kindled and soon quenched.
For if I should be angry with you: you might accoumpt it but the rashness of
a Woman, and her want of foresight, and so I pray you take it,

Strabino, perceiving the courteous excuse of Cornelia, and that his passed
talk was taken in such gentle gree: thought it now good time to prefer his
suit, and so desiring her patience, proceeded as follows.

Strabino now offereh his love and service to his Lady, requiring the
courteous acception thereof. Cap. 3.
THen dear Lady, since neither my rude behavior has offended you, nor my
passed presu^ption purchased any ill will: I hope I may under authority of
your license, proceed to the very ground and effect of all which I have to
unfold. For since your wisdom has weighed each cause so discreetly, and
construed the meaning thereof with such good demeanor: I will make you partner
of my passed perils, and of the distress that may ensue (always provided)
that you accept and conceive no wurse then I think it. Since it has been my
hap (dear Lady) here in Verona, to pass my time in studious exercise,
according to the long desired wish of my Parents: I have one way profited,
and an other way procured my peril, for casting mine eyes among the renowned
troop of gallant Dames, (as here are many) the bountiful beauty of one
among all the rest, has so searched the secrets of my hydden heart, and
bewitched my wits in such wonderful wise: that neither medicines may serve
to mittigate, herbs, or any Physical potion adiunate to amendment: but only
that sovereign salve which most does delight me, her little finger would lift
me to life, a word of her mouth would cease all my sorrows, and one question
absolved: would make me a sufficient Scholar. I presume in place, where I
behold this seemly she: and the more I come in her company: the greater
increases my care, the more I look: the more I like, but lyking brings such
restless woe: that were it not I had a soul to save, and that I stand in awe
of the anger of God: I should finish this Tragedy, with such a merciless
massacring of my poor self, that neither should she vaunt of ye loss of my
life: nor I be thought to demerit so dyrefull a death. But what needs all
these words? to what end do I make this tedious protestation my help is
never ye more furdred, but by talking of her I am ye more endamaged.

Ah Sir (quoth Cornelia) is the wind in ye door now? are you Sea sick so
soon, and not half a mile over? well, well, this little spark will flame to
so fierce a fire: that perhaps all ye wit you have is not able to quench it.
Why Lady (quoth he) I am not so far over shoes: but I may return yet dry,
nor I am not so far in, but I may easily escape out, there is more ways to the
wood then one, and passages wherein are no peril. I shall use my self in
extremity as I see occasion: and doubt you not my wit shall stand for a
warrant. Sir (quoth she) the crafty Fox would eat no grapes, no though they
fell in his mouth, the Catte will eat no sweet milk, for fear of marring her
teeth: so you would not be in love, no though you might, and when you are in,
you will love as your list.

O Sir, soft fire makes sweet Malt, it is ill to halt before a Criple, and it
were shame to belie the Devil. Your own words does condemn you in that
you have spoken: or else you are very impudent, that you speak you know not
what. Medicines you say, can make no amendment, the force of Physic to help
you does fail, and yet you say, there is one sovereign salve can minister a
remedy. O crafty head, your teethe will not let your tongue lie, in faith it
is almost time to bid you good night. Yet to see how you will maintain your
matter with wresting of words, you would make me believe the Moon is made of
green cheese: In faith Sir no, you must rise somewhat more early, if you go
beyond me: and you must deal more subtly, if you seek to deceive me. But
truly if you were as mighty a man of your deed, as you are of your word:
Verona would be little enough to hold you, and never a Woman of them all durst
abide your stearne countenance. You do well, you will hold with the Hare,
and run with the Hound, and you would play Ambodexter, if you could tell how,
but in faith Sir I have you at my fingers end, even as perfect without book
as you are within.

Strabino with this passed tale was so nipt in the head, that he had scant any
thing to say, and when he saw she was so crafty, that his subtle Sophistry
did deceive him: he would with all his heart have been far enough from her
presence: or that his talk were to begin again. For albeit he was a man
stout of his person: yet they that had seen him now, would have thought he
had neither life nor soul left in him. Which when Cornelia beheld how sadly he
sat, and would speak never a word, how his couller went and came, as though
he had line a dying: thought it no courtesy to let him languishe so: but to
give him a fresh encouragement to revive up his spyrites. Why Sir Strabino
(quoth she) is your heart in you hose? Is your corragious countenance so soon
changed to pale and wanny cheeks? Your face makes apparaunce of your grievous
disease, and your looks bewray you, that you are in love. But what of that?
never dismay your self with any doubting dread, nor let not my talk so seem
to to trouble you, if I have made a fault: I ask you forgiveness, and if I
have displeased you: I will do so no more. You know, promise was made, that
all should be well accepted, that pertayned to no harm, and that which should
pass between us: should not be offensive to either. I for my part am not
offended with any thing spoken: and if you are, truly you be to blame. I will
leave your company, if you be not more merry, and will forsake hereafter any
more to frequent it. Shake hands and be friends again, and tell me who she
is that you so faithfully love: I will stand your freende perhaps in the
matter, and if of my self I am not able to do it: I will inform those of it,
who (doubt you not) shall bring it to effect.

With that Strabino revived him self out of his brown study, and began smugly
to hold up the head, right wylling he left his so sudden quandarie: and began
to look up with a sensorical countenance. His heart that before lay in a hole:
was now ready for joy to leap out at his mouth, his mind that erst was
pinched with passions: was now so iocond, that it daunced with joy, and his
couller that before was as pale as ashes: began now as fresh as the redolent
Rose, every member which before seemed maimed: he could now stretch out to the
ninth degree. And if his present service might have won him a Wife: he was
able to discharge it, and that to the uttermost, besides, his conceytes began
to come so nimbly together: that he now rolled in his Rhethoricke, like a Flea
in a blanquet. (Ah courteous Cornelia (quoth Strabino) how much am I bound in
duty to your seemly self? How much am I indebted to your prudent personage?
that with such sweet persuasions, such maydenly and modest motions, such
heroycall and singular actions: has losed to liberty a discouraged prisoner,
and has revived him to life, who was almost past all hope of recovery.

Excellent was the opinion of Valerius Maximus, who commended the freendly
deeds, done in adversity, as for prosperity will succor it self. My self
may be witness, in aduauncing, your freendlines, whose adversity was
incurable: had I not obtained council of so prudent a Physician. I tha^k you
for your freendly offer, wishing I were able to counteruayle it as I would, and
that my might were correspondent to my well meaning intent: then should you see
the depth of my desire, and have occasion to think you should not pass
unrewarded The Lady whom I love will be won to your will, the Saint whom I
serve: will fulfill your request, and the least word of your mouth, will bind
up the bargain. So that do you but speak: I speed, do you say yea, and I
shall have no nay, so much dare I crake of her credit, and boast of her
bounty: that you can not so soon say the word: but she will wyllingly do
the deed.

Cornelia smiling at this gallant gloss, and having half a conjecture at what
mark he aimed to shoot at: framed such an answer as she thought best her
self, and to make Strabinos suit never the near. The foolish Fly (quoth she)
so long iesteth with the Candle, that at last she sindgeth her self, the silly
Mouse wandreth often so far abroad: that she is taken tardy before she come
home, and the Nightinggale sings so sweetly, till she fall in a sleep, and
so oftentimes is caught at unawares. Likewise, I have held you here so long
with a pleasant tale, that you make me half mistrust my self. If your Lady
be so wilful, to be won to my will, and so courteous that she will come at
my call, yea, if I say the word, you ask no better bargain: either I must
conjecture, that her affection is greater to me then to you: or that she would
claim assurance of me for your good behavior. Now credit me Strabino, you
are wily in your words: yet not so crafty, but I conceive your meaning.

Qui simulat verbis, nec cord est fidus Amicus:
^u quoque fac simile: sic Ars deluditur art.
But yet Strabino, let these matters pass, and to come to the point, whereupon
we have stood so long, name me your Lady, what she is, and where she dwells:
then shall you hear farther what I will do for you. If so be (quoth Strabino)
you will promise me no good will shall want on your part, to the fulfylling my
request, and that you will not hinder the matter I have in hand: I will show
you the sweet she, whose captive I am, and to whose love I am thus intierly
entangled. Sir (quoth she) Qui ante non cauit, post dolebit, A man may love
his house well, though he ride not on the roof, and a man may make a good
Mart, yet be no great gayner. There goes more words to a bargayne then one,
and other prayers to be used beside the Pater noster, when you have told me
your tale: you shall see what I will say, and though I make you no promise:
doubt not but I will please you.

Then took Strabino up her glass that hung at her Gyrdle, and therein he
framed many an Amorous countenance. At last (quoth Cornelia) what fancies
find you there, that makes you so pleasant? or have you a delyght in
beholding your own face? Nay (quoth he) not for the fancy I find in mine
own face: but for the comely countenance that consists in my Lady and
Mistress. And have you found her face there (quoth she) I pray you let me see
her, to judge if I know her. After Cornelia had looked a while, she said. Why
Strabino, you promised I should see that seemly she, to whom you owe such
delightful love and loyalty. And what I promised (quoth he) has been here
performed. As how (quoth she) Whose face (quoth he) did you behold when I
showed you? why yours and mine own (quoth she) I thought it would come to such
a pass, well I will speak to her, and if she chance to give her consent:
doubt you not but you shall hear of it. But one thing I can tell ye, and that
you shall perfectly prove, how she is wedded to her will, and married to her
own mind: that she had rather live a maiden still, then be bydden to so bad a
breakfast.

That were against reason (quoth he) that she should be so married to her mind:
as not to respect one so good as her self, or that in disdayning so good a
breakfast, be forced to come to a courser dinner. A little pyttance in the
morning: is better then to be fasting all day, and perhaps, a good strong stake
struck in the hedge in Summer: will stand for a good defense in the Winter.

Albeit Sir (quoth she) you are her better: yet she thinks it not against
reason to like before she love, and though it be not expedient to give the
chyldrens bread to dogs: yet will they lycke the crumbs that falls from their
masters table. And besides she thinks, that if she keep her stomach for a
good supper: she shall not take surfeit of her fasting all day. Likewise,
though the strong stake do well fortify the hedge for Winter: yet if the
stake be without other defense: the Beasts will easily get over and spoil the
pasture, and so in time utterly vndooe the owner.

Strabino having well and sufficiently pondred her talk: thought now he would
not discourage him self with the diversity of her devises, but even as his
heart served him he would make her an answer. Why Lady (quoth he) do you
misdoubt of my bountiful behavior? or yt I am such a one as regards not my
honesty? Think you if I would make my choice, I could not have as good as you,
or if my mind had been so adicted, ere this I could not have been sped?
think you all Women are of your mind? or that they will dislyke upon no
occasion? No credit me, Cornelia (I speak Bonafide) if my stomach had served:
I could have been soon suffised, and if all Women were of your mind: I
should have but a cold suit with my wooing. But belyke you are betrothed
already: and that makes you so dayntie, if you be tell me, that I may loose no
more labor.

Truly Sir Strabino (quoth she) if as yet I am betrothed: it is more then I
know, what my Parents have done, I know not, but as yet I can assure you, there
is no such matter meant by me. But what of that, you are never the nearer your
purpose, nor yet the likelyer to gain my good will, you are a gallant
Gentleman, well known in Verona, wherefore you may chance to light on a better
booty, and doubt you not but there are those, who with all their hearts would
have you. Wherefore good Sir, never feed your humors on such a homely piece:
since there be more delycate Damoselles that will not deny you. But now it
draws toward supper time, and occasion is so offered: that perforce I must
leave you, desiring you not to deem any discourtesie, that I leave your
company so soon.

Nay (quoth Strabino) I am not to conceive the wurst of your departure: but
rather to thank you, that vouchsaued my company so long, no anger I trust is
conceived for my superfluous speech: but rather pardoned for that no
dishonestie was meant. Thus thanking you a thousand times for your courtesy
offered: till Fortune so frame our next meeting together, I commend you to God,
whom I pray grant me my wish, and you the depth of your desire.

Thus Gentlemen is Cornelia and Strabino parted, he taking the way home to his
Chamber: and she speedeth her self that she were at supper, but so sour a
sauce she had given Strabino: that the sharpness turned his stomach from
minding any meat. It is not strange to see what a metamorphesis Love makes
of a man? that he which erst might have bragged with the best: is now become
to careful for any company, he which erst walked the streets with a gallant
grace: now pulls his bonet over his brows, that none may behold his
sudden alteration? He which before lived merrily, faring with the finest, and
delyghting in the dayntiest: now scant eats a good meals meat in a month.
He comes to his Chamber, throws him self on his bed, incombred with so
many cares, that it is unspeakable: at last unto him self talks in this
order.

O God, where are become the lofty looks I used before I was a Loouer? Where
are the curious countenaunces, the wayghtie words, the dayntie dealinges, the
bold behauiours, and the manly order of life wherein I lived before? Has
Love so puissaunt a power to reuert my sweetness into sorrows, my mirth into
mazednesse, my life into langor, and all my happiness into a state so
helpless? O grief without end, O sorrows without ceasing, O hellish
torments that has no conclusion. But yet am I the first that was framed to
folly? Or I am the last that shall be lead by Love? Has not the Gods
themselves been subject to like mestiue miseries? Did not Jupiter enter
Acrissius tower, in the shape of a fair swimming Swan, to deflowre fair
Danea? Apollo persecuted Daphne to get his will of her: Neptune begatte
Nauplius father to Palamedes of Amimone, daughter of Dauaeus: Mercury lay with
Lar the beautiful Nimphe, and got of her two pretty children called Lares.
Likewise king David became convinced by the love of Bersaba: Solomon the wise
was subject to love likewise. If then love has made the Gods to agree, the
wise to be wilful, the stoutest to stoop: is it possible for me poor
Strabino, to resist a thing of such force? O Cornelia, little do thou
esteem the good will I bear thee, little do thou accoumpt of my
constancy, little do thou regard my restless rage, and little do thou
deem all my dollorous doubts. Is thy heart so frosen, that the sunny beams
of bounty may not make it to melt? Is thy mind so misbeleeuing, that no
faithful fidelity may seem to reform it? Is not daily proof sufficient to
try my trustiness? Is not the great good will I bear thee, able to cause
thee to accoumpt well of me? To offer me cruelty for courtesy, thou do me
open injury. Alas wretched wight that I am, whose misery is more then mine?
Whose days more dollorous, whose time more troublesome, whose life more
loathsome, and whose state more yrksome, the day to me is nothing delightful:
the night more careful, sleep I can not, and waking, I never cease wayling.

Sometime I sit to conquer the cogitations, which weary my wits: then again
am I driven into a more deep desire. Sometime I scorn and laugh at Love,
thinking mine own will a sufficient warrant: but then in a moment aryseth
manifold miseries, so that neither waking nor sleeping, walking or sitting,
can my sorrowful self sustain any rest. Why wast thou borne to abide such
bitterness? why have thou lived to see this trystfull time? why has not death
desired his due: and the grave cut of this merciless grief? O Laberinth of
intricate euylles, O maze of endless myseries, whom neither dutiful
surrendering of my self may suffice: nor any virtuous action seem to content
you. Cease Strabino, give not thy self altogether to insolency, nor frame not
thy self wholly vanquished with follyes, time may turn thy troubles to
tranquillity, time may make thy foes thy friends, and time may reuert all thy
pains to pleasure. Impute not thy Lady altogether disloyal, for he that
speedeth at the first: wooeth well, and he that has no denial: in my opinion
is very fortunate.

In these and such like careful complayntes the solytarie Strabino has worn
away the wearysome night. In the morning comes his brother and friend
Rodolfo, to understand the cause of his sudden sickness.

Rodolfo, the brother of Cornelia, and avouched friend to Strabino, comes to
the Chamber to know the cause of his sickness. Cap. 4.
AT last Rodolfo a dear freende to Strabino, and Brother to his Lady and
Mistress, myssing his friend from School, whereto was his daily repair:
comes to his Chamber, and there found him tossing and turmoyling him self,
on his careful coutch, which when he saw, as one amassed at this sudden
mutabilitie, and greatly grieved to see his friend in such a pittious plyght:
began thus to frame his speech.

My dearest friend and cheifest Jewel of my joy, not so glad of the rare
freendship that in you I have found: as sorrowful to see this uncouth sight.
Is this the comely countenance that you were wont to carry: and now changed
into the perfect Image of care? Are you that man, that erst did swim in
delyght: and now bereft of your former behavior? Was my words erst worthy
to procure thee to pleasure: and now not able to stand in their former effect?
Am not I the same Rodolfo I was wont to be: and shall not I now be accoumpted
as thy former friend?

What is the cause my Strabino of this sudden alteration? How happens it you
are so soon changed into heaviness? If I be worthy to know the cause of your
carfulness, or that my deserts may gain my desire: let me understand the
sum of your sorrows, and doubt not but I will see some redress for you.

Strabino having well wayed the words of his friend, and how earnest he was
in this his request: bethought him self how he might sufficiently answer him,
and yet not be found tardy in his talk. Perhaps afterward he would discover
more of the case: but at this instaunt he should not know whom he looued,
wherefore in this order he framed his answer. My dear Rodolfo, whose
freendshippe I highly make accoumpt of, and whose fidelity I have found firm
in weighty affairs, to you will I display my dollorous disease: hoping by your
means it may be mittigated.

Since first it was my fortune (dear friend) to use the company of the brave
Ladies and Damsels here in Verona: I have been attainted with so many
perilous passions: that sure I am past hope to have any recovery, yet do I
strive with mine affection as forceably as I can: but impossible it is for me
to remove it, so excellently do I esteem of the person, whom I honor: that
in life or death I am hers at command.

Rodolfo perceiving Strabinos sickness, and how that love made him to
languish in such sort: he esteemed the matter of less accoumpt, and made him
an answer but little to please him. Ah Sir (quoth he) are coals so soon
kindled in your uncertain stomach? is your mind so mutable, that no steadfast
stay may be had? Are you one ye regards not your prosperity: or make you so
small accoumpt to fall into misery? Do you see the danger each day before
your eyes: and are so heedelesse to fall headlong in the same? You have read
your self, how the effects of Love are strauuge: and by so much as you have
seen and heard, me thinks it should be odious unto you. Forget you Plautus
words, when as touching this devilish disease, he says: Iactor, crucior,
agitor, stimulor, versor in amoris rota, miser exanimor, feror, distrahor
diripior, vbi non sum: ibi sum, ibi est animus. How like you this lesson
alleged to your Love? How can you excuse that these fears are not felt? How
can you disprooue these innumerable dangers? Remember Antigonus words to his
Father Demetrius. Let Seleucus folly to his son, forwarne thee what
aduersenesse consists in this contagious disease, who joined his own Wife
with his son in marriage to satisfy his lust. What caused the long dissencion
between Themistocles and Aristides: but the love of Stesilia the harlot? What
procured the hatred between Cato and Caesar: but the lycentious love after
Seruilia the strumpette? Semiramis, honored and extolled for her nobleness of
mind, and virtue in her deeds: by love brought her name into eternal
infamy. Why are the Assirian Kings so reproved of wantonness: but for the
lawless love they use, with their Concubines? Did not love blemishe the rare
renown of Hanniball in Salapia? Did not love infect the fame of Alexander?
What caused Catalin to kill his son Oristilla: but love? What caused Laodice
Wife to Ariartes King of Cappadocia to murder his sons* but love? What made
Scilla to destroy her Father: but love? What made the stately walls of Troy
be sacked: but love? Infinite are the extremities which through love arise,
and can not be so much reprehended: as by right it deserves. What man so
wilful to come subject to Women? What pains more intolerable then to come at
their calls? It is their joy, to have one bow at their beckes, it is their
delight to have one wait on their wylles, it is the cheifest of their choice,
to have a man sue for their succor. Then Gyll will be a Gentlewoman, if she
could but Parle un petit de Francoys. If a man will be made a meacock, and
blind him self with a little of their bold behauior: then is their coin
current, yea, better silver then an honester Woman's. If they can once fledge
them selves, with an other man's feathers, and iet in their Iewelles at other
men's costs: then a pin for the prowdest, a fygge for the finest, she is as
honest as the best, though she be ashamed to use it, yet sure she does well,
not to have her honesty so much seen, least with wearing it on working days,
it may catch to much heat, and so melt it away: or else take so much cold, yt
it will never be good after. If with a song, you would be sung a sleep, or with
a dau^ce lead to delight, or if you have the Quatrinos, to play at sink and
syse: then is she a Companion with the cunningest, a fellow with the
forwardest, and will rather play small game: then sit quite out. Who would
miss such a mate, that for a months pleasure: will after make you lead a
loathsome life? Who would lack such a Less, that for a days pride: will make
you go a month stark naked? Now truly he were unwise, that would not have
such a Wenche, and he were too far foolish, that would want such a Bon
Companion.

Oh Strabino, in faith the black Ox never trod on your foot yet, you never
came where it grew: nor you never tried time, as here after you shall find
it. If you had beaten the bush, and caught any of the Byrds: I doubt not but
you would have told me an other tale. If you be wise: stay your self in this
state, if you will follow your friends who wish you well: eat a bushel of
Salt with them, ere you trust any one of them, for you were better beware
before: then wish you had taken heed, when it is too late* Try and then
trust me, if you find not true that I have told you: then report of me, as
my deeds shall give occasion.

Strabino having line still a pretty while, and devised how he might now stand
in defense of his Misterisse: made answer unto his friend on this wise. Sir
(quoth he) saying and doing are two men's labors, and it is easier for a man
to promise: then to fulfill, your self now sets such a corragious
countenance on the matter: as though your mind were invincible. Think you
there is not as wise men in the world as you? Are you made of such metal, as
force will not melt you? could you if the matter were brought to the trial:
with all the cunning you have make any resistaunce? No credit me, but eue^ so
glad to find ease as my self: and march under Cupids banner for company. What
said Ariosto in the commendation of Love? He says, what sweeter state? what
more bountiful bliss, and what more happy life: then to be lyncked in love?
Chrisippus also says, that love is the bond of freendship, and ought not to
be held in contempt: for that beauty is the flower of virtue. Cicero holds
opinion, that a Wise man may lawfully love, and the very reciprocal and
mutual society of true and faithful freendship (say the Peripations) is
Love. Zeno the Prince of the Stoikes affirms, that it is needful and
necessary of young men to be loouers, and never disagreeeth with wise men: for
that Love is an associate with virtue. And will you reprove Love that is so
much honored? Will you disdain Love that is so magnified? Will you condemn
all Women, although some be evil? and will you reprehend all Women for one
strumpets sake? What perilous pains? What troublesome travail? What pinching
panges, and what manifold miseries, did one woman sustain for you? Remember
her that brought you into this world, consider her care in providing for your
prosperity, think on the daily devises her motherly affection framed to keep
you in quiet, sometime lulling on the lap, and trifling with many a toy, for
the pure love she bare her child, remember all these points indifferently:
and then judge how much you are bound unto that famous sex. Did not God give
Adam in Paradise a Woman for his companion? Has not God ordained man and woman
to live together in matrimony? and yt the mutual love between man and wife,
is to him most acceptable? O my friend Rodolfo, forsake this fondnes, leave of
this lewdnes, and take hold on a better text, love them yt love you, and
maintain no more this vain assertion. When Rodolfo had wayed the sick man's
answer, and that he was so far in: yt it was too late to cry hoe, he said.
Now credit me Strabino, all women have just cause to wage you well: because you
stand in their defense so doubtily, were I a woman: you should not want what
possibility could perform, and sure I would choose you always for my Champio^
against any whatsoever. And truly, she whom you love, knowing what metal
you are made of: if she love you not again, she is very discourteous.

Well, I warrant you, ye will not dye of this disease, you will take better
aduisement with you I hope. If you would frequent the Tournaments, to bestride
the stately Steedes, and with the shiuering Lance to behave your self
manfully: these foolish fancies, these troublesome thoughts, and these coy
cogitations would soon abandon you. The hour you know of our exercise is at
hand, I must be gone, my Companions attend my coming, in the after noone I will
visit you again. Your sudden departure (quoth Strabino) is an augmenting of
my grief, but I will not hinder you from your valiant exercise: till you come
again, God keep you.

Rodolfo being departed: Strabino could not take any rest, up he rose, his
head incombred with a thousand thoughts, his mind musing on many matters. One
while he thought to go see his sweet Saint: then he thought it would but
procure the greater pain, an other while he thought to send to her: then he
doubted how she would take the matter, at last, he took pen, ink and paper,
and framed his salutations, as follows.

ALbeit dear Mistress, you may accoumpt me more wytlesse, then wise, and more
saucie then beseems me, to perturbe your patience, with these frivolous
lines: yet if you respect the good will I wish you, and consider the dutiful
service I am ready to show you: I trust I shall be discharged of any crime
committed, and that my honest intent deserves no rash repulse. Part of my
pains I have bewrayed to your bounty, and some of my sorrows you have
secretly seen: then judge if my iustnes deserves not your gentleness, and
whether my constancy may claim part of your courtesy. Pigmalion so long
embraced a cold stone: that at last he won the same to his Wife. Admetus in
the attire of a man, with long service gained his best beloved. If Love were
so effectual to frame, fit for their fancies: why may not Strabinos hap at
length return fortunate? But perhaps dear Mistress, you will allege that
the liberty of my speech, bewrays the lyghtnesse of my Love, and that I
seem to undermine you with forgerie, intending no fidelytie. To drive you out
of such doubts, and discharge my self of doubl^ dealing, and to prove my
love vehement without vaunting, fervent without falsehood, trusty without
trifling, and constant without any craftiness: let be practiced for proof,
what shall please you to employ me: and command to the uttermost, though it
were loss of my life. If you find me faltring: then rightly repel me, and if
you prove me perjured: then never more use me. Thus committing the sum of my
suit to your sweet solution, and the construing of my cause to your
inestimable courtesy: I refer here to multiply manifold matters, and so
with a Courteous Conge, bid you farewell heartily.

Yours to command, the solitary Strabino.


THis Letter thus written, and sealed with sorrows: he wished a thousand times
it were in the hands of his courteous Cornelia. But now thought he, how might I
behave my self in the sending my suit? How might I devise to have this
delivered? If I carry it my self: I shall be suspected, if I send it by a
stranger: her Father may chance to see it. If I should make my friend Rodolfo
messenger, he would then perceive the sum of my secrets, then would he see
that his Sister were my Saint* and that her love would set me at liberty. I
know not how the matter may be misvsed: nor how the cause may be by them
consulted. A bargayne (they say) well made is half won, and he that works
surely: lightly has no harm, then will I trust none in this but my self: so
if I speed not well, none knows it but my self.

The Tournaments being ended: Rodolfo returned, and finding S^rabino walking
in his Chamber: requested to know how he felt him self amended? Quoth
Strabino, neither amended, nor worse impaired: but even as you left me, yet if
it were not for hope: the heart could not hold, so I hope that that my
sickness, will in the end return my sweetness. (...) I think will somewhat
mittigate the mazednesse of my mind, and beside make me have a stomach the
better to my meat: if it shall please you to walk with me: I will after go
with you to your Fathers house. With right good will (quoth Rodolfo) I will
walk where you please, and do what you can devise: so that I might somewhat
persuade you from love.

Signor Truculento, an extorting Usurer in Verona, comes to the house of
Giorolamo Ruscelli, the father of Cornelia, to desire his Daughter in marriage,
and brings with him a sumptuous present. Cap. 5.
Leaving Rodolfo and Strabino in walking for their pleasure: I will now
rehearse how old Signor Truculento smoutched up him self in his Fustian
slyppers, and put on his holy day hose, to come a wooing to Mistress
Corneli^^* The old horson would needs be lusty, and to cheerishe up his
churlishe carkase, would get him a wanton Wife. And though I say it, he was as
well made a man, and as curious in his quallities: as ever an old Horse in
this town, when he is gnabling on a thystle. This carpet Knight, having
pou^ced him self up in his perfumes, and walking so nice on the ground, that
he would scant bruise an Onion: comes to the house of Signor Giorolamo Ruscelli,
bringing with him a very costly Cup, wherein was about five hundred Crowns.
When he was come into the presence of the Gentleman, he said Sir, as one right
glad to hear of your health, and willing besides to work your well fare: I
am come to see how it fares with you; because that long time I have been
desirous* First Sir, this Cup I freely give you, and these five hundred
Crowns, I frankly bestow on you, besides if you pleasure me in my reasonable
request: you shall find me your friend in more then I will speak of.

The Gentleman amazed at Truculentos lyberalytie, who before would scant
bestow on him self a good meals meat for expense of money: made him this
answer. I can not choose Sir, but consider well of your courtesy, and
likewise esteem of your bou^tifull benevolence, undeserved of my part to be so
rytchly rewarded: considering my countenance to you has been small. And if
your request be so reasonable as you seem to affirm, and that it lies in me
to bring the same to effect: doubt not that I will make you any denial, since
you have gratified me with so great a gift. Well Sir, now Truculento trusseth
up his towardness, and bustleth up his brains like a bunch of Radishe,
setting up his wits to work about his Amorous eloquence: he thus began to
tell forth his tale. It may be thought to you good Sir, either a natural
inclination, or a predestinate desire, that a man of my years should now be
bent to folly, in craving that company which a youthful head requires, and
seeking to match my self in marriage, drawing each day to my death. But as a
good foresight in all things is to be had, and dillygent industry keeps the
Woolfe from the door. Even so, though I am to be thought fond in following my
will, I am to be excused in wishing my weal. Yet this may be alleged to
condemn mine assertion, and this may be thought, I do it more for lust then
love. That in making my choice, I am not more cyrcu^spect, and in ruling my
will, I am not more wise. The hoary heayres should choose one agreeable to his
age, the lusty youth one meet to his tender time: then if this allegation may
stand in effect, I have made my market far amiss. On age I begin to bend my
brows: and on a gallant Girl I fix my fancy* Age of me is altogether
despised: and youthful years honored and exalted, Age in my mind is nothing
wholesome: but beauty is brave, delycate and toothsome. So Sir, if I may gain
her whom I have thus chosen: I shall not be only pleasured, but your self for
ever hereafter profited. Your Daughter it is whom I desire, it is even she
whom I serve, and none but she must be my solace. If you accept my suit, make
answer accordingly: and if I shall have your Daughter, do not deny me.

The Gentleman having well lystened this new come wooers tale, and seeing at
what mark he leueld his love, he bring one him self that preferred money
before manly modesty, coin before courteous ciuillitie, and rytches before
any virtuous action, besides, overcome with the costlynesse of the Cup, out
of measure contented with the five hundred Crowns: Furthermore he thought, if
he matched his daughter with him: she would soon send him to Church, and then
should she swym in her golden bags: was very loathe to send away such a
sweet Suter, thinking it rare to have a rytcher: wherefore to Truculento he
made this answer.

I hope Sir, you doubt not of the good will I wish you, nor of the courtesy
you shall find hereafter, your reasonable request is altogether allowed: and
your gentle gift greatly accepted. I would my Daughters dowry were as much as
I could wish it: I would bestow it on man sooner then your self. With that
he called for his Daughter Cornelia, who when she was come into this old
amorous Squyres presence: his heart began to heave like a Bakers bun, his whole
complexion so myraculously changed: that you could scant have known him from
a Croydon sanguine. Oh so his Amorous eyes began to look on his new Wife, I
am sure he would have spent all the shoes in his shop to have had one kiss
for a courteous Conge.

Lo Daughter (quoth her Father) God has sent you here a Husband, one that
will maintain you in your bravery with the best, and you shall lack nothing,
but live a Ladies life, now make answer as you shall think best.

Cornelia somewhat moved at this made matter, and nothing contented with her
Fathers choice, all her senses distracted with this sudden motion: yet took
corrage to answer the matter in this sort. Dear Father, it is the duty of
the Child to be obedient to her Parents precepts: and it is the Fathers fame
to have his Child virtuously nurtured, I confess it is my part to obey your
grave advise: and it ought to be your care to see me meetely matched. If then
your care be no better bestowed: my duty must be as much neglected, though
your will be to see me carelessly cast away, if it lie in me, I am to prevent
it, both for the credit of your worthy estate: and also for the good name of
my simple self. Will you for money marry me to a myser? Will you for wealth
wedde me to a Wyttoll? And will you for rytches so little regard me? Shall I
for a little vain glory? forsake virtue? Shall I for paltrie pride run
headlong to hell? Shall I for mortal muck, forsake immortality? No Father, had
he wit to his wealth: he would be more wise, had he reason to his rytches, he
would be of more regard, and had he manhood to his money: he would be ashamed
of his extorting usury. For what is wealth without wisdom? Riches without
reason, and money disorderly governed? Even like the shadow of a man
portraited in a picture, that has all the lyneaments in good order belonging
to a man: yet wants the man him self, for as the Image lacks life to his
proper proportion: so this man wants that which should most of all adorn him.
Rather had I you should have chosen a country Clown, that gets his living
lawfully, and lives by truth and honesty: then such a one as is not
acquainted with any virtuous behavior. I must confess he is wise enough, to
make much of his money, and careful beside how to cull in his coin, but he
that will run to the devil for a little dross: and pinche the poor to the
perdition of his own soul: shall never be looued of me while I live, much
less intend I to have him to my Husband.

When Truculento heard Cornelias pinching reply, and how she disdayned such a
loathsome liver: he would with all his heart have had his Cup again, on
condition he would never come more a wooing. Yet set he a good face on the
matter, because he would not be misdoubted, and feign he would have spoken, but
his heart was so big he could not, the which her Father seeing, said.

Come Sir, we will go walk about the City a while, and never dismay your
self at the words of my Daughter, for will she, nill she: I will have her
follow my mind in this matter. Away went old Truculento with a heavy heart,
yet the Gentleman's words, procured him to be of better cheer.

They were no sooner out of the door: but in came Rodolfo and Strabino both
together, and Strabino in walking: had bewrayed to his friend the sum of his
secrets, whereto he gained so much his good will: that he promised he would
further it as much as he might. When they came into the Garden: there they
found Cornelia very sad and sorrowful. Why Sister (quoth Rodolfo) how happens
it that you seem so sad? Why do you cumber your mind with carfulness, your
head with heaviness, and all your parts with such pensiveness? When I went
forth in the morning: you were merry, and are you now changed into such
melancholi^? O Brother (quoth she) after mirth comes mones, after joy grief,
and after pleasure pain, that comes in an hour: that happens not in seven
year: Even so since your departure, has chanced such change: that all my
friends will lament to hear of my fathers folly. Has my father (quoth
Rodolfo) framed things contrary to your fancy? And does his dealings hinder
your delight? I pray you unfold this sodayn alteration: if I may be so bold
to crave such courtesy. You are to command me in greater affairs then this
quoth she: wherefore attend and I will tell you all. Not fully yet two hours
ago, there came to my father such a comely Camellion: that could change
himself into all hues saving honesty, all quallities in him, saving those yt
are comely, and as expert in humanity: as he that never knew what it meant.
Besides (but that I am not to reprehend age) for that it is honorable, nor to
condemn his years, (for yt he has lived a tranquile time) he is as doting a
dissard as any in Verona, and as covetous a Carle, as lives at this day. But
if wealth may make a man wise: he will brag with the best, or his extortion
make him esteemed: he will be nothing behind hand. But if virtue should vaunt
and claim for her fee: this comely Squyre were sunk in the wetting, and all
his credit cracked before it were gotten. But to come to the effect of the
matter, and to let pass his properties: without they were praise worthy, and
to show the cause of his coming, and his suit to my Father. It is so, that
this money myser: is become a lusty loouer, and bringing a gorgious gift to
gratify my Father: the Amorous whoreson would have me to his wife. Now my father
(as you know) has a good mind to money, and looks that the old suter will
soon turn up his heels, (so then shall I have more money then modest
manners, and greater store of substance, then wisdom to rule it,) he would
needs make him promise, that he should wedde me to his Wife. But I gave him
such a cooling ^arde, and such a pinching replye: that my Father is feign to
go and persuade him, saying at his departure: that he shall have me whether I
will or no^. But sure, ere I give my consent to fulfill his fancy, and match
my self with such a Midas: my Father shall first cause me leave my life, which
will be a greater reward: then to live with reproach.

Now surely Sister (quoth Rodolfo) I must commend your constancy, and allow
the care of your credit, before such a doting drudge should spoil your gallant
youth: my self would tell my Father an other tale. With that Strabino took
out his Letter, and courteously kissing it: gave it to his sweet Saint, and in
the mean while she was in reading it: they walked about the Garden together,
and having read it: came unto him saying. Sir Strabino, your honest intent: I
can not dislyke, nor your well meaning mind can I reprove, but wish I were
worthy so seemly a suter, and of abyllitie to gratify your exceeding
courtesy. I confess your justness condempneth me of ungentleness; and your
constancy reprooueth my great discourtesie, in that at your last departure: I
did misuse my self with such blunt behavior, but as the Sun should not set
on an anger conceived: so I hope my presumption by you was pardoned: If at the
first I had granted your love: you might have alleged my mind to be light,
if at the first demand I had made no denial: you might have thought me very
untrusty, but now perceiving your ardent affection, the loyal love and good
will you bear me: I think I can not bestow my self better, then on him whose
fidelytie I have found so faithful.

Now Brother tell me how like you my choice? In choosing my friend, Sister
(quoth Rodolfo) you have followed my fancy, in making my friend your Husband:
you have done as I would have you. God grant your days may be spent so
prosperous: as I wish this match to each party meritorious. This match is more
seemly: then my Fathers forecasting, and this is more agreeable to God: then
to have you united in that order, for where perfect love is effectually
placed: there is triumphant tranquillity, peace and plenty* Gods blessing and
sufficient. But where marriage is made upon compulsion, the one agreeing, the
other disdayning: there is daily discord, displeasing of God, continual care,
and many infirmities follows. Wherefore I think this a match so meet: that
it can not be mended, a choice so equal: as there can be no better, here is
love and loyalty, here is faith and fidelity, God prospere your proceeding,
I wish it heartily.

Now Gentlemen, judge if Strabino had not cause to be corragious of so gallant
a conquest? of so peerless a prize, and so loouing a Lady? Whose joy was more
iocond? Whose bliss more bountiful? And whose hap might be compared to
Strabinos good luck, in compassing that in a moment: which he thought would
never have come to effect, and in getting the good will of so gallant a
Goddess, so sweet a Saint, and so merciful a Mistress.

Wherefore now leaving the languishing of his sorrowful sickness, and
forsaking the fear that erst followed his fancy: he saluteth his Lady with
this courteous replye. I see (most merciful Mistress) that there is no
disease so desperate: but help may be had, no sickness so sore: but Physic
can foil it, no wound so dangerous: but a sweet salve can recure it, no
grief so great: but patience bringes prosperity, and no doubt so dreadful:
but time brings to full effect. See here, he that was erst drowned in
doubten: now hoysed in happiness, he that erst remained in unmerciful
myserie: now floteth in flourishing felycitie, he that erst was plundged in
pittyfull perplexity: has changed his state to perfect prosperity. If
Caesar here would commit to me all his conquers, Craesus his puissant
possessions, or the three Goddesses proffer unto me, as they did to Paris: None
could so much please me, as you my second self, none could more delyght me:
then my Jewel so gentle, nor any more like me then my Lady so loyal, whose
courteous constancy: high Jove prosper in perpetuity.

Cornelia seeing Strabino in the myddest of his mirth, and having devised a
drift to fall pat to their pleasures, crossed his tale with a courteous kiss,
and after began her talk in this order. The wise hold opinion (quoth she)
that a present peril is good to be prevented, who works warely at the first:
need not repent him after, and a bargayne well made, is half won. You know
Brother, our Father requires rytches out of measure, and a match of money
makes up his mouth, now if Strabino should solycite his suit to him (as needs
he must) he may allege the want of his wealth, and that his abillitie is not
able to maintain me according to his mind, as no doubt he will compass a
hundred conceyts: because he would match me with old Truculento.

To deceive him now of this devise, and to win the matter fit for our will: I
have bethought of a cunning conjecture, and remembered such a remedy, as will
fall very fyt, both that my Father shall give his consent: and the old
worldly wretch served in his right kind. First, Brother you shall go with
Strabino to Truculentes house, and there on your credit, take up a great sum
of money, as much as you shall think good, then go you into La strada di San
Paolo, and buy the Jewel which my Father has long had such great affection
to, the which will so win him: that I dare warrant none but you shall have me
to his Wife. For the payment thereof you shall not need greatly to accoumpt:
for that you shall refer unto me, but this way I think you shall soonest
speed, and this way I warrant you shall gain no nay.

I perceive Sister (quoth Rodolfo) a Woman's wit is good at a need, and this
your devise full well we allow. How say you Strabino, shall we put this in
practice? Or will you defer it for fear of discredit? Nay sure (quoth
Strabino) since the matter consists on no greater a clause, and that this
inuencion may drive all out of doubt: I think each day a year till we have
dispatched it, and each hour a month till we have bound up the bargayne.

Cornelia espying her Father was entered, and fearing least he would mistrust
the matter, gave them a watch word to win them away, and to go about their
pretended purpose. Rodolfo goes in to flatter his Father, in ye mean while
Strabino steals out, so that their prancks were nothing perceived: but all
fell out, even as they would wish it. Rodolfo steals out, and follows his
friend, and in short time they met both together, then they agreeed how the
case should be concluded: if so be the money would be lent that they hoped for.

They being come to Signor Truculentos house, and he sitting at his door
very solytarie: Rodolfo in the freendlyest fashion saluteth him, and
flattering the fool, thus frames his tale. Worthy Sir, if I say otherwise
then beseemes me: I hope you will bear with me, and if I speak as affection
serves me: I doubt not but you will deem all at the best: so that neither
flattering you with any forgerie, nor upholding my self by any vain glory: I
shall commit to your courtesy my well meaning tale, and my simple suit to be
accoumpted of, as you shall like best.

Since the providence of the Gods has so appointed, law of nature has eke
allowed, and the grave advise of my Father has so consented, that you are the
only man must match with my Sister: I rejoice that my hap has proved so
fortunate, and that the Gods has sent me such a lucky lot, as your worthy
self shall become my brother, always wishing that your time may prove as
tranquil, as my good will is to work your well fare. When old Truculento
heard Rodolfos Rhetoric, and how gallantly he glosed to purchase his purpose,
he thinking that all his tale had been truth, and upon pure affection he had
spoken the same, replied. Friend Rodolfo: You have not found me so bountiful:
as hereafter you shall find me brotherlike, ne have you had any such occasion
to commend me: as hereafter you shall purchase occasion to praise me. I
remain to pleasure you, in what I can possible, and will stand your friend in
more then I will speak of. Indeed your Father has found me so freendly: that
I thank him, he deemes me to deserve his Daughter, and you I see conceive so
good opinion of me: that you think me sufficient to match with your Sister.
Well, if all prove so well, as I hope it will, and the match be so granted
as on my part it is proffered. It is not money, or ought that I have, but shall
be all present to do you a pleasure.

Strabino began to smyle in his sleeue. Rodolfo much a do to keep his
countenance, to see the old whoreson how willing he was: and how craftily they
caught him into so good a belief, wherefore now he begins to show forth
his suit: not doubting to speed before they departed. Well Sir (quoth Rodolfo)
for your proffered courtesy I remain your debtor, not doubting but ye matter
will come so to pass as I have always wished it, and if it like you so well,
as to grant me one request: while I live you shall bind me to the uttermost
of my power. Here is a Gentleman, a very dear friend and fellow of mine, who
because his living is not yet come into his hands: is desirous to borrowe a
certain sum of money, allowing for the gaynes thereof, what you will demand:
the sum does amount to four thousand Duckattes, and but for one month he
desires the lending, and if by that time he do not discharge the debt: he is
willing to forfayte his patrimony, and besides the best lym of his body.

Friend Rodolfo (quoth Truculento) the world is so wretched now a days, and
diverse of ye people so pinched by poverty: that many will borrow, but slack
payment is made, then if we exact the Law to the uttermost: we are accoumpted
covetous carles, worldly wretches, and such like, which makes me so loathe to
lend: for I care not for dealing in ye trade any more. What pleasure were it
to me to maime or ma^gle this Ge^tleman for mine own: truly I had rather if I
could well spare so much, to give it him outright, so should I sustain no
reproach my self: nor he be endamaged in ye distress of the law. Yet for your
sake, I care not if I lend him so much: so that you will stand bound unto
me, as straytlie as he shall.

Sir (quoth Rodolfo) for the credit of the Gentleman, I dare wage all that I am
worth, and for the payment thereof, I dare stand to the peril, deliver you
the money, and if the debt be not discharged before, or at the above named day:
I will loose all my Lands, beside the best lym of my body. Well (quoth
Truculento) this is the bond, if by the first day of the month ensuing, the
whole sum be not restored: each of your Lands shall stand to the endamagement,
besides the loss of both your right eyes, are you content to stand to this
bargayne? Yea (quoth they both) and that right wyllingly.

With that he departed to fetch the money, then quoth Strabino to his freende.
Did ever man see a more extorting villayne then this? Is not our Lands
sufficient to glut up his greediness? But that each of our eyes must stand to
the hazard? Oh miserable myser, oh egregrious cormorant, surely the just
judgment of God, will reward him for his wickedness. Well, cease (quoth
Rodolfo) no more words, Lupus est in fabula, little said is soon amended.

Then comes Truculento, wylling them to tell out their money, and then to set
their hands to his Byll, which being done: he delivered forty Duckattes
more to Rodolfo, to carry his Sister for a token from him, saying. Desire her
to esteem of the gratefulness of the gift, more then the quantity does
amount unto, and tell her, that in life or death I am hers at command.

Your courteous token (quoth Rodolfo) shall be delivered, and your message
ministered, with as much expedition as possibility will permit, and thus
thanking you a thousand times for your Brotherlyke benevolence. I commit you
to the custody of the heavenly Creator. The like wish I you (quoth he)
desiring you to remember the bargain wherein you are bound.

After that Rodolfo and Strabino had borrowed the money of Signor Truculento,
they departed to their lodgings, and in the morning go and buy the rich
Jewel, which Strabino presents to Signor Giorolamo Ruscelli, the Father of
Cornelia, and obtayneth promise that he shall have her in marriage. Cap. 6.
ROdolfo in the morning, repayreth to ye Chamber of his assured Strabino, where
being entered, he found him in his study at his Book, awayting his company to
go about their business. Strabino (quoth he) let your Books a while be left:
and frame your self to further your fancy, let be the solemness you use in
your study: for you are like to purchase a double delyght, the tide taryeth no
man, and when we are assured of our wished Jewel: then may we defer ye time
as long as we list. Wherefore, my self desirous to hasten in our enterprise,
and also to prove the doubt of a dream. I desire the more to make an end of
this matter. Quoth Strabino, has a dream driven you in any such doubt, or
have you seen a fancy in your sleep, which you shall prove effectuous now
you are waking: if it shall like you to tell me the truth, I will define
thereon as well as I can.

To trifle the time in talk (quoth Rodolfo) may let our labor, and beside, to
show you the effect of the same: would cause you to delude me, wherefore I will
let it alone till we return, and if by the way it prove to perfection (as my
desire is of God it may not) truly I will tell you. They take their way down
by Signor Truculentos door, where he saw the Saint sitting which all night
was in his vision, no further could he go he was so faint, but stood leaning
on the breast of his friend Strabino, at last he burst forth in these words,
saying.

O my Strabino, but that you are my friend, and one whom I do highly make
accoumpt of: I should doubt to discover the cause of my dollor, and fear to
display my so sudden passions, yet seeing your self has tasted like torment,
and have borne out the bruntes which now I abide: the bolder I may my secrets
bewraye, and the surer demonstrate the cause of my care. Yet you will condemn
me for my preter presumption, and may rightly control me for my rash
reprehension: yet judge with indifferency, and deal with me freendly, let
old faults be forgotten, and penance claim pardon. I see there is no
stomach so stout: but love will allay it, no courage so conquerous: but
love will convince it, nor no heart so hautie: but love can bring low: Even
so my self, who was a reiecter of love, am now enforced to follow my fancy,
and I who envied against Women kind: am now become a thrall to one my self.

With that for fear of being suspected in the open street: they went their
ways about their other affairs, and as they were walking, quoth Strabino. I
see dear freende, that the most learned Clerks, are not the wisest, the most
valiant, not the surest, nor the greatest boasters, the best perfourmers, I
perceive you would have been in your deskant, before you knew what pertayned
to prick Song. What say you now to Plautus words? What say you to all the
matters wherewith you charged me? Well, I will not replye so rashly as you
did: nor I will not give you such cold comfort, as you used to me, but I will
do the best to make up the matter, and my head to a halfepeny, I will bring it
to effect.

I know it is Truculentos Daughter whom you desire, and she it is must cease
your sorrows: let us first end the matter we have in hand, and then you
shall see how I will compass this geere. Rodolfo well satisfied with Strabinos
promise: went and bought the Jewel which his Father so much desired, and there
withal a fair white Iennet of Spain, and coming home: found his Father
sitting at the door, he entered, leaving Strabino to talk with him, who after
he had saluted him in seemly sort: began his matters in this order as
follows.

To rip up the chief occasions (worthy Sir) that procures me in what I can
to pleasure you: would be over tedious to me in the telling, and somewhat
troublesome to you in the hearing, wherefore letting them pass as remembered in
mind, and recounting such matters as occasion does bid me: I first and
foremost present you with this rytch and sumptuous Jewel, wishing it so much
worth, as I could wyllingly bestow.

When Signor Ruscelli saw the Jewel, which so long he desired, and that his
sons friend and Companion was the bestower of the same: he was overcome with
such exceeding joy: that it is impossible for me to express. But when he had
well viewed all about, and seen the sumptuousness bestowed thereon: he
answered Strabino to his great contentment.

If I should show you (quoth he) how much this gift pleases me, and besides,
make manifest the good will I bear you: you would suppose I did but flatter
you, and deem my words of no true intent. Wherefore to drive you out of all
such doubts, and to make apparaunce of that I have spoken: demand of me what
you shall deem expedient, and I vow to the uttermost to grant your request.

With that Cornelia came to the door, and seeing the Jewel in her Fathers
hand: commended greatly the lyberalitie of her Brothers freende, and informing
her Father to make him large amends.

Sir (quoth Strabino) the Jewel given, byds me (under verdite of your license)
crave an other Jewel, and this Iennet besides I give you, wishing but to
speed of that Jewel. What Jewel soever it be (quoth he) I have, or any other
thing, that may seem to suffice you: on my credit and fidelity, you can but
ask and have. Strabino stepped up and took Cornelia by the hand, saying: then
give me this Jewel in recompense of my Jewel: so shall I be contented, and
you nothing injured.

Sir Strabino (quoth Signor Ruscelli) the demand you have made is doubtful,
and the choice you have chosen, nothing correspondent to mine intent, her
marriage is already made, and she is given to one whose wealth is so worthy,
and whose store so surpassing: that while she lives, she shall need to lack
nothing. You are a young Gentleman, youthful and lyberall, and will spend more
in a day: then he in a year, he is wary and wise, you youthful and
prodigal, therefore the match is otherwise determined, any thing else
remains at your request. Sir (quoth Strabino) you have left a point open, and
I have a man to enter, respect your play wisely, least you loose the game
outright. A promise may always be claymed for a due debt, and such a man as
you should never shrink at his word, I may claim this Jewel by a sufficient
title: for that in your promise you made no exception. Yea but Strabino (quoth
he) I meant you should have desired some other desert. But I meant (quoth
Strabino) to crave none other, so that you standing to the bargain, and I
liberty to take what best lykes me: this Jewel is mine, and your word a
sufficient warrant.

Besides, where you doubt my living is not sufficient to welcome such a Wife: I
trust that the patrimony my Parents does allow me, is more then the dowry
you will make to her marriage. Again, if my lyberalitie, of you be dyslyked,
and the niggardly sparing of a worldly wretch so much commended: I perceive you
prefer rytches before a noble mind, and accoumpt more of vanity, then you
do of virtue. Mazeus when he received his Pretorship of Alexander: in
commendation of his munificence, used these words. My Prince Darius was ever
but one man: but thou by thy lyberalitie, make many Alexanders. Scipio
Africanus never rode abroad, but he would use such lyberalitie ere he
returned: that of his greatest fooes, he would make his dearest friends.
Isocrates wysheth Nicocles to be familliar with this excellent virtue, wylling
him in his apparel to be gallant and glorious: and let his lyberalitie set
forth his magnificence. Then never disprayse lyberalitie, which is the chief
ornament of a noble mind: but hate that worldly pleasure, enemy to all
virtuous actions. I content my self to stand to her gentle judgment, if she
do not regard me: I am content you shall refuse me, and if she like me not: I
will let her alone.

What bargayne is between you twain (quoth Signor Ruscelli) I know not, nor
how you have devised the matter in hope to deceive me, yet have I seen no such
familliarity, whereof I should accoumpt: nor any such likelihood, that she will
choose you to her Husband. I am content to abide her agreement, wherefore speak
Daughter as your mind shall best serve you.

Then since dear Father (quoth Cornelia) it has lyked you to grant me my
mind, in making my choice, and that you will not be offended at my bold
behavior: Sir Strabino, you are the man whom I most accoumpt of, and no other
will I have during life.

When Signor Ruscelli perceived it was come to that pass, and that his promise
bound him to stand to her verdict: he said. Take here then Strabino, the
Jewel of my joy, to quite your Jewel so lyberallie bestowed, and God grant
you such prosperity while you live together: as I wish to mine own soul, I
speak unfeignedly. The Nuptialles shall be celebrated when you think best, in
the mean while I will take you as my Son, and you both as Man and Wife.

After much talk passed between them: out comes the mournful Rodolfo,
ravished with such inward desire, and tossed in such frantic fittes: as his
pittious plight bewrayed the state of his sickness. Strabino taking leave of
his new found Father, and of his sweet Lady and wife Cornelia: went with him.
And as they were going (quoth Rodolfo.) O my dear Strabino, needs must I go,
to know either of or on, her Father shall know the good will I bear her, and
she shall perceive I wish her to my Wife. If I may speed, I have my desire,
if not, the greater will be my distress.

Ah Sir (quoth Strabino) how like you love? Who shall control you for
following your fancy? A man knows what his beginning is: but he knows not
his ending. Brag is a good Dog, while he will hold out: but at last he may
chance to meet with his match. In such like conference they came to the
house of Signor Truculento, and who should open the door but Brisana his
Daughter, the Mistress of Rodolfo, whom he saluted in very freendly sort. But
even so willing as he was to have her to his Wife: she was as desirous to have
him to her Husband. Here was hot love on both sides, and each of them so
far in: that it was impossible for either to get out. Rodolfo, he in
secret tells Truculento such a flattering tale in his ear, how his Sister
had calmed her courage, and was content to stand to her Fathers appointment:
that the day after the debt was discharged the marriage should be made, so he
for joy of these new-come tydinges: joins them both hand in hand, to marie
when they will, and God give them much joy* Here were marriages soon made, and
Wives soon won, I believe if I should sue for like succor: I should
perforce take longer space to speed.

Now is Rodolfo returned rejoicing, and Strabino right glad of his good
success, Truculento presently hyes him to horseback, to go will all his
friends, to meet at his marriage.

When Signor Ruscelli knew how his son had spedde, and by so fine a drift had
deceived Truculento: the next morning marieth his son, and Truculentos
Daughter together, and Cornelia and Strabino in the self same sort. What joy
was here on either side: judge you that are married folks and meddle in such
matters, yet though I be unskillful to define on such clauses: I must needs
suppose, that since each of the^ gained, the thing which they most desired:
their joy was not little, nor their pleasure lightly to be accoumpted of.

Strabino he with his sweet Cornelia passes the time pleasantly, and Rodolfo
with his brave Brisana lives at hearts ease and tranquillity, so that they
think there is no other felycitie.

But now Gentlemen (as the ancient Proverb is) after pleasure comes pain,
and after mirth comes myserie, and after a fair and sunny day, arises
blustering winds and sharp showers: Even so to this passed pageant of pleasure,
is annexed a stratageme of sorrows.

Truculento is returned from bydding his Guestes, and has heard of the hap
which chanced in his absence, he comes as one bereft of his wits, or as a
man feared out of his five senses, and utters this tale to Signor Giorolamo
Ruscelli. Sir, blame not my boldness, for that I am constrained, nor reprehend
my rashness, since I am so misused, I thought more credit had consisted in
your ancient heart, and that you would not have dissembled with any such
double dealing. Did not you perfectly promise I should match with your
Daughter, and that no one should gain her but only I? Did not I give your
Son my Daughter on the self same condition? And have you in my absence
married her to an other? Not contented with matching my Daughter with your Son,
I being not present* but to go and play such a Parasites part. Well, well, I
doubt not but to deal so sharply with some: that they shall wish they never
had married my promised wife.

Few words and sweet Sir (quoth Signor Ruscelli) threatened folks live
long, and angry men are subject to many sorrows, I gave you no other consent,
then on my Daughters agreement, and when I mentioned the matter: I still found
her contrary. Wherefore you must pacify your self, there is no other remedy,
and learn to make a virtue of necessity, for sure your luck was still turned
to loss. And whereas my Son has matched with your Daughter: I deem you are
not greatly to find any fault, but rather may be glad she has sped so well,
for ye day has been he might have had her betters. Wherefore if you seem to
chafe your self upon so light occasion, and that you will not be contented, we
offering you such courtesy: meddle in no more matters then you may, nor heap
any more harms on your head, then you are wylling to bear. If you set not a
point by us: we care not a pyn for you, if we may have your good will so it is:
if not, keep your wind to cool your Pottage.

This answer made Truculento more mad then he meant to be, and he flung
forth of doors in such a fume: as though all the Town would not have held
him.

On the morrow, he caused Strabino and Rodolfo to be summoned to appear before
the Judge, for the payment of the money, which when Cornelia and Brisana
perceived: they willed their Husbands in nothing to doubt, for that by their
industry they should be discharged. Cornelia apparelleth her self all in
black like a Scholar, and Brisana attyreth her self in the same sort. After
dinner they appeered before the Judge, where Truculento appealed against them
in this order.

Signor Truculento summoneth Strabino and Rodolfo before the Judge, for the
debt which was due to him, where Cornelia and Brisana, by their excellent
inuencions redeemeth their Husbands, and Truculento at last seeing no remedy:
falls to agreement. Cap. 7.
MOst magnificent Judge, time was (quoth Truculento) when firm affection, and
pure zeal of freendshippe, moved me to mind the destitute estate of these
two Gentlemen, when as either they had not money to their contentment: or
wanted such necessaries, as then was to them needful* At which time (as the
Lamb endaungered by the ravenous Woolfe, flies for sauegard to his fold, or
as the Ship abiding the hazard of Fortune, and fearing the emminent danger,
posteth to some Port, or hastes to some Haven in hope of succor): Even so
these twain repaired to me, who being sufficiently stored of that which they
wanted, and besides, willing to pleasure them, to their greater profit:
committed to their custody, a certain sum of money, which amounts unto
four thousand Crowns. Now their necessite indifferently satisfied, and they
being bound to deliver the sum at a certain day: they have broken their
promise, which is open perjury, and falsyfied their faythes, in not restoring
the money. Wherefore, that all Gentlemen may be warned by such wylfull
offenders, and that God may be glorified in putting them to punishment: I have
thus determined how the debt shall be discharged. The rendering of the money I
do not accoumpt of, ne will I be pleased with twice as much restored: the
breach of the Law I mean to exact, and to use rygor, where it is so required.

The forfayture of their Lands, is the one part of the penalty, the loss of
their right eyes the whole ingenerall, now remembering the woeful estate of
their solitary wives, how in depriving their substance, they might be pinched
by penury: I let their Lands remain unto them in full possession, whereon
hereafter they may live more honestly. I claim their right eyes for
falsifying their faith: to move others regard how they make like rechlesse
promises. So shall Justice be ministered without partialytie, they rightly
served for infringing their fidelity: and my self not thought to deal with
cruelty.

Thus have you heard the cause of my coming: now give judgment as your
wisdom shall think most expedient. My friends (quoth the Judge) here is no
place to deal with partiality, here is no room where falsehood should be
frequented, nor time in this place to defer in trifling affairs: but here
is simply Justice to be advanced, wrong righly revenged, and mercy mildly
maintained. Wherefore, ere I begin to deal in this diversity, or that I
seem to contend about this controversy: I exhort you each one to exempt
double dealing, to fly forged fraud, and to minister nothing maliciously, but
on each cause to way the matter advisedly. Consider you come to deal in
matters of conscience, matters of your own mayntenaunce, and such things
whereon your credit consists, now you are not for freendshippe to further
falsehood, ne yet for malice to touch an untruth, but even to deal so
directly, to frame your matters so faithfully, and to use your selves here so
uprightly: that not so much as a motion be made of any misorder. But every one
to answer as occasion is offered, so help you God and the contents of this
book, whereat they all kissed the book. And then the Judge called Strabino, to
show in what sort, and after what order the money was borrowed, and what
promise there was between them.

Most mighty Judge (quoth Strabino) truth never defameth his Master, right
repelleth all proffered wrong, and upright dealing disdayneth all forged
fraud, wherefore, neither fearing the force of his revenging rigor, nor yet
dismaying at ought that is done: I will tell my tale, reporting nothing but
truth, and clayming no other courtesy then my deserts shall deserve.

Truth is, my Father failing to send me such money, as served to the
mayntenaunce of my studious exercise, and besides, wanting wherewith to deal
in weighty affairs: my friend and I came unto this Caterpyller, (so rightly
may I call him, neither defacing his lycentious living, condempning his
practiced science, and cunning handy craft, nor yet inuaying against any of his
honest behavior: but commending his cut throat conditions, in pinching the
poor, to fyl up his own poutch.) Being come to this aforesaid woorme of the
world, (who eats so many to the bare bones, out of Lands and living, to glut
his greedy desire) we desired a certain sum of money, which is no less then
him self has confessed, for a months space, and then to restore the same to
the unrightful owner, who binding us straytly in the loss of our Lands, and
of each our right eyes: lent us this aforesaid sum. Now in deed, we not
minding the so short restoring of his due debt, for that necessary occasions
was partly our hinderaunce: have indamaged our selves in two days more, then
the limmited time did amount unto, for which time we will allow him to the
uttermost he can ask, and his money to have when him pleases. Now if your
wisdom does not think we deal with him honestly and well: we will stand to
what effect it shall like you to bring it.

My friend (quoth the Judge) your reply is reasonable, you confess your self
indebted in that which he has demanded, and yield that you have broken the
band, wylling to make an amends, insomuch that you will satisfy the uttermost,
which he may seem to sue for: I can not choose but accoumpt your words of
good credit, in that your dealing does demo^strate no other. Now Truculento,
you see the Gentleman grau^teth him self guilty, since his earnest affairs
did hinder the repayment of your debt to you due, now he has the whole ready
to restore, and beside, over and above this sum: will content you to the
uttermost it shall please you to request. In my opinion you can reasonably
require no more, if you do: you shall but seem to shame your self.

Sir (quoth Truculento) he that before my face will use such terrible tauntes,
behind my back, would gladly brew my bane, he that in my presence will so
spightfully reprove me: in my absence would hang me if it were in his
possibility. Does he demerit favor: that so frowneth on his friend? Can he
claim any courtesy: that abuses him self so disorderly? Or can he once
plead for pity: that stands in so great a presumption? Or you my Lord,
desire me deal gently: with one who respects not gentillitie? No, the money
is none of mine, ne will I have it, his Lands I respect not, ne care I for
them, and now his submission I way not, ne will I accept of it. You my Lord
shall rather reap reproach by pleading on his part: then gain any credit in
maintayning so careless a creature. I drive my whole action to this issue, I
plead my privilege unto this point, and to this clause I am severely bent: I
will have the due which breach of promise does deserve, I will exempt all
courtesy: and accoumpt of cruelty, I will be pleased with no rich reward
whatsoever, no pity shall prevail, rigor shall rule, and on them both I will
have Law to the uttermost.

Why Truculento (quoth the Judge) respect you cruelty: more then Christian
ciuillitie, regard you rigor more then reason. Should the God above all Gods,
the Judge above all Judges, administer desert, which your sins has deserved?
If his fatherly affection, if his merciful myldnesse, if his righteous regard,
did not consider the frayltie of your flesh, your promptnes unto peril, and
your aptnes unto evil: how mighty were the myserie, which should justly fall
upon you? How sharp the sentence that should be pronounced against you, and
how rigorous the revenge, which should rightly reward you? Is this the love
you bear to your brother? Is this the care you have of a Christian? The Turk,
whose tyranny is not to be talked of: could but exact to the uttermost of his
cruelty. And you a branch of that blessed body, which bare the burden of our
manifold sins: how can you seem to deal so sharply with your self?
seeing you should use to all men: as you would be dealt withal. Yet to let you
have the liberty of your demand in Law, and you to stand to the Justice
which here I shall pronounce, let first your right eye be put forth in their
presence: and then shall they both abide like punishment.

For since neither the restoring of your debt will suffice you, nor yet the
lyberall amends they are content to make you: I deem it expedient you should
be pertaker of their pains, so shall you know if you demand a reasonable
request. How say you, will you stand to the verdict pronounced: or take the
reward which they have promised.

My Lord (quoth Truculento) neither do I deserve to abide any such doom, nor
they worthy to be favored with any such freendshippe, I may lawfully allege
that you permit partiality: and that you divide not each cause indifferently,
for to what end should you seem to satisfy me with their words: when your
self perceyues how they are found faulty? And what urges you to use such
gentle persuasions: when you see your self they deserve no such dealing? If I
had wylfully offended in any such cause, and wyttingly broken in such sort my
bond: I would be contented you should deliver me my deserts, so that you did
minister nothing but Justice. And wherefore should you seem to demand the
loss of my eye who have not offended: for sauegarde of their eyes that have so
trecherously trespassed? I am sure I go not beyond the breach of my band, nor
I desire no more then they have deserved. Wherefore object no more matters,
whereby to delude me, nor impute no occasions to hinder my pretense, I crave
Justice to be uprightly used, and I crave no more, wherefore I will have it.

Indeed my friends (quoth ye Judge) who seeks the extremity, and urges so
much as his wilful mind does co^mau^d him: his commission is very large, and
his request not to be refused. Wherefore, since neither pity can prevail, nor
freendly counsel persuade: you must render the ransom that he does
require, for we cannot debar him in these his dealings, nor we can not choose
but give our co^sentes. Therefore if you have any that will plead your case in
Law: let them speak and they shall be heard, to further your safety as much as
we may.

My Lord (quoth Rodolfo) their courtesy is overmuch that will kneel to a
Thystle, and their benevolence bountiful that will bow to a Bramble: Even so
we are far foolish to crave courtesy of such a cut throat, and more
wytlesse then wise to meddle with such a wordly wretch. If there be no remedy:
we know the uttermost of our pains, yet we crave that these our Attorneyes,
may have such liberty as Law will permit.

With that Truculento fared like a fiend, and curssed and banned like a Devil
of hell, (quoth he) my Lord, you deal with me discourteously: when the Law is
come to the pass to let them have their Attorneyes.

Sir (quoth the Judge) you have used all this while your Attorneyes advise, and
they have answered simply of them selves, now since you the Plaintiff have had
this prerogative: it is reason the Defendaunts should demand their due. It may
be that their Attorneyes may put you to such a plundge: that you shall have
small occasion to brag of your bargayne: wherefore let them speak.

Then Brisana ( Truculentos Daughter) began in this order to plead for her
avail. Admit my Lord (quoth she) that I come to such a person as this party,
to borrow ye like sum of money, binding me in ye self same band, to restore
the money to the same party of whom I had it. Well, the time expyred, I come
to deliver the due to the owner, he being not at home, nor in the City, but
ridden forth, and uncertain of his coming: I return home to my house, and
he him self comes out of the Country as yesterday. Now he upon some several
spite or malicious intent: sueth me in the Law, not demanding his due, nor I
knowing of his ariuall. Am I to be condemned for breaking the Law: when the
party him self has deferred the day?

How like you this geere Truculento? you have now an other Pigeon to pull, and
here is one wiser then you were beware. Can you condemn this party, not
demanding your due, nor being at home when it might have been discharged?
And making the band to be restored to your self?

My Lord (quoth Truculento) though I was not at home: my house was not empty,
and though I was away, if it had been restored: it stood in as good effect as
if it had been paid to me. Wherefore it is but folly to frame such an
allegation: for my Receyuer in my absence does represent my self.

Well (quoth Brisana) admit your servant in your absence, stands in as full
effect as your self, and admit the debt had been discharged to him, if
wylfulnesse had allured your servant to wandering, and that he had departed
with the debt he received: you return and find it still in your book,
neither marked nor crossed, as if payment had not been made, you will let your
servant slyp with his offense: but you will demand the debt again of me.

Tush (quoth Truculento) this is but a tryfle, and your words are now to be
esteemed as wind, you should have restored the sum to my servant: and I
would not have troubled you in any such sort, for there is no man that uses
such folly: but he will see the book crossed before he depart. Therefore you
do but trouble time with mentioning such matters: for your redemption is never
the near.

Well then Sir (quoth she) you will thus much allow, that at the delivery: the
band should be restored, and if I had delivered the money to your servant: I
should have respected my band till yesterday, for your servant had it not to
deliver: and I would not pay it before I had my ^ande. Ah Signor Truculento
(quoth the Judge) he touches you to ye quick now, how can you reply to this
his demand? In deed I confess (quoth he) my Cubborde kept the band till I
returned, but yet noting the receyt in the book, would have been sufficient
till my coming home.

With that Cornelia stepped up, saying. Since (Signor Truculento) you will
neither allow the reasonable aunsweres he has made, nor be content to abide
my Lord the Judges verdict: receive the ransom you so much require, and take
both their eyes, so shall the matter be ended. But thus much (under verdict of
my Lord his license) I give you in charge, and also especially notify, that no
man but your self shall execute the deed, ne shall you crave any counsel of
any the standers by. If in pulling forth their eyes, you diminishe the least
quantity of blood out of their heads, over and besides their only eyes, or
spyll one drop in taking them out: before you stir your foot, you shall
stand to the loss of both your own eyes. For that the band makes mention
of nothing but their eyes, and so if you take more then you should, and less
then you ought: you shall abide the punishment here in place pronounced. Now
take when you will, but beware of the bargayne.

Truly (quoth the Judge) this matter has been excellently handled, it is no
reason if you have your bargayne: that you should hinder them with the loss of
one drop of blood, wherefore I pronounce no other Judgment, shall at this
time be ministered.

Now was Truculento more mad that he could not have his hearts desire, for that
he knew he must needs spyll some blood, it could not be otherwise chosen,
wherefore he desired he might have his money, and so let all other matters
alone. Nay (quoth ye Judge) since you would not accept of it when it was
offered, nor would be contented with so large a promise: the money shall serve
to make them amends, for the great wrong which you would have offered. Thus in
my opinion is Judgment equally used, and neither party I hope will be
miscontented.

Truculento seeing there was no remedy, and that all the people praised the
Judgment so woorthily: accepted Rodolfo for his lawful son, and put him in
possession of all his lyuinges after his disease. Thus were they on all parts
very well pleased, and every one accoumpted him self well contented.

If now this homely History may seem to suffice you: in recompense of my
costs, I crave nothing but your courtesy. You shall have the rest as
possibility can permyt me, and I remain your friend to pleasure you in ought
to my power.

Take this in mean time, though too short to be sweet, and thus I bid Euphues
heartily welcome into England.

Honos alit Arts. FINIS.
A. Monday.

Faults escaped in the printing.
1. In the.25. Page, in Zelautos speech, for vnderding, read understanding.
2. In the.32. Page, in Zelautos speech, for Timon, read Timantes.

