THE VVoefull cry of Rome.

Containing a defiance to popery. With Thomas Bells second challenge to all
favorites of that Romish faction.

Succinctly comprehending much variety of matter, full of honest recreation,
and very profitable and expedient for all sorts of people: but especially for
all simply seduced Papists.

Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

Apocal. 18.4.

LONDON. Printed by T.C. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Grayhound. 1605.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO THE RIGHT Honorable my very good Lord, Thomas, the Lord of Ellesmere, Lord
high Chancellor of England.
SAint Paul, that chosen Vessel of God, (Right Honorable) made a base
reckoning of all other things in the world, in respect of the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Philip. 3.8.
This knowledge was so dear to the Princely Prophet David: that he desired to
be but a doore-keeper in Gods house, rather then to dwell in the goodly Palaces
of great Parsonages: esteeming one day better in Gods Church, then a thousand
otherwhere. Psalm. 84. verse. 10.
This knowledge yielded so sweet a savor in the nosethrels of holy Moses:
that he chose rather to be the child of God, then to be called the son of
King Phoraohs daughter. Heb. 11. verse. 24. Pro. 1.7. Eccles. 12.13.
This knowledge was to the wisest King so precious: that he reputed it not
only the beginning of wisdom, but even the final end which he aimed at:
with the love of which knowledge he was so ravished: (Oh most excellent
knowledge,) that having in his own free election what he would receive at
Gods hands: he desires neither long life, (which the greater part of people
thirst after) nor riches (which are the greatest joys of al covetous
worldlings:) nor yet the death of his enemies, (which the dancing Damsel
preferred before a Kingdom) 1. Reg. 3. verse. 59.11.12. Matt. 14.8.
but he humbly asked an understanding heart, that he might discern between
good and evil, and judge aright Gods people committed to his charge: a most
wise and holy request. King Solomon the wise.
This petition pleased God so well, that he gave the King a wise and
understanding heart, so that there was never any either before or after him,
comparable or like unto him.

And no marvel, that the true Children of God, desire the true knowledge of
God, before all other things. For as our Savior himself teaches us, this
knowledge is life eternal, the joy of all joys. But (my good Lord) it may
here be demanded, how this most excellent knowledge can be attained? Ioh.
17.3. 1. Cor. 2.9.
To which I answer, even by dilligent reading of the holy Scriptures* For
Saint Paul, writing unto Timothy, commends his knowledge in the holy
Scriptures, which he had attained of a child, and he yields this reason
thereof: because forsooth, (says the Apostle,) the Scriptures are able to make
him wise unto salvation. 2. Tim. 3. verse. 15.
Is this possible? is it so indeed? even so doubtless, Gods Spirit cannot lie.
How then comes it to pass, that the late Bishops of Rome, (now Cat'
e'xochen called Popes,) do this day suppress the light of the Gospel, and
forbid the Lay People to read the holy Scriptures in their vulgar language? How
chances it, that none may read any Commentaries upon the old and new
Testament, nor any other books compiled for the furthera^ce of man's knowledge
in that behalf? unless either the said books and Commentaries, be composed
by professed papists: or the readers being the Popes sworn vassals, have his
dispensation and license so to do?

This (my good Lord,) is the reason, that cannot in truth be denied. They that
do evil hate the light, fearing that it should reprove their naughty deeds.
John 3.20.
And for this end is it, that the Pope can not endure the manifestation of Gods
word, which is a lantern unto our feet, and a bright shining light unto our
souls, directing us the pathway to heaven. Psalm. 119.105. 2 pet. 1.19. Ioh 5
39. Romans 10.13.
For this light, if the pope did not smoother it under the ashes, and violently
keep it under a bushel: would in short time so enlighten the hearts of all
well disposed people, that all the world would detest the Pope, all popish
superstition, heresies, and blasphemies, and all his bloody, tyrannical, and
plain antichristian dealing.

In regard hereof, (most honorable Baron) and most worthy, zealous, christian,
upright, and religious Magistrate,) because it is not enough for a Christian to
know God himself, but he must withal, heartily wish and effectually procure,
(so much as lies in him,) that others may also know and worship the
everliving God with him: Leu. 19.18. Man 19.19. Gal. 5.14. Romans 12.20 ^^^oh.
3.16. Luke 3.11.
I have employed my study, diligence, care, and industry, to deliver a very
compendious enchiridion to al simple seduced Papists, and to other thankful
Readers, wherein they may behold as clearly as the noonday, the original of
popish falsely pretended Primacie: the means by which the Bishops of Rome,
aspired thereunto: the royal titles and power plain divine, ascribed to the
Popes: the lives, manners, and conversation of Popes: the rotten foundations
upon which and by which, Popery is builded and underpropped: the original and
sundry grounds of Popish Purgatory: the vanity and uncertainty of Popish
Succession: the popish execrable Excommunications, Superstitions, Adorations,
and many other matters of great moment. By the due and serious consideration
whereof the indifferent Reader, cannot but behold the abomination of late
Romish Religion: and consequently loath, detest, and utterly renounce the same
for ever.

The work such as it is, I have dedicated unto your Honor, for two special
causes. First, to intimate to the world, my inward conceived comfort, joy, and
solace, (which either is, or at least ought to be, common to my self, with
all other honest and true hearted English Subjects,) of your Lordships most
honorable, zealous, christian, conscionable, upright, painful, and religious
care, vigillancie, and holy constant endeavors, under God, and his most
exellent Majesty: both for the indifferency of justice extended at al
persons, as well to the poor as to the rich, which is not the usual practice of
many Magistrates, alas for the pity,) and also generally for the common good
and peaceable government of this Kingdom. Leu. 19.15. Exodus 23.2. Deuteronomy. 16.
ver. 19.20. Esa. 5.23.


Secondly, to give at the least some small signification of a tha^kfull mind,
(where power is wanting,) for your Lordships most honorable, yea, unspeakable
favors toward me from time to time: even such and so great, as without which,
I could not this day breathe upon earth: and much less make use of my small
talent, ( Quod sentio quam sit exiguum,) for the common good of others. The
Almighty give your Lordship, many, long, joyful and happy years, with much
increase of virtue, holy zeal, and true honor in this life, and with life
eternal in the world to come. Amen.

From my Study, this first of April. 1605. Your Lordships most humble and
bounden: T. Bell.

Thomas Bells defiance to Popery, with a second challenge.
CHAP. I. Of the original of Popish Primacie.
I Have proved at large elsewhere, In my suruay of Popery.
how Popery crept into the Curch by peecemeale, and how she received her daily
increments: Now it shall be sufficient, to touch succinctly and plainly, when
and by what means, Rom^ became the head of al Churches: the truth therefore of
this point, is this; viz. That for the space of six hundred and six years
after Christ, the Bishops of Rome lived in all dutiful obedience unto the
Emperors, neither was the Church of Rome the head of all other Churches, but
one of the three patriarchall seats, whereof mention is made in the first
famous council of Nice, Tres seeds patriarchales; Romana, Alexandrina,
Antioch^na.
which was called by the worthy Emperor Constantinus, surnamed the great. Two
things I have to prove, for the clearing of this question, the one, the
subjection of the Bishops of Rome, in Anno, 606. unto the Emperor. The other
of the supremacy of the Church of Rome after that time.

Concerning the former, most impudent and intolerable is the Popes insolency,
when he exalts himself above kings and Emperors, threatening them that he can
depose them from their scepters and regalities, and dispossess them of their
Empires and dominions. For Gregory, Gregor. libro. 2. epist. 61. chap. 100.
surnamed the great, a very famous Bishop of Rome, when he was appointed by the
Emperor Mauritius, to publish a certain law, sent him from the said Emperor;
did not refuse to accomplish the Emperors designement, but very dutifully and
loyally acknowledged himself to be the Emperors subject, and of duty bound to
execute his command therein; albeit he deemed the law to be in some part
thereof, disagreeable to Gods holy will. These are the Bishops own words; Ego
quidem iussioni subiectus, eundem legem per diuersas terrarum parts
transmittifeci; and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime concrodat, ecce per
suggestionis meae paginam, serenissimis dominis nunciaui: vtrobique ergo quae
debui exolui, qui and imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo quod sensi
minime tacui. Englished thus. I subject to your commandment, have caused the
same law to be sent through diverse parts of the land; and because the law is
not agreeable to Gods holy will, behold* I have intimated so much unto your
majesty by my Epistle: I have therefore discharged my duty in both respects; as
who have yielded my obedience to the Emperor, and have concealed what I
thought in Gods behalf. These are the words of the good Bishop of Rome* for
that Church was in good case and order, in his time and age, out of whose
discourse I note, Gregory, and S. Gregory (as the Papists term him) as famous
and as learned a man, as ever was Bishop of Rome, acknowledges the Emperor to
be his Lord and Sovereign. Mark this, o Papist.
for which duty, he durst not but publish the Emperors law, though in some
part against Gods will, as he deemed it; and that, least he should have been
guilty of disloyalty toward his Prince and Sovereign.

Touching the latter, the cruel tyrant Phocas (who ravished many godly matrons,
and murdered the emperor Mau^ritius with his three sons, Theodosius, Teberius,
and Constantinus) decreed yt the Roman seat should be ye head of al churches.
This to be so, I have proved else where at large, In my suruay of Popery.
out of many famous Chronographers, viz. Sigebertus, Platina, Palmerius,
Bergomensis, Polidorus, Marianus, Scotus, Martinus, Polonus. Here it shall be
enough, to add the testimony of Rhegino a famous popish Abbot. These are his
words; Rhegin. Anno. 628.
Hic obtinuit apud Phocam principem, vt seeds romana caput esset omnium
ecclesiarum. He obtained, (he speaks of Bonifacius the Bishop of Rome) of
the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be the head of all Churches.

Hermannus Contractus, an other famous Chronographer, has these express
words; Herm. Contr. Anno. 600,
Hoc tempore Phocas Romanam ecclesiam omniu^ ecclesiarum caput esse constituit.
Englished thus. At this time Phocas decreed the Church of Rome, to be the head
of all other Churches.

So then, Gregory the good Bishop of Rome, died in the second year of Phocas
his Empire, about which time Mauritiu^ the Emperor was murdered, and five
years after that Rome was made the head of all Churches. That is to say, 607.
years after Christ's sacred birth, and most holy aduent. Johannes Nanclerus a
late writer of high esteem with all papists, and consequently of great force
against them, has these words; Nauclerus. in Ebronic. page 629.
Phocas pontificis suasione, publica ac ad vniuersum orbemdimissa sanctione
constituit, vt romanae ecclesiae romanoque pontifici omnes orbis ecclesiae
obedirent, quod retroactis temporibus non ad vnguem seruabatur, maxim a
graecis. Englished thus. Phocas by the persuasion of Boniface the third, then
Bishop of Rome, made a public co^stitutio^, and sent it through out the whole
world; in which he decreed, that all churches in the world should obey the
church and Bishop of Rome: which thing was not exactly observed in former time,
especially of the Greeks. Thus writes this famous popish Cronographer, whose
testimony is able to confound al papists, and popish falsely challenged
primacie. For first, pope Boniface was made bishop of Rome, but Anno. 607. so
that Rome was 606. years without her now, challenged primacie. Secondly, the
fathers of the great church, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Bassil, S*
Gregory Nazianzene, and the rest, did not yield so much to the Church of Rome,
as to admit it for the chief patriarchall seat. To this testimony of this
great Papist, it is not amiss to adioyne the flat and humble confession of the
Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine; who confesses roundly and peremptorily,
Bellarmine, Lib. 1. de con^cilij^ Cap 19. Tom. 1.
that the popes would never come in person to the councels in the East-church,
because the Emperor would ever sit in the highest place; although the Pope
himself had been there present, in his Pontificalibus. Out of whose grant
three things are cleared; ye Emperor. Gregory did in his time.

CHAP. II. Of the way and means, by which the Popes attained their usurped
primacie.
In the downfall of Popery.
OF the steps of the ladder, by which the Bishops of Rome did clime up unto
their Lordly primacie, I have elsewher discoursed at large. Now I deem it
enough to insinuate in brief, the general means of the accomplishment thereof.

That Romish pontificalitie, and pomp of popery, came up first by beggarly
Canonists, who to advance themselves, flattered the Pope, and gave him more
then princely and royal titles: the popes own dear Doctor a Spanish Friar,
professor of Theology in the famous University of Salmantica, Franciscus a
Victoria, a witness that cannot but carry credit on his back, tells us
roundly without blushing* who after he has rehearsed many Lordly titles, and
more then royal power ascribed to the Pope, adds these express words:
Victor. de potest. Eccles. relect. 1. sect 6. Pra^. 39.
Sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes
rebus and doctrina. Englished thus. But the Glossers and Interpreters of the
Popes law, gave this dominion (and these royal titles) unto the Pope,
themselves being blind Bayards, and beggarly fellows.

Thus writes the Popes learned Doctor, and religious Friar, by whose verdict
it is most apparent to the world, that poverty and ignorance (two gallant
Romish courtiers,) were the beginning of al royal Pope-dom. And no marvel:
for by reason of their poverty, they flattered and sought to please the Pope;
and by reason of their ignorance, they desperately published many things which
they did not understand.

The usual practice of Papists in their Commentaries, Books, and Glosses, has
bin such and so intolerable in wresting the holy Scriptures: as their own
dear brethren and great Doctors, can not for shame deny or conceal the same.
Polidorus Virgilius a famous papist, has these words: Non secus isti
iurisconsulti aliquoties detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac sutores
sordidas solent dentibus extendere pelles. Englished thus. These (popish)
Legists and Canonists, do now and then so wrest and writhe the holy
Scriptures, to that sense which themselves like best, even as Cobblers do gnaw
with their teeth, and stretch out their filthy skins.

Polidore, was a great Papist himself, and consequently, that his testimony
must needs be of great force against the Papists.

viz. of Hostiensis their grand and famous Doctor.

holy Scriptures is most intolerable, and that without the same they cannot
possibly maintain their wicked doctrine.

This is that which Doctor Fisher, the late Bishop of Rochester has freely
confessed, in his answer to the Articles of M. Luther, which he could not in
truth withstand, or gainesay. These are his express words: Roffensis art. 37.
aduers. Luther. pa. 11.
Contendentibus itaque nobiscum haereticis, nos alio subsidio nostram oportet
tueri causam quam scriptura sacrae. Englished thus. Therefore, when Heretics
contend with us, we must defend our cause by other means, then by the holy
Scripture. These are the very express words (I neither add any thing, nor
take any thing away) of their own famous popish bishop, of their own holy
Saint, of their glorious martyr, a learned man in deed: who labored with might
and maine, for the popes usurped sovereignty, and defended the same in the
best manner he was able, and to the uttermost of his skill. And yet for all
that, he has boulted out unawares, and against his will, (such is the force
of truth, which must needs in time prevail) so much in plain terms, as is
sufficient to overthrow all popery for ever; and to cause all people that have
any care of their salvation, to renounce the pope and his abominable doctrine,
to their lives end. For our popish Bishop being put to his best trumpe,
tells us plainly, and without all dissimulation, (his mouth being now opened
by him, who caused Balaams Ass to speak,) that they must not (because
forsooth they cannot,) defend and mantaine their popery by the authority of
the Scripture, but by some other way and means: Mark well for Christ's sake.
Viz. by man's forged inventions, and popish unwritten vanities, which they
term the Churches Traditions.

Now gentle Reader, how can any papist, (who is not given up in Reprobum
sensum, for his just deserts) read such testimonies against popery, freely
confessed and plainly published to the world, and that by the pens of most
learned and renowned papists: even while they bestirre themselves busily, to
defend their pope and his popish doctrine; and for all that continue papists
still, and be carried away headlong into perdition: believing and obeying that
doctrine, which (as themselves confess*) cannot be defended by the holy
Scripture. Me-thinkes, they should be ashamed, to hold and believe that
doctrine: in defense whereof, they can yield no better reason. Alas, alas, how
has the late Romish Church seduced us?

CHAP. III. Of kissing the Popes feet.
TOuching the kissing of the Popes feet, the truth is this, that some Christian
kings and Emperors upon a blind zeal not grounded in knowledge, did humble
themselves to the Bishops of Rome, and did yield up their sovereign rights
unto them, and thereby opened the window to all Antichristian tyranny. For in
short time after, the Romish Bishops became so Lordly and insolent, that they
took roundly upon them to despose the Emperors, to translate their Empires,
and to dispose at their own pleasures, of their royal scepters and regalties.
Yea, to be reverenced, honored, and adored as Gods, and for that end must al
faithful Christians kiss the Popes feet. Here for the better credit of mine
assertion, I will put down the flat testimony of their Saint, Antoninus,
their religious Friar, who was sometime the Arch-byshop of Florence. These are
his express words: Nulli ergo angelo commissa iurisdictio, and cura totius
orbis: sed papae totius mundi iurisdictio and cura commissa est, cum solum vt
nomine mundi importatur terza, sed etiam vt nomine mundi importatur caelum; que
super calum and terram jurisdiction accepit. Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. cap.
5. 1.^4.
Sequitur; vnde papae recipit a fidelibus adorationes, prostrationes, and
oscula pedum, quod non permisit angelus a Iohanne Euangelista sibi fieri.
Englished thus. Therefore the jurisdiction and charge of the whole world, is
committed to none of the Angels: but the jurisdiction and care of the whole
world, is committed to the Pope, not only, as the name of the world does
import the earth, but even as it does also signify Heaven: because he has
received jurisdiction both over Heaven and Earth. Wherefore the Pope receives
of the faithful, adorations, prostrations, and the kissing of his feet; which
thing, the Angel would not suffer John the Evangelist to do unto him. Thus
writes this popish Doctor. For the better understanding of whose discourse, I
note;

Antoninus was not a bare papist, but a man of great authority and high
esteem among the papists; Viz. a canonized Saint, a religious Friar, a
Dominican, and a most reverend Archbishop: and consequently, that whatsoever
he has delivered either touching the pope or popery, must needs be of good
credit and great force against the papists. John to do unto him. Alas, alas,
how has the late Romish Church deceived us?

CHAP. IIII. Of power ascribed to the pope.
The first Paragraph, of his power in general.
CHristus per passionem suam meruit iudiciariam potestatem super omne^
creaturam. Vnde ipse resurgens ait, data est mihi omnis potestas in Caelo and
in terra. Cu^ autem vicarius Christi sit papa, nullus potest seipsum subtrahere
ab obedientia eius de iure: sicut nullus de iure potest se subtrahere ab
obedientia Dei, and sicut recepit Christus a patre ducatum and sceptru^
ecclesiae gentiu^ ex Israel egrediens super omne^ principatu^ and potestate^,
and super omne quodcumque est, vt ei genua cuncta curuentur, sic ipse Petro and
successoribus eius plenissimam potestatem commisit. Englished thus. Christ
merited by his passion iudiciare power over all creatures, wherefore when he
arose from death, he said; all power is given me in heaven and on earth. Now
seeing the Pope is Christ's Vicar, none can lawfully withdraw their obedience
from him; no more then they may withdraw their obedience from God himself. For
as Christ received the Dukedom and Scepter of the Church, over all principate
and power, and over all whatsoever else has being, that al knees do bow unto
him: even so did he commit most full and large power unto Peter and his
Successors, (the Bishops and popes of Rome). Thus writes Antoninus, Antonin.
part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 8. and eius. cap. 7. in fine.
that holy Archbishop and religious Friar.

Augustinus de Ancona, an other religious Friar, in that book which he
dedicated to pope John, the twelft of that name, sings the same song with
Antoninus his popish brother. These are his words; August. de Anc. in summa
page 152.
(papa) tanquam vicarius dei filij coelestis imperatoris, iurisdictione^ habet
vniuersalem super omnia Regna and Imperia. Englished thus. The Pope as he is
the Vicar of the son of God, the heavenly Emperor, has universal
jurisdiction over all Kingdoms and Empires.

Gerson, a famous papist, who was sometime chancelour of Paris, makes
rehearsal of intolerable titles, and power more then royal ascribed to the
pope, and derideth the same: Gerson de potest. eccles. consid. 12. Part. 3.
Sicut non est potestas nisi a Deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel
ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalls, nisi a papa: in cuius foemore scripsit
Christus, Rex regu^, dominus dominantium: de cuius potestate disputare, instar
sacrilegij est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest, cur ita facit? Englished
thus. Like as there is no power but of God, so is there neither any Temporal
nor Ecclesiastical, neither imperial nor regal, but of the Pope: in whose
thigh Christ has written the King of kings, and Lord of Lords: of whose power
to dispute is as mere Sacrilege: to whom none may say, why do thou so?

The pope himself, from his own pen, Gregory the ninth, delivers us this
doctrine: Gregor. 9. libr. 1. decr. tit. 33^ chap. 6.
Ad firmamentum caeli hoc est, vniuersalis ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna
luminaria, id est duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis authoritas,
and regalis potestas. Sequitur; vt quanta est inter solemn and lunam, tanta
inter pontifices and reges differentia cognoscatur. Englished thus. To the
Firmaments of of heaven, that is of the universal Church, God made two lights,
pontifical authority, and power royal: that we may know, there is as much
difference between Popes and Kings, as there is between the Sun and the
Moon.

The Gloss sets down precisely, how far a King is inferior to a pope,
that is to every Bishop of Rome, in these words: Glossa vbi supra.
Restat vt pontificalis dignitas, quadragesies septies sit mayor regali
dignitate. Englished thus. It remains, that the dignity of the pope be
forty times seven times greater, then is the power of the King. Where the
Reader must seriously observe with me, that this Gregory. being himself one
of the Bishops of Rome (who now adays are called popes ( Cat'exochen) lived
1227. years after Christ, Gregory the first, acknowledged himself to be the
Emperors subject, and yielded all loyal obedience unto him. The popish Canons
do so plainly ascribe, divine titles to the pope, that none without blusing can
possibly deny the same. For, in the popes own decretals, I find these express
words: Super cap. 1.
Sic (papa) dicitur habere coeleste arbitrium, and ideo etiam naturam rerum
immutat, substantiam vnius rei applica^do alij: and de nihilo potest aliquid
facere. Englished thus. So the pope is said to have celestial arbitrament, and
therefore does he alter the nature of things, by applying the substantial
parts of one thing to another: and he can make of nothing, something. Glos..
lib. 1. Decretal. tit. 7. cap. 3.
Thus do the papists write of their pope, and he is well pleased therewith.
For without his good pleasure and liking, such doctrine and glosses could not
be current in the Church of Rome. Yea, the Expositors do gather their sense,
even out of the bowels of the text: and this collections are as authentical,
as is the text it self.

Pope Nicholas, as Gratianus tells us, was of the same mind, and in effect
taught the same Doctrine. These are his express words: Gratian did. 22. can.
omnes.
Christus beato Petro aeternae vitae clauigero terreni simul and coelestis
imperij iura commisit. Englished thus. Christ committed to S. Peter, who
bears the keys of eternal life, the right both of earthly and heavenly
empire. Where the gloss ascribes the same power to the pope, in these words:
Gloss. ibid.
Argumentum quod papa habet vtrunque gladium, and spirtiualem and temporalem.
Englished thus. This is an argument, that the pope, has both the swords, as well
the spiritual as the temporal, And in the marginal note, the Reader may find
these express words: Papa habens vtrumque gladiu^, transtulit imperia.
Englished thus. The pope having both swords, translated the Empire. Appendix
fulden^is, apud Ma^t. Polon.
To conclude, pope Boniface the eight, made a flat Constitution and Decree: in
which he affirmed arrogantly, that himself was both Spiritual and Temporal
Lord, of the whole world.

The second Paragraph, of power ascribed to the pope in special.
BArtholomaeus Fumus, a famous Summist, affirms boldly and resolutely, the
popes power to be so exding great, that he is able with his word to deliver
out of purgatory, all the souls that are boiling there in fire. These are his
words: Fumus de Papa, Par. 11.
Papa potest liberare omnes animus purgatorij, etiam si plures essent, si quis
pro eis faceret quod iuberet: peccaret tamen indiscrete consedendo. Englished
thus. The pope could set at liberty all the souls in purgatory, though never
so many, if any would do that for them, which he appoints to be done:
marry, he should sin by his indiscreet pardoning.

Siluester prieras, a learned and famous popish Canonist, sometime Magister
sacripalatij, has these words; S^lu. deindulg.
Sicut potest (papa) liberare a poena peccatorum debita in hoc mundo omnes qui
sunt in mundo, si faciant quod mandat, etia^si essent millies plores quam sunt:
ita liberare potest omnes, qui sunt in purgatorio, si quis pro eis faciat
quodiubet. Englished thus. As the pope can deliver all that are in this world,
from pain due for sin in this world: if they do that which he appoints,
though they were many thousands more then they be, even so can he deliver all
that are in purgatory, if any do that for them which he commands.

Viguerius a famous popish Friar Dominican, Doctor and professor of Thealogie,
proceeds somewhat further then Siluester, and Fumus: auouching it to be
neither inconvenient, nor against Gods justice.

These are his express words; Viguerius de sacram, ordin. in fine.
Nec est inconueniens, quod papa posset purgatorium ^^^cuare. Non enim per hoc
aliquid detraheretur diuinae iustitiae. Englished thus. Neither is it
convenient, that the pope can harrow hell; for that does nothing derogate from
the justice of God.

Aquinas the popish angelical Doctor, (whose Doctrine no papist may reject,
because sundry popes have confirmed the same for authentical,) has these
words: Aquinas in suplem. 9.25. ar. 1.
Christus poterat relaxare, ergo et Paulus potuit, ergo et papa potest, qui non
est minoris potestatis in ecclesia, quam paulus fuit. Englished thus. Christ
could pardon, therefore Paul could also pardon, and therefore the pope can
likewise pardon: as who has no less power and authority in the Church then
Paul himself had. So then, the pope can do as much as Christ, if we believe
popish Doctors, and Doctrine. He can make the deaf to hear, the dumb to
speak, the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the dead to arise to life
again, which I must first see, ere I can believe it: howsoever Aquinas with
his fellow Friars, do write in that behalf, and doubtless, this Doctrine and
this supereminent power ascribed to the pope, is plain diabolical and mere
Antichristian. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church seduced us.

CHAP. V. Of the quality and condition of the Popes pardons, together with the
antiquity thereof.
The first Section of the quality of popish pardons.
SIluester Prieras has these words: Siluester de indulgentiam 33.
qui plenaria^ indulgentiam rite assequutus est si eo instanti moreretur,
euolaret statim in caelum. Englished thus. He that has lawfully gotten a
plenarie pardon, if that man should dye at that instant, he should
incontinently go (...) Aquinas, Fumus, Viguerius, Antoninus, Augustinus de
Aneona, and other papists teach the same Doctrine. But it is needelesse to
allege more authority for this point, seeing (as it is already proved) the
pope has as large power as Christ himself, by the constant doctrine of best
approved popish writers. I will therefore at this present only name some pardons
that have bin granted; the places and times: where and when they were granted;
and the popes that did grant and give the same: referring the reader for a
larger discourse therein, unto my book of Motives.

Auste omnes animae) there the reader shall find in Latin set down in red
letters, that pope John the twelft granted to all them that would say that
prayer following, so many years of pardon, as there have bin bodies buried in
that churchyard since the original thereof. A great reward for a very small
labor: for the prayer contains but ten lines. Before the prayer called ( Aue
vulnus) the reader shall find in latin red letters, that Pope Innocent the
second granted 4000. years of pardon, to every one that should say the same
prayer. This was a greater reward, because the prayer is shorter then the
other. Before the prayer called ( Aue domina) there is set down in red letters,
that whosoever shall say the short prayer following shall enjoy eleven thousand
years of pardon, and withal shall see the blessed Virgin so many days before
his death, as he shall continue years in saying the same prayer. A large and
bountiful reward indeed.

Rome not my self only, but many others, have both seen and read the same.

Rome which is commonly to be sold every where in Rome, (one of which my self
brought from thence, and have it at this hour,) which pamphlet shows many
pardons for many thousands of years, to be granted to many Churches for such
as will but come unto them, and there pray and visit the relikes thereof, some
few I am content to rehearse, for the good of the readers. In the Church of
Saint John Lateran* there are every day granted to all that come thither,
6048. years of pardon: and upon the festival day of Saint. John the
Evangelist. 28. thousand years of pardon, with so many quarantenes, and
plenarie remissions of their sins.

28000. years of pardon.
In the church of Saint Peter in Vaticano are so many years of pardon given, as
no man can number them ( Vi sono indulgentie senza numero) there are pardons
without number.

6048. years of pardon.
In the Church of Saint, Paul there are given every day. 6048. years of pardon,
to all that come thither to pray. Many other like pardons are named in the
foresaid Pamphlet, with the delivery of certain souls out of purgatory. But
these few may be a sufficient pattern, how to give judgment of the rest,
peruse the 13. Chapter of purgatory and note it well for the explication hereof.

The second section, of the antiquity of Popish pardons.
THat the Doctrine of popish pardons is strange and new, and that neither
Christ nor his Apostles ever taught or practiced the same, as the late Romish
Church has used and daily uses them. Syluester a Papist so famous, that he
was not only reputed, but as it were surnamed Absolutus Theologus, has these
words; Syluester de indulgentia.
Indulgentia nobis per scripturam minime innotuit, licet inducatur illud
aposto^i, (si quid donaui vobis) sed nec per dicta antiquorum doctorum, sed
modernorum. Englished thus. The popes pardons (says the popes own dear
Doctor, Sacri Palatij magister.
sometime the master of his sacred palace,) were never known to us by the
scriptures, although some do allege S. Paul for that purpose: neither were
they known by the ancient fathers, but only by late writers.

Antoninus, the popes famous Arch-byshoppe and canonized saint, has the very
same words, and holds the selfsame opinion with Syluester, and he adds
some thing, as it were for an explication of the matter. These are his words:
Antoninus Part. 1. Tit. 10. Cap. 3. in initio
Dicitur tamen Gregorius imposuisse indulgentias septennes, instationibus
Romae, and quia ecclesia hoc facit, and seruat, non est credendum quod erret.
Englished thus. Yet Gregory is reported to have granted seven years pardons,
when the stations were kept at Rome. And because the Church uses to practice
this kind of pardoning, we may not think that it erreth therein. Or as
Syluester says: Credendum est ita esse; we must believe that it is so. Petrus
Lombardus, sometime the Bishop of Paris, surnamed magister sententiarum,
because with great diligence he collected into one volume all worthy sentences
of the ancient Fathers, makes no mention at all, of popish pardons, as which
he could not find in any of the holy Fathers, notwithstanding his painful
industry employed in that kind of exercise. And yet this master Lombard the
reverend popish Bishop, (whose four books of sentences are publicly read in
the popish schools of Divinity) lived in the year of our savior, 1163.
Antoninus and Syluester truly write, the old Fathers were not acquainted with
any such thing. The like may be said of S. Cyprian, S. Austen, S. Hierome, S.
Nazianzene, and others of antiquity. For which cause Durandus Caietanus, and
sundry other schoolmen, affirm the popes manner of pardoning, to be a new
thing in the Church of God. Neither can Dominicus Soto deny the same indeed:
albeit he busieth himself more then a little, in the defense thereof. Yea, the
original of popish pardoning is so very young, as their popish martyr, and
reverend Bishop Master Fisher, in his answer to Master Luthers articles, was
enforced to admit the newness and young age of the same, and to yield this
mighty and strong reason in defense thereof: viz. that purgatory was not so
well known at that time to the Church, as it is now adays. Which saying I
ween, is true indeed: because purgatory and pardons were not heard of in old
time, and now only made known by vain, gross, and sensual imaginations. But
hereof I have wr^^tten else where more at large, In my book of moti^^s.
preamble.
to which place I refer the reader for his better satisfaction.

The 3. section, of the valuation of popish pardons.
COncerning the virtue and efficacy of the popes pardons: the matter is so
intricate, doubtful, and uncertain, and that even amongst the greatest and
best learned popish Doctors: Angelus de indulgentia.
as themselves are therein at their wits end, and cannot tell in the world what
to say or think thereof, Angelus de Clauasio a famous popish Canonist and
religious Friar, recites six several and dissonant opinions, touching this
question of pardons. And after he has confuted them all, he sets down the
seventh for his own and the best, which as he says, is sound and true. Ios.
Angl. in 4. Par. 2. Page 15.
It is therefore no doubt very svbstantiall, seeing we must esteem our Friar
to be a man of credit, especially, for that Iesephus Angles reciting in like
manner seven several opinions of his popish fellows, concludes in effect as
Angelus did before him.



ye pain, which gods justice appointed to be imposed brook it: viz. that the
Pope is bound to do penance, for that person whom he pardons.







viz, that if the pardons contain an hundred thousand years, then the party
obtaining such pardons at the popes hands, must have remission of so many
years. Thus gentle reader, stands the doctrine of popish pardons, even among
the greatest Doctors of that faction. The bare rehearsal of these opinions,
with the variety and uncertainty employed therein, is a most sufficient
confutation of the same.

In this Chapter, these special points are duly to be remembered. Petrus
Lombardus, (who lived 1163. after Christ's glorious ascension into heaven,) the
popes pardons were unknown unto the world. See more in my book^ of
Alas, alas, how has the Church of Rome seduced us.

CHAP. VI. Of the Popes dispensations.
I Have written else where at large, In the downfall of Popery
of the popes impious and abominable dispensations; where I have proved
perspicuously out of his own dear Doctors, that he has dissolved holy
matrimony by his wicked dispensations, and has licenced the brother to marry
his own sister. It shall here be enough to add some memorable specialitie,
for the edification of the thankful reader.

Franciscus a Victoria that learned popish Friar, and professor of Divinity in
Salmantica, has these express words: Vict, de potest. papae and council.
relect. 4. P. 139.
Videmus quotidie a romana curia tam largas, imo omnino tam dissolutas
dispensationes profectas, vt orbis far non possit, non solum in scandalum
pusillorum sed maiorum. Englished thus. We see daily so large, yea altogether
so dissolute dispensations come from the Church of Rome, that the world is not
able to endure it; neither does that tend only to the scandal of the weak,
but even of those also who are strong and perfect.

The same Doctor in another place, has these words; Victor. vbi supra. page
151.
paulatim ad hanc intemperantiam dispensationum deuentum est, and hunc talem
statum, vbi nec mala nostra, nec remedia pati possumus, and ideo necesse est
aliam rationem excogitare ad conseruandas leges, da mihi Clementes, Linos,
Syluestros, and omnia per^ mittam arbitrio eorum, sed vt nihil grauius dicatur
in recentiores pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis illis inferiores.
Englished thus. By little and little we are brought to these inordinate
dispensations, and to this so miserable a state, where we are neither able to
endure our own griefs, nor yet remedies designed for the same, and therefore
must we perforce invent some other way, for conservation of the laws. Give me
Clements, Lives Syluesters, and I will commit all things to their charge and
arbitrament. Lo popery crept in by little, and little.
But to use no rougher words against these latter Popes: they are doubtless
inferior to Popes of old time, by many degrees. I could allege many other
testimonies: but this Victoria, being of great credit among the Papists, is a
most sufficient witness in their own proceedings. See the 12. Chapter, and
note it well
Alas, alas, how has the late romish Church abused us.

CHAP. VII. Of Popish auricular confession.
COncerning this subject, I have written so sufficiently thereof else where: In
the suru^y of Popery.
as no Papist now for many years, durst frame any answer thereunto. There I
have proved by the verdict of best approved papists; that auricular confession
was no article of popish faith, for the space of 1215. years: And I have there
in like manner, answered to all objections which possibly can be made in defense
thereof as no papist will ever adventure to reply upon the same during my life.
I have reason thus to write; because I have often challenged all English
Jesuits, Seminaries, and Iesuited papists, as well jointly as severally, to
answer either all or some one of my books: and yet to this day, I can receive
Ne gry quidem at their hands. I compiled a very little pamphlet, in way of
merry disport and honest christian recreation, terming it the hunting of the
Romish fox: concerning which book, (though a small valuome in quantity,) not
one Jesuit, Seminary, or Iesuited papist, ever durst hitherto, or dares this
day, publish any answer to the view of the world. This being so, I deem it
now enough to propose before the eyes of the reader, how great learned papists
do esteem their auricular confession.

Beatus Rhenanus, a man of great credit with the papists, has these memorable
words: Thomas Aquinas, and Scotus homines nimium arguti, confessionem hodie
talem reddiderunt, vt Johannes ille Geilerius granis ac sanctus Theologus, qui
tot annis Argentorati concionatus est, apud amicos suos saepe testatus fit,
iuxta eroum Deuteroseis impossible esse confiteri. Englished thus. Rhenan. in
annotat ad lib. Tert. de pae^^t.
Thomas Aquinas, and Scotus, men to much delighted with subtilties, have
brought Confesson this day to such a pass: that Ihoannes Geilerius, that
famous, grave, and holy Divine, who preached many years at Argenteratum, said
many a time unto his friends, that it was impossible for a man to make his
Confession, according to their traditions.

Out of these words, I observe these golden Lessons: Christ's holy Gospel must
have the upper hand. Alas, alas, who will not defy Popery.
The papists teach us, to hold for an Article of our belief, that we are bound
upon pain of damnation, to make our Confessions as the popes Laws and Cannons
do prescribe. Viz. as Aquinas and Scotus, have set down the same. For sundry
popes have authorized the doctrine of Aquinas, and confirmed the same for
authentical. And for all that, Geilerius a papist himself, a great Divine, and
a famous preacher, complained often to his dear friends, that no man could
possibly perform the same.

Now then, since on the one side, the popish confession must be made under
pain of damnation: and since on the otherside none possibly can make the same,
as is required by popish ca^nons; it follows of necessity by popish
doctrine, that all papists must be damned eternally. God of his mercy, convert
all papists to the truth.
O miserable popery, confounded and condemned by thine own Doctors dear; thy
self o popery, has bewrayed thy treachery to the world. It is to us Gods
great mercy, for the merits of Christ Jesus; but to all papists his just
judgment* for the punishment of their sins. If you will in time repent and
embrace his holy gospel, his mercy is open to you all; but if you will still
continue (o papists,) in your wilful obstinacy; then doubtless, God will
revenge the blood of his innocents at your hands: for with your beggarly
unwritten traditions* you devour the souls of many thousa^ds

Many among the papists dare not utter their minds.
Thirdly, that many living among papists, do externally obey the popish law;
who for all that do greatly detest in their hearts, a great part of their late
hatched Romish religion. This is evident, by the secret complaint of this
learned man Geilerius; who told that to his trusty friends, which he durst not
disclose to others, and Beatus Rhenannus that famous papist, was of the same
mind; or else doubtless he would not have approved the complaint of Geilerius.
Alas, alas, how has the late Romish church bewitched us.

CHAP. VIII. Of the marriage of Priests.
I Have written so sufficiently of this subject else where, In the suruay of
popery.
as no papists either have made, can make, or ever will make any answer
thereunto. I will only for the present, set down the judgment of three or
four famous Papists, referring the reader for the exact decision thereof, unto
my book of survey. The famous papist, Cardinal Panormitanus, gives so worthy
a testimony of this controversy, as if it be well marked, it will confound all
papists in the world, These are his words Panormit* de cler. coniugal. cap. cum
olim.
Continentia non est in clericis secularibus, de substantia ordinis, nec de
iure diuino; quia alias graeci peccarent, nec excusaret eos consuetudo:
sequitur; and non solum credo potestatem inesse ecclesia hoc condendi, sed
credo pro bono and salute esse animarum, quod esset salubre statutum, vt
volentes possint contrahere; quia experientia docente, contrarius prorsus
effectus sequiturexilla lege continentiae, cum hodie non viuant spiritualiter,
nec sunt mundi, sed maculantur illicito coitu cum eorum grauissimo peccato, vbi
cum propria vxore esset castistas. Englished thus. Continency in secular
priests, is not of the substance of their orders, nor of the law divine;
because otherwise the Greeks should sin, and their custom could not excuse
them. And I do not only believe, that the church can make such a law: but I
also believe, that such a law were for the good and for the salvation of men's
souls, that such as would, might marry; because experience teaches, that a
contrary effect follows of that law of continency, seeing this day they live
nor spiritually, neither are they clean, but polluted in unlawful copulation
with their most grievous sin, albeit they might live chastely with their own
wives.

Out of this notable discourse of Panormitanus, (who was their renouned
canonist, their venerable Abbot, their reverend Arch-Byshop, and their
honerable Cardinal, for he had all these titles and degrees,) I observe these
most worthy and memorable documents.

Out of which observations, I infer this golden and most memorable
corollarie: Viz* That the prohibition of Priests marriage is against Gods law,
against the health and salvation of men's souls, and against the good of the
Common wealth.

Polidorus another dear friend of popish Religion, shall tell the papists what
he thinks of the Pope, touching the prohibition of priests marriage. Thus does
he write: Polidorus lib. 5. cap. 4.
Illud tamen dixerim tantum abfuisse vt ista coacta castitas illa^ coniugalem
vicerit, vt etiam nullius delicti crimen maius ordini dedecus, plus mali
religioni, plus doloris omnibus bonis impresserit, inusserit at ulerit, quam
sacerdotum libidinis labes: proinde forsita^ tam e republica christiana quam ex
ordinis vsu esset, vt tandem aliquando ius publici matrimonij sacerdotibus
restitueretur. Quod illi sine infamia sancte potius colerent, quam se
spurcissime ^iuscemodi naturae vitio turpificarent. Englished thus. Yet this I
will say, that this enforced chastity (of priests) was so far from excelling
chastity in wedlock, as no crime whatsoever, has brought greater shame to
priesthood, more harm to Religion, more grief to all good men, then the
unchaste life of Priests. Therefore, perhaps it were no less necessary for
the public weal of Christendom, then for the order of Priesthood, that once
again Priests might marry publicly, that so they might live honestly* and
without shame, and not pollute themselves most filthily. Thus writes M.
Polidore, who being an Italian, knew best the Romish fashion. Out of whose
words, I note these matteriall points.

Popery is the new Religion.
and consequently, that the late Romish religion, (which simple people term the
old Religion) is a false, new, wicked, and counterfeit religion, against Gods
laws, and the ancient custom of the Church. people. Thirdly, that it is
expedient both for the Church and for the common weal: that the liberty to
marry may be again restored unto priests, which assertion, if it did not
proceed from the pen of a famous papist, no papist would give credit
thereunto. But for a most delicate postpast, I will add the flat and
resolute judgment, of a most famous and learned pope; and the same shall be
guarded with the testimony of the popes own decrees. Pope Pius the second of
that name, (who before his popedom was named Aeneas Syluius, a very learned
man and famous writer) did deliver his opinion in this manner; Platina in vita
Pij. 2. page 342.
Indoctum Episcopum asino comparandum: corpora malos medicos, animas imperitos
sacerdotes occidere, vagum monachum diaboli mancipium esse. Virtutes Clerum
ditasse, vitia pauperem facere sacerdotibus magna ratione s^blatas nuptias,
maiori restituendas videri. Englished thus. He used to say, that a Bishop
without learning was like unto an Ass: (and consequently, that there are many
Asses in the popish Churches.) That evil physicians did kill men's bodies, and
ignorant priests their souls. That a vagarant Moncke was the devils slave
and bondeman. That virtues had enriched the Clergy, (in times past:) but that
vices (of late days) do make it poor. That there was great reason to debar
priests of marriage, but greater reason to restore marriage again unto them.

Thus writes this Pope; a learned man indeed. Whose testimony, (seeing he
was a most famous pope,) must needs be of highest credit with all papists in
the world. He shows plainly, nay he affirms absolutely; that there was
in his time greater cause to restore marriage to the Clergy, then ever there
was to debar them from the same. What that cause was in particular, we have
heard already out of Polydore and Panormitane: but Gratianus the compyler and
collector of the popes Decrees into one volume, shall give the vp-shotte of
this game. ^ist. 56. can. Osius.
These are the express words of pope Damasus; Osius the pope, was the son of
Stephanus the Subdeacon. Bonifacius the pope, was the son of Iocundus the
priest, De titula faciolae. Agapitus the pope, was the son of Gordianus the
priest. Theodorus the pope, was the son of Theodorus the Bishop. Syluerius
the pope, was the son of Syluerius the Bishop of Rome. Densdedit the pope,
was the son of Iocundus the priest. Foelix the third, a Roman borne, was the
son of Foelix the priest: and Gelasus the pope, was the son of Valerius the
Bishop: and after this grave testimony, these express words follow
immediately, Quam plures etiam alij inveniuntur qui de sacerdotibus nati
apostolicae sedi praefuerunt. Englished thus. There are also found many others,
who being the sons of Priests, have ruled the Apostolic seat, or Church of
Rome. Well, what says the popish gloss, to this Canon of pope Damasus? Truly
it grants freely, that all these aforenamed popes were bastards, and it
adds a very sovereign remedy in these golden words; Tollitur. n. vicium per
successionem. For the fault is taken away by sucession: and albeit I grant with
S. Hieromie, that the fault of bastardie is wholly in the parents, and not
hurtful to the soul of the child that lives virtuously; yet pope Vrbanus
answers after an other manner. His words are these: Did. 56. can.
caenomanem se^.
Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos pontifices legantur esse promoti, non
sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de legitimis coniugijs nati: quae
sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem vbique licita erant, and in orientali ecclesia
vsque hodie eis licere probantur. Englished thus. When therefore we read, that
the sons of priests are made popes, we must not understand bastards, but
sons borne in honest marriages, which were every where lawful for priests,
before the (late) prohibition, and are also this day, holden for lawful in the
East Church. But of this point, see more at large else where. In the Survey of
Popery*
To this I ca^ not but add mine own knowledge; touching that which I both
heard and saw, while I was at Rome. Viz. That pope Gregory the 13. of that
name, had a proper man to his son, whom he made the Captain of his Castle
Pont-angelo, and afterward purchased a Barronrie for him, as report was made
abroad. My self demanded of a Jesuit a Roman borne, if the pope had been
married before his priesthood, because he had a son? He answered smiling,
that he could not so affirm; but (quoth he,) he was pope undoubtedly, before
he was known to have a son, as if he had said; I neither dare say all I
think, neither all I know. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church
deceived us.

CHAP. IX. Of Popish idolatrous unwritten Traditions.
POpish unwritten Traditions, has brought flat Idolatry into the Church;
teaching to adore them as saints, and Gods friends, who were known afterward to
be Heretics, and professed enemies to God and his Church. This to be so,
their own dear friend and brother Plaetina, will tell them: Platina in vita
Bonifacij octaui.
for he affirms in plain terms; that the dead corpse of one Hermannus, was
worshipped for a saints relic at Ferrara, the space of 2. years together: who
for all that was an Heretic, as the same Platina avouches. Appendix
fuldensis, (which is added to the chronicle of Martinus Polonus) tells us,
that inquisitores haereticae prauitatis, the master of the popish Inquisition,
caused the corpse of the said Hermannus to be taken out of the grave, and to
be burnt, as the corpse of a damned Heretic: where three special things are
to be remembered, and seriously observed. First, that popish unwritten
traditions, are most fallible and uncertain. Downe-fall of Popery. For this
point, peruse the downfall of popery.
Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church seduced us.

CHAP. X. Of the Popes manners.
POpe Christopher came naughtily to his pope-dome, and lost it as naughtily.
For before the seventh month expired fully, he was deprived of his pontifical
dignity, and enforced to become a monk, the sole and only refuge of al
distressed persons. Thus writes Platina and Carranza contesteth the same to be
the truth. Platina in vita Christo. 1. Carranza in summa, Fol. 354.


Pope Boniface the 7. and pope Siluester the 2. did both aspire to their
popedomes, by Necromancie and diabolical means. Siluester the 3. attained his
pope-dome by sedition; and Damasus the 2. was made pope by violent means,
without consent either of the Clergy, or of the people. This to be so, both
Platina and Carranza, two famous popish writers, will contest with me. Yea,
Platina adds, that pope-dome was now brought to that pass, that who so could
be ye chief in bribes and ambition, (not in holy life and doctrine,) he only
should have the degree of honor, and good men should be rejected. Platina in
vita Syluest. 3.


Gregory the first, was by sedition thrust out of his throne, and pope John
the 18. by tyranny occupied the pope-dome. So say both Platina and Carranza.
Carranza vbi super. fol. 355 Platina in vita. ^oan. 18.
Yea Platina adds; that pope John, was a theife and a robber, and entered not
into his pope-dome lawfully.

Pope Stephanus the sixth persecuted the very name of Formosus, disanulled, and
condemned all the orders which he had given. Martin, Polonus, an 898.
Pope Romanus did abrogate all the acts of Pope Stephanus. Pope Sergius the
third, did persecute the name of Formosus, whose body after it was interred he
commanded to be taken up, and to be beheaded. Carranza in ^u^ma, fol. 354. and
Fol. 355.
Pope John the 13. was more addicted to hunting, then he was unto prayer; and
many other unworthy things, are reported of that Pope. This is the ce^sure of
Bartholomaeus, Carranza, a lear- Thomst and a Dominican Friar; and therefore
has he not said more against the popes of Rome (whose vassal he was) then the
very truth it self (which must in time prevail) did enforce him to utter and
disclose.

Platina affirms no less against these Popes, then his Brother Carranza has
done. Platina in uita Romans 1. and Ser. 3.
He says plainly* that they sought nothing but ambition and pleasure, and to
extinguish the dignity of their ancestors.

The popes own decrees tell us, that though the pope be never so wicked,
though he carry thousa^ds of souls with himself headlong into Hell, yet may
no man take upon him to judge the pope, unless he be an Heretic. Did. 40.
cap. si Papa.
And what is the reason hereof, I pray you? It is alleged already out of
Gerson their own dear Doctor, who is ashamed of popish dealing in that
behalf. Super. cap. 4. ex Gersone.
viz. Because forsooth Christ has written in his thigh, (the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, to whom no man may say, why do thou so) but how the pope
may be judged, I have else where disputed more at large. In the anatomy of
Popish tyranny.
To which treatise I refer the gentle reader, as well for his better
satisfaction how the pope may be judged, as concerning his double person, his
errors personal and judicial, and other things coincident.

Pope John the twelfth, was made pope by violent means: For his father
Albericus being a man of great power and might in the city, enforced the
nobles to take an oath, that after the death of pope Agapitus, they would
promote his son Octauianus to the popedom. Which oath was accomplished, and
he was named John. He was a great hunter, and a man of licentious life. He kept
women openly, to the notorious scandal of the Church: in so much that some of
the Cardinals wrote to Otto king of the Saxons, to come and besiege Rome, and
so to redress the licentious dealing of the pope. Martin. Polon^ an. 959
Antonin. part. 3. Tit. 22. cap. 7. in ^ine.
Which the pope perceiving, commanded that Cardinals nose to be cut off, that
gave the counsel; and the Cardinals hand to be cut off, that wrote the letter.

Pope Syluester the second was first a Monk, a Frenchman borne Gilbertus by
name, he promised homage to the devil, so long as he performed and
accomplished his desires; and that in the end, the devil should have both his
body and soul. Martin. Polon an. 1007. and. Platina in eius vita.
This Syluester being very ambitious, did so often express his desire to the
devil, as he made homage unto him. He was first made Arch-byshop of Rhemes,
then of Rauennas, at the length pope of Rome: for the devil knowing his
ambitious mind, thought good to bring him to honor by degrees. Note well this
point.
Being made pope, he must needs know of the devil, how long he should live
in his pontifical glory: the devil answered, that he should live l^ng, if
he said not mass in Jerusalem. The pope receiving this answer, was a very
joyful man; hoping to be so far from death, as he was far in mind and
purpose, from saying Mass in Jerusalem: as who thought never to go so far
a journey, much less to say Mass there. Well, it so chanced, that in Lent
the pope said Mass in the Church Sanctae crucis, which they call in
Jerusalem, my self know the place. It seems that the pope infatuated with
pride and honor, had quite forgot the name: otherwise doubtless, he would
never have celebrated there: while the pope was at Mass, he heard a great
noise of devils, and so both remembered the place, and his death to be at hand.
Wherefore he wept (although before most wicked) disclosing his offense to all
the company, and nothing doubting of Gods mercy: withal he commanded to cut
away from his body, all the members with which he had done sacrifice to the
devil. Thus writ two famous papists, Martinus Polonus, and Baptista Platina;
whereof the one was an Arch-byshoppe, and the popes dear Paenitentiarie: and
the other, his Abbreuiator Apostolicus. So as their testimonies must needs be
of credit, especially amongst the papists. Among the rest, Platina has these
express words; Plati in vita, 2. Syluestri, page 161.
Primo quidem archiepiscopum Rem^nsem, inde Rauennatem adeptus pontificatum
postremo maiore conatu adiuuante diabolo consecutus est: hac tamen lege, vt
post mortem totus illius esset, cuius frandibus tantam dignitatem adeptus erat.
Englished thus. First he was the Arch-byshoppe of Rhemes, then the Arch-byshop
of Rauennas: and last of all by the help of the devil, he was made the pope
and Bishop of Rome; but upon this condition, that after his death, he should
be wholly his, by whole fraud he had attained so great a dignity. This is a
most worthy history, and for the berter credit thereof, (because papists use
to deny all things that make against them, I assure thee (gentle Reader) that
not only the two famous papists before named, Martinus and Platina, do so
affirm: but (which is much more to be admired,) Johannes Nanclerus a famous
popish Chronographer and late writer, does boldly and constantly avouch the
very same. Nanclerus, an 998. page 742.


Pope Benedict the eight was seen after his death, as it were corporally
ryding upon a black horse: the bishop that saw him, spoke thus unto him, Art
not thou pope Benedict, whom we know to be lately dead? Martin, Polon. an.
1020. Platina in vita illius.
I am says he, that unfortunate Benedict. But how is it with thee o father,
says the Bishop? I am now in great torment, says the pope, and therefore wuld
I have some money to be given to the poor, because all that I gave to the poor
before, was gotten by robbery and extortion.

Pope Boniface the seventh, robbed Saint Peter's Church of all the treasure and
precious things therein, (which doubtless was of exceeding great value,) and
then fled to Constantinople at length, he returned to Rome with a great sum
of money; and when he could not prevail, he plucked out a Cardinal Deacons
eyes. Here note by the way, that some Cardinals are Deacons, some Priests, some
Bishops: yet he that is but a Deacon, is of greater authority then any
Bishop or Arch-byshop whosoever in the Popish seat.

Pope Boniface the eight shall sound the Trumpet for all the rest: who made a
constitution and flat decree, in which he called himself Lord spiritual,
and Lord temporal of the whole world. Appendix fuldensis.
Whereupon he required Philip the French king, to acknowledge that he held his
kingdom of him. Which thing when the christian king refused to do, the cursed
pope took upon him to give his kingdom to the Emperor of Rome. Of this pope,
thus write his dear Vassals, Platina and Carranza, Carranza, fol. 369.
Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt lupus, mortuus est vt canis. Englished thus.
He entered as a Fox, he reigned as a Wolf, he dyed as a dog. Alas, alas, how
has the late Romish Church bewitched us.

CHAP. XI. Of the Popes bloody tyranny.
IT were enough for the manifestation of this Chapter, to ponder well the
contents of the Chapter next before going. But something I have thought meet to
be added thereunto, for the better instruction of the indifferent and well
affected reader. John Husse a Bohemian borne, a famous, eloquent, and very
learned man, came to the council holden at Constance: there to defend the
Doctrine, which he had preached against the late vpstart Romish religion. The
council required of Vuenceslaus the king of Bohemia, that he would send
master Hus unto them. The king acquainting master Hus with their request,
found him very willing, to undergo the journey: by reason of the great
confidence which he had in the truth of his cause, nevertheless the wise,
careful, and prudent king Vuenceslaus, for the better security of his safe
going and coming home again, procured him the Saluum conductum and free
pasport, of the Emperor Sigismundus. Well, one Hieronimus of Praga, a famous
city in Bohemia, an other most eloquent and learned man, accompanied only
with one clarke, came voluntarily unto the said council of Constance: Where
after much disputation, when both the said virtuous and reverend men, remained
constant in the doctrine of truth and Christ's Gospel, and would in no case
yield unto the erroneous and superstitious Romish religion: the council
decreed most cruelly and tyrannically, (notwithstanding the free Charter, the
Letters Patents, free pasport, or safe conduct of the Emperor,) that master
Hus should be burnt with fire and faggot, which Decree was with all speed
effected accordingly. But master Hierome of Praga remained after that burning,
a long time in prison. And at the length, when they found him most constant in
the truth, and in nothing flexible to their humors, their charity was so
great, that they decreed him to be burnt in the same manner. The papists after
their wonted manner, will perhaps deny this to be so: but assure thy self
(gentle reader) that all the papists in Europe shall never be able to touch me,
for any untrue report, assertion, or relation made against them, in any one of
all the books which I have written. If the Papists could have touched me, they
would not so long have been silent in that behalf.
The reader therefore may boldly give credit, to every thing that I have
reported of them: not only in this treatise now in hand, but in all the rest
which I have written. I thank God, I make a conscience to belie the Devil:
and consequently, it is not my meaning, to publish any untruth against any man.
Johannes Nanclerus a very famous popish Historiographer, after he has made
mention of the Emperors saluus conductus a free Charter, (as I have already
related,) adds these express words; Nanclerus an. 1415 page 1045.
Lata est in consessu patrum aduersus pertinaces sententia, cremandos esse, qui
doctrinam ecclesiae respuerent; condemnataque simul est haeresis Wicleff. Prior
itaque Johannes Hus combustus est, sexta feria post festum Vdalrici: Hieronimus
diu post in vinculis habitus* cum resipiscere nollet, pari supplicio affectus,
sabbatho ante exaltationem S. crucis, Anno. 1415. pertulerunt ambo constanti
animo necem and quasi ad epulas invitati, ad incendium properabant* nullam
emittentes vocem, quae miseri animi posset facere indicium: vbi ardere
caeperunt, hymnum cecinere, quem vix fl^mma and fragor ignis intercipere potuit
cineres exustorum ne raperentur a Bohemis in lacum proiecti sunt discipuli vero
eorum ex eo solo terram abstulere in qua ignis fuit, eamque veluti sacram secum
attulere in patriam, Johannes ac Hieronimus apud Bohemos martyrum honores
meruerunt, nec minores quam Petrus and Paulus apud Romanos. Englished thus.
Sentence was given in the assembly of the fathers against the obstinate, that
they should be burnt, who refused the doctrine of the church; and withal, the
heresy of Wiclif was condemned. First therefore John Hus was burnt, upon the
six ferie after the feast of Vdabricus. Hierome being kept in prison a long
time after, when he would not recant, was burnt in like manner, on the Saboath
before the exaltatio^ of the holy cross, in the year of our Lord, 1415. they
both suffered death with a constant and stout courage, they made have to the
fire, as though they had been invited unto a banquet; they uttered not a word,
which could give any sign of a sorrowful heart. When they began to burn, they
sang an hymn: which the flame and noise of the fire, was scarce able to stint,
when their corpse were burnt, their ashes were cast into a lake, least their
countyemen the Bohemians should carry them away, their Disciples took away the
earth (though the ashes were gone,) where the fire was made* and carried the
same with them into their country, as an holy relic. John and Hierome
deserved no less honor of martyrs with the Bohemians, then Peter and Paul
with the Romans. Thus writes Nanclerus. Out of whose words, I observe sundry
very memorable points of Doctrine: wishing the reader to ponder them seriously,
for his godly instruction and Christian edification. Nanclerus was a great
papist, highly renowned in the church of Rome; and consequently, that he will
testify no more against the Papists, then the truth it self does extort from
his pen. Hus to the fire: albeit he had the Emperors free pasport and safe
conduct, freely to go, and freely to return. Hieronimus de Praga, came boldly
of his own accord unto the council: and they stoutly defended the truth,
maugre the malice of the pope and all his popish vassals. Hus could not
terrify Master Hierome of Praga, nor make him deny the truth of Christ's
Gospel. Husse and Master Hieronimus de Praga, went as merrily and as joyfully
to the fire to be burnt, as if they had been invited to a royal banquet.
John Hus and Hierome of Praga) were no less honored for martyrs in Bohemia,
then Peter and Paul were in Rome. Yea, their death was so precious with God,
and so honorable with the godly in their country: that mauger the Pope and all
his Romish tyranny, the Gospel has ever since their burning continued there:
which is for the space almost of two hundred years, even within the kingdom
and dominion of that Empire, a thing impossible to be done by man, if God did
not support the same.

The like cruelty was extended upon the body and bones of Master Bucer, that
holy man, profound Doctor, and stout champion of Gods eternal truth. For after
the blessed man had been dead, and a long time covered with earth in his
grave: his body was taken up, fast bound with an iron chain to a stake, and
burnt with a great fire upon the market day in open place. At Cambridge in the
days of Cardinal poole A* D, 1556.
Insomuch, that some of the market-folkes, when they perceived the wonderful
affairs in hand, said merrily one to an other, what need is there of iron
chains and Armed men, against dead bodies that have been a long time in the
grave? for they can neither resist, nor yet fly away, but the late popes are
so bent to brutish cruelty, that the like tyranny has been by one Pope to an
other. For pope Sergius the third, caused the corpse of pope Formosus, (who now
had been dead almost ten years,) to be taken out of his tomb, and to be
set in a chair with the pontifical attire upon him, (O brave gallant!) and
that done, he commanded his head to be cut off, and to be cast into the
river Tyber. He disanulled the acts and orders given by pope Formosus,
insomuch as all were enforced to take orders again, (O holy romish priesthood!
o indelible characer) who had bin ordered by pope Formosus. And all this was
done forsooth, because Formosus had kept this Sergius from the Pope-dome. Thus
write Martinus Polonus, and Baptista Platina, two famous popish doctors:
whereof the one was the popes Poenitentiarius, and the other, his Abbreuiator
Apostolicus. Thus much for a taste, of popish more then savage tyranny: who so
lists to know more thereof, may peruse my book of Survey. What a thing is
this? we believe many of us, that the popes are Christ's Vicars upon earth, and
yet we see they are most cruel tyrants, even the catch-poles, and bond-slaues
of the master Devil of hell. What shall I say of reverend Cranmer, grave
Latimer, learned Ridley, zealous Bradford, and of 500. more, most worthy men,
who in the year 1555. were burnt with fire and faggots for the testimony of
Christ's Gospel? Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church bewitched us.

CHAP. XII. Of the abomination of popish proceeding.
THe villainy and abomination, wherewith the popes Religion is underpropped
and maintained, is such and so notorious: that the truth it self has enforced
the popes own dearest vassals, to declame in printed books, against the same.
The famous popish canonist Nauarrus, has these express words: Nauar. de
inditijs notab. 3^ P. 275.
papa potest despensare cum monacho iam professo, vt contrahat Matrimonium: imo
de facto multi papae dispensarunt, consentit ipse Caietanus, Antoninus, and
Paludanus. Englished thus. The pope may dispense with a Monk already
professed, that he may marry: for many popes have De facto, so dispensed.
Caietanus, Antoninus, and Paludanus, are of the same opinion.

Franciscus a Victoria the popish famous Schooleman, and religious Friar,
lamenteth the popes dealing, but dares not plainly utter his mind. Thus does
he write: Vict de potest. papae, relect. 4. ad 3. arg.
Multi tenent, quod papa non potest dispensare in votis, quia dispensatio
proprie est relaxatio iuris: vnde cum sit de iure diuino, dispensatio erit
iuris diuini relaxatio, quo^ sane ad papam non spectat: and vtinam haec opinio
non sit vera. Englished thus. Many hold, that the Pope cannot properly dispense
in vows, because dispensation properly is the relaxation of the Law: wherefore
seeing a vow is of the law divine, dispensation must also be remission of the
law divine: which thing doubtless, belongs not to the pope: and would to God
this opinion were not true. Lo, this religious Friar is so zealously affected,
and to careful of his popes credit: that he wishes the opinion were not true,
because it controwleth the popes abominable dealing.

The popes famous Canonist, and most reverend Archbishop Covarruvias,
delivers the case in most plain terms, and blushed no whit thereat. These
are his express words; Covarruvias tom. 1. cap. 20. par. 11. in med. ^ol. 1.
Nec me latet D. Thomam praeuia maxima deliberatione asserere, Romans pontificem
non posse propria dispensatione continentiae solemn votum monachorum tollere:
and paulo post, oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere; ne qua passim fiant,
evertantur omnino. Englished thus. Neither am I ignorant, that Saint Thomas
affirms after exceeding great deliberation, that the Bishop of Rome, can not
by his own proper dispensation, take away from Monks their solemn vow of
chastity. This notwithstanding, the former opinion must be defended; least
those things which are usually done by the pope in every place, be overthrown
and turned up side down.

The popes doings must be defended.
Thus writes this famous papist. Out of whose words, I note many very
profitable Lessons, for the benefit of the thankful Reader.

popes authority: this is a point of great consequence.

Aquinas is one; (whose Doctrine sundry Popes have confirmed,) do roundly
controwle the Popes usurped authority.







Aquinas, (which sundry popes have approved) confuteth the popes Religion. So
then, the popes doings must needs be defended, because otherwise popery can
not stand.

Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Religion seduced us?

CHAP. XIII. Of popish false forged purgatory.
COncerning this point of doctrine (genle Reader) whosoever shall mark
attentively, what I shall sincerely (God willing) deliver even from the pen of
a famous popish writer, M. Doctor Fisher, late Bishop of Rochester, about 22.
Miles distant from London: can not doubtless but have, bear, and conceive, in
everlasting hatred, alienation of mind, and resolute detestation, not only
against popish purgatory, but also against all the rest of late hatched popish
doctrine. These therefore are the express words of this famous popish writer.
Roffensis, contra assert. Luther. art. 18. prope initium.
Sed and graecis ad hunc vsque diem, non est creditum purgatorium esse. Legate
qui velit Graecorum veterum commentarios, and nullum quantum opinor, aut quam
rarissimum de purgatori^ sermonem inveniet. Sed neque latini simul omnes, at
sensim huius rei veritate^ conceperu^t: sequitur; non absque maxima sancti
spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod post tot annorum curricula purgatorij
fides, and indulgentiarum vsus ab orthodoxis generatim sit receptus: quamdiu
nulla fuerat de purgatorio cura, nemo quaesiuit indulgentias. Nam ex illo
pendet omnis indulgentiarum existimatio: si tollas purgatorium, quorsum
indulgentijs opus erit? his. n* si nullum fuerit purgatoriu^ nihil indigebimus:
contemplantes igitur aliquandiu purgatorium incognitum fuisse, deinde,
quibusdam pedetentim, partim ex reuelationibus, partim ex scripturis fuisse
creditum, atque ita tandem generatim eius fidem ab orthodoxa ecclesia fuisse
receptissimam, facillime rationem aliquam indulgentiarum intelligimus; quum
itaque purgatorium tam sero cognitu^ ac receptum ecclesiae fuerit vniuersae,
quis iam de indulgentijs mirari potest, quod in principio nascentis ecclesiae
nullus fuerat carum vsus? caeperunt igitur indulgentiae, postquam ad purgatorij
cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum erat. Englished thus. The Greeks to this day,
do not believe that there is a purgatory. Read who list the Commentaries of
the ancient Gretians, and he shall find either very seldom mention of
purgatory, or none at all. For neither did the Latin Church conceive the truth
of this matter at one and the same time, but by leisure, and by little and
little. Neither was it done without the great dispensation of the holy Ghost,
that after so many years, Catholics both believed there was a purgatory,
and also received the popes pardons generally: so long as there was no care of
purgatory, no man sought for pardons. For of it depends all that estimation
and credit, which is ascribed unto pardons. If thou take away purgatory, to
what end shall pardons be needful? For if there be no purgatory, we shall
have no need of pardons, Considering therefore, how long purgatory was
unknown: then, that some believed it by little and little, partly by
revelations, and partly by the Scriptures, and so at the length the whole
Church received it, we do easily understand the cause of pardons. Since
therefore, purgatory was so lately known and received of the universal
Church, who can now admire, that there was no use of pardons in the Primitive
Church? pardons therefore then began, when the people (being bewitched,) stood
in the fear of purgatorie-paine, and torment.

These are the express words of this famous popish Bishop, when he writing
against M. Luther, did with might and maine to the uttermost of his power, (and
he was able to say and write as much as any papist in the world) defend the
popes authority, and his late hatched Romish Religion, which the vulgar sort
of people being pitifully seduced: (Alas, alas, that they will not hearken unto
the truth, which the maister-papists are enforced to confess,) do zealously
embrace, humbly obey, wonderfully admire, and term it, (but most falsely and
ignorantly,) the old religion. I would gladly do thee good (gentle Reader,)
and take any pain to my self to profit thy soul: persuade thy self, that I
deal faithfully with thee: and that I do in none of my books, which I either
have written, or shall by Gods permission write in time to come, charge the
papists with any thing but the mere truth. For I do assure thee, that my
proceeding in the discovery of popish superstio^s, vanities, enormities,
falsehoods, dissentions, schisms, cruelty, tyranny, errors, heresies, and
blasphemies, is such and so sincere, as upon a saluo conducto (as they term
it (granted from any king Christian, and license procured of my gracious dread
souergaine, I am and will be most willing to repair into any province in
Christendom, there to give an account, and to make trial of the same. This
offer (gentle Reader, I made above ten years ago, when I published my book
of Motives, as the Reader may easily find in peruse thereof; In the Preface
especially.
but to this day no papist ever durst accept the same, or answer either that
book of Motives, or any other that I have written. I therefore here make the
same offer again, and I add thereunto (which is a shorter course;) that if
any English Jesuit, Seminary, or Iesuited papist, will send me in print, a
direct answer to any one book which I have published against them, and that
upon license, and security granted, he will appear with an halter about his
neck, ready to receive according to his deserts, if he fail in the defense
of his answer and cause: and for the performance thereof shall put down his
name in the printed Book: I promise herewith under my hand, that if GOD grant
me life and health, I will fall down upon my knees before the most mighty,
learned, wise, and religious Monarch, James the King of great Britain, and my
most gracious Sovereign, humbly to entreat a free Charter, and safe conduct,
or princely license, for the safe coming and safe departure of that Jesuit or
Iesuited papist, and also with another halter about my neck accordingly, to
meet and encounter that mighty Goliath, whosoever he be: nothing doubting but
that I shall prevail, in my humble suite to his most excellent Majesty: if
any of our English papists shall be of courage to send me his answer, in
manner already specified. If none of them dare this perform, in the defense of
popery: then doubtless may all silly papists be fully resolved, that there is
no truth on their side. If this Challenge be not accepted, now at the last:
then do the papists distrust their religion; it cannot be denied.


One foul-mouthed Swaggering Jesuit, (in his detection against M. Sutcliffe,
and M. Willet,) seems desirous of such an offer, as I here do make: let him
therefore or any other of his brethren, prepare himself with the advice and
help of all the rest: to accept the challenge, and to fight the combat
valiantly with me. I challenge them all jointly, and every one of them
severally: and I take God to witness, that I am fully persuaded as I write,
and do most heartily desire, that this offer and challenge may be accepted at
the papists hands, and accordingly performed, as is already said.

Now, to let pass this digression, and to return to the matter in hand: I
note, out of the free grant of this famous popish Bishop, (who was a learned
man indeed*) these excellent and worthy Lessons.

Christ's glorious Ascension into Heaven.

Rome, did not believe the said purgatory, for many hundred years after S.
Peter's death: whose Successor for all that, the pope boasts himself to be.

(gentle Reader,) that popery crept into the Church by little and little, and
not all at one time. This is a point of great importance, which wounds the
papists even at the heart.

Fourthly, that purgatory was not wholly and soundly known by the Scriptures,
but parlty by the Scriptures, and partly by Revelations. Where I wish the
Reader, to mark well two things, which I shall unfold unto him: the one, that
by this popish doctrine of purgatory, Gods works are made imperfect: contrary
to the Doctrine of holy Moses, who tells us: that, Dei perfecta sunt opera.
Deuteronomy. 32. ^. 4.
Englished thus. Gods works are perfect. I prove this, because (as the Bishop
avouches,) the Scriptures made purgatory known to the Church of Rome, but
imperfectly. For doubtless if God made purgatory known by the Scriptures,
then is purgatory either made perfectly known by them, or else Gods works,
that is, the holy Scriptures, are imperfect. But I will rather believe Moses,
the holy Prophet of God, then my L. our Fisher, though he be the popes
cononized martyr. The other, that the Church has no new revelations, touching
matters of Faith. For the most learned popish Schooleman, their religious
Friar, and reverend Bishop Melchior Canus, has these express words: Canus in
locis, lib. 3. cap. 4. page 101.
nec vllas in fide novas revelationes ecclesia habet. Englished thus. Neither
has the Church any new revelations, concerning matters of Faith. Lo, popery
is contemned by her own dear doctors: for M. Fisher, says plainly, that
purgatory was not known at the first, but after many 100* years by
revelations. Yet M. Canus, his popish brother and fellow bishop, (a man as
learned as he,) says as plainly, and more truly,) that the Church has no
new revelations in faith. So then, either purgatory is no matter of Faith, or
else it came not by late revelations.

Let the papist answer what he can and will, he must needs here be caught by
the heel. Fifthly, that pardons came not up, till purgatory was found out: the
reason whereof is said to be this: because the life of popish pardons, rests
wholly in the life of popish purgatory, and consequently, when the pope could
get no sail for his pardons, it was high time for his holiness to invent his
purgatory. And therefore wisely says his Bishop, and our Fisher of Rochester,
that when the silly ignorant people, were put in fear of the pains of popish
purgatory: then began the popes pardons to flourish, and to be of high
esteem: as being thought able to preserve and defend their receivers, from
the pain and flame of purgatory fire. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish
church bewitched us.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Popes double person.
COncerning the popes double person, I have written at large thereof in a
peculiar treatise, which is entitled, ( ye hunting of the Romish Fox.) Now it
shall suffice, to say a little in that behalf. William Watson that popish
traitor, has these words: Quodl. 6. art. 10.
as the prudent Greek appealed from Alexander furious, to Alexander sober; and
Bishop Crostate from pope Adrian private, to pope Adrian public, and as
summus pontifix in cathedra Petri: so may the seculars appeal from the pope as
Clemens, unto his holiness as Peter. For the full answer unto Watson, see my
anatomy of popish tyranny
Thus writes Watson, and all the papists generally, (who are learned) are of
this opinion herein, I say (who are learned,) because the multitude and vulgar
sort of papists, (being as blind as beetles in popish affairs,) know not,
what the popes double person means. They are taught to believe as the pope
believes, iumpe with the collier. viz. the Church, that is, the pope belieueth
so, therefore do I believe so. The truth of this question stands thus: that
the pope or Bishop of Rome may err personally, speak erroneously, preach
erroneously, write erroneously: yet all this must be done, as he is a private
person only. This notwithstanding, he can never err, say our papists, when he
defines a matter of faith or manners iudicially, and as he is pope or a
public person: so hold the papists generally of late days, as the
Jesuitical Cardinal Bellermine, the mouth of all papists, tells us. These
are his express words; Bellarm libt. 4 cap. 7. de ^om. pont.
Multi canones docent, pontificem non posse iudicari, nisi inveniatur a fide
deuius, ergo potest deuiare a fide, alioqui frustra essent illi canones:
sequitur: respondeo istos omnes canones loqui de errore pontificis personali,
non iudiciali. Englished thus. Many canons teach, that the pope cannot be
judged, unless he be an Heretic: therefore he may be an Heretic,
otherwise those canons should be all in vain. I answer, that all those canons
speak of the personal, not of the judicial error of the pope. This is the
clarkly resolution of our Jesuit, and consequently of the Pope himself.

Vignerius a very learned and famous popish Friar, has these express words;
Vignetius de potest. co^dendi symbolum pa. ^37.
Si dicatur, summus pontifex errare potest, and in animo suo concipere aliquem
articulum orthodoxae fidei contrarium, and etiam privatim proferre, vt legitur
de Anastasio secundo; si ergo posset novum symbolum edere, fides ecclesiae
vnius hominis periculo sub^aceret, dicendum, quod summus pontifex, vt privata
persona errare potest, non tamen vt est summus pontifex, ideo si vt privata
persona symbolum edere tentaret, non esset symbolum, maxim vbi a vera fide
deviaret. Englished thus. If any say, that the pope may err, and conceive in
his heart any article contrary to the Catholic Faith, and also utter the
same privately, as we read of pope Anastasius the second; if therefore he
could make a new Creed, the faith faith of the Church should be subject to the
hazard of one man; we answerre, that the pope may err as a private person,
but not as pope or the high Bishop. Therefore if he should make a Creed as a
private man, it should be no Creed at all; especially, when he swarued from
the right Faith. O brave answer.
Thus writes Vignerius, behold here (gentle Reader,) upon what rotten
stuff, the papists would have us to build and ground our Faith. We must
believe that the Pope cannot err, and yet are we sure that he can err, and
that he has already erred in very deed. We must likewise believe, In my book
of mo^ues.
that he cannot but teach the truth: and yet must we also believe, that he
both can teach heresy, and be an Heretic himself. We must yet further
believe, (as I have proved else where) that it is sacrilege to dispute of the
popes power: and all this notwithstanding, we must perforce both dispute of
his power, and straightly examine his doctrine, as also know assuredly, whether
he speaks publicly as a public man, or privately as a private man, and
nevertheless, when we have done all that possibly we can: we know no more
what to think or say of his doctrine, preaching, or writing, Popes of late
days use not to preach.
(but with preaching popes now adays do not trouble men,) then when we have
an Eele by the tail. For when the pope shall tell me, that I must believe
this and that: if then he speak as a private man, where is my faith? it is no
faith at all, and why? because forsooth, the pope spoke as a private man. Ah
sir, here is both fast and loose, here is legerdemain indeed. For if we charge
the pope with heresy or error, answer will be made with speed: that he
spoke or wrote personally, as he was a private man: not iudicially, as he was
a public man. Truly, this is a very lage prerogative, which the papists
ascribe unto their pope: and a very hard matter it is, to gainsay or withstand
the same. Adrianus a very learned pope.
Yet by the popes good favor, a very famous, and as learned a pope as ever was
pope, Adrianus by name, does constantly and roundly controwle and confute the
same.

These are his express words, as the zealous, religious, and learned papist
Alphonsus de Castro, reports and rehearses them. Alphonsus Libr. 3. aduers.
haeres. prope ^inem.
Sexta haeresis docet nullam animam ante diem iudicij esse beatam, quum vt ait,
nulla anima ante illum diem videt deum, huius haerefeos authors sunt Armeni,
eandem etiam tuentur Graeci: post istos surrexit Johannes, 22. huius nominis
pontifex, Sed ne verbis meis aliquis in hac part deroget, verba Adriani papae
referam, qui in suo quarto sententiarum, in calce cuiusdam quaestionis de
sacramento confirmationis, ita ait novissime fertur de Iohanne, 22 quod public
docuit declaravit, and ab omnibus teneri mandavit, quod animae purgatae ante
finale iudicium non habent stolam, quae est clara and facialis visio dei: and
vniversitatem Parisiensem ad hoc induxisse dicitur, quod nemo in ea poterat
gradum in theologia adipisci nisi primitus hunc errorem iurasset se defensurum,
and perpetuo ei adhaesurum, haec Adrianus. Englished thus. The sixth heresy
teaches, that no soul is in eternal bliss before the day of Doom: because
as it says, no soul before that day sees God, the Armenians are the Authors
of this heresy, and yet the Greeks hold the same. After these rose up pope
John the twelfth of that name. The pope commands his vassales, to swea^e unto
false doctrine.
But least any man distrust my words in this point, I will rehearse the words
of pope Adrian, who in his fourth book of sentences, in the end of a certain
question of the sacrament of confirmation, says thus? last of all, it is
reported of pope John the twelfth: that he publicly taught, declared, and
commanded all men to hold (this opinion,) that the souls of the just have not
the stole before the day of Doom, which is the clear and faciall sight of
God. And it is said, that he induced the University of Paris to this: that no
man should take any degree in the same, but he that first did swear to defend
that error, and to maintain the same for ever. Thus says pope Adrian, the
most excellently learned Bishop* that ever was at Rome: and the famous
religious Friar Alphonsus a Castro, does constantly defend his Doctrine. Out of
whose words I note first, that pope Adrian says of Pope John (Docuit) he
taught. Secondly, he says, ( Public) publicly. Thirdly, he says (
Mandauit) he commanded all to hold it? Fourthly, he says none could be made
graduate in theology, save only he that held this opinion. Fifthly, he says
every graduate did swear to defend it for ever. So then, the pope may err,
not only personally as a private man, but also iudicially as a public
person, and pope of Rome, and that even by the flat testimony of Adrianus, who
himself was also pope of Rome. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish church
bewitched us.

CHAP. XV. Of popish general councels.
THat general popish councels in these our days, are as a nose of wax
flexible to the popes own good liking, and the decrees thereof, as uncertain
as the wind and weather-cocke: I have proved at large else where, In my book
of motives.
by the testimony of best approved popish writers. Now I will only touch in
general words, the principal heads thereof: referring the reader for the
proof of this discourse, unto my book of motives. be true unto the pope, and
to defend his canons, and usurped papal sovereignty, not only against Turk
and Jew, but also against all persons without exception, even also against
their own sovereign Lords, Princes, and Monarchs, to whom they owe most
sacred obedience: which decree and most execrable constitution, was published
in the year 1228. after Christ's most sacred Incarnation. Gregory, the ninth
of that name. Vide super, Cap. 1.
Peter's chair at home, must be certified what the council has done, and
consider well of the matter, least any thing be concluded against himself, or
against his late Romish religion. And consequently, he allowing nothing but
what is to his own good liking; it follows of necessity, that his general
counsels in these days, are as the Wethercocke, as vnco^stant as the wind,
and as flexible as a nose of wax. For when we shall allege the decrees of the
most famous counsels of Chalcedon, of Constance, and of Basil, for the
equalizing of the Bishop of Constantinople, with the Bishop of Rome, or for the
authority of a general council above the pope and Bishop of Rome.

The popes parasites will answer ^oundly and arrogantly (though neither
modestly, nor clarkly) that such decrees and Canons were never confirmed by the
Pope, and presently, if any reply upon that answer, (so it be done where
popery bears the sway) he shall be cast into the holy Inquisition, where he
shall abide until he have paid the utmost farthing: and after all other
tortures be burnt with fire and faggots, if he do not condescend unto the
Popes mind. For whatsoever the Pope defines, that must be holden as true as
the Gospel: and whosoever withstandeth the same, must be condemned for an
Heretic, Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church seduced us?

CHAP. XVI. Of popish succession in the Romish Church.
THe Succession of Romish Bishops is not so certain, as the Papists would
bear the world in hand it is. For first, S. Clement, (whose Epistles the
papists magnify, when they seem to make for their purpose,) testifies for him
self, that S. Peter appointed him to be his successor. Clemens epist. 1.
Ir^n. lib. 3. cap. 3. Epiphan haer. 27. Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 12.


Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Eusebius, and the Canon of the popish Mass, do all
with uniform assent, place Linus and Cletus before Clemens. Yet Sophronius
Metaphrastes, and the popish pontifical which can not lie, affirm roundly and
peremtorily, that S. Peter lived after Linus. This variety so troubled
Nanclerus, a famous popish Historiographer, that he was enforced to coin this
new and untimely hatched distinction. Nanclerus, page 438.
Viz that Saint Peter, did indeed ordeine and appoint Clement to be his
successor: Lo, the pope controuleth S. Peter, if this be true.
but Clem^us perceiving that it would be a thing pernicious unto the Church,
if one Bishop should choose an other to be his Successor, yields up his
right, and so Liuus was elected in his place. The receitall of this imaginary
solution, is a sufficient confutation of it self.

Secondly, many Schisms, have been in the Romish Church amongst our Romish
bishops, and that for very many years together, so that the latter can never
be proved constantly, to have descended successively without interruption from
the former. The great papist Onuphrius Panvinius, reckons up thirty
Schisimes in the church of Rome. Onuphrius in chronico.
The first schism was between Carnelius the good Bishop and Novatus the
antipope, in the year of our lord 252. Liberius and Felix, in the year 355.
Damasus and Vrsicinus, in the year 366. Bonifacius and Enlalius, in the year
420. Symmachus and Laurentius, in the year 428. Bonifacius and Dioscorus, in
the year 530. Syluerius and Vigilius, in the year 538. Petrus and Theodorus,
in the year 685. The Bishops of Rome were for the space of 684. years,
subject to the Emperor.
I wish the reader to observe seriously out of this famous papist Onuphrius,
that the Bishops of Rome for the space almost of seven hundred years after the
sacred incarnation of Christ Jesus, acknowledged the Emperor for their
superior and Lord*as without whose Letter patents they could have no
jurisdiction, nor be reputed lawful Bishop. Of which point, I have else where
written more at large: In the survey of popery.
the 9. schism was between Theodorus and Paschalus in the year 687
Theophilactus and Paulus in the year 757. Constantinus and Philippus in the
year 767. Zinzinus and Eugenius, in the year 827 Anastasius and Benedictus,
in the year 855. Formosus and Sergius in the year 891. Leo the first, and
Christopherus, and Sergius the 3. in the year 903. Benedictus the first,
against Leo the eight, in the year 963. Boniface the 7. and Bennet the sixth,
in the year 974. John the 17. and Gregory the fifth, in the year 996. Bennet
the 7. and an other namelesse adversary, in the year 1012. Siluester the 3.
and Bennet the eight, in the year 1045. Bennet the ninth, and John Mincius the
adverse competitor, in the year 1058. Honorius the second and Alexander the
second, in the 1061. Clement the third, and Gregory the seventh, in the year
1080. Gregory the eight, and Gelasius the second in the year, 1118.
Celestinus the second, and Honorius the second, in the year 1124. Innocentius
the second, and Victor the fourth, in the year 1138. Victor the fourth,
Paschalis the third, Celestius the third, Innocentius the third, and Alexander
the 3. in the year 1177. Nicholaus the fifth, and Johannes the 22. in the year
1327. Clement the seventh, Benedict the eleventh, and Clement the eight, in the
year 1378 John the 24. Gregory the 12. and Benedict the 13. in the year 1466

Paul teaches us,) 1. Tim. 2. verse. 11.12.
is not capable of holy orders, and ecclesiastical function: and consequently,
the popish succession which is derived from our holy Mistress Joan Pope,
cannot possible be of force.

Now, to this, the papists can answer nothing, save only it is a fable, and of
no credit. But (gentle Reader,) many papists highly renowned and of great
esteem in the Churrh of Rome, do with uniform assen^ confirm it to be true:
Lo^, eight famous popish writers agree to this story of Pope Joan.
Viz. Segeberius Gemblacensis, Mar^^^us Scotus, Mathaeus Palmerius, Martinus
Polonus, Philippus Bergomensis, Baptista Platina, Barthol. Carranza and
Johannes Nanclerus, who after he has told a long tale to s^lue the matter
after his fashion concludes in these words: N^^cleru^ Page 713.
Sed etsi fait verum, nulli tamen ex hoc salutis emersit pericula^, quia nec
Ecclesia tunc fuit sine capite quod est Christus, ait Antoninus, nec. ^. vltimi
effectus sacramentorum quae illa conferebat, deficiebant, eis qui deuote
accipiebant, scilicet gratia: licet mulier non sit susceptibilis Characteris
alicuius ordinis, nec conficere encharistiam, etiam de facto ordinata, possit,
nec absoluere a peccato: vnde ordinati ab ea, erant iterum ordinandi, graetiam
tamen sacramentorum Christus supplebat, in recipientibus digne, ignorantia
facti invincibili eos excusante. Englished thus. But although it were true, no
man for all that sustained any loss of his salvation, because the Church even
then had still a head which is Christ, says Antoninus. Neither did they, who
received devoutly the Sacraments which she ministered, want the last effects of
them, which is grace: albeit a woman be neither capable of any character of
order, neither able to celebrate the eucharist, or to absolve from sin.
Whereupon such as received orders of her, were to be ordered again: yet Christ
supplied the grace of the Sacrament, in those that received them worthily,
invincible error of the fact excusing them.

Thus witeth this famous popish Historiographer: who imployeth his whole
industry and all his wits, to defend the pope from shame and dishonor, if it
possibly could be done. Out of whose words, I observe:

Antoninus their reverend Archbishop, and cononized Saint, is of his opinion.

Christ, as he pretends, no^ yet the head of the church.



Cardinals and Bishops be rightly ordered, and whether they be mere
Lay-persons or priests.

Christ's body, and change the bread into flesh, as popish religion holds. To
which I add, that none of them which received orders of our holy Mistress the
pope, were or could be priests, but mere Laymen, and therefore were to be
ordered again, as Nanclerus truly writes. Mark well this discourse.
To which I must add this also: that all the people both priests and
lay-persons, were bound to adore as God Almighty, that which the Priests so
supposed made by Mistrisse Joan pope, did elevate and hold over their heads at
Mass: which for all that, was but a piece of Bakers bread, as popish doctrine
teaches us, neither will invincible ignorance serve the turn, as Nanclerus
would have us believe.

Basil, deposed pope Eugenius for his contumacie, and chose Amadaeus, Amadaeus
olim Dux subbandiae.
who was named Foelix the fifth, who lived pope nine years, five months and
odd days, in which time, he consecrated and made many Cardinals, Priests,
and Deacons. Carranza, N^nclerus, Platina. Pontacus An. 1439.
This notwithstanding, Eugenius crept again into the popedom, without any
Canonical election, and continued in the place as Pope: and consequently, all
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons who afterward sprang of him, that is,
of the Church of Rome, are illegitimate, irregular, usurpers, schismatiques,
and not lawful governors of the Church, and it will not help the Papists to
answer, that the council could not depose the pope. Coficilium est supra
Papam. Victor. rel. 4.
For most famous and best learned papists, Cardinalis Cameracensis, Abbas
Panormitanus, Nicolaus Cusanus, Adrianus papa, Cardinalis Florentinus, Johannes
Gersonus, Iacobus Almainus, Abulensis, and many others, do all constantly
defend as an undoubted truth, that a general council is above the Pope, and
has power to depose the pope. Depot. papae, page 149. in the Anotamie of
popish tyrranie, page 137.
This case is so clear, that the Council of Constance did De facto, depose
two popes John the 12. and the 23. as I have proved at large in an other
book, neither will it suffice to say, that the Council of Basil was not a
lawful Synod, because it neither had the presence of the pope, nor of his
Legates. Concilium ob pest. Senas Translatum.
For first, the council was called by Pope Martin the fifth to be holden at
Papias, from whence by reason of the pest it was removed to Senas. Aterward,
it was translated by Alphonsus the king of Arragon, and continued at Basil:
where were present both Sigismundus the Emperor, and Iulianus the popes own
Legate, and after him Ludovious the Cardinal of Arles, supplied his place.
Again, not only the council of Basil, but the councels also of Constance,
of Florence, and of Lateran, did all constantly and uniformly define for an
undoubted truth: that a general Council is above the pope, and has
authority to cite him, to control him, (and if the cause so require) to
depose him. And for due proof hereof, the council of Constance, de facto,
deposed three popes, Viz. John 23. Gregory the 12, and Benedict the 13. and
chose Martin the first, and made him pope, M. Gerson adds that the council
deposed also John the twelft. Gerson vbi supr.


Pope Sergius the third, (as is already proved) disanulled the acts of Pope
Formosus, and caused all such as had been made Priests, Bishops, or Deacons by
the said Formosus, to take orders again. Supr. cap, 11.
Behold the certainty of golden excellency, of popish so highly esteemed
succession. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish church bewitched us.

CHAP. XVII. Of Popish Excommunications.
IF I should relate verbatim, the huge Mass of popish Excommunications* time
would sooner fail me then matter to write. A few of them I purpose in God to
rehearse, by which the indifferent Reader, may easily esteem the nature and
quality of the rest. But before I come to the depth of the Mystery, I have
thought it good to admonish the Reader of these special points.

First, that by popish proceeding, none can excommunicate himself: and
consequently, when either the Pope, or other inferior Bishops shall
excommunicate al adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, Symonists, and such like:
then neither the Pope nor such Bishops are excommunicate, albeit they be
drowned up to the ears in the self same sins.

Secondly, that the Pope himself can not be excommunicated, neither by any
law, nor yet by the power of any man: unless it be for heresy, for which he
may both be judged and deposed. Did. 40. cau. si papa.


Thirdly, that the Pope, may grant and give Commission to mere Lay-persons,
even unto women, to thunder out excommunications against supposed offenders.
Panormit. in cau. decernim. sumu^. page 301.
These Preambles being seriously pondered, let us view the substance of the
Text.

The 28. Excommunication in number, is against al such as shall appeal to a
future general council, from the sentence, decree, constitution, or mandate
of the Pope. Fumus. page 328. Caietan. Page 185.
This Law was made upon great policy, for the maintenance of the Popes
usurped primacie. First by pope Pius the 2. in the year 1458. and after that
confirmed and extended by Pope Julius the second, in his extravagant in the
year, 1503. Materia inquit Caietanus, est sacrilegium contra sedis apostolicae
primatum. Englished thus. The matter of the Decretal or extravagant, (says our
Cardinal Caietain,) is sacrilege against the primacie of the Apostolic
seat. If I should recite all that the Cardinal says, in defense of this
execrable excommunication: I should be tedious to the Reader, and he reap
small or rather no commodity by the fact. This is enough for the Reader to
know herein: that the general Council of Constance, (which was holden in the
year 1439.) Rome, (now adays called Pope,) was subject to a general
Council, and that it had authority to summon him, to punish him, and to
depose him. Which power they manifested practically, when they deposed three
popes, and placed a fourth man in the pope-dome. Yea, the Council avouches
constantly and most christianly, that the council is above the pope, as is
already proved. To countermaund which decree and Constitution, Pope Pius the 2.
and Julius the 2. published their decrees, with a terrible excommunication
annexed thereunto. For this purpose also did pope Boniface the 8. publish his
antichristian extravaga^t,

The 29. Excommunication in reckoning, is against the College of the Cardinals
of the Romish Church: who by Symonie or Symonicall pacts, procure themselves to
be advanced to the pope-dome: by virtue of which Excommunication, all such as
are made Popes by Symony or Symonicall pacts, do ipso facto, incur the
sentence of excommunication: from which they can never be absolved, but by one
that is pope in deed, and canonically elected thereunto. Upon which
Excommunication, one of the popes Inquisitors, Bartholomaeus Fumus a very
learned Dominican Friar, and consequently a man of high esteem in the Church
of Rome, has published this Commentary for the true sense and meaning of that
axtravagant, which pope Julius the second devulged in that behalf. Nota hic,
and been, papa simoniace electus, non est vere papa. Englished thus. Note
here, and that to good purpose, that the Pope which is elected by Symonie, is
not the true Pope indeed. Fumus in extravag. ^^l. 2.
Mark (gentle Reader) for Christ's sake, even as thou tendrest thine own
salvation: for this doctrine with the circumstances adjacent, is Prora and
puppis: for thine instruction and for the everlasting detestation, of the late
vpstart Romish religion. We see here most evidently by the popes own
constitution and flat decree, which no man may withstand or gainsay: that
whosoever is chosen pope by Symonie, is no pope in deed.

Now sir, let us proceed, and let us look circumspectly into this matter: as
which is of so great importance, as nothing can be more.

Baptista Platina, a man both very near and very dear unto the popes, (as who
was by office Abbreviator apostolicus,) and consequently best acquainted with
the manners and dealings of popes tells us roundly and constantly, that the
popes of latter days crept into the popedom, by gifts, bribes, and Symonie.
These are his express words: Platina, in vit^ Sylvestri.
Eo. n. tum pontificatus devenerat, vt qui plus largitione and ambitione, non
dico sanctitate vitae and doctrina valeret, is tantummodo dignitatis gradum
bonis oppressis and reiectis obtineret: quem morem, vtinam aliquando non
retinuissent nostra tempora. Englished thus. For to that pass was popedo^ now
brought, that whosoever was able to prevail most, in giving bribes and in
ambition, (I say not, in good life and doctrine,) that man only should have the
degree of honor, and good men should be rejected. Which custom, would to God
our days had never known.

Again in another place, the same Platina has these words; Platina, in vita
Damas^, 2.
Adeo. n. inoleverat hic mos vt iam cuique ambitioso liceret Petri sedem
invadere. Englished thus. For this custom did so increase, that now every
ambitious fellow might invade Peter's seat, or Chair. Gregory the fifth, was
by sedition thrust out of his throne, and pope John the 18. by tyranny,
occupied the popedom. So write both Platina and Carranza. Yea, Platina
proceeds further, and says thus; Platina, in vita Ioh. 18. Carranza, in
summa, fol. 355.
qua quide^ beatitudine Johannes caruit, fur certe in pontificatu, and latro,
non. n vt par fuerat, per ostium intravit. Englished thus. Which happy life
pope John wanted, as who was a thief and a robber: for he entered not in by
the door, as he ought to have done. To be brief, pope Bonifacius the 8. may
sound the Trumpet for all the rest. Of him Carranza the popish Friar writes in
this manner: The holy Friar Carranza, vbi sup. fol. 369.
Intravit vt Vulpes, regnavit vt Lupus, mortuus est vt Canis. He entered as a
Fox, he reigned as a Woolfe, he dyed as a Dog. See more to this effect, in the
tenth Chapter afore-going.

Thus (gentle Reader,) two things are cleared: which are of so great
importance, weight, and moment, as they are able to batter down popery, and
to draw it under foot.

For first, what Bishop soever is made pope, by gifts, bribes, and Simonie:
that Bishop is not pope indeed.

Secondly, the Bishops of Rome, for a long time have been very wicked men, and
have aspired to the pope-do^ by bribes and Simonie. To which 2. things thus
cleared, this 3. is consectarie: viz. that the Bishops of Rome now for many
years, are neither the true Bishops nor Popes of Rome in very deed: (...)
visible by popish doctrine.
And consequently, by popish doctrine, there are no true popish Bishops in the
world. This point can never be truly answered, by all the Jesuits, and Iesuited
papists in this land.

The 18. excommunication falls upon all those, which deny the church of Rome
to be the head of all other Churches, and the pope to be the commander of all
people. This excommunication was thundered out, for the establishing of the
popes tyranny throughout the christian world.

The 71. excommunication, is against all such as shall boldly affirm, either
that the blessed virgin Mary was conceived in original sin, or not so
conceived; and thereupon shall condemn them of heresy, or of mortal sin,
that hold, preach, or defend the contrary. This excommunication pope Sixtus the
fourth, thundered out in his extrauagant in the year 1474. By which we may see
the uncertainty of the popes doctrine, as also his ignorance in the high
mysteries of his own religion. For, though he cannot err iudicially in
matters of doctrine, as the papists hold and believe; yet can he not decide
and determine this easy question, whether the virgin Mary was conceived in
original sin, or not. And yet Aquinas the popes angelical Doctor (whose
doctrine two popes, Vrbanus and Innocentius.
Vrbanus the fourth, and Innocentius the fifth, have confirmed to be sound and
true) affirms resolutely, that she was conceived in original sin. So then,
one pope cannot tell what to say or think of an others resolution; and much
less can many silly papists tell, what to hold or believe concerning the
popes decrees in matters of faith. Alas, alas, how has the late church of Rome
deceived us?

CHAP. XVIII. Of adoring Popish Images and Relics.
ALbeit the making of Images for a civil use may be permitted, as a thing not
reproved, but approved, both by the holy scriptures, and by the testimony of
the holy Fathers, whereof I have written elsewhere more at large; In the survey
of Popery.
yet the adoration done to Relics and Images, is (...) condemned even by the
best popish writers. Gr^gorius Magnus (whom the papists repute a saint, and he
was an holy Bishop in deed) being Bishop and Pope of Rome himself, and
consequently, a man of sufficient testimony against the papists, shall be
vmpire and Judge in this weighty controversy. These are his express words;
Gregorius Sereno episcopo, libr. 7. epist. 109. cap. 109.
Praeterea, indico dudum ad nos pervenisse, quod fraternitas vestra quosdam
imaginum adoratores aspicien^, easdem ecclesiae imagines confregit atque
protecit. Et quidem zelum vos, ne quid manu factum adorari possit habuisse
laudavimus; sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse iudicamus. Idcirco. n.
pictura in ecclesus adhibetur, vt hi qui ^tera^ nesciunt saltem in par^etibus
videndo legant, quae legere in codicibus non valent. Tua ergo fraternitas and
illas seruare and ab earum adoratu po^ulum prohibere debuit; quatenus and
literarum nescij habe^ent* vnde scientiam historia colligerent, and populus in
pictura adoratione minime peccaret. Englished thus. Furthermore, I am to tell
you, that relation was made to us a while ago, that when your fraternity
beheld some who adored and worshipped Images, then you brake in pieces the
Images of the church, and hurled them away. And truly, I commend your zeal
therein, least any thing made with hands should be adored. Yet I judge, that
you should not have broken the same Images. For Images are placed in churches
to this end, that they which cannot read stories in the book, may read them by
sight on the walls. Therefore your fraternity should not have broken them, but
have forbidden the people to adore them: that so the unlearned might have
gathered the knowledge of the history, and the people not have sinned in
worshipping the picture. Thus writes the holy, learned, and ancient Bishop,
or Pope of Rome. Out of whose words, I observe these worthy and golden lessons.
First, that Images may not be worshipped. Secondly, that Saint Gregory
commends the zeal of the good Bishop Serenus, who brake the images in
pieces, which the people worshipped. Thirdly, that though Images were in those
days permitted for instruction-sake: yet were the people never permitted to
worship them, but sharply reproved in that behalf.

To which I add, that this Gregory, who was Bishop of Rome, and this Serenus,
who was Bishop of Massilia, did both of them live more then fix hundred years
after Christ: at which time, the worship done to Images, was deemed a very
heinous crime. And therefore the godly Bishop Serenus did break those images,
which the people worshipped. Yea, Gabriel Biel a religious popish Friar, and a
very learned Schoole-doctor, who lived long after Gregory and Serenus, even
one thousand, four hundred eighty, and four years after Christ, does
sharply inveigh and reprove the worship given to images. He has a large
discourse of this subject, in which the Reader may find these express words:
Biel in ca^. missae lect. 49. in line.
Quod vero Chistiana religi^ imagines sustinet in ecclesia and oratorijs, non
permittit eo fine, vt ipsae adorentur* sequitur: neque adore imagi^^ Christi,
quia ^igum, nec quia imag^: sed adoro Christum coram imagine Christi: quia
scilicet image Christi excitat me ad amandum Christum. Englished thus. Whereas
Christian Religion tolerateth images in the Church, and in oratories: it does
not permit them for this end, that they may be adored. Neither do I adore
the Image of Christ, because it is wood, neither for that it is an image. But I
adore Christ before the Image of Christ, because the image of Christ does
allure me to love Christ.

Lo, this famous and learned popish Doctor, agrees with the good Bishops
Gregory and Serenus: and affirms plainly and constantly, that images may not
be worshipped.

And for this end he tells us, that when himself beheld the Image of
Christ, he did not worship the Image, but Christ represented by the Image. So
then, the worshipping of Images is not the old, but a very new religion; as
which was detested and abhorred of the learned and wiser sort, for the space of
fourteen hundred* fourscore, and four years, Florint Biel, An. do. 1484
after Christ's ascension into heaven. But some will say, that S. Gregory
allowed Images in the church, and reproved Serenus, because he brake them in
pieces. To which I answer, that Gregory commended the zeal of Serenus, and
approved his opinion, they both agreed in this, that Images may not be
worshipped. Serenus thought it time to break them in pieces, when the people
began to adore them: but Gregory thought, they might still remain in the
church; so the people were instructed how to use them, and prohibited to
worship them. And of his opinion are some reformed Churches in this age, who
still retain Images in their Temples. I dare condemn neither those, who still
keep them in their churches; nor those who have abolished the same. But this I
boldly avouch, that Serenus had for his example, both the fact of the good King
Ezechias, who break in pieces the brazen Serpent, when the people began to
adore it, albeit God himself had appointed it to be set up; 2. Reg. 18. v. 4.
Epipha in Epist. ad Io. Hieros.
and also the practice of S. Epiphanius, who seeing the Image of a Saint
hanging in the church, rare the same asunder, and advised the warders to bury
some poor body with the veil, and to see, that thenceforth no such vailes
should be hanged up in the church. Some again will say, that many miracles
have been done by Images; and that such as adored and worshipped them, have
thereby received their health. To whom I will answer, even as their own dear
Doctor Grabriel Riel does. His express words are these: Grab Biel, vbi supra.
Quod si aliquando miracula fiunt, hominibus etiam ad eas confluentibus
adiutoria aut sanitates praestantur; non haec virtute imaginum, sed virtute dei
ministerio bonorum angelorum ad intercessiones sanctoru^ contingunt, vel etiam
non nunqua^ operatione daemonum ad fallendum inordinatos cuitores deo
permittente, exigentem taliu^ infidelitate. Englished thus. If miracles be
sometime done, and men also resorting to the^, be helped or receive their
health; yet are not these things done by virtue in the Images, but by the power
of God, and ministry of the good Angels at the intercession of the saints. Yea
sometime by the operation of the d^uels, to deceive the inordinate (and
superstitious) worshippers by Gods permissio^, their infidelity so requiring.
Thus writes Friar Biel; out of whose words I observe, Gerson, sometime the
Chancellor of Paris* of an other different subject in deed, but wholly and
plainly to the same effect. These are his express words* Johan. Gersonus,
cont. medic. mo^uspess. in dicto, 3. in part. prima.
Arguunt iteru^, and nos in similem causum trahere ^atagum. No^ne inquiu^t,
talia similiter fueriut, aut tolerantur ab ecclesia, in peregrinationibus
certis, in cultu imaginum, in cereis, in aquis benedictis, and in exorcismis?
nonne dic^tur quotidie si nouem diebus perdurat in hac ecclesia, si ex aqua
illa perfundatur, aut si tali se v^veat imagini, aut si aliquid talium faciat,
ipse mox sanabitur, vel op^ato potietur? fateor, abnegare non possumus multa
inter Christianos simplices sub sp^^i^ religionis introducta esse quorum
sanctior esset omissi^: tolerantur tamen; quia neque^ut fundit (...) erus.
Englished thus. They object again* and labor greatly to draw us into the like
cause: does not the church say they either practice in like manner such things,
or at least permit such things to be done, in going on pilgrimage, in
worshipping Images, in Torches, Tapers, and Candles, in holy Water, and in
exorcismes? Is it not daily said, if one abide nine days in this church, if he
be sprinkled with that water, or if he make vows to such an Image, or do any
such thing, he shall presently be healed, or have his desire, I grant we
can it not deny, that many things are practiced among Christians, under
color of religion, which to omit and leave undone, were a more holy thing:
nevertheless the Church does tolerate them, because she cannot utterly abolish
the same,

Again, the same Doctor has these words; Gerson vbi supra.
At ob^jciunt; quare non possumus daemonem cogere ad pr^standum humana quadam
obsequia, cum sacerdotes hoc facere tentant ordinary? responde^, si coactio
daemonis aliter expectetur, quam per miraculum, Deo specialiter cooperante,
^stud falso creditur, and pericul^^e quaeritur: falso quid^^^propter libertatem
daemonibus* insitam, quae nec ab istis corporalibus quibus perfectior est, nec
a carminibus cogitur: is^^d antem periculose quaritur, quia hostis est
dolosissimus, and tunc fingit se compelli per tales ritus impios, quibus
honorari quaerit, and animas perdere. Englished thus. But they object; why may
we not compel the devil to do humane duties, seeing the Papists do daily
take in hand to do it? I answer* if the compulsion of the devil be
otherwise expected, then miraculouslie by Gods special handy-worke; it is both
fa^ly bel^eued, and dangerously assayed: falsely, by reason of the natural
power of devils, who neither can be forced by verses, nor yet by any corporal
creatures of less perfection then themselves: dangerously, because the devil
is a most subtle enemy, who then faineth himself to be compelled by those
impious rites, with which he seeks to be honored, and to destroy our souls.

The same learned writer, in an other place has these word^* Gerson. cont.
superst. med. part. 1. (...) abseruat. diorum, concl. 6.
Sicut vera and Christiana fides mirabilia operatur in bone oradeutibus, sic
and fals^^ and mal^ creduli^^^ deo permittente (...), vel (...), dominus (...)
adharere a^quibus vanis observantijs, permittit aliquos eventus contingere, and
ita eos plus consequenter firmari in ta^i opinione, vt mayor fiat cacitat
little, and in laqueum cadant quem sibi fecarunt. Quicquid. n. mali evenit t^li
die, imputant malitiae ^iri, and (...) aspeciunt ad ea, quae ben^ and prospere
successerunt tali die a deo. Vnde merito deus permittit tales deci^i, and in
laqu^^s su^ credulitatis v^n^ incidere. Englished thus. As the true Christian
faith, works miracles in the true believers; so does a wicked false
credulity by God^ permission, work sometime, or rather demerite evil events.
Yea, while the Lord perceives them to be too much given to vain and fond
observations and superstitions, he permits such events (or miracles) to
happen, and consequently, them by that means to be more confirmed in such an
opinion, that their blindness may be the greater, and they catched in their
own snare. For whatsoever evil chances such a day, they impute it to the
wickedness, malice, and ill fortune incident to the day; and they regard not
those things, to which God has given good and prosperous success upon such a
day. Wherefore God does worthily suffer such to be seduced, and to fall into
the snares of their vain credulity. Thus writes Master Gerson, a very
famous papist, and a learned man indeed. Out of whose doctrine I observe sundry
important documents, as well for the instruction of the indifferent Reader, as
for confusion of the obstinate papist.





viz. that the church does tolerate them, because it cannot altogether abolish
the same.









To which I must needs add as a delicate p^st-past, for all the Jesuits and
Iesuited papists: that the supposed miracles done by papists, are often
counterfeit, and plain Legerdemaine. This I will not barely say, but after my
wonted manner prove it: even by the testimony of their own popish writers*
Mark well (gentle Reader*) what I shall truly deliver thee in this behal^.)
The papists in their book intitulted the Jesuits Catechism, have these
express words. Lib. 3 cap. 16. fol 174.
The kingdom (of Portugal) being fallen to Sebastian, the holy Apostles, the
Jesuits conceived a hope, that by this means it might descend unto their
Family, and dealt with him many ways, that no man might from thence forward
be capable of the crown of Portugal, except the were a Jesuit, and chosen by
their society, as at Rome the pope is chosen by the college of Cardinals.
What a couzenage is this?
And for as much as he, (although as superstitious as superstition it self,)
could not, or rather durst not condescend thereunto, they persuaded him, that
God had appointed it should be so, as himself should understand by a voice
from heaven near the seaside. Insomuch as this poor prince thus carried away,
resorted to the place two or three several times: but they could not play
their parts so well, as to make him hear this voice. Thus write the learned
papists of France, in their book called the Jesuits Catechism. Which book
upon the good liking thereof, the English Secular priests have translated into
our vulgar language: to which story, I add this for explication sake, that
this young king (...) up under the Jesuits, and therefore they thought to have
drawn him to their lure and bate. And when they could not prevail that way,
they dissuaded him from marriage, and to go personally to the wars, in such
sort as they designed him. By which unchristian means he was cut off, and the
kingdom devolued to the King of Spain. For their only intent was this, to
maintain popery, and to suppress the Gospel.

I have proved this elsewhere: where I have made evident demonstration, that
popery is inseperably lincked with treason, and cannot consist without the
support of the Spanish king. There may the Reader find at large, In the
anatome of popish tyranny.
many other like miracles wrought by the Jesuits, as also their seditions and
traterous dealing every where. It were expedient for all simply seduced
papists, and for all such as are by any means carried and led into error by
the Jesuits (of which faction, there is too great plenty in this Realm) to
provide my Anotomie, and to read it again, and again: for in so doing, I am
persuaded and fully resolved, that all careful of their salvation, would
utterly abhor and detest all popish faction. The Iesuitical religion, (which
is the Popes own doctrine) is nothing else but an hoge-poge of Omnigitherum^ as
the secular popish priests have constantly avouched, in their printed books
divulged to the whole world. Alas, alas, how has the late Romish Church
bewitched us.

CHAP. XIX. Of Popish adoration, and invocation of Saints.
COncerning this controversy, I have written elsewhere at large: ^n the
Survey of popery: Where every thing is answered, that the papists can possibly
object for themselves.
I deem it here to be enough* to unfold that great superstition and gross
idolatry, which the papists commit in this behalf. The popish invocation of
Saints this day used in the Romish Church, is the self same, which the
Gentiles used in old time, when they did invocate false gods. I prove it,
because they have pecular saints for their several necessities: viz. Saint
Loy, for their horses, S. Anthony, for their Pigges, S. Roch, for the
pestilence: S. Steven, for the night: S. John for the day: S. Nicholas, for
their studies, Saint George, for their wars: S. Cosma, and S. Damian, for
their sores: S. Appolonia, for their teeth: S. Agnes, for their Virginity: and
others innumerable, for the like end and effect: they errect Church^ to their
saints: they frame images to them: they carry their images about in Procession:
they consecrate alters to them, they dedicate Holy Days to the^, they make
vows for the honor of them, they offer presents to their altars and images:
they put Lamps, tapers, torches and lights before their images: they kneel
down before their images: they touch them: they embrace them, they speak to
the^: they entreat them, as if they were yet livings yea, they seem to surpas
the folly and impiety of the Gentiles. For they ascribe their salvation to
their saints: even to such saints, as of whose saint-hood we may well stand in
doubt. They invocate Campion, Sherwin, Ballard, Heart, Nelson, and the rest of
that seditious faction.

Alphonsus, the Iesuit^, and late Rector of the English College at Rome,
caused the Organs to be sounded, and all the Students to come to the Chapel:
where himself having on his back a white Surplesse, and the stole about his
neck, sang a Collect of Martyrs: so after his manner, canonizing Campion the
Traitor, for a Saint. Such is the seditious impudency, of newly hatched R^mish
Jesuits, of which cursed brood, I have written at large in my Anatomy.

And least any Jesuit or Iesuited Papist, shall be able to deny, that they
ascribe their salvation to saints: (for they use to say, they make them but
Mediators of intercession, and not of salvation or redemption*) I will prove it
flatly, out of their own Books: yea, even out of their Church-seruice, which
I wish the Reader to mark attentively. In the Prayer of the Church of Rome
upon Thomas B^^kets day, some-time the Arch-byshoppe of Canterbury, I find
these express words: In Romans ^reviar. in festo Tho. B^cke^
Deus pro cuius ecclesia gloriosus pontifex Thomas gladijs impieru^ occubuit,
prasta quasumus vt omnes qui ^ius impl^rant ^^xili^^, petitionis su^ ^alutarem
consequantur effectum. Englished thus. O God, for whose Church, the glorious
Bishop Thomas, was put to death by the swords of the wicked: grant we beseech
thee, that all which desire his help, may attain the effect of their petition
to salvation.

This mystery is delivered yet more clearly in an other place, in these
express words: In Hymno Tho. Cant.
Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ scandere quo
Thomas ascendit. Englished thus. By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did
spend, make us, O Christ, to clime, whither Thomas did ascend. Lo, Thomas
Becket, dyed for us, and shed his blood to bring us to heaven, as the papists
teach us. It is therefore true by popish doctrine, that he is a Mediator, not
only of Intercession, but also of redemption.

In their Latin Primers delivered to the vulger people to pray upon, (which God
wot they understood not) they teach the people thus to pray: Orat. ad S.
Paulum.
Paul Apostole, ^e deprecor, vt ab Angelo Sathanae me eripias and a ventura
ira liberes, and in caelum introducas. Englished thus. O blessed Apostle Paul,
I pray thee, that thou will deliver me from the Angel of Satan, and defend me
from wrath to come, and bring me into heaven.

To S. James in this manner: Orat. ad S. ^acobum.
O faelix Apostole magne martyr Iacobe, te colentes adiuv^, peregrinos vndique
tuos clemens protege, ducens ad caelestia. Englished thus. O happy Apostle and
mighty Martyr James* help thy worshippers, defend courteously thy pilgrims
on every side, and bring them to heavenly joys.

Much other like stuff I could allege: but for brevity sake, I will
wittingly and willingly superseed many particular prayers made to meaner
saints, and come to the blessed Virgin Marie. Maria matter gratia, matter
misericordia, tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. In concept. B.
Virg.
Englished thus. O Marie, the mother of grace, the mother of mercy, defend thou
us from our (ghostly) enemy, and receive us at the hour of death.

Solve vincla reis, profer lumen caecis, mala nostra pelle, bona cuncta posc^,
monstra te esse matrem, sumat per te preces, qui pro nobis natus, tulit esse
tuus. In Annuntiat. B. Virgin.
Englished thus. Loose the bands of the guilty, bring light to the blind,
drive away our evils, require all good things for us, show thy self to be a
mother: let him receive thy prayers, who being borne for us, suffered to be
thine.

Veni regina gentium, dele flammas r^atuum, dele quodcumque denium, da vitam
innocentium. In visitat. B. Virg.
Englished thus. Come, O Queen of the Gentiles, extinguish the fiery heat of
our sins: blot out what is amiss* and cause us to lead an innocent life.

Again in the old Latin Primars, the people are thus taught to pray: Orat. ad
B. Virg.
In tuo sancto, tremendo, ac terribili iudicio: in extremis diebus meis esto
mihi auxiliatrix and salvatrix, and animam meam, and animam patris mei, and
matris meae, fratrum, sororum, parentum amicorum, benefactorum m^orum, and
^^nium fideliu^ defunctorum ac vinerum (...) aetern^^ mortis enligin^ libera:
ipso auxiliante que^ portasti, D. nostro Jesus Christo filio tuo: Englished
thus. Behold here most intolerable blasphemy, against the son of God.
O Glorious Virgin Marie, be thou my helper and savior in thine holy,
fearful, and terrible judgment, even in my last days, and deliver from the
mist of eternal death, both mine own soul* and my fathers soul, and the
souls of my mother; brethren, sisters, parents, friends, benefactors, and of
all the faithful loving and dead: by his help whom thou did bear, our Lord
Jesus Christ thy son.

Behold here most intolerable blasphemy, against the son of God.
Lo gentle Reader, these prayers (if they be well marked) do contain every
jot of power, right, majesty, glory, and soueraingtie, whatsoever is or
ought to be yielded unto our Lord Jesus Christ; yea, the two last prayers make
the Virgin Mary, not only equal with Christ, but far above him. For first,
the Virgin Mary is desired to defend us from the tortures of hell. Secondly, to
bring us to the joys of heaven. Thirdly, the last judgment is called her
judgment. Fourthly, she is called our Savior. Fifthly, she is requested to
save father, mother, brother, sister, friends, benefactors, the living and the
dead; and all this must be accomplished by the help of Christ her son. Now
by the former prayers, she is made equal with Christ: and by the last, far
above him. ipso auxiliante, by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ) for by these
words and the rest aforegoing, Mary does save us,

For the complement of this present subject, let the Reader observe seriously
with me, what a famous Dominican Friar Iacobus (...) V^ragine has divulged to
the whole world in this behalf. These are his express words: Quidam sancti
adiuvant in principio tentationis, quidamin medio, quidam in fine, sed B. Maria
semper adiuvat; and in principio, dando Vonstantiam: and in medio, dando
perseverantiam: and in fine, dando gloriosam coronam. Jacob. de vorag. in
assumpt. B. virg. sermon* 4. Englished thus. Some Saints do help in the
beginning of temtation, some in the midst, some in the end. But blessed Mary
does help at all times: both in the beginng, while she gives constancy, and
in the midst, while she gives perseverance, and in the end, while she gives
the crown of glory.

Again, in an other place, he has these words, Vbi supra. sermon. 5.
Nos autem debemus reginae caeli sacrificare corpora nostra, per
mortificationem vitiorum: sequitur, vnde legitur in vita. B. Dominici, quod cum
christus contra mundum duram sententiam proferre vellet, occurrit matter Christi
gloriosa* and dixit: bone fili, non secundum ^orum maliciam, sed secundum tuam
misericordiam agere debes. Englished thus. But we must sacrifice our bodies in
mortifying our fleshly desires, unto (the blessed Virgin) the Queen of heaven.
Wherefore we read in the life of Saint Dominick, that when Christ was
resolved to pronounce an hard sentence against the world, then his glorious
mother came unto him, and said. O my good son, thou must not do according
to their malice, but after thine own mercy. O intolerable blasphemy,


In an other place, the same learned Friar and professor of Divinity, has
these express words: Animas nostras semper custodit, haec. n. est illa
gallina, de qua dicitur Mat. 23. quae pullos suos custodit sub alis suae
pietatis, ab insidijs daemonum. Englished thus. She always keeps our souls.
For she is that Hen, whereof mention is made in Matthew: which keeps her
Chickings under the wings of her piety, from the snares of the devil, in
another place thus; Vbi. supra sermon. 7. fol. 2.17.
Virgo autem Maria est thronus misericordiae gratiae, and gloria est. n.
thronus misericordiae peccatoribus: gratiae justice, and gloriae beatis.
Englished thus. But the Virgin Mary is the throne of mercy, of grace, and of
glory. For she is the throne of mercy unto sinners, the throne of grace to the
just, and the throne of glory to the saints in heaven.

In an other place thus: De annuntiat. B. Virgin. sern. 5.
Obviat ipsa nobis auxilijs oportunis, dando nobis. s. panem gratia, virtute^
perseverantiae, and exaltationem gloriae. Englished thus. She comes to us with
helps in convenient time, giving us the bread of grace, the virtue of
perseverance, and the exaltation of glory. Thus writes this Iacobus de
Voragine, who was a famous Thomist, a Dominican Friar, and a professor of
divinity. Out of whose doctrine, (which he preached openly in the popish
Church to the people,) I gather plainly and evidently, most palpable idolatry,
and intolerable blasphemy, inseparably linked and necessarily employed, in
popish invocation and adoration of Saints.





Marie controwleth Christ, tells him what he ought to do, and causes him to
alter hi^ determination in judgment, according to her pleasure.

Virgin Marie has the custody of men's souls, and defends them from the
snares of the devil.



Which things being thus taught, believed, and practiced by the papists: I see
not what remains for them to do, but pull GOD out of his holy throne.

And yet this impious Idolatry and execrable blasphemy, is very current in the
Romish church. For besides that, which is already aleaged out of the Romish
church-seruice, whereby the same is proved sufficiently; the usual practice of
the papists, especially of the Jesuits, does evidently confirm the same. The
proof is at hand, because in the end of their absolution, which they impart
to every one that makes his auricular confession to them, they add these
words; Polanchus de modo ^udie^ di confessioner.
Passio D. N. I. Christi, merita B. Virg. Mariae, and omnium sanctorum, and
quicquid boni feceris vel mali sustinueris, sit tibi in remissionem peccatorum
tuorum, in augmentum gratiae, and in praemium vitae aeternae. Englished thus.
The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the blessed virgin Mary,
and of all Saints, be unto thee for remission of thy sins, for increase of
grace, and for the reward of eternal life. Behold here, the daily practice of
the Romish church. For first, we see the merits of Saints joined as a
fellow-commissioner, too and with the holy passion of our Lord Jesus. Then, we
see remission of sins and eternal glory, ascribed not only to the merits
of the blessed virgin Mary, (whom I honor and reverence in mine heart, as the
dearest child of God, and most blessed Saint in heaven) but also to the merits
of all Saints. Yet not only the blessed virgin, but God himself is by this
means, most highly dishonored, his holy name blasphemed, and his proper glory
given to his creatures. And for this end did the most blessed virgin, make
this answer to the Angel; Behold the servant of the Lord; be it unto me,
according to thy word. Luke 1. cap. ver. 38. Ibid ver. 4^.
And this unto her cozen Saint Elizabeth; My soul does magnify the Lord, and
my spirit rejoices in God my savior. Alas, alas, how has the Romish church
seduced and bewitched us?

Pantote doxa to Theo.
FINIS.
A Table, containing the principal contents of all the Chapters.
CAp. 1. of the original of popish primacie. Cap. 2. of the means of aspiring
to the same: Cap. 3. of kissing the Popes feet. Cap. 4. of power ascribed to
the pope. Cap. 5. of the antiquity of popish pardons. Cap. 6. of popish
dispensations. Cap. 7. of popish auricular confession. Cap. 8. of Priests
marriage. Cap. 9. of popish unwritten traditions, Cap. 10. of the popes
manners. Cap. 11. of the Popes tyranny. Cap. 12. of the abomination of popish
proceeding. Cap. 13. of popish purgatory, and of a challenge withal to all the
papists. Cap. 14. of the popes double person. Cap. 15. of popish general
councels. Cap. 16. of popish succession, etc. Cap. 17. of popish
excommunications. Cap. 18. of popish images and relics. Cap. 19. of popish
invocation of saints.

