The Temporysour (that is to say: the obseruer of time, or he that changes
with the time.) Compyled in Latin by the excellent Clarke Wolfangus Musculus,
and translated into French by M. Vallerain Pullain. And out of French into
Inglishe by R. P. 1555.

iij. Regum xviij. How long will ye hault on both sides, if the Lord be God,
follow him. But if Baal be he, then go after him.

IMPRINTED. Anno Domini. 1555. In the Month of Iulij.

Grace mercy and peace from God our everlasting father in the blood of
Jesus Christ, by the communication of his holy spyryte be multiplied unto the
(O Ingland) into the imbrafinge of the true honor of God in his word, and the
forsakinge of al Idolatrye and Ypocresie.
IN calling to my remembrance (O Ingland) thou cou^trye of my nativity, thy
miserable present state, overwhelmed with iniquity, wherein verity is exiled,
godlynes secluded, virtue defaced, fidelity suppressed, and truth imprisoned.
And on the other side, Falshod retained, lies imbrased, impiete cherished, vice
auaunced, Infidelity extolled, and untruth set at liberty, wherein true
relygion is altered into supersticion, the word of God into men's traditions,
the holy Sacraments into blasphemous sacrifices and supersticious Ceremonies,
and the true worshipping of god into execrable ydolatrie, wherein thy faithful
natural natyf King is changed into a supersticious unnatural forreyne
Prince. Thy worthy Maiestrates, Nobility and Rulers, into faint hearted
tymerous persons, ruled of other their inferiors. Thy vygelant Bishops and
faithful Ministers, into grievous wolves and bloudthurstye murderers. And thy
infinite number of Gospellers and faithful Christians, into dissembling
ypocrites, and hollow hearted Papists.) I co^sydered with my self what might
be the vndoupted cause of this so miserable an alteration: Psa. c. vij
for the certaynte whereof I repaired unto the word of God, Number. 16 ij. esd.
ix.
the only discloser of all truth in doutfull matters: whereas notably I
found, prou. 28.
Sin, to be the vndoupted cause of all these alterations, Esa. 3. 13.
plagues, and mutacions. For Sin was the cause of Adams expulsion out Ier. 5.
30
of Paradyse, Ezec. 23.
of the ouerflowinge and drowning of the world, Amo. ix.
of the consuming of Sodom and Gomor with brunstone and fire, Dani. ix,
of the often captyuitie and slaughter of the people of god: Iudi. 5. 8.
sometime by the Egiptians, Gene. iij.
sometime by the Madianites, Gene. vij
Moabites, Amorites, Philistians, Assyrians, Ge. 13. 19
Caldians and Babilonians, and the final subversion of Jerusalem by the
Romans. Iudi. 3. 4 6. 11. 13. iiij. Reg. xvij. xxv.
Even so is Sin now the cause that God takes away the light of his word
from us, and gives us over to error and darkness. Sin is the cause that he
has taken away our Mat. 24.
virtuous Kings and Princes, Lu. 19. 21
and instead of them has given us ypocrites to raygne over Amos. 8.
us. Ioh. xij.
Sin is the cause that he has taken away the hearts of our Nobility, Job.
18. xxxviij.
Counsayl and Captains in making them fayntharted and weakelinges, Job. 34.
being contented to submit their necks under the yocke of strangers. Dani.
iiij
Sin is the cause that God has taken away from his people, Esaias. iij.
his true Preachers, Leui. 26.
virtuous Ministers, and faithful Shepeherdes, Deuteronomy. 28.
in geuinge them over into the mouths of most cruel wolves, Iere. iiij.
ravening thefes and fugitive hyrelinges. 1. Reg. 28
Sin is the cause that God has sent a dasinge into Esaias. lix.
the hearts of his people, Job. xij.
to believe lies, and not to credyte the truth: but to grope after vanite, Iere.
vij.
thinking by playing the ypocrites, Eze. xiij.
to keep the thing that they shall most certaynely forgo. Nau^. iij. ij.
Tess. ij
Finally to conclude. Sin is the undoubted cause (as testifies the
scriptures) of al plages Amos. ix
misfortunes, Leui. 26.
ruynes, mutacions, captiuities, and destructions. Deuteronomy. 28.
And unless thou repent in time (O England) it wylbe the cause of thy final
desolation and utter confusion. For thou do even now norishe within thee,
those that shall consume thee. Esai. vij.
The Lord has whisled for them out of a far country, and they are spedelye
come, even those that shall ruynate thine honor, adnichelat thine ancient
worthiness, and bring thy prayseworthy fame to ignominy and shame. Oh Sin, how
odible art thou in the sight of ye most highest, that bring such confusion
upon them that has so friendly imbrased thee. O Ingland, thou receyuedst an ill
gest to herborowe, when thou waste contented that sin should lodge with thee:
whose love and friendship is the wrath and enmite of God: whose payment and
recompense is, captivity, destruction and desolation: for now thy pride shall be
rewarded with poverty, Esaias. iij.
thine abundaunce with scarcity, thy gredye purchasinge with dispossessing.
Esaias. v.
Thy sumptuouse buylding with rasing down, and thine ambytion with desolation:
yea the gorgiousnes of thine apparel shall be turned into rags and sackcloth:
thine abundant delicate fare, into famyne and honger, Esaias. iij.
and the cherished beautye of thy Ladies and dayntie Mistresses into
wytherednes and sun burninge. Their fair laid out yelowe locks into
baldness, for the time approaches that of force they must forgo their
trinkettes of pride, the which at the admonicion of Gods word they would not
abandon, as are their abyllements of gold, tawdrye laces, bongraces,
fardingals, tablettes, ringes, with their guarded and brodered raymente of
sundry fashions, counterfeyting all nations: and because their husbands have
vaynly supported them in the same. Their blood shall be shed in the streets,
says the Lord. Esaye. iij. This shall be the reward of Sin thy gest (O
Ingland) besides the grievous Idolatry wherein thou now lyuest, to the utter
woundinge of thy conscientie, against thy knowledge by ypocrisye: the only
mean to accellerat and bring spedye damnation upon thy head. Exodus 32. iij.
Re. 13.
For this Sin of ydolatry is so odious in Gods sight that at no time (as
testifies the scriptures) Number. 25
has ye Lord left the same unpunished: wherefore be thou most certainly
assured of his intolerable wrath and indignation, that after ye committing of
so many sins, instead of repentance do end in Idolatrye: yea, it is a
plain argument that thou art forsaken of god, and given over into reprobation,
Ier. xliiij
for this is ye sin (as witnesses the Prophets) that commonly Ezec. vi.
goes before captivity, slaughter, pestilence, famyne, desolation and utter
destruction. Oh consider, Luke. xv.
I pray thee (O Ingland) how far thou art already strayed from the shepefold
of Christ, by one little storm of te^ptacion. Oh how clean art thou blown
away from the port of health, by one blustering blast of a busy Bishop. Oh how
is the ship of thy common wealth now tossed through the vnskylfulnes of one
that rules the helm. O how are thy faithful Christians induced to play the
dissemblinge ypocrites, in communicatinge at unlawful services and blasphemous
ydolatries, by the instigation of a few unlearned Papists. ij. Tim. ij
Where have thou learned in the time of a storm to abandon the helm, Math. x.
in the time of war to contracte amyte with the enemies i. Pet. iij.
of thy Captain, and in the time of trial, to cloak and dissemble thy faith?
This has not the word of God taught thee, although thou pretend diverse
excuses for the same: but rather the love of thy self, of the world, of thy
goods and riches, thy lands and possessions, thy wife and children, thy
fylthy pleasures, and fleshly delites, the which al, thou thinking by thy
dissimulate ypocrisie to save and preserve, thou shalt most certainly lose and
forgo, as witnesses the verytie, saying: Whosoever goes about by any
fraudulent means to Math. x.
save his life, Mar. viij
he shall most certainly lose the same: yea, Luke. ix
even this transitory life, beside the perpetual damnation of soul and body in
the life to come. For the Lord will reteyn no such soldiers in his Camp, as
shall bear a flattering face toward his enemies, and associate them selves
with his adversaries, he will have no such serving men in his Court, iij. Re. 18
as shall halt on both sides, Apoc. iij.
being neither whote nor cold, sekinge to please two contrary masters, Math. vi
God, and Mammon: yea, he accoumpteth all those pretensed friends, for utter
enemies, that will vysite the table of deuylles, i. Corin. x ij. Cor. vi
and his also: that seek to couple Christ with Beliall, light with darkness,
righteousness with unrighteousness, the beleuer with an infydell, and the Temple
of god with Images. In all these things thou art coulpable O Inglande, through
thy dissimulate ypocrisie, in declining from the truth: notwithstanding thine
earnest promise, vow, and consent, to continue a faithful Soldier, a true
servant, and an unfeigned friend: for who is he in thee, at this present (a few
only excepted) that either for fear of men, or love of the world does not
abandon the persecuted, imprisoned and exyled congregation of God, his faithful
servants, and join himself with the company of Idolaters and masmongers his
enemies? who is he that is not now contented to abandon the table of ye Lord
the holy communion and Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and to unity
himself unto that sacrifycing bloudye altar of the blasphemous bredde^ God,
the romish Idol? who is he that does not now with all diligence (instede of
the lively water of Gods holy word truly preached) repair unto the fylthy
puddels of men's superstitious doctrines, therewith to satisfye their thyrste?
yea, who is he now in thee, that notwithstanding before time he condemned with
knowledge of conscience all manner of Images and Idols, that does not now daily
repair unto the Temples of Idolaters, in whose company and that before their
Idolles, they pray, they knele, they are bareheaded, they lift up their
hands, they receive holy water, and holy bread, with diverse other exterior
iestures of the body: And yet (that worst is) they affirm they do not offend
in as much (as they say) they do it not with the consent of their heart, but
only with the outward iesture of the body, and therefore no sin, in as much
as the Lord only requires the heart, Roma. x.
the which they give unto him: as though there might be made a separation of
the soul and the body, in dedicatinge the one unto the service of God, and the
other to Idolatry: as though the Lord had not created the^ Gene. ij.
both, in vnyting and knytting them together, making but one man, reserving
them both to immortality: Deu. 6. 11
as though the Lord God did not earnestly require in his law of every one
Mat. 22.
of us, Mark. 12
our whole soul, heart, mind, strength, power and outward man: Luke. x.
and yet they contrary to this knowledge, do make a separation, whereas the
Lord has made so perfyte a conjunction. But I fear me this their separation
tends to none other end, but to deuyde themselves wholly from God both in
soul and body, for he will not have the one without the other, neither is he
pleased with half of his creatures. Wherefore if he yt detesteth whoredom,
flees the stews and company of whoremongers: if he that hates swering,
auoydeth the fellowship of blasphemers: and if he that loves quietness
refrayneth the company of ruffians and quarellers. How much more ought thou
(O dearly beloved) if thou dydest in deed hate Idolatrye, as thou pretendeste
in word, to avoid and flee the company of all Idolatres in the committing of
their Idolatrye: how much more I say ought thou to avoid their brothell
houses and stews, their sink and puddel of fylthy Idolatrye, and that not
only with the heart and mind, but also with the body and outward iesture. For
the Lord does not only require (as witnesses saint Paul) Roma. x.
the confydence and belefe of the heart unto iustifycation, but also the
outward confession of the mouth and exterior conversation unto salvation.
Number. xi.
Let not the greasy fleshpottes of Egipte, I mean the pleasures of this life,
so much sincke into thy mind, as for the enioyinge thereof, thou be contented
to abandon the church of God in the desert, ij. Petr. ij
and return to thy filthy puddel again. Set rather before thine eyes the
examples of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all other godly men
from the beginning, who all as necessytie required have abandoned wyllingly
their pleasures, Ebre. xi.
forsaken their commodites, relinquished their natyue country, hasarded their
lives, shed their blood, and patiently endured the most grievous torments of
tyrauntes for the testimony of the truth, rather then they would either in body
or in mind communicate with the ungodly in any untruth. Why rather do thou
not practyse in this raging storm of temptacion, the worthy examples of
Daniel, Tobias, Eliezar, Sidrach, Misech, and Abednego, with diverse others,
Dani. vi.
contained in the holy scriptures: Tobie. i. ij. mac. vi
who all would give no place, (as touching their religion in the true
worshipping of God) unto the contrary co^mau^deme^ts of wicked Princes. Dani.
iij.
Then the examples of Nicodemus, Ioh. iij.
Joseph of Aramathia, and Naaman the Syrian, Ioh. xix.
which seem to you to color your ypocrisy withal. 4. Reg. ^
But they being rightfully wayed and truly understood, measured with the
line of God his holy word, shall little defend your wicked atte^ptes, but rather
dyrectly confute the same. The which thing to accomplish, because I of my
self am utterly insufficient and unable, and for the tender love that I bear
unto my native country, whose salvation in Christ Jesus, I continually wyshe for
as mine own. I have taken upon me to reduce into our natyue tongue (according
to my promise in my former translated Book) a worthy work that latelye
happened into my hands, no les necessary then profitable and no les
profitable then Godly for this present time. The which does most dyrectly and
inuincyble answer to all manner of objections and wrong alleged examples that
may be produced for any dissimularion in religion. Compiled iu. iiij. Dialoges,
by the faithful servant of Jesus Christ, and excellent learned divine,
Wolfangus Musculus, for the comfort, edifycation and instruction of his
contryemen the^ Germaynes, then oppressed by the tyranny of Antechrist in his
fylthy me^bres. And now I dedicate the same unto the (O England) with the same
mind for thy singular premonition and consolation in these thy days of
aduersytie and myserye, oppressed with the life (or rather greater)
Antechristian crueltye and tyranny. In this Book are.iiij. Collocutors or
speakers aptly set forth of the Author. The first is named, Eusebius, who
according to the signification of his name occupies the place of a faithful
Christian, always perseuering in the fear of God, void of all dissimulation,
having always a true and lyuelye faith, without declining at any time from
the same, for any thing that the devil, the world, or the flesh ca^ do, or
ymagine. The.ij. is called, Irenius, who as his name imports, is all together
peace able, and a lover of unity and concord, and therefore he perseuereth in
his accustomed manner of living, without caring for any trouble that ryseth
through any alteration of religion, wherein he differs from the other two, in
as much as he does not condemn all religion, as does the Mondayne, nether yet
is he so variable as is the Temporisour, but for all that he swarueth from the
rules of a true Christian, in that the peace and tranquillity of the common
wealth is more dear unto him, then is the glory of God, the flourishing of his
word, and his own salvation. The.iij. is named the Temporisour, because of his
dissimulation, who observes more the time, then the rules of a Christian,
tendering his own salvation. The last is called Mondayn, that is to say: a
worldly man, or an infydell, who has neither God, nor any religion, in any
reputacion. These.iiij. persons thou shall hear speak in these Dialoges, and
that so aptlye and decentlye, that (if they had the like grace in the Inglishe,
as they have in the French) thou would rather judge them the lively voices
of men then otherwise. As it is, take it in good worth, as a testimonye of my
good will and earnest zeal unto my native country. Trusting gentle Reader,
that after thou have diligently perused the same, and examined it with the
touchstone of Gods word, and thine own conscience, thou will search no more
excuses to cover thy dissimulatio^ and impiete withal. For truly such
invented excuses are manifest arguments of the utter contempt of the son of
God and his Kingdom, as the Parable of those that were inuitated to the marriage
does notably testifye: Mat. 22.
wherefore flee all excuses, Luke xiiij
and come unto the banquet now while thou art called, least thou with thine
excuses be for ever excluded, and peraduentur never after called again. Mat.
xix.
Woe worth those oxe^, that farm, Luke xiiij
that wife, or any other earthlye pleasure, that shall stay us from coming
to that celestial supper, whereas thou shalt behold the son of god friendly
imbrasing thee, saying: Come thou blessed of my father, and possess the life
everlasting, mate merye, and rejoice, the Lord grant you to be found in the
noumbre of those his gestes in that day, Mat. xxij xxv.
having on the wedding garment, and not amongst the folishe slepinge vyrgins,
who, having no respect unto the coming of the brydegrome, Mat. 24.
were shut out from the marriage, Mar. xiij
whose triumphant coming I assure you is not far of, Luke xix. xxi.
for the signs going before the same, have already appeared. ij. Tess. ij
The son of perdition is reveled, Iniquity has already the vpperhande, i.
Tim. 4.
The love of many is abated. What a noumbre is there that depart from the
faith, in giving head unto spyrytes of error, and deuylish doctrines of them
that speak lies through ypocrysye. How are men now become lovers of them
selves? ij. Tim. iij
Covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient, unthankful, ungodly,
unkind, trucebreakers, false accusers, traitors, highmynded, despysers of
them which are good, gready upon voluptuousness more then the lovers of God,
having a similitude of godliness, but have denied the power thereof: whose
madness is now made apparent unto al men. These are the tokens as witnesses
the scriptures, that shall immediately go before his coming, as ye blossom and
leaves of ye fygtree before the So^mer. The which tokens if they have lately
appeared, or no: I appeal to all men's consciences. Wherefore ye holy ones of
the lord rejoice, for the day of your redemption draws nyghe. And in the
mean time the Lord Jesus, the only Savior of our souls grant unto every
one of us his holy spyrite, to thend that we understanding these things may
^yefullye bear in our bodies the mortification of the LORD Jesus, to thend
that the life of Jesus Christ may appear in us, his grace and peace be with
you all. AMEN.

R. P.

The Temporisour (that is to say: the obseruer of time, or he that changes
with the time.) Compyled in Latin by the excellent Clarke Wolfangus Musculus,
and translated into French by M. Vallerain Pullain. And out of French in to
Inglishe by R. P. 1555.
The first Dialoge.
The persons or Colocutours are, Eusebius, the Temporisour, and Mondayne.

Eusebius. I Cannot sufficiently conjecture what will be the fynall end of this
so perverse and corrupted world. Which is so strange, so wicked and
troublesome, that a Christian man can find no place (no not among those that
have, or seem to have the knowledge of God) to rest in. Many years has it
been argued and debated, how to know the veryte from the error, the truth
from the lie, and the light from darkness, as well in the doctrine as in the
Ceremonies of long time used in the Christian church. And this contencio^ has
not been sinal, but has cost much christian blood. The which thing finally
could none otherwise be resolved and brought to pass, the^ by only cleaving
unto the holy Scriptures, in searching therein the veryte, taught unto the world
by Christ and his Apostles, and that being ones found out, not only
reuere^tly to embrace the same, but also to forsake all erroneous and
supersticious doctrynes, were they never so old, and so often confirmed by the
universal authority of the Church. The which thing to bring to pass, diverse
excellent personages have not only employed their pryuate study and labor,
but also publicly without al fear have auaunced the same, by the aid and
Authority of the ordinary Maiestrates. So that in diverse places all
Papisticall doctrine and supersticious services were utterly abolished, withal
their false constitucions, which rather seemed an apyshe maskinge, then a holy
ecclesiastical ministratio^. The land of Almayn was also replenished with
plentye of good Books, compyled by sundry excellent Clerks, both learnedly
and godly. Yea the noumbre of Bybles of the old and new Testamentes were
infynite: which not only the learned but also the vulgar people did
diligently read. Every where and in every Temple was contynual preachinges and
sermons agreing in one unite of doctrine. There was no place in the land but
ye should have heard song the psalms of David: yea, the wisdom of God did
cry in the streets. And to conclude it seemed that in these last days, the
true religion and the simplicity of the ancient Church (so long time
defaced) was perfectly restablished and restored again. But now for one little
myste and storm of temptacion, which is suddenly happened after so long a
caulme and fair wether, diverse are become so afraid that they are utterly
declyned and fallen back to those supersticions before expelled. And of which
noumbre some are so reuoulted, that not only they do willinglye abandon the
verite manifestlye known, but also persist in tearing and renting the same with
their abominable blasphemes, to the end it might not appear that they are
turned from God, but from error and heresye, in making their reuoultinge to
seem no reuoulting, but rather a repentance and reconsiliation. The other
sort although they use no such blasphemes against the truth, but as they have
known it, do keep it secretly hyd in their hearts: yet nevertheless they do
not refrain to assiste and to present at ye execrable mass and supersticious
ydolatryes, no more the^ the first. And do not only dissemble that which is in
their hearts, but also ye worste is against their own knowledge and
conscience, they do outwardlye make a show of that thing, that they do not
inwardli aproue, but detest and hate. And yet nevertheless in doing hereof
they do curiouslye search the means to heal the secret gnawing of their
wounded conscience. They write to diverse learned men, to know the certayntie,
whether it be lawful for a man that has knowledge, to communicate and be
present at the supersticious Ceremonies, or rather Papisticall blasphemes of
the ungodly, or no? They make semblant to enquire of those things as though
they did not know, what a man fearing God ought to do, or leave undone. But
most of these do it not because they would learn, but rather to the end they
might find some stay and comfort in the abusing of their consciences. But
what man is that, that is so ignorant of God, and of all religion, that
directly understands not, that this question no thing apperteyneth unto those
that truly fear God? nevertheless I will more dyligently from henceforth
advise my self, how I may directely answer those that shall interrogate and
question with me hereof.


Mondayn. I cannot tell what deuylishe rage has of late occupied the minds of
a sort of fools. They do complain of these folyes that has brought all the
world in trouble, in the which also there is so little certytude, that for ye
space of these.xxx. years they have contended together without any agreement,
or certaynte therein. And this evil is not new. For what time has there been,
that this supersticious contencion has not vexed and troubled the world?
Through a heap of foolish questions, of God, of the true service of God, of
the truth, of the religion, and I cannot tell what other fantasies. At whom I
laughe at pleasure, without bynding my self to any manner of religion, unless
it be to my commodity and profit: and so I find my self most at rest and
ease, using all things at my pleasure, in casting a side al solicitude and
care, that occurreth and happens by the occasion of religion. But me thinks I
see yonder my Cosyn Temporisour, who is in mine opinion wyser, then a great
many of other, in that he has without any great difficulty abandoned this
new found religion lately introduced. For as I remember it is not past xx.
years agone, that this fantastical new opinion began to budde forth and
reuyue. And then this fellow was one of the first that changed his opinion,
according as the time then required. And hitherto there has no evil happened
unto him therefore, as it has done unto diverse others. For he has in every
condition sought to live at his ease in pleasure, and has wittely wound him
self out of many troubles, wherewith amongst the rest he was afflicted, and
that not only in his outward co^uersacion, but also inwardly in his
conscience. He has now persisted and continued in this liberty that they
term (Christian) as long as it served to his purpose and quietness. But now in
as much as he cannot persevere therein (the time so altering) without ymmynent
danger both of body and goods: he loves rather to follow the thing that
serves to his commodity, then as abedlem to put him self in danger for so
uncertain a hope. And therefore now he begins to strike his sail, and
frames him self unto the present time. But herein, he and I do differ. For I
do not care of any manner of religion, nor any opinions of the same, nor do not
pass a straw to semble or dissemble in any manner of thing that is. But he
contrary wise (although upon every mocion he does change his opinion,
accommodating himself unto the time) cannot refrain his heart from this
conceived rage, but continually (as a sort of other fools do) tormenteth and
vexes him self therewith. And in this he is more unfortunate and unquiet, then
I am: in that he cannot all together vnborden him self of these fantastical
opinions, as I do. And yet nevertheless he is more wise and prudent the^ the
other sort, the which (I cannot tell for what supersticion sake) do submit and
give over them selves to a thousand manner of myseries and afflictions, leading
a difficile and perilous life as well for the^ selves, as their friends: and
finally do fall into diverse extreme dangers. But now I will call him. Whence
come thou Temporisour?


Temporisour. I come from the College, and from the ser^yce of the blowers and
organ players.


Mondayne. What have thou done there, seeing that thou art not accustomed to
haunt that place?


Temporisour. If I had the liberty, that I had in time past, I would not now
haunt those services, that my conscience so much abhors: but I am now
constrained to do otherwise, then I have been accustomed, if I will avoid to
fall into extreme dangers. And thus has time altered my doings.


Mondayne. Thou do wyselye in mine opinion: for what have we to do with
those strifes and co^tencio^s, that are risen up in our days, amongst the wise
vain and idle persons? Let us obey those that rule, and have the auctorite
to order these things, and can do unto us good or evil, well or woe.


Temporisour. Even so I do, and so live in quietness as concerning the world.
But for all that, my conscience is wonderfully troubled.


Mondayne. Wherefore I pray thee?


Temporisour. Astest thou that? Do not thou know that those sin grievously
that do any thing against their conscience?


Mondayne. That is nothing else but a dream of ye Theo logians, which I have
oftentimes heard before: but I pray thee, consider dyrectly what manner of
conscience thou have.


Temporisour. Be it as be may, I sin as often as I do any thing against the
same.


Mondayne. I will not enter in disputacio^ with the touching the quality of the
conscience: but I demand of thee, if thou think that the Princes and
Maiestrates that constrayne thee to go to the seruyces of the Papists, are not
moved thereunto by their consciences: to wit, to restablishe by their power
and auctorytie, the old accustomed Religion, that has been abolished these
certain years?


Temporisour. I will not deny, but that it may be, that some of them do it,
their consciences mouinge them thereunto: but it cannot be also denied, that
diverse of the^ do so live, that it is not possible to judge whether they have
any conscience, or fear of God, or no.


Mondayn. Thou may not for all that doubt, but that they are constituted in
authority, and have power over their subjects.


Temporisour. I do acknowledge and allow their power and authority.


Mondayn. What manner of conscience then have thou, that refusest to obey the
higher powers?


Temporisour. I do not al together refuse that, but rather think that they
ought to be obeyed only in worldly matters, and secular causes, and not in
religion. I think certainly they have authority in temporal regimentes, but
not in men's consciences, which are subject unto one only God.


Mondayn. Thou abusest thy self, wherefore lay a side this thy foolish and
scrupelous conscience, and desiste from all care and pensyfnes of mind, which
consumes thy body without any occasion or purpose. And know this, that the
Maiestrates have received auctorytie over all things: they have in this world
all manner of power and preeminence. Art thou ignoraunte of this saying: (
Dimidium imperij cum Jove Caesar habet.) Jupiter and Caesar have the Empire
divided between them. And because thou shalt not reiecte this, as the saying
of a Panym: see how the scripture confyrmeth it. Psalm. 115.
The heaven is the Lords, but as for the earth he has given it unto the
children of men. God has no manner of care of these things that he has
committed unto ye power of those that he has or^e yned Monarchs and
Governors of the ^orld: to thend they may at their pleasure or^eyne the state
of religion, as it shall seem unto them expedient for the better order and
regi^^ent of their subjects, and to them we must ^beye in all things.
Furthermore thou have a wife and children, over whom by the appoyntmente of God
thou haste especial charge: by what conscience then I pray thee (seeing thou
do so often allege thy conscience) can thou abando^ and forsake them, in
withdrawing thy help from them, when they have need of thee? Furthermore thou
have thy neighbors, with whom thou art bound to live in peace and tranquilite,
as if thou wart but one bodi with the^: With what conscience can thou then
refuse their honest request to remayn and dwell with them, and do as they do?
See how thou art circu^uented and enclosed on every side. Above thee is the
auctorite of the Maiestrate, to who^ thou know and co^fessest we ought to
obey. Equal by thy side is thy wife, who is straytly commended unto thee of
God. Underneath thee are thy children and family, who all as right requires,
call upon thee for thy help. If thou then do abandon and withdraw thy helping
hand from them, have thou not falsified thy faith, as often times thy preachers
have taught thee? Near unto thee are thy neighbors, to whom thou ought to
be fyrinelye united, as one membre with another. I omit here what thou owe
of duetye unto thy self: wherefore then without any occasion do thou so much
afflicte and disquyet thy self in a matter so apparent, for a little folyshe and
scrupelous conscience sake? Follow rather my counsayl: frame thy self unto the
will and pleasure of the Maiestrates, not only by an outward simulation, as I
see thou do, but also with the inward mocio^, of thy heart, and leave those
disputacions unto the learned deuynes and prudent Maiestrates: if they think
mete to change old things, well, obey thou, let it suffyse thee that thou
haste been of that sect and opinion these.xx. years. If they think it
expedient to restablishe ancient customs, and to redyfye again that which
of late has been ruyned, content thy self likewise: if they make any
inhibicions, beware thou do not transgress against them: if they command any
thing, obey the same: and by this means thou shall please all men, and shall
be reputed prudente, discrete and well aduysed: and so thine affairs and
substance shall remain in peace and tranquillity, and shall possess the same
in quietness: for what follye is it to do that thing by constraynte and
compulsion that thou may do willingly, and although thou would est not do
it, yet shalt thou be compelled.


Temporisour. Truly thy counsayl is very pleasant and agreeable unto the
flesh, but for all that you have not as yet healed the wound of my conscience.
This is a good counsayl to concerue and keep my goods, but my conscience does
utterly reponge against it. For all that thou have alleged of the auctorytie
of the Maiestrates and Princes, and then of my wife, children and neighbors,
is not according to the word of God, as I could sufficiently prove by diverse
objections. But I perceive yonder Eusebius, who is a man truly fearing God,
and loving pure religion. I will speak with him, we must make a little haste,
for he goes apace, he has some book in his hand, it may be that he comes
forth to walk abroad to recreate his mind in meditating some good thing.


Mondayn. What occasion moves thee to go unto him, he is a simple
supersticious Idiote? There is no doubt but the book that he has in his hand
is a new Testament, that is to say: the doctrine of supersticion where withal
the world is troubled.


Temporisour. For all thy sayings: I will go to him.


Mondayn. I will go also, to hear what these fools shall deuyse together, and
learn by what means they do thus torment their conscience.


Temporisour. Hear thou Eusebe? Stay a little, if thy busynes require not to
much have.


Eusebius. Yonder comes he that I have diverse times desired to talk withal,
Eusebius speaks to himself.
to prove if I could reduce him into the right way: but I fear me it is but
lost labor, for he is a perfyte Temporisour as well in name as in fact,
such a one as believes for a time, and when temptacio^ comes, wythereth away.
And more over me think I see with him his Cosyn Mo^dayn, a man allienated and
divided from all religion. But for as much as he calls me, I will stay, and
see what he would have.


Temporisour. Whether go thou, Eusebe?


Eusebius. Into the feldes to walk, to recreate my spryte. What will thou have
with me?


Temporisour. Of long time I have purposed to come and vysite the at thy
house, to confarre with the of this miserable ruin of our religion, which
thing troubles my sprytes so much, that I ca^rest neither night nor day.


Eusebius. If it please thee, let us return then to my house together?


Temporisour. I am right well content. What will thou do Mondayn?


Mondayn. If I wist I should not offend you, I would be gladly with you at your
communication?


Temporisour. I shall be contented for my part.


Eusebius. And I reiecte noman: much less then will I refuse a neighbor. And
as the truth is compared unto light, even so is she not afraid to shine and
appear before al manner of persons. God wylleth, that we do assemble together
in his name, and has promised to be in the mids of us, I will go in before,
folowye both.


Temporisour. Peace be unto this house.


Eusebius. And to all those that enter in. Come let us go in yonder.


Mondayn. How many books, From he^ceforth Mo^dayn speaks as it were to him
self, for the other do not answer hi^, as nothing passinge on his say inges.
Even so we may not cast pearls before swyne. etc
and how little household stuff? Is there a more fool then this man?


Eusebius. Sit down at this Table.


Temporisour. We will, seeing thou biddest us. Sit thou down also.


Mondayn. I had lever sit at a table furnished with wine, then with books. I
see nothing here but papers, I would to God the rattes and myce had eaten them
all: for and these books were not, we should live in more peace in the world
then we now do.


Eusebius. Grant O Lord Jesus Christ, that we may profit in some thing to the
glory of thy name. Now Temporisour say what thou will, and we will hear thee,
and communicate together freely every one according to his conscience.


Mondayn. Yet again this conscience, what devil invented that name?


Temporisour. Thou know very well Eusebius, what my substance is.


Eusebius. I know it to be very great, the Lord grant that thou use it well,
and that thou may possess it, and it not thee.


Temporisour. Thou know also what a noumbre of children I have.


Eusebius. The Lord increase them, and keep them to his glory.


Mondayn. O fool what have thou to do with the glory of God? Think of thine
own.


Temporisour. I desire eue^ the same withal my heart. Thou know furthermore in
what reputacio^ I am in, with the Burgeses and Maiestrates.


Mondayn. Thou do well to think of these things, beware that thou doeste
not hasarde them to much.


Eusebius. I know all those things, my friend Temporisour.


Temporisour. Now am I come to this yssewe, either to hasard and forsake all
together, or else to join my self with other men, in being present at the
papisticall services and supersticions by dissimulation. Wherefore I beseech
thee in the name of God, that thou will tell me thine advise, if it be lawefull
without offense of conscience to him that knows the verity of the holy
scriptures, to be present at the papisticall supersticious services through the
compulsio^ of his superiors?


Mondayn. What a foolish question is this to enquire (if it be lawful) when
that necessite and constraynt teaches him, what he ought to do?


Eusebius. Thou may easelye gather mine advise herein, by that which thou
see me do, for I do that, that I think to be the best, if I had here in a
better judgment, truly I would put it in practyse.


Mondayn. If thou wart in his place thou would do otherwise.


Temporisour. I see well what thou do. Thou do keep thy self from coming
to any of the papisticall seruyces. But that notwithstanding I desire to know
if I may not be there without finne?


Eusebius. If thou might so be there, eue^ so would I, and also all other
that now abstain them selves thence: for I think it no more lawefull for thee
to be there, the^ for me. But first let me understand how thou do behave thy
self in this point.


Temporisour. How that I do behave my self? I do obey the ordinances of the
Maiestrates, and I come to their services according as they have commanded.


Mondayn. Therein thou do not foolishly.


Eusebius. Is it true? Do thou first of all the thing that they command
thee: and then ask if it be well done? Why dyddest thou not rather first ask,
what had been the duetye of a man fearing God, and after thou had known
the same, to have put it in practyce? Do thou not remember this old
sentence: first determyne, and then put in execution? But thou have done
clean contrary.


Mondayn. He has done both wisely and aduysedly, according to the present
necessity: but in the other thing he has done foolishly.


Temporisour. You have said well, but I was forced to do as I did.


Eusebius. Whereto then serves it to ask counsayl, if it be lawefull, or no,
seeing thou art resolved to do the thing that they compel thee? Consultacion
belongs unto those that are about to determyne a thing, the thing being as
yet nether done, nor begone: being in their faculty either to do, or undo:
those (I say) may receive profit by consulting and inquiring thereof. But
seeing that thou have lost this liberty, by thine own folly, I cannot perceive
to what end and purpose thou mouest this question, after it is done.


Mondayn. It is without all order.


Temporisour. I am not put from this liberty, but as I said before, I am
forced to do that the Maiestrates commands.


Eusebius. If thou be a christian man, thou can not be compelled to do an
unlawful thing.


Mondayn. This fellow is out of his wit: if he cannot be compelled, no man would
compel him: but they do constrayne him, ergo he may be constrained.


Temporisour. What can I not be compelled?


Eusebius. All their commandments have a condition annexed thereunto, to
wit, if any man will not obey, that he be punished.


Temporisour. It is so.


Eusebius. The^ may thou choose, either to do that they command, or else to
endure and suffer that which the condition annexed thereunto does threaten.
Thou may choose then, one or other.


Temporisour. I know all this to be true.


Eusebius. Seeing the^ that thou may choose according to thy pleasure, how
can thou say then, that thou art constrained: There can be no compulsion,
whereas there is election.


Temporisour. I cannot deny it: but it is dangerous to fall into the hands
of those that may oppress and subdue me. For fear whereof, I do that they
command me.


Mondayn. Wisely done.


Eusebius. But it is a greater matter to fall into the hands of the living god,
that is of power not only to kill the body, but also to cast the soul into
hell fire.


Mondayn. These fellows are afraid of shadows. They prate of a fire, yt noma^
as yet ever saw, and in the mean time they fall into burninge flammes that
apparently consumes them.


Temporisour. Thou say well. But I am so feeble that I am not able to endure
the punishment that they threaten me withal, if I do not obey them.


Eusebius. I know that the spyryte is ready, but the flesh is weak. But for
all that we are not to be excused, if through infyrmitie we do any thing yt
greatly offends the Majesty of god: we ought rather to complain of this
infirmity, the^ to seek means to excuse and cover the same. Let us purely
confess our sin, and not seek to hyde it, praying the Lord continually to
increase and confyrme our faith. But let us proceade further: I demand
secu^darely my friend Temporisour, what thou think in thy heart when thou art
present with the papists at their services? Thou dydst ask of me eue^ now, if
it be lawful for thee to be there. But what answers thy conscience to my
question? Thou cannest not be ignorant thereof.


Temporisour. Seeing thou askeste me of my conscience Eusebie, I cannot deny
but first of al before I went unto the papisticall services my conscience did
incessantlye admonish me that I should not go thither. She said that this
access and conjunction with the ungodly, was nothing else but a manifest
renouncinge of the verity known, and a confyrmation of all supersticion. She
threatened me also with the great indignation and wrath of almightye GOD, if
I did so. And that I should fall thereby into execrable blyndnesse, and other
horrible euylles. And after I had been there, she accused me of my fact, and
that at the first time very sharply: but after that every time that I went,
less then other: so that now in a manner I feel in my conscience no
repugnaunce of my going thither.


Eusebius. O Temporisour, if thou say truly, then art thou in the way of
reprobation, out of the which thou shalt not be able to escape, if thou do
not forthwith withdraw thy self: for it is a heavy burden, the condemnation
of our own conscience: and it is very dangerous to express and expel the
first mocions and pryckinges thereof, even the next way to make the heart
all together incensyble and without all understanding. And what requyreste
thou now Temporisour, but that I would take away these gnawinges and
prickinges of thy conscience, by affyrminge that thou may surely and
lawefullye go unto their superstycious seruyces, to the end that thou may
now do the same with a quiet conscience, that before thou dyddeste with a
sorowefull heart. If thou desire to know nothing but this, thou neadeste not
to inquire of me, for thou haste a teacher in thine own bosom, that is
sufficientlye able to instruct thee in that behalf. For by thine own proper
judgment thou doeste the thing that perteyneth not unto a Christian man to
do: and yet thou askeste whether thou do well or evil.


Mondayn. In all my life I never saw more greater fools, pestring and
troublinge themselves so unadvisedly about vanity and folly. Were it not
better all together to withdraw our selves from all opinion of God and of
religion, then to wrap our selfs in these troubles?


Temporisour. Thou killest me Eusebie, thou doublest my grefe. Before I most
myserably tormented my self with mine own judgment, and now in seking help,
I find present death.


Eusebius. I am moved to pytye, to behold thy miserable state, and not only
thine, but all other our poor brethren, that are oppressed with such
anguishes, by the wickedness of some me^, or by their supersticions.


Mondayn. Your myserye proceadeth not from the supersticion of other, but of
yourselues.


Temporisour. Leave, I pray thee these things, and come to the yssewe: what
know thou if the Lord will extend his mercy hereafter toward me: Do not
repute me amongst the noumbre of those that have no more hope of salvation, I
cannot yet despair of the grace of God. But now (I pray thee) answer
directely unto my question: and as touching that, that bordeneth my conscience,
let us omit it for a while.


Mondayn. Hitherto I have heard the purpose of your communication together: but
for as much as I am come hither, nether to dispute, nor to judge but only to
hear, I will leave you in your disputacion. Only there is one thing whereof I
will admonish you. Remember always yt necessity is a heavy burden. And now
I leave you, for I have other more greater affairs.


Eusebius. My friend, we will not keep thee from thine affairs. But thou
Temporisour, what wylt thou do?


Temporisour. Seeing that this my neighbor will depart I cannot with mine
honesty suffer him to return home alone, but will go with him, and afterward
will return again.


Eusebius. I will tarry thy coming. But I pray thee (if it be possible) bring
with thee thy friend Irenius, for he is a gentle person, and is not altogether
alienated from religion: and also the noumbre of three is more perfect, and
more mete for such a collation.


Temporisour. I will bring him, if I can.


Mondayn. Pardon me Eusebie in that I do depart, and break the purpose of
your communication. If I can do you any pleasure toward the Maiestrates of
the city, let me know it, and ye shall command me, I will not fail. I am
yours.


Eusebius. I most heartily thank you. Thou Temporisour, come again quickly:
least supper tu^^ approaching we be constrained to leave our disputacion.


Temporisour. I will come again strayghtway.


The end of the Dialoge.
The second Dialoge.
The Collocutors. The Temporisour. Ireneus, and Eusebius.

Temporisour. I Was very ill aduysed, when I procured Mondayn to hear our
disputacion. In mine opinion he is a very wicked man: it is to be feared that
he will utter all our communication unto the Maiestrates. Well, an other time I
will be better aduysed. I will make speed to call Ireneus: he is accustomed
about this time of the day commonly to be at home. I will see if he be there.


Ireneus. Some body knocks at the gate. Boy, go open the door.


Temporisour. What do thou Ireneus?


Ireneus. Nothing, but look here in an old book.


Temporisour. For as much as thou have no great busynes, would it not please
thee to accompanye me to the house of Eusebius?


Irenius. What to do?


Temporisour. To deuyse and commune together.


Ireneus. Paraduenture he is not at leisure.


Temporisour. Yes, that he is. And in so doing thou shall do him great pleasure.


I^eneus. Well, I will go with thee, I will not refuse the company and
communicati^ of honest me^.


Temporisour. I will go in before to lead thee the way, for I am better
acquaynted with this house then thou. I am here Eusebie, and here is also
Ireneus. If there be nothing happened since, let us pursew our former
communication.


Eusebius. There is some thing happened since your being here, but what then?
it behooves us alway^s to prefarre those things that concern our salvation,
before all other matters.


Ireneus. If there be any secret matter betwixt you, I will withdraw my self?


Eusebius. There is nothing so secret amongst us, but we can be contented to
communicate the same unto thee. We began not long ago to dispute: if it be
lawful for a man, knowing the word of God, to be present at the papisticall
services. And this question was first moved by our friend here Temporisour,
and for this cause is he come hither now, to understand mine advise herein.


Ireneus. Ye know right well both of you, how I have always behaved my
self in this variete of religion. Seking nothing so much as to live in peace
and quietness, for the mayntenaunce whereof I have contemned neither of the
parties: but used my self with indifferencye toward them both, having
always this desire, that by some good means these quarelles might be
qualified, and co^tencions accorded, that so much do alienate the hearts of the
faith full, and cause the wicked an unbelievers to mock our christianite. And
with the like good will I will be present at this your collatio^, if it please
you.


Eusebius. Sit here then. Assiste us O Christ by thy holy spyryte.


Temporisour. Now if it please thee Eusebie, consider dyligently the matter,
whereof we talked a little before.


Eusebius. I will do it gladly, with this condition, that ye both with me, will
dyligently consider this matter, not as a thing particularely appertey ninge
unto one, but as a matter common to all persons, to the end that private
affection and self love, do lead us to nothing beside the truth. And for
as much as by this our collatio^ our purpose is not to search out abare
knowledge without effect, but rather a perfect obedience, such as
apperteyneth to God and to his truth: Tell me therefore (I pray thee)
Temporisour, before we go any further in this matter: Nota.
what reverence thou will bear unto the truth, when thou shall be made to
know the same, without any contradiction?


Temporisour. Whereto serves this question?


Eusebius. Whereto? I will tell thee at ones. To thend we would not labor in
vain, for the glory of God, and thy salvation: for whereto shall it serve to
beat the air with our words? If you be not resolved in thy conscience, (after
thou know the truth) to frame thy life according unto the same in refusing
al unlawful things? Whereto shall we spend so many words in vain: And not
only in vain, but rather to provoke the judgment of God to fall more
grievously upon thee, and to incense his indignation against the. Art thou
ignorant of this saying of Christ: The servant knowing, and not doing,
shall be grievously punished? and therefore first of all determyne with thy self
what thou will do, when thou shalt know, what thing is commanded, and what
thing is inhybited.


Temporisour. Now can I promise any thing before hand what I will do, seeing it
is not in mine own power, but comes of the grace of god: Leave that then to
the grace of God, and begin as I have desired thee, to consydre and examyne
this matter.


Eusebius. I do not demand (O Temporisour) what thing thou wylt do, having
known the truth, but whereto thou art presently inclyned? I demand not of the
thing to come, but what the intencion of thine heart is now. It is two
things, to say what thou purposest to do, and to say what thou shall do. As
touchi^g things to come: It behooves him that has a good will and is already
inclined to godliness, to ask the grace of God for the performau^ce of the
same. But where as there is no will, nor determined purpose, to do the things
that are godli: it behooves him first of all to desire God to give him a will
to do well, who only (as witnesses the Apostle) accomplisheth and works in
us as well the will, as the deed. Protest and express therefore here (O
Temporisour) what will thou have presently, to thend that I knowing and
understanding the same, may wade in this matter accordingly. I pray thee
Ireneus, is not this my request reasonable? Ireneus.

I cannot deny it. For who is so much a beast that does not well perceive the
great follye yt rests in him that is sick, who continuallye calls for the
physician, and when he has him, will not follow his counsayl? Temporisour.

Yet I cannot express, what I have purposed to do, so much am I perplexed in
my mind, which is as yet inclyned hither and thither, without any resolved
determination. God peradventure will settle my mind to some good end, after
that I am aduertysed and resolved of the truth: and therefore I pray the (O
Eusebie) proceade unto the matter. Eusebius.

The condition of man's mind is very miserable, when that only we know not
what we shall do hereafter, but that least is, we are ignorant of that we will
presentlye. But go to my friend Temporisour, for as much as thou art not able
to make declaration of thy will, at least ways declare unto us, what it is that
you desyrest withal thy heart: thou shall find diverse that do complain that
they cannot feale in themselves no determined purpose and will: and therefore do
unfeignedly wish and desire, that they may have such a purposed will as they
do not as yet feale in their hearts.


Temporisour. I do most earnestly desire a stablished purpose and will. But to
affirm that I have the same all ready in my heart, I dare not.


Eusebius. If thy desire be such, that thou may ones settle thy heart and
mind thorowely, in that thing, wherein it is not as yet stablished, ^hou haste
no cause to despair, but rather to pray unto God our father, to stablishe in
thy heart this purpose to will well, and finally to lead thee unto the true
and perfect desire and study of godlynes by well doing.


Temporisour. I will dyligently fo^ow thy counsayl: wherein I desire thee to
help me with thy prayers. But I pray thee now begin to answer my present
question. Eusebius.

I will most gladly satisfye thy request in both. Three manner of co^munications.
First of all it is most certain, that there are three manner of communications
in religion. The one is necessary and of necessity. The other is indifferent
and lawefull. The third is neither lawefull nor indifferent, but all together
unlawful and prohibyted. In the first are comprysed al those things without
the which no man can be saved: and in this part, this question has no place,
to wit, whether the thing be lawful, or no? Temporisour.

I confess the same. But what are those things that are of necessity
necessary? Things necessary



Eusebius. The true and perfect knowledge of God ye father, and of his son
whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. The true lively faith, and the confession of
the same, unfeigned repentance, lawful obedience, fear and reverence of god,
invocation and prayer with faith, hope of good things to come, patience in
persecution and affliction, true and perfect love of God, and of our
neighbors, Out of ye church there is no salvation
and other like things, with out the which we cannot be saved. For by the
communicating of these things, we do communicate with all the elect of God,
without whose company and fellowship there is no salvation to be hoped for.
Ireneus.

There are very few Eusebie that do enquire after this manner of communication.
Eusebius

So much is the world blinded. The second manner of communication is, as I said
before, indifferent, tolerable, and lawful, herein are comprysed all those
things, that are free, indifferent and lawful. Temporisour.

What are they? Eusebius.

All those things that are not of them selves against the word of grace,
which is the gospel: to wit, meat, drink, clothing, observation of days,
and all other observations, by ye which the purity of the christian faith is
not violated nor defiled. To communicate in these things with the faithful,
if it be free, it is also lawful: and if it tend to charity, it is also
expedient.


Ireneus. What is that, that thou say: if it be free, it is also lawful?
Eusebius.

I said it meaning thereby to exclude all tyranny, by the which those things
that of the^ selves are free, to do them, or to leave them undone (of the
which also we have received no commandment of God) are nevertheless
commanded to be done under the pain of deadly sin: whereby the consciences
of the christians, which ought to be free, are made captyue and bond to the
commandments of men. For I affirm that those things have utterly lost
their freedo^, that otherwise in the^ selves are free, when that either through
costume, or laws they are commanded to be observed as things necessary (as
witnesses the Apostle. Colloss. 2
) Let noman (says he) trouble your conscience, about meat, or drink, or a
piece of a holy day, etc. And afterward (he says) ye are redeemed with a great
price, make not your selfs therefore the bond servants of men. Ireneus.

Some would here reply against you, that the words of the Apostle to the
Collossians by you aledged, do nothing serve to the purpose. In as much as he
does not there speak any thing of the commandments of the church but of
the commandments of the Moyesical law: for as much as in his time some went
about to make those commandments necessary.


Eusebius. It is true, that the Apostle speaks there of the observation of
the law: but I pray thee consydre, if there be any reason, to bind the
consciences of men by the commandments of Bishops: seeing that the
commandments of the law do not bynd them, which were not established by
men, but by God? Ireneus.

I maynteyne nothing: but I have alleged that now, that here tofore I have
heard of other men, only adding there unto this word. That those
commandments that thou call the Bishops commandments, Commandments
of the Church.
other me^ call them the commandments of the church, and therefore necessary.


Eusebius. Of what church?


Ireneus. That inquyre thou of them.


Eusebius. But thou Temporisour, what is thine opinion herein?


Temporisour. No church of Christ has any auctorite to command in the house
of God, Nota.
but only to obey. For she is the wife, and not mystresse.


Ireneus. As a wife she is subject to obey her husband, who is Jesus Christ:
and yet for all that she cease not to have authority over her children, to
command them: so say our Doctors.


Eusebius. I know it well enough. But I pray thee, which be her children to
whom she may command?


Ireneus. I think, all those that be Christians.


Eusebius. Who is then, this commaundinge church, if al children are but the
children of the church? I supposed that the church is so compyled and and knyt
together of Christians, as the body is, of certain me^bres. But these people
speak as if there were some one church by it self, yt has authority to
command all christian people, as her children. Ireneus.

They call this church Catholyke and Apostolical. The Catholyke church.



Eusebius. In this church is comprehended al christian people. If this be the
church that they mean, I would gladly know in what place was there ever this
catholyke and universal assemble of christians: in the which was ordained
these commandments, that they call the commandments of the church? Ireneus.

It is not possible that all Christian people could assemble together in one
place. But they say: that the Romayne church is abled into the place thereof, so
that all that ever she ordained, is auctorysed as if it were done by the
universal church. Eusebius.

They say so: but how do they prove it? Who has given the Church of Rome
this power?


Temporisour. We go clean from our matter: let us refer this question of the
authority of the church unto another time, and return to our former
purpose, from the which we have strayed.


Eusebius. Thou say well. Tell me the^ Temporisour, do thou reken and place
the papisticall services amongst those things that are free, indifferent, and
lawefull, or no?


Temporisour. The papists themselves do not say, that they are free and
indifferent, but necessary: but as for me, I do not exteme them amongst those
things that are lawful and free, but rather amongst those that are prohybyted.


Eusebius. Thou have given a good judgment. Let us now come to the third manner
of communicatio^ the which we call prohibyted or forbode^. Here in are
comprysed all those things that are contrary to the word of God, as are all
false seruyces, supersticions, men's decrees without the authority of the
word, invocation of deadsaynctes, and such other like constitucions.


Temporisour. Amongst the which noumbre, I judge the papistical seruyces to
have place, of the which now we are in question, wherefore tell me if it be
lawful by any means to participate at the same?


Ireneus. I give you leave to judge in these things as it shall seem unto you
good, although I can not accord there unto with you, yet I am contentend to
hear what conclusion you will make of this question.


Eusebius. I commend thy modefiye, Irenie: but come on Temporisour, thou
ask if it be lawful by any means to communicate and be present at unlawful
seruyces. First tell me what thou meanest by this, by any means? wherefore
rather do not thou plainly demand, if it be all together lawful to
communicate all manner of ways at these unlawful seruyces.


Temporisour. I understand that there are The communication of dissemblers
.ij. manner of co^munications: one is, in opinion, will, affection, and mind. The
other is only outwardly as it were in a certain outward behavior: and
forasmuch as my communication is, neither in opinion, will nor mind, but only
in outward iesture, I do not ask therefore, whether every manner of
communication be lawful (for I know the first to be altogether unlawful,) but
I require to know if it be lawful to communicate by any means, understanding
thereby the outward societe and communication.


Eusebius. Think thou that thou do not sin at all, by this outward
societe and conjunction with the ungodly in their supersticio^s, because thou
do not inwardly consent thereunto?


Temporisour. I suppose so: and therefore I make inquisition thereof.


Ireneus. Give me leave Temporisour, to say mine opinion. Thou semest unto me
to do in this behalf, as if one being apprehended amongst thieves in
committing of their robberyes, would excuse himself before the judge that he
did not steal, alleging that he stale with the^ against his heart and mind.


Temporisour. Thou speak very rudelye: and yet nevertheless, thou
co^municatest as well as I, at these papistical services, outw^rdly.


Ireneus. It is true, and inwardly also, and do not condemn my self in so
doing, for I exteme that to be laweful, that ye say to be unlawful.


Eusebius. Although Ireny^ thy last saying be false and untrue, yet dyddest
thou before (in my judgment) apply not far amiss the comparison of the these
unto the fact and question of temporisour. But tell me now Te^porisour, if in
these papisticall services, shere were committed, adulteryes, theft, and
effusion of innocent blood, would thou be present at them?


Temporisour. No, although I were constrained.


Eusebius. Wherefore?


Temporisour. Because I could not be there without sin.


Eusebius. Thou cannest not be without sin (as thou confessest thy self) in
being present and assisting of them that offend against the second table, and
yet thou ask if it be lawful to communicate with those that sin, (not
against ye second table) but that worste is, against the first.


Temporisour. Truth it is, that they do sin against the first table through
their supersticion, and impiete of their hearts, and what is it that gydeth ye
body thither.
but I do not so, for as much as I do not communicate with them in heart and
mind, but only in body and outward iesture. But in the societe and fellowship
of adulterers and thieves, I cannot outwardly join my self thereunto without
sin: who ever saw a body without a heart come to the Mass?
for then I should do against the commandments of God, which do not only
condemn the affections of the ^nynde, but also the outward fact of the body.


Eusebius. Well the^, thou groundest only al false services upon the
supersticion and impiete of the heart, and that, which is only done
outwardlye, is no sin: and herein thou think thy self to be excused, in
as much as thou do only commyt these things outwardly, without having any
reputacion or good opinion of the said seruyces, and supposest that thou do
not commit Idolatry with the Images of the dead saints, (in as much as thou
abhorrest them in thy heart) although thou do outwardly crouche and knel^ before
them.


Temporisour. I think so in deed.


Eusebius. Tell me the^: if thou had lived in the time of Daniel, what other
counsayl would thou have given to the three young men, the^ that, which thou
think presently to be lawful? or else if thou had been in their place,
would thou not have done, as you do now? Thou would have obeyed the
Kings commandment, and have kneled down with the rest.


Temporisour. No that I would not, for if I had done so, it had been sin.


Eusebius. Wherefore? Could thou not outwardlye have satisfied the Kings
commandment by outward iesture and worshipping, reseruinge always unto god
the adoration and worshipping of thy heart?


Temporisour. If I should say: that they might outwardly have obeyed the Kings
commandment with the rest, I am afraid to condemn those m^rtyrs of God,
that without any necessity they did abandon their lyue^s into danger: and
therefore it is better to confess the truth.


Eusebius. Thou confessest then, that in all false seruyces of Idolatrye, they
do not only sin, that being seduced through the error of their
understanding, consent there unto with their heart, but all those also that by
outward iesture do communicate with them?


Temporisour. I confess thy saying to be true in the example of the three
young men, which thou alledgest, but not in my doings.


Eusebius. Wherefore? It is all one, for ye adoratyo^ of al creatures is
generally prohibited.



Temporisour. For there it behooved them to worship the Image of a Panym and
Heathen Prince: but our worshippi^g (as diverse affirm) is another kind of
adoration.


Eusebius. As touching that point we will debate the same more amplye here
afterward in time and place when occasion shall better serve. But now the
question is, if that which thou do, may be excused, by that thou do
communicate at the papisticall seruyces, not with thy mind, but with the body
only. I have gladly co^farred this thine excuse, with the^ example of those
three young me^, to thend thou might perceive that thing not to be lawful,
which thou supposest to be laweful.


Temporisour. I am almost caught.


Eusebius. What aunswerest thou to that which the Apostle says: Romans 14.
the.xiiij. to the Romans: what soever is not of faith, the same is sin?
Thou can not in faith be present and communicate at those seruyces which thou
conde^nest: wherefore all thy doings therein is sin, because you do not the
same in faith.


Temporisour. How can I commnnicate in faith at that thing, which clearly
repungneth against the word of God, which is the only ground and foundation of
faith?


Eusebius. Thou say true: for undoubtedly thou can not communicate in
faith at that thing which thy conscience condemns.


Temporisour. I condemn it truly.


Eusebius. Then art thou also condemned in as much as that thou do, is not
of faith.


Temporisour. Give me the new Testament that I my self may see that text.


Eusebius. Hold, and read it: it is in the end of the Chapter.


Temporisour. Harken what the Apostle says: Happy is he that condemns not
him self, in the thing which he allows, for he that makes conscience to
eat, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever is
not of faith the same is sin. In mine opinion, the Apostle does not speak
here of unlawful things, but of things free and lawful, to wit of meats
which may be used with a safe conscience. And if any do use the same against
his conscience in that he thinks not the fact lawful, that person condemns
him self, for as much as he eareth not in faith. But what serves this to our
question, which is not of indifferent and lawful things, but of those things
that are of the^ selfs unlawful? and as for me, in my doings I do not
condemn my self although I do not inwardly approve these papisticall services.


Ireneus. Me thinks that the objection of Temporisour is somewhat pithy and
strong.


Eusebius. Truth it is, that the Apostle speaks there but of things lawful
and free. But for all that considre (I pray thee) if he be condmned that does a
lawful and free thing without faith, because he does not allow the same, but
condmneth it, and might for all that do the same without sin, if he did
allow it, and did it in faith: what shall we say of those that do things,
that are of them selves al together unlawful, which also they condemn? In the
doing whereof they ca^ have no faith, for as much as they do not allow the
same. If a medecyne that of it self is good, becomes hurtful thorough the
occasion of him that takes it, what would poison be to him, if he received
the same? For if the medecyne evil taken may anoye, how much more poison?


Temporisour. I confess that there is poison in the papisticall services: but
my soul touches it not, but my body only.


Eusebius. Likewise he that uses lawefull and free things evil, Nota.
receives them only with the body, and not with the soul: for in that behalf
(that is to say:) in spyryte, he does abhor them: and yet nevertheless
they condemn him.


Temporisour. That is true because they do condemn the^ selves in their
doings: but as for me, I do not condemn my self in my doings, neither yet
condemn my fact.


Eusebius. This answer would serve thee well, if our question were of
indifferent and lawefull things. But for all that thou do not condemn thy
self in the fact of unlawful and prohibited things: thou art never the
better thereby, but worse a great deal, then those that being blinded with
error, do not condemn their doings: as peradventure they would if they
understood by the word of God, as much as thou know.


Ireneus. If I knew this to be true that you say: I would never be persuaded
to communicate with them.


Temporisour. Yet again I am caught, without knowing any way to escape. The
saying of the Apostle does convince me.


Eusebius. Thou cannest not find a better way to escape, then to give praise
unto the verity, and change thine opinion. What aunswerest thou I pray thee
unto this general sentence: all that is not of faith is sin? Romans 14.
By this sentence is not only condemned all manner of eating without faith, but
also generallye all that ever is done without faith. Where is now become your
exterior communication and conjunction at the papisticall services, which thou
and other thy semblables do use, being so dyrecte contrary unto the word of
God, as your own consciences do testifye in condemning of the same?


Ireneus. If this be true, such people are in great danger.


Temporisour. When I go to the papisticall seruyces, The cogitacion of
dissemblers.
I judge it no great matterto disseble outwardli, seeing I do reserve faith
perfectly in my heart. I pray thee Eusebie, tell me, what seems unto thee of
this cogitacion?


Eusebie. For the first part: If thou have faith in thy heart, tell me, how
can the same be counseled and hyd? Thinkeste thou that faith is anydle thing
and without fact, and that she may be so hyd in the heart, that she cannot
appear out wardly? Faith is a fire: it is impossible either to hide her, or
enclose her, but that she will either cast forth flame or smoke. Psa. cxv.
The Prophet says and likewise the Apostle after him. I have believed and
therefore have I spoken. The faith of the heart is not dombe, but her violence
breaks the bars of the mouth: for of the abundaunce of the heart, the mouth
speaks says Christ. Math. xij
And the Apostle affyrmeth, that to believe with the heart, Roma. x.
iustifyeth: but to acknowledge with the mouth, makes a man safe. Take away
the confession of the mouth, and then is faith dead. Wherefore take heed and
beware that thy dissimulation and communication with the papistry, do not so
thoroughly hide thy faith that it quench not al together that little spark of
faith that is in thee. For as the fire loves and desires a freedom and
abundaunce of air, even so does faith desire to be known every where.


Temporisour. And I fear the contrary. That if I manifest my faith unto the
wicked, that then it will happen unto me, as unto those that show their treasure
and money unto thieves. Math. v.
And more over Christ himself does admonish us, that we should not cast yt
(that is holy) unto dogs and swyne, whereby I am persuaded that it is better
to hyde priuelye this treasure of faith then that it should be known of the
wicked, (who are to be compared unto dogs and swyne) least happily they do
tread the same under their feet, and destroy me.


Eusebius. Thou art then afraid of thy faith, as if it lay in the power of the
wicked, to take it away from thee. Truth it is, that thieves and robbers may
take away our treasure and riches, but the faith which is in our hearts,
cannot be imbeselled nor stolen, no, not of the gates of hell. Math. 16
The confession of the mouth, causes the faith (that is in the heart) to be
known: but it neither destroys it, nor loses it, but rather enterteyneth
it, and preserves it. For faith is of such a nature, that if it be not
communicated, it perishes: so much wants it that in hydinge it, thou shall
preserve it. Furthermore is it not a great follye of thee to think to hyde
thy faith by dissimulation: seeing that for the space of these twenty years
thou have alreadi inanifested the same to al people? Thinkeste thou that all
thy neighbors are so brutishe and ignoraunte that they do not know, that
this yt thou do, is no alteration of thine opinion in religion, but rather a
certain dissimulation? yea, and that not voluntarye, but by violence and fear
of the Maiestrates? Thou fear more this thing, then the loss of thy faith.


Temporisour. In doing the same (Eusebie) I do obey the counsayl of Christ,
Math. 10
who says: beware of me^, for they shall deliver you up, etc. As also, be
wise as serpents, without omitting of that which I resyted before: cast not
pearls before dogs and swyne, least they tread the same under their feet,
and after return and devour you. Thou know yt these things were spoken of
christ, to his faithful flock, to the end they should more diligently take heed to them selfs. Wherefore I se not why I should be reprehe^ded in keeping
secret my preciouse pearls, and in taking head to my self, least I fall
into the hands of the wicked.


Eusebius. I know well enough the sayings of christ, which thou have alleged
for thy defense: wisshing withal my heart that we all did know the spyryte of
Christ. If it be not tediouse unto the Temporisour. I will declare unto thee,
how thou do abuse thy self in the allegatio^ of these scriptures.


Ireneus. The hour is past, it is time to go home to supper, one less thou
wylt Eusebie, reteyne us thy self.


Eusebius. Ye see how I am prepared to entertayne my friends, nevertheless if
it please you to be partaker of such as God sends (with me) tarry. And I
will forthwith cause some thing to be prepared for supper.


Temporisour. It shall not need Eusebie, that we should so many ways moleste
thee, it has suffised that thou have patiently heard our fond communication:
we thank thee for thy good will. Nevertheless, to the end I forget not my
self, I pray thee (if to morrow thou have no greater affairs) that it would
please thee to give me leave to have access unto thee for an hour or two, to
end our disputacion.


Eusebius. Withal my heart, I am contented. Wherefore if it seem good unto thee
Temporisour, to morrow we will mete in thy gardyne. And thou Irenie if it
please thee, I pray thee be there also.


Temporisour. I am content.


Ireneus. Although I serve nothing to further your communication, yet God
willing I will be there.


Temporisour. Fare well then Eusebie.


Ireneus. Fare well.


Eusebius. God be with you both.


The end of the second Dialoge.
The third Dialoge.
The Collocutours. The Temporisour, Eusebius, and Ireneus.

Temporisour. IT behooves me to go betymes to open the gardyne, and tarry there
to receive my friends, as it apperteyneth.


Ireneus. Me thinks, the gardyne is opened, peradventure I have tarried
longest.


Temporisour. Come in hither Irenie, haste thou not seen Eusebius?


Ireneus. No. I feared to have come to late.


Temporisour. Thou come tymeynough: how lykest thou this garden.


Ireneus. It is very pleasant. Thinkeste thou that, that thou shall not
offend Eusebius with these delectacions? for as far as I can deserne he is
nor the man that takes any great pleasure in these things.


Temporisour. There is no danger, he knows well enough this garden, and
furthermore as thou heardest, he chose this place, wherein we might come to
gether.


Ireneus. It is very well: for it is my chief desire, that nothing be done,
whereby any man may be offended, and therefore. I pray thee take in good part,
all that I have said unto thee concerning the same. But see, he is here at
hand, let us go to mere him.


Eusebius. This is my inciuilite to come so late. I ought rather to have tarried
for them, and se they tarry for me: but it goes well enough, for I see them
pleasauntly disposed. Give us grace (O Christ) that we may perfectely treat
and debate this question: it is thy work and not mine.


Temporisour. Thou doeste me great pleasure Eusebie, in coming hither. I feared
least some let or trouble had happened unto the, that thou could not come.


Eusebius. There is nothing happened: but (that in coming) I thought upon our
question, in debating the same with my self, whereby I came the more slowely:
Wherein (I pray you,) pardon me.


Ireneus. You did well: and nevertheless, we have not tarried long for you.


Temporisour. Choose whether ye will walk under thy^ vy^^, or sit down at this
table, to fynishe our c^llation.


Eusebius. Seeing we are three, me thinks it better for us to sit down: to
the end every one may the better hear, and answer: and also propone more
deliberately, the which thing cannot so well be done in walking. But if your
desy^e be to walk, I am contented.


Temporisour. You have devised the best way.


Ireneus. And so it seems unto me.


Eusebius. Pardon me, although I begin first: for as much as I have promised
to answer unto the objections of Temporisour alleged out of the.x. and.^ej.
Chapters of G. Matthew. If so it be your pleasures:


Temporisour. I think it good Eusebie, in pursuynge thy promise, that thou do
prove unto us, whether I have alleged those scriptures, well, or no.


Eusebius. I will first declare, what is the true sense of the words of
Christ, Exposition upon the passage of S. Math. the. 7. cha.
and then we shall see how well to the purpose thou haste alleged them. It is
plain that by dogs and hogs, he does mean, all carnal, fleshely, cruel
and bloudthurstye men: to whom in no respect appertains holy things, no more
then pearls to hogs. And therefore the Lord wylleth, that we do not
wittingly manifest and declare the secrets of his Kingdom to such people,
confyaminge the same by two pro^^able arguments and reasons. The one, for the
conservation of the word and doctrine. And the other for the preservation of
the preachers and teachers of the same word. Least haplye (says he) they
doe^reade them under their feet, and in retourning do devour you. That which
he speaks of treading under their feet, is meant of the word of God, but
that which he rehearses of tenring or devouring, is meante of the mynisters
and preachers thereof. So that by these words his will is not, that the
secret mysteries of the Kyngdomme of GOD should not be publysshed unto the
world, or that we should not freely and expressly confess the veryfie of the
Gospel of God before the Maiestrates when we are called thereunto. As have done
the Apostles and an infynite nou^bre of martyrs before us. But rather, he does
adliyse and persuade us by these sayings: yt it is not good nor convenient
rashely to declare unto wicked and carnal men, the mysteries of the christian
faith, whereby comenly ensues nothing else but contempt and deri^io^ of
the same, with manifest danger of their lives. And to the same end and purpose
he uses these words in the.x. of S. Matheme. Beware of men, and be wise as
serpents. Do not thou acknowledge and confess, Temporisour, that this is
the true sense and meaning of the words of Christ?


Temporisour. I cannot deny it.


Eusebius. Let (...) seenow then if thou have rightfully alledg^ them for thy
purpose, or no Christ commands that thou do not throw forth they pearls
before wicked and fleshely people. But he does not will thee so to (...) them
in the ground, that the church never see them: for thou think that thou
may lawfully dissemble always, before all manner of men, Further ^^ore Christ
does not thereby inhibite the confession of the verity, but rather earnestly
commands and requires the fame of every christian man, and chefely when
they are called before the Maiestrates. But thou, becouse thou ^ilte avoid the
danger thereof, thou doeste not only dissemble and hyd thy faith, but that
worst is, thou do by dissimulation contrary to thy faith and knowledge in
communicating at unlawful seruice^ If this mean^s (...) escape were lawful,
then should we have no martyrs in the Church of God, neither yet any public
confession of the verity of the Gospel, so often commanded and practysed by
Christ and hy^ Apostles.


Temporisour. What is there then to be done?


Eusebius. What? That which thouse est me do. I abhore and detest as a most
stinking carrion, their present established religion, being wholly corrupted by
the ungodly Bishops through our demerites and sumes. I absta^e from the same
both in body and mind, withal my famylie, and at home. I instruct my
household in the pure doctrine of Christ and in his true religion established
by his word. And to this end we daily read at table the holy scriptures:
and the better to confyrme and augment out faith, we singe certain Psalines
and holy songs. Every day we do resyte amongst us, the ten commandments of
almightye God: the Creed of the Apostles, without forgettinge the mayer that
the Lord taught us, to give him thanks for all his benefytes. This do I daily
in my house. And yet I go not through mine own mocron unto the Maiestrate, to
declare unto him my faith, nor yet wittingly to cast before dogs and swyne,
the holy things of God: but if ^ caninduce any one into the way of the truth,
or else reduce any yt is steayed out of the same, I do it as dyligently and as
safely as I can. And furthermore, I am always ready to give an answer of my
faith to eueryman, and chefely to the Maiestrate, when. I shall be required there
unto, being well contented to suffer and endure all that the Lord has ordained
for me, in that behalf. This is a most simple and christian manner of living,
not only to obey christ in his word, but also to keep the conscience pure, and
to give an answer and reason of the hope that is in us.


Ireneus. I condemn nor blame not thy purpose and doings Eusebie, seeing thy
faith is such, and truly I would do likewise if I did believe as thou do.
For although I do not agree (...) you in opinion, yet I cannot commend and allow
any of those that through fear do dissemble in their religion, thereby not
only wounding their own conscience, but also leadinge other by their example
into extreme danger, the which thing might be easelyer remedied if they
did proceade therein more gentlye and humblye.


Temporisour. I know well enough Irenie, thy modeste and peaceable mind, and
therefore I was the more desyreous to bring thee with me to this collation.


Eusebius. Thou haste now, Temporisour, my^e example, ^owe I do use my self
and my famylye in these troublesome days, the which is not only mine, but
also the example of the Apostles, and of al those that fear God, by whose
conversation thou may easelye know what thou ought to do, and whether
thou cannest defend thy fact by the words of Christ.


Temporisour. I hear it and understand it: I do also allow this constancye
of thy mind, the which I would gladly imitate and folow^ if I were not let:
for I declared unto theem our first collation what things impeached and
hindered me in the attempting thereof. And I supposed verily that I did not
sin in communicating with the body only at the papistical services, seeing
that I did retain always in my heart the verity and truth. Thou have as
touching this matter, alleged diverse probable arguments, so that I see no
way to replye against the same. And chefely amongst other things thou
obiectest against me, that I do use a great dissimulacio^, the which truly as
yet, I do not feel in my self such, as thereby my doings deserve to be
condemned. For I do not communicate at the papistical services, to the end yt I
would seem to other to approve and allow the same, or yt I sefe praise thereby,
or to abuse or disceyue any man by my presence, but only because that in
obeying the commandment of the Maiestrates I may avoid al dan^ger. He truly
seems unto me properly a disse^bler, yt through his dissimulatio^ seeks to
abuse al those yt either behold him or hear him: in seking his own comodite, with
the detrement and damage of other. But as for me I do none of al these things
to any such end I do not desire to be reputed a papist, (...) contented also
that all people do know that Iowe no good will unto their relygion, so that the
Maiestrate gather no matter against me of rebellion, that is my only care.


Eusebius. Hitherto thou have diligently labored to excuse thy self, to
the end thou wouldeste not be judged a dissembler, or abuser of other ine^: but
for all that thou ca^nest not escape, but that thy outward fact is judged of
all me^ for a mere dissimulation. For although thou doeste not seek to abuse
any man by thy dissu^^latio^, yet for all that, thy outward facre beying
disagreable from thy heart, (in causing outwardly to appear unto the
communicantes another thing of thee, then the truth is inwardlye) can not, nor
ought not to be reputed such as it seems to be outwardly. And furthermore
thou art not certain whether thou do abuse any man, or no, with thy outward
presence, for those that are assembled there with the, even as they be simple and
rude people, so do they think that thy coming thither, is to the same iud^
and purpose, that theya^ is. Think thou, that thine opinion, which thou
hidest so secretly, is (...) to every one, so that thou do abuse no manner of
person in assistinge at the papisticall seruyces, with the like iestur^ and
countenance as they do?


Temporisour. How can I abuse any one of all my neighbors, seeing that it is
euydently known unto them al, what faith and zeal I have had unto the Gospel
of God in detesting (...) for the space of.^x. years paste?


Eusebius. Yea marye: if diverse of late had not only changed their outward
manner of life, but also they: heart and opinion: and are fallen so far that
now they do not only condemn, but also sharpelye persecute that, which
latelye they did extol unto the heavens, I could redelye name diverse such
examples.


Temporisour. I cannot deny it: I know some such. But I am of another
opinion and mind.


Eusebius. I believe the same: but tell me without fayuing, do thou think
that al men do certainly know this thy mind and opinion?


Temporisour. I could be contented it were known: but whether it be or no, I
am not sure.


Ireneus. I am sure thou cannest not tell: my mind gives me that Eusebius
says well. For what judgment can I have of any man, but only by his present
fac^. To judge after things paste, is no sure judgment, touching the doings
of men, but most certain of God, in as much as he is not mutable like unto men.


Eusebius. Thou understand the thing well, Ireuie: and thou can not deuye
it Temporisour.


Temporisour. I confess it.


Eusebius. Agreest thou then, that in assisting at the ^apisticall services,
tho^ do a^^use (...) in leadinge them so far thereby that they do think
thine opinion to be like unto theyrs, although it do differ^


Temporisour. I have said it, and I cannot (...) say it: and that more is, I do
not only confusse the same to be possible: but I doubt me greatly, least it so
happen unto diverse, my conscience co^streayneth me to confess it.


Tusebius. Seeing thou vnders^ and est their ^ell me, if thou perceyuest not
also as well the great evil that thou do to those, who^ thou abuse ste by
dissimulatio^, as the great offense against God and his church?


Temporisour. No, I perceive it not.


Ireneus. Other men might make that answer, that feleth not the prie^t of
conscience, as does the Temporisour.


Eusebius. I will make thee understand and perceive what I mean Te^porisour,
to the end that thou knowing the same, may amend it.


Temporisour. And I will give dyligent ear thereunto.


Eusebius. First of al, put the case, that I were one of those rude ignorant
people, that nether understood the cause that is in disputacio^, nether ye^ thy
mind in that behalf. Tell me (I pray the) in the name of the living God, when I
shall se thee at the Temple of Idols, at the ^ultar, at their sacrifices, at
their masses, in assistinge the with thy presence at althose, in puttinge of thy
cap, making reverence, and kneling down with the^, what other thing the^ can I
think and judge of the, but that you do likewise reverence and worship those
services, as I do? And what other thing does this thine example work in me,
but only a co^firmacio^ in mine error, in wtdrawingine thereby from the truth
of the gospel? For I shall think this with my self: what, behold yonder the
Te^porisour, who has so many years favored this new opinion, yt is now
suppressed and overthrown it cannot be chosen but yt he knows al ye secrets
thereof, and yet se now he chau^geth his opinion and co^uerteth unto us, yt
which truly he would not do, if he were not thoroughly persuaded, yt he was
seduced and abused by ye new gospel which he lately professed, and now knows
certainly yt we have ye true gospel, and yt we are the true church: god defend
yt ever I should forsake this church and religion: yea, we shall well perceive
shortly yt al those yt are seduced will come home again to their mother holy
church from yt which they have so long straied. Consider here, Te^porsour,
what great occasion of evil thou geuest by this thine example unto the simple
and ignoran^^te people, who have ye zeal of god, but not according to
knowledge. For to what other end tends these words of Jesus Christ; but ^o
thy co^demnatio^, Nota. Math. 18
whereas he says: who soever does offend or cause to stu^ble one of these little
ones ye believe in me, it were better for him that a mylstone were hanged about
his neck, and so to be cast into ye mids of ye sea. For this thine example
does not only confirm the blind papists in their error, in hindering the^
thereby to come to ye knowledge of the truth, but also that worst i^ it does
hinder and trouble the feyth of those little (...), who have only begone to
believe in Christ, in putting them in danger to return to the papisi^e
again: so that by thine example the co^^st of their faith is hindered:
perceyuest thou these things?


Temporisour. Yea: to much.


Eusebius. I would to God that thou dyddest thoroughly perceive it. Harken now
wherein thou art offensive unto the religion of God, and unto ^ll the true
professors and constant maynte^ers of the same. First of all, thou causest that
the wicked do so boldly speak evil of so good a thing, in vtteringe
innumerable reproaches against the same, to the end it may seem the more ^dious
and hateful unto al people. Vndersta^deste thou not, that, the more the noumbre
are that consent to untruth, (although it be but by dissumulation) so much
the greater is his power? And the more that untruth is maynteyned, so much the
more is verity vilipended and oppressed? Furthermore by this means the wicked
become more importunate, bloudthersty and cruel, against the true religion of
God to confound it, and all those that will not abando^ the same. And so much the
more cruelly do they execute their tyranny upon the^ that are constant, as they
se their noumbre increased by those that forsake the truth. These are
Te^porisour, no newfound ymaginacions nor yet vain cogitacions, but the thing
of it self is to notorious and manifest, by the daily experience, that we have
hereof. How cannest thou no we ymagine and think, that thou offendeste and
hur^este nom^^ by thine example, when thou do anoye it moleste all men
thereby, eue^ the papist, the weak christian and me, and such other as I ami
for this thy fac^e tourneth also to our great prejudice, in bringinge us into
extreme danger, because we will not do as thou do.


Temporisour. God defend that I should be the cause of so many great euyls.


Ireneus. I hear horrible things.


Eusebius. I do not speak in parables, but do plainly propose the thing, as
it is to be considered. And thou do well, my friend Temporisour, to desire
God to preserve thee from being the cause of so many euyls. But beware, least
thou only require the same with ye mouth, without the consent of thy heart, and
purpose to amend.


Temporisour. As far as I can perceive, thou constraynest me, to communicate
no more at the papisticall seruyces, onelesse I will damn my self wyllingly,
and also minister grievous offenses unto other.


Eusebius. Even so I do exhort and counsay I thee.


Temporisour. But I know diverse that have another manner of judgment. Some hold
opinion that if I went not to these papisticall assembles, I should mynister
occasion of offense unto the weak and simple. It is not me^e (say they) that
^e do gewe offense unto the rude and ignorant: but it is an offense to
contemn the common and ue^ine services. For the simple by this occasion do
think evil of us, as mocker^ ^f the christian religion, exteming us to be he
rety^es, and enemies of the Church. Or at least wise they are provoked by
our example to leave their publyke seruyces, which they as yet exteme to be
holy and lawefull, and in so doing sin against their consciences. To the end
therefore that we do not mynister such occasion of offense, we ought to go to
their seruyces, till such time as they are more playnelye instructed in the
truth of Gods word, and do abandon the same by their own proper consent, as
we have done. Furthermore some do stay them selves upon the fact and example
of Naaman the Syrian, Nicodemus and Joseph, who were the secret disciples of
Jesus Christ. If it were not grievous unto the, Eusebie, I would desire thee
herein to hear thine advise.


Eusebius. It is easy to answer unto their dreams. As touching the offense,
which thou prete^dest, It behooves us first of al to observe the difference
betwixt the offense that is taken without any just occasion, and the offense
that is given, whether it be taken, or no: To know (I say) which of these two
is sin. The offense, taken without occasion ministered, is, when that any man is
offended with that which of it self is both good and lawful, as when the fact is
such yt thereby thou ought rather to imitate the same, then to be offended
there with. And this is the offense yt those do allege for their excuse ye
purpose to accompany the papists at their services, lest happily the simple and
ignorant people would be offended if there did not come thither. But (I
affirm) yt ^e that does not come to these papistical services, he does ye
thing yt is necessarely required to his salvation, and worthy the zeal of a
christian. And this example is such, that it hinders not: and although some
do find the^ selfs grieved and offended therwt, it is their fault, and
proceeds from the^ selfs, and not from the example given: for they may not
leave the thing ye apperteyneth to their salvation, for any offense ye other
may gather thereby For if we should leave undone al those thiges, whereof the
wicked gather offense, the^ must we bandon the patience and benignite of
almightye god, the which also the impenitent do abuse to their own damnation.
We must also lay a side the great liberalite of ye father of household,
me^cioned of in the gospel, who gave as much unto him yt wrought but one hour
in his vineyard, as he yt continued all the day, nothing regarding the offense
yt the wicked and envious persons did gather thereof. Let the^ also accuse ye
prophets, Christ, the Apostles and martyrs, because they did not acco^modate
and frame themselves, to the vulgar and common doings of other. And fynallye
because that the wicked may gather no offense: is it therefore lawful that the
godly do renounce and forsake the bounty of the divine majesty, in provoking
his indignacion against the^ selves: were this expedient think thou?
Wherefore if I refrain to damn my self, with those that resist the truth,
and provoke the patience of God, do I evil? God forbid. If we may not do
evil, Roma. iij
that good may come thereof, how much less then ought we to do evil, when
no goodness can proceade thereof, but rather much evil: as well to them that do
it, as to those that see it? The offense that is given, whether it be taken or
no, is, when we do any unlawful thing, or else those things that are
indifferent, when they are so done that they do offend the infyrme and weak,
for whose sake we ought to abstain, although otherwise it lies in our powers
to do them, not only void of sin, but also unto edification. This kind
of offense being given, is very heinous, although noman be offended therewith:
for if ^oman be offended, that is rather to be imputed unto the free conscience
of the beholders, (who might if they would, have gathered an offense thereof,)
and not unto him, that on his behalf did mynistre the occasion of offense:
understand thou Temporisour, this difference of offense?


Temporisour. Very well.


Eusebius. Vnderstandeste thou also, which is evil, and which is not?


Temporisour. Suffycyentlye.


Ireneus. You put me now in remembrance of diverse that are offended at the
marriage of Prestes, but none are offended, that for the most part they are
all given over unto filthy whoredom, and common adulterye without al shame
leauinge diverse detestable examples thereof, by the which all degrees of people
are greatly corrupted, and causes the common tyttle of our Christianite to
be infamed and ill repo^red of, even amongst the infydelles. This is the
thing, that always has grieved me.


Eusebius. Thou speakeste well, Irenie. Is it mete, that ^ Christian man
fearinge GOD, do avstrayne from lawefull marriage, because he would not offend
the ignoraunte: and in the mean time polute him self with whoredom, the
next way to depryue himself from the Kingdom of GOD? What greater follye
could there be? Herein may ye behold the excuse of those that would have us
go into the assemble of the papists at their superstitious seruyces, because
we should not offend the papists: but our duery is, to do directelye
contrary, as it has been said before.


Temporisour. Hitherto Eusebie, thou haste sufficientlye proved, that the
excuses (the which I have alleged) to avoid offense, serves nothing to this
purpose. I would gladlye hear now thine advise, as touching the examples of
Naaman, Joseph, and Nicodemus: for these examples are alleged of all those,
that with me do communicate at the papistical services, only with the body,
and not with the spyryte, and truly for my part when my conscience did accuse
me of my doing in this behalf, I always called to my remembrance the
example of these men, for the probation of my fact.


Eusebius. It is requysite that these examples be diligently wayed and
considered, the which thing cannot be forthwith accomplished: wherefore mine
advise is that we do refarre the same until our next meting and collation.


Ireneus. I am therewith very well contented, for I have now certain busynes
that calls me home, that being done, I will return again: when, and where,
it shall please you.


Temporisour. Seeing you both have thus determined, I will not gain say it: but
tell me Eusebie, when may we come together again to fynishe and end this
question?


Eusebius. To morrow at this time, if it please you.


Temporisour. I am contented. To morrow then, ye shall find me (God willing) in
this place at ye hour appointed.


Ireneus. The time, and the place, pleases me well.


Temporisour. I thank you both of your good will, if ever it lie in my
faculty, the occasion so mynistring, I will show you the like.


Eusebius. We do thank thee that thou have vouch ^^^ued to call us into this
plea ^^^nt place.


Ireneus. I will go before. Follow you at your pleasure, God be with you both.


Temporisour. God keep thee my friend, Irenie, we will follow thee by and by.


The end of the third Dialoge.
The fowrth Dialoge.
The Collocutours. The Temporisour, Eusebius, and Irenius.

Temporisour. IF these examples of Nycodemus, Joseph of Ara^^thia, and Naaman
the Sirian, the which I, and my semblables are accustomed to use, do not bring
unto me some present consolation, I am utterly vanquished and overcome, I know
the^ no way to escape. I cannot tell, how hereafter wards to excuse my self,
neither toward God, nor my conscience. And I doubt greatly that they being
narowly scanned and considered, will little serve for my purpose. For here
before when I began to use them for mine excuse, me thought always they seemed
unto me to weak, to defend this my dissimulacion: yet we did always allege
them against those that did reprove our doings, fearinge to leave our
wickedness uncovered and naked. This is the custom of our flesh, The
custom of the flesh.
for she can not abide the reprofe of shame, although she do both feel and
know her nakedness, but seeks all possible means to cover the same. But
yonder me think I see coming both Eusebius and Ireneus. I am happy that I did
accompany my self with them, for they are both tractable and gentle: and
therefore I will not be affrayde to pursew this matter both boldly and freely.
What my friends are ye come already? I came but even now hither to prepare
this place for your coming.


Ireneus. There neded no such diligence, for the place of it self is very
commodious and pleasant.


Temporisour. That is true. But herein I thought it good to show my good will
toward you. But thou Eusebius, as far as I can perceive, you come not
unarmed.


Eusebius. Not so much as having about me a little knyfe, neither do I
prepare my self unto the war, but unto a loving and friendly collatio^.


Temporisour. And yet me think thou art not without weapons for the same,
for either I do abuse my self, or else the book that thou haste in thy hand,
is a sword of the spyryte.


Eusebius. Now I understand what thou meanest Te^porisour, I was yesterdaye
likewise armed with the same, although as then I had not this bugget, the which I
have now brought, thereby the more dyligently to examyne by the scriptures the
examples of Nycodemus, Joseph, and Naaman the Syrian.


Temporisour. These weapons Ireneus, were more meter for your Bishops, the^
those which they have used of late years to murder ye sheep of christ.


Ireneus. It is so, I cannot excuse their doings in that behalf. I do often
lament with my self this miserable corrupcion and alteracion of the
ecclesiastical order, in beholdinge our fleshly Bisshops who ought to be
spiritual Pastors, to become wolves in the stead of shepeherdes: and lions
and like unto all other cruel kind of beasts, as their arms and badges
declare the same. And where as they ought to be seeing bishops, they are
become so thoroughly blind that they may be better called * Episcotes, Episcoti,
is as much to say as obscured and darkened
the^ Episcopi is as much to say as speculatinge and seeing Bishops.
Episcopes: and whereas they ought to be catholics, they are Cacolijcques,
that is to say: cruel or evil wolves. Instead of ecclesiastical persons,
they are become seculer Princes, and Lords, and instead of true doctors, they
are become perfect troublers.


Eusebius. When we do reprehende these vices with innumerable other, through ye
which ye church of Christ is destroyed, the^ are we by those Bishops
condemned for heretics, and judged to ye fire, but now time serves not to
bewail those things, as also we shall profit nothing therein: Math. v.
for salt ones being corrupted cannot be restored to perfection again. The
Lord will come shortly into judgment, and reken with those wicked servants
to their eternal damnacion.


Temporisour. Let us refarre those people unto the judgment of God: and if it
please thee, Eusebie, I pray declare to what end these examples of Nicodemus,
Joseph, and Naama^ the Syrian tend unto: the which, not only I my self but
also all most all other do allege for their excuse, namelye those that for
fear of punishmente of the higher powers do go unto the papisticall services.


Eusebius. I am right well content. But declare first of al, how you do
allege these examples for your purpose and profit.


Temporisour. Whereas for fear of the wicked, we dissemble our opinion
touching the papisticall religion, in communicating with them at the same: we
think we may lawfully do it, and ought not thereof to be reprehended as of an
unlawful fact: seeing that it is manifest that the like has been done by
diverse godly men before us, John. iij.
as witnesses the Scriptures, who as we read, Nicodemus.
were neither reproved nor condemned therefore. Nicodemus was not ignorant of
ye truth, and he loved very well Jesus Christ, who also had him in good
reputacion, and yet all this notwithstanding, he fearing the Jews did
dissemble these things, neither did he withdraw him self from the company of
the enemies of christ. John. xix. Joseph.
The like thing is mentioned of Joseph of Aramathia, who as says ye scriptures
was a secret disciple of Jesus christ, and yt for fear of the Jews, amongst
who^ he lived. It is likewise specifyed of Naama^ ye Siria^. That the Prophet
Elizeus did grant him leave, 4. Reg. 5. Naaman
that he being in the Temple of Remmo^ before strange Gods, for the
assistaunce of his King, to knele down, notwithstanding yt by an excellent
miracle, he was lately come to the knowledge of one only true God: if these men
might then live so without offense, I would gladly understand from thee,
wherefore their examples, does nothing help our matter? They kept their faith
secret in their heart, and outwardlye did communicate with those who^ they knew
to be adversaries to the truth. They did the^ in all things like as we do now:
I mean, I and my semblables. If this dissimulatio^ (as thou call it) did
not hinder their salvation, wherefore then is it damnable unto us? is God
changed, in condemning now, the thing that he before suffered in his children?
I think it not to be true. For even as he is always one, and immutable, even
so cannot his determinacion change more at one time, then at another.


Ireneus. Thou reasonest strongely, Temporisour.


Eusebius. Thou think so: but have a little patience and thou shall judge
otherwise.


Temporisour. Mine arguments are such Eusebie, as diverse do think them very
strong.


Eusebius. Because that they are pleasant unto the sy^^efull flesh,
therefore do ye gredelye embrace them, and desire more that they might be fyrme
and strong, then that ye think them so in deed. For either I am greatly
abused, or else ye do wittingly deceive your selves. But now let us come to
your arguments, and to begin withal, I do admonish you of one thing: that
is, that all those that use to allege these arguments for their excuse, are
not in one like state and condition, although they do acknowledge the same
truth that we do. With the heart ye love the gospel of God, but outwardly ye
communicate with the papists: hitherto ye agree together, but on the other
side there is a difference, for some of you have publykely renounced the
papisme, and have these certain years freely approved the doctrine of the
Gospel, as I, and other have done. But now temptacion being come, they leave
the eua^gelike churches and return to the papisme and papistrye, to the end
they may live the more without danger in this world: and thou art
Temporisour, one of this company. The other sort, although in their heart they
acknowledge the truth, Inglande cannot pleat this excuse.
yet did they never publykely confess the same nor maynteyne it, neither yet
renounced the exterior communication with the papists, but still persevere in
the same hitherto, of which sort there is in the world no small noumbre: and
namely in this la^d of Almany. Who is he that does not now perceive the great
difference yt is betwixt these two sorts of people, and that to no purpose,
they do both allege for them selves the examples of Nycodemus, Joseph, and
Naaman the Syrian? And first, as touching thee, Temporisour, and those that
are like unto thee: who have presently forsaken the true religion, The true
Image of Ingland.
ye which ye have publicly mayntayned, and are now reuoulted and turned
backwarde into the same mire and puddle, from the which sometime ye were yssewed
out, and delivered. Truly these examples of Nicodemus and of the other two,
do nothing serve for your excuse, nether do ye in any respect imitate their
doings. For if these examples might serve for the defense of any
dissimulacion, yet should it not serve for your side: but rather for the^ of ye
other party. Who, as they did never publicly profess the gospel, so can they
not be accused of any reuoulting or renou^cing in that behalf. The thing is
apparau^t and without co^tradictio^. For when as Nicodemus and Joseph did
dissemble their faith for fear of ye Jews, they were but newly come unto this
doctrine, having the same only inwardly incered in their hearts, without either
as yet forsakinge the iudeisme, or else publicly joining themselves to the
faith full co^gregacio^ of Christ. What like thing find they now here in the
example of these two me^ whereby they may justly excuse their doings: those (I
say) that of late did publykelye auouche the Gospel and are now reuoulted
from the same, in tourninge to the papisticall supersticions, as dogs unto
their vomete? And that which I have spoken of Nicodemus and Joseph may also be
veryfyed of Naaman the Syrian. Who being a Panim was newly come unto the
knowledge of God, with out ever being united unto the societe of the people of
God and their religion: yea, he was altogether new and young in his faith and
in the knowledge of god, who had healed him. Consydre now I pray you, how
much this his example serves to cover the fact of our dissembling
Christians: who not only for the space of many years have been perfectely
instructed in the truth, by sincere doctrine, but also united and knytte unto
the same by holy Sacraments purely mynistred? Is there any apperaunce or
lykelyhode herein?


Ireneus. As far as I perceive by thy communicacion, they defend them selves
very poorly.


Temporisour. I harken, and understand all.


Eusebius. I pray thee my friend Te^porisour, tell me by thy conscience. In the
beginning when thou did turn from the papisme, dydst thou never call to thy
remembrance these examples? werre thou not then as ingenious and wytty to sow
fig leaves together to cover thy self, as thou art now? And wherefore? for
(thou say) it was not then needful: for the reuoultinge from the papisme,
required no such defense and coueringe. But now if ye might return again
to the papisme without sin by outward communicacion, contenting your
selfs to believe only with the heart, ye might more iustelye have remained
in the papisme without forsaking the same, A great co^de^nacio^ to al the^ yt
have refused ye papisme, and now join the^ selves there unto again.
in reserving your faith secretly in your heart, and as well might ye have
defended then your dissimulatio^ by these examples, as ye do now. Who
compelled you to forsake your ancient religion? Truly the fear wherewith
presentlye ye are astonished, does move ye more to return again to the
supersticions ones forsaken, then did at the first, the charity and desire of
vnio^ move you to come to the truth: in as much as against your conscience ye
are now declyned again to your former communicacion, of supersticions and
false services.


Temporisour. Those then are not culpable, that have not as yet forsaken the
outward societe and fellowship of the papists, although they have understanding
of the truth, but do persevere still in this communicacion, the which not
withstanding they do not allow in their hearts?


Eusebius. I say not so Temporisour: But rather by this communicacion do
labor to admonish you, how unaptly ye do apply to your behofe these examples
of Nycodemus and Joseph. Inglishe dissemblers can not justly allege ye example
of Nycodemus for their excuse.
As touchi^g the Nicodemistes herein they differ from you, that although they
be not void of sin, yet (I suppose,) that they do not sin so grievously as
ye do. Wherefore to the end ye may more plainly perceive that your fact
cannot be excused by these examples. I will leave you, and examyne the cause of
those that more justly may be called Nicodemistes, then you. Who, if they
cannot be excused by these examples, as it shall notably appear: the^ may we
easily deserne and judge how little the same serves for your defense. For if
their doings be damnable, and can find none excuse by these examples, there
is no man so void of understanding that does not easelye perceive, that much
less is your fact excusable, and cannot be compared to the examples of
Nicodemus, Joseph, and Naaman the Sirian.


Temporisour. I perceive well to what end thou pretendest Eusebie. Thou shall
do me great pleasure to examine this matter narowly.


Eusebius. Let us first consydre the doings of Nycodemus and Joseph. Where to
tend the examples of Nicodemus and Joseph.
In these examples there is something to be reprehended, something to be
excused, and something to be praised and commended. This thing is to be
reprehended, that they fearing the Jews, more the^ God, durst not confess the
truth which they did know, and durst not join them selves to Christ amongst
his faithful flock, but hiding almost their faith, did yet communicate with
the enemies of Christ. Confessest you this point Temporisour?


Temporisour. Yea: proceade.


Eusebius. This thing in their doings was excusable: that the seruyces whereat
they did communicate were not the ordinances of men, but of God, and therefore
not utterly to be dispysed as things odious and supersticious, and all though
the time did approach wherein they should be abolished: yet, as then it was not
manifested and openly known, but remained so obscured and hyd, that many
years after the reuelacio^ of the gospel, the multitude of the faithful in
Jerusalem were yet deteyned under these legal obseruacions, as it plainly
appears in the book of the Acts the.xi. Chap. Thou agreest to these things
also Temporisour?


Temporisour. I cannot gain say it.


Eusebius. First of al then, this thing in the^ was worthy praise, for that in
their hearts they did approve and allow the verity, which other princes did
impunge and condemn: furthermore also for that they did not consent and agree
with the Phariseis in their Sinagoges, consulting against Christ, but did
withstand their determinacio^s to the uttermost of their powers. As S. Luke
mencioneth of Joseph of Aramathia in his.xxiij. Chap. and S. Johan of Nicodemus
in his.vij. Chapter. Thyrdely when as the majesty and glory of the gospel of
God, seemed to the outward appearaunce to be utterly subdued and overthrown: to
wit, when as Christ was crucified and dead, and his Apostles, the one having
betrayed him, the other denied him, and the rest forsaken him, all this not with
standing, these worthy persons without any manner of dissimulacio^ did the^ boldly
declare both to Pilate, and to the high Prestes and Phariseis, their faith and
confidence, in him who^ they had crucified by the begging of his body, and
buryinge the same so honorablye as was possible, Can thou impunge, or haste
thou any thing to replye against these things, Temporisour?


Temporisour. Nothing at all. But do marvel greatly, where about thou go?


Ireneus. That is easy to be perceived.


Eusebius. Harken, and I will tell thee whether I pretend: we have perused and
considered what it is of the example of Nicodemus and Joseph, whereby diverse
think to cover ye dissimulacio^ of their religion, Nicodemistes.
who^ we will call Nicodemistes, because it shall not need often to use any
circumlocucion. This example conteyneth three things. The first is,
reprehensible, the second excusable, and the third commendable. Now I demand
of thee Te^porisour, which of these think thou, that a man fearing God,
ought to follow?


Temporisour. The answer is ready: to wit, the third, the which every
christian heart acknowledges to be only commendable, both before God and man.


Eusebius. Thou aunswerest well. For to this end serves all examples, namelye,
to styre up in us a certain imitacion and following. But we may not imitate and
follow these things that nether are of them selves, nor yet cannot be in us
commendable and praise worthy. And therefore it behooves us to use a great
discrecio^ in following the examples of Saynctes, to deserne between the doings
that are commendable, and those that are vyciouse and culpable: having need of
pardon by the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ. For it were a preposterous
and pernicious imitacio^ that a Publicane should allege for his excuse the
example of S. Matthew: or an adulterer, the example of David: a reuoulter and
denyer of the truth, the example of S. Peter: or a dronkarde the dronkenes of
Noah, for to cover their sins by the examples and deeds of the Saints. Why
rather do they not follow the conversion of S. Matthew, the great repentance
of David and Peter, and sobriety of Noah? But let us se what thing the
Nicodemistes do follow in the example of Nicodemus, and for what purpose they
do allege the same. Truly they do it for nothing else, but thereby to excuse
their fact: but that thing needs no excuse, that deserves no blame, but is
worthy praise: as when they do receive into their hearts, with them, the
verity of Christ, the which the Princes of this world do so extremely
persecute, and do not by any means agree and consent with the^ to subdue and
suppress the same. But herein they pretend their excuse, in that they fearing
me^ more then God, do not unity and join them selves publicly to the truth,
according to their faith and knowledge, in renouncing and forsakinge the
papisticall seruyces, which they condemn in their hearts: but by a wicked
dissimulation do communicate at the same against their consciences. And for to
excuse this their simulatio^, they do allege the examples of Nicodemus and
Joseph, not in that thing, that they did worthy praise, but in that thing,
wherein they sinned: namely in their dissimulatio^ and fear of man. As if the
sins of the Saints, might serve to excuse ours. Understand thou
Te^porisour?


Temporisour. Yea.


Eusebius. Agreest thou also there unto?


Temporisour. Truly I do not allow those, that do rather allege for
examples the thing that is wicked, then that which is commendable: but for all
that I think it cannot be denied, but that we may excuse the infirmity of our
faith, by the infirmity of the Saints, without being judged and condemned for
wicked, more the^ they: or as people having renou^ced the known verity,
because we dare not publykelye confess the same.


Eusebius. Thou acknowledgest and confessest the infyrmitie of faith that
rests in the Nicodemistes: but now is it mete and convenient I pray the, that
weakelinges, do allege the infirmite of the Saints, thereby to excuse their
sin and infyrmitie? or rather ought they not to accuse them selves, and with
plenty of tears and all humility to have recourse unto the throne of grace,
thereby to obtain remission of their sins, and confirmacion of faith?


Temporisour. Thy reason is strong, Eusebie, I cannot replye against it.


Irenie. Truly Eusebie, I do not hear these things unwillingly.


Eusebie. Let us consydre furthermore this one thing: that Nicodemus and
Joseph did communicate at the seruyces and ceremonies of ye law, according
unto the commandment of God: in the which seruyces there was no impiete,
supersticion nor falsyte: but the Nicodemistes of our time, do communicate at
the papistrye, being full of the false seruyces of the saints departed, of
Aungelles and of Idols, with an infinite noumbre of other supersticions, that
daily provoke unto wrath the long patience and benignity of almighty GOD.
Wherefore I pray thee Temporisour, what agreement is there think thou,
between the doings of Nichodemus and Joseph, and our counterfeyte
Nicodemistes?


Temporisour. In mine opinion, none at all, for I perceive now well enough, the
great difference that is between them. But for all that diverse men, (thereby
the better to cover their fact) do apply the thing that is worthy reprehension
in the papistical services unto a good use, saying: yt the principal effect
thereof is dyrected unto God, and to his son Christ. And although there be
diverse humayne inuencions to much supersticiousli added thereunto, yet for all
that the true and perfect service remains whole and sound.


Eusebius. How may that be?


Temporisour. Paraduenture, Irenius can tell thee better the^ I: for I never
had them as yet in such estimacion as I thought them worthy, to be commended to
memory.


Ireneus. As Much as I can remember, I will resyte. First of al they say, Of ye
papisticall baptism
and affirm that the papisticall baptism may be supported as it is
ministered, because that the substance of the same: to wit, the word and the
water remains, notwithstanding the supersticions annexing thereunto of oil,
spittle, cream, salt, candle, crysome, and exorcysme: not withstanding also
the latyne interrogations after the symbol of the Apostles, and the ignoraunte
au^sweres of the witnesses or god fathers there present in the behalf of the
child, being all together done in a foreyne language not understood of the
assystaunces. As tonchinge the Mass, the mass
they say that they may go there unto without sin, for although it be
replenished with diverse supersticious ceremonies invented by the bishops: yet
notwithsta^dinge it does still retain the principal effect of the institucion
of Christ: to wit, the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord. As
concerning Idols, they answer, Of ydols
yt they pass not of the Images of wood, of stone, of gold, nor of silver.
The which they know well enough, by the word of God, ought not to be
worshipped: neither are they set up, to be served and honored, but only to
help the memory, to the end that the lay and ignorant people may be
provoked by the remembrance of the saints, to imitate their lives. Of
singinge.
As touching their chau^ting and singing, they little pass and regard,
wherefore or to what end the papists do sing: for they in the mean time do
pray unto God, according to their faith in commending themselves unto him. This
is almost the effect of all that ever thy allege for their excuse.


Eusebius. If it were not for the present question that I have to answer, I
would Ireneus, examine these their particular excuses, and prove manifestly,
that they in so doing, do sin more grievously then any other. But thou
Temporisour, know thou not that these their excuses are most detestable and
wicked?


Temporisour. I confess. I know the same to be most true.


Eusebius. Another time, the like occasion being mynistred, I will declare my
judgment in that behalf. It is necessari for us to know with what church we
do communicate.
In the mean time consider a little this one thing. These fools pass
nothing at al^ with what Church they do communicate, ney^ther with what
Prelates, and Prestes they d^ associate them selves, at their deuyne seruices^
They think it sufficient to reteyne ye substau^c^ thereof, although the
appendaunces annexed thereunto be manifestly wicked. For whereto serves all
their ceremonies in their Temple, but only to seduce their auditore, in
making them like unto themselfes: to wit, simoniacques, fornicatours, idle
bellies, ^koffers, and slaughterme^ of ye poor sheep of Christ, being
condemned by their own decrees, that whosoever hears the mass of such a
one, he commits most abominable and grievous ydolatrie, nether do they pass
any thing at all of yt which is spoken by the mouth of the prophet. I have
hated the congregation of the ungodly: Neither will I sytte down with the
wicked. But let us leave them there, and return to our matter. I pray thee
now Temporisour tell me, is this example of Nicodemus and Joseph sufficiently
examined, or desire thou yet to know any other thing therein?


Temporisour. No More, for this present.


Eusebius. Let us come now then to the example of Naaman the Syrian. Naaman



Temporisour. We think our selves to have herein a great stay.


Eusebius. Let us consydre now, whether it serves any thing for your purpose,
or no. Let us se the storye which is in the.iiij. book of the Kings, the.v.
Chapter. This example is also partelye commendable, partly excusable, and
partelye reprehensible: it is commendable, in that he does not attribute ye
power of his myraculous healing of his leprosye, nether unto the water, nether
unto Eliseus: but unto the only God of Israel. And furthermore he did
immediatlye acknowledge and confess, that there was none other God, but the
God of Israel: by this confession reproving all other Gods, as vain and
false. And thyrdly in that he protested and purposed to do no more sacrifice
unto none other Gods, but only unto the Lord, in utterly renouncing the
supersticious seruyces of al strange gods, the which he had served in time
past, in as much as he was the^ fully persuaded, yt they were no Gods, but ye
works of men's hands. These are his doings, where in he is to be commended
and praised, beside that he did not show him self ingrate and vntha^kefull
toward the Prophet. This is excusable in his fact, in that he requires to
have the burden of two moylles, of the earth of Israel, for to make an altar,
upon the which he might sacrifice unto the god of Israel. God truly has no
regard unto those things. But in as much as in that time the people served God
by outward sacrifyces, this good man knew not how to show forth his faith
and new religion of his heart, then by doing so as he saw it requysyte
amongeste the Israelytes. But this is reprehensible, Understand this so far,
as that he could not dwell and serve him there, with out offending of ye Lord.
that he having acknowledged and confessed one only true GOD, did not
forthwith withdraw him self, from the court and service of his King and
master: but (remaining still in his estate) did his accustomed service toward
the King: yea, and that namelye in the Temple, where as strange Gods were
worshypped, the which above all other thing he ought to have detested and
abhorred, consyderinge his former protestacion and promise. This fault also he
him self acknowledged and confessed in his fact. For mark what he said unto
the Prophet. There is one thing, for the which I desire thee to pray the
LORD for thy servant, that when my master goes into the Temple of Remmon
for to worship, and he leaninge upon mine arm, if I do worship also, that
the LORD will be merciful unto his servant, because of this thing. These
words declare euydentlye, that he did know, that he could not without
offense, from thence forth bow his knee in the Temple of Remmon: no, not for
the service of the King his master, in as much as he had protested before to
worship none other, but the one only true GOD of Israel: and therefore he
desired the Prophet, that he would pray to God for him. He did not as then
thoroughly purpose and determyne with him self to do so: Nota.
that is, to worship in the Temple, but fearinge, least he should not be
suffered to exempte him self from his office, he said not, I will worship:
but, if I do worship in the Temple of Remmon, that is to say: if I cannot
relinquisshe and forsake mine office. Also I understand this service of his to
be an inclynacion and submission that he used toward the King, and not a
service that he purposed to do unto strange Gods: which thing is easy to
be understood by the circumstaunce of the text, for he did not say
absolutely, if I do worship in the Temple of Remmon: but, when that my Lord
the King does enter for to worship, etc. The Ebrew word, which we call
(worship) signifies properlye, to inclyne and bow the knee. This good
faithful man had now no desire to worship any more the God Remmon, but for
as much as he knew that it was not sufficient, to abstain only from the
worshippinge of strange Gods in his heart, onelesse he did also abstain
from all outward appearaunce of adoration; therefore he asks pardon of the
same, praying that the Lord would dispense with him in his fact. These
things are so manifest in this history, that every one that reads it, does
forthwith perceive it, except it be the Nicodemistes. Now I pray thee,
Temporisour, what thing is there herein that may serve for thy defense, and
other thy fellows?


Temporisour. This thing truly makes for us, in that, all though he did
acknowledge the true God, yet nevertheless, he fearing to offend his King,
did according to his accustomed manner, (all though it were now against his
will) worship in the Temple of Remmon in assisting at unlawful seruyces.


Eusebius. But that is not certainly known whether he did so, or no* For he
said: if I worship in ye Temple of Remmon. And yet ye conclude that he did as
welworship after his conversion as he did before: what manner of consequence is
this? (because he say dyf I do worship) thereby to conclude that he did worship*
But I admyt he did worship: yet were (...) but a (...) reprehensible: the
which, as I have declared before, yt ought not to allege any example of any
reprehensible fact of any Saync^e, to imitate and follow the same. And if ye will
all gates be the folowers of the thing that is reprehensible, at least ways
join this also thereunto, (pray ye the Lord to pardon your dissimulacion,) but
ye cannot do that, onelesse fyr^te of all ye confess the fault, and then
sorrow earnestlye in repentance: but this last part^ hinders you greatly to
ask pardon, for ye your selfs know that ye ought not to hope for pardon of
any sin, with^^t repentinge the (...), and if ye did unfeignedly repent it
then would ye endeavor your selves to leave it.


Temporisour. We extem^ this fault (if at leastwyse there be any) to be very
light and tolerable, and to be amongst the nou^bre of the sins, that are
called venial.


Eusebius. Ye do then (...) your sins, when that ye cannot all together cover
them. we ought not to cover our offenses.
But how much better were it to way them a little more, to the end ye might
the rather be occasioned thereby to leave your faults, and more surely obtain
pardon for the same? It is not the property of a noble and faithful heart, to
ex^^^ nuate and mitigate his own faults.


Temporisour. But the Prophet him self did not make so much a do about this
matter, as I perceive thou do.


Eusebius. How so?


Temporisour. Open the book, and read therein, what answer he made unto him.


Eusebius. I will read it. The text says thus, (unto who^ he said: Go in
peace.) What thing gatherest thou hereof?


Temporisour. What? That the Prophet did not judge, that Naaman should sin,
if for the favor of his master he did worship in the Temple of Remmon, orels
that his sin was so ligh^ and venial, that God would easelye pardon the same*


Eusebius. This is your exposicion, because it pleases you best, in as much as
it seems to permit your sins to remain unpunished. But I pray the my friend
Temporisour, what did this Syria^ demand of the Prophet?


Temporisour. That he would pray unto the Lord for him that he would pardon
him, if ever he did worship in the Temple of Remmon.


Eusebius. What answered the Prophet?


Temporisour. Thou hardest it even now. Go (said he) in peace: the which words
importe a plain consentement.


Eusebius. Yea forsooth, to that which he demanded. He answers not
concerning the pardon, which is only in the hands of God, but only
concerning his prayer: to were, that he would pray unto the Lord for him,
according to his request. So that we cannot hereby conclude, that such kind of
worshipping should be void of sin. The which thing, if it had been true,
assure your self, the Prophet would playnelye have told him the same, to
the end that he should make no conscience of sin in ye, where in there was no
sin.


Temporisour. In this point I agree with thee.


Eusebius. Thou seeste then, that there is sin, in so doing.


Temporisour. I confess it.


Eusebius. But you estemest it to be such, as the lord will easily pardon the
same?


Temporisour. Even so seems to signifye the consentement of the Prophet.


Eusebius. It behooves us diligentelye to consydre in the person of this
Syrian, certain circumstaunces and causes, (which diffre greatly from you,)
which also moved the Prophet to accord so easily unto him his demand, in
suffering him to depart in peace. The which nothing agrees with your
dissimulacion, although you do allege this example never so often, thereby to
cover your synful ypocrisie withal.


Temporisour. Which are they^


Eusebius. I have touched them partelye here before. First he was a stranger,
a Syrian, a Panim, and one that was in high estate and great reputacion with
his King and country, A comparison between Naaman and our Temporisours.
and newly come to the acknowledge of God: yea, he was a new and tender plant
in the faith of one only true God, and was not as yet united and joined with
the people of God by any Sacraments, whereby he could not, nor ought not to be
burdened with so great and wayghtye things, as those that were more stronger
and perfect: being instructed and norished of long time in the true faith
amongeste the people of God. Furthermore he did proteste and swear that he
would never serve more any strange Gods, but the only God of Israel: in
testimonye whereof, he took the burden of two ^^^oylles, of the earth of that
laud, for to make therewith an altar unto the God of Israel: the which thing
the Prophet would not a permitted and suffered an Israelit^^ to have done, in
as much as it was not lawful for a Jew to sacrifice unto God in any other
place, the^ in yt which he had appointed and chosen. Wherefore as unto a Pany^
and not unto (...) Israelite: he permitted unto him that thing, wh^^h he would
not have gra(...)^ted unto an Israelite. For the Prophet exte^^^d it a great
^^^^rdnes in the Syrian, that in condemning all other strange Gods, he had
acknowledged and confessed the only true god of Israel, in protesting to
serve him only. It was not (I say) without a cause that the Prophet did so
greatly exteme these beginninges in the conversion of a Panim. And that as
touching the rest, he did so well encourage him, promysing to demand of God
pardon for him. I pray thee Temporisour, what would thou do, if that some
great Lord out of Turkye, for the like occasion came hither amongst us: and
he, by some like miracle being converted to the christian faith, and to the
acknowledginge and confessinge of one only Jesus Christ, the only son of
God, and only redemer of mankind: and then would protest and swear, that
from thence forth he would contemn the Mahometicall religion as false, and
cleue unto the only religion of Christ. And yet not withstanding, would
require that it might be pardoned him, if at any time through the occasion of
his office, he did come with his prince unto the Temple of Mahomet, and there
he leaning upon his arm should also be constrained to knele down with him?
What thing (I say) would thou do in this case? would thou not answer
the self same thing that the Prophet here answers unto the request of the
Syrian?


Ireneus. Pardon me, Temporisour, in that I speak my conscience. Truly thou
should do very folishlye and vngentillye if thou dyddest not answer even
as the Prophet did.


Temporisour. Verily I would answer even so.


Eusebius. But now consydre on the othersyd, if there be any reason of excuse
for a Christian: that after he has long time communicated with the mysteries of
Christ, and being perfectely instructed in the knowledge of the Kingdom of God,
and of the grace of ye Gospel, would require the same to be granted unto him,
that the Prophet has permitted unto this strange Syrian, and that thou
likewise would permit unto the Turkishe Lord, after thou had wayed the
circumstau^ce of the cause and person? Think thou that your sin is to be
compared unto the infirmity and frayltie of Naaman the Syrian? Do thou not
remember this sentence: to who^ much is given, much of him shall be required?
What man is so far deprived of understanding, that will require as much of a
child, as of a man? or of a young plant, as of an old tree? Even so truly,
has piete and godlynes their increasinges and growinges: for we do a great
deal more easelye supporte the infyrmitie of those that are beginners, then
the remiss negligence of those that are, or ought to be further instructed.
What say thou here unto, Temporisour?


Temporisour. I agree unto all that thou say: I am vanqui^shed and overcome
by the manifest truth.


Eusebius. Do thou acknowledge the^, that these Nicodemistes have nothing
now in the examples of Nicodemus, Joseph, and Naama^ the Syria^ to cover their
ypocrisie withal, but contraryewyse, that the infyrme and new faith of these
i.ij is a great deal greater and more better, then is theyrs?


Temporisour. I do acknowledge it, and cannot withstand it.


Eusebius. Tell me then, if that those which have not as yet outwardely
renounced the papisme (all though that in their heart they do favor and allow
the gospel, yet for all that they have not as yet publikeli confessed the same)
if those (I say) do not find in these examples any thing to excuse their
dissimulacion, as before I have proved? how then can thou and thy semblables,
who have of long time publykely confessed the Gospel, and renounced the
papisme, cover or defend by these examples your great ypocrisye in declyning
from the truth?


Temporisour. I confess unfeignedly, that there is nothing in these examples
that makes for our purpose, in as much as our cause is waightier the^ theirs:
so much the less then, do these examples serve us, then them. But tell me,
what shall I do?


Eusebius. What is it yt thou astest of me? did I not show thee before? The
las^e counsayl.
My counsayl is that thou do as thou see me do. I admonish the in ye name
of Jesus christ, yt thou search no more excuses for thy sins: but confess
thy fante, and forsaking the societe of all unlawful and supersticious
seruyces, join thy self with those that walk dy^ectely in the true religion
of Christ. Pray also the Lord to pardon thy transgression, in that thou haste
abused by thine example thy weak brethren, offended the stronger, and
confyrmed the ydolater in his ydolatrye. Thou have hereof many notable
examples, for to appeace and assure thy conscience against all the barkinges
of the wicked and ungodly: which shall serve thee for thy better confyrmacion,
then those abused examples that thou have hitherto alleged. Follow rather the
example of the Prophets and Apostles, and diverse other godli men, that have
always by outward fact declared the inward faith of their heart: and did not
as yet make any separation between the interior and exterior communicacion in
religion. Why rather do not thou allow and follow the example of Tobias in
the which is no reprehensio^, Tobias.
the^ those which hither (...) thou have alleged to cover thy sins withal?
Tobias, although he was the yo^gest of his (...) be and lynage, and although
the Jews of the.xij Tribes went to the gold Calves of (...), he fled from al
their companies, and went unto Jerusalem, unto the Temple of the Lord, whereas
he did worship (according to the law) the Lord God of Israel. Those whose
company he avoided, were also Israely^es as well as he, and did boast of the
true God* and of his true service, as well as he, in co^de^ning al those* that
for to serve the Lord, would go to Jerusalem, (in as much as the Lord was no
accepter of persons nor places.) I pray thee Temporisour, tell me, why
dyddest thou not as well chose this example, wherein there is no vice nor thing
worthy of reprehension (but commended by the scriptures) as well as the other?


Temporisour. What is it that thou enquyrest, Eusebie? the answer is ready.
Nicodemus, Joseph, and Naama^ did please us better, because that their examples
seemed better to agree with the ease of our flesh, and to continue ^s in a more
worldly security, then the example of Tobias.


Eusebius. For as much now, as thou understand that point sufficiently. Tell
me what do thou from hence forth purpose to do?


Temporisour. I purpose by Gods grace to withdraw my self from all
Ipocrisye and supersticion, unto the confession of the truth, and for as much
as this determinacio^ is mixte with many dangers: I most instantly desire the
Lord to pardon and forgive me mine offenses paste: as also that he will
vouchsafe from hence forth to fortyfye my faith against all the assaults of
the devil.


Eusebius. The Lord confyrme thee in this thy purpose: That again at the
first brunt thou do not recule back and give place unto the enemy, as one
utterly dismayed and astonished. Remember always the thing that I did admonish
thee of in our first collacio^, to wit, that thou do in time withdraw thy
self from this dissimulacion: otherwise thou art in danger to lose the prick
of thy conscience, that does as yet continually admonish thee, and so to fall
into an obstinate blyndnesse, We must in time wtdraw our selfs from al
papistical supersticio^s, either by life or by exile and flighte, if we will
anoyde desperacion the end of dissimulacion.
and hardness of heart, and finallye into desperacion. For I pray thee
Temporisour (consydre dyligentlye with thy self) what other thing can they
attend and look for, that being so utterly abashed and afraid at the
threateninges of a miserable and corruptible man, do against their own
consciences communicate at unlawful seruyces: but that also when the devil
shall assault them more grievously and cruelly, they must needs be overthrown
blinded, and brought into extreme desperacion? Thou know yt fall of the
Hofmaister the munke in germany. Frauncis Spera in Italy. Master Hayles in
England are the terrible examples of Gods justice unto althose that do any
thing against ye testimoni of their co^scie^ces.
Mo^cke Hofmayster, in this land of Germany: and of Frau^cis Spera in Italy,
who are the great admonicions of God, to those nations, to be vygilant in the
work of the Lord, constant in faith, pacient in affliction, and by no means
against their consciences to deny the truth. Happy is he, that can be warned
by other men's dangers.


Temporisour. I give thee hearty thanks of this thy great diligence used
toward me. In that thou have vouchsaued to preserve and with draw from ye mouth
of ye wolf, a poor strayed sheep.


Ireneus. For as much as thy conscience is such Te^porisour, I cannot give the
beter co^sayl, the^ utterly to divide and with draw thy self from our assembles,
till such time as thou wayst understand more plainly, yt therein is nothing
contained that may hindre thy salvation: and eue^ as I do cou^sayl thee, so
would I do my self, if I were so persuaded as thou art.


Eusebius. Thou do Irenie, as a man of a modeste and mylde nature. I would
to the lord yt thou did thoroughly understand this controversy in religion I
will not refuse at any time when it shall please the, to co^farre with the in this
behalf, to thy further edificacion.


Ireneus. I thank the Eusebie, as yet I do not greatly fantasye ye matter: but
if hereafter at any time my heart be inclined thereunto, I will not forget thy
great modesty and fidelite, but so much the rather desire thy company.


Te^porisour. My friend Eusebie, for as much as by the providence of God, I am
by thy means induced to relinquishe and forsake al pap^stry, I pray thee do
not leave often to come and visit me at my house, continually to assist mine
infirmite with some comfortable Scripture of the grace of Christ.


Eusebius. I will do it gladly. The Lord confyrme thee.


Ireneus. His peace, make an end of all this controuersye, that so much
troubles the church.


Eusebius. Ame^, even so be it. Ame^. The peace of christ is not of this
world, she is not void of the verytie of GOD, she defends no errors,
supersticions, false seruyces nor any other execrable sins, nor yet the
Tyranny of false Christians, but contrarywyse she does pacifye the
consciences of the faithful toward GOD, and then amongst them selves. The
same peace my friend, Irenie, make the^ a true and perfect Irenie, that is to
say, peaceable and a lover of peace.


Ireneus. I desire it withal my heart.


Temporisour. I thank ye both, that it has pleased you to assemble here, at
mine instance. I offer you my service, and commend my self unto your prayers.


Eusebius. Let us pray God, one for another, I will go home to my house, you
may follow when it shall please you.


The end of the fowrth and last Dialoge.
Psalm. xxvi. I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship
with the disceytful.

I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly.


An excellent admonicion and resolucion, of the godly and famous learned man
Celius secundus Curio. Dedicated unto all faithful Christians, to the end,
they (being warned) may avoid al supersticious and erroneous papisticall
services. Translated out of French into English. By R. P.
Psalm. xvi. Al my delight is upon the saints that are in ^he earth, and upon
such as excel in virtue. But ^hey that run after another God, shall have
^reat trouble.

Their drink offering of blood will not I of^er, nether make mention of their
names with^n my lips. The Lord him self is the por^ion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup: he shall maynteyne my lotte.


Job. viij. May a rushe be grene without moystnes? or may the grass grow
without water? no^ ^ut (or ever it be shot forth, and or ever it be ga^hered)
it wythereth before any other herb. Even so goes it withal them that forget
god, and even thus also shall the ypocrites hope, ^ome to naught. His
co^fide^ce shall be destroyed and his trust shall be a spyders web. He shall lean
upon his house, but it shall not stand. He shall hold him fast by it, yet shall it
not endure.


An excellent ^dmonicion and resolucion, of the godly and ^amous learned man
Celius secundus Curio. ^edicated unto all faithful Christians, to the end,
they (being warned) may avoid al supersticious and erroneous papisticall
services. Translated out of French into English. By R. P.
THe brethren being as yet in Babylon, do ask our advise: to wit, if it be
not lawefull, and consonnant with the word of God, in a pure conscience, to be
corporally present, to assiste, and communicate at the Babilonicall papisticall
serui^es, the heart being absent and alienated from all supersticion and vain
religion. To whom first of al, I answer: that it is hard to give cou^sail to
those that are oppressed with so horrible tyranny. In as much as on the one
side, their great calamity does inclyne the heart to pytie and compassion: and
on the other side, ^eritie does revoke the same to himself. So yt in
determining, the mind is led hither and thither, into diverse ambigio^s and
doubtful cogitacions. For I my self (...) he^^ to fore experimented the like
pain (...), have learned for the love of those that are as yet deteyned in the
same, to lead my life in (...) sorrow and heauihes. Albeit, notwithstanding
that the har^e cannot refrain it self from such affections: yet nevertheless
it behooves us to trauayl, that this our counsayl and advise be utterly
exe^pted, from al hearted, amity, anger, pity and from al such affection, as
customably does revoke the mind from the verity and truth. Wherefore I
beseech these my most dear brethren to pardon me, if in geuinge counsel I
shall speak any thing that shall seem over hard unto them, not having
accommodated my self sufficientelye to their infirmity: but rather to persuade
them selfs, that not only by counsayl, but also by aid and fact, we would
most gladly in all possible manner support their calamities.

Wherefore the^ in this deliberat determinacio^ we will propone and set forth
two ends to the which all our doings are to be refar^ed.

The one is the glory of the kingdom of christ* and the righteousness of the
same. The other is the salvation of our brethren, that is to saye^ the Church:
Where upon first of all, I will say this much. That if we had perfectely learned
Christ, i. Corin. i.
and had only known him to be our^ wysdo^, sanctificacion, righteousness, and
redemption. If we had (I say) accumelated and heaped up, o^r riches and
treasure in heaven, whereas h^ is set down on the right hand of God the father:
we should have now no need of these aduyses and consideracions. For then we
should know that our duty is to abandon al worldl^ things for his sake: Math.
x
as fre^des, pare^tes, ryche^ (...), Luke xiiij
and also our own lives to the end (...) reserve, kep^, and entertayne in all
fayt^ fullness, the pure and perfect service of Christ, and the religion,
honor, glory and majesty of his name. And furthermore we would endeavor our
selves by all possible means not to offend our brethren, neither by fact,
worde^ nor dissimulacion: for whom Christ Jesus o^^ Lord has vouchsaued to
suffer death: but rather in imitatinge his example we ought to be priest and
ready to shed our blood for them, in confyrming them in the truth.

The first thing then, that it behooves v^ chefely to attempt, is thoroughly
and perfectely to learn Christ, and to wax rich in the excellent knowledge
of his name: from whenc^ ^nelye proceeds the fyrmyte and constancye of the
mind. For whereas some do persecute Christ in his members, some do deny him
before the Maiestrates, and other some do dissemble their faith in him: From
what other thing does this proceade (suppose we) ^ut only of ignorance,
and want of the knowledge of christ^ those ar utterly void o^ ye knowledge of
Christ* that do persecute him: ^or if they had known him, i. Corin. ij
they would ne^^er have crucyfyed the Lord of glory. L^^^le do they know
him, that either do de^ye him: or else do dissemble their knowledge that they
have of him. For as much as such ^ ^issimulacion is a certain kind of
denial. For if they had thoroughly learned Christ, and ^ad been perfectely
instructed in the doctrine ^f the Gospel, if they had at any time recey^ed the
^^^ite of Christ, and had tasted of the (...) of the celestial grace: none of
these things should have happened unto the^, but rather (as it is said of the
apostles) they would have witnessed Christ with great confydence, Actu. 4. 9
and. 10.
in settinge aparte all other things, and have maynteyned his true service and
pure religion with a merueylous constancy. Let those that think it lawful to
semble or dissemble in religion^ tell me, where appears in them the glory of
Christ? Where is the salvation and example of their brethren: by the which they
ought to endure and bring them to Christ? As touching the glory of God, it
shines not amongst them: in as much as by their silence and dissimulacion,
they do not only obscure it, but also as much as in them lies they do
utterly quench it. On the other side, how do they procure the salvation of
their brethren, consydering that by their pernicious example they do wound
their consciences, and confyrme them in all supersticion, and false religion?
and yet notwithstanding, they know Christ to have said: Math. x.
he that confesses me before men, I will also confess him before my father
and his angels: And he that will not confess and acknowledge me before men,
but deny me, I will not also acknowledge him, but deny him before my father.
And as touching their brethren, they are not ignorant of the grievous
threateninges of the Lord unto all those that d^ offend one Math. 18
of the least of those little ones that trust in him They are not ignorant
also, i. Corin. 8
of that which his Apostle Paul has said: Galat. ij.
that all th^se yt sin against their brethren, in woundinge their ^^ake
consciences, do sin against Christ. Where is it that the holy scriptures
does approve any dissimulacion in religion, and holy things: Or rather where
is it, yt it does not reprove ye same? Let such persons call to their
remembrance, and diligently consydre the excellent example of the three worthy
young Israelites, Danie. iij
that in time past in Babylon (upon the life occasion ministered) did seriouslye
debate this question, in making a notable diffinicion and resolacion of the
same, worthy of all men to be imitated and followed. Did they in any respect
dissemble? or rather did they not think it meter to expose them selves quick
unto the flamy furnace, An objection.
then to inclyne to any dissimulacion? But the soul and mind (say they) aby
death always firmly fixed in God, although the body do dissemble in outward
fact, at the papisticall services, (this do they allege:) But let them
answer me: Answer.
has not God created and given, as well the body as the soul: Has he not
reserned and dedicated them both unto him self? Ought we not to believe with
ye heart unto iustificacion? Roma. 10
and with the mouth and other exieriour iestures, ought we not to make
confession unto salvation? The wife in abandoning her body to the use of
another man, shall she be excused toward her husband, by saying that she
has always reserved him most dearest in her heart? no truly. And as this is
no reasonable excuse, even so is not the other: but rather much less to be
allowed. Thou which art but one, will thou deuyde thy self? in dedicating the
one part of thee, unto Christ: and the other to Antechriste? Woe worth this
dullness and cowardnes of mind, wherein rests such peruersite, that either for
fear or for any other cause do declyne from our duties and seruyces, which I
owe unto the immortal God: we (I say) whose part it were to suffer al manner
of death for mortal men. But they replye, saying: An objection.
That for a singular commodotie and profit unto the church of God: or for a
good end and purpose, it is sometime lawful to dissemble. I answer that
there is no greater comoditie then to observe the true and perfect religion:
Answer.
there is no comodite more greater the^ the glory of Christ, and the salvation
of our brethren. For we may in no wise do evil, Roma. iij
how little soever it be (as witnesses S. Paul) to the end that good may
come thereof: nether has God any need of our lies, and dissimulacio^s. It
seems that the Apostles have sometime dissembled, but in very deed they did
not dissemble, but unfeignedly for a time they did observe that which was
contained in the law, to the end that by that means they might alure and
win the Jews unto the knowledge of Christ: wherein they did nothing against
their consciences, for as much as the ceremonies the^ used were first
established by the word of god. But we contrary wise, nothing regarding the
premyses, do those things not only, not permitted of God, but also vehemently
reproved by his holy word. Math. 28
And first, as touching the form and order of Baptism, the which the
papistical prestes do now use, although it be true that the same be auayleable
and effectual unto young children being baptized therwt, who^ the prophenacio^
of the sacrament cannot anoye: yet not withstanding unto the aged, and unto
those that are sufficiently instructed by the word of God of the impiete of the
same, it is unto them nothing else, but the mark and token of the Babilonicall
army, whereby they join the^ selves unto Antechrist, and proteste to serve
him in his wars. Luke. xxij
If any question be of the sacrament of ye altar, i. Corin. 11
to the which the people ones in the year at least, do run so fast? what
other thing is it, but a general monsterday, of the garrison and soldiers of
Anthechrist? Ebre. ix.
If any do ask our advise of the mass? what other answer can we render,
but yt it is the great ensign and standart of Antechrist, elevated and erected
up against Christ and his merits, under the which all the soldiers of
Antichrist do assemble them selves: Canti. iij. Danie. iij
or else it is the great Image of gold erected by Nabuchodonosor, to the
dedicacion and worshipping whereof all the Babilonia^s do assemble and come
together: the which also contrarywyse all the Israelites of God do flee and
abhor. If any man ask our advise of their Canonical hours, Collo. iij.
of their latin Mattens and Euensong, and of their solemn singinge and
Ceremonies? We answer that they are nothing else, Danie. iij apo. 17. 18
but the tabrettes, harpes, vyalles and sweet armonye of the King of Babylon,
and the pleasant daunsinge and melodye of the rose coulered whore attired in
purple. If any do doubt, Deute. v.
of the worshyppinge of Idolles, and of the invocation of innumerable Saynctes,
John. iiij
we certyfye them that it is no thing else but a battle and strife, i. Cori.
xij
wherein we do openly fight against God and his christ. Esaias. 28.
Finally if any do dispute of the funeralles and seruyces of the dead? Mat.
viij
we affirm it is nothing else, i. Tessa. 4
then unfortunately to perish in battle, in making composicion with death
and hell: thereby renouncinge life and heaven (that is to say:) Christ him
self, in buryinge our selfs with the wicked in ungodliness. O how miserable
are we, if we acknowledge not these things: and more miserable if we know them
and do dissemble them: and most miserable if we do allow them, and openly
defend them. If the brethren do consydre these things, and dyligentely examyne
the same, they shall easily know, to what end all things ought to be
refarred, and in what manner it behooves them to live. For if they do not set
before the^ selfs certain determinate ends, where unto they purpose to
dyrecte all their doings and cou^saylles: then of force they must needs
straye from the right way. Wherefore as we said before, there are two ends set
forth unto every Christian man. The first: the sekinge of the auauncement of
the glory of God. The second: the wealth and salvation of our brethren, as a
thing annexed unto the first. Now, in a^much as we are obliged unto Christ, and
do march under his standart: it behooves us by all possible means to seek the
auauncement of his glory, and that with the hasarde of our lives, and smarte
of our bodies: onelesse we wylbe reputed traitors to his Majesty.

But for as much as diverse are so infyrme and weak, and indewed with so little
knowledge and faith, that they dare not publykelye contemn and forsake the
supersticio^^ seru^ (...) I would counsel such not to attempt or
enterprise any thing rashely: but to keep them selves within in the lymities of
their faith, with out forsaking their vocacion, till such time as they are
grown up into a more perfection, knowledge, and strength. Let such (I say)
continually frequent the reading of the holy scriptures in their houses. Let
the^ diligently repair unto such as have the gift of interpretacio^, and are
of godly co^uersacio^. Let them often times pray unto God the father of our
Lord Jesus christ, that he will increase their faith, so that at the last they
may grow up into perfect me^, namely, such as becomes the true disciples of
Jesus Christ. And if at any time, either frayltie, or fear of me^, or any other
thing, do cause the^ to withdraw the^ selfs from this their purposed
determinacio^, in communicating with the papists at their wicked services and
execrable ydolatries: let the^ beware that they do not by any means excuse
their fact and doings: but rather accuse and condemn the^ selfs, and that
before god and their brethren, who^ by their evil example they have offended.
In bewayling their miserable servitude and want of strength, i. Corin. ^
to resist temptacio^. Asking pardon of the Lord, in committing the^ selfs
wholly to the mercy of God, to the end (that they being void of cou^sayl, what
to do;) it may please the Lord to give the^ such hearts and constant minds
rather to suffer death for the glory of his name (if need require) the^
continually to live in unquietness of consciences poluted with sinful
Idolatry, Or else if it please him not to give the^ so great a gift, and fruit
of faith (which is given but unto few) that then he will vouchsafe to show the^
the means and way, by ye which they may escape from so great tyranny, in
serving the Lord in a pure and fre religion, in a quiet and peaceable place.
The which thing truly, our good celestial father will perform: and will not
suffer us to be assaulted above our strength: but will acco^plishe the good
desire of his saynctes, in satisfyinge those that thyrst after righteousness.
We have by the assistaunce of God his spirit, produced this little admonicio^,
for the consolacion of our brethren, being as yet in the Babilonicall
captivity, amongeste the papists: for as much as we were informed that they
required our advise herein. Wherefore if they desire to be further instructed
of any thing else by us: as are ye declaration of the places that some are
accustomed to allege out of the holy scriptures, for ye defense of their
dissimulacion: or else the refuctacio^ of those things that are more
ingenious^y, then faithfully of diverse excogitated and produced. Or else if
there be any that (not contented with this my writing) desire farther to be
instructed and satisfied: let such read ye writings and judgments, of such
learned and virtuous brethren, as have most purely and sincerelye entreated
of those matters: whose wrytinge I do most gladly know and allow: so that
there neded not in any thing our advise herein, if we had not been instantly
requested there unto by certain brethren, whose earnest and godly desire, we
would not, nor durst not refuse.

The LORD have mercy upon (...), and shortly break Satan's head, and throw
down all power, that s^ryueth to hindre the true and pure service of GOD.
Amen.

Finis.
i. Corinthi. vi. Set your selves at large, and bear not ye the yoke with the
unbelievers. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? or
what co^pani has light with darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial?
either what part has he that believes with an infydel? or how agrees the
Temple of God with Idolles? For ye are the Temple of the living God (as said
God: I will dwell amongst them, and walk amongst them: and will be their God,
and they shall be my people: wherefore come out from amongst the^, and separate
your selves from them (says the Lord:) and touch no unclean thing, so will
I receive you, and will be a father unto you: and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the almighty Lord.


Job. xx. Know thou not this, namely, that from the beginning (ever since
the creacion of man upon the earth) the gladness of the ungodly has been
short, and that the joy of ypo^ crites, continued but the twinkeling of an
eye?



