The great wonders that are chanced in the Realm of Naples, with a great
misfortune happened at Rome and in other places, by an earth quake in the
month of December last past.

Translated out of French into English, by I. A. 1566.

Ierem. 18. When I take in h(...) to root out, to destroy, or to wast any
people or kingdom, if that people against whom I have thus devised, convert
from their wickedness, I repent of the plague that I devised to bring upon
them. GEntle Reader by this little discourse,
Which does contain things wonderful and high
And that one God does number days and hours
Thy hour to be uncertain thou may see.
In reading it thou may likewise remember,
That great Cyty called Sodom and Gommor:
To be in great peril to sink without succor,
Which will not God alone in fear and faith honor.
Psalm. 107. verse. 33.
For running floudes to dry deserts,
He does often change and turn:
And dries up as it were dust,
The springing well and burn.
A fruitful land with pleasures decked,
Full barren does he make:
When on their sins that dwell therein,
He does just vengeance take.
To the Reader health.
FOrasmuch (gentle reader) as the Lord god the lover and preserver of things
which he has created, gives us oftentimes warninges and foreshewynges, and
does declare his divine power by showing of signs and tokens, and things more
than natural, as the examples thereof are very familiar and plain in holy
scriptures, as well in the old as in the new Testament, making sometime the
thunders, tempests, and earthquakes, ministers and executers of of his
vengeance and justice. Those his ministers or scourges, are to admonish us,
and to call us to repentance, showing thereby unto us his great clemencye and
goodness, for so much as his heavy displeasure is kindled toward us, and
his wrath nearer than we be aware of, when that we knowleging our selves to be
grievous sinners, will not repent and amend our evil and peruers life. I
thought it there fore good, to put into our vulgar tongue these wonderful
chances that are happened of late days, as well in the borders of Naples, as
also within the City of Rome, the. xvj. xvii. and xviij. days of December last
past Anno. 1565. by the which thou may in my judgment gather some fruit,
whereby thou may remember the great and unspeakable power of our good God,
and his secret judgment. Wherefore I pray thee to take this my little work in
good part. God of his goodness defend and keep you.

From Auignon the. xxvij. of January.
The great wonders that are chanced in the Realm of Naples, with the great
misfortune happened at Rome by an earthquake in the month of December last
past.
The Copy of certain letters sent from Naples, to Cardinal Alexandrian, of
that which has happened in the said country, the. 16. 17. and 18. days of
December last.

FIrst there is overthrown a Palace by the force and violence of the wind
and earthquake: in the fall whereof was slain under the said Palace xxv.
persons, standing in a town called Reyne, within. xxx. miles of Naples.

Moreover there are overthrown by the like tirrible wind and earthquake, five
Castelles belonging to the Lord Carigoll, that is to wit, the Castle
Casignam, Valerin, Saint George, Saint Julian, and Saint Angel, the which
at the very season did sink, and were swallowed up. The said Castelles were
standing toward Sallerne.

More the Palace or Castle of Poliquam is opened by the Earthquake, the breadth
and measure of fifty spaces.

More there is a Laake nere to the said Castle by Angully, that is dried up,
and no man can judge which way the water is gone out, nor what way it has
taken.

More a great flood or River, that none could pass without Baarges or Boats,
is likewise dried up, and the water consumed and gone.

Likewise in the town of Basillicat, the Bishops Palace, and the great
walls compassing the said Palace, is also thrown down.

The Floude and water of Neuo that was very great, is also lost and clean
consumed, as the others aforenamed, eight days before the Earthquake.

The Castle of Vicelle, fell down by night, and a little town nere unto it,
with a great number of houses and Uillages, and there is made count of twelve
thousand people that are slain.

The Castle of Cappello is almost all shaken down, with the death of seven
hundredth persons.

There has been such a wind at Rome that it has blown down a great many
houses, and thrown down a great number of trees, since the. 17. and 18. of
December last past.

The River of Tiber was seen covered with such a quantity of dead fyshes,
that they think not so many to be left living in the said River, as there was
seen dead.

The pestilence or plague is grieuouser in Turkey than ever it was, and the
Turk is so combred with war, that he requires help of the Christians.

FINIS.
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautu.
An admonition or Warning to England.
LO here O England thou, thy fatal end may see:
A warning great if thou be wise, this same may be to thee.
Behold what noble things are come to ruin great:
When fruits are ripe, thou well do know, then are they pluct to eat:
The sin is very ripe, the banks do over flow:
The time will come when thou shall be, like these be brought as low.
If thou do not repent, when mercy stands in gate:
I fear me when thou would feign, that it will be to late.
Take time while time does give, a laysure for the same:
Remember well that time has feet, and she is nothing lame.
Before long hair she has, behind she quite is polde:
Put to thy hand, and of her locks, see that thou take good hold.
Fall now for to repent, for lo, she still does stand:
And eke behold how for to cut, her Sithe is in her hand.
Not four Months fully past, since these were like to thee:
And now thearth has gaped so wide* that swallowed up they be.
What was the cause right well, the scripture us does show:
It was the very sins of them, that brought those towns so low.
Thy sins do more abound, what filth is not in thee:
Why should not thou be swallowed like as all these Castelles be?
But that the mighty God of his abundaunt grace:
Does yet in mercy grant to thee, somewhat of longer space.
Consider how he fierce, of late has dealt with thee:
Because these Castelles and thy self, after might warned be.
And now because nothing, could make them to repent:
From thee he did transport to them, his grievous punishment.
Thy warning could not serve, ne yet theirs could serve thee:
Well now for their refusal great, swallowed up they be.
Amend my country still, I thee desire and pray:
For I a member of thy state, were loath thou should decay.
Behold thy loving Lord, his sword is in his hand:
Thee to the earth to fling in ire what can his force withstand:
Can mighty gates of brass, can Castles strongly builte:
His force withstand? his very breath, these Castles quite has spilte.
No mean there is in deed, that can his plagues withstand:
But only this repentance may, by mercy stay his hand.
Repent in time therefore, to God for mercy cry:
Which when thou do his mighty hand he stays by and by.
For thus he plain does say, when sinners shall relente:
And turn from sin, I even then likewise my self repent.
Of all the plagues which I upon them thought to bring:
Lo here the mercy great I say, of our most heavenly king:
Their sins Ill quite forgette, if they will turn to me:
I will remember them no more, though thousands that there be.
Remember Niniuie, how that when god had sent:
Jonas the Prophet unto them, they straight ways did repent.
Whereof did come that God, his wrath did still restrain:
Repent therefore in time I say, so may thou still remain.
FINIS.
quod John Partridge.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham for Tho mas Hacket, and are to be sold at
his shop in Lumbart streate.


