AN AMPLE DECLARATION OF THE CHRISTIAN doctrine.

COMPOSED IN Italian by the renowned Cardinal: Card. BELLARMINE.

Translated into English by RICHARD HADOCK D. of Divinity.



PRINTED at ROAN.

A DECLARATION OF THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE.
For the use of those that teach children, and other unlearned persons:
Composed in form of a Dialogue, between the Master and Scholar.

CHAP. I. What Christian doctrine is, and what are the principal parts thereof.
SCHOLAR. SEEING I do understand, that it is necessary to salvation, to know
the Christian doctrine, I desire you to declare unto me what this doctrine is.


MASTER. The Christian doctrine is a brief sum of all those things, which
Christ our Lord has taught, to show us the way of salvation.


S How many be the principal and most necessary parts of this doctrine


M Four, to wit, the Creed, the Pater noster, the ten Commandments, and the
holy Sacraments.


S Wherefore are there four, and neither more nor fewer?


M Because there are three principal virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and
Grace, necessary to salvation. And so, the Creed is necessary for Faith,
because it teaches us that which we have to believe; the Pater noster, is
necessary for Hope, because it teaches us what we have to hope; the ten
Commandments are necessary for Charity, because they teach us what we have
to do, to please God; the sacraments are necessary, because they are the
Instruments of Grace, by which those virtues are received and conserved.


S I would be glad you should give me some similitude, to understand better,
the necessity of these four parts of Christian doctrine.


M S. Augustine gives us the similitude of a house: for as to make a house, it
is needful first to place the fundation, then to raise the walls, and last of
all, to cover it with the roof, and to do these things there are some
instruments necessary: so to make in our Souls the building of salvation, we
have need of the foundation of Faith; the walls of Hope; the roof of
Charity; and the instruments, which are the most holy Sacraments.


CHAP. 2. The declaration of the usual blessing with the sign of the Cross.
S BEfore we come unto the first part of this doctrine, I would be glad you
should give me some taste of those things which are to be believed, declaring
unto me in gross and in sum, the most necessary mysteries that are
contained in the Creed.


M You have reason, and so I will do. You must then know that the principal
mysteries of our faith are two, and both two are contained in the blessing that
we use to make with the sign of the holy Cross. The first mystery is the
Unity and trinity of God: the second is the Incarnation and Passion of our
Savior.


S What means the Unity and Trinity of God.


M These are most high matters, and by little and little are to be declared, in
the progress of this doctrine: but for this time it shall suffice to learn
the names, and to understand so much as you may. The Unity of God signifies,
that besides all things created, there is one thing that has not had
beginning, but has always been, and ever shall be, and has made all other
things, and maintains and governs them, and is above all, most high, most
noble, most glorious, most potent, absolutely Patron of all things: and this
is called God, who is one only, because there can not be more then one true
Divinity, that is to say, one only Nature and Essence, infinitely potent,
Holy, good, and so forth. Yet notwithstanding this Divinity, is found in
three persons, which are called the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
which three persons are one only God, because they have the selfsame
Divinity and essence. As for example, if three persons here in earth, called
Peter, Paul, and John, should have one and the same soul, and one and the same
body, they should be called three persons, because one is Peter, an other
Paul, and an other John: and yet they should be one man only, and not three
men, not having three bodies, nor three souls but one body and one soul.
This is not possible amongst men, because the being of a man is dererminat and
limited, and therefore cannot be in many persons. But the being of God and his
divinity is infinite. And there fore the selfsame being, and the selfsame
Divinity of the Father, may be, and is found in the soon, and in the
Holie-Ghost. There be then three persons, because one is the Father, another
is the Son, and the third is the Holie-Ghost. And yet they are one God only,
because they have the same Divinity, the same being, the same power, wisdom,
goodness, etc.


S. Tell me now what signifies the Incarnation and Passion of our Savior?


M You are to know that the second Divine person, the which as we have said,
is called the Son, besides his divine being, which he had before the world was
created, yea from all eternity, took the flesh and soul of man, that is to
say, our whole nature, in the womb of a most pure Virgin, and so he who was
before only God, came likewise to be Man. And after he had conuersed with men
thirty and three years, teaching the way of salvation, and working many
miracles, in the end he suffered himself to be nailed upon a Cross, and on
the same dyed to satisfy God for the sins of the whole world: and after
three days he rose from death to life, and after forty days more, ascended
into heaven, as we shall show in the declaration of the Creed: this is the
Incarnation and Passion of our Savior.


S Wherefore are these the principal mysteries of our Faith?


M Because in the first, is contained the first beginning, and last end of man:
In the second, the only and most effectual means to know the first
beginning, and how to attain unto the last end: and because in believing and
confessing these two mysteries, we manifest our selves distinct from all the
false Sects of Gentiles, Turks, Jews and Heretics: and lastly, because
without believing and confessing these two mysteries, no man can be saved.


S How are these mysteries contained in the sign of the Cross?


M We make the sign of the Cross when we say: In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and that in this form, putting the right
hand under the forehead, when we say, In the name of the Father: then under
the breast, when we say, and of the Son: lastly, from the left shoulder unto
the right, when we say, and of the holy Ghost. And withal the word, In the
name, does show the unity of God: because it is said, in the name, and not in
the names: and by the word name is also understood the divine power and
authority, which is one only in all the three persons. These words of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, do show unto us the Trinity of
persons: The signing in form of a Cross, represents unto us the Passion,
and consequently, the Incarnation of the Son of God: the passing from the
left shoulder to the right, and not from the right to the left, signifies that
by the Passion of our Savior, we are transferred from sin unto grace, from
transitory things unto eternal, from death to life.


S To what purpose is this sign of the Cross made?


M First it is made to show that we are Christians, to wit, soldiers of our
chief Emperor Christ, because this sign is, as it were an ensign or
liuerie, which distinguishes the soldiers of Christ, from all the enemies of
the Holy Church: to wit, Gentiles, Jews Turks and Heretics: besides this
sign is made to call for Gods help, in all our works:: because with this
sign, the most holy Trinity is called to help by means of the passion of
our Savior: and therefore good Christians use to make this sign, when they
arise from bed, when they go to sleep, and in the beginning of all other
things, which they have to do; finally this sign is made to arm us against
all temptations of the Devil, because the Devil is a fraid of this sign, and
flies from it, as malefactors do, when they see the sign of the officers of
Justice, and oftentimes by means of this sign of the holy Cross, a man
escapes many dangers, as well spiritual as temporal, when he makes it with
faith and trust of Gods mercy, and of the merits of Christ our Savior.


CHAP. 3. The declaration of the Creed.
S Now coming to the first part of this doctrine, I desire to learn the
Creed.


M The Creed contains twelve parts, which are called Articles, and they are
twelve, according to the number of the twelve Apostles who composed the same,
and are these.

1 I Believe in God the Father almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. 2 And in
Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord. 3 Who was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary. 4 Suffered under Pontious Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, descended into Hell. 5 The third day he rose again from
death. 6 Ascended into heaven: si^^eth at the right hand of God the Father
almighty. 7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. 8 I
believe in the Holy Ghost. 9 The holy Catholic Church: the Communion of
Saints, 10 Remission of sins. 11 Resurrection of the flesh. 12 Life
everlasting. Amen.



S May it please you declare to me the first article word by word. What
signifies, I believe?


M It signifies, I hold for certain, and for most true, all that is contained
in these twelve articles: and the reason is this, because the same God has
taught the holy Apostles these sentences, and the holy Apostles the Church, and
the Church does teach them us: and because it is impossible that God should
say that which is false, I therefore believe these things more certainly,
then those I see with mine eyes, and feel with my hands.


S What means: In God?


M It means that we ought to believe firmly, that there is a God, albeit we
do not see him with corporal eyes, and this God is one only, and therefore it
is said, in God, and not in Gods. And you must not imagine that god is like to
any corporal thing how great or fair so ever it be, but you must think, that
God is a spiritual thing, which ever was, and forever shall be, has made the
whole, fills the whole, governs the whole, knows and sees every thing,
and finally, what thing soever is represented unto our eyes, or unto our
imagination, you must say, that this which now is represe^ted unto me, is not
god because God is a thing infinitely better


S Wherefore is it said that God is a Father?


M Because he is truly the Father of his only begotten Son, of whom we shall
speak in the second article; and also because he is the Father of al good men,
not by nature but by adoption: and finally because he is the father of al
creatures, not by nature, or by adoption, but by creation: as we shall say
hereafter in this same article.


S Wherefore is he called Almighty!


M Because it is a proper title of God, and albeit God has many proper
titles, as eternal, infinite, unmeasurable and others, yet in this place the
most fit is, that he is omnipotent, because it may not seem hard unto us to
believe, that he has made heaven and earth of nothing, as in the words
following is added. For that unto him, who can do all that he will, and thereby
is omnipotent, nothing can be hard. And if you should say unto me, God can not
dye, nor sin, and therefore it seems not that he can do al things, I would
answer you, that to dye or to sin is not power but impotencie, as when it is
said of a most valiant soldier, that he can overcome al, and that he cannot be
overcome of any, it does not preindicate his force to say, that he cannot be
overcome, because that he can be overcome, is not strength but weakness


S What is signified by Creator?


M It signifies that God has made al things of nothing, and he alone can
bring them again unto nothing. The Angels, Men and also Devils can make, and
unmake some things, but they can not make them otherwise, then of some kind of
matter which was before, neither can they unmake the^ but by changing them into
some other thing, as a Maison cannot make a house of nothing, but he must have
stones, lyme and wood: neither can he destroy it in bringing it to nothing, but
into stones, dust, wood, and such like: so that God only is called and is a
creator, because he only has no need of any matter to make all things.


S Why is he called creator of heaven and earth: has not God also made the
air, the water, stones, trees, men and all other things?


M By heaven and earth, is also understood, all that is in heaven and earth, as
he that says: a man has a body and a soul, means also that he has al
things belonging to a body, as veins, blood, bones, sinews and the rest: and
all things belonging unto a soul; as understanding, will, memory, internal
and external senses, and the rest: so that by heaven is understood the air
where birds use to be and all things above, where the clouds and the stars are:
whereupon it is said, the birds of heaven, the clouds of heaven, the stars of
heaven, and finally the Angels. By the earth is understood all that is compassed
by the air, as the waters of the sea, and of the rivers, which are in the
lower parts of the earth, and also al live creatures, plants, stones, metals,
and all other things which are found in the earth, or in the sea: it is
therefore said, that God is creator of heaven and earth, because these two are
the principal parts of the world, the one above, in the which the Angels
remain, and the other beneath, in which men do dwell, which are the two most
noble creatures of all others, the which also all others do serve, as they are
also bound to serve God who has made them of nothing, and placed them in so
high estate.


The declaration of the second Article.
S DEclare unto me now the second article; what signifies: And in Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord?


M The same God omnipotent, of whom we have spoken in the first article, has
one true and natural Son, who is called Jesus Christ, and that you may see
in some sort how God has begotten this Son; take the example of a
looking-glass, when one does look in a glass, presently he produces an
Image of himself, so like as no difference can be found in so much as it is
not only like in shape, but in moving also: for that if the man move, the
Image will also move, and this Image being so like, is not made by any labor,
neither is it long in making, nor with instruments, but in a moment, and with
one look only. In like manner, you have to think, that God beholding him
self, with the eye of understanding, in the glass of his Divinity, does
produce an Image most like unto him self. And because God has given unto this
Image al his own substance and his own being (which we can not do in
beholding our selves in a glass) therefore that Image is the true Son of
God, albeit our Images which we see in glasses are not our sons. Hereof you
must gather, that the Son of God is God, as the Father, and one the same God
with the father, seeing he has the same substance that his Father has:
furthermore, you have together that the Son of God is not younger then his
Father, but was always as his father always was because he was begotten by
Gods only beholding himself, and God has always beholden himself. Lastly,
you have together, that the Son of God was not begotten, with help of a
woman, nor in length of time, nor in delight of concupiscence, nor any other
imperfection, because, as it has bin said, he was begotten of the Father
alone, by the only beholding himself, with the most pure eye of his divine
understanding.


S What does it mean that this Son of God is called Jesus Christ?


M This name of Jesus signifies a Savior, and Christ, which is his surname,
signifies high Priest and king of all kings, because, as I have told you, in
declaring the sign of the Cross, the Son of God became man, to redeem us
again with his blood, and to bring us to eternal salvation. And so when he
became man, he took this name Savior, to show that he was come to save us,
and he was honored by his Father, with the title of Highest Priest, and
Supreme King, for that Christ does signifye all this, and hereof we are
called Christians.


S What is the reason that all men take off their caps, or bow down when
Jesus is named, which is not done to other names of God?


M The reason is, because this is the proper name of the Son of God, and all
other names are common, and again, because this name does represent unto us
how God humbled himself for us, in making himself man. Therefore we for
gratitude bow our selves unto him, and not only we men, but the Angels of
heaven also, and the devils of hell, do bow to this name, the one for love,
and the other by force: for that God will, that all reasonable creatures do
bow unto his son: seeing that he has abased himself, for our love to the
death of the Cross.


S Wherefore is it said, that Jesus Christ our Lord?


M Because he has created us, together with his Father, and so is our Master
and Lord as his Father is. And moreover, for that by his travels and Passion,
he has brought us again, from the captivity of the Devil, as we shall say
by and by.


Of the third Article.
S IT Follows, that you declare unto me the third Article, what it means:
who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie?


M In this Article is declared the new and merueilous manner of the Incarnation
of the Son of God. You know, that all other men are borne of father and
mother, and that the mother remains not a Virgin, after the conceiving and
bringing forth of a child. But the Son of God intending to make him self
Man, would have no Father in earth but a Mother only: to wit, the perpetual
and most pure Virgin Marie, in whose womb the Holy Ghost (the third person in
Trinity, one and the selfsame God with the Father and the Son) by his
infinite power, formed of her most pure blood, the body of a most perfect
child: and at the same time created a most noble soul, joining it to the same
body: all which the Son of God united to his own Person. And so Jesus
Christ that before was only God, became man, who as he is God, has a Father
without a Mother, and as he is Man, has a Mother without a Father.


S I would have some example or similitude to understand how a Virgin can
conceive?


M The secrets of God must be believed, although they be not understood,
because God can do more the^ we can easily understand, and therefore it is said
in the beginning of the Creed, that God is omnipotent. Yet there is a fit
example in the creation of the world. You know that ordinarily the ground does
not bring forth corn unless it be plowed, sown, watered with rain, and
warmed with the sun, and yet in the beginning, when corn was first brought
forth, the earth being neither tilled nor fowne, watered, nor warmed (and so was
a virgin in her kind) suddenly, by the only commandment of God almighty, and
by his power it brought forth corn: even so the unspotted womb of the B.
Virgin MARIE, without company of man, at the only commandment of God, by the
work of the Holy Ghost, brought forth that precious corn, of the living
body, of the Son of God.


S If Jesus be conceived by the Holy Ghost, it seems that it may be said,
that the Holy Ghost is his Father, as he is man.


M It is not so; because to be a Father, it is not sufficient to make a thing
but it is necessary, that it be made of the substance of the maker: and
therefore we say that the Maison is not the father of the house, because he
makes it of stones, and not of his proper substance. So the holy ghost has
made the body of the Son of God, but he has made it of the blood of the
virgin, and not of his own proper substance: and therefore the Son of God, is
not the Son of the Holy Ghost, but the Son of God the Father, as he is
God, because he has his Godhead of him: and he is the Son of the B. virgin as
he is man, for that he has man's flesh of her.


S Wherefore is it said, that the holy Ghost did this work of the
Incarnation? Did not the Father, and the Son also concur therein?


M That which one Divine Person works, the other two work likewise the same,
because they have one and the same power, wisdom, and goodness: yet
notwithstanding the works of power be attributed unto the Father: those of
wisdom, unto the Son: and those of love, unto the Holy Ghost: and because
this was a work of the highest love of God toward mankind, it is therefore
attributed unto the holy ghost.


S I would have some example to understand, how all the three divine Persons
have concurred to the Incarnation, and yet the Son is only Incarnate.


M When one man puts on a garment, and two others do help to cloth him,
three do then concur to the clothing of him, and yet one only is clothed: so
all the three divine Persons concur to work the Incarnation of the Son of
God, but only the Son is incarnate, and made man.


S Wherefore is it added in the article: Borne of the Virgin Marie?


M Because in this also there is a strange mystery, that is, that the Son of
God came forth of the womb of his Mother, at the end of the ninth month,
without pain or harm of his said Mother, not leaving any sign there at all:
even as he did when rising from death he went out of the close Sepulcher, and
when he entered and went forth of the chamber, where his Disciples were, the
doors being shut, and there upon it is said, that the mother of our Lord
Jesus Christ was always a Virgin, before his birth, in his birth, and after
his birth.


Of the fourth Article.
S What means that which follows in the fourth article? He suffered under
Pontious Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.


M This Article contains the most profitable mystery of our redemption: and
the sum is, that Christ after he had conuersed in this world about thirty
three years, and had taught with his most holy life, his doctrine and his
miracles, the way of salvation, was unjustly caused by Pontius Pilate (who was
governor of Iewrie) to be whipped and nailed upon a Cross, upon the which he
dyed, and by certain holy men was buried.


S Concerning this mystery, there do occur unto me some doubts, and I desire
by you to be cleared of the^, to the end I may be the more grateful unto God
for so great a benefit, by how much I shall the better understand it. Tell me
then, if Christ be the Son of God omnipotent, how happened it, that he was
not delivered by his Father, out of the hands of Pilate? Or rather, if the
same Christ be God, wherefore did he not deliver himself?


M Christ could if he would have delivered himself by a thousand means out
of the hands of Pilate. Yea more, the whole world had not bin able to do him
any evil, if he had not bin willing: and this is clearly seen, because he
knew and foretold unto his Disciples, that the Jews would seek to put him to
death, and that they would whippe him, stone him, and finally kill him. Yet he
did not hide himself but went to meet his enemies. And when they sought to
take him, and knew him not, he said unto them himself, he was that man for
whom they sought: at which time also, they al faling backwards as dead me^, he
did not depart thence as he might have done, but expected and permitted them to
recover themselves: and after, he suffered him self to be taken, bound, and led
like a meek Lamb, where they would.


S For What cause did Christ, being innocent suffer him self to be unjustly
crucified and slain.


M For many reasons. But the principal reason was, to satisfy unto God for
our sins. For you have to know that the offense is measured according to the
dignity of him who is offended: and contrariewise the satisfaction is measured
according to the dignity of him who does satisfy: as for example, if a
servant should give his Prince a blow, it should be esteemed a most grievous
offense, according to the greatness of the prince: but if a prince should give
his servant a blow, it were a small matter, according to the base estate of the
servant. And contrariwise, if a servant take off his cappe unto his Prince, it
is but little esteemed, but if the Prince should take off his, unto his servant
it would be a notable favor, according to the rule we speak of. Now because
the first man, and with him al we have offended God, who is of so infinite
dignity, the offense did require infinite satisfaction: and because there was
neither man nor Angel of so great dignity, therefore the Son of God came,
who being God and of infinite dignity, and having taken mortal flesh, in the
same flesh he submitted him self for the honor of God to the death of the
Cross, and so satisfied with his pains for our faults.


S What other cause is there, for which Christ would suffer so bitter a death?


M To teach us by his example, the virtues, of Patience, Humility, Obedience
and of Charity: which are four virtues signified in the four extreme parts
of the Cross: because greater patience can not be found, then to suffer
unjustly so ignominious a death: nor greater humility, then for the Lord of
all Lords, to submit him self to be crucified betwixt thieues: nor greater
obedience, then to be willing rather to die, then not to fulfill the
commandment of his Father: nor greater charity, then to yield his life, to
save his enemies. And you must know, that Charity is more showed in deeds,
then in words, and more in suffering then in doing. And so Christ, who would
not only bestow upon us infinite benifits, but suffer also, and die for us, has
showed that he loves us most ardently.


S Seeing Christ is God and man, as you said before, and it seems that God
can not suffer, nor die, how do we then say, that he suffered and died?


M Christ being God and man, can suffer and not suffer, die and not die: for in
that he is God, could neither suffer nor die: but as he is man, he could both
suffer and die: and therefore I ^old you, that being God, he was made man, to
satisfy for our sins, suffering the pains of death in his most holy flesh;
which he could not have done, if he had not been man.


S If Christ have satisfied his Father for the sins of all men: whence
^ommeth it, that so many are damned, and that we have need to do penance for
our sins.


M Christ has satisfied for the sins ^f all men: but it is necessary to
ap^lie this satisfaction in particular, to ^his man and to that man, which is
one by faith, by the Sacraments, by good works, and particularly by penance:
and therefore we have need ^o do penance and other good works, though Christ
have suffered, and wrought for us: And the cause that many are damned or
remain enemies to God, is for that either they will not have faith, as Jews,
Turks, and Heritikes: or because they will not receive the Sacraments, as those
that will not be baptized, or will not confess their sins, or will not do such
penance as they can, for their sins, nor resolve to live conformably to the law
of God.


S I would have some example, to understand this.


M Take the example of one, which should take great pains, and with sweat and
labors should gain so much money, as were sufficient to pay all the debts of
this city, and should put the same in a bank, to the end it should be given
unto al such, as should bring a warant from him: this man surely had satisfied
for all, so much as lies in him: and yet many might remain still in debt, for
that they would not, either for pride, or for sloth, or for some other cause,
demand his warant, and carry it to the bank, to receive the money.


S What signifies, He descended into hell? and what does hell signify in this
place?


M Hell is the lowest and deepest place in this world: to wit, the middle of the
earth. And the Scripture in many places, puts heaven as opposite unto hell,
as the highest place unto the lowest. But in this depth of the earth, there are
four, as it were, great caves: one for the damned, which is the deepest of al,
and so it is agreeable, that the proud Devils, and the men which imitate them,
be in the lowest place, and furthest from heaven that can be. In the second
cave, which is something higher, are those souls, which suffer the pains of
Purgatory. In the third, which is yet higher, are the souls of those
children, that die with out Baptism, who do not suffer torments of fire, but
only the perpetual privation of eternal felicity. In the fourth, which is
the highest, remained the souls of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and other Holy
men, that dyed before the coming of Christ; for albeit, those holy souls had
not any thing to be purged, yet they could not enter into glory, before Christ
by his death had opened the gate of eternal life: and therefore they remained
in that higher place, called, the place of holy Fathers, otherwise Abraham's
bosom, where they suffered no pains at all, but enjoyed a sweet repose,
expecting the coming of our Lord with great joy. And so we read in the Gospel,
that the soul of that poor beggar Lazarus, was carried by an Angel to rest
in the bosom of Abraham, where he was seen by the rich glutton, who burning
in flames of hell, cast up his eyes, and saw Lazarus in a far higher place,
remaining in great joy and consolation, enjoying the fruits of his former
patience.


S Into which of these four parts of Hell, did Christ descend, after his
death?


M There is no doubt, but he descended into the place of holy Fathers, and
suddenly made them blessed, and after led the^ with him in to the kingdom of
heaven: He made himself also seen unto all the other parts of hell,
terrifying the Devils, as a victorious Triumpher: threatening the damned, as a
supreme Judge; comforting the souls in Purgatory, as their Advocate and
deliverer. So that Christ descended into Hell, as a King uses sometimes to
repair into prisons to visit prisoners, and to show favor to whom it
pleases him.


S If Christ was dead, and his body did lie in the sepulcher, then he did not
wholly descend into hell, but only the soul of Christ: and how is it then
said, that Christ descended into hell?


M Death had force to separate the soul of Christ from his body, but it could
not separate either the soul, or the body from the Divine person of the same
Christ. And therefore we believe that the Divine person of Christ, remained
with his body, in the sepulcre, and that the same person descended with his
soul into hell.


Of the fifth Article.
S HOw is it true, that our Lord rose from death the third day, seeing that
from Friday in the evening when he was buried, unto the night before Sunday,
when he rose, there wants of two whole days?


M We do not say, that Christ rose after three whole days, but the third
day, which is most true. For he was buried on Friday, which is the first day,
though not a whole day, and so he remained in the Sepulcher all Saturday, and
a part of Sundaie, which is the third day. For the natural day Likewise
beginning the day at midnight, our Savior rising, as he did, after midnight
rose the third day.
beginning the night before at the setting of the Sun, the first hour after
the Sunne-setting, is the first of the day following.


S. For what cause, did not Christ rise straight after his death, but would
expect the third day?


M Because he would show, that he was truly dead, he would remain there in
the grave, so long as sufficed to prove this truth. Moreover, I would have you
considder, that like as Christ lived amongst men, thirty three, or thirty
four years: so he would stay amongst the dead, at least thirty three, or
thirty four hours. For so many they are, if you put together, Counting the
day to end at Sunne-setting. Or if you count to midnight, there was more of
Fridaye and some part of Sunday.
one hour of Friday (for he was buried an hour before Sunne-setting) twenty
four hours of the Saturday, and eight or nine hours of Sunday. For he rose
after midnight toward the beginning of the morning.


S Why is it said of Christ, that he rose, and of other dead, as of Lazarus,
and the Widows son, that they were raised from death?


M The reason is, because Christ being the Son of God, rose of himself, to wit,
by virtue of his Godhead, he reunited his soul to his body and so began to
live again. But other dead men can not return to life, by their own power.
And therefore it is said, they were raised by others. As we al at the day of
Judgment, shall be raised by Christ.


S Is there any other difference betwixt the Resurrection of Christ, and of
others, which returned to life before him?


M There is this difference, that the others rose mortal, and therefore they
died again: but Christ rose immortal, neither can he ever die any more.


Of the sixth Article.
S Now let us come unto the sixth article, which is of the Ascension. I desire
to know, how long our Savior remained upon earth, after his Resurrection: and
for what cause?


M He remained forty days, as you may consider, by numbering the days,
betwixt the feasts of his Resurection, and Ascension. And the reason of his so
long stay was, because he would, with many and diverse apparitions, establish
the Mystery of his most true Resurrection. For that the same seems as it
were the most hard. And he that believes it, has no difficulty to believe
the rest. For he that rises, was certainly dead before: And he that was dead,
was first borne: And so he that believes the Resurrection of Christ, finds no
labor in believing his death, and nativity. And likewise, for so much as the
earth is not a convenient place for glorious bodies, but heaven, therefore he
that believes the Resurrection of our Savior, can easily believe his going up
into heaven.


S I would know the cause, wherefore it is said, that Christ went up into
heaven, and of his most holy Mother it is said, that she was assumpted, or
taken up into heaven, and not that she ascended, or went up?


M The reason is easy. For that Christ being God and man, went up into heaven,
by his own power, as he also rose by his own power. But his Mother, who is a
mere creature though most worthy amongst all others, was raised from death,
and assumpted unto the kingdom of heaven, not by her own power, but by the
power of God.


S What means. He sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty?


M You must not imagine, that the Father is on the left-hande of the Son: nor
that the Father is in midst, having his Son on the righthand, and the
Holie-Ghost on the left corporally. For as well the Father as the Son,
according to his Godhead, and the Holy Ghost, are every where. Neither can it
be properly said, that one is on the righthand of an other: but to be at the
right hand in this article, signifies to be in equal height, glory, and
majesty: because when one is side by side of an other, one is not higher, nor
lower then the other. And to understand this manner of speech, the holy
Scripture in the Psalm 109. which begins: Dixit Dominus Domino meo: etc.
does once say, that the Son does sit at the right hand of the Father: and
an other time says, that the Father is at the right hand of the Son:
instructing us, that they are in deed in equal height: as we have said. So that
Christ, when he went up into heaven, ascended above all the Quyars and orders
of the Angels, and of the blessed souls. which he carried with him, and arrived
unto the high throne of God, and there stayed, not going above his Father,
neither remaining under him, but resting (as we may say) side by his father, as
equal with him in glory and greatness


S Seeing Christ is God and man, I would know, if he sit at the right hand of
the Father, as he is God only, or as he is also man?


M Christ as he is God, is equal to the Father, as he is man, he is less then
the Father: yet for so much, as Christ God and man, are not two Christ's, nor
two persons, but one Christ only, and one person only: therefore it is
said, that Christ God and man, sits at the right hand of the Father. And so
the humanity of our Lord, to wit, his flesh and soul, ^re in the throne of
God, on the right hand of God the father. Not by their proper worthiness, but
because they are united to the person, of the true and natural Son of God.


S I would have some similitude, to understand this.


M Take the similitude of a kings robe: when the king being vested with his
purple robe, sits in his royal throne, and all the Princes of his kingdom
sit below him, the kings robe is in a more eminent place, then the Nobles them
selves are, because it is in the self same throne with the King. And this is
done not because the robe is of equal dignity with the king, but because it is
joined to the King, as his proper garment. So the flesh and the soul of Christ
do sit above all the Cherubims, and Seraphims, in the same seat with God: not
by the dignity of their own nature, but because they are united unto God: not
only as the garment is unto the king, but in much nearer sort, to wit, by
personal union. As has been said.


Of the seventh Article.
S FRom thence he shall come, to judge the quick, and the dead. When shall this
coming of our Lord be?


M It shall be at the end of the world: For you are to understand, that this
world is to have an end, and to be destroyed with an inundation of fire: which
will burn all things upon the earth. And there shall be no more days, nor
nights, nor Marriages, nor merchandise, or any of these things, which you now
see. So that, in the last day of this world, which no man can know, how near
it is, nor how long hence, Christ will come down from heaven, to make the
general Judgment. And these words, From thence he shall come, do forewarne us,
not to believe any that shall call him self Christ, or that would deceive us,
as Antichrist will endeavor to do, toward the end of the world. For that the
true Christ, will not come forth of any desert, or obscure place, but will come
from the highest heaven, with so much glory, and majesty, as no man can
doubt, whether it be he or no. Like as when the Sun rises, it comes with so
much light, as no man can doubt whether lt be the Sun or no.


S Wherefore do we say, that he shall judge the quick and the dead? shall not
al men be dead at that time, and all then rise again?


M By the quick and the dead, may be understood, the good which live with the
spiritual life of grace, and the bad which are spiritually dead by sin. But it
is true also, that Christ will come to judge the quick and the dead
corporally: because at that day many shall be dead, and many shall be found
alive: Who though they be living in that last day, and some also shall be
young, or children, yet all shall die in an instant, and suddenly rise again,
thereby to pay the debt of death.


S I have heard many times, that whosoever dies in mortal sin, goes
presently unto hell, and whosoever dies in the grace of God, goes presently
to Purgatory, or to heaven: how then are all to be judged, the sentence being
already given?


M At the death of every one, the particular judgment is given of that soul
which departed from the body: but after, at the last day, there shall be an
universal judgment of the whole world. And this for manny causes. First, for
Gods honor, because many now seeing bad-men in prosperity, and good-men
afflicted: imagine that God does not govern the world well. But at that time,
it shall be clearly seen, how God has seen and noted all things, and how with
great justice, he has given unto the bad, some temporal prosperity, in
recompense of some good works of theirs, of small moment, intending afterward,
to give them eternal pain, for their mortal sins. And contrariwise unto the
good, he has given temporal affliction, for punishment of some venial sins,
or to give them occasion, and to make them do penance, intending afterward, to
reward them, with an infinite treasure of glory, for their good works.
Secondly, for the glory of Christ, because he being unjustly condemned, and by
many not known, nor honored as he ought to be, it is reason there should be a
day, when all the world shall know him, and honor him, either by force, or for
love, as their true king and Lord of al. Thirdly, for the glory of the
Saints? to the end it may be seen unto all how God has glorified them, who
were persecuted, and vexed in this world. Fourthly, for confusion of the proud
enemies of God. Fifthly, because the body shall have sentence together with the
soul of glory or of punishment eternal.


Of the eight Article.
S THE eight article says: I believe in the Holy Ghost: what signifies the
Holy Ghost?


M Here is declared the third Person of the most Holy Trinity, as in the
first article was declared, the first, and in the other six the second: so
that the Holy Ghost is not the Father, nor the Son, but a third Person,
which proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is true God as the Father,
and the Son, yea the same God, because he has the same divinity, which is
in the Father, and in the Son.


S I would have some similitude of this.


M Divine matters, can not be perfectly declared, by any examples of created
things, and especially by corparal things. Notwithstanding take you the example
of a lake, which is derived from some river? as the river is derived from some
fountain, and yet al is one, and the same water: so the eternal Father, as a
fountain, produces the Son as a river: the Father and the Son, as a
fountain and a river, produce the Holy Ghost as a lake: and yet the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are not three Gods, but one only God.


S Wherefore is the third Person in Trinity called holy ghost? Are not also
al Angels, and all the blessed souls, spirits and holy?


M God is called the Holy spirit by excelencie, because he is the chiefest
spirit, and most holy and author of al created spirits, and of al holiness.
Like as a among me^, there are many that are fathers and holy, either by
office, or by goodness of life, to wit, many good Bishops, or Priests, or
religious men: and yet there is none called Holy Father, but the Pope: because
this name belongs unto him alone by excellency, being the head of al other
fathers, and ought to be the most holy of al by goodness of life, as he is by
office, representing unto us the person of Christ.


S If the name of holy ghost, belong unto God by excellency, wherefore is it
only attributed unto the third Person. Is not the father also, and the Son a
spirit and holy by excellency?


M It is true. But because the first Person has a proper name, to wit, the
Father: and the second has a proper name, to wit, the Son: to the third is
left a common name, to distinguish him from the other two. And moreover you are
to know, that when it is said of the third divine Person, that he is the holy
ghost; these two words make one name only. As when a man is called Ioannes
Maria, they are one only name, though otherwise John and Mary are commonly two
names.


S What means it that the Holy Ghost is painted in the form of a Dove,
especially over Christ, and our Lady?


M You must not think that the Holy Ghost has a body, or that he can be
seen with corporal eyes: but he is painted so, that we may know the effects,
which he works upon men. And because the Dove is simple, pure, jealouse, and
fruitful, he is therefore painted over Christ and our Lady, to the end we
may understand, that Christ and our Lady were full of grace, and of the gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and in particular of holy simplicity, purity, zeal of
souls, and spiritual fecunditie, by the which they have gained infinite
children, to wit, all the faithful, and good Christians.


S What means it that the Holy Ghost is painted over the Apostles, in form
of fyerie tongues?


M Because the Holy Ghost, ten days after the ascension of our Lord came
upon the Apostles, and replenished them with knowledge, with charity, and with
eloquence, teaching them to speak with all tongues, to the end they might be
able to preach the Holy faith, through the whole world. And in sign of these
wonderful effects, he caused those tongues of fire to appear: because the
light of that fire, does signify wisdom, the heat of the same, does signify
charity, and the form of a tongue signifies eloquence: and for that this was
a most great benefit, which God bestowed upon his Church, therefore we do
celebrate that great Feast, called Penticost, or the Feast of the Holy Ghost.


Of the ninth Article.
S WHAT signifies that which is said in the ninth article. The Holy
Catholic Church: the communion of Saints?


M Here begins the second part of the Creed. For the first part belongs
unto God, the second unto the Church the spouse of God. And as in God we
believe one Divinity, and three Persons: so in the Church we believe that
there is one only Church: and that it has three principal graces: the first
in the soul, which is the remission of sins, an other in the body, which
shall be the resurrection of the flesh: and the third in the soul and body
together, which shall be life eternal, as we shall see in the articles
following.


S May it please you declare unto me, the whole article word by word: and first
what means the Church?


M It signifies a convocation, or congregation of men, which are baptized, and
make profession of the faith, and law of Christ, under the obedience, of the
chief Bishop of Rome: and it is called Convocation, because we are not borne
Christians, as we are borne Englishmen, Italians, French, or of any other
country: but we are called Christians of Christ, and we enter into this
congregation by baptism, which is as the door of the church. And to be in the
Church, it does not suffice to be baptized, but it is needeful to believe and
confess the holy faith and law of Christ, as the Pastors and Preachers of the
same Church do teach us. Neither does this suffice, but it is necessary to
obey the chief Bishop of Rome, as Vicar of Christ, to wit, to acknowledge and
hold him for chief Superior and Vicar of Christ.


S If the Church be a congregation of men: how do we call those buildings
Churches, where Mass and other Service of God is said?


M Because the faithful, which are the true Church, are gathered together in
those buildings, to practice the exercises of Christians, therefore those
buildings are also called Churches: chiefly when they are dedicated, and
consecrated to the service of God. But we in this Article, do not speak of
the Churches made of stone and wood, but of the living Church, which is, the
faithful baptized people, and obedient unto the vicar of Christ, as has been
said.


S Why is it said, The Church, and not the Churches seeing many congregations
of the faithful are founded in diverse parts of the world?


M Because the Church is but one, though it contain all the faithful, which are
dispersed through the whole world, not only those which are now living but also
those, which have been from the beginning, and shall be until the end of the
world. And therefore it is not only called one but also Catholic, that is to
say universal, because it is extended to all places, and to all times.


S For what reason, is the Church called one only, if it contain so great a
multitude of men?


M It is called one only, because it has one only head, which is Christ,
and his one Vicar in earth the Bishop of Rome? and again, because it lives by
one and the same spirit, and has one and the same law. As a kingdom is called
one, because it has one only king, and the same laws, though in that
kingdom, there be many provinces, and many more Cities or towns.


S Wherefore is it said, that this Church is holy, seeing there are many
wicked men in it?


M It is called holy for three reasons: first, because the head there of,
which is Christ, is most holy: like as one that has a fair faice, is said to
be a fair man, though he have some crooked finger, or some blot on his breast
or shoulders. Secondly, because all faithful people are holy, by faith and
profession, for they have one most true and divine faith, and make profession
of the holy Sacraments, and of a most just law, which does not command any
thing, but that which is good, and forbids nothing, but that which is evil.
Thirdly, because there are always in the Church some assuredly good, not only
by faith and profession, but by virtues and manners also: Whereas among Jews,
Turks, Heretics and such like people, who are out of the Church, none at all
can truly be good.


S What signifies the Communion of Saints?


M It signifies, that the body of the holy Church, is in such sort united,
that of the good of one member all the rest do participate: whereby how many
soever there be in far countries, though we do not know them, yet their
Masses, divine offices, other prayers and good works help us also. And this
Communion is not only here upon earth, but our Masses, prayers and other good
works, help those that be in Purgatory: And the prayers of such, as are in
heaven help us, and the souls also in Purgatory.


S If this be so, it needs not to pray for any in particular, nor to procure

Mass to be said for this or for that soul in Purgatory, seeing all good is
common.


M It is not so: Because Mass, prayers, and other good works, though they be
in some sort common unto al, yet they help more such as they are done for in
particular, then others.


S What shall we say of such as are excommunicated, do they also participate
of the good works of the faithful, or no?


M For this they are called excommunicated, because they have not the communion
of the Saints, for they are like bows cut from the tree, or like members
separated from the body, which do not enjoy the good humors, that are spread
amongst the other bows, and united members. And by this you may gather, what
account is to be made of excommunication, seeing he cannot have God for his
Father, that has not the Church for his Mother.


S Are then the excommunicated out of the Church, as the Jews, and other
Infidels be?


M So it is: but there is this difference, that the Jews and Turks are out of
the Church, because they never entered in, being never baptized; the Heretics,
which are baptized, and have lost their faith are out, because they are gone
forth, and fled away of themselves, and therefore the Church enforces them by
diverse punishments, to return unto the Holy faith: As when a sheep flies
from the fold, the shepherd forces him with his stafe to return. But other
excommunicated which have baptism and faith, and did enter in, and not go out
of themselves, are driven out by force. As when the shepherd drives forth an
infected sheep, and leaves the same a pray for the Wolf. Yet true it is,
that the Church drives not out the excommunicated, to the end they should ever
remain out, but to the end they should repent of their disobedience, and
demand to return being humbled, and so be received again into the bosom of
their mother, and to the communion of Saints.


Of the tenth article.
S What is signified, by the remission of sins? which is the tenth article.


M This is the first of those three principal benefits, which are found in the
Church. For which it is needful to know, that al men are borne sinners, and
enemies to God, and after increasing, they pass from evil to worse, until by
the grace of God, their sins be remitted, and so become his friends, and
children. This grace which is so great, is not found other where, the^ in the
holy church. In which are the holy Sacraments, and namely Baptism, and
Penance, which as heavenly medicines curemen of al spiritual diseases, which
are sins.


S I pray you declare unto me, a little better, how great this benifite is, of
remission of sins?


M In the world is not found, a greater evil then sin is: not only for that
al evils in this life, and in the life to come, do spring from it; but also,
for that sin is the cause, that man becomes an enemy to God. And what can
be said worse, then to be enemy unto him, who can do all that he will, and none
can resist him: and who can defend him, with whom God is angry? And
contrariwise, in this life a greater good can not be found, then to be in
grace: for who can hurt him, whom God defends al things being in the hands of
God? Briefly you know, that amongst corporal things life is most esteemed,
because it is the foundation of al other good things: and death is most
abhorred because it is contrary unto life. So then seeing sin is the spiritual
death of the soul, and the remission of sin, is the life of the same soul:
you may easily consider, how great a benefit is received, in the church seeing
in it only, is the remission of sins.


Of the eleventh article.
S WHAT means the resurrection of the flesh? which is the eleventh article.


M This is the second principal benefit of the Holy Church, to wit, that in
the last day, all those whose sins shall be remitted, shall return to life.


S And others which are out of the Church, or have not remission of their
sins, shall not they return also to life again?


M Touching natural life, all shall return to live, as the good, so the bad:
but because the resurrection of the bad, shall be for their perpetual torment,
and not for any good to the^, therefore that life of theirs, is called rather a
death, then a true life, and so the true resurrection, to wit, unto life,
worthy to be desired, shall not be of any, but of the good, which shall be
found without sin.


S I would know, if the same bodies, which we now have shall rise, or others
like them?


M There is no doubt, but the same bodies shall rise, because otherwise, it
should not be a true resurrection, if the same should not rise, which is
fallen, and that same return to live, which is dead. And again, the
resurrection is to the end, that the body be partaker of the reward, or
punishment, as it has been partaker of good works or the sins: and there
must be the same body, because an other body should not merit either
punishment or reward.


S How is it possible, that body should return to live, which has bin burned,
and the ashes scattered with the wind, and cast into rivers.


M Yes, for God can do that which seems to us impossible. And there fore it
is said, in the beginning of the Creed, that God is omnipotent. And if you
consider that God has made the heaven and the earth of nothing, it will not
seem hard unto you to believe, that he can bring again to the former state
that which is turned into ashes.


S I would know whether men shall return to be men, and women to be women, or
rather all to one manner?


M It is necessary to believe, that the men shall be men, and the women shall
be women: because otherwise they should not be the same bodies, that they were
before, and as I have already told you, they are to be the same, albeit in the
life to come, there shall not be any more bringing forth of children, nor
husbands, nor wives yet there shall be diversity of men and women, to the
end, that every one enjoy the reward of their proper virtues, which they have
exercised in their own sex, and as it shall be a goodly sight to behold the
glory of Martyrs, and of Confessors, so shall it be to behold the glory of
the virgins, and above all, the Mother of our Lord.


S I pray you tell me, in what age and stature we shall rise, seeing that some
do die children, some young men, others old?


M Al shall rise in that stature, and in that state which they had or were to
have, at the age of thirty three years, in the which our Lord rose. So that
the children shall rise so great as they should have been, if they had arrived
unto thirty three years: and the old men shall rise in that flower of age
which they had, when they were thirty and three years old. And if any in
this life, have been Blind, Crooked, a Dwarf, or had any other deformity,
he shall rise whole, sonnde, and with all perfection. Because the works of
GOD are perfect. And so in the resurrection, which shall be his proper work, he
will correct the errors, and defectes of nature.


Of the twelft article.
S What signifies; Life everlasting, which is the last article?


M It signifies a complete felicity of the soul and of the body. And this
is the chief good, and last end, which we gain by being in the Church.


S Tell me I beseech you in particular, what goodness shall there be in life
everlasting?


M I will teach you this mystery, by a similitude of the things in this world.
You know that here in earth, we desire a body, that is sound, comely, nimble,
and strong: a soul that is wise, prudent, and learned, touching the
understanding, and full of al virtues touching the will: and besides these; we
desire exterior goods to wit, riches, honors, power, and pleasures. Even so is
eternal life, the body for health shall have immortality, with impasibilitie,
that is to say, that nothing can harm it: for beauty it shall have clearnes,
to wit, it shall shine, as the sun: for nimblenes it shall have agilitie, that in
one moment, it shall be able to move from one side of the world to the other,
and from the earth to heaven, without any labor: for strength it shall have
such force, that without eating, drinking, sleeping, or other rest, it shall be
able to serve the spirit, in all things that shall be necessary, neither shall it
have fear of any thing. Touching the soul, the understanding shall be full of
knowledge, for it shall behold the cause of al things, which is God. The will
shall be full of so much goodness, and charity, that it can not commit any venial
sin. The riches shall be to want nothing, having all things in God. Their
honor, to be the children of God, equal to Angels, for they shall be kings,
and spiritual Priests for ever: their power agreeable; for together with God,
they shall be Lords of the whole world, and be able to do all that they shall
have will to do: for that they shall always be conformable to the will of
God, which nothing can resist. Finally, their delight shall be unspeakable,
because all their powers, as well of the soul as of the body, shall be joined
unto their proper objects. Whereof will arise a full contentment, a most
perfect peace never proved before, a perpetual gladness, joy, and exultation.


S If every one shall have all these things, and every one shall be contented in
one manner, then shall not one be more blessed in heaven then an other


M Yes assuredly: For he who has merited more in this life, shall have greater
reward, and shall be more happy: yet for all that, there shall be no envy, nor any
coffeehouse: because each one shall be filled, according to their capacity:
and those which have merited more, shall be more capable, and so shall have more
glory. As for example: If a Father having many children, one greater then
another, according to their age, should make to every one of them, a garment of
cloth of gold, proportionable unto every ones stature, there is no doubt but
that the greatest should have the bigest garment, and of greatest value and yet
every one would remain contented: neither would he that were less, desire
the garment of him that were greater, because it would no be so fit for him.


S What is the cause of this beatitude of heaven is called life everlasting:
shall not the damned live for ever in hell?


M Life properly is said to be in other those things which move of
themselves. Whereupon in a certain manner, the water of a fountain is called
Liue-water, because it moves: and water of Pooles, is called dead, because it
stands still. So the blessed in heaven, are said to have eternal life, for
that they can work all that they will, with all their inward, and outward
powers, without any impediment. And they do always work and exercise
themselves as they most desire. But the damned in hell, notwithstanding they
live (for they shall never be consumed) yet they are said to have eternal
death, because they are still tied unto the fire and torments, and are enforced
ever to suffer that which they would not: neither can they do any thing, that
they would. So that the blessed in heaven enjoy all good, without any mixture
of evil: and the damned in hell, do suffer all evil, not being able to fulfill
any of their desires.


S What means Amen? which is put to the end of the Creed.


M It means, so is the truth, to wit, all that which has been said, is true
and certain.


CHAP. IIII. The declaration of our Lords prayer.
S I have learned through the grace of God, that I am to believe: I desire that
you now teach me what I am to hope for, and desire; and what means I may have
to obtain it.


M All that you demand is contained in our Lords prayer, which we call the
Pater noster: For in this prayer is declared what thing is to be desired, and
of whom we are to demand it, and the selfsame prayer is the means to obtain
it.


S Which is our Lords prayer?


M It is this, Our father which art in heaven, etc.


S For what cause do you prefer the Pater noster, before all other prayers?


M First, because it is the most excellent of all, being made by Christ
himself, who is the supreme wisdom. Secondly, because this prayer is
shortest, and so is easy to be learned and kept in memory, and with all full of
substance, containing all that we ought to demand of God: thirdly, because it
is most profitable, and effectual, being made by him who is both our Judge and
our Advocate, and therefore knows better then any other, how we ought to
demand, that we may obtain. Fourthlie it is the most necessary of all
others, in regard that all Christians are bound to know it, and to repeat it
every day, and therefore it is called the daily prayer, that is to say, prayer
to be said every day.


S Declare then (I pray you) those words: Our Father which art in heaven.


M These few words are, as it were a little preface, or a preparation to the
prayer. For in saying that God is our Father, we take courage and confidece, to
pray unto him: in saying he is in heaven, we remember our selves, that we
ought to go unto him with great fear and humility, seeing he is notan earthly
father, but an heavenly: again, saying he is a Father, we consider that he is
willing to pleasure us, in that we demand; in saying he is in heaven as Lord
and master of the world, we understand that he can do so much as he will.
Finally, in saying he is a Father, we remember that we are children of God, and
heirs of heaven, in saying he is in heaven; and considering that we are on
earth, we remember that we have not the possession of our inheritance, but that
we are pilgrims and travelers, in a land of our enemies, and therefore stand
in great need of his help.


S Declare (if you please) unto me all the words in particular.


M The word Father, albeit it belongs to God, as he is Father of all things
by creation, yet in this prayer, it is understood of God, as he is the Father
of good Christians by adoption. It is true also that sinners may say unto God,
Our father, who desire to be converted to him, and to become his children. And
only those cannot truly say, the Pater noster, who neither are, nor desire to
be the children of God, not thinking at all of amending themselves.


S Wherefore is it said, Our Father, and not my Father?


M It is said, Our Father, to the end we may understand that we are all
brethren, and as brethren ought to love, and be united together, being the
children of one and the same Father. It is also said, Our Father, to teach us,
that a common prayer is better then a private, and more profitable also unto
him that does pray: for that whiles each one says: Our Father, every one
prays for all, and al pray for every one.


S Wherefore is it said, Which are in heaven? is not God in all places?


M God is said to dwell in heaven, not for that he is not in all places: but
because heaven is the most noble part of the world, and in it does appear the
greatness, power, and wisdom of God. Finally in it, God vouchsafes to be seen
face to face, of the Angels, and blessed men. It may be also said, that God is
in heaven, because he dwells in a particular manner, in the Angels, and in
holy me^, who are spiritual heavens.


S Let us now come unto the first petition, what means: Hallowed be thy name?


M Name in this place, signifies same and renoume, as when we say that one
has a great name, because he is known of many. Or that he has a good name,
or an evil name; because he has a good fame, or an evil fame, being known of
many and commended for good, or discommended for bad. Wherefore to sanctify
the name of God, is nothing else, then to publish through the world the
knowledge of God, and to conserve it pure and holy in the hearts and mouths
of men, as in it self it is. And because there are in the world many
infidels, who know not God, and many evil Christians, that blaspheme and curse
him, therefore those that are the children of God, and have zeal of the honor
of their father, do pray with great desire, that his name may be sanctified,
that is, that it be through the whole world known, adored, confessed, praised
and blessed, as is convenient


S Seeing we desire, that God be known, and praised of men, were it not
better to demand it of men, the^ of God.


M Man is not able of him self, neither to know, nor to praise God, and
therefore we demand of God, that he will work with his grace in that manner, that
the Infidels, and other sinners may be conuerred, and being conuered, begin
to know and praise his holy name.


S Wherefore is the prayer begune with demanding, that the name of God be
sanctified?


M We are bound to love God above al things, and more then our selves; and
therefore our first, and most frequent desire ought to be of the glory of God,
and for this cause were we created, and endued with reason, to the end we may
know, and praise God: wherein also does consist our chifest good, as we shall
say here after.


S Declare unto me now the second petition: Thy kingdom come,


M In this petition, in fit place we demand our own salvation, after that in
the first we demanded the glory of God?


S What is to be understood, by the kingdom of God?


M The kingdom of God may be understood three manner of ways: for we find a
kingdom of nature, a kingdom of grace, and a kingdom of glory. The kingdom
of nature is that, where with God governs all the creatures, as absolute Lord
of al things. For albeit perverse men do evil, and observe not the law of God,
yet God does reign over the^, for that when it pleases him he hinders their
disignmentes. And though he permit them sometimes to have their desires,
afterward he punishes them severely: and there is none that can resist his
will, nor that can do otherwise, then he ordains or permits. The kingdom
of grace is that, wherewith God governs and rules the souls, and hearts of
good Christians, giving them spirit and grace to serve him willingly, and to
seek his glory above all things. The kingdom of glory shall be in the other
life, after the day of judgment: for that then God will reign with all the
Saints, over all things created, without any resista^ce For the^ all the force
of the devils shall be taken away, and also of al perverse men, who shall be shut
up in eternal prison of hell. In that time shall death also be extinguished, and
corruption, with all the tentations of the world and of the flesh, which now
trouble the servants of God. So that shall be quiet and peaceable kingdom, with
secure possession of perfect and eternal felicity


S Which of these three kingdoms ^s spoken of, in this petition?


M Not of the first: for that is not to come, but is now come. Neither of the
second, for that is spoken of in the first petition, and is in a great part
already come. But here is spoken of the third, which is to come, and is
expected with great desire, of al those that know the misery of this life: and
so in this petition we demand our chief good, and the perfect glory of both
soul and body.


S If the kingdom of God (which we desire may comequickly) shall begin after
the day of Judgment, then we desire and demand that this world should speedely
end, and that the day of judgment should come shortly.


M So it is: for thought the lovers of the world can have no worse news, then
to hear the day of Judgment named: yet the citiznes of heaven, who live now
as pilgrims, and banished men here below in earth, have no other greater
desire: Where upon S. Augustine says, that like as before Christ came into the
world, all the desires of the Saints of the ancient law, were directed to the
first coming of Christ: so now all the desires of holy men of the new law, are
directed to the second coming of the same Christ, which will bring us perfect
beatitude.


S Let us pass unto the third petition. What do those words signify: Thy will
be done, in earth, as it is in heaven.


M In these words is demanded grace, to observe well the law of god. For that
the eternal life, which is the end of man being demanded in the second
petition, it was convenient, that the principal means to arrive unto that end
should be demanded next after: and this principal means is the observing of
the commandments of God, as our lord has said: if thou will enter into
eternal life: keep the commandments: and for so much as we are not able of
our selves, to keep all the commandments in such sort as we ought, therefore
we demand of God, that his will be done by us: that is, that he give us grace to
fulfill his will, in obeying wholly, and in all things his holy commandments.


S I desire to know, whether that besides the fulfilling the will of God in
observing the commandments, we are bound also to conform our wills with Gods
will, when he sends us tribulations?


M We are bound at the lest, not to murmour, nor to grudge at the providence of
God: because all that he sends or permits, he does it to a good end: to
wit, to give us occasion of greater merit, if we be good: or else to purge us
if we be bad?


S To what purpose is added: In earth as it is in heaven;


M To teach us, that we ought to endeavor to obey God, and to observe his holy
commandments, with that perfection, promptnes and gladness, with which the
Angels do obey in heaven: who never committed any little default in observing
all the commandments of God. It may be also said that we desire; and demand,
that sinners, signified by the earth, may obey God, as the Saints do obey him
who are signified by heaven, Or else that the whole Church, signified by the
earth may entirely obey God, as Christ, who is signified by heaven, obeyed him.


S Let us come unto the fourth petition: what means, Give us this day our
daily bread?


M With great reason, bread is demanded that mainteineth life, after that grace
has been demanded, which is life it self, For that the first thing, that any
one beginning to live desires, is food, where with life is maintained. But you
have to understand, that in this prayer, spiritual bread is principally
demanded, which is the meat of the soul: and secondarily corporal bread,
which is the food for the body. And by spiritual bread, is understood the most
holy Sacrament of the altar, that is the celestial and divine bread, which
merueilously nourishes the life of the soul: and likewise the word of god is
understood, which by preaching or reading of spiritual books, helps no
little to nourish the same life of the soul. Finally is understood, the
inspiration of God, prayer, and every other thing, which helps to maintain
and increase grace in us, the which (as is said) is the life of the soul. By
corporal bread is understood all that is needful unto us, to maintain the
life of the body, which is as an instrument of the soul, to do good works.


S Wherefore is it said, that this bread is ours.


M With great mystery this bread is called ours, for if we speak of the
blessed Sacrament, that is our bread, because of our salvation it was formed by
the holy ghost, in the womb of the blessed Virgin, and in a certain manner,
bakte in the Oven of the holy Cross, and served up, on the table of the Altar,
by the hands of Priests. And moreover it is ours, because it is the bread
proper of the children, and may not be given unto dogs, that is to say, to
Infidels, nor to those that are in mortal sin. If we speak of the
doctrine, we call it our bread, to wit, that which is distributed by the
true preachers, unto the children of the Holy Church, and not the strange
bread, to wit, that which al heretics give unto their followers, which is
corrupt and pestiferous bread. But if we speak of corporal bread, we defire
that God will give us our own bread, and not that which belongs to others,
to wit, that he will help us in just and lawful gains. And again, that he
bless our lands, possessions, and all our labors, to the end, that without
injury and fraud, we may procure our living.


S Wherefore is it said, that this bread is daily?


M It is called daily, that is to say, bread for every day, for that we
desire not superfluous or curious things, but simply that which may suffice for
the days refection: and as well for the soul as for the body, especially
knowing that we are pilgrims, and strangers in this life.


S Wherefore is it said: Give unto us?


M Because, albeit we are willing to labor to have bread, as well spiritual
as corporal, yet we know that our labors should all be vain, if God
concurred not with his grace: as we often see that how much soever men labor
to sow and reap, yet dearth does happen for the sins of the world. We demand
also, that God give us our bread, that is to say, that not only he help us to
procure and gain it, but that he also bless and sanctify it, when we use it:
that it may do us good and be profitable both to soul and body.


S Wherefore is annexed that word this day?


M The word, this day, signifies the whole time of this temporal life, and so
we demand of God, that during the time of this life he sustain us, with
spiritual and corporal bread until we arrive unto our heavenly country, where
we shall have no need more of Sacraments of preachings, nor of corporal food.
It may be also said, that we demand of God that he give us to day this bread,
because we will not be solicitous for the morrow, not knowing whether we
shall be living to morrow or no. And so our Lord has taught us, not to
trouble our selves, with things that be not present. So that we demand this
day, the bread which is sufficient for this day: and that for the morrew, we
shall demand to morrow.


S There arises a new doubt to me, of that which you have said: for if we
ought not to trouble our selves with any thing, but with that which is present
they do evil, that make provision of corn, of wine, and of other
necessaries, for the whole year.


M Our Lord, when he taught us, not to trouble our selves with things not
present, meant nothing else, but to deliver us of superfluous cares, which do
greatly hinder prayers, and other things of greater importance, that belong
unto the gaining of eternal life. And therefore when the care for things to
come, is not superfluous: but necessary, as to make such provision as you
speak of, it is not evil to think of that, which is to come. Yea rather such a
thought is not of the morrow, but of this day: for if we should not think of it
until to morrow, we should not have so fit time


S The fifth petition follows: What means, And forgive us our debts, as we
also forgive our debtors?


M We have already, in the four petitions that go before, demanded of god,
that he will give us all things, as well eternal as temporal: now in the three
following, we demand, that he will deliver us from al evil past, present and to
come: And so you see it is true which I said before, that in this prayer is
contained all that we can desire. We demand then in this petition, that God
deliver us from evil, that is paste, to wit, from the sins which we have
committed, so for so our Lord declared unto the holy Apostles, when he taught
them this prayer; that by debts they ought to understand sins.


S For what cause are sins called debts?


M For three causes. First, because every man that sins, remains debtor to
satisfy God for the injury which he has done him. Secondly, because he that
sins, does transgress the law of God; and because the same law promises
reward to all that observe it, and punishment to him that does not observe it,
therefore he that observes it not, remains debtor to pay the penalty.
Thirdly, because each one of us is bound to cultiuate (or manure) the vineard
of his soul, and to yield to God the fruit of his good works. Therefore he
that does not good works, and much more he that does evil works, instead of
good, is debtor to god, who is the true lord of al vinyards: and because al we
do often fail as well in doing that we ought not, as in doing that we ought:
therefore it is convenient that oftentimes every day we humbly desire of God
that he remit our debts.


S Wherefore is it added, as we also forgive our debtors


M Here likewise by debtes, are understood the offenses injuries, which we
receive of over neighbors. And we desire of God, that he will pardon our
offenses, as we pardon them, that have offended us: for that like as he who
pardons the offenses received of his neighbor, is more disposed to receive
pardon of his offenses committed against God so contrariwise, he that will not
pardon the injuries of his neighbor, does make himself unworthy, that God
should pardon him. Finally, in saying that we pardon the injuries of our
neighbors, we make known, that mercy does please us, and that we make
account, that to pardon is a magnanimous and a notable thing. To the end that
when we demand mercy of God, he may not answer us, how would thou that I
should use mercy toward thee, seeing thou do hate mercy toward others?
and how do thou demand pardon of me, seeing thou esteemest pardoning as an
act of a base mind.


S Declare then unto me, I pray you the sixth petition. And lead us not into
tentation.


M In this petition is demanded help against evil to come: to wit, against
tentations, which are occasions that make us fall into sin. Here you have to
know that principally it is demanded, that God permit us not to be vanquished
and overcome by te^tations: and because tentatio^s are dangerous, and the
victory doubtful, therefore we demand also that God permit us not to be
tempted, chiefly when he sees that the victory shall not be ours, but the
devils: and of this you are to draw an excellent lesson, to wit, that not only
the devil cannot overcome us, but also that he cannot so much as tempt us, if
God do not permit him.


S I do not well understand that speech: Lead us not into tentatio^: for it
may seem to have this sense, that god uses to lead men into tentatio^s and
that we desire him not to do it?


M To bring or lead into tentations whether it be to tempt to evil, or to cause
one to fall into sin, is proper to the devil, and pertains in no respect to
God, who greatly hates sin. But after the manner of speaking in Holy
Scripture, when God is said to induce or lead into tentation, it is nothing
else, but to permit that one be tempted, or overcome by tentation: so the sense
of this petition is no other but as we have said, that knowing our own
weakness and frailty, and on the othet side, the subtlety and force of the
devil, we desire of God, not only that he will not permit us to be overthrown
by temptations, but also that he permit us not to be tempted, if he see not,
that we shall remain victorious.


S The last petition remains: But deliver us from evil. What evil is spoke
of in this petition?


M This last petition does in part confirm the former petitions, and partly
it adds some things more. And therefore it says: But deliver us from evil,
that is, I do not only demand that thou remit unto us our sins past, and
defend us from sins to come: but moreover, that thou deliver us also from all
present evil. And mark well that our Lord with great wisdom teaches us, to
demand to be delivered from all evil and comes not to particulars, as to
poverty, sickness, persecutions, and the like, For that oftentimes it does
seem unto us, that a thing is good for us, which God does see is evil. And
contrariwise it seems to us, that a thing is evil, which God sees is good
for us. And therefore according to the instruction of our Lord, we demand, that
he deliver us from all that which he sees is evil for us, be it prosperity or
adversity.


S What means Amen?


M This is an Hebrew word, and (as I have already said unto you) it signifies,
so be it: or, so it is. And as in the end of the Creed Amen signifies so it
is, and so I believe: In like manner, in the end of the Pater noster, Amen
signifies, so be it, so I desire, and so I pray that it may be done.


Cap. V. The declaration of the Aue Maria.
S NOw you have declared to me the Pater noster, I desire that you declare
also, the Aue Maria


M I will do it willingly, for I desire that you be most devout to our blessed
Lady. The Aue Maria in our vulgar tongue is this: Hail Marie full of grace,
etc.


S What means it, that to the Pater noster, the Aue Maria is joined, rather
then any other prayer?


M For so much as we have no advocate nor intercessor with Christ, more potent
then his Mother, therefore when we have said the prayer, which Christ has
taught us, we repair also to his mother, to the end that she by her
intercession, may help us to obtain, that we have demanded, in saying the
Pater noster: like as in this world, when we have given a supplication to the
Prince, we recommend the business unto the most potent that is in the court.


S Who composed the Aue Maria?


M God himself has composed it. For albeit he taught it not by his own
mouth, yet he taught it by the mouth of the Archangel Gabriel, of S. Elizabeth,
and of the Church. For those words, Hail Marie full of grace, our Lord is
with thee, blessed art thou among women: were spoken by the Archangel Gabriel,
but he spoke them as Gods ambassador, and so he spoke them as from God, and
God spoke them by the mouth of his Ambassador. Those other words: and blessed
is the fruit of thy womb, Saint Elizabeth spoke, but she spoke them when she
was replenished with the Holy Ghost, as the Evangelist Saint Luke testifyeth.
Whereby it appears, that the holy Ghost spoke them by the mouth of S.
Elizabeth. All the rest, holy church has added, which is governed and taught by
the same holy ghost; so it may welbe said that after the pater noster which
christ taught us by his own mouth, the Aue Maria is the most excellent prayer
that can be found: being composed by the same God, and taught us by the mouth
of his servants.


S Let us come the^ to the declaration Wherefore do we say, Hail Marie?


M This is a salutation, which we give unto her, to show that we are friends
and of acquaintance, and therefore dare come to speak unto her, and we use the
words of the Angel, for that we know that she is pleased to hear often that
news which the Angel brought her, when he spoke the same words: and she
rejoices also, that we are mindful thereof, and that we are grateful to
God for so great a benefit.


S What means, Full of grace?


M The grace of God works three principal effects in the soul. It wipeth
out the sins which are as spots that defile the soul: it adorneth the same
soul with gifts and virtues: and finally, it in-ableth to do meritorious
works, grateful to the divine Majesty. Our Lady is full of grace, because
touching the first effect, she never had any spot of sin, neither Original
nor Actual, neither mortal nor venial: Touching the second, she had all the
virtues and gifts of the holy ghost, in the highest degree. Touching the third,
she did works so grateful unto God, and so meritorious, that she was worthy
to be assumpted in body and soul above all the orders of Angels.


S It seems not that our Lady had more grace then other Saints. For I have
often heard that S. Stephen and other Saints were full of grace.


M How much soever it is said of other Saints, that they were full of grace,
yet our Lady had most grace of them al: for that she was made by God capable
of more grace, then any other Saints: as for example if many vessels one
greater then an other were filled with balm, al should be full, and yet in the
greatest should be more balm, then in the others. And the reason of this is,
because God does make men capable of more or less grace, according to the
offices which he gives them. And for so much as the greatest office that has
been given to a mere creature, was to be the Mother of God, therefore our
Lady was made capable of, and filled with more grace then any other mere
creature.


S What means, Our Lord is with thee?


M this is an other singular praise of the blessed virgin which signifies to
us that our Lord has been with our Lady from the beginning of her conception,
with a perpetual assistance, governing her, directing her, and defending her.
And hereof it comes that she never committed any sin, either in thought,
in word, or in deed. Whereupon God has not only adorned this most holy virgin
with all graces, but he would also remain always with her as guardian of so
great a treasure.


S What means, Blessed art thou among women?


M This is the third praise, which is given to our B. Lady, in which is
declared, that she is not only full of all the graces, which can belong to a
virgin: but of those also which can belong unto a wife, and thereby does
absolutely surpass al other women, which have been, or shall be. The benediction
of a married woman is fecunditie, and this was not wanting to the blessed
Virgin, seeing she has brought forth a child, which is more worth, then a
hundredth thousand Children. It may also be said, that she is a Mother of a
very great number of Children: for that all good Christians are brothers to
Christ, and consequently are children to our Lady, not by birth and nature, in
which manner only Christ is her child: but by love and motherlie affection,
which she had toward all. Whereupon she is worthily said to be blessed
amongst all women: because others had either the glory of virginity without
fecunditie, or the benediction of fecunditie without Virginity: she only had
joyntlie by a singular privilege of God, the honor of perfect virginity,
with the benediction of the highest and most happy fecunditie.


S What means. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus.


M This is the fourth praise, which is given to our Lady, that she is not
only worthy of honor, for that she has in her self: but for that also,
which is in the fruit of her womb. Because the praise of the fruit redoundeth
to the tree, and the glory of the child redoundeth to the mother. And because
Jesus is not only true man, and blessed amongst men; but is also God, blessed
above all things, as S. Paul teaches us, therefore his mother is not only
blessed amongst women; but she is blessed amongst all the creatures, as well
in earth as in heaven.


S Declare unto me I pray you that which remains of the Aue Maria.


M In the words following, the holy Church repeating the principal praise of
our Lady, which is to be the mother of God, and so showing, that she can
obtain of the same God what she pleases, desires her to make intercession
for us, who have great need thereof being sinners, and that she help us while
we live, and in particular, at the point of death, when we shall be in greatest
danger.


S I would gladly know, wherefore it ring to the Aue Maria, three times in the
day, to wit, in the morning, at midday, and in the evening.


M To the end we may understand, that we have need to make recourse often to
the help of God, and of the Saints: being in the midst of enemies visible
and invisible. And that we ought not to think it sufficient to have recourse
to the armor of prayer in the beginning of our works but that we must do the
same in the progress and in the end. There is also an other mystery in this
ringing thrice to the Aue Maria. That is, holy Church would have us
continually to remember the three principal mysteries of our Redemption, the
Incarnation, the Passion, and the Resurrection. And therefore wills that we
salute our B. Lady in the morning, in memory of the Resurrection of our lord:
at midday, in memory of the passion: and at night, in memory of the
Incarnation. Because as we are certain that our Lord was mayled on the Cross
at midday, and rose in the morning, so it is probably thought, that the
Incarnation was in the night.


Cap. VI. The declaration of the ten Commandments.
S Having now understood the Creed, and the Pater noster with the Aue Maria: I
desire that you would declare unto me the ten commandments of the law of God:
for that this is the third principal part of the christian doctrine, as you
told me in the beginning.


M You have reason to desire to learn, and to understand well the ten
commandments of the law of god, be cause that faith and hope without charity,
and without observing of the ^aw, are not sufficient to salvation.


S What is the cause, that seeing in the world, and in the Church there are so
many laws and commandments, this law of the Commandments is preferred
before all the rest?


M Many reasons may be alleged concerning the excellency of this law. First,
for that this law was made by God, and written by himself, first of all in the
hearts of men, and afterward in twotables of stone: secondly, because this is
most ancient law of all others, and as the fountain of all the rest. Thirdly,
because this is most universal law that is to be found: for it binds not
only Christians but Jews also and Gentiles: as well men as women, as well rich
as poor, as well Princes as private men, as well the learned as the ignorant.
Fourthly, because this law is immutable and cannot be taken away, nor dispensed
withal by any. Fifthly, because it is necessary to every one to salvation, as
our lord has often taught us, in his holy gospel; lastly, bceause it was
promulgat with greatest solemnity in mount Sinay with sound of Angelical
tru^pets with great thunder, and lightning from heaven, in the presence of all the people of God.


S Before you come to the declaration of the commandementes in particular; it
would be gratful to me to understand briefly the sum, and order of them?


M The end of all the commandementes is the love of God, and of our neighbor:
for they al teach us, not to offend God, nor our neighbor: and for this cause
they are divided into two parts and were written (as I have already said) in
two tables of stone. The first part contains, three commandementes, which
instruct us of the bond we have to God. The second contains seven other
precepts, which teach us the bond, we have to our neighbor. But you must know,
that albeit in one table there were no more then three precepts, and in the
other seaue^: yet the two tables were equal, and both full written: for the
three first were written with more words, and the other seven with fewer: and
so the seven shorter precepts were equal touching the writing unto the three
longer.


S Wherefore are the Commandments of the first table three?


M Because they teach us to love God, with heart, with tongue, and with work.


S Why are the commandementes of the second table seven?


M Because, one teaches us to do good to our neighbor, the other six teach us
to do him no evil. First in his person, after in his honor, lastly in his
goods. And that neither in thought, word, nor deed.


S Let us now come unto the commandementes them selves. And first show me the
words where with they were written by God in those tables.


M The words are these: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth, out
of the land of Egypt, from the house of servitude.

1 Thou shall not have strange Gods in my sight. 2 Thou shall not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain. 3 Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath day.
4 Honor thy father and thy mother. 5 Thou shall not murder. 6 Thou shall not
commit adultrie. 7 Thou shall not steal. 8 Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor. 9 Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10 Thou
shall not covet the neighbors goods.



S What mean those words which go before the commandementes?


M In those words are yielded four reasons, to show that God can give a law,
and that we are bound to observe it. The first reason is in the word, I am the
Lord, because God being our chief and highest Lord, who has created us of
nothing, he may doubtless give us a law, as to his proper servants. The second
is in that word, God, because that word signifies that our Lord is not only
Lord (or Master) but he is also supreme Judge, and governor, and as such a
one can give a law, and punish those that observe it not. The third is in that
word, thine, because besides the bond which we have to obey God, as servants
their master and as subjects their Prince; we have an other bond, by reason of
the packt which God does make with us, and we with him, in holy Baptism. For
therein God takes us for his own adopted children, and we take him for our
proper Father: as God also takes all the faithful for his particular people,
and the faithful take God for their own proper God and Lord. The fourth is in
those words, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of servitude; for that besides so many other bonds, there is this of
gratitude: for that God has delivered us from the servitude of the devil and
of sin, which was signified by that servitude of Egypt and of Pharao, from the
which the same God delivered the people of the Jews.


S Declare unto me now the first commandment.


M The first Commandment contains three parts. The first is, that we ought
to have God for God. The second, that we must not take any other thing for God.
The third, that we must not make Idols, to wit, statues or Images, taking them
for Gods, and that we must not adore the same Idols.


S Declare unto me the first part.


M God will be taken for that which he is, to wit, for true God, which is done
by exercising four virtues toward his divine Majesty, to wit, Faith, Hope,
Charity, and Religion. He that believes in God, takes God for God: because
he takes him for the chief verity: and in this the Heretics do sin, for
they do not believe in him. He that hops in God, takes God for God, for
that he holds him for most faithful, most pitiful, and also most potent,
confidently considering that he can, and will help him in all his necessities:
and in this point those do sin, that despair of the mercy of god, or do trust
more in men, the^ in god, or so much in me^ as in God, he that loves god above
all things, takes God for God, for that he takes him for the chief
goodness, and in this point those do sin, that love any creature whatsoever
more then god, or equal with God. And much more do they sin, that hate God.
Finally, whosoever adoreth god with greatest reverence as the virtue of
Religion teaches us, takes god for god: for he takes him for the first
beginning and author of all things, and in this point they offend, that bear
small respect to God, and to things consecrated unto him, as Churches,
hallowed vessels, Priests, and the like, and those also that honor men
equally with God, or more then God.


S Declare I pray you the second part of this commandment.


M In the second part God wills and commands, that we take no created
thing for God. And in this the Gentiles offended in old time, who not knowing
the true God, did take and adore for God diverse creatures, as the Sun, the
Moon, or some dead men. In the same Inchanters and Witches offend, and al
Sorcerers, Negromancers, and Soothsayers, who gave to the devil of hell that
honor which is due only to God; and some of them take him and adore him for
their God, and think by his means to foretell things to come, or to find
treasures, or to attain unto other their dishonest desires.

For the devil being deadly enemy to all mankind, deceives often this poor
sort of people, and with vain hopes causes the^ to commit many sins, and in
the end to loose their souls and many times their bodies also.


S Declare to me the third part.


M In the third part, God does command, that not only we take not the things
created by him for God, as has been said, but that much less we make to our
selves any thing to take it and adore it for God. Wherein the Gentiles offended,
who were so blind, that they made Idols, to wit, statues of Gold, or of silver
or of wood, or of stone, and made it be thought that they were Gods. Chiefly
because the devils sometimes entered into them, and caused them to speak or to
move themselves, and so they sacrificed unto them, and adored them. And
because the holy Martirs would not in any wise do the same, they put them to
death, with most cruel torments.


S Is there any thing else in this commandment?


M There is annexed by God a terrible threatening, to those that do contrary
to this commandment, and a great promise to those that observe it. For after
the giving of the commandment, God spoke those words, I am a jealous God, who
punish not only those that love me not, but their posterity also, unto the
fourth generation, and show mercy to those that love me, unto a thousand
generations. Where, mark well, that our Lord says, that he is a jealouse
God, to the end we may understand that he can punish most grievously,
because he is God, and that he will punish most grievously, because he is
jealous of his honor, and of justice, and of right: and therefore cannot bear
with impiety and iniquity. Which is against those that sin continually, and
yet live merrily, as if God had no care thereof. But by this you see God has
care, and will show it when time is.


S What mean thit, that God punishes such as do evil, unto the fourth
generation: and gives reward unto those that do well unto a thousand
generations?


M God punishes unto the fourth generation, for that for the most part a man
does not live longer then to see the children of his Nephews, or at the most,
the Nephews to his Nephews, and he will not punish others of his posterity,
then the sinner himself may see. But in doing well, God extended himself not
only unto the fourth generation, but unto a thousand, if there were so many.
For that our Lord is more inclined to reward then to punish, because that he
rewards, is of his own goodness, and therefore he does it very willingly,
but that he punishes any, it comes of our sin, and therefore he does it
as it were perforce, to wit, urged by our perverseness.


S Wherefore is this threat, and this promise joined to the first commandment
only?


M Because this is the principal commandment, and of more importance then the
rest. Again, for that it is the first, and so being spoken of the first, it
may be understood also of the rest.


S I desire to know how the honor which we give to Saints and their Relics
and Images, is not against this commandment. For it seems, that we adore
all these things, seeing we kneel unto them and pray unto them as we do unto
God.


M The holy Church is the spouse of God, and has the holy Ghost for her
master. And therefore there is no danger that she should be deceived, or that
she should do or teach others to do any thing that were against the
commandments of God. And to come to the particular, we do honor and call
upon Saints, as friends of God, who can help us with their merits and prayers
before him: but we do not take them for gods, neither adore them as God:
neither imports it that we knele, because this reuerance is not proper to God
alone: but is done also unto creatures of high dignity, as to the Pope: and in
many places religious persons kneel unto their Superiors So that it is no
marvel if that be done unto saints, who reign with Christ in heaven. which
is done unto some men in earth.


S But what shall we say of the Relics of Saints, which understand nothing:
and yet we kneel and pray unto them?


M We do not pray to the Relics which we know well do not understand: but we
honor the holy Relics, as those which have bin the instruments of the holy
souls, to do many good works, and shall again in their times be living
bodies, and are to us in the mean time dear pledges of the love, which the
Saints did, and do bear unto us. And therefore we do pray, before the same
Relics unto the Saints, desiring them by these dear pledges which we keep
of them, that they remember to help us, as we remember to honor them.


S The same perhaps may be said of Images.


M So it is, for the Images of our Lord, of our Lady, and other Saints, are
not taken by us for gods: and therefore they cannot be called Idols, as those
were of the Gentiles: but they are holden for Images, which make us to remember
our Lord, our Lady, and other Saints: and so they serve such as cannot read in
place of books. For that by Images they learn many mysteries of our holy
faith: and the life and death of many Saints. And the honor we do unto them,
we do it not because they are figures of paper or of metal, or because they
are well-colored and well made: but because they represent unto us our Lord,
our Lady, or other Saints: and for that we know that the Images do not live
nor have sense, being made by the hands of men: we do not demand any thing of
the^: but we pray before them, unto those whom they represent unto us, to wit,
our Lord, our Lady, or other Saints.


S If Relics and Images do not understand: how then do they work so many
miracles to such as do recommend themselves unto them?


M God works all the miracles: but he works them often by the intercession
of Saints, and chiefly of our blessed Lady: and oftentimes he does them unto
those, who pray unto the Saints before their Relics or Images, and
sometimes he uses the Relics and Images, as instruments of such miracles,
to show unto us, that our devotion toward the Saints, and toward their
Relics, and Images, does please him.


S When therefore it is said, that one is recommended to such Relics, or such
Images, and has received grace, it is to be understood, that he is recommended
to that Saint, to whom those Reliuques or Images pertain: and that God, by
the intercession of that Saint, and by the means of those Relics or Images,
has done him that grace.


S So it is: and I am glad that you have well understood all that I have said
unto you.


S I would lastly know for what cause, God the Father is painted like an old
man, and the Holy Ghost like a Dove, and the Angels like young men with wings,
seeing God and the Angels are spirits, and have no corporal figure, which can
be drawn by Painters, as pictures of men may be.


M When God the Father is painted in form of an old man, and the Holy Ghost
in form of a dove, and the Angles in form of young men, that which they are
in themselves is not painted: because as you have said, they are spirits
without bodies, but that form is painted, in which they have sometimes
appeared. And so God the Father is painted like an old man, because he appeared
in that form in a vision to Daniel the prophet. And the Holy Ghost is painted
in form of a dove, because in that form he appeared upon Christ when he was
baptized by Saint John Baptist. And the Angls are painted in form of young men,
for that they have sometimes so appeared. Moreover you are to know, that many
things are painted, to make us understand, not what they are in themselus, but
what properties they have or what effect they use to work. So it may be said,
that God the Father is painted in form of an old man, to make us understand,
that he is most ancient, to wit, eternal, and before al created things. And the
Holy Ghost is painted in likeness of of a dove, to signify the gifts of
innocence, purity, and sanctity, which the Holy Ghost works in us. And
the angels are painted like young me^, because they are always, fair and full
of strength: and with wings, because they are ready to pass whyther it shall
please God to send them: and with white garments, and with holy stoales,
because they are pure, and innocent, and ministers of his divine Majesty.


Of the second commandment.
S LEt us come to the second commandment: what means, thou shall not take
the name of God in vain?


M In this commandment is handled the honor and dishonor of God touching
words, that is, honor is commanded, and dishonor is forbidden. And this
commandment: may be divided into four parts, because God is honored, or
dishonored by words, in four sorts. First, God is honored by naming him
often with charitable affection: and is dishonored by often naming him to no
good purpose. Secondly, he is honored by an oath, and he is dishonored by
perjurie. Thirdly, he is honored by observation of vows, and dishonored by
breaking of vows once made. Fourthly, he is honored by calling upon him and
praising him, and dishonored by blaspheaming and cursing him.


S Declare to me the first part.


M In simply naming God, as also our Lady and other Saints, one may well do
an evil. For those that ^oue God much, remember him often, and often speak of
him: and they do it with devotion and affection, as is seen in the Epistles of
Saint. Paul, where the holy name of Jesus Christ is very often read. For as S.
Paul had Christ in his heart, so he had him in his mouth. But there be others,
who of an evil custom, when they are angry, or when they jest, not regarding
what they say, name God, or some Saint, because nothing else comes to their
mind. And this is evil: for it is a kind of tearing the most holy name of
God. Which is to give you an example, though not equal) as if one having a
precious garment, should wear it in all places and at al times, not regarding
the preciousnes thereof.


S Declare now the second part, which concerns swearing,


M An oath or swearing is nothing else, but to call God as witness of the truth.
But that it be lawfully done three things ought to accompany it, to wit, truth,
justice and judgment, as God himself does teach us, by the mouth of the
Prophet Jeremy. And as God is honored by an oath made with dew circumstances,
we professing thereby, that he sees al things and is the sovereign truth, and
defe^der of the truth: so by the contrary the same god is greatly dishonored
when an oath is made without truth or without justice, or without judgment:
for he that so swears makes show that either God is ignorant of the matter,
or that he is a friend of lying and of antiquity.


S Declare I pray in particular, what is to swear with truth.


M That one may swear with truth it is necessary that he do not affirm with
an oath any thing but that he certainly knows to be true: and that he
promise not with an oath any thing but that he will undoubtedly perform.
Whereupon they are perjured, and sin grievously, that affirm with an oath
such things as they know are false, or do not know to be true. And in like
manner, those that promise by oath, that which they mean not to fulfill.


S What means to swear with justice?


M The meaning is, that a man promise not with an oath, to do any thing, but
that which is lawful. And therefore they sin most grievously who promise with
an oath, to revenge injuries, or to do any thing that displeases God. Neither
ought they to observe such promises: neither do they bind in any sort. For no
man can be bound to do evil, for so much as the law of God binds us that we
must not do it.


S What means to swear with judgment?


M The meaning is, to swear with aduisement, and maturely: considering that it
is not convenient to call God to witness, but in needful things of great
importance, and with much fear and reverence. And therefore they offend, that
for every trifle, yea playing and jeasting do swear. Who by this evil custom
of swearing often do easily incur perjurie, which is one of the greatest
sins that can be committed. Whereupon as well our Lord in the Gospel, as S.
James in his Epistle do command that we do not swear, that is, without
necessity. And holy men do yield the reason thereof, because an oath being
invented for remedy of the weakness of a man's credit: for that men do hardly
believe one an other, therefore an oath ought to be used, as we use a medicine,
which is not often to be taken, but as seldom, as well may be.


S Declar then, if you please, the third part of this commandment, which
consists in vows?


M A Vow is a promise made to God of some good thing grateful to his divine
Majesty. Where you have to considder three things. First that a Vow is a
promise, and therefore it suffices not to the making of a Vow to have a
purpose, and much less a desire to do any thing: but the express promise is
required, either by word of mouth, or at the least in heart. Again you have to
consider, that this promise is to be made to God, to whom Vows do properly
belong. And when you hear that a Vow is made to our Lady, or to other Saints,
you must understand that the same is principally made to God, but in the
honor of our Lady, or other Saints, in whom God remains in a more
particular manner and more excellently then in other creatures. So that a Vow
made to a Saint is nothing else but a promise made unto God, to honor the
memory of such a Saint, with some present: that is to honor God himself in
his Saint. Thirdly, you have to know, that a Vow cannot be made but of a good
thing, and grateful to God, as holy virginity, voluntary poverty, and the
like things. Wherefore he that should vow to commit any sin, or any act not
pertaining to the service of God; yea or any good thing, which should hinder a
greater good, should not make promise of a thing grateful to his divine
Majesty, and therefore should not do him honor, but dishonor, and he should
sin against this second commandment. As he also sins greeuiously against
the same commandment, that makes a vow and fulfilleth it not so soon as he
can. For God commands in holy Scripture, that whosoever makes a vow, do
not only remember to fulfill it, but also that he slack not to do it.


S Declare to me the last part, which treats of the praise of God, and of
blasphemy.


M God comma^deth in the last part of this second commandment, that a man
shall not blaspheame: but contrariwise, that he praise and bless his holy name.
And first, forasmuch as appertains to the praise, there is no difficulty at
all: being manifest that all good things coming unto us from God, and all the
works of God being full of wisdom, of justice, and of mercy; it is reason
that in all things he be praised, and blessed. But touching blaspheamie, it is
necessary you know that blasphemy is nothing else, but an injury done in words
to God in himself or in his Saints. And there are found six sorts of
blasphemies. The first, when that is attributed to God, which is false, as that
he has horns, or like indignity. The second, when that is denied to God,
which belongs to him, as Power, Wisdom, Justice, or other excellences. As to
say that God can not do, or sees some things, or that he is not just. The
third, when that is tributed to any creature, which is proper to God, as if one
say, that the devil knows the things that are to come, or can work true
miracles. The fourth, when one curses God, or our Lady, or other Saints. The
fifth, when some members of Christ, or of Saints are named, to do some injury,
as if there were any things in them to be ashamed of, as be in us. The sixth,
when one names some parts of Christ or of Saints, to jest at them, as to say:
To the bread of Christ: or of Saint Peter: or other like things: which the
envy of the devil, and the wickedness of man has found out.


S I desire to know how great the sin of blasphemy is?


M It is so great, that it is in a manner the greatest of all other: which may
be understood by the pain that it meriteth. For that in the old Testament, God
commands, that blasphemers should presently be stoned by all the people. As
the civil laws do also punish blasphemers with death. And S. Gregory writes
that a little child of five years old, having learned to blaspheme God, and not
being corrected by his father, died in his fathers lap, and his soul was
carried away by devils (that appeared visibly) into hell fire. Which was never
read to have happened for any other sin. Whereby we may see what diligence
ought to be used in avoiding so great an offense of his divine Majesty: and
the avoiding of this sin ought to be more easy, seeing there is no
commodity nor pleasure gotten by it, as by some other sin there is, but the
only hurt which the sin brings with it. And yet we ought never to sin,
though we could gain never so great commodity or pleasure thereby.


Of the third Commandment.
S I Have understood the two first commandments: now I desire that you will
declare to me the third.


M The third commandment, which is of keeping holy feasts, is something
differing from the others, because all the others, to wit, the two that go
before, and the seven which follow, are wholly natural, and bind not only
Christians, but Jews and Gentiles also: but this third is in part natural, and
binds all men, and in part is not natural, neither binds it al: for that to
sanctify the feasts, that is, to have some days for holy, and to be spent in
holy works, and chiefly in the service of God, is a natural precept: for that
natural reason teaches it to al men; and so in all parts of the world some day
is observed festiual. But the ordaining of such a day, that is, that it should
be one, rather then an other, is not natural. And therefore with the Jews the
principal feast was Saturdaye, with Christians it is the Sunday.


S For what cause did God command that the Jews should observe the Saturday,
rather then any other day?


M There are two principal reasons. The first is because, on the Saturday God
finished the frame of the world: and therefore he would, that day should be
sanctified in memory of this great benefit, of the creation of the world:
Which served also to convince the error of certain Philosophers (who said that
the world had always been) for that celebrating the feast in memory of the
creation of the world, it must needs be confessed that the world had a
beginning. The second reason is, because a man having caused his servants, and
hand-maides, and his cattle to work and weary themselves six days of the
week, God would that the seventh day, which is the Saturday, the same
servants and maids, yea, his Oxealso and Ass should repose, and that masters
should learn to be pitiful toward their laborers, and not to be cruel,
but to have compassion also of their very bruit beasts.


S What is the cause that we Christians do not observe the Saturday, as the
Jews do, seeing there is so good reason to observe it?


M With great reason god has changed the Saturday into the Sunday, as he has
also done Circumcision into Baptism, the Paschal lamb, into the blessed
Sacrament, and al other good things of the old Testament, into better things
in the new Testament. Wherefore, if the Saturday was celebrated in memory of
the creation of the world; because in that day the work of the creation was
ended: with more reason the Sunday is celebrated in memory of the same
creation: for that in the sunday the said creation was begune: and if the Jews
did give to God the last day of the week, then Christians do better, who give
him the first. Moreover upon the Sunday, memory is made of three principal
benefits of our Redemption. For Christ was borne on the sunday, on sunday he
rose, and upon Sunday he sent the Holy Ghost to his Apostles. Finally the
Saturday did signify the repose which the holy souls had in Limbo: the
Sunday signifies the glory which the holy souls have now, and the bodies
shall have hereafter in heaven. And therefore the Jews did celebrate the
Saturday, because when they died they went to repose in Limbo: but christians
celebrate the sunday, because when they dye they go unto the glorious bliss of
heaven: which yet is understood, if they have done well according to the holy
Law, which God has given them.


S Is it necessary to observe other feasts besides the Sunday?


M It is necessary to observe many other feasts, as well of our Lord, as of
our Lady, and of other Saints, to wit, al those which are commanded by holy
Church. But we have spoken in particular of the Sunday because it is the most
ancient and oftener celebrared then any other. As amongst the Jews there were
also many feaste^, but the most ancient, most frequent, and the greatest of al
was the Sabbath. And therefore in the ten comma^dements there is not express
mention made of any, but of the Sabbath, to which, as we have said, the
Sunday has succeeded.


S What ought to be done, to observe the feasts?


M Two things are necessary: the first is, to bstaine from seruil works: which
are those, that servants and artificers, are accustomed to do, who labor most
specially with their bodies. For those works in which the understanding does
principally labor, cannot be called seruil, though for help of the
understanding, the tongue, the hand, or any other corporal member be used. The
second thing is, that in the commanded feasts we are bound to be present at
the holy Sacrifice of Mass. And albeit holy Church binds us to no more:
yet is it convenient, that we spend the whole day of the feast, or the greatest
part thereof, in prayer, and spiritual reading, in visiting Churches, in
hearing sermons, and in doing like holy exercises: for this is the end, for
which feasts were instituted.


S If seruil works may not be done, on the festiual days, the^ belles may not
be rongue, the table may not be made ready, and much less meat be dressed,
for all these are seruil works.


M The commandment of not doing servile works, is understood with two
conditions. The first, that they be not necessary to man's life, and therefore
it is permitted to dress meat, to make ready the table, and such like that
can not be done the day before. The second, that they be not necessary for the
service of God: for which it is allowed to ring the Bells, and to do other
works in the Church that cannot be done another day. And besides these
conditions, it is also lawful to do servile works, upon the holy day, when
license is granted by the Prelate for reasonable cause.


Of the fourth Commandment.
S THe fourth Commandment follows, which is of honoring our father and
mother. I desire to know, wherefore the commandment of honoring our father and
mother, is the first in the second table.


M The commandments of the second table belong to our neighbor as those of
the first belong to God. And because amongst all neighbors, our father and
mother are most near to us, to whom we are most bound, as of whom we have
our being and our life, which is the foundation of all our temporal good
things, therefore with great reason the second table begins with the honor
of our father and mother.


S What is understood by this honor which is due to our father and mother?


M Three things are understood, help, obedience, and reverence. First, we
are bound to help and assist our father and mother in their necessities. And
this help in holy Scriptures is called honor. And it is great reason that
children having received life of their father and mother, should procure to
preserve unto them the same life. Further we are bound to obey our father and
mother, as S. Paul says in all things in our Lord, that is, in all things
which are conformable to the will of our Lord: for that when our father or
mother commands us any thing, which is contrary to the will of God, then we
must according to the commandment of Christ, hate our father and mother,
that is, not obey or give ear unto them, no otherwise then if they were our
enemies. Finally we are bound to reverence our father and mother in bearing
them respect, and honoring them in words, and exterior behauior, as is
convenient: and so great account God made of this in the old testament, that
he commanded that who soever durst curse his father or mother, should be killed.


S I know not for what cause the law of God has commanded the children that
they should help their father and mother, and to assist them: and has not also
commanded the fathers and mothers, that they should help and succor their
children, especially whiles they are little and have need of help.


M Truly the bond is reciprocal, and all one, betwixt the parents and the
children. For even as the children are bound to help, to reverence, and to obey
their parents: so the parents are bound to provide for the children, not only
meat and clothes, but also that they be taught and instructed. But the law of
parents toward their children, is so natural and ordinary, that there is no
need of any other written law, to put Parents in mind of their bond toward
their children. But contrariwise it is often seen, that children are not
answerable in love toward their parents. And therefore it was necessary to
admonish them by this commandment of their duty: neither is God contented
with a bare commandment, but has adjoined a promise, and a threatening to make
them observe it.


S I would gladly know what promise and threatening that is.


M Unto this fourth commandment God adjoyneth these words; that thou may
live long upon the earth. Meaning that those who honor their father and
mother, shall have for reward to live long: and those who do not honor them,
shall have amongst other punishments, this particular, not to live long. And it
is a very just punishment. For there is no reason, thar he enjoy long life, who
dtshonoreth those of whom he received the same life.


S There occurreth unto me to demand, whether this, that has been said of the
father and mother, be understood also of other superriors, who toward us have
the place of parents?


M It is very well considered of you. For indeed this commandment, is extended
unto al Superiors, as well Ecclesiastical as temporal.


Of the fifth Commandment.
S DEclare now if you please the fiifth commandment.


M This commandment chiefly forbids murder, to wit, to kill men. For to kill
other living things, is not forbidden by this precept And the reason is,
because living things wen created for man, and therefore where it is needeful
that he serve himself of the life of those living creatures, he may kill them:
but one man is not created for an other man, but for God, and therefore one man
is not master of an other man's life: And so it is not lawful for one man to
kill an other.


S Notwithstanding we see that Princes and Governors put thieues and other
malefactors to death, who nevertheless are men, and it is not holden that they
do evil herein, but well.


M Princes and Governors that have public authority, put malefactors to
death, not as masters of men's lives, but as ministers of God, as S. Paul says.
Because God wills and commands that malefactors be punished and killed,
when they deserve it, that good men may be safe, and live in peace. And for
this purpose God has given the sword into the hands of Princes and Rulers to
do justice, in defending the good, and chastising the bad. And so, when by
public authority a malefactor is put to death, it is not called murder, but
an act of justice: and whereas the commandment of God says: Thou shall not
kill, it is understood, by thy private authority.


S I have hear a doubt, whether this commandment forbids a man to kill him
self, as it forbids to kill an other;


M Without all doubt this commandment forbids to kill himself, because no
man is master of his own life, man being made not by himself, but by God. And
therefore no man by private authority can take the life from himself. And if
any holy men not to lose their faith, or their chastity, have killed them
selves, it is to be thought, that they had particular, and clear inspiration
from God to do it; which otherwise could not be excused from most grievous
sin. For that who kills himself, kills a man, and so commits murder,
which is a sin principally forbidden in this fifth precept of the law.


S Wherefore do you say principally?


M Because not only to kill is forbidden, but also to hurt, to beat, or to do
any other injury whatsoever, to the body and person of our neighbor. Yea
Christ our Lord in the holy Gospel, declaring this commandment, forbids
also disdain, hatred, rancour, reuiling, and other like passionat behavior,
and speeches, which usually are the cause and root of murders. And
contrariwise, wills, that we be meek, and courteous, procuring peace and
concord with all men.


Of the sixth Commandment.
S What is contained in the sixth commandment?


M The prohibition of adultery is principally therein contained. Which is to
sin with an other man's wife. And for that, next unto life, honor (or
honesty) is most esteemed in this world, therefore next after the
commandment, not to kill, with great reason adultery is forbid, by which
honesty is lost.


S Wherefore do you say, principally?


M Because in the ten commandments, which are laws of Justice, those sins
are principally forbid, by which injustice is more manifestly committed, of
which sort is adultery. But besides this all other sorts of carnal sins
are also secondarily forbidden: as sacrilege, which is to sin with a person
consecrated to God: incest, which is to sin with those of our own kindred,
deflowring, which is to sin with a virgin: fornication, which is to sin
with a woman corrupted and single, as a Widow or a harlot: and other sorts of
sins more abominable, which ought not so much as to be named amongst
Christians.


S Albeit I do believe that all is true, which you have said, yet I would be
glad to understand, where upon it is grounded, that fornication is a sin: for
that he seems not to do any harm or injury unto any, that commits simply
fornication.


M It is grounded in all laws: in the law of Nature, in the written law, and
in the law of Grace. In the law of nature it is found, that the Patriarch
Judas would have put to death a woman called Thamar, who had bin his sons
wife, and being now widow was found with child. Whereby it appears, that
in that time, before the Law of Moses was given, by the instinct of nature, men
did know that fornication was sin. After in the law of Moses, fornication is
forbidden in many places. And in the Epistles of S. Paul, we read many times,
that fornicators shall not enter into the glory of heaven. Neither is it true,
that fornication does no hurt nor injury to any. For it hurts the same
woman, who thereby loses her fame: it hurts the child which is borne a
bastard: it does injury to Christ, for we being all members of Christ, he
that commits fornication, makes the member of Christ, the member of an
harlot. Finally, he does injury to the Holy Ghost, for that our bodies are
the temple of the Holy Ghost, and so he that defiles his body with
fornication, defiles the temple of the Holy Ghost.


S Does this sixth commandment forbid any other thing, besides these kinds of
sin, which you have named


M It forbids also al other dishonesties, which are as allurements to
adultery, or fornication: as lascivious looks, unchaste kissing, and the like.
And so our Lord taught us in in the holy Gospel, where declaring this sixth
Commandment he says: Whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her, has
already committed aduoutrie with her in his heart. And therefore it is
necessary to those that will fly from such sins, to have great care of
their outward senses, and especially of their eyes, which are as doors
whereby death of the soul enters.


Of the seventh Commandment.
S What does the seventh commandment contain?


M It contains the prohibition of theeft, that is, to take the goods of an
other against the will of the owner. And so in right order, theft is forbiden,
after murder and adultery. For that amongst temporal, or worldly things next
to life, honor, (or honesty) is esteemed and then the goods or riches of this
world.


S How many ways is this seventh commandment broken;


M Two ways principally, to which al others are reduced. The first way is by
taking an others goods secretly, and this is properly called theft. The second
principal way is by taking an others goods openly, and by force, as robbers do
by the highway: and this is called roberie. And albeit the commandment of God
speaks of the first, saying: Thou shall not steal, yet it is understood also
of the second: for he that forbids the less evil, without doubt forbids
also the greater.


S What be the sins which are reduced to theft and roberie, and are for bid
by this commandment.


M They are these. First all the frauds and deceipts which are used in buying
and selling, and other like bargaynes. And these are reduced to theft: because
he that uses such deceipts, takes secretly of his neighbors more then is
due. Secondly, al vsuries, which are made by lending of money with covenant,
that it shall be restored with something more: And these are reduced to roberie,
because he that takes usury, exacteth manifestly more the^ he hathlent.
Thirdly, all the damages which are done to our neighbor, though he that is the
occasion thereof, gain nothing thereby: As when one burns an other man's
house. And this is reduced sometimes to theft, and sometimes to roberie,
according as the harm is done secretly or manifestly. Fourthly, he that pays
not that he is bouud to pay, sins against this commandment, as much as if
he should steal, in that he keeps an other man's goods against the will of
the owner. Fifthly, he sins against the same commandment, and commits
theft, that finds any thing that an other has lost, and takes it for
himself: I say, that an other has lost, because it is not sin to take that
which belonged to no body. As precious stones which sometimes are found by the
sea side. Sixthly, it is reduced to theft or to robbery, when one appropriateth
to himself any thing which is common. For he that does appropriate things
that are common, depriueth the community of such things as belong to the whole
body.


S I desire to know, if theft be a great sin?


M All mortal sins may be called great, for that they deprive a man of
eternal life: but theft has this property, that it brings greatest evils
with it: for we see that Judas by the custom he had to steal, appropriating
to himself, that was given him, for the common use of our Lord, and his holy
Apostles, it brought him in the end to betray his own most holy Master. And
we see daily that robbers stick not to kill men, whom they never did see
before, and to whom they have no hatred nor enmity, only for dedesire to take
from them, that more or less, which they carry about the^: and God permits,
that commonly those which take from other men, enjoy it not long: as it fell to
Judas, who hanged himself, and al thieues ordinarily fall into the hands of
justice.


Of the eight Commandment.
S What does the eight commandment contain?


M Hitherto has been spoken of injuries, which are committed against our
neighbor in deeds, now follow the injuries which are done by words. And
therefore the eight commandment forbids false witness, which is the most
principal injury, that is committed with words.


S I would know, whether it be against this commandment, when one speaks
that is false without harm to any man?


M One may speak that is false, three manner of ways. First with damage to our
neighbor, as when one accuses an other before the justice, that he has
stolen or killed, or the like, knowing that it is not true. And this is a
wicked and pernicious lie. Secondly, to help or excuse his neighbor, as when
one tells a lie to save an other from some danger. And this is called an
officious lie. Thirdly, when one tells a lie, without either harming or
helping any man. And this is called an idle lie. The first of all these three
manners is properly forbidden by this commandment, because it is not only a
false testimony, but unjust also, and a most grievous sin. The other two
manners, albeit they contain not always justice, and are not so grievous
sins, as the first, yet they are always sins, at the least venial. For
that a lie ought not to be told for any thing in the world.


S Does this precept contain any thing, besides the prohibitio^ of a lie?


M It contains the prohibition of three other sins, which are committed by
the tongue, and in some sort are reduced to false witness: which are,
Contumely, Detraction, and Cursing.


S What (...) ^eante by Contumely?


M A Contumely is an injurious word, spoken to the dishonor or discredit
our neighbor. As if one say to an other, that he is ignorant or of little wit,
base, infamous, or the like. And that this is a great sin, being spoken with
an injurious meaning: our Savior declares in the holy Gospel, where he says,
that he that calls his brother fool, shall be guilty of hell fire. I said
when it is spoken with an injurious mind: for when it is spoken in jest, or to
admonish, or correct, as sometimes a father speaks to his child, or a master
to his Scholar, without meaning to injury him, then it is not co^tumely, nor
any sin, for most part, but sometimes it may be a venial sin.


S What is detraction?


M Detraction is to take away the fame of our neighbor in speaking evil of
him. And this i^ done either by speaking ill falsely, or by telling some evil
that is true, but was secret. Whereby our neighbor loses the good-name
which he had with them, who did not know his sin before. And this detraction
is a very frequent sin amongst men, and very grievous and dangerous, because
a man's name is more worth then his goods, and by some it is more esteemed then
life it self. And therefore it is a great wrong to make them loose it. And
whereas it is an easy thing to find remedy for other losses, a good name when
it is lost, is not recovered without great difficulty. And besides all this,
he that by his detraction has taken it away is bound to restore it.
Wherefore, it is a most profitable counsel, to speak well always of all men,
when it can be done with truth, and when it can not, then be silent.


S What means cursing?


M Malediction or cursing is, when one curses his neighbor, as by saying,
cursed be he, or by uttering, other sorts of maledictions against him, as
saying, such an evil, or such an one take thee. And this cursing is a most
grievous sin, when it is spoken with hatred and with desire that such evils
come unto his neighbor in earneste. But when it is done, without hatred or
evil desire, as in jest, or to make sport, or upon some sudden disdain,
without regard to that he speaks, it is less evil; yet it is for all
that, always evil, for that from the mouth of a Christian, who is the son
of God by adoption, nothing ought to pass but benediction.


Of the ninth Commandment.
S WHAT does the ninth Commandment contain?


M It contains the prohibition of the desire to have thy neighbors wife. For
that albeit in the sixth Commandment adultery is forbidden: yet God would
severely forbid the desire of adultery, to give us to understand, that these
two are diverse sins.


S It seems that in this Commandment the desire of adultery, which a woman
commits with the husband of an other woman is not forbidden, but only the
desire of adultery, which a man commits with the wife of an other man,
seeing it is said, thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife.


M It is not so. But the desire of adultery is forbidden, as well of a woman, as
of a man: for albeit it is said, thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife: yet
that is spoken unto the man, is understood to be spoken also to the woman:
because in the man as more notable, is contained also the woman. And besides
every one knows that the adultery of a woman, is more infamous, at least in
the sight of the world then of a man: as the honesty and shamefastnes, is
also more commended in a woman, then in a man. Seeing then it is forbidden to a
man to desire an other man's wife, without doubt it is also forbidden to a woman
to desire an other woman's husband.


S You have said before, that where adultery is forbidden, all other carnal
sins are also forbidden. I desire to know whether the same be understood of
the desire.


M There is no doubt at all but that when the desire of adultery is forbidden,
the desire also of fornication and of all other dishonesties, is understood to
be forbidden, for that the same reason is of all these sins.


S I would know whether every desire of an other man's wife be sin, although
there be no consent of the will to such a desire?


M S. Gregory the Pope has taugth us, that in an evil desire there are three
degrees. The first is called suggestion; the second delectation; the third
consent. Suggestion is when the devil puts into the mind a dishonest
thought, which is accompanied with a sudden beginning of evil desire: and if
to this suggestion, there be resistance made presently, so that it come to no
delight, a man does not sin, but merit before God: but if the suggestion pass
to a sensual delectation, and there be no consent of reason and will, then a
man is not without some venial sin: but if to the suggestion and
delectation, the consent of reason and will be annexed, so that a man perceive
it and desire it, and willingly remain in such a desire and thought, it is a
mortal sin, and this is that which is properly forbidden in this
commandment.


Of the tenth Commandment.
S WHAT does the tenth Commandment contain?


M It contains the prohibition of the desire of an other man's goods, as well
immooueable, as are his house and lands, as mooueable, such as money, cattle,
fruits, and other things And so is perfect justice fulfilled, when we do
injury to our neighbor, neither in work nor in word, nor so much as in
thought and desire.


S I do marvel that God having forbidden murder, adultery, and theft, he does
not forbid the desire of murder, as he forbids the desire of adultery, and
theft.


M The reason is this, because a man does not desire principally any thing,
but that which brings him some good, at the least in appearance. And so he
desires adultery, because it brings delight he desires theft, for that it
brings profit: murder brings no good at all, and therefore it is not
desired for it self, but only to attain to adultery, or to theft, or to some
other his designements: for this cause, though the desire of murder, be a most
grievous sin, yet God did not forbid it particularly: for that it might be
understood as forbidden, when murder it self was forbidden. Besides, having
shut the doors to disordinat desires of delectation, and of commodities,
consequently were shut up also the desires of murder, which for most part is
not desired, but to attain to some commodity, or delight.


S I would know, for what cause the desire is never prohibited by human
laws, as we see it is forbidden in this law of God.


M The reason is manifest, for that men, although they be Popes, or Emperors,
do not see the hearts, but only the exterior things, and therefore being not
able to judge the thoughts and desires, much less can they punish them, and so
it is not convenient they should busy themselves in forbidding them. But God
that discerns the hearts of all men, can punish the evil thoughts and
desires: and therefore he forbids them in his holy law.


Cap. 7. The declaration of the precepts of the Church.
S BESIDES the Commandments of God, I would know if there be any other to be
observed.


M There are the precepts of Holy Church, which are these.

1 To be present at Mass on commanded feasts. 2 To fast the Lent, the four
Imbre weeks, and commanded Eues of Feasts. Also to abstain from flesh upon
Friday and Saturday Fridaye is also Fasting day, where custom so binds, as
it does in England.
. 3 To confess at the least once in the year. 4 To receive the B. Sacrament
at the least at Easter. 5 To pay tithes to the Church. 6 Not to solemnize
Marriages in times ptohibited, to wit, from the first Sunday of Aduent, until
the Feast of the Epiphanie: and from the first day of Lent, till the Octaues of
Easter. But of these commandments, I will say no more now, partly, because
they are easy, partly for that of the Mass, of Confession, and Communicating,
as also of Fasting we shall speak hereafter, when we shall declare the holy
Sacraments of the Church.



Cap. VIII. The declaration of the Evangelical Counsels.
S I Desire to know, if besides the commandments of our Lord, there be any
counsels also of his, to live more perfectly.


M There are many most holy counsels and most profitable to observe the
commandments with more perfection: But there are three most principal;
voluntary poverty, chastity, and obedience.


S Wherein consists the counsel of poverty.


M In not having any thing proper, all his goods being given to the poor, or
put into the common, which likewise has given all to the poor. And this
counsel Christ taught, not only in words: but also by his example. And
after Christ, the holy Apostles followed it, as also all the first Christians,
who dwelled in Jerusalem, in the time of the Primative Church: and finally al
religious persons make vow to observe this holy counsel of voluntary
poverty.


S Wherein consists the counsel of chastity?


M In a resolution to be perpetually chaste, not only abstayning from all sorts
of carnal sins, but also from Marriage. And this counsel also our Lord
taught by word and example. And our Lady likewise observed the same, S. John
Baptist, all the Apostles, after they were called by Christ to the Apostleship.
And al religious persons make particular vow hereof as also al Ecclesiastical
men, that take holy Orders.


S Where in consists the counsel of obedience;


M In renouncing our proper judgment, and proper will, which in the holy Gospel
is called, denying of a man's self, and to subject him self to the will of his
superior, in all things that be not against God. And this counsel likewise the
Savior of the world, taught not only in word, but also by his example, obeying
in all things his eternal Father, and submitting himself when he was a child
to his mother, and to S. Joseph his supposed Father, the spouse of our B. Lady,
albeit indeed he was not his Father, being borne of a mother, who was always
a Virgin. And this is the third counsel, to the which all religious persons
bind themselves by vow.


S Wherefore are there three principal counsels, and no more?


M Because these principal counsels serve to take away the impediments of
perfection: that consists in charity, for the impediments are three, to
wit, the love of goods, which is taken away by poverty: the love of carnal
pleasures, which is taken away by chastity: and the love of honor and power
which is taken away by obedience. Moreover, because a man has but three sorts
of goods; to wit, a soul, a body, and his exterior wealth, therefore giving
the exterior goods to God by poverty, his body by chastity, and his soul by
obedience, he makes a Sacrifice unto God of all that he has, and so disposes
himself to perfection of charity, in the best manner that in this life is
possible.


Chap. IX. The declaration of the Sacraments of holy Church.
S I HAVE learned through the grace of our Lord, the three principal parts of
Christian doctrine, it remains that you declare unto me the fourth, which, if
I well remember, contains the seven Sacraments of the Church?


M This part of doctrine is also very profitable, and therefore it is conueent
that you learn it with great diligence. You must then know, that in the holy
Church there is a great treasure, to wit these holy Sacraments, by means
whereof, we receive the grace of God, we keep it, we increase it, and when by
our defalt we lose it, we may recover it again. I will therefore declare unto
you what a sacrament is, how many Sacraments there be, by whom they were
instituted, and some other few things: and after we will come to the
declaration of every one of them in particular.


S. Begin then I pray you, to declare what a Sacrament is, which I much desire
to understand.


M. A Sacrament is a holy Mystery, by which God bestows his grace, and with
all it represents exteriorly the invisible effect, which grace works in our
soul. For if we were spirits without bodies, as the Angels are, God would
give us his grace spiritually: but because we are composed of a soul and a
body, therefore our Lord condescending to our nature, gives us his grace by
means of certain corporal actions, which as I have said, together with certain
exterior signs declare to us the inward effect of grace. As for example holy
Baptism, which is one of the Sacraments, is done by washing the body with
water, and therewith calling upon the most holy Trinity. By means of which
ceremonious washing, God gives his grace, and puts it in the soul of him,
that is baptized. And it instructs us, that as that water washes the body,
so grace washes the soul and cleanses it from al sin.


S If I have well understood, three conditions are requisite to the nature of a
Sacrament: first, that it be a ceremony, or as we would say, an exterior
action: the second, that God by it give his grace: the third, that the same
ceremony have a similitude with the effect of grace, and so represent and
signify it exteriorly.


M You have understood it very well. Now you have to know further, that these
Sacraments are in all seven, and are called Baptism, Confirmation or Chrisme,
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony. The reason
wherefore they are seven is this: for that God would proceed in giving us
spiritual life, as he uses to proceed in giving us our corporal life. Touching
corporal life, first is needful to be borne, secondly, is needful to grow,
thirdly, is needful to be nourished: fourthly when a man falls sick, it is
needful he use physic: siftly, when he must fight, he has need to arm
himself: sixthly is needful, that there be some to govern and rule those
that are now borne and grown; seventhly, is needful there be some to
multiply mankind: for seeing those that are borne do die, if others should not
succeed, mankind would soon decay. So then touching the spiritual life, first
it is needful that Gods grace be borne in us, and this is done by baptism:
secondly, it is needful that the same grace increase and be made strong: and
this is done by Confirmation: thirdly, is needful, that it be norished and
maintained, and this does the Eucharist work: fourthly, is needful that it be
recovered, whenit is lost, and this is done be the medicine of Penance. Fifthly,
is needful that at the point of death, a man arm himself against the
infernal enemy, who then, more the^ ever assalteth us, and this does extreme
Vnctio^ work: Sixthly, is necessary that there be in the church such as may
guide and govern us in spiritual life, and this is done by Orders. Seventhly,
is needful that there be in the Church, such as do multiply mankind, and
the number of the faithful thereby, and this is done by the Sacrament of
Matrimony.


S Who found out, and instituted so marvelous things?


M These Sacraments being so admirable, could not be devised otherwise then by
divine wisdom, nor instituted by any other then by God, who can give us grace:
and so Christ our Lord, who is God and man, devised and instituted them.
Moreover all the Sacraments are as certain condicts, by which the virtue of
Christ's Passion is derived unto us. And sure it is, that none can bestow the
treasure of Christ's passion, but in that manner and by those means, which
christ has ordained.


S I would gladly know if in the time of the old Testament, there were
Sacraments, and if they were so excellent as ours?


M There were many Sacraments in the old Testament, but they were different
from ours in four things. First, those were more in number the^ ours, and
therefore the old law was harder then the new law. Secondly, those were not so
easy to be observed as ours are. Thirdly, those were more obscure, whereby
few understood what they signified: whereas ours have so clear signifycation,
that every one may understand them. Fourthly, those did not give grace, which
ours do: but did only figuratively foreshew and promise it. So that our
Sacraments are much more excellent: being fewer, more easy, more clear, and
more effectual, then those were.


S I would also know, which amongst our seven Sacraments is the greatest of
all?


M They are al great, and every one of them has some peculiar greatness. The
greatest of al is the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, for in it is
contained the Author of grace, and of al goodness which is Christ our Lord, yet
touching the necessity, the most necessary of all are Baptism and Penance.
In respect of the dignity of those that can minister the Sacraments: the more
worthy are Confirmation, and Order, because these two Sacraments, can not be
given ordinarily, but by a Bishop. In respect of the facility, the most easy
is Extreme Unction, because by it sins are remitted with out trouble of
penance: touching the signification, Matrimony is the greatest, because it
signifies the union of Christ with the Church.


Of Baptism.
S BEgin, if you please, to declare the first Sacrament: and first tell me
wherefore is it called Baptism?


M This name of baptism is a greek word, and it signifies washing, but holy
Church uses this greek word because the word washing is to common, and is
used every day in common things. And therefore to the end this Sacrament
should have a proper name, and should be the better known, and honored, it is
called Baptism.


S What things are necessary to the Sacrament of Baptism?


M Three things at the least are necessary, and learn them well, because in
certain cases of necessity, as we shall say hereafter, every one may
baptize: and therefore it is good that every one know how to do it. First is
required true and natural water, which must be applied to the party that is
Baptized: Secondly, at the same time when the water is used, these words must
be spoken: I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, it is necessary, that the person that baptiseth have
intention to baptize, that is, to give the Sacrament which Christ has
instituted, and which Holy Church uses to give, when she baptiseth. For if
one had intention only to jest, or to wash only the body of some foulenes, he
should sin most grievously, and it were no baptism, and so the poor soul
were not baptized.


S What effect works Baptism?


M It works three effects. First it renews a man perfectly, giving him the
grace of God, by which, being before the child of the devil, he becomes the
child of God, and of a sinner becomes just; and it does not only wash the
soul from all spot of sin, but it delivers it also from all the pains of
Hell, and of Purgatory. In so much, that if one should die immediately after
Baptism, he should go directly into Heaven, as if he had never committed
sin. Secondly, Baptism leaves in the soul a certain spiritual mark which
cannot by any means be taken away, by which it shall for ever be known, yea
also in those which go to Hell, that they received Baptism, and that they had
been of the sheep of Christ. As by the peculiar marks it is known in this
world, to whom slaves or cattle do belong. And this is the cause why Baptism
can not be taken oftener then once: for it is never lost, this effect thereof
remaining for ever printed in the soul. Thirdly, by Baptism a man enters
into the Church, and is partaker of all the benefits thereof, as a child of
holy Church, and makes profession to be a Christian, and to be ready to
obey those that in place of Christ govern the Church.


S To whom does it belong properly to give Baptism?


M It belongs to a Priest by proper office, and chiefly to those who have
charge of souls. But when a Priest can not be had, it belongs to a Deacon,
and in case of necessity, to wit, when there is danger that the party should
die without Baptism, it belongs to every one, as well Priest as Layman, as
well man as woman: but always order is to be observed, that a woman baptize
not, if a man may be had; and that a Lay man baptize not, if any Ecclesiastical
person be present; and amongst Ecclesiastical, always the less must give
place to the greater.


S I marvel that Baptism is given to little children scarce borne, who do not
know what they take.


M The necessity of Baptism is so great, that who dies without it, or at the
least, without desiring it, can not enter into heaven: and because little
infants, are in great danger to die easily, and can not at that age have any
such desire of Baptism; it is therefore necessary to baptize the^ with all
speed that may be. And although they know not what they take, the Church
supplyeth the defect which by the godfather and godmother answers and
promises for them, and this suffices: because as by the means of Adam we
are fallen into sin, and into the offense of God, not knowing any thing: so God
is contented, that by means of Baptism, and of the Church, we be delivered
from sin, and turn into his grace, yea though we know nothing thereof.


S What means godfather and godmother of whom you spoke, and what is their
office?


M To the administration of Baptism, by ancient custom of the Church,
concurreth a man who is called a godfather, and also a woman, who is called a
godmother, that is, an other father and mother in things pertaining to God. And
these two, or on of them holds the child, whiles it is christened, and
answers for it, when the Priest dema^deth of the child, if it will be
baptized, and if it believe the Articles of the faith, and other such like
things. And after when the child grows in years, the godfather and godmother
are bound, to have care to instruct it, in matters, of faith, and in good
manners, if the father and mother be herein negligent. And moreover it is to be
noted, that by Baptism they become alyed by a spiritual affinity, to the
party that is baptized, and to his father and mother, as well he that
baptiseth, as the godfather and godmother.


Of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
S WE have spoken sufficiently of Baptism, tell me now, I pray you, what
means confirmation or Chrisme, which is the second Sacrament.


M The second Sacrament is called Confirmation, because the effect thereof is to
confirm the baptized in faith, as we shall say by and by. It is also called
Chrisme which is a greek word, and signifies unction, because in this
Sacrament, the forehead of the person that receives this Sacrament, is
anointed with holy Chrisme. For as in Baptism the baptized is washed with
water, to signify that the grace of God washes his soul from all spot of
sins: so in Chrisme the forehead is anointed, to signify that the grace of
God anoynteth the soul, and so comfort and fortifieth it, that it may fight
against the devil, and confess boldly the holy faith, without fear of
torments, or of death it self.


S In what time ought this Sacrament to be received?


M It ought to be received, when the child is come to use of reason, because
then he begins to confess his faith, and has need to be confirmed and
established in the grace of God.


S Does this Sacrament work any thing else, besides the fortifying of the
soul?


M It leaves a caracter or mark fixed and printed in the soul, which never
can be scraped out: and therefore this Sacrament can not be received oftener
then once.


S What need is there to imprint in the soul any other mark, seeing that of
baptism may suffice?


M This second caractar or mark is not imprinted without cause. For that by
the first, a man is only known to be a Christian, that is of the family of
Christ: but by this second, it is known, that he is a soldier of christ and
therefore he carries in his soul the arms of his captain, as in the world,
soldiers carry them on their garments, and whosoever receive this Sacrament,
and go into hell, shall have the greater confusion, for that every one shall
see, that they made profession of the soldiers of christ, and are after so
fowly revolted from him.


Of the Sacraments of the Eucharist.
S MAY it please you declare to me now the third Sacrament: and first tell me
what means this word Eucharist?


M This is a greek word also, and it signifies, grateful memory, or thanks
giving. For in this Sacrament, memory is made, and thanks are given to God,
for the most excellent benefit, of the holy Passion of our Savior, and
withal there is given the true body and blood of our Lord, for which we are
bound to render perpetual thanks to God.


S Declare to me more fully all that is contained in this holy Sacrament, that
knowing the greatness thereof, I may the better honor it.


M The Host which you see upon the Altar, before it be consecrated, is nothing
else but a little bread, made in form of a thin Wafer cake: but immediately,
when the Priest has pronounced the consecration, there is present in the Host
the true body of our Lord: and because the true body of our Lord is living,
and united to the Divinity, in the person of the Son of God, therefore
together with the body is the blood also, and the soul, and the Deity, and
so whole Christ, God and man. In the same manner in the Chalice, before the
consecration, there is nothing else but a little wine with a little water, but
suddenly the consecration being ended, there is the true blood of Christ: and
because the blood of Christ is not forth of his body, therefore in the
Chalice, together with the blood, are the body, the soul, and the Deity of
the same Christ, and so whole Christ, God, man.


S I do yet see, that the Host after the consecration, has the figure of
bread as before, and that which is in the Chalice, the figure of Wine, as
before.


M So it is, that in the Host there remains the figure and also the color,
and the taste of bread, which was there before, but not the substance of bread,
which was before. And so under the form of bread, there is not bread, but the
body of our Lord. And the better to understand this, I will give you an
example You have heard that Lots wife was converted into a statute of salt:
those that saw the statute, did see the figure of Lot his wife, which then was
not any more Lots wife but under the figure of a woman was salt. As there fore
in that conversion, the inward substance was changed, and the outward shape
remained: so in this Mystery, the inward substance is changed from bread into
the body of our Lord, the outward figure of bread remaining, which was there
before. The same also you are to understand of the Chalice, that is, that there
is the figure, the taste, the color and the smell of wine: yet is there not the
substance of wine, but the blood of our Lord, under that form of wine.


S It seems to me a great thing that a great body, as that of our lord, can
be under so little a form as that of the consecrated Host.


M It is certainly a great thing, but the power of God is also great who can
do greater things then we can understand: and so Christ when he said, in the
holy gospel, that God could make a camel, which is a beast bigger the^ a
horse, to pass through the eye of a nedle, he added, that with me^ these
things are impossible; but with God al things are possible.


S I would be glad to have some example, how the same body of our Lord, can be
in so many hosts as are in so many Altars.


M It is not needful to understand the wonders of God, but it suffices to
believe them, seeing we are certain that God cannot deceive us. Yet I will give
you an example for your consolation. It is sure that our soul is but one and
is whole in all the members of the body, al wholly in the head, al in the feet,
yea whole in every little part of our body; what marueill is it then, that God
can make the body of his Son to be in many Hoasts, seeing one and the same
soul to be whole and entire, in so many and so diverse and distinct parts of
the body? It is read in the life of S. Anthony of Padua, that the same time
he was Preaching in a city of Italy, he was also by Gods power in Portugal,
to do some other good works. And if God could make Saint Anthony, to be in two
places at one time, so far distant, and that in his proper form, wherefore
can he not make that Christ be present in many Hoasts, under the form of the
same Host?


S Tell me, I pray you, if Christ depart from Heaven when he comes into the
Hoasts, or remains he still in Heaven?


M When our Lord begins to be present in the holy Host, he departs not
from heaven, but by divine power, he is both present in Heaven and in the
Host. Take the example of our soul: when one is a child of few days old,
and very little as you see; and being measured, is found to be but one Palm
in length, after increasing, he becomes double so big as he was before; and
so being measured, he is above two Palms. Now I demand of you, if the soul
which was first in one palm only, has left that palm to come into the second
or no? Sure it is that it has not left it, neither is it enlarged, because it
is invisible, so that without leaving the first, it comes also into the
second: even so our Lord leaves not heaven to come into the Host, neither
leaves the one Host to be in an other, but he is present in Heaven and in all
the Hoastes at once.


S Now I have learned that which is contained in this most holy Sacrament: I
desire to know what things are requisite to receive it worthily?


M Three things are requuired, the first is, that the party do confess
himself of all his sins, and procure that he be in the grace of God, when
he goes to communicate, for that one of the causes, wherefore this Sacrament
is given to us, under the form of bread, is to the end we understand, that it
is given to living men, and not to dead-men, to nourish the grace of God, and
to increase it. The second thing is, that we be altogether fasting, that is,
at the least from midnight forward we have taken nothing: no not so much as a
little water. The third, that we well understand what we do, and that we have
devotion unto so great a mystery: and therefore this sacrament is not given to
children, neither to fools, neither to any other that has not the use of
reason.


S How often ought we to co^municat?


M The bond of holy Church is to communicate at least once a year, and that at
Easter. Yet it is convenient to do it oftener, so it be by the advice of our
ghostly father.


S Declare now unto me, the fruit which is gotten by this Sacrament, and the
end for which it was instituted.


M For three causes: Christ our Lord has instituted this most noble Sacrament.
First, that it should be the meat of souls: secondly, that it should be a
sacrifice of the new law: thirdly, that it might be a perpetual memory of his
Passion, and so a most dear pledge of his love toward us.


S What effect does it work in respect it is the meat of souls?


M It works that effect which corporal meat works in bodies, and therefore
it is given to us in form of bread: for like as bread conserueth natural
heat, wherein the life of the body consists: so this most holy Sacrament,
when it is worthily received conserueth and increases charity, which is the
life and health of the soul.


S What effect does it work as it is a Sacrifice?


M It reconsileth God unto the world, and obteyneth many benifits, not only
for the living, but also for the dead, that are in purgatory. You must
understand that in the old Testament they offered unto God many Sacrifices of
beasts, but in the new Testament in place of al those Sacrifices, is succeeded
the Mass, in which by the hands of the Priest is offered unto God, the most
acceptable Sacrifice of the body and blood of his Son, which was signified
in all those sacrifices of the old Testament.


S What effect works it, as the memorial and pledge of the love of our Lord
toward us?


M It makes us mindful of so great a benifite, and in flameth us to love him
again, that has loved us so much. And therefore like as God in the old
Testament, would have the Jews not only to eat Manna, which he sent them from
Heaven, but also have them keep one vessel full of the same, in memory of all
the benefits he showed them, when he brought them out of Egypt: so Christ would
that this most holy Sacrament, should not only be eaten by us, but also that
it be conserved on the Altar, and sometimes carried in Procession, that when
soever we see it, we may remember his infinite goodness toward us. But in
particular the holy Mass is a brief representation of the whole life of our
lord, that the same may still remain in our minds.


S I would know how the Mass is a representation of the life of Christ, that
thereby I may become more devout and attentive, when I am present thereat.


M I will declare it briefly. The Introitus (or beginning) of the Mass, does
signify the desire which the holy Fathers had of the coming of our Lord. The
Keyrieleison signifies the voice of the same Patriarchs and Prophets,
demanding of God, this coming of christ, so long desired. Gloria in excelsis,
signifies the Nativity of our Lord. The prayers next following, signify his
presentation and offering in the Temple. The Epistle, which is read at the
lift end of the Altar, signifies the preaching of S. John Baptist. Who invited
al men to Christ. The Gradual signifies the conversion of the people by the
preaching of S. John. The gospel, which is read at the right end of the altar,
signifies the preaching of our Lord, which brings us from the left hand unto
the right: that is, from temporal things to eternal, and from sin to grace:
lights also are carried, and incense burned to signify that the holy Gospel
has lightened the world, and filled it with the good sauors of the glory of
God. The Creed signifies the first conversion of the holy Apostles, and other
Disciples of our Lord. The secret prayers after the Creed signify the secret
practices of the Jews against Christ. The Preface, which is songue with a loud
voice, and ends with Osanna in excelsis, signifies the solemn entrance
which Christ made into Jerusalem on Palme-sunday. The Canon signifies the
Passion of our Lord. The elevation of the holy Hoaste and Chalice,
represents to us, that Christ was elevated upon the Cross. The Pater noster,
signifies, the prayer of our Lord whiles he did hang on the Cross: the
breaking of the Host signifies the wound made by the spear percing his side.
The Agnus Dei, signifies the lamentation of the Mary's, at the taking down of
Christ from the Cross. The communion of the Priest, signifies the burial of
Christ. The Post-communion song with joy, signifies the Resurrection. Ite
missa est, signifies the Asce^sion. The benediction of the Priest signifies
the coming of the Holy Ghost. The Gospel at the end of Mass, signifies the
preaching of the holy Apostles, when being filled with the holy Ghost, they
began to preach the Gospel through the whole world, and so begane the
conversion of the Gentiles.


Of the Sacrament of Penance.
S THERE follows now the fourth Sacrament, which is called Penance: declare
therefore, I pray you, what this Sacrament is?


M Penance signifies three things. First it signifies a certain virtue by
which a man repents himself of his sins, and the contrary vice is called
impenitence, to wit, when a man will not repent, but will persevere in sin.
Secondly we call penance the pain and affliction, which a man takes to
satisfy to God, for the evil he has done, And so we say that one does great
penance, because he afflicts himself much, with fastings and other
austeritie. Thirdly penance signifies a Sacrament, instituted by Christ to
remit sins of those, who after Baptism have lost the grace of God, and do
again repent the same, and desire to return into his favor.


S Wherein does this Sacrament principally consist?


M In two things: in the confession of the sinner, and the absolution of the
Priest. For that christ has made the Priest judges of sins committed after
Baptism, and given them authority in his place, to remitte them, so the
sinner confess them, and be otherwise disposed as he ought to be. So in this
consists the Sacrament, that like as the sinner confesses his sins
exteriorly, and the Priest exteriorly pronounces absolution: so God inwardly
by means of those words of the Priest, loses that soul from the band of
sin, with which it was tied, and restored it to grace, and delivers it from
that it had deserved, to have been cast headlong into hell.


S What is necessary for the receiving of this Sacrament?


M Three things are necessary, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction; Which
are three parts of Penance.


S What means Contrition?


M That the hard-hart of the sinner become soft, and in a certain manner,
break it self with sorrow, for that it has offended God. But in particular,
Contrition contains two things, and the one suffices not without the other.
First, that the sinner be earnestly sorry for all his sins committed after
Baptism: and therefore it is necessary to examine well, and to consider all
his actions, and to be sorrowful, that he has not done them according to the
law of God. Secondly that the sinner have firm purpose to sin no more.


S What means confession?


M The sinner must not be content with only contrition, but he must go to the
feet of the Priest, as Magdalen went unto the feet of Christ, and confess his
sins with truth, not adding nor diminishing, nor mixing any lie; with
simplicity, not excusing himself, nor laying the fault on others, neither
multiplying superfluous words, with integrity, uttering them all, not leaving
any thing for shamfastnes, and telling the number of every sort, and the
circumstances which any way do agrauate the sin, so far as he can remember.
Finally with shamefastness and humility, not recounting his sins, as if he
told an history, but telling them as things deserving shame, and unworthy
of a Christian, and humbly desiring pardon.


S What means satisfaction?


M That the sinner have purpose to do penance, and therefore he must willingly
accept that punishment which his ghostly father shall appoint him, and perform
it with speed, considering that God does him most high favor, in pardoning
him the eternal pain of hell, and is contented with a temporal pain, much
less then his sins have deserved.


S Tell me now, what fruit this Sacrament brings?


M We reap four very great commodities by this Sacrament. The first is that
which was said even now, that God does pardon us the sins committed after
Baptism, and does change the eternal pain of hell, into a temporal pain,
to be suffered in this life, or in Purgatory. The second, that the good works
which we had wrought, during the time we were in grace, and were lost by sin,
are restored to us by means of this Sacrament. The third is, that we be
loosed from the band of Excommunication, if perhaps we were tied therewith. For
you must know that Excommunication is a most grievous punishment, which
depriueth us of the prayers of Holy church, of lawfully receiving the
sacraments, likewise of conuersing with faithful people, and finally of holy
burial, and from this so terrible a punishment, we are delivered, by the
Sacrament of penance, according to the authority, which the Confessors have of
the Bishop or of the Pope. Albeit this absolution from Excommunication may
also be given without the Sacrament, by the Prelate, though he be no Priest.
The fourth and last fruit is, that we are made capable of the indulgences
which the Popes do often give.


S. What is meant by indulgences?


M. Indulgence is a Liberty which God does use by means of his Vicar, with his
faithful, by pardoning their temporal pain, either all or some part, which
they were to suffer for their sins in this life, or in purgatory.


S. What is required for the gaining of Indulgence?


M. That a man be in the grace of God, and therefore he must confess himself,
if he be in sin: and that he fulfill so much as the Pope appoints, when he
grants the Indulgence.


S. How often is it necessary to receive the Sacrament of Penance?


M. Holy Church commands that every one confess, at the least, once in the
year. But it is further necessary to confess every time that the party
will communicate, if he be in mortal sin. And likewise when he is in peril
of death, or goes about any thing wherein is danger he may die. And besides
these, it is very well done to confess often, to keep clean a man's
conscience, especially for that he that confesses seldom can hardly do it
well.


S. There remains lastly, that Idemaund of you what the works be, that are
grateful to God to satisfy for sins.


M. Al are reduced to three, to-wit, Prayer, Fasting, and Alms. For so the
Angel Raphel taught Tobie, The reason whereof is, for that a man having a
soul, a body, and external goods: by prayer he offers unto God the goods of
the soul, by fasting, the goods of the body, by alms the external goods. By
prayer is understood the hearing of Mass, saying of the seven Psalms, the
Offfice of the dead, and other like things. By fasting is understood all
corporal austeritie, as wearing of heare-cloth, whipping, lying on the ground,
pilgrimages, and the like. By alms, is understood, all other works of
charity, and service done to our neighbor, for the love of God.


S What is required to fast aright?


M Three things are required: to eat once only in the day: and that about
midday, and the longer it is deferred the better: and to abstain from flesh,
and in Lent, from eggs, and whit meats.


S Whether is it better to make satisfaction our selves to God, by these works,
or to take Indulgence?


M It is better that our selves satisfy by these words, because by Indulgence
is satisfied only, for the bond of pain, or punishment, but by these works
we do both satisfy, and withal merit eternal life: but best of all is, to
use both their helps, satisfying our selves so much as we can, and withal
taking Indulgences.


Of the Sacrament of extreme Unction.
S What is Extreme Unction?


M Extreme Unction, is a Sacrament, which our Lord instituted for the sick. It
is called Unction, because it consists in annoynting the sick with holy
Oil, and receyting over him certain prayers. And it is called Extreme, as
being the last amongst the Unctions, which are used in the Sacraments of the
church. For the first unction is given in Baptism, the second in confirmation,
the third in Priesthood, the last in sickness: and it may also be called extreme
for that it is given at the end of the life


S What be the effects of this Sacrament?


M They are three. The first is remission of sins, that remain sometimes after
the other Sacraments, to wit, those which the party did not remember or not
know, and which, if he had known and remembered, he would willingly have
repented, and confessed them. The second is, to co^sort the sick, and to make
him stronger in spirit in that time, when he finds himself oppressed with
bodily infirmities, and with temptations of the devil. The third is, to restore
the health of the body, if that be expedient for the eternal salvation of the
same sick person. And these three effects are signified by the oil, which is
used in this Sacrament, for that oil refreshes, strengthens and heals.


S At what time ought this Sacrament to be received?


M In this, many do commit great error, who will not take this Sacrament but
when they are in departing this life: for the true time to take it is, when the
physicians judge the disease to be dangerous, for when humane remedies seem to
be insufficient, the celestial remedies are chiefly to besought for. And so
sometimes it happens, that by the means of this holy oil, the sick party
does recover health, therefore as this Sacrament ought not to be demanded,
when there is no danger to die: so ought it not to be deferred so long, till
there be no hope remaining. And this is the cause why holy oil is not given
to those that are put to death by justice, because such are neither sick, nor
have hope of life.


Of the Sacrament of Order.
S What is the Sacrament of Order?


M It is a Sacrament in whtch power is given, to consecrate the most holy
Eucharist, and to minister the other Sacraments to the people: or to serve by
proper offiee, those that have received such power. And it is called Order,
because there are many degrees in this Sacrament, one subordinate to an other.
As Priests, Deacons, and other inferiors. But of these there is no need to
tell you any more, seeing this Sacrament does not pertain to all, but only to
men of years and learning, who are not to learn the Christian doctrine, but
rather it belongs to them to teach others.


Of the Sacrament of Marriage.
S What is the Sacrament of Matrimony?


M The Sacrament of Matrimony, is the lawful joining of man and woman in
holy wedlock: which signifies and represents the Union of Christ with his
Church, by the Incarnation: and the union of God with the soul by grace.


S What effects works this Sacrament?


M First it gives grace to the husband and the wife, to comport themselves
well, and to love each other spiritually, as Christ loves his Church, and as
God loves a faithful and just soul. Secondly, it conferreth grace, to know
and to desire to bring up their children in the fear of God. Thirdly, it
produces a bond between the husband and the wife so straight, that it is not
possible to be dissolved, like as between Christ and his Church. And hereof
it comes that no body can dispense that the husband leave his first wife,
and take an other, neither that the wife leave her first husband, and take an
other.


S What is necessary to the making of Marriage?


M Three things are necessary. First that the parties be without impediment to
be joined together; that is, that they be not kinsfolks within the fourth
degree; that they have no solemn vow of chastity, nor the like. Secondly,
that in contracting of Matrimony, there be witnesses, and that in particular,
the Curate or proper Pastor be present, or (as we call him) the Parrish Priest.
Thirdly that the consent of both parties be free, not forced by any great
fear; and that it be expressed by words, or some equivalent sign. And if
any of these three things shall be wanting the Marriage is not of force.


S Whether is it better to take the Sacrament of matrimony or to keep
virginity?


M The Apostle S. Paul has cleared this doubt, having written, that who
joins himself in Marriage does well, but he that does not join himself, but
keeps virginity does better. And the reason is, because Marriage is a thing
humane, virginity is Angelical. Marriage is according to nature, Virginity is
above nature. And not only virginity but widowhood also is better then
marriage. Therefore whereas our Savior said in a parable, that the good seed
yielded in one field thirty fold fruit; in an other threescore, in an other a
hundred fold: the holy Doctors have declared, that the thirty fold fruit is
of Matrimony, the threescore fold of widowhood, hundereth fold of virginity.


Cap. X. Of virtues in general.
You have declared the four principal parts of Christian Doctrine: I desire
to know, if there be any thing else to learn?

M The necessary things to be known, are those four which I have already
showed you. But there be some other things profitable also, to the end we
pretend of obtaining eternal salvation, to wit, Virtues and Vices, good works
and sins. For albeit we have spoken already of these things in general, in
the declaration of the Creed, and of the Commandments, yet it will be very
profitable to speak of them more distinctly and in particular.


S Tell me then what is virtue?


M Virtue is a quality which is received in the soul, and makes a man good.
For as science makes a man a good Philosopher, and art makes one a good
artificer: so virtue makes a good man, and causes him to do that which is
good, and that with facility, readiness and perfection. Whereas he that has
not virtue, though he may sometimes do well, yet he shall not do it without
difficulty and imperfection, whereof to give you some example, virtue is like
to art, and practice. For you see one that has art, to play on the Citerone or
Lute, plays both well and with facility, although he never look upon the
strings, where as an other that has not the art, or has not practice, may
well touch the strings, and make them sound, but he shall neither do it
readily nor so well. Even so he that has the virtue (for example) of
Temperance, fasted with great facility and cheerfulness, when it is
needful, and he fasteth perfectly, expecting the convenient hour, and eating
meats appointed, and once only, but he that has not this virtue, or
contrariwise is a glutton, it seems a death to him to fast, and if perhaps
he fast, he can not well expect the due hour of dinner, and after at night,
in place of a drinking as the custom is, he will make so large a collation, as
wants little of a supper.


S How many virtues be there?


M The virtues are very many: but the more principal, and to which all the
rest are reduced, are seven, to wit the three Theological, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, and four Cardinal, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance:
and according to this number, there are seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
the Euangelical Beatitudes, which guide us to the perfection of Christian life.
There be also seven works of mercy corporal: and seven spiritual. Of all
which I will give you a brief instruction.


Chap. II. Of the Theological Virtues.
S What is faith?


M Faith is the first of the Theological virtues, that is, of those virtues
which have immediate relation to God. And the proper office of faith is, to
illuminate and eleuate the understanding, to believe firmly all that God, by
his Church, reueileth unto us: although it be otherwise heard and above
natural reason.


S What is the cause, that we must believe matters of faith so firmly?


M The cause is, for that faith does rely upon infallible verity, for so much
as all that faith proposes unto us, is reueiled from God, and God is verity
it self. Wherefore it is impossible that, which God says, should be false.
And so when faith proposes any thing unto us, which appears contrary to
reason, as for example, that a virgin should bring forth a child, it is
necessary to consider that human reason is feeble, and may easily be
deceived, but God can not be deceived nor deceive us.


S What is necessary to be believed, by this virtue of faith?


M It is necessary to believe distinctly, all the Articles of the Creed, which
before I have declared. And specially those Articles, whereof Feasts are kept,
every year in holy Church: as the Incarnation of our Lord, the Nativity,
the Passion, the Resurrection, the Ascension, the coming of the Holy Ghost,
and the most Holy Trinity. Moreover we must be ready to believe, all that
shall be declared unto us, by holy Church. And finally in all out ward
behavior, to shun and avoid those things, which have any show of
infidelity, as to carry the habit of a Turk, or of the Jews, the eating of
flesh on days forbidden as Heretics do, and such like. For that it is
necessary, to confess the true faith, not only in heart and with mouth but
also with exterior deeds, to show our selves to dislike of all Sects, that are
contrary to holy Church.


S What is hope?


M Hope is the second Theological virtue, so called, because it also has
immediate relation to God. For as by faith we believe in God, so by hope, we
trust or hope in God.


S What is the office of Hope?


M It is to eleuate our mind to hope for eternal felicity. And because, this
is so heigh a benefit, that it was not possible to reach thereto by human
ability, therefore God gives us this supernatural virtue, that by it we may
trust, to attain to so great a good.


S Whereupon is this hope grounded, and whereupon does it rely?


M It is grounded, and does rely upon the infinite goodness and mercy of
God, whereof we have most certain signs: seeing he has given us his own
Son, and by his means adopted us for his children, and promised us the
inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, if we do works comfortable to the
dignity received, and has also given us grace and sufficient help, to do such
works.


S What is Charity?


M It is the third Theological virtue, having immediate relation to God: by
this virtue our soul is elevated to love God above all things. Not only as
Creator and Author of al our natural good, but also as the g^ of grace and of
glory, which are supernatural.


S I would know, whether charity be also extended unto creatures?


M Charity is properly extended unto all men, and to all things, which God has
made. But with this difference, that God is to be loved for himself, he being
infinitely good, and it is further extended, to all other things, which are to
be loved, for the love of God. And in particular our neighbor, our parents or
friends are not only to be understood, but also every man though he would be
our enemy, because every man is the Image of God, and for the same is to be
loved.


S Is Charity a great virtue?


M It is the greatest of all others, and it is so great, that whosoever has
it, can not lose his salvation if he first lose not charity. And he that has
it not, can by no means be saved, though he had all the other virtues, and
gifts of God.


Of the cardinal virtues.
S WHAT is Prudence?


M It is the first of the four Cardinal virtues, which have this name,
because they be principal virtues, and as fountains of all the other moral and
human virtues. For that Prudence governs the understanding, Justice
governs the will. Fortitude governs the irascible power, And Temporance
governs the appetite of concupiscence.


S What is the office of Prudence?


M It is to show the due end of every action, and the convenient means and
all the circumstances, to wit, the time, the place, the manner, and such like;
that the work may be wei done in all points and perfectly. And therefore it is
called the mystris of other virtues, and is as salt to meats, and as the sun
in the world.


S Which be the vices contrary to Prudence?


M Virtue consists in the midst, and has always two contrary vices,
which are in the extremes, One vice contrary to Prudence, is Imprudence, that
is, inconsideration and rashness: and it is in those, that do not consider what
they have to do; and so either they look not to the true end, or they use not
the true means. The other vice is subtlety: or carnal policy: and it is in
those that with great diligence think of the end, and of the means, but they
direct al things to their private commodity, for the gaining of some worldly
benefit. And therefore they endeavor subtly, to deceive their neighbor, to
bring to pass their business to their own purpose. But in the end it will
appear, that such are most impudent, losing the most sovereign good, for the
love of things of no impotence.


S What is Justice, and what is the office thereof?


M Justice is a virtue, which gives every one that is his own: and so the
office thereof is to make things just, and to put equality in human
contracts: which is the foundation of quietness and of peace. For if each one
would be content with his own, and not covet that belongs to an other, there
should never be war nor discord.


S What be the vices contrary to Justice?


M They are two. One is Injustice, that is, when one takes that which
belongs to an other, or in co^tracts gives less then he ought, or takes
more then is due to him. The other is too much justice, that is, when one is
too rigorous, and wreasteth things by pretense of justice more severely then
reason requires. For in some cases, it is necessary, that compassion be
mixed with justice. As if a poor man, can not pay all he owes presently,
without his great loss or damage, it is a reasonable thing and just, that he
have a little time granted him: and to deny him the same is to great rigor.


S What is Fortitude, and what is the office thereof?


M It is a virtue which makes us ready to ouercom al difficulties that would
otherwise hinder us from doing well: and it reaches even to suffering death,
when it is necessary for the glory of god, or for performing our duty: and so
al holy martirs have triu^phed over their persecutors, by this virtue: and in
like manner al valiant soldiars, which in just wars have made so great proof of
their valor, have become glorious by the same virtue


S what be vices contrary to fortitude?


M They are cowardlines, and audacious temeritie. For cowardlines makes one to
yield too easily; Which comes of the lack of fortitude: and audatious
temeritie, makes one put himself in danger, when there is no need. Which (so
to term it) is too much fortitude. And it deserves no praise but blame, and
therefore is no virtue but a vice.


S What is Temperance, and what is the office thereof?


M Temperance is a virtue that bridleth sensual delights, and makes a man to
content himself, with such pleasures, and in that measure, as reason allows.


S What are the vices contrary to Temperance?


M They are Intemperance, and Insensibility. Intemperance is, when one is too
much given to delights, and therefore commits excesses in eating, and such
things as do hurt both the soul and the body. Insensibilitie is, when a man
uses the other extreme, and so flies all pleasures, that he will not eat
things necessary for his health, to avoid that little delectation, which
convenient meats do naturally bring. But the vice of inte^perance is much more
common amongst men, then the vice of insensibilitie. And therefore all holy
men, by word and example, have exhorted us to fasting, and to mortification of
the flesh.


Cap. XIII. Of the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost.
S Which be the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost?


M They are those which the Prophet Isaie has taught us, to wit, Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and the Fear of our
Lord.


S Whereto do these gifts help us?


M To attain to the perfection of Christian life: For they are as the ladder,
by which we clime up, from the state of sin by diverse degrees, even to the
highest of sanctity. But you must know, that the Prophet numbreth these
steps coming downwards. For he did see as it were a ladder which came from
Heaven. Nevertheless we will recoont the ascending, as going upwards and
ascending from earth to heaven. The first degree then is, the Fear of our
lord, which does terrify a sinner, when he thinks that he has God almighty
his enemiet the second degree is Piety: For he that fears punishment which
God threatens against a sinner, begins to become godly, and desires to
obey and serve God, and to work his holy will in all things. The third
degree is Knowledge, for that he who desires to work the will of God,
demands of God that he will teach him, his holy commandments, and God
partly by Preachers, partly by books, and partly by inward inspirations,
teaches him all that is necessary. The fourth degree is Fortitude, for he
that knows, and is willing in all things to serve God, finds many
difficulties and tentatio^s of the world the flesh and the devil. And therefore
god at that time of need gives him the gift of Fortitude, that he may overcome
al difficulties. The fifth degree is Counsel, for when the devil cannot
prevail by force, he turns himself to decepts, and under pretense of good,
provoke the just man to fall: yet God does not abandon him, but gives him
the gift of Counsel, by which he prevails against the deceipts of the enemy:
the sixth is the gift of Understanding, for when a man is well exercised in
active life, and has had many victories against the devil, god does draw him
and exalt him to contemplative life, and with the gift of understanding,
makes him to understand and penitrate divine Mysteries. The seventh, is the
gift of Wisdom, which is the co^plement of perfection For he is wise that
knows the first cause of all things, and according thereto, forms al his
actions: which none can do, but he that joyneth perfect charity, to the gift
of understanding. For by the understanding he knows the first cause, and by
charity, he directs and disposes all things unto it, as unto the last
end. And because wisdom joyneth the affection to understanding, therefore it
is called wisdom, that is, sauorie knowledge, as Saint Barnard teaches us.


Cap. XIIII. Of the eight beatitudes.
S What are the eight beatitudes, which our Lord taught us in the Gospel?


M They are an other ladder to clime unto perfection, like unto that of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost. For that in seven sentences, are contained seven
degrees, to arrive unto beatititude. And lastly, the eight does give us a sign
to know whether a man have ascended up these degrees or no.


S Declare unto me this ladder briefly?


M Christ our Lord, in the three first degrees, teaches us to take away the
impediments of perfection, whereby we ascend unto felicity. The general and
ordinary impediments are three; the desire of goods, of honors, and pleasures.
So Christ says in the first degree, that the poor in spirit are blessed, that
is, those who willingly despise goods. In the second he says, that the meek
are blessed, that is, those that give place to all, not resisting those, that
put themselves before, and thrust them behind. In the third he says, that
those are blessed that weep, that is, those that seek not the delights, and
pleasures of the world, but attend to do penance, and to be wail their sins.
In other two degrees he teaches us the perfection of the active life, which
consists in fulfilling all that we are bound unto by justice, and by
charity. Therefore he says in the fourth degree, that those are blessed, that
hunger and thirst justice. And in the fifth he says, that the merciful are
blessed. In the last two, he draws us to perfection of the contemplative
life: and therefore he says in the sixth, that they are blessed, that have a
clean heart, for they shall see God, that is, they shall see him in the life to
come, in glory; and in this they shall know him by grace of contemplation: and
in the seventh he says, that the peaceable are blessed because they shall be
called the children of God; that is, blessed are they who having added perfect
charity, to contemplation, have made al their repose in God, and pacified all
the Kingdom of the soul, and so they shall be children of God, like unto their
Father, holy and perfect. In the eight sentence no new degree of perfection is
contained, as S. Augustine does well say, but there is declared a manifest
sign, to know if one be arrived to perfection: and this sign is to suffer
willingly unjust persecution, for the like as that gold is tried in the
furnace, so is a just and perfect man in tribulations.


Chap. XV. Of the seven Works of mercy corporal, and seven spiritual.
S IT remains that you declare to me the works of mercy, as well corporal
as spiritual.


M The works of mercy corporal are seven. Whereof we have six in the holy
gospel; to wit, to give meat to such as have hunger: to give drink to such as
have thirste, to cloth the naked: to harbor pilgrims: to visit the sick: to
comfort the imprisoned. The seventh work, which is to bury the dead, holy
Tobie has taught us, and the Angel Raphael. The works of mercy spiritual are
also seven? to instruct the ignorant: to give counsel to the doubtful: to
comfort the afflicted: to correct such as err: to pardon offenses: to bear
with other men's defects: and to pray to God for the quick and dead.


S Is there any cause that excuses us, from the works of mercy?


M Three things may excuse us. The first is when a man has not the means to
do them: and so that good Lazarus, the poor beggar, of whom it is read in the
Gospel, did no corporal works of mercy, because himself had need, in a
manner of all those works, and so was crouned for his patience. And this is
the ordinance of God, that the rich may save themselves, by showing mercy, and
the poor by the way of patience, and so he that has not knowledge or prudence
for himself, is not bound to teach or give counsel to others. The second
cause is, when a man serves God in a higher sort, then the active life is,
and by reason of that state, has no occasion to do many works of charity,
so the holy Eremits, that remain enclosed in solitary places, or in their
cells, to contemplate heavenly things, are not bound to leave that holy
exercise, and go to seek those, to whom they may do works of mercy. The
third cause is, when a man does not find any that has notorious need of his
mercy: for that we are not bound to succor any but those, who can not help
themselves, or have not others that will and can help them. True it is, that
perfect mercy does not expect the time of the bond, but is ready to succor
in the best manner it can, and all that it can.


S It seems to me that all men may work the last work of mercy, that is,
to pray to God for our neighbor?


M So it is, and therefore the holy Eremits do also the works of mercy, for
that they pray to god that he give his grace to al those that need it.


Chap. XVI. Of Vices and sins in general.
S IT is now time that you teach me, what vice and sin is, to fly from it:
like as you have instructed me in virtues and good works, to obtain them.


M Sin is nothing else but a voluntary committing, or omitting against the
law of God: where you have to consider, that three things are required to a
sin. First, that there be some act committed, or omitted, that is, to do and
work a thing forbidden, or not to do a thing commanded. As for example, to
blaspheame is a committing, not to hear Mass is an omission. Secondly is
required, that this committing, or omitting be against the law of God: for that
the law of God is the rule of well-working: like as the art of a Maison, is
the rule of making a Wall well: And therefore as a Maison is not a good Maison,
and makes not a Wall well, when he works not according to art: so a man
lives not well, and is not a good man, when he follows not the law of God.
And by the law of God, is not only understood, that which he has given by
himself, as the ten commandments are, but that also, which he gives us by
his vicar in earth, the Pope his holiness, and other superiors, as well
spiritual as temporal: because al are the ministers of God, and have
authority from him: thirdly, is required, that committing, or omitting be
voluntary: for whatsoever is done without consent of the will, is no sin. As
for example, if one blaspheme when he sleeps, or has not the use of reason,
or probably knows not, that such a word is blasphemy: in such a case a man
sins not: because there is no consent of the will.


S I have understood, what sin is, now tell me what vice is?


M Vice is an evil habit, or an evil custom of sinning, procured by often
sinning. Whereof comes, that a nan sins more easily: and with more boldness
and alacrity. As (for example) we do call one a blasphemer, or a gamester,
when he is wont to blaspheme, or uses gamming. So that to blaspheme is a sin,
and to be a blasphemer is a vice. And so we may say of all the other sins.


S Is sin a great evil?


M It is the greatest evil that can be found. Yea rather, it only is absolutely
evil, and displeases God more then any thing else, which appears by this,
that God spares not to destroy and loose the most noble things that he has,
to punish finne. If a Prince had a vessel of silver, or of gold most fair and
most precious, and finding in it some stinking liquore, should be so
displeased there with, that he should break it and cast it into the bottom of
the Sea, you would doubtless say, that Prince had a wounderfull great hate
against that liquore. So God has made two most precious vessels: one of
silver, which is man, and one of gold which is an Angel. And for that he has
found this stinking liquore of sin, in the one and in the other, he has
broken them, and cast into the bottom of hell to perpetual misery, all those
Angels that sinned, and daily casts into the same place of perdition, all
those men that die in their And once for the sins of the world, he brought upon
it the Deluge, and drowned all, except Noe and his family that lived justly.


S How many sorts of sins be there?


M Sin is of two sorts. For one is called Original sin, and the other
Actual. And actual sin is likewise of two sorts; one mortal, and the other
venial.


Cap. XVII, Of Original sin.
S What is original sin?


M Original sin is that in which we are borne: and it comes unto us by
succession from our first father Adam. For you have to know, that when God made
the first man, and the first woman, called Adam and Eve, he gave them seven
gifts. First, he gave them his grace, by which they were just, and the friends
of God, and his adopted children. Secondly, he gave them great knowledge, how
to do well and to shun evil. Thirdly, he gave them obedience of the flesh
to the spirit, that it should not be moved to unlawful desires against
reason. Fourthly, he gave them promptnes and great facility to do well, and
to fly evil, and but one most easy commandment to observe. Fifthly, he
freed them from all labor, and fear. For the earth brought forth fruits
sufficient for man's life of it self: neither was there any thing that could
hurt man: Sixthly, he made them immortal, that is, that they should never have
dyed, if they had not sinned. Seauenthly, he would after some time have
translated the^ into Heaven, to such an eternal and glorious life, as Angels
have. But the first man and woman, inueigled by the Devil, did not observe
that commandment, and so they sinned against God, and thereby lost those seven
gifts, which I spoke of. And because God gave them those gifts, not only for
them selves, but also for all their posterity, therefore they lost them, for
themselves and for us all: and made us partakers of their sin, and of all
their miseries: as we should have been of all their graces, and other
benefits, if they had not sinned. This then is Original sin, an emnitie with
God, and a privation of his grace, with which privation we are borne. Whereof
proceeds ignorance, evil inclinations, difficulty to do well, and facility
to do evil, the pain and travel to provide to live, the fears and periles in
which we remain, most certain death of the body, and also eternal death in
hell, if before we dye, we be not delivered of sin, and return not into the
savor of God.


S What remedy have we against this Original sin?


M It is already said before, that the remedy is the Passion and death of
Christ our Lord. For so God would that he that should satisfy for the sin
of Adam, should be himself without sin: and the same was God and man, and so
he was infinitely acceptable to God, and did obey, not in an easy thing, as
that was, which was commanded to Adam, but in a most hard thing, as was the
ignominious death of the Cross. And this remedy is applied to us by holy
Baptism, as has bin said. And albeit God does not straight-waies render unto
us, all those seven gifts, yet he has restored to us, the most principal
which is his grace, by means whereof, we are made just, the friends and
children of God and heirs of Heaven. The other gifts shall be restored unto us
hereafter with great increase in the other life, if we behave our selves well
in this.


Cap. XVIII. Of mortal and venial sin.
S DEclare unto me now, what is actual sin, and how one is mortal and an
other venial.


M Actual sin is that which we commit by our own will, when we are come
to the use of reason. As to steal, to kill, to swear falsely, and such like
things, contrary to the law of God. And it is mortal sin, when it depriueth
us of the grace of God, which is the life of the soul, and makes one worthy
of eternal death in hell. It is venial sin, when it displeases God, but not
so much that it depriueth us of his grace and meriteth punishment, but not
eternal.


S How shall I know, whether the sin be mortal or venial?


M To know when a sin is mortal, you must observe two rules, one is, that
the sin be contrary to the charity or love of God, or of our neighbor. The
other, that it be with full consent of the will. For when either of these two
things is wanting, it is not mortal but venial. And a sin is then said to
be aagainst charity, when it is against the law in a matter of weight, as
when it is a sufficient offense to break friendship: but when it is in a small
matter, such as ordinarily breaks not friendship: It is not then against
charity: but is said, not to be according to charity. And so such as commonly
breaks friendship is against the law, because it is against charity, which
is the end of the law, such as commonly breaks not friendship, is not against
the law, but not acording to the law, because it is not against charity, but
not according to charity. Take an example to steal a great quantity of
money, is a mortal sin: because it is against the law of God, being in a
matter of weight, and in the judgment of most men sufficient to break
friendship, and so is against charity: but to steal a farthing, or a pin, or
a like thing, is not a mortal sin, but a venial, because it is in a small
matter: which although it be not according to charity, yet it is not against
charity: because it is not a thing that in reason can break friendship. In
like manner we may say of being voluntary. For when a thing is against the
law, in a matter of weight, and fully, voluntary, it is a mortal sin: but
if it be not fully voluntary, as if one have a thought, or a sudden desire to
steal, or to kill, or to blaspheme, and presently perceives his error, before
he fully consent with his will, it is only a venial sin. Therefore a man must
stand upon his guard, and presently as he is aware of an evil thought, or
desire, he must drive it away, before they give consent.


Chap. XIX. Of the seven Capital sins.
S I Desire now to know, which be the most principal sins, to the end I may
fly them with more diligence.


M Some sins are more principal, because they are as fountains or roots of
others, and therefore called capital, and these are seven. Others are more
principal for that they are more hard to be pardoned, and are called sins
against the Holy Ghost, and they are six. Finally there are others more
principal, because they are more manifestly enormious, and against all reason,
and therefore it is said, that they cry for revenge to Heaven, and they are
four.


S Which are the Capital sins?


M They are these, Pride, or (as others call it) Vainglorie, Covetousness,
Lechery, Envy, Glutonie, Anger and Sloth.


S Wherefore are they called capital?


M They are not called capital, because they are mortal: for many sins are
mortal, and are not capital, as blasphemy and murder; and many capital,
which are not always mortal as gluttony, anger and sloth. But they are called
capital, because they are heads of many others, which proceed from them, as
branches from the root, and rivers from the fountains.


S What is Pride, what sins does it bring forth, and what is the remedy
against it?


M Pride is a sin, by which a man thinks himself to be more then he is, and
so prefers himself above others, not willing to have others a boue him nor
equal with him. The sins which it produces, are vain glory, and vaunting
of him self, contending with others, discord, disobedience, and the like. The
remedy is to attend with all diligence to holiehumilitie, that is, to know
that a man is nothing of him self and that al we have, is the gift of God, and
to think that others are better then we, and therefore to esteem our selves
less then others, in mind to submit our selves to all, and outwardly to honor
all others according to their degrees. It helps also to consider, that pride
makes a man like the devil, and that it pleases God highly: whereupon it is
written, that God resists proud men, and boweth himself to humble men: he
confounds the proud and exalts the humble.


S What is Covetousness, what are the sins which come of it, and the remedy
against it?


M Covetousness is a disordinate affection toward riches, and it consists
in three things. First in desiring the goods of others, not being content with
his own. Secondly in desiring more then is sufficient and not willing to give
the superfluous to the poor, as we are bound. Thirdly, in loving those goods,
we have too much, though they be our own, and not superfluous. And this
appears when a man is not found ready to loose his goods, in a case that is
necessary, for the honor of God. And therefore Saint PAVL says, that
covetousness is (in some sort) Idolatry, for that the covetous man prefers
his goods before God, seeing he is contented rather to loose God then his
goods. The sins then which proceed of covetousness are many, as Theft,
Robrie, deceipts in buying and selling, cruelty toward the poor, and other
like: the remedy is to exercise our selus in the virtue of liberality,
considering that in this life, we are travelers and pilgrims: and that
therefore it is much better for us, not to load our selves with goods, but to
divide them, with our fellow travelers, who may carry them unto our country:
and so being in part disburdened, we may make our voyage more easily.


S What is Lechery, what sins does it bring forth, and what is the remedy
against it?


M Leacherie is a disordinate affection toward cardinal pleasures and
delights. The sins which proceed from it, are Blindness of mind, Temeritie
and Inconstancy, as also Adultery, Fornication, dishonest words, and all
other uncleanness. The remedy is to be well exercised in fasting, in prayer,
and in flying evil company: because these are the means to keep chastity: and
above all for men not to trust themselves, for their own virtue and holiness,
but to stand aloof from dangers, and to keep well their senses, considering
that the most strong Sampson, the most holy David, and the most wise Solomon,
were deceived with this vice, and fell into great blindness of mind, and chiefly
Salomo^, who was brought to adore all the Idols of his co^cubins


S What is Envy, what sins do come of it, and what remedy is there against
it?


M Envy is a sin, by which one is displeased at the good of an other: for
that it seems to diminish his own greatness. Where you have to consider, that
when the good of an other displeases you, for that he is not worthy to have
it, or because he uses it not well, it is no sin. Likewise, when you are
displeased, that you also have not the good, which others have, and chiefly
virtue, devotion, and the like goodness, this also is no sin, but rather is a
holy and commendable emulation. But when it displeases you, that an other
has some goodness, because it seems to you that it darkneth your glory,
and you would that he had it not, to the end he were not your equal or your
better, it is the sin of Envy. And it brings forth many sins, as perverse
judgment, joy of an other man's evil, murmuring, and detraction. For that the
envious seeks to diminish the good name of his neighbor. And finally,
sometimes it induces to commit murder: as Cain did, who for envy killed his
brother: and the Jews for envy procured the death of our Lord. The remedy,
is to be exercicised in brotherly charity, and often to think that Envy
hurts more him that enuieth, then him that is envied. For that the envious
afflicts and fretteth himself inwardly, and oftentimes God does exalt him
that is envied, by that means by which the envious would have abased him. So
we see that the devil for envy caused man to lose the terrestrial Paradise,
and god by that occasion wrought, that christ came into the world, and so gave
us the celestial paradise: The brothers of the patriarch Joseph, sold him for
envy, and God by that occasion brought to pass, that Joseph became lord of
his brothers. Saul for envy persecuted David, and God caused Saul to lose the
kingdom and gave it to David.


S What is Gluttony, what sins produces it, and what is the remedy against
it?


M Gluttony is a disordinate appetite of eating and drinking: which consists
in taking more meat then is convenient, in seeking too precious meats, in
desiring forbidden meats, as flesh on the Friday and Saturday, in not
exspecting the hour of eating on fasting days, and finally in eating with too
great desire and eagerness. The sins which come of gluttony, are obscurity
of understanding, vain mirth, and babbling, And often of Gluttony, comes
Leacherie, with all the sins which proceed thereof. The remedy is to attend
unto temperance and abstinence, which help both the soul and the body. And
in particular it is most profitable to consider, that the delight of gluttony
is very short and often leaves behind it long pains of the stomach, of the
head, and other like.


S What is anger, what sins does it bring, and what remedy is there against
it?


M Anger is a disordinate desire of revenge. But you must know that moderat
and ordinate anger is good. Whereupon the Psalm says: Be you angry and
sin not. And S. Basil says, that anger is like to a dog, which is good
when he barketh against enemies, but more when he hurts friends. The disorder
of anger consists in three things. First, in desire to be revenged of him
that deserves it not, and that has not offended us. Secondly, in desiring to
revenge by private authority, for that to punish and to use revenge against
malefactors, does not belong to any, but to Superiors, as to the Prince, or
Magistrate. And for so much as God is the Supreme Prince, he says, that to
him revenge principally belongs. Thirdly, in revenging for hatred, and not
for zeal of justce, and in exceeding in the manner, and in other circumstances.
The sins which come of disordinate anger, are contentions, injourious words,
furious behauior, outrageous actions, as of madmen: for immoderat anger is
like to madness. The remedy is to be exercised in the virtues of meekness,
and of patience, considering the examples of holy men and of Christ himself,
who by supporting and suffering, have triumphed more gloriously then worldly
men do by endeavoring to be revenged of their enemies.


S What is Sloth, what sins produces it, and what is the remedy against it?


M Sloth is called in Greek Acidia, and signifies tediousnes, loathsomnes,
and grief to do well. And it is a mortal sin, when one gives and takes
loathsomnes to do well, and is displeased for that he is bound to observe the
commandments of God, and to walk in the way of virtue. The sins which he
produces, are light esteeming the commandments: easelie yielding him self
to vices: desperation of well-doing: hatred and dislike of such as would draw or
force a sinner to leave sin and to take a good way. The remedy is, never to
be idle, to read good books, to consider the great reward which God promises
to those that are diligent and observing his commandments, and the eternal
and intolerable punishments, which is provided for the negligent.


Cap. XX. Of the sins against the Holy Ghost.
What and how many be the sins against the Holy Ghost?

M They are six, to wit, despair of our salvation: presumption to be saved
without merits: to impugn the known truth: envy at an other man's grace:
obstinacy in sin: and final impenitence.


S Wherefore are they called sins against the Holy Ghost?


M Because they are committed upon mere malice, and speacially the third,
which is of all other properly a sin against the Holy Ghost: that is, when a
man knows the truth, and yet will obstinatly hold, and prove that it is not
true. To sin of malice is said to be against the Holy Ghost: because goodness
is attributed to the Holy Ghost, which is contrary to malice: like as to
sin of ignorance, is said to be against the Son of God, to whom wisdom is
atributed: and sinning of frailty is said to be against the Father, to whom
power is attributed.


S What have these sins proper?


M They have this, that they are not pardoned in this world, nor in the other,
as our Lord admonishes us in the Gospel. Which yet is thus understood: that
they are hard to be pardoned: because seldom and hardly those that fall into
these sins, come to true repentance: like as when we say: a disease is
incurable, we will not for all that say, it can not be cured by any means:
but that it is seldom cured, or that ordinarily it is not cured.


Chap. XXI. Of sins that cry unto Heaven.
S HOw many are they, and what be the sins, which cry unto Heaven?


M They are four, to wit, wilful murder: carnal sins against nature:
oppression of the poor, and chiefly of orphans, and widows: and to defraud
workmen of their wages.


S Wherefore is it said, that they cry to Heaven?


M Because the injustice of these sins is so maniefest, that it can not be
covered or hidden by any means.


Chap. XXII. Of The four last things.
S I Would have some general document to fly sin.


M The wise man says, Remember thou the last things, and thou will never
sin. The last things are four, Death, the General Judgment, Hell, and
Heaven.


S Wherefore are these four things called the last?


M Because death is the end of life, and the last thing which is to happen in
this world. Final judgment is the last of all the judgments, that are to be
given: and therefore there is no appealing from it. Hell is the last evil, that
melefactours are to have, and they are to remain therein for ever, without
possibility ever to change. Heaven is the last good, which the good are to
have, and they are never to lose it.


S I would have some considerations, to exercise my self in these last things,
for that remembering my self often of them, I should never sin, as the wise
man says whom you alleged.


M Concerning death, you may consider these four points. First, that death is
most certain, and none can escape it. The second, that the hour of death is
uncertain, and many die when they least think of it. The third, that in
death all the designments of this life do end: and then the vanity of the
world appears. The fourth, that at their death every one repents the evil
he has done, and the omission of good, which he might have done: and therefore
it is great folly to do that, whereof we are sure to repent us. Touching
Judgment, you may consider these points. First, that the judgment shall be
given of a most important matter, to wit, of the chiefest good, or the greatest
evil. Secondly, it shall be given by the highest Judge who knows all things,
and whom none can resist. Thirdly, it shall be given in the presence of the
whole world, where none can hide themselves. Fourthly, there will be no hope to
fly the sentene, or the execution of Gods Justice. Concerning Hell, consider
that it is large, long, high and deep. Large, for that it conteyneth all the
pains that can be imagined. Long, for that they are eternal. High, for that
they are all most bitter in the highest degree. Deep, because they are all
absolute pains, without mixture of any sort of consolation.

Concerning Heaven, consider in like manner, that it is large, for that it
conteyneth all the goodness that can be imagined, and more also then we can
imagine or desire. It is long, because all those Beatitudes are eternal. It is
high, because they are most high and noble, It is deep, because they are pure
good without any mixture of evil. And here you may add, that the commodities
of this life, have no one of these conditions: for that they are few, short,
little, and always mixed with vexations, and troubles of mind. And likewise
the evils of this world are few, short, little, and always tempered with some
consolation. Whereupon you are to conclude, that all those have truly lost their
wits, that for love of the commodities of this life, or for fear of present
tribulations, lose the happiness, or fall into the evils, of the world to come.


FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters, and principal contents of this book.
What Christian Doctrine is, and what are the principal parts thereof. page 1

The declaration of the usual blessing with the sign of the Cross. 5 The
declaration of the Creed 13 And first of the first Article. 20 Of the second.
20 Of the third 24 Of the fourth. 29 Of the fifth 40 Of the sixth. 43 Of the
seventh. 44 Of the eight. 53 Of the ninth, 57 Of the tenth. 68 Of the
eleventh. 64 Of the twelfth. 71 The declaration of our Lords prayer. 77 The
declaration of the Aue Maria. 105 The declaration of the ten command. 111 And
first, of the first commandment. 117 Of the second. 130 Of the third. 145 Of
the fourth 148 Of the fifth. 152 Of the sixth. 156 Of the seventh. 159 Of the
eight. 147 Of the ninth. 253 Of the tenth, 168 Declaration of the precepts of
the church. 201 Declaration of Euangelical counsel. 276 Declaration of the
Sacraments of the church. 279 Of the Sacrament of Baptism 215 Of the Sacrament
of Confirmation. 293 Of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 294 Of the Sacrament of
Penance. 241 Of the Sacrament of Extreme Vnctio^. 217 Of the Sacrament of
Order. 220 Of the Sacrament of Matrimony. 220 Of virtues in general 258 Of
the Theological virtues 231 Of the cardinal virtues 221 Of the seven gifts
of the Holy Ghost. 237 Of the eight Beatitudes. 240 Of the seven works of
mercy corporal and spiritual. 253 A declaration of vices and sins in general.
284 Of mortal and venall sin. 254 Of Original sin 259 Of the seven capital
sin. 296 Of the sins against the Holy Ghost. 243 Of sins that cry to
heaven. 270 Of the four last things. 312
FINIS.

