A True Relation of the birth of three Monsters in the City of Namen in
Flanders: As also Gods Judgment upon an unnatural sister of the poor woman's,
mother of these obortiue children, whose house was consumed with fire from
heaven, and her self swallowed into the earth. All which happened the 16. of
December last. 1608.



A True relation of the birth of three Monsters, in the City of Namen in
Flanders: as also Gods Judgment upon an unnatural sister of the poor woman's,
mother of these obortyue children, whose house was consumed with fire from
heaven, and herself swallowed into the earth. All which happened the 16. of
December last. 1608.
GOd, in his great love to mankind, has ever showed us his suffering mercy,
before his sudden Judgments, and with a fathers love to his offending
children, tells us of our faults, before he chastize us. Many ways has God (of
late) both here at home, as well as in forrayne countries, forewarned us to
repent, before his Judgment lighten upon us, yet we still preseuer in our
vicious kind of living, neglecting his mercy, when we know his Judgment is
irreuocable. So repugnant is frail nature against Divine reason, that our
souls lie wallowing (like Swyne) in all foulness of life and sensual
Concupiscence.

O England, look upon thy self, before thou search into forrayne wonders, and
thou shall find, the Highest is offended with thee: for these tokens of his
wrath, to forewarne thee, have thou felt; mortality through pestilence: he has
(for the seven deadly sins) given thee almost seven years punishment:
strange Inundations of waters, like a second Deluge, have rayned upon the
fruitful earth: fire from heaven has made Churches and steeples, Gods
Beacons, to bid us arm our selves with repentance, against y^ general enemy
to the world, the Devil: frosts have hardened y^ heart of our mother earth, and
have made her so unnatural, that she has almost starued her children, sending
out of her barren womb no fruit, but leane-visaged dearth, to devour those
that she should feed; and now does this monster-feede upon us, and yet we
repent not.

And now look further into the world, and you shall see through the eyes of
your understanding, such apparent tokens of Gods wrath, able to fright ugly
sin, from the hearts of welshaped creation, and make men by Contrition as
pure, as before they were polluted with their fleshly Concupiscence.

IN the City of Namen, in the Low Countries, there dwelt a poor laboring
man, having to his wife a woman of a good birth, and reputed always virtuous
in her living. This poor woman had a sister exceeding rich, one as fully
vicious, as she was virtuous, more proud, then she could be humble. So blind is
Fortune in her gifts, that merit does not guide her, but Chance.

The poor man's wife being great with child, and feeling the pangs of
Childbirth, in all haste sent her husband to her rich sister, to lend her aid
in that extremity, thinking that womanly Charity (if they had not been sisters)
would have made her come and visited her in that time of need and danger.

The poor man being come to his wines sisters house, and speaking with her,
told her the cause of his coming. But she replied, and said, How dare thou
(base beggar) to come to procure me to visit so poor a whore, whose blood and
knowledge I disclayme, as being not my fathers right begotten daughter, but a
bastard? I have friends coming to my house, to make marry with me, and I
shall leave them, and go help to bring more beggars into the world.

The poor man replied, O sister, do not so much wrong your poor sister, as to
term her a bastard, being your mothers daughter.

With that, this enraged shee-deuill struck the poor man with a staff, that
the blood ran about his ears, and commanded her servants to kick him out
of doors, saying. It was a fit reward for a beggar, that will call a
Gentlewoman sister.

Home goes this poor man, with a sorrowful heart, calling to Almighty God for
vengeance on this Monster of her sex, that pitiless woman: And coming to
his wife, told her of the unkindness of her sister. The poor affrighted
woman, through grief and rage, fell presently in labor, and was delivered of
three Monsters, striking a terror to those women employed in that business.

Th^se ill-proportioned children, were a son and two daughters; and the first
that saw this world, was a daughter, that had such dressings, and attire on
the head, by nature of flesh, as women have made by art of Bonelaces, and such
like, with a fleshy Uardingale about the middle of it, as if Nature, having
forsaken her old fashions, had now devised new.

This child, (or rather Monster) cried with a shrill voice, and spoke, saying,
O thou Creator, that gave me this form and life, let me not live here in
this world of Pride, of Lust, of Murder, and all wickedness: return me
suddenly to what I was; for here (I know) is nothing but calamity. And as it
spoke these words, it straightwayes dyed.

The second was a son, with a strange misshapen head, having upon the back
of his right hand, the fashion of a deaths head: And this child said, that
Dearth and Plague should cover the whole World, and that they were sent to give
notice of it to all men. And so speech and life left him together.

The third was a daughter, having about the neck, a Ruff laced, and Cuffes
about the wrests, like the Ruff, all of flesh, so artificial in nature, as if
Nature in her first work had entreated Art to help her: And this child said,
that God would punish the world suddenly, for our manifold transgressions; and
said moreover, that they three were sent to forewarne us of the Lords coming;
and then straight dyed

The mother of these Monsters, through grief and terror, yielded up the ghost,
and left a poor disconsolate husband behind her, to fill ye mouth of rumor,
with these strange unheard of wonders.

But now to show the Justice of God, with his mercyes.

That proud, rich, unnatural sister of this unfortunate mother, at the same
instant time that this poor woman was delivered, had her house, amidst all her
mirth, fired with lightening: and she flying out of it, to save her life, the
willing earth gaped wide, and swallowed her quick, holding it more fit for her
to be in the earth, then on the earth, being so unnatural against nature: And
her wealth and all her substance was quite consumed with that quenchlesse fire,
till Gods Judgment was executed, and then it ceast of it self, doing no
farther damage.

The fame of these wonders having possessed the City, and the truth of them
apparently known, stirred up good motions in the hearts of the Inhabitants, to
Fasting, to Prayer, to Almsdeeds, and such like works of grace and pardon.

The Governors of the City caused it to be printed, as well to give the
country round about knowledge of it, as to continue the remembrance of it
there, that they might still preseuer in the good course they begun.

Thus have I set down briefly these wonders in nature, in the City of Namen in
Flanders, which happned the 16 of December last. 1609.

Faithfully translated, according to the Dutch Copy, printed in the same City.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Simon Stafford, for Richard Bunnian, and are to be sold at
the sign of the red Lion upon London Bridge. 1609.


