CHRIST'S STAR: OR, A CHRISTIAN TREATISE FOR OUR DIRECTION TO OUR SAVIOVR, AND
FOR OUR conjunction with him.

DECLARING CHRIST'S Excellency, our necessity of him, his great love and
manifold mercies bestowed upon us; as also some of our duties.

By W. NARNE P. of Dysert.

2. PETER 3.18. Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to him be glory both now and evermore. Amen.

(...)

Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at their shop, at the sign of the Golden Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1625.

PRVDENTISSIMI AC POTENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS IACOBI, I. DEI GRATIA, MAGNAE
Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis: etc.
Praeclarissimotum Prophetarum Dauidis atque Mosis verbis concepta paraenesis.

1. CHRON. 28.9. Carole fili mi, agnosce Deum patris tui, and cole eum cord
integro, and animo studioso: quia omnia corda exquirit Iehoua, and quodque
figmentum cogitationum intelligit: si exquisiueris eum, invenietur abs te: sed
si dereliqueris eum, reijciet te in perpetuum.

DEVT. 30.19. Quare elige vitam, diligend^ Iehouam Deum tuum, auscultando voci
eius, and adharendo ei, vt vivas tu cum semine tuo.

AD SERENISSIMVM ET ILLVSTRISSIMVM PRINCIPEM CAROLVM MAGNAE BRITANNIAE
PRINCIPEM, etc. FILIVM CHARISSIMVM.
CAROLE mi filj, mea spes,
mea certa voluptas
Delitiaeque patris,
solertj indagine prudens,
Tu patrium cognosce deum,
venerare fidelj
Mente, and sincerj toto conamine cordis.
Quippe parens mundi tacitae molimina mentis
Cuncta videns trutinat, rimatur pectoris altj
Occultas latebras: Quem si digneris honor
Eximio, si rite colas, si semper adorans
Peruigili quaeras studio, tutamine scutj
Faelix, inuenies certo facilemque bonumque:
Sin (quod abesto nefas) co^tempto numine spernes
Munificum patrem, iusta ille accensus ab ira,
Dejiciet fragilem linquens in saecula sontem.
Quare age, quamprimum praelustris praemia vitae
Delige, dum dominum caelique solique potentem
Charu^ habeas, firm teneas, dum iussa capessas
Sospes eris semper, faelix erit aurea proles,
Faelices nati, fortunatique nepotes.
Illustriss. Celsitud. Vestrae Servus addictissimus, G. Narne.

TO THE MOST Illustrious and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain,
Grace in this life, and Glory in the life to come.
Religious and most gracious PRINCE.
THis Treatise, that chiefly concerns Christ Jesus, and directs to him,
the Prince of all glory and of our salvation; does most fitly belong to you a
Prince of such worth, and of so great expectation. Let it please your grace
therefore favorably to accept of the same, which with all humility and
submission, I one of your meanest servants do present unto your Highness: By
such acceptance, as you will give to the world, notable and comfortable
testimony, that you are an earnest imitator of the godly courses of your pious
and Princely father, a Pattern and a Patron of godliness and learning, who
therefore by a Idenius in discursu de virtutibus Principum, in Epistola
nuncupat.
stranger is justly called, Nostri huius saeculi miraculum, and to whom we may
speak, as Varus Germinus that Orator said to Caesar the Emperor, Caesar, qui
apud te audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant; qui non audent, humanitatem.
So you will also give evident and ample declaration, that you are an happy
follower of your heavenly Father, your most blessed Creator and Savior, Psalm.
113.5.
who having his dwelling on high, abaseth himself to behold the contemptible
things of this earth, who did graciously receive Mar. 12.43.
two mites from a poor widow, and of whom a willing mind is accepted
according to that a man has, 2. Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that he has not? But if any shall say, that by
presenting these small travels to so high a Prince, I do presumptuously, and
that by publishing them in such a learned nation, I do superfluously: This, I
answer, is the comfort encouraging me, that goodness (God be thanked) in your
sacred person is conjoined with greatness, that Courtesy and Clemency in
you, do grow up with Authority and eminency, hoping assuredly your Grace will
be well content, to suffer me patiently at this one time to write to you: who
at all times (as my bounden duty requires) shall earnestly pray for you,
Psalm. 20.4.
even that the great God may grant you according to your heart, and fulfill all
your purpose, for his glory and your eternal felicity.

Again, if it be said, that I come with the dim light of a small candle,
where many bright torches are already shining, and with a rural pipe where
many silver trumpets are melodiously sounding: This is my heartning, that the
most learned and laborious, are the most modest and gentle censurers, they will
reverence the grace of God, even in his simplest servants; the most judicious
and spiritual with Vacui laboris inuident laboribus aliorum, and omnem
collocant operam suam, vt deprehendant quod queant reprehendere.
the spirit of meekness, will take in good part the unworthy labors of their
inferiors, in any way tending to the edification of the Church of Christ Jesus.

Now in the humblest manner I can devise, I crave your Princely patience,
pardon for my boldness and presumption; and prostrate upon the knees of my
heart, I instantly beseech the Almighty and most merciful God to bless your
highness, with heavenly Genesis 49.25.
blessings from above, with blessings of the deep that lies beneath; 1. Sam.
25.29.
that the soul of our hopeful Prince may be bound in the bundle of life with
the Lord thy God, who will teach your Highness by his holy Spirit, Psalm 17.8.
and keep you as the apple of his own eye, and satisfy you with long life,
and glorify you with endless salvation in his heavenly kingdom for ever,
Psalm. 91.15.
remaining

Your Highness most humble servant: W. NARNE.

To the Christian Reader.
Ephesians. 5.14.
AWake and Cant. 2.10.
Arise, John 1.46.
Come and see, August. lib. 8. confess. cap. 12.
Take up and read, Luke 8.50.
Believe and Ioh. 15.20.
remember, Psalm. 34.14.
Do good, and Phil. 1.29.
suffer, Luke 22.32.
Strengthen others and Psalm. 147.12.
praise God.

EPHESIANS. 6. verse. 18. And pray always with all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance.

1. THESE. 5.23, 24, 25. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and
I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Faithful is he which calls you, who also will do it.

Brethren pray for us.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of Christ's Excellency. Page 1. Chap. 2. Christ most necessary for
us. Page 24. Chap. 3. Of the Love of Christ. Page 51. Chap. 4. Christ's free
Love to miserable man. Page 74. Chap. 5. Christ gives his Spirit to his own.
Page 84. Chap. 6. Christ gives Life. Page 106. Chap. 7. Christ gives Health.
Page 124. Chap. 8. Christ gives Wisdom. Page 139. Chap. 9. Christ gives
Food. Page 161. Chap. 10. Christ gives Raiment and Riches. Page 178. Chap.
11. Christ gives Liberty. Page 202. Chap. 12. Christ gives Honor. Page 218.
Chap. 13. Christ gives Joy. Page 233. Chap. 14. Christ gives Peace. Page 251.
Chap. 15. Christ gives Grace. Page 267. Chap. 16. Christ gives a Blessing.
Page 289. Chap. 17. Christ gives himself to be our Husband. Page 306. Chap.
18. We should desire Christ, and wait for Him. Page 336. Chap. 19. We should
come to Christ, and follow after Him. Page 356. Chap. 20. We should receive
Christ, and entertain Him. Page 388.
CHRIST HIS STAR, OR, A CHRISTIAN TREATISE FOR OUR Direction to our Savior,
and for our conjunction with Him.
CHAP. I. Of Christ His Excellency. Some causes wherefore few are saved.

Math. 7.44.
BEcause the gate is strait and the Way narrow that leads unto Life, and
Psalm. 38.4.
our iniquities are as a weighty burden too heavy for us, we our selves are
weak, Ier. 4.22.
foolish, and (by nature) have no understanding to do well: being a sinful
nation, Isa. 1.4.
a seed of the wicked corrupt children, that are gone backe-ward: having many
cruel and crafty enemies, compassing about us, drawing near unto us,
remaining within us, fighting against us, our Ier. 17.9.
deceitful and wicked heart ready (like a false Dalilah) to betray us, the
world to allure and defile us (so that this is a principal point of Iam. 1.27.
pure religion, to keep our selves unspotted of the world) Heb. 12.1.
sin hanging so fast on us, 1. Pet. 5.8.
our adversary the Devil like a rearing Lion seeking to devour us. These are
the worst and 2. Tim. 3.1.
Last days, most perilous times, men are become unholy, unthankful, lovers
of pleasures, more then lovers of God, 2. Pet. 3.1.
Mockers which walk after their ungodly lusts, Math. 14.12.
Iniquity has increased, and the love of many has waxed cold, Ier. 6.4.
The day declineth, and the shadows of the evening are stretched out, The
wholesome word of God for the most part (alas) being vilipended and
misbeleeued. Hence it comes to pass (which with anguish of soul, with
bitterness of spirit, and heaviness of heart, is daily to be lamented and
deplored) Math. 20.16
That many are called, but few chosen, that the Mich. 7.14.
flock of Gods heritage, which dwell solitary in the wood as in the midst of
Carmel, is but Luke 12.32.
a little flock, Math. 7.13.
Many there be which go in at the wide gate and broad way, that leads to
destruction, 1. Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appears. Hos. 4.6.
People perish eternally and are destroyed for lack of knowledge, and
holiness.

Now forasmuch as this is a most undoubted truth, Salvation only in Christ.
without all controversy, that salvation is to be gotten in Christ Jesus
only, Act. 4.12.
For among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved; he is Math. 17.5.
that beloved Son, in whom God is well pleased, for his sake God will be
merciful to our unrighteousness, Heb. 8.12.
and will no more remember our sins, and iniquities, Ioh. 1.17.
Grace and truth, and happiness comes by our Savior Jesus unto us: My
purpose and prayer is therefore, That this Treatise ( Phil. 1.19.
By the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ) may be a furtherance of our timous
coming to him, and of our most happy conjunction with him, Who is Luke 1.7.
the dayspring from an high, visiting us for our salvation; That the same, I
say may be to us (As his Star was unto the wise men) both a motive and
direction, moving us to go forward, and directing us in out way, to bring us
unto him, Reu. 22.6.
Who is the root and generation of David, and the bright morning Star, even
the shining Numb. 24.17.
Star of Jacob, and eternal light of glory.

That Star, The reason of the Title of this Treatise.
which appeared to the Wise men in the East, was not any of the fixed Stars,
or planets, because they commonly are seen above the upper Region of the air,
and have their ordinary motion, neither was it any natural apparition, which
happened in the inferior Region of the air, suddenly vanishing away, but rather
(according to the opinion of some) it was an Angel of the Lord, representing
the form of a Star, or else as Chrysostom says, (whose judgment in this
is best allowed) a certain miraculous new Star (such a new Star was seen
as a learned Divine testifies) in the year of GOD, 1572. Serving the Wisemen
for the time; And albeit this Star, which as Augustine thinks, See Piscator
upon Matthew. Vide itinerarium totiut S. Scripturae.
was governed by an Angel of God, did first appear upon the day of the
conception of Christ, being the 25. day of March, as Nicephorus and Chrysostom
observe; and was seen for a whole year, and 41 weeks, that is, to the sixth
of January in the beginning of the second year after the Nativity of Christ,
it wanted eleven weeks of two year; Yet notwithstanding of this long
appearance and shining, See Plate in Alcibi. Cicero lib. de Diuinat, Strabo
lib. 6. Geogr. Piccolomineus de defin.
some few Wisemen only came to the knowledge and presence of Jesus Christ by
the help thereof. These might justly have been termed Wisemen although
called by this name Magi, which word primitiuely expresses those, who were
altogether co^uersant in things divine, and gave themselves to the knowledge of
hard things, to find out the secrets and mysteries of nature, so according to
Varinus they were both Priests and Philosophers, as much regarded amongst the
Persians, as the Gymnosophists were esteemed amongst the Indians, as the
Philosophers amongst the Grecians, or the Prophets or Cabalists amongst the
Hebrews, Accidit huic nomini idem quod nomini Tyranni item Sophista.
so that name anciently was far diverse from Inchanters or Magicians,
although afterward through abuse it was taken in an evil part, but was not so
from the beginning.

And surely: First, their perilous and tedious journey undertaken for Christ's
cause, questionless with great expenses, and perhaps with derision and
opposition of many. Secondly, their diligent inquisition for the babe. Thirdly,
their exceeding great joy wherewith Math. 2.
they rejoiced, when again they saw the Star. Fourthly, their humble
worshipping of him, whom they found in the house with his mother. Fifthly, their
presenting of gifts unto him, even gold, incense, and mirrhe. Sixthly, their
obedience to that heavenly warning, Albeit the same was contrary to the
commandment of a mighty and a cruel King; all of these were manifest
evidences of true wisdom.

Such fruits whereof, I heartily wish not to few, but to many: Yea to all, who
shall read or hear the words of this little book, namely, that they may
attain to the saving knowledge of Jesus our Lord, not 2. Pet. 1.8.
to be idle nor unfruitful therein, but knowing him they may come to him, for
his Isa. 60.4.
sons shall come from far unto him to be nourished at his side, that in their
journey coming to him with David, Psa. 119.10.
they may seek him with their whole heart, and with the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.10.
they may inquire and search of the salvation which is unto him, that they
searching for him, may Ier. 29.13.
find him, that finding him and the permanent pledges of his gracious
presence, Phil. 4.4.
they may rejoice in him continually: That rejoicing in him, Isa. 35.14.
They may fall down before him, worshipping him willingly, making supplication
to him earnestly, Romans 12.1.
offering their bodies and souls an acceptable sacrifice to him most
willingly, Psalm. 2.11.
Serving their Lord in fear and rejoicing in trembling, kissing the Son lest
he be angry and they perish in the way, when his wrath shall burn suddenly,
but that they may constantly, continue in the course of his commandments, that
they may be the true Isa. 45.17.
Israel of God, which shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting
salvation, never to be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

Almighty and blessed God, The prayer of the Author
2. Cor. 1.3.
the father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, Isa. 63.15.
look down from the heaven, and behold from the dwelling place of thy
holiness and glory, thy poor and unworthy servant, and seeing it is thy
accustomed manner, by weakest instruments to do greatest works: Grant of thy
gracious goodness, that by this ministry many 2. Tim. 2.26
may come to amendment, out of the snare of the Devil, that Psalm. 116.16.
their bonds being broken, and the Pro. 5.22.
cords of sin wherewith they were holden being cut, the prison Colos. 1.13.
door being opened, they may be delivered from the power of darkness, and
translated into the kingdom of Jesus, that the veil of ignorance being
removed, sin subdued, and their earthly affections mortified, they may be 1.
Pet. 2.9.
called unto his marvelous light, and Romans 12.2.
be changed by renewing of their mind, they may 1. Cor. 15.49
bear the image of heavenly Adam, Romans 8.1.
walking after the spirit in love, Ephe. 4.1.
worthy of their Christian vocation, Heb. 13.9.
that they may have their hearts stablished with grace, Collos. 2.6.
that after they have received Jesus their Lord, they may remain rooted and
built in him, so Act. 26.18.
that they may receive forgiveness of their sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith in him, Amen.

For our more encouragement, The method of this Book
and better progress in this purpose, let us with diligent attention consider:
First, how excellent Christ is in his own nature: Secondly, how necessary he
is for us: Thirdly, how merciful and gracious toward us. To the end we may
be moved to esteem highly of him, because of his excellency, to seek him
earnestly, because of our necessity, and to receive him most lovingly, because
of his great mercy and manifold benefits, which he imparteth most plentifully
unto us.

Christ his excellency will appear the more clearly, being illustrated by
some comparisons: Christ more worthy then the fruit of the Earth.
He is more precious then the fruit of the Earth, then Gold and Pearls, then
the Heavens, then Men, then Angels. 1. The Iam. 5.7.
fruit of the Earth is precious, as the Apostle says; and of all the fruit
thereof, that Palm Tree growing in upper Babylonia, is the most excellent and
commodious, the most profitable plant, giving unto man, whatsoever his need
beggeth at natures hand, affording sundry and wonderful commodities, namely
Wine, Honey, and Vinegar. Herod. in Clio. lib. 1.
Strabo and Niger adds a fourth commodity that it yields Bread, and
Antonius the Hermit finds a fifth commodity, little inferior to any of
those four, which is, that from the self same Tree, is drawn a kind of fine
flax, Read the first book, of the first part of the History of the World.
chap. 3. Sec. 12
of which people make their garments, and with which they prepare the Cordage
for their Ships; and that this is true, Athanasius in the life of Antonius the
Hermit confesses, declaring that he received a garment made thereof from the
Hermit himself: Yet this Tree cannot give Wisdom to the foolish, nor sight
to the blind, nor health for all manner of sickness, nor righteousness to
the wicked, nor happiness to the wretched.

But Jesus Christ Isa. 11.10.
the root of Ishai which stands up for a sign unto the people, whose rest
is glorious, the nations shall seek unto him, Romans 15.12.
who shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in whom the Gentiles shall trust.
He will give us Isa. 55.1.
wine and milk, without silver or money, he will Cant. 8.2.
cause us to drink spiced wine, and new wine of the Pomegranates. And albeit
the Hypocrite, Job 20.17.
shall not see the rivers, nor the floodes, nor streams of honey and butter,
yet Isa. 7.22.
every one of his servants, shall eat butter and honey abundantly, and Psalm.
105.40
shall be filled with the Bread of Heaven, with the hid Reu. 2.17.
Manna sufficiently, Psalm. 36.8.
they shall be satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he will give
them drink, out of the rivers of his pleasures, which endure eternally: And if
the Pro. 31.21.
family of a wise and worthy woman, be well apparrelled and clothed with
scarlet, shall not they of the Gal. 6.10.
family of faith, and of the household of God, be better arraied, even with
the Reu. 3.18.
white raiment of Christ's righteousness, who will bestow upon us many more
benefits, as life, health, wisdom, peace, grace, and happiness; as God
willing afterward shall be more particularly expressed.

Thus he Ioh. 15.1.
the true Vine, the only Olive Romans 11.17.
tree, the most pleasant Palm tree, who will never Judge. 9.11.
for sake his sweetness, nor fatness, nor bountifulness, who will make his
own to be Isa. 61.3.
the planting of the Lord, and the trees of righteousness Psalm. 1.3.
bringing forth their fruit in due season; He is by infinite degrees, much
more precious and excellent then all the fruit of the Earth, from whom we may
receive innumerable benefits.

Gold and Silver are in great price and account amongst earthly and ignorant
men, yet the Apostle declares their baseness, in calling them 1. Pet. 1.18.
corruptible things; another Apostle declares their changeableness, in
calling riches 1. Tim. 6.17
uncertain things; Solomon says, that they are Pro. 23.5.
nothing, and in another place hurtful things, Eccle. 5.12.
reserved to the owners thereof for evil, as shall be set down somewhat more
largely, in the tenth Chapter following.

Also in the holy Scripture, there is mention made of sundry precious stones
and Pearls, which were then in old times, and are as yet in our days much
regarded, and thought of both for their beauty and splendor, also for their
qualities, operation and power.

The Exodus 28.17 Job 28.17. Scribonius lib. 2. de gemmis Dioscorides.
Rubie, Topaz, Carbuncle, Emeraud, Saphir, Diamond, Turkeis, Agate, Hematite,
Berill, Onix, and Jasper, the Crystal, and Coral, with others, which
(according to the judgment of the learned) have their own properties,
wherefore they are so esteemed.

The Rubie remooueth dimnesse from the eyes, and makes men bold.

The Topaz being cast into very hot water, preserves the hand from burning
therein: Montanus.
also it is available against Frenzy, Lunacie, and Melancholy.

The Carbuncle gives a light like fire, Tostatus.
and shines in a dark night.

The Emeraud is comfortable to the heart, it is good for memory, and an enemy
to venery.

Plinius lib. 37.
The Saphir is profitable against the stinging of Scorpions, and stays the
flux of blood.

The Diamond can scarcely be broken, neither is it mollified with fire, nor
iron.

Borrhaius.
The Turkeis comfort the spirits of the whole body, and is good for those
that want color.

The Agate preserves against poisonable beasts, and Scorpions; wherefore the
Aegles did put them in their nests, for the defense of their young-ones: also
it is thought, that it will resist Thunder, and allay Tempests.

The Hematite stays the extraordinary bleeding of the Nose, and has a
singular force against Dunkennesse.

The Berill, or Hyacinth does bring joy, and conciliate favor.

The Onix hung about the neck, serves to strengthen the body, and it is
profitable for chastity.

The Jasper has an astringent quality, and stancheth blood.

The Crystal is of the same nature, also it does greatly augment Milk to
women.

The Coral being knit to a sick man's neck, grows pale, Strabo lib. 14.
the powder thereof is good for the stones in the Kidneies, and in the Bladder,
and helps those that are diseased with the falling sicknenesse.

Whether or not, Herod. lib. 3
these stones be of such virtue and force, I will neither dispute, nor
determine, but experience teaches that they are of power to draw money even
from the covetous. One says, they are amicae oculorum, Petrar. dial. 37.
hosts animorum, victrices virorum fortium, friends of the eyes, enemies of
the minds, and ouercommers of valiant men, as of Alexander, and Pompey.

Neither did that Agate which Pyrrhus so regarded, make him invincible, but by
a woman he was killed; neither did that precious stone of Policrates, brought
again to him out of the Sea by a fish, make him fortunate, but by that Persian
Orontes, he was taken and crucified.

Yet we may affirm boldly, that all those are but trifles and Ier. 16.19.
vanity, wherein there is no profit, in respect of the preciousnesse, and
excellency of Jesus Christ: First Christ preferred to the Rubie.
Who first will surely remove the dimnesse, and take away the scales from the
eyes of our mind, and make us Pro. 28.1.2. To the Topaze.
righteous and bold as a Lion: Secondly, he will preserve us from most
dangerous and fiery perils; Isa 43.2.
when then walk through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee; he will save thee, that in this life thou
be not consumed by thy burning and fiery affections, and in the life to come,
he will keep thee from that Luke 3.17.
fire which never shall be quenched; He Luke 11.49.
who is the wisdom of God, will be a most perfect preservative against
sprirituall madness, and frenzy; Reu. 5.12.
That lamb of God who has received power, riches, and wisdom, will grant to
his own, that Iam. 3.13.
they may be wise and endued with knowledge, showing by their good conversation
their works, in meekness of wisdom, with joy and gladness.

3. To the Carbuncle.
Christ is Ioh. 8.12.
the true light of the World, who follows him shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life, Luke 1.79.
he will give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
guiding their feet into the way of peace.

4. To the Emeraud.
Christ will give 2. These. 2.16
everlasting consolation; and if Job 29.25.
Job did comfort the mourners, will not Jesus, 2. Cor. 7.6.
that comfort the abject do that to the distressed; if Ephe. 6.22.
Tychicus could comfort the hearts of the Ephesians, cannot Christ rather
minister consolation to the hearts of all Christians, he Psalm. 115.12.
who is mindful of us, will sanctify and strengthen our corrupt and weak
memory, that we should be mindful of him, and 2. Tim. 2.8.
remember that Jesus Christ, made of the seed of David, was raised again from
the dead, for our righteousness.

5. To the Sapphire.
He who is Hos. 13.14.
the death of Death, and the destruction of the grave, will take away the sting
of sin, and redeem his own from the power of the grave, preserving them
also from those Reu. 9.10.
Locusts, which like unto Scorpions, have stings in their tails.

6. To the Diamond.
He is most strong and constant, who cannot be overcome nor changed, he shall
subdue and Reu. 17.14.
overcome Satan, and those beasts that fight against him; he will give power to
his own, to 1. Ioh 2.13.
overcome that wicked one; and seeing 1. Ioh. 5.4.
they are borne of God, also to overcome the world, furnishing strength to
them, 1. Cor. 15.58.
to be steadfast and immovable.

7 To the Turkeis.
He who is Number. 27.16.
the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, will refresh the spirits of his own
people: For if some few good Christians 1. Cor. 16.18.
comforted Paul's spirit, shall not Jesus Christ comfort better the spirits of
his servants; he will change their black color, and make them Cant. 6.9.
bright as the Morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, terrible as an
Army with banners.

8 To the Agate.
Christ will preserve his own from the venom and poison of sin, which worse
then wine, Prou. 23.32.
in the end thereof, it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice;
he will also be Isa. 32.2.
an hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for the tempest of Gods wrath
and indignation.

9. To the Hematite.
He stays the bloody course of our spiritual infirmity, and when as the
wicked Ezech. 23.33.
shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, even with the cup of destruction
and desolation, he will grant unto us, for to be children 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.
of the day, and to be sober.

10 To the Berill.
Christ will make the righteous Psalm. 21.6.
glad with the joy of his countenance, and purchase unto them the favor of the
Almighty.

11 To the Onix.
He shall be to his people Ier. 16.19.
their force, their strength, and their refuge in the day of affliction, he
will adorn them with all comely virtues and honesty.

12 To the Jasper.
He has an attractiue power to Cant. 1.3.
draw us, who are of a refractorie and repining nature, and of an astringent
power, to bind us to the altar of his obedience.

13 To the Crystal.
He will Luke 17.5.
increase the faith of his own Disciples, and Act. 2.47.
the Lord who added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved,
will augment also the heavenly graces, and spiritual gifts of his Elect.

14 To the Coral.
There is virtue in Christ, Ezech. 11.19.
To take the stony hearts out of our bodies, 2. Cor. 12.9.
his power is made perfect through our weakness, he will keep us from the
falling and filthy sickness of sin.

Thirdly, Christ more excellent then the Heavens and the Sun.
our Savior, who is Isa. 4.4.
higher then the heavens, doubtless he is more excellent then the heavens. It
is true, that as the earth has need of the help of the heavens; If the cold
earth were not warmed from above, if the dry earth were not watered from
heaven, it would be barren and unprofitable: So if our cold hearts were not
warmed with the fire of holy zeal, and Isa. 4.4.
with the spirit of burning, and watered with the Zach. 8.12.
dew which the heaven gives, even with the dew of grace, they would be
altogether obdurate and unfruitful.

Now of all the planets in the visible heavens, the shining Sun is most
precious, and powerful in respect of the abundance of light, in respect also
of the motion and operation thereof.

There is great light in the Sun, but Christ has a much more greater light,
he may send Act. 26.13.
a light from heaven passing the brightness of the Sun; the Sun shines
not in all places; not in dark dungeons; nor at all times; not in the night
season; but Christ gives light to his own in an obscure prison, as unto
Peter; Their Act. 12.7.
Sun shall never go down, neither shall their Moon be hid, for the Lord
shall be their everlasting light, Isa. 60.20.
and the days of their sorrow shall be ended.

The natural Sun helps and comfort by the light thereof, those only who
have seeing, and clear eyes; but the borne blind has little pleasure thereby:
but the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, that Ioh. 1.9.
true light which lighteneth every man, has power to Ioh. 9.6.
open the eyes of those that are borne blind, their Isa. 35.5.
eyes shall be lightened, and their understanding illuminated.

2. The Psalm. 19.5.
Sun comes forth as a Bridegroom, out of his chamber, and rejoices like a
mighty man to run his race; his going out, is from the end of the heaven,
and his compass is unto the ends of the same, using wonderful celeritie with
an exceeding swift motion, Heidfeldius in Sphing. cap. 3. de mundo.
so that (as some think) in the short space of an hour, he passes two
hundredth seven thousand miles (I take them to be Dutch miles) because a German
affirms the same.

But Jesus Christ, who in respect of his Godhead is every where, and present in
all places, yet even in his blessed body, he will come far more swiftly then
the Sun moves; for in a short time, 1. Cor. 15.52.
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet, from the third
heaven, Heb. 12.2.
from the right hand of the throne of God, he will descend unto this air, and
his own servants then remaining upon the earth, they shall be all changed, and
all saved. Reu. 22.20.
Surely he will come quickly, Psalm. 70.1.
He will make have to help and deliver his Saints.

For whose comfort and safety, he may cause the speedy Sun Josh. 10.13.
stand still, and abide in one place, as in the days of Joshua; or to 2. King.
20.11.
go back again by so many degrees, as he did for the strengthening of
Hezekiah; at whose pleasure it shall be darkened and obscured, as it was Math.
27.45.
at the time of his passion. Job. 9.7. Tull. Cicer. in Some. Scip.
He commands the Sun and it rises not, he closes up the Stars as (...)
a Signet.

3. Concerning the operation of the Sun, the Ethnikes were not ignorant
thereof, when they said it was, Men's mundi, cor caeli, dux, princeps, Macrob.
Saturnal. lib. 1. a cap. 17. ad cap. 24.
and moderator luminum reliquorum, The worlds mind, the heavens heart, the
guide, the principal, and the Moderator of the rest of the lights; Also it was
the Author of the earths fertility, that it brought all corns to maturitie;
And some affirm, That all the Idol gods worshipped by the Pagans, were no
other thing but the Sun only; that they all (although many) rehearsed by
Macrobius might be referred to the Sun only, which he takes to prove at
length with sundry reasons.

Yea Scribonius himself says, Scribon. Phys. lib. 1. de planetis.
Solest caloris and facultatis vitalis vniuersa scaturigo, That it is the
wellspring and fountain of heat, and of all lively faculty.

Yet notwithstanding, the Sun is but a creature, subject to the commandment
of Christ, by infinite degrees inferior to our blessed Savior, in glory and
excellency, no ways to be compared with him; Who is Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the ingraued form of his Person,
bearing up all things by his mighty word, Reu. 19.16.
The King of kings, and Lord of lords, Psalm. 36.9.
with him is the well of Life, and in his light shall we see light, he who is
the true way to life, will Psalm. 16.11.
show us the path of life, and Act. 2.28.
make us full of joy with his countenance* If we shall 2. Tim 6.12.
lay hold of him, who is eternal life, if Psalm. 80.18.
we go not back from him, the fountain of our felicity, then he will revive
us, and keep us, and we shall call upon him here, and praise his glorious name
for ever.

Good it is for us, to Heb. 12.2.
Look to this Son of righteousness; men by looking long to the natural
Sun, will have their eyes dazzled, and their face blackned: but we by looking
to Christ, we shall have our eyes cleerer, and our face fairer. If Prou 15 30.
Solisequium Lupinum. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 41. Lemnius de occul. lib. 2. cap. 41.
the light of the eyes (according to our Saviors saying) rejoices the heart,
Shall not the pleasant light of our soul bring greater gladness unto us?

Some senseless herbs, as the Mary-gold with others, does (as it were)
conuoy and behold the visible Sun; and shall not we to whom God has given
sense and understanding, love and behold him, Ioh. 8.12.
who is the light of the world; if we follow him, we shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of Life. Indeed (as our Savior says) we
should Ioh. 12.35, 36.
walk while we have light, least the darkness come upon us, and he that
walks in the dark knows not whither he goes. While we have the light, let
us believe in the light, that we may be the children of light.

And seeing according to the most wise dispensation of the provident goodness
of the Almighty God (If it be true which a godly and judicious divine writes)
that the shining Sun of the firmament has come nearer to this earth now in
this last age, Philip Melancton in Lucam. 21.
then it was before by a very large space and quantity. For in our days as he
affirmed, the Sun is nearer the earth almost by ten thousand Germane miles,
then it was in the days of Hippansis and Ptolomeus. It may be doubted indeed,
whether it be for the old age of the world, the heaven as it were crooking and
settling, the universe tending to decay and languishing, or whether the outworne
and wearied earth, wanting the old strength and vigor, has need of the
nearer position and placing of the Sun, to nourish and refresh the same; as
old bodies and so feeble and cold, have need to be warmed and cherished with
the heat of the fire.

But how ever it be naturally, yet this is most certain, Romans 13.11.
that now our salvation is nearer then when we believed it; Heb. 1.1.
God who in the old time spoke in diverse manners to our fathers by the
Prophets, in these last days, he has spoken to us by his Son, who has now
come very near unto us, who Reu. 3.20.
stands at the door and knocks, saying, Cant. 5.2.
open unto me my sister, my undefiled, he is willing to warm our cold hearts,
and to Mich. 5.4.
feed or nourish us in his strength, Mich. 7.14.
with his own rod, Isa. 40.11.
he will gather us with his arm, and carry us in his bosom for our
refreshment, giving all good things needful for us, and guiding us by his
Spirit.

Seeing therefore Psalm. 119.151.
our Lord is near unto us, Psalm. 73.28.
it is good for us to draw near to him; as when we Iam. 4.7.
resist the devil, he will fly from us, so when we draw near to God, he will
draw near to us. Now we should Isa. 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.

Besides this, Christ is more excellent then the heavens, seeing he is more
stable and permanent, for Psalm. 102.26.
they shall perish, but he shall endure: they shall all wax old as does a
garment, and as a vesture they shall be changed, but he is the same for ever,
and his years shall not fail, yea the children of his servants shall
continue, and their seed shall stand fast in his sight.

Fourthly, Christ more excellent then man.
Albeit Psalm. 8.5, 6, 7, 8.
God has made man a little lower then himself, and has crowned him with
glory and worship, and has made him to have dominion in the works of his
hands, and has put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and
the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fish of the Sea, and
that which passes through the paths thereof, giving unto him exceeding
preferment, to Genesis 1.28.
subdue the earth, and to rule over other creatures. The Paraeus in Genesin.
learned observes ten prerogatives granted to man, yet he is very far
inferior to Jesus Christ, in respect of whom, Abraham himself is Genesis 18.27.
but dust and ashes, Moses is a Heb. 3.5.
servant, Job is Job 3^.37.
vile, Job 42.6.
abhorring himself, The Nah. 3.17.
chief Captains, and proud Princes of the great Nineue are but Locusts and as
the Grasshoppers, which fly away, and their place is not known where they are,
yea David Psalm. 22.6.
is a worm, Isa. 4^.1^.
Jacob is a worm, seeing the Job 25.5.
Stars are unclean in Christ's sight, how much more man a worm, even the
son of man, which is but a worm: Isa. 40.15, 17, 23, 24.
Behold all nations before him, are as a drop of a buckes, and are counted as
the dust of the balance, they are as nothing, and they are counted to him less
then nothing and vanitle, He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the
Judges of the earth as vanity, as though they were not planted, Christ is more
excellent then the Angels.
as though they were not sown, as though their stock took no root in the
earth; for he did even blow upon them and they withered, and the whirlewinde
will take them away as stubble. The mightiest, the noblest, the wisest are not
to be compared with Christ in excellency, nor worthiness.

Fifthly, Heb. 1.4, 5.
Christ is made so much more excellent then the Angels, inasmuch as he has
obtained a more excellent name then they; he is Gods Son, and all the Angels
of God do worship him, his throne is for ever and ever, they set forth the
praises of their Creator, saying, Isa. 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole world is full of his glory,
Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men good
will, also they are all ministering spirits sent forth to minister, for their
sakes which shall be heirs of salvation. One writes this truth of them.

Angelicus sine fine chorus, qui Laud perenni Alcimus auit. lib. 4.

Conclamat, celebratque Deum famulantia suetus,
Far ministeria, and iussis parere supernis.
They Matthew. 4.11.
came and ministered unto Christ, after his temptation in the Wilderness, and
he being in a terrible agony upon the mount of Olives, Luke 22.43.
there appeared an Angel from heaven, comforting him who is the Colos. 2.10.
head of all Principality and power, Colos. 1.15. and 16. and 18.
the first borne of every creature, by whom, and for whom all things were
created, even Thrones and Dominions, having in all things the pre-eminence, at
whose name every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth.

The due consideration of Christ's incomparable preciousnesse and perfection,
Luke. 2.32.
who is a light to the Gentiles, and the glory of Israel, who is Reave. 19.16.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Isa. 9.6.
Government is upon his shoulder; he shall call his name Wonderful,
Counselor, The mighty God, The Prince of Peace, Ephesians. 1.21.
who is far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that, that is to
come.

Seeing then that our Savior is of such pre-eminence, worthiness, and
excellency, we may soon know our bounden duty, namely, reverently to regard
him, to have a great estimation of him, to imprint his reverence in our hearts,
and with his holy servant Phili. 3.8.
to think and judge, all things to be loss and dung, for the excellent
knowledge sake of Jesus our Lord, that we may win Christ, Phili. 1.21.
Who is to us both in life and death advantage.

We should account him our chief treasure, our only joy, our most precious
Matthew. 13.16
Pearl of great price.

We read that a Roman Senator called Nonius, did possess a very rare and
precious jewel named Opalus; Antonius one of the Triumphers hearing of the
beauty thereof, had a very great desire to obtain the same, being then in the
pride of his power; because of a refusal, he conceived such hatred and
indignation against the possessour, that in the terrible fire of that
proscription, he adjudged him to death. But Nonius to keep his jewel,
suffered banishment, Illa salua nulla ei patrimonii, Petrarch. dial. 37.
vel patriae cura erat, cum illa paratus exulare and mendicare, and ad extremum
mori: His Pearl being safe, he had no care of his patrimony, nor of his
native Country, being ready with it to be banished, to beg, and at last to
die.

What then should we suffer for Christ's cause? What estimation should we
make of him, who is our only Psalm. 16.5.
portion, our inheritance, the God of our salvation?

Let every one say with the Prophet, Psalm. 73.25.
whom have I in Heaven but thee? and I have desired none in the earth but thee,
My flesh fails and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever, he will guide me by his counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory.

Miserable is the madness of many men, Madness to despise Christ.
contemning and despising him who is so precious, and excellent, he alas Isa.
53.3.
is despised and rejected, we hide as it were our faces from him, we esteemed
him not, who has borne our sins, who has carried our sorrows, who was
wounded for our transgressions.

If the Captains with their fifties 2. King. 1.10
were burnt with fire from heaven, because they misregarded Elias, if the 2.
Kin. 2.24.
little children were rent in pieces with Bears because they mocked Elisha, if
2. Sam. 12.31.
the Amonites Citizens of Rabbah were put under sawes, and under iron harrowes,
and under axes of iron, and made to pass through the bricke-kilne, who abused
David's messengers: Heb. 2.3.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, if we shall contemn
him, who is so excellent, so worthy, and powerful, the fountain of felicity
and consolation. The ignorance of Christ is the cause wherefore he is so
dis-esteemed, and vilified. The woman of Samaria before she knew Christ, in her
ignorance, she mis-regarded and mocked Christ, accounting him unworthy of a
cup of cold water; But when she knew Christ, and the gift of God in him, that
he had the water of Life, then she left her business, and did manifest Christ
to her neighbors, declaring that he had told her all things, Ioh. 4.29.
that he was the Christ; then she would have given her heart to him.

The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto us the spirit
of wisdom, and revelation through the knowledge of him, that the eyes of our
understanding may be lightened, Ephesians. 1.17.18.
that we may know, what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his
glorious inheritance is in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of
his power toward us, according to the working of his mighty power. God grant,
that seeing we who are weak and unworthy, are dear to him, and Isa. 43.4.
precious in his sight, that we esteeming of him, because of his excellency,
may prefer him before all things.

CHAP. II. Christ most necessary for us.
Our Savior who is most excellent in himself, Christ our King.
he is also most necessary for us; that he may be our King to govern us,
that he may be our high Priest to reconcile us to our God, our Doctor to
instruct us, our Physician to cure us, our Pastor to feed us, that he may be
all in all to us.

Christ is a King most strong, most wise, most holy, most loving, most
liberal, a wonderful King, an immortal and everlasting King, Reave. 12.6.
Isa. 9.7.
Who rules all Nations, whose Kingdom shall have no end, Heb. 7.2.
and who is King of Peace and Righteousness.

A good earthly King is most necessary, 2. Sam. 21.17
He is the light of the people, Lam. 4.20.
he is the breath of their nostriles, he is the life of the people, 2. Sam.
18.3. Macedones se omnes vnius Alexandri Spiritum ritum viuere affirmabant.
Curtius lib. 9. cap. 5.
Worth ten thousand of his subjects, yea the very Ethnikes, who were destitute
of the light of Gods word, granted this: for the Macedonians affirmed, that
they all lived by the spirit, or life of their King Alexander.

Where there is no King in a Country, it is manifest by proof of holy Judge.
17.6. and 18.1. and 19. Christ our King.
Scripture, and by lamentable experience, that inspeakeable hurt and calamity
befalles that Country; then there is no good order, or decency, but disorder
and confusion, there is little Godliness or Piety, but Idolatry and
Abomination; little Truth or Honesty, but Robbery and Oppression; no Justice
or Equity, but Murder, Bloodshed, and Desolation.

If there be a necessity of an earthly King, there is a greater necessity of
our Heavenly King.

I. To relieve and deliver us from the power of darkness, to acquire and
purchase us to himself, who before remained under the thraldom of sin and
Satan.

Jesus Christ John 3.8.
the Son of God, who for this purpose appeared, that he might dissolve the
works of the Devil; Tit. 2.14.
And gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works. He is a
most happy Conqueror, and there is a great difference betwixt him, and all
other earthly Conquerours.

1. Other Conquerours rather seek their own wealth and profit, then the good
and commodity of those whom they subdue: But Christ has a greater regard to
our welfare and ease then to his own.

2. Other Conquerours in their conquering, proceeded not so far as they
intended, neither subdued all those people whom they desired to subdue. But it
is not so with Christ, Psalm. 2.8.
To whom is given the ends of the earth for his possession, he acquires to him,
whom, and when he pleases.

3. When Conquerours usually did acquire Kingdoms and Dominions, it was by the
death of strangers or enemies: But Christ, he was content to shed his own
precious blood, and by his own Death, to bring life to all them that believe
in him; for Act. 20.28.
he has purchased the Church of God with his own blood.

II. Our King when he has relieved us from the oppression and dominion of
strong Enemies, he is very necessary to defend us, who are weak and infirm,
but Ephesians. 6.10.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; he must defend and preserve
us, from the old Dragon who is Reave. 12.17.
wroth and makes war against us continually, and maliciously assaults us,
laboring earnestly by all means, again to bring us into thraldom and
miserable bondage, and so to endless pain and damnation.

III. To govern and order us who are unruly, who if we were left to our
selves, would Ezekiel. 34.5.
be scattered and dispersed, and devoured of all beasts; who would destroy our
selves, and Zach. 11.9.
every one eat the flesh of his neighbor.

IIII. To bestow great benefits and favors upon his people, who of themselves
Reu. 3.17.
are wretched and miserable, poor, blind, and naked.

David was a powerful King, Christ our King.
2. Sam. 19.9.
and saved his people from the hands of their enemies, and delivered them from
the tirannie of the Philistimes.

Solomon was a wise King, to whom was 1. King. 3.9.
given an understanding heart, to judge his people, and that he might discern
betwixt good and evil.

Zedekias was a holy King, 2. Kin. 18.6.
For he claue to the Lord, and departed not from him, but kept his
commandments: So the Lord was with him, and he prospered in all things he
took in hand, and he served not the King of Ashur, for he served the King of
Heaven.

Moses was a loving Ruler, more desirous of the peoples safety, then of his
own eternal felicity.

Darius a bountiful and liberal King, Christ our King.
who did give of his Ezra 6.8.
own revenues, and of his own tribute, expenses for the building of the
house of God.

But our blessed King the Lord Jesus, is much more powerful then David was.
Christ delivers his own, that are on his side Reave. 17.14
called, and chosen and faithful, from worse enemies; from sin, from Satan,
from the World, and from their own corrupt affections.

Exo. 32.32.
Christ more wise then Solomon, who will judge the World with equity, and when
Mat. 25.32.
all nations shall be gathered before him, he will separate the good from the
bad, he will give unto his own an heavenly Kingdom, and an eternal
inheritance, an incorruptible Crown of endless glory; as for the wicked, he
will adiudge them as cursed, to be tormented in everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his angels; without whom Ier. 10.8.
all other Kings do dote, and are foolish.

Hezekiah a holy King, yet he was defiled with sin, he wanted not his
imperfections: But our heavenly King Heb. 7.25.
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then
the Heavens. Jesus Christ, more loving then Moses, he endured shame, that his
Saints might obtain glory, he suffered death, and the pains of Hell, that his
Elect might receive life, and the unspeakable joy of Heaven: we should 2. Cor.
8.9.
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he being rich, for our sakes
became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich; Heb. 2.9.
he through the suffering of death, did taste death for us, that we might live
eternally with him in his glorious Kingdom.

It is written of Antonius Pius, Chro. Cari. lib. 3.
that he was loving to his subjects, Solus omnium principium sine civilly
sanguine fuit. He often times repeated that saying of Scipio, that he rather
desired to save one of his own Subjects, then to kill a thousand of his
Enemies: yet out of question, he lost some of his Subjects in his war against
the people of Dacia, and in repressing some of the Germans.

But Christ safely preserues all his servants, Ioh. 17.12.
none of them will be lost, and he deals most liberally and bountifully with
them, 1. Cor. 3.12
for he gives all things to them, Ephe. 4.8.
when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men. Christ, Tit. 2.14.
who gave himself for us, will not deny us any thing profitable for us.

Christ is most unlike the Emperor Mauritius, who being auaritious, would
bestow no money nor ransom for the redemption of his Christian soldiers, who
therefore were cruelly killed by Caganus.

But our most liberal King, 1. Cor. 6.10.
Has bought us with a great price, 1. Pet. 1.18.
and we are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of his Christ, as of a La^ (...) defiled and without spot.

Christ is a wonderful King, f^^ ^eath did not put an end to his reign and
go^^rnment, as it does to all other earthly Monarchs.

He is an eternal King, Christ our King.
1. Tim. 1.17.
Now unto this our King, everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wise, be honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Seeing then Christ is such a great King, Iere. 10.7.
Who would not fear him? the King of Nations, who is great in power, and to
whom appertains the dominion for ever: we should Mat. 10.28.
fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell, we Psalm.
34.9.
his Saints should fear him, for nothing wants to them that fear him, the
Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord shall want
nothing that is good.

Seeing Christ is a most wise King, Psalm. 149.2.
Let all the children of Sion rejoice in their King. If the people of the Jews
came up after Solomon their King, 1. King. 1.40.
and rejoiced with great joy, so that they range with the sound of them when he
was anointed; What great and unspeakable cause of joy have the true subjects
of Christ to rejoice in him the Lord of the whole earth? Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be
glad.

Seeing Christ is a most holy King, we should study with an earnest endeavor,
1. Pet. 1.15.
So to be holy in all manner of conversation, as he is holy. Men naturally do
imitate the manners of those that are in place of eminency and authority. The
example of the Prince is the greatest provocation to do good or evil.

Et Domini mores Caesarianus habet. If we be followers of Christ, 2. Cor. 3.18.
and be changed into the same image; Luke 2.52.
as our King increased in wisdom, and in favor with God and men; So shall we
obtain the favor of God, and of good men, and increase therein. It is
certain that Ioh. 16.27.
the Father himself will love us, because we love Christ. And the Lords Saints
will be of that disposition that holy David was of, Psalm. 139.22.
As he hated them with an unfeigned hatred, as his utter enemies that hated the
Lord: So he loved ardently all those that loved the Lord, Psalm. 16.3.
his delight was in them.

The Persians, Plutarchus in praeceptis politicis, and Castellanus de officio
regis. lib. 1. cap. 59.
because of the virtues of their King Cyrus, and because of the benefits which
they received from him, did not only affect and reverence himself, but also
for a long time after his death, they loved all those that were like to him in
countenance.

Christians will not only love their gracious King the Lord Jesus, but also
those they will love and tender, who are transformed into his glorious image.

Is our King so loving, so liberal, so wonderful an immortal King, we should
Psa. 2.11, 12.
serve him in fear, and rejoice in trembling, We should kiss the Son least
he be angry, and we perish when his wrath shall suddenly burn.

If we in sincerity shall serve him, and in humility subject our selves to
our gracious King, of such unspeakable Princely love and liberality, we may
be assured that he will uphold, and defend us against all crosses and
calamities, for he will be unto us, Esa. 32.2.
a hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for the tempest, as rivers of
water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

Accursed and unhappy is the estate of all such as say, Luke 19.14. and verse
27.
We will not have this man to reign over us; for when he comes again, in
great power and glory, he will say, those mine enemies, who would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither and slay before me.

Blessed and glorious is the condition of all, Who shall Math. 11.29
take his yoke on them, and who willingly shall submit themselves to his easy
and happy government, for he shall be such a King to them, who shall by his
power deliver and preserve them, by his wisdom rule and govern them, by his
holiness be a Pattern to them, by his love he will cheerish and comfort
them: His liberality shall be constantly, wonderfully, and eternally extended
unto them; he shall bestow upon them 1. Pet. 1.4.
an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not, reserved in
heaven for them.

Jesus Christ, Christ our high Priest.
a most gracious high Priest, Heb. 5.2.
who is able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are ignorant and out
of the way, Heb. 7.25.
who is able also to save them perfectly that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them.

He is absolutely most necessary for us, when he, Heb. 9.12.
who by his own blood entered once into the holy place and obtained eternal
redemption for us.) 1. To appear in the sight of God for us. 2. To reconcile
us to God, (for 2. Cor. 5.19.
in Christ God reconciled the world to himself:) 3. And to bless us with
spiritual and heavenly blessings.

Aaron was a profitable high Priest to the Jews, Numb. 16.7, 48.
they murmured against God, his plague already began among them: Aaron ran
into the midst of the congregation, and made an atonement for the people,
and when he stood between the dead and them that were alive, the plague was
stayed.

Numb. 25.11. and Psalm. 106.30.
Phineas the son of Eleazer was jealous for the Lords sake, he stood and
executed judgment, therefore the Lord consumed not the children of Israel, and
the Lord did give unto Phineas his covenant of peace.

Iehoshua Zech. 3.5.
was a glorious high Priest, when a fair Diadem was set upon his head, and he
clothed with precious garments, and the Angel of the Lord stood by.

Our loving Master Jesus, is a high Priest more profitable to us then Aaron was
to the Jews; he delivered us from the fierce wrath and indignation of the
Almighty, and from all those fearful plagues which we justly deserved,
because of our disobedience and abominations.

Christ more zealous then Phineas, Ioh. 2.17.
For the zeal of his fathers house did eat him up.

He is more glorious then Iehoshua was, not only in his own Person, but also
in all his faithful servants; for he will give to each one of them a precious
Garment, and a fair Diadem; Revel. 2.10.
Even the crown of life, which shall not be taken from them.

Jesus Christ as he is our high Priest to appear in the sight of God for us,
Col. 1.20.
To reconcile us to our God, and to set us at peace with him, through the blood
of his cross: So also he is our propitiatory and meritorious sacrifice. Ephesians.
5.2.
Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, to be an offering, and a
sacrifice of sweet smelling savor unto God.

Vnus Christus, idem Sacerdos, and Sacrificium, Alcui. lib. 3. de trinitate
cap. 2.
veniens ad nos, offerre pro nobis, quod sumpsit ex nobis, vt auferret a nobis
quod invenit in nobis, peccatum. One Christ, the same one Priest, and one
Sacrifice, coming to us, offered for us, which he took of us, that he might
take from us, which he found in us, viz. sin and iniquity.

Christ is both the Priest, the Sacrifice, and the Altar; the Priest, as he is
both God and man: the Sacrifice, as he is man: the Altar, as he is God; and
Ioh. 17.9.
As for our sakes he did Sanctify himself, So he will Sanctify all the
Sacrifices which he shall offer to God, and make them acceptable to his
heavenly Father.

Heb. 10.21.
have such an high Priest which is over the house of God, let us draw near
with a true heart in assurance of faith sprinkled in our hearts from an evil
conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water.

By approaching unto such an high Priest, and by inioying the virtue of his
Priesthood, we shall receive many and great benefits.

For if the people of Jerusalem by the ministry of Iaddus their high Priest,
Josephus Antiq. iudaic. lib. 11. cap. 8.
were freed from great fear, and their worldly state bettered: If the wrath of
a mighty enemy, even of Alexander the great (who came of purpose to destroy
and spoil the city) was mitigated and removed, and sundry favors and
immunities was granted and conferred to the nation, while as the high Priest,
being clad with his Priestly garments, did come forth to salute that conqueror.

We by acknowledging and taking hold upon our high Priest, Luk 3.7.
Shall be delivered from the wrath to come, from the displeasure and
indignation of the Almighty, from the fearful plagues and punishments due to
sin; and Romans 5.11.
Now we may rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
received the atonement and reconciliation. We shall have great comfort in this
life, and greater consolations in the life to come. By the Priesthood of Jesus
we shall have comfort in this life, to mitigate our troubles and temper them;
but greater comfort in the life to come, for to abolish our troubles and
remove them, Reu. 21.4.
God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be neither
sorrow, neither crying, nor death: Reu. 14.13.
Blessed are they who dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit, for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them.

Thus by the Priesthood of Christ we shall be delivered from the anger of God,
from the curse of the Law, from the punishment of sin, from the pains of
hell. We shall be reconciled unto the Almighty, we shall obtain great favors
and privileges; grace and peace shall be multiplied to us, his loving
kindness better than life shall be continually extended to us.

We stand in great need of Jesus to be our Doctor and Master, Christ our Doctor.
that he may instruct us that are ignorant and uncertain what to do: in
comparison of Christ the most learned among men should not Math. 23.10.
be called Doctors, for one is our Doctor, even Christ.

He is a Master of greatest wisdom, of greatest power, of greatest diligence,
of greatest patience, of greatest love, and a most willing Master and
everlasting Doctor.

He is a most wise Master, Ioh. 1.18.
The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

First, Our Master as he delivers most wholesome, most excellent and heavenly
doctrine to his own Disciples; so is he most powerful and able to make them
(albeit by nature they are dulwitted and foolish) to understand and be capable
of his profitable and high instructions. This is only proper to our great
Doctor, for no other Master is of power to teach and instruct an idiote,
according to the saying of the Wise man; Eccles. 22.7.
Who so teaches a fool, is as one that glueth a potshard together, and as he
that waketh one that sleeps from a sound sleep.

Secondly, He is also a powerful Master, because he furnishes strength and
grace to his Disciples, that they may practice his profitable precepts. Those
old men, who had been ancient councellers to Solomon, did give good counsel
to Rehoboam, whereby his kingdom might have bin established, 1. King. 12.7.
and his people been his servants for ever: But they were not of power to
cause Reboboam to follow their good advise, for he forsook the counsel that
the old men had given him, and followed the counsel of young men, so his people
rebelled, and his kingdom was rent from him.

Seneca a wise and learned man, he taught his disciple Nero many lessons of
temperancie, of honesty, of clemency, but he could not move Nero to embrace
them, and continually to practice them in his life and conversation; for Nero
became cruel, deceitful, most intemperate, and vicious.

But our blessed Master, as he teaches supernatural knowledge, and heavenly
lessons that leads to eternal happiness; so he gives to us power to
conceive them, and to believe them: further, he gives us grace to practice
them in our life and conversation, to use them rightly to his own glory, the
good of others, and to our own salvation.

Thirdly, our Master is very willing and desirous to receive disciples, of
whatsoever estate, sex, or condition they be; he inuites and calls upon all,
Mat. 11.29. Laert. in vita Diogenis.
Come to me, learn of me, ye shall find rest to your souls. Antisthenes a
Philosopher, he said to his scholars, abite, pass from me: Our blessed Master
is most unlike him, for he is very willing and content to receive all that in
sincerity and humility will come to him, he allures all to come to him, that
he may teach them the way of their salvation.

Fourthly, Christ is a most diligent Master, Christ our Doctor.
Iere. 7.13.
He rises up early; and speaks to his people; all the day long he is
content to instruct them, ye in the night he will teach them, Psalm. 17.3.
He will prove them, and so visit their hearts, Psa. 119.55.
that they shall remember his Name in the night, and keep his Law.

The Apostle Paul was earnest, and diligent to instruct the Ephesians, For Act.
20.31.
by the space of three years, he ceased not to warn every one, both night
and day with tears.

Christ, he is a master of greater power and diligence, and very earnest to
teach all Christians the way to eternal happiness.

Fifthly, Christ is a most patient teacher, for Romans 9.22.
if he suffer with long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction,
will he not suffer with longer, and greater patience, the vessels of mercy
prepared unto glory? He is patient in teaching us, that of our selves are
indocile, that are unruly, that are unthankful; but let us diligently take
head, least we Romans 2.4.
despise the riches of his bountifulness, of his patience, and long-suffering.

Sixthly, Christ is a most loving teacher, for he not only instructs us in the
way of our salvation, but also he furnishes, and bestows upon us all things
necessary.

Elisha was a loving master, it is certain he taught the children of the
Prophets the knowledge of God, further, 2. Kin. 4.38.
He nourished them that dwelt with him, when there was a famine in the Land.

Christ, Ephesians. 4.8.
when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, the gift of Knowledge,
the gift of Prophecy, In vita Aristo. Guarino veronensi Authore.
yea all gifts which we enjoy and possess; Food, Raiment, Health, Riches,
Honor, etc.

It is written of Aristotle, that he greatly loved and affected his scholars
and disciples, principally Callisthenes, and Theophrastus; and so great was his
affection to Callisthenes, that for his sake he suffered the wrath and
indignation of Alexander himself.

The ardent love of Christ toward his Disciples is unspeakable and admirable;
he teaches them, he nourishes them, he has suffered the curse of the Law,
the heavy wrath of God, the torments of Hell, for the good of his Disciples
that they may be delivered; therefore he gives them sufficient maintenance on
this earth, and prepares an eternal Mansion of glory for them in the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Seventhly, Christ he is an everlasting Doctor, he ever lives to instruct
us, and this redoundes to the great profit and utility of all his Disciples.
How profitable and expedient was it to Iehoash King of Judea, that Iehoiada was
his Praeceptor and instructour, for 2. Kin. 12.2.
Iehoash did that which was good in the sight of the Lord, all his time that
Iehoiada the Priest taught him: but Iehoiada waxed old, and was full of days,
and died; after the death of Iehoiada, the King and the Princes left the house
of the Lord God of their fathers, and served Groves and Idols, and wrath came
upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of their trespass. During the life time of
Iehoiada, while he taught him, Iehoash lived honestly, but after his death he
falls to Idolatry.

Jesus Christ he says truly of himself, Revel. 1.18.
Behold I am alive for evermore, Amen. He living, instructs us, which is for
our exceeding good, Psalm. 32.8.
For he will instruct us and teach us in the way that we should go, and will
guide us with his eye continually.

Seeing Jesus Christ is such a Doctor, to Mat. 11.29.
learn of him, 1. Cor. 1.30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption; and that we may make the better progress in his heavenly and
wholesome Doctrine, Isa. 2.3.
Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

We have great need of Christ to be our Physician. Christ our Physician.
to heal us that are diseased, and Isa. 61.1.
to bind up the broken hearted.

The Lord may justly say of us, as he said of the people of the Jews, Isa.
1.6.
The whole head is sick, yea and the whole heart is heavy, from the sole of
the foot unto the crown of the head, there is nothing whole therein, but
wounds and swelling, and sores full of corruption: they have not been wrapped
nor bound up, nor mollified with oil.

We stand then in great need of Christ to be our Physician, he is most
expert, well furnished with all sorts of Medicaments, he is a most Loving,
most Humble, and a most happy Physician.

First, he is most expert, and of perfect knowledge, and exactly knows both
the Nature, the Causes, and Remedies of all sickenesses and infirmities; he
knew what weakness and infirmity was in his servant Peter, Ioh. 13.38.
better then Peter himself.

Secondly, he is well furnished with all sorts of Medicaments, for grace is
the principallest Medicament, and salve for our souls; John 1.14.
The only begotten Son of the Father, is full of grace and truth; and
obtaining grace from him who is the Fountain of grace, we shall certainly
find the truth of his saying, 2. Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee; sufficient to amend, or to mitigate all our
infirmities.

Thirdly, Christ is a most loving Physician, he regards our health and
happiness, but seeks not our silver, gold, or riches: Elisha freely healed
Naaman of his Leprosy, 2. Kin. 5.16.
and refused to receive a reward from him.

Christ, he heales us from the Leprosy of sin, also he heaps his benefits
upon us, and bestows rich rewards upon his unworthy creatures; and to procure
our health, Christ was content to make the medicine of his own heart blood:
Fusus est sanguis medici, August. lib. 5. contra. haeres.
and factum est Medicamentum phrenetici.

Fourthly, Christ is a most humble Physician, Mat. 11.29.
meek and lowly in heart, esteeming of poor and ignoble men, who dwell in
small cottages, as of the Noble and rich personages, who remain in pleasant
Palaces, Act. 10.34.
For God is no accepter of persons.

Christ, he is very unlike that vain Physician Menecrates, Plutarch. in (...)
who being but a man, styled himself god in his letter directed to King
Agesilaus: Yet that natural wise King, offended at the presumption of that
foolish man, wished him a sound mind, and a right judgment.

Our Physician being God himself, took upon him our nature, and in great
humility called himself Ioh. 3.13. and passim.
the son of man.

Fifthly, Christ is a most happy Physician, because none of his patients did
ever perish in their sickness, Mat. 11.15.
For the blind receive sight, and the halt go, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up; the most dangerous and deadly diseases
which he undertakes, are sufficiently cured and removed.

And Christ he most perfectly performs the duty of a happy Physician,
which is (according to the judgment of Asclepiades, one expert himself in
that Art) Medici officium est, Cornel. Cells.
vt cito, vt tute, vt iucunde curet, It is the duty of a Physician to cure
speedily, surely, pleasantly.

Christ heals the diseased quickly, because Mat. 8.16.
he cast out the unclean spirits with his word, and healed all that were
sick; Luke 4.39.
when Peter's wines mother was taken with a great fener, Christ, he stood over
her, and rebuked the fever, and it left her, and immediately she arose, and
ministered unto them. Christ he heals most surely, Psalm. 103.3.
for he heals all the infirmities of the godly: and most pleasantly, for in
stead of their short pain, he gives eternal pleasure.

If it be said, that many find grief and bitterness, whiles the diseases of
their souls are in curing.

I answer that it may be of truth, Hieron. in Ier.
for omnis medicina habet, ad tempus amaritudinem, sed postea fructus doloris
sanitate monstratur, All sort of medicine for a time has bitterness, but
afterward the fruit of that pain, is known by health; the grief and
bitterness is but momentany: but the joy and pleasure is eternal, which none
shall take from them.

First, because Christ is such a Physician, we should look to him with the
eye of faith, that we may be healed.

The Jewish people being Number. 21.
stung with fiery Serpents, by looking to the brazen Serpent were healed; so
we by looking to Christ, shall be healed from the sting of sin.

Secondly, is Jesus Christ such a Physician? John 5.3.
A great multitude of sick folk, of blind, halt, and withered, came to the
poole Bethesda to obtain health for their bodies; albeit, of all the number
one only was made whole at one time: we have great cause to come to Christ,
that we may obtain health for our souls, seeing all who earnestly require
health, will receive it from his merciful hands.

If we had such a feeling of the pain of the grievous disease of our souls,
Mar. 5.25.
as that poor woman diseased with a bloody issue twelve years, who suffered
many things of many Physicians; who had spent all her goods, and it auailed her
nothing. If a sense of the pain of her body, moved her with weakness, and
weariness through many impediments, to touch Christ's garment; let us address
our selves to come to our Savior. Mat. 9.12.
The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.

When we are come to our Physician, let us with all reverence honor him: The
wise man counsels us to Ecclus. 38.1
honor an earthly Physician, with that honor that is due unto him, because of
necessity. (...)
There is much more a necessity of our heavenly Physician, that we should
honor him with all reverence and submission.

We should trust in him whom we honor; Asa the King of Judah did very
foolishly, who in the extremity of his disease, 2. Chr. 16.12
sought not the Lord, but did cleave to the Physicians: but we shall do most
wisely, if we cleave to our Physician when we expect for all good from him,
who is the fountain and bestower of every good gift, and heavenly blessing.

Thus looking to Christ, coming to him, honoring him, and trusting in him, we
shall obtain health from him, for Ezech. 18.32
Christ desires not the death of him that dies; and being restored to our
health by our heavenly Physician, we should show our thankfulness toward
him, as that Cripple did to Peter and John, he followed them, Act. 3.8.
He entered with them into the Temple praising God.

The Graecians exceedingly honored Hippocrates, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 37.
and esteemed him worthy of divine worship, because he foretold that the plague
of pestilence was coming, and did send his disciples to help and support the
diseased.

Our Physician he forewarnes us of the wrath of God, and of his plagues, he
auerts and stays the judgments of God, that they do not seize upon us, he
works our health, he procures our reconciliation with God, and our eternal
salvation. What thankfulness should we show to him, with what honor should
we adore him, how earnestly and willingly should we follow him, praising and
worshipping his glorious name for ever.

Jesus Christ Heb. 13.20.
Who is the great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, Christ our Pastor.
he is most necessary for us, Ioh. 11.52.
That he might gather together in one the children of God which were scattered,
Ezech. 34.23, 25, 31.
That he may feed them, and give them peace, that they may dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods, now the sheep of Christ's pasture are
men, says the Lord God.

Jacob he was a good shepherd, he suffered great pains for the good of his
sheep; Gen 31.40.
In the day he was consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and sleep
departed from his eyes.

So Exodus 3.1.
Moses, when he kept the sheep of Iethro his father in law, he drone the
flock far within the desert, to the end they might have more plenty of
food.

David was a strong and courageous shepherd, for 1. Sam. 17.34.
when a lion came and took a sheep out of the flock, David went out after
the Lion and caught him, and took it out of his mouth, he smote the Lion, and
slew him.

The great Shepherd of our souls is more painful then Jacob, more careful
and provident then Moses, more strong and courageous then David.

Christ he Heb. 12.2.
endured the cross, and suffered contempt, Phil. 2.8.
He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, Psalm. 23.2.
He makes his sheep to rest in green pasture, they shall not want; Luke 15.4.
He follows the lost sheep, he finds it, he lays it on his shoulders with
joy, he carries it home.

Christ he is more strong then David, he delivers us from the devil our
adversary, 1. Pet. 5.8.
Who as a roaring Lion walks about continually, seeking whom he may devour.

Let every one of us confess in sincerity, Psalm. 119.176.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, for I do not forget
thy commandments.

It is very manifest by proof of continual experience, that there is an
absolute necessity of the four elements for the maintenance of this our
earthly life, but certainly we stand in greater need of the Lord Jesus, for the
sustenance and preservation of the spiritual life of our souls.

The element of the Air refreshes us; it is the element of our breathing, and
place of our Being.

The Water serves to cleanse and to wash away our filthiness, and for many
other good uses.

Fire or heat warmes us, and prepares food for the nourishment of our
corruptible bodies.

The Earth bears us, albeit, Romans 8.22.
It groneth under us, for the burden of our sins; it nourishes us, and does
carry through the secret veins thereof, the water of the Ocean, far from man;
it makes the salt and bitter waters of the Sea, to be sweet and pleasant to us.

But Christ is much more needful for us; he does refresh us with joy, with
comfort, and with the light of his countenance, Ioh. 16.33.
In him we have peace, Act. 17.28.
in him we live, we move, and have our Being; Christ purges us, Reu. 1.5.
and washes us from our sins in his blood, he warmeth our cold frozen hearts
with the heat of his love.

Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 19.
We who were aliants and strangers from the couenent of promise, and we who
were far off, are made near by his blood; we are no more strangers nor
forreiners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God. Yea, 2.
Pet. 3.10.
When the Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that
are therein shall be burnt up, and the heavens shall pass away with a noise,
and all things shall forsake us: Even then Christ Phil. 1.22.
shall be unto us both in life and death advantage, Col. 3.11.
He shall be all, and in all things to us; he will never leave us, Ioh. 14.3.
He will receive us unto himself, that where he is, there we may be also,
remaining and reigning with him in eternal and unspeakable glory.

The consideration of this, To seek Christ.
should move us, and urge us to seek him first of all and principally, to
seek him diligently and carefully, to seek him in time, to seek him in the
right place where he is to be found, to seek him in fear and humility, to
seek him in truth and sincerity, to seek him continually and constantly.

First, We should seek him principally, for if Math. 6.33.
First we should seek the kingdom of God (we should seek Him first and
principally) Who is Ioh. 14.6.
the way to that kingdom, and Mat. 25.34.
who is the giver and bestower of that kingdom.

Secondly, Let us seek Christ diligently, for so he seeks us, as Luke 15.8.
a woman if she lose one piece of silver, does light a candle, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently till she find it. By our diligent seeking of
Christ, we declare and testify that we are the true Spouse of Christ, who
desires to be joined inseparably to her husband, Cant. 3.2.
seeks him by night, and if she find him not, she rises and goes about in
the City by the streets, and by the open places, and asks the watchmen, and
diligently seeks him whom her soul loves, till she find him and take hold
on him.

Thirdly, Let us seek Christ in time, Isa. 55.6.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ve upon him while he is near;
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive.

The foolish Virgins sought Christ, but vntimously; Math. 25.12.
When the gate was shut, they cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us, but he answered
verily I know you not.

If we desire the Lord near unto us, that so timously we may seek him and
find him, our joy and our treasure, let us labor to obtain melting and
broken hearts, and sorrow full souls, because of our grievous sins and
heinous trespasses committed against so good a God, so kind and so gracious a
God for us; Psalm. 34.18.
The Lord will be near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save
such as be afflicted in spirit.

Fourthly, When we address our selves to seek Christ, let us resort to the
right place, and to the blessed company of the godly people: John he saw Reu.
1.13.
Christ in the midst of the seven golden candle-stickes, abiding with great
majesty, power and glory. We should seek Christ in that place, among that
society, where he promised to be present, in the Church, among the assembly of
the righteous. Math. 28.20
Lo, I am with you always until the end of the world.

Fifthly, Seeing Christ is so necessary, it is our duty to seek him with
holy fear and humility, as Jacob sought his fathers blessing; he feared Genesis
27.12.
least he should have been cursed; with humility and fear he sought his
blessing.

That happy woman Queen Ester, while she was to seek her own life, and the
life of her people from her husband King Ester 4.16.
Asbuerus, remembering her own unworthiness and indignity, and beholding the
King his majesty and glory, with preparation, fear, humility and fasting,
she came to the King, and made her humble supplication to him, she found
favor in his sight, her request was granted unto her.

Thus we seeking Jesus in holy fear, in humility, with fasting, with
preparation; we shall find him: we may draw near to him while he holds up
the golden scepter of his mercy unto us.

Sixthly, Let us seek Christ in sincerity for his own sake, to glorify and
honor his holy name; not as the carnal Jews, who sought Christ for their
bellies, Ioh. 6.26.
That they might be filled; wherefore Christ he reprooues them; but let us with
earnest study seek Christ, and labor to be like Nathaniel, Ioh. 1.47.
True Israelites in whom is noguile, so Christ shall accept of us.

Seauenthly, If it be profitable for us to pray continually, it will be
profitable also to seek Christ continually; Christi natiuitas sanctificat
nostram, Bernard.
eius vita instruit nostram, eius mors destruit nostram, Christ's birth
sanctifies our birth, his life instructs ours, and his death destroys our
death. Incassum laborat in acquisitione virtutum qui eas alibi quam in Christo
quaerit, In vain do any labor to acquire virtues, who seek them in any
other place then in Christ.

When we by the grace of God are dutifully exercised in seeking of the Lord
Jesus, we may 1. Thesse. 5.17.
be well assured to find him, Cant. 1.6.
whom our soul loves, seeing it is his own gracious promise, Math. 7.6.
Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, even Christ
himself, who is of greatest excellency; in whom there is sufficiency of all
good, to be our King to deliver us, who naturally are in bondage; to defend us
that are infirm and weak of our selves; to govern us, who are unruly; we
shall find him to be an high Priest, to make intercession for us, who are
guilty; to reconcile us to our God, who were his enemies; to bless us with
spiritual blessings; we shall find him our Doctor to instruct us that are
ignorant; our Physician to heal us that are diseased; our Pastor to feed us,
who are most indigent, to the great joy of our hearts, to the eternal comfort
of our souls, to our everlasting happiness.

CHAP. III. Of the Love of Christ.
OUR blessed Savior, so excellent in his own nature, so necessary for us, he
is also most loving and merciful to us. The undoubted assurance, and the firm
persuasion of his great love and ardent affection toward us, is the cause of
our unspeakable joy and consolation: Yea, the diligent remembrance of this love
of God to his own Saints, is the cause oft-times of their wonder and
admiration; Psalm. 40.5.
O Lord my God, thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can
count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us: I would declare, and speak of
them, but they are more then I am able to express.

Psalm. 139.17.
How dear therefore are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum
of them! If I should count them, they are more then the sand: Ephesians. 3.18.
Who may be able to comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.

If the infinite love of Christ toward his own cannot be comprehended,
Christ's Love. 9. Properties.
how can it be sufficiently uttered or declared; Yet let us remember for our
comfort and instruction, that the love of Christ toward his Saints is
eternal, great, constant, sweet, wise, strong, manifest, a natural love, and
a free love.

First, His Love eternal.
Christ's Love is eternal, because he loved us before the world was made, he
Ephesians 1.4.
who chose us, and Math. 25.34
prepared a kingdom for us before the foundation of the world, he also loved
us before the beginning of the world: But Christ chose us, and prepared a
kingdom for us, before the foundation of the world. It is true then he loved
us before the world was made, Ephesians. 1.11.
even he loved us, and predestinate us to happiness from all eternity, which
works all things after the counsel of his own will, to his glory, to our
felicity.

Secondly, Christ's love is very great, His love tender.
his affection wonderful tender toward his own, Psalm. 34.15. and 15.17.
His eyes are upon them, his ears are open to their cry, his heart pittieth
them, his hand helps them, he delivers them out of all their troubles, he
will never forget them; Isa. 49.15.
Can a woman forget her child; though she should forget, yet Christ will not
forget his Saints, for Cant. 8.6.
he sets them as a seal upon his heart, and a signet upon his arm.

His love is more tender and ardent, then the love of parents to their
children; Psalm. 27.10.
Though my Father and Mother should forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me up,
and be the God of my salvation; Ioh. 15.13.
Greater love then this has no man, when any man bestows his life for his
friends.

Some Mothers for the preservation of their natural life, have killed their
own children, 2. Kin. 6.29
and did eat them; we read of no Mother, who did give her own flesh to be
food for her child, to save his life in time of famine: But our most loving
Savior did bestow his own life, John 6.51.
And gave his own flesh for the life of the World, he was willingly content to
die, that we might live eternally with him in his happy Kingdom.

Thirdly, Love constant.
Christ's tender love is also constant and permanent, John 13.1.
Forasmuch as he loved his own which were in the World, unto the end he loved
them; Iam. 1.17.
With him there is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning; Mal. 3.6.
The Lord changes not, and the sons of Jacob are not consumed.

The great King of Heaven, is not as the mortal kings on this earth, who
oftentimes will alter fection, and change their favor to wrath and indignation;
Ester 3.1.
King Ahashuerosh did promote Haman, and exalted him above all his Princes, but
shortly after, in his wrath commanded Ester 7.9.
to hang him.

Who was in greater favor with Alexander the great, Plutar. in vita Alex.
then Clytus or Callisthenes? yet Clytus within a short space was killed, and
Callisthenes tormented.

Who in greater credit with Solomon the Magnificient, Richard Knolles in the
Turkish History.
fourth Emperors of the Turks, then Abraham Bassa, whom Solomon made Vesier,
which is the chief of all the Bassaes, and President of his Council, the
greatest honor in the Turkish Empire, next unto the Emperor himself? And to
honor him yet more, he delivered him his private Signet, wherewith the
Turkish Emperors never used to trust any but themselves; what he commanded
was done, and whatsoever he did was taken for well done. He might without the
Emperors knowledge give any office, yea, the government of whole Provinces and
Countries unto his favorites; without whose company Solomon was as one half
dead.

He so possessed the Emperor, that many commonly said the soul of Solomon
lived in Abraham. But quickly after, Abraham so much beloved and honored, is
brought in disgrace with Solomon, He in the Court was murdered by the
commandment of the Emperor, and so became the scorn of Fortune, the
lamentable spectacle of man's fragilitie.

But whosoever shall attain to that happiness, as once to enjoy the love and
favor of Jesus, he may certainly be persuaded, never to loose the same; For
Number. 23.19
God is not as man that he should repent, Romans 11.29.
and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 8.25.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ, Esa. 42.3.
he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but bring
forth judgment in truth, who Heb. 5.2.
will sufficiently have compassion on them that are ignorant, and out of the
way.

Dilexit nos Christus dulciter, sapienter, fortiter, His love Sweet. Bern.
super Cant. ser. 20
dulciter quod carnem induit, sapienter quod culpam vitauit, fortiter quod
mortem sustinuit. Christ has loved us Sweetly, Wisely, Courageously; Sweetly,
because he was clothed with our flesh; Wisely, because he eschewed our fault;
Courageously, because he suffered death, that Heb. 2.4.
through the suffering of death, by Gods grace he might taste death for all men.

Christ he loved us Sweetly, when he Phil. 2.7.
being equal with God, took on him the form of a servant, Gal. 4.4.
and was made of a woman, Romans 1.3.
our Lord was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16
Without controversy; great is the mystery of godliness, which is God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up in glory.

August.
Is qui fecerat hominem, factus est quod fecit, ne periret, quod fecit factus
est, homo suscipiendo, quod non erat, non perdendo quod erat. He who made man,
has become what he has made; least that which he has made should perish; he
has become man, by taking that which he had not, not by loosing that which he
had.

Christ has loved us Sweetly, who being equal with God in glory, did take
upon him our nature, and Hebr. 5.1.
was compassed with our infirmities, and was found in our shape, because he
loved us so, he would work that great work of our redemption.

King Achab 1. Kin. 21.30
when he went unto the battle against the Aramites, he did change his
apparel, undoubtedly not of love, but of fear.

Our Savior, Gene. 3.15.
the seed of the woman, who was to break the head of the Serpent, Phil. 2.7.
he made himself of no reputation, and was made like unto men, and was found
in shape like as a man; his exceeding love and wonderful affection, was the
cause that moved him to make such an exchange, as to take our flesh, and give
to us his righteousness.

Fifthly, His love Wise.
Christ has loved us most Wisely; for albeit, he took upon him our nature,
yet he was not defiled with our sin, 1. Pet. 2.22.
Christ did not finne, neither was there guile found in his mouth.

As that Serpent of brass, which Moses by the direction of God lift up in the
Wilderness, it had the shape of a Serpent, but not the venom, nor poison of a
Serpent; Yea, Number. 21.9.
when a fiery Serpent had bitten a man, if he looked up to the Serpent of
brass, he recovered and lived.

So Jesus Christ John 3.14.
became the son of man, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have eternal life.

He was clad with our nature, but not polluted with sin, being Luke 1.35.
the holy Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

We have great comfort in this similitude, because Christ being very God, is
very man also in one person; we have greater comfort in the dissimilitude,
because albeit Christ be man like unto us, yet he is no sinful man as we
are; but is holy, harmless, 1. Pet. 1.19.
the undefiled Lamb of God without spot, 2. Cor. 5.21.
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

Seeing the Son of God has assumed our nature, he is a fit Savior to
satisfy the Justice of his Father, for that transgression and fault committed
by man; for it is agreeable to reason, that because man sinned against God, he
should also make satisfaction for sin.

And seeing Christ was free from sin, and the holy Son of God, not subject to
any inbred impiety, that is a greater comfort for us; thereby we may be
assured whatsoever Christ suffered, it was for our sakes; Isa. 53.5, 6.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, with his stripes we are healed; and the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all.

Christ our most holy high Priest, is not like the Leuiticall Priests; For Heb.
5.3.
they were bound to offer for sins, as well for their own part, as for the
peoples, because they were sinful like the people: But Christ who is
altogether free of sin, Heb. 9.26.
Has appeared once to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Christ
being without sin, is most fit to make satisfaction for us who are sinners.

Sixthly, our Savior loved us Valiantly, because he suffered death for us, His
love strong.
and that most willingly, not by constraint or compulsion; Ioh. 10.18.
No man takes my life from me, but I (says he) lay it down of my self; I
have power to lay it down, and to take it up again; And so 2. Tim. 2.10
has abolished death, and has brought life, and immortality unto light
through the Gospel.

Quemadmodum infestum animalculum cui nomen vespa, Athanasius de Christi
passione.
cum impetit Petram, non eam laedit incursu, sed potius perdit aculeum, sic
mors vehementer falsa est incurrens vitam, quae est Christus Jesus, non enim
potuit eum tenere mors, sed ipsa potius aculeum perdidit.

Like as that trouble some little beast called the Waspe, when it inuades a
hard Rock, it hurts not the Rock by that onset, but rather looses her sting:
So death was greatly deceived by setting upon life, which is Christ Jesus; for
death could not hold him, but rather loose her sting; so that Christ says
triumphantly; 1. Cor. 15.55
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Seventhly, His love manifest.
Christ's love toward us is manifest and apparent, not an obscure or hid love;
it appears clearly both by his words or styles which he gives us, and by his
works which he did for us; Christ says to the godly soul, Cant. 4.9. and 5.2.
My Sister, my Spouse, my Love, my Done, my undefiled, open to me, come to me;
He calls his people Psalm. 94.5.
his heritage, his Deuteronomy. 32.9.
portion, the lot of his inheritance; Zach. 2.8.
He that touches them, touches the apple of the Lords eye; and Christ when he
is speaking of any, who Math. 12.50
shall do his Fathers will, he says the same is my brother, my sister, and
mother.

All those styles which Christ gives to his own, are loving and comfortable.

So the works which he does to them, they are very pleasant and profitable.

First, He awaites upon our coming to him, and expects us a longer time then
1. Sam. 16.12.
Samuel did awaite for David, when he was to anoint him King over Israel; Reu.
3.20.
He stands at the door of our hearts and knockes; If any man hear his voice,
and open the door, he will come in unto him, and suppe with him.

Gemina dulcedo suauitatis exuberat in pectore Christi, longanimitas in
expectando, Bernard supra Cant.
and facilitas in donando, Double sweetness of pleasure abounds in Christ's
heart, his patience, longanimitie in awaiting for us, his readiness to give
gifts to us.

Secondly, When we have wandered and gone astray, and are as lost sheep in the
wilderness of this world, he follows us, he seeks us diligently while he
finds us, Luke 15.5.
he lays us on his shoulders with joy, and brings us home again into the
sheepe-fold of his obedience.

Thirdly, Because he loved us, he has suffered much pain for us, more then
Genesis 29.28.
Jacob suffered for Rachel; 1. Ioh. 3.16.
Hereby have we perceived his love, that he laid down his life for us, Gal.
3.13, 14.
and has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for
us, that through him the blessing of Abraham might come upon us, that we might
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

Fourthly, Because Christ loved us, he has fought valiantly to obtain and
purchase us to himself; he has fought more valiantly then Josh. 15.17.
Othniell did for Achsah the daughter of Caleb, whom he gat to wife, with a
field, and with a blessing: But Col. 2.15.
Christ has spoiled the Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them in the cross.

Fifthly, Because he has loved us, he has patiently borne with our
infirmities, and did not forsake us when we did offend him; Psalm. 37.24.
Though we fall, we shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand;
Psalm. 103.13.
As the father has compassion upon his children, so has the Lord compassion
on them that fear him. Parents do not reject and despise their diseased and
sickly children, but rather cherish them and bear with them; the love of
Christ is more ardent, who bears with our imperfections, and heals all our
infirmities.

Sixthly, Col. 2.13, 14.
Christ has forgiven us all our trespasses, and has put out the handwriting
that was against us, even he took out of the way that obligation which was
contrary to us. Thus he discharges us of a most dangerous debt, he cures us
of a most deadly disease, he preserues us from a most cruel enemy, he
delivers us from a most dark prison, he washes us from most filthy spots.
That happy woman did evidently declare her great love to Christ, while she
Luke 7.38.
did wash his feet with her tears, and did wipe them with her hair, and
kissed them, and anointed them with ointment.

But this is a greater demonstration of Christ's love toward us, for that he
has washed us vile and miserable sinners with his own blood, from the
filthiness and pollution of our sins, and Reu. 3.18.
anointed our eyes with eye salve, that we may see; And 1. Ioh. 2.27.
the anointing which we have received from him dwells in us, and teaches us
all things needful for us to know for our eternal salvation.

And as in love he has delivered us from the greatest evil, and has
discharged us of the worst debt; so also in his incomprehensible favor, he
has bestowed upon us the greatest good, and furnished to us the most precious
and durable riches.

When as Augustus Caesar had of his own accord paid the debt of a Senator his
favorite, Macrobius, l. 2. Saturn. cap. 8.
and had relieved him of that heavy burden, he was therefore renowned and
greatly praised; Yet he did not bestow a sufficient maintenance, whereupon his
friend afterward might have bin entertained, as he being advertised of that
matter, did write to the Emperor, Mihi nihil, Thou have given nothing to me.

But Christ as he has relieved us, of a most trouble some debt, by making
satisfaction thereof; so further, he will give us more precious jewels, and
more worthy raiment then Genesis 24.51.
Eleazer Abraham's servant gave to Rebecca, and 2. King. 9.7.
a better inheritance the^ David gave to Mephibosheth: yea, Heb. 12.28.
He will receive from him a kingdom which cannot be shaken, but remains with
us for ever. So we may say, Col. 3.11.
Christus nobis omnia and in omnibus, Christ is all to us, and in all things.

This was a true signification of the love of Euilmerodach King of Babel,
toward Iehoiachin King of Judah, for that Ier. 52.31.
he lifted up his head and brought him out of prison, he spoke kindly to him,
and changed his prison garments; he set his throne above the throne of his
Princes that were with him in Babel, and he did give him a continual portion
all the days of his life.

Christ has given a more sure demonstration of his love toward us, who brings
us forth from a filthy prison, who speaks peaceably and comfortably to our
consciences, who changes our prison, rent and polluted garments, who bestows
upon us Ioh. 16.13.
the Spirit of truth which will lead us in all truth, and Reu. 3.21.
who will grant to us, that we shall sit with Him, and with his Father in his
throne, to praise and bless his glorious name for ever and ever.

Thus the Love of Christ, may be very manifest and well known to us, by his
awaiting for us, who are lingering; by his seeking of us, when we are wandering;
by his taking pains for us, who were fleeing and departing from him; by
fighting for us, for our Redemption; by suffering us who are infirm and weak;
by forgiving us great debts, by bestowing upon us great benefits.

Eighthly, Christ's Love is natural, not forced; Natural.
Mich. 7.18, 19.
He takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of his heritage,
he reteineth not his wrath for ever, beeause mercy pleases him; He will turn
again and have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all
our sins into the bottom of the Sea: We may therefore (because Christ's love
is natural, and mercy pleases him) with assured confidence believe all his
promises. Gracious.


If a covetous or auaricious worm, would promise us great benefit, we might
have cause to doubt of the performance of that promise, feeing it is contrary
to his nature to be liberal or beneficial.

But Christ when he promises good things, we may be certainly persuaded that
in due time he will accomplish and fulfill what ever he has promised; for he
does Zeph. 3.17.
quiet himself in his love. His favor is natural to him. As it is natural
to a lively fountain, Mal. 4.2.
the Son of righteousness, to refresh, enlighten, and give health and grace
to all his beloved Saints, where ever they remain upon this earth.

Ninthly, The Love of Christ, Christ's Love free.
is a most free Love, no ways merited by us; for it is extended to miserable,
sinful, unworthy, and wretched creatures: Christ will cure our misery, Hos.
14.5.
heal our rebellion, he will love us freely, his anger will be turned away
from us, he will make us happy for ever.

I will speak God-willing,

But first, propound the use of this doctrine, viz. that we should love Christ,
who has so loved us.

Secondly, The evident signs, and some infallible tokens of those that love
Christ, whereby they may truly know whether they love Christ their Redeemer or
not.

Thirdly, Some comforts and benefits, which are prepared for all those that
love the Lord Jesus.

First, Love Christ earnestly.
it is our duty to love and affect our Savior with a most ardent and earnest
affection; the faithful soul, the true Spouse of Christ says Cant. 2.5.
I am sick of love; Great is her affection toward Christ, great will be the
consolation she shall receive from Christ; Cant. 2.4.
He will bring her to the wine-cellar, his love will be a banner over her, he
will stay her with flagons, and comfort her with his apples, his fruit will be
sweet and delectable unto her mouth, his comforts will refresh her for ever.
Let us not prefer the love of any worldly thing or earthly commodity unto
the love of Christ, for so did the Gadarens, from Luke 8.37.
whom Christ departed, whom he left in misery and bondage: But let us Deuteronomy.
30.5.
love the Lord our God, with all our heart, and with all our soul, that we may
live; He that loves his life better then Christ, shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

Secondly, The inward affection of our heart, Love Christ openly.
should appear evidently, and be manifest to all, by the outward profession of
our mouth; Math. 10.
Whosoever therefore shall confess Christ before men, Christ will confess him
also before his heavenly Father; whosoever shall deny Christ before men, him
also will Christ deny before his heavenly Father which is in heaven; Mark. 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of Christ and of his words among this sinful and
adulterous generation, of him shall the Son of man also be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

The good Emperor Iouianus, Theodoret Eusebius.
who was of excellent wit, and sound Judgment, given to letters, and therewith
well learned, he was a faithful and sincere Christian; Insomuch that when the
Apostata Iulianus, commanded that no Christian should be a Captain, neither
should have any charge or office in the wars. Iouianus pleasantly answered,
that he made greater account of the faith whereof he made profession, then of
any dignity or honor he inioyed, and so gave up his charge: Yet afterward
he was advanced to great honor, even with great joy and applause chosen
Emperor, and the Imperial ensigns given to him. His love to Christ, as it
was entire and ardent, so he publicly with danger and loss for a time,
professed the same, as many other Martyrs, the faithful servants of the Lord,
who albeit Heb. 11.37.
they were stoned, hewn asunder, albeit they were slain with the sword,
afflicted and tormented, yet did they never deny their Master, nor forsake
their faith, but because of their great and inward affection, they publicly,
constantly, and openly confessed their Lord, Heb. 4.14.
bolding fast their profession; whose example should be a pattern to us to love
Christ as they did, ardently and manifestly in the view and sight of all the
world, and never to be ashamed of such a good Master.

Thirdly, Love Christ constantly.
We should constantly love Christ at all times, and never suffer our love to
decay, but that continually it be fervent, manifest, plentiful and constant.
As the Hawke while she is fit to catch the Prey and lively to flee well,
Perkins.
she is set on the hand of the King or Nobleman; did keep the fire upon the
Altar, never let it go out, but fed it continually; Leu. 6.13.
The fire (says the Lord) shall ever burn upon the Altar, and never go out.
So we must cheerish and preserve this fire of our love, and carry wood to this
fire daily and continually: if we be like the Ephesians, Reu. 2.4.
who left their first love (as all are when we examine our selves thoroughly, we
may soon perceive a great and manifest decay of our love) our Judge will then
Reu. 2.5.
come against us shortly, and will remove our candlestick out of his place,
except we amend; and suffer us to remain in fearful and comfortless
darkness, and in ignorant blindness, destitute of the light of Gods loving
countenance.

But let us endeavor with great diligence, that we may have such an affection
and love to Christ, as Mary Magdalen had, who loved and honored Christ in his
life, and awaited on him at his death, and sought him diligently after his
resurrection; Ioh. 20.15.
to whom first he appeared, comforting her, and directing her, to show his
resurrection to his Disciples.

We read of many women who were not enlightened with the knowledge of Gods
word, Plutarch in Pomp.
that constantly and firmly loved their husbands; Valerius Maximus. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
Hypsicrates wife to Mithridates a King of Pontus, did change her apparel, and
followed her husband through many difficult and dangerous ways, while he fled
from Pompei, and was a great comfort to him in time of his trouble, during the
space of his exile and banishment. Also Sulpitia, wife to Lentulus Crustelio,
when as her mother Iulia did watch over her narrowly, and keep her most
diligently, least she should follow her husband to Sicilia, banished by the
Triumvers; notwithstanding taking to her worn and common clothes, accompanied
with two maids, forsaking her mother, who with alluring words (no doubt)
promised her ease and rest, Valerius Max. lib. 6. cap. 7.
and good entertainment, she privily came to her husband, neither refused she
to banish her self, that her love and fidelity toward her troubled husband,
might the better appear. It is greatly to be feared, that (as the Math. 12.42.
Queen of the South will rise in judgment, and condemn the Jews, for their
contempt of Christ; so even Ethnicke women will rise in judgment with this
generation, and condemn it for their cold affection and disloyalty to Jesus
Christ, who offers to be the good husband of their souls: But let us Math.
16.24.
take up our cross and follow Christ, and for sake our selves. Let us love our
heavenly husband most constantly, and adhere to him, most steadfastly affecting
him, with a most tender, an earnest, a constant and a loyal affection.

Now forasmuch as the profane worldly man, Signs to know who loves Christ.
will profess openly, and affirm boldly, that he loves Christ greatly: Yea,
one would think a manifest wrong done to him, if his love toward Christ were
called in question, and he accounted as one that is Reu. 3.16.
Lukewarm, neither bot nor cold, whom Christ will spew out of his mouth. And
seeing that Ier. 17.9.
the heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it? I will
briefly set down some sure signs and tokens, whereby any may know assuredly
whether they love Christ rightly or not.

1. One that loves Christ truly, Our remembrance of Christ.
will be mindful of Christ continually, his first thought in the morning will
be of him, his last cogitation in the evening will be of him, in the day time,
and night time he will think upon him, and never suffer that Christ slip out
of his memory, he will say with the faithful soul, the true spouse of
Christ, Cant. 1.3.
I will remember thy love more then wine. The people of God in their banishment
at Babylon, did Psalm. 137.5.
never forget Jerusalem, but remembered their City, and preferred it to their
chief joy, because of their love to Jerusalem. If one love earnestly the King
of Jerusalem, he will never forget him, but always remember him with entire
affection, and hearty thanksgiving. Our delight in his Word.


Secondly, if thou love Christ in sincerity, thou will delight in his word
greatly, and rejoice to hear him speaking to thee, thou will say; Cant. 2.8.
It is the voice of my well-beloved; John 10.4.
The sheep of Christ know his voice, and follow their Savior, but they flee
from a stranger, because they know not his voice. Thou will take great pleasure
to hear him speak to thee, (for he Isa. 61.1.
will preach good tidings to thee, liberty to thee that art captive, the
opening of the Prison to thee that art bound, he will preach the acceptable
year of the Lord to thee, to comfort thee that mournes) and proclaim peace,
and reconciliation to thee who by nature was his enemy.

Thirdly, Our desire of a communion with him.
whosoever loves Christ as they should do, they will desire earnestly to have
society and communion with Christ, yea, to possess Christ, and to be
possessed by him, that they may with feeling and experience testify Cant. 2.16.
my beloved is mine, and I am his, and to attain to that fellowship and
communion, they will be content to suffer great pains, and to bestow great
charges and expenses.

Schechem, Genesis 34.12.
when his heart claue unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, while he longed for
her naturally, did ask her in Marriage; He said unto her Father, and to her
Brethren, let me find favor in your eyes, grant me my request, and I will
give you whatsoever ye appoint me, ask of me abundantly, both dowry and
gifts, and I will give as ye appoint me, so that ye give me the maid to
wife; and for her sake he suffered incision in his flesh, and he deferred not
to be circumcised, because he loved Jacobs daughter.

Who so loves Christ spiritually, with an earnest and tender affection, to the
end they may possess Christ, and enjoy the pledges of his presence, they will
be content willingly to bestow expenses, and to endure pains, yea, to suffer
death, that they may obtain him, Ioh. 11.25.
Who is the resurrection and the life.

Fourthly, Obedience to his commandments.
obedience to the commandments of Christ, is a most sure argument of a
Christians affection toward Christ; Ioh. 14.15.
If ye love me (says he) keep my Commandments. Dathan and Abiram loved not
Moses, for when he the Ruler of the people sent for them, they disobeyed and
answered, Number. 16.12.
We will not come up; therefore they went down alive into the pit, a^^ the
earth covered them.

David loved the Lord tenderly; Psalm. 116.1.
Therefore he made have, Psalm. 119.60.
and delayed not to keep his Commandments.

Fifthly, if thou love Christ, Our sorrow for his his dishonor.
thou will be greatly grieved and discontented, when any dishonor or
indignity is done to him. Abishai the son of Zeruiah did carry great
affection to David, for when Shimei came out, cursed and iuiured David, Abishai
was offended, and 2. Sam. 16.9
said unto the King, what does this dead dog curse my lord the King? let me
go, I pray thee, and take away his head.

Many and great benefits will they receive who love Christ dutifully; He that
loves me, John. 14.21.
shall be loved of my Father: he will bestow his loving kindness and favor
upon them. The favor of God is most profitable, most pleasant and permanent.
If the favor of an earthly King Pro. 19.12.
be like the dew upon the grass, that will refresh one, and increase his
estate in Worldly goods; the favor of the Heavenly King will be much more
profitable; Psalm. 30.5.
In his favor is life. Gods favor is most pleasant, and so most to be
desired, which made David thus to pray; Psalm. 4.7.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, (God give us thy favor and
loving kindness.) Thou have given me more joy of heart, then others had, when
their wheat and wine did abound. His favor is permanent and not alterable;
Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord (says he) I change not, and therefore ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed; And seeing Romans 11.29.
the gifts of God are unchangeable, and without repentance; Number. 23.19
God is not as man, that he should repent. Our Heavenly King is not like an
earthly King, for oftentimes it comes to pass, that a mortal King will
change his affection, and alter his love, as Esther 7.
Ahashuerus did to Haman, as before was specified.

Orontes sonne-in-law to King Artaxerxes, Plutarch. in apo. reg.
having experience of the changeableness of the affection of great Princes,
being rejected of the angry King, and condemned; Like as (said he) the fingers
of those who did account, sometimes were placed for a great number, at other
times for a small number (for in old times, men used to make their accounts
with their fingers, as now they do with counters:) so the friends of Kings,
while they enjoy the favor of Kings, they may do great things to help
themselves and others; but when they are in disgrace with their Prince, they
may do very little for their own relief. It is better therefore to trust in
the Lord, Psalm. 118.9.
Then to have confidence in Princes; his favor is steadfast, and permanent,
he himself is always present with his own, Heb. 4.16.
To help in time of need.

Jacob a loving father; Genesis 37.3.
He loved Joseph, and made him a coat of many colors, but he could not
continually be present with him, to have defended him from the envy and fury
of his brethren.

David a loving Prince, and well minded toward Abner, 2. Sam. 3.20
unto whom he made a feast, yet he could not ever accompany him, to save him
from the sword of Ioab, but whom God favors he will at all times be present
with them, Psalm. 91.15.
He will be with them in trouble, be will deliver them and glorify them.

Secondly, if we love Christ, Romans 8.28.
We know that all things work together for the best unto us; the troubles,
afflictions, and calamities of this life will work to our good. Martyr in Romans
cap. 8.
This they do not of their own strength or nature, but by the appointment of
God: for if earthly Physicians can so temper poison by their art, that they
will make it to procure the health of a man's body; It is no merueile although
the most wise God, so temper our crosses and all our afflictions, as to make
them to redound to the weal and profit of those who love him.

Thirdly, if we love Christ, we shall be beloved of him, and Psalm. 127.2.
surely he will give rest to his beloved; after our pains, travel, and
misery, we shall enjoy peace, rest, and tranquillity. Nao^^ Ruth. 3.1.
said unto Ruth, my daughter shall I not seek rest for thee, that thou may
prosper: Christ will say unto that soul that loves him, I will seek rest for
thee, that thou may prosper eternally.

Fourthly, John 14.24.
he that loves me (says Christ) I will love him, and show my own self unto
him; yea he will give his own self unto him, for the price of his
redemption, he will purge him, honor, and bless him.

Let Ephe 5.2.
us walk in love, us, and has given himself for us, to be an offering and a
sacrifice of sweet smelling savor to God.

Now Reave. 1.5.
unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made
us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father, to him be glory and dominion
for evermore, Amen.

Thus of the manner how we should love Christ, viz. greatly, openly,
constantly; also of the signs showing our affection to him, viz. our
remembrance of him, our delighting in his word, our desire of communion with
him, our obedience to his precepts, our grief and coffeehouse at his
dishonor: further, of our comforts when we love him; we shall get Gods favor,
all things shall turn to our good, we shall get rest, peace, purity,
protection, his blessing, honor, and eternal happiness. We will next speak
of the freeness of his great love toward miserable man.

CHAP. IIII. Christ's free love to miserable man.
THis incomprehensible love of Christ is most free, no way of our deserving,
for it is extended to miserable, sinful, unworthy, and wretched creatures: We
indeed are Revel. 3.17.
poor, naked, blind, miserable, and wretched, and that by our default and
procurement, for God at the beginning, Genesis 1.26.
He made man in his own image, according to his own likeness, and in
rigteousnes, and holiness, (...), man was the image and workmanship of God.
Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parua, Nazianz. Manil.
every one is the example of God in a small image; so we were all at the
beginning, but we did not abide in the state of our creation; we lost our
happiness by our own sin and defection, and so we became weak, mortal,
vile, unhappy, sinful, and miserable in our bodies, souls, and in our
actions.

Our bodies Genesis 3.19.
are dust and earth, The misery of the body
taken out of the earth, and which shall return again thereto: Corpus materia
est malitiae, our body is a matter of naughtiness, Corpus est volutabrum,
Hilarious. Ambros. in Lucam. August. lib. 2. confess.
and diuersorium peccatorum, our body is a wallowing place, and lodging of
sins: Corpus est puteus caeno ac miseria tantum scatens, our body is a pit
full of clay, filthiness, and only misery, it is become cadauer sensibile,
sepulchrum portabile; a sensible carrion, a portable sepulcher: the beginning of
our body is filthiness, the perfection thereof is weakness, the end thereof
is rottenness. It is called saccus stercorum, esca vermium, a sack of
filthiness, a bait and food of the worms.

The soul of man much more precious and excellent then the body: Of the soul.
when we consider the faculties, and the best ornaments thereof, we may soon
perceive them (as they are merely natural) to be exceedingly defaced and
depraved, in so much that the reason and understanding it self (which is as
needful for our safety and tranquillity, Plutarch. in moral.
as the anchore is to the Ship, and as pleasant and profitable to us, as the
Sun is to the World; without the Sun, albeit, there were other planets and
Stars, there would remain but darkness; and without reason, albeit, there
were other senses and powers, there would remain but bruitishnesse. This our
understanding is first obscured and darkened; 1. Cor. 2.14.
So that the natural man, perceives not the things that are of God, for they
are foolishness to him: Secondly, it is so feeble and weakened, that all the
travels and labors of the wisest (without the assistance of Gods holy Spirit)
cannot increase the light, the knowledge and the strength thereof; 1. Cor. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives increase: Thirdly, it is so corrupted and vitiate, that it would Isa.
47.10.
deceive us, and cause us rebel against God, with those Babylonians; 1. Cor.
8.1.
It would puff us up, and not edify us; Iere. 4.22.
It would make us wise to do evil, but have no knowledge to do well, yea,
the best effect thereof would be trouble and vexation; Eccles. 1.18.
For in the multitude of wisdom is much grief, and he that increases
knowledge increases sorrow.

Such then being the vanity and misery of the understanding, The vanity of
the will.
how great is the vanity, and misery of the will, and of the affections,
which ought to be governed and directed by the understanding.

The will of man so differs from the will of God, as the Ionick Idiome or
Language,

It is Gods will that we contain our selves within the limits of reason, but
our will is to pass over and transgress the bounds appointed by God, yea, our
will is direct contrary to the Lords will; his will, is holy and heavenly, our
will is wicked and earthly; Romans 12.2.
The will of God is good, acceptable and perfect; our will is evil, perverse
and imperfect.

It is the Lords will, 1. Pet. 1.15.
That we be holy in all manner of life and conversation, as he which has
called us is holy; But Romans 3 9.
we are all under sin, we have all gone out of the way, we are all
unrighteous, and made altogether unprofitable. It is Gods will that we be true
and faithful, Reu. 19.11.
as he is called faithful and true, and judges righteously; but Psalm. 116.11.
all men are liars, false and deceitful by nature. God wills us to be 1.
Pet. 29.
a Royal Priesthood, a free people, his own children, brethren and sisters to
Christ Jesus; but Romans 6.17.
we have been servants to sin, slaves to our vile affections, and vassals to
Satan. It is the Lords will, 1. Cor. 3.16.
That we should be the Temple of God, and that his good Spirit should dwell in
us; but we have become Luke 19.46.
a den of thieves, a receptacle of foul spirits. It is the Lords will, Hos.
14.7.
that we should be as the Olive trees spreading our branches in beauty, within
his garden; but we Isa. 7.23.
are as briars and thorns, worthy to be cast into everlasting fire. It is the
Lords will, that 1. Cor. 3 9.
we should be his husbandry or field to bring forth fruit in the appointed
season.

But alas in us Job 31.40.
thistles do grow in stead of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley; we are a
barren and unprofitable husbandry, Heb. 6.8.
justly to be reproved, very near unto cursing; whose end (except we timely
and seriously repent) is to be burned. It is the Lords will that we should be
his Isa. 5.2.
fruitful Vineyard, to bring forth grapes, and to be his pleasant plants; but
we have brought forth wild grapes; he looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; for righteousness, but behold a crying. It is the Lords will that
we 2. Tim. 2.20.
should be vessels of gold and silver unto honor in his house, but we have
been vessels of wood and earth unto dishonor. It is the Lords will 2. Cor.
11.2.
that we be prepared to be presented as pure Virgins to him, that he may be
our husband, Hos. 2.19.
to marry us unto himself for ever, yea to marry us in righteousness and
judgment, in mercy, in faithfulness, and in compassion: but we forsaking our
most wise and most loving husband, the guide of our youth, the giver of all our
good, Ezech. 16.26.
we have committed fornication with his enemies, we have increased our
whoredoms, Hos. 2.5.
we have done shamefully and foolishly, and have played the harlot with the
world and with sin, and justly have we deserved his wrath and indignation,
shame, poverty and destruction; Psalm. 63.27.
For the Lord destroys all them that go a whoring from him; also our nature,
and the whole course of our life is directly repugnant to his most holy
commandments.

We have then good cause to renounce our own wicked and perverse will,
Prophet; Psalm. 143.10.
Teach me O Lord to do thy will, for thou art my God, let thy good Spirit
lead me unto the land of righteousness, Phil. 3.13.
for it is God which works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure; we have cause at all times to say with our Savior; Math. 26.39.
O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will so be it done.

Concerning our affections (which inseparably abide with us, Of our affections.
which no thing can remove from us) as clearly appears by experience, and
that speech of that worthy Emperor, Antoninus Pius. Permittite illi vt
homosit, nam neque Imperium, neque Philosophia tollet affectus. Eras. lib. 6.
Apoth. Nec madida ebrietas, nec mihi sicca placet. Chrysostom. in Joan. Plutarch.
in Moral.
For when as his adopted Son Marcus Aurelius, did heavily lament the death of
his Tutor, and the Courtiers assayed hastily to mitigate his grief and sorrow;
the Emperor said, suffer him to be a man, for neither the Empire, neither
Philosophy, will take away his natural affections.

These are to us a sort of drunkenness, for to distemper and annoy us.

These are to us as a heavy burden, pressing us down, and hindering us, from
running the race of our spiritual Journey. Our affections are tovs, as a
mighty tempest, and vehement wind is to the Sea, which make it troublous, and
very dangerous. These are like an evil and watery humor, falling down from
the head upon the eyes, and hindering the sight. These are like the poisonable
cup of Circes, that suddenly transformed men: These are to us naturally, as the
Nations and Cananites were to the Jews, Josh. 23.13.
a snare and destruction to us, as a whip on our sides, and thorns in our
eyes, withdrawing us from doing good, urging us to do evil, so to bring us to
misery and wretchedness.

Seeing then such is the condition of the body and soul, Psalm. 39.5.
surely every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity, Psalm. 62.9.
the chief men are liers: to lay them upon a balance, they are Psalm. 90.15.
altogether lighter then vanity, Psalm. 90.15.
they are as a dream, and as the shadow of a dream; a shadow is a vain, a
weak, a dark, (...). Pind.
and a backward thing, fleeing from the Sun, and from the light; when the
Sun is in East, the shadow enclines to the West, and when the Sun is in the
West, the shadow tends to the East: So in man there is vanity, weakness,
darkness, perverseness, and backwardness, a rebellious and deceiving heart,
declining and departing from the living God.

If then the fountain be bitter, the water flowing therefrom, can not be
sweet; if the tree be evil, the fruit cannot be good; If a man be so perverse
and corrupt, So Genesis 6.5.
that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart be only evil
continually, his actions and deeds will be as his thoughts, wicked and vicious.
Romans 3.12.
There is none then, who of himself, Innocen. de vilit. cond. hum.
by his own nature (the Apostle speaks truly) that does good, no not one;
But Agit praua, quibus offendit Deum, offendit proximum, offendit seipsum, agit
turpia quibus polluit famam, polluit personam, polluit conscientiam; agit vana
quibus negligit vtilia, negligit necessaria, fit cibus ignis qui semper ardet
and vrit, inextinguibilis; esca vermis, qui semper rodit and comedit
immortalis; massa putredinis, quae semper foetet and sordet: A man does wicked
things, wherewith he offends God, he offends his neighbor, he offends
himself; he does filthy things, wherewith he defiles his good name, he
defiles his person, he defiles his conscience; he does vain things, whereby
he neglects profitable and necessary things; he becomes the food of an
unquenchable fire, which is ever burning and consuming, a bait of a never
dying worm, which is ever gnawing and devouring, a very mass of rottenness,
that at all times is filthy and stinking. Job 4.8.
He that will plow iniquity and sow wickedness, shall reap the same, with
the blast of God he perishes, and with the breath of his nostrhils he is
consumed.

All mankind is subject to a threefold misery, according to the judgment of
an Ancient. First, we are readily seduced. Secondly, we are unable to obey God.
Thirdly, Bernard sermon. 8.
we are weak and infirm to resist tentations. If we would discern betwixt
good and evil we are deceived; if we assay to do good, we are soon weary of
well-doing; if we preasse to withstand evil, we are ast down and vanquished;
Hos. 13.9.
Our destruction is of our selves, our help and deliverance is of God, and in
him.

Further, the remembrance of the place where we have bin, where we are
presently, and whither we go naturally, may be an occasion to show to us our
baseness, and to aggranate our wretchedness. Bernard.
Considera vnde venis and erubesce, vbi es and ingemisce, quo vadis and
contremisce; Consider from whence thou come, and be ashamed; and where thou
art (that thou remainest in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar) thou
may sigh; Psalm. 120.5.
whether thou go, and be afraid.

Yet notwithstanding of our misery, vanity, and deformity, of our weakness,
foolishness, and filthiness, of our cortuption, perverseness, rebellion and
wickedness; it has been the good pleasure of our glorious and blessed
Savior, freely of his own accord, to love and affect us a Zeph. 2.1.
people not worthy to be beloved; and if we shall embrace his tender and free
love, even he who in his own due time will Act. 1.6.
restore the Kingdom to Israel, he will also restore to us all those gifts and
graces which we lost by sin; we shall be conceived Ioh. 3.5.
of the spirit, and the womb of Gal. 4.26.
our mother the Church; we shall be Ioh. 1.13.
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God, who is our
Father in Christ, and we shall be 2. Cor. 3.18.
changed into the same image of the Lord, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit
of the Lord; he will make us his own habitation; He Reu. 3.20.
will come in unto us, and suppe with us, we shall be 1. Cor. 3.16.
the holy Temple of God, in whom his Spirit dwells; He will make us, 2. Tim.
2.20.
vessels of gold and silver appointed to honor; and all Romans 6.13.
our members as weapons of righteousness unto God; and because Psalm. 119.73
his hand has fashioned thee, he will give thee understanding, that thou
may learn his commandments; Job 33.30.
He will turn back thy soul from the pit, to be illuminate in the light of
the living; he will enlighten thy dark understanding, strengthen thy weak
understanding; and renew thy corrupt and vitiat understanding; he will so
conform our wicked will, to his holy will, that we Ephesians. 2.3.
shall not fulfill the will of our flesh, neither that, Ephesians. 5.27.
we be unwise, but shall know what the will of the Lord is, as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; further, he will moderate and
rectify our crooked affections, and Col. 3.2.
set them on things which are above, and not things which are on the earth, so
that they shall be esteemed not earthly but heavenly; Bernard.
as a small drop of water poured into a great quantity of wine, loses the
nature of water, Zech. 12.10.
When thou shall look upon him, whom thou have pierced; thy most joy shall be
in the cross of Jesus, whereby the world is crucified unto thee, and thou unto
the world; thy greatest fear shall be like the fear of Joseph, least Genesis
39.9.
thou sin against God; thy most fervent love shall be set upon Christ; that
2. Cor. 5.14.
love shall so constrain thee, Phil. 3.20.
that thy conversation shall be with him in the heaven, and thou Romans 13.14.
shall have no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, but shall
be Ephesians. 5.1.
a follower of God, as a dear child in all thy actions, and walk in love
with Christ, Tit. 2.2.
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, living soberly, justly, and godly, in
this present world; Heb. 12.2.
looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of thy faith, who gave himself for
thee, to redeem thee from all iniquity; and will bestow upon thee many and
excellent blessings.

A few number thereof, I am now God willing to lay before thee, that by thy
meditation on them, thou may readily receive Christ, offering himself with
his mercies, so graciously to thee.

CHAP. V. Christ gives his Spirit.
AMONGST many innumerable and unspeakable benefits, Christ gives his Spirit.
which Christ of his undeserved favor, will vouchsafe unto his own servants,
I will recompt these for the present: He will give his Spirit, life, health,
wisdom, food, clothing, riches, liberty, joy, honor, peace, grace, his
blessing, yea, himself for to be a husband to all those, who will willingly,
and rightly receive him.

First, Christ will give to his own his holy Spirit, which Ioh. 15.26.
proceeds from the Father, to testify of him. This spirit by his most mighty
power and effectual working, will banish and expel the spirit of Satan, which
naturally possesses all the children of Adam, an 1. Sam. 16.17
evil and wicked spirit, that would vex and trouble us: Secondly, a 1. Kin.
22.22
false and lying spirit, that would deceive us: Thirdly, Zach. 13.2.
an unclean foul spirit, that would defile us: Fourthly, a Hos. 5.4.
spirit of fornication, causing us to depart from our God, withholding and
staying us, from giving our minds to turn to our Lord: Fifthly, a Mar. 9.25.
deaf spirit, so that of our selves we cannot hear the word of God: Sixthly, a
dumb spirit, so that we cannot speak to our God: Seventhly, a Luke 13.11.
spirit of infirmity, bowing us together, so that we cannot in any wise lift
up our selves to look to him: Eighthly, Romans 11.8.
a spirit of slumber, so that with our eyes, we cannot see the way of God,
neither in our hearts consider those things that belong to our peace: Ninthly,
a Esa. 19.14.
spirit of giddiness to distemper us: Tenthly, a 1. Tim. 1.7.
spirit of fear to terrify us from Gods service: Eleuenthly, the 1. Cor. 2.12.
spirit of the world, to tie and glue our affections thereto, deteining us from
the Heavenly Kingdom.

The people of Jerusalem were greatly indebted unto David, because he expelled
the Iebusites out of the City and 2. Sam. 5.7.
took the fort Aion: Are we not more obliged unto the goodness of Jesus, who
has cast out of us so many devils spiritually, as he had Mar. 16.9.
cast out of Mary Magdalen bodily, and has taken to him our heart, to be his
habitation. Cicer. Phi. 1 and Valerius lib. 4.


That renoumed man Trasybulus, deserved well of the Athenians, who drove out of
their Town, thirty Tyrants miserably oppressing the Citizens, and made a
Decree of oblivion, and forgetting of all wrongs, never to be remembered among
them, and so restored great peace and tranquillity unto his own people. But
much more better has Christ deserved of us, who will send his holy Spirit to
deliver us: first, from Romans 8.15.
the spirit of bondage, and cast out the foul spirit with the unclean lusts
thereof, and give to us John 14.17.
the Spirit of life: secondly, the Spirit of verity: thirdly, the Zach. 12.10.
Spirit of grace: fourthly, the Eze. 18.31.
Spirit of prayer and compassion: fifthly, a new Spirit, that we die not:
sixthly, the Romans 8.5.
Spirit of adoption: seventhly, the Job 20.3.
Spirit of understanding: eighthly, the Isay 11 2.
Spirit of wisdom and counsell^ ninthly, the Spirit of knowledge and strength
to quicken us; to teach us, to beautify us, to make us serve our God in
newness of spirit, to strengthen us, to give wisdom to us, to guide our feet
in the way of of peace and righteousness, so to cover us with his innocence,
That the Lord shall not remember the sins of our youth, neither our
rebellions; Romans 7.6.
But his only tender mercies and loving kindness, even for his goodness sake.

Psalm. 25.7.
The operation of this holy spirit is principally our sanctification, from the
which the spirit is called, Romans 1.4.
the spirit of sanctification. And the effects and fruits of the holy Spirit,
proceeding from the sanctification of the spirit are spread into many branches:
First, John 3.5.
to renew us, or to work faith and conversion in us. Secondly, to make us
sensible Gal. 5.17.
of our wants: Thirdly, sorrowful for our sins: Fourthly, to wrestle, and
lust against the flesh, and our own corruption: Fifthly, Psalm 42.2.
to thirst earnestly for grace, and mercy from God: Sixthly, to prefer Christ
to all, Phil. 3.8.
thinking all things loss for him: Seventhly, to Ioh. 14.26.
teach and inform us according to Christ's promise; Et vbi spiritus est
magister, cito discitur quod dacetar, where the spirit is master, it is soon
learned by us, which is taught unto us: Eighthly, Romans 8.11.
to conioyne and couple us with Christ, that as members of his body we may be
raised with him from the dead: Ninthly, Romans 18.14.
to lead and govern us, through all the dangers and difficulties of this life:
Tenthly, Ioh. 14.16.
to comfort us in time of our trouble and affliction; and in this respect he
is truly called the Comforter: Eleuenthly, to confirm us who are weak and
wavering in our faith, and to make us sure of our salvation, and of the
continuation of all the blessings of Christ toward us, and of our preservation
even unto the end; Ephesians. 1.13.
That we may be sealed with his holy Spirit of the promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased,
unto the praise of his glory.

The effects and properties of the holy Spirit, may be the better known by
those comparisons which are set down in the holy Scripture: It is compared, to
Matthew. 3.11.
fire, Isa. 55.1.
to water, and to the Psalm. 47.8.
oil of gladness. 1. The fire does warm and give heat to cold things. 2.
It will furnish light in darkness. 3. It will nourish us in some manner, at
least prepare food for our nourishment. 4. It is the nature of the fire to
ascend and go upward. 5. It has a power to burn. 6. It has force to melt
metals, to mollify hard things. 7. It serves to be a Beacon for the safety
of ships. 8. Fire is a terror to Lions, and other ravenous beasts. 9. It is
fit to cleanse houses infected with the plague of the pestilence.

1. Holy spirit compared to the fire.
The holy Spirit will warm with the love of Christ, our cold hearts, frozen in
the dregs of sin, in this cold age of the decaying world. 2. It will
illuminate us with sanctifying and saving light, who of our selves remain in
the shadow of death and darkness. 3. It will cherish us. 4. Raise our
affections toward him. 5. It will consume the dross of sin. 6. Mollify and
melt our hard hearts. 7. Direct us to the salvation of our souls. 8. Be a
terror to Satan and evil spirits. 9. It will cleanse our infected souls. And
to insist in these properties more particularly; As fire warmeth cold things,
so does the holy Spirit warm our cold and benumbed hearts: We find that S.
Paul and his company, had great need of a fire to warm them, when after
Shipwreck they were cast in winter upon Malta, they accounted it no little
kindness, when those of the Isle Acts 28.2.
kindled a fire, and received them all, because of the shower, and of the cold.

I. We have great need to be warmed with the holy Spirit in this World; And we
may be assured, that our hearts will never be quickened with the life of
Christ, but when they are warmed with the heat of the holy Spirit: Before the
Shunamites dead son was raised to life, 2. Kin. 4.34.
The flesh of the child waxed warm, when Elisha stretched himself upon him;
so our warmed heart becomes a quickened heart. If no creatures be hid Psalm.
19.6.
from the heat of the Sun in the Firmament, none of Christ's Saints shall be
deprived of the heat of the love of his Spirit.

II. The spirit brings a more clear and continuing light, unto our dark
minds, then a fire can bring unto our house; Psalm. 36.9.
In this light shall we see light; as for the wicked man, who has not the
light of this spirit, Job 15.30.
He shall never depart out of darkness; his Psalm. 35.6.
way shall be dark and slippery; he Job 24.13.
will abhor the light, not knowing the ways thereof, neither continuing in
the paths thereof; wherefore, Isa. 8.15.
He shall stumble, and shall fall, and shall be broken, and shall be snared,
and shall be taken, and destroyed; when the godly shall be well guided, and
surely preserved. If the Jews received a great benefit by that cloud which
guided them, and was in the night a Exodus 13.21.
pillar of fire to show light to them. True Christians receive a greater
benefit by Gods good Spirit; Isa. 58.10.
Our light shall spring out of darkness; Colos. 1.13
We shall be delivered from the power of darkness; Colos. 1.13
Light shall be sown for us; Psalm. 93.15.
We shall walk in the light of Gods countenance, Isa. 48.17,
Which will teach us to profit, and lead us the way that we should go.

III. At focus a flammis and quod fouet omnia dictus.
We are nourished and refreshed by the benefit of the fire, (at the least,
most part of our food is prepared and made fit for us, by the help thereof.)
So Moses desired the people, Exo. 16.23.
To bake or seethe Manna it self, for their nourishment and sustentation: And
it is known by experience, that our most necessary food, would become
unprofitable, unwholesome, and unsavory for us, if it were not dressed by the
fire. We are better refreshed by the consolations of the holy Spirit: Yea, all
natural and civil gifts, as worldly Wisdom, Eloquence, Utterance, the gift
of Prophesying, without the grace of the sanctifying Spirit, at one day will
serve to no purpose; When as Christ Mat. 7.23.
will profess to them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work
iniquity.

IIII. It is the property of the fire, that the flame thereof ascends and
tends upward, Vnam viam scit, August.
alteram nescit, it knows one way, to go upward; it has no other way. So it
is the property of the Spirit, to raise up our earthly hearts; Colos. 3.2.
That we may set our affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are on the earth, Phil. 1.27.
That our conversation may be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and that
Ephesians. 3.1.
we may walk worthy of the vocation, whereunto we are called; whosoever has
received the Spirit of Christ, he will say with David, Psalm. 25.1.
Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my soul, even unto thee, Isa. 57.15.
That is high and excellent, that inhabiteth eternity, who dwells in the
high and holy place. Our soul being lift up unto God by heavenly
contemplation, is then most sure from the tentation and danger of Satan; Job
1.7.
compasses the earth, and so within it hunteth whom he may devour.

V. The holy Spirit, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in Ioh.
is as a fire to kindle the feruencie of grace in us, and to consume, and burn
up the dross of sin; as gold cast into the furnace, it is fined and the
dross consumed: we are by the feruencie of the Spirit fined and bettered, our
sins are removed, but we our selves preserved. Exodus 3.2.
That Bush which Moses saw in the Wilderness, burned with fire and was not
consumed, because the great Angel of the Covenant, Christ, was in the Bush:
Although we be kindled with an ardent love to Gods glory, yet we shall not be
destroyed by the fire of that zeal; but our wickedness thereby will be
weakened, and we our selves preserved, Spiritus fanctus, Gregor. in hom.
ideo in linguis igneis apparuit, quia omnes quos replenit ardentes pariter,
and loquentes fecit, The holy Spirit, therefore, appeared in fiery tongues,
because it made all those whom it filled to be burning, and speaking; burning
indeed with zeal of Gods glory; Act. 28.31.
Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things, which concern the
Lord Jesus Christ.

VI. As the fire has power to melt metals, and to soften in some measure hard
iron: So the Spirit has a more forcible power, to mollify and soften our hard
hearts: When Josiah heard the words of the Law, 2. Kin. 22.19.
His heart did melt, and he humbled himself before the Lord. Who did work
this effect in him? only the holy Spirit; for as no waters could have come out
of the Rock, Exodus 17.6.
unless it had been smitten, with the rod of Moses, at Gods command: so our
hard hearts cannot be softened, till they be wrought upon by the virtue of
Christ's Spirit; That Psa. 114.8.
God which turns the Rock into water pooles, and the flint into a fountain
of water, must by the power of his Spirit, change our hard hearts, He must
Ezekiel. 11.19.
take away the stony heart out of our bodies, and (according to his promise)
give us an heart of flesh.

VII. Psa. 107.23.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy by the great waters, have
need of a fire, or Beacon to be a direction for their safe entry into the
Port, at sundry places, and oftentimes: So in Pharos in Egypt, at the
commandment of Ptolomeus Philadelphus, Strab. l. 17.
and by the Art of that cunning artificer Sostrates Guidius, a high Tower of
white marble was built, upon the top whereof were kindled fires in the night
season, for the fafetie of passengers in the right course to the haven: But at
all times, and in all parts, we have greater need of the light of Gods Spirit,
that we may be ever guided, or else we taking and holding a wrong course, 1.
Tim. 1.19.
as concerning faith, we may make Shipwreck to our destruction both of soul
and body eternally.

VIII. (...) Arist. lib. 9. de hist. animal. and Hom. ardentesque faces, quas
quamuis saeuia^, horret.
The Philosopher affirms that fire is a great terror to Lions. The Devil
our adversary is as a roaring Lion walking about, seeking whom he may devour,
he most fears the Spirit, whom if we possess and entertain, being steadfast
in the faith, surely then we shall be able to Iam. 4.7.
resist the Devil, and he will fly from us.

IX. It is known by experience, that houses infected with the plague of
pestilence, are cleansed by fire; and the Lord ordained to purify with fire
all the prey, (Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron,) taken from their enemies, as
polluted with their sins; Number. 31.23
that which might abide or suffer the fire, they behooued to make it go
through the fire, that it might be clean. The Spirit of Christ has an inward
purging power, to Ioh. 15.3.
make us clean through the Word of Christ, and to keep us in soul and body
blameless, unto the coming 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now if that dwelling place be unpleasant and vnheartsome, which in a cold and
stormy season, 1. Pet. 5.8.
wants the service and pleasure of a fire: Yea, God appointed, Leu. 6.12.
that fire should evermore burn upon his Altar, never to be put out, never to
go out. Surely, that soul is more unpleasant in the eyes of the Almighty,
that wants the presence of Christ's Spirit; that soul will not be a
habitation for the holy and blessed God; and if men will bestow great labor
and expenses, to provide fire to burn in their houses, should not we employ
the uttermost of our power, and labor with most earnest endeauours, that the
fire of Christ's Spirit, may be kindled in our hearts.

The Spirit is compared unto water; Holy Spirit compared to water.
Hoe every one that thirsts, let him come to the waters: these waters come
not from the Ocean of this earth, but they Ezech. 47.1.
issue out of the Lords Sanctuary, Christ will give us this water, Ioh. 4.14.
he that drinks thereof, shall never be more athirst; this water shall be to
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

We have great need of this corruptible water, There are uses of water. Better
uses of the Spirit.
it is very necessary for us. 1. To wash filthy things; without water many
things would remain foul and defiled. 2. To give growth to corn, herbs,
grass; without showers of rain they would wither, and never come to maturity
nor perfection. 3. Plenty of water extinguisheth fire. 4. It will refresh and
comfort wearied men traveling in a great drouth. But the spirit of Jesus is
more necessary to wash us from the filthiness of our sin. 2. To make us
increase in godliness. 3. To extinguish the violence Isa. 55.1.
of our fiery affections. 4. To refresh and comfort us, fighting against sin,
Satan, and our ghostly enemies.

I. Aaron and his sons; Leu. 8.6.
Were washed with water, and then did put upon him his Priestly garments; we
must first be washed from the pollution of our sins, and then be Reu. 3.18.
clothed with that white raiment, that our filthy nakedness do not appear:
The Spirit of Christ does thus purge us from the filthiness of our sins, and
does wash our souls in a better sort, then water can cleanse our bodies; even
to wash Ier. 4.14.
our hearts from wickedness, that we may be saved; wherefore when David
desired of the Lord, that a Psalm. 51.10.
clean heart should be created within him, and that a right Spirit should be
renewed within him, he thus prayed; Cast me not away from thy presence, and
take not thy holy Spirit from me; the holy Prophet knew well, that if the holy
Spirit should be taken from him, then it were impossible for him to have a
clean heart, and a right Spirit within him.

II. Corn, herbs, and grass, will not grow without water, rain and dew; Job
8.11.
Can a rush grow without mire (says Job) or can the grass grow without water,
though it were green and not cut down, yet shall it wither. So in the days
of Achab, 1. Kin. 17.1.
there was neither dew nor rain, Luke 4.25.
when the heaven was shut three years, and six months, then great famine was
thorowout all the land, because of the continuing drouth, and lack of showers
and rain; as it was a fearful plague, when Deuteronomy. 28.24 Verse. 12.
the Lord would give the Jews for the rain of their land, dust and ashes; so
it was a great earthly blessing, When the Lord did give rain in due season,
that was profitable for the increase of their corn, grass, and fruits of
their ground. It is the presence and operation of the Spirit, that makes us to
grow in virtue and godliness, without it all graces would lessen and decay in
us: 1. Sam. 3.19.
When the Lord was with faithful Samuel, by his Spirit, then he grew both in
stature and knowledge, and none of his words did fall to the ground.

III. The Spirit extinguisheth our fiery lusts and affections, as water
extinguisheth fire; It is true, that the lust of the unregenerate, is as a
fire, 1. Cor. 7.9.
to burn and consume them; the heat of concupiscence in Ammon, was the cause
of leanness, yea, of sickness; 2. Sam. 13.2.
he was sore vexed, that he fell sick for Tamar: It is of necessity, that
every one must become a sacrifice, either to God, or to the devil (there is no
midst) we may know to which of them we are a sacrifice, Chrysostom.
both by the fire consuming, and the thing that is consumed in us; if the fire
consuming be the heat and fervor of the Spirit, the ardent love of God, the
earnest zeal of his glory, and the thing that is consumed, be our filthy
sin, our raging lust, our inordinate affections, then we may be assured, we
are a sacrifice to God, Romans 12.1.
Living, holy, and acceptable to him; but if the fire consuming be our fire of
affections, our raging lusts, and burning concupiscence, and if the things that
be consumed, be the gifts of the Spirit, our love, zeal, then undoubtedly we
are a sacrifice to Satan, miserable are they, whose sins and fiery affections
are not quenched by the cooling water of the holy Spirit, they will be burnt
up in this world with the fire of their passions, and in the world to come,
Christ the righteous Judge, will Math. 3.12.
burn them as chafe with unquenchable fire.

IV. Wholesome and clean water, refreshes and comforts one wearied,
languishing and fainting through thirst: Ismael was at the point of death,
until the time he was refreshed and strengthened with Gen 21.19.
the water of that well, which God showed to his mother Hagar; Yea, Sampson
himself having overcome and slain the Philistims; Judge. 15.19.
He was sore athirst, and said, shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hands
of the uncircumcised; and then the Lord gave him water; when he had drunk, his
spirit came again, and he was revived. The holy Ghost in a greater measure and
better manner strengthens and comforts the hearts of those, who are filled
therewith; for this cause he is Ioh. 14.26.
called the Comforter, in comparison of whom all men may be called, as Job
called his friends, Job 16.2.
miserable comforters; and every one who inioyeth the company of this Spirit,
may say truly, Psalm. 94.19.
In the multitude of my thoughts, in mine heart, thy comforts have rejoiced my
soul. If David 2. Sam. 23.15.
longed for the water of the well of Bethlehem, and said, oh that one would
give me to drink thereof; Have not we greater cause to long for the water of
the holy Spirit, to wash us who are filthy, to increase us, who decay in good,
to quench our fiery passions, to comfort and refresh us, who are weak and
wearied.

V. This Spirit is called, Psalm. 45.7.
the oil of gladness; it rejoices our grieved heart, it is medcinall to cure
our souls; Psalm. 104.15.
And as oil will make the face to shine before men, so the spirit will make
our souls to shine before our God, and to be beautiful in his sight.

Christ said truly to his Disciples, Ioh. 15.5.
without me ye can do nothing; So without the Spirit of Christ, we can
receive no good thing; for the Romans 8.26.
Spirit helps our infirmities, and makes requests for us, with sighs that
cannot be expressed. We read that 2. Chro. 9.23.
all the Kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his
wisdom; we should rather seek the presence of his spirit, who is greater
then Solomon. Math. 12.42
The presence of Ichosaphat King of Judah, was very profitable to Iehoram, for
when they had 2. King. 3.9
compassed the wilderness of Edom seven days, they had no water for the host,
nor for the cattle that followed them; And Iehoram lamenting their estate to
the Prophet Elisha, he was thus answered; As the Lord of hosts lives, in whose
sight I stand, if it were not, that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat King
of Judah, and verse 14.
I would not have looked toward thee, nor seen thee; but for his sake, he
assured him of present plenty of water, and of victory over the Moabites.
Unless the Lord regarded the presence of his own Spirit, he would not look
in mercy upon us, he would not vouchsafe to visit us; and so we should be
miserable in the wilderness of this world, and more miserable in the life to
come.

The people of Rome esteemed the presence of the Tribunes so necessary and
expedient, Tribuni plebis quos nullum diem integrum Roma abesse licet, Macrob.
lib. 1. Satur. cap. 3.
that by law it was ordained, that they should abide continually in the City;
neither was it lawful for them to be absent from Rome, for the space of an
whole day: we Christians should esteem the presence of Christ's Spirit, more
requisite and needful for us; we may not want the same for the space of one
day, not of one hour, not of one moment; if we want it, we will fall into some
grievous sin, we will Math. 26.70.
shamefully with Peter deny our Master, wound our conscience, and slander our
holy calling and profession, to the dishonor of God, to our own great hurt
and detriment, to the offense of our brethren.

God made a gracious promise to his servant Jacob; Genesis 28.15.
Lo I am with thee, I will keep thee whithersoeuer thou go, I will not
forsake thee. Happy was Jacob by reason of Gods presence, which was profitable
to him, in his life time, at his death, yea, after his death; for his
protection, for his instruction, for his honor and commendation.

First, it was profitable in his life time for his protection, for by Gods
presence he was defended against the craft of Laban, who would Genesis 31.7.
have deceived him; Also against the cruelty of Esau, who would Genesis 32.11.
have destroyed him; yea, because the Lord was with him, he received more
benefits then he himself required. 2. Gods presence was comfortable to him at
his death for his instruction, for albeit his bodily eyes through age were
dimmed, Genesis 49.
yet the eyes of his mind were enlightened, his knowledge at that time was
augmented, he understood more at his death, then ever he knew in his life time;
He shows plainly what was to come, he tells his children that Christ shall
come out of Judah, and what shall be the conditions and heritage of every
Tribe. 3. God was present with him after his death, to honor him, and to
accompany his funeral; for the Lord said to him, Genesis 46.4.
I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also bring thee up again;
and how? even at his burial; for the Lord foretold, Joseph should put his
hands upon his eyes. The presence of Christ's Spirit will in like manner be
profitable to strengthen us in our life time, to comfort us at our death, to
bring us to eternal honor and happiness. The Spirit will so strengthen us,
that with all Act. 4.29.
boldness we may do the works of our calling, when we are living; and we
Act. 7.59.
shall see the heavens open, and Christ ready to receive our spirit, when we
are dying: when we enjoy the presence of this spirit, Psalm. 91.15.
God will deliver us, and glorisie us; with long life, will he satisfy us, and
show us his salvation.

It is our duty, to 1. Tim. 6.12.
fight the good fight of faith. 2. to 2. Tim. 2.15.
be workmen, that need not to be ashamed in the Lords husbandry. 3. to Heb.
12.1.
run with patience the race that is set before us. 4. to 2. Tim. 2.3.
suffer affliction, as the good soldiers of Jesus; but now it is impossible
for us, either to fight until his Spirit Psa. 144.1.
teach our hands to fight, and our fingers to battle, or to work in the Lords
vineyard, or to run the race of godliness, or to suffer, until we be helped
with Luke 11.20.
the finger of God, and Luke 24.49.
until we be endued with power from on high, until we be assisted by the
Spirit of Christ.

Barak had no desire to Judge. 4.8.
go in battle against Iabin and Sisera, without the company of Deborah the
Prophetess: Exodus 31.3.
Bezalee^ and Aholiab could not work the curious work of the Tabernacle,
until they were filled with the Spirit of God: 2. Sam. 18.23
Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, did run more speedily unto David, when he
received a warrant from his Captain: Stephen did suffer Martyrdom the more
willingly, Act. 7.60.
being full of the holy Ghost. If we would fight courageously against sin
and Satan; If we would work diligently, the works of our Christian calling;
If we would run constantly the race of true Piety; If we would suffer
affliction patiently; let us then desire earnestly the company, the presence,
the warrant, and fellowship of the Spirit.

It is our duty 1. To hearken to Gods word attentively. 2. To pray to our God
fervently. 3. To receive the holy Sacraments worthily. 4. To praise our God
continually: but without the help of the Spirit, the Word would be a 2. Cor.
3.6.
killing letter, the 2. Cor. 2.16.
savor of death unto death, the ministration of damnation. If we desire to
pray, let us Jude 20.
pray in the holy Ghost. If we be to receive the Sacraments, John 1.33.
Christ baptizeth with the holy Ghost. The Apostles themselves were unfit to
discharge their Apostolical function, till the holy Ghost was sent unto them;
they could not glorify God in their ministration until Acts 2.4.
they were filled with the holy Ghost.

1. Let us then with all careful diligence, seek his holy Spirir. 2. Let us
Gal. 5.6.
so walk in the Spirit, and we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

The Spirit, How to obtain the Spirit.
even the growth thereof, is obtained by earnest prayer. If Luke 11.13.
evil men can give good gifts to their children, how much more shall our
heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him.

Besides these reasons already declared; if we look what good others have
gotten by the holy Spirit, we shall be greatly moved to pray for the same.
Gregor. super. Ezec.
Considero Patres noui and veteris Testamenti, etc. I consider (says an
Ancient) the Fathers of the new and old Testament, David, Daniel, Amos, Peter,
Paul, and Matthew; and with open eyes I look unto them: The holy Spirit filled
young David, who followed sheep, and played upon a Harp, and made him 2. Sam.
23.1.
the Anointed of the Lord, and the sweet Singer of Israel. The Spirit filled
Daniel a child, and made him more wise then the Ancient, and gave him
knowledge, wisdom, and Dan. 1.17.
understanding of secrets, of visions, and dreams. The Spirit filled Amo. 7.14.
a Heardman and a gatherer of wild figs, and made him a Prophet to prophecy
unto Israel. The Spirit filled a Fisher, and made him a chief Apostle. The
Spirit filled a persecuter and made him a Act. 9.15.
chosen Vessel, to bear Gods name before the Gentiles. The Spirit filled a
Publican, and made him an Evangelist. Quam ergo insani sumus, qui hunc Spiritum
non quaerimus, how mad therefore (says he) are we, who seek not this Spirit.
Spiritus Jesus, Spiritus bonus, Bernar.
Spiritus sanctus, Spiritus rectus, Spiritus dulcis, Spiritus fortis, infirma
roborans, aspera planans, corda purificans; quicquid in hoc seculo difficile
videtur, leave facit; and hic allatum opprobrium gaudium iudicat, despectionem
exaltationem esse persuadet, The Spirit of Jesus a good Spirit, a holy Spirit,
a right Spirit, a sweet Spirit, a strong Spirit, strengthening weak things,
making plain rough things, purifying hearts; he makes light whatsoever
seems to be difficill in this world, judges our shame in this life to be
joy, and persuades us our contempt for Christ's sake is honor and glory.

2. Let us walk in the Spirit, let us frame our life according to the motion
and direction of the same; which if we do, we will be very loathe Ephe. 4.30.
to grieve the holy Spirit of God, by whom we are sealed unto the day of
redemption, and we will be most earnest to entertain and keep this good
Spirit. The Spirit is grieved; yea in respect of many gifts thereof, it is 2.
These. 5.19
quenched by filthy sins committed against knowledge, and against conscience.

Sin for many causes should be abominable and odious to us, but especially
because it grieves the Spirit, Psalm. 51.12.
renewing, confirming, and stablishing us; and further, as smoke chaseth away
Bees, and as stinking filthiness banisheth away Doves; (...). Basil. in psalm.
34.
so lamentable and stinking sin remooueth from us the good Psalm. 34 7.
Angels that pitch round about us, Psalm. 91.11. Bernar.
and that have charge over us, to keep us in all our ways; and therefore,
because that by our sins the good Spirit is grieved and quenched, and the
Angels removed; we should eschew sin to the uttermost of our power, and
study with all industry to entertain and keep the good Spirit of Christ
within us. Spiritus dat pignus salutis, robur vitae, lumen scientiae, vt ipse
reddat testimonium spiritui tuo, quod filius Dei sis; robur vitae, vt quod per
naturam tibi est impossible, per gratiam eius non solum possible, sed etiam
facile fiat: Lumen scientiae, vt cum omnia been feceris, te seruum inutilem
putes, and quicquid boni in te inueneris, illi tribuas a quo omne bonum est, in
tribis istis spiritus sanctus, docebit te omnia quae pertinent ad salutem. The
Spirit gives to thee, the pledge of thy salvation, strength of thy life, light
of thy knowledge, that he may bear witness to thy spirit, that thou art the
son of God; he gives strength of life, that, that which by nature is
impossible to thee, by grace it may be made not only possible, but also
easy; he gives light of knowledge, that when thou have done all things well,
thou may esteem thy self an unprofitable servant; and what ever good thing
thou find in thee, that thou may ascribe it to him, from whom is all
good. In these three things, The means to retain the Spirit.
the holy Spirit shall teach thee all things belonging to thy salvation.

The means to entertain the spirit, are first, a continual repentance, and
earnest endeavor to eschew wickedness; Pro. 4.23.
to keep our heart with all diligence: Secondly, a careful Psalm. 1.2.
meditation of Gods word; If the Colos. 3.16.
word of Christ dwell in us plentifully, surely the spirit of Christ dwells
in us also: Thirdly, fervent prayer and supplication; Thus prayed David, Psalm.
51.10.
Renew a right spirit within me, take not thy holy Spirit from me: Fourthly, to
bestow those gifts already received, for Gods glory, and safety of our
neighbor; Luke 19.13.
this is to use our talents rightly; Psalm. 51.13.
Then shall we teach Gods ways to the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto the God of their salvation.

If thou perceiuest the gifts of the spirit decaying in thee, and find
sensibly the spirit desertting, and departing from thee; alas, then Prou. 6.4.
give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, give no joy to
thy heart, no pleasure to thy mind, no contentment to thy soul, no rest to
thy body; 1. Pet. 5.6.
Humble and submit thy self, in a most pitiful manner, under the mighty hand
of God; Hos. 12.4.
Wrestle with God as Jacob did, with praying and weeping; Offer Heb. 5.7.
up continual supplications, with strong crying, and tears unto God, who is
able to save thee from death, and to hear thee in that which thou requirest;
Let thy fervent sighs and groans, declare the inward grief of thy heavy and
perplexed heart; conceal not the dolor, and displeasure of thy soul; resort
to him who Isa. 50.4.
has the tongue of the learned, and who knows to minister a word in time, to
thee that art weary; entreat him to support thee with his prayers; never cease
from praying, and saying, Psalm 31.9.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eye, my soul, my belly,
are consumed with grief; my life is wasted with heaviness, and my years with
mourning: make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and save me through thy
mercy; Psalm. 51.10.
Cast me not away from thy presence, take not thy holy Spirit from me,
restore to me the joy of my salvation, let me find again, thy Spirit
dwelling in my heart. If thou continue for a season prostrate, and pressing
before the throne of Grace, the Lord will again visit thee, and refresh thee
with his Spirit, without the which Spirit, none John 3 5.
can be borne again, and renewed; John 6.29.
none can believe, John 1.12. and 13.
none can become the child of God and heir of life everlasting.

This is the first, and most principal blessing, which Christ bestows upon
those, who receive him as they ought to do.

CHAP. VI. Christ gives Life.
JESUS Christ Act. 3.15.
the Lord of life, who gives his holy Spirit to all those, who are content
willingly to receive him, (without the Spirit no preaching, no reading, no
hearing, no example, no corrections, no benefit will profit us to our eternal
salvation; this Spirit Job 32.18.
will compel us, to go forward in the way of godliness) Christ 1. Cor. 15.4,
5.
the last Adam, by his quickening Spirit will give life, Ephesians. 2.1.
and quicken us, that are dead in sins and trespases.

Two things precede this life. 1. Separation. Who are quickened, are sundred
from the World.
2. Mortification. None will be quickened with the life of Christ, but who are
first separate from the rest of the World, and who dies to sin and
unrighteousness. Our regeneration in the Scripture is compared to grafting, to
building; We are Romans 11.17.
as branches grafted in the Olive tree, made partakers of the root and fatness
of the Olive tree, but first we must be cut off from the wild Olive tree,
wild by nature, and then grafted in the right Olive tree; We are 1. Pet. 2.5.
as lively stones, to be made a spiritual house for the holy God, but first
we must be hewn of the Quarry, before we become a new building.

When God was to make a Covenant with Abraham, he said unto him; Genesis 12.1.
and act. 7.3.
Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house;
and then I will make thy Name great, and give thee a blessing. When God was to
have mercy upon Lot, and save him from fire and Brimstone, he separated him
from the Sodomites, Genesis 19.16.
He brought him forth, and set him without the City: If the Lord be to
deliver thee, from the punishment which will come on the wicked; If the Lord be
of purpose to make Mala. 2.5.
his Covenant of Life and Peace with thee, and to give thee his blessing; then
truly he will separate thee from the wicked, and sunder thee from the World,
so that thou shall not Romans 12.2.
fashion thy self, like unto this World; but be changed by the renewing of thy
mind.

If one ask, Ans. Let us Colos. 3.2.
set our affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on
the earth; Phil. 3.20.
Let our conuer sation be in heaven, from whence we look for our Savior; we
cannot depart out of this world in respect of our actions; yet we may leave it
in our minds and affections; yet so we must depart our of it, if we would be
Gal. 1.4.
delivered from this present evil world. A number of the Jews who left
Egypt, Number. 12.5.
fell a lusting, and turned away, they remembering the fish, cueumbers, leekes,
onyons and garlic of Egypt, did remain in Egypt in their hearts, Psalm.
78.31.
the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the strongest of them, and smote
down the obosen men of Israel; Lots wife left Sodom, yet her heart was in
Sodom, Genesis 19.26.
she was made a spectacle of Gods anger; and Christ says to us all, Luke 17.32.
Remember Lots wife. Moses said to the congregation of the Jews Number. 16.26
Depart I pray you, from the tents of those wicked men, Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, lest ye perish in all their sins, we must abhor the conversation
of the ungodly, or else Christ will say Mat. 7.23.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; and so cast us into endless
misery. 1. Sam. 15.6.
The Kenites departed from among the Amalekites, at the commandment of Saul
purposing to destroy the Amalekites; we at the commandment of God, should for
sake the fashions, and depart from the conditions of the wicked, least we fall
in the destruction of the wicked.

The true Spouse of Christ, must Psalm. 45.10.
forget her own people and her fathers house, that the King may have pleasure
in her beauty; she cannot forget her fathers house, if her heart be earnestly
set upon it. We must forget and forsake the world, and set our hearts upon
heavenly pleasures, if we defire the King of heaven to have any pleasure in us.
Oh how hard and difficult it is to part from our fleshly pleasures, and to
separate our hearts from filthy sins, which Heb. 12.1.
hang so fast on us, we shall find, when we would address our selves, to
leave them, and to turn to Christ the Prince of life (as Augustine confesses)
Amicae antiquae, nugae nugarum, vanitates vanitatum, August. conf. lib. 8. cap.
11.
retinebunt, retardabunt, submurmurabunt, dimittitis ne nos? and a momento isto
non erimus vobiscum in aeternum. Our old lovers, trifles of trifles, Eccles.
1.1.
vanities of vanities, they will retain us, they will hinder us, they will
whisper to us, will you leave us, and send us from you? and from this time
shall we never be with you? Surely, we shall sunder from these Sirens, with
great pain, with much wrestling, with fervent prayers, with strong cries, with
many tears, with sore striving, yea at the beginning, with some grief,
unwillingness, and coffeehouse; yet of necessity we must forsake them, or
else the blessed God will forsake us; we must sunder, if we desire Christ to
Math. 25.32.
separate us from the goats at the last day, and to set us on his right hand,
to inherit that heavenly Kingdom. We must now separate our hearts from this
world and wickedness, Ephesians. 5.7.
we should not be companions with them; and verse. 11.
we should have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
even reprove them rather: Gal. 1.15.
who separated Paul from his mothers womb to his Apostolic calling) so to
separate us from the world to our Christian calling, that we may be a Tit. 2.14.
peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works.

2. Of our Mortification.
Our mortification follows this separation, and goes before our quickening;
the matter is not so in our regeneration and spiritual life, as it is in our
first generation and natural life: in our natural generation, life goes
before death; Eccles. 3.2.
a time to be borne, a time to die: in our regeneration and new birth, death
goes before life, the death of sin precedeth the life of Christ. Sin must
be first slain in us, and then we shall live the glorious life of Jesus; Romans
6.6.
our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, and verse. 11.
and then we are alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord; we must Col. 3.5.
mortify our members which are an earth, if we would have our souls to live
the life of grace here, and the life of glory for ever. Foolish, cruel, and
miserable were those Jews, who saved and served the idols Psalm. 106.38.
of Canaan, but killed their own children, and shed the innocent blood of
their sons and daughters. Are they not all unhappy, senseless, and
wretched, who keep and serve their sins, and who slay and destroy their
precious souls? and of necessity their must be a slaughter of one of them;
either of our sins, or else of our souls to die the second death. It shall
be very expedient for those who desire the old man crucified, and the body of
sin destroyed, To know; first, the power: secondly, the deceitfulness:
thirdly, the number: and fourthly, the nature of sin more; That sin is a Romans
6.12.
tyrant commanding, but not to be obeyed of the faithful; That it Heb. 3.13.
hardens through deceitfulness; That none can Psalm. 19.12.
understand or perceive all his faults; that our Psalm. 40.12.
sins are more in number then the hairs of our head; to the end also, we
distrusting our selves for our infirmities and weakness, for our negligence
and slothfulness, may do as did the men of Gibeon, when their enemies made
war against them; we may send our faithful prayers to Jesus, thus
entreating; Ioh. 10.6.
Withdraw not thy hand from thy servants, come to us quickly, save us and help
us: Col. 3.15.
That he who has spoiled the Principalities and Powers, and openly triumphed
over them, that he who Ioh. 16.33.
has overcome the world, 2. Tim. 4.17.
may assist us, and strengthen us, that sin may be overcome and slain in us,
by the virtue and operation of his powerful Spirit: neither should we think
sin so to be overcome and slain in us, as that after, it will never fall
upon us, nor fight against us; Gal. 5.17.
for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh,
and those are contrary one to the other; we ever carry within us concupiscence,
and 1. Pet. 2.11.
Lusts which fight against the Soul. We may truly say of sin, as Hannibal
said of Marcellus, Sibi rem esse cum host, Plutarch.
qui nec victus, nec victor, noscet quiescere, That he had to do with such an
enemy, who neither vanquished, nor victor could rest: Sin is a restless
enemy, and we Ephesians. 6.12: and 13.
wrestle also against Principalities and Powers; for this cause we should take
the whole armor of God, and 1. Tim. 6.12.
fight the good Fight of Faith; never to make truce with sin, but striving
still against such a malicious, incessant, irreconciliable adversary, which
will never suffer us to remain in quietness, or tranquillity. The Israelites
had great war in the days of Iehoshua; yet at length, Ioh. 11.23.
The land was at rest without war. We read that the Romans were almost in
a continual warfare, fighting against enemies; yet three sundry times, they
enjoyed a universal peace; the gate of the Temple Ianus was shut, Liuius, and
Florus, and alij.
a sure sign they were not molested then with any war. 1. In the days of
Numa Pompilius, their second King. 2. After the end of the second Punick war
against the Carthaginians, Titus Manlius being Consul. 3. In the reign of
Augustus Caesar, at the birth of Jesus, the most blessed, the everlasting King
of peace and righteousness. But Christians of the Militant Church, Ioh. 15.19.
Whom the world hates, Rou. 12.
against whom Satan fights, because they keep the commandments of God, and
testimonies of Jesus Christ; Romans 7.23.
In whom the Law of their members rebelleth against the Law of their minds,
ought Romans 12.12.
to put on the armor of light, but never in this life cast it off again; they
ought to begin that battle against Satan and sin, and never to cease from
it, until the last enemy death be destroyed, 1. Cor. 15.26.
and swallowed up in victory, and 1. Pet. 5.4.
they receive that incorruptible crown of glory and immortality: Albeit,
sin cannot altogether be removed and abolished, yet in some measure, it must
be beaten down and weakened, so Romans 6.12.
that it reign not in our mortal body, that we should obey it in the lusts
thereof; Yea, it must be strongly subdued, and in some respect slain and
crucified, that so we may live this comfortable and happy life of Jesus; For
whosoever dies not to sin, will die in his sin; who dies to sin, and
lives in Christ, and Reu. 20.6.
has part in the first resurrection, blessed and holy is he, for on such the
second death has no power. In comparison of this death of the wicked, in sin
and second death, our natural death, the separation of our souls from our
bodies, is not to be esteemed death: Ambros. Sermon. 77.
Non est plane dicenda mors quae Christo mortuum socians, Lucrum efficit
morientis, sicut ait beatus Apostolus, mihi vita Christus mori Lucrum, Illa
autem vere mors, quae etiam viuentem hominem peccatorum morte constringit, qui
quamuis viuere videatur, sceleribus tamen suis morti iam videtur addictus,
sicut ait Apostolus de deliciosa vidua quae (...), That is not plainly to be
called death, which makes the gain of the dying, conioyning and associating
him being dead to Christ, as the blessed Apostle says, Phil. 1.21.
Christ is to me both in life and death advantage: But that truly is to be
called death, which binds even a living man with the death of sins; who
albeit he appears to live, yet by his wicked deeds, he is adjudged already to
death, as the Apostle speaks of the wanton widow, that 2. Tim. 5.6.
she is dead while she lives. If we would escape this death in sin, let us
in time die to sin, and mortify our earthly members, that we may be quickened
with the spiritual life of Christ.

Of the which, Of our quickening 6. points.
we will consider six particular points. 1. the excellency of this life. 2.
the necessity of it. 3. the time when we first receive this life. 4. the
manner how it is wrought in us. 5. signs that discover it. 6. privileges
belonging to those who enjoy it.

I. The excellency of spiritual life.
The Excellency of our spiritual quickening, may be known by the Author
thereof, by the continuance thereof, by the judgment of godly wise men; It is
begotten by the whole blessed Trinity, the Father Isa. 41.4.
calls up those generations from the beginning, the Son gives this life,
even Heb. 7.16.
he, who is made our high Priest, not after the law of the carnal
commandment, but after the power of endless life; so does the Ioh. 6.63.
Spirit quicken also: Arist. Metaph. lib. 7. cap. 7.
No creature can give life to a dead body, but God most wise and mighty; far
less can any give life to a dead soul.

The holy Scriptures, also the writings of judicious Philosophers witness, God
only the Author of nature, to be only life, and the Author of life in
creatures; it is Ioh. 5.21.
He that raises up the dead, and quickens them.

If it be said, That Aesculapius quickened two dead men, Capaneus and Lycurgus,
and that Polytius gave life again to young Glaucus Minois son; also that one
Draco, Apollodorus Biblioth. l. 3.
raised another man from death called Draco, as may be found in Histories.

Ans. These were devilish deceits, and vain fables; for Scripture and
experience tells us, and Physicians confess, Contra vim mortis, Vide Paraeum
ad To man.
non est medicamen in hortis, there can be no refuge against the stroke of
death.

It is only God, Romans 4.17.
who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which be not, as though they
were. They then who would enjoy this life, let them seek it from him, who may
give it, on whom it depends, who bestows life natural to our bodies, and
spiritual life for the quickening of our souls; Judah said of Jacob, that his
Genesis 44.30.
life depended on his son Beniamins life; we may Reu. 1.18.
say more truly, that our life depends on our Saviors life, who was dead,
but is now alive for evermore.

Hence also is the continuance of this excellent life, that it endures for
ever; we have it not from mortal Adam, by Romans 5.12.
whom sin entered into the world, and by sin death, and 1. Cor. 15.22.
in whom we all aie, but we have our life from Christ, by Romans 5.10.
whose life we shall be saved. And if that joy which Christ gives to his
own, be a continuing and permanent joy, Ioh. 16.22.
which no man can take from them; the life must be permanent, which none can
take away, for that 1. Tim. 6.15.
blessed, and only Prince, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who only
has immortality, will furnish the life of immortality to his own servants.

This life is more precious then natural life, by the judgment of the Apostle
Paul, who enjoyed both the lives; he had best skill to judge in this matter;
he preferred the spiritual life, and was ready to lose his natural life,
Act. 21.13. Nos Aper auditu, sed vincit Aranea tactu: Vultur odoratu, Linx
visu, Simia gustn.
and to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. As for the senses of
our natural life, they are common to us, and to the beasts; yea in liveliness
of the senses, we are overcome by many beasts; but the senses of our
spiritual life, are proper to the elect Angels and us: 1. Ioh. 5.20.
by them we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us a mind to
know him who is true; and we are in him that is true, that is, in his Son
Jesus Christ, this Son is very God, and eternal life.

II. The necessity of this spiritual quickening is such, as without it we
cannot John 3.5.
possibly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, we cannot be partakers of the
eternal happiness. No entering the kingdom of heaven, no attaining to
salvation without our second birth and regeneration; there can be no new birth,
without a new life: such then is the necessity of our new spiritual life, that
our felicity depends thereupon.

Out of doubt, that widow of Naim, who Luke 7.13.
wept for the death of her only begotten son, rejoiced greatly, and glorified
God heartily, when Christ restored him to life; we have greater cause of joy
and gladness, when Christ raises us from our spiritual death, and restores
us to the life of God, whereby we are transformed according to his glorious
image.

III. Concerning the time, The time of our spiritual life.
when this life is first wrought in us; let us be assured, if it be not given
to us while we are in this earth, that we shall never enjoy the same. It is
well known, that if an infant receive not life in the mothers womb, but be
dead there, it will never get life, nor be quickened: so men, Ioh. 3.36.
obey not the Son, they shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
them. A woman fearing barrenness, or any false conception, has very great
pleasure when she finds the babe spring and move in her womb. We who of our
selves are barren and unfruitful, have greater cause of joy, when we find
sensibly the life of Jesus quickened in our hearts; Let us 2. Cor. 6.1.
not then receive the grace of God in vain; behold, now the acceptable time,
behold, now the day of salvation; Let us now receive 2. Tim. 1.10.
our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and
immortality; Who for this purpose Ioh. 10.10.
came, that in him men might have life, and have it in abundance: but those
that are Ephe. 4.18.
strangers from the Life of God here, that in this World are not borne a new of
immortal seed, Reave. 13.8.
their names are not written in the book of Life, nor of the Lamb who was
slain, from the beginning of the World; they shall never receive the Iam. 1.12.
Crown of Life in Heaven; they Reu. 21.8.
shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and Brimstone, which
is the second death.

IIII. Means of Life.
The means by which we are ordinaly quickened, are the Word and Spirit; 2.
Tim. 1.10.
Christ has brought Life unto light, through the Gospel; We must Phil. 2.16.
hold forth the Word of Life; We must also retain the presence of the
Spirit, without which our spiritual life cannot be preserved.

Paul said of the Mariners, Act. 27.31.
Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be safe: So we may say of the
Spirit, except he abide in our souls, we cannot have life, but 1. Tim. 1.19
will make Ship wrack of faith, to eternal destruction.

V. Signs of Life.
Spiritual senses, are sure signs of spiritual life. 1. When Psa. 119.18.
our eyes are opened, that we may see the wonders of Gods Law. 2. When Isa.
50.5.
our ears are opened to hear the Lords Word, that we be not rebellious. 3.
When we Psalm. 34.8.
taste and see how gracious, how 1. Pet. 2.3.
bountiful the Lord is. 4 When he 2. Cor. 2.14.
makes manifest the savor of his knowledge to us, and by us; that we smell
the savor Cant. 1.2.
of the good ointments of Christ's Name; when Romans 8.5.
we after the Spirit, savor the things of the Spirit. 5. When we have
received an 1. Ioh. 5.20.
understanding, to know him who is true, and such a feeling of that life, that
with Saint Paul we may affirm, Gal. 2.20.
Thus we live, yet not we, but Christ lives in us: So by our spiritual
seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and feeling of Christ, we may know whether
we enjoy that precious life of Christ; if we be made 1. Pet. 1 4.
partakers of the godly nature, conform to his glorious Image.

Again, our Isa. 19.18.
speaking the language of Canaan, our 1. Pet. 2.2.
desire to the sincere milk of the Word, our Math. 5.6.
hunger and thirst for righteousness, Ephesians. 4.1.
our walking worthy of our vocation, Reu. 2.19.
our works of piety and charity, me at the last then at the first, are
undoubted testimonies of our spiritual quickening; They who speak not of God
reverently, and to God in humility; who have no appetite to the wholesome
word, who walk not wifely in the Deuteronomy. 30.16.
ways of God, who Phil. 2.12.
work not their own salvation with fear and trembling; they are void of the
life of grace, they Ephesians. 2.1.
are dead in their sins and trespasses.

That dead young man, the son of the widow in Naim, as soon as he was
revived by Christ, it is said of him, That Luke 7.15.
he began to speak; his speaking declares that he was restored to natural
life.

Again, Iairus daughter, being raised to life had need of bodily food, else
Christ who quickened her, Luke 8.55.
had not commanded to give her meat; her appetite and desire to meat, was an
evident demonstration of her restoring to life. Lazarus who was dead and
stinking in the grave, having received life from Christ (the resur rection and
the life) Ioh. 11.44.
did go, and walk.

So all who are spiritually quickened, in whom the life of grace is breathed,
with Exodus 14.15
Moses and 1. Sam. 1.13.
Anna, they will speak and cry in their hearts to God, (a living soul is ever
a speaking soul.) They will have a great appetite and affection to the Word,
longing daily after it, esteeming it Mat. 13.44.
above all treasure, receiving the same with patience, and 1. These. 1.6.
in much affliction, never loathing, nor wearied of Ioh. 6.33. verse 27.
that bread of God, which came down from Heaven; but most earnestly laboring
for the meat, which endures to life ever lasting: Also they will walk in a
Isa. 35. ver. 8, 9, 10.
path, and in a way, and the way shall be called Holy; Christ shall be with
them, and walk in the way, and the fools shall not err; There shall be no
Lion, nor noisome beasts shall ascend by it, neither shall they be found there,
that the Redeemed may walk; Therefore the Redeemed of the Lord shall return
and come to Zion with praise; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads,
and they shall obtain joy and gladness; and sorrow, and mourning shall fly
away.

There are other signs of spiritual quickening, See M. Byfield in the
Exposition upon the Colos. cap. 2.13.
largely and comfortably set down by the learned: as affliction of conscience,
which is such an inward Romans 8.5.
pricking in the heart, as causes a man Ezec ^0.45.
voluntarily to remember his evil ways, and judge himself daily for them,
Isa. 61.20.
mourning for hu^ finfull life, and confounded in himself, for his ways which
are not good. 2. Affection to such as fear God; for we know that 1. Ioh. 3.14.
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; He that
loves not his brother abides in death. 3. Ceasing from sin, with sundry
others; briefly humility and contrition, is an infallible note of spiritual
quickening, for Isa. 57.15.
this says he that is High and Excellent, he that inhabiteth Eternity,
whose name is the holy One; I dwell in the High and holy Place, with him also,
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

VI. Privileges of the quickened.
As for the notable prerogatives of such as are converted, and quickened in
Jesus Christ; who can particularly number them? Who can sufficiently consider
of them? 1. The mighty and most merciful, is a God to them; Even the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for Mat. 22.32.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. 2. They are Isa. 43.4. and
21.
precious and honorable in Gods sight, dearly beloved of the Lord, whom he
formed for himself, to show forth his praise. 3. They shall be Gal. 1.4.
delivered from this evil world, Romans 7.25.
from the tyranie and dominion of sin, from the craft and cruelty of the
Reu. 12.12.
great Dragon, that old Serpent, the Devil, who is come down to the
inhabitants of the earth, with great wrath, knowing that he has but a short
time; Their Isa. 44.22.
transgression shall be put away like a clo^d, and their sins as a mist;
Their Psa. 103.12.
iniquities shall be removed from them, as far as the East is from the West,
and Mich. 7.19.
cast into the bottom of the Sea, never to be remembered, nor punished. They
receive a better gift in their regeneration, then they did in their creation;
in their first birth, they gat reason, whereby they differ from the beasts; in
their second birth, Ioh. 1.16.
of Christ's fullness, they receive grace, more precious then reason, whereby
they differ from reprobate men, both 1. Tim. 3.8.
reprobate concerning the faith, Tit. 1.18.
and unto every good work reprobate; whose end is to be burned.

Ephesians. 1.3.
They are blessed with the seeds of all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things; If they loose any thing, it shall be restored double unto them; Job
42.12.
The Lord shall bless their last days, more then the first; Psalm. 1.3.
Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de poenit.
They shall be like trees planted by the Rivers of waters, whose fruit may be
plucked off and carried away by men; whose branches may be broken off by the
violence of a tempest; but their roots remaining sure in the ground, those
trees will rise again, will spring, and flourish, with as great beauty and
ornament as before; So Luke 6.35.
the children of the most High, the brood of immortality, that Math. 19.28.
follow Christ in their regeneration: In this World their riches may be taken
from them, and they impouerished, their earthly honor may be taken from them,
and they vilipended; yea, the tabernacles of their bodies may be destroyed,
and turned to dust, yet because 1. Pet. 1.23.
they are borne a new of immortal seed, by the word of God, who lives and
endures for ever: because they have the root of life, Col. 3.3.
which is hid in Christ with God; When Christ which is their life shall
appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory 1. Cor. 15.42.
incorruptible, glorious, strong, spiritual, 2. Cor. 5.1.
having a building given of God, that is, a house not made with hands, but
eternal in the Heavens.

If any be desirous to be partakers of those, Heb. 6.8.
and many other prerogatives, let them be content first to separate their
affections, from too much desire of earthly things, and in regard of their
conversation, not frame themselves like unto the World, 2. Cor. 6.18.
but come out from among them, and sunder from them, as says the Lord; Isa.
52.11.
To touch no unclean thing, and God will receive them, he Ier. 31.1.
will be a Father to them, and they shall be his sons and daughters. Next
let them be content, 2. Cor. 4.10.
every where to bear about the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the Life also of
Jesus may be made manifest in them, even to die to sin, that they may live in
Christ, to Christ, and with Christ for ever.

Christians may say, Plutar. in vit. Themist.
that which Themistocles said to his children. Interieramus nisi interijssemus,
we had perished, unless we had perished; we shall die eternally in sin,
unless we die to sin. Also let them receive Christ the fountain of life.
When he remains in us, he is like the soul in the body, quickening the body;
when we are in him, we are like Ioh. 15.8.
brancbes in the tree, bearing much fruit; that God may be glorified, our
neighbors edified, and we our selves saved.

CHAP. VII. Christ gives Health.
ALBEIT, we be dead to sin, and be alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord, yet
in this World, we are wounded and diseased with the stroke, and with the
sickness of sin, and have great need to pray with the Prophet, Ier. 17.14.
Heal us O Lord, and we shall be healed, save us and we shall be saved, for
thou art our praise.

As for the spiritual wounds of our souls, Great difference betwixt Gods
wounds and Satan's.
God is said to Job ^.8.
wound and Act. ^7.
prick the heart with 2. Cor. 7.10. Simil.
sorrow, that leads to repentance, never to be repented of. Satan also by
sin wounds the soul; but contrariwise, God wounds men for their salvation;
Satan to their destruction; as the Surgeon takes the rasour and makes
incision in the flesh of a patient, to heal his putrified wound, and to
preserve his life; the murderer smites with his knife to kill a passenger;
And to bereave him of his life and of his goods; when God makes the wound, Job
5.18.
he binds it up, when he smites, his hands makes whole, Ier. 30.17.
Petradial. 77.
and restores health unto his own, Sic is bonum vulnus and vtile quod plurium
ac maiorum vulnerum medicinaest; A good and profitable wound it is, which is
the medium of more and greater wounds, for to preserve Romans 6.11.
the spiritual life of our souls; But Satan, Ioh. 8.44.
who has been a liar, and a murderer from the beginning, when he wounds with
sin, it is his purpose to kill the soul, to bring men to desperation and to
endless damnation, except Christ come to Luke 10.34.
bind up their wounds, to pour oil and wine, and make provision for them.

We will briefly speak of five points. 1. Five points
of the cause moving Christ to heal. 2. wherewith he cures. 3. whom
especially. 4. from what. 5. of the uses.

For the first, the great mercy of Christ, makes him to cure our diseases,
Mat. 14.14.
Jesus saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and
he healed their sick.

Sola misericordia deducit deum ad hominem, August.
deducit hominem ad deum, Only mercy brings God to man, and brings man to
God: That which brings God to man, mooues him to heal man, Bernard.
even his great and tender mercy appearing in this, Quia Deus venit ad homines
propter homines, and factus homo, O great mercy, and great mystery, God to
take upon him our nature, 1. Tim. 3.16
and be manifested in the flesh, for our quickening, and for our healing, Colos.
1.22. The means of our curing. The great force and virtue of the Word.
To make us holy and unblameable, and without fault in his sight.

Secondly, the means wherewith he cures, is his word, Psa. 107.20.
he sends his word and heals them, and delivers them to life; no health,
no deliverance ordinarily without the word, which has a wonderful and
manifold power. 1. to open. 2. to restrain. 3. to draw. 4. to conioyne. 5. to
quicken. 6. to nourish. 7. to heal. 8. to sanctify. 9. to comfort. 10. to
preserve, with sundry others. The word being as a conduite, whereby all the
blessings of Christ are conveyed unto us. 1. It has an opening power, as in
Lydia, Act. 16.14.
which worshipped God, and hearing his word, her heart was apened. 2. It has a
restraining power; The officers sent by the high Priest and Pharisees, to take
Christ were so restrained by his word, that they might not apprehend him, but
said, Ioh 7.46.
never man spoke like this man. 3. It has a drawing power; Math. 4.25.
Great multitudes out of Galilee and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and
from beyond Jordan, followed Christ, and were drawn to him by the force and
operation of his word. 4. It has a conioyning power; Cleophas and that other
Disciple, were so conjoined in affection with Christ, by the virtue of his
word: that they were vety loath to separate from him: Luke 24.29.
They constrained him, saying, abide with us. The twelve Disciples, Ioh. 6.68.
would not go from him, who had the words of eternal life. 5. It has a
quickening power, therefore David prayed well, Psalm 110. verse. 25.28.
Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy Word, raise me up according to thy word.
6. It has a nourishing power; for Deuteronomy. 8.3.
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of the Lord, does a man live. 7. It has a healing power; As officers and
soldiers are obedient to Magistrates, and Captains, Math. 8.9.
To come and depart at their commandment, so are sicknesses obedient to the
word of Christ, to go from one when he pleases. 8. It has a sanctifying
power, Christ prays, Ioh. 17.17.
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth. 9. It has a comforting and
rejoicing power; Psalm. 119.111.
Thy testimonies I have taken for my heritage; they are the joy of my heart.
10. It has a preserving power, to keep us from shame, from sin, and from
our enemies; Psa. 119.22.
Remove from me shame and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies: from
sin, Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy promises in my heart, that I might not sin: from our enemies,
by Gods Psalm. 19.11.
Law, his servant is made circumspect, by Psa. 119.98, 99, 100.
Gods commandments, we have more wisdom, and understanding then our
enemies, then our teachers, then the ancient. Gods Psalm. 19.10.
word is more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold: sweeter also
then honey, and the honey comb.

Who desire then, to have their hearts opened, to be restrained from sin, to
follow Christ, to be conjoined with him, to be quickened with his life, to be
nourished with his food, to be healed of their diseases, to be comforted in
their distresses, to be sanctified with his truth, to be preserved from all
evil: Let them be content speedily to resort to Gods house, Isa. 60.8.
as Doves to the windows: Let them harken to the Word with willingness and
gladness; like Act. 10.33.
Cornelius let them 1 Thessalonians 1.6.
receive the Word, though in much affliction, seeing it is so Heb. 4.12.
lively and mighty in operation, and Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes. Who gets
health.


Thirdly, as for those whom Christ heals.

I. We may know, Math. 9.12.
that the whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick, who are touched
with a sense of their disease, and find the pain of their sickness, and
long greatly for health and recovery; Christ (who Mat. 1.23.
went about healing every sickness, Psa. 147.3.
and every disease,) he will be a Physician to cure them also.

II. Bernard. super Cant. sermon. 10.
He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores,
Vnguentum est contritionis, est vnguentum deuotionis, est vnguentum pietatis;
primum pungitivum, dolorem faciens; secundum temperativum, dolorem leniens;
tertium sanativum, dolorem expellens, There is an ointment of contrition, Psalm.
30.2. Isa. 6.10.
there is an ointment of devotion, and there is an ointment of godliness; the
first is pricking, causing sorrow; the second temperating, asswaging sorrow;
the third is healing, remoouing pain and sorrow.

III. Christ restores those who call on his name, and those that turn to him.

IV. Christ cures those, Exodus 15.26
that will diligently hearken unto his voice, that will keep his ordinances,
and will do that which is right in his sight; It is he that heals them, who
are wearied and desire health, who are of a contrite and broken spirit,
Christhealeth the wounds of our souls.
who are obedient unto his commandments.

Fourthly, Christ a most perfect Physician, he heals his own of many and
great evils; of the wounds, of the infirmities, and sicknesses of their souls,
proceeding from sin, from Satan, and their own corruption, for if
spiritual or the second death come of sin, Romans 6.23.
spiritual wounds and diseases, which make way to death, proceed of sin also.

The wounds which one receives by a slanderer or false witness, are evil and
grievous; but the wounds wherewith sin smites are worse, and more grievous; a
Prou. 25.18.
false witness is like a hammer and a sword, and a sharp arrow: a hammer
bruiseth, a sword cutteth, and an arrow fleeeth, and pierces the heart, to the
destruction of the body; but sin cutteth and pierces the soul to the hurt
and loss thereof. The arrow of Iehu 2. Reg. 9.24.
smote Iehoram, it went through his heart, that he fell down dead in the
chariot; Sin is more piercing and more to be feared, albeit it appear
delectable and pleasant to our corrupt nature: If the words of Achitophel which
appeared to be more gentle Psalm. 55.21.
then oil, were sharp as swords, did offend and grieve David; surely sin
when we esteem it softer then butter, it will (rather then wine) in the end
thereof, bite like a Serpent, hurt like a Cockatrice, and grievously wound our
soul.

O how profitable would it be for us, if we were as sensible of the wounds of
our souls, inflicted by sin, as we are sensible of the dolor and wounds of
our bodies! 2. Reg. 8.29.
Ioram King of Israel had a feeling of the pain of the wounds, which the
Aramites had given him at Ramath; therefore he returned to his own City to be
healed: But who have a feeling of their spiritual wounds given by sin and
Satan, that they may return to the Lord, Isa. 30.26.
Who shall bind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of their
wounds? surely few.

Prou. 23.32.
Christ who Mark. 7.37.
has done all things well, Christ heals our spiritual infirmities.
he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, Psalm. 103.3.
he heals all our infirmities; even the spiritual infirmities of our souls,
our deafness, blindness, and gives us power to hear Gods voice, to see his
ways, to pray to his Majesty, and to praise his blessed name.

Isa. 35.4, 5, 6
Behold, our God comes with a recompense; he will come and save us, Then
shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf opened;
Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the dumb man's tongue shall sing,
when Christ shall vouchsafe to be the Physician of his own people.

He will remove the deafness of our souls; when that man who was deaf and
dumb bodily, was brought to Christ, He did Mark. 7.33.
put his fingers in his ears, and said unto him, be opened, Straight ways his
ears were opened, and the strings of his tongue were loosed.

If it shall please our Savior spiritually to cure our inward infirmities,
Isa. 29.18.
in that day we who are deaf shall hear the words of his book, and the eyes
of us who are blind, shall see out of obscurity and darkness. And we who
are dumb shall confess our faults, and pray to our God.

As outward deafness of the body, commonly comes three manner of ways:

I. By a loud sound, or a very great noise, continually ringing in the ears:
Thus the nation that dwells at Catadupa (where the River Nilus tumbling
down, and falling from high mountains makes a continual rumbling sound) is
deaf and wants the sense of hearing. Cicer. in some Scipion. Vbi Nilus ad
illa quae Catadupa nominantur praecipitat ex altissimis montibus ea gens quae
locum illum accolit propter magnitudinem sonitus sensu audiendi caret.


II. By the voluntary cloasing of the ears outwardly: So the mad and malicious
Jews, at the Sermon of Steven Act. 7.57.
stopped their ears, and stoned the holy and sincere servant of Christ, Psalm.
58.4.
the deaf adder or aspe stops his ear and hears not the voice of the
inchanter, it thrusts the one ear to the ground, and covers the other with
his tail) as the learned does witness and record to us.

III. By some inward defect or impediment, the passage of hearing is stopped.

The inward deafness of the soul proceeds also, 1. by the loud cry of
sin. 2. by the great care of earthly things. 3. Testes sunt Hieronymus,
Augustinus, Cassiodorus, and alij.
by the inward corruption of our nature; as the Gen 18.20.
cry of a grievous sin, is great, crying to God for punishment; so the cry
thereof is very loud, ever crying to man for practice, to Romans 6.13.
give his members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin.

When C. Marius was reproved by some, Respondebat ob strepitum armorum se
legem non esse auditurum. Plutar. in vita Marc.
because he transgressed the established law, he answered; That he could give
no ear to the law, for the rattling of weapons, the noise of armor; the
outcries of soldiers in the battles made him deaf, that he heard not what the
Roman law prescribed: So the continual cry of sin; makes us so deaf by
nature, Zach. 7.11.
that we refuse to hearken; we pull away the shoulder, we stop our ears, least
we should hear the Law of God, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in
his Spirit, by the ministry of his Prophets.

Also worldly cares, the pleasure of sin, our inward corruption stops so our
inward ears, that we are hindered from hearing, until our Physician in mercy
come unto us, by whom our spiritual deafness is removed, Psalm. 40.6.
our ears prepared and opened, Heb. 10.5.
our bodies ordained and made fit to hear him willingly, to serve him
accordingly as he prescribes in his blessed word.

Christ also who has sufficiency, Reu 3.18.
of eye-salue, and Luke 7.21.
who gave sight to many blind, Isa. 42.7.
He will open the eyes of the blind, and bring the prisoners out of prison; he
Psalm. 4.6.
will lift up the light of his countenance upon us, and restore to us the
spiritual sight of our souls.

This spiritual sight, Spiritual fight peculiar to Christians.
when the eyes of our minds are opened and enlightened, is of greater worth by
infinite degrees, then our natural sight; For our spiritual sight is, 1.
proper and peculiar only to Gods chosen. 2. It is most comfortable. 3. it is
most excellent. 4. it is the cleerest and quickest sight. 5. it is constant and
continuing.

This sight is proper to the true Israelites, dwelling in Exodus 10.^1.
Goshen, to Christ's chosen remaining in his Church, as for the Egyptians and
Wis. 17.2.
the unrighteous, they are blind and bound with the bands of darkness and long
night, Isa. 59.10.
they grope for the wall, and stumble at the noone day: But as for the Lords
chosen; knowledge is their special portion, to know the mysteries of his
kingdom.

Mark. 4.11.
It is a comfortable sight to see the favorable face of God reconciled in the
Lord Jesus, Comfortable sight to us.
which made Philip to say, Ioh. 14.8.
Lord show us thy father, and it suffices us. If it were comfortable for
Jacob, Genesis 46.30.
to see the face of Joseph (let me die says he, since I have seen thy face,
and that thou art yet alive); Is it not a more comfortable sight to see the
glorious face of Jesus looking on us with the eyes of his tender compassion?
When the Martyr Stephen was falsely accused before the Council of Jerusalem,
and Act. 7.55.
saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God ready to relieve him from misery
and to receive him to glory, out of all doubt it was a pleasant sight to him;
so will it be to us, when we shall see him, Cant. 1.6.
whom our soul loves.

And seeing the Prou. 15.30.
Light or sight of the eyes of our bodies rejoices the heart; will not the
light and sight of our souls more rejoice and be most comfortable?

3. This sight is excellent; Excellent sight.
as the Exodus 30.25.32.
oil of holy ointment, even the anointing oil of consecration, appointed
principally for Kings, Priests, Prophets, neither any composition might be
lawfully made like unto it; as that ointment of Gods Sanctuary was more
precious then the ordinary ointment used amongst the rest of the Jews; so this
spiritual sight which is given unto us by our Savior, is more precious then
the natural sight.

Thus from the excellency of this spiritual sight, Antoninus a holy man,
encouraged Didimus a worthy soldier of Christ, of great knowledge, and
holiness, patiently to be content with his bodily blindness; Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. lib. 11. cap. 7.
Desunt tibi oculi quos mures, and muscae, and lacertae habent, Sed laetare,
quia habes oculos quos Angeli habent, and quibus Deus videtur, per quos tibi
magnum scientiae lumen accenditur. Thou want the eyes, which mice, and
flies, and lyzards have; but rejoice because thou have the eyes which Angels
have, and wherewith God is seen, by which a great light of knowledge is
kindled in thee.

4. A clear sight.
When Christ opens the eyes of our minds, and gives unto us this sight of
faith, we shall then find by experience, that it is a most clear and piercing
sight. The thick clouds, and a great tempest was the occasion, Act. 27.20.
that neither Sun nor Stars appeared in many days, to Paul nor to his
company; but no cloud of adversity, no tempest of trouble, no interiected
impediment, can hide the sight of the Mal. 4.2.
Son of righteousness from the eyes of our souls. Jonas in the midst of the
Sea, and in the fishes belly, when the deep closed him round about; he enjoyed
this spiritual sight, he prayed unto the Lord his God, and said, Ion. 2.4.
I will look toward thy holy Temple.

If it was a rare prerogative, profitable to the Emperor Tiberius, Sueton.
who had great and clear eyes, that awaking in a dark night, he clearly saw
the place wherein he lay, and all that was therein, as well as though he had a
light; surely, it is a greater prerogative to have spiritual eyes, and so Ioh.
12.46.
not to abide in darkness, but to have 2. Cor. 4.6.
God shining in our hearts, to give to us the light of the knowledge of his
glory in the face of Jesus Christ; Mich. 7.8.
That when we fall we may arise again, that when we sit in darkness, the
Lord may be a light unto us; Isa. 58.8.
Then shall our light break forth as the morning, our health shall grow
speedily, our righteousness shall go before us, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace us.

5. A constant sight.
This sight is constant and continuing for ever; Ahiiah that Prophet in Shiloh,
his bodily eyes waxed dim, 1. Kin. 14.4.
that he could not see, and his natural sight decayed for his age, but his
spiritual sight, and the eyes of his soul continued clear; so shall it be
with all those, whom Psalm. 107.14.
Christ brings out of darkness, and of the shadow of death, whose
blindness he remooueth, they shall all 2. Cor. 3.18.
behold the glory of the Lord with open face, they shall be all changed into
the same image, from glory to glory; They who are saved, Reu. 21.24.
shall walk in the light of the Lamb, where shall be no night but Isa. 60.5.
everlasting joy and happiness; where they shall see and shine for ever and
ever.

Christ will also cure the spiritual Leaprosie of souls, Christ cures the
Leprosy of our souls.
which is more vile and abominable, more hurtful and lamentable, then the
Leaprosie of the body: The Leapers under the Law Leui. 13.45.
had their clothes rent, their heads bare, a covering upon their lips, and
cried, they were unclean; they dwelt alone, and without the Camp was their
habitation: but impenitent sinners polluted with the plague of inward
Leaprosie, are Reu. 3.17.
wretched, miserable, and naked, they have bare heads, for they want Ephe. 6.17.
the helmet of salvation, Est. 7.8.
their faces shall be covered like Hamans, in sign of the great Kings heavy
indignation, and of their own damnation, they remaining Reu. 21.27.
unclean, they shall not enter into the holy Jerusalem. If the bodily
Leaprosie of Vzziah King of Judah, caused him 2. Chr. 26.21
to be cut off from the house of the Lord, and to loose an earthly Kingdom;
Will not the spiritual Leaprosie separate those that are plagued therewith,
from the society of Christ, deprive them of a heavenly Kingdom, Mat. 25.46.
when they shall go into everlasting pain?

Naaman the Syrian his Leaprosie was no hindrance to him from serving his
Master, it was no impediment to his honor, 2 King. 5.1.
for he was captain of the host of the King of Aram, a great man, and
honorable in the sight of his Lord.

But inward Leprosy makes us vile and filthy, unable and unfit. If Pro. 17.7.
high talk or speech of excellency becomes not a fool, far less, high
preferment and excellent place becomes leaprous fools; and such are all
impenitent sinners.

Oh if we were else sensible of the spiritual Leaprosie of our souls, as men
are of their bodily Leaprosie; what continual pain would we take to be
healed? What earnest prayers would we make to be cleansed? we would lift up
Luke 17.13.
our voices and cry, Jesus, master, have mercy on us; We would Mar. 1.30.
kneel down unto Christ, we would Luke 5.12.
fall on our face before him, Matthew. 8.2.
worshipping and beseeching him to make us clean, Mar. 1.41.
and that our Leaprosie by his power and mercy, might depart from us.

Our Savior would harken to our supplications, he would have compassion on us,
he would put forth his helping hand, and touch us, saying, I will be thou
clean; So he would cure us of our spiritual Leaprosie, even he who 1. Ioh.
1.9.
is faithful and just will forgive us our sins (which justly by the most
judicious and learned, Lutherus Chemnicius and alii.
are called and compared to bodily Leaprosie) and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, he will heal Psalm. 103.3.
our infirmities, by remoouing our deafness, and blindness of our minds,
he would bind Job 5.18.
up all our inward wounds, and his hand would make us whole, by giving to us
Reu. 22.2.
those leaves of the tree of Life, which serve to heal the nations.

The uses; First, and Psalm. 138.2.
to praise his holy Name, because of his loving kindness, who Act. 2.23.
by his determinate counsel and foreknowledge, appointed and ordained his
beloved Son Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever; to be our
Physician before sickness did befall us.

As God of his goodness created the herbs of the field, Gualter in John.
and roots to be remedies of sickness, before diseases did proceed of
sin: So God did preordinate a Physician to us, before we did fall in disease
and destruction. Secondly, let us apply his plasters for the curing of our
spiritual wound; that good King Ezechia did well, who being sick unto death,
did take (as the Prophet Isaiah directed,) 2. Kin. 20.7.
A lump of dry figs, and laid on the boil, and so he recovered: We shall
do well also by taking and applying the salve of grace unto our souls: Let us
not be like desperate Porus, Just. lib. 12
who would not suffer his wounds to be dressed. Let us not be like those
unhappy Babylonians, Iere. 51.8.
who albeit Balm was brought for their sore, albeit God would have cured them,
yet, they would not be healed.

Thirdly, if we be Ioh. 5.14.
made whole, let us sin no more, least a worse thing come unto us; let us be
thankful unto our heavenly Physician, and Psalm. 2.12.
kiss the Son our Savior, whom if we requite with disdain and unkindness,
the savage beasts will in the day of judgment bear witness against us.

We read, Gellius. lib. 5. cap. 14.
that a Lion saved and nourished Androdus, who cured the sore foot of the
wild beast; what thankfulness should we show to our blessed Master,
offering to cure the maladies of our minds, and to heal all the infirmities
and sickenesses of our souls?

Lastly, Signs of spiritual Health.
all those are the sure tokens, which may certainly persuade us, if we have
received the health of our souls, when we have a spiritual appetite, 1. Pet.
2.2.
Desiring the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby; John 6.27.
Laboring for the meat, that endures for everlasting life. Secondly, when we
Hos. 11.10.
walk after the Lord, and with Hezekiah 2. King. 20.5
resort unto the house of our God, ever Ezec. 33.15.
walking in the Statutes of Life, without committing iniquity. Thirdly, we
will take upon us Christ's Mat. 11.30.
easy yoke, and with that man cured by Christ of a very longsome disease;
John 5.11.
Carry the light burden he commaundes us. Fourthly, as Peter's Mother-in-law
being healed of her fever m ministered unto Christ, Math. 8.15.
so will we with gladness and alacrity serve him, Iere. 30.17.
who has restored health to us, bound up our brusing, and healed us of the
dolourous wounds of our souls.

CHAP. VIII. Christ gives Wisdom.
CHRIST Jesus, 1. Cor. 11.30
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, Colos. 2.3.
and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; He will of
his incomprehensible goodness, bestow wisdom and understanding upon us, who
of our selves are unwise and foolish, so that we shall not Prou. 5.23.
die for fault of instruction, and we shall not go astray through our great
folly; for if the words of Solomon Prou. 1.4.
give unto the simple sharpness, and to the child knowledge and discretion;
Will not Christ Mat. 12.42.
greater then Solomon, who Luke 11.49.
is the wisdom of God John 1.18.
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, give wisdom
also and discretion, to all who will truly receive him?

By this heavenly and excellent Wisdom. 1. Diverse effects of heavenly
Wisdom.
Our temeritie and rashness, 2. Our vndiscretion and foolishness, 3. Our
fury and madness, will be expelled and banished, and we be Psalm. 19.11.
made circumspect and attentive, discreet, and wise in God, we will come to
our selves and attain to our right wits.

First, the King of Israel by the help of Elisha became circumspect, and 2.
King. 6.10
saved himself oftentimes from the ambush of the Aramites his enemies. We by
the Wisdom of Christ warning us, will become circumspect and watchful, and
decline the danger of all our enemies; yea, our souls will be saved from the
1. Pet. 5.8.
Devil our adversary, who as a roaring Lion walks about seeking to devour
us.

Secondly, Our natural folly approved in sour things.
We are by nature Iere. 4.21. First, in our cogitations
foolish, and have no understanding, and our foolishness appears. 1. In our
vain cogitations. 2. In our evil elections. 3. In wicked actions. 4. In
corrupt speeches.

I. Except Christ furnish us with heavenly Wisdom, we will Romans 1.21.
become vain in our imaginations, and our foolish hearts will be full of
darkness.

II. Secondly, in our choice.
We will choose to Romans 1.25.
serve and worship the creature, forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for
ever, preferring Iere. 2.13.
broken pots that can hold no water, forsaking the fountain of living water;
we will choose Brass rather then fine Gold, the Earth before the Heaven, Sin
and Satan, before our blessed Savior, and Death, yea, endless Misery, rather
then Life, and eternal Felicity.

III. Thirdly, in our actions
Our actions will be to do the Gal. 5.19.
works of flesh, even to commit sins, which are against Piety, against
Chastity, against Sobriety, and against truth and honesty; we shall Math.
7.26.
build our house but like foolish men upon the sand, the fall whereof shall be
great, we will fight, but under the standard of Satan, we shall be Act. 5.39.
found even fighters against God, and against our Savior, who may Psalm. 2.9.
crush us with a scepter of iron, and break us in pieces like a potters
vessel.

We will endeavor to traffic, and to be in business, but in vain, for
Math. 8.36.
what will it profit us, though we did win the whole world, if we loose our
own souls, we will Ephesians. 4.17.
walk but like miserable Gentiles in vanity of our minds having our
cogitation darkened we would give our selves unto wantonness, to work all
uncleanness even with greediness, yea will walk in that Math. 7.13. In our
speech.
broad way that leads to destruction. So without the wisdom of Christ, we
would at length prove to be foolish workers, foolish builders, foolish
soldiers, foolish merchants, foolish runners, posting to hell and eternal
damnation.

IV. Our speech would be Col. 3.8.
cursed speaking, filthy speaking, to the dishonor of God, and offense of his
servants.

Also this foolishness is so fast bound to us by nature, that Pro. 27.22.
though we were brayed with a pestell in a mortar, yet it will not depart from
us, while Christ in his great mercy, and by his mighty power remove the
same, before which time our Pro. 12.19.
own ways are right in our own eyes, we are very wise in our own conceit,
and condemn all wisdom in respect of our selves, yea when we do most
foolishly, even then with Exodus 1.10.
Pharaoh we think that we work wisely.

But as the punishment of natural folly, Punishment of folly natural.
is great and grievous, so the punishment of sinful folly is more grievous. 1.
Riches does not profit idiots, Prou. ^^.16.
wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool, to get wisdom, seeing he
has no heart? 2. honor is not seemly for such, Prou. 26.1.
as the snow in summer, and as the rain in harnest are not meet, so is honor
unseemly for a fool. 3. they cannot enjoy lands or heritages, nor a kingdom,
but are subject to contempt, derision, stripes, as may be seen in
Nebuchadnezzar the great Monarch, who Dan. 4.30, 31.
was driven from his kingdom, and from men, and had his dwelling with the
beasts of the field, unto the time his understanding was restored unto him, and
then he returned to the honor of his kingdom.

Foolish sinners are more grievously punished, Punishment of folly spiritual.
for, when they say that Luke 12.19.
they have much goods laid up for many years, and resolve to live at ease, to
eat, drink, and to take their pastime, suddenly their souls will depart from
them, their goods, their riches, will nothing avail them. 2. Psalm. 49.12.
They shall not continue in honor, they are like the beasts that die, their
way utters their foolishness, Ioh. 24.24.
they are exalted for a little; but they are gone and brought low, They are
destroyed and cut off, as the top of an ear of corn. 3. Albeit they had
great possessions in this world, and Iam, 5.5.
lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness, and have nourished their
hearts, as in a day of slaughter; yet they shall die and remain Luke 17.23.
in hell in torments for ever, and being tormented in flames, shall never
obtain the smallest refreshment.

But when it shall please Jesus Christ to indue us with heavenly wisdom from
above, Then to our great joy we shall sensibly find that our thoughts shall be
holy, Other effects of heavenly Wisdom appearing in our thoughts. 2. In our
choice.
and the meditation of our hearts acceptable in Gods sight. 2. Then we shall
get understanding and discretion, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
to choose life by obeying God, who is our life and the length of our days, to
choose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sins for a season, Job 34.4.
we shall choose judgment, and know what is good, Luke 16.42.
we shall not be unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.17.
we shall choose that one thing which is needful which shall not be taken away
from us. 3. our actions shall be holy, we shall do the works of piety and of
charity, Gal. 5.25.
we shall walk in the spirit, we Matb. 7.24.
will build our house on a rock, etc. albeit, the tempest arise, the floods
come, and the winds blow, yet our sure grounded house will not fall, 1. Tim.
6.12.
We will fight the good sight of faith, and 2. Tim. 2 3.
suffer affliction as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ, we will traffic as
good Merchants, and be content to Mat. 13.45.
sell all that we have, that we may buy that pearl of great price, even the
kingdom of heaven, we will so 1. Cor. 9.24.
run in the race of godliness, not as uncertainly, but that we may obtain
that incorruptible crown, And receive that inestimable price which endures
for ever. So by the wisdom of Christ, at length we shall prove to be wise
laborers, wise builders, wise soldiers, wise merchants, wise runners
continually making forwards, Math. 1 15. 4. In our words.
in that strait gate, and in that narrow way that leads unto life and
eternal salvation. 4. We will 2 Thessalonians. 2.17.
establish our selves in every word and good work, Col. 4.6.
Our speech will be gracious always, and poudered with salt, that we may
know, how to answer every man, Isa. 19.18.
and to speak the language of Canaan.

Thus the wisdom of Christ will appear in us, in our holy cogitations, and
settled resolutions. 2. in our good choices and elections. 3. in our deeds and
actions. 4. in our sauorie speech tending to Gods glory, and the good of our
neighbors.

Thirdly, Our madness in 3. things appears:
our madness will be removed, which in us is evident, 1. By our unkind
behavior to our heavenly Father, we weary of his blessed company, Luke 15.13.
we depart from him by impiety, we cleave to a stranger, we take part with our
mortal enemy, we delight in his vile slavery, who delights to destroy us. 2.
by our undutiful dealing with our eldest brother the Lord Jesus, we fly away
from him, when he would seek us, we displease him, when he would pleasure
us, we wound him, when he would heal us, we press to pierce him, and kill
him, when he would save us, we dishonor him, who would honor us. 3. by the
unspeakable hurt and wrong we do to our selves, we spend prodigally, the
gifts of our father, we cast from us our best garments, we are not ashamed Reu.
3.10.
of our filthy nakedness, we Genesis 25.34.
contemn our birthright, we remain Deuteronomy. 9.24.
rebellious unto the Lord.

If the Priests of Baal might ha^^ ^ene accounted mad men, whose manner was to
cut themselves with knives and lancers, until their blood 1. King. 18.28.
gushed out; what may be thought of obstinate sinners, who wound themselves,
by their iniquities, and who suffer their Psalm. 38.5.
wounds to be putrified and corrupt, because of their foolishness?

If the Aethnicks esteemed a Lycurgus King of Thracia son to Drias, to be
furious and mad, Theat. Zwing. Plin. lib. 34. cap. 14.
because he cutted his own legs, when he desired to cut vine trees; And if
Athamas King of Theba Aeolus his son, was also reported mad for that he
killed his own son Learchus; what may be thought of rebellious sinners, who
despising Gods holy word, Christ cures our madness.
misregarding all wholesome counsel, furiously run in that way, wherein many
have perished, and in their mad mood waste their goods, weaken and hurt their
bodies, and which is worst of all, to the offense of the Almighty, and to the
grief of their wise friends, Prou. 6.32.
destroys their own souls?

But the Lord Jesus, when we rightly receive him, he 2. Tim. 2.7.
will give unto us understanding in all things needful, he will put away our
spiritual madness, and make us to Luke 15.17.
come to our selves, he will give to us sound judgment and bring us to our
right wits, and so he will 2. These. 3.5.
guide our hearts to the love of God our loving Father, and then Psalm. 42.2.
our souls shall thirst for the living God, He will cause us to Iam. 48.
draw near to God, and to cast down our selves before the Lord, to confess
our sins unfeignedly, to beg mercy and favor earnestly, to Psalm 37.4.
delight our selves in the Lord, who shall give us our hearts desire, even to
Isa. 58.14.
delight in God, who will feed us with the heritage of Jacob; Then it shall be
our Ioh. 4.34.
meat to do the will, and to finish the work of him that created us, Then
Heb. 10.39.
we shall not be they which withdraw themselves unto perdition, but we shall
follow faith unto the conservation of our souls. 2. when we shall come to our
selves, we shall take up our selves, and Luke 14.27.
come after Christ, and be his disciples, we shall Gal. 6.14.
rejoice in the cross of our Lord, whereby the world is crucified unto us, and
we unto the world, we will endeavor to the uttermost of our power, to honor
him, and to continue in his service, who will comfort, 1. Pet. 5.10.
confirm, strengthen and establish us. 3. we shall obtain unspeakable gain
and vantage, we shall Heb. 12.1.
cast from us every thing that presses down, and sin that hangs so fast
on, we will Heb. 4.14.
hold fast our profession, and 1. Tim. 6.12.
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and
meekness, fighting the good fight of faith, laying hold of eternal life, and
Act 23.1.
in all good conscience serving God continually, of whom we shall 2. Ioh. verse.
8.
receive a full reward, Act. 3 19.
when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Dan. 4.24.
healing of their error, and turning of the spiritual frenzy and madness,
into a sound mind and settled judgment, and an upright Dan. 4 33.
understanding restored unto them, so that they shall begin to 1. Chr. 28.9.
know the God of their fathers, to seek and serve him with a perfect heart,
and with a willing mind, that they shall be content to Heb. 13.13.
go out of the camp bearing the reproach of Christ, who will sanctify them
with his own blood, and to 1. Tim. 4.7.
exercise themselves unto godliness, that is profitable unto all things.

Let them Dan. 4.34.
extol and magnify the King of heaven, whose works are all truth, his ways
and judgments, let them Heb. 13.15.
offer the sacrifice of praise always to God; Let them Luke 9.23.
deny and forsake themselves, take up their cross daily, and follow Christ,
Josh. 22.5.
by walking in his ways, by loving and cleaving unto him; Let them as pure
virgins, most earnestly desire to be 2. Cor. 11.2
prepared to Christ, with cheerfulness to offer themselves to be his Spouse,
instantly entreating him, to become the husband of their souls, who willingly
will be content, Hos. 1.19.
To marry them unto himself for ever, yea to marry them in righteousness, in
judgment, in faithfulness, in mercy, and in compassion.

It is written of Iphianassa daughter to Praetus King of the Argiues, that she
being mad, and out of her wits, supposing her self to be a beast; when she
was well cured, and restored to the health of her mind by Melampus; Plin. lib.
25. cap. 5.
then for declaration of her thankfulness and affection, she was willing to
accept of him, albeit of a meaner degree, to be her husband, she gave her self
in marriage to him that healed her; Oh, what gratitude and affection, shall we
show to the Lord Jesus, for the curing and remoouing of our spiritual frenzy
and madness, for restoring us to a sound mind, and Psalm. 51.10.
renewing a right spirit within us? Should we not Romans 12.1.
give up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto him? should we
not most of all desire to be the Spouse of so glorious a husband, whose honor,
strength, beauty, riches, love and power, can not sufficiently be expressed?

When we have received Christ-truly, Heavenly wisdom, banisheth earthly.
we shall be endued with such heavenly knowledge and wisdom, which will both
banish Iam. 3.15.
earthly, sensual, and devilish wisdom from us (that manifests it self by
bitter envying, strife, sedition, and all manner of evil works) further it
will so season and savor our earthly wisdom, that we shall be Prou. 14.8.
prudent to understand our own way, we shall be wise; Prou. 9.12.
and that for our selves, to our own commodity and profit.

We will then not seek the earth chiefly, but Math. 6.23.
seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, setting our affections
on things which are above, and not on things which are on the earth, Then we
shall Mat. 10.28.
not fear them most, which kill the body only, but rather we will fear him,
who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Then we shall love not our
selves principally, but the Lord Jesus and his glory: for who Mat. 10.39.
loses his life for Christ's sake shall save it.

As for natural or civil wisdom, it is indeed very pleasant and profitable:
Ecclus. 2.13. Gignit opes nunquamque perit Sapientia plebem nobilitat cunctis,
eadem neglecta nocebit.
There is profit (says Solomon) in wisdom more then in folly, as the light
is more excellent then darkness; it brings with it riches, pleasure, and
worldly honor, and (if according to the judgment of Col. 3.2.
that Orator) Cir. 3. de not. deor.
Stultitia sit maius malum, quam omnia mala and fortunae and corporis,
foolishness is the greatest evil that can befall in the body, or estate of
any; wisdom contrarily must be the greatest good, yet notwithstanding, Humane
wisdom does only hide and cover vice; but Heavenly wisdom weakeneth and
rooteth out vice: the one restraines our faults, and corruption, but the other
Colos. 3.5.
mortifieth our vile lusts and affections, 1. Cor. 1.25.
if the weakness of God be stronger then man, also the foolishness of God is
wiser then man, as the light of a candle appears to be somewhat, and is
comfortable in the night, but at the noonetide of the day, it is obscured and
almost extinguished, the light of the Sun being by infinite degrees greater
and more comfortable; and as to those who remain in low valleys, Ergo vbi iam
validis quassainm est viribus aeui Corpus and obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus,
Claudicat ingenium delirat linguaque voxque. Omnia deficiunt at que vno tempore
desunt.
the tops of adjoining hills seem to be high, yet that Altitude and height
of the Mountains, is nothing in respect of the Stars and Planets; so earthly
wisdom seems to be a great light to the blind World, but in comparison of
Heavenly Wisdom, it vanishes and is scarcely known.

Humane wifedome and Worldly wit 1. Decays in many. 2. It deceives all,
Experience proves, that oftentimes worldly wit decays in many. What number
of men, who in their childe-hood and youth are admired for their good parts,
for their mature judgment and quick wit, and a great expectation taken of
their singular virtues? But when they come to the age of men, then they are
found to be very inconsiderate, to be eb-witted and effectlesse in all their
proceedings, these flourishes quickly being gone, and no fruit following
thereupon? Some there are, who almost in the whole course of their life,
behaved themselves very wisely, and discreetly; but coming to old age they
become stupid, Plutarch. in vita Luculli and alii.
senseless, and frantique. Such was that Roman Lucullus, who having fought
great Battles, and gained many victories, and obtained many glorious Triumphs,
by subduing mighty Kings Tigranes the fifth and Mithridates; he who by his
wisdom and valor, by the spoils of so many mighty Princes, and by the
Conquest of so many Nations enlarged the Roman Dominions, and enriched
himself: Yet his learning and wisdom decayed in him, and he became so
troubled in mind, so forgetful and foolish, that he could not guide his own
affairs, wherefore the administration of his estate was committed to his
brother Marcus. Vndes Chro. car. Suidam and Dyonis.
Also Bassienius Caracalla, was reputed for a long time to be both learned and
wise, a Philosopher as an Emperor: afterward he became obliuious and
ignorant, his folly appearing by his incestuous marriage, by the slaughter of
that learned Lawyer Papinianus; by his commandment, for to abolish all the
works of Aristotle. So worldy wisdom decays, and men may loose it, which
if they brook till death; Eccl. 15.1.18
In the multitude thereof is much grief, then Iere. 8.9.
what wisdom is in them, seeing it vexes the wisemen themselves, and seeing
it Isa. 29.14.
shall perish from them, when they have most need thereof, and seeing it is 1.
Cor. 3.19.
foolishness with God, Job 5.13.
who takes the wise in their own craftiness, Rem. 8.7.
because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, it will deceive all
that trust in it, and Isa. 47.10.
cause them to rebel. Therefore it brings death Romans 8.6.
and evil Isa. 47.11.
destruction which none shall be able to put away.

Forasmuch then as worldly wisdom is vain and weak in good things, Iere.
9.23.
Let not the wiseman glory in his wisdom, but 2. Cor. 10.17.
let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord, let us labor Deuteronomy. 4.6.
to keep and do Gods commandments: for that is our wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the people, Let us 2. Tim. 3.15
know the Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvation, Let us
Psalm. 34.14.
eschew evil and do good, let us Deuteronomy. 17.19
learn to fear the Lord our God, for Job 28.28.
behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is
understanding. The fear of God, is Prou. 1.7.
the beginning of all saving knowledge and instruction. Iam. 1.5.
If any lack this wholesome and heavenly wisdom, let him ask it of God,
which gives to all men liberally, and reprooueth no man, and it shall be given
him.

Happy, O blessed are those who have gotten this wisdom: Ecclus. 2.1.
Their eyes are in their head, they see things honest and profitable which they
follow after and obtain, they perceive things dishonest and hurtful, which
with foresight and diligence they eschew, and so they never walk in
darkness: 2. Their tongue Isa. 50.4.
is a tongue of the learned, and they know to minister a word in time to him
that is weary, and Psa. 119.172
to entreat of Gods Word continually for their own consolation, for their
neighbors edification, because Pro. 16.23.
the heart of the wise guides his mouth wisely, and adds Doctrine to his
lips: 3. Their Psa. 142 1.
hands are taught to fight the Lords battles, and to Ephesians. 4.28.
work the things which are good, Deuteronomy. 17.7.
not to be shut, but to be open to the poor: 4. Their Psa. 119.101
feet shall be refrained from every evil way, they Prou. 8.20.
shall walk in the way of righteousness, and in the mids of the paths of
judgment Prou. 15.24.
to avoid from hell beneath: 5. Their Ecclus. 10.2
heart is at their right hand, they do all things directly with consideration,
all Romans 6.13.
their members being as weapons of righteousness unto God: 6. Their 1. Sam.
25.29
souls shall be bound in the bundle of Life, with the Lord their God, Psalm.
25.10.
all the paths of the Lord shall be mercy and truth unto them, Ephesians. 5.15
walking circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time.

Blessed then is the man that finds wisdom, and gets understanding, the
Merchandise thereof is better then Silver, the gain thereof is better then
Gold, it is more precious then Pearls, nothing is to be compared to her,
length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory;
her ways are the ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity, she is a
tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and blessed is he that reteineth
her, he shall walk safely by the way and his feet shall not stumble, she shall
be life to his soul, and grace unto his neck for ever.

Prou. 3. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 22, 23.
This Wisdom, which is not Job 28. ver. 12.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
to be valued with the wedge of the gold of Ophir, nor with the precious Onix,
nor the Saphir, the Crystal, the Coral, the Topaz of Ethiopia, shall not be
equal unto it? Where is it found? whence comes it? Answer, The depth says,
It is not in me; The Sea also says, It is not with me; The Earth, the Sea,
Man cannot give it us. O but this wisdom is to be found in Christ Jesus,
Colos. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, he is both the
matter of our wisdom, for we are only here wise, 1. Cor. 2.2.
when we know Christ and him crucified; and also he is the root, from whence
all this wisdom springs: for believing in Christ, we are so conjoined with
him, incorporated and ingraffed into him, that being 2. Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the godly nature, we Ephesians. 5.30.
are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; and thus we (as the
branches from the stock, the fruit from the root gets life) do receive
from him true wisdom, understanding and discretion, whereby we shall be Psa.
119.98.
wiser then our enemies, and have more understanding then our teachers, and the
ancient; whereby also we shall attain unto that serpentine wisdom
recommended to us by our Master; Be Mat 10.16.
wise (says he) as Serpents, and innocent as Doves: Vt nulli nocuisse velis
imitare columbam, Serpentem vt possit nemo nocere tibi.

The wisdom of the Serpent appears in six things: First, when it is in
danger, it offers all the body for the safety of the head, Chryso. Hom. 24. in
Mat. vide Arist. li. 8. cap. 17. de histo. an.
it regards not the wounds of the body, if the head be whole: Secondly, it
loses the skin for the preservation of the life: Arist. lib. 8. cap. 17. de
hist animal. and cap. 15. eius. lib.
Thirdly, * in the cold of Winter it seeks refreshment in the cauerns and
holes of the earth: Fourthly, some Serpents Psalm. 58.4.
stop their ears, and hear not the voice of the Inchanter: Fifthly, it
escheweth danger, and is not after found in the ways, where men usually
resort: Sixthly, before she drinks she casts forth her poison. This
wisdom of the Serpent should be followed by us, in those same respects: then
we should be Acts 21.13.
ready ( with Paul) to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus, neither should Acts
20.24.
our life be dear unto us, so that we may Phil. 3.8.
win Christ, and brook him Ephe. 4.15.
which is our head, by whom we receive the increase of all good, unto the
edifying of our selves in love.

II. We should for the conservation of our souls Hebr. 10.34.
suffer with joy, the loss, yea the spoiling of our goods, knowing our selves
that we have in Heaven a better, and an euer-enduring substance. For if men
for the safety of their bodies will John 1.5.
cast away their goods, and further will be content, that rotten and festered
members be cut from them; Yea if that bruit beast the Beauer, which is much
like unto the Otter, Plini. lib. 8. cap. 30. Aelian. lib. 13. cap. 47. histo.
ans. Alciat. lib. 1. Emb. 85.
when he is in danger being pursued by the Hunter, that he may escape with
his life, will bite away his own genitours which are medicinal, knowing by
the instinct of nature, that for those chiefly he is sought for and pursued;
What should we do, who are endued with reason, and have the Word of God to be
a rule to our life, and Psa. 119.105
a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths, should not we I say, Heb.
12.1.
cast away every thing that presses down, howsoever pleasant or profitable it
seem to our corrupt and vitiate nature, if it be prejudicial and hurtful to
the welfare of our immortal souls? We should most willingly forsake the same,
for the salvation of our souls, to the end we may have an happy, and
perpetual union and society with our glorious God who is blessed for ever.

III. In the winter of adversity, in the time of trouble and calamity, when
we can find no refreshment nor comfort upon earth, we will with Anna, go to
the house of the Lord, we will power out our souls before our God, then Psa,
94.19.
in the multitude of our thoughts in our hearts his comforts will rejoice our
souls, we will have our refuge to Christ, and as 2. Cor. 1.7.
we are partakers of his sufferings, so we shall be also partakers of his
consolations.

IIII. We should stop our ears, Pro. 19.27.
and not hearken unto the instruction, that causes us to err from the words
of knowledge, and so we shall not Heb. 13.9.
be carried about with diverse and strange doctrine, but we shall consent
continually to the wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness.

V. We would eschew all occasions of sin, neither should we Psalm. 1.1.
walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, which is
a dangerous way, where Satan lays many snares, to entrap us for our
destruction. It was of the Lords provident care and goodness to 1. Tim. 6.3.
his people, respecting their fragilitie and weakness, that he commanded them
to remove every occasion of Idolatry and defection, to Exodus 34.12.
take heed to themselves, not to make any covenant or compact with the
Canaanites, but to overthrow their altars, and break their images in pieces,
and cut down their groves, to abstain from joining with them in marriage,
lest they should be cause of ruin to them. It is a point of great wisdom, to
eschew and forbear the occasion of sin, and consequently of the punishment
following thereupon.

Sixthly, Let us lay aside all maliciousness, guile and envy, and drink in the
sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby, etc. As by this wisdom
which we receive from Christ, we will be wise as Serpents, so we shall be Romans
12.3.
wise according to sobriety, not presuming to understand above that which is
meet to understand; we will not be proud (disdaining all others) of those
gifts which God has bestowed upon us; we will not Romans 12.16.
be wise in our selves, in our own conceit, for Isa. 5.21.
woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight; And so Solomon says, Prou. 3.7.
Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear the Lord, and depart from evil. 2.
We will not curiously search those things, which belong not to us; for Deuteronomy.
29.29.
secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong unto
us: Aug. lib. 8. cap. 5. de Trinit.
and the Ancient affirms, Melius est dabitare de occultis, quam litigare de
incertis, It is better to doubt of secret things, then to strive for uncertain
things; Also 1. Pet. 2.1.
he complains, Aug. lib. 10. confess.
Curiosum genus hominum ad cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosum ad
corrigendum suam, Mankind is curious to know the life of others, and
slothful to amend their own life. And Seneca says truly; Seneca. Omnia si
reputes transactae tempora vitae, vel male vel temere vel nihil egit homo.
Bonam vitae partem perire nobis dum nihilagimus, maiorem autem dum male
agimus, multo vero maximam dum aliena agimus, That a good part of our lifetime
is lost, while we are idle doing nothing; that a greater part of our life is
lost, while we are doing evil things, but that the greatest part is lost while
we are doing other things, not appertaining to us. 3. We will not trouble our
selves about many things, which are frivolous and unnecessary, as the Emperor
Hadrian did show himself ridiculous, by enquiring subtly and carefully of
all the Grammarians, who was Euanders Nourisher, and Priamus his great great
Grandfathers father, Vide commen. P. Martyr. ad Romans cap. 12.
when as he should have been exercised in the administration of Justice, and
in doing of the more weighty and urgent affairs of the Commonwealth: but we
will employ our selves chiefly in those things, that are most necessary and
expedient; we e will exercise our selves unto godliness, which is profitable
unto all things, and has the promise of this life present, and of that that is
to come.

The King of Tyrus Ezech. 28 4.
had wisdom and understanding, whereby he acquired gold and silver in his
treasures, and increased his riches, but that wisdom was not according to
sobriety; he was thereby 1. Cor. 8.1.
puffed up with pride and arrogancy, he esteemed himself equal with God; wiser
then b. 1. Tim. 4.7.
Daniel, and that no secret thing could be hid from him: wherefore his
brightness was defiled, he died miserably, and was cast down to the pit.

It was not wisdom, but wicked curiosity, which made the 1. Sam. 6.19.
men of Beth-shemesh to meddle with the Lords secrets, and to look into the
Arc, to gaze thereon irreuerently; wherefore God smote them with a great
plague.

The Athenians (who principally and most confidently did arrogate to themselves
the praise of wisdom) were not wise according to sobriety, when as they did
not attend upon lawful business: some Act. 17.21.
gave themselves to naught else, but either to tell, or to hear some news.

We may see a wise pattern of this sober wisdom in the Prophet David, whose
Psalm. 131.1.
heart was not hautie, neither his eyes lofty, who walked not in great matters
hid from him, 1. Kin. 15.5.
who did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, who did not Psalm.
119.111, 112.
decline from his judgments, who took his testimonies as an heritage for
ever: 1. Sam. 18.30.
so he behaved himself more wisely then all his companions, and his name was
much set by.

According to Bernards judgment, Sermon. de eo quod Scriptum est, Beatus homo
qui inuenit sapientiam. Prou. 3.
Sobria sapientia est, in paenitudine peccatorum praeteritorum, in contemptu
praesentium commodorum, in desiderio futurorum praemiorum. Inuenisti plane
sapientiam, si prioris vitae peccata defleas, si huius seculi desiderabilia
parui pendeas, si aeternam beatitudinem toto desiderio concupiscas. Sober
wisdom, consists in the repentance of our bygone sins, in contempt of the
present profit, in the desire of the future rewards; Thou have altogether
found wisdom, if thou lament for the sins of thy former life, if thou
vilipend those things which are most desired in this world, if with thy whole
desire thou shall long for eternal happiness. True Wisdom.


The Lord endued Hezekiah with wisdom, when he gave him 2. Chro. 32.26.
true repentance, for his sin of pride and ingratitude, when Isa. 38.3.
he prayed to the Lord and wept sore, in time of sickness. So Manasse when he
repented his idolatry, murder and sorcery; when he humbled himself greatly,
and prayed to God earnestly, he did very wisely, for he was then delivered from
prison, and restored to his kingdom. It was great wisdom in Zacheus to
forsake his covetousness, to be liberal to the poor, to Luke 19.8.
restore fourfold, what he had taken by forged cauillation.

So was it in Peter, to go forth of the Priests Hall, to Math. 26.75.
weep bitterly for the denying of his master. So was it in that sinful woman,
to come to the house where Christ was, Luke 7.38.48.
to wash his feet with her tears, and to wipe them with the hairs of her
head; her sins were forgiven her. True and great repentance, is true and
great wisdom. Also contempt of the worme-eaten pleasures of this vain world,
is solid and sober wisdom. Ester was wise, Ester 14 15
who did hate the glory of the unrighteous, and did abhor the very token of
her praeeminence, who had not her chief joy in the court of Ashuerus, but in
the Lord her God. Moses did wisely, in that he contemned the pleasures of 2.
Chro. 33.12.
Egypt, and Heb. 11.26.
esteemed the rebuke of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of a mighty
and wealthy nation, for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.

In all matters of wisdom and understanding, Daniel and his companions, who
determined in their hearts not to be defiled with the portion of
Nebuchadnezzars meat, nor with his wine, Dan. 1.20.
were ten times better, then all the Inchanters and Astrologians of Babylon.

Further, the Apostle Paul did wisely, who longed for the joys of a better
life, Phil. 1.23.
desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. They are
all very wise, 2. Tim. 4.8.
that love Christ's appearing: for at that day the righteous judge shall give
them the Crown of righteousness.

And seeing Prou. 4.7, 8, 9.
wisdom is the beginning of grace and happiness; above all thy possession,
get wisdom and understanding, exalt her, and she shall exalt thee, she
shall bring thee to honor, if thou embrace her, she shall give a comely
ornament to thy head, yea she shall give thee a crown of glory.

By this Wisdom, our natural temeritie and rashness, also our indiscretion
and foolishness, moreover, our frenzy and madness will be expelled and
removed. Again, our worldly wisdom will be seasoned and well governed; when
we perceive the wonderful and profitable effects of spiritual wisdom, the
excellency and the gain thereof, being by men considered, we will desire and
affect the same with earnest and continual love, labor and affection. Then we
shall be wise as Serpents, and according to sobriety; we Pro. 16. verse. 20,
21, 22.
shall be wise in our business, and find good. We shall be wise in heart, and
called prudent, our understanding shall be a wellspring of life unto us that
have it, we shall trust in the Lord, and be for ever blessed. Jude. 25.
To our God only wise, our Savior, be Glory, Majesty, and Dominion, and
Power, both now and ever, Amen.

CHAP. IX. Christ gives Food.
JOSEPH the son of Jacob (says that Wiseman) Ecclus. 49.15
was the Governor of his brethren, and the vpholder of his people; But Jesus
Christ Luke 3.38.
the Son of God, is a better Governor, Isa. 48.17.
who will teach his own people to profit, and lead them by the way that they
should go. He is a better vpholder, Hebr. 1.3.
bearing up all things by his mighty word. Joseph, of his tender love and
goodness, Genesis 50.17.
did forgive the trespass of his brethren, and their sin, who rewarded him
evil, and in time of famine, Genesis 47.12.
he nourished them with bread, and placed them in the land of Goshen.

Jesus of more ardent and entire affection, of admirable and unspeakable
goodness, will Revel. 1.5.
love us, and wash us from our sins in his blood, he Psalm. 103.9.
will not always chide, nor reward us according to our iniquities, but he will
John 6.27.
give us meat, that nourishes our souls, and that endures to life
everlasting.

The Patriarchs had good reason to leave that Country where they soiourned;
for by famine and scarcity of corn, they were constrained, and were in good
hope to be with plenty by Joseph, relieved and refreshed. We have better
cause in our hearts and affections, to forsake this world, this Psalm. 120.5.
Mesheth and tents of Kedar, to Reu. 18.4.
flee out of Babylon, this place of sin and confusion, lest we be partakers
of her plagues, and with all possible speed to come to Jesus who is calling
upon us, Math. 11.28.
Come to me, and promising to ease us, and comfort us, and with abundance of
all good, to refresh our wearied and distressed souls.

In handling of this benefit, To whom this spiritual food is given.
we will keep this order, to show, 1. on whom Christ will bestow this food.
2. how necessary it is. 3. the worthiness of this food. 4. that Christ does
more to our souls, then food does to our bodies. 5. signs whereby we may
know, if we receive this benefit. 6. Their misery who want it. 7. what they
should render to Christ who get it.

First then, Christ gives food freely, to those who are in his own family,
Gal. 6.10.
specially to those, who are of the household of faith. As Joseph did not
plentifully, frankly, and freely, nourish all the families of Egypt, but
principally and most lovingly, the family of Jacob: So Christ Jesus vouchsafes
not his spiritual nourishment to all people of the world indifferently, (for
this heavenly Manna, is hid from the wicked.) And if those who were disobedient
to Gods commandment, Exodus 16.27.
could not find corruptible Manna, shall his enemies rebelling and fighting
against him, obtain that incorruptible Manna? but Math. 15.26.
the childrens bread is given to Gods children, who with love and care x honor
their Holy Father.

O how happy a thing is it to be one of Gods Household! they will be delivered
from all evil. As Joshua x saved Rahab and her family, at the destruction of
Jericho, when he destroyed utterly, both man and woman, young and old, and all
the beasts therein, with the edge of the sword: So Jesus will save his own
Saints, when Isa. 65.12, 13.
God will number to the sword, and to the slaughter, all those that have
forsaken: him whom he saves, he nourishes; behold, his servants shall eat,
drink, and rejoice, when the wicked shall be hungry, thirsty, and ashamed,
crying for sorrow of heart, and howling for vexation of mind. Also who are in
Christ's family, they shall be furnished, with all needful things, and
instructed in all wisdom, they remain in a happy and prosperous estate,
Psalm. 25.13.
their soul dwells at ease. For if 1. King. 10.8.
the servants of Solomon, who stood in his presence, and heard his wisdom,
were happy; much more are they happy and blessed: for Psa. 104.27.
he who opens his hand, and gives food in due season to all men, will give
them natural sustenance for their bodies. Also as Genesis 43.34.
Beniamins mess was sieve times so much as any of his brethrens; so the Reu.
2.17.
Mal. 1.6.
Josh. 6.25.
food of Gods children, will be five times better then the food of the wicked.

II. Christ gives food to those that hunger for the same, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be
filled. This hunger of our souls, must be like to the hunger of our stomach
in two respects: 1. as there is a pain in the bottom of our stomach, till it
be satisfied and filled with meat. 2. as from this pain proceeds an earnest
and hungry appetite, greatly longing for refreshment: 1. So we must have a
sorrow and pain for the want of so precious food. 2. also an earnest desire
to be satisfied, and then Luke 1.53.
the Lord will fill the hungry with good things. First, God Phil. 2.13.
works this will and appetite: Again, he fulfilleth the same; for he Psalm.
145.19.
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry,
and save them.

III. Christ feeds those who abide with him; Matthew. 8.2.
When a multitude continued with him certain days, and had nothing to eat,
he had compassion on them, and did satisfy them with bread in the
Wilderness: When his own servants are Psalm. 107. verse. 4, 5, 6, 9.
wandering in the desert Wilderness of this World, both hungry and thirsty,
their souls fainting within them, If they continue with God, and cry to him,
he will satisfy the thirsty soul, and fill the hungry soul with goodness;
Thus Christ nourishes those that are of the household of Faith, who are hungry
and thirsty, who continue with him constantly, John 6.27.
laboring for the bread of Life earnestly, Psalm. 65.4.
they shall be satisfied with the pleasures of Gods holy Temple; They Psalm.
49.10.
shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty, for he that has
compassion on them, shall lead them, even to the spring of water shall he
drive them.

Secondly, we should know how necessary this food is. As for the necessity
thereof, Secondly, the necessity of this Heavenly food.
it is well known by common experience. The natural life, if it be not
vpholden with convenient meat belonging thereto, it wears and decays: Also
Spiritual life, if it be not entertained with fit nourishment appertaining
thereunto, it wears and decays, Alimenti ratio duplex est, altera
nutriendi, altera augendi, Arist. lib. 2. cap. 6. de Gene. anim.
nutriens est quod esse praebeat, and toti and partibus: Augens, quod
accessionem ad magnitudinem faciat, There is a twofold reason of our food; one
for to nourish, and another to give us an increase. That which does nourish
us, is which gives a being both to the whole body and parts thereof; the
increasing food which makes an augmentation to the greatness of the body,
till it attain to the due proportion and quantity thereof.

That Egyptian, the servant of an Amalekit, had great need of corporal food,
for when he had eaten of the bread, and drank of the wine given him by David,
1. Sam. 30.12
his spirit came again to him. Jonathan fighting against the uncircumcised
Philistims, had need of sustenance, because 1. Sam. 14.27
when he had tasted a little honey, his eyes received sight, and were made
clear. Elias had need of food, when 1. King. 19.8
he was to go to the mount of God, a great journey: Surely we have all a
great need of our Spiritual food, that we may be nourished, 1. Peter 2.2.
and grow thereby, Ephesians. 3.16.
that we may be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man, Psalm. 119.18.
that the eyes of our understanding may be opened, Job 33.3.
to be illuminate in the light of the living, to the end we may Ephesians. 4.1.
walk worthy of our holy vocation, and go forward toward heavenly Jerusalem.
That man in Bethleem Judah, said to his sonne-inlaw, Judge. 19.5.
comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread; He thought that natural bread
would comfort his sons heart; but far more will Spiritual food comfort
us. Thus the necessity of this food is evident in these respects, because
without it, there will be no continuance of Spiritual life, no growth of the
inward man, no strength, no sight, no walking to heavenly Canaan, no
refreshment, no comfort to our souls.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the worthiness of this food.
concerning the worthiness of this nourishment; let us remember first, that it
is rare, and not to be found in every place, neither to be found at every time
in any place; this food is only to be gotten where God is known, in the true
Church, not in every Nation. Now Psalm. 76.1.
God is known in Judah, his Name is great in Israel, in Shalem is his
Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion: There this food is to be gotten, and in
no other place of the whole World. It being the bread of the Lords children, it
is most unlike the bread of Worldlings and Idolaters, Hose 9.4.
all that eat of that bread shall be polluted, but who shall eat carefully
this bread, they shall be preserved and sanctified. Secondly, this food (which
is Gods word) is much worth, for it Psalm. 19.10.
is more to be desired then much fine Gold. In time of bodily famine, 2. King.
6.25
an Asses head (meat I think neither of great quantity, nor good quality)
was sold for About 5. lib.
80. pieces of silver: If in the extremity of thirst and want of water, See
the Turkish history in the life of Solomon the Magnificent.
a draught thereof was thought worth two ducats, (as happened in the Army of
the Emperor Charles marching toward Tunes;) at what great rate ought the
wholesome and precious food of our souls be to esteemed, with what charges
and travel, day and night should we labor for it?

Manna was an excellent food, Wisd. 16.20.
which had the abundance of al pleasures in it, and was meat for all tastes;
for it was Exo. 16.31.
like unto wafers made with honey, Number. 11.7.
also the taste of it was like unto the taste of fresh oil, Plut. li. 7. (...)
of the best sort that ever swimmeth above, it served to the appetite of all
that took it, therefore it is called Psalm. 78.25.
the bread of Angels; yet the Jews, that John 6.49.
did eat that Manna in the wilderness are dead: but this most excellent
sustenance, this most precious bread, which comes down from heaven, he which
eats of it, shall not die, he shall live for ever, Christ's flesh is meat
indeed, his blood is drink indeed, he that eats his flesh and drinks his
blood dwells in Christ, Fourthly, Christ does more to our souls, then food
does to our bodies.
and he in him, he has eternal life, Christ will raise him up at the last day.

Fourthly, let us consider, that Christ and his food is more profitable to our
souls, and to Spiritual life, then earthly meat is to our mortal bodies,
and our natural life: for execpt there be health, strength, and appetite, and
power in our bodies, natural food will in no ways avail us; so men Psa.
107.17.
by reason of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities afflicted
with sickness, their soul abhors all meat, and are brought to deaths
door.

Thus we see that there is a fourfold power or faculty, in well disposed and
wholesome bodies: 1. A drawing power to receive meat: 2. A retaining power to
keep it: 3. A converting power after digestion, to turn it into our
substance: 4. An expelling power, to cast forth the filthy and unprofitable
excrements; unless these faculties were in a body, meat would in no ways
profit it: But Christ as he bestows this food upon us, so he gives us
strength to receive it, grace for to keep it, his blessing that we may grow
by it, and Ephesians. 4.16.
receive increase in the measure of every part. Without Christ's help, Dan.
10.8.
there shall remain no strength in us, our strength shall be turned into
corruption, we shall have no power to receive his food, albeit we would
receive it; without Christ, we shall not Luke 8.15.
with an honest and good heart keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience,
but as wicked Saul 1. Sam. 15.23
did cast away the Word of God, so we would cast away the food of Christ: and
as the carnal Jews Number. 21.5.
loathed heavenly Manna, so we would loathe and be weary of that most
precious, and Spiritual Manna the Word of God, which is Psalm. 19.9.
altogether righteous, perfect, and profitable; and thus is the saying of an
Ancient verified, Omnia habemus in Christo, Ambros.
and omnia in nobis Christus. Si a vulnere curari desideras, medicus est: si
febribus aestuas, fons est: si graueris iniquitate, iustitia est: si indiges
auxilio, virtus est: si mortem times, vita est: si tenebras fugis, lux est: si
coelum desideras, via est: si cibum desideras, alimentum est. We have all
things in Christ, and Christ is all things in us. If thou desire to be cured
of thy wounds, he is a Physician: if thou be hot and burning with feauers,
he is a fountain to refresh thee: if thou be laden with iniquities, he is
righteousness: if thou need help, he is power and virtue: if thou fear
death, he is life: if thou fleest from darkness, he is light: if thou desire
heaven, he is the way thereto: if thou desire food, he is true and
wholesome nourishment. And Christ by infinite degrees is more necessary and
profitable to us, then food is to our bodies.

Fifthly, Fifthly, signs whereby we may know that we are nourished Spiritually.
touching those signs which may assure us of our spiritual nourishment, I
reckon five chiefly. 1. Life. 2. Strength. 3. Growth. 4. An Appetite. 5. Joy.

First, none may receive spiritual life, except Christ Revel. 2.7.
give them to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God. He 1. Ioh. 5.12.
that has the Son, has life from the Son; he that has this life, has
also food convenient, for the continuance and preservation of this life. As it
is John 6.33.
the bread of God, which comes down from Heaven, that gives life to the
World, so it is Christ that same bread, that preserves this life in us.
Again, strength in us to resist our enemies, and to work diligently the
works of our holy vocation, is a note that we are nourished with Heavenly
food. As outward strength would not remain in us without meat and
sustenance, (for of hunger comes Lam. 2.19.
fainting and weakness,) neither would inward strength abide in us, without
daily food fit for our inward man. 3. When 1. Cor. 3.7.
God gives a Spiritual increase in virtue and godliness, a most sure token
that he gives food; when with happy Samuel, we 1. Sam. 2.21. verse 26.
grow before the Lord, when we profit and are in favor with the Lord, then
Christ nourishes us, when with him Luke 2.40.
we grow and wax strong in the spirit, and are filled with wisdom; the
grace of God being ever with us. 4. If one greatly hunger and long for heavenly
food, it is an infallible demonstration, that already he has received, and
that he is to receive more abundantly of precious food; for God will Iere.
31.25.
saciate and replenish every weary soul, and sorrowful soul, hungring for
him, Psalm. 146.6.
The Lord which keeps fidelity for ever, which executes Justice for the
oppressed, which gives sight to the blind, which gives bread to the hungry,
He will Ephesians. 5.29.
nourish and cherish his own Church, that has an earnest appetite to
incorruptible refreshment. 5. Inward joy is a coheire of our spiritual
nourishment, Revel. 2.17.
Who has eaten of the hid Manna, and Reave. 22.17.
drunk of the water of Life freely? Even Gods Isa. 65.16.
servants, shall rejoice and have great joy, when the wicked shall have sorrow
and be ashamed.

Sixthly, Sixthly, the Spiritual famine.
great are the miseries of all those who are so forsaken of God, that he will
say unto them, Zach. 11.9.
I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die, and that that perishes,
let it perish, Eze. 34.29.
they shall be consumed with hunger. If they be happy to whom Iere. 3.15.
God gives Pastors according to his heart, which shall feed them with
knowledge and understanding; are they not miserable, who want food, and are
destroyed with darkness and ignorance?

There is a twofold hunger: A double famine.
one bodily famine, of corruptible food, another that is Spiritual, of the
wholesome word; bodily famine is a great evil, it makes the Lam. 4.8.
visage blacker then a coal, the skin to cleave to the bone, and to be
withered like a flock: they that be slain with the sword, are better then
they that are killed with hunger, which is an evil counsel, which compels
parents Deuteronomy. 28.58
to eat the fruit of their bodies, even the flesh of their sons and
daughters, as may be read both in the holy Scripture, When 2. King. 6.29
Benhadad besieged Samaria, and in other Histories, when Josephus de bello
Iudaico. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Titus Vespasian besieged the City of Jerusalem.

But Spiritual hunger is a greater evil, which makes one black and evil
favored in Gods sight as, Iere. 13.23.
black Mores, who cannot change their skins, Psalm. 106.15.
it brings leanness unto the soul, yea consumption and destruction there to.

Vt perdunt propriam mortalia corpora vitam,
Si nequeunt escas sumere corporeas:
Sic animi nisi deliciis rationis alantur,
Dum verbi aeterni pane carent, pereunt.
As our mortal bodies loose their own natural life, if they cannot receive
food: So our souls, unless they be nourished with the delicates of wisdom
and understanding, perish, when they want the bread of the eternal Word. This
terrible plague of the famine of Gods word, is mentioned by the Prophet, Amos
8.11, 12.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing of the Word
of the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and they shall run to and
fro, from the North to the East, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. How Lamentable is the fearful estate of such an unhappy people? As
the sins and transgressions of men, are the cause of natural hunger, and of
Amos 4.6.
scarceness of earthly bread; so they are the cause of this fearful famine
of the soul.

If John 6.33.
to eat of that heavenly bread brings everlasting life, to want it, it will
be eternal death. Aliud, Bernard.
sequi Iesum; aliud tenere, aliud manducare. Sequi, salubre consilium; tenere
and amplecti, solenne gaudium; manducare, vita beata. It is another thing to
follow CHRIST, another thing to hold him, another thing to eat CHRIST: To
follow CHRIST, is a wholesome counsel; to embrace him, is great joy; to eat
him, is a happy life. Then, to be deprived of that Heavenly food, is a
wretched and unhappy life.

If they Psalm. 75.4.
be blessed whom Christ chooses and causes to come to him, for they shall
dwell in his Courts, and be satisfied with the pleasures of his house, even of
his boly Temple: Are they not miserable and cursed, who will be Mat. 24.40.
refused at Christ's second coming: Who being Mat. 25.32.
separated from the godly, shall be shut forth from the Kingdom of Heaven, to
be ever famished in hell, and to be tormented in that lake with fire
unquenchable?

What will it at length avail any, with the rich glutton to Luke 16.19.
be clothed in purple, and fare well and delicate every day, to be fed as oxen
for the day of slaughter, if within very short time they be plunged in Hels
torments, where there is continual hunger and thirst, Mat. 8.12.
Weeping and gnashing of teeth, utter darkness, in all extremity of
everlasting horrors and pains?

7. Secondly, Duties of those that are fed.
what duties should the Lords people, nourished by him, render again unto God?
Let us serve so good a Father both in body outwardly, and Ioh. 4 24.
worship him in Spirit and truth inwardly, far be it from us, First, to
serve our Nourisher.
to give our blessed God such an occasion of complaint as the reprobate Jews
did. Isa. 1.2.
Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth: for the Lord has said, I have
nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me, says he
by his Prophet.

But seeing he is so good a Mala. 1.6.
Master, let us fear him: seeing he is so loving a Father, who Hos. 11.3.
will bear us in his arms that are weak; who will heal us that are sick;
who will lead us with the cords of love; who will take of the yoke from our
jaws, and lay meat unto us that are hungry, let us honor him always,
endeavoring to walk in his ways, and to observe his commandments: That
happy woman Ester did well, and behaved her self thankefully toward
Mordecai, Esther 2.20.
she did after his word, and obeyed his commandment, of whom she was
nourished. It is also a point of our duty to obey our God willingly, and
duly use his word who nourishes us continually.

The deep and frequent remembrance of our wretchedness, and unworthiness,
will be to us a very great help, both for our due preparation, that we may be
made ready to receive so necessary and precious food; as also for our
obedience and thankfulness, that we may behave our selves, dutifully to him,
who deals with us so lovingly: This serious meditation of our baseness and
indignity, will move us to say with Jacob, Lord, Genesis 32.10
We are not worthy of the least of thy mercies, and all the truth which thou
have showen unto thy servants; and to admire with the Prophet crying, Psalm. 8.4.
What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou
visitest him? and to esteem our selves but as Mat. 15.27.
whelps that should eat the crummes, which fall from our Masters table; and
this consideration of our wretchedness, should not hinder us from coming to
Christ, and from receiving this nourishment, but should move us to come with
greater humiliation, with greater preparation even to come as Mephibesheth did
to David, to prostrate our selves with great reverence, saying, 2. Sam. 9.8.
What are thy servants, that thou should look on such dead dogs? to
prepare our selves by a diligent trial of our faith, repentance, and of our
Spiritual appetite: for if preparation and trial was needful before the
Jews did eat the 2. Chr. 35.6
Pascall Lamb; is it not more needful to us, before we receive this so
excellent food, as to eat of the John 1.29.
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World, when our most loving
Savior, will say to us, Cant. 5.1.
I am come to my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse; I gathered my Myrrh with my
Spice; I eat my Hony-combe with my Honey; I drank my Wine with my Milk; and
thus he will inuit us: O my friends, and well-beloved, eat, drink, and make
you merry: Far be it from us, to disdain so great delicates; far be it
from us, to refuse this Heavenly banquet.

Because Est. 1.12.
Queen Vasthi refused to come to Assueroths feast, the King was very angry,
and his wrath kindled in him, then she was divorced, and her royal estate
given unto another. Surely the great King of Heaven will be highly offended,
and very angry with those, that will refuse to come to Luke 14.16.
his great Supper, none of them shall taste of his holy Banquet: he will Judge
them Matthew. 22.8.
not worthy of so great favor, Secondly, we should be thankful.
they shall be separate from him, and deprived for ever of his presence.

Again, when it shall please God to nourish thee, be not as the wanton Horse,
who Deuteronomy. 32.15.
waxing fat, spurns with his heel; forsake not God that made thee, misregard
not the strong God of thy salvation, who vpholdeth thee, but with a thankful
mind say with the faithful Prophet Elisha, 2. King. 4.13.
Behold, thou have had all this great care for us; Lord, what shall I do for
thee? how shall I be able to requite thy loving kindness toward me?

3. Thirdly, we should entertain Christ.
Seeing Christ entertaineth thee, and bestows so rare and excellent
nourishment upon thee, thou again ought with great care and diligence, to
provide and prepare entertainment for him, to desire him, Cant. 4.16.
to eat of the delicate things, and pleasant fruits, wherein he delights,
thou should make a feast to Christ, with the fruits of true repentance, and
give him those dishes, and delicates, wherewith he is most contented, to wit,
Psalm. 51.17.
a contrite and broken heart, which he will never despise, a faithful and
believing heart, Hebr. 11.6.
Without the which it is impossible to please him, an obedient heart, which
will cause thee to offer Romans 12.1.
thy body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto him. If thou have no
entertainment for Christ, it is a fearful token, that Christ does not
nourish thy soul unto eternal life.

4. We should have peace with Christ
Above all things, let it be our principal purpose to be at peace with
Christ, to have fellowship with him, ever remaining in his favor: otherwise,
those of Tyrus and Sidon in the day of Judgment will rise and be witness
against us; for when Herod Agrippa Acts. 12.20.
intended to make war against them, they came all with one accord unto him,
and persuaded Blastus the Kings chamberlain, they desired peace, because their
Country was nourished by the Kings Land. Have we not greater reason to be
very careful and solicitous, that we be at unity with Christ, to desire his
peace, who of his mercy, goodness, and liberality does nourish both soul
and body? They desired peace for their earthly, and natural sustenance; should
not we rather seek his favor, both for our earthly and heavenly nourishment?
Let us Psalm. 131.2.
behave our selves as babes weaned from their mother, depending upon him,
expecting and seeking food and all things necessary from him, loving and
honoring him, who is so favorable and beneficial toward us.

If the Romans much affected, Vide vitam Augusti and aliorum.
and esteemed of those Emperors who helped them in time of famine, and
rejoiced them with feasts and banquets; what great regard should we have to
Christ, who will deliver us from Revel. 7. ver. 11, 15, 16.
our great tribulations, and bring us in the presence of the throne of God,
that we may dwell with him in his holy Temple, serving him day and night?
There we shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, for the Lamb which is
in the mids of the throne shall govern us, and shall lead us unto the lively
fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: Isa.
49.10.
For he has compassion upon us, therefore Psalm. 84.11.
no good thing will he withhold from us, but will give us grace here, and
glory hereafter, for ever and ever.

CHAP. X. Christ gives Raiment and Riches.
AS Joseph Genesis 45.22
gave victual and nourishment to his brethren, so he gave them all (none
except) raiment: he was of great power in Egypt, and according to the
testimony of the Potestate been vsus Joseph antiquit. iudaic. lib. 21. ca. 4.
writer of the Jews History, he used his power well. Jesus Christ Hebr. 2.11.
who is not ashamed to call us brethren, who will Psalm. 81.16.
feed us with the fat of wheat, and will suffice us with honey out of the
Rock, who will Isa. 58.14.
feed us with the heritage of Jacob our Father, John 6.27.
who will give unto us that meat that perishes not but endures to
everlasting life: And those who loathe and refuse such heavenly and wholesome
food, Ier. 23.15.
He will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall;
but to those that willingly will receive wholesome food from him, Job. 36.31.
who gives meat abundantly, he will also give necessary and honest raiment.
When Jonathan 1. Sam. 18.3.
loved David as his own soul, and made a covenant with him, then he gave him
his Robe, his Garments, his Sword, and his Bow, even to his girdle. Christ
loving us, nourishing us, and making a Covenant with us, he will give a
robe-royall, precious garments, and sure armor, Revel. 3.18.
white raiment, that we may be clothed, and that our filthy nakedness do
not appear: He who is of great power and goodness, will Revel. 1.6.
make us Priests unto God his Father, and then Psalm. 132.9.
cloathe us with righteousness, and so Psalm. 90.17.
the beauty of our God shall be upon us, who will direct the work of our
hands continually, Christ, 2. Cor. 5.21
which knew no sin, made himself to be sin for us, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him. And thus we shall be apparrelled with
Psalm. 45.8.
garments smelling of Mirrhe and Aloes and Cassia, like to his own. Alas, how
miserably foolish are they, who vilipend and reject so precious and necessary
raiments? Richard Knowles in the life of Bajazet.


If that renoumed Tamberlane was offended grievously, and made war against
Bajazet fourth King of the Turks, because in great scorn he rejected
certain garments, that in kindness were sent to him by Tamberlane: Will not
Christ, that most mighty King in his wrath, consume all those that contemn,
and refuse the rich robes, which in kindness he offers unto them? They who
Mat. 22.12.
have not this wedding garment, at the last day shall be speechless, they
shall be bound hand and foot, and cast in utter darkness. If thou want this
Spiritual vesture, Iere. 4.30.
Though thou cloathest thy self with Scarlet; though thou deckest thee with
ornaments of Gold; though thou paintest thy face with colors; yet thou shall
trim thy self in vain, thou shall be abhorred and destroyed.

How expedient and profitable is it for us, diligently to endeavor, that we may
be armed and beautified with such comely apparel, as is the righteousness of
the Lord Jesus! So shall Psalm. 45.11.
the King have pleasure in (...) beauty, when we are all glorious within.

After Ruth had proof of Boaz gentleness and courtesy, who had entertained
her, she further adjoined this request, Ruth. 3.9.
spread the wing of thy garment over me. When thou have gotten experience of
Christ's goodness and liberality in feeding thee, say farther to Christ, Lord,
thou have nourished me when I was hungry, Lord also give garments unto me, and
grant that I may Reu. 16.15.
be so blessed as to watch and keep my garments, least I walk naked and men
see my filthiness. As soon as thou art adorned with that most honest raiment,
thy Psalm. 32.1.
sin shall be covered, thy iniquity shall not be imputed. Moreover, Christ
will say to thee, Cant. 7.6.
how fair art thou, and how pleasant art thou my love in pleasures!

But for that I purpose, God willing, to speak of that garment more largely in
another place, I continue the more ample discourse thereof for the present.

Christ gives riches to those who will receive him; for he sends his own
servants, Ephesians. 3.8.
to preach his unsearchable riches. 1. I will speak of the excellency of
them. 2. I will show to whom they are given. That their excellency may the
better appear, I will instance a comparison betwixt them and earthly riches,
which are so frequently wished for, and so diligently hunted for, Brus. lib. 5.
cap. 10.
and for some reason, because one that altogether wants them, As that
Athenian Timotheus the son of Conon thinks, Mortuus inter viuos viuit, he
lives as a dead man amongst living and quick men, and according to the saying
of the Philosopher, Arist. lib. 1. Ethic. and lib. 2. polit.
Impossible est indigentem operari bona. It is impossible that a poor man can
do many good things. Again, Impossible est indigentem stadi^ vacare, It is
not possible to an indigent man for to attend his studies: yet I say of earthly
riches (without the possession of spiritual riches) that they are
unprofitable, uncertain, insufficient, and hurtful.

First, riches to the wicked are unprofitable: for though he had Job 20.15.
devoured wealth, yet he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his
belly, he Ezech. 7.19.
shall cast his silver in the streets, and his gold far off: their silver and
their gold cannot deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shall
not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels, when their ruin is for
their iniquity.

Secondly, worldly riches are uncertain to the wicked, they will not remain.
Job 27.16.
Though he should heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
yet he shall not keep it to enjoy: for the innocent shall divide the silver.
Prou. 23.5.
Riches takes her to her wings, and flies away as an Eagle; riches will not
profit a rich man when he dies, Psalm. 49.17.
neither shall his pomp follow after him. Death will violently and suddenly
make a lamentable separation betwixt the rich man and all his goods, when it
will be said to him, Luke 12.20.
Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy soul from thee. Wherefore we
may clearly see, that the holy Apostle fitly calls them 1. Tim. 6.17.
uncertain riches, for a man cannot always keep them, but Eccles. 5.15.
must return naked as he came, he shall bear away nothing of his labor, and
what profit has he that he has traveled for the wind?

Thirdly, riches are insufficient. For, as Solomon testifies, Eccles. 5.9.
He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. The rich man is
like the dropsy man; the more he drinks, the more he thirsts; the wealthy
man the more he possesses, the more he desires. So Eccles. 4.8. Creuerunt and
opes, and opum furiosa libido.
there is no end of his travel, neither can his eye be satisfied with riches.

Fourthly, riches are hurtful to the possessours, Ecclesiast. 31.6. Ergo,
solicitae tu causa pecunia vitae es.
which the Wiseman affirms: Many are destroyed by reason of gold, and have
found their destruction before them. It is a stumbling block unto them that
sacrifice unto it, and every fool is taken therewith. And our Savior says,
Mat. 10.23. Per te immaturum mortis adimus iter. Prop. lib. 3.
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven: And Solomon
says, That Eccles. 5.12.
riches are reserved to the owners thereof for their evil. Zeph. 1.18. Greg.
Naz.
Neither their silver, nor gold, shall be able to deliver them in the day of
the Lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
jealousy, So speaks the Prophet. And the Ancient, Qui male vtitur diuitijs,
miserabilis est, vt ille quisponte se vulnerauerit eo gladio quem ad vindictam
hostium sumpserat: He who uses his riches evil, is miserable, like that man
who willingly wounds himself with the sword, which he took for to be
revenged of his enemies.

Riches without virtue, Eras. in Apoth. 1^9. Chrysostom. Epist. ad Heb. hom. 29.
are compared by the learned to unripe fruit, unwholesome and hurtful to the
health: and a wise father forbids his loving children to eat thereof, and
leaves them to his contemptible servants, for that they are the cause of
diverse sickenesses.

They are compared to cords and fetters, which bind us, and deteine us in the
slavery of our enemy: which cords it becomes us to break with Sampson, that
those Judge. 15.14. Chrysostom. hom. 33. epist. ad Heb.
bands may be loosed from our hands, and we obtain the victory.

They are like to an whoorish woman corrupting our minds, and making us to
misregard our heavenly Fathers good admonitions: for when he Ier. 22.21.
speaks to his own in prosperity, oftentimes they say that they will not
hear.

Riches are like to a burden Heb. 12.1.
pressing us down, wearying us in our spiritual race, and bringing upon us 1.
Tim. 6.9.
many noisome and foolish lusts, which drown men into perdition and
destruction. An impious rich man is in a worse estate then a Camel: Bernard.
Bilius. haec fuge quae seruans ab eis seruabere nunquam, Serpentemque sinu
parce fouere, etc.
the beast bears but one burden, but the rich man has two: One, of his
earthly possessions, another of his sins. Primum in morte deponitur, aliud
velit nolit moriens retinet, the first is laid down at the time of death, but
will he, nill he, he retains the other when he is dying, yea after death for
ever to grieve and vex him.

They are like a Serpent troubling and biting the keeper of them. As for
earthly and corruptible riches, because they are not always and continually
profitable but unprofitable, for Psalm. 49.17.
the rich man shall take away none of them when he dies, because the foolish
rich men will at length lament that riches are uncertain and unstable, saying,
Wis. 5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
what profit has the pomp of riches brought us, all things are passed away
like a shadow, and as a post that passes by, as a ship that passes over
the waves of the water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be
found, neither the pathe thereof in the floods, or as a bird that flies in
the air, and no man can see any token of her passage; Sermon. 4. de aduent. dom.
Bernard.
even so the wicked approach suddenly to their end. Bernard says of them, Si
vestra sunt, tollite ea hinc vobiscum. If they be yours, surely carry them
hence with you, because they are insufficient which will never fully content
nor satisfy the soul of man, Non plus satiabitur cor hominis aure, quam
corpus aura, The heart of man will no more be satiate and sufficed with gold,
then his body with air. As l the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
ear filled with hearing, so neither is the heart of man contented with
receiving riches, but ay thirsts for more.

Because they are hurtful to the possessours, The Use. To seek better riches.
for diuites desiderijs vastantur, cupiditatibus dissipantur, timoribus
cruciantur, tristitia contabescunt, ungodly wealthy men are wasted with
desires, are distracted with lusts, are tormented with this uncertainty of
their insufficiency, and of their detriment, Psalm. 62.10.
if riches increase, set not your heart thereon: for what good shall all the
goods of the world do to thee, Math. 16.26.
if thou loose thy soul? or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul?
Eccles. 1.8. August.
labor thou more diligently for 1. Tim. 6.6.
godliness, which is great gain, which if thou haste obtained, though thou
have nothing in this earth, yet 2. Cor. 6.10.
thou possessest all things.

Study with all possible endeavor, to Iam. 2.5.
be rich in faith, so shall thou be an heir of his heavenly Kingdom.

Strive to 1. Tim. 6.17.
be rich in good works, to be ready to distribute, and communicate, that thou
may obtain eternal life: seek to Luke 12.33.
make up your treasure that can never fail, in heaven, where no thief
comes, neither moth corrupts.

As for worldly riches, August.
Putantur plenae deliciarum, sed sunt plenae periculorum: they are esteemed
full of pleasure, but they are full of danger. Cassiodor. de dilectione Dei.
cap. 9.
Pecunia cum labere acquiritur, cum timore seruatur, and tandem cum dolor
grauissimo amittitur: Wealth is purchased with travel, kept with fear, and at
length lost with exceeding displeasure. Diuitiae cum acquiruntur tribuunt,
August.
falsam latitiam, cum perduntur derelinquunt veram tristitiam. Riches when they
are acquired give false joy, but when they are lost, they leave true sorrow.
Therefore we should not Psalm. 49.6.
trust in our goods, Not to trust in earthly riches.
nor boast our selves in the multitude of our riches, for who Psalm. 52.7.
trusts therein, the Lord shall take him, and pluck him out of his
Tabernacle, and root him out of the land of the living; and that justly, for
Job 31.24.
who makes gold his hope, or the wedge of gold his confidence, and rejoices
because of his substance, and because his hand has gotten much, this is in him
an iniquity to be condemned, for he denies the God above. But let us be most
instant to acquire the Col. 1.27.
riches of Gods glorious mystery, which riches Christ is in us the hope of our
glory, who will vouchsafe these happy and spiritual riches upon us. August.
The properties of spiritual riches. 1. They are comely.
Non oculis carnis, sed oculis cordis videntur, They are seen not with the
eyes of the body, but with the eyes of the soul.

1. They are most comely and beautiful, an ornament to us in our life, they
are profit and emolument to us at our death; 2. Cor. 9.11.
That on all parts we may be made rich, Col. 2.2.
in all riches of the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery of
Jesus Christ.

2. They are sure.
They are most sure and certain riches, Math. 6.20.
neither the moth nor canker corrupts them, neither thieves can break
through to steal them. Albeit Nebuchadnezzar might take from Iehoiachim 2.
King. 24.13.
all his gold, silver, and treasures, and carry them to Babel: Albeit Craesus
and Crassus, and the rich King Ezech. 28.5.
of Tyrus, may be bereft of those worldly goods, and be impouerished: yet no
strength nor policy of Satan, will be able to bereave the godly of their
incorruptible treasure, They are sufficient.
for they are laid up in heaven.

3. They are sufficient to content one: when the Saints do find Christ,
living and reigning in their souls, then they will say with Jacob, Genesis 45.28.
I have enough, They will proclaim with David, Psalm. 16.5.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance; I have a fair heritage. And
surely it is true: Pessidet ille nihil, Christum quiperdidit vnum.
Perdidit ille nihil, Christum qui possidet vnum.


In respect of the plenitude of the heavenly riches, that is in the Lord Jesus,
who possess him, they loose nothing; who loose him, they possess nothing
tending to their eternal happiness and salvation.

4. They are absolutely necessary, They are necessary.
to bring one to honor and estimation: Yea, to a wonderful preferment: for
without them none will Ioh. 1.12.
have that prerogative, as to be the son of God. 2. For safety and
preservation, when 1. Cor. 1.5.
in all things we are made rich in Christ, he will Math. 1.21.
save us from our sins, and Luke 1.71.
give us deliverance from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us.
If corruptible gold was an occasion wherefore Iehoash and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem was preserved from death or bondage in the days of 2. King. 12.18.
Hazael; certainly the most excellent spiritual treasures, will be means of
our eternal preservation.

5. So considering the beauty, the certainty, the sufficiency, the
necessity of heavenly treasures, let us seek earnestly, and receive
thankfully from Christ, Reu. 3.18.
that fine gold tried by the fire, that we may be made rich, viz. the saving
graces of Gods Spirit, true faith, unfeigned repentance, holy fear, sincere
love, by which we shall beautify our selves both in soul and body, for the
price and valor whereof we ought, Math. 13.44.
to sell all that we have, knowing that they will be Psa. 119.72.
better unto us then thousands of gold and silver.

Secondly, we have to observe, upon whom this so precious riches, and heavenly
treasures are bestowed: for many in this point are deceived and disappointed,
who suppose, with the lukewarm Laodiceans, that they Revel. 3.17.
are rich and increased with goods, have need of nothing, altogether ignorant,
that in the mean time, they are miserable, poor, wretched, and naked, having
need of all things. Many Christians are like the puffed up Corinthians,
thinking themselves full and rich, 1. Cor. 4.8.
and reigning as Kings, who in that same instant are empty, needy, poor, and
vile slaves, to a filthy and cruel enemy.

Wherefore let us take good heed, Secondly, to whom Spiritual riches are given.
upon whom Christ will vouchsafe so rich and precious treasures: Even first, to
those who know their loss; Secondly, who lament their poverty; Thirdly, who
with most earnest endeavor labor for riches; those only and none others,
shall be partakers of that inspeakeable wealth, and enriched with that fine
Gold, with that Spiritual and permanent treasure.

First, To those who know their loss.
it is a wonder, and great pity to behold men to be so sensible of any
worldly loss, and to be so ignorant and senseless of Spiritual loss, and
hurt done to their soul, prejudicial to their salvation.

We find that Kish, Saul's father, knew soon when 1. Sam. 9.3.
his Asses were lost: Naomi, that her Ruth 1.20.
beauty was lost: Jeroboam, that the 1. Kin. 13.6.
power of his hand was lost: Samson, that his Judge. 16.28.
two eyes were lost: Manasseh, 2. Chr. 33.12
that his earthly Kingdom and liberty was lost: But alas, we know not that
we have Revel. 2.4.
left our first love, that we have lost the gifts which we received at the
time of our creation, that 1. Cor. 15.49.
we have borne the image of earthly, and sinful Adam, having blotted the
image of God in holiness and righteousness, that we have lost the eyes of
our understanding, and have great need to pray, Lord Psa. 119.18.
open our eyes, that we may see. We are ignorant of the decay of the strength
of our inward man, and that we through our natural unrighteousness, are in
danger to loose the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, Christ will enrich those who lament their poverty after they have
seen it, and make their moan to Christ, because they have no furniture, nor
goodness in them, for the mainteinance of their Spiritual life, acknowledging
themselves to be beggars and bankerupts, their estate being distressed and
undone; that in regard of grace and Gods favor, they are so poor by nature,
so that they have no good thing at all, more then they get by begging.

The knowledge and feeling of our miserable spiritual poverty, Good poverty.
will greatly serve to beat down this foolish and proud conceit, which we
have by nature, and cause us to be out of heart with our selves, which will
prepare us to true grace, and to be Matthew. 5.3.
poor in spirit, to be blessed, for they who are poor in such form, are
Psalm. 72 2.
Gods poor, the Lord thinks on them, Psalm. 40.17.
though I be poor and needy, the Lord thinks on me, says David: 2. Isa.
66.2.
The Lord looks to them: 3 The Lord will satisfy them, Luke 1.53.
and send away the rich 1. Cor. 6 9. Two those who lament their poverty.
empty. But the other inward poverty, to want grace the only riches which
beautifieth the soul, is most to be bewailed and lamented, and by many degrees
much worse then Worldly poverty: For poor men in respect of earthly things,
they may be honest and godly men, contented with their estate; so were the
chief Apostles, Peter, Acts. 3.6.
who had not Gold nor Silver; Paul, Phil. 4.11.
who had learned in whatsoever state he was in, to be contented therewith.

This worldly poverty, is (as one well says) Aduersus fures, Petrarch de
paup. dial. 8.
and peiores furibus voluptates peruigil excubitrix. But to want grace, and to
be empty of Spiritual riches, is the misery of all miseries: no Honesty,
no Virtue, no Piety, can stand with that unhappy poverty.

Thirdly, Thirdly, these riches are given to those who labor for them.
who so wishes to participate of this so excellent, and precious treasure, they
must of necessity labor for it with great travel and industry. If 2. Tim.
2.6.
the husbandman must labor before he receive fruits; the Merchant, and
Mariner, before they get gain; the Soldier, before he obtain his wages:
Should not a wise Christian labor, that he may receive those incorruptible
riches? A grief of griefs, to behold men professing Christianity, so
intentiuely careful, and diligent, for to purchase and keep corruptible
trash, and the perishing pelf of this World, while as they are careless, and
altogether negligent to acquire Heavenly, and eternal treasure, which will be
gainefull and steadable for ever and ever.

Let all those who are willing to enjoy this inestimable wealth (without the
which, life is more miserable then death,) resolve to Reu. 3.18.
buy it from Christ, and how? not with money, for Act. 8.20.
Simon Magus would have bought it so, and was deceived; yea our blessed Savior
most lovingly inuiteth us to buy without money, Isa. 55.1.
and without Silver: Namely, with great humility, fervent prayer, earnest
labor, and vehement desire, to make an exchange with him. First, Humility is
requisite in this bargain; Because 1. Pet. 5.5.
God who resists the proud, gives grace to the humble, and Pro. 22 4.
reward of humility, and the fear of God is riches, and glory, and life.
Secondly, Prayer is needful; Matthew. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find. Truly this
durable treasure is worth the asking. Thirdly, and also worth the travel: then
labor painefully for it, and 1. Cor. 15.58
your labor shall not be vain in the Lord. When ye have gotten any portion
thereof, be most diligent, that it Luke 19.16.
increase more, and at length your Master will say to you; Mat. 25.21.
It is well done, good servant and faithful, enter into your Masters joy.
Fourthly, in this bargaining, there must been an exchange. Give Christ all thy
sins, and receive his righteousness; give him thy shame, death, and
confusion; and receive from him, honor, life, and salvation. A happy and
blessed change for us, wherein we can have no loss, but ever gain and
profit. There was some correspondence, and proportion in that exchange betwixt
Solomon and Hiram: for 1. King. 5.8.
Hiram gave Cedar-trees and Fur trees for the building of the Temple; again,
Solomon did minister food for his family: but in this bargain with Christ,
there is no proportion nor correspondence.

That woman who pleaded before Solomon, would gladly have bin content, to have
1. Kin. 3.23.
changed her dead son, for her companions living son: but there are few who
are content to part with their sins, and to take Christ's righteousness: many
will rather keep still their filthy pleasures, Romans 13.12.
and the works of darkness, to their own destruction, then change for the
better, and receive that treasure, which will enrich them for ever. Thus much
of the excellency of heavenly riches, and to whom they are given.

CHAP. XI. Christ gives Liberty.
WE shall the more esteem of this great blessing of our Christian liberty,
Slavery in sin.
after we have known the vile slavery of sin, and the miserable thraldom
and captivity, wherein Satan deteineth the ungodly.

If we felt rightly, the heavy bondage of sin, Romans 6.6.
hence forth we would not serve sin: 1. Because sin is deceitful: 2. It
is grievous: 3. It is cruel.

First, sin is deceitful; we ought to be the more attentive, Hebr. 3.13.
least we be hardened through the deceitfulness thereof. Laban was deceitful,
Genesis 31.41.
who changed Jacobs wages ten times, and would have sent him away empty,
notwithstanding of his longsome and painful service: Sin is false.
but sin is more deceitful then Laban, performing far other ways then it
promises. It will promise pleasure, profit, and preferment; but will give in
the end pain, disadvantage, and dishonor. No permanent pleasure in sin.
Albeit, Gene. 20.17
Abimelech King of Gerar expected for pleasure, yet he found sorrow sickness
and danger. Our first father Adam, supposed to have had Gene. 3.7.
honor by sin; but shame and dishonor befell him, and his posterity ever
after. 1. Sam. 15.23.
Saul and 1. King. 21.21.
Achab looked for profit by sin, but they lost their Kingdoms: and
undoubtedly, no profit, no pleasure, no preferment in sin.

Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, dealt very guilefully and falsely with those
Iere. 41.5, 6, 7.
foruescore men, who were going to offer in the house of the Lord; he wept with
them, promising to bring them to Gedaliah, whom they were seeking; but when he
had gotten opportunity, he slew them, and cast them into the mids of the
pit. Sin is more guilefull and false, promising to bring men to the full of
their desires; but it will slay them, and cast them into the pit of everlasting
perdition. Sin is grievous.


Secondly, sin is very heavy and grievous, to those especially, who are
quickened with the life of Jesus, and feel the burden thereof. If the
Israelites complained, that Solomon's 2. Chr. 10.4.
yoke was grievous upon them, and his servitude: Have we not greater cause of
complaint, and lamentation, in respect of the intolerable and bitter yoke of
sin, Heb. 12.1.
hanging so fast on us, and pressing us sore down? The holy Apostle under the
sense of this burden cries, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! Yea
the dead earth, and senseless creatures, Romans 8.22.
groan and travel together in pain, waiting with fervent desire to be
delivered of such a weighty burden.

Thirdly, Sin is cruel.
sin is a cruel and merciless master. The Apostle Peter makes mention of
some 1. Pet. 2.18.
froward masters buffeting their servants. but alas, how froward and malicious
is sin, buffering, and wounding, and tormenting those that foster the same?
An evident proof hereof in Amnon, he was 2. Sam. 13.2.
sore vexed therewith, that he became lean and fell sick, through the
vehemency, and cruelty of that commander.

Wretched and unwise are they and deceived, Tit. 3.3.
who serve their lusts, and filthy rotten pleasures, who are entangled in the
vile and abominable slavery of sin, and iniquity, which is so false,
grievous, cruel, and malicious.

Let us also think seriously of Satan's captivity, Captivity of sinners under
Satan
of the bondage and thraldom, wherein he holds his miserable slaves. The
bondage of the Israelites in Egypt under Pharaoh, was evil: the bondage in
Babylon was worse: but the bondage under the Devil by infinite degrees is
worst of all. Pharaoh a mighty King of great power; Nabuchadnezar a more
mighty King of greater power; the Devil more mighty, and of greater power
then they both. These were Princes of some wicked men, John 14.30.
Satan the Prince of all the wicked of the whole World: they flesh and blood,
natural men of short continuance, Princes on earth: Satan Ephesians. 6.12.
the Prince of darkness, spiritual wickedness remaining in high places,
whose hatred is deadly, seeing there is Genesis 3.15.
enmity between his seed and the godly, whose cruelty is insatiable, seeing
he is a 1. Pet. 5.8.
Lion and a Reave. 20.2.
Dragon, whose craft and subtilties are manifold, seeing he Reave 12.9.
Captives both in body and soul eternal.
is a Serpent. Those Tyrants did only captiuate men's bodies, their minds were
free, and therefore the Exodus 2.23.
children of Israel sighed, and cried for the bondage of Egypt, and Psa. 137.1.
by the Rivers of Babel they wept before the Lord, they were exceeding weary of
their thraldom and captivity: But Satan deteineth both body and soul in
captivity and filthiness, so that Tit. 1.15.
even their minds and consciences are defiled, and enthralled, Ephe. 4.18.
having their cogitation darkened, the eyes of their soul blinded, their
hearts hardened, being past all feeling, giving themselves to wantonness, to
work all uncleanness, with delight and greediness, not being weary of
their wearisome slavery, but abiding therein with pleasure and delectation.

Furthermore, captives to earthly Tyrants, They are in snares and prison.
are not ever detained in pits, and snares: but Isa. 24.17.
fear and the pit, and the snare, are upon the inhabitants of the Earth, who
are not delivered by Christ; They are all taken 2. Tim. 2.26.
in Satan's snare, to do his will: who received not liberty in Christ, they
remain continually in the Devils pit, in great woe and misery.

As Nebuchadnezar did to Zedechiah bodily, so Satan does worse to all his
captives spiritually. Iere. 39.7.
He put out his eyes, and bound him in chains to carry him to Babel; The
devil puts out the eyes of the understanding, he binds sinners in chains,
to carry them to Hell, and to everlasting torments.

Zedechiah was Iere. 52.11.
put in Prison till the day of his death, (this is a comfort against the
terror, and pain of the earthly prison, Mors claue^ alteram habet. Petra.
dial. 64.
that as the Jailer has one key of the door thereof, so death has another
key, to set prisoners at liberty.) But Satan's captives (unless they be
redeemed by Christ,) are cast into a prison, out of which there is no delivery
nor foorth-comming, Mar. 9.44.
where their worm dies not, and the fire never goes out.

2. King. 23.33.
Pharaoh Nechoh put Iehoaz in bonds at Riblah. Satan deteineth his prisoners in
stronger bonds, out of which when we are delivered, we may say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 116. ver. 16, 17, 18.
Behold, Lord, we are thy servants, thou have broken our bonds; We will offer
a sacrifice of praise, we will call upon the Name of the Lord, and pay our
vows unto him, in the presence of all thy people. Christ's bonds.
And we should be willingly content, to be led with the cords of Christ,
Hos. 11.4.
even with the bonds of love wherewith God Psalm. 86.11.
will draw us to him, and knit our hearts unto him, and make us to fear his
holy name, which is sure freedom, and true liberty to serve Christ in
holiness and humility. August.
Is est qui donat libertatem, exhibet fraternitatem, and promittit
haereditatem, He it is who gives liberty, exhibiteth brotherhood, and
promises an heritage.

In handling of this benefit, we will keep this method: 1. show some sorts
of liberty: 2. How true liberty is obtained: 3. from what we are delivered:
4. what estimation we ought to make of so great a gift: 5. some uses of the
premises.

I. There is a twofold liberty; one evil, Two sorts of liberty.
offered by Satan, who is a liar, and a murderer from the beginning, and 2.
Pet. 2.19.
promised by false teachers, who themselves are servants of corruption. This is
an accursed liberty, giving loose reins to sin and impiety, drawing people
unto most unhappy thraldom, and slavery, and at length ouerwhelming them
with most woeful calamity, and plunging them in that sulphurous and Reu. 20.1.
bottomless pit of eternal misery, where they are bound for ever in the
chains of utter and palpable darkness. Satan like an Ape, is a preposterous
imitator of Christ's actions, as appears in this same instance: for Christ
loses, that he may bind, Luke 13.12.
he loosed from the bonds of the devil a poor woman, who had a spirit of
infirmity eighteen years, who was so bound together, that she could not
lift up her self in any ways, and he set her at liberty out of Satan's bonds,
that he might Ioh. 8.44.
bind her heart to God, who immediately glorified him; also Satan loses
some, to bind them more surely and miserably, he loosed Genesis 4.8.
Cains hand to kill his brother, but he bound his tongue from confession, and
his heart from conversion. So he does with all senseless sinners, who being
wrapped up in great security, delighting themselves in his slavery, and
filthiness, he strives to bring them to a disliking and detestation of
Christ's bands, so that they refuse his inward bonds, whereby their affections
should be bound, and Col. 3.5.
mortified; they refuse also his outward bonds of discipline and correction,
whereby their manners should be amended, Psalm. 2.2.
assembling themselves against the Lord, and his Christ, resolving to break
his bonds, and to cast his cords from them, dreaming woeful bondage to sin,
and looseness of life, to be in it self liberty and freedom.

Again, Good liberty.
there is a happy liberty given by Christ, Ier. 15.21.
who delivers his own out of the hand of the wicked; and from the power of
the tyrants, Ioh. 8.36.
who makes them free indeed, and Abraham's true children, Zach. 9.11.
who will save his own through the blood of his covenant, and loose his
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, Psalm 53 6.
and turn the captivity his people, 2 Samuel 8.1.
by taking the bridle of bondage out of the hand of all their enemies, by Act.
1.6.
restoring the kingdom, and consequently freedom to Israel, so that they are
Ephesians. 2.19.
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, so that they are of the
family Gal. 6.10
of faith, brethren to Christ, Romans 8.17.
and heirs annexed with him, even 1. Pet. 2.7.
heirs of the grace of life, and a heavenly Kingdom.

Secondly, How liberty is obtained.
spiritual liberty in some manner is obtained, as corporal liberty in old
time was purchased. 1. by ransom. 2. by powerful deliverance. 3. by
manumission. 4. by exchange.

I. In respect of Gods Justice, which of necessity must be satisfied, we are
set at liberty by ransom paid by Christ, Math. 20.28.
who came to give his life, for the ransom of many. Thus we should know, that
we 1. Pet. 1.18.
are not redeemed, nor ransomed with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot.

And seeing, 1. Cor. 6.10.
we are bought for a price, we should glorify God to whom we do belong.

II. We attain to liberty by a glorious and powerful deliverance, by that
notable victory of our Savior, and overthrow of our enemy, Christ Col. 2.25.
having spoiled the Principalities and Powers, Col. 1.13.
who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and Isa. 42.7.
brought out the prisoners from the prison, he who is most strong, and of
all-sufficient power, has Mat. 12.29.
entered into the strong man's house, he has bound him, spoiled him, and given
freedom to his own servants, whom he finds therein.

III. After the comfortable victory, and our happy delivery, when we are in
Christ's own possession, he most franckly manumitteth us, and give us true
liberty, not that we may frame our life according to our natural and filthy
will, or to 1. Pet. 2.13.
count it our pleasure to live deliciously for a season, serving our carnal
iusts and sinful appetite; but that we should conform our selves according to
his holy will, and prescript of his holy word, to Tit. 2.12.
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world, and this I take
to be the meaning of that saying of the Ancient, August.
Christus non fecit de seruis liberos, sed demalis seruis seruos bonos, Christ
has not made us free, who were servants, but of evil slaves, he has made us
good servants to him, that we may serve and Ioh. 4.24.
worship him, in spirit, in truth, and sincerity, as he requires of us.

IV. That exchange made betwixt Christ and us, is either a cause, or a
testimony of our liberty, that He, the substantial Ioh. 1.14.
Word was made Flesh, and took upon him our nature, Phil. 2.7.
even the form of a servant, to the end that 2. Pet. 1.4.
we should be partakers of the godly nature; Christ Gal. 4.4.
made of a woman became the Son of man, and Gal. 3.13.
was made a curse for us, that Gal. 3.26.
we all may be the sons of God by faith in him, and that the blessing of
Abraham might come on us. Christ took our sins, and gives us his
righteousness, our shame, and gives us glory; our bands due to us, and gives
us freedom and liberty in him. Thus we may be well assured of our liberty by
so many ways acquired to us, as by ransom, deliverance, manumission, and
exchange, not of person, but of qualities.

Thirdly, From what we are freeed.
Christ gives us liberty, from the ceremonial Law, and the rites of Moses.
2. from the dominion of Sin. 3. from the curse of the Law. 4. from the
cruelty and tyranny of Satan.

These ceremonies, as Peter confesses, were a Act. 15.10, 31.
yoke and burden which the Jews were not able to bear. Now as the people of
Antiochia rejoiced for the consolation, when they were certified, that they
were Gal. 5.11.
not to be entangled with that yoke of bondage; so the assurance of our
delivery from that thraldom, should be unto us an occasion of joy and
gladness.

2. When we are made free by Christ, Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over us, for he Isa. 44.22.
will put away our sins like a mist, and our transgressions as a cloud, and
cause us to turn to him who redeemed us. This is the blessing of blessings,
for other ways, our Isa. 59.2.
iniquities would have separated between God and us, and our sins would have
hid his face from us, so that he would not hear us.

3. Having gotten liberty by Christ, we are saved from the curse of the Law;
for Christ was Gal. 3.13.
made a curse for us. If it be asked, how these can stand together, God the
Father says of Christ, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and yet that he was made a
curse, that he did bear Gods heavy wrath, and suffered the shameful and
painful death of the cross? It is answered, That they may agree well
together: for Gods unspeakable love to Christ, could not stay his justice
whereby he punishes the sins of the world, in the person of his beloved
Son, and John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son for the
Redemption and life of the faithful. Gods love to Christ, and the execution of
his Justice, and his kindness to his own sighteth not together.

Again, if it be asked; If we be delivered from the punishment of sin, and
from the curse of the Law; wherefore are we not also saved from the first
death, which Romans 6.23.
is the wages of sin, and yet Heb. 9.27.
it is appointed unto men, that they shall once die, And the Apostle affirms,
That in Cor. 15.22.
Adam all die? A weak Christian may think, that because he is not freed from
a natural death, that therefore he is not freed from the curse of the Law.

Answ. Christ Hos. 13.14.
delivered his own from death, he will be the death of death, and the
destruction of the grave; he changes the condition of death in his own, so
that it is as but the shadow of death, and entrance to life, as the Ancient
speaks, Mors est ianua vitae, Cyprian.
victoria belli, portus maris, Death, it is a gate of life, the victory of our
warfare, the haven of the Sea, and so through Christ, Psalm. 116.15.
precious in the sight of Lord is the death of his Saints, and Reu. 14.13.
blessed are they which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. One of the Fathers writes comfortably of this
purpose; Mors Sanctorum, est labor is omniumque malorum consummatio, Citant.
Hemming. in 8. John. Euang.
ad portum applicatio, peregrinationis, and omnium aegritudinum terminus,
oneris grauissimi depositio, de equo furioso descensio, de domo ruinosa
liberatio, omnium periculorum euasio, debiti naturae solutio, reditus in
patriam, and ingressus ad gloriam, The death of the Saints is the finishing of
their travel and of all their evils, the going to the harbor of his rest, the
end of his pilgrimage, and of all their diseases, a laying down of a most
heavy burden, and the lighting down from a mad and furious horse, the
deliverance from a ruinous house, the payment of the debt of nature, the
return to our native country, and an entrance to glory.

The assurance of this made the Apostle Phil. 1.23.
to desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ which is best of all.

4. We are freed by Christ from the tyranny of Satan, who is more false to us
then Zebul was to Baal, having deceived him, saying, that his enemies, that
were coming to fight against him, were Iud. 9.36.
the shadows of the mountains, so the devil goes about continually, Reu.
20.5.
to deceive the people which are in the four quarters of the earth, in making
them to suppose, first the most dangerous and pernicious enemy to be but a
light or small thing, as a shadow: he also and his unclean spirits are more
cruel and bloody, then, were the Assyrians, of whom it was said by the
Prophet, Ier. 6.23.
they are cruel and will have no compassion, their commandments are more
cruel then Pharaohs: he commanded the Jews Exodus 1.32.
to destroy every man child; Satan commands every one of his slaves to destroy
their souls. We read that Abraham had a special care to deliver Lot, who in
the overthrow of Sodom was taken prisoner by Chedorlaomer, Genesis 14.15.
he brought him again, and recovered all his substance: Christ has greater
care to deliver and save us, who are taken prisoners of Satan, and to restore
to us all the loss which we have sustained by the fall of our first parents,
and our own defection. Christ Psalm. 86.17.
will show a token of his goodness toward us, that all they that hate us may
see it and be ashamed, because he has helped and comforted us, and our 2. Tim.
4.18
Lord will deliver us from every evil work, and preserve us unto his heavenly
kingdom.

Fourthly, touching the estimation that we ought to make of this blessed
freedom; surely, we have good cause to account of it highly. For if Lysias
esteemed much of the freedom of the Romans, so that Act. 22.28.
with a great sum of money, he obtained it; we should think more of the
liberty of the Christians.

The privileges of the Romans were chiefly four: 1. They might not be
judged by any foreign Judge, but by one of their own nation: 2. Test.
Aretio. in Act. cap. 22.
It was not lawful to scourge or torment them. 3. Their children were ever
free in the power of their parents, and might not be pressed to the war. 4.
They had free access to the most ample honors and preferments, with sundry
other privileges.

But the prerogatives of Christians, are of much more worth and value. Romans
8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
justifies; who shall judge them whom Christ absolueth? who Isa. 50.8.
will contend with them, whom he assures? what adversary shall trouble and
torture those, to 2. These. 2.16.
whom Christ has given everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace?

III. The children of Christian parents are happy, for they being comprehended
within the compass of the Covenant of God, 1. Cor. 7.14.
are holy, and their Mat. 18.10.
Angels always behold the face of the Lord in Heaven; Gal. 4.31.
They are not children of the servant, but of the free woman, Abraham's seed,
heirs by promise, a 1. Pet. 2.9.
royal Priesthood, enjoying true liberty.

IIII. They shall not only have access to the greatest preferments and
dignity, but shall attain also to the highest honor and glory, and
themselves, Psalm. 8.5.
be crowned with worship and felicity for ever.

We read that the Athenians with great courage and feruencie, Herodo. and
vide Chron. Carrion. li. 2.
maintained their civil liberty, so that they stoned to death one of their
neighbors Lycidas, (or as Demosthenes calls him Cyrsilus) for that he
counseled them to accept of the condition in infringing their liberty, which
Mardonius General to Xerxes proposed unto them; yea, the women of Athens
killed also with stones his wife for the same cause. With what endeavor should
we study, to keep our spiritual freedom, and to stand Gal. 5.9.
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage?

We read also what Diogenes said to Craterus one of Alexanders chief
Captains, Laertius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
who being a man of great wealth, invited the Philosopher to abide with him,
promising him good entertainment: But he replied, that he had rather lick
salt in Athens then to fare delicatly with Craterus, preferring liberty,
albeit it be conjoined with poverty, unto the delicates of rich men where
freedom is diminished. Yea the Apostle himself esteems much of civil
liberty, as appears by his counsel, 1. Cor. 7.21.
If thou may be free, use it rather.

The Romans also both did, Liuius. Plutarch. August. citant.
and suffered great things for the keeping of their liberty. And Brutus for
the obtaining thereof did kill his own children: Have we not better cause, to
kill and Colos. 3.5.
to mortify our sins, and lewd affections, that we may keep our Christian
liberty, that we who are Isa. 61.1. and Luke 4.18.
bound, and are captives may have the prison opened, and our selves delivered
in the acceptable year of the Lord?

This liberty should be the more regarded of us, because the Lord only can
give it unto us, so that we may truly say, The Psa. 144.2.
Lord is our goodness, and our fortress, our shield and our deliverer: It is
not as the gift or donation of any mortal man. Indeed Nero might proclaim an
earthly liberty to the Grecians; Alexander. lib. 4. ca. 10.
and Cinna to slaves; but they themselves were slaves and captives unto their
vile lusts and affections. But no Prince nor Potentate has power, to give this
Christian liberty: 1. Tim. 3.13
It is in the faith which is in Christ Jesus, he may only give his own
Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.17.
and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

Servants of old were very desirous of liberty; for when they received
freedom, 1. They were apparelled with white raiment: 2. They were honored
with a Gold ring: 3. They were admitted to their Masters table.

Christians should think more of Spiritual liberty, for then, Tertullia. and
Pier. Valor. li. 40,
Isa. 52.1.
They will put on the garments of beauty, and be Reave. 3.5.
clothed in white array: Secondly, they will be more honored then Joseph was
in Egypt, when Pharaoh Genesis 41.42.
put a ring upon his hand: Thirdly, Christ Luke 22.29.
appoints for them a Kingdom, that they may eat and drink at his table.

V. After we have gotten this liberty, The uses of true Liberty.
we must not 1. Pet. 2.16.
have it as a cloak of maliciousness, but we must live as the servants of
God. The fury and madness of the Libertines, who under the pretext of
liberty, do pollute themselves with all sort of impiety, is justly to be
abhorred and detested: as also of the Anabaptists, who because of their
freedom, (as they term it,) would shake off all obedience and subjection unto
the ciuell Magistrate, express contrary to Gods word. Romans 13.5.
We must be subject unto the higher powers, not because of wrath only, and
damnation; for that our spiritual freedom does no way exempt us from ciuell
and lawful subjection, and so the Apostle commands, Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh,
in singleness of your hearts unto Christ.

2. It is good counsel that is given by the Apostle, Heb. 4.14.
Let us hold fast our profession, that we should also hold fast our liberty,
which is a privilege of our profession, and Romans 6.22.
being freed from sin, and made servants unto God, we should have our fruit
in holiness, that in the end we may obtain everlasting life.

3. We should so account of this happy freedom, as to prefer the same unto
all the decaying delicates, and perishing pleasures, which this vain world can
afford, never regarding, nor yet lusting after the flesh pots, nor after Number.
11.5.
the fish, Cucumbers, Leekes, Onions, and Garleke of Egypt, which may cause us
to loose our liberty, and again to be reduced to vile slavery.

CHAP. XII. Christ gives Honor.
Jesus Christ 2. Pet. 1.17.
who received of God the Father honor and glory, he will Romans 15.7.
receive us also to the glory of God. As he vouchsafes upon us true and
happy liberty; so he will Hebr. 2.7.
crown us with honor and glory, and set us ahoue the work of his hands, so
that s we shall have a Crown of glory, and a royal Diadem in the hand of our
Lord.

Touching this benefit, in handling thereof, we will consider these seven
points. 1. That Christ will deliver us from shame and dishonor. 2. That he
will remove contempt and disgrace. 3. That he gives true honor. 4. Of the
certainetie thereof. 5. Of the continuance thereof. 6. To whom it shall be
given, and where chiefly. 7. Of the uses of this gift.

Christ delivers his own from shame. Christ delivers, from shame.
For if he Romans 8.2.
has freed them from sin, he will also save them from shame; because wise
Solomon says, Prou. 14.34.
Sin is a shame to the people.

Men naturally and usually are ashamed: First, when they are tried to be
ignorant, especially professing knowledge: Secondly, when they are disappointed
in those in whom they most trusted: Thirdly, when they are deprehended in an
unjust and unlawful fact: Fourthly, when they are manifestly convicted of
ingratitude: Fifthly, when publicly they are punished: Sixthly, when they see
themselves filthy and naked.

Men are ashamed of ignorance: Plutarch. in vita. Idom. and Valor. Man. lib. 9.
cap. 12.
As when the Poet Homer could not understand an answer of certain Fishers,
through shame and sorrow he died. Will not the shame of sinners who have no
part in Christ, be exceeding great, being convicted of worse ignorance then is
in beasts? 2. When they are frustrated, and disappointed of their hopes and
expectations. Isa. 1.3.
Senac herib King of Ashur invaded Judah, of purpose to destroy Jerusalem: But
Chr. 32.21.
Ezekiah and the Prophet Isaiah prayed, and crept to God, who sent an Angel
which destroyed all the valiant men, the Princes and Captains of the host of
Senacherib; so that he being disappointed, returned with shame to his own
Land. 3. It is manifest by experience, that one will be ashamed when he is
taken committing some dishonest deed, and the wicked may say with the Jews,
Ier. 3.25.
We lie down in our confusion, and our shame coucreth us; for we have sinned
against the Lord our God. 4. Joseph's brethren Genesis 4^.3.
were astonished at his presence, and ashamed for their unkindness; 5. King Saul
chose rather to die, then publicly to be 2 Samuel 31.4.
mocked, and exemplarily punished of the uncircumcised Philistimes: 6. our
first father Adam for shame, Genesis 3.10.
Hid himself, because he was naked: and David his servants, 2. Sam. 10 5.
were exceedingly ashamed, for that Hanun King of Ammonshaued their herds, and
cut off their garments in the middle.

Now Christ's sernants, who have rightly received him, they have hope in him,
Romans 5.5.
and hope makes not ashamed, Isa. 54.13.
they shall be taught of the Lord, who will Ier. 31.33.
put his Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. Gob 1.9.
They shall be fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, and not continue in ignorance to be confounded
therewith: 2. for they Psalm. 37.4.
delight in the Lord, he shall give them their hearts desire; Josh. 23.14
no thing shall fail of all the good things, which the Lord promised, and they
expected; Mich. 7.7.
they shall look unto the Lord, and wait for God their Savior, God will
hear them, Psalm. 91.15.
he will be with them in trouble, he will deliver and glorify them: 3. they
will never be deprehended, committing any dishonest or unlawful deed, because
they 1. Cor. 6.11.
are washed, and sanctified, and justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of God: 4. They shall be commended as faithful, Mat. 24.25.
as wise servants, not reproved for unkindness: 5. They with good King
Hezekiah 2. Chr. 32.2
shall be magnified in the sight of all nations, 6. they shall be Reu. 19.15.
clothed in fine linen, white and pure, and 2. Cor. 5.3.
not found naked. Thus who receives Christ shall be altogether freed from
shame, and ignominy, for that they shall be instructed, and satisfied, and
sanctified, and praised, they shall be magnified and clothed.

Secondly, Christ delivers from contempt.
the godly in this world will complain, that Ps. 119.141.
they are small and despised, and will pray, saying, Psa. 119.22.
Remove from us shame and contempt.

Here Isaac will be Genesis 21.9.
mocked of Ismael. David will grant, that he is the shame of men, and the
contempt of the people, Christ testifies, John 4.44
that a Prophet has no honor in his own country, and Paul with the Lords
Saints affirms, 1 Cor. 4.1^.
that he is made as the filth of the world, the off scouring of all things; yea
the son of a Prophet, will be misregarded, and reputed to be 2 Kid. 9.11.
a (...) fellow.

And sure it is an usual thing in this earth; That virtuous, wise, godly, and
courageous men are vilipended, of vicious, foolish, profane, and unworthy
dastards; so it was in all ages by gone, so it is for the present, so it shall
be in all times coming perpetually.

Thus Thersites despised Achilles, Petrarch. Di^l. 36. de cortep.
Zerlus misiegarded Homer; Antonius vpbraided the Emperor Augustus; and
Maeuius Virgil; Calv^s contemned Cicero: And which is worst of all, Nerod a
most profane and miserable man, Luke 23.11.
despised Jesus Christ the Lord of life, the God of glory, and mocked him, But
Christ is most honored and glorious in himself, and in every one of his clect
in particular; 1. Ioh. 3.2.
and we know that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him: Every Christian
in some respect may be compared to Brutus the first. Nemo primum Bruto
contemptior Romae fuit, Petrarch. Dial. 36.
Nemo minus postea, None in Rome at the first more contemned then Brutus; None
afterward more regarded; None in the world more despised then a true Christian,
Christ gives honor.
but none afterward more exalted.

Thirdly, Christ gives honor to his own: for as Job 5.6.
misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of
the earth, neither does shame come by accident; so also Psalm. 75.6.
to come to prefermen^ neither from the East, nor from the Wast, nor from the
South, Christ gives it to his own. Surely in was not Pharaohs power, So to
honor, Genesis 41.42.
Joseph: nor Ashuerous power, Est. 6.14.
to do so great honor to Mordecai; neither might Nebuchadnezzar so prefer
Dan. 2.48.
Daniel, as Jesus will honor his elect: he will Reu. 1.26.
make them Kings and Priests unto God his Father; Reu. 2.26.
to them he will give power ever nations, to them he will grant to sit with
him in his throne, to Judge the world, yea to Judge the Angels. The certainty
of it.


Fourthly, touching the certainty of this honor, we may be persuaded of it;
for the Ren. 7.10.
holy and true God both promised the same; Ioh. 14.6.
He who is the Way, the Truth, and Life, will give it; 1. Cor. 1.20.
and the promises of God in him, are yea, and Amen: He is also most powerful,
most constant, and mindful of his own; no untruth, no weakness, no
inconstancy, 1. Cor. 6.2.
no forgetfulness, nor oblivion is in him: wherefore we may be firmly
assured, that whatsoever he promises, that perfectly he will accomplish, who
will give unto us honor and dignity, Phil. 3.21.
who will change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things to himself.

And albeit the godly in this present life, attain not to that hight of
honor, which is prepared for them: yet let them be content, because Christ
has promised the same, expecting patiently the time appointed by his wisdom
for the accomplishment of that promise.

It is recorded, that Pompey the Great, Plutarch.
when he had passed over to Lybia against Domitius, and having vanquished the
enemy in a great battle, his soldiers saluted and honored him with the
style of an Emperor: but he denied to accept of that honor, as long as the
Camp of his enemy did remain in his sight not demolished.

May not we be more willing to want the fullness of our honor as long as our
enemy Sin is within us? as long as Romans 7.23.
we see another law in our members rebelling against the law of our minds, and
leading us captive unto the law of sin; As long Gal. 5.17.
as the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these all contrary one to the other, we cannot do the same things that we
would.

Yet we need not to fear, Luke 12.32. The continuance of this honor.
for it is our Fathers pleasure to possess us in that kingdom which he will
give us, in due season, where we shall remain in all honor and felicity for
ever.

Fifthly, albeit Psalm. 44.12.
man shall not continue in worldly honor, yet the Elect shall continue in the
heavenly honor. As for worldly glory, It may be compared to the smoke that
comes out of the chimney, which at the first appears to be something, but
suddenly euanisheth in the air, and is not perceived for true, Isa. 40.6.
all flesh is grass, all the grace and glory thereof is as the flower of the
field that soon withers and fades; which words are spoken of a natural man
as he is in himself, Vide Tremell. in hunc locum. (...)
and not of one that is regenerate by the spirit of sanctification in Christ.

Nazianzen compares earthly honor to the impressions or furrows which the
ship makes in the Sea, they suddenly go out of fight, and the place of them
is not known. The truth of this may be seen in Zezckiah King of Judah, who
being a glorious King reigning in honor and liberty, yet with contempt and
ignominy was carried away to captivity, 2. Kin. 25.6.
Judgment is given upon him, his sons slain in his presence, his eyes put
out, he bound in chains, is carried captine to Babell. Haman the Agagite one
day was highly exalted Est. 3.2. and 7.9.
and renerenced, the other day is disgraced and hanged on the gallows which
he had prepared for Mordecai.

Among the Roman Emperors, Valerianus was taken prisoner by Sapor king of the
Persians, his wealth turned to poverty, his honor to ignominy, and he made a
footstool to a proud Barbarian, mounting on his horseback: many of the
Emperors of Constantinople died in prison; severely detained in pain and
slavery. Spinaeus lib. 7. in metum.
Henry the fourth, a most Victorious and Illustrious Emperor of the Germans,
imprisoned and degraded by his own son, dyed lamentably; Thilpericus and
Ludouicus, French Kings, deprived of their kingdoms and dignities, the one
thrust in the prison, the other in the Monastery: And thus oftentimes it
falls out according to our Savior, saying, that one Eccle. 4.14.
who is borne in his kingdom is made poor, bereft of all his riches,
estimation, and authority.

Now although the honor and glory of the worldlings be very unstable and
unconstant, like unto a perishing shadow, for Prou. 10 7.
the name, honor and fame of the wicked shall rotte, and be abhorred both of
God and man, yet the godly Job 11.15.
shall lift up his face without spot, and shall be stable and not fear. There
age shall appear more clear then the nooneday, they shall shine and be as the
morning, they shall be builded and still adorned with everlasting glory,
because Ier. 31.3.
God has loved them with an everlasting love, their honor shall be constant
and perpetual, their Reu. 3.11.
crown shall be sure, that no man can take it from them, as their Psalm. 16.11.
pleasure shall be for evermore, so their honor shall be for evermore.

Christ 2. Tim. 1.10.
who abolished death, and has brought life and immortality, will bring unto
them immortality of honor and glory, even to his 1. Pet. 2.9.
chosen generation, to his royal Priesthood, to his peculiar people, and his
holy nation.

Sixthly, against those Psalm. 16.3.
excellent, whom Christ will honor in heaven: Who receive honor.
Let us remember, That he will vouchsafe this benefit to the humble: 2. To the
faithful: 3. To those who honors him.

1. The humble who thinks that they are worthy of shame and contempt, Christ
will give unto them honor and renown; when Daniel confessed that Dan. 9.7.
open shame and confusion of face appertained to him and his people, he found
righteousness, compassion and forgiveness in the Lord, he was honored, and
he prospered in all his ways. If Christ 1. Pet. 5.5.
gives grace to the humble, he will also give glory to the humble; for glory
undoubtedly follows grace.

He Job 5.11.
sets upon high them that be low, that the sorrowful may be exalted to
salvation.

David 2. Sam. 6.22.
who was vile in his own eyes, and low in his own sight, he is preferred and
had in honor; our Savior Christ Phil. 2.8.
humbled himself and was of no reputation, wherefore he is highly exalted, and
a name given to him above every name: And he tells us in his Gospel, Math.
18.4.
Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, the same is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven; And thus according to the saying of wise Solomon,
before honor goes humility.

2. Christ will give honor to his faithful servants, for Heb. 11.3.
by faith our elders were well reported of, in old times, and as yet who are
endued therewith will be esteemed and accomplished, for he will Ioh. 1.12.
give that prerogative to them to be the sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name; Now if in the Judgment of David, thinking Pro. 15.33.
himself 1. Sam. 18.23. The virtue of our Adeption.
a poor man and of no estimation. It was a great preferment to be a Kings
sonne-in-law: Is it not a greater honor and preferment, to be the adopted
son of the King of heaven. By virtue of this adoption, as our earthly,
carnal, and sinful affections will be changed and altered, for they will
become holy, heavenly, and spiritual, because when God does adopt any to be
his son, he makes him who was wicked and disobedient, to be godly and
obedient, and Ephesians. 4.23.
to be renewed in the spirit of his mind: so our estate and condition will be
helped and bettered by virtue of the same adoption? for of Ephesians. 2.12.
strangers and aliants, yea of Romans 5.10.
enemies, He makes us Ioh. ^^.15.
friends; Heb. 2.11.
He is not ashamed to call us brethren, we are the 1. Cor. 6.15.
^mbers of his body.

Soon we may perceive a great difference betwixt the adoption of God, and man;
for the adoption of man does not change the nature; and fashions of the
adopted: Salustius in bello Iugurth. Petrarch. Dial. 69.
Micepsa King of Numidia, adopted Iugurtha, and that did alter his cruel and
savage nature; but by the power of Gods adoption, the corrupt and carnal
disposition of the adopted will be removed, at the least renewed again: the
adoption of man is changeable, and it may be altered; as when Augustus the
Emperor, first adopted his own Agrippa; but afterward, appointed Tiberius to
be his successor in the Empire: But Gods adoption is like himself, Psa.
102.26.
who will endure for ever, it is always unchangeable and subject to no
alteration.

Thus who has true and lively faith, will be partakers of the gift of this
Adoption, and consequently will attain to this honor, authority, and
estimation.

3. 1. Sam. 2.30
God will honor them, that honor him, and they that despise God shall be
despised. It is the Apostle Peter his exhortation, 1. Pet. 2.17.
to honor an carthly King, far rather we should honor our heavenly and
immortal King.

A son honors his father (says the Lord of Hosts) and a servant his
master. If we be dutiful children to so loving a father, if we be obedient
servants to so liberal a master; we will labor to the uttermost of our power
to honor and 1. Cor. 6.20.
glorisie our God in our body, and in our spiris; neither will be content with
the reprobate Jews, Isa. 29.13.
to come near to our Lord with our mouth, and to honor him with our lips;
in the mean time, remoouing our hearts far from him, but we will worship and
honor him Ioh. 4.24.
in spirit and truth, sincerely and constantly.

As also we will Prou. 3.9.
honor the Lord with our riches, and with the first fruits of all our
inerease; Then we may assure our selves, that the Lord will fill us with
abundance of his grace, he will honor and bless us with heavenly blessing and
everlasting honor, if not in this earth which is the place of our captivity,
and should be to us the school of humility, yet assuredly in the kingdom of
heaven, the appointed place of our victory and glory.

Lastly, Use threefold.
for the use of this doctrine, the consideration of it should move us: 1. to
contemn Mal. 1.6.
this earthly and transirorie glory: 2. to seek for heavenly and permanent
honor: 3. to suffer patiently in this earth, the reproach and contempt of the
wicked.

1. As for the credit of the world, and this vulgar applause, it is to be
contemned of wise Christians: 1. because there is labor and danger in the
seeking of it: 2. because there is more labor and danger in keeping of it: 3.
because it is of short continuance and durance, for that it is an effectlesse,
and hurtful thing.

That similitude of Anshelmus, Anshelm. in Similit.
is worthy of observation, comparing men who hunts for worldly honor, to
little children following butter-flies: there is travel and peril in persuing
of them, no gain nor commodity by possessing of them, which are neither
profitable for food nor raiment.

Again, earthly honor is oftentimes the nurse of pride: high preferments, and
vulgar praise, are to the wicked, fortunes and procurers of some fearful
punishment, as may be seen in Herod Agrippa, who being applauded by his (...),
Act. 12.23.
because he gave not glory unto God, an Angel suddenly smote him, and he was
eaten of worms.

Moreover, worldly glory is an occasion of envy in others; The holy and humble
men of God, 1. Sam. 18.
David, and Dan. 6.4.
Daniel, When they were honored, they wore then most envied, and the envy and
malice of their enemies had been effectual against them; except the favor of
the Almighty God had preserved them, when he himself had preferred.

Alas, for the foolishness of worldlings, who misregarding durable and sure
honor from God, care with Saul to have 1. Sam 15.39.
honor only amongst the people; and for their madness, who laboring to hold
their renown and reputation in the world, dare not profess or practice those
duties, which may tend to the honor and glory of the Almightrie, because with
some Jews, Ioh. 12.43.
they leued the praise of men, more then the praise of God.

Whosoever then shall study to be crowned with the vanishing shadow of earthly
estimation; let them remember the inconstancy of that perishing dignity, and
the mutabilitie of all worldly things; that 1. Cor. 7.31
the fashion of this world does pass away, and the glory thereof, vanishes
like the vapor of smoke, and that the Isa. 27.9.
Lord of Hosts has decreed this to stain the pride of all glory, and to
bring to contempt all them that be glorious in the earth: This God did to Ind.
1.7.
Adonibezeck, a conqueror of many Kings, but at last himself is conquered,
disgraced, and brought to a shameful death; so is worldly honor and glory
dangerous, brittle, painful, and very transitory. We should endeavor to be
beautified with everlasting honor, Iam. 1.12.
to receive that crown of life, even that 1 Pet. 5.4.
incorruptible crown of glory, by 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 10.
joining virtue with our faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperance, and with temperence patience, and with patience godliness, and
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness Lone.

If we do these things we shall never fall from grace, nor glory, unto shame
and misery.

As Romans 2.9.
tribulation, and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil;
So to every man that does good, shall be glory and honor, and peace for ener.

It is a great pity, Luke 16.8.
that the children of this world should be in their generation wiser, then the
children of light: Horat. and alij.
how careful and earnest are they to attain to yncertaine and decaying glory!
how careless are Christians to be honored with most solid and certain
glory! The man scarce worthy to be named Erostracus, was so desirous to be
remembered, that with his own hands, he burnt the stately Temple of Ephesus;
And Empedoiles the Philosopher, thinking thereby to be accounted immortal, did
cast himself in the burning hot Mountain Aetna; where he was consumed into
ashes.

But we should give diligence, 1. Tim. 4.7.
to exercise our selves unto godliness, both by doing and suffering to Math.
5.10.
make our light shine before men, and so our hearts be stablished, and Psalm.
112.6.
we had in everlasting remembrance; we shall enjoy a kingdom, thrones of
Majesty, and the never fading crowns of incorruptible glory; when we Reu.
21.7.
shall inherit all things, Reu. 7.17.
the Lamb of God, leading us unto the lively fountains of Gelest all waters.
Est. 6.11.
Thus shall it be done to them an, whom the King of heaven will honor.

3. Let the assurance we have to possess this glorious 1. Pet. 1.4.
inheritonce, immortal, that fades not, nor encourage and hearten us, to Romans
8.17.
suffer with Christ, pain and shame, that we may be glorified with him in his
Kingdom, being our blessed Savior, Heb. 12.2.
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God.

Should not We 1. Pet. 4.13.
rejoice inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice continually, persuading our
selves, that God will Joel 2.17.
not give for ever his heritage into reproach; because thus He spoke to us,
Isa. 51.7.
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
Law: fear not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their rebukes, for
all the shame and ignominy, that the wicked can do to the godly, will soon
vanish and decay. The righteous may be compared to that herb called Adiantam,
or Maidens-haire, albeit, water be cast upon it, remains not the herb
appearing to be dry? Erasm. in simil.
So the contempt and ignominy done to the Saints abides not, and therefore
more patiently they may be content to suffer the same: when as the glory of
the wicked Hos. 9.11. Chrysostom. in Johan.
shall fly away like a bird, after it has pined them: for as a worm
consumes the tree, it breeds with the rust of iron that sticks thereto: so
vainglory destroys that soul which nourishes it: but the Elect at all
times will Romans 5.2.
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, which Christ in due season most
abundantly will vouchsafe upon them, to him be praise, 1. Tim. 1.17.
honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. XIII. Christ gives Joy.
When the Lord Psalm. 113.7.
has raised the needy out of the dust, and lifts up his poor out of the
dung, that he may set them with the Princes of his people, they whom Christ
has thus honored, and enriched with other heavenly and excellent gifts; the
Isa. 35.9.
redeemed of the Lord, undoubtedly shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and mourning shall fly away from them.

It is true indeed, that as Christ's best beloved Brethren and Sisters, shall
have first bitterness and displeasure in this world (as their Master
foretells them) they Ioh 16.20.
shall weep, lament, and sorrow, but their sorrow shall be turned to joy: Then
they Ier. 31.13.
shall come and rejoice in the hight of Sion, and shall turn to the
bountifulness of the Lord, who will turn their mourning unto gladness, and
give them joy for their sorrows.

Let none of Christ's dear servants be deceived: if they expect consolation
here, Godly sorrow before joy.
and salvation hereafter, let them be certainly resolved at the beginning, to
be grieved, molested, and displeased at themselves, for their manifold sins
and heinous offenses committed against the Majesty of such a loving, kind,
and patient Father, Exodus 34.6.
the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth.

Before we speak of that incomprehensible joy of the Elect, we will first
speak of their sorrow; again, of their mourning and lamentation for sin.

As for the godly sorrow of the Saints of Christ, Let us first consider the
reason^ of it: secondly, the difference betwixt it and worldly heaviness:
thirdly, what are the effects of it: fourthly, some circumstances of this
sorrow.

The Saints have cause of sorrow: Causes of godly sorrow.
1. because of their own sin: 2. because of the iniquity that abounds in
the earth: 3. because of the affliction and trouble of the righteous. The
Saints of God here, are tempted with sin; for who can say, My heart is
clean, I am clean from sin? Every one has better reason to say with the
Psalmist, If Psalm. 130.3.
thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? and to say
with Job, Job 9.20.
If I would justify my self, mine own: mouth shall condemn me: If I would
be perfect, he shall Judge me wicked, Iam. 3.2.
for in many things we sin all. And sure it is, that the regenerate man,
finding himself so defiled and troubled with sin, He will cry out with the
Apostle, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! He
will see that he has a competent matter of sorrow, Lam. 3.39.
when he suffers for his sin.

2. The godly have cause of grief for the sins of others, as 2. Pet. 2.8.
Lot vexes his righteous soul from day to day, for the unclean conversation
of the wicked: as David, when Psalm. 119.15.8.
he saw the transgressors, he was grieved because they kept not Gods word; as
the Prou. 20.9.
Prophet Jeremy, whose Ier. 13.17.
soul did weep in secret for the pride of his people, as Christ himself, who
Mark. 6.6.
marueiled at the unbelief of the Jews, Mark. 3.5.
mourning also for the hardness of their hearts.

3. The righteous will be sorrowful for the calamity and desolation of
Jerusalem. So Nehemiah was sad, Neh. 1.4.
he fasted and prayed, because of the reproach and misery of Jerusalem: they
will be sorry for the affliction of Joseph.

If Darius was sore displeased, and remained fasting, and suffered not the
instruments of music to be brought before him, yea, his sleep went from him:
for the trouble and danger of a holy man Daniel; Good God, how should
Christians be moved, afflicted, and perplexed, for the trouble and calamity
of many sincere professors, for the affliction and desolation of the Church
Militant, vexed on every side with the Zach. 1.14.
four horns of wicked persecutors, laboring to scatter and molest Jerusalem?

Secondly, there is a great difference, Difference betwixt godly and worldly
sorrow.
betwixt the sorrow of Christ his chosen, and the displeasure of the wicked:
for the godly in the midst of their sorrow, they have first a love and
affection to Christ: secondly, they have hope and confidence that they shall be
delivered and comforted: thirdly, they have patience in time of their trouble:
they have love like Mary, Luke 7.38.
who stood behind Christ weeping and washing his feet with tears, a sign of
her sorrow, also she kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment, an
argument of her affection.

Amos 6 6.
Dan. 6.14.18.
Again, the righteous has hope, as Job, saying; Job. 13.15
Lo, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and I will reprove my ways
in his sight. Furthermore, they have patience in time of affliction, and will
praise God for his fatherly and favorable correction, worshipping with that
same man, Job. 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again; the
Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.

But the wicked in their trouble, because Ephesians. 2.12.
they are strangers from the covenant of promise, and have no help remaining
without God in the world, therefore they have no love to God, no confidence nor
trust in him, no patience nor meekness of mind, Isa. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt; they Number. 14.2.
become murmurers with the obstinate Jews, they are impatient with grudging
and complaining against God like cursed Cain.

Thirdly, Good effects of godly sorrow.
concerning the effects of this sorrow: 1. It will prepare us for the good
seed of other graces: 2. It is a token that men shall be delivered from the
destruction of the reprobate: 3. It is an occasion that the sacrifices shall be
accepted: 4. It is a means and the beginning of repentance: 5. It is a sure
pledge that they shall be blessed.

First, We are 1. Cor. 3.9.
Gods husbandry. As in the husbandry of man, the ground is usually first
plowed and rent, afterward the seed is sown therein; So the Lord in his
husbandry, the heart is first Joel 2.13.
rent with sorrow, and Act 2.37.
pricked with displeasure, Genesis 4.13.
and prepared with godly grief, and afterward the happy seed of godliness
and piety is sown in the same. Thus Psalm. 126.5.
they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Secondly, Godly sorrow is a mark of safety, so they that did Ezech. 9.4.
mourn and cry for all the abominations that were done in the midst of
Jerusalem, they were marked upon the forehead, and escaped the utter
destruction of the reprobate.

Thirdly, Their sacrifices shall be regarded and accepted of God: for Psalm.
51.17.
a contrite spirit and a broken heart will never be despised.

Fourthly, As 2. Cor. 7.10
worldly sorrow causes death, so godly sorrow causes repentance with
salvation not to be repented of.

Fifthly, Math. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: Assuredly, they
shall get the Isa. 61.3.
garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, that the Lord their God may
be glorified.

As touching the circumstances of godly sorrow, let us consider, first, the
time when: Circumstances of godly sorrow.
secondly, the persons with whom: thirdly, the place we ought to lament and
be displeased for our sins, Eccles. 3.4.
A time (says Solomon) to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
time to rejoice.

Gal. 6.10.
While we have time, let us do good unto all men, this is the Apostles rule:
we should also study to do good unto our selves; now when we are grieved for
our iniquities, and 1. Sam. 7.2. Time of sorrow.
lament after the Lord, we do that which is good for our selves, as has been
before declared.

That same should be the time of our mourning, which is the time of our hearing
Gods word, of our searching of our selves, and of our turning to the Lord: but
to Heb. 3.15.
day we should hear his voice, and not harden our hearts, we should Zeph.
2.1.
search and try our selves before the decree of our desertion come forth, we
should turn Eccles. 5.7.
to the Lord without tarrying or delay, least suddenly his wrath break forth
and we perish in time of vengeance. To day then, before the decree be
pronounced, speedily we ought to be displeased, to mourn and lament for our
offenses, and transgressions.

God of his mercy save us from the condemnation and punishment of unhappy
Esau, who Heb. 12.17.
afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing was rejected, he found no
place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears, albeit Genesis 27.
he cried out with a great cry, and bitter out of measure; because it was out
of time, the due season was past, he was frustrated, and disappointed of his
expectation.

This was the folly and misery of the foolish virgins, That when Math. 25.10
the gate was shut, afterward they came crying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but
coming too late; therefore their petition was not granted, neither were they
admitted to the wedding. Whosoever will not repent, and mourn in due time,
their Ier. 30.15.
sorrow it incurable for the multitude of there iniquities, alas, Isa. 50.11.
they shall lie down in sorrow, they Ezec. 23.33
shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, even with the cup of
destruction and desolation, and yet laughed to scorn and had in derision, even
when they are gnawing their own tongues for sorrow, pain and tribulation.

2. Again, With whom should we sorrow.
seeing Eccles. 7.6.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, it shall be expedient for
us to mourn with the godly, that we may be partakers of their joy and
consolation; As Romans 8.18.
the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory, which
shall be showed unto us; So neither are they worthy of the joy which shall be
given to us.

3. The place of our sorrow.
It is absolutely needful for us to have sorrow in this earth: for they who
here never mourned for their sins, but delighted themselves in their
abominations, Amos 8.10
God will turn their feasts into mourning, and all their songs into
lamentations, they shall be Math. 8.12.
cast into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Because the obstinate Jews would not Joel 2.12.
turn unto God with all their heart, with fasting, mourning and weeping in
their own country, when the Lord commanded them, but they contrariwise
continued careless, committing iniquity, they Amos 6.4, 5, 6, 7.
did lie upon beds of Iu^rie, and stretching themselves on heir beds, did eute
the lambs of the flecke, and the calves out of the staul, they did sing to the
sound of the viole, inuenting to themselves instruments of music, they did
drink wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with chief ointments.
Therefore they did go captive with the first of them, that were carried
captives, and their sorrow was at hand; They were transported by the Chaldeans
to Babylon, to Psalm. 137.4.
a strange land, where Reu. 16.10.
they wept and lamented, and their lamentable estate was no way pitied.

Neither let us think, Job 15.20.24.
a wicked man is continually as one that trauelleth of child, affliction and
anguish shall make him afraid, yea, Prou. 14.13.
even in laughing his heart is sorrowful; although they have sorrow, seeing it
is not for their sin, and they not being of the true Church, their sorrow
will not avail them.

Moreover, Saints will shed tears.
and their own unworthiness (...) wickedness, with Peter will Mat. 27.75.
weep bitterly (...) with David will Psalm. 6.6.
faint in the mourning, and shed tears abundantly, and with Hezekiah Isa.
38.14.
chatter like a Crane, or a swallow, for their sins and iniquities.

But peradventure some 2. Tim. 3.5.
having but a show of godliness, and denying the power thereof, will think that
is unbeseeming the gravity and courage of men, thus to weep as children or
babes, and to shed tears, as women of weak spirit.

Surely to do so, because of men, or for any worldly regard, it is not
commendable, yet in respect of our kind God offended, Ier. 2.5. and 31.
in whom there is no iniquity, and who has not been as a wilderness to us, or
a land of darkness, Mich. 6.3.
against whom we cannot testify wherein he has grieved us, and in regard of
our Ier. 5.25.
sins which have hindered good things from us, and Ier. 44.8.
provoked God unto wrath against us; I say, for these causes to weep and to
shed tears, it is a thing praise worthy, proper to the godly, practiced by
Jesus Christ, which in the Heb. 5.7.
days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and by his dear
Saints of greatest courage, and magnanimity; by Jacob Hosh. 12.4.
who had power over the Angel and prouailed, when he wept and prayed, and by
many Kings and Prophets above specified.

Yea, suppose that Christians here enjoyed health, wealth, peace, and liberty,
that their children and friends remained also in a good estate and safety,
according to their hearts desire, yet let them rightly remember, and deeply
consider that Iam. 3.2.
in many things they sin all, that they of themselves are defiled with
wickedness, that their best actions are intermingled with many imperfections,
that they have all been as an unclean thing, and all their righteousness is
as filthy clouts; The earnest consideration of this their pollution, will be a
greater occasion of their sorrow and weeping.

When the congregation of Israel, understood Isa. 64.6.
that God for their disobedience Judge. 2.4.
would not cast out their enemies the Canaanites before them, but that they
should remain as thorns in their sides, to trouble and molest them; the
people lift up their voice and wept, and called the name of that place Bochim,
or weeping. Now the Jews did weep, because the Canaanites were conversant
among them, to weary and vex them. Should not Christians rather weep, because
they have sin with them, and a law of their members rebelling against them, to
trouble and annoy them? Hagar being cast forth out of Abraham's house, and
knowing her son to be dying through thirst, Genesis 21.16.
she lift up her voice and wept. Hanna, because of her barren^es, 1. Sem. 1.10.
prayed to God and wept sore. Sin unrepented will cause us to be cast forth
from Gods kingdom, and our souls to die eternally; we should lament therefore
for it, and for our barren and fruitless hearts not Luke 3.8.
bringing forth fruits worthy amendment of life. If the people of Israel,
remaining Psalm. 137.1.
by the rivers of Babel, did weep when they remembered Zion: Seeing we are
captives in the Babel of this world, have we not great reason to lament for our
long absence from that heavenly Jerusalem, that holy Heb. 11.10.
City, having a foundation whose builder and maker is God?

Moreover, when we call to mind, that by our manifold and presumptuous sins,
we Reu. 1.7.
have pierced our most loving Savior, and by our grievous offenses Act. 2.36.
have crucified the King of glory, who for our redemption from hell, and for
our reconciliation with God, did most willingly pour forth his most precious
blood upon the cross abundantly, should not we be moved to shed tears for
our offenses, which made him to shed his most precious blood? Also God has his
bottle and register. If we shed no tears, we cannot pray with David, Lord
Psalm. 56.5.
put my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy register? neither may we
acknowledge, that Psalm. 116.8.
God has delivered our soul from death, our eyes from tears, our feet from
falling.

It is said of the glorified Saints; that Reu. 7.17.
the Lamb shall lead them to lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes: by which it appears, that the godly will
shed tears in the earth, and the Lord shall wipe them away in the heaven.

Great is the profit which proceeds of weeping, according to the judgment
of the Ancient. Fletus est cibus animarum, Cassio. in Psalm.
corroboratio sensuum, and absolutio peccatorum, refectio mentium, lauacrum
culparum; Weeping for sins, lamenting after the Lord; is the food of souls,
the strengthening of senses, and absolution of sins, and refreshment of mind, a
lauer to wash away faults. Sicut post vehementes imbres aer mundus, ac purus
efficitur: ita and post Lachrymarum pluuias, Chrysostom. sup. Math.
sereni^^s mentes sequitur atque tranquillitas: As after great showers, the
air is made clean and pure, so after the rain of tears, follows serenitie
and tranquillity of mind.

A proof hereof in the Israelites. Neh. 8.9.
All the people wept when they heard the words of Gods Law, but immediately
followed great joy in the Lord.

The example of dumb and senseless creatures, Romans 8.27.
groaning for our sins, the earth traveling for pain for our trespasses,
the heavens weeping for our iniquities, should be Luke 6.21.
provocation to us, to lament and weep now, that so we may be blessed for ever.

Mortales queniam nolunt sua? crimina flere:
Caelum pro nobis soluitur in Lachrymas.
As Math. 8.24.
first a great tempest, endangered the ship in the which Christ and his
Disciples had entered, but afterward there was a great calm: So in true
Christians great joy and contentment, peace, and consolation will succeed. And
if the sorrow be great first, surely the refreshment will be the more pleasant
and greatest at the last.

In handling of this benefit, The order here observed. To whom joy is given
we will show: 1. to whom Christ will give it: 2. wherein it consists: 3. the
difference betwixt an earthly joy: 4. some properties of it: Lastly, of the use
of this benefit.

Christ will give this joy: 1. to those who have sorrowed for their sin, they
shall at length say with David, Lord Psalm. 30.11.
thou have turned my mourning into joy, and have girded me with gladness; God
promised in this manner, Ier. 31.13.
I will turn their mourning into joy, and I will comfort them, and give them
joy for their sorrows: 2. To those who are upright in heart, Psalm. 32.11.
for the righteous shall be glad, and they that are upright in heart shall be
joyful, and rejoice in the Lord: 3. To those that seek him, Psalm. 105.3.
let the heart of them that seek the Lord rejoice: 4. To the meek, Isay.
29.19.
The meek in the Lord shall receive joy.

Secondly, this joy will be in Gods favor and loving kindness, Psalm. 4.6.
in the light of his countenance, Where it is.
In Isa. 61.10.
the Lord himself: Their soul shall be joy full in God, in Psalm. 31.7.
his mercy they shall rejoice and be glad, Romans 5.11.
Through Christ, by whom they receive the atonement especially Gal. 6.14.
in his cross, whereby the world is crucified to them, and they to the world:
then they shall sing with the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.47.
my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

Again, it will be in the word, the Psalm 1.2.
delight of the blessed is in the Law of the Lord, he will protest with the
Prophet, Ier. 15.16.
Thy word is unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: Then shall he with
wonderful delectation Isay. 12.3.
draw waters out of the salvation, which shall be to him, even in time of Psalm.
119.50
trouble, exceeding comfort and consolation.

If those wise men that came from the East to Jerusalem to worship Christ, and
to offer their press^s unto him, Math. 2.10.
rejoiced with an exceeding great joy, when they saw his Star: may it not be
a great cause of true pleasure to hear the words of a loving Father, and to
rejoice Ioh. 2.29.
greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice?

And indeed it is no marvel, Properties of the word.
although the Lords people find much joy and comfort in his holy word; seeing
it is precious, perfect, pure, pleasant, permanent, and profitable. It is truth
(so says Solomon) Pro. 3.15.
that wisdom is more precious then pearls, a justifying faith 1. Pet. 17.
is much more precious then gold. The blessed word, which is the special
instrument to bring heavenly wisdom, and to work saving faith, of necessity
must be very precious, and of inestimable value. The Lords testimonies, as they
Psalm. 19.10
are altogether righteous, so they are altogether precious, more to be desired
then gold, yea then much fine gold. 2. The word of God is like to the will of
God, seeing his revealed will is, contained in his written word. But the Romans
12.2.
will of God is perfect, so also is his word, and his Law Psalm. 19.7.
is perfect converting the soul, giving wisdom unto the simple, and making
the man of God absolute and perfect unto all good works. 3. The commandment
of the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes: 4. It is pleasant, for it is
sweeter then honey and the honey comb: 5. It is permanent and endures for ever,
Luke 16.17.
now it is more easier that heaven and earth should pass away, then that one
little of the Law should fall: 6. To be profitable, for the word is a means
whereby we shall come Reu, 19.7.
to the marriage of the Lamb: we with David should Psalm. 119.111.
take his word as an heritage for ever, ^^d to be the joy of our hearts;
because of the preciousnesse, perfection, purity, pleasure, continuance, and
commodity thereof.

Thirdly, Joy in Christ's benefits.
as Christ will vouchsafe upon us joy in himself, and in his word: so also he
will make us to rejoice in his benefits, whether they be spiritual blessings,
or else natural gifts.

Christ's chosen shall be joyful, of their election, Luke 10.20.
because their names are written in heaven, and in Phil. 4.3.
the book of life Reu. 13.8.
of the Lamb, which was stain from the beginning of the world: 2. of their
vocation and effectual calling. When Jesus called Bartimeus, to give him
natural sight; he was 2. Tim. 3.17
Psalm. 19.8.
of good comfort, Math. 10.50.
he threw away his cloak, he arose and came gladly to him. When Christ
calls upon his own, to give them spiritual sight, and to work
regeneration, they will be of great comfort: thirdly, of their justification
Romans 5.2.
under the hope of the glory of God: fourthly, of their sanctification, for
Prou. 21.15.
it is joy to the just to do judgment: fifthly, of their salvation, rejoicing
1 Pet. 1.8.
with joy, receiving the end of their faith, even the salvation of their
souls: sixthly, of their glorification, becauseth Great is their reward in
heaven, Math. 5.12.
when they in glory shall appear before their Redeemer, and hear that
comfortable and honorable sentence of acquitting, Maill. 25.24
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess th^^ing (...) beginning of the world.

Elizabeth the mother of John Baptist rejoiced, when she heard the salutation
of the virgin Mary, Luke 1.44.
for joy the babe spring in her belly: shall not also the redeemed of God,
exceedingly be the glad, and abound with fullness of joy, when they hear the
fentence of absolution, and enter into the possession of unspeakable glory, and
eternal felicity?

Again, they will have some joy in Gods gifts, Deu. 26.11.
Rejoicing in all the good things which the Lord their God has given them, and
unto their household.

Moreover, they shall be glad for God benefits bestowed upon the godly, Romans
16.19.
as for their obedience, and for 2. Cor. 7.13.
their joy, wherewith they are refreshed, and such like blessings given unto
them.

In the third place we have to speak of the difference, Difference betwixt
heavenly and carnal joy.
betwixt this heavenly joy, and the carnal joy of worldlings. They differ in
three things: first, in the ground: secondly, in the continuance: thirdly in
the effect.

The joy of the godly is in Creat^re, Barnard.
grounded in their Creator; in his love and favor, while they enjoy his most
comfortable presence, they Phil. 4.4.
rejoice always in the Lord: As Mephibosheth so delighted in David, That in
respect of him, he mis-regarded all the fields of Saul his Father, 2. Sam.
1^.30.
yea (said he) Let Ziba take all the lands, seeing my Lord the King is come in
peace: So the godly, who Psalm. 16.5.
have the Lord to be the portion of their inheritance, who set the (...) before
them, to the end that they may Phil. 3.8.
win their Savior, they judge al earthly things to be loss and doung, in
comparison of him. But the joy of the worldlings is in Creature in the
creature: Such was the joy of that rich man, thus resolving Luke 12.19.
to live at ease, to eat, drink, and take his pastime and pleasure in the
creatures. But God said unto him, O fool, this night they will fetch away thy
soul from thee, etc. August.


The joy of the godly, is Gaudium veritatis, a joy of verity and true joy or
the truth: Ioh. 17.37.
Gods word is truth, but the joy of the wicked is Gaudium vanitatis, a joy of
vanity, vain joy, a perishing pleasure, or in vain, effectlesse things: such
was the joy of Absolon, he had pleasure in his land, a small matter, which in
the end became his lucker; for his 2. Sam. 18.9
head caught bold of thick a Oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and
the earth, and after was slain.

The joy of the Saints is in Materia immutabili, in a matter immutable, in Gods
love and favor, Ioh. 13.1.
which is permanent and unchangeable: but the joy of the wicked is i^ ^e
concertibili, in a thing as immutable; Such was the joy of Haman: Est. 5.9.
he was joyful and of a glad heart, because of the love of a mortal King,
whose heart was soon changed, and Haman shamefully hanged. Iouah did not well,
who Ioh. 4.6.
was exceeding glad of a gourd: for the next day a worm smote the gourd that
it withered. Whoeuer shall place their joy in a corruptible matter, it will
soon decay and vanish.

2. From the diversity of the ground, Difference in the continuance.
of the joy of the godly and worldlings, proceeds the difference of the
continuance of that joy. As for the joy of the elect, that which was spoken to
Christ's Disciples, may be applied to them, Ioh. 16.22.
Their hearts shall rejoice, and their joy shall no man take from them: yea
they have joy in affliction, Col. 3.24.
rejoicing in their sufferings, that they are counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for Christ's name. For surely, Isa. 30.20.29.
When the Lord has given them the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, after they shall have joy and gladness of heart, and a fong shall
be unto them as in a night when a (...) feast is kept: Isa. 61.7.
for their shame, they shall receive double glory; and for their confusion,
they shall rejoice in their portion: everlasting joy shall be unto them, for it
is grounded on God, Lam. 3 22.
Whose compassions fail not, Psalm. 136.1.
and his mercy endures for ever.

But it is far otherwise with worldlings: their joy continues not, it is the
beginning of endless sorrow they may say; Ovid.
Gaudia principium nostri sunt certe deloris, when it departs from them, it
never returns again.

Gaudia (...), Mart.
sed sngiti^a volant.

And thus the Job 20.5, 6, 7, 8.
rejoicing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the ^^p^^rites is but for a
moment; And if himself shall fly away like a dream and perish for ever like
his d^^ng, shall not also his pleasure: And this (...) pass away from him, and
perish suddenly, as a vision of the night?

Belthazar King of Babylon had some worldly joy, when Dan. ^.1.
he made a great feast to a thousand Princes, and dra^^^ wine with his wines
and concubines; but that same night incontinent his countenance was changed;
his hear troubled, and himself slain and destroyed. So the delectation and
pleasure of the wicked is perishing, but the pleasure and prosperity of the
Saints is permanent, Difference in effect.
for they shall be set at the Psalm. 16.11.
right hand of God, there are pleasaies for ever more.

3. The effect of heavenly joy is thankfulness to God, in life eternal, as
that most happy and notable company of the Lamb of God, praising the Lord
continually, Reu. 14.^.
singing a new song before the (...) one of his Majesty, being filled with
joy, for their redemption and glorification; they are thankful to their
Savior, following the Lamb whither so ever he goes.

But the effect of wicked joy is sometimes pride, and after destruction, as may
be seen in Dan. 4.27.
Nebuchadnezzar and many others, Hab. 1.16.
sacrificing unto their own net, and burning incense unto their yarne; because
by them their portion is fat, and their meat plentious, whereof they rejoice
and are glad: but their mirth shall be changed into mourning, and their
gladness into endless lamentation: Because, Post mundi gaudia sequuntur
aeterna lamenta. August.


Sometimes it is Idolatry, albeit, afterward comes ruin and utter
extirportion; as may be seen in Belhashar, who drunk wine, and abusing the
consecrate vessels of the Lords Temple in Jerusalem, Dan. 5.4.
praised the false gods of gold and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, of
stone, was suddenly slain.

Neither is it wonder that wicked and worldly joy bring sorrow and death; for
oft-times we read, that natural joy and mirth, has been hurtful and
brought many to their graves very speedily; as Diagoras of Rhodes, Aul. Belli.
and Cic.
through too much joy, because of the honor of his three Victorious sons in
several exercises at Olympus, and of the admiration of the people applauding
him, Val. Marc. Diodor. Suid.
fell down dead presently in that place. So Sophocles and Philippides the
Poets, ouercomming others in their poesy, died for their present pleasure and
great joy: So more lately Sinan an expert Captain, Rich. Knolls in vita Soly.
when his son was restored by the means of Barbarussa, in the reign of
Solomon the Magnificent, he for joy, because of the recovery of his son
beside his expectation, ended his days.

Seeing therefore this is the fruit of wicked and worldly joy, that counsel
of the Apostle is needful for them, Sorrow ye and weep, let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness: otherways the same shall
be the end of their profane joy, which is the end of folly: for Prou. 15 21.
foolishness is joy to him that is destitute of understanding.

Fourthly, Properties of this Joy.
concerning the properties of this joy given by Christ: first, It is heavenly:
secondly, spiritual: thirdly, eternal: fourthly, unspeakable: fifthly,
glorious: sixthly, internal: seauenthly, full joy.

First, It is heavenly, begun here, but chiefly reserved for us in the
heavens. Psalm. 16.11.
In the Lords presence is fullness of joy; at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 68.3.
The righteous shall rejoice and be glad, before God. Non est gaudium certum in
hoc mundo, nec de alio, nec in alio, nec in te: There is no sure joy in this
world, neither of another, August.
nor in another, nor in thy self. Verum gaudium in hoc mundo, nec est, nec
fuit, nec erit, nec esse potest: There is no true joy, neither was, neither
shall be, neither can be in this world; it comes from heaven, and is
complete in heaven.

Secondly, This joy is spiritual: Gal. 5.22.
The fruit of the spirit wrought in the heart through the power of the holy
Ghost; not a fleshly, nor a sensual delight which is contemned by the Saints.

Iam. 4.^.
Romans 15.13
Phil 3.8.
Thirdly, It is internal, seeing it is called Phil. 3.25.
the joy of faith, Ioh. 15.11.
remaining in the godly: Although sometime it appear outwardly in them, Psalm.
68.3.
yea that they leap for joy, as was seen in 2 Samuel 6.14
David, while he brought the Arc to his City.

Fourthly, It is unspeakable, as those 2 Cor. 12.4.
words which the Apostle heard in Paradise could not be spoken, it was not
possible for man to utter them. So it is with this joy: and no wonder, that it
surpass the speech of man, for it is of the nature of that peace, Phil 4.7.
which passes all understanding.

Fifthly, It is glorious, for as the Apostle says, They that do truly believe
in Christ Jesus, do 1. Pet. 1.8.
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious: and no marvel, because it is of
the same joy which the Saints enjoy hereafter in the kingdom of heaven: as
that first sight of the blind man, whereby he shall see men Mark. 8.24.
walk like trees, it was the same sight whereby he saw them a far off to be
men clearly, though it was at the first more confused; so the begun and
inchoate joy of the faithful, which is given to them in this life, is
unspeakable and glorious, and the beginning of that celestial joy, which more
perfectly and abundantly shall be imparted to them.

Sixthly, It is an everlasting joy, called our Math. 25.21.
Masters joy: as God shall live for ever, so our joy shall remain for ever.

Seauenthly, Therefore also it is a Ioh. 15.11.
full joy. An Ancient speaks of this joy in these words; Gaudium quod
acceperis de Creatore, Bernard.
nemo tollet a te; cui aliunde comparata omnis iucundit as maeror est, omnis
suauttas dolor est, omne dulce amarum est, omne decorum faedum est, ac postremo
omne quod delectare potest, molestum est:

Fifthly, the assurance of this joy, may be of great use to the godly.

First, That they (as Christ did) Heb. 12.2.
for the joy that is set before them may endure the cross, and despise the
shame of this world.

Secondly, They may be persuaded, Deuteronomy. 30.9.
That God will rejoice over them, to do them good, that Isa. 62.5.
God will be glad of them, as a Bridegroom is glad of the Bride, the Lord
delighting in them, Zeph. 3.17.
he will save them, quiet himself in his Love, and rejoice over them with joy,
and thus Psa. 118.15.
the voice of joy and deliverance shall be in the Tabernacles of the righteous
continually.

CHAP. XIIII. Christ gives Peace.
AS true and solid joy is wrought in the heart of man by Christ (not by the
virtue of herbs Helenium Halicampani, Beroald in symbolis Pythag.
or Burrage, as some does affirm) Ephesians. 2.14.
so he who is our peace, Psalm. 85.8.
will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints, that they turn not
again to folly; 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
the Lord of peace will give peace always by all means, yea Romans 15.13.
he will fill his own with all joy and peace in believing, so that Col. 3.15.
the peace of God shall rule in their hearts, seeing 1. Pet. 1.2.
it will be multiplied unto them, and abound as a Isa. 48.18.
flood.

Before we attain unto this spiritual peace, first we must sight 2. Tim. 2.3.
as good soldiers of Jesus Christ 1. Tim. 6.12.
the good fight of faith, and be well exercised in that spiritual 2. Cor. 10.4.
warrefare, the weapons whereof are not carnal, but mighty through God to
cast down strong holds.

Secondly, we must resolve to Heb. 12.7.
endure Gods chastening, correcting us with distress of mind, and trouble of
conscience, before he send us glorious feelings of his comfortable presence,
and refresh our Phil. 4.7.
hearts and minds with that peace which passes all understanding, that is in
Christ Jesus.

Concerning our spiritual warrefare, that we may be the more hardened to
undergo the travel and turmoile, War must go before Peace. Properties of
this Warfare.
which is in it, let us consider some properties and prerogatives thereof.

Our spiritual warrefare is: 1. Just and holy, because of Gods appointment,
that it should continue Genesis 3.15.
between the seed of the woman and the Serpent, It is most unlike that war
of the Jews, that was against Numb. 14.41.
the Lords commandment, and therefore they were vanquished and consumed.

2. It is necessary: otherways we cannot be obedient to God, for whosoever
refuse this warfare, they make defection, from their Creator, neither shall
Judge. 7 23.
Peace be unto them, (as it was unto Gideon) who will not be content to 2. Sam.
25.2.
fight the battles of the Lord with David.

3. It is admirable and wonderful, because there is no exception of persons,
no privilege, nor immunitie granted to any from it. King, Priest, rich, poor,
young and old, man and woman, all and every one of them must fight under the
Isa. 49.22.
standard which Christ sets up to his people. The matter is not so in this
warfare, as it is in worldly warfare; for some of the Lords people might
lawfully have left it, and Deuteronomy. 20.5, 6, 7.
returned again unto their houses; but none at all may forsake this warfare
without disobedience and defection from God.

4. It is a continual warfare, for the Reu. 12.17.
Dragon is wroth with the woman, and makes war with the remnant of her
seed, which keep the commandment of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ, Satan without any intermission Job 1.7.
compasses the earth 1. Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour. The Reu. 12.10.
accuser of the brethren, which accuses them before God day and night, he
fights also against them day and night with irrecouerable hatred and
continual tentations, so that the most reformed in this earth cannot enjoy
such perfection of peace, but they will find that the Gal. 5.17.
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, the
battle begun in their life, never altogether ended until the hour of death.

5. This is a comfortable warfare, because all Christ's soldiers may be assured
of undoubted victory, and that they are to 1. Pet 5.4.
receive an incorruptible crown of glory, seeing Josh. 5.14.
the captain of that host is Isa 9.6.
the mighty God, who Math. 28.20
will be with them always, Reu. 19.11.
he judges and fights righteously, he will 2. Tim. 4.18
preserve his own unto his heavenly kingdom, where Reu 7.9.
clothed with long white robes, and palms in their hands, they shall triumph
eternally.

Albeit the Saints be uncertain, in what place of the earth, in what nation
or kingdom they must fight and encounter with their enemies; Yet they are most
certain in what place they shall triumph, namely in the kingdom of heaven. As
the Roman soldiers sent out by their Senate at there departure knew not
assuredly, weapons and give counsel to them, and did furnish, food, victuals,
money, and other warlike provision with all necessaries unto them.

So Christian soldiers though they be ignorant of the proper place of the
battle yet they know well the place of their triumph, even in the heaven, in
presence of God, and before the Lamb, of whom they received counsel,
strength, courage Ioh. 15.5.
without whom they could do nothing, neither for Gods glory, nor there own
salvation; so that every one of the Godly justly may say with David Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to fight, and my
fingers to battle.

Now if men naturally will make war to resist their enemy, and for the
obtaining of outward peace for ( August.
bellum geritur, vt pax acquiratur.)

Should not Christians gladly undertake this spiritual warfare to Iam. 4.7.
resist the devil, who then will fly from them, and to the end they may enjoy
inward and spiritual peace, and tranquillity of mind.

In this holy warfare that counsel and advise which God did give to his
people, is worthy of continual remembrance and is of absolute necessity;
namely Deuteronomy. 23.9.
when thou go out with the host against thine enemies, keep thee then from
all wickedness.

Again thou who desire the fruition of this happy peace, must be content
first to suffer some unquietness of mind, and grief of conscience which has
been incident to the deatest servants of God, as unto patient Job thus
complaining, Job 13.24, 25.
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thy enemy? will thou break
a leaf driven to and fro, and will thou pursue the dry stubble? thou writest
bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth,
thou put my feet in the stocks and Job 6.4.
the arrows of the Almighty are in me, the venom whereof does drink up my
Spirit, and the terrous of God fight against me. Lo the wonderful
perturbation, and grievous perplexity of the afflicted Saint, appointed for
Glory, peace and happiness! Likewise David himself was wonderfully cast down
and disquieted with grief of mind, and anguish of his soul, and thus
complains, Psalm. 38.2.8.12.
Thine arrows, O Lord, has light upon me, I am weakened and sore broken. I
roar for the very grief of mine heart, my strength fails, and the Light of
mine eyes, even they are not mine own. Again, in another place, Psalm. 77.7,
8, 9, 10.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will be show no more favor? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure!
and I said, This is my death: yet at length that holy man Mat. 11.29.
found rest unto his soul, when 2. Sam. 12.13.
the Lord did put away his sin, and 2. Sam. 22.1. The trouble of the Saints
most unlike the horror of the Reprobate.
delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies.

This trouble of mind, wherewith the Saints are exercised, is most unlike to
that desperate horror of conscience, wherewith the wicked are plagued, because
Job 11.20.
their hope shall be grief of mind, and their refuge shall perish: they Job
15.20.
shall be continually as a woman that trauelleth of child, they Pro. 28.1.
shall flee when none persueth them, they Isa. 57.20.
shall be like the raging sea that cannot rest, there shall be no peace unto
them, for their Isa. 28.20.
bed is straight that it cannot suffice, their covering, it is narrow that they
cannot wrap themselves, therefore Job 15.24.
affliction and anguish shall make them afraid, Mark 9.44.
their worm dies not, the fire never goes out, they are tormented for ever.
Vt cruciarii Romano ritu crucem suam ferebant, Lips.
ipsi ab ea mox ferendi: Sic impiis omnibus conscientiae crucem Deus imposuit,
in qua poenas luant antequam luant. As these Malefactors worthy of torment
(after the custom of the Romans) did bear their own Cross, themselves
incontinent to be borne and tormented thereupon; so God has laid the Cross
of the conscience upon all the wicked, whereon they may be punished here
temporally, before they be punished internally hereafter.

But the godly 1. Pet. 1.6, 7.
are in heaviness for a season, through manyfolde tentations, oftentimes
through grief of mind and trouble of their conscience, that the trial of
their Faith being much more precious then gold that perishes, might be found,
unto their praise and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ; they
1. Pet. 5.6.
are first humbled, and afterward exalted: They are afflicted, that the more
they may be comforted. God Job 5.18.
makes their wound, and his hand makes them whole: they have trouble, that
they may have greater John 16.33.
peace, 2. Tim. 2.11
they are dead with Christ, that they may also live with him; Romans 6.5.
grafted with him to the similitude of his death, that even so they may be to
the similitude of his resurrection, suffering with him, that they may reign
with him in his glorious Kingdom.

Yet forasmuch as this trouble of mind, Tokens preceding trouble of mind.
and grief of conscience, is very fearful and terrible to the godly
themselves, (for Prou. 18.14.
the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities; but a wounded spirit who
can bear it?) Therefore for the eschewing of the extreamitie of this vexation
of the mind, it shall be expedient to declare some tokens preceding this
horror of conscience. Aristot. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 2.
As the Philosopher sets down certain signs which go before an
Earthquake, viz. First, darkness and obscurity, the Sun being Mistie
without any cloud: Secondly, calmness of the Air: Thirdly, coldness. So the
same are the inward tokens fore-shewing that trouble of conscience is to come:
Namely, 1. darkness of mind, if one Isa. 59.10.
stumble at the nooneday as in the night, and with Job. 13.24.
Job for a time, cannot see the loving face of God, neither enjoy, nor walk
(as he accustomed to do) Psa. 89.15.
in the light of the Lords countenance. 2. When a godly man has fallen into
finfull security, and does not Pro. 28.14.
fear always, but for a season sleeps in his iniquity, as David after he had
committed that terrible sin of murder and adultery, until the time he was
awaked by Nathans ministry, 2. Sam. 12.1
sent to him from the Lord. 3. When man's heart is not so enflamed with the
zeal of God as it should be, but has Reave. 2.4.
left his first love, and his Mat. 24.12.
charity is waxed cold.

If therefore thou be afraid of this inward horror, and painful gnawing of
a wounded spirit, and of a tormenting conscience: First, labor diligently,
that thou John 12.36.
be the child of light, and to Ephesians. 5. verse 8, 10.
walk as a child of light, approouing that which is pleasing to the Lord,
forsaking the ways, and Romans 13.12.
casting away the works of darkness: Secondly, Revel. 3.2.
Be awake and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die,
continue not in the fearful slumber of sinful security: Thirdly, Be 1.
Kin. 19.14
very Zealous ( with Elijah) for the Lord God of hosts, of his honor and
glory; Be not Gala. 6.9.
weary of well-doing, for in due season thou shall reap, if thou faint not.

After the mighty wind, which brake the Mountains, and rent the Rocks; after
the Fire, and Earthquake; 1. Kin. 19.12
there came a still and soft voice to the man of God: So after warfare, the
battles, the grief of mind, and trouble of conscience, then true
tranquillity: Gala. 6.16.
peace and mercy shall be upon the Israel of God.

In handling of this point, Order observed.
this order shall be kept: 1. We will speak of the sorts of peace: 2. Of the
author thereof: 3. To whom it is given: 4. From what things it proceeds: 5.
Which are the effects thereof: 6. How it should be retained: 7. Of the uses
of this Doctrine. Two sorts of peace.


First, let us remember, that there is a double 1. A false and deceiving peace
of the wicked: For when they shall say, 1. These. 5.3.
Peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the
travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Alas, many will
say, Ier. 6.14.
Peace, peace, when there is no peace: They Ier. 8.15.
will look for peace, but no good will come, and for a time of health, but
behold trouble and vexation: such peace is not the gift of Christ.

Again there is a true peace, Another of peace.
appertaining to the godly, which is in the Lord Jesus, a good peace of the
Militant Church, whereby they overcome temptations, and a better peace of the
triumphant Church, whereby they are freed and delivered from all temptations.

Secondly, God is the Author and giver of this peace, 1. These. 5.23.
The God of peace must sanctify us through out, Romans 16.28
and tread Satan under our feet shortly; Phil. 4.9.
he must be with us continually, 2. These. 3.16.
and the Lord of peace will give us peace always by all means. Jesus Christ
also bestows this peace, and tranquillity; for Ephesians. 2.14. and 17.
he is our peace, which has broken the partition wall, and preached peace
unto us, that he might reconcile us unto God. As he is King of righteousness,
he is also King Heb. 7.2.
of Salem, King of peace; he Zech. 9.10.
whose dominion is from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the end of the Land,
he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, which shall Col. 3.15.
rule in the hearts of his chosen.

Christ Isa. 9.6.
the Prince of peace, procures our peace and reconciliation with God much more
surely, and firmly, then Ioab could procure Absaloms peace with David; for it
endured but for a very short time, and thereafter followed Treason, War, and
2. Sam. 18.17.
Absaloms destruction: But the peace which Christ gives, is eternal, and
endures for ever, without change or alteration. Isa. 54.10.
For the Mountains shall remove, and the Hills shall fall down, but his
mercy shall not depart from his own, neither shall the Covenant of his peace
fall away: therewith shall be joy, safety, and eternal salvation. That
Covenant of peace which he makes, Ezech. 37.26.
is an everlasting Covenant, he will set his Sanctuary among them for
evermore, he will be their God, and they shall be his people: Job 34.29.
When he gives peace and quietness, who can make trouble or vexation?

Thirdly, To whom true peace is given.
Christ will give this peace, to those that fear him. Mala. 2.5.
Leui feared the Lord, and was afraid before his name, and the Lord made a
Covenant of life and peace with him. 2. To those that love his Word; Ps. 119.165
They that love thy Law (says David) shall have great peace, and they shall
have no hurt. 3. To those who with happy Iehoshaphat, 2. Chr. 17.4.
seek the Lord God, and walk in his Commandments. 2. Chro. 20.30.
As his Kingdom was quiet, and God gave him rest on every side; so doubtless
his heart was quiet and settled in his God, who gave him also inward peace, and
tranquillity of mind. 4. To those that with (Asa) 2. Chro. 14.2.
do good and right in the eyes of the Lord. 5. To those who Psalm. 34.14.
seek peace and follow after it. 6. Christ will leave Ioh. 14.27.
his peace, and give his peace to his Disciples, not as the World gives. 7. To
the Luke 10.6.
sons of peace, for peace shall rest upon them for ever.

If therefore thou fear God, love him, doing right in his eyes, follow peace
and be Christ Disciple and the Son of peace, peace shall be with thee: but
all those that rebel against the Lord, contemn his word, who are given to
contention, who refuse his instruction, God who Psalm. 5.5.
hates all them that work iniquity, will abhor them also, they shall not
be partakers of this peace, nor tranquillity which is a privilege
appertaining to the righteous serving God in spirit, in truth and sincerity.

Fourthly, This Gal. 5.22.
peace is a fruit of the holy Spirit, From whence this peace proceeds
whereby the children of God do receive the comfortable assurance of this
adoption, and Romans 8.15.
they cry Abba Father, and the same spirit, that true Ioh. 14.16.
comforter abiding with them for ever, does furnish unto them abundance of
inward peace and heavenly consolation. 2. It is an effect of Justifying faith,
Romans 5.1.
For being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. 3. This faith as it works piety and devotion, so it Gal. 5.6.
works by Charity and brotherly affection, of which proceeds a godly life
and holy conversation, which surely yields inward rest and peace of
conscience, even in time of trouble and affliction, as the holy Apostle of his
own experience 2. Cor. 1.12.
witnesses. 4. That 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
good hope which God even the Father which has loved us, has given us,
works this happy peace in us: this hope persuades us, that albeit with
Christ our eldest brother we Heb. 12.2.
endure the Cross and suffer pain and molestation here; yet afterward we
shall also Luke 24.26.
enter into his glory, and Isa. 57.13.
trusting in him we shall possess his holy mountain, which is a great cause
of true peace and contentment.

Fifthly concerning the effects of this peace, Effects of peace.
we will remember four of them. Peace causes prosperity; it preserves the
heart; it governs the same, they who receives it, shall be found in peace
and blessed for ever.

1. This peace brings prosperity. Job 22.21.
Therefore (as Eliphaz counsels) acquaint thy self, I pray thee, with the
Almighty, and make peace with him, ask peace of him, thereby thou shall have
prosperity, and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

2 This peace will be a defense to the heart: for after this way the Apostle
testifies, Phil. 7.
the peace of God which passes all understanding shall preserve your hearts
and minds in Christ Jesus.

For our loving God, who appointed six Cities of refuge, for the safety Number.
35.11.
of the slayer, which slew any person unawares, he also provides and bestows
this peace as a City of refuge the safety and preservation of a sinner who
truly returns to him.

And seeing our provident Father has a care of the Does, of the Roes, and of
the Conies, in that he appoints Psalm. 104.18.
the high mountains and the rocks to be a refuge for them: will he neglect his
faithful servants, or will he be careless of his dear children? No: for his
2. Pet. 1.2.
peace shall be multiplied to them, whereby they shall be comforted and
preserved, it shall be to them a refuge in time of calamity and affliction.

3. This peace governs and moderateth the heart. Col 3.15. (...). Plutarch.
Aristot. Vide Annotatio. Maiora D. Bezae. Col. 5.11.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, says the Apostle. It so rules as a
Judge deciding controversies, and remoouing doubts, or as a commander of those,
who prove Mastery by putting an end to their painful exercise, there
wrastlings and combats, and so by bringing rest and quietness to that soul
where it remains.

4. Who so have gotten this peace, 2 Pet. 3.14. How this peace is retained.
They will be diligent that they may be found of God in peace, without spot and
blameless, they shall receive eternal felicity and happiness.

Sixthly, this peace is retained by confession of our sins, and true
repentance. Psalm. 32.3.
When we hide our iniquities, our bones are consumed; our hearts are troubled:
but when we acknowledge our sin, God will forgive the punishment thereof, and
compass us with peace and joyful deliverance.

2. We keep this peace, by Psalm. 34.4.
eschewing evil, and doing good, by seeking and following after the same: for
if Isa. 59.2.
our iniquities have separated between God and us, and our sins hane hid his
face from us, that he will not hear, then our righteousness in Jesus, and
true faith in him, will make us to Iam. 4.8.
draw near to our God, and to Romans 5.1.
have peace toward him: when we Tit. 2.12.
deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts and work no iniquities, but walk in
Gods ways, and keep his precepts diligently, then Psalm. 4.6.
he will lift up the light of his countenance upon us, Isa. 49.8.
in an acceptable time he will hear us, and in the day of salvation he will
help us, he will preserve us and give his covenant of mercy and peace unto us.

Psalm. 119.3.
If we 1. Ioh. 2.18.
abide in Christ, as we shall have peace here, so when he shall appear, we may
be bold and not be ashamed before him at his coming: and the counsel of that
wise man is very profitable for the entertaining of this peace, Eccles. 2.3.
Join thy self unto God, and depart not away, then thou shall not be
disquieted nor destroyed, but comforted and increased at the last end.

Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the holy spirit of God, the fruit whereof is peace, gentleness and
goodness.



Lastly, for the use of this doctrine. It should be our principal study Luke
19.42.
to know in this our day those things, which belong unto our peace, and to
travel with all endeavor that they be not bid from our eyes.

After the knowledge of them, we will seek earnesly to have this peace in
Christ with God, and having obtained the same, Job 5.23.
Then the stones of the field shall be in league with us, and the beasts of the
field shall be at peace with us: Lamentable and doleful is the estate of all
who art at variance, and enmity with the Almighty. Psalm. ^6.7.
Who shall stand in his sight when he is angry? Who can stand before his wrath,
or abide the fierceness of his fury? Job 33.13.
God is greater then man, wherefore should he strive against him, who does not
give account of his matters? and Psalm. 139.7.
whither shall man go from him, and fly from his presence?

Nah. 1.6.
Indeed Jeroboam 1. King. 2.40.
fled from Solomon into Egypt, and was safe with Shishoi. But he Amos 9.1.
that flies from God, shall not fly away; his enemies that escape for a time
shall not be delivered, though they dig into the hell, or clime up to the
heaven, or hide themselves in the bottom of the Sea, yet thence his hand will
take them, and punish them.

Albeit, Jonah supposed that he might Ion. 1.2.
flee to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord; yet he was far disappointed,
and for his foolishness corrected. As for us therefore, Psalm. 73.28.
It is good for us to draw near to our God, and to be at peace with him that
the omnipotent God Josh. 5.13.
may be on our side then? surely his salvation shall be near to us,
righteousness and peace shall kiss one another, mercy and truth shall meet,
and our Lord shall give good things unto us: then his all-sufficient power
shall be for us, and not against us; it shall be comfortable, and not terrible,
as it was to the 1. Sam 4.8.
Philistims. If thou obtain and entertain this peace with Christ, thou shall
find his power: 1. To be a delivering: 2. A nourishing: 3. A defending: 4. A
conferring: 5. And an honoring power, as Abraham's power was for Lot, Genesis
14.16.
who delivered him taken prisoner: as Joseph's power was for his brethren: Genesis
50.21.
he comforted and nourished them and their children in the time of famine: as
Moses power was for the Israelites, to defend them, and kill the Egyptians: as
Joshua his power was for his country people, to give them a good land, and an
Josh. 11.23.
inheritance: as Daniels power was for his companions, to bring them to honor
Exodus 2.12.
and preferment, Dan. 2.49.
To set them over the charge of the Pronince of Babel; So Christ's power will be
extended in thy favor, Luke 1.74.
To deliver thee out of the hands of all thine enemies, Ephesians. 5.29.
he will nourish and cherish thee as his own Spouse, he Psalm. 22.21.
will save thee and defend thee from the Lions mouth, from the horns of the
Unicorn, from the power of the Dog, from the malice of all thy strong and
cruel enemies, he will give to thee a Psalm. 16.6.
fair heritage, in a pleasant place, a Heb. 12.28.
kingdom which cannot be shaken, he will bestow upon thee, 2. Co. 4.17.
eternal honor and an 1. Pet. 5.4.
incorruptible crown of glory.

But think not to enjoy here pure and perfect peace, without any fashrie or
fighting, Talis pax est, August.
vbinullum est bellum, nulla contradictio, vbi nihil resistit, quae hic haberi
non potest. Such peace is in the heaven, where there is no war, no
contradiction, where nothing makes resistance, which cannot be obtained here.
Pacem summam obtinebimus in patria, nobis inter nos, and cum ipso Deo. In our
native country we shall receive great peace, pure and perfect peace to our
selves, amongst ourselves, and with God himself.

CHAP. XV. Christ gives Grace.
AS Jesus Christ of his gracious goodness vouchsafes upon his own true and
happy peace, (whereof the most profane Atheist at one time, when the righteous
Judge does come to Judgment will be most desirous, like Iehoram, who 2. King.
9.22.
wished peace with Iehu, but it was refused, and he destroyed,) when 1 Thessalonians.
4.16.
the Lord shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trumpet of God Mat. 24.33.
with power and great glory; then the most senseless and slothful sinner,
would be glad of peace, which will utterly be denied to him. So likewise
Christ, Ioh. 1.14.
The only begotten Son of the Father, who is full of grace and truth, of his
plenitude and fullness will give grace to us, who by nature are graceless.

Boaz did not suffer Ruth to depart from him Ruth. 3.17.
empty, but gave her six measures of Barley; for he was a man of wealth and
Ruth. 2.1.
great power.

Jesus Christ, whose power is infinite, and whose favor is surpassing great,
will not suffer his own servants to be always empty, but they shall be Act.
4.31.
filled with the holy Ghost, and filled with grace, and Phil. 1.11.
with the fruits of righteousness, according to that measure, which he
thinks most expedient for them.

God who willed his people to bestow Deu. 15.13.
a liberal reward upon their poor brethren, and not to let them go away
empty after six years service, He himself will be much more liberal and
bountiful, he will be a Genesis 15.1.
Buckler to his own, and their exceeding great reward. When he Reu. 22.12.
comes, his reward is with him: At his second coming he will give glory at
his first coming into our hearts, he brings grace with him.

Concerning this benefit, The order here observed.
which is the most special good, we receive in this earth, we will speak
briefly of these particular points: 1. Of the beginnings of grace: 2. Of the
necessity of it: 3. Of the comeliness thereof: 4. Of the utility and profit
of it: 5. Of the stabilitie thereof: 6. Of the effects of grace: 7. To whom it
is given: 8. Of some uses.

First, Beginnings of grace desire thereof.
he who is the fountain of grace, gives ordinarily two beginnings of it: 1. A
desire of grace: 2. A purpose of amendment.

This desire of grace proceeds from grace,

As a sick man desires the windows of his house to be opened, that he may
get air to be refreshed. This his desire argues not, that altogether he
wants air, for then his life could not continue, he would incontinently be
choked, but that already he has some air, and thirsts for the same juice
abundantly: so the desire of grace is no token of the want of grace, but a
beginning of further grace, and a sure pledge that it will come shortly more
plentifully.

Yet let us remember: First, that our desire should not be inconstant and
fleeting, but constant and continuing, like David's desire; Psalm. 27.4.
One thing I have desired that I will require: Secondly, our desire should be
accompanied with an earnest care to use lawful means, whereby we may attain
to it, like Luke 19.3.
Zacheus, he desired to see Jesus, and could not for the prease of the people,
because he was of a low stature; wherefore he ran before, and climed up into
a wild fig tree, that he might see him; He carefully (as we should do)
used means to accomplish his desire.

It is the custom of the reprobate to desire and wish for grace and good
things, but to use no means to come to it. As Balaam desired good, and wished
to Numb. 23.11.
die the death of the righteous but cared not to live the life of the
righteous. His desire was no good desire like to the desire of the righteous.

The Lord Phil. 2.13.
works this will and desire, also the deed even of his good pleasure. 2. He
Psalm. 10.17.
hears that desire which he works and bends his care to it: 3. A desire
and 2. Cor. 8.12.
willing mind, it is accepted of God, according to that a maen has, and not
according to that he has not: 4. This desire wrought, heard, accepted of God
shall be fulfilled, and satisfied. Math. 5.6.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be
filled; again purpose of amendment of life, and a constant determination to
worship and honor God by an honest and godly conversation, is a sure beginning
of grace and happiness: therefore Baruabas sent forth from the Church which
was at Jerusalem to go to Antioch, Act. 11.23.
when he was come he exhorted all that with purpoe of heart they would cleave
unto the Lord, and continue with him that exhortation then given unto the
Antiochians, which is most needful for all Christians, and that every one may
say with holy David Psalm. 119.57.
, O Lord, thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy words: and with
Hezekiah 2. Chro. 19.10.
Now I purpose to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that he may
turn away his fierce wrath from us.

This purpose, as it was in the prodigal son resolving, Luke 15.18.
to rife and go to his father, to confess his sins humbly, and to crave
pardon earnestly; so it will be also in all the children of God, and this
resolution, with that godly desire, is the true beginning and seminary of
saving grace, and felicity.

But let us remember, that this desire is not a natural desire or fleshly (for
that is Psa. 112.10.
the desire of the wicked which shall perish) but it is a spiritual desire and
heavenly, Esa. 26.8. Cassiod. Lib. 4. cap. 25.
the desire of our soul will be to Gods name, and the remembrance of him. In
qualitate desiderij potest men's honesta cognosci: In the quality of the desire
an honest mind may be known. Some sorrow will also accompany this desire. The
Israelites who Psa. 137.6.
remembered Jerusalem, being most desirous to remain there, were sorrowful for
their banishment in Babylon; and their absence from Jerusalem. Gal. 6.16.
The Israel of God who longs and languisheth for grace, will be most
sorrowful for the decay and want of grace.

Moreover, this desire, Crescit dilatione; Gregor. Hom. 23. sup. Euan.
siautem dilatione desicit, desiderium verum non fuit: Grows by delay, but if
by delay the same shall diminish or decay, that has not bin any true desire.

And as concerning the purpose to serve God, it must tend to practice, and end
at performance: for we should be Iam. 1.22.
doers of the word and will of God, and not hearers only, deceauing our own
selves. Then Romans 2.13.
we shall be justified here, whereas the only hearers of the law are not
righteous before God, And hereafter Math. 7.21.
we shall onter into the kingdom of heaven, when we do our fathers will which
is in heaven.

Thus when practice is conjoined with our settled purpose, Isa. 26.3.
by an assured purpose, God will preserve perfect peace unto us, as the Prophet
speaks.

Next, touching the necessity of grace, Necessity of grace.
Heb. 12.28.
let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with
reverence and fear; in which words the Apostle plainly tells us, that grace
is most necessary, without the which, we can do no pleasure nor no service to
God.

Act. 15.11.
We believe (says Peter) through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
saved. If salvation be needful so is grace, whereby we attain to salvation.
Sine gratia nec infantes, August. lib. de natura and gratia.
nec aetate grandes salui fieri possunt. Without grace neither young nor old
can be saved.

The true Christians and elect brethren at Antiochia knew well the necessity of
grace, and therefore they Act. 15.40.
commended Paul and Silas departing from them for the visitation and
confirmation of the Saints, unto the grace of God; being assured that by
grace, They would 1. Tim. 1.16.
take heed unto themselves, and unto learning, and to their hearers, and
continue in their calling, that in so doing they might both save themselves and
those that heard them.

As all those who were without the arc, albeit they had worldly wit, strength,
riches, and earthly glory, yet they Genesis 7.21.
perished, and were drowned in the flood: so all those that are Ephesians. 2 12.
without God in the world, without Christ, wanting grace, and repentance, Luke
13.3.
shall likewise perish, and have Reu. 21 8.
their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. No knowledge, no
strength, no honor, no Prou. 11.4.
riches avails them in the day of wrath, who are destitute of grace and
righteousness.

Crysostome by a comparison declares how necessary grace is for us. Crysost.
As a rudder is needful to a ship; so grace is necessary for the safety of our
souls. Sicut nauis fracto gubernaculo illuc ducitur vbi tempestas impellerit:
Sic et homo diuinae gratiae auxilio perdito, illuc ducitur, et illud agit per
peccatum, quod Diabolus vult. As a ship, the rudder being broken, is driven to
that place, where the tempest forces it: So a man having lost the help of
Gods grace, is driven there and does that by sin, which the devil wills.

Thirdly, grace is the most comely ornament. Grace is the best ornament.
Genesis 42.42.
Pharaohs ring, the Garments of fine linen, that golden chain, was not so
brave an ornament to Joseph, as grace was.

The Princely Est. 6.11.
apparel of Ahashuerosh, his best horse, his royal crown, was not so great
an ornament to Mordecai as grace was.

The Luk 15.22.
best robe, the precious ring, the new shoes, was not so great an ornament to
the prodigal son as grace was.

If grace be laeking, neither Esaues Genesis 27.15:
fair clothes, neither Absolons 1. Sam. 14.25.
vare beauty, who had no blemish in his whole body, neither 2. Kings 9.30.
Iezabels painted face nor tired head, will be a continual and sufficient
ornament.

For he who without grace has rich apparel, and rare beauty, he has also,
Petrar. dial. de forma eximia corporis.
velum oculis, laqueum pedibus, viscum alis quibus detinetur, vera discernere,
virtute^ sequi, aut in altum evolare animo; a veil covering his eyes, a snare
holding his feet, birdlime entangling his wings, whereby he is detained to
discern verity, to follow virtue, and to mount up in his mind to the
contemplation of heavenly things.

Who so has received grace, may say with the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 1.4.
I am black, but comely as the tents of Kedar, and as the curtains of
Solomon, Psalm. 45.13.
I am all glorious and beautiful within, and 2. Cor. 3.18.
am changed into the same image of the Lord, from glory to glory, as my the
spirit of the Lord; Psalm. 8.5.
I am crowned with honor, Hebr. 2.7.
glory, and worship, and set above the works of Gods hands.

Fourthly, Grace profitable.
concerning the necessity of grace; the Apostle tells us, that 1. Timo. 4.8.
godliness is profitable to all things, so grace which is the ground of true
virtue and godliness is profitable unto all things, both for eschewing evil,
and obtaining of good.

By Iam. 4.7. August. Simil.
grace we submit our selves to God, and we resist the devil, so that he
flees from us: Gratia Dei, a Daemonum dominatione liberat. As where
Sothernwood, Lysimathus, or Calamint are laid or grow, there venomous beasts
remain not, but flee away: So where the grace of God is, Satan and sin, and
evil motions depart. Men by nature are prone to do wickedness, and Iere. 9.3.
they proceed from evil to worse, but 1. Tim. 1.14 Simil.
the grace of our Lord is exceeding abundant, by which we are restrained and
preserved.

Like as a spring lock which of it self can shut, but cannot unlock without
a key; even so we of our selves may fall into wickedness, and 1. Pet. 4.3.
walk in wantonness, and run to the excess of riot, but we cannot return,
and come out of the same, without the key of Gods grace, Psalm. 84.11.
for the Lord God is the Sun and shield unto us; the Lord will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he with hold from them that walk uprightly.

Sine gratia Dei nemo aliquid benefacit, August.
quia quod malefacit, ipsiu^ hominis est; quod facit been, de beneficio Dei
est. Without the grace of God, none does any thing well, because a man doing
evil, it is his own deed; that which he does well, is from the benefit of
God.

If the holy Apostle Paul desired Mark, to be brought to him, because he was
2. Tim. 4.11
profitable unto him to minister; we should rather wish that grace may be
given to us, which will be most profitable unto us, to be a master to
overrule us, Rom 5.21.
to reign by righteousness unto eternal life, to be our guide to direct us,
our helper to assist us, and to work every good work in us, Gratia omnia
operatur bona, says the Ancient; as also, August.
Nihil est homo sine gratia Dei: A man is nothing without the grace of God, yea
worse then nothing, even companion to Satan in sin and misery. Grace is
profitable. 1. Because we are elected by grace, therefore it is called Romans
11.5.
the election of grace. 2. Because of our vocation. We with the Apostle, are
Galat. 1.15.
separated from the wicked world, and called by grace. 3. Because we are Titus
3.7.
justified, by grace, and made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
4. We Ephe. 2.8.
are saved by grace. 5. Because the Heb. 13.9.
heart is stablished with grace. So our election, vocation, justification,
stabilitie, and salvation, are by the free grace of God through Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, grace is the free favor of God, The stabilitie of grace.
whereby it pleases his Majesty to make us his dear children, which truly
believe in Christ: It is most sure and stable, which cannot wholly and finally
be lost; for although Satan be powerful; yet neither he, nor the gates of
hell, Mat. 16.18.
shall prevail and overcome one member of Christ's body: although he be
deceitful, yet it is impossible to Mat. 24.24.
deceive the very Elect of God. The Devil neither by might, nor slight,
neither by power, nor policy, shall ever be able so to prevail against the
godly, that they shall altogether fall away from grace, and utterly loose true
faith and Piety: because Ioh. 10.28.
the sheep of Christ shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
his hand: because 1. John 3.9.
they are borne of God, they cannot sin, they cannot commit that 1. John 5.16
sin which is unto death, Romans 6.14.
sin has not dominion over them, it rules not in them with whole consent.

So this grace given by Christ, as it is more ample and greater, then the grace
given to Adam at his creation: so also this grace is more firm and stable,
which is for our great consolation. Gratia per Christum nobis impertita, long
amplior quam illa quae ante lapsum Adamo fuerat collata. August. lib. de
correctione and gratia.
Nam hoc tantum Deus illi dedcrat, vt in iustitia, in qua erat creatus,
perseueraret si vellet: at voluntatem perseuerandinon dedit, sed ipsius
arbitrio optionem permisit adharendi suae integritati, aut ab ea deflectendi.
At gratia ab eius filio nobis allata longior est and amplior. Nam praeter
facultatem, nobis etiam impartit voluntatem been agendi, efficitque per suum
spiritum, vt tanto amore ac studio amplectamur, quod illi gratum esse
intelligimus, vt inde nec carnis nostrae obluctatione ac repugnantia, nec alia
vlla tentatione auertamur. That grace bestowed upon us by Christ, is much more
ample then that which was given to Adam before the fall: for God gave only
this to him, that he might persevere in that righteousness, in which he was
created, if he would: but he did not give unto him a will to persevere, but
left it to the option of his arbiterment, to cleave to his integrity, or to
depart therefrom. But the grace brought to us by his Son, is far greater:
for beside the faculty and power, he also vouchsafes unto us a will to do
well; and he causes by his spirit, that we embrace with so great love and
earnestness, that which we understand to be acceptable and pleasant to him,
that neither by the wrestling, and resisting of our flesh, neither by any other
tentation are we diuerted or turned any way therefrom.

If Iere. 31.35.
the Sun which is a light to the day, and the courses of the Moon, and of
the Stars, which are for a light to the night; if these ordinances depart out
of Gods sight; then shall the seed of Israel be cast off.

But that order of nature is immovable and unchangeable. So is the Leuit.
26.9.
Covenant of God which he will establish and confirm with us; it will be an
unchangeable, Ezech. 37.26.
and everlasting Covenant. If Gods Iere. 33.20.
Covenant of the day and night can be broken, so that there should not be day
and night in their seasons; then may his Covenant be broken with David. He will
Iere. 31.3.
love us with an everlasting love, his Leui 26.11.
soul shall never loath us, we will be 2. Cor. 6.16.
the Temple of the living God, he will dwell among us, and walk with us, he
Reave. 3.12.
will make us pillars in his Temple, we shall go no more out; his grace shall
be most sure and firm.

Sixthly, The effects of grace. August.
the effects of grace are many and diverse. Prima gratia beneficii Dei est
redigere nos ad confessionem infirmitatis: The first grace of Gods benefit is
to bring us to a confession of our weakness, sins, and infirmities. David
received grace, Psalm. 32.5.
He acknowledged his sin unto God, neither did he hide his iniquity, but he
confessed against himself his wickedness, and the Lord forgave him the
punishment of his sin. The Prophet Isay received grace, he confessed that
Isa. 6.5.
he was a man of polluted lips. The Prophet Jeremy with the godly through
grace, did Ier. 14.20.
acknowledge their wickedness, and the iniquity of their fathers, beseeching
God not to abhor them, neither to break his covenant with them. Daniel
through grace confessed sincerely, That Dan. 9.7.
righteousness belonged unto the Lord, but that open shame and confusion of
face appertained to him and his people, because of their offenses committed
against God, and because they had not obeyed the voice of the Lord, to walk in
his laws which he had laid before them by the ministry of his servants, the
Prophets. The Luke 15.18.
Prodigal son, the humble Luke 18.13.
Publican, repenting Luke 19.8.
Zacheus, the converted Luk 23.14.
theife, Act. 9.15.
that chosen vessel unto God 1. Cor. 15.9.
Saint Paul, humbly confessed their sins and infirmites through grace, also
they received remission and mercy. Ambros. Isidor.
Confession quae fit cum paenitentia, nos liberat a morte: Confession with
repentance delivers us from death. Confessio sanat, confessio iustificat,
confessio peccatis veniam donat: Confession heals, justifies, and gives
pardon to sins. Also earnest prayer, fervent supplication Leb. 5.7.
strong crying and tears, will be joined to this humble and hearty confession,
as may clearly appear in the examples before specified.

2. It is an effect of grace that our will is healed: then we shall labor with
all care and diligence Heb. 13.21.
to make us perfect in all good works to do Gods will working in us that which
is pleasant in his sight.

3. This comes of grace, when 2. These. 13.
our faith grows exceedingly, when Math. 24.13.
we endure, and persevere to the end that we may be saved. August.


4. Gratia si non abundasset in Martyribus, tantas paenas sustinere non
potuissent: If grace had not abounded in the Martyrs, they could not patiently
have suffered so great torment. As Romans 5.20.
where sin abounded, their grace abounded much more: so where pain abounded in
the Martyrs, grace super abounded: by grace we patiently suffer shame.

5. Where we receive grace from Christ, we shall with Joseph Genesis 39.4.
find favor in their sight, whose favor may be profitable and comfortable
unto us, having received grace we shall Prou 22.11
love, and obtain pureness of heart, our Ephesians. ^.29.
communication shall be good to the use of edifying, that it may Minister grace
to the hearers: then for the grace of our lips: The King shall be our friend.
We may so say of grace, as one speaks of a fit time or opportunity: Beroaldus
in Heptalog. septem sapientum.
Scitote plus pollere hanc ad successus petitionum, quam adipem leonis, quam
sanguinem basilisti, quam spondylo^ draconis, quam anguium, druidarum ovum,
caeteraque id genus premissae magicae va^^tatis. You may be assured that this
is more profitable for the success of your petitions unto earthly Princes,
then the fat of the Lions, then the blood of the Cockatrice, then some sorts of
Serpents, then the egg of an Adder, and other frivolous trifles of Magic
vanity: By the abundance of grace, Romans 5.17.
and gift of righteousness, We shall reign in life through Jesus.

Thus seeing an humble confession of our weakness, a sure curing of our will,
a reformation of our life, continuance to the end, patience to endure trouble,
favor profitable, a crown incorruptible with many more good things, are the
effects of grace, as an Ancient shows. By grace (says he) we are converted,
by grace we are helped in time of our trial and tentation, Bernard. in
assumpt. Mariae. Sermon. 5. Simil.
by grace we are rewarded. And like as the same is the strength of the Sun
which warmeth and prepares the earth to receive the seed; and that same
strength of the Sun which makes the seed sown to bud forth, and which
brings the corns to maturitie and ripeness. So that same grace forerunneth
our will, and which follows after. August.
Praeuenit gratia vt saluemur; eadem subsequitur vt vegetemur, praeuenit vt
vocemur, subsequitur vt glorificemur. Grace forerunneth that we may be healed:
the same follows after, that we may be strengthened: grace goes before, that
we may be called: the same follows after, that we may be glorified. For Act.
15.11.
we believe through the Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, Romans 5.17.
and to be crowned by virtue thereof, with a Prou. 4.9.
comely ornament, even with a crown of endless glory.

We will briefly consider in the seventh place, To whom grace is given.
upon whom this inestimable gift is vouchsafed, and who are endued therewith:
1. The humble and lowly in heart. God Prou. 3.20.
with the scornful he scorneth; but he gives grace to the humble. Iam. 4.6.
and 1. Pet. 5.5.
He resists the proud, and he gives grace to the humble. 2. Those who are
members of the true Church, Zach. 12.9.
God will pour upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
the spirit of grace and compassion: 3. who walks uprightly and lives a godly
life and conversation. Prou. 14.4.
Among the righteous there is favor and grace, whereby they are accepted and
reconciled to God. Away with that erroneous, detestable, and damnable doctrine
of the Arminians, dreaming of an universal grace as they call it; that grace
commonly appertains to all, which is only proper to the elect: To Mat. 13.11.
whom it is given to know the secrets and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
but to all it is not given. Neither think we that freewill by grace is wholly
removed and abolished, but only thereby delivered and amended. Caelest. Epist.
1.
Gratia non aufertur liberum arbitrium. sed liberatur; vt de tenebroso lucidum,
de prauo rectum, de improuidente sit prouidum, quae operatur in nobis hoc ipsum
velle, perficere, credere, sperare, and quicquid ad salutem opus est; vtpote
per quam charitas Dei, in qua summa est omnium non ostensa nobis, sed affusa in
cordibus nostris per spiri^um sanctum, qui datus est nobis. The free will is
not taken away by grace, but is delivered, so that it becomes lightsome of a
dark free will, and if a wicked, it becomes rectified, of an improuident, it
is made flourishing and provident, grace works in us this same, to will, to
perform, to believe, to hope, and what-euer is needful for our salvation;
forasmuch by grace the love of God, in the which is the sum of all, is not
only showed to us, but also is Romans 5.5.
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us.

Neither yet teach we, that humility, or a good life goes before all grace,
as the cause thereof, but that grace works humility and godliness, which
brings an increase thereof: Mat. 25.29.
For unto every man that has, it shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: and from him that has not, even that that he has shall be taken
away.

When thou have gotten grace, pride will be banished, then thou will well
know, that 1. Cor. 4.7.
thou have nothing, but that which thou have received; thou will find, that 2.
Cor. 3.5.
of thy self thou art not sufficient, to think any good thing, thou will
acknowledge that thy sufficiency is of God. August.
Si vis esse alienus a gratia, iacta tua merita. If thou would be a
stranger from grace, boast of thy own merits.

The proud Pharisee glorying in his righteousness, Luke 18.14.
was not justified, he received no grace: but that holy and humble virgin
Mary, is exalted and Luke 1.28.
blessed, esteeming her self to be of Luke 1.48.
a lowestate and poor degree, yea Jesus Christ her son and Savior; Col. 2.9.
in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily as he is Ioh. 1.14.
full of grace, so he is Math. 11.29.
meek and lowly in heart, full of lowliness and humility: and although he
was Ioh. 14.13.
Master and Lord, yet he was content to wash his own Disciples feet.

Heb. 10.29.
sore punishment, that we despite not the Spirit of grace, that we be not Iud.
1.4.
ungodly men which turn the grace of our God into wantonness, that we remain
not under the kingdom of sin, which is Act 26.18.
the power of Satan, the power of darkness, 2. Tim. 2.26.
the snare of the devil, by which men are taken at his will, and Luke 11.21.
that house kept by that strong man armed, the things that he possesses are in
peace, in the which kingdom their is no honesty, no holiness, no happiness.
But let us strive with our whole care and continual labor, that we may Ioh.
15.4.
abide in Christ, in the kingdom of grace, and so 1. Pet. 3.13.
look for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness, where
the dominion of sin and death being destroyed, 1. Cor. 15.28.
God shall be all in all unto us. Now for this purpose, let us daily and
earnestly send up to our God that petition taught us by our Master; Math. 6.10.
Luke 11.2.
Let thy kingdom come, that we may remain in the kingdom of grace, and
afterward be received into the kingdom of glory.

If none will neither despise nor despite earthly grace, and tempor^^y good,
by which Col. 1.13.
men are we a^hie, mighty, witty, and honorable in the eyes of the world;
far less should heavenly and saving grace be despised or despighted, that
eternal and spiritual good should principally be resteemed and accepted of,
whereby we are honorable in the eyes of God, and happy for ever.

2. Biel. lib. 2. dest. 26.
Let us wish feriously, and pray fervently for this chief good wished by the
servants of Christ (...) one times or oftener, to the Saints in the new
Testament to whom they did write. O with what wonderful industry should
Christians seek for grace; In Epist. Apostel. August.
qua fiunt ex nolentibus volentes; ex repugnantibus consentientes, ex
oppugnantibus amaindes, by which of unwilling they become willing, of
gainstanding they become agreeing, and of fighters against they become loving.
If we ask, it shall be Luke 11.9.
given us: if we seek, we shall find: when we have found the same, let us
take heed, least we Gal. 5.4.
fall from grace, even Heb. 12.15.
fall away from the grace of God.

As the wise man Solomon said of Wisdom, so we may say of grace: Prou. 4.5.
Get grace, forget not, forsake it not, and it shall keep thee, love it, and it
shall preserve thee.

3. Thou to whom God has been so beneficial, that thou have gotten grace, 2.
Pet. 3.18.
go on in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ,
Col. 2.19.
increase therein with the increasing of God; then, in thee Isa. 55.13.
for nettles shall grow, the mirthe tree; for sinful thoughts, idle words,
profane deeds, thy works shall be good, thy words sauoury Psalm. 19.14.
the meditation of thy heart shall be acceptable in Gods sight.

Doubtless mortal men desire to grow in worldly wealth, in credit, and in
estimation; they desire their corn to grow to maturity, their children to
grow in stature to a just measure: wherefore should they not desire also with
Samuel 1. Sam. 2.26
to profit and grow in grace, and to be in favor both with the Lord and also
with men; having 2. Cor 4.5.
most plentious grace, Col. 2.7.
abounding therein with thanksgiving that they 1. These. 4.1.
may increase more and more, till they be Iam. 1.4.
perfect and entire, lacking nothing which is expedient for them.

4. Let us 1. Pet. 1.13.
trust perfectly on the grace that is brought to us by the revelation of Jesus
Christ, never trusting to our merits. August.
Gratia Dei ex Saulo fecit Paulum, non opera nec merita: The grace of God made
of Saul, the Apostle Paul, not his works nor merits: he who Gal. 1.13.
persecuted the Church of God extremely and wasted it, who was 1. Tim. 2.13
a blasphemer, a persecuter and an oppressor; when the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant toward him, was received to mercy, he was made a Act.
9.15.
chosen vessel unto God to bear his name before the Gentiles and Kings, and
children of Israel: he was Act. 21.13.
ready, not to be bound only, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus.
does the rain bring forth fruit without the earth: so neither grace without
our will works any thing, neither our will without grace can be profitable to
us for our salvation.

And albeit we trust on grace, yet we Romans 11.20. Bernard.
should not be high minded; but fear. Time ergo, cum arriserit gratia; time
cum abierit; time cum denuo reuertetur. Fear therefore, when grace shall
delight thee; fear when (in thy sense) it shall depart from thee; fear when
it shall return again unto thee.

Moreover, thou art to be advertised, that thou shall find a battle and
wrestling with thy self, because of thy fleshly corruption, even after thou
have received grace from Christ.

For by grace, a man in his Psalm. 25.1.
soul is lifted upward to God, by the flesh, Ioh. 8.23.
men which are beneath, are pulled downward to the earth: Isa. 1.4.
They go backward. By grace, a man will 2. King. 18.6.
cleave unto the Lord with godly Hezekiah, and not depart from him: by their
flesh, Ier. 2.13.
they will forsake him who is the fountain of living waters. By grace, a man
continues and 1. Ioh. 2.15.
loves not the world, neither the things that are in the world, which with the
lust thereof passes away: but by the flesh, one desires Iam. 5.5.
to live in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness, Romans 12.14.
taking most thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. By grace one
Romans 7.22.
delights in the Law of God, concerning the inner man: by the flesh, Rom 7.2,
3.
he is led captive unto the law of sin, which is in his members. By grace, a
man Phil. 1.29.
will not only believe in Christ, but also suffer for his sake: but albeit,
the Mat. 26.41.
spirit be ready, yet the flesh is weak, to do or to suffer for
righteousness. What shall I say? By grace, and by Ephesians. 3.17.
faith, Christ and all good dwells in our hearts: but Romans 7.18.
in the flesh no good thing dwells at all.

Therefore it is no wonder, albeit there be a battle in this man regenerate;
the flesh lusts against the spirit, and against grace that is given. But as
when 2. Sam. 3.1.
there was long war betwixt the house of Saul, and the house of David, David
waxed stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker: So when there shall be
war, and wrestling between the regenerate part within thee, and the part
unregenerate, between grace and thy flesh; grace shall wax stronger and
stronger, and the flesh shall become weaker and weaker, until Romans 6.6.
thy old man be crucified, and the body of sin be destroyed.

5. Who-euer thou be who have received grace, out of that Zach. 13.1.
fountain of grace which is opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness, be thou most ready
and willing, 1. Pet. 4.10.
to minister the same to another, as a good disposer of the manifold grace of
God. Like as that Psalm. 133.2.
precious ointment powered upon Aarons head, did not stay there, but went down
to his beard, and to the border of his garments; so when precious and plentious
grace is bestowed upon thee, as it will remain with thy self, be thou most
desirous to communicate the same to thy brethren, no way fearing that the
distribution of thy spiritual gift, and the ministration of grace for the
edification of others, shall bring any diminution to thy grace, but contrarily,
the more that grace is furnished and distributed to others, the more it is
augmented and multiplied to thy self. John 6.9.
five loaves given by Christ, and the ministry of his Disciples by
distribution to many was multiplied, and five thousand therewith were satisfied.

6. That we may increase in grace, 2. Pet. 1.19.
we shall do well to take heed to the most sure Word of God, and of the
Prophets, John 5.39.
to search the Scriptures which testify of the Lord Jesus, to delight in the
Gospel of the grace of God, by which ordinarily grace is wrought in us, who are
graceless of our selves; that so being 2. Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the godly nature, we may flee the corruption which is in the
World through lust, and give diligence to make our calling and election sure,
that by this means an entering may be ministered unto us; abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who of his fullness,
gives grace for grace, unto all who shall read or hear attentively, this
short discourse of grace.

CHAP. XVI. Christ gives a Blessing.
AS Melchisedeck Genesis 14.19. Joseph. anti. Iudai. lib. 1. cap. 11.
brought forth bread and wine for the refreshment of Abraham and his
soldiers, after he returned from the slaughter of Chedourlaomer: moreover
being a Priest of the most high God, he blessed Abraham. So Christ Jesus the
King of peace and righteousness, and Ps. 110.4 and Hebr. 5.6.
high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, Isa. 28.12.
gives rest to him who is weary, and the refreshing to the hungry: John 6.51.
He will give his own flesh for the life of his servants; moreover he will
bless all those who are the children of Abraham, believing in him. And it
shall come to pass, that as of our own nature we are a curse among the
Heathen, so Christ will deliver us, and we shall be a blessing. This blessing
will be the more accounted, and the more instantly asked, if we consider; that
as we are the children of Adam, we are but 2. Pet. 2 14.
cursed children, Isa. 2.4.
a corrupt generation, and a sinful nation, yea in every place, every time,
every action, and in every respect, our estate is most miserable Zach. 8.13.
and accursed: That without Christ and his blessing, Deuteronomy. 28.16.
we are cursed in the town, and in the field, cursed in our goods, and in our
grounds, cursed in our life, and in our death, cursed in bodies and souls,
cursed in this world, and for ever more: the Lord shall send cursing, trouble,
and shame, until we be destroyed, and perish eternally, and that most
deservedly and justly.

For the vengeance of God, Who are cursed.
and the curse of the Law naturally is due to us, by reason of our many and
presumptuous sins and transgressions. If God Mal. 2.2.
will send a curse upon those, who do not consider in their hearts to give
glory to his Name: 2. If Iere. 11.3.
the man be cursed, that obeys not the words of Gods Covenant: 3. If the
Mal. 1.14.
deceiuer be cursed, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and
sacrifices unto the Lord of hosts, that great King whose Name is terrible, a
corrupt thing, a torn and unworthy offering: 4. If Iere. 48.10.
he be cursed, that does the work of the Lord negligently: 5. If they be
Iere. 17.5.
cursed, that trust in man, and make flesh their arm, withdrawing their
hearts from the Lord: 6. If a Isa. 5.20.
woe or curse, will come to those that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent
in their own sight: 7. If a Hos. 7.13.
woe and a curse, will be to them that have fled away, and departed from God:
8. If a Haba. 2.9.
woe and curse, will be to him that coueteth, an evil covetousness to his
house, that he may set his nest on high: 9. If a Matthew. 18.7.
woe be to that man, by whom an offense comes: 10. If a Iud. 11.
woe be to them, who follow the way of Cain. 11. If Gala. 3.10.
every man be cursed, that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law to do them. Now my brother, 1. Cor. 11.28.
examine, and search thy self diligently, 2. Cor. 13.5.
prove, and try thy self truly, and after that exact trial, and
examination, according to the light of Gods Word, and testimony of thy own
conscience, tell plainly and sincerely, what thou think of thy self. In
what estate remainest thou? Whether art thou culpable of those faults, or not?
If thou Luke 23.4.
receive things worthy of that which thou have done, because Psa. 109.18.
thou have clothed thy self with cursing.

Like a raiment, The just curse of man fearful.
have thou not deserved that all the fearful curses, threatened against the
wicked in Gods Law, should be powered upon thy head? Never go about to deny
it, think not to gainsay it, nor yet to make any exception against the same,
whereof thy conscience so manifestly conuinceth thee.

Remember also that if the curse of Parents, and Prophets, and Magistrates be
oftentimes fearful, because they are effectual: how dangerous then and
terrible is the curse of that Mat. 15.13.
heavenly Father, of Iere. 10.10.
the living Lord, the God of truth, and an everlasting King, at whose anger the
earth does tremble, and whose wrath the Nations cannot abide?

First, the just curse of Parents, wants not the own effect, as may be
seen in Genesis 9.25.
Came, who was cursed by his father Noah; therefore Canaan and his posterity,
was made a servant of servants, to his brethren.

In the days of Luther, Lonicerus in theat. hist. in exemp. 4. precopti.
a young woman in Witenberge, being cursed of her mother, was possessed, and
lamentably vexed by an evil spirit.

And Saint Augustine records, that he saw seven children, who after their
mothers curse, did tremble fearfully in all the parts of their bodies, and did
wander as vagabonds through sundry places of the World.

Secondly, also the curse of a Prophet is fearful and terrible. When 2. Kin.
2.4.
the little children of Bethel mocked Elisha, he cursed them in the name of
the Lord, and afterward two she Bears tore in pieces, two and forty of them.

Yet notwithstanding, Causeless curses shall not come.
godly Princes and people, have no cause to fear those curses, pronounced by
the Pope of Rome, or any of his Clergy, because they Isa. 65.23.
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, they are the Number. 23.23.
Israel of God, against whom there is no sorcery, no incantation, no cursing:
Pro. 24.25.
upon them shall come the blessing of goodness, for they Psalm. 1.1.
do not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor in the way of sinners, but
their delight is in the Law of the Lord. And it is most true, which is spoken
by wise Solomon, Pro. 26.2.
the curse that is causeless, shall not come.

As the Swallow coming from her nest, 2. Sam. 16.12.
and the Lord will do good to his own, for that wrong cursing thundered
against them; thus the Papists curses, are like the curses of Shimei; 1. King.
2.14.
whose wickedness the Lord brought upon his own head, the good King being
ever blessed of the God of heaven, because his 1. King. 15.3.
heart was perfect with the Lord his God.

Thirdly: The curse also of a lawful Magistrate is greatly to be feared: for
the effect of Ioshuahs cursing, Ioh. 6.26.
who cursed the builders of the City Jericho, was seen on 1. King. 16.34.
Hiel the Bethelite, who laid the foundation thereof in the death of Abiram his
eldest son, and set up the gates thereof in the death of Segu his youngest
son. If then the curse of Parents, Prophets, and Magistrates be heavy and
dreadful: How bitter and grievous is it for to be subject to the deserved
curse of the Almighty and everliving God: Heb. 12.9.
The Father of the spirits, Luke 7.16.
that great Prophet, the eternal King and Lord of Hosts?

Maledictum esse, Paraeus in Genesis cap. 9. verse. 29.
est Deo and creaturis omnibus inuisum esse and execrabilem, quod omnium
malorum pessimum est atque extremum. To be accursed, is to be hated both of God
and all creatures, to be execrable, and abominable, which of all evils is the
worst and last evil.

For if the Gibeonites remained in great misery under the curse of Joshua,
being bound to perpetual slavery, Ios. 9.23.
none of them was freed from being bondmen and hewers of wood and drawers of
water: In what lamentable estate will reprobates remain, who are under the
curse and malediction of God himself? they will abide under the Isa. 6.5.
bondage and servitude of sin and Satan.

Gods curse will be much more bitter and grievous then the bitter and cursed
water was Number. 5.27.
to the defiled woman, who by adultery had trespassed against her husband: her
belly did swell, her thighs did rot, and she was accursed among her people. But
the curse of God (unto which by nature we are all subject) is more horrible and
fearful; that will cause soul and body, head and heart, flesh and bones, to
be loathsome, to stink, to be heinous, vilde, detestable, and accursed before
God and his Angels, among men and all creatures. Neither should men be secure
and void of fear, albeit the curse suddenly seize not upon them; As the curse
of Iotham the son of Ierubbaal came not at the first upon Abimelech and the
men of Schechen, but at length after Judge. 9.57.
three years God did bring it upon their heads: So albeit the Exodus 34.6.
Lord (who is strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in
truth and goodness, Reu. 2.21.
giving to the wicked space to repent them of their sins,) does not
incontinently punish the impious and ungodly; yet Amos 9.1.
he that escapes of them shall not be delivered: but at length the Zach. 5.2.
flying book of Gods curse that goes forth over the whole earth, will surely
seize upon them, and incontinently consume their habitation, with their own
torment and perdition.

Now our blessed and loving Savior, our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, Gal.
3.13.
was made a curse for us, and has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, that
the blessing of Abraham might come on us, who are Gentiles, that we might
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith; and Deuteronomy. 23.5.
because our God has loved us in Christ, he will turn the curse to a blessng
unto us. Yea, Deuteronomy. 30.7.
he will lay all our curses on our enemies, and on them that hate us and
persecute us.

Moreover, if our sin and wickedness move God Mal. 2.2.
to curse our blessings; shall not our Savior, who 1. Cor. 1.30.
of God is made unto us righteousness; move him also to turn our curse into
a blessing for us?

In handling of this we will keep this order: The order here observed. Christ
blesses really.
1. We will show, how and in what manner Christ blesses: 2. What are the
effects of his blessing: 3. Whom he blesses: 4. Some uses thereof.

First, Christ really conferreth his blessing, as when he took the little
children in his arms. Mar. 10.16.
He put his hand on them and blessed them. His blessing was real and most
effectual. Likewise after his resurrection: He Luke 24.50.
led his Disciples into Bethania, he lift up his hands and blessed them; by
virtue whereof, they were indeed happy and blessed.

Men frequently will give their blessing to others, but not in such sort as
Christ gives his blessing: sometimes they will wish a blessing, as Boaz his
feruants wished, Ruth. 2.4.
The Lord to bless their master. Sometimes they will pronounce and declare a
blessing, as Melchisedeck King of Shalem the Priest of the most high God, Genesis
14.19.
blessed Abraham. Sometimes they will foretell of the blessing, as the
Patriarch Jacob Genesis 48.16.
blessed Joseph's children and his own.

But no man has power of himself, to give and confer a blessing: for Jacob
cannot make his beloved and Genesis 27.33.
first borne son Esau to be truly blessed, neither holy Samuel, albeit 1.
Sa^. 15.35.
he mourned for Saul, yet could he not procure a blessing to Saul, no not so
much as the continuance of his Royal dignity.

1. Cor. 3.7.
So then neither, is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but
God that gives the increase: and Psalm. 127.1.
except the Lord build the house, the builders labor in vain, except the Lord
keep the City, the keepers watch in vain, and except Christ bless really,
man blesses in vain, his blessing will be ineffectual and fruitless without
Christ's blessing.

Doubtless the blessing of a godly King given to his subjects, and the blessing
of Pastors Heb. 13.17.
(who watch for souls) given to their people, and the blessings of masters of
families given to their household, and the blessing of parents given to their
children, is wonderful delectable and exceeding comfortable; as when 1 Kin.
8.14.
King Solomon blessed all his subjects even all the congregation of Israel:
likewise Number. 6.23.
Aaron and his sons blessed the people, calling upon the name of the Lord: 2.
Sam. 6.20
David returned to bless his house: Jacob Genesis 49.28.
blessed every one of his children, such blessings are pleasant and acceptable.
But the blessing of Christ, Reu. 1.5.
the Prince of the Kings of the earth, Heb. 10.21.
the high Priest who is over the house of God, Isa. 9 6.
the everlasting Father, by many degrees is much more pleasant, comfortable,
and acceptable to all those who thirst for his blessing.

This manner of Christ's blessing, in that he blesses really and in very deed,
declares his prerogative and greatness above his Saints; for the Apostle
says Heb. 7.7.
without all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater.

2. Eftects of Christ's blessing.
Many and profitable are the effects of Christ's blessing. He has done, he
does, and will do, great and good things for those whom he blesses: for 1.
Election to life: 2. Remission of sins: 3. Habitation in Gods house: 4.
Fatherly correction and instruction: 5. True repentance: 6. Sanctification: 7.
Spiritual joy: 8. Sure trust and confidence: 9. Patience in affliction: 10. A
good name and commendation: 11. Fruitful off spring and posterity: 12.
Protection and safety: 13. Abundance and plenty: 14. The holy fear of God:
15. Contented life and happy death: Lastly eternal glory and happiness, all
these good things, and many more proceed from the blessing of the Lord Jesus.
Who are blessed of him, they are thus beautified and enriched, as may appear
by clear proof of facred Scripture. There is a blessing of election. Psalm.
65.4.
Blessed is he whom thou chusest and causest to come to thee, he shall be
satisfied with the pleasure of the holy Temple: a blessing of remission: Psalm.
32.1.
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, on
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: a blessing of habitation within the Lords
Tabernacle, Psalm. 84.4.
Blessed are they that dwell in Gods house, his ways are in their heart; their
strength is in him, they will ever praise him: a blessing of correction and
instruction, Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach thy Law: a
blessing of repentance, which is the first resurrection, Reu. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection; for of such
the second death has no power; but they shall be the Priests of God and of
Christ: blessing of sanctification, Isa. 56.2.
Blessed is the man that keeps judgment, and does justice, that keeps the
Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any evil: a
blessing of spiritual joy and consolation, Psalm. 89.15.
Blessed is the people that can rejoice in the Lord, they shall walk in the
light of his countenance: a blessing of trust and confidence, Psalm. 40.4.
Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust: a blessing of patience,
Iam. 1.12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him:
a blessing of fame and renown, Genesis 12.2.
God blessed Abranam and made his name great: a blessing of an ample
succession, Genesis 22.17.
God blessing Abraham he did greatly multiply his seed as the Stars of the
heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Sea shore: a blessing of safety and
protection, Psalm. 5.12.
The Lord will bless the righteous, and with favor will compass him as with
a shield: a blessing of plenty and abundance, 1. Chro. 13.14.
The Lord blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that he had: a blessing of
Gods fear, Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his
commandments: a blessing of a peaceable death, Reu. 14 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; Psa. 119.16.
and precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psa. 144.15.
Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord, happy and blessed are they in
their life, more happy and blessed at their death, most happy, after their
resurrection; they receive a blessng of glory, and Mith. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world.

Surely when we find our selves thus blessed, we shall then be constrained to
bless our God in our hearts, to praise him with our mouths, and to honor him
in our whole conversation. August.
Prior in nobis est benedictio domini; et consequens, est vt benedicamus
dominum; says the ancient. The blessing of the Lord is first in us, and it
will follow, that we bless the Lord: every one of us will say, Psalm. 103.1.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me bless his holy name,
forget not all his benefits which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and heals
all thine infirmities; which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns
thee with mercy and compassion. Psalm. 66.20.
Praised or blessed be the Lord, which has not put back my prayer, nor his
mercies from me: Psalm. 68.19.
praised be the Lord, even the God of my salvation, which loadeth me with
benefits daily; and with the Apostles, 1. Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be God, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again
into a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead to an
inheritance immortal and undefiled, that fades not, reserved in heaven for
us: and Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be God which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things.

Whosoever has gotten this blessing, as they will be most ready and willing to
bless God; so, they will altogether be loath and most unwilling to Exodus 20.7
take the name of the Lord their God in vain, or Leu. 19.12.
to swear falsely thereby, defiling the holy name of their God.

He that usually swears rashly and idly is not as yet blessed of God, for his
continual swearing betokens that Zach. 5.4.
the curse of God shall lay siedge unto his house, until it have consumed the
timber and stones thereof. Eccl. 23.11.
A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the
plague shall never go from his house, the Land mourns and shakes. And if
that memorable statute made by one of the Kings of France, Rhenan. in. annot.
in. Tertull.
had force and were observed in this country, that all swearers should have
their mouths seared with burning irons, we should soon behold very many thus
marked.

Again, whosoever is blessed of the Lord, they will be most desirous to bless
him perpetually: Psalm. 34.1.
They will always give thanks to the Lord, his praise shall be in their mouth
continually. As they will abstain from wrongs, swearing; so also they will
abstain from grudging: 1. Cor. 10.10. August sup Johan.
neither will they murmr as some of the carnal Jews murmured and were
destroyed of the destroyer. De re nulla magis, deum off endisse ille populus
iudaicus dicitur, quam contra Deum murmurando. That people of the Jews is said
to have offended God in nothing more, then in murmuring against him: and
therefore Number. 11.1.
when they became murmurers, it displeased the Lord; his wrath was kindled, and
the fire of God burnt among them, and consumed the utmost part of the host. The
murmurers Number. 14.37
who brought vile slander upon the land, did die by a plague before the Lord:
they were rebellious and murmured, Number. 21.6.
wherefore the Lord sent sirie Serpents among them, which stung the people so
that they died.

How foolish and vain are they, who in time of trouble and misery, murmr
against the God of heaven, as though thereby they could do any evil unto his
holy Majesty? Such murmuring rather augments,

But the practice of patient Job is very commendable, and worthy of imitation,
who after great loss of his substance and children in his greiuous adversity,
yet he did not charge God foolishly but falling down upon the ground, he
worshipped saying. Ioh. 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb and naked shall I return thither; the
Lord has given, the Lord has taken; blessed be the name of the Lord;
therefore Job 42.12.
the Lord blessed his last days more then the first, his goods are restored
double unto him, he saw his sons and his sons sons; even four generations.

Who so are blessed, as they will abstain from swearing and murmuring, so they
will be most willing Romans 12.14.
to bless their neighbors and not to curse them, according to the Apostles
precept.

Thirdly, Whom Christ blesses.
whom blesses Christ? even those who are marked with the foresaid true tokens
of his blessing. Also he tells us, that they Math. 5.4.
who mourn for their sins are blessed, they Ier. 31.9.
shall come weeping, and the Lord who is the Father of Israel, with mercy will
bring them to himself again, They that are meek are blessed. Math. 5.5.
Now they are not to be esteemed weak, who can patiently endure God to be
dishonored, and sin, openly with an high hand, committed. For this purpose
the Ancient says truly, Ambrose.
Beatus qui seueritatem and mansuetudinem tenet; vt altero disciplina seruetur,
altero innocentia non opprimetur. He is blessed who keeps severity and
meekness: that with the one discipline may be kept; and with the other,
innocence may not be oppressed.

Christ will bless them, Luke 6.21.
who hunger now for righteousness, for they shall be filled: Matthew. 5.6. and
Matthew. 5.7.
blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, but Iam. 2.13.
there shall be judgment merciless, to him, that shows no mercy.

They are blessed Matthew. 5.6.
who are poor in heart, they Psalm. 24.4.
shall ascend into the Mountain of the Lord, and stand in his holy place, and
they shall see God.

Blessed are the Matthew. 5.9.
peacemakers, that Hebr. 12.14.
follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the which no man shall see
the Lord: Matthew. 5.10.
Blessed are they who suffer persecution for righteousness sake, they have no
cause 1. Pet. 3.14.
to fear their fear, neither to be troubled nor afraid, but to sanctify the
Lord God in their hearts, Isa. 8.13.
to let him be their fear and dread, who will be as a Sanctuary unto them.
Christ will Psalm. 28.9.
save his own people, and bless his inheritance, he will feed also and exalt
them for ever.

Lastly, touching the use of this doctrine. Prou. 10.22
the blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and he does add no sorrows with
it. Let us not content our selves only with earthly benefits, and Worldly
gifts, which without Christ, will be testimonies against us, and Romans 12.20.
coals of fire to burn us.

The men of this World, according to Saint Augustines judgment, are unhappily
happy; that is, in their wealth they are poor, in their health sick, and in
their felicity they are accursed: their Psalm. 69.22.
table is a snare before them, and their prosperity will be their ruin. But
let us desire most earnestly, that with Joseph we may Genesis 49.25.
be blessed, with heavenly blessing from above.

After Achsah had gotten the South country from her father Caleb, she asked
also, saying; Josh. 15.19.
give me a blessing, give me springs of water, and he gave her the springs
above and the springs beneath.

After thou have received temporal gifts from God, ask moreover his
spiritual, and heavenly blessing; which is that Iam. 2.17.
good giving, and that perfect gift from above, coming down from the Father
of lights, Iam. 1.5.
which gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth no man that asks in faith
and humility: yea, let his blessing be so dear to thee, and so desired of
thee, that thou be most willing to wrestle for the same. Take hold of Christ
by sure faith, and say with Jacob, Genesis 32.26.
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, Hos. 12.4.
weep and pray unto him, until he bless thee, then thou shall find, Psa.
115.12.
that he will be mindful of thee, and that Eccle. 11.22
the blessings of the Lord, are the wages of the godly; and that he makes thy
prosperity soon to flourish, and when he Mal. 3.10.
will power thee out a blessing without measure, then justly thou may say,
as the Apostle speaks to another purpose, Phil. 4 18.
Now I have received all, and I have plenty, seeing, I have gotten the
blessing of my Savior.

Declare openly great thank fullness, to thy most loving and kind God, who
Act. 3.26.
raised up his Son Jesus, and has sent him to bless thee, in turning thee
from thine iniquities, and 1. Pet. 3.9.
called thee who should be an heir of blessing. Eccle. 39.35
Therefore praise the Lord, with thy whole heart and mouth, and bless the Name
of the Lord. August.
Si vis benedicere Dominum, fac verbum, fac volunta^em eius. If thou desire to
bless the Lord do his Word, do his Will.

If thou would look diligently to others who blessed God, their example
might be a provocation, and an allurement to thee, or thee, to do the like
duty. Iethro said, Exodus 18.10
Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered his people out of the hand of
Pharaoh, and from under the hands of the Egyptians. Judge. 5.2.
Deborah and Barak praised the Lord for their victory, because the Lord brought
down Iabin the King of Canaan. Luke 19.37.
The whole multitude of the Disciples, did praise God, with a loud voice;
saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord, peace in
Heaven, and glory in the highest places. The servant of Abraham said, Genesis
24.27.
Blessed be the Lord God, who has not withdrawns his mercy, and truth from
my master: he praised God, who prospered the marriage of Isaac with Rebecca.

Seeing those men had just occasion to bless God, even for his benefits
bestowed upon others; have thou not (Christian reader,) greater reason to
bless thy God, for his mercies vouchsafed upon thy own self, and to say with
Zacharias, Luke 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people, and has raised up the horn of salvation to us, and has sent us
deliverance from the hands of our enemies, and from all that hate us, that he
would show mercy toward us, and remember his holy Covenant?

To the end thou may obtain this most joyful blessing, let the Spirit of
Christ rule powerfully in thy heart. August.
Ibi non benedicitur, vbi non dominatur: no blessing there, where Christ has
not the ruling and government.

CHAP. XVII. Christ gives Himself, to be our Husband.
JESUS Christ Nazian. orat. 4. de filio.
in whom all things appear full of mercy, and full of marvel, gives
Himself to be a Husband to his Church; Ephe. 5.27.
That he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.

As those men whom Moses sent to spy out the land of Canaan, had not
sufficient strength, to carry of all the fruits which grew in that fertile
land. But only brought with them, Number. 13.24
a branch with one cluster of Grapes, some of the Pomegranates, and of the
Figs: So neither man, nor Angel is able exactly to declare, what are the
manifold and wonderful benefits, what exceeding good they receive, who get
Christ truly to be the Husband of their souls.

When a Prince gives to his Favorite, David, Psalm. 16.6.
I have a fair heritage.

Christ will marry thee, Hos. 2.19.
unto himself for ever: yea he will marry thee unto himself in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion; he will
even marry thee unto him in faithfulness, and thou shall know thy Lord; he
will then continually Iere. 2.2.
remember thee with the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy marriage;
he will then give to thee more precious Pearls, better raiment, and more
worthy gifts, then was given to Genesis 24.53.
Rebecca, Isaacks wife.

In handling of this matter, The order here observed.
we will keep this order. First, we will speak of the preparation to the
marriage. Secondly, of the marriage it self. Thirdly, of the duties of those
who are married. Fourthly, of the consolations which redound to us, by this
happy marriage.

First, concerning our preparation. Preparation for spiritual matrimony.
As all civil matters of any importance, require due preparation: no great
warre-fare undertaken, no stately building enterprised, no far journey
begun, no notable work performed, no earthly marriage solemnized without
preparation:

I. We should prepare our selves for our heavenly marriage. Man prepares him
self.
First, with true humility, and holy care like Abigail, humble, and 1. Sam.
25.42.
hastening for her marriage with David. Secondly, by putting on Mat. 22.12.
a wedding garment; otherwise we shall be cast into utter darkness. Thirdly,
by forsaking our fathers house with Gen 24.58.
Rebecca. Fourthly, by Ephesians. 6.18.
praying always, with all manner of prayer, and supplication in the spirit,
that we may be rightly prepared, Heb. 3.14.
to be made partakers of Christ: for his Revel. 19.7.
wife will make her self ready.

Rehoboam Salomons son, did 2. Chr. 12.14
evil and foolishly; for he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord, to be
his protector, husband, and master; but happy Iehoshaphat did well and
wisely, who 2. Chr. 19.3
prepared his heart to seek God, exhorting his people to fear God, whom he
worshipped.

II. Pastors prepare people.
The Ministers of Christ, 1. Cor. 3.9.
Gods laborers together with him, the 1. Cor. 4.1.
disposers of his secrets, the Ephesians. 6.20.
Ambassadors of his glorious Gospel, they press also 2. Cor. 11.20.
to prepare the people for one husband, to present them as a pure virgin to
Christ.

Which thing they do, by preaching sincerely, the true word of God, his
undoubted verity, by delivering doctrine containing the person, and office of
Christ; Acts 20.20.
keeping back nothing, that is profitable for the people; witnessing to all,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: and by
refuting of erroneous and impious doctrine, as that first Martyr Steven, so
refuted the Libertines, and Cyrenians with whom he disputed, Acts 6.10.
that they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the spirit by the which he
spoke; Thus did Apollos, Acts 18.28.
who mightily confuted the Jews publicly, with great vehemency, showing by
the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ.

Thus did the Apostle Paul, Acts 9.22.
who confuted the Jews, which dwelt at Damasous, confirming that Jesus was the
Christ. Also Peter, vehemently refuted false teachers, for telling that 2. Pet.
2.12.
they should perish through their own corruption, and should receive the wages
of unrighteousness, to their damnation. Indeed Ministers of the holy Euangel,
should labor earnestly, to be like that Angel, which descended from heaven,
at the time of Christ's resurrection; he did three things: First, Matthew. 28.2.
he rolled back the stone from the door of the Sepulcher: Secondly, for
fear of him, Christ's enemies were afraid: Thirdly, they who loved Christ, were
directed to Galile, where they might see him.

So faithful Pastors should press and pray. 1. That the Ezekiel. 11.19.
stony hearts of their people, may be taken from them, that soft hearts of
flesh may be given unto them, that they Luke 3.4.
may prepare the way of the Lord, to welke in his Statutes, and keep his
judgments. 2. That all stubborn and incorrigible sinners, who Psalm. 25.3.
transgress without cause, who Iere. 17.13.
forsake the Lord, departing from him, may be ashamed and confounded. 3. That
many may be brought to Christ to be saved.

III. Ministers do prepare people by exhorting them, with Peter Acts 2.38.
to repentance, and amendment of life, instructing them in the way of
godliness, that Phil. 1.27.
their conversation may be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ: 4. By
reproouing and threatening them, for their wicked ways; denouncing with Christ,
Luke 13.3.
except they amend their lives, that (as the ungodly) they shall all likewise
perish. 5. By comforting them when they are in trouble, telling them Psalm.
121.2.
that their help comes from the Lord, which has made the heaven and the
earth; that he will not forsake the workmanship of his own hands, whom Psalm.
22.9.
he did draw out of the womb, and whose God he was from their mothers belly;
assuring them, that 2 Cor. 1.5.
as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so also their consolations will
abound through Christ; that Romans 8.28.
all the ways of the Lord, are mercy and truth, unto all such as keep his
Covenant, and that all things work together, for the best unto them that love
God. 6. By praying for their people 1. Sam. 12.23. Praeitque primus quam
indicat a^is viam. (...).
with Samuel, without ceasing. 7, By living a godly life and conversation,
showing the good and right way, by their own example, going before others in
the course of godliness.

Thus the Ministers by doctrine, by refuting of errors, by exhortation,
reprehensions, consolations, prayers, and by good example, do travel to
prepare people for this happy marriage: wherefore they should be honored,
obeyed 1. The. 5.13.
and had in singular love for their works sake, who are Heb 13.17.
watching for our souls, that they all may be saved and joined inseparably
with their Savior. Yet let us remember, that neither the painful labors of
most vigilant and faithful Pastors, neither the continual care and endeavor
of people themselves, will be altogether sufficient for their due preparation
to this heavenly wedlock; but even he Ier. 51.15.
that made the earth by his power, and prepared and established the world by
his wisdom, and has stretched out the heaven by his discretion, he must
principally do this work, and make us ready, for such a blessed matrimony.

And albeit the Pelagians affirmed, that it is in the power of man wholly to
prepare himself to receive Christ and to do according to Gods Law, to fulfill
the same, and so to live here without committing of any sin: Augustine
answers and refuteth them very iudiciously, showing that the Pelagians look
only to one thing in the Scripture, when as they should look to three things;
they look to the commandment alone, but they should consider: 1. The
Commandments: 2. The Reproves: 3. Prayers. The commandment shows, what men
ought to do; the reproof what sin they have committed, or what good is
omitted: the Prayer entreats for mercy, for strength and grace to live
better afterward.

If they object, then the law is given in vain to man, if man's nature furnish
no strength to obey the same.

Answ. The Law is not in vain; for it declares to us what God may require of
us. As an obligation or charges raised thereupon, shows what sum, and how
much money we are indebted in, but gives us no strength to satisfy that debt:
So the Law shows us what is our debt to God, but gives us no power to
satisfy that debt. Also Gal. 3.24.
The Law is our Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith.

But our Master who Ioh. 14.2.
prepares a place for us in his Fathers house, he also prepares us for
himself, and for those heavenly mansions, to be 1. Pet. 3.7.
heirs together of the grace of life, to be Ephesians. 2.19.
citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.

Christ prepares us for this marriage, Ier. 31.31.
by making a new covenant with us; by putting his Law in our inward parts, and
writing it in our hearts, and Eze. 20.37.
by bringing us into the bond of the covenant.

We will briefly here remember: Covenant betwixt Christ and us. 1. The parties.
1. Who are the parties: 2. The qualities of this covenant: 3. The cause
thereof: 4. The confirmation of the same: 5. Of the most comfortable effects
redounding to us thereby.

As for the parties: Christ Psalm. 93.1.
who is clothed with Majesty, and girded with power, whose throne is
established of old, himself being from everlasting, our Psalm. 95.3.
Lord who is a great God and a great King above all Gods, he, the very
foundation and groundworke of the covenant, Mal. 3.1.
Even the Messenger of the covenant whom we desire, and Isa. 49.8.
the covenant of the people to obtain the inheritance; He, even the Lord of
life and Prince of glory, is most willingly content and desirous to make a
covenant with poor and filthy man! Psalm. 144.3.
Lord, what is man that thou regardest him? or the son of man that thou
think upon him? Man is like to vanity, and his days are like a shadow,
that vanish, Job. 11.11.
Thou know the vanity of man and see iniquity, and him that has no
understanding. Lord, Psalm 8.4.
what is man that thou art mindful of him, Qualities of the covenant.
or the son of man that thou visitest him! and that it should please thee to
make such a covenant with him!

2. Which is most sure and most profitable, Psalm. 89.28.
God will keep his mercy for him for evermore, and his covenant shall stand
fast with him. That Ezech. 37.26.
covenant of peace, shall be an Isa. 51.8.
everlasting covenant, not like the covenant of mortal and changeable man: 1.
Kings. 15.20.
Benhadad King of Aram, did break his covenant made with Baasha King of
Israel: But Ier. 31.35.
the Sun that is a light to the day and the course of the Moon, and of the
Stars, which are for a light to the night; These ordinances shall rather be
broken, then the covenant made with the seed of Israel, which shall endure for
ever. That is also most profitable: for if the Gibconites received a great
benefit Ios. 9.15.
By that league which Joshua made with them, namely, Ios 10.
deliverance from many enemies which made war against them, who were
destroyed with an exceeding great slaughter, till they were consumed: and
Liuius. l. 45. and Valerius and alij.
if Ptolemie Philometor King of Egypt was much helped, because he was the
Romans confederate, (for so a dreadful enemy Antiochus Magnus who had entered
Egypt with a puissant army, was removed, and that war was brought to an end
by C. Popilius the Roman Ambassador). Also, if King Solomon was enriched by
virtue of that 1. King. 5.12.
covenant which was between him and Hiram King of Tyrus, whose 1. Kin. 9.27.
servants that were mariners and had knowledge of the sea, went with Salomons
Navy and servants to Ophir. From whence they did fetch gold in great
abundance; moreover his country with stately buildings was beutified, and 1.
King. 9.1.
that brought to him whatsoever he desired: shall not the covenant of Christ be
much more steadable and comfortable for Christians? We by virtue thereof shall
receive: 1. Safety: 2. Plenty: and 3. Beauty. Even, Luke 1.71.
delinerance from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us; Psalm.
144.2.
for he is our goodness, our fortress, our tower and deliverer: plenty and a
Mal. 1.10.
blessing, without measure, Pro. 14.23.
In all our labor their shall be abundance, beauty for our bodies, although
the same be turned into dust and ashes, yet at the last day they shall be
beautiful as the brightness of the firmament, and may Dan. 12.3.
shine as the Stars for ever. Some other commodities of this covenant,
shortly God-willing, shall be specified. Cause of this covenant.


Thirdly, touching the cause thereof; It is not the dignity and perfection of
our nature; for we are but earth and slime, Genesis 18.27.
dust and ashes, we may Job. 39.37.
lay our hands upon our mouth, and confess we are vile creatures. It is not
for our merits or for our righteousness; we have profane hearts, Genesis 6.5.
evil continually by nature, Isa. 6.5.
polluted lips, defiled hands: so that Romans 3.10.
there is none righteous, no not one, we have all gone out of the way, and we
are unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.
But his most tender mercies, his surpassing and unspeakable kindness, and
Ephesians. 1.9.
his good pleasure which he had purposed in him, has moved him to make such a
covenant with us: 2. The. 2.13.
Because from the beginning he has chosen us to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit and faith of truth, and Romans 8.33.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, with whom he has made
this confederacy?

4. Concerning the confirmation thereof, Confirmation of this covenant.
because the corruption of our nature is well known to Christ.

By which it comes to pass, that we give less credence to him, then to
lying men and to Satan, who is Ioh. 8.44.
a liar and the father thereof: therefore our Savior having a respect to our
infirmity, he has given to us his word, even he Reu. 19.11.
who is called faithful and true, has given his word more Mark 13.31.
sure then the heavens, for it 1. Pet. 1.25.
endures for ever, whereby we may be sufficiently confirmed and undoubtedly
assured of the certainty of his covenant. Moreover, he has given to us his
holy Sacraments, which are Seals to strengthen us in the same, and especially
as by Heb. 9.12.
his own blood he has obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.26.
putting away sin by the sacrifice of himself: so Heb. 13.20.
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, we may be most certainly
persuaded, that the league which he makes with us, will be for ever
established, even 1. Pet. 1.2.
through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.24.
that speaks better things then that of Abel.

Indeed the Grecians, Liuius. Suid. Polid. Virg. and alij.
Romans, and Arabians desired their covenants made with men, to be ratified by
the blood of beasts, by wine, and sundry other Ceremonies which at large are
recorded in Histories. But Christians forsaking such fantasies should most
willingly content themselves, with this most sure confirmation, which is
purchased Act. 20.28.
by the virtue and vigor of the blood of God, and the working of his Spirit.

Lastly, Effects of this covenant.
many and comfortable are the effects of this covenant. When 2. Chro. 20.35.
Iehoshaphat King of Judah did join himself with Ahaziah King of Israel who
was given to do evil, no profit nor commodity followed to him thereupon,
for his ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish: But the
matter is otherways, when we are joined with Christ Jesus, that conjunction
will never be for our hurt or detriment, but thereby we shall receive great good
and profit. Seeing God in Christ his Math. 3.17.
beloved Son is well pleased, therefore he 1. These. 5.9.
has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation, by the means of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. The. 1.10.
which delivers us from the wrath to come, so that we shall not be Romans 9.22.
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction.

Moreover, Col. 1.20.
it pleased the Father, by Christ to reconcile all things unto himself, even
strangers and enemies has he now reconciled unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19.
not imputing our sins to us. Furthermore, he will purge Ephesians. 5.26.
and cleanse us by the washing of water through the Word, yea he will Reu. 1.5.
wash us from our sins in his own blood: also he will Ezech. 16. Verse.
10.11.13.
cloth us with broidered work, and cover us with fine linen and silk, and
deck us with gold and ornaments, so that we shall become through his goodness
very beautiful, through that beauty that God has set upon us. 1. Sam. 18.3.
That covenant between Jonathan and David, redounded to the welfare of David,
who thereby was apparelled and armed, 1. Sam. 19.2.
advertised, delivered and comforted: 1. Sam. 20.4.
But we shall be better apparelled, more surely armed, even with Romans 13.12.
the armor of light, more frequently advertised, more powerfully delivered,
and more joyfully comforted by the strength and power of the covenant, which
Christ makes with us, who requires on our part lively and justifying faith,
Gal. 5.6.
working by love, which all men have not, but only 2. These. 3.2.
Gods Elect who have that knowledge of the truth which is according to
godliness.

Now we are to consider in the next place of this happy marriage. Surely, Of
the marriage between Christ and the Church.
by diligent meditation thereof, my heart fails within my breast, my tongue
faultereth within my mouth, abundance of tears falls from my eyes, all the
powers of my soul are astonished, and all the members of my body are suspended
from their own functions. Almighty God, King of glory, let it please thy
Majesty to tell thy poor servant, what saw thy wisdom and holiness in us,
that moved thee to enter into such a society with us. Indeed Jacob had a
respect to Rachels beauty, for she Genesis 29.17.
was beautiful and fair. Othniel had a respect to Achsahs riches, for she
obtained Ios. 15.19.
a Sauth country and springs of water. Boaz had a respect to the goodness of
Ruth, for Ruth. 3.11.
she was a virtuous woman. David had a respect to Michals nobility, for she
1. Sam. 18.23.
was a Kings daughter, and to Abigails wisdom and humility, who 1. Sa^.
25.33.
kept him from shedding of blood. Every one of these men had some reasons for
their marriage with such worthy personages: but Lord, thou saw no cause in
us, which might allure thee to regard us, no comeliness or beauty, but
deformity by nature, Nah. 2.10.
All our faces gathering blackenesse, no treasure nor riches but poverty and
nakedness, For Eze. 16.7.
we were naked and bare, no virtue nor goodness, but disloyalty and
wickedness, for we Tit. 3.3.
were in time past, disobedient, deceived, living in envy and maliciousness;
no Gentry nor Nobility, but contempt and baseness, Job. 17.14.
corruption being our father, the worm being our mother and sister, no
wisdom nor humility, but pride and foolishness; for we who are Tit. 3.3.
unwise, Neh. 9.16.
have behaved our selves proudly, and have hardened our necks, so that we have
not harkned to Christ's commandments: Yet this has been the good pleasure of
thee our blessed Savior, to join thy self unseparably with us, and of thy
pure bounty and grace without any of our deseruings, to give thy self unto
us, that thou may enrich us with great and excellent benefits.

Let Ier. 2.12.
the heavens be astonished at this (not at man's unkindness only, but at the
Lords kindness) let the holy Angels admire this, having Exo. 25.20.
their faces toward the true Propitiatory, let all the world wonder at so
rare goodness, let Psa. 103.21.
all his servants that do his pleasure praise the Lord, for so rich mercy and
great mystery. There are sundry sorts of mysteries recorded in the holy
scriptures; as the Math. 13.11.
mysteries or secrets of the kingdom of heaven which are reueiled unto Christ's
disciples, Romans 16.25
the mystery which was kept secret since the world began, namly the Gospel and
preaching of Jesus Christ reueiled by himself and his Apostles; the 1. Cor.
15.5.
mystery concerning the estate of people at Christ's second coming; with some
others: but there is mention made only of two great mysteries, one in the
personal conjunction of the natures in Christ 1. Tim. 3.16.
which is God manifested in the flesh, a great mystery; another in the
spiritual bond of the Church with her head Christ, Ephesians. 5.31. Points to be
entreated. The necessity of marriage. August. Lib. de Virg Be. mar.
they twain shall be one flesh: This is also a great mystery, which may make
the wisest to be ravished in the spirit with great love and admiration.

In handling of this marriage, we will declare. 1. the necessity thereof: 2.
of the similitude between heavenly and civil marriage: 3. of the
dissimilitude: 4. of some properties of our husband.

1. Concerning the necessity thereof, if natural or civil marriage (which is
a lawful society or conjunction between man and woman, in the which with a
like consent, the one ought himself to the other) be expedient and needful,
according to the saying of God himself: Genesis 2.18.
It is not good that the man should be himself alone, and an ancient thus
speaks: Qui sine vxore est quasi sieve domo sit; Sicut enim vir publicis
officiis, ita mulier domesticis ministeriis habitior habetur: Ambrose.
who wants a wife let him be as if he wanted an house; for like as a man is
more able for public affairs, so is the woman for household matters. Also the
gentiles (especially the Lacedaemonians, Plutar. in Lacon. Xenoph. Hist. grae.
Lib. 4.
did so esteem of marriage, that they noted with a mark of ignominy, those
men who abhorred the same, and ordained that the honor and reverence due to
aged men, should be denied to those, who did not augment the number of the
Citizens in the estate of marriage. Wherefore, when Dorcillidaes a worthy and
valiant Captain, and profitable for the commonweal had reproved a young man
for that he did not rise and give place to him (according to the custom of
Sparta) Albeit he thus answered neither have thou begotten any to give place to
me, yet that young man for such an answer to his elder and superior, was
neither challenged nor punished. But there is an absolute necessity of this
spiritual marriage, without the which Ioh. 13.8.
we shall have no part with Christ, no communion nor fellowship with him, and
we Hos. 2.3.
shall be stripped naked and made as a wilderness, like a dry land, slain for
thirst: But by virtue thereof, we shall have undoubted right and interest to
Christ himself, to his benefits here, and to all the joys and pleasures of
the kingdom of heaven for ever. He shall be come our most plentiful Psalm.
142.5.
portion in the land of the living, Math. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall not overcome us, nothing rm. 8.39.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord; who shall be to us a most pleasant and profitable storehouse of all
felicity and happiness.

2. There is an agreement or similitude between Heavenly and civil marriage:
1. In that one and the same God is the ordainer of them both: Again, for one
spiritual end, for procreation and propagation naturally and spiritually,
Psalm. 128.3.
that children like the olive plants may be seen round about the table, and
Isa. 66.8.
that Zion may bring forth her children, that a nation may be borne at once.
Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such a thing?

3. There is a difference in this. In civil marriage, The woman was appointed
Genesis 2.18.
to be an help for man, even an help of piety, 1. Pet. 3.1.
that some may be won to Christ by the pure conversation of wifes: (...).
Arist. Ethic. cap. 1. etc. 12.
2. An help of society to bear him company in his life; for it is not good
that man who is a loving creature, desirous of friendship, and sociable, should
be himself alone. Eccl. 4.9.
Two are better then one: woe to him that is alone, for he falls, and there
is not a second to lift him up: 3. An help of government of the family, 1.
Tim. 5.14.
To govern the house, for a virtuous woman Pro. 31.12.
will do good and not evil to her husband, she will ouer-see the ways of
her household, and not eat the bread of idleness. 4. An help of his
infirmity, that he may be kept from his uncleanness, and unlawful love,
that 1. Cor. 7.2.
he may avoid fornication.

But Christ who is God all-sufficient, has no need at all of the help of any
man. If he were Psalm. 50.12.
hungry he would not tell us; for the World is his, and all that therein is.

4. Many are the good properties of this blessed husband, who of his own
accord, and good pleasure, having no need, marries the Church to himself;
such as strength, diligence, riches, beauty, wisdom, patience, constancy,
and nobility. First, strength, stronger then Samson, Psalm. 72.12.
to deliver the poor when he cries, and the needy that has no helper.
Secondly, diligence, and vigilancie; more diligent then Jacob, for Isa. 65.24.
he will answer before we call, and will hear whiles we speak. Thirdly, he
is more rich then Boas, for he is Ephesians. 2.4.
rich in mercy, and 1. Sam. 2.7.
makes rich, whom he pleases. Fourthly, he is Psalm. 45.2.
fairer then the children of men, grace is powered in his lips; he is most
mighty, to prosper with his worship and glory, Cant. 5. verse. 10, 11, 12, 16.
he is white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand; he is wholly
dilectable, his head is fine Gold, his eyes like Doves, his cheeks as a bed of
Spices, and as sweet Flowers, his lips like Lillies, dropping down pure
Mirrhe; his mouth as sweet things, his countenance as Lebanon, excellent as
the Ceders. Fifthly, wiser then Solomon, for he is Reave. 5.12.
worthy to receive power, riches, and wisdom, and honor, and glory. Sixthly,
more patient then Job, for he is a Revel. 15.5.
God of patience, and consolation, Isa. 42.14.
who for a long time has been still, and refrained himself, Psalm. 103.10
who has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. Seventhly, our husband is more constant then Ashuerosh; his wife
was divorced from, and Est. 1.19.
not suffered to come before him; Deuteronomy. 24.3.
Christ will never write a letter of diuorcement against his beloved, Hos. 2.19.
whom he will marry to himself for ever. Eighthly, he is most noble, that 1.
Tim. 6.15
blessed Prince, only King of kings, and Lord of lords, who is the Luke 3.38.
son of Adam, and also the Son of God.

Yet notwithstanding, of so many and so good properties; he is well content,
August. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 1.
and consents to give himself to be our husband, even he who is omni
voluptate dulcior, omni luce clarior, omni honor sublimior; more sweet then
all pleasure, more bright then all light, more high then all honor, will
accept of us to be his Spouse, and call us to the participation, of all his
treasures, and solemnize this happy marriage with us, to the which God the
Father gives also his consent; John 3.16.
who so loves the World, that he has given his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; 2.
Cor. 9.15
thanks therefore be unto God, for his unspeakable gift.

Truly we our selves, have more then reason, most willingly with all our
hearts, to give our consent and approbation to this marriage, and to embrace
most lovingly, and humbly this condition. Genesis 24.58.
Rebecca readily consented to be Isaacs wife; so 1. Sam. 25.42.
Abigail arose and hasted to be David's wife: shall not we most joyfully,
consent to be the Spouse of Jesus Christ, the King of all glory, the giver of
all felicity?

Because he most exactly performs to his Church all the duties belonging to
a good husband, Duties of an husband
which are seven: 1. To love us: 2. To teach us: 3. To furnish needful things
unto us: 4. To defend us: 5. To bear with our infirmities: 6. To comfort us in
time of trouble: 7. Oftentimes to visit us, and to dwell with us.

First, Christ Hos. 14.5.
will love us freely, and turn away his anger from us. Secondly, when his
Spouse Cant. 8.2.
will bring him to her mothers house, then he will teach her. If Eliha said to
Job, Job 33.33.
hear me, and I will teach thee wisdom; may not our husband rather say to
us; hear me, and I will teach ye wisdom? he Psalm. 71.17.
who has taught us from our youth, even until now; he will also instruct us
unto our old age, and gray head, never forsaking us. Thirdly, he who suffered
his Disciples, to Luke 22.35.
lack nothing that was needful for them: Deuteronomy. 8.3.
who fed his people with Manna in the unfruitful Wilderness; Psalm. 78.15.
who in that great and terrible desert, claue the Rocks, and gave them drink
as out of the great deepes, yea, not only Isa. 48.21.
he caused the waters to gush out, and to flow from the Rock for the thirslie,
but also would have Psalm. 81.16.
sufficed them with Honey out of the Rock; who may make Mat. 17.27.
fish to furnish money to his own; who may cause, that the Deuteronomy. 29.5.
clothes of his servants, and their shoes wax not old, in the space of
forty years; See the History of the Roman Emperors Englished by Traheron.
who may make an infinite quantity of wool, so perfect as the most fine
wool, that the Sheep bears, to rain from heaven, like as at other times it
uses to snow; which he did in the days of Valentinianus the first, (if it be
true as Saint Jerome writes,) who may command the 1. Kin. 17.6.
Ravens (against their nature) for to bring bread and flesh, even daily, for
the sustenance of his beloved; Isa. 59.1.
whose hand is never shortened; whose love is never changed; whose power is
never diminished; whose treasure of mercy is never exhausted. Seeing our
Savior is Mat. 6.26.
careful for the fowls of the air, that do not sow, neither reap, nor
carry into the barnes, that he feeds them; and seeing he regards the
flowers and grass of the field, that do not labor neither spin, yet most
beautifully he cloatheth and arrayeth them; which are growing pleasantly one
day, and on the morrow, are cast into the Oven: are not his own Saints better
then they? Will he not do much more for them, who depend upon his providence?

Fourthly, Christ will save and defend his Spouse whom he enricheth. If Judge.
3.31.
Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistimes six hundredth men,
with an Ox good, saved Israel: shall not our Savior destroy our enemies, and
preserve his own Church? Surely Psalm. 17.8.
he will keep her as the apple of his eye, and hide her under the shadow of
his wings, and Isa. 51.16.
defend her in the shadow of his hand: for he who is most loving, he is ever
present with her, and also most powerful.

Albeit, David was not ever present with Abigail, to save her from the
Amalckites, (for in his absence, 1. Sam. 30.5 Curt. Iusti. Plutar.
she was taken prisoner, and albeit, Darius was not powerful enough to save
his wife, from the force of that great Conqueror; yet Jesus Christ is always
present, and most powerful, he Zach. 9.15.
who is the Lord of hosts, shall defend his own Spouse, and preserve her
continually.

Fifthly, he Isa. 42.14.
who has been still, and refrained himself, who is slow to anger, albeit he
Nah. 1.3.
be great in power, Psalm. 103.14
he knows whereof we be made, whowill bear his own people, as a man
does bear his son, and who will Isa. 63.9.
carry them always continually, Hos. 11.3.
in his arms, he will also bear with their infirmities, and suffer the
imperfections of his own beloved, he will never cast her off, nor give her a
bill of diuorcement. See Traheron, in the lives of the Emperors with many
others.
Marcus Aurelius patiently endured the misbehauiour, and undutifulness of his
wife Faustina; who was (as all writers affirm) very dishonest, and
vnmeasurably dissolute; he would not put her away, nor divorce himself from
her; and for some reason which he confesses, because he received with her the
Roman Empire, that was the Dowry of their Marriage: But what reason has Jesus
Christ in our spiritual Matrimony, so often to suffer our infidelity, and
unthankfulness, that when as we intend to go after other lovers, yet Hos.
2.6.
he will stop our way with thorns, and make a hedge, that we shall not find
our paths; and to incline our hearts, to return to our first husband? This is
for no good which he receives of us; for we of our selves are Ezech. 16.6.
contemptible, weak, filthy, and poor miserable wretches; but it proceeds
of his admirable goodness, and most tender compassions; he will Ephesians. 5.30.
make us members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, then nourish,
cherish, and suffer us; yea, he will give honor to us, as unto 1. Pet. 3.7.
the weaker vessels.

Sixthly, he will then comfort his own Church. Shall Ruth. 2.13.
Boaz comfort Ruth? Shall 1. Sam. 18.
Elcanah comfort Hannah? Shall 2. Sam. 12.24.
David comfort Bersheba? And shall not Christ rather minister joy, and
consolation to his own Spouse? Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our
God, which has 2. These. 2 16
loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace always, will comfort our hearts, and establish us in every word, and
good work: Petrarch. lib. 4. Epist. 60. de reb. fam.
The consolations given by Christ, are not like those consolations, which the
Ambassadors of Ilium or Troy, delivered to Tiberius: these were untimely and
too late, long after the decease of his son; therefore justly in his answer
he mocked them, saying; that he was sorrowful for their sakes, because they
had lost a worthy Citizen, Hector.

While Christ is our comforter, he is not like Jobs friends, who Job 16.2.
all were miserable Comforters to him, but most truly he Psalm. 71.21.
will return and comfort us, and most sufficiently; for his Psa. 119.76.
tender and sufficient mercies, according to his promise will comfort his own
servants. Isa. 49.13.
Rejoice, O Heavens, and be joyful, O Earth, burst forth into praise, O
Mountains; for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his
afflicted.

Seauenthly, He will not only behold and visit us; Psalm. 80.15.
as the vineyard, that his own right hand has planted, Psalm. 106.4.
but also he will visit us with his salvation, and Ephesians 3.17.
dwell in our hearts by faith.

And if God Genesis 39.5.
blessed Potiphar the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, who dwelt therein, will
he not bless that heart wherein Christ dwells? Now Christ dwells with his
Spouse continually, Heb. 13.5.
He will not fail her nor forsake her eternally: Isa. 54.8.
if for a moment and a little season he hide his face from her, yet he will
return, and with everlasting mercy have compassion on her, performing
perfitely all the duties of a most dutiful and kind husband.

But let us with all diligence endeavor, Duties of Christ's Spouse.
faithfully to observe and to do the duties belonging to our selves, which are
diverse: 1. Col. 2.18.
To submit our selves to our Lord, 1. Pet. 5.6.
humbling our selves under his mighty hand that he may exalt us in due time:
2. To Psalm. 45.10.
forget our fathers house, Romans 12.2.
not to fashion our selves like unto this world. If for the love of Jacob,
Rahel and Leah, said, Genesis 31.12.
that they had no more portion nor inheritance in their father Labans house,
seeing he did commit them as strangers: Should we not far rather for the
love of Jesus, be 1 Pet. 2.11.
as strangers and pilgrims: seeing Heb. 13.14.
we have no continuing City, think that we have no sure portion nor heritage
here in this world, whereof Satan is called (in respect of the reprobate) Ioh.
14.30.
The Prince, accounting us strangers and enemies? therefore for Christ sake we
ought to be content to contemn and forsake this present world.

Themistocles the Athenian, Plutarch. in grae. Apoth. Cicero lib. 2. de Orat.
desired to learn the art of oblivion, because he remembered those things which
he would not, and could not forget the things he wished to forget: Christians
also should wish to learn the art of oblivion, to forget the evil fashions of
this evil world, and with the Apostle Phil. 3.13.
to forget that which is behind, and endeavor themselves unto that which is
before.

It is certain, as the servant of Christ Saint Paul, lamented for that he did
not the good thing he would, but that Romans 7.19.
he did the evil, which he would not; so Christians remember the things,
which they desire to forget, namely, sin, and wrongs done to them, and with
lamentation, forget many good instructions, which they would feign keep in
mind: and before they learn to remember, and practice their spiritual
husbands lessons, they must first learn to forget the errors of sin and
Satan, Ioh. 3.14.
in whom there is no truth, who is a liar, and the father thereof.

3. As the captive woman whom an Israelite was of purpose to marry, behooved
Deuteronomy 21.13
to put off the garment, that she was taken in, and remain in her husbands
house; so the Spouse of Christ must cast off the filthy and dishonest garments
of nature and be arrayed with pure Reu. 19.8.
fine linen and shining, which is the righteousness of the Saints, ever
remaining in her husbands house.

4. When we remain in his house, we should behave our selves reverently in his
presence, as Genesis 24.65.
Rebecca did before Isaac, obeying and honoring him dutifully, as 1. Pet. 3.6.
Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord or Master; yea the Ethnic women, as
Lucretia, so spoke of their husbands, calling them Lords.

This obedient humility and humble obedience is most pleasant and acceptable to
our most worthy and blessed husband, Ovid. Mittenda est domino (nunc properate
puellae) Quam primum nostra facta Lucerna manu.
and of greatest force to win him and to obtain his comfortable favor: for
according to the saying of wise Solomon, Pro. 29.23. Dion. in Tib.
the humble in spirit shall receive glory: And no marvel, seeing they enjoy
him, who is the giver of all glory. And as Liuia Aug. Caesar's wife, being
asked, by what means she could so purchase the affection of her husband, as
it were to subdue him, who subdued the whole world. She answers, that with
great humility, and modesty, and because she did gladly those things, which
she knew was pleasant to him: she did procure his favor and affection. So to
obtain the love of Christ, the best means which we can use, is 1. Pet. 5.5.
to deck our souls inwardly, in lowliness of mind, and to 2. Cor. 29.
be obedient to him in all things, which he requires of us.

5. Christ's Spouse should not receive wicked strangers, Arist. 2. Occu.
contrary to his command, nor his enemies within his lodging: for (as that
natural Philosopher shows) no woman should do so, Prou. 14.10.
The stranger should not meddle with his joy.

The holy Prophet accounted that to be a great detriment, Ier. 5.5.
A reproach and shame to the Lords people, when strangers came into the
Sanctuary of the Lords House: Is it not a greater hurt, and greater shame to
the Spouse of Christ, if strangers shall enter into his tabernecle, into the
heart which should be Christ's dwelling place?

When David received 2. Sam. 12.11.
that stranger which came to him, then he sinned hainously against his God,
and did great wrong to his neighbor. When any shall receive a stranger, even
vile lust and sinful affections within their hearts, then they do commit
great iniquity against their husband, and sin against their own souls:
Far less should we admit our husbands enemies, and betray him, Occurrent
multae tibi. Belides atque Eriphila lib. Saty. 6. Petrar. Dial. and 19.
Plutarch.
who so loves us. Eriphile was punished, and is blamed for betraying her
husband Amphiarans: And Helene for her falsehood and wickedness against
Deiphobus, was greatly abhorred: what vengeance and infamy deserve they, who
receive Christ's enemy, by whose help Heb. 6.6.
they would crucify again to themselves, the Son of God, and make a mock
of him? Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon their souls, they shall be punished
with everlasting damnation.

Now seeing that Dragon the devil, who fights against Christ in his members,
has Reu. 12.8.
no place for him in the heaven; neither let him have any place in our hearts,
that he may remain in them, we should never suffer him to get entry, or to
make residence within our souls.

6. Christ's Spouse should know her husbands good conditions, his notable
virtues, and endeavor to be endued with them, that she may practice them. Let
us follow him in piety, Math. 26.39
in obeying God, Luk 11.1.
and praying to his Majesty, in his Luke 2.51.
subjection to his parents and superiors: Let us learn of him Math. 11.29.
humility and meekness, long-suffering and patience, 2. Pet. 3.9.
who is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would have all
men to come to repentance: Let us learn of our husband gentleness, love, and
temperance, with many good qualities, whereby we may be assured that Gal. 5.24.
we are Christ's, when we have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

7. 1. These. 4 3.
This is the will of God, even our sanctification, that we may abstain from
fornication, that every one of us, should know to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor, we ought to behave our selves honestly, and live chastely,
keeping faith and truth unto him, laboring by all means possible to pleasure
him, and to do the rest of the duties belonging to our calling.

We should not be given to spiritual whooredome, Genesis 39.7.
as Potiphars wife was bent to adultery; neither should we despise our
husband, as Michal despised David in her heart, neither should we tempt our
husband, as Job 2 9.
Jobs wife tempted him; for those, Number. 21.6. 1. Cor. 10.5.
who tempted Christ, were destroyed of Serpents, neither should we forsake our
husband, as Samsons wife did, wherefore she Iud. 15.6.
was burnt with fire. But we most lovingly and constantly, should cleave to our
husband, keeping our hearts to him, who is greatly Eze. 6.9.
grieved for the whoorish hearts of hypocrites, ever endeavoring to behave our
selves dutifully, as his faithful Spouse, living honestly, 1. These. 5.22
abstaining from all appearance of evil, carefully, let us (I say again) not
be lascivious and wanton like Genesis 39.7.
Potiphars wife, neither troublesome nor tempting like Job. 2.9.
Jobs wife, nor yet proud and despising 2. Sam. 6.16.
like David's wife, neither changeable and unconstant like Samsons wife, who for
forsaking her own husband Iud. 15.16.
was burnt with fire by her own people.

But let us 2. Tim. 2.15 Consolation proceeding from this marriage.
study to show our selves approved unto our God and husband, laboring by our
chaste and honest behauour, by our modest and comely carriage, principally to
please him, in whom his Father is well pleased, rejoicing inseperable to be
conjoined with him, who is the giver of all happiness and salvation.

Fourthly, we may have strong consolation, by this firm conjunction, and
happy marriage, with our glorious husband, for first, he will Ephesians. 5. Verse.
26.27.
Sanctify us, and cleanse us by the washing of water through the word, that he
may make us unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle or any
such thing, but that we should be holy, and without blame: And by virtue of
this conjunction or mystical and spiritual union, Christ 2 Cor. 5.21.
which knew no sin, has received our sins with the punishment thereof,
made his by application or imputation, also he received our afflictions with
all the miseries of this life, which he accounted his own, and therefore as it
were, does put under his shoulders to bear the burden of them.

As when Luke. 23.26.
Simon the Cyrenian did bear Christ's material cross, even then Christ
himself did Ioh. 19.17.
bear the heauiest part thereof, unto the place of execution: When Paul before
his conversion Gal. 1.13.
persecuted his Church extremely and wastes it, Christ he accounted that
injury done to himself, Act. 9.4. Theod. 5. cap. 19.
saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Good Theodosius the first, was
very angry against the people of Antiochia, for some small indignity done to
his Empress, for overthrowing of the brazen Protraite of his beloved Placilla:
Christ will be more justly offended and surely avenged upon those, who shall
preserve to do any wrong or indignity to his best beloved Spouse; for he
esteems all her miseries to be his own refreshing, He in the mean season
most lovingly, and punishing her foes and her oppressors most rigorously.

Again, when we are joined and united unto him, 1. Cor. 1.30.
he will be unto us wisdom Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; he
will be our portion, our pleasure, our protection, and Psalm. 65.5.
the God of our consolation, renewing us according to his glorious image,
giving himself and all his benefits most freely unto us.

Has not every one of us just occasion, to say with David, Psalm. 116.12.
Bernard. de diligendo Deo.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? And with
that Father, Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto hoc
modo? nec enim tam facile refectus quam factus. In primo opere me mihi dedit,
in secundo se et mihi dedit, meque mihi reddidit; datus ergo et redditus me pro
me debeo. Sed quid Domino pro se retribuam? Nam etsi me millies rependere
possum, quid sumus ad Dominum meum? If I ought my self whole for my self
being made, what shall I ad for my self renewed, and made again in this
manner? for I am not so easily renewed as made. In the first work he gave me
to my self; In the second he gave himself to me, and restored me to my self:
being then given and restored; I owe my self for my self; and I am twice
owing: But what shall I render to my Lord for himself? for albeit I might
repay my self a thousand times, what am I in respect of my Lord?

Truly, his Spouse should Psalm. 9.1.
praise the Lord with her whole heart, and speak of all his marvelous, and
merciful works, She may be glad and rejoice in him, singing praise to his
name. Mordecai (questionless) was joyful, Ester 2.17.
When Ashuerus became an husband to Ester: May not thou be more joyful,
(when Jesus becomes the husband of thy soul) when thou shall find grace and
favor in his sight, when he shall see the crown of the Kingdom upon thy
head, and bestow eternal felicity upon thee for ever?

CHAP. XVIII. We should desire Christ, and wait for Him.
THE diligent rememberance and consideration of those things already delivered,
may move the attentive Reader: 1. To desire Christ earnestly, and to wait for
him patiently: 2. To come to him speedily, and to follow him constantly: 3. To
receive him readily, and to entertain him most joyfully.

The faithful soul being fully assured Cant. 7.10.
that she is her beloueds, and that his disire is toward her, will be easily
persuaded, yea lovingly constrained, openly to protest, that Isa. 26.8.
the desire of her soul is to his name and to the rememberance of him; Also to
say, Job 7.2.
As a servant longs for the shadow, and as a hireling looks for the end of
his work, even so she longs for her Savior, looking for, and 2. Tim. 4.8.
loving his appearing. Also Psalm. 42.1.
as the heart braieth for the rivers of water, so her soul Psalm. 63.1.
panted after her God, her soul thirsts for the living God, her flesh
longs greatly after him in a barren and dry land. If Genesis 31 30.
Iaacob longed greatly after his fathers house, should not we long earnestly
after Jesus our elder brother, who is gone John 14.2.
to prepare a place for us in our heavenly Fathers house?

If we shall call to mind: 1. His excellency: 2. Our necessity, we shall be
soon induced to this duty.

1. Job 37.23
He is excellent in power and judgment, and abundant in justice; Psalm. 8.9.
how excellent is his Name in all the world? He will be Ezekiel. 38.23.
magnified, and sanctified, and known in the eyes of many nations, and be much
desired of all who know his preciousnesse and perfection.

Again, we have very great need of him: Christ our high Priest for our
reconciliation.
First, for our reconciliation: Secondly, for our good government: Thirdly, for
our instruction: Fourthly, for our health and welfare. Wherefore we have
great cause to desire him.

1. There is no reconciliation without Christ, because there is no
reconciliation, where there is no remission, purgation, and remoouing of sin,
which makes us Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath, and enemies to God: no remission without Christ, for Act.
13.38.
through him forgiveness of sins is purchased, and preached unto us, and
Hebr. 9 22.
without shedding of blood is no remission, neither is this remission, Hebr.
9.12.
by the blood of Goats, Calves, or of Bulls, but Act. 20 28.
by the blood of Christ, whereby the Church is purchased, sins are remitted,
the godly are purged, and eternal Redemption is obtained: So if we desire
reconciliation with our God, let us thirst for Christ, who Ephesians. 2.14.
is our peace, and reconciliation, and has broken the stop of the particion
wall, by whom we are wonderfully benefited.

If the people of Antiochia, was much benefited by the earnest travels of their
Bishop Flauianus, Sozin. lib. 7. cap. 23.
for thereby the wrath of the Emperor Theodosius the first was mittigated,
their fault was pardoned, and their City preserved, and their Master
reconciled: Are we not more helped by the travels, by the obedience,
sufferings, death, and intercession of our LORD Jesus, Heb. 7.24.
who has an everlasting Priesthood, being Hebr. 8.1.
such an high Priest, that sits at the right hand, of the throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, 1. John 2.1.
that is an Advocate with the Father, and Romans 8.34.
makes request for us; by whom we are truly reconciled with God, and surely
preserved from evil?

We read, that Michah a man of Mount Ephraim, was joyful and well content,
when he said; Judge. 17.13.
Now I know that the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuite to my
Priest: We may be much more joyful, and far better content; having Jesus
to be our high Priest: then we may be firmly persuaded, that God will be
good unto us.

2. Christ our King, for our government.
We should desire him for our government, Isa. 48.17.
that he may lead us the way, which we should go: Isa. 49.10.
he that has compassion upon us, shall lead us, and rule over us. Now this is
most certain; that every man must either have Christ to be his King, Iere.
23.5.
who shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth; who is Matthew. 21.5.
meek and loving to him, or else Satan, who albeit, 2. Cor. 11.14
he be transformed into an Angel of light, yet he is a Ephesians. 6.12.
Prince of darkness, and spiritual wickedness; who being worse then 2. Mac.
4.25.
Menelaus, does bear the stomach of a cruel Tyrant, and the wrath of a wild
beast; and more crafty then that Luke 13.32.
fox Herod, most intentive and diligent, to Reave. 13.14.
deceive and destroy; seeing his name is Appollyon, even destroying.

And surely Satan, may be justly compared to Nabis, and to Domitianus. Satan a
cruel Tyrant, like Nabis.
Nabis that Tyrant of Lacedemon, was a cruel Oppressor, and a greedy
Extortioner upon those that lived under him, and one that of his natural
condition smelt rankely, of a Layman; he had a wife Apega, very fitly matched
with him, as cunning as he himself to exhaust the Subjects: His dexterity
was no greater in spoiling the men, then hers was in fleecing their wives; whom
she would never suffer to be at quiet, till she had obtained their Jewels
and best raiment: Her husband was well content with her fashions, Read the
fifth book, of the History of the World. chap. 4. Sect. 10.
caused an Image to be made very like unto her, and lively representing her
visage, and apparrelled it with such costly garments, as she used to wear;
but it was indeed, an engine serving to torment men. Hereof he made use, when
he meant to try the force of his Rethoricke; for calling unto him some rich
men, (of whose money he was desirous) he would bring him to the place, Polyb.
where this counterfeite Apega remained; and here he used all his art of
persuasion, to get what he desired, as it were by goodwill; yet he could not
so speed, but was answered with excuses; at last, he took the refructarie
Denier by the hand, and told him that perhaps his wife Apega who sat near by
in a chair, could persuade him more effectually: So he led him to the Image
that rose up, and opened her arms as it were for imbracement; those arms were
full of sharp iron nails, the like whereof was also sticking in the breast,
though hidden with her clothes; and here-with she grasped the poor wretch,
to the pleasure of the cruel Tyrant, that laughed at his painful death.

So Satan a merciless tyrant, and an infernal King, troubling and Act. 10.38.
oppressing many, endeavoring most carefully to take away from us, that Reu.
3.18.
Gold which Christ gave unto us: I mean the graces of his Spirit, true faith
1. Pet. 1.7.
being much more precious then gold, repentance, fear and holy love, also to
bereave us of his blessed word, which is Psalm. 19.10.
more to be desired then much fine gold. As Antiochus discharged the Jews; 1.
Mich. 1.60.
The Book of the Lords Testament, upon pain of death; So Satan forbids the
Lords Law, to be fulfilled by his.

Antiochus his 1. Mich. 1.67.
Tyranny was very sore upon the people of Israel, but Satan's tyranny is much
more sore, grievous, and miserable.

He uses the help of the world also to this effect, which appearing lovingly
to embrace us, will torment and annoy us. Albeit the work 1. Ioh. 2.17.
passes away suddenly, yet it waxes grievously, and destroys certainly, all
of it is, Eccl. 1.14.
vanity and vexation of the spirit. Christ's 2. Tim. 2.4.
soldier, as he should not entangle himself with the affairs of this life;
neither should he be deceived with the pleasures thereof, because Iam. 4.4.
the amity of the world is the inimitie of God, and so the woe and misery of
man.

And as Domitianus the twelfth Roman Emperor, was a crafty dissembler; The
Devil dissembling like Domitian. See Traheron in the life of Domitian.
for some of those whom he purposed to put to death upon the next day, he
entertained ouernight in his chamber, and showed them many favors with a
cheerful countenance: So the devil is a most crafty deceiuer; His vassals
whom he appears to entertain most kindly, those he intends to overthrow
most cruelly.

The adversaries of Judah, were false and fained when they pretended
friendship, and offered their assistance to Zorubbabel, saying, Ezra 4.2.
We will build with you; they had a purpose in the mean time to hinder the
building: So Satan when with Genesis 4.8.
Cain he speaks most friendly, he seeks occasion to destroy most suddenly
that soul with whom he is familiar: 1. We should be then most weary and
sorrowful to remain slaves under the tyranny of such an oppressor and
deceiuer: We should thirst to be governed by Christ, who is most loving and
liberal, and our blessed Savior: Let us not Isa. 8.6.
refuse the waters of Shiloah, that run softly, Zach. 9.9.
least the waters of the river, great and mighty, come up to the neck and
ouerflowe us: let us not refuse Christ to be our King, a just and Math. 21.5.
meek King, least we be subject to an unrighteous and merciless tyrant, even
Satan, whom we shall be compelled to Isa. 8.21.
curse in the end, fretting our selves being hungry and grieved, but we
should earnestly wish and long for our Savior, who will govern us here, and
surely 2. Tim. 4.18
preserve unto his heavenly Kingdom.

3. He is also to be desired for our instruction, seeing Ioh. 3.2.
He is that Teacher come from God, who Psalm 86.11.
will teach us his way, that we may walk in his truth, knitting our hearts to
him that we may fear his name, we shall 1. Ioh. 2.27.
receive from him that anointing which is true and not lying, which will teach
us of all things, so that we shall abide in him.

If that Conqueror Alexander, did hazard his own person, and put his life in
great peril, for the desire and affection he had to his Instructor Lysimachus;
Plutarch. in vita Alex. Mag.
Because in his expedition against the Arabians, the in-dwellers of the mount
Antilibanus, when they were constrained to forsake their horse and to walk on
foot, albeit the army had passed far before, albeit darkness and the
enemy approached, yet he could not sustain to learn his Pedagogue
Lisimachus, heavy through age, and weary through travel, but in the extreme
cold and danger, constantly he remained with him, aduenturing himself
wonderfully with a matchless resolution for his teachers food and
preservation: with what fervent desire, and burning affection should a
Christian be inflamed with, toward Jesus Christ, who is of much more Ezec.
8.18.
understanding then Sherebia was, whom Ezra acknowledged to be brought to him
by the good hand of God. Psalm. 94.12.
The man is blessed whom he teaches in his Law, every one should resolve to
endure all travels, and to go through all perils for their unfeigned affection
and desire toward him.

4. In vain shall a man use many medicines, without the help of our great
Physician Jesus: for he shall have no health without his assistance, for he
alone will Ier. 33.6.
give health and amendment, he will cure him and give unto him the abundance of
peace and truth, Prou. 4.22.
his words are life unto those that find them, and health unto all their flesh.

Thus our heavenly Physician is most to be desired and wished for our health
and preservation, Wisd. 16.12.
neither herb nor plaster heals us, but we are cured by his mercy and
word, which helps and eureth all things?

That Macedonian trusted much in the fidelity and skill of his Physician,
Philippus Acarnanus; Plutarch. in vit. Alex. and Curtius.
for he drank out that potion that he gave him, although his Favorite
Parmenio by letter advertised him that his Physician was corrupted by Darius,
and was minded to kill him: but we have much more reason to depend upon our
great Physician, Reu. 19.11.
who is true and faithful, most loving and liberal: they shall never be
ashamed nor confounded who shall believe in him.

Oh if every Christian were of that holy disposition with the Prophet David
thus protesting, Mine heart breaks for the desire of thy judgments, that his
soul might languish for the desire of Christ, of his precepts, of his
Documents and Medicaments; who is our King, Doctor, and Physician. Ier. 46.11.
Psa. 119.20.
of a small candle; So our holy and happy desire toward the Lord Jesus, would
speedily either banish or subdue all the fleshly and filthy desires of our
corrupt nature; then we would 1. Pet. 2.11.
abstain from fleshly Lusts or desires which fight against the soul; then we
would not Tit. 3.3.
be serving the lusts and the worldly pleasures of the world, then we would
Gal. 5.16.
walk in the spirit, and not fulfill the lusts or desires of the flesh. But
desiring Christ, we should with Daniel be Iam. 10.19. Vir desideriorum.
greatly beloved, desired and accepted; God would Psalm. 20.4. The order that
here is observed.
grant us according to our hearts, and fulfill our purposes and desires.
Moreover, who desires Christ will awaite for him; we will show: 1. what evil
comes to those who wait not for Christ: 2. some impediments hindering us from
waiting: 3. wherefore we should wait: 3. how and in what manner we should do
the same: 5. and show some examples of happy men who were blessed waiters upon
God. The hurt of those which awaite not on Christ.
First, there comes great evil and unspeakable calamity to all those who will
not wait for the Lord Jesus: 1. they will be disappointed of their expectation:
2. they will be punished with final destruction. The Jews which expected
help of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, were disappointed, and in the end Isa.
30.5.
ashamed of that people, that could not profit them, nor do them good, but
became a shame and a reproach unto them. These idolatrous Priests waited long,
1. King. ^8.29.
and cried loud to that Idol Baal; but because there was neither voice, nor one
to answer, nor any that regarded, therefore they were frustrated, as they who
waited not upon Christ shall be at last disappointed, of their most pleasant
designs.

Again, who so waits not upon Christ, he waits upon some lying vanity, and
who so does, Jonas. 2.8.
he forsakes his own mercy, and consequently falls into endless misery.
If Saul received hurt, for that he did not wait upon the Prophet Samuel, 1.
Sam. 13.14.
his kingdom did not continue, but he with his posterity perished: Do they
not more foolishly, and shall they not be plagued more greiuously, who will
not be content to wait upon Jesus the Prince of prophets, Psalm. 49.12.
they shall not continue in honor, but shall be like the beasts that die, and
worse then beasts, they shall die the second death eternally. Then Micah. 7.5.7
trust ye not in a friend, neither put your confidence in a counselor: keep
the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. Therefore (say thou
with the Prophet): I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for God my Savior,
my good God will hear me, and help me, and blessem eperpetually.

Secondly, Some impediments which stay men from waiting upon Christ. Slumber
Spiritually.
as Mariners are careful to know dangerous and hid rocks in the sea, that
they may avoid them; so Christians ought to know what impediments do stay
them from waiting, to the end they may strive against the same. These are
principally: 1. Secure sleeping in sin: 2. Negligence or slothfulness: 3.
Intemperancy: 4. Worldly cares: 5. Impatiency: 6. Distrust: 7. sinful
pleasures.

1. These Isa. 29.10.
whom the Lord has covered with a spirit of slumber, cannot attend upon their
Savior. While 1. Sam. 26.15.
Abner was sleeping naturally, he could not wait well upon his earthly
Master: While one is sleeping spiritually and securely he cannot wait upon his
heavenly Master.

2. Slothfulness.
Prou. 19.15.
Sloathfulnesse that causes to fall sleepy, causes own Ier. 48.10.
Intemperancie.
to do the work of God negligently, and stays him from that duty.

3. The Math. 24.49.
evil servant eating and drinking with the drunken, 2. Pet 2.12. Worldlines.
as a bruit beast led with sensuality, walking after the flesh in the lust of
vneleannesse counting it pleasure, to live deliciously for a season, cannot
diligently wait upon his Master, but he shall perish through his own
corruption.

4. As worldly business and earthly cares detained many from the Matthew. 22.5.
and Luke 14.16.
wedding and great supper of the King, one going to his Farm, and another
about his Merchandise, so the same stays innumerable people from giving of
their attendance unto Christ: they Luke 10.41.
take care and are troubled about many things, neglecting and omitting that one
thing that is needful, even the good part which shall not be taken away from
them. Matthew. 6.24.
No man (says our Savior) can serve two Master; ever disagreeing, God and
Mammon.

But let us remember, Worldly cares, what they are.
that the things of this world, in respect of heavenly happiness, they are
trifles, never contenting, vanities, deceiving, burdening, oppressing,
thornes-renting, filthiness, defiling, winds-shaking, blasting and scaring, and
snares intrapping.

We think that Domitianus, Sueton. and Traheron.
Titus his brother and successor in the Empire, was foolish and ridiculous in
this point, for that every day and hour he would go to some chamber or secret
place, and there busy himself to catch flies, of no price; which he
afterward filed up, upon a long sharp needle, forgetting the more weighty
affairs of his Empire.

Those are more foolish and ridiculous, who Romans 2.4.
despising the riches of Christ's bountifulness, and Heb. 2.3.
neglecting so great salvation, as is freely offered, do not wait upon their
Redeemer; and yet will weary, and fashion themselves to catch flies, or gather
earthly trifles, which will never content, nor fully satisfy their souls;
which at length they will find (as the Preacher pronounces of them) to be
Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of vanities, to beguile and deceive them.

When men in over burdened Ships, are in danger of drowning, Iona. 1.5.
they will cast their wares into the Sea, to lighten their Ships, and to save
their lives; Yea for the preservation of a momentany and miserable life, they
will cast out with their own hands, Acts 27.19, 38.
the tackling of the Ship, and their Wheat into the Sea: and shall we not
cast away from us, all burdens ouer-loading us, to save our souls, least they
drown in the Sea of Hell? And for the keeping of a most happy and durable
life, shall we not forsake things superfluous and unnecessary, 1 Timothy 6.9.
noisome and foolish lusts, weighty burdens, which drown men in perdition,
and destruction.

These are like Mat. 13.22.
thorns renting, piercing, and pricking, the wretched, who are bent upon them,
with care, pain, grief, and continual molestation. As Pro. 6.28.
pitch, or other filthiness taken in the bosom, defiles the same; so worldly
cares, entertained in the heart, they pollute the same. As the cold East wind,
withers, blasteth, shakes, and scatters Herbs, Corns, Trees, and good
seed: So the troubles of this life, they wither, shake, and disperse the
flowers, the fruit, and the seed of grace and godliness. They are as snares,
entrapping and destroying, hindering us most strongly, from our diligent and
careful attendance, and waiting.

5. Impatiencie.
Impatiencie also brings that hurt to us: for an impatient man, Pro. 14.17.
hasty to anger, he commits folly; he cannot perform his duty.

6. Distrust.
So does distrust; the distrustful man, Heb. 10.38.
with-draweth himself from the Lord, and the Lords soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Let none of us be so impatient, or misbeleeuing, as to say;
2. Kin. 6.33.
behold this evil comes of the Lord, should I attend on the Lord any longer?

Thou who art of purpose to wait upon Christ, Sinful pleasures.
be most diligent to eschew the alluring pleasures of sin: Luke 16.25.
For Dives, who received his pleasures in his lifetime, he was grievously
tormented in Hell. As a Fisher catches fish with an angle; so does the Devil
catch men by filthy pleasure, detaining them from Christ's service and
attendance.

Thirdly, Ant^nius in ^eliss.
there are many motives, which may urge the performance of this duty,
Christ's Reasons wherefore we should wait.
goodness, thy own blessedness, the commandment given in the Scripture, and
that thou may attain to perseverance in righteousness: Isa. 30.18.
Christ who is good and gracious, he will wait for thy good, even that he may
have mercy, and compassion upon thee: Reason therefore requires thee to wait
upon him, thus resolving; Psa. 123.2.
as the eyes of a servant, look unto the hand of his Master; and as the eyes
of a maiden, unto the hand of her Mistress; so that thy eyes shall wait upon
the Lord thy God, until he have mercy upon thee.

Who-euer had knowledge of Socrates, Xenophon. lib. 4. memora. and Theat. Zuing.
what manner of man he was (says Xeuophon) those who were given to virtue and
honesty among them, with a perpetual desire, did wish for him, waiting on
him, as most profitable to instruct them in knowledge and living: Wilt not thou
who art graced with the excellent knowledge of thy Savior, endued with that
heavenly, and saving light of him, the Prince of Prophets, Luke 24.19.
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, wish for him, and
wait upon him, by the knowledge of whom, grace and peace, 2. Pet. 1.3.
will be multiplied unto thee, who according to his godly power, will give
unto thee all things that pertain to life and godliness, and who has called
thee to virtue and glory?

2. Thy own blessedness, may allure thee to this attendance: For Isa. 30.18.
blessed are all they (says the Prophet) that wait for him, they Isa. 49.23.
shall not be ashamed, nor confounded that wait for him: who does the same
may assuredly with Joseph of Arimathea Luke 23.5.
wait for the kingdom of God, and I may speak so thereof, as the Prophet
speaks of the vision, Hab. 2.3.
Though it tarry, wait; for it shall surely come, and shall not stay. Again I
affirm, Dan. 12.12. Val. Max. lib. 7.
Blessed is he that waits, more happy and blessed is he then Q. Metellus,
then Gyges; remembered and admired for their momentany felicity.

3. We have sundry commandments: Psalm. 27.14.
Wait on the Lord, be strong, and he shall comfort thy heart and strengthen
the same: Again, Psalm. 37.34.
Wait thou on the Lord, keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, that thou
shall inherit the land. Zeph. 3.8.
Therefore wait ye upon me (says the Lord), surely then I will turn to my
people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, to serve
him with one consent.

4. Isa. 40.31.
They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall lift up
their wings as the Eagles: they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not faint: they shall obtain the rare gift of perseverance, even to be
holy and Reu. 2.10.
faithful unto the death, and Christ will give them the crown of life.
Fourthly, touching the manner: We should wait willingly, diligently, in
readiness, The manner how we should wait willingly.
patiently, and constantly.

I. Let us wait for Christ willingly and gladly. If Job 28.23.
men waited for Job, for instruction and counsel, as for the rain; should not
we wait so upon Christ for better instruction, and wiser counsel, whose name,
Isa. 9.6.
Is Wonderful, Counselor the mighty God, who does ever Act. 14.17.
good, giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness? Mark. 12.37. Diligently.
Much people of the Jews hard Christ gladly; all Christians should wait for
him and hear him willingly.

II. As the Evangelist Saint Luke, most Luke 1.3. (...). Quod est exquisita and
perfecta diligentia.
Acurately searched all things, concerning Christ, to write them; so let us
most diligently, desire Christ to wait on him. Ioh. 5.3.
A great multitude of sick folk waited for the moving of the water of the
poole of Bethesda, that they might be healed of their diseases; doubtless they
did this attentively: so we when we wait on Christ our Physician to be
cured, let us do the same with diligence and carfulness. If (as Solomon
says) Prou. 22.29.
a man that is diligent in his business, shall stand before Kings, and not
before the base sort: Shall not a painful and industrious man in the Lords
service, diligently attending his vocation, and waiting on his Master, shall he
not remain before him, who is the King of Kings; when as in the mean time,
the slothful and Psalm 5.5.
foolish shall not stand in Gods sight, Psalm. 1.5.
nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous?

III. In readiness.
The Israelites were in readiness for their departure from Egypt when they
did eat the Passover; the hour of their deliverance from that thraldom
approached: and Exodus 12.11.
thus did they eat it, their loins girded, their shoes on their feet, their
staves in their hand, they did eat in have, expecting their own safety, and
the appointed time for their journey: After the same manner let us Christians
wait for our Savior, 1. Pet. 1.13.
Girding up the loins of our mind, Ephesians. 6.15.
having our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, taking
Psalm. 23.4.
Gods rod and his staff to comfort us, ever waiting for him, who Isa. 52.7.
declares good tidings, and publishes peace and salvation, saying unto Zion,
Thy God reigns: For this purpose let us with the noble Men of Berea Act.
17.11.
receive his word with all readiness, and search the Scripture with great
earnestness, that (according to our Masters direction) Luke 12.35. Verse. 26,
27.
our loins may be girded about, and our lights burning, and we our selves like
unto men that wait for their Master, when he will return from the wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, we may open unto him immediately. Blessed
are those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find waking and
waiting.

Cornelius that Captain of the Italian band, A devout man and one that feared
God, Act. 10.24. Verse 33.
waited for Peter, and his company: this he did with preparation and readiness
as present before God, to hear all things which were to be spoken by his
servant: Let us in like sort expect the coming of Christ, as he commands,
Luke 12.40.
and be prepared both for his first coming in grace, and for his second
coming in glory, for he will come at an hour when we think not.

4. Patiently.
We should do this duty patiently. Iam. 5.7.
The husband man has long patience while he is waiting for the fruit of the
earth, until he receive the former and the later rain: the true Christian
ought to have longer patience while he is waiting for Jesus, until he receive
him Isa. 53.12.
who did bear the sin of many, and prayed for trespassers. And seeing Act.
1.7.
it is not for us to know the times and seasons, which God has put in his own
power; albeit Christ came not when we wished, neither at the first to refresh
us to our contentment with his mostgratious presence; yet assuredly he will come
in his time, and give good things to those that wait for him, Psa. 145.15.
in due season. Psalm. 30.5.
Weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes to them in the morning: Every
one therefore may be well heartned to wait for Christ Psalm. 37.7.
patiently, for Isa. 65.23.
he shall not labor in vain, neither shall he be disappointed of his
expectation; and although waiting and expectation be grievous and unpleasant;
Peta. Dial. expectatum.
vix vllum vitae taedium expectatione molestius, scarcely is there any
yrkesomenesse of our life time, more troublesome then expectation: yet the
vndoubtted certainty of his speedy coming, may encourage and uphold us in
this difficulty; for neither, death, danger, nor enemy, can hinder him from
helping of us in our necessity.

The Emperor Augustus, Drusium inexpectata mori abstulit.
with Liuia and all Rome, waited for his Son in law Victorius Drusius with
great and earnest expectation; intertaining his death hindered his wished
return, frustrating themselves of their hoped joy and delectation; with the
like event, they waited for their beloved Marcellus; and the Romans for that
valiant and illustrious Germanicus; who never did come to them: But Jesus
Christ, whose most happy and ever continuing life, is not subject to death,
whose power is infinite, whose wise proceeding and long-suffering is not to be
counted 2. Pet. 3.9.
slacknesse,) should patiently be expected, who will undoubtedly give mercy
and Heb. 4.16.
grace to his own to help in time of need.

5. He is to be looked for most constantly. As the first Martyr S. Steven, Act.
7.55.
looked steadfastly into heaven; so Christians steadfastly should look for Christ,
for his assistance and comfort from heaven. The people of the Jews Luke 1.21.
waited for their Priest Zacharias, while the incense was burning upon the holy
Altar: this they did constantly, albeit they meruailed that he tarried so long
in the Temple: Now seeing Jesus Christ Heb. 9.24.
is not entered into the holy places, which are paternes of the true Sanctuary,
but is entered into heaven to appear in the sight of God for us to be our high
Priest and 1. Ioh. 2.1.
Advocate with the Father, to make request for us and intercession, who shall
appear the second time for our salvation, if we shall constantly and dutifully
look for him. The example of the godly, may be a motive to us.


Lastly, the examples of the Saints and secret ones may be an inducement for us
to this duty. Jacob in his infirmity a little before his death said, Genesis
49.18.
O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. Job in time of his extremity, said,
Job 14.14.
All the days of mine appointed time will I wait, till my changing shall
come; thou shall call me, and I shall answer thee; thou love the work of
thine one hands. The Royal Prophet said, Psalm. 40.1.
I waited patiently; for the Lord, he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: and
in another place, I am weary of crying: my throat is dry: mine eyes fail,
whiles I wait for Psalm. 69.3.
Psalm. 1.9.174.
my God. Again, Psalm. 119.174.
I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord, and thy law is my delight. That
Evangelical Prophet said, Isa. 8.17.
I will wait upon the Lord that has hid his face from the house of Jacob, and
I will look for him: again Isa. 25.9.
In that day shall men say, lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, he
will save us, this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoice and be
joyful in his salvation. The Church of Christ, and the faithful flock
says, Isa. 32.2.
O Lord have mercy upon us, we have waited for thee; be thou, which wast their
arm in the morning our help also in time of trouble. Lam. 3.26.
It is good therefore (as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks) both to trust and
wait for the salvation of the Lord: for as Luke 2.25.
godly Simeon waited for Christ the consolation of Israel; he received him, he
took him in his arms, and immediately praised God: so let us wait for him,
and he will come for our salvation. If all Luke 8.40.
the people of the Jews waited for Christ, in the days of humility: shall not
Christians now wait for him, remaining in glory? If Joseph of Arimathea a wise
counselor, a good man and a just, Luke 23.51.
waited for the kingdom of God; should not all Christ's servants increasing in
virtue and godliness, wait for him, the only giver and way to that kingdom;
and with him they may assuredly wait Romans 8.23.
for adoption even the redemption of their body, they may Gal. 5.5.
wait for the hope of righteousness through faith; even Tit. 2.13.
for that blessed hope of glory: most comfortable they may Iud. 21.
look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life and
blessedness.

CHAP. XIX. We should come to Christ, and follow after Him.
WHO ever desires Christ earnestly the (bitterness of sanctified affliction
in this earth will also help to work this desire): Order in this point
observed.
who ever waits for Christ diligently, will be soon persuaded for to come to
Christ speedily, and follow after him most willingly. In handling of this
duty, this order shall be observed: 1. To show some causes wherefore we should
come: 2. Who does come: 3. From what he comes: 4. The manner of coming: 5.
The way whereby he must come: 6. His guide in the way: 7. Some impediments
staying our coming: Lastly their profit who come.

First, Some causes wherefore we must come to our Savior.
there are some causes in Christ, and some in our selves, which may both allure
us and enforce us to come to him: 1. Christ's love and affection: 2. His coming
to us, and his visitation: 3. His calling and inuitation, offering to us
abundant kindness: 4. Our wretched and forlorn estate, unless we come: 5.
The example of others who have gone before us. Christ loves us.


I. Because of Christ's exceeding great love (appearing both in suffering for
us, and giving good things unto us. 1. Pet. 3.18.
The just suffers for the sins of the unjust, and He was put to death
concerning the flesh, that he might bring us to God, and Ephesians. 5.2.
he has loved us, and has given himself for us to be an offering and
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God) we may be glad therefore to
come to him, who is so favorable to us: which we shall do very readily, if we
shall love him as becomes us. August. Christ has come to us.
Non in superficie sed in medullis cordis diligendus est: He is to be loved,
not superficiously in outward appearance only, but inwardly in the secret of
the heart.

II. Because he has come to us. Bernard. Sermon. 3. de aduent. domin.
venit vniuersitatis creator et Dominus, venit ad homines, venit propter
homines, venit Homo: The creator and Lord of the whole university has come,
has come to men, he has come for men, Bernard. Sermon. 1. de aduent. domini.
he has come being man. Benignissimus saluator et medicus animarum descendit
ab altitudine sua: Our most bountiful Savior and the Physician of our souls
has come down from his highness, from glory, from heaven; our most loving
and learned teacher 1. Ioh. 3.2.
has come from God; Phil. 2.7.
he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, he
humbled and abased himself, he Math. 20.21.
came meek and lowly, Math. 9.13.
not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance: He did Luke 9.56.
come not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; Hag 2.8.
the desire of all nations did come to fill his house, and the hearts of his
own with glory; Origines.
he did come (says the Ancient) that he might restore to the former dignity,
his own image defaced in man by Satan's craft. In Pri. Genesis Ambr. sup. Luc.
He the righteous did come to us sinners, that of sinners he might make us
righteous; the godly came to the ungodly, the humble came to the proud;
Bernard. super. Cant.
that may make us godly and humble, says an other father: he does come to
correct us when we sin, to help us; when we are weak to strenghten us; when
we are doubting, to defend us; when we are fighting, to reward us with a crown
of immortality: he did come Isa. 63.15.
from the dwelling place of his holiness to this earth, he became Math. 10.23.
the son of man Math. 20.28.
to serve and not to be served, to suffer and to give his life for the ransom
of many, to the end he may bring us from this earth to the heavenly Mansions,
Ioh. 14.3.
that where he is there we may be also, being 1. Ioh. 3.2.
the sons of God, Reu. 1.6.
Kings and Priests unto his Father Reu. 22.5.
to reign with him for ever more in his blessed kingdom: Vt nos insereret
summis se miscuit imis; Our Savior has come to us and visited us in mercy
three manner of ways: 1. by his incarnation being Gal. 4.4.
made of a woman, taking our nature, but not our corruption: 2. By the
preaching of the Euangels Tit. 2.11.
the grace of God, that brings salvation has appeared and teached us, that
we should deny ungodly lusts: 3. He comes and visits us daily by giving
benefits unto us, Lam. 3.22.
his compassions fail not, they are renewed every morning. As the estate of
Jerusalem was lamentable and doubtful, Luke 19.44.
because she knew not the time of her visitation; so shall the estate of the
slothful and negligent be, who are ignorant of that gracious season: but the
godly may say with Job Job 10.12.
Lord thou have given me life and grace, and thy visitation has preserved my
spirit. Seeing this, Christ comes and visits us, by good reason we ought
to come to him.

3. Because also he calls and inuiteth us. Christ inuiteth us.
That inuitation which David made to Barzillai was very kind and loving; 2.
Sam. 19.33.
come over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem: but Bazillai
made some reasonable excuse, in respect of his age and imbecility, that he was
then four score year old, and could not discern between good and evil; he
had no taste in his food, nor pleasure in music, he was loath to be any more
a burden unto King David. Yet the inuitation of Christ is much more kind and
loving; he calls upon us to come to him, offering to nourish us not only
with earthly and corruptible food, but also with heavenly and incorruptible
nourishment ever, Ioh. 6.27.
with that meat that endures unto life everlasting: he desires us to come
not to earthly, but to, Heb. 12.22.
celestial Jerusalem, to the City of the living God, and to the company of
innumerable Angels.

IIII. Neither can one allege any reason of refusal: for by his help who
calls upon us, 1. Sam. 2.3, 4.
enterprises are established, the weak are strengthened, the youth of men like
Eagles is renewed, and so all just excuse may be easily removed.

V. But this shall be very profitable for us; That we travel with diligence to
learn rightly, Psalm. 103.5.
to discern between the inuitation of our Savior, and the inuitation of our
adversary, who will not ever set upon us with open force like a cruel Lion
roaring, but at sometimes also with secret craft like a sly Serpent, seducing;
inuiting us in a false friendly form to come to him for our destruction, when
as he pretends our welfare and salvation.

As that blasphemous and railing Rabshakeh, by appearance seemed to have spoken
favorably to the people of Jerusalem, saying; 2. King. 18.31.
Make appointment with me, and come out to me, that every man may eat of his
own vine, and every man of his own fig tree, and drink every man of the
water of his own well; yet his intention was to draw them from this lawful
and good King, to carry them from their native and fertile country, and to
bring them to miserable slavery, bondage, and poverty under the tyranny of a
wrongful usurper: So the devil by the worlds allurements offers friendly,
and inuiteth (as one would think) courteously, but his purpose is to deceive,
and to destroy eternally.

Like as that ravenous and crafty beast, Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 30.
Arist. de hist. any. lib. 8. cap. 5.
Hyaena will counterfeit the voice of a man, and learn his name, and then call
upon him for to devour him, as also will imitate man's vomiting to draw thither
dogs to be catched: So Satan, albeit a most malicious enemy, he will
dissemble subtly a friends voice, that he may catch man, that he may torment
him for ever.

Notwithstanding, the advised and circumspect Christian knowing his hatred,
should refuse him, inuiting cruelly with Goliath, crying; ( 1. Sam. 17.44.
Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the heaven, and to
the beasts of the field; come to me to be concionated continually. And knowing
his deceit should also refuse him inuiting guilfully: Prou. 7.18.
Come, let us take our fill of love, let us take our pleasure in dalliance: who
yields to his entisings, is as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a
fool to the stocks for punishment: but let us harken and yield unto the
loving inuitation of our Savior offering rich mercy, and exhibiting tender
kindness, whose calling is ever for our profit, and emolument. Sometimes he
calls upon us for our instruction, Psalm. 34.11.
Come children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord:
sometimes for our recreation, Cant. 2.11, 12.
The flowers appear in the earth, the time of singing of birds is come, and
the voice of the Turtle is hard in our land, the fig tree has brought forth
her young figs, and the vines with their small grapes, cast a savor; arise
my Love, my fair one, and come thy way: sometimes he calls upon us for our
nourishment, Isa. 55.1.
Come, buy wine and milk without silver and without money: sometimes for our
preferment, as it was an honor to the holy Evangelist Saint John, when the
Angel said, Reu. 21.9.
Come, I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife, so it will be greater honor
to the true Christian, when Christ says, Come to be my Spouse: this honorable
and comfortable inuitation should allure us to yield willingly thereunto.

4. The condition of the wicked who come not to Christ, They are miserable that
come not.
is very miserable: for by not coming they depart from him, and they forsake
him, they shall be forsaken and desolate, he will depart from them, Hos. 9.12.
and woe to them when he departs from them: for then seeing they enter not
in at the right gate, to come to Christ; as Eccles. 2.14.
fools they walk in darkness, then Genesis 29.19.
they walk according to the stubburnnesse of their own hearts, adding
drunkenness to thirst: 1. Pet. 4.3.
then they will walk after vanity, and become vain, then they shall walk in
lusts and wantonness, in gluttony and drunkenness, and in abominable
idolatries, after the ungodly Gentiles, and Iud. 18.
after their ungodly lusts and concupiscences, until they be drowned in
filthiness, and endless damnation.

5. The example of the godly.
The example of the faithful, who have gone before us; should inuit us also
to go to Christ: Heb. 12.1.
Seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us run with
patience, the race that is set before us, looking and coming to Jesus the
author, and finisher of our faith; for all the godly, from the beginning of
the World, who have been adorned with true faith and obedience, they have gone
to Christ before us.

Secondly, Who come to Christ.
we will declare briefly, who does come to Christ: First, that person whom he
chooses; Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed is he whom thou chusest, and causest to come to thee: Secondly, he
whom the Father gives; Ioh. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, (says our Savior) shall come to me, and him
that comes to me, I cast not away: Thirdly, who are Mat. 11.28.
weary and laden, having a sense, and a feeling of their heavy burden, Christ
calls on them, promising to ease them: Fourthly, whom John 6.44.
the Father draws: Fifthly, his own faithful servants, his Disciples and
Isa. 6.4.
children shall come from far, to be nourished and instructed. Seeing then
without Gods election, his donation, his attractiue operation, without the
feeling of thy burden, and his love and compassion, none can come to him; let
us entreat our God to love us, to choose us, to give us his only Son, to
grant life and light to us, so that we may address our selves to our
Redeemer; praying with his own Spouse, Cant. 1.3.
Draw me, and we will run after thee.

Thirdly, From what they come.
if we have a purpose to come to Christ, we must leave and forsake the World,
Sin, Satan, and our carnal pleasures.

1. We must come from the World, From the World.
which is a matter of much difficulty; for then our enemy will show us the
Kingdoms, Mat. 4.8.
and the glory thereof; yet if we look narrowly thereto, we shall subscribe
unto the saying of the Ancient, Mundus ecce nutat and labitur, and riuinam sui,
Cyprian. lib. de moral.
non tam senectu te rerum, quam fine testatur. Behold the World is tottering
and failing, and does witness the decay thereof, not so much by the old age
of things, as by the end; therein is the John 2.16.
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life.

A man would willingly remove, and flee out of a ruinous, and rotten house: A
Christian should more gladly remove, in his heart, affections and
determinations, from this rotten and ruinous World. As a noble and wealthy
personage, has no pleasure nor contentment, to remain long within a cool
trench under the earth, for there is narrowness, filthiness, darkness, and
danger, that place is not ample, but straight; not clean, but defiling; there
is little but darkness and peril: Dan, esteemed that place where they dwelt
to be too little for them, and resolved to leave it, and to go to Laish,
Judge. 18.10.
a very good land, and a large Country, a place which does lack nothing: The
children of God, should also be weary of this earth, which is not spacious;
but as a point in respect of the Heavens, and resolve to go speedily to
Heaven, a most large Kingdom, John 14.2.
where are many dwelling places; Christ reigns, who will grant to the godly,
Reave. 3.21.
that they may sit with him in his throne, to be blessed for ever.

And seeing this World, may be compared to a painted Sepulcher, or Mat. 23.27.
whited Tomb, appearing beautiful outward, but is within full of all
filthiness, where the Luke 9.60.
dead bury the dead, and where there are many men, like Iud. 12.
corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots: what
delight or pleasure may an honest heart have to remain therein, which justly
may be called Ioh. 10.21.
the land of darkness, and shadow of death, dark, as darkness it self,
where there is no order, but danger, the light being there as darkness?

2. Let us Psalm. 34.14.
eschew evil and depart from sin, From sin
which is as a fearful inundation, and a dangerous deluge of water,
ouerflowing suddenly, and destroying violently. Grauis quidem est, Fancisc.
Iunius. in epistol. ad ordines. Zelandus vbi de pecc. primo.
aquarum inundatio in omni tempore, grauis audientibus, grauior videntibus,
conflictantibus grauissima: sed omnium profecto est grauissima inundatio illa,
qua non campi, non prata, non vici vrbesque, non regiones eliminuntur atque
euertuntur, sed homines ipsi, animaeque ipsorum: est enim haec peccati
inundatio, multo periculosior quam illa, etc. Indeed an inundation of waters is
grievous at all times, grievous to the hearers, more grievous to the seers,
most of all grievous to those who strive and fight therewith: but truly the
most grievous of all, is that deluge, by which not Fields, not Meadows, not
Villages and Towns, not Countries are washed away and destroyed, but Men
themselves and their souls; for this inundation of sin, is much more
dangerous, then that other. Now if we should love sin with all our affection,
and not leave the same in our purpose and resolution, then Hos. 5.10.
the Lord will power his wrath upon us like water, whereby we shall be
overwhelmed and destroyed.

3. From Satan.
We must forsake Satan 1. John 3.8.
who sins from the beginning, who is incessantly laboring, to deceive the
people, which are in the four quarters of the earth; 1. Kin. 22.34.
who deceived Achab King of Israel to his destruction, and endeavoring to bring
men 1. Tim. 3.7.
to rebuke, and to his snare, to his dungeon, to their damnation. That prison
in the house of Iehonathan the Scribe was fearful, and filthy, and dolorous;
wherefore the Prophet Jeremiah, made this earnest petition to Zedekiah, saying,
Iere. 37.20.
hear me now I pray thee, O my Lord the King, let my prayer be accepted
before thee, that thou cause me not to return, to the house of Iehonathan,
least I die there. If that wise man was loath to go to that prison, and gladly
did come out of the same; the prudent Christian will be more glad, to go out
of the Devils danger, and be more loath to return thither again.

Alas, what madness does possess the minds of most men, who will not in
heart fully yield, to renounce and forsake a seducer, a merciless stranger; a
cruel tormentor, a malicious enemy, and an unjust Tyrant, to the end they may
come to Christ, who is Reu. 3.14.
Amen, the faithful and true witness, Mat. 23.10.
our only Doctor, our most pitiful, and powerful brother, Romans 8.29.
the first borne among many brethren, our most comfortable Isa. 62.11.
Savior, whose wages is with him, our most trusty friend, calling us, John.
15.15
not servants, but friends, revealing his Fathers counsel unto us, our own
most Iere. 23.5.
righteous King, who shall reign, and prosper, and shall execute judgment,
and Justice upon the earth; who will teach us, and be beneficial unto us,
save our selves, and destroy our enemies?

Lastly, Chrysostom. hom. Genes.
let us be weary of sinful pleasures, and refrain from filthy delights,
which may be compared to the Anglers bait, that has an hook hid under it,
wherewith the foolish fishes are caught and killed: and as a ship full of
water, that cannot be emptied incontinent, is drowned; so a man, when he
exposes himself to drunkenness, to his corrupt pleasules and wantonness,
he goes to decay, he drowneth his reason, and destroys his soul; for
surely, 2. Pet. 2.13.
those who are led with sensuality, shall receive the wages of
unrighteousness, who receive their portion and pleasure, in sinning Luke 16.25.
with Dives here in this earth, they shall receive pain and torments in hell
for ever: but let us depart from our voluptuousness, and draw near to our
Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, The manner of our coming. In mind.
touching the manner of our coming. 1. Let us come in our minds, and in our
affections, 2. Let us come timely, and speedily. 3. Let us come in holy
beauty, and honesty. 4. Let us come in faith. 5. In humility and reverence.
6. Let us come in sincerity. 7. Let us come with our gift, and with purpose of
obedience.

1. We should come in our mind and affections. This word Come, Montan. in
Hos. cap. 6.1.
studiorum excitationem magis, quam corporis motum explicas, signifies not so
much a motion of the body, as a devotion of the mind.

As Moses when he remained between his Enemies, and the red Sea, among a
murmuring and mutinous people, in his heart and mind he went to God; who said
to him, Exo. 14.15.
wherefore cryest thou unto me? So where-euer our bodies shall abide, let us
go to Christ in our affections, saying with David, Psalm. 25.1.
Unto thee, O Lord, lift I up my soul. Adeamus Christum non pedibus, sed
affectibus.

2. Go timely.
Let us come timely while our Savior calls upon us; other ways the very
fowls of heaven will testify against us. Ier. 8.7.
Even the storke in the air knows her appointed times and the Turtle and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of her coming, but my people (says
God) knows not the indgement of the Lord, neither Luke 19.44.
the time of their merciful visitation. And though Christ will not at all
times cry, Math. 11.28.
Come unto me and I will ease you, Isa. 55.1.
Come, come I say, buy wine and milk without silver or money, eat that which
is good, and let your soul delight in fatness: Yet one day he will thus
denounce a most fearful judgment against the disobedient. Luke 13.27.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, Mat. 25.41.
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire; It shall be good for us to
come, Est. 5.2.
While he holds out the golden Scepter of his compassion, while he is
mercifully calling, and Ezra. 7.23.
as whatsoever is by the commandment of God, should be done speedily for the
house of the God of heaven; so whatsoever is by the commandment of Christ,
should be done speedily, for the honor of Christ; Now our coming to Christ
is for his honor, therefore our coming ought to be timely and speedy without
delay or procrastination. When Marie, Lazarus his sister, Luke 10.42.
who had chosen the good part, that one thing needful which could not be taken
away from her, hearing that Christ was come and calling for her; Ioh. 11.29.
she arose quickly, and came to him: so it is our duty to address our selves
to come quickly to Christ for our consolation, especially seeing our Master
has greater power to command us, then Paul had, when he commanded his
Disciples, Timothy and Titus; thus writing to one, 2 Timothy 4.21.
Make speed to come; and to the other, Tit. 3.12.
Be diligent to come to me.

We read, that in the days of that unfortunate Valens, an happy and
courageous woman of Edessa a City of Mesopotamia, Histor. Eccles. lib. 11.
cap. 5. and apud alios. Let us go honestly.
did with all possible speed make great haste to go to the place where devout
Christians were conveyed, of purpose to lose her life for Christ's cause (that
notable history and conference, between the Captain and the religious Woman,
is worthy of frequent reading, and diligent consideration:) Then should not
Christians make good speed with all diligence to come to Christ, that they may
obtain life and salvation?

3. In respect, Psalm. 110.3.
The Lords people and army shall come willingly at the time of assembling and
in holy beauty, every godly person should so do, that Christ may say, Cant.
7.6.
How fair art thou, and how pleasant art thou, O my Love in pleasures! Because
by nature, we are dishonest, uncomely, and abominable, let us 1. Cor. 12.23.
put on more honesty and comeliness, when we resolve to go to Jesus; And
seeing we have not this beauty, nor this honesty of our selves, but are poor
and wretched and naked; let us ask instantly and entreat our merciful God,
Isa. 61.10.
that he will be pleased, h to cloth us with the garmente of salvation, to
cover us with the robe of righteousness, and to honor us with rings on our
hands, and Luke 15.22.
shoes on our feet, that thus decored and beautified with his beauty; we
may resort to him in comeliness and honesty.

4. We should come in faith.
Let us go in faith; for Romans 14.23
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. If we
desire to be delivered from the dominion and thraldom of the Devil; if we
desire to see Christ, to come to him, to be conjoined inseparably with him; let
us labor by an earnest prayer, and all lawful means, to be indeued wirh true
faith. Fide vera liberatur homo ex dominatione daemonum, August.
fides vera continet vniuersalem viam animae liberandae, and est via regalis ad
regnum ducens. By true faith, man is freed from the tyranny of Satan, and
thereby 1. Pet. 5.9.
we resist that strong adversary; when we are steadfast in faith, true faith
contains the whole way to save our souls, and it is that kingly gate leading
us to that heavenly Kingdom.

Who so have within them Heb. 3.12.
an evil heart and unfaithful, they will not come to Christ, but depart away
from the living God, and fall into endless misery.

5. Come in humility.
We should approach unto our righteous Judge, with great reverence and
humility, like Mephibosheh coming to David: 2. Iam. 9.6.
He did reverence, and said; What is thy servant, that thou should look
upon such a dead Dog as I am? This unfeigned humility is the principal
document, which Christ's Disciples do chiefly learn of him. Discite (inquit
dominus) a me, August.
non mundum fabricare: non cuncta visibilia creare: non in ipso mundo miracula
facere, and mortuos suscitare: sed quod mitis sum and humilis cord. Learn
(says our Master) of me, not to make the world, not to create all visible
things, not to work miracles, or to raise the dead, but Math. 11.29.
that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
O faelix humilitas, Barnard.
quae Dei ligat omni potentiam, and ad se trahit eius clementiam! O happy
humility, (says the Ancient) which does bind Gods omnipotency, and does
draw to it self his mercy! Gregor. 19. lib. moral.
Perit omne quod agitur, nisi Humilitate custodiatur: qui enim caeter as
virtutes sine humilitate congregat, quasi qui manu pnluerem inuentum portat:
All, which is done perishes, unless with humility it be preserved; for who so
gathers other virtues without humility, is like a man who carries in his
hand dust which he has found.

6. Whosoever thou be, Come to Christ in sincerity.
who resoluest to go to thy Savior, go to him in sincerity with an upright
and an honest heart, not for any worldly honor or commodity, but for his own
sake only, not as those carnal Capernaites, who for their bellies cause, went
unto him, who afterward Ioh. 6.66.
went back and walked no more with him, who has the words of eternal life:
but 2. King. 10.15.
Ionadab the son of Rechab came to John with an upright heart toward him; so
go thou to Jesus, and then he will give thee that great commendation, which he
gave to Nathaniel Ioh. 1.47.
Behold in deed an Israelite, in whom is no guile: then Psalm. 7.10.
thy defense shall be in God, who preserves the upright in heart that he Psalm.
36.10.
will extend his loving kindness and righteousness unto them who are upright
in heart; then thou shall find that Psalm. 97.11.
light is soon for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart; when in
such a manner thou shall address thy self to him.

7. Come to Christ with a gift.
This prohibition was repeted sundry times in the law, That Exodus 23.15 and Exo
34.28.
none should appear before the Lord empty: It behooved his people of
necessity to bring some sacrifice or offering to him. In the time of the
Gospel seeing Reu. 1.6.
we are made Priests unto God, we should labor for a sacrifice, and for a gift
to him, even for c a contrite spirit and broken heart, which he will not
despise: we should Psalm. 51.17.
Hos. 14.3.
render the calves of our lips, to him who will take a way all our iniquity,
and receive us graciously: we should Heb. 13.15.
offer the sacrifice of praise always unto God, and pay our vows most
thankful unto the most high. Now when we come unto him, if we shall find our
selves void and empty of all good by nature (as surely we will do when we
try our selves narrowly) then let us deal most earnestly with our God, by
humble and frequent supplication, by the secret and fervent Romans 8.26.
sighs of the spirit which cannot be expreassed, that it would please him of
his gracious goodness to furnish a sacrifice unto us acceptable to himself,
as he provided of his servant Genesis 22.13.
Abraham. Let us thus come to Christ with purpose of adherence and obedience to
Ioh. 15.4.
abide in him steadfastly, that we may bear fruit as he desires, and to obey
him heartily in all things, which is 1. Sam. 15.22.
better then legal or outward sacrifice. Melior obedientia quam victima; quia
per victimas aliena caro, per obedientiam vero volunt as mactatur: Greg. lib.
35. Moral.
because by sacrifice other flesh of beasts, but by obedience, our will, our
lusts, and sinful concupiscence is killed. In regard of which obedience, let
us Romans 6.13.
give our selves unto him, and our members as weapons of righteousness, Romans
12.1.
a holy and living sacrifice, which is our reasonable serving of God.

Fifthly, touching the way or gate, The way where-by me must come.
whereby we must come to Christ: That way is not the 2. Pet. 2.15.
way of Balaam, of craft and covetousness, and dissimulation; neither Iud. 11.
the way of Cain, of malice cruelty, and oppression; neither the way of
Iereboam, nor of Core, of treason, idolatry, 1. King. 16.2
and abomination; neither Psalm. 1.1.
the way of sinners, of wantonness, wickedness, derision and defection; Math.
7 13.
the wide gate and broad way that leads to desolation and destruction.

Albeit that broad way be an evil way, of darkness and Romans 3.16.
calamities; yet alas, many, too many do walk therein, committing heinous
sins against piety, against charity, against chastity and sobriety; and will
not leave that way, which leads to death, to hell and perdition; but the way
to Christ is that old good way, in the which our Ier. 6.16.
elders who are well reported of, who are certainly blessed, Abel, Enoch, Noe,
Abraham, etc. Walked, even the way of faith, which is Heb. 10.20.
through the flesh of Christ; being also a new and living way which he has
prepared for us, Heb. 10.19.
whereby we may be bold to enter into the holy place: O that is, Mar. 12.14.
a way of God, truly in truth and verity taught by Christ, that, Math. 21.32.
is a way of righteousness, in the which John baptist came: that is Prou. 9.6.
a way of wisdom, and prudence, in the which wise Solomon wishes us to go on
in: that Luke 1.79.
is the way of peace, in the which we should desire our feet to be guided:
that is the Psalm. 119.32.
way of the Lords commandments, in the which all Christians should run: that
is the 1. Cor. 12.31.
more excellent way to obtain the best gifts. Now Christ himself, Ioh. 14.6.
the truth, and the life, he is also the way: for no man comes to the father
but by him, whose way is Prou. 3.17.
a way of pleasure, and all his paths prosperity; albeit it appear to be other
ways at the first entry.

All those who walk not in the right way, albeit they have Moral virtues and
carry themselves ciuily, and do endeavor to worldly honesty, yet they wander,
and shall perish in the wilderness of this world, because they go out of the
true way. August.
Qui praeter viam currit, errit potius, quam adfinem pervenit optatum. Who
runs out of the way, he goes rather astray then shall come to his wished
end of his journey.

Heb. 11.2.
Sixthly, Christ is also our guide in this way, Christ is our guide in this way.
Isa. 48.17.
our redeemer, the holy one of Israel, which teaches us to profit, and leads
us by the way that we should go, he will Exodus 15.13.
by his mercy carry his people and guide them, he will bring them in his
strength unto his holy habitation.

Our guide: 1. He will show us the way: 2. Will place us in the way: 3. He will
furnish things needful: 4. He will keep us: 5. He will bring us to the place
of our rest.

1. He will teach them that are ignorant that way which is hid from us by
nature, yea David himself knew not that way, until the time he was
instructed, yet trusting in Gods goodness, he thus protests, Psalm. 16.11.
thou Lord wilt show me the path of life: and at another time, in the fervent
desire of his heart, he earnestly prayed, Psalm. 25.4.
show me thy ways; O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

2. Our Guide will place us who are feeble, in the way which he has pointed
out unto us. And because of our weakness, we have need also to pray with the
Prophet, Psalm. 27.11.
Lead us in a right path. Viam nobis Christus monstrauit, et in viam
collocauit, nec in via nos dimittit: Christ has showed us the way, and placed
us in the way, neither does he send us away from him in the way.

3. He will furnish all things necessary; food to us when we are hungry,
raiment when we are naked, health when we are sick, joy when we are
sorrowful. If the Israelites received a great benefit, by the cloud which did
ouershadow them, and preserved them from the burning heat of the sun in the
day time, and Exodus 13.22
was a pillar of fire by night unto them, it directed them in their journey,
and conducted them through the wilderness, when the Number. 9.22.
cloud tarried, the people abode still; when the cloud was taked up, then they
iourneyed: Christians have a greater benefit by Christ, he will Luke 1.79.
give light to them that sit in darkness, he will give refreshment to the
weary, and they shall Psalm. 91.1.
abide in the shadow of the Almighty, who will conduct them through all the
difficulties of this life, and bestow all things needful upon them.

4. He will Isa. 49.8.
preserve thee whom he guides, he Psalm. 91.4.
will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall lie sure under his feathers,
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler, thou shall not be afraid of the
fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day, thou Ioh. 10.28.
shall never perist, neither shall any pluck thee out of his hands.

5. He will Isa. 40.11.
carry thee in his bosom when thou art weak, he will Luke 15.5.
lay thee on his shoulders with joy, and bring thee home to thy heavenly
mansion. Christ is much more a better guide then Moses, who did convey the
Jews through the wilderness, but did not possess them in the Land of Canaan:
himself, Deuteronomy. 34.4.
saw it with his eyes, but went not thither into the same. Now Christ will
never leave his own, nor forsake them, until he give them, full possession of
that eternal kingdom, and they attain to the fruition of endless glory and
happiness. Here we are to be advertised, that there was never man or woman
since the world began, neither is there any now living, neither shall there be
any, in time succeding, but either he must be guided, or governed by Jesus
Christ, Math. 7.11.
unto that nerrow way that leads to life and salvation, or we be misguided
and drawn by Satan, in that broad way, that leads to damnation.

As that Math. 8.32.
heard of Swine, in the which the Devils entered, was carried with violence from
a steep down place into the Sea, and were drowned: so those most miserable
creatures, who are by Satan ouer-ruled, they shall run headlong unto Hell,
where they shall be drowned in eternal 1. Tim. 6.9.
perdition and destruction. Happy and blessed are they, who have received
Christ, to direct them in the right way, Exodus 23.20 and Verse. 21.
who will keep them, and bring them to the place of permanent pleasure, which
he has prepared.

Thou who have gotten such a good guide; Impediments hindering us.
beware of him, and hear his voice, provoke him not, for he will not spare
thy misdeedes: but honor him continually, with all fear and reverence.

Seventhly, there are many impediments to stay our going to Christ. As 1. These.
2.18.
Satan hindered the Apostle Paul, from coming to the Thessalonians; so that
vigilant enemy, hinders man and woman, from coming to Christ. Satan.
If David's enemies could prepare a snare, and Psalm. 57.6.
lay a net for his steps, and dig a pit before him; Satan more craftily, can
prepare 1. Tim. 3.7.
his snare, in the which men unawares are detained, and dig a pit wherein
more willingly he would cast them, then 2. Sam. 18.17.
Absoloms enemies, did cast him, into that pit in the wood, and laid an heap
of Stones upon him: he has Ephesians. 6.16.
fiery darts to wound us, he will Reu. 12.15.
cast out of his mouth water like a flood to drown us, and all to stay our
going to our Savior. Yet this may be a strong comfort to us, that our most
strong God will preserve and conduct us; that Romans 16.20.
the God of peace will tread Satan under his feet shortly; over whom (by his
help) we shall obtain a most profitable, and honorable victory.

Again, Worldliness.
worldliness and the cares of this life, are a great impediment to detain us
from coming to Christ. He indeed calls us lovingly to his Math. 22.3.
wedding; but alas, many do make light of it, and go their ways, one to his
Farm, and another about his Merchandise; he does inuit us to Luke 14.16.
a great Supper, but many will make an excuse, one will go to see his land
which he has bought, another to prove his Oxen, another will stay with his
wife, and refuse to come to that Supper. Surely the things of this World being
rightly used, and placed in their own room, may further men in the way to
Christ, and in the race of godliness: then they be steadeable and helpful to
us. But if they be abused, and set out of their own place, they will hinder us
in the course of Christianity, and be very hurtful for us: like as a chair
under a man, it is an ease to him, who is weary to fit in; but if it be set
upon his head, the same will trouble and offend him: And as water is a chief
help to the sailing of a Ship, but if it leake much water, the same will be a
means to sink her; and a plaster applied to a wound in the flesh, will heal
the wound, but received inwardly in the stomach, would annoy the same: even so
the things of this World, they are good servants, but evil masters; they
should be set in there own room, to be under our feet, to ease us, and not
to be above our heads, for to burden us: they should as it were help us in
our journey, but not greedily glut within us, to hinder us from going to our
Master.

The counsel therefore of the Ancient is profitable to every Christian;
August. in Psa. 36.
Trample the Sea of this World under thy feet, least thou be drowned in it,
and so never attain to Christ, and the port of thy everlasting happiness.

Also wickedness, Wickedness.
and Pro. 5.22.
iniquities that take the wicked, which are holden with the cords of their
sins, are terrible and fearful impediments. Indeed it was easier for Judge.
15.14.
Samson, to break the new cords, wherewith the three thousand men of Judge.
16.12.
Judah did bind him, and to break the seven green cords, wherewith Dalilah
bound him; then it is easy for a sinner, to break the cords of sin. Yea
God himself must do that work, even Iete. 30.8.
break our bonds, and cut the cords of sin, and give us freedom, to come
to Christ, whom we serve.

Moreover, Crosses. August.
crosses and calamities will comber us. In via Christi, ne tibi promittas
prosperitatem seculi: In the way of Christ, promise not to thy self the
prosperity of the World. Job 36.8.
We shall be tied with the cords of affliction, but Christ will open our ear
to discipline, and command us to return from our iniquity unto him: Albeit
we Psalm. 66.12.
went into the fire, and water of tribulation, yet he will bring us out into a
wealthy place, he will Psalm. 18.16.
draw us with David, out of many waters, he will 1. Cor. 10.13
even give us the issue with the temtation, he will Psalm. 32.7.
compass us with joyful deliverance: whom he preserves from trouble; he
will give to us 1. Pet. 1.9.
the end of our faith, even the saltion of our souls. Our profit to come.


Lastly, the consideration of this commodity of our coming, should
wonderfully allure us, to wrestle against all the obstacles impeaching us: for
Christ will not cast him away, that comes to him, Iere. 22.28.
he will not despise him, as a broken idol, or as a vessel, wherein is no
pleasure; he will not Deuteronomy. 7.26.
abhor him utterly, and count him abominable, as a filthy creature, he will
not Genesis 21.14.
cast him out with Agar, and Ishmael, as a mocking and troublesome trespasser;
he will not cast him away to be punished, as a wretched and rebellious
Traitor.

Ah, how unhappy and unfortunate are they whom Christ casts away! This was a
miserable, and doleful punishment to the posterity of idolatrous Jeroboam, 1.
Kin. 14.11.
that he which died in the City, was cast unto dogs to be eaten; and they
which died in the Field, were eaten by the fowls of the air: but much more is
it miserable, to be cast from Christ, into the power of the Devil; to be
captiuated, blinded, deceived, and everlastingly tormented.

Now would thou be sure and certain that Christ will never cast thee away?
Then do not thou as Saul did: 1. Sam. 15.23.
he did cast away the Word of the Lord, and the Lord cast him away from being
King. I say, cast not away the precious and wholesome Word of God, but Deuteronomy.
11.18.
lay it up in thy heart, and in thy soul, bind it for a sign upon the hand,
that it may be as a frontlet between thy eyes; come thou rightly to Christ,
who will esteem thee precious and Psalm. 16.3.
excellent, a 2. Tim. 2.20
vessel of Gold for honor, he will embrace thee, having Iere. 4.14.
washed thy heart from wickedness, he will Hos. 14.3.
receive thee graciously, and entertain thee most lovingly. If thou John 6.35.
come to him, thou shall not hunger; if thou believe in him, thou shall not
thirst: He will make thee not only his servant, but his John 15.15.
loving friend, yea his own Mar. 3.35.
brother, yea his glorious Spouse, and a lively Ephesians. 5.30.
member of his own body, of his flesh, and of his bones; and therefore he
will preserve thee, nourish thee, cherish, and honor thee.

Thus thou coming to Christ, Pro 24.25.
upon thee shall come the blessing of goodness; Psa. 119.41.
unto thee shall come salvation and his loving kindness, his Psa. 119.77.
tender mercies shall come to thee, that thou may live in all happiness:
for Iere. 30.2.
who directs his heart to come unto me, says the Lord, he shall be one of
my people, and the Lord will be his God. We should follow Christ.


Not only should we come to Christ, but also (according to his direction) we
should Luke 9.23.
come after him: which none can do, unless he deny himself, and take up
his cross daily, and so follow him.

If we remember that we are not our own, neither do we belong to our
selves, but that we are the workmanship of God, Psalm. 95.7.
and the sheep of his hand, and that by nature we are malefactors, heinous
sinners, and fighters against God, we shall be the more easily persuaded for
to deny our selves, and Mat. 10.32.
confess Christ before men, that he may confess us before his heavenly
Father. Also we must resolve to undergo trouble, to 2. Tim. 4.5.
suffer adversity, to Mat. 11.26.
take on Christ's easy yoke, to bear our cross, as Christ has borne his, 1.
Pet. 2.21. August.
leaving us an ensample that we should follow his steps. Christus crucem non
ad potentiae documentum, sed ad patientiae exemplum suscepit: Christ took upon
him the Cross, not only for a document of his power, but chiefly for an
ensample of his patience.

As the people could not have followed Christ, John 6.24.
they took shipping, and followed: so none can attain to Christ, and to the
haven of happiness, without the Cross. Via ista mare, August.
fluctus tentationes, crux Christi nauis, qua ascensa transimus: This life is a
Sea, temtations are floodes, the Cross of Christ is a Ship, in the which when
we enter, we pass over and escape.

Let us consider shortly: First, how and in what manner, we ought to follow
him: Secondly, in what way, then we will walk: Thirdly, for what cause, we
ought so to do.

First, we should follow him diligently, How we should follow Christ
diligently.
faithfully, willingly with our whole heart, and constantly.

1. Let us follow Christ diligently. Indeed Asahel did evil, when he 2. Sam.
2.19
followed Abner so earnestly, neither turning to the right hand, nor to the
left from him: that was the cause of his death and destruction. But we shall
do most profitably, when with Christ's disciples, Mat. 4.20.
straight way, and diligently we shall follow him, that we may obtain life and
salvation. Seeing Christ himself has gone before us, with speed and
diligence, and he is therefore called our Heb. 6.20. (...)
forerunner, who has entered for us within the veil; let us run after him
accordingly, that we may receive the price laid before us.

2. This should be our care and study, to follow Christ faithfully, not as 2.
Kin. 5.25.
Gehazi followed Elisha his Master, not as John 12.6.
Judas Iscariot followed our Savior: they did couetously, and unfaithfully,
and were punished as they deserved: but as good Iehoshaphat charged the Judges,
and Ministers whom he appointed, 2. Chr. 19.9
to do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect heart. So Jesus
charge us, to follow him faithfully, and uprightly, to employ our talents to
his glory, that he may both commend and reward us; Mat. 25.21.
Good servants and faithful, enter into your Masters joy.

3. Let us follow Christ willingly, Ephesians. 5.1.
as dear children, loving and honoring him, who is most worthy of all love
and estimation. As a poor man and needy, would gladly follow a rich man and
wealthy, to get alms for the support of his necessity: so let us most
willingly follow him, John 1.14.
who is full of grace, truth, and glory, and 1. Kin. 14 8.
with all our heart, as did his servant David, that we may receive all
benefits from him.

4. These benefits he will bestow on those, who will follow him with Deuteronomy.
1.36.
Caleb constantly, and with Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 18.6.
cleave to the Lord, and not depart from him.

Secondly, In what way they walk.
whosoever follows Christ: 1. He shall not Deuteronomy. 29.19
walk according to the stubbornenesse of his own heart, adding drunkenness
to thirst, to whom God will not be merciful, and upon whom all his curses
shall light: 2. He shall not Iere. 2.5.
walk after vanity, and become vain: 3. Eccle. 2.14.
He shall not with the fool, walk in darkness: 4. He shall not Iere. 6.28.
walk craftily, as a rebellious Traitor: 5. He shall not Romans 13.13.
walk in gluttony, nor wantonness, nor in strife and envying: 6. He shall
not 2. These. 3.11
walk inordinately, as a busie-body: 7. He shall 1. Pet. 4.3.
not walk in abominable idolatries, after the lusts of the Gentiles: 8. He
shall not 2. Pet. 3.3.
walk as a mocker, according to his ungodly concupiscence, he shall not
follow Satan to shame and perdition.

But he that follows Christ, Pro. 2.20.
shall walk in the way of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous.
First, he shall 1. John 1.7.
walk in the light, and the blood of Christ shall cleanse him from all sin.
Secondly, he shall Ephe. 5.15. and Collos. 4.5.
walk circumspectly and wisely, not as a fool, but as the wise, redeeming the
time. Thirdly, he shall Heb. 12.14.
follow peace and holiness, without the which no man shall see the Lord.
Fourthly, he shall Romans 6.4.
walk in newness of life, and not serve sin. Fifthly, he shall Ephesians. ^.1.
walk worthy of his vocation, whereunto he is called; yea, he shall walk
worthy of the Lord, pleasing him in all things. Sixthly, he shall Gal. 5.16.
walk in the spirit, and not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Seventhly, he
shall Ephesians. 5.2.
walk in love with Christ; he shall Gene. 24.40.
walk before God with Abraham; he shall Hos. 11.10.
walk after the Lord with Ephraim; he shall Reave. 3.12.
walk safely by the way, his foot shall not stumble; he shall come to the
Mountain of God; he shall be made a Pillar in the Temple of his God, and go
no more out.

Thirdly, besides this great commodity, we have other causes, wherefore we
should so do: for he is our Master, we are his servants; he is our Doctor,
we be his disciples; he is our Captain, we be his soldiers; he is our
King, we his subjects. When Jonathan said to his servant, his Armor-bearer;
1. Sam. 14.12
Come up after me, or follow me, the man obeyed, and followed. When Christ
said to Matthew; Mann 9.9.
Follow me, he arose and followed him: Licentius, Augustines disciple, thus
protested that he would follow his precept.

Non me dura gelu prohiberent frigora cano, August. Epist. 39.

Nec fera tempestas Zephyrum fremitusque Boriin
Quin tua sollicito premerem vestigia passu:
Hoc opus, vt iubeas tantum.
When Ehud said to the Israelites, Judge. 3.28.
follow me, they went after him; when Gideon said to his Soldiers, Judge. 7.17.
look on me, even as I do, so do you, they did as he commanded them. If 2.
Sam. 2.10.
the house of Judah, had reason to follow David a mortal King; have not we
more reason, to Hos. 3.5.
seek our true David, an immortal King, to follow and to Iere. 30.9.
serve him with true affection? Many other creatures may be witnesses against
those, who do refuse to follow Christ. Aristo. lib. 9. cap. 6. de hist. an^.
If the wild beasts do follow the Panther, because of his sweet smell, albeit
she kill many of them: Plin. hist. not. lib. 8. cap. 17.
If some fish in the Sea, do follow other to receive food: if the fowls of
Heaven, follow other by instinct of nature, as experience shows: Shall not
men Cant. 1.2.
run after Christ, because of the savor of his good ointments, that they
John 3.17.
through him might be saved, and that being free from all misery; Reave. 19.14
in Heaven they may follow him upon white horses, clothed with fine linen,
white and pure?

If any ask, what it is to follow Christ.

Answer. Theodo. lib. de actiua virtute.
It is not to go through those parts of the World, where he went, nor to
resort to those places of this Earth, where he resorted; but according to the
Ancients, he that loves and hates, what Christ, as God, does love and
detest; follows and imitates Christ, as much, as man may imitate God. He
that does, that which Christ as man does, follows Christ, as a Christian
should. Bernard. Lib. Sent.
To follow Christ is to abhor the vanity of the world courageously, to
abstain from sin diligently, to be endewed with true charity, and to be
followers of his holiness and piety. To follow Christ, Cyprian. lib. de abus.
is to be a sincere and right Christian, who to the uttermost of his ability,
does resemble Christ in his conversation, to embrace his virtues, faith, love,
humility, meekness, patience, and godliness, to Tit. 2.12.
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, and righteously, and
godly in this present world.

Now because men by nature are so addicted to imitation, that they will follow
the fashion of those whom they hate, as may be seen clearly by the example of
the Jews, who albeit the Egyptians oppressed and Exodus 1.13.
vexed them by cruelty, causing them to serve, and made them weary of their
lives by sore labor in clay and brick; yet the Jews followed the
superstitions and abominable idolatry of the Egyptians whom they hated, they
Psalm. 106.19.
made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten images, they turned their
glory into the similitude of a Bullock that eats grass, saying, Exodus 32.4.
These be the Gods which brought us out of the land of Egypt: The Philistimes
were enemies unto them, fighting against them, yet they Iud. 10.6.
served the Gods of the Philistimes, whom they disdained: The Ammonites also
Iud. 10.8.
vexed and oppressed the Jews, eighteen years, and yet they did imitate
their cruel idolatry; They Act. 7.43.
took up the Tabernacle of Molech, and the star of Remphan, and 2. Kin. 16.3.
made their children to go through the fire after the abominations of the
heathen, expressly against the Lords Leu. 20.2.
commandment: Seeing then men are given to follow the example of others, let
us look to Christ, and be followers of him; And then Psalm. 23.6.
doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow us, and we shall remain for
ever in the house of the Lord.

CHAP. XX. We should receive Christ, and entertain Him.
IF thou come to Christ, thou will find him coming to thee for to dwell in
thy soul, let it be thy chief care readily to receive him: Christus primo
aduentu venit quesiturus hospitium, August.
in secundo venit daturus regnum. Christ at his first coming comes to seek
a lodging; at his second coming he will come to give a kingdom: Order of this
chapter. The misery of those who refuse Christ.
will thou be content to give him lodging here within thy heart, he will
afterward give to thee an eternal kingdom in heaven?

In this Chapter, I will speak of five things: 1. of their misery who refuse
him: 2. wherefore we should receive him: 3. How or in what manner we should
receive him: 4. where we should place him: Lastly, what entertainment we ought
to give him and the tokens thereof.

First grievous is their punishment who refuse Christ: Heb. 12.25.
for if they did not escape which refused Moses that spoke on earth, much more
shall they not escape, if they refuse and turn away from him that speaks and
offers himself from heaven. If the in-dwellers 2. King. 15.16.
of Tiphsah were destroyed and smitten, and the woman with child ripped up,
because they refused and not opened to Menahem, an evil King of Israel; what
woeful destruction will come upon those who shall refuse Christ a good King,
Isa. 32.1.
who shall reign in justice? what terrible punishment does abide them who
despise him, Dan. 7.14.
whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken away,
whose kingdom shall never be destroyed?

If the Lord killed Nabal, and 1. Sam. 29.38.
smote him that he died, because he refused and railed on David, who was as a
wall to his servants keeping sheep; what plagues will he pour one those who
disdain and refuse Christ, Heb. 13.20.
the great shepherd, the 1. Pet. 5.4.
chief shepherd, the good 1. Pet. 2.25.
shepherd, and Bishop of our souls?

Men of wisdom do discommend Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh who
misregarding that most valiant and liberal Emperor Henry the fourth, did deny
to receive him, Foxus.
within the town Cannisio; he suffered him three days together to stand
barefooted at the gates of the City before he would admit him to his
presence. This Pope shortly after that died in Salerno. Are they not more to be
blamed who stubbornly refused Christ, who has Isa. 11.5.
justice to be the girdle of his loins, Zach. 9.10.
and faithfulness the girdle of his reins, who will speak peace unto the
heathen, and Reu. 5.10.
make his own Kings and Priests unto God? Yet many, alas, contemn Christ,
suffer him to stand many years knocking at the gates of their hearts. Christ
Ioh. 1.11.
came unto his own (to the people of the Jews) but his own received him not,
and therefore it is known what unspeakable calamity and desolation did befall
them.

Surely all who refuse to receive Christ, shall be punished fearfully, they
shall be compelled to lodge within them many sins and Devils, that will
bring more grief and displeasure unto them, than the five men of Dan brought
to Iud. 18.2.
Micha who lodged them in mount Ephraim: for they shall be spoiled of all good,
defiled with all filthiness, and destroyed with everlasting perdition of 2.
Pet. 3.7.
ungodly men.

Secondly, we have great reason to receive Christ, Causes wherefore we should
receive Christ.
for: 1. He will be most profitable to us in our life: 2. He will receive our
souls in his rest at the hour of death: 3. He will receive us in his glory at
the day of judgment.

When we receive him rightly, he will Eze 36.26.
put a new spirit within us, and power clean water upon us, and cleanse us
from all our filthiness, and that holy 1. Cor. 3.16.
spirit shall dwell in us Gal. 5.18.
to lead us, to Ephesians. 2.22.
build us in him, to be the habitation of God, to Ephesians. 3.16.
strengthen us in the inner man, to glorify us, seeing his spirit resting upon
us, 1. Pet. 4.14.
the spirit of all glory and felicity, as the Apostle Peter does testify.

Also when we receive Christ, we shall obtain life for 1. Ioh. 5.12.
he that has the son has life, and he that has not the son has not
life, truly then we are all quickened, Romans 5.10.
we are all saved by his life, without the which the life of man is more
miserable then death, and no way to be acknowledged life.

Barlaam being asked of Iosaphat the godly son of a cruel father Auemer,
Damascen. historia duorum Christi militum: sed fides historia sit paenes
authorem.
how old he was he thus answered, I am of forty five years, the young Prince
maruelling, replied: Thou appearest to me to be of threescore and ten years:
but the old Eremite further declared, if thou desire to know the years from my
nativity and natural birth thou have reckned well; for I am of a greater age
then threescore and ten: but I will not esteem my years spent in the vanity
of the world without Christ, to be in the number and measure of my life, for
while I was a slave to sin in my flesh, I was dead in the inward man: Annos
igitur mortis nunquam vitae nominabo, I shall call them the years of my death,
but never of my life he did think that he then began; to live when he first
knew and received Christ. I doubt of the truth of that history, but I
subscribe to the truth of that saying.

Moreour we shall get health when we receive Christ Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet. 2.21.
by whose stripes we are healed; by whose goodness we are made Titus 2.2.
sound in the faith, our Act. 19.12.
diseases shall depart from us, and the evil spirits shall go out of us.

Besides this, Job 12.13.
with Christ is wisdom and strength: he has counsel and understanding
without the which many may have wisdom in their lips, August.
but not in their heart; in their speech, but not in their life; and at their
death, their wisdom and counsel will be like to the Edomites, Ier. 49.7.
perishing and vanishing: but Col. 3.16.
the word of Christ will dwell plentiously in all wisdom in those who receive
him.

Furthermore, Isa. 58.14.
he will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father, and Psalm. 81.16.
with the fat of wheat, sufficing thee with honey out of the rock: he will
cover thee who art naked: Zach. 3.4.
And clothe thee with change of raiment, he will enrich thee who art poor; he
will set thee at liberty who art captiued; he will honor thee who art worthy
of shame; he will give thee joy in time of sorrow, and peace when thou art
disquieted; and he will grant grace to thee who art graceless by nature; he
will bestow upon thee a great blessing, who has deserved a fearful curse:
and which is most of all, he will give himself to thee to be thy husband, if
thou be content to receive him.

Saint Paul said to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7.2.
Receive us, we have done wrong to no man, we have consumed no man, we have
defrauded no man: Christ says to all Christians; Receive me, I have done wrong
to no person, I have consumed no person, I have defrauded no person. If they
had reason to receive the servant, we have better reason to receive the
Master, who is most righteous, who Job 33.23.
declares and bestows righteousness upon man, whose Psalm. 119.172.
commandments are all righteous, who delivers from wrong and Psalm. 103.6.
executes judgment to all that are oppressed, who will not consume thy
substance, thy body nor thy soul, but will Ezech. 24.11.
consume thy filthiness, thy scum and thy sin, who will never defraud thee,
but maintain thee in thy right, and give a most ample and rich Reu. 11.18.
reward to all his Saints that fear his name, to small and great, of
whatsoever country, sex or condition. As Rahab was rewarded, because she
received in her house and lodged the two spies sent by Joshua, hiding them from
their pursuers, therefore Josh. 6.25.
her self with her fathers household, her brethren, and all that she had was
saved, when Jericho was utterly destroyed; and as that widow of Sarepta got her
reward, who received Elias, Luke 4.25.
When great famine was throughout all the land, she was nourished and
sustained, her dead son was again quickened, and 1. King. 17.22.
revived: So they shall be most liberally rewarded, who do receive Jesus
Christ, Psalm. 23.7.
The King of glory in their hearts, that he may come to dwell in their souls,
they shall be preserved from all destruction, from endless wrath and
damnation, their dead bodies shall be raised out of the earth, they shall be
blessed and glorified for ever.

Secondly, if thou receive Christ in thy heart, thou may have boldness to
pray with Stephen at the hour of thy death, Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, who will hear thy petition and grant thee thy
request.

Thirdly, Christ will receive them within his Kingdom in the day of judgment,
who shall receive him in this earth, he will Ioh. 1.12.
Give power to them to be the sons of God, and Col. 3.24.
of the Lord they shall receive the reward of the inheritance. But who so
refuse and repel Christ, he will Hos. 9.15.
cast them out of his house to unspeakable pain and infamy; to them 2. Pet.
21.7.
the black darkness is reserved for ever.

If that malicious man 3. Ioh. 1.9.
Diotrephes be reputed miserable and infamous, because he did not receive the
Apostle John and the brethren: How accursed and wretched are all, who will not
receive Jesus Christ, who brings with him peace, plenty of good and
felicity, who promises to 2. Co. 6.17.
receive us, when we are separate from sin?

To come to speak of the third point, The manner to receive Christ.
namely, how or what manner we should receive Christ, let us receive him
reverently, speedily, willingly, joyfully, and with great humility.

First, let us receive him reverently: for his 1. Chro. 29.11.
is kingdom, and he excels as head over all: riches and honor come of
him: in his hand is power and strength, and to make great.

Ornan the Iebusite he saw David coming to him, he went out to the King, and
1. Chro. 21.21.
bowed himself with his face to the ground, he received him reverently and
spoke kindly, let the Lord my King do that which seems him good: O with what
great reverence should a Christian receive him, Isa. 33.22.
who is his judge, who is his lawgiuer, who is his King to save him, and to
glorify him.

Let us not be like those ungrateful and unhappy husbandmen, who would
neither receive nor reverence the Lords beloved son, Mark. 12.8.
but cast him out of the vineyard and killed him; therefore they were horribly
destroyed, and the vineyard given to others: but let us carefully and
continually study that we may receive him, Heb. 12.28.
please him with fear and reverence, that we may be at all times preserved and
refreshed with his everlasting blessings.

We should do this good to our selves speedily. Receive Christ speedily.
If thou wish to pray with the holy Prophet Psalm. 143.7.
O Lord hear me speedily, hide not thy face from me, for my spirit fails;
then delay not this, duty, but receive Christ speedily, that God may so
incline his ear, and harken unto thee when thou have admitted Ioh. 2.1.
Jesus the Just, thy aduocat, the reconciliation for thy sins.

As Abraham Genesis 18.6.
made have to receive Christ with two Angels, into his tent, Isaak then again
was promised, and the Lords will was revealed.

So Ioh. 8.39.
Abraham's children who do the works of Abraham, will make have to receive
Christ within their hearts, who will reveal heavenly and holy mysteries unto
them.

Truly a sincere Christians will be very sorry, because he has suffered his
Savior to remain so long time without, knocking and calling at the door of
his heart: and he knowing what abundance of precious jewels Christ brings
with him. Incontinently he will say, Genesis 24.31.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord wherefore stand thou without?

3. Receive Christ willingly.
Let us receive Christ willingly within our souls, as his Disciples Ioh. 6.21.
willingly received him into the ship. Darkness, danger, sore labor and fear
troubled them, until the time they received him: but afterward by and by the
ship was at the Land, and they were delivered from danger, fear, and vexation:
so Christ will Heb. 2.15.
deliver them who receive him, which for fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.

We have good causes willingly to admit him, Vide Vitam Bassiani.
who is true, meek, and merciful: not like that false cruel and dishonest
Emperor Bassianus Caracalla, who coming to the City of Alexandria in Egypt
was most solemnly and willingly received; but extreme cruelty was executed by
him upon the Citizens: he made them being assembled to see certain public
pastimes, to be compassed about by his soldiers, and an infinite number of
them of all ages, conditions, and degrees mercilesly to be destroyed: but
Christ Reu. 3.7.
is holy, harmless, and true; Reu. 15.3.
just and true are his ways, who is the King of Saints, who is Heb. 2.17.
a merciful and a faithful high Priest to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people, who will succor those that are tempted, and comfort the
wearied; Receive Christ joyfully.
he most willingly therefore should be received.

4. If the Apostle Paul desired the Philippians to Phil. 2.29.
receive Epaphroditus his companion in labor with all gladness; may I not
entreat all Christians to receive the Lord Jesus with greater gladness, who
comes to his own as he came to Bethania, sometimes to deliver wholesome
doctrine and instruction; there Luke 10.39.
Mary sat at his feet and hard his preaching; sometimes to give sweet comfort
and consolation, by Ioh. 11.44.
raising Lazarus from death.

He comes to his own as a good husbandman to his vineyard, to Isa. 27.3.
Water it every moment, to keep it night and day: O how joyfully should we
receive him, who will teach us, comfort us, refresh and preserve us? King David
received the Ark of God into his City 2. Sam. 6.12.
with gladness: should not we receive Jesus Christ the Son of God with more
gladness, in whom alone, and in whose Gal. 6.14.
cross principally we may rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious?

Lastly, Receive Christ in Humility.
Let us receive Christ with submission of mind and great humility. Elizabeth
said to the blessed Virgin: Luke 14.
Whence comes this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? It
is evident by this, that accounting her self unworthy of such company, she
well-comed Marie in Humility?

May not we Ephesians. 4.2.
With all humbleness of mind say; Whence comes this to us, that the Lord of
Life, the Son of God, the Savior of the World should come and visit us, to
desire to dwell and remain within us?

Surely every one may acknowledge with Jacob, saying, Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou
have showed to thy servant, and with David, 2. Sam. 7.18.
Who am I, O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? even as to be an house and habitation for the King of glory, and
with that godly contrition, Luke 7.6.
I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. No by 2. Pet. 1.11.
this means entering shall be ministered unto thee abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, The place wherein we should receive Christ.
touching the place which we should appoint for our Savior to have his
residence in, let us prepare our hearts for him; let a Christian be diligent
and vigilant with David, thus resolving, Psalm. 132.3, 4, 5.
I will not enter into the Tabernacle of mine house, nor come upon my pallet or
bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, until I
find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the Lord, an habitation for
the mighty God of Jacob, The room wherein thou should receive him, is thy
heart for his lodging, to the end thou may be persuaded that Ioh. 14.2.
he is preparing a place and mansion for thee in heavenly Jerusalem.

Desire thou two things for such a preparation, that thy heart like Act. 16.14.
Lydia's may be opened, Reu. 3.7.
with the key of David: 2. That thy filthy heart may be purged and cleansed by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the tears of unfeigned repentance, if thy heart
be opened, Heb. 9.8.
Then a way into the holiest place of all shall be opened unto thee. If thy
heart Act. 15.9.
by faith be purified, a sure sign of Christ's being in thee, and that he will
abide in thee afterward: Cor aperiendum est Deo, and claudendum Diabolo; August.
thou should open thy heart to God, and shut the same to the Devil.

Remember then; First, that the heart, is the place or seat of Christ, and of
true Religion: Secondly, that it is the wellspring of our actions: Thirdly,
that it is the most precious part of man; therefore as traitorous Absalom,
studied 2. Sam. 15.6 Bernard. Sermon. 46.
to steal the hearts of the men of Israel, from the righteous King: So Satan
most diligently, labors to steal our hearts, from our blessed King and
Savior. But let us Pro. 4.23.
keep our hearts with all diligence. The men of this World, use to say that
he keeps a good Castle, who keeps his own body: but the heart and soul,
should rather be kept as a Castle, to receive the Lord of life, that he may
remain therein. Let not Christians do, as did the Bethlemites; they provided
not a Luke 2.7.
room for Christ, at his birth in the Inn; and therefore he was laid in a
cratch.

Now we read not that after that time, he returned ever to visit Bethleem,
where he was borne: but let us, I say again, with all carfulness, prepare
our hearts to be his Mansion, and when he shall take full possession of them,
then our shut hearts, shall be Act. 16.14.
opened; our narrow hearts Isa. 60.9.
shall be enlarged, for to Psa. 119.32.
run the way of his commandments; our dark hearts, shall be Ephesians. 1.18.
lightened, that we may know the right of his glorious inheritance; our filthy
and polluted hearts, Iere. 4.14.
shall be washed and purged from wickedness, that we may be saved; our empty
hearts, void of grace, shall be well furnished by him, John 1.14.
who is full of grace and truth.

If thou be content to receive Christ in thy heart, he will then change thy
heart, which by nature, 1. Iere. 17.9.
is deceitful and wicked; 2. which is Isa. 6.10.
fat and senseless; 3. which is Psalm. 101.4.
froward and crooked; 4. which is Eccles. 1.33.
double; 5. which is Hos. 10.2.
divided; 6. which is Ezec. 11.19
stony and obdured; 7. which is Heb. 3.12.
evil and unfaithful; 8. which will be come Deuteronomy. 28.63
trembling, and astonished; 9. which is Deuteronomy. 30.17.
turned out of the way, and diuerted; 10. which is Ezech. 2.4.
stiff, and not bowed; 11. which is unholy, and Iere. 9.26.
uncircumcised; 12. which is 2. Chr. 26.16
proud, and lofty; 13. which is foolish, Romans 2.4.
impenitent, and earthly.

It is most profitable, to know and lament the natural wickedness,
senselessness, frowardness, doubleness, unfaithfulness, stiffenesse,
loftiness, foolishness, and hardness, of the heart; that every one being
touched with a sense, and sorrow of his own corruption and misery, may be
moved to pray seriously, that Christ would be pleased to remedy the same,
saying: Rumpe mei lapidem Cordis seruator Jesus Paulinus in P. Item. A.

Vt mollita pio viscera melle, fluant:
Fac mea men's; ferro quo nunc est durior omni,
flexilis in rectum fiat ab igne tuo.


Oh, but if thou give place to Christ, that he may have his residence within
thee: 1. He will Psalm. 51.10.
create a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within thee: 2. He will 1.
King. 3.9.
give unto thee an understanding heart, that thou may discern between good
and bad: 3. And a converted heart, (for the Lord only has power to 1. Kin.
18.37
turn again the same at last:) 4. He will make thy heart Psalm. 101.2.
upright and sincere, and thou shall walk in the uprightness thereof, serving
and loving him: 5. With thy Deuteronomy. 6.5.
whole heart. Now as that mother pleading before Solomon, would not have her 1.
King. 3.26
child divided; so thy Savior will not remain in a divided heart, because he
tells thee, that Mat. 22.37.
to love thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, is the first and greatest commandment; now none can so love him, except
he Pro. 23.26.
give his heart unto him, to be his habitation, as he requires: 6. He will Job
23.16.
soften thy heart, that after trouble, joy may come to thee: 7. He will give
thee Ezec. 11.19.
an heart of flesh, that thou may walk in his Statutes, and keep his
Judgments: 8. He will give thee Luke 8.15.
an honest and good heart, that thou may hear his Word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience. 9. When Christ dwells within thee: He will make
thy heart Neh. 9.8.
faithful like Abraham's, and ratify his Covenant with thee, thy Heb. 13.9.
heart shall be stablished with grace, and settled in his service, so that thou
shall not be carried about with diverse, and strange Doctrine: 10. He will
make thy heart both Ezech. 11.9.
new: 11. And Psalm. 125.4.
true, that God may do well to thee: 12. Psa. 119.36.
Thy heart shall be inclined unto his Testimonies, and not to covetousness:
13. Colos. 2.11.
In him thou shall be crucified, with circumsion made without hands, even with
the Romans 2.29.
circumcision of the heart: 14. Then thy Psa. 131.1.
heart shall not be hauty, neither thy eyes lofty, neither shall thou walk
in great matters hid from thee, thou shall be of Isa. 66.2.
a contrite spirit, trembling at Gods word; and although the Heaven be his
throne, and the Earth his footstool, yet thou shall be a place of his rest,
and he will ever look lovingly to thee: 15. Then when he shall 1. Kin. 8.58.
bow thine ear unto him, to observe his Commandments, it shall be penitent
and heavenly; always Psalm. 51.12.
free.

Now dear Christian, desire thou thy heart to be graced with holiness,
with wisdom, with sincerity, and uprightness, with softness, and honesty,
with goodness, and fidelity, with strength, truth, and humbleness, with
freedom, and repentance, and all good qualities? Then open thy heart to
Christ; be thou most willing, to give the same to thy Savior, to be his
habitation, who looks not 1. Sam. 16.7
on thy countenance, nor on the height of thy stature, but he beholds thy
heart, and what is in thy inward affection.

Again, The heart is the fountain of actions.
seeing thy heart is the fountain of all thy actions; for these evil things,
which Mat. 15.18.
proceed from the heart, defile the man, and Mat. 12.35.
an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things, as a good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things: thy special care should be, that the same may ever be honest
and clean: Front. lib. 2. and Trenelli.
If the Romans appointed by a Law of the twelve Tables, that their fountains,
or well-springs, should be most diligently kept from pollution and filthiness;
should not all Christians most circumspectly wisely, that their hearts may be
preserved from poison, from dung, and all pollution? For such as the heart and
inward cogitations are, such shall be thy life and outward conversation: When
the man of God, Elisha, was about to heal the bitter, and venomous waters of
Jericho; 2. King. 2.21
he went unto the spring, and cast therein salt: When God is to reform thy
evil life; first, he will go to thy heart, and powers grace, and sends his
Spirit there; so thy heart being cleansed, and well guided, thy actions shall
be holy, according to Gods Word.

But if thy heart remain dishonest and filthy, that is a fearful presage, of
some great approaching calamity. When the Temple, the house of God, which
should have been kept most holy, was made a Ioh. 2.16.
house of Merchandise, and Matthew. 21.13.
den of Thieves; that was a forerunning token, of a sudden, and doleful
destruction to come upon Jerusalem: So when the heart (which ought to be most
sanctified) becomes profane and polluted; some heavy judgment, is very
near that captive, who is so plagued.

Also consider, The heart the best part of man.
that thy heart is the most excellent part of man, and therefore fittest, and
most apt for Christ, the excellent King of glory, that he may abide therein:
and if Jude 9.
there was a debate and contention between Michael the Archangel, and the
Devil, for the body of Moses; will not Satan strive more eagerly for thy
heart, and the soul of a Christian? But dedicate thou thine heart to thy
Savior, seeking the same from thee. The Apostle Paul, did write to his dear
friend Philemon, Phile. 22.
to prepare him lodging: Thy Lord and loving husband, says to thee, prepare
me lodging, even thy heart to be my dwelling place; study thou again I
remember thee, to do three things for such preparation: First, to open thy
heart, at the least by praying to him, Revel 3.7.
who has the key of David, to open the same: Secondly, by sweeping thy heart,
with the Beesome of repentance: Thirdly, by requesting him, more earnestly to
come to thee. Let him that reads this book, and him Reave. 22.17.
that hears it, say, come now; when of his goodness he has commanded,
labor diligently to keep him. If the wiseman thus counsels thee,
concerning an earthly Physician; Eccle. 38.12.
Give place to him, let him not go from thee, for thou have need of him;
may not thou be also counseled, to give place to thy heavenly Physician,
not to let him depart from thee, for thou have continual need of him?

We read of one Syrna, Stepha.
daughter to Damethus King of Caria, that she was well content, to be married
unto the Physician Podalirius, albeit a stranger, because he cured her,
wounded with a fall from the house; she did retain and reverence her husband:
Thou by sin, have gotten a more dangerous and deadly fall; thy Mediciner
vouchsafes to heal thy sick soul; first, give then a place to him, and
suffer him not to go from thee, labor greatly, ever to retain and reverence
him. Entertain Christ remaining within thee


Moreover, during his residence with thee, use all manner of diligence,
employing thy self to the uttermost of thy power, to entertain him most
kindly; study thou with thy whole endeavor to make a feast unto him, give to
him the dishes and delicates wherewith he is fed, wherein he delights: Oh
Christian, remember with consideration, that thou have wonderful good reason,
to make a feast unto thy blessed Savior, remaining with thee.

Did Abraham Gene. 21.8.
make a great feast, the same day that Isaac was weaned? Wilt not thou make a
banquet to Christ, when thy soul is weaned from sin? Did Isaac make Gene.
26.39
a feast to Abimelech King of the Philistims, when a Covenant was between
them? Shall not thou make a banquet to Christ, who has made a Covenant with
thee, who is King of Heaven and of all Nations? Did Joseph Ge c. 43.34.
feast his brethren, especially his younger brother Benjamin? Shall not thou
feast thy Redeemer, Romans 8.29.
the first borne among many brethren? Exodus 18.12.
Did Aaron and all the Elders of Israel, entertain Iethro father in-law to
Moses? They came to eat bread with him before God: shall not thou labor with
all industry, and carefulnes to entertain him, thy Isa. 9.6.
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, the Lord of life and salvation?

We will now for thy edification briefly declare, With what entertainment
Christ is feasted: Humility.
what entertainment thou should bring to Christ abiding within thee: first
humility and lowliness of mind which our Lord much regards and rewards.
For he will revive the spirit of the humble and give life to them that are of a
contrite heart; also Them that be meek will he guide in judgment and teach
the humble his way; for certainly the humblest shall be the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven, the reward of humility and the fear of God; is riches,
and glory, and life.

Secondly, Sorrow.
2. Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow and true contrition for thy foolish sins and iniquities, Psalm.
51.17.
the sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit a broken heart Joel 2.13.
a rent heart with grief, Act. 3.37.
a pricked heart with sore displeasure for displeasing thy Savior, Isa. 58.14.
chattering like a Crane, mourning as a done, Mich. 4.10.
sorrowing like a woman in travel, and thus Psalm. 126.5.
sowing in tears shall reap enjoy, It is said more frequently then truly by
the Graecians (...) That he is fortunate who lives without sorrow: but
Christians far more wisely, That he is unhappy and unfortunate who lives
without sorrow and grief for his sins, the time of his trouble shall
afterward come, so that, he shall Reu. 16.10.
gnaw his tongue for sorrow and vexation.

Thirdly labor to have faith, without which Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ will not dwell in thine heart, without the which thou have not an eye
to see him, neither an hand to apprehend him, nor a place to lodge him, seeing
Act. 15.9.
faith is that which purifieth the heart, Heb. 11.6.
without the which it is impossible to please God.

Isa. 57.15.
Psalm. 25.9.
Math. 18.4.
Prou. 22.4.
Fourthly make have to crucify and cast away thy sins displeasing him,
Banishment of sin.
even thy lewd Ephesians 4.22.
conversation in time past, the old man that is corrupt through deceivable
lusts; if thou be Christ's, desirous to give him pleasant entertainme^t, thou will Gal. 5.21.
crucify the flesh with the affections thereof, thou will speedily remove the
evil which displeases him, for as the Daughters of Heth Genesis 26.35.
were grief of mind to Isaac and Rebeckah, so our sins they weary Jesus
and grieve his holy spirit, also they annoy and destroy the soul of man; the
natural Poet says truly.

Quae laedunt oculos festinas demere, Horat. Epist. 2.
quid si
Est aninus, differs curandi tempus in annum.
Let us use all diligence, With Regeneration.
without delay to expel our heinous infirmities; which defile our hearts,
displease our Savior, and destroy our souls, that are much more to be
regarded and cured then our bodily eyes.

Fifthly Ephesians. 4.23.
be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and put on the new man which after God
is created in righteousness and holiness, and feast thy Savior with love
obedience and with the fruits of true repentance, those are the sauory and
pleasant meats which Jesus loves: Indeed Isaac delights to eat venison, but
Christ is only feasted with regeneration. Tokens to know Christ entertained.


Touching the tokens to know if Christ remain within thee, and be entertained
by thee, observe; that as it is known when a King dwells Genesis 27.3.
within a hid place by their signs: First, There are Porters abiding at the
gate and entry, not suffering vagabonds or beggars to enter within: Secondly,
There is cleanness and honesty in the Courts, no dunghill or filthiness:
Thirdly, There is magnificent, Stateliness and Tapistrie in the Halles:
Fourthly, There is honest company, Noble personages, Grave counselors, Wise,
Learned, and Godly men resorting hither: Fifthly, There is good furniture and
plentiful provision, beseeming a Royal estate.

So also it will be soon known, if the great King abides within thee: 1.
Then as 2. Chro. 23.19.
Iehoiada set porters by the gates of the house of the Lord, even of the
material temple of timber and stone, that none that was unclean should enter
in; so thou will have a porter at the gate of the spiritual temple, thou will
pray with the Prophet Psalm. 141.3.
set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth and keep the door of my lips, thou will Job 31.1.
make a covenant with thy eyes, that vanity come not within, by that way; thou will set a porter before thy ears and Pro. 19.27.
not hear the instruction that causes thee err from the word of knowledge:
2. Thou will not have Ephesians. 4.29.
corrupt communication in thy mouth, no Ephesians. 5.3.
uncleanness shall be named by thee, Colos. 4.6.
thy speech always shall be gracious and powdered with salt; and thou shall
rightly Isa. 19.18.
speak the language of Canaan, to the glory of God, and to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers: 4. thou 2. Cor 9.8.
having all sufficiency in all things shall abound in every good work: 5. and
Acts. 10.35.
working righteousness shall be accompanied by the holy Angels, and accepted
with God; who will give unto thee contentment here, and happiness for ever: to
whom with his son and holy spirit be eternal praise and glory. Amen.

FINIS.

