CIVIL CONSIDERATIONS UPON MANY AND SUNDRY HISTORIES, AS WELL ANCIENT AS
MODERN, AND principally upon those of Guicciardin.

CONTAINING SUNDRY RVLES AND PRECEPTS FOR PRINCES, COMMONWEALTHS, CAPTAINS,
CORONELS, Ambassadors and others, Agents and servants of Princes, with sundry
aduertisements and counsels concerning a civil life, gathered out of the
examples of the greatest Princes and Commonwealths in Christendom.

HANDLED AFTER THE MANNER OF A discourse, by the Lord Remy of Florence, and
done into French by Gabriel Chappuys, Tourangeau, and out of French into
English, by W. T.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY. printer's device of Felix Kingston

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his
shop under S. Dunstons Church in the West. 1601.

TO THE NOBLE, VALOROVS, AND MOST WORTHY OF ALL HONOR, SIR ROBERT SYDNEY
KNIGHT, LORD GOVERNOR OF FLVSHING, and the Castle of the Ramekins, etc.
MY Lord, knowing my self much bounden unto your Lordship, for undeserved
favor some years past by your Lordship extended in my behalf: in
consideration whereof, hitherto J have not had any possibility to manifest my
desire to do your Lordship some agreeable service: but almost ever since
unable for the Wars, or other foreign employment, have remained in this
City: where encountering many books treating of sundry subjects, one compiled
by an Jtalian Gentleman, translated into the French tongue, and dedicated to
the Duke de Ioyense, came to my hands, containing sundry discourses of
Princes, Commonwealths, Chieftians in Wars and others, collected out of
several Authors, but chiefly out of Guicciardin. Which seeing it has with
good acceptance passed among those two Nations, J presumed could not be but
well entertained among our Country men, for whose benefit, J attempted to set
it out of French into our vulgar tongue. And as it was my fortune many years
since, first to bear Arms under your Lordships leading and command in the
Wars: so this being the first fruit of my labor with my pen, J humbly
present unto your Lordship; beseeching the same to accept thereof, as a pledge
of the honor, love, and duty which J owe, until it shall please God to
enable me to make better show thereof. J mean not herein to be understood to
presume to prescribe any rules or precepts for your Lordshippe to follow, whose
wisdom, learning and experience is well known sufficient to compile any
volume of far greater experience: But if that by your Lordships censure, this
may pass for current, J rest assured that it will be generally well accepted,
and nothing doubt, but that many thereby may reap profit, and therein find
fit aduertisements to learn them by other men's harms to beware, and examples
to imitate, which if it so happen, J shall hold my time and labor well
employed. If the style please not as J desire, J entreat to be held the more
excused, seeing it is my first fault herein, and also seeing that in former
time it has bin the least part of my profession: but if I ever hereafter
undertake the like task, J will, God willing, endeavor to make amends. And so
humbly beseeching your Lordship to pardon this my presumption, praying to God
for the long continuance of your health, increase of all worldly honor, and
perpetual felicity in the world to come: J rest ever

Your Lordships in all duty most humble to be commanded, W. T.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MOST MIGHTY LORD, MY LORD ANNE DE IOYENSE, DVKE AND PEER
OF FRANCE, FIRST GENTLEMAN OF THE KINGS CHAMBER, CAPTAIN OF an hundred men at
Arms of his Ordenaunces, Admiral of France and Bretaigne, Governor and
Lieutenant General for his Majesty in his Country and Duchy of Normandy.
MY Lord, the Philosopher Bion, being demanded what beast was most noisome
unto all men, answered, if you ask me of savage wild beasts, it is a Tyrant:
but if you ask me of tame beasts, it is a Flatterer. Diogenes as I remember,
made in a manner such an answer, who in place of a Tyrant, speaks of a
detractor and backbiter, and says in another place, as Antisthenes in
Laertius, that it is more dangerous to fall among Flatterers, than among
Ravens, I have desired to be far from that vice, which now adays is common
and familiar with many men, who in the beginning of their works, insert a
thousand lies, attributing excessive praises unto those, unto whom they
address the same, a man may rightly call them the fauning dogs of Kings,
Princes, and great Lords, even as Diogines, of whom we have above made mention,
called Aristippus, because he flattered Dionysius, the Tirant of Syracusa: the
interpreter of Nicephorus in his Ecclesiastical history, reports, that
Constantine Emperor of the Romans, did so abhor Flatterers, that he called
them the Moathes and vermin of the Court: Sigismond did so hate them, that
hearing one (beyond measure) to praise him, comparing him with the Gods, he
gave him a blow on the ear: Alfonso King of Arragon and Sicilia, said that
Flatterers were like unto Wolves, and as Wolves in grating and gnawing use to
devour certain other beasts, even so Flatterers tend to the ruin of Princes
and great Lords by their flattering and lying. To what purpose so many
examples? to show (my Lord) that vowing and consecrating this my little labor,
I intend not by flattery, to procure to be the more acceptable, for although
that I know my self far from it, if I should flatter you by too much
praising you, I should be afraid you would use me, as Alexander used the
historian Aristobulus, who having written a book of his acts (wherein he
showed himself a flatterer) recited to him (in a certain voyage by sea) the
contents thereof: Alexander being unable to endure his flattery, plucked the
book out of his hands, and threw it into the River Hydaspis, and turning
himself toward him, said, Thou do better deserve to be thrown there thy
self, seeing that thou make me so to fight alone, and that thou, with one
only dart killest an Elephant: even so, thinking that I peradventure exceeding
the limits of reason, you might throw my book into the fire, and make a
sacrifice thereof unto Vulcan. But to keep me from this fault, in this
dedication, I have desired to observe two principal points, which will
preserve me from incurring the dishonest name of those abouesaid: the first is,
that I here say not that to your praise, which I might well say, but do rather
hold my peace, than peradventure to wander (to no purpose) through those
spacious fields of your praises, which ought to be handled by a more skillful
pen than mine. The second is, that I address my self to a personage, so
illustrious, noble, and generous, that although I should say all the good of
the world, I ought not to be reprehended of the vice abouesaid, seeing that he
is not only worthy of all praise, but also surpasses it: the common report,
all France, the favor of the most Christian most magnanimous, and most noble
Monarke bear sufficient testimony of the rare virtues, and singular
perfections which are in you, which raise you above all the greatness which you
enjoy: for dignities and greatness serve to little purpose, or are rather
hurtful, without the noble virtues wherewith they ought to be adorned: which
is the cause that I boldly present unto you, this my little book, which
although unworthy of you, after an infinite number of others, which the gentle
pens of our France have dedicated unto you, assuring me so much in your grave
humanity, that you will give no worse entertainment unto this, which I here
humbly present unto you, than you have done unto others, which peradventure
more boldly have prevented themselves unto your view. This doing (my Lord)
having made an end of the preface of my book, of the estate, description and
government of the kingdoms and Commonwealths of the world, almost imprinted
to be presented to the King, you shall give me occasion to attempt (according
to my ordinary profession of writing) some greater and more serious matter,
which shall not peradventure be unworthy of you, and will not fear (seeing
your natural goodness and clemency) to weary you with that, whereof you have
but too much, and which daily comes to your hands, seeing the great number of
books which are vowed unto you, which makes me steadfastly to believe, that
if you received them ill, and gave them evil countenance, there would not be
so many addressed unto you; neither should you be so followed by the muses,
which fly all those which hate them: in the mean time, I beseech you to
accept in good part my humble devotion, which I offer at the feet of your
greatness, which I pray our good God (my Lord) long to preserve by his grace,
and to grant you Nestors years, according to the desire of all the gentle
wits in France: from Paris the last of November. 1584.

Your most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate servant, Gabriel
Chappuys Tourangeau.

THE ORDER OF THE CHAPTERS AND ARGVMENTS HANDLED IN THESE CIVIL CONSIDERATIONS.
THe advice of great Princes is not to be lightly regarded, but to be noted,
especially if those Princes be friends. Chap. 1. fol. 1 That it is very
dangerous to be governed by the same example, without the same reason, and the
same fortune. Chap. 2. fol. 3 Whether it be lawful upon any occasion, to
forget good turns received, and not to seem thankful toward the benefactor.
Chap. 3. fol. 8 That he who by himself, or by any other, begins any
dangerous enterprise, without foreseeing the end and issue thereof, brings
himself and others in peril, and is constrained to do some things, little to
his honor. Chap. 4. fol. 10 That ill Genies and unclean spirits often times
suffer themselves to be seen and heard by men, and have appeared to diverse,
foretelling them of many matters. Chap. 5. fol. 12 That it is very dangerous to
jest and scoff with men of valor, which are sudden, and as some say, have
their blood in their nails. Chap. 6. fol. 14 Which may be well perceived by
the doings of Jews Sforce, when he committed the guard of Valencia to Donat
Raffignin. Chap. 7. fol. 17. That it is a great fault in any man to give
himself to robbing and pillage, when he ought to fight, which has been the
occasion of the ill success of many fair enterprises. Chap. 8. fol. 18 The
Ambassadors of Princes ought not to show themselves fearful in any case, but
virtuously to accommodate themselves to all occasions that shall happen. Chap.
9. fol. 23 Between reconciled friends the least suspicion breeds great
distrust, and causes them again to become enemies. Chap. 10. fol. 25 It is an
evil example in any Commonwealth to prescribe laws, and not to observe the
same, principally in those which are the authors thereof, and do not defend,
and maintain those laws against all such as would infringe them. Chap. 11.
fol. 27 In our affairs and occurrences we ought to settle and ground more
trust and assurance in him which expects good from us, then in him who has
already received the same. Chap. 12. f. 29 He which takes more authority
upon him then appertains to his dignity and office, commits an error, and
seldom escapes unpunished. Chap. 13. f. 31 Whether a public servant of a
Prince or Commonwealth may pass the limits of the Commission given to him or
no. Chap. 14. f. 35 Whether Jews Poggio did err in refusing to take
possession of the Duchy of Milan, in the name and behalf of Alphonse King of
Naples, because he had no commission thereto, the which estate was renounced
and abandoned by Phillip Maria Vicount to the said King, being by him nominated
and instituted heir unto the said Duchy. Chap. 15. f. 38 That he who is
disloyal and unfaithful to the first friend, may yet prove trusty and
faithful to the second. Chap. 16. f. 42 To deny unto a people their first
requests, is to make them the better content with what they receive, and to
make them the more moderate in their demands. Chap. 17. f. 44 That in choosing
Generals, and chief Commanders, their virtue ought more to be regarded, then
the noblenes of their blood, or any private affection. Chap. 18. f. 46 That in
time of dangerous wars, men of virtue and worth ought to be preferred and
placed in government, and when a man in small enterprises has carried himself
honorably therein, and yet would make himself chief and have principal
command in great matters, he deserves to be repelled and put back. Chap. 19.
f. 48 How dangerous it is in two contrary, and enemies Armies, to have
souldirs of one particular nation. Chap. 20. f. 51 That lightness of belief is
a great fault in any man, and that too much credulity has bred and caused
many evils. Chap. 21. f. 53 That it is neither good nor sure to continue
obstinate, and not to believe often aduertisements by sundry persons. Chap.
22. f. 57 That the obstinacy of those who are established in great authority,
breeds many disorders, which afterward cannot be remedied. Chap. 23. f. 60
That courtesies bestowed upon obstinate enemies, using them with gentleness and
favor, serve to no purpose, but are employed in vain. Chap. 24. f. 62 That
the suspicions increased and made greater, and the speeches and ill rapports by
men in authority, is the occasion that men oftentimes become cruel. Chap. 25.
f. 63 That no man ought either in jest or by any other means to put the Prince
in jealousy of his state, for that it is a matter full of danger. Chap. 26. f.
65 Which may be well perceived by the doings of Valentine, who having requested
passage of the Florentines, set forwards and marched on with his Army, without
attending their answer. Chap. 27. f. 67 That Princes and great Lords ought not
to despise him who desires audience, and chiefly if he may peradventure rise
to some high degree. Chap. 28. f. 69 That those estates which are not mighty
and puissant, cannot accommodate themselves to valiant and courageous
enterprises, and that their resolutions are more often taken perforce, then by
their wills. Chap. 29. fol. 71 That he commits a great error who reposeth
trust in him to whom he has done some former injury. Chap. 30. f. 73 That it
is not a deed worthy of blame, by subtlety and policy to draw unto him a
certain kind of pernicious men, to the end to punish them for faults
committed, or to hinder and let them so as they commit no more. Chap. 31. f.
80. That a man, be he never so wicked, does not always all the ill which is
in his power, no although he have a will and a desire to do the same. Chap.
32. f. 82 That enterprises put in execution by the persuasion of Rebels and
banished men, are dangerous, and seldom come to good end. Chap. 33. f. 84 That
the faults committed by the familiars and kinsmen of Princes, are oftentimes
punished in the persons of those Princes which have tolerated those faults, and
not on those friends and familiars which committed the same. Chap. 34. f. 86
That it is a thing very dangerous for a Prince or Common wealth, not to revenge
an injury done to the state. Chap. 35. f 88 That he who is in prosperity,
ought not to reproach him who is fallen into adversity, for that he little
knows what may happen to himself. Chap. 36. f. 90 That mighty
Commonwealths and excellent personages ought not to be blamed, although they
give place to some great force, and be oppressed by fortune. Chap. 37. f. 92
That he who of an enemy will become a friend, ought not only to forget all
injuries past, but also to put from him all such things as may reduce the same
to memory. Chap. 38. f. 101 A man ought not to give credit to an error, which
he sees committed by his enemy, but rather to believe that he does such a
fault to some purpose, and that under the same lies hidden some deceit or
ambush. Chap. 39. f. 103 A Captain in time of war ought in all times and
places to be so vigilant and in such readiness, that he may avoid the blame to
have warred preposterously, and not to have thoroughly done his endeavor. Chap.
40. f. 106 When a man has news, and is advertised of a victory, it is better
to pursue and assure the same, then to triumph and make good cheer for joy.
Chap. 41. f. 108 That enterprise seldom fails which is noisome and hurtful
to the enemy, and whereof a man knows that he stands in fear. Chap. 42.
fol. 111 To iniure the statues, images and pictures of Princes in their life
time, is a poor revenge, and oftentimes brings great harm to him who does
the same. Chap. 43. f. 112 A Prince or Commonwealth, which has to deal with
a mighty and well armed enemy, ought not to refuse any honest and reasonable
composition and agreement, by reason that the hope of prevailing is doubtful
and incertaine. Chap. 44. f. 115 It is a great fault in confederates, to be
slow in succouring and helping one another in time of danger, and loss and
damage that rises thereof. Chap 45. f. 118 When succor sent to a friend or
confederate, is insufficient to rid and free him out of danger and trouble,
through being too weak, it brings danger, loss and dishonor. Chap. 46. 120
An Ambassador ought not to regard to be accounted importune by the Prince with
whom he has to deal, provided that he satisfy his own Prince in that which
he desires. Chap. 47. f. 122 What manner of men they ought to be, who are
sent in ambassade and office to other Princes. Chap. 48. f. 123 That an enemy
be always accounted of and held in reputation: for who so regards him not,
despises him, often to his own loss and damage. Chap. 49. f. 125 Virtuous
and worthy deeds are always more requited with ingratitude and reproach, then
with commendation and reward. Chap. 50. f. 128 Princes ought to give ear to
such as complain of their governors and officers: for it is a dangerous thing
not to regard them. Chap. 51. f. 131 Public officers and ministers of Princes
being found guilty in having done any unjust thing, ought to be punished for
example. Chap. 52. f. 133 To execute cruelty is often hurtful to him that
uses it. Chap. 53. fol. 136 Let no man give credit to the promises and
safeguard or assurance of a cruel man, desirous to reign and govern. Chap.
54. f. 138 It is a pernicious thing to a Prince to have two Captains general
in the wars, which strive for pre-eminence, or between whom is envy and
emulation. Chap. 55. f. 140 No man ought to give credit to the words and
promises of fugitives and runnawaies: for who so reposeth trust in them,
without being first well ascertained of them, commits a great error. Chap.
56. f. 143 One only word, being misunderstoode, may breed great hurt.
Chap. 57. fol. 145 Who so will impart unto his servant any thing which may
concern his life, or honor, must resolve with himself never after to
displease him. Chap. 58. fol. 146 It has always bin held for a thing blame
worthy to vaunt and boast by word, or writing, and he greatly erreth who
promises to himself any certainty of a doubtful enemy. Chap. 59. f. 149
Which may be considered and learned here by the Lords of Venice, who would not
suffer a gentleman of theirs, to kill Jews Sforce Duke of Milan. Chap. 60.
fol. 152 In time of war it is not good to resolve to hold places ill and hard
to be kept, and to stop passages. Chap. 61. f. 154 How much it avails for a
Captain to know in what state his enemy is in. Chap. 62. f. 156 Spies are
necessary for Princes and Captains of Armies, and in what sort a man ought to
carry himself with them. Chap. 63. f. 159 Sundry Captains have obtained
very great victories in the wars, with very little loss of their troops and
soldiers. Chap. 64. f. 162 Words uttered without consideration, have been the
occasion of much evil, as well to them who spoke them, as to others. Chap. 65.
f. 165 Who so does evil, or offends another in secret, thinking that it
shall not be known, he is often deceived, and feels the pain thereof.
Chap. 66. fol. 169 It ill beseems a Prince, or great Captain to say; In
truth I had not thought it, and that enterprises put in execution ought not be
grounded upon vain and deceiving hopes. Chap. 67. fol. 173 To deny some
requests to him to whom a man in some sort is bound, does not therefore yield a
man ungrateful, although by the aid and assistance of the demaunder, he has
attained unto some great dignity. Chap. 68. fol. 175 A good counsel, tending
to the profit of the Prince or Commonwealth, ought not to be concealed, for
fear that it be not put in execution. Chap. 69. f. 177 Promises voluntarily
made, ought to be held and performed, and the evil which ensues through
default thereof. Chap. 70. f. 179 In what case promises exacted by force, ought
to be performed. Chap. 71. f. 180 When a General or Commander in chief,
too much doubts his enemy, and too much distrusteth his own forces, he can
never effect any laudable enterprise. Chap. 72. f. 183 Princes ought to give no
charge to covetous men. Chap. 73. f. 186 Princes ought to suffer their servants
and familiars to grow rich, so as it be not by dishonest means. Chap. 74. f.
188 It is very dangerous to let slip time, and not to execute what is
determined and resolved upon, principally in the wars. Chap. 75. f. 189 Those
Princes which make no reckoning of their Generals, which serve them faithfully,
but give them occasion to leave their pay and service, commit great faults.
Chap. 76. f. 192 A private Captain, serving a Prince or General, ought not to
receive any present or gift from any other Prince or General, enemy to his
Lord and Master. Chap. 77. f. 196 When an Ambassador speaks otherwise then
as his Master, he deserves to be had in derision. Chap. 78. f. 197 When an
Ambassador so handles his Masters business, that it is at the point to be
mocked and laughed at, he cannot avoid to bear blame. Chap. 79. f. 199 When a
Rebel or a banished man is pardoned, and by his Princes grace and favor
permitted to return into his country, he ought not to doubt of the faith of
his Prince. Chap. 80. f. 201 How that man ought to bear himself, to whom is
denied the grace desired of his Prince. Chap. 81. f. 203 That Captain who
leaves a strong place ill guarded, to take or surprise another, makes a
fault. Chap. 82. f. 205 Courtesies may be used between enemy and enemy,
without deserving blame of either side. Chap. 83. f. 207 It is a very dangerous
thing to tell Princes their faults and imperfections, although that at
sometimes it be very necessary to do so. Chap. 84. f. 209 It is a most notable
folly to entermeddle with enterprises without consideration, principally in
the wars. Chap. 85. f. 214 It avails more to provide according to the
aduertisements and rumors of dangerous accidents, which may annoy a Prince
and Commonwealth, then to make no account thereof. Chap. 86. f. 214 Innocence
and a clear conscience make a man bold and hardy, giving him heart and courage
to show himself in all places and before all persons. Chap. 87. f. 216 Ill
speeches and backbitings ought not draw a man to do any thing against reason
and judgment, especially in the wars. Chap. 88. f. 218 To despise, rail at,
and backbite any man, breeds hatred against him that uses it, who seldom
escapes unpunished. Chap. 89. f. 220 That Princes ought to punish backbiters,
and in no case to endure them. Chap. 90. 222 An innocent man accused of some
great fault, ought not to set himself upon trial of incertaine proofs, which
happen unto him otherwise then he thought. Chap. 91. f. 225 The inward
familiars and Secretaries of Princes may commit many errors, by means whereof
they are in danger of their Princes favor and their own lives. Chap. 92. f.
228 It is a great honor and profit to a Captain sometimes to yield and
consent to the desire of his soldiers, thereby to maintain and hold himself
in the love and friendship of his soldiers. Chap. 93. f. 230 It is a thing
blame worthy in all men to be noted for inconstant and light headed, which in
a Captain is held for a most notable vice. Chap. 94. f. 232 A General or
Commander in chief, ought not to be touched in his honor and reputation,
principally by those who made choice of him, and during the time that he is in
Arms. Chap. 95. f. 235 It is both honorable and profitable to treat of peace
between those which are in wars. Chap. 96. f. 237 He which goes into another
country with charge of importance, ought to frame himself to the fashions of
the country wherein he is: for to live after the custom of his own country
is not every where good. Chap. 97. f. 239 It is a great shame, and a thing very
dishonest, to do wrong and injury to strangers. Chap. 98. f. 243 The vice of
ingratitude is worthy of blame in all manner persons. Chap. 99. f. 248
The end of the Table of the Chapters.
(...)^^crets, than he which governed that Commonwealth. Don Diego of Charles
the fifth, and this Governor with his garrison of Spaniards, which he had with
him, bare himself in such sort, that the Sienois unable any longer to endure
their insolency, resolved to chase them from thence, and yield themselves
subjects to the King of France, Henry the second of that name: and this matter
was hotly managed and pursued by such men as were most affected to the French.
This, notwithstanding that it was carried very secretly, came to the knowledge
of the Duke of Florence, as to him who took careful heed, and vigilant care,
for his own Don Diego de Mendozza made no account of the Duke of Florence,
when he gave him to understand of the rebellion and revolt of the City of
Siena.
and the Emperors, which was his neighbor: and gave advertisement thereof to
Don Diego, who either for his boasting vainglory, or for that he esteeming
himself more, then indeed he was, made no account of this advertisement,
neither gave credit thereto, but very proudly answered him, that the Emperor
had given him the charge and government of the state of Siena, and that he
well knew how to govern it without his aid or counsel: and therefore that
he should take care for his own estate of Florence. Mendozza making no
reckoning of the kind and loving advertisement of the Duke, Don Diego, who,
about certain his business and affairs, was gone to Rome, executing their
desseignes, slew sundry of the Spaniards, and shut up the rest, perforce
within their Fortress, and displayed the Ensigns of France. The revolt of
Siena was signified to Don Diego being at Rome, who came presently in post to
Florence, to desire counsel and aid of the Duke: The subtle answer of the
Duke of Florence, to Don Diego de Mendo^za, Governor of Siena.
But Cosmo perceiving that he should procure war for himself, if he should
show himself Mendozza had despised his advertisement, answered him very
wisely, that he would now follow his Counsel; and be careful and vigilant
to rule and govern his own estate of Florence, without otherwise in any sort,
to trouble himself about the affairs of Siena, whereof the Emperor had given
him the charge and government. Do not mock then at the aduertisements of
great Princes, for it may possibly be that they know that which others know
not, and it is better to seem to regard it, than Mendozza had well noted the
aduertisements of Duke Cosmo, he might have found remedy sufficient for the
revolt, and to have incountred with that which followed: and though that he
could not have let the conspiracy; yet he might have been able to have
resisted the force thereof, with the help of the succors near at hand. And
finally, the vain boasting of Mendozza was well known, and that he alone
was not a man to resist so great an inconvenience, as afterward followed in
the City of Siena; and a man

CHAP. 2. That it is very dangerous to be governed by the same example, without
the same reason, and the same fortune.
CHarles the 8. King of France, being come into Italy, at the instance and
procurement of Jews Duke of Milan, for the conquest of Naples, against those
of Arrago^, the French army grew to be so terrible in Italy, that they were
all afraid thereof: and for that the French in their journey toward Naples
determined to pass through Tuscane, particularly because of the Peterde
Medicis, who then with great authority managed the affairs of the Florentine
Commonwealth, perseuering firm in the amity of the house of Arragon, would
give no ear to the Kings demands: who requiring passage, offered many fair
conditions, if it might be granted; and thereto added many threatenings, if it
were denied. Peter de Medicis hereupon entertained the King with delays,
alleging, that the could not give any sudden answer, for that the chief
Burgesses, and Citizens were at their farms and possessions Finizan sacked by
the French.
they sacked Finizan: and afterward being in the way toward Serezana, a place
fortified by the Florentines, but not sufficiently to withstand so great
forces, they would march no further, without taking the first town that should
oppose it self against them, which was the occasion that they were in great
fear at Florence, and began to speak liberally against Peter de Medicis,
blaming his obstinacy,

In this mean season the French continued the siege before Serezana and
Serezanell, and at the river of Magre they defeated Paul Orsin, which came with
certain troops of horse and foot, to have relieved Serezana. Which Peter de
Medicis understanding, and considering the Laurence de Medicis his father, who
by the like manner of proceeding with Ferdinand King of Naples, purchased
public safety to his country, and particular quiet to himself; he thinking
that it would happen unto him with the King of France, as it happened to his
father with the King of Naples: and so came to King Charles, Peter de Med^cis
chased from his coun^^^.
and finally drove him out of the city. From this doing of Peter de Medicis,
this advice and counsel may be drawn, which Guicciardin wisely notes, which
is this: That it is a matter very dangerous to follow the example of another,
if a man in general or particular have not the same reason, the same wit, and
the same fortune. The^ first I say, Peter de Medicis had justly balanced his
reasons, with those of Laurence his father, he would not by so sudden a
determination, have cast himself into his enemies arms.

Three things there ought to have met and agreed in one, to have Laurence his
determination did: to wit, the reason, the wisdom, and the fortune, which
ought to have been alike and the same. Comparison between the manner of
proceeding of Peter de Medicis with the King of France, and of Laurence de
Medicis with Alphonse king of Naples
The reasons which caused Laurence to take that course, were these: First, he
knew that he had at once to deal with two very mighty enemies, strangers, the
one of which was the Pope, the other the King of Naples: and knowing well that
he was not able to resist any one of them alone, he took this resolution.
For his enemies would have neither truce, nor peace, nor league, or
confederacy with him, but would absolutely put him from his estate, and the
one of them Sixtus, and King Ferdinand, had given the Florentines to
understand, that they had begun this war, not to the end to deprive or
bereave them of their public liberty, but to free them from their tyrant, and
to set them at liberty, so as they might be ruled and governed, as free men,
without depending of the will and pleasure of one man alone: which did greatly
increase their hatred against him. Guicciar. lib. 1
The sixth reason was, that he considered that

Behold the reasons which moved Laurence, wherein he showed his wit, who
consulting with himself, and the greatness of his courage, took the benefit of
the time. For winter being come, he procured and obtained truce for two
months: and during that time, he acquired and won to him the love and good
will of King Ferdinand, to whom he wrote, that trusting in his own innocence,
he Thomas Soderini, a man of great account, and dealt so warily, that for
pledge and assurance of his faith, Laurence de Medicis reconciled to Alphonse
King of Naples.
having with ripe judgment provided for all things else, he took Soderini his
son with him to Naples, where he found Fortune very favorable and gracious
unto him. For notwithstanding Laurence his enemies solicited the King to put
him to death, yet he held his word with him, and received him royally: and
after that he had heard him in private, marueiling at the highness of his
stomach, and his great wisdom and experience in civil and military
affairs, he made peace and a league with him, and sent him back again to
Florence, with greater honor and reputation, then he had at his coming from
thence. His son Peter to the contrary had not the like reason, neither did
he show the like wit, neither had he the like favorable fortune: for he would
obstinately Charles the eight, at the persuasion of some his favorites, who
were men of no experience in the wars, and scorned the league with the King of
France; from whose house, the house of Medicis had received many favors;
nothing considering that of himself he was a most mighty Prince, and
supported with great forces in Italy; he did nothing consider that King
Charles fought for his own interest, and not at the instigation of others, as
King Ferdinand did; neither that his citizens, being inclined and affectioned
to the French, were much displeased, so to be resisted; he perceived not the
danger, but Charles had already taken footing in Italy, and had gotten
sundry victories, who making way for his passage, The oversight of Peter de
Medicis.
would leave no enemy behind him, neither would he in any thing yield unto
him, but went to his angry enemy, being yet in a chafe, for the new injury
lately received, and would (according to the common saying) do a thing
impossible, to wit, take a vessel boiling from the fire, and cool it at an
instant. Neither did he wisely govern himself, concerning the affairs within
the City: for he left not the rule thereof Guicciardin does wisely relate this
matter, and withal gives this advice, saying: That it is a very dangerous
matter for a man to govern himself by the example of another man, if the like
occurrences concur not.

CHAP. 3. Whether it be lawful in any occasion to forget good turns
received, and to show forgetfulness toward the benefactor.
EVery man ordinarily blames the little acknowledgement, Guicchardin treats
of two memorable examples, of little acknowledgement, the one of the Vrsins,
the other of the Colonnois, the one happened when King Charles the eight of
France entered Italy, Virginio Orsin sent his sons to (...) the French.
the other when he departed thence. Virginio Vrsin had received great pleasures
from the house of Arragon (and Virginio did this through extreme necessity and
bitter grief of heart: the proper interests being of such nature, that they
cause pleasures received, to be forgotten, how great soever they were: by
reason whereof it may be said, that if the little acknowledgement or
ingratitude of Vrsin was not lawful; yet nevertheless it was excusable. The
other example was of Prospero and Fabritio Colonna, who having showed great
prowess, and done many feats of arms, for the King of France in the conquest
of Naples, and were much honored by that King, and received of him many
benefits: yet nevertheless Prospero and Fabritio, considering that Charles
going into France, could not maintain them in the estates which he had given
them, and that Ferdinand his great enemy, began to have the better hand in the
wars of Naples, constrained likewise by necessity and through desire to
continue in their estates, concluded an agreement with Ferdinand, and coming
to his service, help him to recover again that estate which a little before,
Guicciar. lib. 2 Prospero and Fabritio Columna return to the service of
Ferdinand King of Naples.
they sought by all means to make him to leese. They are likewise excused for
departing from the French Kings service, for as much as Virginio Vrsin, and the
County de Petiglian, without any desert were highly cherished, and much made
of by the King, whereat being grieved, as at an injury received, they forsook
his service, and served King Ferdinand: wherefore if the ingratitude of the
Colonnois, to the Crown of France were not lawful; yet it was in some sort
excusable, seeing that ordinarily, an injury has greater power in our
hearts, then a pleasure or a good turn received; and he which does an injury
or wrong, through necessity, is far more excusable, then he who does it
willingly, for such a one can never yield any sufficient excuse.

CHAP. 4. He who by himself or another begins any dangerous enterprise,
without consideration of the end, brings both himself and others into
danger, and is often constrained to do things little to his Honor.
ONe of the most principal parts that are in a wise man, yea the first and the
greatest is, to consider the end and issue of any enterprise, which as well in
the beginning, as in the pursuit and end thereof, may be very dangerous, as
well for him which does it, as for those which are by him persuaded to be a
party, and with him to enter into the action. For those which before hand
consider not of the end, weighing and Let not him which is not of power
sufficienterprises enterprises which he cannot maintain. Guicciar. lib. 2.
little knowing what wrong they do therein, and afterward repent them of their
former Guicciardin) which moved Pope Alexander the sixth, not to accord and
agree with Charles the eight, King of France, when he with his victorious army
ouerranne the territory of Rome, was this: That he remembered himself to have
bin one of the first, which by all means incited and procured the French King
to the enterprise of Naples, and afterward without any occasion, with all
hostility, he resisted him, employing therein both authority, counsel and
arms: which proceeded of no other thing, then through want of Jews Sforce was
led by the like inconsideration, who would with all post-hast satisfy his own
will and humor which he had to rule: and to bereave his Nephew of his estate,
he called the French into Italy, and when he perceived his fault, and could
not remedy it, and had well considered in the end, that which he

CHAP. 5. That the evil Genies or unclean Spirits suffer themselves to be
seen and heard by men, and have appeared unto sundry, foretelling them of many
things to come.
I Would not willingly let pass without consideration this place of our
author, where he tells of the appearing of the Spirit of Ferdinand to his
Surgeon, whose words are these: Gui^^ia^. lib. 1
The report also is, (if it be lawful altogether not to contemn such things)
that the Spirit of Ferdinand did three several nights appear to James, A
(...) Jacques a (...) of Ferdinand King (...).
the chief Surgeon of the Court; and that first with fair words, and
afterward with many threatenings, he charged him to say unto Alphonse from
(...).
to affirm the contrary. Secondly, it is said that Spirits are of two sorts,
to wit, good and evil, and that both the one and the other Tobie, who took a
humane body; A Spirit appeared to Saul in the likeness of Samuel.
and that of Saul also, who by the means of the Enchantresse took the likeness
of Samuel: for it seems that wicked Spirits have this property, to show
themselves in such form, as they desire which see them: wherefore he appeared
in the shape and likeness of Samuel to Saul, who desired to see and speak to
Samuel; for the Scripture says, that he knew him by his garment, and by his
face. Moreover, they appear in diverse shapes, Spirits appear in ^^^ers forms.
and most commonly monstrous, fearful and hideous, as may well be gathered
out of sundry histories. Plutarch says, that the evil Genius or Demon, of
Dion of Genius or Demon of Brutus, appeared to him in the form of a horrible
humane body, at his Tent or Pauillion door, as Appian Alexandrin, and
Plutarch do both witness: And to the Emperor Iulianus Apostata, a Spirit
appeared in the likeness of a lean pale-faced man, holding a horn of
abundance in his hand, covered with a black cloth. They appear also in
dreams to those which sleep, which is of the good; To what kind of men they
appear.
as we read of the spirit of Ferdinand, which appeared to his Surgeon.
Genius appear unto holy and good men, as we read of many Saints: they
appear to valiant wicked men, as is said of Dion, of Brutus, and Iulianus
Apostata; the one of which showed himself an ouer-hardie and audacious freer
of his country, the other was ungrateful and betrayed Caesar; the third
renounced Christ. They do likewise show themselves to them, who believe that
there are such: for the Spirit which appeared to Brutus, did not appear to
Cassius, who did not believe that there were any Brutus told him what he had
seen, he fell into a great laughter, and said, it was but a melancholy
humor. Fourthly, some say that they never prognosticate but evil, which they
do either by voice, by signs, or by doubtful speeches: by the voice which is
understood, they foretell the evil to come; as that which represented Samuel,
who told Saul that his army should be overthrown and put to flight,
prognosticating to him his own death, and the death of his sons, and all that
which happened unto him in the Mount Gilboa. They foreshew evil to come by
signs, as that which appeared to Dion in the shape of an ugly woman, which
went up and down the house Dion was slain through a conspiracy, and a son
of his, which was then well grown, (in a melancholic humor) cast himself
from the top of the house, (...)
and was slain; and Areta his wife, and son which was borne to him in
prison, Aristomacha his sister, and Ipparin his nephew, were drowned in the sea
by Iretas, sometimes a friend to Dion. And so the devil foreshewed unto him,
that death should sweep his house, that is to say, should extinguish his whole
race. And by another contrary sign he foreshewed unto the Emperor Iulianus
his death, when he appeared unto him, with a heavy countenance covered
Brutus, when his Demon said unto him, I will see thee again in the plains at
Philippos. And sometimes by express and plain words, as the Spirit of
Ferdinand to his Surgeon, who told him expressly of the loss of that
kingdom, and that his great lineage and race should be extinct. This discourse
shall suffice for this place, which I accounted worthy to be considered of.

CHAP. 6. That it is a dangerous matter to jest and scoff with men which are
of valor, and (as some say) which have their blood in their nails.
THE small consideration which is sometimes held Jews Sforce, with Peter de
Medicis: Peter excusing himself for that he did not meet Jews to do him
honor upon the way, Guicciar. lib. (...)
because that Jews mist of his way in going to the French army, Jews
answered him very subtly: It is true that one of us was out of the way, but
you peradventure will be found to be that one which strayed: but the issue of
their business did Scipio Nasica odious to the Roman people.
Scipio Nasica brake Scipio into such disgrace, that when he demanded the
Consulship, the people withstood him, and he could not obtain what he desired.
Penander the Tyrant by one of his household.
Penander the Tyrant of Andracia, too hautily scoffing at a young man, which
was of his household, the young man was so enraged and wroth with the scoff,
that it did so waken his spirits and courage, that notstanding that he was bred
up in his house, yet he bereaved him both of his life and estate. A man ought
not to use to any man those Antigonus, who saw but with one eye, and as those
which led the soldier (...) pleasant (...).
Nay then I am well, seeing that I may hope for grace when I come before the
eyes of King Antigonus. This jest of the soldier was reported to the King, who
took it in ill part, and caused him to be executed. Peter Aretin would needs
jest at the Lord Peter Strozzi, when he gave Marano to the Venetians, and made
him a song which began thus: Meutre il gran Strozzi: Arma virumque cano, etc.
But the Lord Peter, as a valiant and noble personage, who could brook no such
jests, made him to Aretin knowing that the Lord Peter was a personage readier
to strike then to speak, was so amazed, that he shut himself up in his
house, suffering no man to come in; and being in continual fear to be
poyniarded, he led a most heavy and unfortunate life: for so long as the Lord
Strozzi made his abode in the Venetians country, he never durst to come forth
at his doors. A man might produce a number of examples of those, which for
jesting at great men have been in ill taking. It cannot be excused, to
Ferdinand King of Naples with his father Alphonso, who was old and sick: he
nipt him extremely, so as a man might well say, that that manner of jesting was
such, as men use with those which are held for men of small courage.

Ferdinand, after that the King of France was departed Italy, (...).
recovered the kingdom of Naples; and being with his father Alphonso in
Sicilie, Alphonso was earnest with him to return to Naples before he died.
But Ferdinand displeased with the request of his father, answered him with a
subtle and bitter jest: I am content, but stay, until I have so assured the
kingdom unto you, The bitter jest of Ferdinand with Alphonse his father.
that you need not run away from it any more. Behold the end, it is better
for a man to hold his peace, then (to his danger and damage) to show the quick
sharpnes of his wit, for friends are grieved. Men of mean degree revenge
themselves as they may, and Princes give

CHAP. 7. Which may be well considered by the doings of Jews Sforce, when he
committed Valencia to the guard of Donat Raffignin.
Man's wit requires that other men's doings should serve for example for us to
follow, and that we seeing what has happened unto others, may consider what
may betide our selves. Every man without controlment confesses, that treason
is the greatest mischief Jews Sforce, Duke of Milan, did not consider the
treason of Donat Raffignin, who had betrayed John Galeas his Nephew, and Bonna
the Duchess, mother of the said John Galeas, in giving unto the said Jews
himself, a port Donat, Donat Raffignin, by treason yields the Fortress of
Valence to the French.
who had not changed his nature, although he had changed his Master, (corrupted
by the promises of John Jacques Triuulse) delivered the Fortress of Valencia to
the Frenchmen, enemies to Jews, and received them into the Town. This treason
is the more worthy to be remembered, for that it happened in the same day, Donat
had betrayed the little Duke John Galeas, and given the Town of Tortona to
Jews his Uncle. Wherein a man may plainly see, that Traitors being
mischievous, retain always their wicked disposition; and therefore no man
ought to trust them, when as they are once discovered for such: and whosoever
does repose trust in him, who has once been a Traitor, although the treason
were greatly to his profit, yet he commits a great error; but he commits
a greater, who imployeth him in a government and charge of importance.

CHAP. 8. It is a great fault in any man to give himself to robbing and
pilling, when he ought to fight; which has been the occasion of the ill
success of many fair enterprises.
IN mine opinion there is nothing more fit to The greedines of Soldiers and
Captains has been the loss of many fair enterprises.
(besides the loss of their lives) have purchased perpetual dishonor and
infamy to their name and posterity: which is an evil very hardly to be
remedied in the wars now adays, which (if not wholly, yet for the most Saxon
the Grammarian in the 1. book of his histories of Denmark, knowing how
dangerous the desire of spoil is, through the hindrance and let that it gives
to a manifest victory, Saxon the Grammarian in his first book of the affairs
of Denmark.
brings in the King of England for example, using these words to his
soldiers, which he persuades to fight against the King of Denmark, in this
manner: Ne fatigetis, milites, opum onere manus, praelio destinatas, ac scitote
triumphum, Which is to say: Do not weary and encomber with the burden of
riches, those hands which are ordained to fight, and know that you ought to
obtain the victory before the spoil: and so (despising gold) pursue the
owners of the gold, and fix your eyes not in the brightness of the gold, but in
the glory of the victory: and it behooves you also to know, that it more
avails to purchase honor than profit, and that virtue is of more worth than
metal. The greedines of the English soldiers.
Phroton King of Denmark being landed in England, sacked many places, and
being laden with the riches of spoil and booty, took his way toward
Scotland, to have done as much there as he had done in England. The English
being advertised of the harm which the King of Denmark had done in their
Island, and of their departure, the King of England therefore with a great army
followed him, with intent to give him battle, and by force Phroton seeing his
enemies near at hand, and that the English and Scots (already in arms) did
follow him, resolved with himself to abandon all the goods and treasure, which
he had gotten in England, and caused it to be cast away, strawing the gold,
silver, and other goods of the English, abroad in the fields, thinking indeed
that they would stay to gather and heap the same together, and so being laden
he would run upon them, and overthrow them. And notwithstanding that a
certain old Captain did gainsay the counsel and will of Phroton, alleging
that the soldiers would be very unwilling Phroton understanding, turned head
and followed them; and having found them wearied and tired, no less with the
way, then with the burden of the spoil, being much pestered with the cari^^^
of so much baggage, he charged, and cut them in pieces, and valiantly recovered
that, which wisely he had thrown away: and A notable overthrow of the English.
lost miserably both the booty, the victory, and their lives.

The Venetian soldiers committed the like error in the year 1509. even then,
when almost all the Princes of Christendom were united together against their
Commonwealth: for the Venetian army, led by Bartelmy Liuiano, having taken
Treui, in the very beard of the enemies, amongst which was the King of France
in person, the soldiers gave themselves to sack and pillaging; and whilst
they were busy about their luggage, the Kings army passed the river of Add,
without let or resistance: for that the soldiers were so busy Giarad' Add,
wherein the Venetians (without question) had been victors, if their soldiers,
in stead of pillaging, would have been brought to hinder and stop the passage
of the French army: for they had either overthrown them and put The greedines
of the Italian soldiers.
than with honor and glory; and suddenly after they lost both the one and the
other. By means of this disco^moditie of pillaging, many occasions of
victories are lost, not only before they come to strokes, but even in time of
the battle, which was seen in the Venetian army, and of Jews Sforce, and
others in league together, in the memorable Charles the 8. King of France: for
the army of the League was overthrown, or at least had not the victory,
through the greedy covetousness of the Venetian adventurers. For during the
fight at the passage of Tare, the King willing to go into France, and those of
the League to stop his passage, Francis Gonzagua, Marquess of Mantoua and
General of the army of the League, had so well ordered every thing, that the
French army was in some disorder: so as they had had the victory, if the
greedy adventurers (who saw the Kings carriages abandoned, The greedines of
the Stradiots.
by the advice and counsel of Triuulce) had not began to run to the spoil:
by (...) their protection against the Florentines, which they valiantly
defended: Maximilian came into Italy, and Francis Sforce persuaded the
Florentines to join and enter into league with him, and to put the
controversy to the Emperors judgment, who understanding the discord between
them and the Venetians, would be an upright arbitrator in the cause. The
Florentines answered, that they would stand to no arbiterment, but that they
would first have Pisa rendered into their possession, as it had been
theretofore. This was the occasion why the Florentines sent their Ambassadors
to Gennes, Francis Sforce glorying in his eloquence, and thinking to scoff the
Florentines, prepared a Pepi, to whom it appertained to speak, said, that they
being with great travel come from Gean to Milan, to return to Florence, would
willingly have held their way, but stayed to take their leave of him, and to
do him honor before they went out of his dominion, knowing him to be a
Prince, which was their friend, who by his Jews More, out of countenance, and
(...) by the Florentine Ambassadors.
that he was to give them answer in the behalf of the Emperor. The
Ambassador answered, that he had no commission to hear it, neither any way to
negotiate with him. By reason whereof, the Duke in a great chafe, sent away the
Ambassadors of Florence, and all the rest which he had called thither,
receiving in himself the greatest part of the disgrace, which he thought to
have used toward others. Let Ambassadors then be resolute, and let them
endeavor to be brief, and advised in their aunswers, for fear to be mocked
by the Princes, with whom they have to negotiate; and that in all causes and
accidents not foreseen, they may be well resolved, maintaining their own
reputation, and the honor of those which sent them.

Between reconciled friends, the least suspicion breeds great distrust,
making them again to become enemies.
ALthough there cannot be any so great enmity, but that he which has been an
enemy, may again become a good friend, even as he which has been a good
friend, may become a great enemy: yet it is harder to tie A small matter
breaks friendship, but much is required to restore it.
than where it is whole; even so suspicion, although it be false. A shadow
Antonel and Bernardin Sanseuerin, brothers, the one Prince of Salern, Antonel
and Bernardin Sanseuerin, again rebel against King Ferdinand upon suspicion.
and the other of Bisignan, most honorable and Bernardin Prince of Bisignan,
had wronged a Greek in the person of his Wife: the Greek dissembling the
wrong, attended time and place to be revenged. In the mean season, the wars
arose in that Kingdom, between the King of France, and those of the house of
Arragon, in which wars, these two brethren with all their power, favored the
French party, and help to chase Alphonso and Ferdinand out of that Kingdom:
and after that King Charles returned into France, they continued in their
friendship, ayding and succouring the French against Ferdinand and Federicque,
which reconquered the Federicque: and upon an evening, as the Prince of
Bisignan came forth of the new Castle at Naples, he was very grieuouslie
wounded by the Greek aforenamed: whereupon his brother Antonel Prince of
Salern, amazed with this deed, grew in suspicion and fear that this was done
by the Kings commandment, in revenge of offenses past, and presently without
dissembling the doubt, withdrew himself to Salern. And notwithstanding that
King Federicque delivered the Greek prisoner into his hands, to content

CHAP. 11. It is an evil example in any Commonwealth to prescribe Laws, and
not to observe the same, and principally in those who are the authors thereof,
and do not defend and maintain
Certainly it is a thing pernicious, and very scandalous in any
Commonwealth, to make and publish a Law, and afterward not to observe the
same, principally when those who were the Lawmakers, care not to break them,
specially in time of occasion, neither to defend them against such as resist
and impugn and misconster them: for Hierosme Sauonarola, The ^awe of appeal
in Florence, introduced by Sauonarola.
by means of his help and the great credit which he had in the City, by
reason of his orations; and having caused an ordinance and statute to be made,
for the security and safety of Gentlemen, who from the sentence of the
Magistracy of the Eight and of the Seignorie, given in matters of de Medicis,
and the condemned appealing to the people, by virtue of the Law of appeal,
could not be heard, and the matter was referred to some few of the Citizens,
who were to decide whether the Law of appeal should continue in force or be
repealed in matter of estate: Sauonarola, that he could never after attain to
the credit which he had before: for he spoke nothing in the defense of the Law
which was made, and brought in by himself: So as this grew greatly to his
dishonor, in that he persuaded not his followers, and such as were of his
faction; to cause that Law to be observed, which he a little before had by
many persuasions alleged to be a most holy and wholesome Law for the
Commonwealth, and with so great vehemency Sauonarola after the death of these
five Gentlemen in any of his orations (although he made many) did neither
accuse, nor excuse any of them, which were breakers of this Law: for he blamed
none, because he would not be found contrary to himself, Appius and
Virginius, two noble Romans: but because we will not spend long time in
examples, it shall suffice to say that he which makes and establishes a Law,
ought to observe and maintain the same, notwithstanding it were against his
own profit. And although there was at that time in Florence, question of
matter appertaining to estate, the people peradventure would have judged the
same, or altered the punishment,

CHAP. 12. Jn our affairs and occurrences, we ought to settle and ground more
trust and assurance in him, who expects good from us, then in him, who
already has received the same.
GVicciardins counsel and advice is most certain, who says, that more trust
is to be reposed in him who stands in need of us, than in him who has
already received pleasure at our hands: for the desire of the good to come,
has much more force in our hearts, than the remembrance of that which is
already received. And here-hence it comes, that when one man stands in
need of another, we see that the needy follows,
entreats, and importuneth him that is able to do him pleasure; so as he
would do any thing to have what he desires: but after that he has received
it, he grows careless, and is not led with such fervent affection; neither
does he court his benefactor as before he was wont: and his benefactor
requiring any matter of importance at his hands, More reckoning is made of one
pleasure to come, than of an hundred already received.
he is not so zealous in doing of him service, as before that he received his
desire, or during the time that he expected the same. Whence it follows to be
true, according to the common proverb, That more reckoning is made of one
pleasure to come, than of an hundred already past: which does plainly
Valentine, The means and wiles of Duke Valentin to make himself great.
who effected and performed all his enterprises with much wit, and very
cunningly, and was very subtle in all his doings, had a determination to make
himself great, and to attempt great matters: but considering that his forces
alone were not sufficient to effect his desseignes, he began to think upon
foreign forces, to further him in that which he most desired. And because he
could not greatly trust in any of them which had received pleasure at his
hands, or from the Pope; he bent his mind on those which expected and hoped for
aid and succor of him, and cunningly Jews the 12. King of France, who would
feign put away his first Wife, for that she was both barren and ill favored,
and desired to marry Anne Duchess of Britain, which was Wife to the King
lately deceased: whereto might be added another great desire of the said King,
to see the Lord of Amboise, Archbishop of Roane his greatest favorite, who had
followed the King in all his fortunes, made a Cardinal, in all which Guicciar.
lib. 4
The Duke Valentine went in person to the King, supported by this advise and
counsel, that a man may better hope for favor and aid from him, who
expects a pleasure, then of him who has already received a pleasure, and
carrying to the King a dispensation for a Marriage, and a red hat for the
Archbishop, he obtained of the King, what he would desire, who gave him the
title of Duke of Valence, and twenty thousand Francques of reuenew: the
conduct and leading of an hundred men at Arms, and with promise of aid and
Valentine had need of him, so as both the one and the other might be led
with like conceit. Let a man then in time of need, assure himself more of
him that desires, than of him that already has received a pleasure: for he
which desires is hot, and he who has received what he desired is cold, or at
the most is but lukewarm.

CHAP. 13. He which takes more authority upon him then belongs to his
degree and office, commits an error, and seldom escapes unpunished.
EVery man, which by commission from another takes any charge, or being by a
superior established in the administration of any matter of importance, ought
well to consider that his authority is not sovereign and absolute, but
depends of a superior: and therefore is restrained within certain limits,
which he may not pass without error, and danger to discontent his Superior
and to be punished, or to incur the then is convenient, and to proceed as
absolute, let him not doubt

Peter de Medicis, after the death of Laurence his father, having obtained in
the Florentine Commonwealth the same authority which his father had, which
was such that all public matters were done by his counsel: he was at the
creation of all Magistrates, and even by his consent, and by his means,
offices were bestowed upon such as by him were recommended. But Peter not
content with this authority, which his father held a long time with great
modesty, usurped greater authority then his country would permit. Wherefore,
when Charles the 8. King of France went into Italy, to the conquest of the
kingdom of Naples, Peter having resolved Alphonse of Arragon King of Naples,
would never give ear to the French King, who desiring to enter into league
with him, and offered him many fair conditions: to which league all the whole
city seemed to lean and to yield, as inclined and well affected to the French
nation. For afterward when the French armies began to have the better in
Italy, and the name of the French to be terrible, and the affairs of those of
the house of Arragon to decline from ill to worse; Peter repenting him of his
resolute determination, to assuage the wrath of Charles, (...) Charles the S.
King of (...) to Peeter de Medicis.
went to S. Peter's to see and speak with him in person: where Peter yielded to
all these demands, and taking upon him more authority then he ought, yielded
the Holds and Fortresses above said, without Peter de Medicis chased from
Florence.
and by the fury of the Citizens was driven from the Palace, and out of the
City, and declared and proclaimed a Rebel. If in any case it be a matter
doubtful, yea or very dangerous to pass the bounds of the authority received,
and as a man may say, play the Prince, whereas is no need, it is principally
in charges and commands in the wars, where every fact done in this manner by
Paulo Vitellio, a man most valorous, and in his time one of the chief and most
renowned Captains in Italy, being by the Florentines established, and made
General of their army against the Pisans, in that time wherein they were
under the sauegard and protection of the Venetians, for one only fact, wherein
he usurped more authority then belonged unto him, put the Florentines in such
jealousy and Bartelmy Liuiano, Astor Baglioni, and other honorable Captains,
all which he did so valiantly resist, that he did not only stop the passage
against them, but also besieged them, with their principal Captains, within
Bibienna, a Castle of the Casantin. The Duke of Vrbin fell sick in this siege,
who desired Vitellio to give him a safeconduct to go to take Physic and to
cure himself: and this Paul usurping a little too much authority, Guicciar.
lib. 4
(without acquainting the Florentine Commissioners Julian de Medicis, a rebel
to the Seignorie Commonwealth: which made him so suspected, that they began to
mark his behavior, and the manner of his proceedings; for they mistrusted him
to have some secret intelligence with the enemy. And for this cause when they
afterward saw, that without any occasion he abandoned the Fortress of
Stampace, which was taken by force, and that being able to follow the victory
against the Pisans, he took no care to pursue them, but usurping supreme
power and authority, he raised the siege from before Pisa, without the leave
or knowledge of the Florentine Paulo Vitellio condemned to dye by the
Florentines.
in such sort, that to rid themselves of this suspicion and fear, and to give
example to their other Leaders and Commanders of armies, they put him to death
by order of Justice. But except it were upon some extreme accident, or to
avoid some manifest and present danger, it were ill done for a man to
attribute to himself more authority then he ought, and to promise also that
which is not in his power to perform, as the Lord of Tremouille, who being,
for Jews the 12. King of France, General of his army against Henry the 8.
King of England, which made war against The Lord of Tremouille with absolute
power coucluded a peace with the Swissers, notwithstanding that it was upon
very unworthy conditions.
he usurped and attributed to himself more authority then to him
appertained; so as promising that which he could not perform, neither had
commission to promise, he came to parley with the chief conductors of the
Swissers, and promised them that the King of France should surrender the right
which he

Peter de Medicis might peradventure have the same consideration, in making his
treaty with the King of France, who seeing his country in great danger, for
that the King was in arms, victorious,

CHAP. 14. Whether a public servant of a Prince or Commonwealth,
IT has been often demanded, and brought in question, whether a Commissioner
of a Prince or Commonwealth, ought so strictly to contain himself tied
within the limits of the Commission prescribed unto him, that he never pass
the same? Sundry opinions whether a man ought to contain himself within the
limits of his Commission.
The reason of this question comes of the occasion, which may But the
severity of Manlius Torquatus, Manlius Torquatus caused his own son to be
slain.
might discourage Publius Crassus, who battering a town in the Isle of Saint
Maura, otherwise called Leucade, sent word to his Ingenour, that he should send
him the greatest and the longest shipmast, that was in the whole fleet, with
intent to make a Ram, to beat down the walls of the City therewith: but the
Ingenour, knowing what was necessary for that purpose, He that is employed,
ought to have an eye to his Princes qualities and cenditions.
I had no such Commission. And if a man have to Francis Sforce General of the
Venetian Army, Francis Sforce of his own authority concluded peace between
the Venetians and Philip Duke of Milan.
took upon him this authority, in the wars which they had against Philip
Duke of Milan, which was of great importance: and having brought the same in a
manner to a good end, at an instant, without any long study, and without using
any speech to the purueyours, neither by writing, to give the Senate to
understand thereof; in a night, he concluded a peace with the Duke of Milan,
reueiled it to his Starza; neither had he so easily attained to such
commendation, if he had had to deal with some cruel and proud Prince, who
judging that by this treaty, he had let slip the victory

CHAP. 16. He who is disloyal and unfaithful to the first friend, may yet
prove both trusty and faithful to the second.
ALthough that we have said here before, that Francis committed a fault, in
reposing trust in Donat Raffignin, who betrayed his kinswoman Bonna, a man
speaks not always by contraries when he says, that a disloyal and
unfaithful man to the first friend, may nevertheless prove trusty and
faithful to the second. And when (I say) that a man ought not to trust him who
has cousoned and deceived his first friend, O^^ m^^^ doings ought not to s^r^^
^or a general ^^le (...) ^or all m^^.
this is not to say but that he may be loyal to a second: and the doings of
one man ought not to be held as a general rule for all men, the contrary
being seen in some, who have made most commendable (...).
which they may do for many causes. First, to recover and get again their
honor lost, in forsaking and abandoning their first friend in time of need:
which makes a man very blame worthy, except urgent occasion force it.
Secondly, to let the world know that the fact by him committed was not through
his malice, but through the fault of his first friend, who upon some occasion
had constrained him to leave him. Thirdly, he continues firm and constant in
his friendship, to repair and amend the lightness of the first, which cannot be
amended but by the firm constancy of the Charles the 5. refused not, neither
contemned the friendship of the Duke of Bourbon, who forsook (in his greatest
need) his first friend and Lord Francis the first King of France; but
entertained and embraced his friendship, using him very honorably: and Bourbon
in this second friendship always carried himself very faithfully, and did the
Emperor great service: and although that he knew well Charles of Bourbon, that
entertaining him with honorable parts, and having made him his No man's
friendship is to be despised, whatsoever he be, when it is offered.
and ground his foundation upon such light and variable men, whose friendship
is so fickle: yet nevertheless a man ought not to contemn and reject their
friendship and good will,
but so to repose trust in them, that if they would, yet they should not be
able to do any harm.

CHAP. 17. To deny to a people their first demands, is to make them the
better content with what they receive, and the more moderate in their demands
afterward.
OF all the imperfections and evil conditions of a people, this is placed
amongst the most principal, to be insatiable and never content with their
estate and degree: As when they meet with a Prince, who for any occasion
whatsoever will yield to their demands, and grant what they desire, they
never cease nor rest, following their peevish condition: but still drawn
forwards with hope to obtain, they continue their asking with greater
vehemency then at the first. The common people is infaliable, ever co(...)
things, and is never content.
And it happens unto Jews the 12. King of France, and the people of Milan:
Guicciar. lib. 4
for that Le More Duke of Milan being fled into Germany to escape from the
French, who in a manner without arms made a conquest of that estate, the news
came speedily into France of the conquest of Milan, of the Castle, and of the
whole Duchy, with advertisement of the flight of the Duke. Wherefore King
Jews passed speedily into Italy; and being come to Milan, he was received by
the people with incredible joy: and the people finding this King to be very
gentle, who granted them many graces and favors, they demanded exemption of
sundry toles and customs, The people of Milan rejected by Jews K. of France.
and the King graciously yielded to their petitions. But persisting in their
immoderate requests, and not content to obtain their first desires, purposed
to be wholly exempt from all

CHAP. 18. Jn choosing Generals and chief commanders, their virtue ought more
to be regarded, then the nobility of their blood or any private affection.
THe Emperor Leo in his first book entitled, the preparation for war,
speaking of the election of a General, says, that to know the generositie
and courage of a Dog or a Horse, we have regard to his proper operations,
and not to the damme or sire which got him: The (...) to, and after his descent.
even so the nobleness of a man, ought to be considered, by his proper valor
and virtue, and not by the blood of those which brought him into the world,
neither of the glory of his predecessors, which oftentimes There is double
error commit (...) of Captains.
This error in election is committed in two manners, either in thinking that he
which is noble should likewise be virtuous; or for particular affection in the
behalf of some one, from whom a man would expect the like favor. As for the
error which is committed in the election of the General, to aim more at the
nobleness Nicephorus Phocas Emperor of Constantinople, who regarding more the
nobility of the blood from whence was issued a young man, called Manicel, than
his experience and virtue in the war, Fazelli in his s^^^ book of the second
de^^^ o^ the (...).
which he had in Sicilia against the Sarrazins, he chose him for his General.
This Emperor Phocas, in the beginning of his Empire, seeing how unfit it was
for the dignity of an Emperor, to pay tribute to the Barbarians, resolved
with himself to make war, and sent into Sicilie a great army against
Manicel General, bastard son of Leo his brother, which he had on a
Concubine. This man what for his age, (being very young) as also for his
ignorance and little experience in the wars, besides many other vices,
wherewith he was spotted, being unfit for the place of a General, would not
hearken to the advice of his Captains, which were appointed to be his
counselors, and tutours, but governing all with little judgment and
discretion, he was drawn by the Sarrazins into certain streights and hard
passages, where enclosed and compassed about; he Manicel put to slight by the
Sarrasins through want of experience in the wars.
what it was to commit the charge of a Navy by Sea, or an army by land, to
persons without judgment and experience, notwithstanding that they be noble
and of his own blood: for notwithstanding that a man give them Captains and
Counselors, which are wise and of experience; yet it is to be doubted, that a
young man through his foole-hardinesse, will not be ruled, after the judgment
of wise men, but will mar all. As for the error in choosing of a Captain, it
was committed in our fathers time, by Jews Duke of Anthony Maria Sanseuerin,
Earl of Gaiazza, to whom he had sundry times given charge in the wars; and
having made him his General, and afterward taking a liking to Galeas
Sanseuerin his younger brother, being not only of fewer years, but also of
less experience, yet he preferred him in his greatest need and danger, before
the Earl; Guicciar. lib. 4
for that he had seen him manage his horse very gallantly, and charge his
lance very bravely at a Tournay. For this cause Jews favoring him, made him
General of his Army, Galeas Sanseuerin fled from Alexandria and lest it in
pray to the enemy.
in whose place (for many reasons) he ought to have given that charge to the
Galeas shamefully fled by night from Alexandria, which was taken by the enemy,
and then Jews was taught to know the difference between the wise leading of
an Army with judgment, and the gallant charging of a lance with a good
grace. And hereof ensued many inconveniences, for the Earl went to serve the
French, seeing that his younger brother was preferred before him to the charge
of General, Antonie Maria Earl of Gaiazza accompanied Jews More Duke of
Milan to prison in France with (...) of ^^^se.
and forsook him in his greatest Galeas was of every man held for a coward and
a dastard: Jews was noted of little judgment; and Anthony Maria blamed for
unfaithful and disloyal, having taken pay of the French King, and abandoning
the Duke in his greatest misery, so far, that in the end he accompanied him
with his troop of horse into France to a prison.



CHAP. 19. Jn time of dangerous wars, men of virtue and of worth ought to be
preferred and placed in governments; and when a man in a small enterprise, has
not honorably discharged his office, and yet would intrude and make himself
chief, and have principal command in great matters, he deserves to be
repulsed.
THe spur of ambition does prick and sometimes so poison the heart, Charges
of importonce are most commonly given to unworthy persons, and sach as are of
no experience.
that a man in this sort losing the light of his understanding, and the
knowledge of himself, regards neither the common good, nor the greatness of
the enterprise, so as he may obtain what he desires: And this fault happens
more often in Commonwealths, where governments are given by voices, then in
absolute principalities, That virtue is known in time of trouble, which in
peace is not este^med.
but is plainly verified in extreme dangers, as the Romans did by Fabius
Maximus, the Venetians by Victor Pisani, and the Florentines by Anthony
Iacomini: yea it is seen, that without the sage counsel of wise Senators, and
the ripe judgment of old men, the advice of young men had overthrown and
undone their Country in their elections. Wherefore the Senator and
Counselor, who without respect of persons, in public shall declare the ill
carriage of those, which having not done well in small matters, and yet would
be chief in matters of greatest importance, shall be ever praised and
esteemed, as a procurer Fabius Maximus was in the Senate at Rome, when election
should have been made of new Consuls, at what time Hannibal of Carthage made
preparation to invade Sicilia, which seemed to be much inclined unto him.
Fabius Ma^imus opposed himself against Titus Ottacilius, who had married his
sisters daughter, and would have been Confull.
In that day the young men were to name the new Consuls, and for that they
named one Titus Ottacilius, who in his Consulship and government past, had done
nothing that was of worth: Fabius thought him unfit for that charge,
notwithstanding that he had married one Ottacilius, he said, we have (oh Titus
Ottacilius) had experience of thy virtue and valor in less matters: and truly
thou have not done any good thing, by means whereof we should be induced to
commit to thy charge, any matters of greater importance. We made the other
year, preparation for a navy by Sea, whereof thou had the charge and
government; first, to the end it should spoil and sack the shores side of
Africa. Secondly, to the end to guard and assure our own coasts and frontiers
of Italic. Thirdly, to the end that to Hannibal from Africa into Italy, there
should come no relief or succor, neither of money nor victuals. And then
turning himself toward the whole council, Titus Liuius in his fourth book
of the 3. decades.
he added, Make Ottacilius Hannibal, and with such liberty as in time of
peace, if the coast of Italy has been more infested with war, than the
coast of Africa, what can thou say and allege for thy defense, etc. By the
which words all the young men altered their opinions, J^ thusing of Gentrals
for the Wars, the quality of the War, and the worth^^ese of the person
(...) is to be chosen, are ch^^sely to be regarded.
and opened their eyes, to make choice of such men for Consuls, as by Hannibal.
Wherefore let every Gentleman, that shall be present at the election of such
Captains, consider the time, the quality of the war, and the virtue and
worth of the person whom they nominate. If the time be quiet, and the quality
of the war of no great importance, they may make proof of some one whom the
favor: but if he have ill discharged his place in the first employment in a
small matter, he ought not to be trusted in the second in a greater: and
although he possibly escaped with his honor, yet it is not good to put such
affairs in hazard. Guicciardin says, that the Florentines Rinuccio de Marcian
General of their army, in their wars of Pisa, although he were much
favored, for that he had once been vanquished and put to flight, and carried
himself ill in a charge of lesser importance.

CHAP. 20. How dangerous it is in two armies being enemies, to have soldiers
of one particular nation.
It is not possible to forese^ nor prevent the mishaps and disgrace which may
happen to preces, neither to resist or redress them when the^ happen.
that it is impossible to foresee the^, and much less to yield remedy when
they are come: but if by things past, we may conjecture of things to come, and
by other men's loss learn to provide for our selves, let us make our profit of
other men's harms. It shall not be much from the matter, to consider how
dangerous it is to Princes and Commonwealths, which have not sufficient forces
in their own countries, but are Jews More Duke of Milan, and Francis the
first, King of France, and the Emperor Maximilian. Jews More took Nauarrette,
with the aid of the Swisswers: but being besieged therein by the French,
amongst which were many Swissers, he made trial how dangerous it was to have
friends and enemies both of one country and nation: for that the Swisser
Captains which were in the French camp, won and corrupted the Swissers
soldiers which were with the Duke, so (...). lib. 4
the Captains of the Swissers (already mutining) said openly, that without
leave from their Lords, they would not fight and come to blows, against their
cousins, their brothers, and others of their own nation; and presently after
they assembled themselves togethers, faining that they would go home to their
own houses: and their treachery and disloyalty was so extreme, that they
betrayed the Duke, who being apparelled and armed like a Swisser, marched a
foot in rank in a squadron like a

The Almains which were in the pay of Francis the first, showed him such a like
trick: for when the King of France would have given assault to the town of
Bresse, they said that they would not go against such towns as were held by
the Emperor. Guicci. lib. 12.
But the truth was that they did this, because that within the town there were
(besides other men of war) two thousand Almaine soldiers: so as to eschew
the coming to hands against them, they would not fight. The Emperor
Maximilian distrusted the Swissers.
And the Emperor Maximilian fearing the like danger, when he came into Italy
against the French, and considering that Jews More, and how the Swissers had
dealt with him at Nouarrette: wherefore without doing any other thing he
retired to Trent, and would not (to his danger and damage) make proof of the
Swissers fidelity, knowing how hard a matter it is, to bring soldiers of a
nation to fight against others in the enemies camp of the same nation. When a
Prince or a Commonwealth is constrained to use the help of strangers,
especially of those nations which are free, as the Swissers, the Grisons, and
such like, it is very necessary to know

CHAP. 21. Lightness of belief is a great fault in any man, and too much
credulity has bred and caused many evils.
Light beleef^ in every th^^^, shows a (...) wit and (...) brains.
that to be light of belief, and easily persuaded to a thing, shows a
lightness of wit, and a weakness of the brain: and from thence it comes that
such manner of men are easily deceived; for through want of judgment,
standing upon the show and appearance of reasons, and the efficacy of words,
they, without consideration, do that whereto they are persuaded and made to
believe. These men (for the most part) are of the nature of women, or of
Charges and governments of importance are not to be given to men of the first
impres^ion.
Charges and governments of importance ought not to be given to such persons:
for that being easy to be deceived, they are subject and prone to commit a
thousand errors. These men are also easily induced to trust, and remit smooth
words of those which persuade them to the contrary of

Roger the 2. King of Sicilie, son of Tancredi, was of such light belief,
and so prone to repose trust in others, to his own great hurt and damage,
that having some controversy with the Emperor Henry the fifth, which pretended
title to the Kingdom of Sicilie, in the right of Constance his Wife, he came
to an accord and agreement with him, whereby the Kingdom was divided, which
contained then the Kingdom of Naples. Roger the second, King of S^^^lie taken
(...) at Pa^^^en by the (...) Henry the sift, with (...) three (...) who had
(...) and ^ienes plucked out, and afterward dyed in Prison.
King Roger perceiving Roger the Kingdom of Naples: The Emperor was content
with this agreement, and taking his way toward Palermo, to enter into
possession of the Kingdom of Sicilia, with many signs of good will and
friendship, and many fair words, but all fained, he drew unto him the simple
credulous King Roger, who went with him even to Palermo, to pass and thoroughly
to confirm the agreement: where, with Alteria, Constance, and Madonia his
sisters, he was Vital Michel second of that name, Prince of Venice, fell into
this error of light and easy belief; arriving at Negrepont with a mighty
Army and Navy, to go against Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople, who had
showed infinite signs of hatred against that Commonwealth, and was of power to
have put the Emperor to great trouble, giving credit to the governor of that
I Will, who was a most subtle Greek; he lost a Michel to send Ambassadors to
Constantinople: for he knew well, that the Emperor would accept of any
condition of peace. This, this Governor did, either through his own malice,
or that he had agreed with the Emperor to say so. The Venetian Prince gave
simply too much credit to the subtle Greek, Vital Michael Prince of Venice in
disgrace with the people.
and having sent Ambassadors toward the Emperor, whilst he attended their
return at Scio, which were entertained Manfredi; by reason whereof ensued many
tumults and troubles of wars in Sicilia. King Manfredi was a man very wily and
cunning, who aspired to the kingdom of Sicilie, wherein Conradin the son of
the Emperor Conrad was invested, who dying, left to his son Conradin (which
was in Germany) for tutours, the principal and chief Lords of Bauiere: and
Manfredi who was Prince of Tarento, was by the Emperor Conradin. Manfredi then
aspired to the kingdom of Sicilia, (the papal seat of Pope Innocent being
void,) he overthrew the Ecclesiastical Army: but Alexander coming to succeed
in the Papacy, he sent an Army against Manfredi, under the conduct of his
Legate Octauian Vbaldini, to keep him from seizing on that Kingdom. Manfredi
which was enclosed in Nocerra, knew well that he could not long resist the
forces of the Church, and the tutours of Conradin, Barons and Lords of Bauiere:
wherefore having recourse to wiles and shifts, he purposed to show some
cunning, which served rather through the credulity of the enemy, then that of
it self it was so ingenious. He made certain of Conradin: by reason whereof,
by exterior signs, Manfredi knew so well, how to color his treason, Mansredi
by a w^^e delivered himself from the ^^ge of ^ocerra, and seized on the
kingdom of Sicilie.
(making public funerals, clothing himself and all his rout with him, in
mourning apparel) that the Popes Legate believing that to be true, which was
feigned, raised the siege; and the tutours of Bauiere which were in diverse
towns, for Conradin, abandoned their charge, saying, that seeing that Conradin
was dead, they had no Fazelli in the eight book of his second decad^ of
Sict^^c.
being deceived with the same error, saluted Manfredi, and proclaimed him king
of Sicilia. So the light and easy belief of the Italian and Bauiere Lords,
was the cause that Conradin in his life time, was deprived of his estate, which
might easily have been prevented, if the tutours of the child, or any other
Prince, would diligently have informed himself of the truth, and discovered
the fact, by sending some man expressly with all speed into Germany, without
giving such light credit to one only advertisement, and with so little
consideration, to forsake and abandon Bartelmi d'Auiano with their Army. This
man having secret intelligence with some of Bibienna, sent his soldiers into
the town, to perform the treaty and enterprise: the Florentines had
advertisement hereof from many places, Guicciar. lib. 4
and particularly from the city of Boulongna. Wherefore they Conspiratours and
(...) not to be believed.
neither changed the Captains, neither commanded that the Ports should be kept
longer shut then of custom, neither sending out any to discover; and in sum
provided for nothing, Aluiano sent in great diligence by night his people
toward Bibienna; which coming to the gate, were presently received into the
town by the conspirators: and then the Commissarie knew (by the loss of the
town) how great an error it is to give light credit to those which have the
name of conspirators: and being suspected for such, ought to be constrained
and forced to confess the truth by means of torments.



CHAP. 22. It is neither good nor sure to be too obstinate, and not to believe
often aduertisements given by sundry persons.
It (...) ^otable sollie to give much credit to judicial Astrology.
which over curiously sought to know their fortunes and adventures by
Astrologers and Southsayers: for that if they prognosticate ill unto them, then
their minds are troubled, whether they be vile or valorous: and afterward if
they be to enter into any dangerous action, they think that without all doubt
that evil must needs happen unto them, which was prognosticated. I remember
there was a Captain of account in the wars, who was to enter into the lists
to fight the Pythagoras wheel, which is a vain manner of divining, by means
of numbers and names of those which cast the lot, and in this wheel is
distinguished the good and the evil, life and death. It happened unto this
Captain that his name, set by numbers and letters, which are practiced by him
who busieth himself about such foolish vanities, came under the place of
death, and his adversaries under the place of life: by reason whereof he was
in so great fear, and gave such ^publike ru^iour is not to he contemned but
regarded, because it see^^eth that what is in every man's mouth is to be held
for a ^uine oracle.
which may draw them from executing any honorable action. But I say also, that
to be obstinate in not believing or giving credit to that which has been
often foretold him by Astrologers, to whom they presage some evil to come, is
neither good nor sure: for that they may foresee some ill inclination of the
heavens against him, whereof by the ^ust. lib. 12.
but wisely to provide for those evils which are threatened against us, and by
wisdom to withstand the maleuolent aspect of the Planets and Stars.
Notwithstanding that Alexander the great was a worthy and most happy Prince,
yet failed he herein: for that he obstinately despised the Magitians and Sages
of Egypt, Alexander the great poisoned by Thessalus his Physician.
which oftentimes persuaded him to forbear to enter into Babylon, for if he
did, he should there leave his life: but he contemning their often warnings
would needs go thither; where being poisoned by Thessalus his Physician, he
dyed.

Suetonius in the life of Caesar says, that the divine Spurina did many times
tell Caesar, that he should take heed of the day of the Ides of March, which
is the 15. day of that month, for that then upon that day he should be in
great danger of death: Julius Caesar would not give credit to the speech which
she used to him, but in going the morning of that same day toward the Senate,
he met her upon the way and said unto her: Spurina, we are now in the 15. day
of March, and I am yet alive. Whereto she answered: If the day be come, it is
not yet past, but tell me this to morrow morning. But Caesar Caesar slain and
massacred by Cassius and Brutus.
was presently slain by Cassius and Brutus, and other conspirators. Whereby it
appeared that it had bin better and more expedient for him to have given some
credit to the Divine, and by his wisdom to have observed that day, to
overcome his constellation, rather then in despising her counsel and
aduertisements to tempt his ill fortune, seeing that the Divine had prefixed
the certain day, he by his wisdom might have made her a lier. And through
the like obstinacy, in giving no credit to often aduertisements of evil, and
so to take heed thereof, the histories of the kingdom of Sicilie make mention
of great dangers foretold William the first of that name called the Caitiffe,
William the first King of Sicilie would never believe that Maion, a favorite
of his, would have slain him.
of whom we read, that he having raised to the honor and dignity of Admiral,
a man of most base and unnoble race and lineage, called Maion, he remained many
days as with a dagger at his throat, for that that the same Maion aspiring to
the royal dignity, had to the government of the realm so fitted his business,
that there mist but a little, that he had not deprived the King of his life and
seized on the Crown: which he had effected, if he had not been prevented by
death. This William would never believe what was told him concerning Maio^, how
he would have killed him: but was so blinded in his Maion had rather caused
the^ to be made to give unto him, than to any evil end, construing al these
signs to the contrary, notwithstanding that he were made (as a man may say)
to touch the danger with his hand: he loved better to suffer himself to be led
by his blind and foolish affection, than by the consideration of the truth,
which was often told him by his true and affectionate friends. And thou
friendly reader, if thou will know Fazelli in that chapter where he treats of
William the Caitiffe King of Sicilie. A man ought not too curiously to apply
himself to the predictions of Astrologers, which are often found vain and
false, A man by his wisdom ought to eschew and over come the evils threatened
unto him by his constellation.
and may draw a man from executing sundry fair and good actions; neither
would I that a man should too obstinately despise them, for that they may
foresee many ill inclinations: but we ought to govern our selves in such
sort, that the contempt of them hurt us not, and that by our wisdom we may
withstand those evils which are threatened unto us.

CHAP. 23. The obstinacy of those which are established in great authority,
breeds many disorders, which afterward cannot be remedied.
Obstinacy is no other thing than a settled and firm purpose and determination
to do, or not to do some thing: he which is in this manner resolute, is not
to admit or receive any counsel, neither to consider any danger, but
preferring his own rash opinion before the sound aduertisements of wise and
well advised men, to show himself to be a man of little judgment, and of no
experience in the affairs of the world. Such men are the cause of many evils,
and commit so many disorders, It is lost labor to gee about to persuade
obstinate persons by reason: for the more they are counseled, the more they
per^st^^ their opi^on.
It is but lost labor to attempt to persuade such persons, by reason for that
they (imagining and presuming themselves to know more than all the world
besides) stop their ears to all good counsels, and their eyes to all
dangers, so as all goes to wrack. ANd as an egg by how much the longer it
lies in the fire, by so much the harder it waxes: even so a man who trusts
only to his own brains, by how much the more you counsel him, by Monsieur de
Lautrech was General for the French King at the siege of Naples, and of heart
so hautie and obstinate, that although he manifestly saw before his face, that
the place wherein he was encamped was neither fit nor wholesome, and that it
daily waxed worse and worse; yet would he not depart from thence to choose a
better, neither for the counsel of his Captains, neither for the
discommoditie of the soldiers, neither for the death which he saw daily before
his eyes: so that after the loss of a great number of soldiers, which dyed
Lautrech, through his obstinacy, was the cause of the total ruin of the
French army before Naples, and was the occasion of his own death. Guicciar.
lib. 4
and in this manner he lost the honor and reputation of the victory, and was
the cause that the Kings army (whereof he was General) came to extreme
ruin, which had not happened, if (leaving his obstinacy) he had given ear
to those which counseled him, both for the private and public good. Wherefore
our author wisely says, that it is good to consider of the disorders, bred by
the obstinacy of those which are employed in great matters. This obstinacy
makes men cruel, both against others and themselves also: whereof are many
examples

Moreover, Obstinacy makes men cruel both against themselves and others also.
obstinacy makes the obstinate to be easily oppressed by their enemies: for
knowing their natural condition, means may be easily found to offend them,
and in fine persisting obstinate without reason or judgment, and so
consequently without wit or

CHAP. 24. Courtesies employed upon obstinate enemies are to no purpose, but
bestowed in vain.
WHen a Prince or Commonwealth undertakes to wage war against another
people, if An obstinate man loves rather to die, then to show but e^e the
least sign of humility, or of giving place to his adversary.
for so soon as occasion is offered him, he will show that what he did was
done perforce. Wherefore an obstinate and rude enemy is to be handled and
dealt withal by all rigor and severity, forasmuch as gentleness and courtesy
will neither pacify him nor assuage his fury. Many examples might be alleged
hereof, as of the Saguntines besieged by Hanniball, but I will content my self
with the example of the Pisans, happened in the time of our ancestors.

The Florentines made long wars against the Pisans, and oftentimes vanquished
them, and ever used them very hardly, and in The Pisans love better to subject
themselves to the Genouais their mortal enemies, then to the Florentines,
their Lords, neighbors and friends.
and in part discharged of the dearth which oppressed them: and those which
went forth (no less obstinate then those which remained within) for the
defense of the city, with their revenues did secretly succor and



CHAP. 25. The suspicions increased and made greater by the evil speeches and
reports of men in authority, is the occasion that men oftentimes become cruel.
augment their suspicion, chiefly when they are stirred, and that the
Guicciardin, of John Bentiuogli Lord of Bologna, who having to his advantage
(by means of the King of France) ended his business with Duke Valentine, and
being assured that he should not be molested by him any more, he began again
to entertain and to continue the suspicion which he bare in himself against
the house of the Mariscotti, which was enemy unto him, and this suspicion
Valentine, who told him in secret, yet with a malicious heart, that he was
invited by the house of the Mariscotti to approach and draw near to Bologna:
which was the occasion that Bentiuogli, who held the Duke to be a man of credit
and authority, giving credit unto his words, entered into so great jealousy
and suspicion, that being become very eager and cruel to deliver himself of
this fear, knowing the house of the Mariscotti to be rich, mighty, and well
followed, determined to rid himself of this corrosiue, by the death of all the
Mariscotti, whether they were culpable or innocent. And making his son Hermes
the instrument of his cruel determination, John Bentiuogli and Hern^ (...).
he brought it so to pass, that many of the most honorable houses of Bologna,
did with him embrue their hands in the blood of almost all the Mariscotti which
were in Bologna. This was done by these young men, to the end that those
honorable houses, which had served his turn in the execution of so great a
cruelty (in favor of Bentiuogli) becoming enemies of this noble house of
Mariscotti, should ever desire the conservation of him and his estate, and with
all their power help to support the same. And although Duke Valentines purpose
was to make Bentiuogli odious in that city, he should not have done



CHAP. 26. A man ought not neither in jest or by any other means to put a
Prince in jealousy of his estate, for that it is a matter full of danger.
FOrasmuch as Princes concerning their estates, A comparison between a lover
and a Prince.
are like lovers toward their Mistresses; and as for jealousy they are equal
and march with like pace: for as a man may easily lodge jealousy in the heart
of a lover; even so may a man with great facility put a doubt and suspicion
into the heart of a Prince, by reason of his estate. And as he which revealing
to a lover something which may be prejudicial to his love, makes him
Alexander Bon a gentleman of Venice, through a vain plot and enterprise put
the whole Commonwealth of Venice in doubt and suspicion of a revolution of
their estate: but he mist to effect with his honor that which he pretended.
This man having once deceived the Senate, in case of revealing of secrets of
importance, and thereby got money; and the practice succeeding well, he
practiced the second time to do the like: for he was a man of great expense,
and wanting means sufficient to maintain that greatness, which he desired,
with (...) rigor, A Captain, through boldness and diligence oftentimes
obtains that which by mildnes he should never attain unto.
he obtained of them what he would. Whereby a man may Guicciar. li. 10
wherefore the Marquis being taken upon the sudden, and having no leisure to
consult or think upon the demand of the Lord of Foix, who was already entered
and come within his Country of Mantoua, he sent him the keys of the
Fortresses, which peradventure he would not have done, if the Lord of Foix had
used but the ordinary means with the Marquis, which men use, which desire
peaceably to pass through other Princes Countries: because that then the
Marquis had had leisure to think of the matter, and in denying him to serve
his turn, with such means as he had; but considering the necessity of the
Lord of Foix, who

CHAP. 28. Princes and great Lords ought not to despise those which desire
audience of them, and especially such as may rise to some degree of honor.
ONe of the fairest conditions that may be in a Prince, or great Lord, in my
opinion, is this, to be gentle and ready to give audience to such as desire to
speak to him, and principally to strangers which come to him about affairs:
for besides that, he gets and wins to himself the love and good will of
his Subjects, he may easily rid and deliver himself from the trouble of the
abundance of business, which by Men happen oftentimes to have need of those
men which in former time they despised.
but that he may have need of another man: Wherefore let him disdain no man,
for fortune (as often it happens) may change, and a man may peradventure be
brought to so low an ebb, that from him (of whom in former Peter de Medicis,
who (as our author affirms, to have heard by persons worthy to be believed)
was not assisted by Duke Valentine, to return again to Florence, in revenging
of an injury received of him, refusing to give him audience when he was in
meaner estate. The words of Guicciardin are these. Valentin had no desire to
restore Peter de Medicis to his Country, Guicciar. lib.
neither to do any thing for him, seeing that the greatness of the houses of
the Orsini and of Vitellozo, unto which he well knew that Peter de Medicis
after his return would be very firmly conjoined: and moreover, I have heard
by men of credit, that in his heart was Guicciardin, whereof may be collected,
that Princes ought sometimes to give over their sports and pleasures, to
dispatch an

CHAP. 29. Those estates which are not mighty and of power, are not to attempt
great and hardy enterprises, and their resolutions are more often taken of
force, than of their own free
GVicciardin speaks of two adventures happened in the Commonwealth of
Florence, whereby the Florentines showed that they wanted heart and courage to
undertake any hardy and valorous enterprise, and that they were of small
judgment, for the issue of their resolutions made it apparent, that they knew
not how to make choice and apply themselves Jews the 12. King of France, went
to Pisa, hoping with those forces to take it. King Jews the 12. desired to
render Pisa to the Florentines, for that they were bound to pay unto him fifty
thousand Ducats upon the taking and delivery thereof: and to this purpose the
King sent thither his army, under the leading of the Lord of Beaumont, who
although he were a French man borne, yet was such a one as the Florentines
greatly trusted. This General marched forwards, hard matter to endure
injuries; and although they have not debated Herod. lib. 1. Astyages King of
the Medes commanded his nephew to be slain.
I say that this fault is so gross and foolish, that it may be accounted above
all the follies of the world. And if we speak of ancient histories, Astyages
King of Harpagus his General, and chief Commander of his men at Arms,
commanding him to kill him. Harpagus had pity of the innocent infant, and
would not soil and embrue his hands in his blood, but left him in a forest,
to the end that wild beasts should have devoured him. The child was found by a
shepherd, who brought him up, and named him Cyrus: he was at length known to
be nephew to Astyages, and that he was delivered into the hands of Harpagus to
the end Astyages was very wroth, and enraged hereat, and for revenge he took
the son of Harpagus, and caused it to be cut in pieces, and dressed in sundry
manners, and given to his father to eat. Harpagus dissembled this injury, as
he which wisely considered, that then to be revenged was no less difficult
than dangerous, but attending a time, he took a notable revenge. For Cyrus
being become great, made war against Astyages his Graundfather by the Mother,
who forgetting the wrong which he had done to Harpagus, in making him to eat
his own son, he held him still in the Harpagus, at what time as he should
have fought, revolted with the greatest part of the army, put him to flight,
Harpagus General for Astiages, revolted from him, overcame and slew him.
and deprived him both of his kingdom and his life. This error deserved a
great reprehension, to make a man to eat his own child, and afterward to
put into his hands both his estate and life also. The same Herodotus reports,
that one Panionie Sciotte used a mischievous and wicked trade of merchandise,
and lived of most infamous and dishonest gain, which was thus: He bought young
children of Sea-rouers, and other thieves Herodot. lib. 8
whether they were taken either by sea or land: and when he saw any that were
fair, well favored, and of good countenance, he gelded them, and sold them
to the Barbarians for a great sum of money: for they make great account of
Eunuchs, esteeming them very faithful, and trusty in any thing above all
others. There fell (by chance) into the hands of this Panionie, a young boy of
Hermotine of Pedase, and having gelded him, he was bought for his beauty and
good grace, wherewith he was endowed, and was given for a present to King
Xerxes, with whom in short space he gat so great favor, that he Xerxes went
into Greece in the wars against Athens, this Hermotine was sent into Mysia
about the Kings affairs: and being arrived at a certain place inhabited by
the Sciots called Artane, he found there Panionie, and after many courtesies
and embracements, he told him that he acknowledged to have received from him
all the good that he had: for through his occasion he was raised to that
greatness which he now enjoyed, and that he would not fail to let him know how
much he remembered the pleasure received by his means: and if that he would
resolve to go with his wife and children Panionie (forgetting the wrong which
he had done to Hermotine, in gelding, and selling him for a slave) gave credit
unto his words, and hoping to bring his business well to pass, he with his
wife and children went thither, where Hermotine did dwell. But so soon as he
was come thither, and that Hermotine had him in his power, changing both
speeches and countenance, he said unto him: What displeasure have I ever done
unto thee, O thou unhappy man? or what wrong (...) trusting him whom he had
iniuried: for being invaded by Charles Clement the 4. was made King of Sicilie,
and coming to blows with him at Beneuent, he was slain, and his army
overthrown and put to flight. And the greatest occasion of this loss, John
Rata Earl of Caserta, put his Lord Manfredi king of Sicilie in extreme danger.
and of the victory of the French, was attributed to John Rata Earl of
Caserta, who in honor was wronged by Manfredi, who had violated his wives
honesty: and being made a Colonel and Leader of many Companies in this war,
seeing the opportunity, he sought to be revenged of a particular injury by a
public loss: for having made a secret agreement with Charles, he first gave
him passage into the confines of Naples, and would not fight in the Manfredi
did ill in giving charge of importance in his army to him, whom he had so
highly grieved in his honor. And although (as some say) that the horns which
Kings make are Crowns; yet it ought to be considered, that every man's heart is
not compounded of like substance. And when a King or a Prince is disposed to
do an injury to his subject or vassal, he ought also to make account that
he never use his service any more in any charge, that may be hurtful unto him
afterward, but ought to entertain him in show, and giving him some honest
pension or provision, to hold him far from him: for when noble hearts

In the time of our ancestors, Charles Duke of Burgundy incurred the same
error, who being in a council of war with his Captains, gave a blow to
Nicolas Campo Bachio, an Italian Earl, who was in that council; who,
imprinting the injury in his memory, made show many years that he regarded it
not, attending time and place to be revenged, Nicholas Campo-Bachio, an Italian
Earl, to be revenged betrayed his Master Charles Duke of Burgundy, and
withdrew himself to Jews King of France.
which at length came to pass: for being entertained Rene Duke of Lorraine,
the said Earl Nicholas, at the battle at Nansci, gave Duke Rene warning that
he should make no difficulty to encounter the Duke of Burgundy with the
Swissers, for that he would come to his aid with his men at arms. The Duke of
Lorraine gave battle to the Duke of Burgundy, and the Earl Nicholas would
not once vouchsafe to boudge with his Cauallerie, but turning his Cornet
toward France, he went to the service of King Jews, revenging himself, by
the death and overthrow of his Master, of the Charles then committed a great
fault, to hold in his camp for chief of his men at arms, him whom he had so
grievously offended through folly in choler: and although that the Earl bare
the name of disloyal and a traitor; yet nevertheless he gave an example to
Princes, and by this fact does advise them to take heed how they grieve their
subjects, (especially such as are men of spirit and of quality) for ever
trusting them any more.

The Lord Peter Strozzi, a Captain of great worth in our time, Guicciar. lib. 5
in the defense which he wrote to show the occasion wherefore he Marignan,
where some Captains forsook him, produces many reasons: but he concealeth
the injuries done unto some, which he afterward took with him to the wars,
to which he gave the charge to guard certain holds, and to command certain
men at Arms, for which fault he was publikelie blamed. For there are some men
which care not by a public loss, to revenge a private injury, and so as they
may effect their purpose, they care not what becomes of the affairs wherein
they are employed. And although that they which forsook and abandoned him,
ought principally Strozza; yet they cared not for that, provided that he who
had offended them, might lose his credit and reputation; and whosoever shall
read his apology, shall see, (though he expressly say it not) yet he notes
and means it, when he silentlie says: It is a thing neither honest nor
honorable, It is dishonorable for a man to abandon his friend in time of
need, for any occasion whatsoever.
for any to abandon their masters and friends in their greatest need,
notwithstanding there had been some occasion given. And to speak uprightly, I
say that he is much to be blamed that wrongeth another: but after that he
perceives that he has done him wrong, humane Alphonse King of Naples did, by
Iacques Piccinino the son of Nicholas, whom he wisely aided and relieved as a
friend, but kept himself as well from him, as from an enemy.

CHAP. 31. He is not to be blamed, who by policy or industry draws unto him
pernicious and wicked persons, to the end to punish them for offenses already
committed, and to stop them
THere are sometimes such men borne into world, which seem to be borne to no
other end, than to the ruin of mankind: and are so full of mischief, and so
grounded in all kind of villainy, that when they dye and leave this world, a
man may justly say that the world is delivered and purged of a dangerous
plague. These men, or rather monsters When assurance and safeguard given to a
and by a Prince is to be maintained, and when not.
all policy and cunning means to entrap them is to be used: and it is but
well done to fail and break the doubtful promises and assurances made unto
them, so as they may be punished for the evils which they have committed, or at
the least hindered and kept from committing any more. And although that faith
and promise ought to be held, yea even with a man's enemies, and that it is the
part of a good and just Prince to hold his word, nevertheless that is to be
understood when the cases are alike: for when faith is expressly given, and
that safeguard is

Gonsaluo Fernandez, surnamed the great Captain, knowing the most wicked
inclination of Valentine, and how pernicious he had been to all Italy, so long
as ability was joined with his ill disposition, drew him unto him by a
safeconduct, under assurance whereof, so soon as he had him in his power he
sent him prisoner into Spain. After the death of Alexander the sixth, Valentine
lived in base fortune, which nothing altered his old condition, for he
persuaded Gonsaluo to invade Pisa with his forces both by Sea and by Land, to
the end to trouble and make war against the Florentines, for the service of
his King. Gonsaluo, which very well knew Guicciar. lib. 6
and Valentine cunningly entrapped by Gonsaluo Fernandes, and sent prisoner
into Spain, and there kept prisoner in the Castle at Medina del Campo.
And as Valentine complained that faith and promise was not held with him,
Gonsaluo wisely answered, that servants hands and writings serve to no purpose,
and are of no effect and value, without the consent of their Masters, and
therefore this safeconduct could not serve his turn, seeing his Emperor had
otherwise determined contrary to his desire. And Valentine being arrived in
Spain, attended on by one Page only, he was committed prisoner to the Castle
of Medina del Campo, and escaping from thence, he went into Navarre to (...)
for fear to make those which already are wicked to become worse. Baglione bare
himself as a wise Prince, notwithstanding that it was in him to have done
otherwise: but he considered that wisdom and good dealing would support him,
and the contrary would be his ruin: and so it may be coucluded, that he
might have been disloyal if he had would, but he would not for the reasons
abouesaid.

CHAP. 33. That enterprises executed by the persuasion of Rebels and banished
men, are dangerous, and seldom come to good end.
SVch men as are banished from their country, have so great desire to return
thither again, that being always in hope, they promise both to themselves and
to others also great matters: and seeking always ways and means to recover
their country, they hazard and adventure themselves in every desperate actio^,
be it never so hard and doubtful, and having but two things to lose, to wit,
life and goods, they expose both the one and the other to attain to their
desire. And moreover, when Titus Liuius, the other modern in our author: the
one appertains to the want of faith in banished men: and the other concerns
the vanity and falsenes of their promises. Titus Liuius declares, that when
Alexander the great passed with his army into Asia, Alexander King of Epire,
or Albania, his kinsman, went with a great power into Italy, A Province in the
Kingdom of Naples.
whither he was called by certain banished men called Lucains (now the people
of Basilicate) Alexander the Epirote was induced by the oaths and promises of
the Lucains, and being arrived in Lucania, the inhabitants there promised to
call home and restore their banished men to their country, upon condition that
they would kill Alexander. Alexander, King of the Epirotes, slain by the
Lucains, being banished from their Country whom he sought to restore.
Wherefore in hope to repossesse their country, they slew the Albanian King,
falsifying their oaths and promises made unto him: and so will all they do
which bind themselves by oath, to him which shall promise to restore them to
their liberty in their own houses: so great is their desire to return

Themistocles being banished from Greece, by his promises and persuasions
induced Artaxerxes to make war against it: Themistocles poisoned himself.
but Themistocles being unable to maintain and hold his promise to Artaxerxes,
Themistocles, who procured it, and scandalous and exceeding chargeable to
Artaxerxes, who by his persuasion put it in execution.

Of later time the Lord of Chaumont, General for the King of France in Italy,
a personage of great virtue and authority, through the persuasion of those of
the house of the Bentiuogli, was induced to go to Boulogne to restore them
again into the City, and there to have suppressed Pope Iuli the second. But
the promises which the (...) out, Ferdinand and Don Julius conspire against
Alfonso Duke of Ferrara.
and made them to be put in their place again, without loss of Ferdinand
which was the second son, in hope to possess the state, and Julius for that
it seemed unto him that Alfonso regarded not the injuries done unto him by the
Cardinal, and for that he expected not otherwise to be able to be revenged on
him. See what Guicciardin says. By which words it may be gathered, that the
intention of Don Iulio was to stir more against the Duke, who had dissembled
the wrong and outrage done unto him, then against the Cardinal the author of
the injury. Wherefore let Princes take heed that they suffer not their
favorites

CHAP. 35. It is a thing very dangerous for a Prince or Commonwealth, not to
revenge a public injury.
WE have said in the last chapter how dangerous it is for a Prince to leave
unpunished the injuries committed by his parents and familiars, against some
private person: now in this chap. we will show, that the same danger hangs
over him, which suffers to escape unpunished Romulus and Tatius Sabinus were
Princes of the City of Rome, Prutarch in the life of Romulus.
as Plutarch writes.

In the fourth year of the reign of Tatius the Ambassadors of Laurentins
came to Rome about certain business concerning the Public: and as they were
traveling on their journey, certain friends and kinsemen of Tatius assaulted
them upon the way, in manner of thieves, to take their purses, with such money
as they had: And the Ambassadors standing in their defense, making resistance,
were slain by the Romans. The Laurentins complained to Romulus and Tatius of
this injury, requiring that the thieves and murderers should be punished: but
Tatius who was so far from punishing and revenging the injury, that he not
only pardoned the offenders, but set them at liberty, against the will of
Romulus, The Laurentins in revenge of the injury done to their Ambassadors
slew Tatius king of the Romans.
The Laurentins were much offended and discontent hereat, waiting opportunity
to be revenged, and upon a day they followed King Tatius which went to do
sacrifice, and while as he was busy about his ceremonies they slew him. So as
for not revenging and punishing the wrong done to the persons of the
Ambassadors (which are every where held for holy, reverend, and inviolable) he
purchased the death which he deserved: which had not happened unto him, if he
had punished the public injury, as he ought to have done. The second is this,
that the French, which are now called wrath and fury, they suddenly levied a
mighty army, and by assault

CHAP. 36. He that is in prosperity ought not to reprove him that is fallen
from good to evil fortune, for that he little knows what may happen to
himself.
THere is a certain kind of men in the world, who so long as fortune
favors them, thinking that this fortune will never fail, esteem themselves
to be so wise and provident, that they cannot decay: and if by chance there
come before them a man who by misfortune is fallen from some great estate, and
become poor, and of low degree, presently as though they were the only men
that knew how to govern well, either John Bentiuogli Lord of Boulogne in the
wars and misfortunes of Italy, in the time of Charles the 8. King of France,
behaved himself in such sort, that he preserved his estate, and lived
peaceably: but the like happened Peter de Medicis, who was as it were Lord of
Florence; for having consigned the Fortresses of Serezana and Serezanel, to the
King of France, he purchased the hatred of the Commonwealth of Florence, and
was driven out of the Country and proclaimed rebel; who went to Boulogna, and
was received by John Bentiuogli, who at the first sight sharply reproved him,
for that, that without striking one blow with his sword, and without the death
of any one man, he had forsaken such and so great estate; which he said was
prejudicial unto him, and was an ill president for all those which would
oppress the liberty of their Country: Guicciar. lib. ^
and wished that Peter A man cannot retain that greatness of courage in
adversity, which they showed in the beginning of their prosperity.
But afterward when the same John Bentiuogli in the time of Pope Julius the
second, began to prove ill and contrary fortune, (which depriueth men of their
wits and judgment) and that the Pope chased him out of his estate, he knew
then, that men in contrary accidents and misfortunes, cannot reteyne that
greatness of courage which they had in time of their prosperity: and then
perceive that when they were fortunate, they did wrongfullie reprehend others
of fear and ill government. For the Lord of Boulogna, Peter de Medicis,
neither had he that greatness of courage and force in himself which he desired
to have been in another: and left for example, that no man should

CHAP. 37. That mighty Commonwealths and excellent personages ought not to be
blamed, although they give place to the force and oppression of fortune.
FOrasmuch as I know well, that many have blamed the Lords of Venice, because
that in the year 1508. they were vanquished and put to flight at Vaila, and
were in a manner at a point to have yielded unto the Empire all the maine land:
I have thought it a matter not altogether unprofitable to consider a little,
and by peecemeale to examine the manner of their carriage and proceeding in
that case; and to show that they were not so blameworthie as many would make
them. Titus Liuius, an Author truly, both grave and honorable, who by words
a little too large and vehement, terms them weak, base minded, insolent,
and of small judgment: for this cause I will endeavor my self to show,
(without offense to this Author) that the Lords of Venice, have not deserved
in their doings to be so much blamed and mocked by him: and whosoever shall
proceed as they have done, be it a Prince, or Commonwealth, cannot justly
be termed, weak, insufficient, nor less excellent then before. This Furius
Camillus; and another universal, of the Roman Commonwealth, and says, that
although that fortune change and is variable, yet nevertheless their courage
alters nor changes not, and they bear themselves in such sort in their
accustomed manner of living, Titus Liuius makes Camillus to speak: Nec mihi
dictatura animos fecit, nec exilium ademit. Which is to say: The Dictatorship
has not given me courage, or made me proud, neither has my banishment taken
it from me, and made me base and a coward. The greatness of courage of the
Roman Commonwealth.
The example of the Commonwealth consists in this, that after the loss of
the battle of Cannas, which was the third, the Romans were not out of heart,
nor discouraged, neither would they ransom their prisoners, nor send
Ambassadors to Hanniball, but put another army into the fields.

But whosoever shall well examine the doings of the Venetians, shall see that
they therein did deserve more praise then blame, and Camillus, might be
compared with the misfortune of Hanniball of Carthage, Scipio at Carthage, and
whether Hanniball might be said and reputed to be base and abject, when
(seeing his country oppressed by ill fortune) he went to entreat a peace with
Scipio: I do not think that Hanniball can be said to be of a base courage in
comparison of Camillus, the disgraces being unlike. And a man may say as much
of the Commonwealths. Let a man make comparison between the disgraces and ill
fortunes of the overthrow at Cannas, and the war which the Venetians had in
the year 1508. and he shall see whether Rome may be termed a mighty
Commonwealth, and Venice a weak Commonwealth. But Hanniball, they had had to
deal with four Hannibals togethers at one instant, all conspired to their
overthrow and ruin? I am of opinion, that being oppressed by their ill
fortune, they would hardly have retained the hautie courage which they showed,
having to deal but with one. Wherefore, if the Venetians, after their
overthrow at Vaila, had had to deal but with the King of France alone, as the
Romans with Hanniball alone, this half overthrow of Adda had not made them so
much discouraged, Patiglian, and one of their Pouruours, amounting to the
number of 25000. men, and with many others which were gathered and joined
togethers) but would have resisted the King, and retained their former courage,
and peradventure surmounted their adversary. But being to fight not only
against one enemy, but against five or six at once, united and coniured
together, who had concluded in the Castle of Cambray, and resolved to ruinate
them, and to make war against them Ne Hercules contra duos, that Hercules
himself is not sufficient to fight against two at once: one only
Commonwealth then, could worse resist and make head against Pope Julius the
second, the Emperor, the kings of France and of Spain, besides other petty
Princes, which altogether rose and made war against them in diverse places, as
the Duke of Ferrara, the Marquis of Mantoua, and the Frangipani, Infrioli. So
as it could not be said, that

And moreover seeing that the Venetian Commonwealth, by the Author of these
discourses, is placed in rank with weak Commonwealths, he ought rather for
pity to have excused the
gives a rule and advertisement: that when many that are puissant and mighty
are joined and united togethers against one other, that is mighty, although
that they all being united be far mightier then he, a man ought
nevertheless to hope better of him alone which is the weaker, then in all
them, although in number they be most mighty, for this, that he alone using a
little industry, may disunite and separate them asunder; provided always,
that he be so valorous, as that he Jews More governor of Milan, and a
practice and device they delivered themselves of that trouble, recovered the
country which they had lost, and usurped part of the Duchy of Ferrara. This
advertisement being founded upon the example of the Venetians, Anthony
Justinian their Ambassador Hanniball alone: and therefore they used all means
to bring it to pass that he might remain alone, for that they doubted not so
to unite and reinforce their troops, to fight with him, and to overcome him if
possibly: Guicciardin, shall see that the Venetian Lords did very wisely, to
use this expedition to disunite the Princes: for they were no less to fear
some civil tumult within their walls, then the enemies armies abroad: upon
this accident which might happen, the Fathers and Senators used great
consideration. And although that Guicciardin do note them of a little fear
and of a too sudden despair; I say, nevertheless that it more avails to be
wisely fearful, then rash and foolishly hardy: for sometimes the faining of
fear has served men's turns in many occasions and occurrences. Moreover, the
author of the said discourses,
That when a man has to deal with one man alone, the yielding up of any thing
through pusillanimitie, will not appease him, but that he will have more: but
when a man is to answer to many enemies, when thou shall restore to some one,
that which appertains unto him, thereby to win him to thee, and to disunite
and separate him from the rest of the confederates against thee, (although that
the war were already open) this plot and counsel is good: see what he
says. Resting my self upon this his foundation, I say, that humility to
overcome arrogancy, and his words are such as follow: Proud men are hardly
appeased by humility.
No Prince ought to omit any part of his degree, neither ought to leave or give
up any thing by composition, (if he will honorably leave it) except it be when
he is able, or thinks himself able to hold it: for it is better to suffer
it to be taken perforce, (the business being brought to such terms, that it
cannot be left in the manner aforesaid) then to leave it for fear of forces.
For if thou leave it for fear, and thou do so to the end to deliver thee
from war, most commonly thou gettest nothing thereby; and for that that he
to whom (through apparent fear) thou have yielded ought, will not be
contented, but will have yet more, and will be inflamed against Joy cannot be
hidden.
for it is more easy to conceal sorrow then joy, the which being unable to be
contained within a man's breast, of force will show it self in some one manner
Jews More, Governor of Milan, caused himself to be called the son of
Fortune.
and endeavor to extol themselves through proud and ambitious titles, as did
Jews More, who called himself (and would that others also should do the
like) the son of Fortune. Should a man then marvel though the Venetians
through insolency called the French King the son of S. Mark? And it is a
common saying, that every dog will bark at his masters door, Anthony
Justinian to accord with the Emperor upon whatsoever condition: whereupon many
things were spoken Guicciardin is said to have translated word Justinian before
the Emperor, I say it might well be true, that Guicciardin had seen, and had
this Oration, for that that at Rome, and in sundry places of Italy, many
copies were to be seen by the fault of many Secretaries, or men's curiosity,
which make profession to have certain secret and singular matters: and every
man knows that when such copies pass many men's hands, a man may easily add,
not only words, but even whole sentences. But may it not be found that
Guicciardin fained it, and drew Hannibals oration to Scipio, written by Titus
Liuius, wherein are the very same conceits: for he had no reason to compile
such a tale, when as he might summarily show the substance and content of the
legation and the Embassage of Justinian, as by his history a man may see many
others dispersed: but for as much (as I have said) many copies were to be
seen, and peradventure before Justinian parted from Venice, Guicciardin may
be exempted from the reproach and slander to have forged it, to the dishonor
of the Venotians. And for conclusion. I say, that a man ought not too hastily
to condemn either Princes or Commonwealths of debilitie or

CHAP. 38. That he who of an enemy will become a friend, ought not only to
forget all injuries past, but to put from him all things
ALthough it be more easy of a friend to become an enemy, then of an enemy
to return friend: so is it that the last is not impossible, although it be
somewhat difficile, and less used then the first, the which difficulty
comes of no other thing, then from the greatness and noblenes of our heart,
which cannot endure to be iniuried nor grieved in any part, which may diminish
(be it never so little) of his dignity: which he also does in matters conjoined
therewith, as country, wife, children, and such More praise and commendation is
parchused by pard^^ing than taking revenge.
I say that then when a man is resolved to remit and pardon all injuries past,
and of an enemy to become a true friend, he must put from before him and wholly
forget all matters which may bring to mind the offenses received: for hated
objects do greatly move our spirit, which if it be not well tempered, is
easily drawn to do that which it would not, if it saw them not.

There was a gentlewoman of Cesena worthy of much praise and commendation,
whose husband in the year 1539. with many wounds was murdered: and she
desiring that her son, which she

In like manner the noble and magnanimous act of Maximilian the first Emperor
is worthy of eternal memory, and to be registered Jews the 12. King of
France, A noble act of the Emperor Maxun^^an.
from the house of the which Kings of France the Empire had received many
injuries: he not only thanked the King for helping him by his means to
recover his towns in Frioli, which the Venetians held, but forgetting all the
wrongs received of the kingdom of France, and to show that he was become a
true friend, and had no object before his eyes, which might call to memory
offenses past, he caused a book to be burnt which was kept at Spire, wherein
were written all the injuries, which in time past the Kings of

CHAP. 39. A man ought not to give credit to an error which he sees his
A Wise Captain or General of an Army, ought never to give credit to an
error, which he sees his enemy to commit, especially, when the error is
apparently foul and gross, for therein ever lies some secret and hidden
deceit: which may happen in sundry manners: of the enemies proceeding ought to
make thee beware, for such (...)
Amongst the examples of the Romans, we have one of Fuluius, Lieutenant of the
Roman army, when he remained alone to guard the Camp in the war against
the Tuscanes, for the Consul being gone to Rome to do certain ceremonies,
the Tuscanes then thinking to draw the Romans in the absence of the Consul
out of their Camp, and to make them fall into an ambush laid there hard by:
they sent certain Soldiers apparrelled like Shepherds, with a good number of
beasts, and made them go within sight of the Roman Army, coming almost to
the (...)
and seeing none to guarde the same, and fearing some Ambush and deceit, for
they thought it impossible that the Romans should commit so gross a fault as
to leave their City open

We have another example of error, Culcciardin.
which happened in the time of our auncesters, in the year 1508. when the
Florentines made war against the Pisans. In this war was taken prisoner
Alfonso de Mutolo, a citizen of Pisa, but a man of base condition, who was
Canaicio de prato, an old Soldier of the Florentines, which kept this
Alfonso, and made him great cheer and used him very honorably. This man being
by the Pisans induced to do some exployte, offered to give unto the
Florentines one of the ports of Pisa, provided that they should set him at
liberty: whereupon he was delivered, and being come to Pisa, he entertained
the Florentines with this hope to be possessed of a port of Pisa, wherein their
army might enter, and the matter was carried so openly, that coming to
consult and parle with the Commissioners and principal men of the Florentine
Camp, The overthrow of the Florentines before Pisa, through the policy of
Mutolo, a Pisan Captain.
Mutolo brought with him Alfonso without some fraud, which took such effect,
as the Pisans desired; for the Florentine Army approaching the port appointed
and given in guard to Mutolo, which was that toward Luques, the Pisans
Alfonso, until it was too late, and they not able to remedy it: and there
they lost many of their Soldiers and Captains, amongst which dyed the
Captain Canaicio aforesaid, who took Mutolo prisoner, whom he had used with
so much and so many courtesies.

CHAP. 40. A Captain at all times and in all places in the wars ought to be
so vigilant and in such readiness, that he may avoid the blame to have warred
preposterouslie, and not to have done his enduour.
AMong many considerations which a Captain ought to have, which serves a
Prince or Commonwealth in the wars, one of the most principal is, to carry
himself so advisedly in his charge, that he incur not through his fault
any danger: and failing in his office, he wrong not his soldiers, and
dishonor not himself and the Prince whom he serves. To trust and presume
too much of himself, and to make Petilius Coreal, General of the Romans,
through his negligence was overthrown and put to flight.
Petilius Coreal was General for the Romans, against three Leaders of the
Germans, to wit, Civil, Classique, and Tutor: and having encamped himself in
a strong place, he valiantly fought with the enemy, and gave them often
alarmes. He had a desire one night to lie out of his Camp; whereof the
Germans being advertised, assailed it with great fury Petilius from the place
where he slept heard the noise and overthrow of his army, and when it was day
he retired with great danger toward his friends, and had much to do to
reunite his forces and make head against his enemy: which had not befallen
him, if he had not thus erred in lying out of his Camp. Cornelius Tacitus.
lib. 20
Behold what Cornelius Tacitus says.

But to come to examples of latter times, in the time of our Ancestors,
Maximilian determined to reconquer his Towns which the Venetians withheld from
him, when the Lord of Trent which was for him at Verona, desired to besiege the
Town of Lignago, from whence the Venetian soldiers oftentimes made roades and
incursions, even to the gates of Verona, and did much hurt: wherefore he called
the Marquis of Mantoua, who with a company of men at Arms, which he had of the
King, lay in an Island called Scale, at a great Village in the country of
Verona, but unwalled, and without any manner of fortification. Whilst that the
Marquis was there, doubting no enemies, Lucio Maluezzo and Zitolo de Perusa,
Venetian Captains, by a stratageme; by means whereof he was taken prisoner,
having first fled almost naked, for that being deceived by the Word, Turk,
which was the Marquis his Watchword, and thinking with his people, that they
had been stradiots and adventurers, which had promised to leave the Venetians,
and to come to serve him; wherefore finding him with any guard, they entered
without any contradiction, or resistance, for that the other soldiers and men
at Arms, lay scattered here and there in the Village. They sacked the house,
and disarmed the soldiers, and the Marquess flying in Baiazeth the great Lord
of the Turks. A Captain ought always to be in readiness and well advised in
his affairs, in all accidents.
By the which fact according to the opinion which Guicciardin gives, other
Captains may also take example, to be vigilant and in a readiness in time of
wars: and when they have any charge, so to hold themselves upon their guards,
that in all occasions, they may serve their turns with their own forces,
without Prospero Colomna in the veere 1515. Guicciar. li. ^^
who being at Villa Franque, when Francis the first king of France passed into
Italy, and thinking that his enemies were far off, suspecting nothing, not
imagining that that celeritie and expedition might be in another man which was
in himself, being suddenly surprised by the Lord de la Palisse, as he was
sitting at his table at dinner, he was taken prisoner the 15. of August,
Prospero Columna, through (...) own fault was taken prisoner by the Lord of
Palisse, a Captain of the French.
having heard nothing of the enemy, de la Palisse; yet this surprise was
attributed to his negligence and little care, notwithstanding that he was a
most honorable Captain, and of that noble house full of glory, and worthy
personages. Let Captains and brave warriors then learn to take heed, that
they fail not of their endeavor: to the end that if they encounter with some
disaster or lucklesse accident, they may boldly and with a cheerful
countenance accuse their ill

CHAP. 41. When a man has news, and is advertised of a victory, it is
better to pursue and assure the same, then to make good
THose men which consider not well the affairs of the world, and which govern
themselves more after their own fantasy then by reason, and which apply
themselves more to their present pleasure, then to provide for the evil which
in time may come; will not like of this discourse, as that which seems to
blame the joy of a victory, That is a perfect victory which assures a man in
his estate; and delivers him from the sear of his enemies.
Wherefore a man ought to know, that the victory is either whole and perfect,
or else imperfect and vain. The entire and perfect victory is this, wherein
the enemy is wholly overthrown and oppressed, in such sort that you need not
any more to fear that he shall be able to hurt you, or rise against you, having
wholly disarmed him, and leaving nothing remaining more for you to overcome, you
may live in assurance and security. For although the victory be great, and
bring to the victorious much reputation: yet the victory cannot be said to be
whole and perfect, so long as there rests Augustus Caesar. The imperfect
victories are these, which although they make you respected, and give you
reputation; yet they do not wholly deliver you from the enemy, and resemble a
certain kind of ill plants, which bring forth branches with some fruit, which
although a man cut away, yet nevertheless in the root there rests a virtue
to bring forth other, Animperfect victory is the seed, root, and beginning
of another war.
that an imperfect victory is the seed of another future war; the virtue
and forces remaining yet in the enemy to renew the war, to fight again, and
to bring you into new trouble and danger. And when I say, that the victory is
vain, I speak not of that vanity, which signifies little or nothing at all:
but I mean that it has not that perfection and fulness in it self, as the
other before spoken of. Victory is many times the cause of many vices.
When a man does not thoroughly know these imperfect victories, they of custom
do draw after them many vices, as negligence, immoderate joy, insolency, and
little regard of the enemy, vices truly pernicious and full of infinite ensue.
Guicciar. li. 10
The Lords of Venice in the year 1512. obtained a great victory



CHAP. 42. That enterprise seldom fails which is noisome and hurtful to the
enemy, and whereof a man well knows that he stands in fear.
IT is a common saying, that he which knows whereof his enemy stands most
in fear, knows also how to be able to offend him, and this is found true,
when a man has to deal with an enemy that is a man of judgment, and
governs himself by reason: for when a man sees that his enemy proceeds in
his affairs with reason, a man may well believe that he does it not without
some purpose and occasion: but when To know what may breed fear in a Prince
that is enemy, is the beginning of good success.
whereby he may truly and assuredly know whereof he is afraid, then may he well
hope of the good success of the assault to be given. And this comes to pass
when he doubts and fears that his enemy will assail him in some place
which is weak, or ill guarded, or which he cannot rescue, by reason of the
far distance; or when he has not forces sufficient for the defense thereof,
or for some other such like reason which yield him just cause of fear: and
when a man has evident tokens or certain aduertisements of such fear, the
enterprise so attempted seldom fails.

Guicciar. li. 10
were before gone to Pontoglio to stop their passage: but the Swissers having
taken another way, the Lord de la Palisse, the French Kings Lieutenant

CHAP. 43. To wrong the statues, images, and pictures of Princes in their life
time is a poor revenge, and oftentimes the cause of great hurt to him which
does the same.
Never man found good by doing wrong: and if it be ill done to be outrageous
toward living men, which may remember the injuries, a man shall do much worse
by doing Homer blamed the Greeks, who wounded the dead body of Hector after
he was slain by Achilles, and noted them with this scoff, That the very Hares
would adventure to charge the Lion when he was dead. And although it seems
Those which do vvrong and show cruelty to the dead, are worthy of eternal
shame and dishonur.
receive some contentment by glutting their rage: yet it cannot be said, but
that such doings are rather brute and savage, than humane. The injuries which
are done to statues and images of Princes in their life time, resembles this
injury: and if it be done for revenge, because they cannot do it to himself
being alive, a man satisfies his rage against the stone or the wood which
represents him, I say that this is a poor revenge, fitting the fury of the
common people, which in it self has no reason or judgment. And if such
injury be done to charge the person represented in this image, I say that it
is a thing very dangerous, Julius the second, who having driven the Bentiuogli
out of Boulogne, did many pleasures to the Boulognois, granting them many
privileges, dignities, and exemptions, which the Boulognois ill acknowledged,
when the Bentiuogli, by means of the French King, again returned into the
city: for then they Bentiuogli, or otherwise being tired with the troubles of
the war, they would discharge their choler and fury, according to their
custom, upon the image which represented him, whom they deemed to have put
them to all that pain and trouble. The Pope was highly displeased with this
injury, Gucciar. li. 10.
and when Boulogne returned again under the command of the Church, after the
French were driven out of Italy, if he had not been prevented by Bentiuogli:
and if death had not interrupted his conceits, he was a man very likely to have
effected what he had proiected in his mind. And so the Boulognois, for having
outraged the statue of a Prince then living, were in danger to have lost their
country.

The Florentines likewise were so ill affected to the house of Medicis, that
when the people rose against that house, in the year 1524. certain young
gentlemen of noble houses, went to the Church of the Annunciation, where were
the statues of Pope Leo the tenth, and Clement the seventh, which were great
and made to the life, and having thrown them down, brake them in pieces,
using them very ill: this injury among others was the cause of the wars of
Florence. After the which, the government being returned into the hands of the
de Medicis, those which committed this wrong and outraged those Images, were
severely punished: and the Florentines Charles Duke of Burgundy, severely
punished the City of Nantes.
Charles the last Duke of Burgundy, used so great and memorable a revenge
against the town of Nantes, for no other cause but only for that the Nantois
made his statue and the statues of certain others his friends, and hanged them
by the neck upon a gibbet. Such injuries then done through choler or malice,
are base and vile reuenges, which bring with them great danger, when Princes
are able to punish them. When a man has to deal with the dead there is less
danger, and yet a man purchases the name and Bartholmew Coleon, erected at
Venice in the place of S. John Pol, for they which envied his glory, would
whisperingly say, that he was but a peddler, and had not deserved such honor,
and they put into the hand of his statue, a beesome, a sack upon his shoulder,
and a basket upon his head, which are signs of a peddler. But this was a base
injury, and a reueuge of the viler sort of some base common people: the valor
of Bartholmew of Bergamo (as a warrior and Chieftaine of great happiness and
reputation)

CHAP. 44. A Prince or Commonwealth, which has to deal with a mighty and
well armed enemy, ought not to refuse any reasonable and honest composition
and agreement, by reason of
WOrldly hopes are so deceitful, that whosoever does too much depend of them,
shall commit an error and be ever deceived: and for this cause every man, who
upon hope of a better bargain, shall reject a good one offered, the event and
expectation seldom answering the conceived hope, and the first occasion being
lost, he will at length repent the refusing of the

The example drawn out of the ancients, is that of the city of Tire, which
stood in the water as Venice does now: Plutarch in the life of Alexander.
Alexander the great having conquered the East, the Tyrians seeing his
greatness, sent him Ambassadors to offer him their service, and to yield him
such obedience as it should please him; yet upon this condition, that they
would receive neither himself, neither any of his people into their city.
Alexander being displeased that one such town should shut the ports against
him, whom all the East had received, rejecting both the Ambassadors, and the
conditions offered, he resolved to send thither his Army. The City of Tire
(as I have said) was built in the water, well walled, and furnished with all
things for the defense thereof, in such sort, that Alexander having besieged it
the space of four months, knew well, that to stay there, was but to diminish
his glory, and to lose time; whereas in the mean time, by the conquest of
many other countries he might increase the same: and for this cause he
concluded to accept of the conditions offered him before, and to grant to
them, that which they demanded, and so began to parle of an agreement. But
the Tyrians swollen with pride, and fierce, by reason of the resistance which
they had made, would not so much as accept of any agreement Alexander being
much moved, with such fury and obstinacy he assaulted the Town, that taking
it perforce, Alexander the great destroyed the city of Tire.
he razed it to the ground, and slew the one half of all the inhabitants, and
the other half he made slaves. And then the Tyrians to their whole subversion
and utter ruin of their Country knew, that it had been better for them, to
have accepted of the conditions, which they themselves had offered, then
vainly persuading themselves to overcome Alexander, and to have obtained
better, which was to make the enemy to give over his enterprise, and with

The other example is taken out of the histories of Guicciardin in an action of
the Florentine Commonwealth: which was, that in the year 1512. an army of
Spaniards came into the Seignorie of Florence, for three causes, to wit, to
alter the Government; to reestablish the de Medicis in Florence, and to draw
some money from their Commonwealth. The altering and changing of the
Government, consisted, in taking away the authority of Magistracy from Peter
Soderini, who was Gonfalonier for term of his life. The de Medicis, was to be
on condition, that they should, live as private Citizens: and the sum of
money which the Spaniards required, was not such, but that the Florentines
might very easily have paid it. The Spaniards had not that favor which was
promised them, by many Citizens, who had offered themselves to take arms in
their behalf, so soon as it should come to their knowledge, that they were
arrived in that Seignorie. Wherefore victuals and other necessary provisions
beginning to fail, they assayed to come to some composition, and there being
no more question of de Medicis in like manner, but all the matter rested in
paying a certain sum of money, which exceeded not 30000. Ducats: and that
out of the town of Prato, before which the Spanish Army then lay, victuals
should be given, until that the articles of agreement were ratified. But the
Florentines, moved with a vain hope of prevailing, without accepting of any of
these conditions, delaied their resolution, and finally would not accept of
this agreement (the three points being reduced into one,) which was of the
payment of the money. Wherefore the Spaniards constrained through Prato sacked
by the Spaniards.
and put the whole estate of Florence to great pain and trouble. He then
commits a great fault, which is assailed by a mighty enemy, and accepts
not of the reasonable conditions which are offered him, in hope to prevail
without them. The City of Tire ought to have been contented, when Alexander
yielded to grant unto them the conditions, which they themselves before had
demanded, and to have made so great a Warrior to consent to their wills. It
ought also to have sufficed the Florentines, when so many conditions propounded
by the Spaniards were reduced into one:



CHAP. 45. It is a great fault when confederats are slow in helping one another
in time of danger, and the loss and damage that rises thereof.
WHen a Prince or Commonwealth desires league or confederacy, to offend or
defend, this grows not but through the consideration of his own forces: for
an estate which would offend or defend it self from the force and violence of
another, and knows that their own forces are not sufficient to resist or
offend, has recourse to the aid or succors near or far off, according as
it best fitteth his purpose, though the succors which a man requires from
far off, be for the most part (and to say the truth) in a manner always
unprofitable and hurtful:
for a town which cannot defend it self by their own forces, and desires
succors from far off, resembles a man which falls sick of some dangerous
disease, in some village far from the City, in such sort that he must send
to the City for the Physician, through the far distance whereof, either the
sick man dies, or the coming of the Physician serves to no purpose, for
that the disease has taken so great hold on him, that it is grown incurable:
and so when the aid and succor is far off, of force the City so assailed
must fall into the enemies hands. A man may see an example in Sagunt, the which
being besieged by the Carthaginians, Silenonte was taken by the Carthagonians,
for that it was not in time relieved by the Siracusians.
the Silenontines had had no occasion to have complained of their confederates,
Jews the 12. King of France, fell into the like error, being confederate with
the King of Navarre. The King of Castile being enemy to King Jews of France,
would have passed into France with his Army, but the King of Navarre, for that
he would not fail his friend and allie, denied and stopped his passage, in such
sort that the King of Navarre procured to himself the war, and being unable
to resist the Spanish King, had recourse to the aid of France. But King Jews
thinking that the King of Navarre had been able for a time to have defended
himself from the forces of the Spaniard, slacked to send him succors: and
this delay was the cause why the King of Navarre was overcome, and forced

CHAP. 46. When succors sent to a friend or confederate are insufficient, to
put him out of danger and trouble, through being too weak, they bring danger
of loss and dishonor.
THere is no doubt but that he which demands Manfredi by the Gibelins of
Florence, which M. Farinata of the Vberti, chief of this faction, it was
devised that the Almaines should either win or lose the victory alone, or
should remain for pledges, to the end that being overcome and dispatched out
of the way, K. Manfredi should send them some greater aid. There was a fair
banquet made for them, furnished with much good meat, and excellent good
Leonar. Arch. lib. 1.
sallied out of Sienna, and with great fury charging the enemy, made a most
fair proof of themselves: The Germans were defeated by the Guelfes before
Siena.
but in the end were all cut in pieces, and the Kings Ensign taken. Wherefore
K. Manfredi wroth and moved with this disgrace, sent to the Gibelins such
succors, as they therewith overcame their enemies, and returned to their
country: which if King Manfredi had done in the beginning, his Ensign had not
received that shame, neither had his people bin overthrown.

CHAP. 47. An Ambassador ought not to care to be accounted importune by the
Prince with whom he has to deal, provided that he satisfy his own Prince in
that which he desires.
THe charge of an Ambassador is full of great care and trouble; and he which
discharges the same with his honor, may be placed in the rank of honorable
personages, and worthy of reputation: and this charge is, by so much the
greater, by how much the more a man has to handle and manage matters of
importance, or to negotiate with Princes, which being obstinate in their
opinions, are not induced by the lively reasons which are alleged, neither
answer to the An Ambassador ought not to care for an ill word from the Prince
with whom be has to deal.
has been the cause why the business has not taken wished effect: and when a
man comes to the point of that which he desires, if the Lord with whom he
has to deal, wearied with his instance and importunity, show himself

In the year 1513. the King of Spain sent to the Emperor Maximilian for his
Ambassador Peter Diurea, Guicci. lib. 12.
to persuade him to resign Verona to the Venetians, to the end that they
should not ally themselves to the King of France, and there went with him John
Baptista Spinello Earl of Carriati, Ambassador for the same King to Venice:
Caesar continued still firm in his resolution, and would not be turned, what
conditions soever were offered to his advantage: And because the Spanish
Ambassadors were very earnest with him, Caesar displeased with their replies
and importunities, and principally with those of Count Carriati, he said unto
him; that by the means of his inclination to the Venetians, A check given by
Maximilian the Emperor to the Spanish Ambassadors.
he ought rather to be called a Venetian than a Spanish Ambassador. The Earl
cared not for that nip, knowing that his Kings desire was, that he should
pursue the restitution, and loved better to be accounted importune Caesar, then
negligent by his Master.

CHAP. 48. What manner men they ought to be which are sent Ambassadors and
officers to other Princes.
of a discreet and well advised Prince, and he to whom he is sent

I remember that I read in Muzio Iustinopolitan, an example of an officer of
small account, Mutius Iustinopol. in his treatise of a Prince.
I know not whether it be fained or true. He reports of the inconsideration
of a Prince whom he knew, who chose a servant unfit for the affairs which he
should manage, and consequently of small reputation, and says: I knew a Prince
which had to manage and treat of a matter of importance, with the Pope of his
time, to whom he sent for Ambassador the chief groom of his chamber: to whom
having caused his Secretaries to give instruction, according to the custom, of
all that whereof he Alfonse the first of Arragon King of Naples, being to send
an Ambassador to Gaietta, which obstinately defended it self against him,
chose Anthony Panormitan, whom he knew to be a man fit to persuade and
dissuade; Gaietta.
he sent not thither a groom of his chamber, neither the master of his
household, neither a Captain which wanted eloquence, requisite in such a case,
to persuade the Gaiettanes to yield, and not to try Panormitan obtained
nothing, yet it cannot be said but that the Kings judgment was good, to choose
a man who had more force in his tongue, then a Captain in his hands.

CHAP. 49. A man ought ever to esteem of his enemy: for whosoever does
despise him, does commonly despise him to his own hurt and damage.
I Have ever marueiled at some, which are accustomed to a certain manner of
living, different from that of other men, which make no account of any man, and
in all matters and actions, every man must give them place, and give them the
honor to be superiors of themselves, that they imagine that their looks
should be as A witty answer of a gentleman of Florence.
he said, that he went so armed, because he would not be afeard, and spoke
wisely: for a man cannot better despise his enemy then in fearing him, to the
end that he may always find us ready when he shall assault us, and that he
be either deceived or grieved. As for public quarrels, to wit, when armies
which are enemies follow and seek to oppress and overcome the one the other,
then to account little of an enemy is most dangerous, and causes many
honorable enterprises to be lost: which may be proved by many

Tigranes the most mighty King of Armenia, being to fight against Lucullus
General of the Romans, and seeing the small number of the Roman soldiers,
he despising and mocking them, said: If they came to fight, they were too few;
but if they came for Ambassadors, they were too many. But the issue of the
battle showed, that a man ought always to make account of his enemies: for
Tigranes was vanquished by a few valiant men, Tigranes the king of Armenia put
to flight by Lucullus a Captain of the Romans.
and to save his life, he was forced to put from him all his royal ensigns,
and to fly unknown,

Nicias, General of a mighty Army of the Athenians, made war against the
Siracusians in Sicilia, whither was sent with succor by the Lacedaemonians,
Gelippus, who after many dangers by Sea, arrived at Locres. Nicias was before
Siracusa, and had so furiously assaulted Nicias, touching composition of peace:
whereto as Nicias would give no ear, there came news that Gelippus was landed
with succors in Sicilia; whereat Nicias mocked in disdain, being grown
proud, as much for his happy success, as for that he heard the enemies Army
by Sea had made shipwreck, as also for that by secret means he practiced with
certain Siracusans, to deliver the Town: by reason whereof, hec judged that
Gelippus was not a man to make resistance against him. Nicias a Captain of the
Athenians, through his temeritie was overcome and slain by Gilippus.
By this contempt of the enemy and trust in himself, Nicias being Gelippus as
a man ought to have done of a valiant Captain) and had provided as he ought;
he had not been brought into that extremity as he was, neither had he at
last, lost both his Army and his life also. Even so Nicias showed by his
example, the danger and loss that there is, in not esteeming an enemy,
although that he that contemns have the advantage, and the favor of fortune
in the war, seeing that his fortune may change,

In time past there fell into the like error of contempt, Braccio de Montone,
a most excellent and valorous Captain in his time, this man besieging Aquila a
town in Abruzzo, understood that Jacques Caldor and Francis Sforce came to
rescue the place: but he despising and making no account of his enemy, as well
for that he had the better and the advantage, as also for that, Braccio da
Montone defeated and put to flight by Francis Sforce.
that Francis Sforce was yet but young, he suffered them to come into the
plain, without making any such resistance, as he had ought to have done,
because he had given his word, that he would not stop their passage. But
Caldor Sforce being come into the plain, with their Cauallerie, without
finding any let, put themselves in order of battle, and giving the charge,
slew Braccio, and put his whole Army to flight: which peradventure had not
happened, if Braccio had withstood his enemy, at his descending from the
mountain, or if he had not given his enemy leave to descend, and leisure to
range themselves in order. The Bishop of Crotone, which at large writes the
life of Braccio, says, that he sent a Trumpet to Caldor, and Sforce, offering
them, that if they would give him battle, he would give them liberty to
descend the Mountain, and come into the plain, and would not hinder the
coming of their Army. Although this Caldor, who had neither will, nor
commission to fight, except in extreme necessity: notwithstanding this,
Braccio against the rule and law of arms, (which wills a man to take
advantage against his enemy in what manner soever) and against the will of all
his Captains, which cried that then they were to charge the enemy when he
came down from the mountain, where he might have been overcome; yet would he
not alter his first determination, nor change his mind, being resolved either
to overcome, or to die in that fight: which he did, because he would not fail
of his bold and presumptuous offer, or because he made Braccio committing that
to the will of fortune, which he safely might have performed by his own
industry, lost miserably his army, his reputation, estate, and life; and
being wounded to death, was taken prisoner by a simple soldier: and by his
disaster and overthrow, taught other Captains not so lightly to regard their
enemies, whether he be old or young; because he ought to esteem the aged, by
reason of his wisdom and experience; and the young, because of his hardines
and good fortune.

CHAP. 50. VVorthie acts are more often requited with ingratitude and reproach,
then with reward and commendation.
TRuly it is a great disgrace to a gentleman, loving the good and safety of
his country, when he enforces himself to deliver the same from some imminent
danger: and after that he has delivered it, to be requited with ingratitude,
and blamed for that which he has done: and having directed all his actions to
a good end, when the execution thereof is ill construed. This of custom
happens in towns which are divided, where is a government which pleases not
all: where if

In the year 1527. Guicci. lib. 13.
the City of Florence was governed as a free Commonwealth, whereof, for the
house of Medicis, and in the Clement the 7. was chief, Siluio Passerino
Cardinal of Crotona. It happened in the 27. of March in that year, that the
Duke of Bourbon with his army marched through Tuscane to go to Rome: and
being near to Florence, the Florentine people discontent with the government
which then was, under color to defend themselves against the Duke of Bourbon,
demanded the common Arms from the Magistrates: and as the matter was
deferred, there grew by chance a sedition in the public place: by reason
whereof the greatest part of the people, and in a manner all the young men
running to the Palace, constrained the sovereign Magistrate Hippolito and
Alexander de Medicis Rebels, which were the Popes nephews, with intent to
alter the government, and to reduce it to a popular estate. The Cardinal
Siluius provided not for this sedition, but following his determination to go
to meet the Duke of Vrbin, which, with the army of the league, followed the
Duke of Bourbon, and to receive him into Florence, gave opportunity to the
gentlemen and the young men to possess the Palace. This done, the Duke of
Vrbin and the Cardinal, with Hippolito de Medicis, entered into Florence, and
having put 1500. soldiers in arms, which upon a just suspicion had bin many
days in the city: massacred, Francis Gu^^c^ardin de^uered the city of
Florence from great danger.
and the rest to be sacked. Francis Guicciardin, being the Frederick Bozolo
coming out of the Palace, whither he entered at the beginning of this
sedition, to the end to have appeased the same, which he could not do, but
being taunted with many bitter speeches by the angry young gentlemen, and
therewith highly offended, in a great chafe he returned: and knowing the small
forces and the great disorder within the Palace, by his report he might have
done much harm. But Guicciardin went to him and appeased him, praying him that
he would not inflame Guicciardin the sedition ceased and was appeased. But
within a little while after, he was blamed both by the Cardinal Siluius, and
by the Florentines also: and each of the parties deemed that this agreement was
prejudicial unto them, for Medicis, he had been the occasion that by his
means and cunning, the estate of the house of Medicis had not that day been
for ever established by the blood and death of the Nobility: The Floren^i^es
murmured against Guicciardin.
and on the other side, the Nobility and Commons railing at him, said, that
when he entered into the Palace, making the danger greater then it was, he
seduced them (for the benefit of the de Medicis, and to support them in their
greatness) without need, to lay down their weapons and return to their
houses: so as the doings of Guicciardin pleased neither

CHAP. 51. Princes ought to give ear to such as complain of their Governors
and Officers: for it is a dangerous thing, not to regard them.
FOrasmuch as Governors and Ministers of Princes and Commonwealths, may
behave themselves ill in their gouernements, and do them little honor which
placed them therein; when any one comes, to complain to the Superior, of
the ill government of some one his servant or officer, he ought graciously to
hear him, and so well as he possibly may, to content the Plaintiff; for
fear that some inconvenience of them, Subjects ought not to be put in despair
to ma^^taine governors.
will use them worse then before: but he ought by Charles the fifth, sent to
govern the State of Siena, (because of the discord amongst them) Don Diego de
Mendoza, who for the Emperor had executed the charge of an Ambassador, and
managed many affairs in that Province. He coming to that The insolence of
the Spaniards in Siena.
that they were not to be endured: and the Sienois did but lose time to go to
the governor to complain: for he was so far from punishing the Spaniards
for the evils which they committed, that he himself fell to mocking of those
which complained. The Sienois then wearied with the ill behavior of Don Diego,
and his soldiers, resolved to send an honorable Don Diego, who being offended
that they had complained against him, did and suffered to be done unto them
worse then was done before. Wherefore the Sienois again sent other Ambassadors
in greater number Don Diego, and brought back the same answer which they
likewise had before, and were again sent back to the same Governor: by reason
whereof, the Sienois despairing of due revenge and not expecting any release of
their troubles, for that they could not be heard by the Emperor, and fearing
wholly to lose their liberty, began to talk of rebellion, and of yielding
themselves to the French King; which they did with all possible expedition: and
having slain sundry Spaniards, and shut up the rest in their Citadell, they
set up the arms of France, and submitted themselves unto King Henry the
second: and if then Don Diego had bin taken in the town, and fallen into the
hands of the Sienois in that fury, surely they had done him no great pleasure.
And so Caesar for giving too much credit to Don Diego, and would not by other
secret means be informed of the truth, and the complaints of the Sienois, the
City was brought to rebellion, and infested with a most dangerous war, and
finally Don Diego betook himself to a private life; which he ought to have
done before. Let Princes then understand attentively them which complain of
their Governors; let them inform themselves of the truth, and do justice to
him who shall require the

CHAP. 52. Public officers and ministers of Princes, ought to be punished
THere are some men, the which confuted with certain apparent reasons, have
been of opinion that a Prince ought not to punish his public officer, being in
public charge of Magistrate, when he commits in justice; and say that he
ought not to be punished for three reasons: to wit, for not to diffame or
dishonor the Magistracy, or public charge: for not to be esteemed of small
judgment, in choosing such a one: and for not to be accounted cruel, and
covetous, in bereauing him both of his life William, King of Sicile, caused a
certain Judge to be ^leyed, because he did not justice in his charge.
William King of Sicilie surnamed the good, imitating herein Artaxerxes, caused
an unjust Judge to be fleyed, and commanded his skin to be fastened to the
Judgment seat, upon the which he afterward set the son of the deceased
Judge to exercise judgment, and successively many others, which proceeding
always justly, gave no further occasion to the King to use any more
punishment. Cosmo de Medicis great Duke of Tuscane, during all the time of his
reign, which was 38. years, or thereabouts, had no occasion to inflict
overmuch punishment, for that once only he cassed all the

A Prince ought to punish the said officers and Magistrates, to maintain his
own reputation, and to avoid the dishonor which he might incur, to be
accounted a man of small effect, or a wicked man of little wit, for that he
knows not, or has not the heart to punish; or of wicked, for that he will
not punish: which things Valentin well knew this humor, who seeing himself
hated by the Romans, Duke Valentin caused Ramire de orco a Spaniard, his
Lieutenant, to be slain in Romania for doing injustice.
by reason of the cruelty, injustice, and ill behavior of Remire de Orco a
Spaniard, his Lieutena^t in Romania, wherefore he caused him one morning to be
slain and cut in two pieces in the place of Cesena: by which deed he acquired
to himself the good will of all that province. A man

CHAP. 53. To use cruelty, is commonly hurtful to him that uses it.
IT is a most great fault in a Prince or Captain, Aprius K. of Egypt, who for
a brutish and cruel act, Herodot. lib. 2
practiced against one who was his familiar friend and an able man, was by his
own subjects deprived both of his Realm and life. After that Samnis King of
Egypt was dead, Aprius Aprius advertised hereof, sent Amasis Amasis executed,
or seemed to execute, the charge committed unto him by the King, and being come
to the towns which rebelled, he reproved them with great gravity of speech,
and endeavored to reduce them to the Kings obedience. But while as he was
talking unto them in this manner, one Egizius bound his Murrion or Burgonet
about with a band, and having so bound it, he put it upon Amasis head, and said
unto him, that he did put it upon his Amasis, fearing King Aprius, prepared
himself to go against him, and to defend himself from him, if he came to
suppress him. Aprius was advertised hereof, and sent to him an Egyptian, which
abode with him, named Papremitan, a man of great reputation and authority, to
the end to bring to him Amasis, which was made King. Papremitan, being come
where Amasis was, which was on horseback, exhorting his people courageously to
follow him, began to pray him that he would come with him to King Aprius: to
whom Amasis answered, Aprius should have no occasion to complain of him, for
that he would not stay long before he went to seek him, and would bring
others with him. By these words Papremitan knew his intent, and seeing how he
had provided for his desseignes, returned presently to advertise Aprius of the
manifest rebellion of Amasis. Papremitan being returned to Aprius, who so soon
as he saw that he had not brought Amasis with him, without hearing him speak,
was so much displeased, Aprius King of Egypt caused the nose and ears of
Papremitan to be cut off.
that he caused his nose and his ears to be cut off: for the which cruel and
inhumane fact, Aprius being by them assaulted, was put to slight and taken by
Amasis: and so Aprius, which was of opinion that no man in the world had been
able to put him from his kingdom, being (as he thought) so firmly established,
having proved the fortune of the war, was overcome and led away prisoner. And
although that for certain days he were honorably entreated by Amasis, at
length the Egyptians unable to Papremitan, a personage of so great worth
amongst them, should be kept by Amasis in so great delights, pleasures and
honors, in great fury they required to have him into their hands. Wherefore
Amasis delivered him into their power, who after they had shamefully used him,
Aprius King of Egypt strangled by his subjects.
they stra^gled him. Let Princes then and great Lords having great estates,
leave to be inhumane, and not to be carried away by wrath and choler, and so
commit things unworthy their greatness: for one cruel act suffices to
alienate the hearts of their friends, and likewise make them oftentimes to lose
both life and estate.



CHAP. 54. Let no man give credit to the promises, sauegard or assurance of a
cruel man, which desires to rule and govern.
AS gentleness and clemency in a Prince have the power to draw unto him the
love and good will, not Julius Caesar, none of them knowing certainly how to
determine what made his Empire greater and him finally Lord of the Roman
Empire, whether his celeritie and expedition in executing his enterprises, or
his great liberality, by Vrsin Vitellozo Vitelli, Guiccia^. lib. ^
Pagolo Orsino, John Pagolo Baglioni, Liuorato da Fermo, and John Bentiuogli,
and some other petty Lords of Italy, seeing the little faith, the great
ambition and evil nature of Duke Valentin, allied themselves together,
notwithstanding that they had been his Captains and Generals in the wars, to
oppose themselves against the forces of the said Duke, who sometime bereaved
one Lord, and sometime another of his estate: and their forces being united all
together, The cunning of Duke Valentin.
were such, that Valentin could not annoy them. Valentin had recourse to his
subtilty and dissimulation; and seeing that he could not resist the Cagli.
The confederates might have put him in great danger and disorder, for that
that they once had put him to flight near the city of Cagli; if they had
followed the victory, Valentin had not had the leisure so soon to raise
himself again. But he continuing stiff and resolute to conclude the
agreement, which was already begun, humbling himself, and promising to his
enemies all that which they could demand, brought the matter so well about,
that of most Valentin having taken by their means the estate of Vrbin, The
cruelty and treason of Duke Valentin.
and still remembering the hatred conceived against them, he caused them to be
apprehended in Sinigaglia, and there to be hanged and strangled by the hands of
a hangman, and taught them to know that it was not lawful for Captains to
dally and jest with Dukes and their Superiors, to make an oath and to break
it as a man will, and afterward Valentin) made this agreement: I answer them,
that having taken arms against him, for the preservation of their estates and
lives, it had been better to have left all to the incertaine hazard and lot of
the war, then to give credit to the words of one, who had never maintained
his faith, agreement nor promise with any man, whom they themselves held for a
Prince faithless, treacherous, cruel, and disloyal.

CHAP. 55. It is a pernicious thing for a Prince to have two Generals in the
wars, which strive for pre-eminence, or between whom is envy and emulation.
IF the error of a Prince or Commonwealth be great, which having any war
either civil or foreign, admits into his holds and towns any garrison and
other men at arms, who after they have overcome the enemy may also subdue
him, or them which set them at work, and in whose pay they have made the war:
that Prince or Commonwealth shall commit a most great fault, who having or
being to make war against puissant and politic enemies, shall hire and take
into his service ^ycurgus his (...).
For this cause Lycurgus, the most wise lawmaker, ordained in his laws that
the Kings of Sparta, in their civil government, should not do any thing but
in the company of the Magistrate: but in time of wars in the field with the
army, he would that they should have supreme power and authority, that they
alone should command, that all should depend of their will, and that the
regal authority should no way be restrained, joining certain counselors
unto him, to consult with them of the affairs Lycurgus did with great
judgment; because that knowing and foreseeing well, that when the armies are
opposite the one before the other ready to give battle, the least stay or
slacknes suffices to let slip a most happy success and noble victory, from
the one and to give it to his enemy: for then is no time to be busied about
the advice and opinion of many: and it is a dangerous matter when soldiers are
commanded by many heads, who for envy or hatred reigning between them, or for
their obstinacy or temeritie for the most part, agree not together: and for
this cause having confirmed and united all the power and authority in one man
Fazel in the uinth book of the first Decade of the history of Sicilie.
recited by Fazel in the ninth book of the first Decade of Sicilie, to show how
dangerous a thing it is for a Prince to have to his aid and succor a mighty
garrison, which afterward he shall not be able to resist. The Reginos (a
people of Sicilie) were once divided into two factions, and made civil war:
it came to pass that one of these parties called to their aid The Imeresiens
seize upon Reggio.
these three short examples shall bear witness: the first is recited by
Cornelius Tacitus in his 19. book, Fabius Valens, and L. Cecinna were chief
and Captains for the Emperor Vitellius, and so hated the one the other, that
but for the respect they had Cecinna thinking himself in less reputation then
the other with Vitellius, used treason, and departed from the pay and service
of Vitellius; The Emperor Vitellius was overcome by Vespasian the Emperor.
Fazel in his 6. book of the history of Sicilie.
and Valens remaining alone, being unable to bear the burden of the war
which Vespasian waged against him, was overcome and taken prisoner: and
Vitellius was deprived of his life and Empire. Fazel alleges another example
in his sixth book of the history of Sicilie; Leo, and Procopius were chief
Generals in Italy for Basilius the Emperor of Constantinople: these in a
battle at sea against the Sarasins, divided their army and fleet into two
parts; Leo led his part Procopius his part on the left; Leo of his side
overcame the enemies, and Procopius on his part was overcome: Leo,
notwithstanding that he might have done it, yet would not help him: whereby
it happened that Procopius dyed, and Leo remained alone and was forced to
retire, being unable to resist the force of the enemies; so as the affairs of
the Empire prospered not so well as they might have done, had there not been
malice and emulation between the two Generals.

The very same befell the Lords of Venice: the Earl of Petiglian and Bartelmy
Liuiano were Generals for the Venetians almost Liuiano at the Ghiarra de Adda
bravely assailed his enemies, and began to make them run; and if that
Petiglian had helped him, the victory had remained to the Seigniorie of
Venice. Petiglian would not help him either for the malice which was between
them, or for the displeasure conceived against him, for that he had begun the
battle without aduertising him thereof, whereof ensued the memorable loss
and overthrow of the battle of Ghiarra de Adda. Let Princes and Commonwealths
then be well advised, how they receive forces and garrisons into their holds
and towns, for fear they shall not be able after

CHAP. 56. No man ought to give credit to the words and promises of Fugitives
and runnawaies, for whosoever reposeth trust in them, without being well assured of
them, commits a great
WE have said above, that it is a great error to undertake an enterprise,
through the persuasion of Rebels, because that for the most part such
enterprises have not prevailed, but have been dammageable and prejudicial to
the authors thereof. But I find not that there is less danger and prejudice,
easily to believe those which in deed are, or for some plot and secret
Crassus, a General for the Romans, was overthrown and slain, being betrayed
by a Fugitive.
and cause of most notable loss and damage, the City of Babylon can well
testify, and Crassus Captain for the Romans. The City was deprived of her
liberty and almost ruinated; and the other deceived by a Fugitive, lost the
Roman Army and his life with all, which came to pass in this manner. The
City of Babylon rebelled against Darius King of Persia, the which to defend it
self, and to resist the forces of Darius, and fearing a tedious and long
siege, made all necessary provision, as well for munition and things
appertaining to the wars to defend and offend, as for victuals; and to the
end that victuals should not be consumed by idle and unprofitable persons for
the wars, the Babylonians slew all their women, reserving only one in every
house, to give order for those things which there are necessary. Darius being
advertised of the rebellion and revolt of so noble, rich, and strong a town,
having assembled a great and mighty army, and made provision of all things
necessary thereto, took his way toward Babylon, and at length besieged it
very strictly on every side: those of Babylon were nothing amazed to see so
great an army about their walls, ^abilon strictly besieged, and the siege
thereof.
but in view of the enemies they daunced upon their rampires, and gave
themselves to Zophir, perceiving that all the Persians, and the King himself,
were weary of so long a siege, attempted a most courageous and profitable
enterprise for his King: for having communicated his desseignes and the course
which he meant to hold to the King, he marred and mangled al his face with a
knife, and fled from Darius and Zophir, had made a road even unto the gate of
Semiramis, Zophir by fraud put the city of Babylon into the hands of King
Darius.
which wanne Zophir great honor and marvelous Darius sent another Captain,
with two thousand soldiers to the port of Ninus, which valiantly defending
themselves, in the end were cut in pieces. Twenty days after (following the
accord and agreement) the King failed not to send four thousand soldiers to
the port of Caldea, the which likewise were defeated by the Babylonians, by
reason whereof, Zophir was held by them in such reputation, that they put into
his hands the government of the town, and charge of the war against the
Persians, and Darius at the time appointed, Zophir opened two ports to the
Persian army, the port Cisiana and Belida, which being entered into the town,
sacked it, and the King caused the ports of the City to be taken away, defaced
all, and put to death 3000. of the most noble and principal of the City.
Hereby the Babylonians to their great loss knew, the great fault which they
had committed, to believe a man which fained himself to be a fugitive, and to
give him the charge and government of their City.



CHAP. 57. One word only being misunderstood, may breed great hurt.
Oddi, and the Baglioni: the Oddi were in that town the chief of the faction
of the Gibelins; and the Baglioni, of the Guelphs. The Oddi were chased out of
Perusa, and being resolved to return, through the help of the Gibelins of the
towns near adjoining, they entered one night into Perusa, with so great
amazement of the Baglioni, that being out of hope to be able to defend
themselves, they began to sly. But they by an accident altogether unthought
of, or (if we may so say) by an error, lost the victory, which could not have
been taken from them by the enemies. There were chains cross the streets of
Perusa, as at that time was the custom in towns which maintained the
factions: and the Oddi being come as far as the place without any let or
hindrance, a soldier with a sledge, which he of purpose carried to that
effect, would have broken one of these chains, being drawn, and being unable
to lift up Baglioni, to recover heart and to follow them, and they not only
drove them out of the City, but slew many in the heat of the chase and fight,
and afterward put many of them to death by the hands of the Executioner.

CHAP. 58. Who so will impart unto his servant any secret concerning his life
or honor, must resolve with himself, never after to
AMong the faults, which men of custom commit, this to me has ever seemed
very great in matters of importance, which concern a man's honor or his life,
to trust to servants. The wise man says, if thou have a good and faithful
servant, love him as thy soul, touching the which words, is to be understood,
that to know a good servant, there
having no occupation or art to have their foot upon their Masters throat,
usually they become insolent Cosmo de Medicis, then great Duke of Tuscane,
notwithstanding that he had enjoyed much good by him; and having never
discovered this his thought to any man, but conspired it with himself alone,
at length he imparted this secret unto one who was his

CHAP. 59. It has ever been held for a thing blame worthy, to vaunt and boast
by word or writing; and he greatly erreth, who promises to himself any
certainty of a doubtful enemy.
IF men which make profession to have honorable charges, as well in civil
government, Public persons having charge, encur many errors, if they he not
endued with vvisdome.
as in managing the wars, be not naturally endued with prudence, truly they
are subject to a thousand errors which they commit, either through negligence
in not foreseeing what may happen contrary to their desseignes, or by rashly
promising so much of themselves, that they are persuaded through their wit and
industry, to make Iusius Caesar was never known to say, I will go, I will
see, I will overcome: but when he had happily achieved his enterprise, he
said, Veni, vidi, vici, I came, Things which may be or not be, and depend of
the will of Fortune, ought not constantry to be affirmed before that they are
performed.
whose power and inconstancy, if a man knew, it is principally in the wars.
And a wise Captain ought not hastily to speak or write things for certain
and true, which may be otherwise: to affirm a certainty for an incertaintie,
is the part of a rash man, and of a fool: for besides the blame of
inconsideration and vain boasting, he loses much credit and reputation;
neither is he so much esteemed as before, and sometimes is punished for his
insolency and rashness.

Milciades a most famous Captain of the Athenians, having gotten the victory
at the battle of Marathon, against the Barbarous, Lisagoras Prince of the
Isle of Para, who had accused him of treason, resolved to be revenged: he went
to the Senate of Athens, demanding of them sixty armed Galleyes, vaunting
much, and promising with great audacitie, that he would not only bring them
home again safe and whole, but also laden with gold; without declaring
whither he would lead them. The Athenians which had him in great account, and
having made trial of his valor, setting their hearts and Lisagoras. Milciades
being arrived in the Island, constrained the Parians by force of Arms to
retire into a fortress, which he besieged round about, and threatened the
besieged, that he would raze their Town, except they would give him an hundred
thousand talents. Milciades spoke in secret with the she Priest of Ceres,
called Timo, won by him either by prayers and entreaty or money, she led him
upon the wall which compassed the Temple about; but while as he walked with
her, to view the place most fit to give the assault, and saw where he might
most easily enter, surprised with a great religious fear, being in a sacred
place, he returned trembling by the same way that he came, and as he went
down the wall, he fell and brake one of his thighs: by which accident he was
constrained to return, and bring back home again

Terentius Varro (as Titus Liuius writes) fell into this error of boasting,
Titus Liuius in the s^co^^ boo^ (...) third D^^^^^^.
who being Consul and chief of the Roman army against Hanniball, at the same
day an hour wherein he received the Military Ensigns of the Senate and of
the Roman people, very rashly said, that the first day wherein he did display
those Colors against the Carthagenians, he would end the war, blaming Fabius
Maximus for his slacknes, and foreslowing it by delays. But the success
Terentius Varro defeated by the Carthagenians.
the Lord of Tremouille being sent by Jews the 12. King of France, to the
enterprise of Milan, against Maximilian Sforce, the son of Jews More, fell
into this error. This man seeing that the Duke was retired to Nouarra, and that
the Swissers had undertaken to defend him, he wrote to the King of France very
inconsideratly, and with great presumption, that he would deliver The French
overthrown by the Swissers.
without horse or Artillery, they came to blows, and in this assault, with a
marvelous bold hardines, they took from the French 22. pieces of Artillery,
put them to flight, and slew many, although that of the Swissers were slain
about fifteen hundred men. And so the issue of the battle showed to the Lord
of Tremouille, how vain a thing Jews Duke of Milan, into the hands of the
French, and that he meant to follow the same rule, to make Maximilian also his
prisoner.

A young Florentine in the year 1527. esteemed very brave and valiant in
arms, but a great prater and boaster, being to fight with another young man,
who, because he was melancholic and spoke little, was called Forchebene,
going in company with many others Forchebene being become, as the Minister and
instrument of God, gave him a thrust in the mouth with such force, that having
fastened his tongue to the pole of his neck, where the sword went through
above the length of a palm and



CHAP. 60. Which may be considered and learned by the Lords of Venice, who
would not suffer a Gentleman of theirs, to kill Jews Sforce Duke of Milan.
THe Lords of Venice and Jews Sforce entered Charles the eight, King of France,
and held the Town of Nouarra straightly besieged, wherein was the Duke of
Orleance, brother to the King, who to deliver the Duke his brother, came to a
peace with Jews Sforce, and the peace being made, the Venetian Army being to
return, was constrained to pass through the estate of Milan: but Jews which
bare them no good will, commanded his Captains, that in all Bembo in his
book of the history of Venice.
they should show themselves in Arms; and so at all passages of Rivers, and in
all places where was any danger to pass, he made the boats to be taken away:
which Jews did, to the end that the Venetian Soldiers should not save
themselves, and go out of his Country, without his leave and permission, or
against his will; and to say the truth, they were enclosed, and must in a
manner debate by force at every passage; which greatly displeased the Lords,
and they much blamed the disloyalty of Jews. In the Venetian Army, Bernard
Contarini purposed to have slain the Duke of Milan.
was Bernard Contarini, Collonell of the Albanois horsemen, a man of a high
Jews, while as he were talking with him in his Chamber, showing by lively
reasons that there was no cause of fear, for neither the City nor the estate
of Milan would rise by reason of his death. The Purueyours and chief
commanders of the Army would not grant this leave to Contarini, but they
told him, that they would give the Senate to understand of this his
proposition, and that then they would govern themselves, according to their
answer. The Fathers Bernard for his good will, they commanded him to give
over that enterprise: and for as much as they knew him to be a man that would
as soon do it as speak it, The Venetians would not suffer Bernard Contarini
to execute his disseigne.
they commanded him so expressly, and forbad him so strictly, that Contarini
forbear to perform what he ha^ determined. In this act the Venetians imitated
the great Fabritius, and the generositie of the Romans, who would not accept
the offer of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes his Physician, who offered to make
his Master to dye; and Jews had continued in using their Army in that manner
as an enemy. A man may also consider by this doing of the Venetians, that it
is a dishonest thing to use treason, and to put to death noble Princes and
honorable Captains, by unlawful and dishonest means: And therefore
Guicciardin with great gravity, does reprehend the resolution taken by
certain Spanish Captains in the year 1514. who having sent some of their
soldiers to Padua, The villainy of certain Spanish Captains, who by treason
world have cause (...) Alu^an a Captain of the Venetians to have been slain.
under color of fugitives, Aluian, hoping easily to have this town, being in
disorder and confusion through the death of so great a Captain, and said, that
the manner of the wars and Art Military in these days, is far different
from the virtue of the ancients, for they suborned no murderers: but if any
one practiced any treason, they revealed it to the enemy, trusting to subdue
them by their prowess. If the Venetians did not discover to Jews the danger
wherein he was, they showed nevertheless a great bounty and virtue, that they
suffered him not to be slain, as they might have done. Let Princes also
consider, and advise themselves well,

CHAP. 61. Jn time of war it is not good to hold places which are ill and
hard to be kept, and to stop passages.
SEeing that at the coming of the French into Italy (...) the year 1515. in
the time of Francis the first King of France, it manifestly appeared to what
pass it came to hold difficill places, ill to be kept, and to stop passages:
it shall be also good to consider, as diverse writers It is folly to commit to
the will of a few the state of an Empire.
and not all his forces: for to do so, is a manifest folly, as when a man
puts all his estate to the trial of a combat, of two or three, which, as
arbitrators, are to determine and decide the controversy of that estate, as
the Romans and the Albanians Horatij and the Curatij, where both the one and
the other Empire put in danger their whole fortune, but not their whole
forces. Secondly, because that the passages are straight, and mountainous,
where many men of war cannot accommodate themselves, a man puts in great
danger the garrison which he sends thither: for the enemy increasing, may
force the place, and by this mean part of the forces is lost, and this loss,
how little soever it be, cannot be but dangerous and prejudicial; seeing that
in such places a man always places valiant men. Thirdly, because that the
enemies coming is incertaine and unknown, and The Swissers were deceived by
the French in passing the Alps.
and to stop the passage against the French, knew that the Lieutenant General
to the King of France, had taken Prospero Colomna prisoner, in Villa Francha,
before they knew that they were past the mountains. Wherefore the Swissers
being deceived in the passage of the French, and the Princes astonished,
Guicci. lib. 12.
which had taken upon them to defend Milan against them, and perceived that it
had been much better to have let them pass by the ordinary way, and at the
descent from the mountains to have charged them, then in keeping those
passages in vain, to Leo, and the Viceroy of Naples, altered their opinions,
and all the estate of Milan was turned vpside down. For these reasons, the
Hanniball, but rather would that their armies should fight in an open place,
where they might overcome him, then to send them to the mountains to be
consumed with cold and other discommodities of those places. If a man could
conduct to those passages and hard places, all the forces, and there maintain
them; in such case this course were to be held: for he that is upon the way
and is to pass, shall be ever in more disorder, then he who is upon his guard
in those difficult places.



CHAP. 62. How much it avails a Captain to know, what state his enemy
stands in.
IT is great wisdom in a General to endeavor A man may in two manners have
knowledge of the enemies purposes.
by his own industry, or by some accident which may happen: by industry,
when the General has good and trusty spies, and has secret intelligence in
the enemies Army, and assaieth by all means to have both tongue and ears
even in the Generals Brutus and Cassius fought against Octauius, and Marcus
Antonius; and through the coming on of the night, it was unknown who had the
victory: and for as much as Brutus on his side overcame, and Cassius on his
side lost; Cassius (without taking any pain to know how it went with his
companion) thinking that he likewise had bin put to flight, without hope

In the year 1515. at the battle of Marignan, or as others say, of S.
Cicele, in the which Francis the first fought with the Swissers, the battle
having lasted until four hours within night, each party retired from the
battle, without sound of Drum or Trumpet, and without the commandment of
the Captains, the one or the other being no longer able to hold their weapons
in their hands, they were so weary and tired. And because the Swissers in the
first charge made the French to retraite, and took certain pieces of
Artillery, and were encamped in the Camp, without offending The prudence of
Francis the first King of France in the battle against the Swissers at
Ma^^gnan.
and thinking that they had overcome, without using any diligence to know how
things passed, was the cause that about the break of day, the Swissers to
their disadvantage began the battle; and not only erred therein themselves,
but made others to fail also, which put themselves in danger: for having been
happy in the first charge, it was held for certain that they had overcome,
and the Currors and Posts carried the news over all Italy, that the Swissers
had the victory: and Francis having made a view of his army, and considering
in what estate it was, he employed not the rest of the night unprofitably, but
used al diligence to know how al his affairs went: and having foreseen that
in the morning the fight would begin again, he ordered all things accordingly,
called his succors, which were near, disposed of his Artillery in fittest
places, and provided so for all things, that when the battle began again,
he obtained the victory. The error afterward, in not caring to know
Sempronius being Consul, and having his Army opposite face to face against the
Army of the enemy, the battle began between them, which continued until
night, with variable fortune of either side. The night being come, and both
Camps being in disorder, neither of the Armies returned into their own Camp,
but each party retired into the next mountains, where they thought to be most
assured; and the Roman Army divided it self into two parts, whereof the one
went with Tempanius a Centurion: the morning being come, the Consul (without
knowing any thing of the affairs of the enemy) went to Rome, thinking that he
had lost the battle; and the Equiens did the like, having both the one and
the other left their Camps, to him that would, and thought himself
victorious. It happened that Tempanius, in retiring with the rest of the Army,
understood (by chance) by certain soldiers of the Equiens which were wounded,
how their Captains abandoning their Camp were departed by flight: wherefore
he returning saved Francis at Marignan had no other foundation, but that he
knew the state of his own affairs, the will and desseignes of his enemies,
and gave order for a new battle.



CHAP. 63. Spies are necessary for Princes or Generals of Armies, and in what
sort a man ought to carry himself with them.
Nero, and of others: which is a thing oftentimes, also augmenting the same,
they make him fearful and What harm epsy may do by their report to Princes.
they make him become cruel. Wherefore it is necessary, that the Prince be
discreet, and well advised, not standing upon the report of one Spy only, but
he ought to enfourme himself of the truth by some other: and he ought not to
be negligent herein, for fear to commit some faults, being persuaded by the
efficacy of the speeches of one only spy, who to maintain his credit and
profit, regards not another man's hurt, neither his Princes dishonor.
Wherefore it is good and profitable, that the Prince have sundry, and that the
one know not the other, to the A Prince ought to have many spries the one not
know ^ng the other.
and if they agree not, he may know the deceit of the spy, which would have
had the Prince to have made some faults, and one spy alone may be deceived,
or deal maliciously: these men ever being of ill meaning, which have a
desire, not so much to show themselves zealous of the Princes profit, as to
see some evil. And as for making account of such men, they ought not to be
esteemed so much, as that the Prince should raise them to honors and public
dignities; for it shall suffice to give them profit and gain, without giving
them honors and magistracies in cities: (...) ought not by the ^rince to be
advanced to honors and public charges.
set himself secretly to work in this most profitable occupation: for in this
case, public dignity being agreeing with the noblenes of his house, it
seems lawful to me, that the Prince deprive him of the honor of a
Magistrate, to be his secret spy, because that in this manner he should come
to make himself manifest. But speaking of other spies, they ought not to be
made great or raised to honor, to dishonor the dignity of the Magistrate by
their presence, being unlawful that Gentlemen, which have always lived
honorably, should have The opinion of the Marquis of Pescara.
wisely judged it to be a matter of great importance, to have spies in the
enemies Army, and not to fail to entertain them, with great kindness, money
and rewards: he did use to say, that things could not prove well to a General,
if he took not pain and care by all endeavor and expense to have in the
enemies Army many spies, to the end, that according to the behavior and
practices of the enemy, he The subtlety of Gonsaluo Fernandez the great
Captain.
accompanied with his valor, the great Captain Gonsaluo Fernandes obtained so



CHAP. 64. Sundry Captains have obtained very great victories in the wars,
with very little loss of their own troops and Soldiers.
THe hardy and bold exployte of the Swissers against the French at Nouarra,
have made me to consider, that that is not impossible which sundry Historians
have written of some battles, between some very great armies, in which there
has followed so great occision of the vanquished, with so little loss of the
victorious, that they which read it, think that the authors and historians
are liars and far wide from the truth: and although at Nouarra, there
Diodor. lib. 20.
At the River Inere in Sicilie, (as Diodorus writes) Agathocles and Amilcar a
Carthaginian; in the which of the Carthaginians, there dyed about 500. Appianus
Alexandrinus lib. 1.
men, and of Agathocles party 7000. Appianus Alexandrinus, speaking of the
wars of Carthage, says, That in the battle between Siphax and Massinissa
the Army of Siphax was defeated, and there died 20000. persons, and of the
Romans there were slain but 75. and about 300. of Massinissaes people. The
same Appian, Lib. 2.
in the civil wars, says, that Marcus Crassus going against Spartacus,
Crassus made such a slaughter of the Army of Spartacus, Appian in his second
book of the civil wars writes, that Curio having begun a very hot
skirmish against Varro, a Captain for King Iuba; the soldiers of Curio slew
six hundred of their enemies, and hurt as many, and of the Romans was slain
but one. Plutarch in the life of Agesilaus, writes, that Archidamus son of
Agesilaus aided and assisted by the Sicilians, obtained a victory against the
Archadians, which was called the Victory without tears, for that there dyed
never a one of his, but of the enemies a great number. Plutarch (in the life of
Lucullus) writes, Plutarch.
that Lucullus going against Tigranes, and having joined in battle, the
Barbarians fled, whereof were slain 100000. men, and a few men at arms
escaped; and of the Roman army were slain but five, and 100. wounded. The
same Plutarch, in the life of Sylla, recounting the battle which he had
against Marius, says, that Sylla might well boast that he had cut in pieces
1000. Marians, and taken 8000. prisoners, and lost of his people but 23. men.
Paulus Emilius a Roman Consul, as the same Plutarch writes in the life of
him, fighting against Perseus King of the Macedonians, slew in one battle
25000. Macedonians, Titus Liuius in the 4. book of his fist Decade.
Titus Liuius testifies the same, and that for this cause his triumph was
celebrated, as of a victory without tears. Alexander the great, having passed
the river Gramique, gave battle to the Barbarians, of which were slain 2000.
footme^, and 2000. horsemen, and of the Macedonians dyed but 34. among the
which were nine soldiers, as Aristobulus reports, (who wrote this history)
to which Alexander erected statues, by the hand of Lisippus, as Plutarch
declares in the life of Alexander. The same Alexander fighting against Darius,
(as Diodorus writes) under the town of Isso, Cornel. Tacit.
obtained a most great victory, Darius his people about 100000. soulders, and
above 10000. men at arms: and of the Macedonians lay dead in the place above
300. and about 150. men at arms. Caius Caesar, in the battle against Iuba,
took three armies, and slew 50000. enemies, having hardly lost of his people
above fifty persons. Cornelius Tacitus describing the battle between the
English and the Romans, says, that in this battle the Romans slew 24000.
English, and there died not of them above 400. and as many wounded,
notwithstanding that the Roman army was much less then the English. Ioh.
Villan^ lib. 8. cap. 2.
John Villani recounteth a defeat of the French by the Flemmings, near
Courtray in Flaunders in the year 1132. with a Fazelli (who wrote the history
of Sicilia) recites, that the Normans fighting in Sicilie against the
Sarasins, the said Normans in one battle slew ten thousand Sarasins, and of
them died so few that they regarded it not, and called this victory without
blood. The same author says, that the Siracusians fighting against the
Carthaginians, at the river Crimise, under the conduct of Timoleon, twelve
thousand Siracusians, at the passage over a river, charged three score thousand
Carthaginians, which came into Sicilie under Hanniball of Bomilcar; and without
the death of any of Timoleons people, the Carthaginian army was put to flight,
and in this battle ten thousand were dispatched, almost all gentlemen, and
fifteen thousand were taken, the rest fled at their pleasure: which happened
then when Timoleon passed from Corinth into Sicilie, to deliver it from
oppression of sundry Tyrants.

Emilius Probus in the life of Milciades says, Emilius Probus.
that Datis and Artaphernes (Captains of Darius) having assailed the
Athenians, abandoned of all the Greeks, except those of Platea, which sent
them one thousand soldiers, by means of which they made the number Milciades
having taken the advantage of the place, and having ranged himself, where the
enemies horse could not charge him, by reason of the trees, neither could the
multitude of the enemies enclose him, having the mountains at his back, gave
the battle, and ten thousand men ran upon one hundred thousand Barbarians,
and the valiant courage of Milciades and the Athenians was so great, that each
of them slew ten Persians: for he says, that they slew ten times as many
of the enemies as they were of themselves: and from that time until this, was
never seen a more notable victory. And although it be to be believed John de
Earl of Colisan, who was slain with a shot in the head, which was in the
year 1522. But before that, Pope Eugenius being then living, who was created
in the year 1431. Boulogna being revolted, and rebelling against the Church,
through the occasion of Canedoli, the armies of the Pope, the Venetians, and
the Florentines, being confederates, enforced themselves to get and recover it
again. Nicholas de Tolentin was Captain of the League, and Picinino was
chief of the enemies; they came to give battle in the country of Imote:
Tolentin was put to flight, and there taken prisoner, with five principal
Colonels, and 3500. men at arms, Sabellicus.
and a Picinino died but four, and thirty were wounded; yet nevertheless
Artillery and small shot were then used, although not with such perfection as
now we see. The hardines of the Swissers at Nouarra was admirable, but the
battles and victories repeated were no less memorable, in which may be
seen, that the wisdom and discretion of the Captains has had great part:
yet nevertheless through the valor of the soldiers, accompanied with the
good counsel and direction of the Captains, happy victories are to be hoped
for.



CHAP. 65. Speeches used without consideration, have been the occasion of much
evil, as well to them which used them, as to others.
IN consideration, in all things is evil, To speak to no purpose is hurtful.
but worse in speaking: and to babble and prate, is a vice blameworthie E pria
chio parli le parole mastico. Which is to say: And before I speak, I chew my
words.

This vice, besides the blame which it deserves, brings with it Dionysius
was Lord in Siracusa, there were certain young men which went to his Barbers
shop to wash, or to discourse, as the manner is, in such shops, whither idle
persons resort, to talk and to Dionysius, who made this Barber to be
apprehended and quartered. This inconsidered word, uttered without reason, was
cause of his death, and did advise Dionysius to trust Dionysius put a gentleman
his very familiar to death, for a word by him foolishly spoken, who being in
company with certain gentlemen his friends, said: Wot you what, I dreamed to
night that I had cut Dionysius his throat? These words were reported to the
Tyrant, who, notwithstanding the great familiarity between them, made him to
dye, saying: If he had not first thought it in the day time, he had never
dreamed thereof at night. But a man may say that these

Demaratus, which should have succeeded in the kingdom of the Lacedaemonians,
was deprived of that kingdom by Ariston his father, for one only word uttered
without consideration in the Senate, which was, that news being brought unto
him that he had a son borne, he counted upon his fingers how long his wife
had been with him, and seeing that there were no more but seven months,
Demaratus: for after the death of Ariston his father, the Lacedaemonians refused
to give him the kingdom, Herodot. lib. 6
because the Ephores bare record, that Ariston had said, that it was not
possible that Demaratus borne at seven months end, should be his son, which
he confirmed with an oath.

When Pope Julius the second attempted to deliver Italy from the Oltramontani,
he sent an Italian Ambassador to the King of England, to persuade him to take
arms in his behalf against the Anchio hodetto piu volte questo medesimo a
which is to say: And I have oftentimes said the same to his holiness. These
words, which showed the will of the Ambassador to be different from that of
his Prince, The Ambassador of Pope Julius was taken for a Spy by the King of
England.
gave great doubt and suspicion to the Kings Counsel, and they began to doubt
that the Ambassador was rather inclined to favor the King of France then the
Pope his Master; and setting secret Spies about him, to take notice of his
behavior, it was perceived that by night he spoke secretly with the French
Ambassador: by which means he was undone, and if he had fallen into the hands
of the Pope, he had peradventure put him to death. And so by his answer, which
was

Renzo de Ceri, a most honorable Captain in his time, being in the pay and
service of Laurence de Medicis in the war which Francis Maria Duke of Vrbin
made against him, to reconquer and recover his estate, was advertised that
certain Spanish Captains had plotted a treason to deliver Francis Maria, into
the hands of the Renzo, talking with a Drum, demanded of him in jest and
laughing, but with great inconsideration, When will these Spaniards deliver
your Duke prisoner? The Drum made no answer: but being returned to the
Camp, he reported to Francis Maria, the words which Renzo had used unto him,
without any necessity or reason. Wherefore the Duke of Vrbin having engraven
them in his heart, stood upon his guard, and marked the behavior of the
Spanish Captains. In the end, through certain letters and writings found
among their baggage, Certain Spanish Captains counict of treason, were made
to pass the pikes.
the truth appeared, and the conspirators against Duke Francis Renzo was the
cause why the treason took not effect, the Captains were dispatched, and
Laurence his Master made not so soon an end of the wars, as otherwise
peradventure he might have done. And Guicciardin says of Renzo, that he was
but shallow witted, to use such speeches to a Drum, without any consideration.

Let every man then take heed of inconsiderationof speech: for a man may fill
whole books with the evils which have risen and procecded from such faults:
and there where shall be such little



CHAP. 66. Who so does any evil, or offends another in secret, thinking
that it shall not be revealed, is commonly deceived, and bears the pain
thereof.
ALthough that the imprudence and inconsideration of men, be seen in many
things, yet in this it seems to me very notable, when some do, or would do
some evil, thinking that it should never be revealed: and moreover there are
some, so ill advised, that they hazard to offend some worthy Personage,
grounded upon the same conceit, and hope of concealment, and that the author
of the evil action shall never Jews Ariosto calls this kind of men
miserable, saying in his sixth Song:

Miser chi mal oprando si confida
Ch'ogn' hor star debba in maleficio occulto
Che quand' ogn' altro taccia intorno grida
L'aria la terra e'l luggo in ch'e sepolto
E dio fa spesso ch'il peccato grida
il peccator poi ch'aclun di gli ha indulto
Che se medesimo senza altrui rechiesta
inauedutamente manifesta.
Unhappy is he, doing ill who relieth
On secrecy, thinking none will him epsy,
All other being silent, about him still cries
The air, earth, and place, whereas he does lie,
And God so works, that the sin it self cries
And the sinner at sometime before he does die,
Unawares of himself, without any request,
His own sin reuealeth and makes manifest.
These verses are very sententious, and worthy to be considered by all those,
which swelling with grief, are constrained to bring forth their iniquity: for
although that for a time, the malefactor be not discovered, yet nevertheless
by certain means unknown, unthought of, nor premeditated, only known unto
God, the offenses come to be manifest, yea they come to be discovered, when a
man thinks least thereof: and in some, either early or late, God Plutarch in
his work, or the fair Treatise of the slow vengeance of God, says that in
the Cipriotte wars, one Aristocrates chief of the Messenians, through the
desire to rule, betrayed his Messenians, by which occasion, his practice taking
effect, all the Messenians were cut in pieces; but twenty years after his
treason was revealed, and Aristocrates was rigorously punished. It is said in
the verses before, that the sin induces the sinner sometime to manifest it
himself: which appears to be true in this example, which I would have held
for a fable, if it had been reported by any other author then Plutarch, who in
the same treatise here above alleged, reports such a case, saying; that a
certain man named Bessus, had slain his father, and this murder and
parricide lay long hidden: but coming upon a time into an Inn to supper, he
saw a Swallows nest, wherein were young ones which cried: and he having
thrown down the nest with a long pole which he had in his hand, with his
foot killed all the young birds in a great bravery: and being demanded by
those which were there present, wherefore he had so cruelly killed them, he
answered: Did you not understand that they Bessus: and the King causing him to
be apprehended, made him to be tortured: by which means he confessed the
fact, and how it passed, and was punished accordingly.

We read in the history of the Greeks, and also in those of Sicilie, in the
life of William the good, that Andronicus a Greek fell into this
inconvenience, who being left by Emanuell Emperor of Constantinople, Tutour of
Alessus his son: Andronicus aspiring Alessus went in a little bark, to
recreate himself upon the Sea, Andronious threw him into the water and drowned
him, making the world to believe, that by mischaunce he fell into the Sea, so
as he was not able to save him. But in the end the treason being discovered by
the course which he held, putting many to death, and unjustly and without
reason banishing others, the people of Constantinople pulled him in pieces. We
read in the same histories of Sicilia, that Robert King of Naples, and
Federique King of Sicilie, making Robert disembarked and set foot on land,
between the Castle of Iccare, and the Castle of the Sea of the Gulf, and a
Captain, named Remond the white, having the Castle of the Gulf in guard, in
the behalf of King Federique, King Robert after many proffers, in the end won
Remond with money, and Remond delivered the Castle to King Robert. Remond
thought that this his treason was hidden, and could not by any means soever be
known, for that he had done it very secretly, and so grounded in this thought
and imagination, he impudently setting a good countenance upon it, went to King
Federique, Federicque King of Sicilie, caused Remond le Blanc to be beheaded
for treason.
who having Remond found himself deceived, thinking that his fault should not
have been made manifest and known to the King: and in like sort shall they all
be deceived in their imaginations, which complotting and devising any evil,
principally against their Princes, if they shall attempt to execute the same,
and think that they shall not be discovered; for that Princes have long hands,
wide ears, and Lynx his eyes, to pearce and see through Mountains; and
although that some one peradventure have attained to the height of his
enterprise, and has escaped, yet that ought not to be held for an example;
Tibert Brandolin a valiant Captain in his time; this man being in the pay of
Francis Sforce the elder Duke, and seeing him very sick, and thinking for
certain that he would dye of that disease, conspired with the Paisants of the
Piacentin, which rebelled against the Duke, and promised to succor them, and
give aid and favor against him with the men of war of Picinino. Afterward
perceiving that the Duke recovered, John of Aniou, and to color his flight,
he asked the Duke leave to go to the marriage of his daughter, with promise
shortly to return. The Duke nothing suspecting him, graciously gave him leave,
but his treason being discovered unto the Duke, by a mean which Brandolin
thought not of, he was apprehended before he could get forth of Milan, and
committed to prison: where being stung, by his own conscience and remorse of
his faults, and fearing to dye publikelie by the hands of an executioner, he
slew himself. Let no man then



CHAP. 67. It ill beseems a Prince or great Captain, to say in truth J had
not thought it, and enterprises to be put in execution, ought not to be
grounded upon vain and deceivable hopes.
I Know well, that it is a very unworthy word in the mouth of any man which
undertakes any enterprise, whereof he attaineth not to a happy issue, to say,
I had not thought, or I would not have believed it; and though that it may be
true, he who says so, is not always worthy of reprehension, for that there
may happen some accident, either so light, or so Guicciar. lib. 6
he who has the care and charge of great matters, esteems it not; or for the
weight thereof, it be so far from reasonable, that reason being ruled in his
actions, could not foresee that which was without rule. Wherefore a Prince
deserves not to be blamed, who (for example) has put some one in a fortress,
to whom he has done much good, and in the end is by him betrayed. And if he
should then say, I should never have thought, that such a man would have
betrayed me, he deserved not to be blamed. As it happened unto Jews More Duke
of Milan, who having committed the castle of Milan to the guard of one of his
greatest friends, and to whom he most trusted, and who was most Bernardin
Court, he was by him betrayed, to his perpetual dishonor and infamy. For
this cause, if the Duke had said, Bernardin Court, ingrate full to Jews Duke
of Milan.
truly I would never have thought that Bernardin Court would have betrayed me,
he had not deserved blame. In like manner, he ought not to be reproved, who
having provided for every thing, is assailed by some so strange and grievous
accident, that being wholly without reason, it was impossible by any judgment
and counsel to foresee or prevent it; being imposible with reason to foresee
any thing, which of it self is without reason, as was this Federicque de
Bezolo fell into this fault, when he undertook the enterprise of Parma, in the
year 1529. whereof Francis Guicciardin was governor general for the Pope,
after the death of Leo the tenth, (if the author for his own praise make not
the matter greater) for Federicque went thither without provision of
Artillery, Guicciardin being inexperienced in the affairs of the wars,
would not defend the City, and make his party good against him. But this
imagination deceived him, and he being forced to retire from Parma, to his
loss and dishonor. He may say, (according as Guicciardin himself has
written) that nothing had deceived him in this enterprise (whereof he was the
author) but that he had not thought that a governor, being no man of war, and
newly come to that City, would have undertaken the defense, and put himself
in danger after the death of the Pope, without hope of any profit, seeing
Federick de Bezzolo, let slip these words out of his mouth: I never thought
that this man so constantly would have undertaken this defense: which words
truly were not worthy of so renowned and noble a Captain, as Federick was, in
that time: for that he ought to believe that valor of courage is sometimes
found in men contrary to all expectation, and necessity does often make men
to do those things, which they would never have attempted of themselves, by
their own choice,



CHAP. 68. To deny some requests to him to whom a man in some sort is bounden,
does not therefore yield a man ungrateful, although by the aid and assistance
of the demaunder he have attained unto some great dignity.
THose which mount to some high degree and honorable dignity, by the means
and aid of some other man, truly ought ever to rest bounden unto him, so far
forth as such a pleasure does deserve, and so to bear himself toward him,
that he may seem to be always thankful, in such sort that at all times and
as often as he may with his honor, he ought to requite it in any thing to his
power. But there are by they cast in his teeth the pleasure they did him,
saying: Remember Clement the seventh, answered the Cardinal Pompey Colomne in
the like discourse very wisely, this Cardinal Pompey, being employed, used
such means, that Clement mounted to the Apostolic seat, and that the
Cardinal Franciotto Orsin Clement was Pope, Pompey obtained of him many graces
and honors, but assuring himself that nothing should be denied him that he
should require. Upon a time being importunate for some matters, which the Pope
judged to be unjust, and by his holiness not to be granted with his honor:
whereof Pompey failing of his expectation, began to reproach the Pope, and to
tell him, that by his means he was Pope. His holiness answered him, that it was
true, and prayed him to suffer him to be Pope, and that he would not be it
himself: for in proceeding in this manner, he took that from him which he
had given him. Wherefore they The answer of Pope Clement the seventh to the
Card nall Pompey Colomno. Guicci. lib. 15.
for besides the displeasure he receives in not obtaining what he demands,
he acquireth the name of an indiscreete man: and he which is established in a
dignity, ought not to do any thing unworthy of him, nor of his honor, to
please him who made him great: for he shall avoid the blame of a weak man,
wanting discretion, and shall acquire unto himself the name and



CHAP. 69. Good counsel, tending to the profit of the Prince or Commonwealth,
ought not to be concealed, for fear that it should not be put in execution.
THere are some Citizens and Counselors to Princes, which have so great regard
and respect issue of the matter shall be more correspondent with the counfell
The issue and end of an enterprise manisteth the wisdom of the counsel given.


Archidamus King of the Lacedaemonians, saw that the whole Council of Sparta
was inclined to take arms against the Athenians, in the behalf of the
Corinthians, which were recommended unto them, and as confederates had required
their aid in the war, which the Athenians waged against them, and knew well
that his advice should not be accepted: notwithstanding this he would not
fail to speak his opinion, and by many lively reasons to show, that they
ought not to stir against the Athenians, nor to break the truce which they
had with them. Archidamus got nothing Stenelaides an Ephore was followed, who
seeing the hearts of the Lacedaemonians disposed to make war against the
Athenians, caused them to resolve to make it suddenly. But the issue of the
matter made it manifest, how much the counsel of Archidamus had been more
profitable, then the resolution of Stenelaides.

Mercury Gattinara, a Piemontois, great Chauncellor of the kingdom of Spain,
knowing the heart of the Emperor Charles the fifth to be disposed to come to
agreement with Francis the first of that name King of France and his prisoner,
and to deliver him; Guicciardin in the oration of the said Gattinara; whose
advice was not allowed nor approved, but theirs was followed which persuaded
the agreement: and Mercury was Gattinara was much better then that of the
rest, for that the Articles were not observed: and after that the King was at
liberty, all vanished away in smoke. Then let no good Counselor of a Prince
leave to speak his advice, neither let him leave to give good counsel, for
fear that it shall not be regarded, or that it shall be despised: for in the
end the goodness of

CHAP. 70. Promises voluntarily made, are to be held and performed, and
IT is a thing altogether infamous and dishonest to fail and break promise;
but it is most dishonest in a Prince or Commonwealth: for it cannot be said
that such persons failed through inaduertence, or want of discretion, as of
particular men, A man ought to be well advised how he promise any thing.
if they were not carried away by affection, or appearance of good. A man ought
to be well advised touching his promise, and ought not to make it, but that
first he weigh and consider Herod to his daughter in law, which daunced before
him at a banquet; and this promise to give to her what she should demand, was
made without consideration, and sinfully and wickedly performed: whereby he
purchased perpetual infamy, and the just man unjustly lost his life. Some
there are also which promise dishonest and reproachful things, and more
shamefully perform them: and to these men ordinarily comes that which Cicero
speaks of, that wicked promises hurt him which made them, and him also which
receives them: whereof the examples are daily so manifest, in robberies,
murders, and such other Riots, that it is needles to produce them. But
speaking of promises which are made, not through necessity, but free and
voluntarily, if they be of honest matters, I say they must be performed: for to
fail in them, there happen and grow Robert Gescard made to Roger his natural
brother. This Robert in the division of the Norman Empire, promised to his
brother Roger the half of Calabria, and all Sicilie: but when it came to
sharing and dividing, Robert would give him nothing in Calabria, Meto and
Squillacci.
but Meto and Squillacci, and bad him to purchase the Realm which he already
began to possess, meaning Sicilie, and in the end resolved, according to
Alexanders words to Darius, that as the world could not endure two Suns, so
one Realm could not endure two sovereign Lords. Roger being much displeased
herewith, made war against Robert unwisely was entered, in the habit of a
paisant, to bring it to his own devotion, King Robert taken prisoner, and
afterward graciously delivered by his brother Roger.
Roger of a brotherly pity saved his life, and restored him to his estate,
which by right of war, and being prisoner, he had lost. So Roberts failing
of his word, was the cause that he entered into such disorder, so as if he had
had to deal with any other then his brother, he had peradventure learned to
his loss, or to his perpetual dishonor, how great a fault it is not to
perform and keep those promises, which no man constrained him to make.

CHAP. 71. Jn what case promises exacted perforce, ought to be performed.
ALthough that some have said and left in writing, that promises made by
constraint ought not to be performed, alleging the example of the Romans,
when they made agreement with the Samnites; I say nevertheless, that that
ought not to be taken for a law or a general rule, for that it is not a thing
secure for all men to fail in their promise, notwithstanding that it were made
by force. I say then, that he which is constrained to make some promise, to
grant Francis the first, Monarke of France, Wherefore King Francis the first,
would not perform the articles of agreement made between him and Charles the
fifth.
would not maintain to Charles the fifth any thing that he had promised,
concerning Burgundy or any other matter, when he was prisoner; because that
they then, and he now being at liberty, might at even hand encounter their
enemies, and again try the fortune of the wars and win, as it happened to
the Romans. But when a man that is forced to agreement, cannot possibly have
the upper hand, or to return again equally to fight with him who has
constrained him, he ought not to fail of his promise; and he which does
otherwise, commits a

The Saguntines fell into this error, when the first time that they were
invaded by Hanniball of Carthage, Plutarch of noble women.
as Plutarch recites in the treatise of noble women, and principally of the
women of Sagunt: for (says he) before that Hanniball levied arms to invade
Italy, he Hanniball to do what he would command them, and swear that they
would be obedient and observe their promises. And among other conditions were
these, that Hanniball should raise his siege and depart, and so soon as he
should be out of the country, and the City free and at liberty, they should
pay him three hundred talents of silver, which may amount to the sum of one
hundred and four score thousand French Crowns of gold, and should deliver
unto him three hundred gentlemen for hostages, of all that they had couenanted
and agreed upon together. Hanniball out of the country, and land of Sagunt,
the Saguntines repenting them of the agreement, would not observe their
promises made by force. Wherewith Hanniball being moved, returned to besiege
the City, in such sort, Hannibal compelled the Saguntines to depart out of
their Country, with only the, clothes on their hackes.
that the Saguntines, to save their lives, were content to accept of what the
Carthaginians would: and Hanniball commanded them to lay down their Arms,
and permitted the men to depart the City in their coats only, and would not
suffer that the women should carry any more then one suit of apparel upon
their backs only, and that they should go so whither they would.

In the year of our salvation 1277. Ottacar King of Bohemia, having first made
some promises to the Emperor Rodulph the first, and having sworn to them, and
done him homage in his Pauillion: which he did perforce, and for fear to lose
the battle, which should presently have been fought, for his Army was by a
great deal less in number then the Emperors: and for this cause he Ottacar
was returned into his kingdom, Cunicunda his wife reproved and blamed him for
his small courage, and that he without one blow stricken, had accepted and
received so great dishonor. Wherefore (wroth at his wives words, and for the
remembrance which was yet fresh, of the injury which Rodulph had done him,
when he made him to be seen of all his army upon his knees before him: for
his Pauillion was made in such sort, that it fell just then when he upon his
knees did him homage, which he would not to have happened) he again rebelled,
and held no part of his Ottacar was of less force, though equal in despite
and choler) he was overcome and slain: which had not happened unto him, if he
had considered that he could not fight with equal force against the Emperor,
and that he was then in the same necessity which he was in before, when he
first compounded with him. And if the Emperor had not been of so good a mind
and conscience as he was, he might have seized on his The noble mind of the
Emperor Rodulph the first.
but being content to have overcome, he gave the kingdom of Bohemia to
Vinceslaus, son of King Ottacar deceased, and withal gave him his daughter
in marriage. He then which will not maintain and keep his promises made
perforce, let him first measure himself and his forces, and see whether he be
able to make his party good against his enemy; and then if he find himself
able to do it, he may resolve to fail of his promises. But he that has not
forces to overcome, or equally to resist, let him not put himself in danger,
for he will ever find himself deceived.



CHAP. 72. When a General or chief Commander too much doubts his enemy,
and too much distrusteth his own forces, he shall never effect any laudable
enterprises.
TO make account of an enemy, as much as is needful, is the part of a wise
Captain: but to have such opinion, and to make so great reckoning of him that
it bereaueth you of courage to assail him, is rather a sign of base fear,
then of a wise doubt. Wherefore when a General governs himself with
consideration, and shows that he so much esteems the enemies valor, that
he will not hazard rashly to assault him, neither with shame and pusillanimitie
to fly from him, he does well, and makes conceit makes him so fearful,
that he escheweth all occasions to Francis Maria Duke of Vrbin, being General
for the Venetians, and the League, after the delivery of the French King, was
to go to relieve and set at liberty Francis Sforce, who was besieged in the
Castle of Milan: being come to the City, he conceived such an opinion Guicci.
lib. 17.
he suddenly determined to withdraw himself from Milan with his Army: and so
the same night he gave the Popes Lieutenant and the Pourueiour of the Venetians
to understand of his determination, and how that he had already begun to put
it in execution, persuading them to do the like: and so going to incamp
himself at Marignan, he resolved not to depart from thence until his succors
of twelve thousand Swissers should be come, judging it impossible to obtain
the victory, without two armies; whereof each of them apart, had been
sufficient John de Medicis, who commanded the Arriergard with the Popes
Infantrie, would never retire until



CHAP. 73. Princes ought to give no charge to covetous Men.
A Great Prince ought to foresee, and principally to take order for three
things, which are of great importance, Covetous servants and officers are the
cause of the run of their Prince, and rebellion of his subjects.
and the two Emperors at wars togethers, these Governors making choice of
Soldiers, they enrolled the Ciuilis which was a man of great courage, and
nobly descended; making himself chief head of the rebellion, did much hurt
and damage to the Romans, seeing that by his means this Province shook off
their obedience: This avarice also which consists (as a man might say) in
this pedlerie, in sparing to spend, when need requires, being found in the
servant of a Siluius Passerin, whom Pope Clement the seventh had established in
the government of Florence, to the end, that in the house of Medicis should be
conserved the dignity of government, as tofore it had been. This man, when in
the year 1527. the City rose against that noble family, after the news of
the sack of Rome, became so miserable, that he would not spend a farthing of
his own for his Masters profit, and being impossible to get any of the Popes
treasure for many reasons, he loved rather to depart from Florence with the
Popes Nephews, and suffer those of that house, to be driven County Peter de
Noferi, which he had there to guard the City. The avarice of the servants and
Captains of Jews the 12. were cause of his ruin.
As for those which have the managing of the wars, it appears in the
servants and Captains which had the handling of the money of Jews the 12.
King of France, when he warred against the King of Spain in Italy, for the
Kingdom of Naples. This avarice besides many other disgraces and ill fortunes,
was the cause that the King, who had provided all things necessary in great
abundance, to his dishonor lost the enterprise. Wherefore Princes must pray
unto God, that it may please him to accompany Guicciar. lib. 6
the bounty and fidelity of their servants: and to use the speeches of
Guicciardin, As for the sustaining of the body, it suffices not that the head
be well, but it is also necessary, that all the other parts do their duty
and office: even so, it is not enough that the Prince be exempt from fault in
his affairs, if that virtue and diligence be not likewise found in his
servants. As for the avarice of those which have the guarde of Castles, holds,
and fortresses, it is very hurtful and pernicious to the Prince, who employeth
them; whereof there be so many memorable examples, that it shall not need to
take the pains to recite



CHAP. 74. Princes ought to suffer their servants and familiars to grow rich,
so as it be not through dishonest means.
ALthough the common people may conceive an The liberality of Artaxerxes.
he will be ready to give out of his own purse, as did King Artaxerxes by a
Groom of his chamber, by whom he was prayed and entreated for a matter very
inconvenient, who in lieu of that which he desired, gave him thirty talents,
and said unto him, This which I give thee, does not make me less rich; but if
I should grant that which thou demaundest, I should be less just; which is
not expedient either for thee or me, because I should Leo the tenth, Pope Leo
the tenth, his discourse to a Groom of his chamber.
a most liberal Prince, being entreated by an household favorite of his, that
it would please him to bestow a benefice upon a friend of his, who knowing
that the request was neither just nor honest, and that he should have some good
sum of money for the procuring hereof, he smiling demanded what he had, for
this dispatch: his servant and favorite freely answered, that he had 200.
Ducates: the Pope merely gave him 200. Ducates of his own, and said, go and
deliver thy friend his money again, and tell him that thou



CHAP. 75. It is very dangerous to let slip time, and not to execute what is
determined, principally in the wars.
THose men seem to me to be very wise, who to be executed: for the delaying
may in an instant alter the estate Enterprises ought to be consulted of in cold
blood, and executed in hot blood.
And for this cause men say, that counsels and enterprises are to be taken in
hand in cold blood, and the execution thereof to be done in hot blood. That to
defer and delay the execution of things first well devised, is the occasion
of loss and harm, may Charles the 8. King of France, who having happily
conquered the realm of Naples, lost (when he returned into France) much time,
and was slow in sending (according to the resolution taken) garrisons and
provisions necessary for the keeping of those things which he had gotten: For
he was no sooner out of Italy, but he began to lose all; and the occasion
was, that while as he was at Lions, and ought speedily to have provided for the
wars, and to return presently again into Italy, he took (without reason,
and without consideration of the importance of the affairs) post horse,
Guicci. lib. 3.
and rode to Paris to see a Lady which he much loved. Don Hugues de Moncado,
Viceroy of Naples, committed the same fault in the year 1528. when the Lord
of Lautrech was before Naples with a French Moncado had determined to disperse
and scatter the Fleet and army by Sea of Phillipin de Doria, which held all
the coast of Salern in subjection, and did stop the passage of victuals and
other provision to go to Naples; he rigged certain vessels, and furnished
them with brave Soldiers, with whom went many Lords, and the same Don Hugues
himself in person. The said Army, in good order being parted from Polisippo,
arrived at the Isle of Capra, where Don Hugues did this notable fault, that to
no purpose he lost much time: and this loss of time, with the diligence
Phillipin, who having sented the determination of the Imperialists, had
somewhat provided for his affairs, was the cause that the succors which he
had demanded of the Lord of Lautrech, had time to arrive at Doria his Army,
and to put themselves in order to fight; and the time was so short, that the
French had scarcely settled themselves in the Galleys when Don Hugues arrived,
and they must fight; where Doria remained victour, and Don Hugues was slain,
and many Lords were taken prisoners: and so Moncado to his hurt and loss gave
example to others not to lose time about needless things, in enterprises which
have need of diligence. Peter de Medicis, when with his forces he took his
way toward Florence, and to have reentred into it: for if he had not been
hindered, his coming was so sudden, that they within, had not had leisure to
have made resistance. But when Peter was upon the way, there fell so great and
continual rain, that he was constrained to stay, and could not get to the
City before it was



CHAP. 76. Those Princes which make no account of their Generals, which
faithfully serve them, but give them occasion to forsake their pay and
service, commit great faults.
THe dishonest and vituperable vice of ingratitude ought by Princes and
Commonwealths to be avoided, as most unworthy to be lodged in royal hearts,
and the breasts of noble Senators: and if a man ever ought to fly it in any
thing, he ought principally to do it in the behalf of Captains and others
chief Commanders in the wars, by whom the Prince has been faithfully
served, provided that the fault grow not from themselves. And whether it be
either Prince or Commonwealth Artaxerxes used to Themistocles the Athenian,
who was banished by his Citizens, and coming to see Alberigue de Barbian, a
man of great valor and reputation in the wars in his time, committed this
error, he having subdued the Bouloignois, through the prowess and valor of
Braccio de Monton, which he acknowledged with many signs of courtesy and good
will, commending him publikelie, and increased his pay and his charge, gave him
the arms and ensigns of his house, and finally the government of the whole
Barbian was of kin and allied, he sent to their succors, certain Captains
of horse and foot, and appointed Braccio, Lorens de Cotignola, and Rosso de
L'aigle for chief Commanders of those troops. Lorens and Rosso did greatly
malice the glory of Braccio, and by many detractions and slanderous speeches,
bringing him in disgrace with Barbian, brought it so to pass, that he giving
credit to their backbitings, slanderous words and letters, resolved with
Lorens and Rosso to cause Braccio to be slain. Barbians Braccio, knowing how
much her husband was bound unto him, and being acquainted with the purpose and
devises of Rosso and Lorens, and with the resolution it self which they had
taken to put him to death, she advertised Braccio thereof, willing him
speedily to be gone, for that her husband would cause him to be slain, and
told him the course which was to be held, and who they were which had
persuaded him thereto. Braccio having this advertisement, which he soon had,
being lodged but a league from thence, because of the winter, mounted on
horseback, with the greatest part of his best friends, without saddles or
stirrups, and got him out of the confines of Barbians dominion, and fled to the
enemies Camp, whither he was Braccio was made known, the Soldiers began to
mutin and rail against those which had brought him into disgrace with Barbian,
and to blame Barbian for his lightness. Wherefore Barbian being very sorry, but
too late, that he had given Braccio occasion to fly from him, and grieved to
be deprived of so valorous a Captain, wrote him a letter, by which he desired
to speak with him, and yielding himself culpable, offered to give him better
pay, and more honorable charge than ever he had before. But Braccio answering
him with great gravity, would no more assure himself of him, neither go to
serve a The error of Alberigue de Barbian. Guicciardin. lib. 12.
who, peradventure another day, carried away with the like lightness, might
again conspire his death. So Barbian rashly without thinking thereof, giving
occasion to Braccio to forsake him, and to go to his enemies, was the cause of
the decay of the Padouan Brothers, and the advancement of their enemies.

The Catholic King also committed this error, making show lightly to regard
Peter de Nauarra, a Captain much esteemed and very valiant in the wars; for
this King conceived in his mind, that the overthrow at Rauenna, (wherein Peter
was taken prisoner) happened (for the most part) through his fault; and this
Peter being prisoner The error of Ferdmand king of Spain.
and set at 20000 Ducats ransom; the King continuing his displeasure, would
not harken to the payment, nor to deliver him. Wherefore Peter perceiving that
the King did little esteem him, and thinking that he made more account of
20000 crowns then of him, resolved to serve the French king, Francis the
first, who loved him much, and paid his ransom of 20000 crowns, to the
Marquess of Rottelin, The error of Francis the first king of France.
to whom King Jews the twelfth had given him; and Peter to avoid all
dishonor, gave the Catholic King to understand, that since he was abandoned
by him, and was constrained to leave in the kingdom of Naples, the estate,
which he held Francis the first did no less a fault, to give occasion to
Andre Dorie to forsake his service, and to serve another: for Dorie having
served him very faithfully, with his Galleys, the space of five years
continually, thinking to have deserved so well as to have bin employed in all
occasions for chief; the King either for that, he cared little for him, either
for that he was persuaded by the prayers and entreaties of the Princes of
France, which envying the Italians, love not to see Mounsieur de Barbesieux,
leaving Dorie (as a private Captain) leader of his own Galleys only; who
thought that his deserts had bin such, that if he had refused such a charge,
he should have been instantly entreated to have accepted thereof. He
thought also, that there was great wrong done him, in that he was not paid
20000 crowns due unto him for his service, without the which he could not
entertain his galleys, and because that the king was so earnest with him, to
have the Marquis de Guast and Ascaigno Colomna his prisoners, notwithstanding
that Dorie forsook his service, and went to serve the Emperor Charles the
fifth, Guicciar. li. 19
and the Spanish nation, whereof he had bin a mortal enemy. Andrew Dori
forsook King Francis the first, in hi^ greatest need.
And notwithstanding the King perceiving his own fault, sent to Dorie, making
him many fair offers, yet it was too late, for he would not accept John Acute
an Englishman: and the Lords of Venice deserve great praise, who have never
used to estrange from them, the hearts of those which have well served them: but
their charges being brought to an end, they have returned them very
honorably; and if they died in their service, in token of Gatta Mallata, and
in Bartelmy de Bergamo, and many others in the city of Venice, and the
Seignorie thereof; all which are things fit and proper to incite the hearts of
Captains, to virtue, love, and fidelity, wherewith a man ought to serve great
Princes and honorable common wealths.

CHAP. 77. A private Captain serving a Prince, or a General, ought not to
receive any present or gift from the Prince or General, which is enemy to his
Lord and Master.
AS to gain the reputation of wise and virtuous, One only foolish act makes
a man to be reputed a fool, and one act of infidelity makes a man to be for
ever h^ld for disloyal.
many virtuous and wise acts are required: but for a man to make himself to be
esteemed for a fool, one only foolish act sufficieth; so to be esteemed
faithful, many proofs of fidelity are necessary; and to acquire the name of
unfaithful, and disloyal, one act of disloyalty and fault of duty, is
sufficient: principally in time of wars, and suspicions, wherein the

Tartaglia, a valiant soldier and renowned Captain of his time, Sforce, in
the behalf of Jews of Aniou, against Alfonso King of Arragon. This Tartaglia,
by reason of his valor, was much beloved by Sforce, and seemed to be much
respected and esteemed by Braccio de Monton, perpetual enemy to Sforce. It
happened that in the time of these wars, Fazio in his second book of the act
of Alfonso King of Arragon.
King Alfonso gave for a present unto Tartaglia certain fair horses, and
there appeared many other signs of Braccio his love unto him: wherefore Sforce
entering into some suspicion of evil, through Tartaglia his behavior, caused
hands to be laid on him, and to be apprehended, and being convict of secret
practice and intelligence with the enemy, he made his



CHAP. 78. When an Ambassador speaks otherwise then as his Master, he
deserves to be had in derision.
THe office of an Ambassador Lieger for his Master, with some Prince or
Commonwealth, or which is sent sometime to one place, sometime to another,
about affairs of an Ambassador which proceeds in this manner, shows that
he

King Francis the first, of France, sent for his Ambassador, Mounsieur de
Tarbe, then, when there was a treaty of peace between the Emperor Charles
the fifth and this King, to persuade the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, the
Florentines, and the Duke of Ferrara, confederates and allies with the king
against the Emperor, that they should not think, that any peace should be
concluded: and so far as to advise them that they should not disunite
themselves, and to promise and assure them for certain, that if the Emperor
came into Tarbe, which was in Italy, being gone to Venice, to Florence, to the
Dukes of Milan and Ferrara, where the conclusion of the peace was already
Tarbe, might say, that the King had deceived him in giving him this charge,
seeing it is a common saying, that when one Prince will deceive another, he
will first deceive his own Ambassador whom he sends.



CHAP. 79. When an Ambassador so handles his Masters business, that it is
at the point to be laughed at, he cannot avoid the bearing of blame.
Affairs of importance are not to be treated of in jest.
demanding time to answer, then not knowing how to defend and uphold the
wrong wherein he is, to expose all to be laughed at: purchasing to his
Sovereign the name of unjust and unwise, and to himself the blame to have
taken upon him to defend a matter, which he can bring to no good end. And when
affairs of importance are exposed to be Charles the 5. at what time as Don
Hugo de Modozza was governor of their town. The said Sienois sent to Florence
for their Ambassador Alexander Sansedonio, where it seems that the Emperor
was desirous to reduce the City to his devotion in friendly manner, and that by
means of his servants and officers, the affairs might be carried so, that the
Sienois should have humbled themselves, and have acknowledged their fault: It
happened upon a day that one of Sansedonio of this matter, The foolisp answer
of San sedonto Ambassador of Stena.
and blaming the Sienois, and reciting the injury done by that City to the
Empire, Sansedonio answered to al, sometimes in denying, sometimes showing the
sinister and ill informations, then excusing the Sienois of things done by
them. But the Emperors Agent persisting in repeating and declaring one offense
after another, and finding always new, saying, what will you answer to this?
and continuing, what will you answer to that other? and then, how excuse you
such an injury? and then, how will you maintain that other? Sansedonio
feeling himself oppressed and overcome, and having no A scoff used by an Agent
for Charles the fifth.
To whom the Agent made answer: Even that shall excuse you, but upon the
condition which is fit for fools: which is, to be kept bound and inchained.
Some write that this happened at Siena, in the presence of the Magistrate de
Balia: but howsoever it was, Sansedonio should not have hazarded affairs of so
great importance, to be laughed at, neither have made his Lords and Masters to
have bin accounted fools, and himself unwise and ill advised;



CHAP. 80. When a Rebel or a banished man by his Princes grace and favor is
pardoned, and permitted to return again into his country, he ought not to
doubt of his Princes faith.
Clemency in a Prince is highly extolled, when he resolves to pardon a
subject, and to restore a banished Rebel to his country, and by how much the
subjects offense has been the more heinous, by so much is the Princes
clemency the more praise worthy. And to the contrary, when a subject having
grace, doubts of the faith of his Lord, and does distrust him, he deserves
much blame. Wherefore they which being Cosmo, and so consequently were received
with great courtesy into grace and favor: some accepted the return, and
promised to raise companies; but afterward moved with this fear, and
distrusting that promise should not be held with them, resolved with
themselves to stay abroad, and serve those which rebelled against their
country: and some there were which did serve in that war, and having
obtained the victory, even then, when they should have endeavored to have
maintained themselves in the favor of this most gentle Prince, being
fearful, went out again, and would never Alexander the great, who being
entreated by Proteus to receive him again into grace and favor, Alexander was
nothing discontented, The answer of Alexander to Protens, who required
security.
but pleasantly answered him, that the best assurance that he could give him,
was to bestow five talents upon him, to the end that he might be the better
able to maintain himself near about him. But when as a Prince cannot be so
perfect, and complete with all virtues, as to heap grace upon grace, but
should be displeased to be dealt withal as a man of little faith, and not to
be trusted upon his word, he were not to be blamed, but the subject should
deserve Cosmo de Medicis the great Duke of Tuscane, an enemy of his, after The
liberality of Cosmo de Medicis Duke of Florence.
this has bin seen in him toward his enemies, taken at the battle of
Chiana, that having pardoned their faults, and saved and preserved them from
the pains of death, whereto they were near, and condemned;



CHAP. 81. How that man ought to behave himself, to whom is denied the grace
which is desired of his Prince.
IT often happens unto subjects to entreat favors at their Princes hands,
which happens A subject ought to dissemble his coffeehouse when he is
rejected by his Prince.
In this case it is better to dissemble the displeasure, which a man feels
through this denial, and to seem contented with the Princes pleasure, than to
appear discontented, whereby the Prince might doubt that you would remember it
another day; whereby some hurt might arise unto you, and the Prince might
resolve with himself, never after to do you Guicciardin in his aduertisements
says, That for having dissembled the coffeehouse Cosmo de Medicis, the
great Duke of Tuscane, who caused the receiver of his tenths to be hanged for
his demeanor in his charge. Wherefore another Citizen, whom for the honor of
his house, I will not name, entreated the great Duke to give him that office,
to whom he answered, that he could not, nor ought not, to bestow it upon him:
and the Citizen being earnest to know wherefore he would not give it him; the
Duke answered, The great love which I bear thee, and the good which I wish
unto thee, permit not that I give it thee. But quoth the Citizen, if you loved
me, and would me L'huomo sarebbe il caso, ma'la casa non lo comporta. When then
a man obtains not of the Prince the grace which he desires, let him content
himself, or feign to be contented with his Princes pleasure, who for some
occasion to us unknown, denies it. For showing our selves content, he
conceiueth no evil opinion of us, and may upon some other occasion be better
disposed to yield to our desire, provided that we degenerate not from our
selves, and demand not such things, as shall not be fit and convenient

CHAP. 82. That Captain which leaves a strong place ill guarded to take
another, commits a fault.
Man's judgment is known in hard matters, which bring difficulty, as when a
man is between two extremities, and carries himself so, that he auoydeth the
danger of the one, and acquireth and gets the good of the other. There are
none but men well experienced, and such as oftentimes have managed difficulties
of importance, which are of such judgment: so as he which well escapes out of
such difficulties, is gotten, according as the fortune of the wars, and the
valor of Francis Ferruzzio was in our time, for the Florentines in the
fortress of Empoli, in the time of the wars of Florence. It happened that
the City of Volterra was taken by the enemies; and for this cause the
Florentines, pricked forwards with a desire to recover it again, for that that
the fortress held still for them; they wrote to Ferruzzio that he should
attempt to surprise it, and having sent him a certain number of Soldiers, and
set in his place a Captain which was of no great experience in the wars,
made him to leave Empoli, to go to recover Volterra. Wherefore Ferruzzio
either trusting in the strength of the place, or judging, that leading so many



CHAP. 83. Between Enemy and Enemy, courtesies may be used without blame of
either side.
John de Medicis, a most renowned Captain of his time, and restorer of the
glory and splendor of the Military art in Italy, among his Soldiers had
two brave and valiant young men, the one called John of Turin, and the other
Amy de Benacque, or as others say, Peter Corso: there happened unkindness
between these two young men, as it often happens between Soldiers, which
proceeded so far forth, that the Lord John de Medicis willing to appease it,
and to make them friends, it was not in his power to do it, neither to
reconcile them, what persuasions and promises soever he used, willing that they
should remit the different and matter in question between them, A combat
between two soldiers.
to him; but they were resolved to decide and end the quarrel by Arms. The
Lord John de Medicis was wroth, and taking one of their cloakes, he divided it
into two by the midst, and gave to each one half, with a sword of equal
length, and locked them up in a certain place of his Palace, and bad them
there to end their quarrel, in such sort, that when he should return, he
might find all qualified. The young men began to use their weapons, and to give
blows, for they both were courageous and valiant: it happened that Amy
received a thrust in the forehead, but little hurt, whereby nevertheless the
blood running down his face, and into his John de Turin then said, Amy stay,
rest thee, and bind up thy wound; and so giving back, he gave his enemy
leisure to bind up his wound with a handkercher, and to rest himself.
Afterward the fight being begun again, and using their hands very gallantly,
Amy gave so great a blow, that he smote John de Turin his sword out of his
hand; and therewith said to John, stay, rest thee, and take up thy sword
again: and after that they had rested, they began the third assault, but the
other Soldiers which stood to behold the combat, seeing de Medicis, reciting
unto him all the success of the combat, praying him that he would not suffer,
that either of them both should be slain, and so their Lord entering into the
chamber, found that through the much blood which they had lost, they were so
weak and faint, that they were both fallen to the ground, and scarcely able to
speak: and so having caused them to be taken up, and the controversy to be
referred to him, he made them agree, and their wounds to be bound up with all
diligence, and they lived many years after the death of their Lord. I would
now know John Baptista Posseuin produces another example at the end of the
fifth book of his dialogues, of the honor of Cechino de Padoua, John Baptista
Posteum. lib. 5
who fighting at Mantoua, with Benedict Liberal, who with a stroke with his
sword, brake his adversaries sword: A combat between Cechino of Padua, and
Bennet Liberal.
and Cechino retiring himself, bad Benedict to take another sword, if he would
fight: but Cechino deserved great praise for this courtesy, who nobly would
prevail by his own virtue and valor, and not by the favor of Fortune, and
would not kill his enemy being disarmed or fallen, as most men now a days
would do, and as many in time past have done, who would have for the prize and
reward of their victory, the blood and life of their enemy, slain by them,
in any manner howsoever.



CHAP. 84. It is a very dangerous matter to tell Princes of their faults and
imperfections, not withstanding that at sometimes it be very necessary so to
do.
No man would be too freely reprehended.
but because it might be displeasing unto them, for as much as there is no man
that willingly gives ear to him which does freely and liberally reprehend
him; and they which should undertake to do it, should (peradventure) incur
the danger to displease the Prince, the evil government would ever proceed,
and the abuses and vices take The subtle discourse of Demetrius Phalerius to
king Ptolomy.
incur his displeasure, and bring his attempt to an evil end. Demetrius
Phalerius knew well this difficulty, and for this cause when he would
advertise King Ptolomy of his faults and errors which he committed, he did not
liberally discover them unto him, but he counseled him to read those books
which did treat of the government of Princes, because that those dead men
would tell him those things which living men durst not: so as without any shame
or danger to any, he might know what were convenient for him to do, and to
avoid the committing of faults in the government of his estate.

That it is a dangerous matter to tell Princes their imperfections, an infinite
number of examples both ancient and modern do bear record: but this only
shall suffice which Matthew Villani wrote of a King of Spain, Matthew Villani.
which reigning in the year 1358. was extremely in love with a young woman his
concubine: for the which he became so incensed, that he would have all the
Cities subject to his Crown to do her homage, and swear unto her fealty; so
that to satisfy her, he committed things unworthy of a King, and became to
be so outrageous and cruel, that he respected not with his own hands to kill
some of his own parentage. The gentlemen of The cruelty of John king of
Spain.
he made them all to be massacred in one night within their houses. And so this
free reproof used to this King of his imperfections, notwithstanding that it
was with modesty and great humility, had such end, as speeches spoken well to
persons which take A man wrongeth himself in speaking ill of his superiors.
but they ought to be respected as fathers: it is not lawful with reproachful
speeches to publish their faults and ill doings: for a man thereby brings
himself in danger through his liberal speaking against his Prince, who by
that mean takes offense, and begins to believe, that he which is so bold
to speak ill of him, may also undertake A Prince ought to consider what be
speaks in choler when he speaks any thing of any particular subject.
for that they are sometimes understood without speaking, and evil ensues:
which although that it please them after that it is done, and that



CHAP. 85. It is a most notable folly to intermeddle with enterprises, without
consideration principally in the wars.
AMong the virtues worthy of admiration in a

Cambyses King of Persia having a determination to make wars against the
Macrobians of Aethiopia who inhabit in the South of the African sea, Herodot.
lib. 3
before that he would take his journey for that coast with his Army by land,
he sent certain Spies into Aethiopia with some presents to the King, as well
to discover the strong holds of the country, as also to consider what forces
this King had. The Ambassadors being arrived before the Ethiopian King, and
having presented the gifts sent by Cambyses, were known for Spies: and
Cambyses sent them, The answer of the King of Ethiopian to the Ambassadors
of Cambyles.
he said unto them, that they should make report unto their King, that he
could not be a just Prince, in desiring to possess another Princes country:
and having shown to them the most admirable and most curious things of that
land, he sent them back again to Cambyses. The Ambassadors being returned,
and having made recital of all the fair and marvelous things which they had
seen, and also of that which the Ethiopian King had said unto them; Cambyses
(who then was in the city of Hay in Egypt) grew into extreme choler, and
suddenly without any consideration, commanded his Army to Jupiter and he with
the rest of his Army (still inconsiderate) marched toward Aethiopia. But
before he had past the fifth part of the way, his provisions and victuals began
to fail him; by reason whereof his Army was constrained to eat their horses
and beasts of carriage: If he had then resolved to return, he had done wisely,
for by the disorder then, he might have perceived his error. But perseuering
in his folly, The folly and obstinacy of Cambyses.
and nothing considering in what necessity he was, he went still forwards: and
the soldiers (unwilling to abandon him) followed him, so long as they could
find any herbs or roots to feed upon: but being come to the sandy places,
where Cambyses being advertised of this cruelty, and fearing that his
soldiers would eat up one another, turned head, leaving the enterprise of
Aethiopia, with a great loss of his people, and perpetual dishonor for his
folly. And so that enterprise had such end, as all such desperate enterprises,
full of error and shameful success use to have and made him to know how great
a dishonor it is to a Prince to begin wars, without providing for those
things which ought to go before, and to be prudently

CHAP. 86. It more avails to provide according to the aduertisements and
rumors of dangerous accidents, which may happen
BEing in a manner impossible, that great preparation for war should be so
secretly made, but that by some means or other it may be known, what persons
and places will be invaded: and being also impossible, but by some way or
means, advice and intelligence may pass to those against whom such
preparations

When advice is given (although that it be somewhat doubtful) that wars will
be made against a Commonwealth, the Senators ought not to give ear to those
which dissuade the making of provision and preparation for the wars by any
apparent reasons, persuading them to have regard to the charge, and to the
difficulty of the enterprise; but ought to resolve to provide them. For to
what purpose serves money, if a man have not time and means to employ
Hermocrates of Siracusa being particularly advertised hereof, who, as a man
experienced in the affairs of the world, made it known to the Senate, and
with a grave oration exhorted the Siracusians Athenagoras, by a discourse,
using al means possible to dissuade the Senate from making any provision and
preparation for the wars; affirmed that the report of the Nauall Army was
false, and that it could not be that the Athenians should come into Sicilie,
and began as it were to blame and reprove those which had spread that rumor.
Notwithstanding all this, the wise Hermocrates, neither did they show any such
fear, as that they did any thing unworthy of their gravity. The prudence of
the Senate of Syracusa.
And so it was concluded, to make ready sufficient and necessary provision,
to the end that afterward they should not need to be made upon a sudden (if
the news proved to be true) and if the news proved not true, it was no great
discommoditie to their City. And it is always better to fear then to
neglect. Let no man then despise the report which is spread, neither the news
which a man receives of any imminent danger: for it is better for a man to be
noted of fear, then to show himself ill advised and negligent, and the
charges and expenses which are made to assure and secure an

CHAP. 87. Jnnocencie and a clear conscience make a man bold and hardy, and
give him heart and courage to show himself in all
TRuly Guicciardins counsel is both very good and profitable for those which
have committed some fault: for counselling those which have offended, and will
put themselves into the hands of the Prince and of the law, he wills them
first to think upon it very well before hand, and to measure their doings:
for although that their case be very

Xenophon with his Army of Grecians served King Seutus, who Xenophon had
received it and did not give it to them: wherefore they began already to
speak ill of him in the Army, which was now ready to mutin and revolt.
Xenophon did patiently endure (for certain days) the injurious speeches of
the soldiers; but one day, as occasion was offered unto him (by many lively
reasons) he showed his innocence, and that having received no pay of the King,
but Xenophon gives his soldiers to understand that he had not robbed them of
their pay.
he prayed him to make that good unto him, which he had promised. Wherefore the
King seeing that Xenophon complained not without just cause, paid the
soldiers, and showed unto them the innocence of

It appeared in our fathers days, in Francis Sforce Duke of Milan, Guicci.
lib. 19.
what boldness his innocence gave him, for having been accused of rebellion,
and to have practiced against the Army of Charles the 5. with Ierosme Moron,
and the Marquess of Pescara, after many alterations the Duke came to Boulogne
to the Emperor, who had there received the Crown with his safeconduct, and
being in the Emperors presence, he thanked him for his courtesy, in giving him
means and leave to come to see him, and afterward said unto him, that
reposing his trust in his justice, for all things happened before Francis
Sforce Duke of M^lan renounced the safe conduct of the Emperor Charles the
fifth.
which he threw down at the Emperors feet; to whom this his doing was so
pleasing, that he restored unto him the Duchy of Milan, as much through this
occasion as any other. Innocence surely is of more force then a thousand
witnesses, and he that is therewith accompanied, may safely (holding up his
head) go any where: for an honest and innocent man may be slandered,

CHAP. 88. Evil speeches ought not to provoke a man to do any thing without
judgment and reason, especially in the wars.
Truly railing and bitter speaking has great force and power in a generous
and noble heart, and urges it sometimes to do things with small judgment and
discretion: and by this means there are some, which induced by the railings of
their enemies, principally Fabius Maximus, and Marius, are highly commended by
the Historians, and in our fathers days Francis Sforce, Fabius showed himself
to be of so firm and constant a spirit toward him, which spoke evil of him,
with very dishonest and unseemly words, that he knew how to endure the injury
and attend the occasion to fight, saying, that he accounted him more bale and
cowardly which feared evil words, then him which fled before his enemies, who
fled for fear of doings, and he which cannot endure ill speeches and
detractions, shows himself afraid of words. Marius in like manner, The
witty speech of Marius and Fabius Maximus
and upon Marius, which thou art esteemed to be, come forth and fight now that
thou art defied. To whom Marius answered and said: If thou be that great
Captain, which thou reputest thy self to be, force me to come forth of my
Trenches and to fight. But he attended both time and oportunitle, and fought,
and bare away the victory. Francis Sforce, a most renowned Captain in his
time, being with his Army enclosed in a Nicholas Picinino, his concurrant and
emulator, both in war and in glory no less esteemed then he, who warred
with Alfonso King of Naples, he sent to challenge him the combat, saying, that
in one battle their valor would be known, and to whom did justly
appertain the prize of Military glory. Picinino, Fazio in the 8. book of
the acts of Alfonso King of Arragon.
notwithstanding that he was wounded, accepted the offer of Francis Sforce,
and King Alfonso retired with his Army, more then half a league off, to give
place and field room free, according as he had promised, Picinino presented
himself armed and in order with his people, at the place appointed for Francis
Sforce should come forth of Fano with his people to fight; but he would not
come forth, notwithstanding that he was the first that defied his enemy, and
provoked him to fight. And notwithstanding that Peter went even to the walls
of Fano and called him and his people, after the manner as soldiers use to
provoke their enemies to come forth, yet Francis, either knowing some
disadvantage, or for that he would not hazard all his reputation at once, or
for some other occasion unknown, would not come forth, and cared not for the
injurious railings of the enemies soldiers, considering that such speeches
should not move a man to do any thing unadvisedly, and against reason; which
ought to be

CHAP. 89. To despise, backbite, and slander any Man, breeds hatred against
him which uses it, who seldom escapes unpunished.
I Said before that a man ought not through evil speeches to be drawn and
provoked to do any thing contrary to judgment and reason, and have confirmed
by examples, all that I have spoken. I say now, that to despise and by evil
speaking to blame another man, is a thing very dangerous for him that does it:
and I uphold that they are wise and advised, Gabades, a Captain of the
Persians, who having long time lien at the siege of Amade, and being weary
thereof, determined to raise the Siege, and began to send away his army.
Wherefore the inhabitants of that City, being puffed up with pride, for the
victory, came upon the walls and Ramparts, and spoke much evil of the enemies,
forgetting nothing that might Gabades being very wroth, returned to the siege
which was so hard and straight, and the inhabitants were so closely followed,
that he overcame them by force, sacked their City, and in this manner taught
them how to speak well. The same happened to the Veientes, when as they came
even to the very Ports, Ramparts, and Trenches of the Romans, they used many
injurious speeches: wherewith the Soldiers being moved and much offended,
prayed and enforced the Consults and Commanders, to give battle, and therein
overcame them, and by this overthrow they caused Valerius Coruinus, Laws
ordained by Valerius Coruinus, and Tiberius Gracchus.
and Tiberius Gracchus are greatly praised and esteemed, the one for having
imposed a grievous penalty upon whosoever should reproach certain seditious
Soldiers, with a mutiny happened at Padua: the other for having forbidden
upon pain of death, to reproach certain slaves with servitude Hannibal in
time of necessity, wherein they did very wisely: for there is nothing that
more grieueth and troubles a man's mind, than to be reproched with some
shameful matter and worthy of blame.



CHAP. 90. Princes ought to punish backbiters and slaunderers, and in no case
to endure them.
I Remember, that I have said elsewhere, that to Four things principally to be
held inuiotable.
but principally four, which repress evil speeches, to wit, the dignity of
degree, the reputation, the life and the friends. The Prince which does not
punish slaunderers and evil speakers, hazardeth his reputation: for so soon
as men hear the Prince ill spoken of, and see that he regards it not, they
believe that that which was written or spoken of A Prince ought to consider of
the quality of evil speeches.
and if they be light foreheaded and foolish, to use them like fools and
hayrebrained; but if they be malicious, to punish them publicly for example,
to teach others thereby, the better to rule their tongues. Dionysius of
Siracusa the elder, was advertised of two young men, which at a supper used
many injurious speeches of him, and spoke much evil of his government;
wherefore he invited them both one night to suppe with him, to see and know the
quality of those young men, and of what natural inclination they were, and
finding that the one was a bibber, and that the wine made him prate, and that
the other drank Pius the fourth, a man in our time whose good and virtuous
life was such, as the world knows, yet could he not avoid evil speeches and
blame; for at the beginning of his Papacy, there was a diffamatorie libell
against him, fastened and set upon Pasquin, as in that time the abuse at Rome
then was, to speak ill in this manner, and to rail against the lives of all
the Princes in Christendom. The Author of this libell was found out, and
known to be a Doctor of the Marks day, when early in the morning the
procession past before Pasquin, which is a statue of Marble without arms,
where before that day, a man should have seen nothing but rithmes and verses,
written to the slanders and reproach of Princes and Prelates, but then there
was an Arm made unto that statue, which held one finger upon Nicholas Franco
was (...) at (...) for ^ay^^^.
to rule their tongues. Afterward in the later years of the same Pope,
Nicholas Franco fell into his hands who in all his life, had professed nothing
else but dishonest, mali^^us and shameless railing; who after he had lien
certain moneth^^n prison, was hanged for his tongue and evil speaking,
signified by a writing which he ware about his neck, wherein were these words
which follow: A comparison.
so is it a kind of misery to a gentle and good wit, to be addicted to evil
speaking and railing at others, be they little or great.

CHAP. 91. An innocent man accused of some great crime, ought not to put his
innocence to be tried by uncertain proofs, for it may happen otherwise then
he expected.
I Said here before, that the innocence of a man accused, of some great crime,
is of great efficacy and worth, and makes a man bold to come into any place,
and to present himself, and of good conscience, let him freely enter into any
place to clear Ariosto (if it be lawful to mix grave matters with fables)
has very elegantly depainted this furious and rash judgment in the person of
Mandricard, when he unjustly accuses King Gradasse to have stolen Rolands
sword. Wherefore let every man be well advised, how he too rashly put himself
upon uncertain proofs, where he may as well receive dishonor, as discharge
of the crime imputed unto him. For although that in his own conscience he be
clear and innocent, yet with some men he cannot escape without a blot, who
may believe



CHAP. 92. Jn ward familiars, and Secretaries of Princes may commit many
errors, by means whereof they are in danger to lose their favor, or their
own lives.
THe great familiarity and favor of Princes, in appearance, is much esteemed
and desired: but whosoever shall ripely consider it, shall find that it is a
golden shackle, and a bitter sweet, for it is conjoined with so many
discommodities and dangers, that most commonly a simple seruitour and
ordinary Courtier has better days and greater liberty, then he which with
the Prince is most familiar. The discommodities which such men find are very
many: for those being insufficient, which the wearisome life and miserable
servitude of the Court bring with Philippides, The witty answer of the Poet
Philippides to king Lysimachus.
who being demanded by King Lysimachus what great favor he might do him to
let him know how much he loved him, who answered: That you never impart unto me
any of your secrets. But when that fortune has advanced them so far
forwards, that they have purchased their Lords favor, I say, that I find it
expedient that they conserve and keep it, and that they be most vigilant, and
take heed, that the over Garcia Nicosio, Secretary to Alaim Sicilian, Lord of
Ficaire, in the time of Peter of Arragon King of Sicilie: for King Peter being
called into Sicilie by the Sicilian Lords and Barons, and King Charles being
driven out, they repenting afterward to have called him, by reason of his
prosperity against King Charles, conspired against him; and amongst the rest
of the Lords was this Alaim, who made his Secretary to write certain letters
to K. Charles, promising to render Sicilia into his hands, if he would send
him twelve galleyes. These letters were intercepted and delivered unto King
Peter. Wherefore Alaim fearing that his Secretary would Garsia Nicosio, slain
by his Lord upon suspicion.
that such persons ought principally to be careful and advised, that the over
great familiarity and favor which they have with their Princes, breed not in
them a contempt of their Lord, so as they make no very great account to offend
him in these four things, whereof a Prince is commonly very jealous, which
are, his estate, his honor, his life, and his love, for this is a most notable
fault: into the which, in the year 1566. fell a gentleman of Perusa, (which I
name not) being one of the most private of the chamber of one of the most
gentleman was suspected to have grieuouslie offended the Prince

CHAP. 93. It is both honorable and profitable to a Captain, sometime to
yield to the desire of his Soldiers, thereby to hold and maintain himself
in their love and friendship.
THe chiefest care that a Captain ought to have concerning his Soldiers is,
to make himself beloved among them, and to keep and continue himself in
their love and friendship: and although that at sometime it be necessary to
use Iacques Caldor noted of inconstrncie.
Iacques Caldor in his time was a valiant Captain, as Bertelmew Fazio writes
in the acts and jests of Alfonso King of Naples, a man of spirit, learned, and
endowed with many good parts, fit to make him beloved of soldiers and men of
war: but by reason of his lightness and inconstancy, he was not so esteemed
as his other qualities were worthy of: which might in his time have made him
very honorable, if they had bin
Anthony Caldor his son, who after the death of his father, took upon him
the charge and leading of his fathers troops, was likewise stained with the
same spot, whereof being first suspected by Rene Duke of Aniou, he was cast in
prison, and afterward coming to the service of Alfonso of Arragon his enemy,
he was likewise held by him for inconstant and of small trust: wherefore this
poor Anthony, seeing himself in disgrace with both the one and other Prince,
was constrained to give his son unto Alfonso, in pawn of his faith. But some
space after, having Alfonso, and being again returned to follow Duke Rene,
provoked thereto by his own ficklenes and inconstancy of spirit, was overcome
in a battle, and taken prisoner by King Alfonso: which will ever happen unto
such Captains which serve Princes, and are so inconstant, that they know not
how to continue in the favor and good grace of one Master, but to their shame
and dishonor show themselves desirous of change and novelties. But this is not
to be understood of those, which in that they are free, having served one
Prince in the wars, and giving up their charge and commission, may serve any
other whom they list; neither of given them pay and maintenance, and reposing
much trust in them, Bartel. Fazio lib. 8.
Of such kind of men, many examples might be alleged, which for brevity I
will ouer-passe, Peter Brunor betrayed Francis Sforce.
only this of Peter Brunor shall suffice, according as Bartelmew Fazio in the
acts of Alfonso King of Naples writes: which Brunor having bin a great friend
to Francis Sforce, and much honored by him; enticed either by the fair
promises of King Alfonso, or induced through some displeasure, which could be
neither reasonable, nor very great, even in his greatest need he forsook him,
and went to serve the King with 800. horse: and this his departure put Francis
Sforce to such trouble and so out of order, that his affairs John Anthony
Orsin, Prince of Tarent, worthily deserved eternal praise, and to be esteemed
and reputed for a rare example of firm constancy of heart; who in the
beginning favored and took part with Alfonso King of Naples, The constancy of
John Anthony Orsin Prince of Otranto.
against Queen Joan, and against Rene of Aniou, and could never after, neither
for loss of battles, imprisonment of his own person, or for any other
strange accident that happened unto him whatsoever, be induced to forsake King
Alfonso so long as he lived, but continued firm and steadfast in his
friendship. And although that afterward (upon some occasion) he would not
follow the friendship of Ferdinand his son, he deserved not therefore to be
condemned of inconstancy, seeing that he was not bound to persist and continue
in the friendship of another man, notwithstanding that he were a dependant and
successor of his deceased friend.



CHAP. 95. A General or Commander in chief, ought not to be touched in his
honor and reputation by those which made choice of him, and principally during
the time that he is in Arms.
IT is a custom among all Princes, having occasion to choose a General, either
of their own subjects or some stranger, to make choice of some honorable
personage and of good renown. After that he is chosen and that he has the
government and charge of the Armies, it is neither secure nor convenient, to
touch him in honor, either in word or deed, as (with disgrace) to take his
charge from him, or by injurious speeches to withdraw him from his enterprises,
or to charge him to do Narses an eunuch (to confirm my saying with an ancient
example) was General of the Emperor Iustine his Army in Italy, and performed
for the Empire diverse and sundry worthy enterprises: and while as he was
armed, and even upon the point of his victories, Iustine deposed him from his
charge and government of the imperial Army; and the Empress added thereto
certain injurious speeches, Narses wroth with the Emperor of Constantinople.
and sent him word that Narses made answer, that he would spin her such a
thread, which after that it were twisted, she should in long time not unwind
it. And by his wit and valor, having called the Lombards into Italy, he was
the occasion why the Emperor of the East, lost all that which he possessed in
the West.

A man may also for example bring in the fault which the Florentines committed
in the time that Pope Clement the 7. made wars against them, which was this:
They chose Malatesta Baglioni for their General, Guicci. lib. 20.
and put themselves in arms for their defense against the Popes and the
Emperors Armies: and having sustained and Stephen Columna, advised them to see
if they could come to some agreement with the Emperor and the Pope, by some
good composition. But Raphael Girolami, which was Standerd-bearer, with many
other citizens of his faction, being moved against Malatesta, without
consideration of the danger wherein the city was, and that the General was
armed, and had a good corpse de guard of soldiers, Perusins, and other Nations
at his service and commandment; Andrew Nicolini, and Francis Zati as
Ambassadors to Malatesta, to discharge him, and to deprive him of his
authority and charge of General; which was concluded in their Common
council. Malatesta was very angry, and setting hand to his poyniard, fell
upon Nicolini, and once stabd him, and would have slain him, but for those
which stood by, who prayed him to hold his hands. Hereupon the City mutined,
and every man betook him to his weapons. Wherefore Malatesta fearing some
great hurly burly, presently sent the Captain Margute of Perusa, to seize on
the port of S. Peter Gatolini, which is the gate toward Rome, A dangerous
tumult happened in Florence.
and caused to come to him all the soldiers strangers which he had in
Florence. If the enemy at that time had given assault unto the City, being
then disunited from their General, it might easily have been taken and sacked,
as well by those which were within, as by those which were without, both which
at one instant would have been become enemies. And so through the little wit
and small discretion of the Magistrates, the safety of their City and
country was set (as a man might say) upon

(...)



CHAP. 97. He which goes into a foreign Country with charge of importance,
ought to frame himself according to the fashions of that Country wherein he
is, for to live after the manner of his own country, it is not every where
secure.
AMong all the fair conditions and qualities which ought to be in a
Gentleman, well borne, who is to be employed in public affairs, in my
opinion, the one of the most principal is, for a man to know how to
accommodate and frame himself according to the fashion of those Countries
whither he goes, whether it be upon his own pleasure, or some other bodies.
And this is it, why many as well Ambassadors where he is, as evil; or despise
them as vicious; but so observes Alcibiades the Athenian was highly praised,
Alcibiades an Athenian, beloved of strangers.
for in what place soever he came, either by his apparel, or his manner of
life and conversation, he accommodated and framed himself to the custom and
fashions of the Country where he was, whereby he wan the hearts as well of the
Princes, as of the common people, with whom he had to deal, and brought
whatsoever he undertook, to a good and happy success: for when he was at
Athens, he applied himself to pleasant and witty discourses, and often

When Hippolito de Medicis was sent by Pope Clement the seventh, Hippolito de
Medicis was much favored of the Hungars.
Ambassador for his Holiness into the wars of Hungary, against the Turks,
he was much beloved by those of the Country; because Agesilaus and
Epaminondas, in retaining their particular nourtur and behavior, although that
they frequented many nations of diverse manners and fashions, were nevertheless
beloved every where, showing themselves in their apparel, diet, speech, grace
and bringing up worthy themselves. And Plato was no other at Syracusa, then he
was wont to be at Athens, and with Dion and Dionysius he was the same. It
imports much to know the manners and fashions of
or such as are pleasing unto the^: for although that they be but worldly
vanities, yet a man must not deprive the^ of that, which they hold dear, and
have peradventure sometime bought for a great sum of gold, and are angry and
displeased when it is denied of an Interpreter by him, he shall have a better
grace in speaking Eugenius the fourth, the Cardinal of Aquileia had this
consideration, being sent by the Pope as Legate, to Alfonso K. of Arragon and
of Naples, to treat of peace between them: but because the Cardinal had not
the Spanish tongue, neither was well able to express his mind in the Italian,
in such sort as the King might well understand him, neither answered to the
Kings demands so well as to content him, he resolved to serve his turn, by
the means of a Prothonotarie, which he had with him, whose name also was
Alfonso, who speaking in Spanish Vnon King of the Parthians, which being
brought young to Vnon seeming unto them more womanish then manly,



CHAP. 98. It is a shameful and dishonest thing to wrong and do injury to
strangers.
difference between man and man, but used al alike. Hospitality is a Procust
and Sciron, slain by Theseus, but from the cruelty which they used toward
strangers, which fell into their hands? For as Plutarch says, the one had a
bed, where he lodged all the guests which he brought into his house; and if the
Dominus custodiet aduenas, pupillum and viduam suscipiet, and vias peccatorum
disperdet. As if he would say, there are three sorts of people in the world
preserved by the Lord, and are as in his safeguard: to wit, Strangers,
Orphans, and Widows. That Particular persons preserved of God.
for where man's wisdom could not defend them, the secret judgment of God
has supplied it. Abraham was a stranger in Egypt, and feared that the beauty
of his wife would be an occasion of dishonor unto her, and of hurt unto him;
and so, as a man, he sought humane means: and although that he would not tell
a lie, yet he sought nevertheless to conceal one truth in alleging another,
willing her to say that she was his sister, and conceal that she was his wife:
but in that that God takes care and charge of strangers, Abraham was
miraculously delivered, but not by his Joseph, being sold to the Ismaelites,
and made young Tobias to be accompanied by an Angel, being to go into a
strange country. Yea the same Prophet reciting the misdeedes and wickedness of
the unjust, and praying to God to behold them with the eye of his justice,
among other things says thus; Viduam and aduenam interfecerunt, and pupillos
occiderunt: They of Judges in the 19. chapter, that an old Gabaonite lodged a
young

In the time of Totila, Cerbon, a man of holy life, was Bishop of a City in
Tuscane, called Popolongna: this man loved better to endure death and to be
slain by Totila, then to discover certain strangers which he had lodged in his
house. He suffered himself to be thrown by this Tyrant and given to Bears,
to the end that they should have devoured him, rather then to suffer that those
which he had hidden should fall into the hands of him who was more enraged and
cruel then a Bear. But Totila seeing that those cruel beasts did not hurt
him, notwithstanding that he was in the midst among

After the battle of Cannas, wherein Hanniball defeated the Roman army with
two Consuls, Hanniball retired with victory to Capua, and was lodged by a
gentleman of Capua in his house. This gentleman's son named Perolla, much
affected to the Romans, had a desire to kill Hanniball: but his father would
not suffer him to do it, not permitting him to kill so great a Captain in his
own house. And among many reasons which Titus Liuius bringing in the father of
this young man, speaking to his son, dissuading Hanniball, he produces him,
among the most lively and effectual, saying: That he should not soil his
hands in the blood of a stranger, nor stain and defile his table of
hospitality, where Hanniball had in saftie drunk and eaten.

The Romans had wars against Phillip of Macedon, and desiring to draw the
Etolians unto their party, and to bring Phillip into disgrace with them; as
the Roman Orators spoke to the Senate of the Etolians, among other matters,
they alleged and reproched unto Phillip, the homicide and murder of a
stranger, whom Cornelius Tacitus in the fifteenth book of his histories says,
that at Rome was a conspiracy against Nero, wherein were many participants, to
wit, Senators, sundry of the Order of Knighthood, many soldiers, and some
women: all these conspired together to kill Nero, being unable to endure his so
great and many villainies and tyrannies: the conspiracy came to this point,
that there wanted nothing, but to find a place fit to put it in execution. The
conspiratours consulted together of the time and Caius Piso, who was one of the
conspiratours, a man who for his good qualities and virtues, was wished to have
been chosen to the imperial dignity. Piso had his house and farm at Baya,
whither Nero Piso would not consent thereto, saying, that he would not defile
his house with the blood of any Prince whatsoever he were, neither his table of
hospitality, and receiving of guests, whither the Emperor came with assurance
and trust; adding further, that as often as Nero came into his house, he
received him as a stranger, and not as a Prince. Lorenzin de Medicis had not
that consideration and respect, (notwithstanding his good affection to
Cornelius Tacitus) when he slew Alexander de Medicis Duke of Florence: for he
Alexander used to go, with great assurance: neither whether he were in his
house as a guest, or as a kinsman, or as a Duke: for he as a resolute
conspiratour had determined to kill him, where soever he might find
opportunity thereto: by reason whereof he peradventure deserved no less blame
for having quelled him in his house, where he held himself for very assured,
being lodged and asleep upon his bed, then to have slain a man after whose
death ensued not any thing of that which he had proiected. But Piso would have
hospitality and courtesy toward strangers held in such reverence, as in
ancient time was used, which was, holy, free, and venerable, even



CHAP. 99. How blame-worthie the vice of ingratitude is, in all manner of
persons.
IF I ever desired to be provided and furnished

There be three degrees of ingratitude, the first is, not to recompense and
requite a pleasure received: the second, to forget it only: the third to
render evil for good. The first is evil, the second is worse, and the third
is worst of all: the first may be sometimes attributed to the impossibility;
the other to negligence; but the third is ever attributed to malignitie. Not to
recompense in more afraid to show themselves to be ungrateful, and without
courtesy Zenophon in the life of Cyrus says, that among the Persians, no vice
was more blamed then ingratitude: and they severely punished him, that was able
to requite a pleasure, if he did not recompense it; for they judged an
ungrateful man, to be a contemner of the gods, to have no respect to his
Parents, love to his country, neither care of his friends. Ingratitude
ordinarily is a friend and companion to contempt and shamelesnes or impudency:
and Pythagoras showed well, that ungrateful men were to be banished from the
country, when he said that we should drive the swallows from the Bernard
means when he says, that ingratitude emptieth and dries up the fountain
of piety, that is to say, was the occasion why men drue back and withheld
from doing good to others, through the example of some ungrateful man. And for
this cause the Romans took liberty and freedom from ungrateful slaves,
being already made free, and made them return again into bondage and
servitude: and children being ungrateful to their Parents, were disinherited
of their patrimony, and so by this penalty, they held both their servants and
their children in Plato called Aristotle, who after that he had learned art
and knowledge of Plato, was so unthankful and ungrateful for the pleasure
received, in having learned knowledge and science of him, as to keep open
school in front, and as in despite of his Pontanus was reputed unthankful,
who being nourished and brought up by Ferdinand and Alfonso Kings of Naples,
and brought to that point to be so famous, and a great personage in learning
and knowledge as he was, and little acknowledging this good, and ungrateful to
his benefactors, made an oration in dispraise of the King of Arragon, to the
praise and commendation of Charles the eight, King of France, upon his
Coronation Pontanus repenting to have made this oration, buried it in
perpetual darkness, and would not that it should come to light with his other
works, as he which wisely judged it to be expedient to cut from the world, the
testimony of his ingratitude, although that in one part he did not ill, with
praise to extol the warlike King of France. Behold (gentle Reader) these
Considerations of the Lord Remy of Florence, who purposed to have proceeded if
death had not prevented

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
A
ABraham was miraculously delivered from danger. 244. h. Alcibiades an Athenian
beloved of strangers. 240. e. Agesilaus and Epamino^das were every where
beloved. 241. a Alexander Bon a gentleman of Venice punished for deceit. 65. d
Andronicus a Greek slain by the people. 171. b Alexander the great poisoned
by Thessalus his Physician. 58. g the subtle answer of the Duke of Florence to
Don Diego de Mendoza governor of Siena. 42. h Antonell and Bernardine
Sanseuerin again rebelled against king Ferdinand upon suspicion. 26. e Antony
Maria Earl of Gaiazza accompanied Jews More Duke of Milan to prison in France
with his troop of horse. 48. f Assurance and safeguard given to a man by a
Prince, when it is to be maintained, and when not. 80. h Alexander king of the
Epirots slain by the Lucains, being banished from their country, whom he
sought to restore. 85. c Alexander the great destroyed the City of Tire. 116.
f An Ambassador ought not to care for an ill word from the Prince with who^
he has to deal. 122. h A witty answer of a gentleman of Florence 126. f
Aprius King of Egypt caused the nose and ears of Papremitan to be cut off.
137. c Aprius King of Egypt strangled by his subjects. 137. d the answer of
Pope Clement the seventh to the Cardinal Pompey Columno. 176. h the avarice of
the servants and Captains of Jews the 12. King of France were the cause of
his ruin. 187. b Andrew Dorie forsook king Francis the first in his greatest
need. 195. c Affairs of importance are not to be treated of in jest. 199. d
the answer of Alexander to Proteus who required security. 202. e the answer
of the King of Ethiopia to the Ambassador of Cambyses. 213. a the foolish
answer of Sansedonio Ambassador of Siena. 200. f Astyages King of the Medes
commanded his nephew to be slain. 74. g
B
BEssus executed for murdering his father. 171. a Braccio da Montone defeated
and put to flight by Francis Sforce. 127. d Brutus and Cassius against Octauius
and Marcus Antonius. 157. c Babylon strictly besieged, and the siege thereof.
144. f Bernard Contarini purposed to have slain the Duke of Milan. 153. b the
Boulognois for doing outrage to the statue of Pope Julius the second, undid and
almost wholly ruinated their whole country. 113. d Bernardin Court ungrateful
to Jews Duke of Milan. 173. d the Bitter jest of Ferdinand with Alfonse his
father. 17. a
C
COmbat between Cechino of Padua and Bennet Liberal. 209. b the Cruelty of
John King of Spain. 211. a the Circumspection of Fuluius a Roman Captain.
104. e Comparison between the manner of proceeding of Peter de Medicis with
the King of France, and of Laurence de Medicis with Alfonso King of Naples. 5.
b Clearchus amiablie appeased the Greeks. 231. d Charges of importance are
most commonly given to unworthy persons, and such as have no experience. 48. g
Caius Caesar against King Iuba. 163. d Charges and governments of importance
are not to be given to men of the first impression. 53. d Conspirators and
suspected persons are not to be believed. 56. h the Constancy of John Anthony
Orsin Prince of Otranto. 234. g Caesar slain and massacred by Brutus and
Cassius. 59. a Cerbon a holy Bishop in the time of Totila. 246. f Comparison
between a lover and a Prince. 65. b a Conspiracy in Rome against Nero. 247. a
a Captain through boldness and diligence oftentimes obtains that which by
mildnes he should never attain unto. 68. e Crassus against Spartacus. 162. h a
Captain ought always to be in a readiness and well advised in his affairs
and all actions. 107. c Cruelty a great fault in a Prince. 137. c Charles Duke
of Burgundy severely punished the City of Nants. 114. f a Check given by the
Emperor Maximilian to the Spanish Ambassadors. 123. c a Combat between two
soldiers. 208. e the Cunning of Duke Valentine. 139. b the Isle of Cypres
taken by the Turks forces in anno 1570. 118. h the Cruelty of Duke Valentine.
139. c Cyrus was found by a shepherd. 74. c Crassus a General for the Romans
overthrown and slain being betrayed by a fugitive. 143. d Covetous servants
and officers are the cause of the ruin of their Prince and rebellion of
subjects. 186. h a Combat wherein the innocent was slain. 227. a
D
DOn Diego de Me^doza made no account of the Duke of Florence, when he gave
him to understand of the Rebellion and revolt of Siena. 2. f a Dangerous
tumult happened in Florence. 236. g the subtle Discourse of Demetrius
Phalerius to King Ptolomie. 210. f Dionysius the Tyrant made his Barber to be
slain. 166. g Donat Raffignin by treason yields the fortress of Valence to
the French. 18. e Demaratus lost the kingdom of the Lacedaemonians for speaking
one word unadvisedly. 166. h the Demands of Charles the eight King of France.
32. h Dionysius put a gentleman to death for speaking of a word. 166. g It is
dishonorable for a man to abandon his friend in time of need for any occasion
whatsoever. 79. c Duke Valentine caused Ranire de Orco a Spaniard his
Lieutenant to be slain in Romania for doing injustice. 135. b In choosing of
Generals for the wars the quality of the war and the worthiness of the
person which is to be chosen, is chiefly to be regarded. 50. f
E
ENterprises ought to be considered in cold blood, and executed in hot blood.
190. e the Emperor Maximilian distrusted the Swissers. 52. g the Emperor
Vitellius was overthrown by Vespasian the Emperor. 141. d the error of
Alberigue of Barbian. 194. f the error of Ferdinand King of Spain. 194. g the
error of Francis the first King of France. 194. h there is double error
committed in choosing of Captains. 46. g the Egyptians punished those children
which were ungrateful to their parents. 250. e Empoli taken by the Prince of
Orange. 206. g of an Enemy what account is to be made. 183. c. d
F
FInizan sacked by the French. 4. e Francis Sforce of his own authority
concluded a peace between the Venetians and Duke Phillip of Milan. 37. a
Francis Sforce makes war against Phillip his father in law. 39. e the Fault
of Jews Poggio in departing from Milan. 41. a Fabius Maximus opposed himself
against Titus Ottacilius who married his sisters daughter, and would have been
Consul. 49. c Fuluius a wise Captain of the Romans. 104. a the Florentines by
distrusting the King of France and the Lord Beaumont his General, lost a most
fit opportunity to recover the City of Pisa. 72. f Ferdinand and Don Julius
conspire against Alfonse Duke of Ferrara. 88. e Francis Guicciardin delivered
the City of Florence from great danger. 130. e the Florentines murmured
against Guicciardin. 130. g Federick of Sicilie caused Remond il Blanco to be
beheaded for treason. 171. d the Folly and obstinacy of Cambyses. 213. c the
French overthrown by the Swissers. 151. c wherefore Francis the first would
not perform the articles of agreement made between him and Charles the fifth.
181. b Francis Sforce Duke of Milan renounced the safeconduct of the Emperor
Charles the fifth. 218. f Four things principally to be held inviolable. 222.
g the Florentines were severely punished for breaking certain statues. 114. e
G
GArsia Nicosio slain by his Lord upon suspicion. 229. c God reuealeth sin
early or late, and the punishment follows. 170. e the Greedines of soldiers
and Captains has been the loss of many fair enterprises. 19. b Gabades a
Captain of the Persians sacked the City of Amide. 220. h the Greedines of
English soldiers. 19. d the Greedines of Italian soldiers. 21. c the
Greedines of the Stradiots. 21. d Galeas Sanseuerin fled from Alexandria, and
left it in pray to the enemy. 47. d the Greatness of courage of the Roman
Commonwealth. 93. b the Germans were defeated by the Guelphes before Siena.
121. d in choosing of Generals for the wars the quality of the war and the
worthiness of the person which is to be chosen, is chiefly to be regarded. 50. g
the Gabaonites punished for abusing a stranger. 246. e a Gentlewoman of Cesena
much praised. 102. g
H
HAnnibal preserved by a gentleman of Capua. 246. g Hanniball compelled the
Saguntines to depart their country with the clothes on their backs only.
182. e Harpagus took pity of Cyrus being an innocent infant. 74. c Harpagus
General for Astyages revolted from him, overcame and slew him. 75. a Henry the
5. Emperor made war in Sicilie against King Roger. 54. e He that is employed
ought to have an eye to his Princes qualities and conditions. 36. e the Hopes
of banished men are more measured with desire then with reason. 86. h Hippolito
de Medicis much favored of the Hungars. 240. g Herod made a promise to his
daughter in law, without any consideration. 179. d Hierom Sauonarola lost his
credit in Florence. 28. e Hippolita Cardinal of Ferrara, made the eyes of
Julius de Este to be plucked out and set in again. 87. d Hospitality is a
virtue worthy of a gentleman and a Christian. 244. e Hugo de Moncado slain in
a battle by Sea against Phillippin de Doria. 191. a
I
IT is notable folly to give much credit to judicial Astrology. 57. c It is
not possible to foresee or prevent all the mishaps and disgraces which may
happen to Princes, neither to resist or redress them when they happen. 51. f
It is folly to commit the state of an Empire to the will of a few. 154. e John
Bentiuogli and Hermes his son in one night murdered almost all those which
were of the house of Marescotti, or depending thereof, through suspicion. 64. g
Jacques Caldor noted of inconstancy. 233. a Imbault General of the French
army mocked the Florentines. 72. g John Rata Earl of Caserta put his Lord
Manfredi King of Sicilie in extreme danger. 78. e the Insolence of the Spanish
soldiers. 132. g the Imeresians seize upon Reggio. 141. c Joy cannot be
hidden. 99. c the Issue and end of an enterprise manifests the wisdom of the
counsel given. 178. e be which does an Injury does more shame and dishonor
to himself, then to him to whom the wrong is done. 73. c to deface an Image or
statue is a poor revenge. 113. a Inconstancy and lightness of wit is greatly
to be reproved, principally in a Captain. 233. b
L
Laws ordained by Valerius Coruinus, and Tiberius Gracchus. 221. b Laurence de
Medicis reconciled to Alfonse King of Naples. 6. h Let not him which is not of
power sufficient attempt enterprises which he cannot maintain. 11. b Jews
More out of countenance and mocked by the Florentine Ambassadors. 24. h the
Law of Appeal introduced by Sauonarola. 27. c the Lord of Tremouille with
absolute power concluded a peace with the Swissers, notwithstanding that it was
upon very unworthy conditions. 34. g Light belief in every thing shows a
light wit, and weak brains. 53. b it is Lost labor to go about to persuade
obstinate persons by reason: for the more they are counseled, the more stiffly
they persist in their opinion. 60. g Lautrech through his obstinacy was the
cause of the total ruin of the French Army before Naples, and was the
occasion of his own death. 61. a Liuius Salinator exposed the Roman Army to
manifest danger. 27. a the Laurentines in revenge of the injury done to their
Ambassadors slew Tatius king of the Romans. 89. b Jews More Governor of
Milan, caused himself to be called the son of Fortune. 99. d Jews Duke of
Milan betrayed by the Swissers. 52. e Lycurgus his law. 140. h the liberality
of Artaxerxes. 188. h the liberality of Cosmo de Medicis Duke of Florence.
203. a
M
MOre praise and commendation is purchased by pardoning, then by taking
revenge. 102. f a Man wrongeth himself in speaking ill of his superiors. 211.
b no Man would be too freely reprehended. 209. d a Man ought to be well
advised how he promise any thing. 179. b a Man may in two manners have
knowledge of his enemies purposes. 156. h a Man cannot retain that greatness in
adversity, which he showed in the beginning of his prosperity. 91. b no Man
is absolutely nor altogether wicked. 82. h Men happen oftentimes to have need
of those men, which in former time they despised. 69. d no Man can serve two
masters. 232. h a Man ought by his wisdom to eschew and overcome the evils
threatened against him by his constellation. 59. d Manfredi by a wile delivered
himself from the siege of Nocerra, and seized on the kingdom of Sicilie. 56.
f no Man's friendship is to be despised whatsoever when it is offered. 45. c one
Man's doings ought not to serve for a general rule for all me^. 42. g Manlius
Torquatus caused his own son to be slain. 63. e the Means of Duke Valentine
to make himself great. 29. d
N
NIcholas Campo Bachio an Italian Earl, to be revenged betrayed his Master
Charles Duke of Burgundy, and withdrew himself to Jews King of France. 78. h
a Notable overthrow of the English. 21. a the Noblenes of a man is to be
considered according to his valor and virtue, and not according to and after
his descent. 46. g a Notable revenge upon Panioni Sciotte by Hermotine of
Pedase. 76. f a Noble act of the Emperor Maximilian. 103. e Nicias a Captain
of the Athenians through his temeritie was overcome and slain by Gilippus. 127.
b the Noble mind of the Emperor Rodulph the first. 183. a Nicholas Franco was
hanged at Rome for railing. 224. g Narses wroth with the Emperor of
Constantinople. 235. d
O
ONe foolish act makes a man to be reputed a fool, and one act of
infidelity makes a man for ever to be held for disloyal. 196. g the Opinion
of the Marquess of Pescara. 161. a the Overthrow of the Florentines before
Pisa, through the policy of Mutolo a Pisan Captain. 105. b Obstinacy makes
men cruel both against themselves and others. 61. c an Obstinate man loves
rather to dye, then to show even the least sign of humility. 62. g the
Overthrow of the French at Guinguast in Picardie. 22. f the Oversight of Peter
de Medicis. 7. b
P
PEace between Charles the fifth and Francis the first King of France. 238. e
Peter de Medicis chased from his country. 4. h Penander the tyrant slain by
one of his household. 15. d the Pleasant dangerous jest of a soldier. 16. e
Peter de Medicis driven from Florence. 33. a Paulo Vitellio condemned to die by
the Florentines. 34. e the People of Milan rejected by Jews King of France.
45. b the Pisans loved better to subject themselves to the Genoays their
mortal enemies, than to the Florentines their Lords, neighbors, and friends.
63. b Peter Candian Prince of Venice, for his evil behavior was slain by the
common people. 77. d Princes have need of many things, and of the service of
many persons. 86. h Pausanias murdered Phillip king of Macedonia his
sovereign Lord 87. c more Praise is purchased by pardoning, than by taking
revenge. 102. f Petilius Coreal General for the Romans, through his
negligence was put to flight. 106. g Prospero Columna through his own fault
was taken prisoner by the Lord of Palisse, a Commander of the French. 108. e
Prato sacked by the Spaniards. 117. b Public persons having charge, incur many
errors if they be not endued with wisdom. 149. b Pope Leo the tenth his
discourse to a Groom of his Chamber. 189. a a Prince ought to consider what he
speaks in choler when he speaks any thing of any particular subject. 211. d
the Prudence of the Senate of Siracusa. 215. d Particular persons preserved by
God. 244. g Peace between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis the first,
king of France. 238. e Peter Brunor betrayed Francis Sforce. 234. e a Prince
ought to consider of the quality of evil speeches. 223. c Prospero and
Fabritio Columna, return to the service of Ferdinand king of Naples. 9. c the
common People is insatiable, ever coueteth new things, and is never content.
44. g a Prince ought to have many Spies, and one not to know the other. 160. f
the Prudence of king Francis the first, in the battle against the Swissers at
Marignan. 158. e Proud men are hardly appeased by humility. 98. e
R
ROger the second, king of Sicilie, taken prisoner by the Emperor, Henry the
fifth, at Palermo, with his three sisters, and had his eyes and stones plucked
out, and dyed in prison. 54. f more Reckoning is made of one pleasure to come,
than of a hundred already received. 29. d a public Rumor is not to be
contemned, because it seems, that what is in every man's mouth, is to be held
for a divine oracle. 58. f Rome abandoned by the Romans, for fear of the
Gauls. 104. h Robert K. of Sicilie taken prisoner, and afterward delivered by
his brother Roger. 180. f
S
SPies may do harm by their reports to Princes. 160. e a Scoff used by an
Agent, for Charles the fifth. 200. g certain Spanish Captains convict of
treason, and made to pass the Pikes. 168. f to Speak to no purpose is
hurtful. 165. d the Subtlety of Gonsaluo Fernandes, the great Captain. 161.
c Spies ought not by a Prince to be advanced to honors and public charges.
160. g the Swissers were deceived by the French, in passing the Alps. 155. c
Subjects ought not to be put in despair, by maintaining of Governors. 132. e
Silenonte was taken by the Carthagenians, for that it was not in time relieved
by the Siracusans. 119. c Sundry opinions whether a man ought to contain
himself within the bonds of his Commission. 35. c a Small matter breaks
friendship, but much is required to restore it. 25. d Scipio Nasica odious to
the Roman people. 15. d a Spirit appeared to Jacques a Surgeon, in the
likeness of Ferdinand king of Naples. 12. g Spirits are of two kinds. 12. h a
Spirit appeared to Saul in the likeness of Samuel. 13. a Spirits appear in
diverse forms. 13. b to what kind of men they appear. eadem. a Subject ought
to dissemble his coffeehouse, when he is rejected by his Prince. 203. e
T
TErentius Varro defeated by the Carthagenians. 151. c Things which may be or
not be, and depend on the will of Fortune, ought not constantly to be affirmed,
before they be performed. 149. d Tygranes king of Armenia, put to flight, by
Lucullus a Captain of the Romans. 122. g They which do wrong and show
cruelty to the dead, are worthy of eternal shame and dishonor. 113. b To
know what may breed fear in an enemy, is the beginning of good success.
111. c Themistocles poisoned himself. 85. d There are five things which induce
a man which has been disloyal to his first friend, to be faithful to the
second. 42. g
V
VIrginio Vrsin sent his son to serve the French. 8. h that Virtue is known
in time of trouble, which in peace is not esteemed. 49. a Vital Michael Prince
of Venice in disgrace with the people. 55. b Valentine cunningly entrapped by
Gonsaluo Fernandes sent into Spain prisoner, and there kept in the Castle at
Medina del Campo. 81. d that is a perfect Victory, which assures a man in his
estate, and delivers him from the fear of his enemies. 109. a an imperfect
Victory, is the seed, root, and original of another war. 109. c Victory
is oftentimes the cause of vices. 109. d the Venetians would not suffer Bernard
Contarini to kill the Duke of Milan. 133. c the Villainy of certain Spanish
Captains, who by treason would have caused the Aluain, a Captain of the
Venetians to have been slain. 154. h that Virtue is known in time of trouble,
which in peace is not esteemed. 149. a
W
WIlliam the first, king of Sicilie, would never believe, that Maion a favorite
of his, would have slain him. 59. b William king of Sicilie, caused a certain
Judge to be fleyed, because he did not execute Justice in his charge. 134. f
the Witty speech of Marius and Fabius Maximus. 219. b the Wise answer of the
Poet Philippides, to king Lysimachus. 228. h
X
XEnophon gives his Soldiers to understand that he had not robbed the^ of
their pay. 217. d
Z
ZOphir by fraud put the City of Babylon into the hands of king Darius. 144.
h
FINIS.

