OUR LADY HAS A NEW SON.

APOCALIP. 3. I will write my new name on him which shall overcome.

PRINTED AT DOWAIE. CVM PREVILEGIO. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT Virtuous as Honorable Lady, the Lady M. C. A. health and
increase of Honor.
RAchell, Genesis 30.35.
the wife of Israel, had two sons, Joseph, and Benjamin, John. 19.
Mary the spouse, not of Israel, that is of one which see God, but of God
himself had likewise two Sons, Jesus and John: the Mother of the first was a
figure of the last Mother, and their Children not unfitly to be compared
together.

Rachell signifies a sheep, and Marie John. 1.
brought a Lamb into the world, a Lamb which took away the sins of the world.

Joseph the first begotten of Rachell, because of his dreams, which signified
a superiority he should have over all his brethren, grew so odious unto them,
that they sought opportunity to kill him, and in the end was sold to the
Egiptians for thirty pence by Judas.

Jesus the first begotten of Mary, because the Jews feared he should be King
over them, being mighty not in dreams, Luke 24
but in work and word, became so much hated amongst them, although he were a
Jew borne, and one of their brethren, that they thought it long until they
crucified him: but he was first sold Mat. 26
by a Judas also for 30 pence, yet did they no more prevail in preue^ting what
they feared in him, the^ did Joseph his brethren, Genesis 44.
who afterward were forced to bow unto him, for he had as glorious a name, and
did more worthily deserve it, than did Joseph, Genesis 41
who was accounted and so called by the Egiptians:. The Savior of the world.
Genesis 35.
Benjamin the sccond son of Rachell, when his Mother was to be delivered of
him came with such defficulty into the world, that it was thought neither she
could have lived to have been disburdned, nor he likelier to be borne to
breath, than to be buried, in so much that being in the midst of her panges
of death, she called his name Benoin, which is as much to say, as the son of
my sorrow. But with what great sorrow our. Mark. 1.
bless. Lady travailed when she was to be delivered of Ioh. it shall appear in
the discourse following, where the danger was not only of the life of the
mother and a son, but of life it self, which living as graciously gave every
one their life, as dying redeemed gloriously each one from death, that had not
John been very filty named before his birth, his Mother might have rightly
called him Benoin, and upon greater cause then Rachell called hers.

His name was John, and so it remains still. John that is to say, to whom is
given, and nothing named what is given: we are to understand some excellent
gift, the like whereof was neither before nor since given to any man. John. 19.
God gave himself to our blessed Lady, and then gave her to John, and by this
gift of her to him, and him again to her by the son of God, is he borne a
new into this world, and made our Lady her son.

This birth of Saint John, together with his breeding I present unto you, and
rather this than any other thing of his life, because it seems a matter
touching most his honor, and a dignity much passing all his titles, to be
the son of her, who only was thought meet and was the Mother of God.

His conception I suppose was at his marriage in Cana of Galile, John. 2
and John. 19
his birth at Christ his Passion upon the mount Caluarie, the best of both
which places, were an homely presence for any Honorable personage, but since
that GOD himself made his choice of Luke 1.
a Carpenters spouse, to set up the frame of his own most blessed body, right
well may it beseem one of what dignity soever to be present at the labor of
a poor Carpenter.

Presuming therefore of your usual favoring good endeavors, whose outward
actions, as well as inward intentions never sauored any other. I will use no
further perswations to forward a gracious acceptance of a slender travail in
so worthy a labor, and forbear to hold you with any longer preface.

TO THE READER.
IF that may worthelie be judged true, which is not only discovered by common
practice; but also disfigured by holy Scripture, that where a man's treasure
does lie, Luke. 12.
there his heart does live: this treatise it self will dispose the virtuous to
a favorable censure, and a friendly construction of whatsoever shall either
sound harsh in the ear, or seem hard in the History: But because that some
tooched with a superfluous devotion do seem to doubt, and other troubled with
a spirit of contradiction do sloutlie denay that in the marriage mentioned in
the Gospel John. 2
the Evangelist himself was the bridegroom, I have made choice of a late
writer, but very learned, who is no less pregnant in giving antiquities, then
curious in recording them, one adversary so mighty, as he having the mate,
all the rest may rest mute.

Caesar Baronius the light of this, Lib. 1. page 121.
and life of former ages, in his Eeclesiasticall History is of opinion, that
in that famous marriage in Cana of Galile Saint John the Evangelist was not the
bridegroom: which first confirms with the authority of Epist. ad Philan.
S. Ignatius, lib. 1. aduer. Ioui.
S. Hierome, tract. vlt. in Ioa.
S. Augustine, in vita. 5 Ioa.
Abdias, and Here Is. 58
Epiphanius: Secondly with this reason, that doubtless neither Iouinian would
have forgotten that S. John was married, nor the Manichees conceal that Christ
called him from marriage, who urged the example of S. Paul and Tecla: either of
them having by this somewhat to say for themselves, the one against Virginity,
the other against the Sacrament of marriage.

But under correction of so worthy an Antiquarie, neither does S. Ignatius say
otherwise, then that S. John Non de. dit operam nuptiis.
did not give himself to marriage as S. Peter did, (which no man affirms) nor
S. Hierome, then that it cannot be proved out of the Scriptures, that any of
the Apostles were married but Peter, (which no man denies) nor saint August.
then that others thought that saint John was never married, which he says
cannot be proved out of the Scripture, although it may be somewhat confirmed by
this congruence, that by him that life is signified, where shall be no marriage;
but if we shall say, Apocalip. 19.21.
that the Scriptures do mention a marriage of the Lamb, and how that every
blessed soul shall be espoused unto Christ, that life may much better be
perfigured in John being married, and remaining chaste, then if he were not
married. As for Abdias, if his authority be to be reckoned of, he says only
that Saint John would have married, and Saint Epiphanius that he did not
marry, for the better understanding of whom, we are to consider a custom
which was among the Jews for their marriages.

When a couple were to be married, a solemn meeting was made of their
friends, before whom the names of the couple were taken, and the maiden
afterward carried back to her Parents house, where she remained until the
marriage should be perfected: During which time they were accounted as man and
wife, in so much as if the woman did offend with any man, she was punished not
as a fornicatrix, but as an adultres. Thus writes Lib. de special. legis.
Philo the Jew upon his commandment: Thou shall not commit Adultrie. In this
sort was our B. Lady married, who is said to have an husband at the
Incarnation of our Savior, and as yet was in her Parents house, from Joseph as
may appear in the text of the Mat. 1.
Gospel, upon which place Origin in an Homily, and S. Hierome in his
Commentary call her Joseph's wife which shall be. Vxoris futurae.
By this custom, and example we see that diverse men may speak diversely of the
same matter, and no contradiction between the^, but in words only, for so does
S. Epiphanius, say that S. John did not marry in respect that Christ altered
his mind from that course of life, before that he and his spouse were each in
others possession.

So does Abdias say only that S. John would have married, had not Christ called
him from that kind of life. So does saint Hierome say both Prolog. in Apoca.
that he would have married, and ^^^th. 1. adued. Ioui.
that he was an husband.

As for Iouinian, and the Maniches, they could not but see that this example
did rather confute, than confirm their opinions, and therefore they had little
cause to remember it, for here both virginity was preferred before marriage,
and marriage notwithstanding allowed to be good, both by our Savior his
presence, and by that which he did at the marriage, howsoever the Maniches
cauiled at that fact of saint Paul with Thecla.

Lib. 8. hist. eccle. cap. 30
Nicephorus might breed a scrouple, when describing Queen Helens visitation
of the holy land, he says, that in this marriage S. Simon the Apostle was the
bridegroom, but that undertaking to certify us in Lib. 2. cap. 44.
an other place, who of the Apostles were married, he never names saint Simon,
but rather leaves some cause to think that S. John was married: yet does page
121
Caesar Baronius incline unto him, against whom (to omit what he alleged
against us) is his own opinion, that very probably in this marriage some
kinsman of Christ was the bridegroom, and no man ever said that S. Simon was
our Lords kinsman, but such as upon error took saint Simon the Apostle to be
saint Simon, who succeeded saint James at Jerusalem.

How much more plainly and constantly do they write, who say that saint John
was married, or would have married? both which phrases may be used indifferently
of those, whose names were taken at the solemn meeting of their friends, as
is showed before by Phylo the Jew, and the example of our blessed Lady.

Abdias and Saint Hierome are before cyted Prolog^^ in Joan.
Saint Augustine says, that Christ called him from the troublesome state of
marriage, Saint Bede upon those words follow thou me, Joan. 21.
says that Histories do mention that Saint John would have married, and
thereupon concludes, that because Christ withdrewe him from a Carnal delight,
he recompeased him with the greater sweetness of his love. Lib. 3. lit. cap. 25.
lib 4. lit. 15 cap. 38.
Saint Anthony is of opinion that this was his marriage. duica. 2. post Epi.
Roiard also and Ierus upon those words John. 19
Behold thy Mother, among the things which Saint John forsook to follow
Christ reckons his wife Ludolphus and S. Bonauenture upon the life of
Christ. Lib. 2. diol, cap. 12.
Alane Cope cyteth Metaphrastes and S. Bid, and Lyra upon the second Chap of
Saint John says, it was the common opinion of all men, and that herevppon it
was practiced throughout all the world; that any (although married) might leave
their spouse, before their marriage were consummated, without farther leave, to
betake themselves to a chaste life.

Many conjectures might also be made, why this should be thought Saint John's
marriage as first because our blessed Lady was present, and as a coadiutrix:
Secondly because Christ manifesting himself here first to the world by
miracle, and making his Disciples thereby believe in him, no other Evangelist
would mention a thing so worthy to be recorded: Thirdly because it was most
meet that a virgin a wife should be committed to a virgin a husband in keeping:
John. 2.19
Fourthly, S. John only making mention as well of this marriage, as also of his
committing to our Lady and hers to him, we are to think that he would give us
to understand, that some great mystery was begun at the one and finished at
the other, as both Prolog. in Ioa.
S, Augustine and Prolog in Apocal.
Sa. Hierome compare them together: but for breuities sake these, and other are
omitted, and the discourse committed to the judgment of the indifferent.

C. N.

Faults escaped in the Authors absence, by reason they were not perfect in the
English tongue.
In the Epistle Dedicatorie.
For Benoin read Benoni.

In the Epistle to the Reader.
Page 1. and line 4. for disfigured, read adisciphered, and in the 21 line,
for giving 2. ntiquities, read proving antiquities.

P. and 11. line, first confirms, read first he confirms.

in the note for ad Philan, read ad Philad,

5. p. and third line, upon his commandment, read upon this commandment.

7. p. and is line, for Simion read Simeon.

8. p. and 19 line, for Antonie read Antonine.

Lib. 3. lit. cap. 25. read Lib. 3. Tit. 1. cap. 15. in the 11. line for Ierus
read Ferus.

In the discourse.
5. p. for were bidden, read art bidden.

7. p. and 13. line for express them, read, oppress thee.

10. p. and 14. line, for no men but, read, no men, what then but,

15. p. and 18. line, for nursed thee with read nursed thee, with.

heaviness, she fled read beauines she fled.

18. p. and 23. his flight, read his slight?

e 19. p. and 14 line for whether shall I end ad where shall I end.

b 23. p. and the leaves line, for wicked argaine, read wicked bargain?

26 p, and 7, line for that thereby they, read that they.

27. p. and 17 line for die ye shall, read die he shall

28 and 9. line gave him read give him.

29 22 for lightning read lighting,

31. p: and 5 line for yields he read yet yeldeth he, forced and
constrained, read constrained.

33 p. and the 13 line for profits read profits.

34 p, and 6, line for if one offense, read is one offense,

36 p. and 2. line no other death, read no death,

38 and the 2, line for game read gain,

49 p, and 1 line for great shame, read with so great shame,

52, p and 2, line for acquit he, read acquit him, he for although the read
as though the, for of them as read of, then as for called from the earth, read
exalten from the earth,

61 p, and 4 line for mean ey the, read mean by the, for durest not, read
dooest not, for or other wise she, read as otherwise she.

69 pa, and ^, line for all God, read all good,

72 p, and 12 line, for my walks, read my walls.

73 p, and 23 line, for a eteranall read an eternal,

78 p. and 20 line for that he had, read that she had.

OUR LADY HAS A NEW SON.
THere was a marriage made in Cana of Galile, John. 2.
and the Mother of Jesus was there, and Jesus also was called and his Disciples
to the marriage, where either in respect of the miracle wrought in turning water
into wine, or by especial inspiration, an invisible conversion of a married
man into a vowed Maiden, Saint John began to follow Christ, forsaking his
Spouse, and deuote himself wholly to his love and service.

He was then privately taught by the Holy Ghost, that which was afterward
publicly preached by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7.
he that is without a wife is careful for the things which pertain to our
Lord: but he which is with a wife is careful for the things which pertain to
the world, how he may please his wife, and he is divided.

Yet that we should understand how lawful and Honorable a state marriage is,
not only Christ, but his Mother also, and his Disciples were present, that
such as coming after condemned it as a thing devised by the devil, should by
this act of his be more easily suppressed.

They eat, they drink, they are merry and spend their time pleasantly and no
man wondereth: Math. 9.
for neither can the Children of the Spouse, so long as he is with the^
mourn, nor as yet the day is come wherein his absence shall cause them to
fast, nevertheless they have some want of wine.

But how happens it sweet Lord that where thou were, there was want? Can he
which Prou. 8.
finds thee, finds life, and yet want such things as are necessary for
the maintenance of his life? or can thou be present and suffer that there
should he want? In Math. 15.
desartes thou can find enough to satisfy thousands, here are but few at
this marriage, and yet there is great want.

True it is that the wine failed, but the guests fainted not: there was want
but they felt it not: because that Christ was present to supply their want. If
they would have drunk water, there could not have bin any want, for there was
Cantic. 4
a Well standing by them full of waters of life: but they desired wine Ephe. 5
in which is lust, and therefore although that Christ were present they had
what to want: yea therefore they wanted wine, because that he was present.

But since that at the solemnizing of marriages, nothing is more intended than
mirth, Psa. 103.
and mirth is most procured by wine, no wonder if here be complaint of want,
since that they have no wine.

O John! what did you when you invited Christ unto your marriage and his mother?
you promised them a feast, and were not able to give them to drink. Thirst
afflicts him more than hunger, and his Mother tells him there is no wine.
John. 4.
So he sat panting on the side of the Well, saying: Woman give me to drink.
John. 19.
So he hung fainting on the wood of the Cross crying out I thirst, and what
need soever now he should have had there is no wine.

But (O most loving LORD) who is able to feast thee without thee? If thou make
not the Feast thy self to which thou were bidden, thou shall have but simple
entertainment: But pardon this boldness of thy Disciple, whose heart his love
to thee and to thy Mother did so occupy that he minded not his marriage, and
having himself whereon to feed and quench his thirst, he attended not to
satisfy others appetites. He had drunk wine with milk, for he was as yet a
little one: he had harkned unto thy voice, and followed thine advice. Cantic. 5
Eat my friends and drink and be overcome my dearest beloved: Yet did he
so follow thy counsel in this, that he forgot not thine admonition given at
an other time, Isai. 29.
be drunk but not with wine, be moooued and not with drunkenness, for behold thy
Mother says, they have no wine. John. 2.


O Mary! what need is there of any wine? are not thy breasts better than
wine? If wine be desired for the excellency of the color, and beauty
thereof, Canti. 4.
thy breasts are fayrer than any wine. If wine be wished for the pleasant
odor it has Cant. 1.
the sent of thy breasts is more fragrant than the most precious and costly
Ointments. If wine be thirsted after for any strength it gives to them which
drink it, Cant. 1.
thy breasts are better tha^ any wine: which gave strength not to man only,
but unto God himself, and who so knowing whom thy breasts have nourished,
should seek to fill themselves with wine, they are unworthy to be beholding
unto him, which longed so much to enjoy the pleasure of them, that being a most
mighty King, he became in manner a beggar, and having given to every thing
their being, Phil. 2.
made himself almost nothing, feeling neither want of wine, nor of any thing
else, when he found himself sucking at them, yet find thou a want because
there is no wine.

O Mary! why do thou desire that there should be more wine? Know thou
not that when that vine is ripe and ready to be gathered, which said of it
self. Joan. 15.
I am the true vine, thy sorrows will expres them, of which also thine
exceeding great woe will threaten an end, Luke, 2.
and a sword of grief shall pierce thy soul, and come thou to thy son to
complain that there is want of wine? What have (Mother of pity) what have of
thy son his death? he is only the vine of which we must hope for wine, after
which we shall never thirst again: wherefore in demanding a full supply of
wine, what ask thou else but thy son his death?

Was it agreed upon betwixt thee and John, that if thy Son would die thou
should adopt John to thy son, and therefore come in such haste to thine
own son, saying, they have no wine?

Surely thou gave here a pledge of more Motherlie love to John than to
thine own son, and John. 19.
at thy son his death we see that John became thy Son, what reason else had
thy son to give thee so short an answer, as to say: John. 2.
Woman what have I to do with thee? Why did he not call thee Mother, but
that thy speech did bewray thy desire to change thy son?

If thy Mother (most sweet Lord) had any such unnatural meaning toward thee,
that love above nature which made thee intend an act so much unworthy thy
person, made her also forget her self: Loath I dare boldly say she was to part
with thee, but her excessive charity preferred a common profit, before her
private comfort, and Luke 2.
she remembered when she lost the last, in three days she found thee again,
and in hope of like good hap she is the more willing to part with thee, and
because thy self have so appointed it.

If none had loved John but Mary, some cause might have bin demanded of that
love, but since that he was the Disciple whose name was to be John. 21.
whom Jesus loved, what wonder sweet Lord if thy Mother loved him? it is a
motive good and sufficient, able to abide any trial.

Again if likeness causes love, great reason had she to make account of John:
She loved thee who were John. 1.
a God, a Man, Math. 1.
her Son. What shall we say of John? If we say he was a man, we say that which
we say of many: If we say he was a God, we shall say that which we say of few
but upon thine own warrant: who after thou had asked of thine Apostles
what me^ did say of thee, did dest then demand of them Mat. 16.
but what say ye of me? as who would say they were no men but Gods? but if we
say of John that he is Mary's son, we shall say that of him, which we cannot
say of any else but thee, and in this respect thy Mother thought she might
justly love him above all creatures next unto thee: wherefore seeing him
abashed for the want of wine at his marriage, and knowing thee to be as willing
to do what she would have thee do, being her son, as able to perform what
she could wish, because thou were also God, she said unto thee, they have no
wine.

O Mary! where did thou first become so cunning a beggar? thou did
earnestly desire that there should be more wine, and why did thou not
demand it? If thy love were such unto thy Cosen as he did deserve, or thy
compassion for the want so great as it seemed, why did thou not demand some
wine? If thy confidence in thy son were such as it might have been, or if thy
son his obedience to thee were such as Luke 2.
it is said to have bin, why did thou not command some wine?

O pattern of humility! O example of rare virtue! thou were contented rather
to expect somewhat what that thy son would, then to give the adventure to be
denayed, what he should not think meet at that time to be granted, and
therefore would go no farther than to show their want, and said: They
have no wine.

John. 2.
And Jesus says unto her, woman what have I to do with thee?

O most sweet Lord what answer is this? she is thy Mother, and say thou
unto her, what have I to do with thee? Was it thy custom Mark. 10.
by whom we are commanded to honor our Parents, to give thy Mother such
sharp answers? we have not heard of much communication betwixt thee and her,
and yet that little which has bin, has bin very bitter.

When thou were lost in the Temple, she asked thee after that she found thee:
Luke. 2.
Son why have thou so done unto us, thy father and I sorrowing did seek
thee, and thou gave her this anuswere: why sought ye me?

Math. 12.
Again being told that thy mother and brethren were without seeking thee,
thou did ask, who was thy Mother and thy brethren, adding moreover, that who
so should do the will of thy Father which is in Heaven, he was thy brother,
thy sister, and thy mother.

But what encouragement was this to those which heard thee, to do the will of
thy Father, when they see the little reckoning thou made of her which was thy
mother, and of thy brethren that they were unworthy either to come into thee,
or that thou should go forth to them?

At thy death also did thou not after a sort denay thy Mother when thou
said unto her and her company, Luke. 23.
Weep not on me, but weep on your selves, and on your Children: If thou
did take her to be thy Mother, how could she weep on her Children, and not
weep on thee?

Surely O Lord these speeches were very strange, considering what a dutiful
son thou were said to be, but above all, this answer. Woman what have I to
do with thee? seems intolerable. Heaven and earth do witness that she is thy
mother, and ask thou of her, Woman what have I to do with thee? wherefore
should the Holy Ghost come down upon her, and the power of the most high
ouershadow her, if that holy one which should be borne of her, should not be
called the Son of God, and do thou ask of her, what have I to do with
thee? Math. 13
All the earth does witness thou were the Carpenters son, and ask thou of
her, what have I to do with thee?

Did thou not thy self solicit her Luke. 1.
by thine Angel Gabriell to be her son, and she humbly entertained thy
messenger, granting thee thy suit, whereupon thou had all that thy heart
could desire, and ask thou now of her, what have I to do with thee?

She bare thee nine months in her womb, she brought thee into this world,
she carefully nursed thee with great sorrow and heaviness, Math. 2.
she fled into Egypt to save thy life, and now for a requital do thou ask
her, Woman what have I to do with thee?

What business had thou most loving Lord, that thou could find nothing
to do with thy Mother? were thou belike so earnest in thy Fathers affairs,
that thou forgattest thy Mother? surely thy mind was very much occupied, or
else thou would at the least have remembered that she was thy mother, and not
have spoken unto her as to a stranger, Woman what have I to do with thee?

O Marie! thou know not now, what thy son means, but thou shall know
afterward, mark well that word woman, and when thou hear it next attend
what follows.

He has now partly resigned thee up to John in saying woman. but not wholy,
for he has not as yet added, Behold thy son: He foresaw what sorrow thou
would suffer at his Passion, and therefore reserved this comfort until
then, as a fresh reviving of thy dying spirits, Behold thy son. The time was
not yet to commit thee to his custody, because himself was yet with thee, and
therefore as yet he said not hehold thy son: but the time will come, when he
shall be taken away from thee, and then at this watch word, woman, behold thy
son.

When therefore our Savior his hour was come, and that he was to return
unto his Father, our blessed Lady her time was also come that she should be
delivered of her second son, where neither she was privileged, above any
other to be delivered without pain, nor Saint John exempted from the
ordinary custom of Children, which no sooner begin to look into the
world, then they bewail their own misery, both of them being in those
exceeding great panges, that no man could iustlye judge, whether the mother was
more likely to die in her travail, before her son was perfectly brought into
the world, or the son yield up his Ghost in his Mothers womb before he
should be borne.

The beginning of this grievous travail was our Saviors apprehension, when
praying in the garden Math. 26
Judas betrayed him with a kiss, at what time Saint John astonished (being
newly awaked) fled with the other Disciples, Mark. 14
leaving behind him his sindon in the hands of the soldiers. But returning
unto himself, with what pitiful sighs and doleful groans, bewailed he his
flight.

Thieves, thieves, he cried out amain, and the farther he went the more he
found, he eschewed the Soldiers and fell into the hands of their capitaines,
he shunned Charibdis, and became in danger of Silla, whilst seeking to faue his
body harmeles by flying from Judas, he put his Soul in hazard by forsaking
his Master.

Ah ungrateful wretch that I am (says he) with what face or countenance
shall I behold my sweet Lord again? which way shall I go? whether shall I
run? whether shall I end my shameful flight? more torment could I not have
suffered, if I had been taken with my Master, and a great deal less shame I
had sustained.

I remember my vocation Mat. 4.
from the business of the world, to be a diligent follower of my Lord I call
to mind Mat. 17.26.
those privileges, which above the rest with Peter and James I did enjoy,
and also how above these, he loved me so dearly that no longer since then this
night at supper John. 13.
I rested in his bosom, and was bold to ask that which no other dared, and
he vouchsafed me an answer.

Had my sindon bin taken from me by the Soldiers of Judas for such like cause
Genesis 39.
as Joseph his garment was by the Egiptian harlot, mine action had bin
Honorable: or if I had left it mounting aloft, as 4. Reg. 2.
Elias left his cloak, my flight had bin glorious: but I left it to run from
the fountain of purity, and to forsake my Lord the King of heaven: for which
being now attainted of sin, for mine expected endless joys, I am in perrill
of unexpected endless grief, and in place of a reward for fidelity, I am
become subject to perpetual infamy.

Now the happiness I had inioyed in loosing myself to find my Lord, is too
too well declared by the heaviness I sustain in loosing him to save my self.

O Judas! had thou delivered him to me, much more had I given thee for him
than any man else whosoever, and although none were so sacrilegious as the Jews
to buy that holy thing, which thou did set to sale, yet had I redeemed it,
had thou brought it unto me, and thou a greater gainer by the bargain,
rather would I have satisfied thy covetous desire, and concealed thy malicious
endeavor, then thou should have attempted this treacherous mischief, or
entered into so bloody an action.

But thou fearedst to have been stayed for a thief, if to any of understanding
thou had offered that Jewel to be sold, and therefore thoughtest them
meetest to possess the Gemme, which having as corrupt minds as thy self, were
as ready to be thy receivers as thou to be their thief, which thou did
manifestly declare, as well in the price, as in the place, in the time, as in
the manner of betraing: In Mat. 26.
the price because thou soldest a Jewel not to be valued for a trifle: Mar. 14
In the place, because thou tookest him abroad, out of City or town: John.
18.
In the time because thon did betray him by night in the dark: Mar. 14
In the manner, because thou badst thy merchants lead him away warily.

Did thy conscience give thee, that thou could not take too little for that,
in which thou know thou had no part? Did thou fear that in the open
City thy villainy should have been descried? Did thou so euilly in thine
own conceit, that thou wroughtest in darkness? and was thy crafty malice so
great, that warye leading away was judged necessary for the conclusion of thy
wicked bargain.

But now alas my Master appears not. I whether shall I go? vvandring alone
Mark. 14
attired only with tears, I shall be as sorrowful, as certain a sign unto
his Mother, that the high Priests have seized on him, for she knows as well,
that he would be no where of his own appointment without me, as also that
my sweetest being is in his bosom.

Some comfort may she take to save her life, whilst missing me she may think
her son is not clean abandoned, and I cannot but be accessory to her death,
if I should deprive her of it: return therefore to her I will not, because I
may not hurt her, to go back to him it booteth not, because I cannot help
him, to live without them it is impossible: If die then I must, the clubs of
the soldiers will make a speedier dispatch than can the swords of sorrow: and
although I should be slain by pressing into his presence, yet with his look
will he reuine me again, and because living he loved me so dearly, too too
ungrateful I were to forsake him now dying.

Thus resolving rather to dye than to live, whose life ever after was likely to
prove a death, he followed his Master to Annas his house, from thence to
Caiphas, and so from place to place, where when he beheld with what cruelty
his Lord was entertained, his sorrows grew so great that they cannot be
expressed, seeing a Lamb amongst Wolves ready to be devoured, an innocent
among murderers, threatened to be killed, the Son of God among the devils impes,
adjudged to a shameful death, having now an opportunity as well to destroy
the heir, although they had no hope the inheritance should be theirs, Math.
21.
as also to revenge themselves upon God who was clothed with man's nature, and
as it were, John. 1.
yielded up unto their wills: for although they staggered, doubting whether he
should die or no, as appeared by the message Mat. 27
done to Pilate from his wife, because they knew thereby the salvation of the
world should be wrought, yet was their malice so extreme great against God,
that they cared not what loss they should sustain afterward of men, so that
thereby they might put GOD to a most cruel, and a painful death.

He John. 19.
see him come in attired like a King, but used like a vassal; he see him
wear a crown upon his head, but to his pain; he see him have a purple
garment on his back, but wherein to be laughed at; Mat. 27.
he see him have a Scepter in his hand, but for his head to bear a stroke
therewith; he see him honored with bowing of their knees, but all in scoffing
wise, for by and by they use him as before, and that which most afflicted John
John. 19.
no satisfaction would be taken, where no offense was given, but a most
shameful death.

O cruel minded men! (says he) is it so little ye have done, that ye will
never cease? and whereas now ye seem by death to give an end to all his pain,
it is too much against your wills, your intention was murder, and ye think it
no murder, unless ye do some act, which of it self is murder. He lives
yet, but as one dying, and because he could sustain no more and live,
unmerciful pity moved you to end his torments by a more cruel torture: Die
ye saw he would, and die ye shall, ye all conclude, but with more pain, if
too much pain before did not prevent all future pain.

Ye scorn that, which all the Court of heaven does reverence ye take disdalne
where Angels take delight, Mark. 14.
ye hide that face, which all the heavenly spirits desire to see: Mat. 27.
ye strike that head, where is the Fountain of all wisdom: John. 19.
ye bruise those cheeks, which never any worthily did kiss: Math. 27
ye defile that savor, which is the beauty both of heaven and earth: ye gave
him a reed in his hand, whom all your stormy blastes could never move: ye
crown him with thorns who crowns all with glory: ye cloth him in
mockery, and strippe your selves of all humanity: ye bind him straight with
cords, who gives to all their liberty, not discerning a king from a vassal;
a son from a servant; a freeman from a slave; God himself from a pure and
impure creature, and (which I tremble to think on) ye call for his blood upon
you and on your Children. Math. 27.


Ye have had already more than ye can well avouch the shedding thereof, and yet
ye are not satisfied: Could ever any Tiger be more fierce, or Lion greedier of
his pray? O men! no men, but far exceeding what evil could ever be devised.

But bear with them a little, (O John) they understand perchance with what
cruelty they have erred, they weigh the debt into which they have wilfully
run by their wickedness, they fear the slauerye to which by their folly they
have made themselves subject, and knowing that their error cannot otherwise be
discerned, their debt no way else discharged, their liberty and their
Childrens by no other means procured, but by the lightning of his most
precious blood upon them and theirs, they call and cry out: Math. 27.
His blood be on us and on our children.

Expect a while, if peradventure upon the taking of so precious a receipt, they
will all cry out; In very deed this man was just, and return knocking their
breasts sorrowing for their offense committed against him, and make him some
satisfaction for what they have done before unto him.

Heard they not the high Priest say: John. 11.
It is expedient that one should die, that all the people perish not, and now
they perceive there is no other way but death, they wish they may be washed
with his blood, and thereby reconciled again unto him and be saved, and for
this cause they all cry out His blood be on us and on our children.

A grievous leprosy has ouergrowne their souls, that they can no longer be
accepted for Citizens of Heaven. The water of Jordan cannot purge it, and
although they have often stricken the Rock yields he no water to cleanse it,
until his side be pierced, and therefore are they forced and constrained to
use a bath of Innocents blood, which forces them to cry out: His blood be on
us and on our children. John. 6.


They have heard him also say himself, that there is no way but death for such
as eat not of his flesh, and drink not of his blood, and although at that
time having a most carnal and brutish conceit, they abhorred so unusual a
feeding, yet being now brought to this exigent, that they know in cruelty
they have exceeded the nature of men, and think the sore cannot be salued but
by his precious blood, albeit such potions seem unto them contrary to the same
nature, they will apply their senses unto them, and master their former
conceits, and therefore all cry out, His blood be on us, and on our Children.

Remembrest thou not Mat. 11
how that many blind received their sight, by his laying his hands upon them?
Luke. 7.
call to mind how for a most great debt Mary Magdalen, her bond was
cancelled, when she only touched his holy feet.

Forgettest thou how many by his word only he set at liberty, Math. 8.
which were possessed by devils? and blamest thou them whose blindness is so
grievous, that it can not otherwise be cured; whose debt is so great, that it
cannot otherwise be discharged; whose thraldom is so villainous, that they
cannot otherwise be freed, if with vehemence they call and cry out, His blood
be upon us, and on our Children.

But alas, these surmises do rather increase grief, then ease it, what is it
to me (says John) if they remain still blind? What concerns it me if
their debts be not paid? What touches it me if they still continue in
bondage? What profits it me that all the world do the better if I fare the
worse?

Cannot their eyes be opened, unless mine be put out? Cannot their debts be
paid, unless I be impouerished? Cannot they be at liberty, unless I live in
misery? Cannot the sun shine clearelie to them, unless it be eclipsed to me?
Cannot they be enriched, unless I be robbed? Cannot they joy in freedom, unless
I grieve in thraldom? or is there no other way to work this their weal, my
woe, but by procuring his blood upon the^ and on their Children? If one offense
pardoned by the committing of an other? is an evil enterprise remitted by a
cruel prosecuting of the same? is it a satisfaction for the shedding of blood
to cry for more? No, no: murder it is which they intend, and for naught else
then to glut themselves therewith, they all cry out, Mat. 27.
His blood be on us and on our Children.

The Jews sometime the glory of the world, are now become opprobrious to all
people, that whereas heretofore all such as used cruelty, were rightly likened
unto beasts, no tyrranie hereafter shall be adjudged comparable to this of the
Jews a measure to serve for all tyrants because it was without measure, that
so much the greater the tyrranie should be thought, by how much it has
proportion to the cruelty of the Jews.

But thou (O most loving Lord) where or when could thou deserve so sharp a
torture: I know right well Psa. 68.
thou payest that which thou did never owe. One drop of blood had bin
enough for to have saved a thousand worlds, and thou have made no spare
thereof: Why should thou then die, since naught thereby is done, but what
already is done? The price is given, the uttermost farthing paid; Thy Mother
also and the rest of thy friends are sold to sorrow and grief, as though thou
had not wherewithal to pay this debt thy self and of thy self. If die thou will, because thou must, yet choose some other death, no other death (sweet
Lord) can sound well in their ears, but this of all the rest, will be as
grievous unto the^, as painful unto thee: deferr at least the time, else now
thy friends, beside thy self become a fable to all nations.

What scandal will those take which did believe in thee? Who will account of
them, which once did follow thee? What hope is left for the^, which put their
trust in thee? John. 8.
thou made a promise to set thy people free, and how art thou thy self
become a thrale? John. 18.
Thou said thou were a King, and how then art thou Judged by these men to
death? Mar. 16
Thou do profess thy self the son of God, but why then will men say
do thou not save thy self?

Those which have seen thy life, may well believe what thou haste said, and
who thou art, but those which see the manner of thy death, will easily be
dismayed: In that thou liuedst as thou did, all had thee in admiration: In
that thou die as thou do, they turn it to derision: How shall thy life be
deemed void of forgerie, since that thou suffer now so great an ignominy?
How can that raising from the dead be clear from all suspicion, when as thy
self alive do suffer by compulsion? How did thou free so many from
infirmities, and art thy self oppressed with calamities?

It seems that thy forces were as Iud. 16
Sampson fained his to be before that thou were bound: thou alone without any
other help Mark. 1.
drauest out of the Temple, multitudes of people (a thing to think impossible,
as well for that the number was so great, as that they sat there for their
game) what power of men, what strength of arms, John. 18
overthrew the soldiers, which coming to apprehend thee in the garden fell
backward to the ground? but after once they bound thee, they drew thee like a
sheep unto the slaughter, and nothing apeareth in thee singular, which is not
in all others, but that thou live and suffer that which no man else could
do, as well for the violence of the torture, as also the vileness of thy
tormenters, who as they were patro^s of all impuritie, so have they now made
themselves patterns of all impiety. But how could thou (O John) remain to
see so unworthy a spectacle? How could thine innocent soul not fly this
heinous fact? how could thy maidenly heart behold such flowing streams of
blood? how could thy loving mind forbear the murderers of thy master? who is
it will not judge thee to consent to all this treason; which sees thee present
and silent at all this evil using? and although thou did not keep their
garments, while they did this Execution, yet did thou keep their counsel,
while they wrecked on him their malicious intention.

Thou denaydst him not in open speech three times, Mark. 16
as Peter did, but innumerable stripes, the bloody crown of thorns, the
unworthy scoffs and mocks, the inspeakable evil intreatinges, which thou
did see and hear did every one demand of thee whether thou were not also
with Jesus of Nazareth and one of his Disciples, and either fear did make thee
quail, or shame to hold thy peace, that it did seem at least a secret nay of
that thou were.

What think thou would Thomas do? who hearing that his Lord would go to
Jerusalem and knowing he was there, sought for by his enemies offered
frankely and with great courage: John. 11.
Let us go also and die with him. And now thou stand by, and see him thus
tormented, and nether make offer to abide some small pain for him, nor yet
are forward in suffering any thing with him.

Know thou not that all things amongst lovers ought to be common?
Considerest thou not that friends do joy together, and mourn not one without
the other, because as one ioyeth for the joy of another, so does he feel what
smarteth in the other? and not one who loves offers not his life to save his
love? for as they enterchange their hearts, so make they reckoning of their
harms.

All men do seek to save their lives, but where they are, the lovers life is
where he loves most, and there he lives and no where else: Wherefore (O John)
either now confess thou louedst not, where it was thought thou did, or
that thou made but little reckoning of thy life.

Think when he is gone how many die in him, how fares now his Mother and the
rest of his company? Can they be well when he is ill? Can they be whole when
he is wounded? Can they be sound when he is bruised? Can they find ease when
he feels pain? How think thou could they contain themselves from that
poor weak revenge, which they would take upon the soldiers? the men would
soon forgette that they were never trained up to fight, the women would not
think themselves the weaker sex, love banisheth away all fear, and sweet
life makes all sorts refuse no sower which may maintain the same. Their love
is subject to his enemies, and their life is in the hands of cruel murderers,
and hold thou both tongue and hands as though thou knew him not, or at
the least regardest him not?

How can this thy most beloved disciple (sweet Lord) be excused, who seems so
much more then the rest to be in fault, by how much he was favored above the
rest? for although he knew that thou did suffer because thou would, yet
had it been his part to have defended thee in what he could, seeing that thou
were his Lord, his love, his life.

But herein also showed he his excessive love, which was so much the stronger,
by how much it prevailed against love, and now he has found by love a
secret, that a greater love may be, then for a man to give his life for his
love.

When thou shewedst to thy disciples that thou must go to Jerusalem and
suffer many things of the Elders, Mat. 16.
Scribes and chief Priests, and be killed, and the third day arise; Peter
took thee unto him, and rebuking thee said: Lord be it far from thee, this
shall not be unto thee, wherefore he deserved to hear, go after me Satan,
thou art a scandal unto me, because thou sauourest not the things which are
of God, but the things which are of me^. and John remembering these words
thought he could not without offending thee, either wish, or work thy
safety, and therefore chose to leese thee, rather than thy favor, and to
breath without his life, then bereave himself of thy love.

He knew right well more than twelve Legions of Angels ready at thy call, Math.
26.
both where and when thou would have used them, it booted not to strive
against the stream, he was too weak, it was in vain to offer himself to
death, his time was not yet come, although that present death had bin but one
for all, and now escaping this he dyed many deaths by living one loathsome life.

Had his heart been as hard as stone, it had been riuen in a thousand pieces,
but being soft it did relent at every stroke, that still he seemed dying, and
yet he lived still, suffering the more because he could, and died not rather
as he desired, for nothing could have bin a greater ease to him, tha^ that
which should have been an end of all his grief.

And whilst he waded more and more into a sea of sorrow, he see a heavy Cross
laid on his Masters shoulders, John. 19.
and the soldiers some drawing, some driving him unto the Mount Caluarie to
be crucified among the thieves.

Here might ye see infinite multitudes of people flocking to this spectacle,
the like whereof could never be seen again: Among the rest he espied the
blessed Virgin but sorrowful Mother, whom after he had saluted in as dutiful
manner as he might, what sighs, what sorrows, what complaints were made by one
to the other? the mother for her only and dearly beloved son, the Disciple
for his entirely loving Master, both of them for their only comfort, their
hearts joy, their souls delight. Neither of them were able to contain
themselves from tears, especially our blessed Lady who had a warrant from her
son, to ease her heart somewhat that way, when he bad the women which
followed him to weep upon themselves and on their children. Luke. 23.


They pass on together, with now and then half a word, sorrow dividing it a
sunder, but being both of one mind, and grieuing for the self same loss, the
signs they made were easily understood. How often did they wish that heavy
cross upon some other shoulders, and then contrould themselves, they see him
faint and would most feign he should have had some ease, they knew again
that by that means he should be sooner gone, and therefore knew not what
to wish, yet at the length seeing no hope of life, and waying the cruelty of
the Jews, they reioysed not a little to see an other take the cross, Mat. 27.
wishing earnestly their pains might have procured that rest.

And now that this grievous labor grows to an end, and much sorrow
begins even in things insensible, how much more was our blessed Lady
afflicted, seeing her son so cruelly handled, and with sorrowful sighs
began to bewail her self, sometime to him, other times to S. John, and
sometimes to the Jews, who seeing her excessive grief could not but take
compassion upon her.

Who will give water unto my head (says she) and a Fountain of tears unto
mine eyes, to bewail both day and night the murder, not of any other then
mine own and only son? My days of joy are turned into grief, and my song
notes into sighs of sorrow.

Bewail me ye hills and mountains, lament me ye floods and Fountains, since
that of a Mother of peace and joy, I am become the Daughter of tears and
sorrow: Mourn ye beasts of the earth: weep ye fowls of the air, and every
thing which lives grieve, since that life it self, by whom ye all have life,
leaves to live any longer among you.

O who of you all (once his chosen people, now his chiefest enemies) can accuse
him of the least sin, that ye cause him to die with great shame? his pitiful
cries do so pierce the heavens, as they are ashamed of this your cruel fact,
and seek to cover it with a woeful darkness, and ye alone of all creatures are
so hard hearted, as ye discover nothing to be in you but a wilful deafenes. Had
not he himself come unto you, and done those things which never any did, and
done them to testefie that he was Gods son, ye might have had some excuse
for this sin, but having done so many good deeds among you, as ye all have
just cause to love him, for which of them all do you kill him? John. 18
it is not lawful for you (ye say) to kill any man, and is it lawful for you
to put Gods son and mine to death? ye gave not the sentence of death against
him, but why then were all other judgments utterly condemned by you? did ye
not bewray how much ye desired that he should die this death, when as upon
every light motion or opportunity offered to speak, no other echo rebounded
in all the Palace, Mat. 27
then, Let him be crucified without any remorce, either for his daily good
deserts, or the Judge his own decree? Too cruel were ye all, but much more
friendly cruel was Pilate, than were ye, because he used that cruelty to
procure his liberty, hoping that after this my son had abidde^ al manner of
abuses, even until the soldiers were tired with evil using him, his
affliction would have moved ye to some compassion, and therefore he brought
forth unto you so lamentable a spectacle, John. 19.
as no heart but yours would not but melt with grief to behold him, and ye
continued still your former notes crying out until ye were hoarse with crying
crucify him, John. 19.
crucify him, what said ye? and why so? because ye will have no other king but
Caesar. Alas he never labored to make himself a king, (although no man had
more right to be your king than he) John. 6.
but rather fled when it was urged upon him, Mat. 17
and was willing to pay all duties as a subject, even from the time that he
was eight days old. O how well have ye tried (well? alas not well) that he
seeks not that which is his own (our selves only excepted) when as wrangling
with him for his cloak, John. 9
he deliuored also unto you his coat, and bore all your whippes upon his bare
back. True it is that Pilate gave the sentence of death, not because he judged
him worthy of death, for after diverse examinations he openly protested that
Luke 23
he found no cause of death in him, but because he feared that ye would falsely,
and slanderously inform Caesar against him, if he should have showed but the
least favor in this cause, and ye using this his fear for the finishing of
this blody tragedy, urged him too often, that if John. 19.
he did acquit he was not Caesar's friend, although the trials of justice
between a Prince and his subjects, should no other wise be esteemed of them
as quarrels. O heavenly father, Caesar is more regarded than thy son, and
more are men afraid not to be over officious to Caesar than to be too much
offensive to thee and thy son, and therefore is thy son at this time called
from the earth.

(O ungrateful creatures) not because they judged the earth unworthy to bear
him, but because in their corrupted conceits they thought him unworthy to live
any longer upon the earth, and hangs in the air fast nailed to a Cross. O
happy Cross! O Holy nails! O sweet instruments of a sorrowful death!
worthy for this so near touch of so sacred a body, to be had herafter in
perpetual reverence, ye were not painful unto him, but they which caused you
to enter his hands and feet: but neither deserve ye any blame, if ye desierd
to stick so close unto him.

O my sweet son, be not hard to me, who haste been so bountiful to all,
but grant me this my last request: Take thy Mother unto thee on the Cross,
that dying with thee I may also live with thee after death, for nothing can be
more sweet unto me than having embraced thee, to die with thee, and nothing
more loathsome, than to live without thee after that thou art dead.

O true son of God, thou were a father unto me, thou were a mother to me,
thou were my son, thou were my spouse, thou were my soul, now am I become an
orphant, without Father or Mother, a spouse without a mate, a Mother without a
son, a body without sense, and soul, and in conclusion when thou art gone,
all that I have and all that I am is gone. Tell me my most loving son, tell me
who were mine only joy. Why suffer thou me to languish and pine away with
grief? Why have thou separated thy self so far from me? shall thy sorrowful
mother when she most needs receive least comfort of thee? and where she
least suspected, shall she there be most neglected? O how long do thou ha^g
with thine arms abroad, and none will come to be embraced? How lovingly do
thou stretch them out to an incredulous and contradictious people, and none do
take any compassion upon thee? How largely do thou bestow thy most dear
and precious blood upon this prodigal Nation, and none there are which tread
it not under their feet? O had I bin thy Cross, no other nails should have
fastened thee unto me, then a motherly affection, and no other witnesses should
have bin called of our sweet embracings, then thy Father and his Angels. Less
pain (I am well assured) it should have bin unto thee, but knowing that
neither this nor any thing else can be done without thy priuity, I cannot say
how much more pleasing at this time it would have bin unto thee, but howsoever
it is or might be, not seeing any likelihood of thy longer life, I cannot but
grieve as mothers use to grieve at the death of their first begotten. But he
being no les careful of her now at his death, then he was obedient unto her
in his life, moved with these inward speeches, and woeful lamentations,
looking down upon her, said unto her: John. 19.
Woman behold thy son. O most merciful Lord, what doubtful words are
these? Woman behold thy son? thou know right well that she has sorrowed
so much for thee, that all her senses fail her: her understanding also is
quite dulled: she stands still like one without her life, looking up to
thee and no where else, and say thou unto her, Woman behold thy son?

O most sweet Lord, whom does she behold when she beholds thee? on whom
does she look when she looks on thee? where is her eye when it is fixed on
thee? and yet as though she had not regarded thee, but minded somewhat else
beside thee, thou say unto her: Woman behold thy son?

What joy would it be to her to behold thee, if she could help thee? but
being that she cannot, why to increase her grief do thou say unto her,
Woman behold thy son? and the more sorrow conceaueth she by these thy
words, that thou say unto her (Woman) as though she could, and did not
discharge the part of a Mother, as thou had done the duty of a Son.

But if now at thy departure from her, thou art to deliver her up a Mother to
another, and therefore say unto her, Woman behold thy son? consider her
case, consider thine own, sorrow has taken away her sense from her, and too
much pain thy life from thee, both which concurring, what wonder if she stand
amazed, not knowing what thou meanest, for although she might aim at thine
intention, yet was her attention so great, to every last word which she herd
of thee, being now almost breathles, that nothing else seemed to sound in her
ears, and therefore she could not but behold thee still.

Beside this, if it had been so, that thou had quickened her wits, that she
had understood thy meaning, that by virtue of thy word, Saint John should
become her son: yet since that this word (son) has such relation to John,
that it has a more proper to thee: No wonder sweet Lord, if she still stand
beholding thee, since that without naming which, thou say unto her, woman
behold thy son.

Our blessed Lady being now wounded to the death, hearing her son with a
hoarse and fainting voice utter these words, was not able to make him any
answer, but being in a more grievous travail than ever was any woman, she
cried for help she knew not whence. Mat. 27.
God had denayed it her, for he had forsaken his son, the Angels neclected
her, Luke 22
for they knew their Lord to be in this agony, and would not defend him,
Mat. 27
his friends stood looking on aloof of, her pains grew upon her, and her
panges increased double and treble about her, there was not any of her dearest
could comfort her.

But her son seeing her thus perplexed, knowing that he was the cause of al
her grief although void of all comfort also himself, hastened what he could to
comfort her, by giving her to understand, that he came into this world, to
this end and no other, that by this way he should redeem the world, and since
that it pleased his father it should be so, he would not it should displease
his Mother, also that by this Passion he was to enter into his glory,
nevertheless that he would not leave her, although for a time he must be
absent from her: During which season in his place, she should take her cosen,
and account him as her son, who should be a most faithful comforter unto
her, love her, serve her, have care of her, and obey her as his Mother; Looking
therefore upon John, who stood close by him with a sad countenance, and a
sorrowful heart, shedding many a hot tear, he said unto him, Behold thy
Mother. John. 19.


Sweet Lord, right well may thou put her out of doubt by these words what
before thou did mean ey the other, but thou dare not put her out of her
dumpes, because she is now assured, that thou will depart from her; but since
that she her self cannot now have her choice, which should have been no
other then thy self. She is cotented with her chance, and not altogether
so much dismayed, or otherwise she should have been, if her lot had not lighted
where she not lightly loved, and yields up her will to be wholly thine,
although to thine own pain as well as hers, thou leauest to be hers: But who
can think what grief will possess this thy other beloved Disciple to hear
him self posted over to another, whom, although he loved entirely well, he
loved because she was thy mother, and now that this dignity is either quite
taken from her, or at the least suspended, he knows not for how long; as
appears by that thou have given her a mother to an other, how can he be
but full of sorrow?

His love to thee was such, as he never loved himself, or any for himself,
wherefore if thou did mind to bequeath thy Mother to his custody, much
better had thou said unto him behold my Mother, then behold thy Mother,
since that he knew not how to love any but thy self, or else for thy sake.

But alas sweet Lord, how in seeking to comfort him, do thou take away all
comfort from him? Right well might he call to mind now, yea and understand
that which once thou said, that the son of man (for so did the son of GOD
delight to call him self) should be betrayed to the gentiles, Luke. 13.
he should be mocked, whipped, and spet at, and that after that they should
whippe him, they would kill him, for all this he has seen both with watrie
eyes, and a woeful heart, but how can he think in his mind, that according
to thy promise thou will rise again the third day, since that thou haste thus
disposed of thy chiefest treasure? can he think that thou have any such
meaning as to return at the least in any short time, who have given over both
thy mother and him, and in such sort as an everlasting link of love should be
between them when thou said to the one in respect of the other. Woman
behold thy son, behold thy mother? Behold thy mother thou say unto him,
what child, sweet Lord, in his mothers womb desires not to see their Mother?
What else do those throws portend, which to their pain all mothers but thine
own, and only as thine, do feel in their travail, so that no doubt this thy
Disciple cannot but judge this a most guide, and careful motive, by which he
should become thy mothers son.

He knew right well that once her bowels were thy living Temple, and now he
sees that when thou die, her heart will be thy chiefest shrine, and
therefore is very well contented to behold her as thou biddest him: yet
pardon Lord, pardon does he crave a while, and leave to look upon thee still,
because he has just cause of fear in respect of thy grievous torments, that
whilst he casts his eye one way from thee to look on her, thou will make
an escape some other way both from her and him, and because he doubts he
cannot see thee so long as he would, he desires to look upon thee so long as
he may: and although she be one, who deserves to be beheld, as well for the
signs she makes of exceeding great love unto thee, as also for that she was
so potent an object, that she drew thee to look in an extraordinary manner
upon her, yet when thou art present, he thinks his senses have such an object
of thee, in regard both of his own love and compassion, as also of thine
exceeding great dignity (being author of whatsoever is worthy praise, or
marvel in any other) that he cannot as yet behold any other but thee.

Some comfort were these speeches unto them, woman behold thy son, Behold thy
mother: but they wished they might have proceeded from some other occasion.

When he was with them him self he was most tender over them, and now that
he is taken from them he gives the one of them charge over the other. He
knew not who loved him and his mother better than did John, and therefore he
thought none so fit to have charge of her as John, neither did he know who
could love John better than did he and his mother, and therefore would his
mother should have the care of him, and that this love should continue in the
most tender manner that might be, he joined them together as mother and son.

O Mary if thou were a Virgin, as thou were most pure, behold thy son, if
thou were es poused to thy mare, and yet remainedst chaste, behold thy son: If
thou were one who for thy most rare virtues were singularly beloved of Christ,
behold thy son, if thy love were such unto Christ, that neither bashfulnes
in thrusting among the people being a maiden, nor fear of being trodden down
in the multitude being a weakeling, nor danger of being apprehended and evil
entreated by the soldiers, being so dear and near unto him, could hold thee
back from accompanying him to the Cross, behold thy son.

John. 21
Christ left Peter as his successor to guide his Church being his spouse, a
sign of great love, a place of high renown and dignity, John. 19
Christ has left John as his successor to have care of Mary, who was not only
his spouse, but also his mother, what greater honor with like contentment,
could he enjoy in this world.

If Moses having charge of the Jews, had such abundance of grace infused
into him, that when it was divided. Number. 11
it was sufficient for threescore more and ten, what shall we imagine was
given unto John, who was to have charge not of the children of Israel John. 19
but of the Mother of God?

Likewise when God passed by Moses, he passed in that order, and with such
swiftnes, that nothing could be seen, but his hinder parts, and yet no doubt
his promise was performed Exodus 33
I will show thee all God.

But Saint John did so long behold God his face, that he was not able to hold
up his head any longer, John. 13
but laid it down upon his breast, and rested in his bosom, what good was it
likely was showed then to him? nay rather what good had he not communicated
unto him.

Thence his exceeding great knowledge, whereby when others write of Christ as a
man John. 1.
he began his Gospel, with insearchable mysteries of his Godheade: Thence his
inuinsible courage, which could neither with any promised honor, nor present
horror be vanquished: Thence his unspeakable charity which was so hot, and
burning within him, that he felt not the scalding oil: The love which lay
within his breast was so potent, that fire it self in respect of it was cold,
or at the least had no force in working comparable unto it, for neither did he
desire a tabernacle in mount Math. 17
Tabor with Peter, nor covet a crown, or Mat. 20
next sitting to Christ in heaven with James, without a firm purpose and a
resolute mind to disburse what should be thought convenient for so great a
purchase, which fully and truly he paid upon his birth day.

Other Martirs have their Martyrdom and they suffer in it: S. Ioh. had his at
his masters his Passion, but he suffered not in it, and therefore he suffered
the more, for it was death for him to live, and to die for Christ his gain.

But O most merciful Lord, why did thou afflict this thy beloved Disciple
in this sort? Thou Mat. 20
gave him a promise, that he should drink of thy cup, and he expecting a
death for thy sake, cannot have it: did pity move thee being thy darling,
that thou could not see him murdered, as thy other Apostles were, and whom
thou louedst most entirelye? and therefore would he should drink of no
other Cup than thine, and so to have him as thy Mother and his, a Martyr in
life, in mind, in will; but not in death, that thou might have to Crown at
once the Mother and the Son with the same Crowns of glory?

Impossible it was (O Mary) that thou should be like unto thy son in all
things, wherefore in as much as it is possible, thy Son has made one like
unto thee, where also thou shall not leese the name of a mother: behold then
Saint John thy son, a most pure virgin, a most learned Docter, a most
constant Martyr.

Now is it performed which was so long before promised Isai. 56.
I will give unto mine Euenuches a worthy place in my house, and within my
walks, and a name better than the name of sons and daughters of Israel. I
will give them an eternal name which shall never fail. Woman behold thy
son: What name under Heaven is comparable unto this name? What name shall
endure after this name: the Son of Marie?

It. John. 8.
was an honor to be accounted the son of Abraham, the son of Israel, and
happy was he which could be numbered among them: But this name the son of
Mary, none was worthy of, but God himself, the second person in the Trinity:
John. 19
and now it is given to John by Christ hanging upon the Cross, for his
inheritance, when looking upon his mother, and making sign toward John, he
said unto her, Woman behold thy son.

A name, which as it had no greater under heaven, so did it never perish: for
as Christ dying upon the Cross, so lest a Son with his mother, as he himself
did not leave to be her son, so also she dying, did so join her self to
her son in heaven, as she left not to be a Mother also unto him which was in
earth, that this name might very well be called a eternal name, for whether
she were in earth or in heaven, alive or dead, her son had so provided it,
there should be Mary's son.

O blessed Virgin! when thou did conceive Saint John John. 2
thou did conceive him in mirth: John. 19.
but thou were delivered of him, when he was delivered unto thee in great
sorrow and heaviness. He was the first for whose cause at thy request, thy
Son did manifest himself unto the world, by showing his power in working
miracles, and now he is the last, and the only man committed unto thee, when
thy Son passes out of the world, by suffering with patience, what malice
could work against him: so that the measure of thy Son his life in this world,
was no more than the time in which thou did breed Saint John, for when the
time was come that John became thy Son, thou lost thine other Son.

Now that thou should be a comfort unto others, thou have experience what
that saying means, Genesis 3.
thou shall bring forth in grief: for the ease thou had when Christ was
borne, is with usury recompensed at thy delivery of John, whom with excessive
sorrow thou broughtest forth thy son.

John. 16
A woman when she is in travail has sorrow, because her hour is come, but
when she has brought forth the child, now she remembers not the anguish
for joy that a man is borne into the world: But thou most blessed Virgin as
thou were privileged in this above all other women that thou were delivered of
thy first begotten without any pain: so now have thou this singular above any
other woman, that at thy second travail, thou feel as great panges after it
as before it.

She ioyeth because a man is borne into the world, and thou haste cause to
grieve, because a man is gone out of the world: she is glad because she has
a son, and thou haste cause to mourn, because thou haste lost a son, and
so much is thy sorrow more, than theyrioy may be, as thy son exceeds all
other women's sons: for although thou were delivered of a son, yet were thou
spoiled of an other, such was thy travail, and with such condition, that the
birth of thy second son, supposed the death of thy first begotten.

Luke 1
When thou gave consent unto the words of the Angel, God spoke the word,
and the word was incarnate, the same word vouchsafing to speak unto thee, not
by the mouth of an Angel, but by himself has said the word, and thou haste
not only conceived thy second son, but art also delivered of him, Woman behold
thy son: Behold thy Mother.

Thus having either of them charge of other, glad they were, that neither was
willing to depart, Saint John feared not he should be forced to leave his
Master in following his charge, when she should go away, neither did our
blessed Lady doubt what she might do, if John should part from thence: their
life was nailed on the Cross, that they could not stir from it, and rather
had they stay John. 19
and see him wounded (a doleful sight) then not see him at all: wherefore
never satisfied with looking up upon him, they tarried until he was taken
down, whom when his Mother received in her Arms, sorrow and joy fought so
doubtful a Combat, that it was not to be judged which of them was the
stronger.

She had lost him and now she has found him again, great cause she has to
joy, he was her hope, her help, her life.

She had lost him and now she has found him again, great cause she has to
mourn, he is past hope, past help, and past out of his life.

What joy was comparable to that he had, when she might speak unto him,
embrace him and kiss him, as she was wont to do.

But alas what grief was like to that she had, when he did neither answer
by word, or behavior, as he was wont to do?

Noe joy to that she had, when she beheld him again, Psalm. 44.
for he was the most fair, and beautefull of all the Sons of men.

Noe grief to that she had when she beheld him again, and found that Isal.
53.
neither any favor nor comeliness was in him.

She see his head swollen, with the Crown of Thorns, she see his face
black and blew with the buffettes of their fistes, she see his body torn
from top to the toe with whippes, or to say more true, she neither see head,
face, nor any part of his body, but a mass only of congealed blood, which
covered all his body, being most grievously wounded, and in so many places,
that they altogether seemed one on lie wound, which reached from the crown of
his head, unto the soles of his seete.

So sat she at the foot of the Cross, with the dead body in her lap,
offering it all bloody to Almighty God, Genesis 37.
and demanding of him whether that were not his son his coat, showing it
also unto the Angels, and asking of them whether that were not their Master his
Garment: Her self was not able to discern perfectly, whether it were any part
of her or no, it was so dissigured, but that with sorrow she had brought her
self so out of savor, that every one which see her, might easily judge he
was her son and she his mother.

She has found him again, but because whatsoever she found she must
forgo except sorrow, sorrow got the victory, in which she did so much
abound, as her son his sorrow being at an end, there was now no sorrow
like unto hers, and no comfort would she admit, because he was not.

They sought no water to wash his blessed body, fountains there were enough of
hoate and scalding tears, wherein they bathed him first, then buried him
against their wills, wishing that either they themselves were his sepulcher,
or his were theirs.

When thy days were come (O full of sorrow) that thou should be delivered,
thou broughtest forth thy first begotten Son, thou swadlest him in cloutes,
Luke 2.
and laidst him down in a maunger, because there was no place for thee in the
Inn, and now thy days were fully come that thou should be delivered
again thou broughtest forth thy second son, John. 19.
and in steed of swaddling him in cloutes, and joyful laying him down, and
tending him, thou art constrained to swaddle thy first begotten Son again,
and with sorrow to lay him down in a Monument, because no other place but
that, would he make choice of to lie in.

The Funeralles being ended Saint John does take possession, he leads home
his sorrowful Mother, giving her what comfort he could, being now almost
spent with grief, with whom he continued yielding unto her that duty which
became him. John. 19.
For from that hour, he took her for his own.

FINIS.

