THE Unfortunate Mother: A TRAGEDY.

Never acted; but set down according to the intention of the Author

Thomas Nabbes.

LONDON: Printed by I. O. for Daniell Friar, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Red Bull in Little Britain. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Richard Braithwaite ESQVIRE.
Sir,
I Have (though boldly being a stranger) elected you, to countenance a piece,
that (undeservedly I hope) has been denied the credit which it might have
gained from the Stage; though I can accuse my self of no error in it, more
than a nice curiosity (which not withstanding I must boast to be without
president) in the method where I have denied my self much liberty, that may be
allowed a Poet from old example, and new established custom. Your self have
given many sufficient testimonies of your own abilities and judgment, by your
own many published and unquestionable labors. In giving way and pardon to
this bold act of mine, you will engage to thankfulness, and honor him that
is ambitious to be known by you, and styled

Your honourer and humble Servant, Thomas Nabbes.

Proeme To the Reader.
REader, thou will undo my Poems fate
If thy opinion be prejudicate:
If not, then I shall neither hope nor fear,
Whether thou will be partial or severe.
But 'cause I know not how thou art inclined,
I Will tell thee what shall not, and what shall find.
Here are no bumbast raptures swelling high,
To pluck Jove and the rest down from the sky.
Here is no sense that must by thee be scanned,
Before thou can the meaning understand.
Here is not any glorious Scene of state;
Nor Christning set out with the Lottery Plate.
There Is no disguise in it; no false beard, that can
Discover several persons in one man.
No Politician tells his plots unto
Those in the Pit, and what he means to do.
But now me thinks I hear some Critic say,
All these left out there is nothing in the play.
Yes; Thou shall find plain words, and language clean
That Cockram needs not tell thee what they mean.
Shall find strict method in it, and every part
Severely ordered by the rules of Art.
A constant Scene: the business it intends
The two hours time of action comprehends.
Read it with observation then, and be
My Judge from reason; not from tyranny.
Thine Thomas Nabbes.

To The Author on this his TRAGEDY.
PRinted before it is Acted! such a trick
As few men will judge to be politic.
But little reason for it we can see,
Profit should grow contemptible with thee.
I read it, and it has my vote for good;
Sure 'twas not by some others understood:
By whom I wish action might added be,
For that is the best life of a Tragedy.
Sure though they tyrant like did sentence give
Upon thy Mother, she deserves to live.
E. B.

To the Author on his Unfortunate MOTHER.
I Do not wonder that great Iohnsons Play
Was scorned so by the ignorant, that day
It did appear in its most glorious shine;
And comely action graced each learned line.
There was some reason for it: 'twas above
Their rea^^^, their envy; their applause or love:
When as the wiser few did it admire,
And warmed their fancies at his genuine fire.
But I commend the wisdom of thy Fate,
To sell thy labors at a better rate,
Then the contempt of the most squeamish age;
Or the exactest Roscij of the Stage:
Which might provoke our Laureat to repine,
That thine should rival his brave Albovine.
Thy Muse in this birth does unhappy prove,
In that it is abortive. Let thy love
Appear to us in getting such another,
That she may boast her self a happy Mother.
C. G.

To my friend the: Author.
WEll writ; well plotted: why not acted then?
Have the actors judgment more then other men?
Or is it their humor so to keep those under,
Whose bays are known to be secure from thunder?
Since all the world I dare be bold will say,
Folly was guide when judgment lost its way:
Yet each good wit to thee a sprig will bring,
To crown thy Muse that does so sweetly sing:
Whilst others weakness ordering thy sad fate,
Has made themselves like her; Unfortunate.
R. W.

The Persons.
MAcario. A young Duke of Ferrara. Infelici. Duchess Dowager. Corvino.
Supposed Father to Spurio and Notho. Bonardo. Father to Fidelio and Amanda.
Spurio. Favorite to the Duke. Notho. General returned victorious. Fidelio.
Friend to Spurio, and lover of Melissa. Beneventi. Friend to Fidelio. Vittorio.
Two Captains, friends to Notho. Polemici. Melissa. Daughter to Carvino.
Amanda. In love with Spurio. Cardente. An old Groan; mother of the maids.
Mutes. Ladies attendants. The Guard.
The Scene the Court of Ferrara.

THE Unfortunate Mother. A Tragedy.
The first Act, and first Scene: The Scene being the Presence.
Fidelio and Beneventi.
Beneventi. OUr Mourning's ended, and the Court again
Looks like the Morning, when the Eastern air
Is painted with a mixture of her blushes,
And the Suns golden glory.

Fid. So it should:
Great Princes Death's but like a short Eclipse
Darken the Orbs they lighted, 'till another
Spreads his succeeding beams: We have his son,
As full of hope as ever promised state
A happiness; and now he is risen, we
Shall gaze, and glad our selves as cheerfully
In his warm favors, as in those, which time
So lately dispossessed us of.

Ben. I shall not
Court them with any flattery.

Fid. His temper
Is virtuous, Beneventi: He' le admit
Of no such practice; and his minion too,
The noble Spurio, such a rare example
Of a good great man.

Ben. That Is your partiality,
Because he is your friend.

Fid. Wrong not th integrity
Of what is real in me. By my hopes
Of a fair memory, there is not a charm
In greatness has the Magic power to sway
My reason with affection, but true merit,
That binds me. I never coucht unto the humors
Of any great one yet; or styled my self
Th'admirer of his virtues, if they were not
The true steps so his raising.

Ben. Sure the Duchess
Affects him with a more than common favor;
As if there were some secret interest
That yet scapes public knowledge.

Fid. Be not jealous:
It Is the rude peoples vice. In our pure difference
There should be nobler thoughts.

Ben. You love his sister.

Fid. Yes Beneventi: can my wishes covet
A greater honor* The second Scene. Enter Spurio.

Ben. Here Is your friend, the favorite:
He Will pay his sisters portion in some Office
Begged of the Duke; and with the Dowery which
His Father gives her buy himself sweet pleasures;
Or a new glorious wardrobe. How he stands?
As if some frowns of the new Duke dejected him,
And made him fear a fall.

Fid. Thou Art too severe
And Cynicall. This bitterness might move
Another spleen: but prithee Beneventi
Do not presume on privilege. A friend
Shares so much of my self, he cannot suffer*
But I am sensible by a consent
And an affinity of parts.

Ben. I Will honor him
At your commands.

Fid. My honored Lord why thus? (To Spurio.

Spu. Fidelio, welcome to mine eyes; thy presence,
Like Sunshine, has illuminated my dark soul,
Clouded with melancholy.

Fid. What Is the cause?
You flow in honors.

Spu. Oh Fidelio,
Be not too curious: should thou know my sufferings,
Thy Physic cannot cure them. Beneventi!

Fid. My friend, my Lord.

Spu. Then mine. My friends must be (To Beneventi.
Like Chains, the first link leads on his dependants.
Instruct me how, then use me.

Ben. I shall study
A grateful service.

Fid. Pray do not conceal
What Is your disturbance. By communicating
You Will lessen something of the suffering*
In making me partaker.

Spur. I shall add to it.
We shall be like two neighbor buildings, when
A flame proceeding from the one has seized
The others roof, it makes the burning greater.
Friend let me suffer, be thou free.

Fid. Report,
Perhaps, has multiplied, and rumour's grown
Pregnant withissue, that your noble brother
Wants the success we hoped for.

Spu. Ha! my Brother!
My brothers virtue does command his fortune;
The later waits upon the first, as slaves
Act their Directors wills. No my Fidelio,
A certain knowledge newly's come to Court
Of his sure victory, and his arrival
Is suddenly expected, that it may
Crown this days (yet unperfect) glory. Friend,
My joys transport me, that I share in blood
With one so worthy: But the peace that waits
Upon his Conquest cannot stay the war The third Scene. Flourish. Enter
Macario, Infelice, Corvino, Melissa, Ladies.
That is within me.

Fid. Here Is the Duke and Duchess,
Compose your self.

Maca. Grief, Madam, should be like
A short Sea-storme; 'soon as a calmer air
Has smoothed the rugged waters, there is not seen
The least impression which the formers rage
Made on their even surface. I am still
Your son in duty, as in blood; And though
I share not in this out ward act of sorrow
For my dead Father (since the mourning ceremonies
Of Court should be prescribed to stricter limits
Of time, than where the affairs and men are private)
His memory presents it self as fresh
To every apprehension that assailes me,
As when his living precepts taught me how
To be a Prince, by more than the election
Of Fortune and my Birth: His virtues shall
Be (as I hope) my souls inheritance,
Well as his dignities: I Will be directed
By their examples.

Inf. Dear son (for my love
Bids me make use of Natures privilege,
And leave out other titles) I have joys
Greater within me, than those weak ones, which
Only take life from the expression,
And quickly dye, the object once removed.
Yet give me leave to temper them with mixture
Of some sad thoughts, lest their excess may grow
Into a danger, and a little taste
Of contrarieties will whet the sense
With a fresh appetite, preventing surfeits.
My comforts swell, like a full tide, to see
Thy growing state propt up with such advantages,
As show it unto all men's expectations
Int's future flourishing: A Counsel grave
And wise as ever ordered policy
From the best unresisted principles:
Men, whose designs set down the acts success
As positive as Oracles. Thy Spurio,
Thy almost self; a man so rich in soul,
And all her best dependancies, he gives
Honor to greatness, by the noblest ^^^^g
Of a Court-favourites power, that ever yet
Deserved a record. Next to him, thy Champion,
His valiant brother; one, upon whose Plumes
Victory danceth as they far^^e the air,
Whispering the voice of Triumph. Thou art guarded
With such a general loyalty in Subjects,
That if thou slept'st amongst the multitude,
Even when some rage possessed them, undesended
With any Arms but that, the imperfect slumber
Need not be broken with a fear. Macario,
These tears are tears of joy: and yet I cannot
Choose but reflect upon those times that gave me
The embraces of thy Noble Father.

Mac. Madam,
The loss you suffer is repaired in me;
I Will own no honors, nor delights of earth,
But what my duty shall confer on you:
Making your present greatness equal to
The former without discontinuance:
I will call nothing mine, more than a title,
And ceremonious outside.

Cor. Would you would please
To take your seat, and give an audience
To what I shall deliver.

Mac. Speak Corvino.
Your Oratory has power to draw attention,
What e're the subject be.

Cor. It Is that that makes
Language harmonious. It Is your self, great sir,
Both your own private and the public good
Must be my Theme. In part it likewise has
Relation unto your eternity,
For Princes never dye that have fair issue.
Your marriage sir.

Maca. I Am yet too young, Corvino.

Cor. You Are old in judgment, and in all the parts
That make a Prince up absolute. Too young!
Some careful Parents (and such providence
Might be a good example) in the childhood
Of their loved sons, have made election
Of hopeful beauties, that they might be sure
To keep their names alive in their posterity.
You are mature enough: now therefore know,
Your dying Father (to whose memory
We owe a reverence) when his fainting Spirits
Labourd for help from all their weakened Organs,
He breathed these last words: Let my Son (quoth he)
Marry betimes; and if he makes his choice
Amongst his own subjects, let him place Melissa
In his first thoughts.

Ben. Where is your honor now? (To Fidelio privately.

Cor. I do not urge it as she is my daughter,
Through an ambition that affects such greatness:
Sir, my desires are humble; and on those
A safety waits, whose comfort I Will not lose
For all the others flatteries.

Mac. Blush not Lady.
If Fortune has designed you for a Princess, To Melissa.
The favour's worth the courting with a smile,
And cheerful aspect, so't transport you not
From a becoming duty.

Mel. Gracious Sir,
My temper can admit of no desires (Kneeles.
Suit not with my condition. If it be
Decreed by providence, I can obey,
But never wish.

Mac. Rise lovely maid. (Rises.

Fid. My Lord, (To Spurio in private.
I Am lost to all the happiness that ever
My hopes showed me a way to.

Spu. Have no fears:
She Is constant; and I Will soon divert the Duke,
Even here in public.

Mac. Fair Melissa take
Thy Princes grant.

Spu. Of what sir? Do not mock
Your reason into error. You Are a Prince
And every act of yours concerns a state,
Not your mere person only: what you do
Must therefore deeply be considered on,
Before your will allow it execution.
Princes should wed with Princess: where there is
An innate Majesty on both sides, that
Well mixed, makes up an issue fit for rule,
And the successive dignities. Besides,
A State is strengthened: by alliance much:
It may enlarge your Territories to,
By times kind working. We have neighbor Princes,
That gladly would bestow their Female heirs
Upon your highness; and by such a choice,
Your subjects with your self might gain a happiness.

Mac. You, Spurio, counsel this?

Spu. He cannot own
A duty worth your cherishing with favor,
That will not urge it home.

Mac. She is your sister;
And 'twould be some additions to your honors
(Though they are many which your merits challenge)
To see your sister graced with the high Title
Of our great Duchess.

Spu. 'T would be disadvantage
To all that is good within me: For although
No policy preserves my Actions
Free from suspicion, but their own integrity,
And that has showed them clear without abuse
Of favor or of power; yet if I were
The brother of the Duchess, I should hardly
Escape envy, where I now have love.

Mac. Brave spirit.
Thy virtue moves me.

Ben. How his father frowns? To Fidelio privately.
He Is moved another way.

Spu. If you esteem it
A virtue in me to suppress desires
That bear me higher than the moderate pitch,
Cherish it still, and do not with addition
Of favors make me lose the opinion
Of being good in my prosperities:
Such flatteries may tempt me to aspire;
My flight holds even yet.

Mac. My dearest Spurio,
How thou appear'st in this humility!
Nor do I think it any counterfeit
To whet my yet cold appetite. Her form,
Though it be full of active fire, enough
To move the dullest earth, wherein a soul
Has made its habitation, I not doat on:
Nor will it prejudice your worth Metissa,
In that your Prince refuses you: Affection
Must not guide us, but counsel.

Mel. You have done
A justice unto me and your own honor:
I shall be happy when my Virgin freedom
May make an equal choice.

Mac. That choice shall want
No honor we can give it. And dear Madam (To Infelice.
Your self have youth enough and beauty yet
T'admit a second fellowship: Elect
Even where you please, our duty shall allow it:
Virtue and judgment guide you.

Infe. I am happy in my unhappiness, that time has left me
A husband still; thy Fathers memory
Preserved in thee my Son: I know no widow-hood
Whilst wedded unto that.

Mac. Yet if hereafter
You would at any time confer such honor,
Let it be Lord Corvinos.

Spu. Ha! my father! To Fidelio privately.
Named he not him Fidelio?

Corv. To my self
You show me my defects, by the fair light
Of your too gracious and too great opinion;
All the desert that I can have, must be
Of your creating. Flourish.

Mac. These events shall be Exeunt Mac. Infe. Ladies, the rest remaining.
Referred to time and providence

Corv. Son Spurio.

Ben. Now will he school his Son for being honest.
It Is an ambitious Lord, yet strives to hide it To Fidelio whispering.
With politic hypocrisy.

Corv. Your Childhood
Grew up to riper years in such obedience,
As promised duty to me; how you should
Decline that goodness from the hopes conceived
Strikes me with wonder. Sure you were instructed,
And taught to know men by the study of
Their difference; and in what one may excel
Another being: Greatness is no vice
That you should shun it, and your Sisters honors
Would neither have impaired yours, nor mine:
It Is not so dangerous caring to preserve
Abundance, as to labor with necessity;
And though it might be real temperance in you
To shun so great additions, yet it showed
Little obedience that you contradicted
What I proposed.

Spu. Sir 'twas from your example,
You urged it not as an ambition;
If your desires were humble, mine were so:
I prefer safety sir as well as you,
Before the flattering dangers that are incident
To the other.

Coru. You have mis-interpreted
A modest fear, an absolute denial.
Besides; how unbecomming it is to accept
A pressed consent with greed inesse; it argues
Desire without desert: but since you are
So nicely moral, by my self I will
Advance my self. The Duchess bed will be
An honor I never thought of.

Spu. How sir! you
Marry the Duchess?

Coru. Has your greatness taught you
To practice scorn on me? or are you swollen
With an unnatural envy? I shall hatch
Practices 'bove your reach; and teach your sister
To Obey as well as love: it is not your humor
But my command that must dispose of her:
Nor will I ask your leave to have the Duchess.
Be what you are, and keep your Princes love:
You Have almost lost a fathers. Exit.

Ben. How he stands? to Fidelio.
Some wanton lobby Lady sure has laid
The issue of her pleasures to his charge;
For which the old man chid him.

Fid. I much fear
Part of the cause is mine.

Ben. Two hands in a dish,
The right Court Ordinary.

Fid. Prithee be
More serious. Why again dejected thus?

Spu. I have news for thee Fidelio.

Been. Pay the Post.

Spu. Thou must not have my Sister.

Fid. Ha? it is horror.

Ben. Then it is not honor.

Spu. She must be disposed of.

Fid. How? for the Duke?

Spu. My father so resolves it.

Fid. Then I have lost --

Ben. Just nothing.

Fid. Thou prophan'st
A worth, that bids my justice punish thee.

Ben. She Is nothing worth, nor to the purpose, if
You have her not.

Fid. If there be more impart it.

Spu. I love the Duchess.

Fid. So do I your Sister.

Ben. And I love both.

Spv. How is that Beneventi?
Love both?

Ben. Yes, both alike; that is, love neither.

Spu. My rival is my father.

Fid. Mine my Sovereign.

Ben. Then if I be your second against either,
Let the Axe make me first a head less monster;
And Surgeons next in public search my parts,
To find where treason lay and patricide.

Spu. What Fates are we two subject to?

Ben. The worse
If you attempt to better them.

Spu. Fidelio,
We will consult a little; I have had
Grounds for strong hopes, I Will not be flattered by them;
But work with policy. There is within me
A war 'twixt love and duty: one must be
Destroyed to quit and set the other free. Exeunt.

The Second Act and first Scene. The Scene being the Duchess Chamber.
A Table etc.
Infelice, Amanda, Melissa and Cardente.
Infe. AManda you look sickly, you were wont
To wear a lovely blush upon your cheek,
Such as no Art can counterfeit: your eyes
Were the Court Stars, at which the amorous gallants
Lighted their flames: who but Amanda famed
For beauty, and a liveliness of spirit;
Your colour's earthy now, your mind unactive:
Nor can such accidents without a cause
Show their effects. I wish it were communicated.
Unto our knowledge.

Card. Madam, it is nothing
But eating Sallets, Oate-meale, and green fruits,
She has got the loving Chamber-maids disease:
On my virginity that is it, she must
Be steeled to th'purpose.

Infe. I believe they are
Some passions rather.

Card. Certainly that is it:
Madam she reads Arcadiaes, Amorettas;
And will discourse this Ladies love and that
So sadly, that the faces in the hangings
Seem to have sense and weep: I Am sure I cannot
Forbear when I remember it.

Am. It Is strange,
Your reverend Ladyship has so much moisture;
Sure you preserved your tears, and wasted none
When you were young, to the end you might express
Your self now tenderhearted: What sweet Courtier
But would esteem those tears and make them bracelets*
Their toughness will endure the stringing.

Infe. So, so;
Be lightsome still.

Card. And jeere my age, that has
Given you counsel; which observed, would keep
Your heart from aching, and your lunges from sighs:
You never would cry aye me, that love, but cannot
Be loved again.

Infe. Is she in love Cardente?

Card. That Is it upon my Maidenhead.

Ama. An o th,
Of great antiquity; the Cavaliers
Used it before the battle of Lepanto.

Card. Used what? my Maidenhead?

Meli. You would have it constred
In that best sense.

Card. You Are very witty Ladies,
To play on my decaies; I could have done
As well as you: but now have graver thoughts.

Am. The Grave is that best fits them.

Card. Well Amanda,
You may again want counsel; when you do
I wish some cough may seize me, or the want
Of my fore teeth make my speech so imperfect,
You may not understand it.

Meli. Very likely;
You need not wish it.

Infe. They are wagges Cardente,
But for your mirth Amanda it is affected;
Your soul I do believe retains its sadness,
Reveal it, and i will aid thee in the cure.

Ama. Madam I gladly would give satisfaction
Unto your graces curiosity,
So that it might not prejudice fair truth:
To say I Am sick, were a dissimulation:
If well, you will not believe it.

Card. How? you well?
When your complexion's like the queen of Spades;
Or like a painting wrought in the first color;
Or like a withered blossom, or a --

Ama. Hold
Good Lady Simile; Or like your Monkey
When he wants Spiders; the poor beast looks scurvily,
And not unlike your Ladyship.

Card. Well, well;
I still must bear with youth.

Ama. If a distemper,
Or a disease that is crept into my blood
Renders me now less beautiful, then lately
The flatteries of some esteemed me; must it
Conclude my mind is sick?

Infe. Enough Amanda,
Yet still I must suspect; when you are alone To Card. privately.
Perhaps she will reveal it. Exit.

Card. That Is it Madame,
We maids will chat so prettily alone;
You did not well Amanda to abuse me
Before the Duchess: other Ladies would not
Have served me so, and there are few in Court
But would make use of what you slight; my counsel:
I have bin verst in things that might advantage
Your restitution.

Amb. Unto what good Lady?

Card. Your health, your mind; your wits.

Ama. Why does your reverence
Think I am mad?

Card. A little loving frenzy.

Mel. Delude her importunity with some slight, To Amanda privately.
She Will be a trouble else.

Card. Pray' think not Ladies
This age of mine has not attained some knowledge
From observation. There have bin few passages
In Court which I have not bin privy too.
Ladies have fallen and risen; and their timpanies
Have bin cured with as secret carriage,
As e're was practiced by a suburb Midwife:
I have had plots to save a Ladies honor.

Ama. She has given me an occasion. To Melissa privately.

Mel. Ply it home,
We Will raise some mirth from melancholy.

Card. Come,
You must not be reserved.

Ama. Might I presume
You would be secret.

Card. How? suspect Amanda?
By my virginity

Mel. I do believe
That Oath will never be broken.

Card. Why Melissa?
I have bin known and known these fifty years,
My age has seen Lords turn cast Ladies of
Unto their Pages, and preferment follow;
I have known secrets too, and kept them secret
Without any Oath. Is It coming yet?

Ama. It Is almost
At my tongues end: but shame --

Card. A fig for shame.

Ama. Perhaps it is something cannot be expressed
In modest Language.

Card. Then I must interpret,
And now I see that is it.

Mel. That! what Cardente?

Card. Yes, yes; it is so: your eye, your noses sharpness:
And here is a sign.

Mel. Of Virgo I dare swear.

Card. Of Gemini: You Are subject to strange qualmes,
Are you not Lady? dare you wear a buske?
Are you not quick? me thinks it kicks on both sides:
You have bin at it to some purpose.

Ama. She
Interprets right Melissa.

Card. I can do it.
She Is not the first at Court has had a clap,
And let it be my charge to save her honor;
Even the Duchess self --

Mel. How Is that Cardente?

Card. Tut I know secrets.

Ama. And you will reveal them.
How have I fooled my self into a misery,
Prevention cannot free me from? committing
A secret of such consequence to one
Will make my shame the pastime of the Court
By her discovery.

Card. No such matter Lady,
Doubt not a close conveyance; yet I wish
You had revealed it sooner: Physic then
Might have done much.

Ama. You Will aid me then Cardente
In the concealment?

Card. I Will not tell the Duchess.

Mel. But I will.

Card. What sweet Lady?

Mel. What a creature
Warmes her self in her bosom, a Court Bawd;
A cloth of tissue centinell.

Ama. An old cole
Raked up in counterfeited sanctity:
Thou credulous piece of wickedness, did think
If any wanton forwardness had led me
To such a sin as looseness, I would suffer
The knowledge often pass from me? and especially
To one suspected for a wicked agent
In those base practices, but now discovered.

Card. What will you bait me Ladies?

Mel. Yes, and worry thee;
Thou mother of the maids! thou art fitter far
To be the Madam regent of the stews,
Nay we will dissect thee.

Am. And before the Duchess
Lay open all.

Card. Nay then farewell sweet Ladies. Exit.

Mel. She Is gone, and we are free, and now Amanda
Let loose thy thoughts; for all are here imprisoned
Thou shall command releasement.

Am. Oh Melissa
I love thy brother, and my virgin flame
Grows every hour more violent.

Mel. Oh Amanda
I love thy brother, and my virgin flame
Grows every hour more violent.

Am. You mock me
With ecchoing back my words.

Mel. I speak a truth
Although with blushes: If your anguish grow
From that sweet passion, how our even states
Hang in the balance?

Am. All my hopes are lost,
In that the Duchess favors him so much;
My jealousies can point no other end out,
Then their uniting in that fellowship
My wishes covet.

Mel. Have not I like doubts?
The Duke rivalls Fidelio; and my father
Urges unwilling honors, which my fears
Dare not attempt to reach at. I had rather
Sleep in the sweet embraces of thy brother,
Then be advanced to greatness that will make me
The object of men's envy. 2 Scene. Enter Infelice, Corvino, Car lent.

Am. Here Is the Duchess,

Inf. We Will hear you straight Corvino. Fie Amanda,
Have all your seeming virtues lost themselves
In one foul stain?

Am. Madam let me prevent
The abusing of your faith: my honor suffers
In nothing but a counterfeit of that,
With which I mocked her curiosity,
That else refused all satisfaction;
And in it betrayed herself to the discovery
Of such an inclination, as to think on it
Renewes the blushes which you say my cheeks
So late have lost.

Card. Nay, Madam, I made show
Of any thing that might discover her:
Told her I had been privy to such cases,
And many a Ladies fall.

Inf. Enough Cardente.
But let not such things be your sport hereafter.
Jealousy is a spirit which once raised,
Will hardly be commanded down again;
And honor is a substance too too nice
To play withal

Am. I dare expose my eslfe
To the trial of her jury.

Inf. U^ge no more;
You are believed Amanda. Now my Lord (To Corvino.
We give you hearing.

Cor. Madam, I would whisper
The secrets of my soul.

Infe. Withdraw Cardente. (The Ladies retire.

Corv. Madam, if ought appear an error in me,
Condemn it not with too severe a sentence,
Till I have pleaded my excuse. I love you:
The general graces of your mind and person,
In this my settled age has raised high flames:
Which cherisht by your favor will preserve me,
Or quite consume me, if they waste themselves
In your disdain. The disproportion
We wear in outward titles, makes me fear
You will refuse consent: and yet I hope
(Not urging the Dukes favor) you will allow
My suit consideration, and your answer.

Inf. My Lord Corvino you have honored me
In your opinion; putting such a gloss
On my defects, that I appear more worthy
Then really I am. My age is subject
To those decays, that render the unfit
For a morous delights.

Corv. Your beauty, Madam,
Is in that freshness yet, that were I warmed
In your fair bosom, all the frost that hangs
Upon these hairs would quickly be dissolved,
And a new spring of liveliness and strength
Quicken this cold and passive earth that holds,
An Icy soul within it. You Would restore me
To my best youth again.

Infe. This love has taught you
The long neglected practice of your Court-ship:
Forbear it, good my Lord, my griefs are yet
Unapt for flattery.

Corv. Then give me leave
To speak in plainness my desires, that are
You would admit me to your sweet embraces
In lawful fellowship. You Would satisfy
My longing passions, and your sons request,
And pay those services that I have done you;
Which some might but my self dare not presume
To call desert.

Infe. Your faithful servines
Have been rewarded with degrees of honor,
And I expect your gratitude. I never
Discovered such ambition in your temper,
Which always seemed to level its just aim
At fair equality. Then good my Lord
Consider your attempts, and how they make
Your virtues much suspected.

Corv. If you dare
Call it a pride that I seek such addition,
Know there is no substance now depends upon
Your empty title which can make a difference,
But I will reconcile it by my merit,
I am not so inferior to be checked;
Nor weak in power, but that I can revenge
A scorn that is dishonorable.

Infe. Do not
Add to your ills Corvino. This had sense
As if it did imply you would not owe
A Duty to me now: or that you meant
Some treacherous discovery. Take heed
Of base ingratitude, 'twil slain your fame
(which good men call their life) with such a Leprosy,
As time can never cleanse it from.

Corv. I then
Must count my self refused.

Infe. Yes for a husband.
I must prepare for heaven: Nor shall I ever
Admit of new desires whilst the loved memory
Of my dead Lord presents it self.

Corv. Your Pardon.
Only you may consider, 'twas his will
Melissa should be Dutehesse.

Infe. Not without
The free election of my son, who now
Leaves it to time and counsel. Thus you still
Show your ambition. Dearest Spurio welcome, The third Seen Enter Spurio.
Let us go take the air.

Corv. Your graces leave
To have some conference with him.

Infe. When it is ended
Attend us in the garden. Exeunt Infe. Card. Aman.

Corv. Stay Melissa
Son I would urge your duty to reveal
What it is disturbes you. I by observation
Have noted odd expressions in your looks,
Your words, and actions, since the late Dukes death,
That argue there is within some strange distemper
Of your best parts, counsel must rectify.
I challenge from my interest the will
And power to give it.

Spu. How can I discover
What I yet know no? you must satisfy
Your self, and your own suppositions,
Even by yourselfe. If you have framed conjectures
From any outward Characters that may
Express an inward perturbation,
Propose and i'se reveal it.

Corv. You are in love.

Spu. I have desires, I must confess, but temper them
With a discreet respect to their best end:
Nor do I suffer any to flame out
In violent passions.

Corv. But they are directed
To one peculiar object; that is the Duchess,
Is it not so?

Spu. My breeding and Religion
Permit me not to lie: sir it is a truth;
And you may call it virtuous if you please:
But duty which you challenge from me checks it.
I neither dare nor will plead any right
Where you are interested.

Corv. I assign it all,
She has over thrown my cause with such a scorn
As burns me into rage; witness ye powers
That guide our not to be resisted fates,
How far she is banished from my thoughts.

Spu. You have sir
Breathed a new soul of comfort into me;
I Will freely now solicit for my self,
And try success.

Corv. 'Twill show of youthful rashness,
Can you ground any hopes?

Spu. From circumstance
I can; but none with which I will be flattered:
The honors which she has confert'd upon me
Are Arguments she loves me; her salutes
Are always dear or dearest.

Corv. Yet you must not.
Marry this Duchess.

Spu. How, will you oppose it?
You then are swollen with an unnatural envy.

Corv. No more, I must dispose you.

Spu. I Will obey.
But yet I beg you sir temper your power
With mild command, and deep consideration:
Think on the Duchess.

Corv. Think upon Melissa.

Spu. What of my sister sir?

Corv. She is a beauty
That might invite desire, and crown the bed
Of any Prince with happiness. Look on her,
And make her thy election.

Spu. Mine! for what?

Corv. A Wife.

Spu. Defend ye better influences,
No such incestuous dream could e're possess
My wanton'st, slumber.

Cor. It Is not so incestuous
As that thy inconsideratnesse attempted:
Resolve to take her, and by all my hopes
Of blessed eternity, I will not only
Justify that for lawful, but salute thee
Ferrara's lawful Duke.

Spu. What riddle's this?
Give it solution.

Corv. First resolve to be
What I have promised. Exit.

Spu. Good sir leave me not
Confounded with amazement: are not you
My Father sir? or who must own me? Sister,
Is there ought in your knowledge that may satisfy
My doubtful thrughts? must I not call you sister?
Or what is that greater ineest I would have
Committed? Can the Duchess be my mother?
An Aunt's less then a sister?

Mel. Dearest brother,
My knowledge ownes no secret which I would not
As freely make you master of as wish
My self a happiness: I must confess
My mother often has told me that you were not
The issue of her Womb.

Spu. There Is half the riddle 4 Scene. Enter Fidelio, Beneventi.
Unfoulded yet.

Fid. My Lord your valiant brother
This instant is arrived, to enrich the Court
With his full glories: all men court his victory
With such a praise, it stains his manly cheeks
With modest blushes. He expects your visit.

Spu. I know no brother.

Fid. How my Lord? your virtue.
Will suffer by suspicion if'y express
Your self or proud or envious,

Spu. Melissa,
I cannot satisfy your fathers Will,
Though all were cleared that darkes the reasons of it:
Be still Fidelios. Exit.

Ben. What the devil ails him?
His passions are as various as his clothes;
He shifts them daily: only keeps one fashion,
And one sad garb.

Fid. Are you acquainted with
Any events that have relation
Unto your brothers melancholy?

Mel. Some I am,
But urge not their discovery.

Fid. I obey
What ever you command; and hope my services
Will shortly be rewarded.

Mel. Take the assurance
Of my resolves and promise.

Ben. Trifle not
With court-ship now: let us think on bouncing complements
To bid the Soldiers welcome.

Fid. To the presence,
There is their entertainment. We shall see
What different things Courtiers and Soldiers be. Exeunt.

The third Act and first Scene. The Scene being the presence.
Bonardo, Cardente and Fidelio.
Non. DId she reveal't her self Candente to you?
Or else do you conclude it from some circumstance?
In such a cause I would not have credulity
Mock it self into error.

Card. 'Twas my Lord
Her own confession; yet before the Duchess
She does pretend 'twas only an intent
To mock my curiosity: but I fear
It is too sad a truth.

Bon. To me most sad,
Mine age grows fast upon me; and to have
A stain thrown now upon our House, by one
So eminent in all appearancies
Of good, it makes my wishes have to meet
The sweet peace of my grave: but yet Cardente
I am not easy to believe.

Card. Nor I.
There may be other causes why a Lady
Of her pure constitution should be subject
To qualmes and puling.

Bon. Is she not in love?

Card. That may be it my Lord, and if you could
Discover who the man is.

Bon. Would that help
To clear suspicion?

Card. All would straightappeare
In its full truth; her stain, or innocence;
For thus my Lord. I know the inclinations
Of all the Gallants; which are Goats, which Eunuchs:
Now if she does love any forward youth,
One that will thrust his Knife into the meat
Before he has said grace (you can apply it)
It Is so; if not, so.

Fid. My Italian nature
Begins to break her prison, and grow violent;
I Will force her sir to tell me.

Bon. Use no threats,
But mild persuasions; such as may become
The place: and urge them home before the presence
Fills with more number. Here she is. 2 Scene. Enter Amanda.

Card. Pray Heaven
He do not stab her.

Fid. Sister are y' in health?

Am. I know not brother, would you would ask a Doctor,
A skillful one that has proved more men mortal,
Then a corrupted Vintage, or French Duells:
If such a learned man's inspection can
Tell the disease which many think I have,
But am not sensible thereof my self.

Fid. You slight my question.

Am. Sure it does deserve
No better answer. How do I appear
To every curious eye that undertakes
The reading of my inside? sure that Lady
Has made you jealous.

Fid. There Is a stain Amanda
Thrown on you by suspicion, on your honor;
Nothing but blood, or a fair satisfaction
Can wash it off.

Am. I thought some such fine thing
Had mocked your credulous weakness. Blush to think
You own so low a soul as to suspect
Her whom your love calls sister; though detraction
Spoke with a hund red tongues, and muttered circumstance
To make it probable,

Fid. Your confidence
Carries the greater show of guilt.

Am. Of guilt!
Should you present all tortures tyranny
Did e're invent: I have no fears can make me
Belie mine innocence, though it might free me
From all their suffering.

Fid. This does show more like
The violence of a distempered passion,
Than will to satisfy. 'Twas never yet
Read in the story of our Ancestors,
Any least blemish stuck upon our house.
And if you have transgrest, the knowledge of it
Will point us out a way to just revenge,
Or to an honorable recompense;
And so preserve our yet unsullyed fames
Clear to post esterity.

Am. This circumvention
Is of so strange and intricate a nature,
I know not how to free my self, but by
Mine own just testimony. Brother know
Your best prepared devotions are not purer
Then my worst thoughts; their ends being always noble
When I have had desires.

Fid. Not to have some,
Indeed were more than wonder: such a Lady
As you are sister, pampered with the full nesse
Of Court delights, not to elect some one
Preferred in her esteem, were such a paradox,
Not all your learning can maintain.

Am. Suppose
I should confess to whom mine are directed;
He Is one that you dare not suspect, much less
Accuse of such a sin that is so far from
His virtuous inclination.

Fid. I am glad
Your love can give him such a Character.
To know him might advance your desires,
Provided they be honorable.

Am. Brother
You seem to hedge me in with studdied cunning.
But I can give my self a liberty
By naming him you would know. I do affect
Your friend Lord Spurio.

Fid. He the man has done it?

Am. Done what? your jealousy is weak, and grounded
Upon too nice a fear; and only propt
With her slight information.

Fid. Stay, stay Sister;
There Is something more: Did not you once pretend
You had a powerful interest in his Sister
That might command me a success with her?

Am. And you interpret it.

Fid. Nothing good Sister,
But one thing for another.

Am. Hug your error,
And cherish it until it sting your bosom:
Your threats shall not enforce another answer
Though the place had no privilege.

Fid. Enough
Good Sister; I am satisfied.

Am. Will you sir (To Bonardo.
Cherish my duty with a faith?

Bon. Of what?

Am. What that bad woman has accused me of,
Is false as any fabulous Deity Bono. and Fidelio whisper.
Ascribed to wicked mortal.

Card. Nay good Lady,
If any grounded fear has raised suspicion,
Truth ought to be discovered; if it were,
We then would make provision of some Villa,
Some pretty Country house, under pretense
That ayr's most wholesome for you.

Am. Would thou were
Without that noysefull instrument of speech;
Or all thy hearers deaf. But that her virtues
Carry their perfect luster, I should almost
Suspect the Duchess, for corferring favor
Upon so vile a woman. Exit.

Bon. Practice it. (To Fidelio. 3 Scene. Enter Polemici, Vittorio, A Lady and
Beneventi.
Twill be a perfect trial.

Fid. Here Is Vittorio,
And brave Polemici, that are returned
With the triumphing Notho.

Bon. I embrace ye;
You Are welcome home to peace, Salute.

Vit. We thank your Lord-ship.

Ben. It Is down right complement; we Soldiers
Are sparing of our words my Lord: blows chiefly
Are our discourse.

Pole. We Courtiers Beneventi
Can talk, but seldom fight.

Bon. That hit you home. To Beneventi.

Ben. How dare you offer to salute the Ladies,
Before you have shifted shirts? sure your Camp Laund resse
Never perfumed your linen.

Pole. Had you bin
There Beneventi, 'twould have made your linen
Soon want perfuming.

Card. Soldiers do not use To Beneventi.
Other perfumes than match and Gunpowder.

Ben. Were you converted into it Cardente,
You Would sweeten their Buffe-jerkins.

Lady. Were I Gunpowder
I Would blow you up.

Pole. You take your servants part.

Ben. You serve a Lady! Ladies should serve you
For your good service to the Duke and State:
Oh the men's heads that you cut off, Polemici!

Pole. The Maiden-heads you purchased in our absence!
Many a Suburb agent is inricht by it;
Though to the loss of your own state and conscience:
Ingeniously confess your chief employment.

Ben. We feign our selves as virtuous as the Duke,
And are as chaste at Court as withered Eunuchs:
But when we are at liberty abroad,
Ease and high feeding cannot hold out long:
Then to it like Monkeyes Captain. Sure your selves
Do piddle now and then with Suttlers wives;
And are content to praise their tanned complexions
For most rich beauties: whilst we Courtiers
Ravish delights from lips that taste of Nectar,
And think our selves in Heaven.

Pole. Whilst we Soldiers
After a tedious match, are forced to make
The earth our bed without a Pillow, sheets,
Or silver warming-pan; start from our sleep
At every sound the airs light motion makes,
Thinking it an alarm: Return from fight
Smeared over with blood and sweat, and savourly
Take the refreshment of a troubled water;
Whose muddy streams our Horses would scarce taste
But for necessity: fast till our guts
Contract themselves so close they will scarce hold
The full digestion of one Lark.

Ben. Good Captain
No more of this discourse; it mortifies me:
But now the Wars are ended, you will turn Courtier!
It Is quickly learnt.

Pole. You have instructed me,
Dissemble first an imitation
Of the Dukes virtues; feed high, and be lazy;
Next leacherous: is it not so?

Ben. A great proficient,
You Will quickly take Degrees.

Pole. In the last School
We shall outstrip you Courtiers; for observe
If any one of you should rival us,
And dare to intercept our pleasures, we
Can beat you Beneventi, mark me, beat you;
And sure the Duke would give us pensions for it,
To keep your Goat-ships honest.

Lady. Witty Soldier,
He fits you at all weapons.

Ben. Yours, the tongue;
But that it wants some of your woman's length:
Hee'ld h^t you otherwise. 4 Scene. Flourish Enter Macario, Infelice, Notho,
Spurio, Corvino, Amanda, Melissa and Ladies

Bon. Peace thus plays with war,
And makes it pastime.

Fid. Here Is the noble Conqueror.

Mac. Welcome again into our bosom Soldier.
We Would have you now leave action, and apply
Your ready will to entertain and manage
The honors we intend you, as rewards
Due to your valor and success: you have
Settled our peace at home by the subversion
Of all our neighboring enemies, and now
It Is fit you share a full proportion
Of all you labored for, that we in ease
And softness might securely please our senses;
And know no sufferings more then what are incident
To every prince, our cares: those lesson'd too
By our grave Counsels industry. I wish
You would move something from your own desires,
That granted might be valewed by your self:
We should be free.

Not. Ambition never touched me.
If I have done an act has gained allowance
In popular opinion, let not flattery
Court it with too much praife. These ought to share;
And every common soldier well as I:
I but directed what they executed.
Let your rewards sir, smile upon their wants,
For sure our victory brought much more honor
Then profit home: nor could I think it less
Than tyranny to slave men being conquered,
And force them buy their liberty; though in policy
And custom it is allowed both safe and honorable.
Cherish their valor sir, and the example
Will (when your need requires it) arm the hearts
Of others with like forwardness.

Mac. We give
The spoils to be distributed, and pension
To every soldier; and unto thy self --
I know not what: considerate judgments must.
Allow the gift a worth before I offer it.
Embrace you two whilst I embrace ye both.
Why does my Spurio frown upon his brother?
Can his clear soul give entertainment to
Neglect or envy? such a glorious pair
To suffer an Eclipse.

Spu. Your victory
And person both are welcome.

Not. Both must serve you.

Inf. Dear valiant Notho, now you have put off
The rough abilliments of War, pray' wear
These ornaments for my sake. Gives him jewels.

Not. They are favors.
An Eastern Monarch might be proud of Madam:
A Mine could not have made your servant richer*
In's own esteem.

Card. Trust me the Soldier speaks
Excellent Court-ship Ladies. Those rich jewels
Will be yours shortly; and I would advise you
Not to refuse them upon any terms
When they are offered.

Inf. Your deserts require Give Vitt. and Polem. Jewels.
Some due acknowledgement.

Pole. These Madam are
Bounties above them.

Mac. Do not you my Lord To Corvino.
Conceive strange joys, to see so fair an issue*
Make your age happy?

Corv. It Is a happiness*
For which I owe Heaven thanks.

Ben. What think you Captain? To Polemici.
You seldom found such spoils in a py'd Knap-sack.
Do you know how to use them?

Pole. Not as you do,
Like Children; play with them.

Ben. You Will pawn them rather?

Pole. That I believe you use.

Mac. We Will have some revells,
It Is fit that Soldiers sometimes should have rest,
And taste the Courts delights.

Ben. You Will find there is difference
Betwixt a Courtier and a Soldier Captain.

Pole. There Is much.

Ben. How much?

Pole. As much as is betwixt
A good sword and a Fiddle-sticke.

Ben. But how
Do you apply them?

Pole. That unto my self
I best know how to use.

Mac. We Will first thank Heaven,
And then we will see some maskery. This day
We Will honor with solemnities. Exeunt.

Spu. With me sir? Flourish, Spu. Not. Fid. Ben. Vitto. and Polemici remaining.

Not. Brother.

Spu. Forget that name; it must be lost
To both our memories.

Not. Sure mine preserves not
The least impression of an injury
I ever did you, that might justly challenge
The acqu^intance of that Title. Others look
Upon my fortune with respectfull smiles;
You either scorn or envy it.

Spu. I do neither;
But there are secrets which my knowledge cannot
Yet comprehend, till time makes more discoveries:
If it appear then you are not my brother,
Say not it was my fault.

Not. I would you give me
A fuller satisfaction.

Spu. When I can
I will not be reserved.

Not. I know not what
Your words imply, unless you will call me bastard;
And that has danger in it. No privilege
Of nature, or respects unto the greatness
Favor has raised you to --

Spu. He Is here can satisfy. 5 Scene. Enter Corvino.

Cor. Will you yet wedde Melissa?

Spu. Never sir;
I would you would clear my doubts.

Cor. Oh never sir,
Till you perform that act.

Spu. My ignorance
And innocence shall then preserve me safe*
There may be danger in the knowledge of it:
Hence forth I Will not be curious. Exeunt Spurio, Fide. Beneventi.

Not. Sir, my duty
That taught me humble knees, and an obedience
Is somewhat staggered; something has begot
A jealousy within me, that I ought not
Pay them to you: but still my virtuous reason
Does fight against that sin.

Cor. What mean you Notho?

Not. My brother sir, or Spurio (for the name
Of brother he refuses) says we are not
The issue of one blood.

Cor. It was a folly,
And inconsiderate rashness to betray
Himself to so much hazard.

Not. Sir, the knowledge
Would settle my disturbances, and make
Again that duty perfect, which yet doubts
To whom it owes it self.

Cor. Those words of his
Might be interpreted; and I confess
My wanton youth had much unlawful issue:
Of which perhaps he is one.

Not. My lawfulness
Had then first privilege to take exception:
I must not now own him.

Cor. Yes; for my love
Is equal to you both.

Not. In that you are
Unjust to the deserts of my dead mother;
And the Honored family whence she derived
Her blood and virtues.

Cor. It becomes not you
To tax my partial humor, since your self
Is equally unlawful.

Not. You have awed me,
'Twas not my sin; and thus my duty beggs Kneeles.
The public knowledge may not be my shame.

Cor. That shall not stain, thy fame stains not thy conscience:
And tell me Notho, dare be great?

Not. (...) be
What fortune o^ my reason promp^s me to,
If warranted for lawful.

Cor. Dare be Duke?

Not. Forbid it loyalty.

Cor. It Is in my power
To make thee justly so.

Not. If It be my right,
There Is no attempt that can have danger in it
Enough to fright me.

Cor. Shall't attempt no danger:
The prosecution shall be politic
And safe. But first thou must resolve to do
What I command thee.

Not. Speak it.

Cor. Wed Melissa.

Not. Did ever father yet command his Children
To be incestious! is your reason perfect?
This shows distraction.

Cor. All depends upon it*
And Heaven knows it is lawful: Therefore be
Sudden in thy resolves. Exit.

Not. What fit has seaz'd him?

Pole. The Ladies eyes have shot some wanton fire
Into his heart: my Lord.

Not. Polemici
I have heard wonders, and your bosoms shall
Partake the secret, so you will keep it safe:
It Is of high consequence.

Pole. They are the same
Safe Closets you have trusted.

Not. You Would not envy me
If I were Duke.

Pole. We should not sure unless
It made you proud.

Not. But dare your valors aid me
In the design?

Pole. Why what disloyal devil
Has put these thoughts into you? have we saved
Our throats from cutting by the enemy
To feel the Hang-mans Axe? why how dare you
Cherish such vain ambition? if you should
Marry the Duchess, she must have no son first:
And then it is doubtful whether the election
Will be conferred on you. There are more worthies
That hold as good opinion in the state.

Not. But say it be my rig

Pole. I never studied
Your Genealogy so much, to find
How there might be relation; if there is any
Let it appear.

Not. You shall know more hereafter;
Strange mysteries in fortunes hidden lie,
Cannot be judged of by a common eye.

Exeunt. The Fourth Act and first Scene. The Scene being the Gallery.
Spurio and Fidelio.
Fid. It Is an unkindnesse thus to be reserved,
And hide the causes of your discontent:
The privilege of friendship should be larger;
And not confined to any weak respects
That bound its limits. I should not conceal
My secret'st sins from you, but for the scandal.

Spu. Fidelio, I am lost in such a mist
Of doubts and error, all my reasons faculties
Cannot instruct my knowledge how to find
A way that leads to truth,

Fid. If any counsel
My weak abilities can aid you with
May be thought useful --

Spu. Urge it not Fidelio;
To know and not to remedy increases
The suffering more.

Fid. My love would not interpret
Neglect or jealousy to be the cause
Of these expressions; if you do suspect it,
I then may ground a fear you have declined
Your wonted purity: and through the guilt
Of some foul act makes shame over sway your reason,
You do enforce your blushing soul to be
The unwilling prison of so vile an evil
You dare not give it liberty.

Spu. This is
Such an extreme Fidelio, I should rather
Admit of flattery then to be taxt thus.
Time and your neerenesse to me might have taught
Your knowledge, something by observing me,
And how my courses tended: There was never
The coursenesse in my humor, that it pleased me
To hear my self commended: but the life
Of honor being wounded by detraction,
Or any false aspersion, 'twere a sin
Equal to guilt should I neglect to cure it
By any testimony; though it forced me
To Praise my self, above all the degrees
Of moderation: Therefore good Fidelio
Neither be partial to me, nor let weakness
Interpret any private act of mine
From common rumor: such an even temper
Would make our friendship lasting.

Fid. I my Lord
Think you so far from being vicious,
Your scruples scarce allow those virtues in you
A merit, which to us might be examples.

Spu. I meant you no such privilege.

Fid. Believe it,
I will not flatter you; for sure you have
Some easy faults, that will admit the excuse
Of frailty: such as love.

Spu. Is Love a sin then?

Fid. Yes, when it burns with a corrupted flame;
And lights desire to what is sensual only,
Without regard of ought that makes our difference
The most refined and perfect in its nature:
Beasts have their lust.

Spu. I almost understand you,
But sure you dare not think me forward that way;
Your error were not friendly: neither is there
A Lady so neglected: she would court
My shallow worth, or yield if she were courted.

Fid. There is that Magic in your masculine graces,
They Have charmed the beauty of the Court to love you:
And it is arrived my knowledge.

Spu. What Is that beauty?
Instruct my ignorance.

Fid. Amanda sir,
And though she be my sister, I do give her
No attribute, fame and the general voice
Confirm? not to her.

Spu. With that name thou have
Charmed me Fidelio thoroughly, and recalled
My apoplexi'd thoughts to their first life.
Mine eyes were blinded with the Duchess so,
I could not see that happiness which now
I wish next to my eternity. But give me
Assurance good Fidelio.

Fid. That were vainenesse;
And now I must confess you had great cause
To be disturbed: profess love to the Duchess,
When you had given Amanda such deep earnest.

Spu. What earnest mean you? yet I never saluted
Her ears with a request; or urged the grant
Of what you say, her inclination
Would freely give me.

Fid. Why should you express
This nice unwillingnesse to be discovered?
The knowledge often as yet is limited
To a small number, and the memory
Of her dishonor will be quickly lost
In a fair recompense.

Spu. There Is nothing clear
To me in this dark mystery, but that
The beauty you call sister is a Whore:
Is it not so?

Fid. Your self can best interpret,
And yet me thinks another name would sound
More Court-like; and not have half so much offensive:
For though she have the stain, I know she holds
That nobleness of spirit, none but such a one
As your full self could ever win her to it;
And a fair satisfaction vowed withal:
Which sure you will perform.

Spu. Thou art a villain;
Did my election from a world of men
Single thee out to be so much my self;
The union of our souls would not admit
Of a division, but that interchange
And custom taught us read each others thoughts?
And can that soul of thine express it self
Subject, so easily to be corrupted
With jealousy and error? Then let Moralifts
Fable hence forth no empty name of friendship,
Nor boast there is such a secret: I shall never
Wear thee more here.

Fid. This is no satisfaction,
I dare believe your innocence; if you
Dare urge it solemnly, and thereby give it
A confirmation.

Spu. That my pity cannot
Deny thy weakness: witness Heaven --

Fid. Enough.
You shall not swear; I credit it; and my penitence (Kneeles.
Humbles me for your pardon.

Spu. Rise and take it:
But I would know upon what circumstance
This jealousy was grounded.

Fid. The information
Came from Cardente, and her own acknowledgement
Of her desires to you. But she shall dye,
Her shame must not out live her.

Spu. How Fidelio!
Mock not thy self out of eternity,
By such a sin will like wise render thee
A scorn to memory: her innocence
May suffer falsely. It Is not supposition,
But proof that must condemn her; sure there cannot
Be lodged in such a frame as is Amandas
A thought but nobleness: I Would soon take
A withered Anchoresse into my suspect,
As her sweet purity.

Fid. You Would have her live then!

Spu. Why not? to make me happy.

Fid. Marry her,
And to it again; 'till that confirms all lawful,
I must forbid more pleasure.

Spu. What words fall
From thy distraction? dare renew thy guilt
By a worse second jealousy?

Fid. You Will be
Her Champion too? this zeal of yours confirms
That truth which was but doubt.

Spu. I shall forget
The place has any privilege; but come sir,
Since my clear protestations will not satisfy,
We Will argue it with these. 2 Scene. Enter Amanda, and Melissa meeting them.

Fid. There will not be
Much Fallacy. Offer to go.

Am. Is your belief good brother
Yet rectified?

Fid. I must not own thee: hence.

Spu. Since she is here --

Fid. This trifling smells of cowardice.

Spu. Away then. Offer to go again.

Am. What Is the meaning? two such friends
To be divided!

Mel. By that interest To Fidelio.
My love does challenge, let us know the motives
To this strange anger.

Fid. Pardon me Melissa,
I must (though willingly I would not do it)
Forget your virtues.

Am. Let our tears divert To Spurio.
Your rash and violent purpose: trust me sir,
Unless a noble cause has fired your spirits --

Spu. It Is yours Amanda.

Am. Then I understand it;
And challenge it my privilege to order
Your reconciliation. Brother, know
Your error has dishonored you so much,
That till you have called back to your opinion
My fame and inocence, I must not own you.
To raise a scandal of high consequence
From such an empty and perverse suspicion
And not to clear it with the satisfaction
Both of protests and testimony, argues
A soul less noble than the generous blood
Of our brave Ancestors successively
Inherited; producing actions,
The subject of large stories. Let Melissae
Witness the intent; a humorous counterfeit,
To mock Cardendte curiosity
Into an apt discovery of her self
And wicked inclinations; that we knowing them
Our care might shun her courses.

Fid. This Amanda
Believed would bring me peace again.

Mel. Believe it, For it is a truth clear as the innocence
Of babes: after the holy ceremony
Has purged the original stain.

Fid. I am confirmed;
And ask again your pardon! Yours Amanda*
I do presume upon.

Am. Your noble anger
Has such a fair excuse, that I must thank you.
Your error only was your fault, and that
My pity pardons freely.

Spu. This has likewise
Restored me to new hopes: and fair Amanda,
If your esteem has added any worth
To my defects that make them seem perfections,
Such as may please your chaste and free desires;
If you will possess me with the happiness
Of blessed union, it is the only one
That I would covet.

Am. Let my blushes speak
A maids consent, and in them you may read
My thoughts direction that made you their object;
Mixing themselves with fears, hopes, jealousies;
And all that is incident to earnest love,
May it be crowned with such a fair event,
'Twill make your handmaid happy.

Spu. 'Twill but be A mutual exchange.

Fid. I hope our loves To Melissa.
Are grown so ripe, the fasting of our joys
Will not be long protracted. 3 Scene. Enter Corvino, Bonardo, and Cardente.

Mel. Even when
It pleases the high providence.

Card. My Lord
Observe how they are paired. Doubtless all is clear:
And sure he will make amends.

Bon. My Lord Corvino,
If your consent will ratify --

Corv. You need not
Urge it again. Have you observed Cardente
Ought in Melissas inclination (Corvino and Card whisper.
Toward Fidelio?

Card. That Is it; she is struck
With the blind Archer.

Spu. From a cloud of error To Bonardo.
A light is broken that has made new day
In our dark treasons, and directed me
To that which yields my being here a happiness,
'Bove any form I could prescribe my wishes:
My knowledge learnt it from the imperfect motives
To your suspicion; without which discovery
My ignorance had lost it: but it cannot
Be full till crowned with your consent,

Bon. You have it;
And I as freely pardon both your faults:
Your frailty does excuse them.

Spu. You Will return
To your first error; let not a new jealousy
Stagger our fair proceedings: We have climbed
Half of our height already: and to fall
From such bright hopes.

Am. As you would cherish duty
Or other virtues in me, clear the mist
That hangs before your reason; you shall see
The whiteness of my innocence: confirm it
With your beliefes (for truth is only valued
As it is received) I shall meet his embraces
With all my Virgin sweets, like evening air
Without a cloud; when it but only blusheth
To kiss the Sun at parting.

Spu. It Is received
As positive a truth as e're came from
A Sybills mouth.

Bon. It has restored thee likewise
To my now rectified opinion:
Blessings dwell with you.

Fid. Please you Lord Corvino To Corvino,
With your consent to perfect what is begun
So fairly here; and make our union add
Something to this days glory.

Corv. She Fidelio
Wants much to meet your full deserts; your love
Perhaps she may: when I have ordered her
With some becoming counsels.

Bon. He Is my son,
And shall inherit honors and possessions,
With virtues to their best dependances;
Grant that you like of the election,
And the solemnities of both their marriages
To morrowes sun shall gaze at.

Corv. Pray my Lord
Give me a fathers privilege to prepare her
With some fit precepts; then few minutes shall
Resolve it.

Bon. We Will expect. Exeunt Bonar. Spur. Am. Fide.

Corv. Melissa, you
Have made my age conceive as many hopes
As ever father did to make him happy.
Kill not their issue by a rash neglect,
And voluntary loss of that which perfect
And ordered judgments do call happiness;
Above th'enjoying of a course desire;
Confined to a mean person too: if greatness
Were not a relative to all that is good,
And glorious in the general speculation
Of things that do affect us, not in sense,
But the bright part of reason; emulous man
Would not through danger manage actions
So full of wonder, nor employ his faculties
In high designs: but like a heavy lump*
That only by its weight moves to its center,
And there sleeps, so should we: leave no? so much
As the Record of any memorable
And brave achievement, for a monument
That such men once had being. To be Duchess
Will not impair your virtues; they would take
More luster from the title. Now Melissa
I Would have you quench that low and common flame
That burns toward Fidelio; and embrace
Those high desires I point you to: my policy
Has ordered the success, and your obedience
By your subjecting of it to my will,
Shall crown you with full blessings.

Mel. Honored Sir,
The duty which I owe you, and which ought not
Be mentioned without reverence, humbles me Kneeles,
Thus to express it. If I could new mould
My frame and temper fit for such great honors.
I should embrace them with the entertainment
Of my most ready will. My constitution
Is of too course a matter to receive
Such nice impressions. Those whom Heaven has
Ordained for Princes, are of purer earth
Then common mortals sure; and by instinct
Both know, and order their high difference,
To make it fit for greatness. If I were
The Duchess sir, my thoughts would still betray
Me to my self; and such imperfect actions
Receive their ordering from my weak abilities,
They'ld render me a scorn to those, that otherwise
Would pay me reverence.

Corv. Your unwillingnesse
Plays with illusions that are vain and empty.
In what are you defective but your will,
That Is regulated by a childish humor?
Let your consideration weigh the events
Are incident to both: when you are Duchess
You Will be above the danger of your fortune;
And awe that weak necessity to which
The other may be subject.

Card. Sure your father
Says right sweet Lady; there is much difference
Betwixt the Duchess and a subjects wife;
Betwixt a chair of State, and a thrum'd couch;
A Ward robe that would furnish a Jews Lumbre,
And one embroydred petty-coate for Sundaies;
And that perhaps not paid for too. Be wise,
Obey your father Lady and be Duchess:
'Twill be the better choice.

Mel. Content abounds
In riches, when the owners of cramb'd Treasuries
Unsatisfi'd are beggars. Sir, the Duke
Having refused me, how can I affect him?
And where love is enforced.

Card. Why there is your privilege,
Great Ladies ought not love: their husbands more
Then in a just proportion of state.

Corv. Melissa, I do find your inclination:
And though my zeal intended your advancement
Which you your self refuse; yet my: indulgence
Ties up mine anger: only I must wish you
Consider thoroughly.

Mel. Sir, my duty shall not
Give way to any act without your liking;
Although I have desires I can restrain them
From satisfaction. Exit.

Corv. Would Fidelio were not
His love, a love diverts her.

Card. There are means;
You understand my Lord: but yet I do not advise you to it.

Corv. Thou art wise Cardente,
And can be secret too; for thou and I
Know something hidden to the world: It Is better
Give her some Philter, that may raise in her
A flame toward the Duke.

Card. But is there virtue in any such?

Corv. My youth has made experience,
And I am furnished with that is powerful:
I bear it still about me.

Card. Good my Lord
Impart it to my use; I feign would have A Husband yet.

Cor. Why thou may have Fidelio,
A young and handsome Lord. It chiefly works
Upon such disproportions; share it justly,
You both must take it; for in that consists
The magic Sympathy. 4 Scene. Enter Polemici, and Vittorio.

Card. I Will to my Closet
And pray, then love. Exit.

Cor. Polemici, where left you
My valiant Son?

Pole. Notho! he is in the presence.

Corv. When you return, desire him meet me in
The Grove behind the Garden.

Pole. I scarce think
He Will own you when he is Duke: Vittorio,
What think thou of this riddle?

Vitt. It Is a hard one, he to be Duke and lawful!

Pole. He begins
To form himself fit for it: he takes survey
Of all that he supposes shortly must
Bow to his humor: tell's me he will new mould
The State, and we shall be advanced.

Vitt. To the Gallows*

Pole. I do not like such raising; let us be honest;
And though we cannot make a full discovery
Of this so close and intricate proceeding,
We Will intimate some fears that may betray him
To jealousy and care; that watchful eyes
Observing him; if ought should be attempted,
It may be stifled by prevention in the first birth.

Vitt. His favors yet deserve
We should preserve him.

Pole. Yes, I would preserve him.
But chiefly from the dangers incident
To such a vain ambition, into which
He Is flattered by his father* but upon
What ground, I do not think the devil ownes
A perfect knowledge: Sure he cannot think
There Is power in his success to make him popular,
And lead the multitude in their disorder
To wish an innovation first, then practice it.

Vitt. He says it is his right.

Pole. But where is the testimony?
Hell on these dark devises. Well, let us be
Like valiant Soldiers in the Rear, that dare
Go on, whilst the front stands to be their bulwark:
But breaches made therein to show them danger,
In flight they put their safety. Let Us observe,
And add more to our knowledge; then resolve:
He that persues an act that is attended
With doubtful issues, for the means had need
Of policy and force to make it speed. Exeunt.

Act. 5. First Scene. The Scene the Grove.
Corvino and Notho.
Corv. THis preparation of your high resolves
I must allow with wonder: sure you had
Some revelation of the weighty secret;
Or else instinct has taught your knowledge more
Then a weak judgment could conclude from doubts;
And those bare circumstances I have used
TO instruct you by.

Not. But if Ferrara must
Own me her Duke, what progress yet is ordered
For my establishment? great actions ought not
Want equal means: and sure my single force
May not encounter such an opposition
As I shall meet. To challenge it my right
And not mainetaine it, renders me the laws:
I would not pay my life for a distracted
Unwarrantable action. If it may
Be pleaded or with force, or testimony,
I am above all fears.

Corv. I have a faction
Which with your party will make up a power
Of strength enough: but there is no such need.
Melissa joined unto you will be more
Than any numerous Army of resolved
And faithful spirits: she alone shall clear
All that is yet in mists.

Not. If you will take from me
The scruples that I have about its lawfulness,
I Will court her to prevail.

Corv. You may command her,
Confirm it with an Oath as you are a Prince;
And as I hope the ends of my ambition
Will meet success, you shall be satisfied.

Not. By all the vertuall powers that make an Oath
Sacred, I vow only to wedde Melissa;
Provided it be lawful.

Corv. Then accept
My duty sir, that owes subjection
Duly to none but you. It is your birthright
That shall prefer you before this young usurper;
And thus his knee to whom yours often has bended Kneeles.
Humbles it self for pardon, that my breast
So long concealed what should make many happy.

Not. I then am elder son to the late Duke!
And only yours supposed: I must acknowledge
A large debt to you for my education,
Which answered my high birth. But can this have
Clear confirmation?

Corv. As the brightest air
The Sun illumines.

Not. I am then a Prince,
And you my only Subject:
For I know not
Who else will pay obedience to me.

Corv. All Will follow my example; for the rumor
As it grows bigger will incense the multitude:
From whom your fortunes and deserts have won
Both love and admiration. Fury then
Runs them into a lump, or monstrous form
With many heads, that carry their mad body
Reelingly forward, where they find resistance
Growing more violent: when to prevent
The mischievous effects of such an uproare:
The cause is asked and known; expostulated:
And your right proved by me, the general voice
Salutes you Duke. And shortly after you
May call Melissa Duchess.

Not. I have heard
She does affect Fidelio, And unless
She be diverted --.

Corv. By this time Fidelio
Has not his being,

Not. Have you killed him then?

Cor. Both politickly it is and safely ordered,
Cardente poisons both him and her self.

Not. Could you have such a conscience?

Car. Nice religion
Awes not a Politician. They both stood
Betwixt me and my ends.

Not. You have confessed
Your self a murderer, 'twas a bad act;
And you have added to it: the discovery
Has made me guilty by the knowledge of it.
I cannot but with horror now embrace
Her love, for which his innocence has suffered:
Nor will I marry her.

Cor. Dare you then be
Unjust to your own honor? and neglect
That which you call religion, we but form?

Not. You have instructed me: all other virtues
Depend on Justice; she alone is perfect
Without addition in her self. A Prince
Cannot deserv'dly wear the royal title,
That orders not it, nor is ordered by it.
Justice with tyranny may be allowed
Rather than partiality, for that
Emboldens sin; the other makes it fear.
If this day I should not be just (the first
Of my uncertain government) a blessing
Would not preserve it; for the bad example
Would teach bad subjects (such as thou) to be
Presumptious in their errors.

Cor. What proceeding Intends this ambage?

Not. Such a sin as thine
Is not allowed the plea of an excuse.
Then since thoustand'st convicted by thy self,
I thus pronounce thy sentence: thou shall dye.

Corv. Your self is not immortal Prince.

Not. By the hand Of Justice.

Cor. Who Is the executioner?

Not. Thy self, I have no other to command.
Do It with that instrument. Throws him his Dagger.

Cor. It Is a command
Becomes a Prince; and chiefly such a one
As makes it scruple to preserve his rayser,
Or to connive at a slight petty sin;
Whose execution has confirmed his title:
It Is a less sin to kill thee than my self.

Not. Honor must yield then to necessity:
I Will do it my self. My sword that has bin just Draws.
In war, in Peace shall be so. Therefore pray;
And if the apprehension of thy death
Presents thy guilty conscience with an horror,
Meet it with holy thoughts, that thy repentance
May bear thy best part upwards. I am loath
To kill thy soul.

Corv. What strange conceits are these
Transport your reason from its use? pray kill me,
And when y' have done it, call my silent ashes
To tell the people how you are their Prince.
What then shall give my cold tongue motion
To justify your right?

Not. Just Hevens want not
Miraculous means. My Justice is too slow,
And slies with lazy wings. Therefore be sudden;
I cannot give thy preparations
A longer time.

Cor. Put up your sword, and take Throws back the Dagger.
Your Hang-mans tool again. Put up I say,
And call your duty back. Son I have played
My trialls into danger, hear the reason.
Observing in thee haughtiness of spirit,
Forward to noble action, that was always
Attended with success, I feared ambition
Might tempt thy virtue, therefore ordered this
To prove its truth.

Not. You cannot trifle me
Into new error. I have shaken off
That loose and vulgar outside I was dressed in
By ignorance; but now I know my self
To be a Prince: It Is I that have discovered
Ambition in thee, and thy practices;
To make thy daughter Duchess. But I play
Too much with Justice. Take thy punishment
For murder. Offers to kill him. 2 Scene. Enter Spurio. draws.

Spu. It Is not yet but in attempt.

Corv. Y' have saved my life. Exit.

Nnt. Why do thou interpose?
Rash man, I do command thee fetch him back,
And be his executioner. Art fixed?
Obey thy Prince with motion, or I Will turn
My rage on thee.

Spu. What madness has possessed thee?

Not. I Am like to have good subjects, I must beat them
Into obedience: think not on defense
For that is as vain as if with nothing armed
But empty air, thou mett'st a Thunderbolt.
A sword thus ordered by the hand of Majesty
Will make its way.

Spu. Traitor call back that breath, Fight.
Which as it does divide the circling air,
Poisons it more than fenns from whence the Sun
Exhales infectious vapors.

Not. Dare resist
Thy Sovereigns Will and power?

Spu. Disloyal villain,
Thy words have made the cause inspire such valor
Into my hand and sword, such a just rage Fight.
To punish thee --

Not. It has a point, I feel it;
My royal blood does wast.

Spu. It Is course and sordid.

Not. I fail not yet, my spirits still have force
I think that reached you Fight.

Spu. That reached you again.
The cause assures me victory.

Not. It Is enough,
W' are both proved mortal. Falis.

Spu. Farewell dearest Master:
I dye thy loyal Champion. Falls. 3 Scene. Ent. Corv. Infelice.

Inf. What Is this horror
Presents it self? Is It real or illusive?
My Spurio, Notho, dead! let my soul flight
To meet yours in the peaceful shades of rest. Sownes,

Corv. Madam look up, suffer not your faint spirits
Thus to retire unto their inmost cells:
Let them dilate their vigor, and at once
Make all your senses useful. This sad accident
If well considered is not of such consequence,
That it should show how much our passions can
Out do our reason.

Inf. Give me more fresh air,
That I may draw it freely in to increase
My sighs; not to preserve the breath that keeps
The different parts united. What sad influence
Ordered this Tragic action? or what motives
Could teach them to direct it to this end?
This most unnatural end --

Corv. Good Madam cease
Your exclamations; this may be applied
To better use from a consideration.
Your honor is secured, your shame prevented:
It was a mercy in high providence
Would you receive it so.

Inf. How weak is counsel
To desperate frailty? it is not your Art can
Persuade me to a comfort, being lost
To all that should revive it. In these two
Were lodged such a proportion of
My living joys, in their cold earth remains
All my hopes dead and frozen, unto which
They whilst they lived gave life. If there were virtue
In tears to warm your numbed and bloodlesse limbs,
Into new life and motion, I would bath them
With a large flood: and when the springs were dry
Wish my self changed into a weeping marble
To be your monument.

Corv. Be not transported
Into such vain expressions.

Infe. Vain advise,
My griefs are like to Walls resisting Darts,
They Will beat thy counsels back to thy own danger.
Corvino you were surely false, and taught
The youths this way to ruin. One more sigh
Will crack my hearts weak cordage, and the vessel
Wanting its helps, yield to the only guidance
Of the distracted waves till it be swallowed.
I thought my patience could have met with cheerfulness,
Any cross storm of fortune; this has killed it.
Forgive me Heaven, translate my penitent
And reconciled soul to a better mansion
Then that she is lodged in now. Divide my heart
You two. Corvino bear my dying blessings
Unto Macario -- Oh -- Dies.

Corv. Will you then dye?
And so prevent me? for I did not mean
You should survive them, though I ordered not
Their deaths; retain your senses yet a little.
Live but to hear me, and I will relate
All that my knowledge ownes concerning it;
And the new policies that I have built
Upon these happy accidents; for hitherto
Fortune has bin my Matchiaveile, and brought,
Events about I never practiced for.
Fidelio and Cardente are removed:
One stood betwixt my high ends, and the other
Begot continual fear of a new danger
By her discovery. I shall be perfect now
In all things but revenge upon your scorn,
And the neglect of my deservings; will you not
Stay then to hear me? Farewell. 4 Scene. Ent. Mac. Pole. Vitt. Bon. Ben. Am.
Mel. Guard.

Mac. What Is this horror?
The Scene presents a Tragedy; our Guard.
Our mother dead, and our two friends made livelesse
By one another? grief seal up mine eyes
With an eternal darkness.

Am. Most unhappy Kneeling by Spurio.
Amanda, in the loss of all thy wishes;
We Will not be long divided, if my griefs
Meet not too stubborn and perverse resistance
From the soft heart I gave to thee.

Mac. Remove
The bodies decently, and then support me: Exit Guard with the Bodies, the
Ladies following
My spirits faint. Corvino we would have
The best account you can of this sad business,
To which you cannot choose but have relation,
Considering the persons and the manner;
Speak your best knowledge.

Corv. I have now no language
But tears to be interpreted, and they
Are characters of inward sorrow only;
Cannot express more then their propper meaning,
And whence they take their form. Sir I am lost
To all my hopes of being, they being gone
On which it did depend, my sons; in whom
I had a lasting name, and should have lived
Unto succeeding times: now it will vanish
Like Clouds dissolved, to be forgotten.

Mac. Know you
What were the motives to their difference,
That fired such anger in them?

Corv. The remembrance
Of that calls up more grief. Your mother sir.
The inconsiderate youths interpreted
Her favors to be love, and rivalling
Each other in desire, their passions met
By fury, joined together, and begot
This sad effect: which when she understood,
And saw the dire events that had proceeded
From her so clear intentions through mistaking,
Compassion broke her heart. This sir is all
My sad soul knows.

Mac. I would it never had bin,
Or I to know it.

Corv. Shortly I shall pay
Nature her last debt, for my weakened age
Cannot resist these killing sorrows long.
And my poor services desire your grief
Not to be deaf to one request; that is,
You Would take my daughter to your care, and be
A father to her: or --

Mac. We will respect her.

Pole. My information sir was truth. There is
More mystery to be unfoulded yet;
Times daughter will appear, although she blush
To show her nakedness. 5 Scene. Enter Fidelio and Cardente.

Card. Oh a Confessor.

Fid. Confess who 'twas that ordered this vile practice,
Or my just anger shall allay it self
With that infected blood thou have, before
The poison works more.

Card. It was Lord Corvino.

Mac. What Is that?

Fid. She would have given poison to me,
Of which her self had taken before: but providence
Ordered it that my jealousy deferred it,
'Till it appeared to work on her with violence:
And so I was preserved.

Card. But I am peppered;
There Is something in my conscience.

Mac. Utter it,
'Twill make thy peace with heaven; what is it Cardente?

Card. Spurio, and Notho were your natural brothers,
Got by your father, on your mother sir.
In his first Duchess days she being barren.
I and Corvino had the secret carriage
Of all the business. He has poisoned me.
I never shall love Philters more. Dies.

Mac. Corvino,
Here Is a discovery renders you so vile,
That new suspicions spring from't: Neither can we
Trust our own safety where a murderer
Sits near our favor. Tortures therefore shall
Force from you what they can.

Cor. Your Justice might
Be tempered with more mercy, and from reason.
Since the great secret is revealed which I
Kept guarded with my best resolves, as being
The Closet of your mothers honor, now
I will stand up and Justify my actions.
First for the death of your unlawful brothers
It Was accidental, not by me determined.
And has secured your state that might have suffered
A great disturbance by the knowledge of it:
Which by your Mothers and Cardentes death
Had found prevention being then restrained
Only to me. For you Fidelio,
You intercepted all my studied means
Unto my daughters honor. But intents
Proceeding not to act may challenge pardon.
What tortures then do I deserve?

Mac. Just death.

Fid. That sentence kills me too. Melissa!

Mac. Take him away; provide for's execution.
This day I Will see it done; 'twill set more fairly.
Lust and ambition are two means of evils,
That practiced by their owners make them devils.

FINIS.

