A TOVNG-COMBAT, LATELY HAPPENING, Between two English soldiers; in the
Tilt-boat of Grauesend.

The one go-ing to serve the King of Spayn, The other to serve the States of
Holland.

PRINTED With Approbation. 1623.

To the Right woorshipful, SIR EDWARD PARHAM Knight, Seriant Major of the
Regiment of the Right honorable The LORD VAVX, in the service of the King of
Spayn in the Netherlandes.
IN my late passage down from London to Grauesend by Tiltboat, there chanced
among others, two gentlemen at that present also to pas, being both of
millitarie profession, but differently disposed in their determinations
touching the sides they went to serve on, for after some course of speech that
passed among the compagnie: the one discovered his intention to go over into
the Netherlandes to serve the King of Spayn, and the other manifested his
purpose to go to serve the States of Holland, but because each of them seemed
fortifyed with reason for his determination, and to think himself as well able
to defend it as he seemed willing to follow it, all the compagnie out of a
curiosity wear very desirous to hear what by either could be said, but yet
with a prouiso that no inconvenience or falling out between them upon it might
ersue, and therefore they desired them, that before they began seriously to
argue the matter, they should pas their words to each other upon their
honors, that without iniurying one another in particular, each might have his
free speech, in defense of his own determined course, and that their argunig
being ended, their should no exceptions be taken, either by them or any of
the compagnie, for oght that had bin spoken, but that both they and all the
rest of the compagnie (their discourse being ended) should in civil and
courteous manner carry themselves, and so take their leaves of each other,
when their ways lay to be separated.

To this all agreed, and these twdyn gave each other their hands, upon the
conditions, and there upon began between them a Toung-combat, wherein neither
of both were slain or maimed, and because it may be some recreation unto you
to understand how the matter passed, I thought good now at my soonest leisure,
and as well as my memory would permit me, to pen it down, and to present it
unto your view, to whom I hold my best endeavors obliged, and thus kissing
your hands I take my leave, wishing unto you the atchyving of all honor,
answerable unto your noble valor and courage.

The devoted honorer of your virtues D. N.

To the Reader.
BECAUSE the ensuing discourse is dialogue wise, and that some note of
distinction must of necessity be used; seeing I know not these gentlemennes
names: I have th^gh^ good to note them by their scarfs, as by calling him that
was to go to serve the King of Spayn by the name of Red-scarf, according to the
color of the scarf he wore, and to call the other by the name of
Tawney-scarf, because he wore a scarf of the color of Orange-tawney.

The compagnie, after the conditions of quietness at parting were agreed upon,
became all silent, to hear them begin, The first then (being Tawney-scarf)
began in this manner.

IT seems strange unto me, that any of our Countrymen should rather resolve
to serve the King of Spayn, then thee States of Holland, considering how long
their cause and quarrel had bin by Englishmen supported, and the number of our
Countrymen that continue to serve on that side.

Red-scarf. It seems as strange unto me that men of sense and understanding,
should not rather regard the iustnes of the cause and quarrel which they are to
def^d (especially when they are not constrained, but that their resolution
lies in their own choice) then to let themselves be blyndfolded and led
forward by sinister suggestion, to follow the un understanding vulgar multitude
for company or custom sake, because they have continued so long a time to
serve on that side, without knowing or caring wherein right or wrong consists.


Tawney-scarf. You must not think that the first resolution taken for the
assistance of the Hollanders was without good consideration of the iustnes of
their cause, and the same being once begun and continued, what needed further
doubt or scruple be made thereof by the after-followers of it?


Red-scarf. Because it is no article of faith, to believe that the first
resolution taken in England for the assisting of the Hollanders; was not
without good consideration of the iustnes of their cause, diverse have since
penetrated further in to it, to see whether it so were or not, but could not so
find it, and therefore those you speak of, that have followed it without
scruple, have bin people that were not scrupulus at all, for there is no cause
be it never so bad, but some will be found without any scruple willing to
follow it.


Tawney scarf. I know their are some that are ready enough to embrace the
following of bad courses, but what co^cernes that this?


Red-scarf. If the cause of the Hollanders by any vndisprooueable reasons of
yours shall appeer unto me to be just, I shall not only be sorry for mine
error in not apprehending it so to be, but resolve to go along with your self
unto their service.


Tawney-scarf. I am glad to hear you speak so, and therefore I will endeavor to
give you satisfaction in hope of the having of your good compagnie.

Three causes I conceive to have bin the motyues why Queen Elizabeth did first
undergo her assisting the Hollanders.

The first was, their being opressed and wronged by the King of Spayn, and in
danger to be brought under the severity, of the Spanish inquisition.

The second was in regard they were our so near aioyning freindes and
neighbors.

And the third and that not the least, was for the maintenance of the Ghospel.


Red-scarf. You have here alleged sundry reasons to have caused Queen
Elizabeth to take the Hollanders parts, it is reason then that If so be I
cannot allow them for sufficient reasons, I prove them not so to be, which by
your patience and permission, I think I shall be able to do.

The first point is about their being oppressed and wronged by the King of
Spayn, and in danger to be brought under the severity of a Spanish inquisition.

That these people lived in obedience of King Phillip the second of Spayn* as
did all the other inhabitants of the seuenteen Netherland Provinces,
acknowledging him as their true and lawful Sovereign Lord, as they had
acknowledged his anceters before him from whom he successyuely inherited
those countries, no man can make any doubt or question, The question then is
whether this King when he came to the possession of these countries, did impose
upon the people any pressures more then his former ancesters had done, but
who is able to show that he did? The said King being then in as full and quiet
possession of all those countries as ever any of his ancesters had bin, and
departing from thence toward Spayn in the year 1559. he left none of his
Netherland subjects for any cause of innovation, in any thing, any whit
disgusted, but in as great tranquillity as ever they had bin, He left behind
him in those countries no Spanish Governors nor Soldiers, but gave the
particular governments to the nobility of the country it self, and the
general Government of them all, unto his natural sister the Duchess of
Parma, being of the same country borne, what wrong in any respect was here
done them? who complained of any wrong? why was not the good peace and
reciprocal love between this King and his Netherland subjects continued? who
began the breach? what actions of innovation caused it? proceeded it from this
Prince or from the Netherland people?

When no thought nor cogitation was in this Kings mind of any breach between
him and his subjects, in the year of our Lord 1566. certain of the rascalitie
being suggested by seditious preachers, and those preachers set on by some of
nobillitie little better then bankrupt, they began in most rebellious rage to
fall to the robbing and spoiling of Churches, The Duchess of Parma being at
Bruxelles when the news of his outrageous and general sacrilegious theft, was
brought unto her, was much amassed there at, and demanded of the Earl of
Barlamont, (who then was present) what they were that had done this, where
unto he answered her in French, Ce ne sont que de Geus, which is as much to say
in English They are but rogues, or rascalles. The Church robbers and those
that set them on woork, whereof some were gentlemen (though much unworthy of
that title) having gotten knowledge how the name of Geus was given them, did
foorth-with accept of the name, and wore instead of brooches on their hattes
little wodden dishes, to betoken beggars dishes, and some of that sort did
afterward wear fox-tayles in their hattes in steed of feathers, so as it
seems they took a glory in this worthy name, for they also caused a print
or sta^p of a cock to be made, at whose mouth the words, Viue les Geus par
tout le monde, were set down, which is as much to say, as Live or flourish may
the rogues over all the world, and the paper printes or pictures taken from
this stamp, were set up in all howses, taphowses and tauernes, where they
frequented, here hence it comes that in all the low countries this kind of
people do unto this day bear the name of Geuses, howbeit they have since bin
taught to call themselves The Reformed, but protestants they neither do, or
ever did call themselves.

Here have you the original and beginning of the breach between the King of
Spayn, and these his Netherla^d subjects. And as touching their being
oppressed and wronged by the King of Spayn, and in danger to be brought under
the severity of the Spanish inquisitio^. The blame that the King of Spayn
heerin deserves, is, that he was so much over shot that when he heard of
their breaking down of Alters, and Images in Churches, of their robbing and
carrying thence of silver Chalices, patrens, cruets, candlesticks, lamps, and
reliquaries, with the tapistrie, and whatsoever they might make money of, even
to the very belles in the steeples, he had not commended it to be well done,
and sent them rewards for so doing, and so have let them run on eue^ to the
taking of the crucifix out of the Church, and hanging it on the gallows as
they did at Gorcum in Holland, an act that albeit the devil, Jews, and
Geuses, could take pleasure in, yet would very Turcks and Mahometanes be
scandalized to behold it.

Now because the King of Spayn had sworn at his being in the Netherlandes; to
defend the Church and Ecclesiastical persons in their ancient and Christian
privileges, and that he apprehended Churche-robberie to be theft, he so much
wronged these people as to send the Duke of Alua to punish this theft, which as
I take it, was as little wrong as to hang a minister for stealing of a book of
Martirs out of a Parish Church in London.


Tawney-scarf. You have here said something, but the Duke of Alua was not
satisfied with the hanging and punishing of a number of these, but he soght to
have brought in and intruded upon them the Tirannons inquisition of Spayn, which
was a mere innovation, and such as the privileges of the country could not
bear.


Red-scarf. The Duke of Alua had never charge from Spayn nor never intention of
his own, to bring an inquisition into the Netherlandes, this is but a mere
calumny, which has bin given out and spread abroad hy the seditious, to foster
the obstinatie of the people, But had the inquisition bin brought into the
Netherlandes, it had but returned from whence in long fore going years it
came, for you must note that the inquisition was never invented or brought up in
Spayn, or there ever intended for Protestants, seeing it was in the world many
ages before ever the world was acquainted with the name of Protestants, or with
any such kind of people as Protestants are, for the Emperor Charles the great
who lived about 800. years past, did first promulgate and put it in practice,
and the cause was, that after the Saxons in their country of Saxony,
(Holland, and those annexed provinces, being at that time parts of the Nether
Saxony) had bin brought from Paganism to Christianity, this pious Emperor
having greatly furthered it, he had no soouer turned his back by reason of his
being empeached with wars in other parts, but these Saxons turned from
Christianity back again to paganism, and for such Apostataes and forsakers of
the faith he ordained an inquisition, the memory whereof gave example that
some ages after it was renewed and put in practice in Spayn, for such moors
and Jews, as having received the character of Christ fell back again to
Mathometisme, and Indaisme, and albeit this inquisition was never intended (as
before is said) to have bin renewed in the Netherlandes, yet paraduenture it
might have proved as necessary when signs appeered of the good disposition
of some there, as well to Mahometisme, as to Iudaisme, for diverse that are yet
lyving have seen written upon the targets or rondasses which some of these
Geus gallants did bear, their resolution there unto, in these words, Rather
Turkish, then Popish, which is in effect, rather Mahomet the^ Christ, and
Hollanders report themselves that some of their countrymen have bin so edified
in the present Synagogue of Amsterdam, that they have relinquished their
Christianity and are become jews, and for defect of an inquisition had not
any thing said unto the^ for it, nor must they where profession is made of
such conscience liberty, that every man may choose what he will believe, or
whether he will believe any thing or nothing. But this may seem the less
wonder, whe^there have bin found among these geuses, a company that marched
under the ensign of the devil, for so was the ensign called, because there
were depicted therein the Diuelles claws, which ma^ie that are yet lyving have
seen displayed in the town of Liere in Brabant, at such time as it stood out
in rebellion against the King, and so may you now see how rebellion against the
king, and rebellion against God, do concur toge there, for where as ancient
good Christians having bin taught by the example of the most glorious
Christian Emperor Constantinus Magnus, to fight under the sign of the Cross,
these new contrary Christians, abhorring that sign, have more devotion to the
claws of the devil, a well devised and befitting ensign for such as foght
under it.


Tawncy-scarf. I wot well there is in Holland free liberty of conscience
allowed to all, and free exercise of Religion allowed to some, but of any
their enclyning to Mahometisme or to Iudaisme, or of their marching under the
deuilles claws, have I not heard.


Red-scarf. Where free liberty of conscience is allowed, why may not every
one believe as him list? what shall restrayn him? If you doubt of the Hollanders
making difficulty of turning Turckes, do but enquire what they have don at
Tunis where they have fal^e to Mahometisme by whole shipfulls at once, and
afterward to mend the matter have taught the Mahometanes of those parts, the
laudable science of Piracie, for the more affliction of Christians, and as for
Iudaisme, such as like there of and like no swynes flesh* or can be content to
forbear the eating thereof may be circumcised when they will, and then speak
as much blasphemy against Christ as the devil will direct them to do.

Thus have I here showed you, what great wrong the King of Spayn has done
this people, and what great cause they have to complayn of his breach of their
privileges, which is alwaycs in their mouths, albeit they would never
vouchsase to produce any one old privilege for the robbing of Churches.

I have also showed you where the inquisition began, and the cause why it was
first put in practice in Saxony, and afterward in Spayn, the name whereof is
now as much put in practice in Holland, in continual pamphlets and preachings,
as is the name of a Bulbegger to make little children afraid.


Tawney-scarf. These be things I have not to do withal.


Red-scarf. But these be things that belong to the purpose, here to be
alleged.


Tawney-scarf. The Hollanders were and are, our near neighbors and freindes,
and therefore Queen Elizabeth saw great reason to uphold them, against her
potent enemy the King of Spayn.


Red-scarf. Before I come to discourse about Queen Elizabeth's reason for taking
the Hollanders parts give me leave I pray you to speak a little of the blind
ignorance of our vulgar multitude here in England, to the end you may consider
of the reasons why they hate the Spagniard, and love the Hollander, to see how
well and wisely this love and hatred is founded.

That England and Spayn have anciently remained in great amity together
Histories and Chronicles will witness, and the diverse alliances and marriages
often made between those two countries, can also give testimony thereof. True
then it is, that the great breach and hostillitie between England and Spayn
began but in these our days, let us now see and consider why and how it began,
to wit, whether by Spayn or by England.

King Phillip the second of Spayn as all the world knows, did upon the death
of Queen Marie his wife, give place and quiet entrance unto Queen Elizabeth, and
for further proof of his desire of continuance of peace and amity with her he
freely gave unto her all Queen Mary's Iewelles, they justly belonging unto
himself, he also kept his Ambassador lidger in England; as the said Queen kept
hers also in Spayn, profeising out wardly unto him all love and amity, and yet
this not-withstanding, she permitted secretly and underhand, the transporte of
Artillery and Munition of war to the Moors of Granado to enable them to
rebel, just about the very same time that the Netherland rebellion was
determined to be begun, that thereby thee King of Spayn might have his hands
full, by being thrust in-to two wars at once, both which she underhand
furthered, but more the war of the Netherlandes then that of Granado, because
of the redier comoditie. Soon upon the contryving of this plot, when the King
of Spayn to appease the Netherland broils in the beginning, had sent the Duke
of Alua with forces into those parts, and after his arryuall there, sent him a
supply of 600000 crowns, some affirm it to have bin 800000. she ceazed upon
this money in the west part of England, and having gotten it into her hands,
did therewith assist his Netherland Rebels, whereby his money ordained to
have served himself against his rebels, came to serve his rebels against
him, and bred besides this a far greater inconvenience, for it was the cause
why the Duke of Alua demanded the tenth penny of the country peoples goods,
whereby they became the more alienated and apt to rebellion.

Some years after this; Captayn Drake was employed from England to the
West Indies, where he robbed the King of Spayn of about a million and a half,
of his treasure, These and sundry other wrongs and detriments were done by
the said Queen unto the King of Spayn at such time as either had their
Ambassadors (the Ministers of peace) in each others country, they professing
to each other, love and amity. The King of Spayn doing against the Queen of
England, no act whatsoever to the contrary, whereas she contrariwise
continued to do against him underhand as many wrongs as she could, besides
those great notorious wrongs here mentioned, But when these grew so frequent
that the smart unto the King of Spayn became intolerable, and so manifested
unto the world that all other Princes and people took notice thereof, how was
it possible that it could stand with the honor of a King, and of such a potent
King* as is a King of Spayn, still to continue to put up wrongs as fast as she
continued to do them? he was therefore at the last moved to the preparation of
his great Armada naual* of the year of our Lord 1588. the memory whereof by
the incessant clamours of Puritanical enemies of peace* has possessed more
place in the heads of the inconsiderate vulgar multitude, then the many great
wrongs that enforced it

But thanks be unto God, our peaceful King James coming to the crown, and
well knowing how matters had passed, did to the great happynes of the Realm
salve up this sore* from further festering, whereunto he found Spayn most
ready and willing, and well content to let pas and forget all English injuries,
for to give the Spagniaerds their due, certain it is, they are men* that are
not of irreconcilable and revengefull natures, nor such long entertayners of
desire of revenge, as some other nations are said to be, And this appears
manifestly in this nation more the^ in others, for notwith*standing all fore
going hostillitie between Englishmen and Spagniards, both by sea and land, and
enuasions even in Portugal and Spayn it self, whereof people may remayn more
sensible then of an vnefectuall Armada, yet has not any English Ambassador or
any other of the English nation bin by Spagniards in Spayn barbarously abused,
but I am ashamed even for the honor of our nation to repeat how Spanish
Ambassadors, and other Spagniardes, have bin used in England.

As for the sundry benefits which the commerce and traficque between England
and Spayn has brought unto our country, and nation, I doubt not but many of
our merchants, seafaring men, and others, will confess, and far more profit
and benefit will no doubt ensue the most honorable and great alliance now
expected.

But let us come to our good neighbors and friends the Hollanders, and
consider of the grateful goodness and benefits which we reap by them, that
thereby we may know how well and wisely we are aduysed to esteem them for our
good Neighbors and friends, and so friendly sticking unto them.

That we have for above these fifty years taken their parts, is
sufficiently known, that the people of England have often times generally
smarted by the great pressures and parlamental payments imposed upon them by
Queen Elizabeth, to uphold these friends and neighbors withal, is likewise
well enough known, as also that great boundance of English blood has bin shed
in their quarrel; and an infinite number of Englishmennes lives lost, whose
courage and valor, was worthy of more honor then in their base and
dishonorable service could be deserved, and now when all comes to all, they
are so far from honest ciuillitie, that they will not acknowledge any
friendship done them, and therefore can they not entertayn any thoghts of
obligation, or gratitude, nay they dare plainly tell us; that we are beholding
unto them, which is as much to say as that they expect gratitude at our hands.


Tawney scarf. In deed I must confess I have heard them affirm that our
assisting them was to free our selves from war in our own country, by means
of Spanish enuasio^, which may carry some reason.


Red-scarf. But what reason was there, why we should have any fear of
Spanish enuasion, then only for our taking their parts, against their true
and lawful Sovereign the King of Spayn.


Tawney-scarf. I must remayn your debtor for the giving you a reason heerof,
until I am able to do it.


Red-scarf. But I must tell you further, that they do not only deny all
gratitude where it is due, and unjustly claym it, where they ow it, but passing
further beyond the limits of reason and humanity; they discover themselves to
be such monsters, as to bear a very devilish hatred both unto our nation
and to our most gracious Sovereign himself. Against our nation their actious
declare it, against our Sovereign their vilanous tounges.

Of their most vile and contemptible usage of our nation in the East Indies I
shall not here need to speak, the letters written by our merchants and others
from thence do declare it; Their usage of us in Groon-land, and the undoing of
our long continued trade in Muscouie I will also omit, but we find that they
are the very caterpillars and desroyers of our common wealth, by all the ways
and means they can devise, for they have not only, by means of their
corespondent countriemen, conveyed and drawn by stelth our gold and silver out
of the Realm, but they have brought the whole Realm in a general decay of
traficque, to the empouerishing and undoing of thou sands of the inahbitants,
as all that deal in clothing in all parts of the Realm will confess.

As for their vilanous speeches against our Sovereign, I could name unto you
that Englishman who passing not long since between Rotterdam and the Hage, and
hearing some of those varlets speak il of his Majesty, which he being an
Englishma^ could not endure, he as it became him, did in good manner reprehend
them for it, but straight-wayes a couple of them drew their knyues upon him to
have stabbed him, and so had they done, had they not bin hild and kept back by
others there present, we have a proverb, that it is better for some to steal a
horse then some to look on. What detriments endure we by Spagniards? where do
they bynd us hand and foot, and cast us over Indian rocks like dogs? Where
undo they our trade? how empouerish they our country? where rail they upon
our Sovereign? Are we in our right wits I wonder? when we resolve to go to
shed our blood for those that suck our blood? when we fight for those at home,
that kill us abroad, me thinks purging with Heleborus were fitter now a days
to be taken in use of our countrime^, then the smoak-drinck of driueling
Tobacco.


Tawney-scarf. For Gods love lets have no more of this, least you drive me in
a desperate mood to turn Spanish with you, and so discredit my self with my
friends that expect me in Holland.


Red-scarf. Nay Sir, you should by your so doing, give a good ensample for
those friends to follow.


Tawney-scarf. I have served some years alredie in Holland, and have past my
word and promis to some friends of mine there to return back unto them again,
to the service of the States.


Red-scarf. I could then wish that both you and they would resolve to serve
them as they oght to be served, such tricks I mean as might revenge some of
the vilanies and wrongs they have offered us.


Tawney-scarf. I guess at your meaning, but it concurres not with my
resolution, and you know theare is a precept that wills to do good for evil.


Red-scarf. That is well done where evil is thereby amended, but your doing
good where you do it, makes evil become woors. But let me now return to speak
something of Queen Elizabethes reason to take the Hollanders parts, And first I
must tell you that Queen Elizabeth did never take their parts upon compassion
of their cause, in regard of any wrong which she knew the King of Spayn to do
them, for she could not but know them to be as very notorious rebels, as
ever were any in the world, and therefore was her assistence not given because
she loved them, but because she hated the King of Spayn, and so made use of
them as the instruments of her hate.


Tawney-scarf. Then must there be cause why she hated the King of Spayn, and
hating him, she had reason to favor and foster those that hated him as well as
her self.


Red-scarf. I pray Sir, for the instruction of my ignorance, tell me the cause
why she hated him.


Tawney-scarf. The cause I cannot tell you, but cause I must imagine there was.


Red-scarf. You can know no just cause, nor any man else, but you say you must
imagine there was a cause, but this must is not forcecible, unless it were a
clear case that never any man were causelessly hated, But to tell you the true
cause why in deed she ha^ed him, it was no other then for doing her good.


Tawney scarf. That me thinks is impossible.


Red scarf. Impossible only to good and grateful minds.

The King of Spayn in her sister Queen Mary's time, did her no less good then
the saving of her life, and experience has often showed that there are some
kind of people that can never abide those that they are very deeply beholding
unto, because they think the obligation of gratitude to be a bondage, whereas
want of gratitude when it consists in the will and not in the power, is
monstrous and not humayn.


Tawney scarf. That the king of Spayn saved her life can hardly be prooueed,
for albeit she was imprisoned in her sisters time, yet she was never brought
to any publyke trial, and so there was no saving of her life needful, she
not being by law found guilty.


Red-scarf. If it had come to that, it had gone hard with her, but the King of
Spayn prevented it, and thereby not only saved her life, but also her honor.


Tawney-scarf. But how is this proved?


Red-scarf. That there were diverse conspiracies of treason in her sisters time
is evident, that she was apprehended and put in prison upon them, is evident,
that she was the only hope and object of the conspira^ors is evident, and
that some of them accused her is also evident, for religion her troobles were
not, because she made profession of the religion of her sister, and daily
heard Mass, Some cause there must be of her apprehension, which must also be
some great cause, for no small cause can urge the calling in question, and
apprehension of the sister of a Queen regnant, and her next and apparent heir,
But I will leave the belief of this to your own leisure and pleasure, when you
shall have better thought upon it, or better informed your self about the matter.


Tawney-scarf. I accept of that liberty, but in the mean time I must tell you
that I must yet put you to your trumpes, about the greatest and most important
cause of Queen Elizabethes and our nations favoring and assisting the
Hollanders, which was the cause of religion, they professing with us, one same
Ghospel.


Red-scarf. I doubt whether they profess with us one same Epistle, but one
same Ghospel I am sure they profess not.


Tawney-scarf. I pray what differs their Ghospel from ours?


Red-scarf. Is there no difference between Protestants and Puritanes?


Tawney-scarf. Not much.


Red-scarf. Why have we then so much co^tended about so little a difference?
why have so many books bin written by those of the one and the other side,
one against another? why restraints of preaching? why imprisonment of somanie
of the brethren? why punishments with death and exile?


Tawney-scarf. I grant you, some seditious and vurulie tounged fellows have
smarted.


Red-scarf. Had it bin well done to defend such?


Tawney-scarf. No.


Red-scarf. More then such our countrime^ defend in Holland, for your Gomarists
in Holland those I mean that are of the States peculiar religion, are more
seditious and vurulie tounged follows then are our English Gomarists, I mean
our Puritanes, who are just of the same inward illumination of spirit, as are
their dearest brethren the Gomarists of Holland, differing only in name, but
not in mind or nature. Here at home you seem not willing to defend such
vurulie tounged fellows, and yet you go from hence into Holland to fight for
them, But these fellows are yet more vurulie tounged then our Puritanes, for
they go farther then to the making of Petty Popes, and Petty Antichrists of
our Bishops, Seeing they will make whosoever it be being a mortal creature,
and taking upon him the name or title of Supreme head, or governor of the
Church, to be no less then an Idol, and those that give unto him such title,
to be no less the^ Idolaters, Behold what one same Ghospel this is with the
Ghospel of Queen Elizabeth, seeing the Hollanders thereby, do make herself an
Idol, and all her clergy and magistrates Idolaters, and I pray consider
whether piety or conscience could move her to defend that Ghospel and religion
abroad, which she persecuted at home, as holding it to be ungodly and
seditious, marck but the absurdity heerof. But how had Queen Elizabeth seen
her self rewarded if these, good Ghospellers had in her time so wide opened
their budget as to let her see their making making of herself an Idol, and her
prelates who Puritanes did but make Petty Popes and petty Antichrists, to
be no better then Idolaters.


Tawney-scarf. I pray let us alter our discourse, and talck no more of these
matters.


Red-scarf. That in deed is the best remedy to avoid reply unto a matter,
whereunto no reply can be found, But I pray give me leave to end the matter I
am about, and then we will fall to what other discourse you will.


Fawney-scarf. Me thinks their has enough alredie bin said to turn a man's
appetyt from Holland cheese.


Red-scarf. But I am very desirous to let you understand the effects of your
endeavors, to the end you may the more esteem the value of your deserts.

And perhaps I may say something that the company here present, has not as yet
heard of, and therefore may out of curisositie receive contentment therein.


Tawney-scarf. Me thinks you cannot say woors of the Hollanders then you have
alredie done and therefore, the best may follow, seeing the woorst is gone
before.


Red-scarf. Be it better or be it woors you may please to accept of it as it
is, seeing it is the residue remaining behynd and belonging to the former
matter.

You must understand that I am not ignorant, that many of our nation who
deuote themselves, to the service of the Hollanders, think their endeavors
directly employed for the maintenance of one same religion with that of
England, wherein I have here clearly proved them to be deceived, But now will
I go further, and as clearly prove unto you that you do as well defend
Lutheranisme, Anabaptisme, and Iudaisme, as the Holland Religion, that you
supposed to have bin all one with yours.

You must consider that the Holland rebels at the beginning of their
rebellion to the end they might fortefy themselves with all sorts and sects,
made open profession that according to the Ghospel, all men oght to have their
consciences free, and that no man for his religion oght to be called in
question or troobled, by means whereof the religions and beliefs in Holland*
are grown to be infinite, every man making choice to be of what religion he
list, and if he list not choose any of the rel^gio^s that are alredie made to
his had, he may make one of his own deuysing, and draw as many unto it as he
can, and he may leave it of and make or choose another in steed thereof, or
leave all religious and be of none if he please, and boldly make his
profession so to be: But the high Powerful Lords the States, notwithstanding
they allow all this freedom to the generality, yet they allow free exercise
of religion, but to the four sorts aforementioned, to wit, to the profession of
their own, Geus or Caluinian religion, To that of the Luthera^s to that of the
Anabaptists, and to that of the Synagogue of the Jews, none of all which
relig^o^s being allowed in England* but being by authority of the States
allowed in Holland whosoever employeth himself in defense of that usurped State
and Gournment does consequently defend these four different religious, and
as well all four as any one. He defends that Caluinisme, that makes either
Prelate or Prince that has the title of Supreme headship or Government of the
Church, to be an Idol.

He defends Lutheranisme that holds the real presence of Christ to be in
the Sacrament, even the very same body that was borne of the blessed Virgin
Marie, He defends Anabaptisme that holds it unlawful to Baptize children,
and among other heresies teaches that Christ took no flesh of the Virgin
Marie. And he defends Iudaisme that denies our Savior Christ to be the
true Messiah and Savior of the world, for if by force of arms the state of
these States were not defended, these different sects could have in Holland no
allowance of free exercise of religion. Now besides these allowed exercising
sects, there is the late risen sect of the Pe fectists, which as it seems
needs no leave or allowance of exercise, because it is come to such
perfection that it is past exercise. These be such as have bin great
travailers in the word, and continual goers to sermons, and fynding that S.
Paul speaks, of some that are always learning, and never attayning unto the
knowledge of the truth, they will not be accounted such truants or non
proficientes, as still to have need of teaching and instruction, they perceive
by their inward illumination of spirit, that they are come to the rypenes of
perfection, they have made trial thereof by their examining one another, as well
about the exposition of textes, as of their text-fastnes in citing chapter and
verse without mistaking it, as readily, yea and some times more readily then
the Preacher himself, whereby they see themselves so much to have profited, that
they have no need to run up and down after sermon-makers, but leave them to the
instructing and teaching of the ignorant.

These now and then meet together among themselves, and consolate one another
in the Lord, with singing of Psalms, and discoursing out of the word,
according to the perfection and greatness of their knowledge.

Where are our poor Puritanes in respect of these, that all the days of their
lives run unsatisfied with sermon-hearing, behold how these Holland brethere^
have gotten the start of them, and leave them to remayn the perpetual prentises
of their sermon-makers.


Tawney-scarf. Me thinks you have drawn out the reconiug of my service, which
is greater then my self understood it to be.


Red-scarf. Greater but not better, for I suppose you understood it not to be
so il, but being so good as you supposed it, to wit to be employed in defense
of the Ghospel, it could be but bad, because no good Ghospel can allow
stealing.


Tawney scarf. No more does that, for they hang thieues as well in Holland as
they do in England.


Red-scarf. Thieues that steal try fles are there hanged by thieues that steal
whole provinces and cities, so as they are not hanged because they steal, but
because they steal not fio^ the King of Spayn, as though it were honester theft,
for a man to rob his master, then to rob another man.


Tawney-scarf. You have exceedingly disgraced my service.


Red-scarf. Not with intention to disgrace your self, but to let you see how
unjust and wrong a course both you and others take, to the end that knowing it,
you and they may relinquish it, and make choice of a course more agreeable to
your woorthinesses and valor.


Tawney-scarf. But now Sir I must tell you concerning your choice of service,
that if we had one of our preachers here, he would tell you that it were in
desence of Idolatry.


Red scarf. If he did so, and could prove it so, I would ask God forgiveness
and leave it, but that is he not able to prove.


Tawney-scarf. He would tell you that you woorshiped bread in the Mass, for
the body of Christ.


Red-scarf. If we so did, that were Idolatry in deed. We do not in any
sort intend any woorship unto bread, all the devotion woorship and honor
which there we do, is merely and sincerly intended unto the true body of
Christ, the which if it should not be there, then is there no woorship or
honor at all by us intended, But our warrant for the being thereof there, is
so great that it is not deryued from the mouth of any mortal man, but even
from the very mouth of him that is Christ and God, who cannot possibly
deceive us, neither can his power be insufficient to make good his own
words, and if it were possible that it could be but bread, yet he having
said it was his body and I believing it so to be, his justice and goodness is
such that he cannot condemn me of misbelief, himself having bin the cause
why I so believe, for if he never had said it, I had never believed it. I can
do Christ no greater honor then to give credit unto his words, nor no
greater dishonor then not to believe them to be veritable.


Tawney-scarf. But Sir, our Learned men say that Christ's words at his last
supper oght otherwise to be interpreted, and not understood as he there spoke
them, but that in saying the bread was his body, he intended to have it
understood to be the sign or figure of his body.


Red-scarf. They that pretend to prove all their doctrine by scripture, do
consequently oblige themselves to show us wherein scripture it is said that
Christ meant it for the sign or figure of his body?

If they have this knowledge by inward illumination, how can they let us know
that it is of God?


Tawney-fcarf. I do not remembr to have heard any text of Scripture alleged
for it. And for inward illuminations I know not what to say.


Red-scarf. That Christ meant it for the figure of his body is Caluinistical
and Anabaptistical scripture, made without book, but in sacred scripture not to
be found, and as for their inward illuminatio^s what ca^ they be other the^
such dreams as all other sectaries are as full of as they, and ca^ say as well
as they, that they had the^ from above and perhapsly not altogether neither,
for it may be that such fancies came in their heads when they were in their
garrets. And yet was the inward illumination of Loy the Slater of Antwerp in
lyklyhood more higher, for he (as he said) had his as he sat above on the top
of a hows covering it with slate, and it was, that there were no devilles, no
hell, nor no resurrection of the dead, and that Christ and his Apostles,
me^tioning such things, meant otherwise the^ they spoke, and in this his
illumination he was so confident, that the light of burning fire, wherein
himself was cosumed, could not put him out of his opinion.

And seeing you confess not to have heard any text alleged that makes this
Sacrament a figure of Christ his body, nor any proof or reason to oblige
belief of imagined illuminations, I will now show you by plain scripture that
Christ himself could not mean it to be the figure of his body.


Tawney-scarf. If you do that you do much.


Red-scarf. I pray you then Sir tell me, was it the figure of Christ his body
that was crucified for us on the Cross, or was it his true body?


Tawney-scarf. It was without all doubt his true body.


Red-scarf. Then must without all doubt his true body be in this Sacrament,
seeing Christ said: Take and eat this is my body which shall be given for you,
etc. and that no figure was given for us.


Tawney-scarf. There by the Lord, you have posed me in deed.


Red-scarf. But I will yet go further with you, sure I am that none of the
disciples of Christ that were present at the speaking of those words, do
assign us to the seeking out of some other meaning, if this had bin requisite
themselves had known it best, and could best have bin the interpreters, and so
without all doubt would have bin, if the intention of Christ had bin such, for
never would they have letten all ensuying Christians of the world as well of
the Greek as of the Latin Church and all others, have run on in the believing
his words as they were spoken, until he should send new teachers into the
world to interpreet his meaning fifteen hundredth years after they were spoken,
which cannot stand with the providence and goodness of God, But to the contrary
that no such interpretation was by God intended, is clearly manifested to all
the world, by the confusion which he has permitted to be among the
interpreters, the one interpreting his words one way, the other another way,
and so contrary and discorda^t that no reconciliation can bring them to have
one same understanding of Christ his meaning, And therefore remayn they to
their own shame and confusion in perpetual discord, giving in effect the one
the other the ly about the matter, and challenging one another to the weapon of
the word, even to the killing and sleaing of souls.

I have adventured here to say thusmuch notwithstanding I am no divine, because
you should understand how far Catholykes are from the most abominable sin
of Idolatry, And I must further note unto you the absurdity of this calumny:
Idolatry did always consist in the offering up of Sacrifise to Idols, but by
the making of Catholics Idolaters they do make the Sacrifise it self, which
they offer up, to be an Idol.


Tawney-scarf. I perceive you would seem to have bin to heard for me if I
should give you over so, But I must now demand further of you, whether
Protestants or Papists go nearer to the manner of Christ his celebrating this
Sacrament, Christ I am sure both instituted and celebrated it at a table, but
not at an Altar, as you do, and therefore you vary and differ from Christ,
and this being so manifest, it is consequently manifest, that here I have put
you down, for this you cannot deny.


Red-scarf. I have alredie told you that I am no divine, and I had not thought
to have bin by you put to defend matter of religion, but seeing you have again
put me to it, and that you think you have put me down about it. If I cannot
recover my self I suppose you will triumph and trample upon me. True it is
that Christ instituted and celebrated this B. Sacrament upon a table, and not
upon an Altar, and Protestants do also celebrate their communion upon a table,
wherein they show themselves to teach and controlle their Patriarche Luther,
who celebrated his communion upon an Altar, as all his truest follows in
Germany continue to do, as also their anceters the Hussytes of Bohemia, and
yet did both Husse and Luther, assure them selves to have penetrated as far
into the word as Caluinian-Protestants, and Anabaptists can assure themselves
to do, no Christians in the world using tables in steed of Altars but only
they, nor none denying the real presence of Christein that Sacrament but they,
and their dependants.

But now as touching your Protestants celebrating upon a table, to the end you
may discover how truly they imitate Christ I must discover unto you a notable
trick of fraud of theirs (if I may be so bold as call it so) which is, that
they make a show of exactly imitating Christ his manner of doing, by the use
of tables and not Altars, to deceive the ignorant multitude, but they deny the
verity of Christ his words in the principalle matter of faith which unto
this Sacrament is belonging, which is no petty piece of coosinage, and most
far from the true imitation of Christ, seeing faith and belief imports
more then a show of observing his manner of doing in the only use of a table.

The cause and reason why Christ celebrated on a table, and not upon an Altar,
was because he had supped at the same table, and after he had supped he there
celebrated this Sacrament, having purposely referred it for the last and most
principal actio^ which he would perform in the presence of his disciples
before his passion.

But if Protestants would profess herein to follow Christ ptecysely, the^
must they not celebrate their communion upon hows-tables, in Churches, seeing
Christ did not so, but upon hows-tables in private howses, and in paued
parlers of such howses. It must also be at night and after supper, at which
supper they must have eaten a roasted Lamb.

There must also be neither more nor less then thirteen persons at the
table, and these must be all men, for Christ had not one woman present at his
celebration.

There must neither Ghospel nor Epistle be red, for when Christ celebrated
they were not written, Geneua songs must not thear be sung, but the Hymn (if
Protestant reformation can produce it) must be repeated, which was said before
he and his disciples rose from the table.

But it now appears that Protestants, make a show of imitating Christ only
in the use of a hows-table, and omit all the rest, which is but an imitation
by piece meal, taking and leaving, what they list, at their own pleasures And I
dare confidently avouch, that if any Sermon-maker in England should in his
pulpit urge the use of all these omitted things, for the more exact following
of Christ, wherein must also be comprysed his girding himself with a towel and
his washing his communicants feet, he should be exactly punished for his
labor, and thus may you see what is become of your making a hows-table a
Churche-table.


Tawney-scarf. But say you what you can, you cannot deny but Christ used a
table and not an Altar, and therefore we imitate Christ more them you.


Red-scarf. You make a show to imitate Christ, and it is but in the only use
of a table, which is as it were but a cover to hyde your deuiall of the verity
of the chiefest matter of faith, and why do you not imitate the rest which
here I have mentioned as well as only the table, seeing you should better
imitate Christ in his whole manner of doing then in a part thereof? or can
you show me where you were appointed to imitate him in the use of a
hows-table, and not in the rest, nor in the Sacrament of Baptism as well as in
this one thing of his supper, Christ was baptized in a river, why baptize you
not also in rivers, upon what warrant use you Fontes in Churches more then
Altars.

But now must I go further with you seeing you have put me to it, and tell you
of another Communion fraud, and I pray you note it. Your Protestant minister in
his administering his communion uses these words, to his communicant. vidz.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy
body and soul into everlasting life, And take and eat this in remenbrance that
Christ dred sor thee, and feed on him in thy heart by faith with
thancks-giuing. I demand now of you whether Christ be truly imitated here
in or no. Or whether these words here by the Minister spoken, are the same
words that Christ him self did speak?


Tawney-scarf. Did not Christ say unto his Apostles, Take and eat this in
remenbrance of me.


Red-scarf. No Sir.


Tawney-scarf. Will you deny that?


Red-scarf. I cannot but deny it, because Christ did not so speak.


Tawney-scarf. How spoke he then?


Red-scarf. He said unto his Disciples when he had taken bread and blessed it
Take and eat this is my body, etc. and having said this, the^ said he
further, Do this in co^memoratio^ of me. The Apostles were willed here to do
two things, the one was, To eat the Body of Christ, the other was to do this
in commemoration of him, by the first precept they did eat the Body of
Christ, by the second, in Christ his saying Do this, they had power and
authority given them to do afterward as Christ there the^ did, that is, to
take bread to bless it, to pronounce his sacred words over it, thereby to
make it become his body, and to administer it unto others as he had
administered it unto them, and to do or sacrifise this, in commemoration of him,
for if this later precept had not bin given the celebratio^ of this Sacrament
had not bin continued by the Apostles and their successors, but had only bin
there at that time performed by Christ and so have ceased. Thus may you see
what a notable trick of Caluinistical falsitie it is, to abuse the people by
confounding the words of Christ in saying in steed of his word Take and
eat this is my body, And Do this in commemoration of me, to say, Take and eat
this in remembrance of me, which Christ said not, but they as if he had so
said, do thereby consequently infer that he did say and unsay, or as if his
saying, Do this in remembrance of me, which they falsify, and make to be Eat
this in remembrance of me, did wholly dysanul and take away the whole effect
of his former words which were, Take and eat this it my body, etc. which is
to make Christ to have spoken those words friuolously and to no purpose, for
if Christ intended not this his blessed and consecrated bread to be his body
to what end spoke he those words? what edification could they yield? why
might they not as well or better have bin left unspoken? And why might he not
more directly and clearly have said at the first. Take and eat this bread in
remembrance of me, or as a sign or figure of my body, this had bin better
fitting for the forming of a Protestant communion, if he had intended it, But
Protestants to come now so long after, to make Christ a sayer and an vnsayer,
to be hild vnpowrable to perform so much as he said, or to have spoken
friuolously and to no purpose, can no way stand with Christian piety, nor
confident faith in Christ.


Tawney scarf. By the Lord you put me to it still, but I must for all that have
about with you concerning another matter. You use to woorship Images and by
woorshiping them you make Idolles of them.


Red-scarf. By this reason they that do reverence unto the Kings chair of
State, do there of make an Idol allo. But you must understand that as the sound
of words entering at the ear do reuyne memory in the mind, of the thing
which by the sound is intended, so is memory no less reuyued by the sight of
the eye, and as at the hearing of the name of Jesus, the mind is stirred up to
a devout remembrance and reverence of him, so is the mind by the sight of his
Image, stirred up in like manner. And here by the way, because it is not
impertinent to the purpose, I must allege unto you a late example somewhat
concerning this purpose, An English servingman coming over out of England to
Antwerp and beholding in the principal street of the city the Image of
Christ on the Cross, stood on the suddayn, amassed as it were, at the sight
thereof, and supposing it (as it should seem) to have bin the dead body of
some malefactor newly executed (it being painted over with a pale dead color)
demanded of one that was with him, what that man had done that was so nailed
up there, but when the other told him it was the Image of Christ, representing
unto the view of Christians his crucifying and death on the Cross, for the
redemption of the world, he confessed that he had heard it preached that
Christ was crucified, but he knew not for all that what crucifying meant, nor
did he ever apprehend it as now at the sight of the Image he was moved to
do. I make no doubt but this man had heard sermons in England more the^
enoughe and yet was he with all his Sermon-hearing such a Christian, as
neither knew nor apprehended how Christ had dyed for his salvation. You may
heerby judge of the vtillitie of the School wherein he had had his education,
and of the requisytnes of such representations to the view of Christian people,
and therefore with no little reason did that great and godly Doctor S. Augustine
(as did also other ancient and holy Doctors term the Images of Christ and
his saints, the books of lay people where by you may see that these men were
no good protestants, for had they so bin, they would have defaced and broken
them, and slaundered the^ with the false imputatio^ of being Idolles. Being
then as here has bin showed, ordained for represe^tations and memories of
Christ and his saints no reverence is do^ne at the sight of them, as merely
intended to the Images themselves, but ever intending Christ or his saints or
friends which such Images may represent, for when the woman troobled with the
flux had a desire to touch the Hemme of Christ his garment it was not because
she thought the garment of it self could do her good, but because she thought
that virtue by that means might come from Christ unto her, and yet may this
deed of this woman seem according to the doctrine of Protestants to be an act
of Idolatry, no less then the woorship of an Image, which Christ (not being
protestantly conceyted) approved far otherwise, both by curing her, and
comending the greatness of her faith. You must also understand that Sacrifice
was by Pagans offered unto Idolles, incense was burut upon their Alters, and it
was death by pagan laws to refuse to do it, But so much as the doing of
reverence unto an Image among Christians, is not commanded, nor is it taken for
scandal to pas by an Image and not to do reverence unto it, but left to every
man's own discretion according as his mind is stirred up to some devout
cogitation, which by the sight of the Image he may be moved unto.


Tawney-scarf. I must confess your words carry sense in them, and that I
never heard those reasons before, But there rests yet one thing, that I must
have about with you for, wherein I think you will be put to your trumpes to the
full.


Red-scarf. If I then find not trumps enough wherewith to defend my self, my
defect of trumpes, will become your triumph.


Tawney-scarf. Then Sir, I must demand of you, with what proof of Scripture or
show of reason men may be persuaded to believe that such as are mortal men and
sinners themselves, can forgive the sins of other men. And strange it is that
so many can be made such fools as on their knees unto a priest to utter the
very secrets of their souls and consciences, yea and perhaps somtymes to
declare such sins unto him, as themselves after they have done them, are
ashamed to thinck on.


Red-scarf. I remember to have red, that the Jews upon Christ his forgiving
of one his sins, said, that none could forgive sins but God only. True in
deed it is, that no mortal man of his own authority, can pardon sins, yet
having commission from God to do it, why may he not then do it? unless you will
say it is not in the power of God to give him power to do it, and that you will
limit God to use no ministers under him for the executing of his will, but will
have him do all himself. But that it has pleased our Savior Christ to give
such, power and authority to men, is manifest by his breathing upon his
Apostles, and saying, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgiven, and whose sins you shall retayn, they are retained I pray
tell me now whether you think the Apostles by this authority given them by
Christ, had power to forgive sins or not?


Tawney-scarf. Me thinks I must confess they had.


Red scarf. Having authority then to forgive sins, do you think they did use
it?


Tawney-scarf. It may be they did.


Red-scarf. We must make it a clear case that they so did, for if they did
not, then did Christ give the^ a frivolous commission, or themselves committed
a great fault in neglecting to execute his will, b^t it were impiety to think
that either Christ would give a frivolous commission, or that his Disciples
would neglect the execution thereof.


Tawney-scarf. Admit that Christ gave them such authority, and that they
executed it, is it therefore said, that Priests should have it now?


Red-scarf. If such power and grace had only bin given by Christ to his
Apostles, and was not to remayn from them unto their successors, then could no
body have reaped benefit thereby, but such as lived in the time of the
Apostles, and were conversant with them, and so should all other ensuing
Christians have remained depryued, of this grace and benefit, but so to think
were also impiety.

When Christ gave his Apostles commission to go over all the world to preach
and Baptize, I suppose you will not say that he intended not that their
successors should also preach and baptize. If he intended they should, as I
make no doubt, you will confess, why should he not also intend the authority
of forgiveness of sins unto the successors of the Apostles, to the end that
after-coming Christians might as well enjoy that grace and benefit, as those
that lived in the time of the Apostles, or show where the one was called in or
prohibited, and the other not.


Tawney-scarf. I fear me I shall fail of my expected victory.


Red-scarf. I dare warrant you so much, because you may see your self in so
good forwardnes of failing alredie.


Tawney-scarf. But this confessing of ones sins to a Priest is such a thing,
that I much wonder how people could be brought unto it.


Red-scarf. If you well consider thereof, you shall see it a woork not to be
wroght by man, but by the wonderful co^curring power of God, for how were it
else possible, that Apostles of the Catholyke Church should be able to convert
somanie Pagan Princes and people to Christianity, and consequently to bring
them to that devotion and humillitie as to kneel down and make confession of
their sins to a Priest, whereas we cannot see that ministers do convert any
such people unto any their new religions, albeit it be far more easy, and
would never trouble them with confession of sins.

This practice of confession of sins albeit to the ears of new teachers it
seems harsh, yet was it put in practice, by the holy friend of Christ, S.
John Baptist, before Christ gave the authority of pardoning sins unto his
Apostles, for the penitent people that resorted unto S. John Baptist, did make
confession of their sins, which it is not like they would have done, nor
that the scripture would have mentioned it as a deed well done, if S. John
himself had not persuaded them unto it, or approved it. The Scripture says
they came unto him confessing their sins. It is one thing for a man to
confess himself to be a sinner, and another thing to confess his sins, for
when he confesses his sins, he confesses what sins he has committed.
And the Apostle S. James promulgateth the precept, by saying, Confess your
sins one to another, for this Apostle knowing that Christ h^^ said to him,
and the rest of the Apostles, Whose sins you forgive they are forgiven* and
caet. Did also know that confession of sins must go before pardon of sins.

But if we consider it well we shall see it to be a most great grace and
happiness imparted by Christ unto men in leaving behynd him with his servants
and Priests, this commission and privilege, whereby sinners by contrition
confession, and satisfaction of and for their sins may put themselves in
state of grace, and dischardge themselves of so heavy a weight in this world,
as would bear down their souls to hell in the next.


Tawney-scarf. The case concerning this matter of confession being so clear,
as here both by scripture and necessary deduced reasons you have showed, I
wonder very much why our Learned men, that pretend all their recours to
Scripture, should not see and practice the same.


Red-scarf. They cannot but see it, but they scufle it over, the silenceing
thereof being unto them, reason of state.


Tawney-scarf. How shall I understand that?


Red-scarf. You shall understand that the new religion-makers of this time, to
draw people from the old, found it fit for the^ in policy, to make their new
religions more easy and pleasing, and therefore, such as follow the doctrine
of Calvin taking a way confession, brought in predestination, teaching that God
has determined who he will have saved, and who he will have damned, before
ever themselves are borne: and who he will grant or deny his grace unto, and
that to such as he will have to be damned albeit they be innocent children
sucking at their mothers breasts, and of themselves could never deserve it, yet
will he resoluedly deny them his grace so as they shall and must be damned,
By which new and most damnable doctrine, confession of sins to such as are
of years and able to make it, is as utterly needles, taken away, and so is
also in very trothe, all devotion and doing of good deeds, for seeing God
has determined before how he will dispose of all men's souls, his
disposition must hold whether they themselves do well or il. and to what purpose
then were going to confession?


Tawney-scarf. In deed I have heard enoughe of this in Holland, where Doctor
Arminius a Protestant himself, did find it to be against the justice, and
goodness of God, and many are now grown to think it so also, and to be of his
opinion.


Red-scarf. There rests yet one point that I must note unto you concerning
this matter of confession, because you said you marveled that men could be
made such fools, as to tell their sins unto Priests, but this wonder will be
no wonder when you consider that Priests must no less make confession of their
sins then other men, for you must not understand that confession of sins
unto a Priest, is an invention brought up by Priests, to be practiced upon
other men, which they persuade unto it, but a thing ordained and instituted by
Christ and his Apostles, and of religious duty and obligation practiced and
continued in Christ, his Catholyke Church where there is not any priest that
is not as much obliged to make Confession of his sins unto an other Priest,
as any other man is, and where there is no, Ecclesiastical person, Prelate,
Bishop, or the Pope himself, that heerin is exempted, for even the Pope who is
the chief and head of all the Catholyke Clergy, must fit on his knees and make
his confession to a Priest, albeit his own inferior, so as you may see that
Priests in this matter of confession have not imposed a burden upon other men
which themselves do not bear. The like humility in confession of sins is
also seen in Emperors Kings and Princes, no less then in other people.


Tawney-scarf. But is this, so in deed.


Red-scarf. It is most undoubtedly true.


Tawney-scarf. But what if a Priest should disclose* what is vttred unto him
inconfession?


Red-scarf. If he should so do he should be grivously punished, and
suspended from the practice of his priestly function during his whole life, for
confessions must not in any case be revealed, and if so be this seal of
secrecy, where with the lips of the priest are sealed up, should come to be
violated, it were the destruction of the Sacrament of Penance, which the holy
Ghost will never permit.

The Priest well knows that confession is made unto God more the^ to him, and
that he as the minister of God, is by hearing of the sin to judge thereof,
and accordingly to give the sinner good and ghostly counsel, and to ordayn him
his Penance.

To conclude this matter I must tell you, that it is only the devil, who to
keep us from being absolved of our sins, puts all fear and shame before
our eyes, when we should go to confess them, but sequestreth it from our
sight when we go about to commit them.


Tawney-scarf. You have of this matter said so-much that you have made me see
that I still have the woorst end of the staf, and therefore to despair of the
victory, and to see my reasons not sufficient enough (in regard of yours) to
make you turn Protestant.


Red-scarf. If you could bring me so far as so much to dislyke my religion
as to be willing to relinquish it, it does not consequently follow that I
should turn protestant, but I should then stand in a great labrinth to consider
which of all the new religions that this day by pretense of Scripture will
needs be the true religion, I might make choice of, for the undoubted true
religion in deed, you must understand I have bin a travayler and have had more
trial and experience of these pretenders in the world abroad, then our
puritan Idiots, that only hear and heed what their homebred minister tells
them, when he will make it seem as though the Catholyke religion had no more
contradictors but those that are of his religion, as if there were not diverse
others of different religions from that which he holds (and of much like
new-nes) that do as earnestly contradict the Catholyke religion and as much
pretend to have their only recours to scripture, as possibly he can do, and
will not by Scripture be put down by such as he is, albeitthey should with
Bibles beat out their brains.

All these, how different soever from ours, and from one another, do as
earnestly pretend restoration of the ancient religion of the Apostles time, as
they for their lives can do, In which pretense both of theires and of ours, I
have so thoroughly penetrated, that I have fully discerned the Idleness thereof,
for no one of them all can carry the matter away with any proofs or reasons
peculiar to it self, which none of the rest cannot make his use of as well as it.

That there were in the primityue Church somanie different religions as now
pretend to restore the same, who can believe? That any one is the restorer
thereof, how shall it be known which it is? seeing none can any way make
himself appear to be the same before others, If he will say that he will prove
it by the word of God, how can he make his proof appeer to others, to be
more clear then their lyk proofs to him?

When I consider how our Puritanes do here in England ween themselves to be
the only Scripture fellows of the world, I cannot but laugh with my self to
imagine how they would be taken down with other scripture laddes that I have
met withal in my travailes in Germany among Arrians, Trinitists, Lutherans,
Morauian-Anabaptists, Holland-Anabaptists, and others of pettier sects, that
at the word, would make but poor snakes of the^. I heard a Luthera^ preacher
at Augusta tell his auditorie that to deal with a Caluinist (inte^ding our
Protestants or Puritanes) the best way was to take Gods word and grease him
well with that about the snowt, telling him still that Christ at his last
supper, said, Take and eat this is my body, etc. Not suffering him by any of
his Caluinistical shifts, to slip from these words, so may we conclude quoth
he, that either the Caluinist must make Christ a liar, or be a liar himself.

At Francford I heard an Anabaptist demand of a Caluinist, what Scripture he
had for the Christening of children, the Caluinist would have gone about to
deduce it by consequence, away with your consequenting quoth the Anabaptist,
for if consequences may be admitted, I will hear the Papists speak before you,
you are the very cooseners of the world, you brag and boast of profession of
Scripture, and when you are put to it then forsooth you are far enough to
seek, and not in this matter only of Christning of Children, but of more
matters besides, If I would put you to it, and did not spare you for pity,
because you are turned without book alredie.

I could allege unto you sundry examples of the resolutenes of Hussytes,
Lutherans, Anabaptists* and others in their several religions, which is such
that none of our sermon-makers here in England can any whit go beyond them, I
have heard somanie of their different pulpit cries, of the light of the
Ghospel, of the pure word of God, of inward illumination of spirit, of sealing
it with their blood and such like pretensio^s, general to all, and as duly
claymed by the one sort as by the other, that good experience has taught me
to know such pretensions here at home to be as idle fopperies as I have found
the^ in other countries abroad, serving only to lead away fools, that see no
further then the length of their noses.

If such as here do keep the greatest coyl in their pulpit-crying of their
light of the Ghospel, and pure word of God (as though without all contradiction
they were the only men lyving under the cope of heaven that had it) would but
dare to appeer among these other several sorts of professors of other lights
of the Ghospel, and other purity of the word, and be urged if they will be
believed before all the world besides, to set down to the manifest view of all
men, such proofs and reasons, for their assurednes of having the truth, as all
the rest shall not be able in the very like manner to produce for theirs.

Good Lord how would then our English pulpit boasters be puzzled, and what
poverty would then their glorious Ghospel be brought unto? trust me there
could nothing in this case be better fitting for them the^ to transport
themselves back again into invisibillitie (if they have reserved the f^il) for
thereby might they save themselves from becoming (by being pointed at) the
objects of the sport of all the others.

And thusmuch (with desire of pardon) dare I further anouche, that I do not
know, any forreyn country upon earth, wherein in any sort the name of
Christianity is professed, where the religion of England in the judgment of
the Learned of any of these whatsoever, is fully and wholly allowed for good,
and not in one principal point or other, gainsayed and contradicted.

And whereas many here in England do stand very much upon the resolutenes of
their Foxian, Martirs, as though their sufferance for their Caluinistical cause
were a marvelous, great argument of the goodness thereof, but which of the other
new pretenders cannot produce their Martirs also? Husytes and Lutherans are not
without store of them, and both thinking themselves to be much wronged by M.
Fox. The Hussites in being robbed by him of their Patriarche John Husse, and
the Lutherans by being robbed by him in like sort, of their much esteemed
martyr, friar Barnes.

As for the Anabaptists their number far exceeds those of M. Fox, and
perhaps ten for one. They that list to make the calculation may compare those
which they have set down in their book of Martirs, entitled, The Sacrifice of
the Lord, with the number of those that are in M. Fox his Acts and monuments.

I will now cease to be further tedious unto you, but by this which I have
related concerning religion, as also concerning your resolution in your
intended service, I leave you to judge which of both our courses is best
founded.


Tawney-scarf. I protest unto you, you have so intoxicated my brain, that you
have almost brought me to stand staggering between hauk, and bussard.


Red-scarf. If you will stand sure from falling, lean unto the better and the
stronger side.


Tawney-scarf. I will think on the matter.


Red-scarf. Forget not then to consider I pray you, even for your own honor and
the honor of our nation, that Englishmen still continewing to serve the
Hollanders, notwithstanding all the vilanous wrongs they have do^ne them, do
prejudice their own esteem, among other nations, who may imagine them to be so
basely blinded or bewitched by mistaken Holland Ghospel, that they cannot see
themselves made by the Hollanders in a manner as their slaves, for slaves
receive blows and serve them that beat them, and even so do our countrymen
receive blows at the hands of the Hollanders, and yet serve them. The
difference is, that slaves are beaten by their Masters at home, and Englishmen
by Hollanders abroad, while their inconsiderate countrymen serve them at home,
where if they served them right, they might right some of the wrongs which
abroad they do them. And I cannot enough wonder at the sencelessnes of such
giddie pated prentises of London as durst so barbarously abuse, an Ambassador
of a King of Spayn, themselves not knowing any cause why, and yet when by
letters from the East Indies it was by our own Marcha^ts signified how most
barbarously and vilanously, the Hollanders had abused them, these considerate
youths were not a whit moved to anger against M. Caroon, who carries the name
of Ambassador for the Holland States, but could show themselves so soft minded,
as to let him pas quietly in the streets of London in his Coatche, and do him
reverence, as if they had thanked him for it. But beginning now to fear that I
may have bin to tedious unto you and to this good compagnie, I will with desire
to be pardoned for my freeness of speech, thank you all for your patience, and
here make an end of this busynes.


Tawney-scarf. And I thank you also for yours.

Heervpon according to the promise before made, this Toung-combat, ciuilie
ceased, and soon upon it, the Graucsend journey also, and every man disposed
himself, as his affairs, and further journey lay.


FINIS.
L. B. S. T. L.


