AN ANSWER UNTO THE CATHOLIQVES SVPPLICATION, PRESENTED Unto the Kings
Majesty, for a tolleration of Popish religion in England. WHEREIN IS CONTAINED
A confutation of their unreasonable petitions, and slanderous lies against our
late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, whose happy and gracious government, the
Papists in their said Supplication do so peremptorily traduce. Together with
an information unto his Majesty of diverse their wicked and treasonable
practices, attempted in the life time of our late Queen his worthy
predecessor, whose life they always sought means to extinguish. Whereunto is
annexed the Supplication of the Papists, word for word as it was presented unto
the Kings Majesty: With some necessary annotations thereupon. Newly
corrected and augmented.

Written by Christopher Muriell the elder.

Imprinted at London by R. R. for Francis Burton, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the figne of the White-Lyon. 1603.

TO THE MOST GRAcious renowned Christian King; JAMES by the grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, defender of the true Catholic
and Apostolic faith: All divine, and celestial graces, mercies, and
blessings, be multiplied from generation to generation, for evermore: Amen.
MOst Gracious, and renowned Christian King, whereas the Papists, (who usurp
the name of Catholics) having posted unto your Majesty, to exhibit unto
your royal person a Supplication full of untruths: I one of the meanest of
your Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects, moved with zeal of the holy
and undoubted true religion, now professed in England; have thought it not
inconvenient (with your Graces favor, which I humbly crave) to answer the
chief and most material points of the said supplication, because it tends
to the grievous slander of our late deceased Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and
also of the noble and worshipful personages of this your Graces Realm of
England: and the rather, because I hear that some favorites of the Roman
religion, do so highly extol and advance the learned and eloquent penning of
the same, and the imaginary validity and force thereof, that they vaunt that it
cannot be contradicted, yet doubt I not but that the plain verity of this
short answer will be of sufficient force to daunt their expectations, and to
bewray their untruths, to their deserved discredit. The said Supplication
consists of feauen several parts, as by perusal thereof may appear.

1. The first part is their exordium, wherein they pretend faith and dutiful
obedience, and loyalty unto your Majesty, the which protestation I pray God
they may effect in verity, in as effectual and ample manner as they have in
flourishing and glosing show of words professed the same. But I commit that to
God who searches the hearts and reins, time tries all things: nil fictum
diuturnum essepotest.

2. In the second part they do complain that they were ouer-whelmed with
greeuom persecutions, by the severity of our late deceased Queen: We do not a
little marvel that they blushed not to inform your Grace with so manifest
untruths, if they supposed (as they in words pretend) that God has blessed
you with a wise and understanding heart, rightly to discern between truth and
fashood: For I dare boldly affirm that they cannot prove that any one
received the sentence of death only for professing the Romish religion, except
treason were thereunto also annexed: And if it may please your most Gracious
Majesty to weigh in equal balance the persecutions (to use their own
words) they suffered either by imprisonment or fining by the purse, (wherewith
very few in comparison were touched) your highness shall understand that
their own wilful obstinacy, and not the Queens Majesty's feueritie urged
the same; for whenever it pleased them to resort to their parish churches
unto divine prayers, they had present releasement both of their imprisonment,
and also of their fines and fees: But seeing that their unjust exclamations
enforce me to call to fresh remembrance the most savage and brutish dealings of
the Papists in Queen Maryes days, how they then dominered your highness
cannot be ignorant: how unmercifully did they torment unto death the faithful
servants and Saints of God, for professing the glorious Gospel of our redeemer
Christ Jesus? Some they tormented with most sharp and long imprisonment, some
they whipped with rods, some they secretly murdered in prison, but the
greatest and general number were sacryficed in the fire, in which kind of
torment they spared none, no not any degrees of persons, not so much as women
great with child, but tormented them to death, even when the children did fall
out of the mothers wombes into the fire, in the view of the Papists, who being
past shame and grace, nothing regarded it. Yea such was their raging madness,
that they dug up the dead bones of those two godly and learned fathers
Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, and burned them in Cambridge: It is manifest
unto the world, that the Papists tortured to death, as grave, as wise, as
virtuous, and as learned, and Catholic fathers, as Europe affords: Acts and
Monuments.
The records of these things are so manifest, so true, and so fresh in memory
(of many yet living) that they cannot be contradicted. But to return to our
late deceased Queen, whereas the Papists do unjustly charge her, that she was
A grievous persecutor of them, their assertion consists of contrarieties, for
after the death of her brother King Edward, they vndelayedly persecuted her
Grace: in the days of Queen Mary, they tossed her from prison to prison,
threatening her with continual death, so that she daily expected the Axe to
sever her sacred head from her Princely shoulders: D. Sutcliffe in his reply to
the Apo. pa. 84.
and once a precept was given for the executing thereof, to the Lieutenant of
the Tower, by the treacherous dealing of one of the Popes Gardener Bishop of
Winchester.
minions (the bearing great sway in England,) in so much that if the Lieutenant
of the Tower had not himself presently posted unto the Court unto the Queen
her sister, to understand certainly her pleasure therein, she had dyed before
the Queen had been acquainted therewith. But in process of time, she by Gods
providence being freed from that danger, and her self enjoying the royal
Crown, Scepter, and dignity of the Realm: did not the Pope deal with her as
his predecessor did in former time deal with King John? By his cursed Bull he
cursed and excommunicated the aforesaid King, and interdicted the whole realm:
So that for diverse years none were suffered to be Christianly buried: he
charged all his subjects that none of them should relieve, help, or succor
him by any means, either directly or indirectly, upon pain of his curse: so
that the rebellion of his nobles was so great that of force (to procure his
peace) he was constrained to Stovves Chro: in the life of K. John. Page 255.
and 256.
resign both the kingdoms of England and Ireland into the Popes hands, and
did take it again of the Pope by fee farm, paying one thousand marks yearly
for the fame. And even the like he practiced against our late Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth: But the sacred word of God had taught her subjects a better lesson
of fidelity, and loyalty to their Prince, then to regard his vain and wicked
Bull which by his Felton. Stovves Chro: page 129.
agents he caused to be hanged upon the Bishop of London his gate. After this
he instigated a mighty Prince (who is now dead and gone) to attempt his
pretended invincible inuation, and with his many fold forces utterly to
subuerte the flourishing state of this Realm, and to extirpate (if it had
been possible) the true worship of God. Moreover also the Pope instigated
Parry, Babington, and Lopez, and diverse others their confederates to conspire
the Queens untimely death, he fent also his cursed brood of Jesuits and
Seminaries (the firebrands of sedition in all kingdoms) to induce her subjects
to rebellion: whereunto also the Pope (their unholy father) added his yearly
curse at Rome with book, bell, and candle: hereby may you plainly see and
perceive, that the Pope and Papists which pretend to be (but indeed desire
rather to make) Martyrs, did continually persecute her Majesty and sought all
the mean that they possibly could to procure her untimely death, yet shame
they not to cry with open mouths unto your Majesty that they were persecuted.
As for our Queen, the only, omnipotent, wise, and all seeing God, preserved
her from all their bloody practices, and gave unto her an happy, joyful, and
peaceable end, to his glory, her own and our comforts, and to their unspeakable
grief and sorrow.

3. In the third part, this generation of vypers relate unto the world their
own wicked and treacherous endeavors to induce some now living, to aspire unto
the royal dignity of this kingdom. O cursed Parasites and false hearted
Papists, cannot you be soliciters of mischief, but you must needs brag
thereof; it argues that discord and rebellion are the chiefest virtues (if I
may so say) of your new and false Catholic Romish religion. But most gracious
King, let us praise and glorify God, who has so directed your godly
proceedings by his holy spirit, and has also given you wisdom and fortitude
to rely upon his divine providence, who workerh all things for the best, to
them that serve and love him. And that it has now pleased God to crown your
royal head with the crowns of these kingdoms of England, France and Ireland, it
cannot be any wise imputed unto the Papists, for they were (like traitors)
wholly bent another way, until they perceived that their designs were in
vain, and their hopes frustrate. For no sooner had it pleased God to call unto
his mercy our gracious Queen (who at and before her death resigned unto your
highness, as unto whom of right it appertained, the royal scepter of all her
dominions) but that once her, now your most faithful nobles, caused your
rightful title unto all her kingdoms, to be by open proclamation published
unto the world, the undoubted truth of which your royal and lineall descent,
together with the spirit of God working in their hearts to acknowledge the
same, has so united the hearts and minds of all the nobility, clergy, and
communalty of this land, that all (the Papists excepted) do joy to behold
your royal face, and are ready to serve, honor, and obaye you, with their
bodies and goods even unto death: The Lord bless and preserve you from the
practices and conspiracies of the wicked Romanists (for surely they hate you in
their hearts because you profess the Gospel of Christ as your predecessor
Queen Elizabeth did) who if (notwithstanding their flourishing show of words)
their wicked and desired expectations had bin effected, when the general
invasion of this land was intended (your Majesty knows by whom) never had
your Grace inioyed the scepter of these kingdoms of England and Ireland, yes
hardly (if they could have effected the contrary) should you have retained the
kingdom of Scotland, which then (and now also God be thanked)you possess
quietly.

4. In the fourth part they do grievously complain of two evils that do vex
their hearts: The first is, that this Realm of England is divided into
fourereligions, to wit, Protestants, Papists, Puritans, and Athists, over all
which the Protestants did domineere all the reign of our late disceased
Queen: Thus much we do truly, to the glory of God confess, that all such as
did profess the sacred Scriptures, were protected first and principally by
God, next by her Majesty as an instrument from God, against the tyranny of the
Pope, and all bloodthirsty Papists; and that the Barrowistes (who may most
justly of all other among us be termed Puritanes) as Jesuits which are the
Popish Puritanes amongst them, and all Pharisaicall Iusticiares, together with
all turbulent Athiest, (if any such be) which have sprung up in this
flourishing time of the Gospel as evil weeds amongst good Corn, have been
continually repelled by the preaching of the Gospel, by the wise, advised and
faithful ministers and dispensers thereof in this kingdom. And we are fully
assured that the said religion is so firmly established and founded upon the
sacred Scriptures, yea even upon Christ Jesus that sure rock, and is so
mightily defended with the two-edged sword that proceeds from the mouth of
God, which is able to cast down strong holds, and every high thing that shall
exalt it self against God and his true Church: that the gates of hell (that is
to say, the Devil himself, nor cursed Pope, Turk, Heretic, Infidel, Papist
or Athiest) shall never be able to prevail there-against so long as the world
endures. The second thing they complain of is, that wars and bloodshed have
seldom ceased, Taskes and Subsidies never so many, discontented minds
innumerable Behold the children of the Devil cannot but lie, for their father
the Devil has been a liar from the beginning: How injuriously do they
charge that blessed buried corpse whose spirit is inglory, with these
untruths? did not every man sit under his own Vine, and eat the labors of
his hands quietly and peaceably without molestation, forty and four years
and better to the great admiration of the world? See the Kings own testimony
of her Majesty in the latter end of the preface prefixed before the book of
instructions to his son. The words are these. But notwithstanding since there
is a lawful Queen there presently reigning, who has so long, with so great
wisdom and felicity governed her kingdoms, as (I must in true sincenty
confess) the like has not bin red nor hard of either in our time, or since
the days of the Roman Emperor Augustus, etc.
If it please your gracious Majesty to peruse the Chroncicles, you shall
find, that no King nor Queen before her time has ever governed this realm
in so godly peace and Christian unity, so long time protecting it most:
miraculously against the tyrrannie of the Pope, and all other foreign and
domestical enemies. Moreover, her Majesty has been a nourishing mother, and
a loving Neighbor unto diverse Princes, countries and states about her (as
their consciences can witness) and their ingratitude cannot but acknowledge,
if not requite, and graciously protected she the distressed people from the
bloody tyranny of their implacable, insolent, and cruel enemies. Yet has she
resigned her Kingdoms unto your Gracious Majesty in such state as your own
eyes do now and long may behold, and the world does admire. And no doubt, but
as the Protestants have been faithful unto her, so will they also be unto
your Majesty: wherefore let all faithful Christians, extol, praise and
magnify, the omnipotent and only wise God, who has waged his battles by her
hand, being (in the respect of her sex) a poor Grasshopper (in man's judgment)
against all the enemies of his sacred Church, as he waged battle against
Pharao and all his host, with an army of Grasshoppers: And therefore let the
Papists cease to publish so great untruth, redounding unto their own
perpetual shame and discredit for ever.

5. In the fifth part, they make their humble suit unto your Grace, that they
may obtain freedom to use the Romish religion freely without molestatio^,
though not openly, yet secretly, alleging two reasons: the first is, that
because they be restrained of that liberty, your kingdoms is abhorred of all
kingdoms that profess the Romish Religion. The second reason is, that it
would be a joyful thing to all the said Kingdoms, to grant them their said
suits. And to the end to induce your Grace to grant their requests, they
allege two arguments. The first is, that the now French King yielding to the
Papists to secure the use of the Romish religion, they honored him with these
venerable titles, Pater patriae, et pacis restitutor. If it be true that he now
deserves these honorable titles, why then since that time has not that
honorable King been freed from the dangerous conspiracy of the Papists, who
have diverse times since sought to murder him? If it please your renowned
Majesty to peruse the trecheries of the Papists, you shall find that they have
greater murdering hearts then cursed Caine, who murdered his own brother. For to
omit the many and continual treasons and conspiracies of the Papists against
our disceased Queen, did not a graceless Monk poison King John? did not a
cursed Friar of France murder with a poisoned Penknife the last diseased
French King? In vita Pii quinti.
did not the Bishops, Monks, Friars and Jesuits of Spain, cause the kings
eldest son of Spain to be murdered, in letting him blood? did not the
Papists of France urge the King of France to commit a tragical Butcherly
massacre at Paris, in poisoning the Queen of Navarre, and in a brutish
butcherly order to murder the most part of the peerlesse Nobility in France,
their wives and children, with a great number of the common people in diverse
parts of his realm: So that in one year by one means and others, they did
massacre a hundred thousand, as by their own histories it does appear. But
why should I stay upon recital of particularities? does not the bloody
Inquisitio^ at this day testify, that this tyranny is still continued in
Spain, in Rome, and amongst other their confederates? Behold the fruits of
the professors of the Romish Religion.

The second argument is drawn from the grave and wise counsel of Salomons
Counselors unto Roboham ( si loquaris eis bona verba, etc.) This Text is as
rightly alleged, as the devil alleged the Scripture unto our Savior Jesus
Christ, when he tempted him: for there was no request made un. to Roboham as
concerning religion, but only for a mitigation of grievous exactions. And the
Counsel of Salomons counselors in that behalf, was both wise, right, and
good.

But in causes of religion, O most renowned King, let the sacred Scriptures be
your direction, and prefer them before and above all worldly policies,
royalties, dignities, and honors whatsoever: for therein consists your true
honor, your true wisdom, your true authority, and royal dignity. Moses
teaches from the mouth of God, Deutero: the 15. chapter and 6. verse.
that if thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy own son, or the
daughter of thy wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend that is as thy
soul, shall intise thee secretly, saying, Let us go serve other gods: thou
shall not consent to him, nor hear him, neither shall thy eye pity him, nor
show mercy, nor keep him secret: but thou shall kill him, thy hand shall be
first upon him to put him to death. And our Savior Jesus Christ has assured
us, that if we confess him before men, he will confess us before his heavenly
Father. And if we deny him before men, he will deny us before his heavenly
father. And whosoever loves Father or Mother, brother or sister, wife or
children, or any worldly honor, riches, dignity, or regalitie, more then him,
is not worthy of him: for we cannot serve two Masters, for we shall either
love the one and hate the other, or else we shall hate the one and love the
other. And to this effect serves the persuasion of Eliha unto the Israelites,
If God be God, serve him, etc. Therefore let the fear of God and his sacred
word, be your direction; Let it be a Lantern to your feet, and a light unto
your paths, that God may be with you and bless you in all your actions. And
then (as the Apostle says) If God be on your side, who can be against you?
But if God be against you, who can be with you? For most gracious King, if all
the Kings and Potentates in the world did love, favor, and honor you, what is
it to the purpose if God be against you? And therefore the Lord bless you with
his grace and holy spirit, that no wordly thing may separate you from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

6. In the sixth part they employ their wits to persuade your most gracious
Majesty, that their religion is venerable for antiquity, constant for
continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to all virtue and piety,
maintained by the first Christian Emperors, sealed with the blood of millions
of Martyrs, etc. We do not a little marvel that they be not ashamed to avouch
so great untruths. But it is truly said (amisso pudore omnis virtus ruit) for
if their ascertions were true, why has one Pope caused the dead corpse of his
predecessor to be dug out of his grave and to be dismembered, and have
condemned him for an heretic, and all his works for heresy? And the next
successor has ratified the first dismembered Pope to be good and Catholic,
and all his works Catholic: we must needs be here in a Labyrinth, not
knowing how to judge which is the Catholic Pope: the condemnor, or the
condemned, have not some Popes been condemned and deprived by general
counsels? has there not been two Popes at once, and sometimes three, and
every one has cursed other, and excommunicated others, and fought bloody
battelles one against another, to the disturbance of all Christendom, and the
shedding of the blood of many thousand Christians? And he that was the
valiantest tyrant, was the most religious Pope. But to let them pass; let us
remember Constantine the Emperor, who first endowed the Pope with stately
revenues: But in his days where was their holy Bread, and holy Water? where
were their pardons of free remission of sins, both venial and deadly?
(soulde now for money throughout Christendom to redeem souls out of
purgatory) where was their Ladies Chapel, their Ladies Masses, their
pilgrimages to Saint James of Compostella, etc? Where was their praying to
Saints? Where was their diabollicall authority to deprive Kings and Emperors
of their Kingdoms, and to dispose of them at their free will and pleasure?
Where was the supremacy of the Pope universally over all Realms, Kings, and
Emperors, and over all degrees of persons spiritual and temporal? but it
has been since great honor for an Emperor to lead the Popes horse by the
bridle, and for a King to hold his stirrope, yea for an Emperor to be a
foote-stoole to the Pope to tread on when he went upon his horse: This
Luciferian pride was not heard off in Constantines time, nor long since: and as
for the religion that was professed in those days and long before Constantines
time, it was the same religion that we in England do now profess. And it is
for certain that the Heathenish and Infidel Emperors, both long before
Constantines days, and long since, did persecute the now professed religion in
England, and that it was sealed with the blood of many Martyrs, adorned with
the virtues of many thousand confessors, beautified with the blood of the pure
and Immaculate virgins: neither were the Bishops of Rome in those days, freed
from the said persecutions. But when Infidel Emperors by Gods divine
providence ceased their tyranny; Then the Luciferian Popes by degrees and steps
climing the highest staff of the ladder of pride, did so far exceed in
haughtiness of heart, insolency, and tyranny, that they first did shake off
the lawful authority of Emperors in the electing and admitting the Pope, and
then presently after, they did domineere and tyrannise over Emperors, Kings,
and all degrees of persons spiritual and temporal, so that it is to be
doubted whether the heathenish Emperors in their time, or the irreligious
Popes in their time have persecuted and tormented to death the greater number
of faithful Christians and the Saints of God. It is superfluous to rehearse
the stories of these things, seeing they be recorded in all Ecclesiastical
Histories, and in the Chronicles of all kingdoms: And we are persuaded that
your grace has both seen and read the History of these bloody tragedies: But
of late time the Pope has been well plumed tof his borrowed feathers, and his
Luciferian pride somewhat depressed: Yet, if the Papists will so be content, we
will join with them to procure that a General and free Counsel may be held
in Christendom, whereunto both Papists and Protestants may freely repair,
that thereby the Church of Christ may have peace, and the ignorant may be
confirmed in the true faith: and to this purpose has one of our learned
Divines offered himself to dispute with any Papists whosoever (and many other
will do the like) so that his person may be secured red from perrill. D:
Sutcliffe in the reply to The word. page 43.
This I pray God that it may be effected, and that he that is the true God may
be worshipped of all, and that Baall may be utterly forgotten, that all
Christian kingdoms agreeing in true doctrine and sinceere truth may jointly
acknowledge one verity, one faith, one baptism, one religion, and one only
God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, Amen.

7. In the seventh and last part they make a sollemne profession before God and
his holy Angels, of as loyal, as obedient, and immaculate allegiance to your
Grace, at ever did faithful subjects in Scotland or England unto your
progenitors, and intend sincerely and truly with goods and lives to serve your
Grace, for confirmation whereof they confess merit in obeying, and demerite in
disobeying, and therefore cannot but in soul be grievously tormented for the
least preuarication: This protestation is indeed with a flourishing show of
good words, let the fruits of their obediences try the verity thereof: where
was the fruits of their obediences in the days of their anointed Queen now
deceased that they may have merit for it? These Romanists have sugered words,
but their hearts be full of deadly poison, for although they be a generation of
vypers, yet they can change their shape into an Angel of light, to deceive the
very elect, if it were possible. The world ca^ testify that the manifoulde
treasons and conspiracies of the Papists, were sufficient testimonies of their
demerit: And if they must needs be tormented in soul and conscience for their
least preuarication, needs must thousa^ds of their souls and consciences be
tormented for their many treasons and conspiracies, against their late
anointed Queen now deceased. But whatsoever they profess in words, it is
impossible so long as they profess the Romish religion to be faithful
subjects unto your grace, for this is a maxim in the minds of most papists,
fides non est serua^da cum hereticis, and we are sure that the Pope has
censured al Protestant Princes for heretics, and their religion for heresy:
Therefore whatsoever they profess in words, they cannot serve God and the
devil, neither can they truly serve and obaye you and the Pope: (Two so great
contrarieties cannot concur in one subject) And thus I conclude, praying to God
(as our bounden duty requires) that of his great goodness, he will vouchsafe
to bless, preserve, and defend your royal majesty, our noble Queen, and all
your Princely Children, from all your enemies both foreign and domestical,
spiritual and temporal, and from the treasons and conspiracies of all
Romanists: That your sacred Majesty and your posterity, may live and reign
over us in the fear of God, and to his honor and glory, in regal dignity,
happy prosperity, godly peace and unity, and that after this life, you may
have celestial felicity in the life to come for evermore, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject CHRISTOPHER MVRIEL, Senior.

THE CATHOLICS SVPPLICATION.
Most puissant Prince, and orient Monarch,
SVch are the rare perfections and admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence,
valor and justice, wherewith the bountiful hand of Gods divine Majesty has
endued your Majesty, as in the depth of your provident judgment, we doubt not
but you foresee what concerns both the spiritual and temporal government
of all your kingdoms and dominions. 2. Notwithstanding your Graces most
afflicted subjects and I pray God that your Majesty never stand in need of
their service.
devoted servants, the Catholics of England, partly to prevent sinister
informations, which happily may possess your sacred ears, before our answer
be heard; partly almost as men overwhelmed with If they be perse cuted,
themselves are the cause thereof, for they are never well but when their heads
are hatching of rebellion.
persecutions for our consciences, we are enforced to have speedy recourse, in
hope of present redress from your Highness, and to present these humblelines
unto your royal person to plead for us some As you deserve, so I pray God you
may have.
commiseration and favor. 3. What Nay, what desperate and unnatural
designements will they not, to their power, at the Popes commandment attempt
against the^? for they hold it a matter of great merit at the Popes
commandment to kill and murder their lawful Princes. See Parry his Treasons,
Squire his treasons: Likewise Peter Barricre, and John Chastell, their
desperate attemptes againsts the French King, Jesuits Catechism 3. book,
page 148. 155.
allegiance or duty can any temporal Prince desire or exped at his vassalls
hands, which we are not addressed to perform? How many Noblemen and worthy
Gentlemen, most zealous in the Catholic Religion, have endured some loss of
lands and livings, some exile, others imprisonment, some the effusion of blood
and life for the Busy fellows, that would take in hand such treasonable
actions before they had acquainted the party for whom they undertook them
therewith. Jesuits Catechism 3. book, page 138.
advancement of your blessed Mothers right unto the scepter of Albion? Nay,
whose singer did ever ache, but Catholics, for your Majesty's present title and
dominions? How many Happy is that country, that is rid of them, for it is
better have their room then their compaine.
fled to your Court offering themselves as hostages for their friends, to live
and die in your Graces His Majesty in public Print acknowledges (and ever
did) that Queen ELIZABETH was lawful Queen, and therefore must those that so
offered themselves, by the Kings own testumonie be traitors.
quarrel, if ever Adversary had opposed himself against the equity of your
cause? If this they attempted with their Princes disgrace, to obtain your
Majesty's grace; what will they do? nay, what will they not do, to live without
disgrace in your Graces favor? 4. The maine of this Realm, if we respect
Religion (setting petty sects aside) consists upon four parts: Protestants,
who have dominiered all the former Queens days: Puritanes, who have crept up
apace among them: Atheists or Politititans, who were bred upon their brawles
and contentions in matters of faith: And Catholics, who as they are opposite
to all, so are they detested of all, because Error was ever an enemy to
Truth. Hardly all, or any of the No thanks to them, for if their deseignes
could have been effected, all protestants throats had been cut long agone:
call to mind they year 1588, and then judge whether it be so or not.
first, two, three can be suppressed: and therefore we beseech your Majesty to
yield us as much favor, as others of contrary religion (to that which shall
he publicly professed in England) shall obtain at your hands. For if our
fault be like, or less, or none at all; in They plead miustice against the
Kings Majesty, if they may not be permitted freely to use their Idolatrous
religion.
equity, our punishment ought to be like, or less, or none at all. The
Gates, Arches, and Pyramides of France proclaimed the present King Pater
patriae and pacis restitutor, because that kingdom being well nigh torn in
pieces with civil wars, and made a pray to foreign foes, was by his
provident wise dome and valor acquired in it self, and hostile strangers
expelled; the which he principally effected by condescending to Has he been
since that time freed from the danger of Papists, search the French Chronicles,
and you shall find the contrary.
tolerate them of an adverse religion, to that was openly professed.
Questionless, dread Sovereign, the kingdom of England, by cruel persecution
of Catholics, has bin almost odious to all Christian Nations: Trade and
traffic is decayed, wars and blood has seldom ceased, Subsidies and taxes
never so many, None (or very few) discontented but Papists, whose heads do
always ache but when they are working of treasons, and drawing of others into
the same state of coffeehouse with them.
discontented minds innumerable; all which your Majesty's princely conniuencie
to your humble Suppliants, the afflicted Catholics, will easily redress,
especially at your Highness ingresse. Si loquaris ad eos verba lenia, erunt
tibi serui cunctis diebus, said the sage Counselors of Solomon to Rehoboham.
For enlargement after affliction resembles a pleasant gale after a vehement
The Papists have caused more storms and tempests to arise in this land, then
all other Sects besides that they can invent names for. Who but Papists sought
means induce the late Earl of Essex (if he would have been atraytour to his
Prince) to be a Pencioner for the King of Spain? Earl of Essex his own
Apology. Yet had they underhand acquainted therewith the late Lord Treasurer
Sir William Cecill, insomuch that if the Earl had consented unto them,
presently had he been entrapped. Watson the Priestin his book of Quod
libetts.
tempest: and a benefit in distress doubleth the value thereof. 5. How
grateful will it be to all Catholic Princes abroad, and honorable to your
Majesty, to understand how Queen Elizabeth's A manifest slander of his
Majesty, for she was far more merciful unto them then ever they deserved.
Nay the Priests themselves in their own books acknowledge the justice of his
Majesty's laws against them
severity is changed into your royal clemency: and that the lenity of a man
reedified that which the misinformed anger of a woman destroyed: That the Lion
rampant is passant, whereas the passant had been rampant? How acceptable shall
all your subjects be to all Catholic countries, who are now almost abhorred of
all, when they shall perceive your Highness prepared not and pikes and prisons
for the professors of their faith, but permitted them Temples and To offer
sacrifice upon unto their Popish Idols
Altars for the use of their Religion? Then shall we see with our eyes, and
touch with our fingers that happy benediction or Esaias in this land, that swords
are changed into ploughs, and lances into sithes. And all Nations admiring us
will say, Hi sunt semen cui benedixit Dominus. We request no more favor at
your Graces hands, then that we may securely profess that Catholic religion,
which al your happy Predecessors professed, from Donaldus the first converted,
unto your Majesty's peerless Mother last martyred. 6. A Religion venerable
for D. Sutcliffe in his challenge unto N.D. has proved the contrary, chap.
the 2. page 27.
antiquity, maiesticall for amplitude, constant for continuance,
irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to all kind of virtue and piety,
dissuading from all sin and wickedness. A Religion beloved by all primitive
Pastors, established by all Occumenicall Councels, vpheld by all ancient
Doctors, maintained by the first and most Christian Emperors, recorded almost
alone in all Ecclesiastical Histories, sealed with the blood of millions of
Martyrs, adorned with the virtues of so many Confessors, beautified with the
purity of thousands of Virgins, so conformable to Therein I think they speak
more truly then they are aware of.
natural sense and reafon, and finally so agreeable to the sacred text of Gods
word and Gospel. The free use of this Religion we request, if not in public
Churches, at least in private houses; if not with approbation, yet with
toleration, without molestation. 7. Assure your Grace that howsoever some
Protestants or Puritanes, incited by moral honesty of life, or innated
instinct of nature, or for fear of some temporal punishment, pretend
obedience unto your Highness laws; yet certainly the only Are the chiefest
stirrers unto rebellion in all Christian commonwealths.
Catholics for conscience sake observe them. For they defending that A mere
untruth, for no Protestants maintain any such position.
Princes precepts and statutes oblige no subject under the penalty of sin,
will little care in conscience to transgress them which principally are
tormented with the guilt of finne. But Catholics confessing merit in obeying,
and demerit in transgressing, cannot but in soul be grievously tortured, at
the least preuarication thereof. Wherefore most merciful Sovereign, we your
long afflicted subjects, in all dutiful submission, protest before the Majesty
of God and all his holy Angels, as loyal obedience, and as immaculate
allegiance unto your Grace, as ever did faithful subjects in England or
Scotland unto you Highness Progenitors; and intend as sincerely with our
goods and lives to As long as your Majesty will serve their purposes, but no
longer. Let them all oh Lord, if it be thy will, be converted and agree with us
in one truth. Amen.
serve you, as ever did the loyallest Isralites King David, or the trusty
legions the Roman Emperors. And thus expecting your Majesty's customarie
favor and gracious bounty, we rest your devoted Suppliants to him whose hands
do manage the hearts of Kings, and with reciprocate mercy will requite the
merciful.

Your sacred Majesty's most devoted Servants. The Catholics of England.


