THE COMPLAINT OF A CHRISTIAN SOVLE.

Containing certain remedies and comforts against the trouble and conflict of
Conscience.

Newly written in meter.

PRINTED AT EDINBVRGH BY RObert Charters, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. M.D.C.X.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND HIS singular good Lord JOHN Earl of MONTROSE Lord
Grahame, one of his Majesty's privy Counsel, we wish long life with incresse
of honor in the fear of the Lord
Although, most Noble Lord, I (as one ever mindful of your L. honorable place,
and of that dewtie we all ought thereunto) did not lack a will to have saluted
your L. with some fruits of my travelles this long time ago: but finding in my
self that great want of graces which my Muse should have granted, and not
being bold to have presented my self empty into your presence, as also
fearing if I had offered any thing that my barbarity and incongruous speech
should rather have moved your L. to mislike me for my homelines, then otherwise
to have received me in favor for the same. Yet being long tosted betwixt two
extremities, sometimes calling to mind the dewty I was bound to, and sometimes
remembering how I was always unable (because of my manifold defects) to have
satisfied the least point of your worthy desire, have in end thought better to
be rude then ungrate, and so much the more because of the excellency of the
theme proposed unto me, I must with your favor (although not with such learning
as you merit, nor with such holiness as the matter requyres) take the boldness as
to acquaint your L. mith my small beginning, and to speak a little of this
subject concerning a troubled soul, and of the comforts against the conflict
of conscience, as a thing prescrived unto me for the time, being in the same
agony my self (for my own private content, and to avoid the tediousnes of
ill employed time) I was persuaded by some who had a great interest to the
disposition of my will, to publish this little scrole to the world, that others
might reap some profit thereby, and be fortified against the fear and
apprehension of the gilt of sin, and certainly the worthiness of the subject
moved me to yield the more easily to their desires. Yet knowing that students
in their beginning (how worthy so ever) have but a cold welcome in a foreign
land without the support and countenance of some great and worthy personage,
as also fearing my imperfections, in handling this sukiect, might happily
blemish the excellency of the work, and give some dstiaste to the curious
reader. I have therefore in my boldness directed it to your L. as a patron,
hoping ye will rather be a preses to defend my weakness, then to cavell or oppon
against such tender propositions. For since all that I have done, rather
proceeds of love and bounden dewry, then any santasticall toy or desire of
renoun: I must therefore commit all my slips and ignorances to your L.
subsidy, looking rather to be acceptable for my good will, then to be loathed
for that quhilk is inlaiking in me, and thought unsavory for that quhilk in
due affection is done. So I have presumed to shrewd both my self and my
labors under your L. protection, besceching you receive these strangers (as
you usually do all men) with a gracious and a gentle eye, and to accept of my
poor endeavors, as a testimony and a pledge of my humble dewty and service:
that by your L. honorable acceptance and exemple, others may be drawn to
entertain them kindly, and bid them the better welcome: so shall your L,
encourage me to some stronger attempt, and bind me to continue always,
promising certemly if mymuse shall afford any better things thereafter, neither
shall your person nor your place be forge, but as my taient incresses your
L.shall know.

MY greatest reverence is not half my dew,
For more nor all my worth thy worth requyres:
By my attempt I wish there might ensew
But some contentment to thy hie desires:
And as before the Sun no darkness bides,
Thy Sunnie cies my imperfections hides.
Virtue quhilk dwells into the inward thought,
Makes good the seed what ever be the smell:
The outward gloss some time does seem but noght,
Quhill as the inward stuff does much excel:
Gold though not find some men do well esteem,
I rather love to be then so to seem.
Your Lordships humble orator in Christ M. George Muschet.

THE PREFACE.
AS it is a great happiness to fle al vicious extremes, and to hold a commend
able mediocritie: so it is a misery quhilk we cannot sufficiently lament, to
see (in their latter days amongst men quhilk make profession to believe in a
better life) some who have so sold them self to the love of this world that
they seek not for an other, and some who are so violently carried away with the
fear and apprehension of Death, so that upon any show of alteration in their
health there is nothing to be heard bot strange sighs and groans, the witnesses
of abject thoghts, and the unworthy contesting of a soul that would dispute
with God. The remedies against so great mischieues are very necessary: and I
hope this treatise following will furnish somewhat for the purpose (gathered
not in the bogs and mures of humane wisdom, but in the garden of life) quhilk
is the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles of the ever-living God: The
savory juce of the quhilk remedies digested in our souls, will make us neither
be too much rejoisd with the pleasures of this world, neither too much feared to
pass out of this world, but that with a holy care, a vigilant fear, and a
filial reverence, we shall have the eyes of our souls and ears of our
hearts open to the voice of the Lord, crying to all mankind, Sons of men
return, yea it would cure us of that lethargy, palsy, and spiritual
apoplexy, wherewith so many poor souls are daily infected, quhilk never
thinking of death are dead living, or rather are as the dead quhilk bury the
dead, noknowing what the kingdom of God is, neither having any care to be of
it, or to procure or advance it. This juce will free us from that fear quhilk
congeils our spirits, and from that frencie quhilk makes us doubt of our saife
delivery, and from that spiritual melancholy quhilk subverts all true
judgment in us, and thrusts us (as it were) in a brutishe childishnes,
estranging us from these things quhilk should cause most joy and consolation in
us. This present collection is the box containing the precious oil the quhilk
being carefully digested by you will (I hope) produce some profitable effect.
Bot to give you some greater taist of the samin, and to show the sum or this
little scrole. In their few and unadvised lines, there is breeflie (or as it
were) in a certain a bridgment set down two things, the one is the vehement
calamity quhilk proceeds not from a sleeping soul, but from the feeling
disease and excessive trouble of a wakned conscience, not only accused but
convicted of her persewers, and brought to the strait, farther nor the
scaffold, even almost to the door of the grave, by the rememberance of sin. In
the other part there is adjoind, although not separately by it self but mixtly
through the whole, some special remedies for the most diseased soul, and some
medicens equivalent for the farrest dijected conscience, and some salues very
necessary for that spirituail palsy, quhilk if it be rightly applied, will
not only banish all present fear of death, but even that quhilk no other
Physic can afford, it will furnishe perpetual health to the soul, and leave
the mind so at ease, that no inconvenient (how great so ever) shall be able
hereafter to ty the man to the bed. This is the sum Christian Reader, and
albeit it be not so ripely digested, nor uttered with such grace, as he ought
to have who lets any thing go from him to the censure of this age: yet
impudency hes so prevailde with me for the time, and a care to do good with my
small talent, did so continually push my lukles muse that I could find no rest
in silence. But as Michall did laugh when David did dance, so I know some
Michals will scorn at my singing, and yet I hope otherways to be welcomed of
some, for if any good David's be in this land there I shall be harbored, because
this is a song whereat David's should be delyted. So not caring for Michals
taunting, nor Rabschek as railings, nor Ischmaels scofs, because it is not with
such I crave to be mirrie, neither with them to communicate our spiritual
melody, to the well effected Christian (who gives lodging to the Hebrew
Harpes, and who intertaines the musical instruments of Sion) I direct this
Ballad, to be set upon their strings, to be played in their Palaces, and to be
sung in their Innes, knowing this one that if the pleasantnes do not delight
you, the long somnes shall not weary you. And if all be not so well ordered,
as you merit (worthy Reader) nor so Poeticallie composed as the writer would
wish, let my want be countervailed by my good will, and when better things
shall be offered, you shall not lack.

Fair well.
THE COMPLAINT OF A CHRISTIAN SOVLE.
Would God I had such access to thy face,
As of before when I thy favor fande:
Would God my soul were so indewed with grace,
That I might live as thy word does command.
Then should my life for ever preach thy praise,
My lips should found thy mercies manifold:
Much should I scorn for to be one of these,
Whom Satan sin death, hell or worldlings would.
But ah, my wits can not so far aspyre,
My senseless heart is ever hardened so:
That while thy spirit in me should have impyre,
Sin reigns to death, Romans 6.
that all my weils do go.
Thus ere I live* I rather choose to die,
And die I dare not for my great trespass:
Except in death thy son should pi^^e me,
And wash my soul while it be clean as glass. Psalm. 51.

Sins great deceate unto the world is known
By old experience and by practice late:
And I poor wretch am daily overthrown,
And spoilde by sins which conscience does repeat.
Her glittring shades and her allurements strange,
Moude me to yield, and did me captive take:
And therefore justly may the Lord revenge,
To my great grief and everlasting wrack.
My great offenses if I should express,
I know large scrolles could not the same contene:
And neither are my privy falts the less,
But much more frequent in my life hes been.
My false affection and my corrupt will
Has sold my soul to every sort of sin:
And this frail flesh conspyring ay my ill
Lettes suithing fancies all my freedom win.
Thus can I never to the heavens approach,
So much infect with every blemish thing:
No, no, I have not boldness in so much,
Once to behold thy countenance bening.
For oh, the vylenes of my great trespass
Wrappes me in chains of dark eternal cair:
And I forgot how sweet thy presence was,
My lights are dark, my eyes sees life na mair.
And so it skilles not what my sins have been,
I cease t'abridge, much more to find them out:
For if my lesser faultines were seen,
I should be odious all the world throughout.
Therefore with David I mon rather wine
My sins were covered and my slippes forget, Psalm. 32.

That my perverseness and my deeds amiss
Quench not the courage that should mercy get.
For if thy goodness do deny relief,
Fallen are my hopes like widdring leafes to ground:
None can express the agony and grief,
Which in my conscience daily does abound.
For oh, my sins unto the heavens are gone
My soul to banish from that pleasant place,
Yea, that quhilks more my life is almost done,
And wrakt by that perturber of my peace.
Though this be much it is not all my we,
But here the greefs quhilk do me most annoy,
That I remember how my God was so,
My light, my love, my life, my hope, my joy.
And to have sind against so fair a face,
O it would crushe a world of souls in care,
And I who liud in sin so long a space,
Except thou help must die into dispare.
But though my lukles life hes ay been such,
As did transgres the limits of thy law,
Yet my offenses are not half so much,
But to thy servant thou may mercy show.
For nons cast off but such as haits thy Name,
And none do perish but who dies perverse,
None dies to torment but who lives in shame,
Bad life brings death, and does all joys disperse.
Such am I not, with all my strength I love thee,
And my perverseness I sinceerely hate:
I loath my sinful life, and longs to prove thee
Sweet, kind and gracious to my poor estate.
My sins are great, but here my comforts haill,
Thou know that which I would not, that I do:
And yet not I, but my corruptions faill,
And thus I Am sinful all the world unto.
But oh, my spirit does sorrow for my sin,
Although my fragile flesh be frighted so:
My soul does long to see the days begin,
That my affection from the world should go.
Jude
My former walking I abhor so much,
The coat that's spotted with the flesh I hate:
Yea I disdain the members made me such,
And loathes my self that I was so ingrate.
But though I do bewail my sins eachone,
And all my crooked ways with tears lament:
And though I smart for that great evil that's done,
While I sinceerely for my sins repent.
Yet am I ever troubled and dismaide,
Because my God has hid his gracious face:
Satan rejoices that I am affraide,
And wills me never look for any grace.
Thus am I humbled, but too much cast down,
And sees my sins, but in a fearful glass:
This sight wills meto th'vncouth land be bowne,
And such strong charge does all my strength surpass.
Does thus my God conspire my woe and wrack*
Or did he not a gracious faviour send?
Or does he only life from me abstract?
Or shall I yet have happiness in end?
Thy strength is not diminished, I know,
Thy arm not shortened to thine own elect:
Isai. 8.
They taste of Sions fontaine sweet Siloa,
And drinks the brock which from the river breek.
Reve. 21.
Thou gives the^ food which from the heve^s does rain
Thou'le quench their thirst even with the water of life:
Once let me drink, that I thirst not again,
And finish quickly all my woe and strife.
For thou delights not in a sinners death.
And have no pleasure wounded souls to kill:
No, thou can not rejoice to stop the breath,
Though we be frighted with a world of ill.
The dame would not so gladly keep her young,
For all the flightring of her feathers fair:
The mothers hand is not so softly hung,
To save her child of whom she hes great caire.
As thou have thine outstretched arms abrod
For their deliverie who regardes thy name:
No, thou art theirs, and they are thine, o God,
And so, though lost, yet thou can bring them hame*
Then this that I do ever so bewail,
Is not because with thee their is no grace:
No, no, it is rather that I am so frail,
And hes not eyes to see thy gracious face,
For what great comfort can thy grace afford?
Or what a joy is it thy mercy brings?
Or what a pleasure is thy glory, Lord?
If thou withold from me these precious things.
No, it does seem but to aggredge my pain,
To see such plenty and so small to teast:
I rather wish my lights were dark again,
Or by such sight my life were so oppressed.
But let my faith go apprehend thy love.
And make my hope assured of thy joys:
And let my thirsty soul these mercies prove,
Ise loath the world and all her foolish toys.
Then shall I not unto my fancy live,
Nor worldlings best contentments longer love
The Earths fading glory I should not archieue,
But ever long eternity to prove.
Ester 3.
Hamans preferment I should not respect,
Luk, 16.
All Dives riches should not once content met
I Alexanders kingdoms should reject,
And not rejoice though all the world were lent me.
But all my thoghts outthrogh the clouds should reik
My words above the highest mountains roar:
And my delights should be of heaven to speik,
My joy to think on that eternal glore.
But since my faith is ever weakened so,
And all my hopes are shadowed with care:
And since thy quickening sprite departs me fro,
That living I among the graves repair,
How can my thoghts or words to heaven ascend?
How can my deing sprites exalt on hie?
How can my courage in such woe be kend,
While it is loadned in perplexity?
My life is death if so I live alas,
My courage faintnes, all my pleasure pain:
My rest is tedious, all my health distress,
Except some comfort from the heaven do rain.
I know thy goodness may asswadge my strife,
Though I encounter with these perrelles all:
Thy sacred Book shows thou may save my life,
And keep it harmeles both from death and hell.
Exodus 14
For Israel escaped from that Egyptian host,
And eke against proud Pharao so prevailde:
That horses, chariots, Capitaines he lost,
The rotten reed of Egypt so him failde.
1. Kin. 19
That strong Assyrian army was defeat
By heavenly powers of their lives bereft:
And Sions City saved from perelles great,
And Ashur slaughtered when the seege he left.
Young David with the Philistim did fight
1 Samuel 19
By that great strength of God and not of man:
Saules best coat armor could not fit him right,
By other forces he the battle wan.
My Pharo, Ashur and Goliath strong
Shall take the foil, if yet thy strength thou grant me
And I triumph thy holy Courts among,
And be victorious when the world shall want me.
My pains may cease, my trouble shall depart,
And all my inward greefes shall have an end:
And I have solace yet for all my smart,
If thou shall mercy to thy servant send.
No foraine forces, no domestic fo,
Shall once astonish or amaze my mind:
Except my heinous treachery do go,
And make my Savior to my soul unkind.
Genesis 19.
I know my sins may make me lose thy love,
Loyttring in Sodom may procure thy hate:
Or to look back when from the world I move,
May serve to metamorphose my estate,
Number, 11.
Or to loath Manna and that heavenly fude,
And long for Egypts fatnes in the plain:
May make the fiery serpents be too rude,
And sting to death, that we live not again.
Jonas 1.
Or to repyne against thy holy will,
And go to Tharsis that should Nineue teach:
May tossed the silly ship with storms so shill,
And cast poor Jonah in a fearful ditch.
In Sodom, Egypt, Tharsis, noght but woe,
Although their dainties do a while delight thee:
Their pleasures perish, all their games do go,
And sorrowing sadness shall in end requite thee.
No, noght in earth but crossed delights is seen,
And all her sweetness mixed with bitter gall:
For where to day triumph and ball hes been,
To morrow mourning oftentimes befall.
What shall I then such bad contentments love?
Which noght but momentaneall comfort brings:
No, no, my soul delights to be above,
To see the valor of eternal things.
Where there is endless happiness of life,
And perfect pleasure for the Saints preparde:
Glory but shame and rest withoutten strife,
As hes the holy Scriptures often declarde.
Then these great things should every fancy wisse,
For this abiding wealth the world should cair:
For it brings life and such perpetual bliss,
That Abraham's children needs to wish na mair.
Which if my soul were once sure to enjoy,
When all this veil of misery is past:
No earthly conslict here should me annoy,
Because I should possess the heavens at last.
But all toil, troubles, contrare change of time,
My faith should welcome, and not be affraide:
Though cares would blast the blossoms of my prime,
That I were find or as in mortar brayde.
All should I embrace as tokens of thy love,
And I should feed upon thy favor still:
My songs of praise should mount to heavens above,
While I were fashioned to thine holy will.
Then should I always solemnize thy name,
For this deliverie to thy servant granted:
To sing thy mercy this should be my theme,
As did the godly who thy Courts hes hanted.
On David's Harp often should my finger strike,
Yea David's heart in my breast should be found:
That heavenly voice which from my lips should brek
Most Echo-like among the rocks should sound,
No music should but Hebrew songs delight me,
Though all the Muses with their mirth were brought:
I know the lecherous singer will despite me,
But all his sonnets should I set at noght.
Good Ezechias to thy house should lead me,
With David to the Temple should I pass:
And holy Moses through the Courts should guide me,
In Sions songs should be our merinesse.
But who can sing in such a monstrous grave?
Or praise thy name in this infernal place:
Who can be glade who does nor grace receive
To see the sweemes of thy heavenly face?
Or can his voice be heard in heavens above,
Whose soul is crushed in the earth below?
Or may my mind be warmed with thy love,
While ever frowning thou thy self do show?
Oh raise my soul from such a gulffe of care,
As thou did Lazarus body from the grave:
Reviue my spirits that yet I may repare
These pleasant places which the Saints receive.
For oh, thou see my fainting in distress,
How no man's torment is so much as mine:
And how my pains are so remediless,
That though I live, yet in that life I pine,
Must this, alas, thy servant needs be gone?
That all supporting aid is from him rain:
Or shall I die before my days be done?
Or shall I live when all these days are gane?
If once thy former mercy was so great,
When as thou sparedst all the world for one:
One may have access to thy mercies seat,
Through all in all who sits upon the Throne.
For once he suffered for my great trespass,
Once he was offered for the sins of men:
In him thy very justice pleased was,
Of force thy mercy must remit us then.
So all my troubles and afflictions strange
Shall not destroy me nor procure my wrack:
Because my God he does not still revenge,
But tryes his children when he does them strike.
The mother does absent her self a while,
From her dear child whom she intierly loves:
And so the infant after this exile,
In his affection much more fervent proves.
So though my God from me his face obscure,
Yet will he kyith when all these clouds are past:
And this disertion shall my soul allure,
To love more trewlie not I loved last.
Its not to leave me that my God is (...),
Its not to kill me that he sends the cross:
He does not strike that I should die anon,
But fines the gold by burning of the dross.
Since by the furnace our corruption dies,
And all our faulty parts are framde of new:
And all the trouble that the body sees,
Serves but to make it of an heavenly hew.
We should not fret to be afflicted much,
Since by afflictions we the heaven attain,
And none to Canaan ever can approach,
But he who in the wilderness hes been.
Then though great waters do so often beset me,
That Satan says it is thy extreme disdain,
Yet now thy wondrous goodness will not let me,
Dispare of mercy for a world of pain.
But though thou kill me, to thy hand I Will come,
And though thou slay me, I shall ever love thee,
No chance no change shall so my speech benume,
But it shall praise thee as my thoghts do prove thee.
Touch, touch my lips, for oh my soul does long
To be anointed with thy heavenly grace,
And thus I put a period to my song,
Quhill I appear before thy glorious face.
M. George Muschet Minister of the Evangell at Dunning.


