MARIA TRIVMPHANS. BEING A Discourse, wherein (by way of Dialogue) the B. Virgin
Mary Mother of God, is defended, and vindicated, from all such Dishonours and
Indignities, with which the Precisians of these our days, are accustomed
unjustly to charge her.

Aue Gratia ple^a, Dominus tecum: Benedicta tu in mulieribus.

Luc. 1. Intercede Hera, and Domin^, and Matter Dei pronobis. Athan. Sermon. in
Enang. de Deip^^.

Permissu Superiorum. 1635.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST renowned Prin^sse and Mirro^ ^f Virtue, Behold ^eere, I, one of Your
devoted Vassals, have presumed (pardon this my humble Presumption) to dedicate
unto Your Majesty, this poor ensuing Work; that with the Wings of your
gracious Patronage, it may more freely, and vnrestraynedly fly abroad.

The subject thereof is, to vindicate (so far as in me lies) the Honor of
the most Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, from the Indignities, which she
suffers from the enuenomed Tongues, and Pens of our P^^^^ians; for the more
temperate and learned Protestant is fa^ from such Exorbitancyes.

In your Patronage whereof, She, whom it chiefly concerns, will a new become
your Patroness: And thus will Mary intercede for Mary; the Queen of Heaven,
for a great Queen upon earth; the Mother of our Celestial King, for the
mother of our future terrene King: And finally, by your protecting and pleading
for it, the Immaculate Virgin will (in a more full manner) become an Advocate
for You, her Advocate.

Vouchsaf^ ^^^refore to accomplish this my Petition, most Great Lady* ^reat, I
say, since You are borne Great, married Great, and are Virtuously Great: For
you are the daughter of a King, sister to a King, Spouse to a King; and
(notwithstanding Your weakestrong Sex) do persevere with more then manly
Resolution in Practice of Piety, and in inuiolably professing the Ancient
Apostolical Faith.

For which your immovable Constancy, all good Catholics do most joyfully
sound forth your due Panegyricks, and Lauds: Your Virtue here ^^^ing of that
worth and heig^t, as that Words light fa^^hort to express it, and therefore a
silent Admiration must here in part supply the Tongues office.

The Queen of Saba (as we read, 3. Reg. 10.) repaired to Solomon (a mortal
and sinful Man) to hear his Wisdom: But the Queen of England, firmly
anchors her Judgment, upon the Universal Church of Christ, sterned with his
Spirit, to receive its holy Instructions. O, how great is the disparity!

And thus, in the good hope of obtaining my much desired suite (So the rather
since diverse Pass^ges of this small Treatise do ^ut Comment your own daily
Devotions toward the Intemerate Virgin) I most humbly prostrate my self
before your Majesty, and will never cease to batter at the ears of the divine
Majesty with my incessant Prayers, to protect and defend (as the aple of his
eye) our most Gracious Sovereign, King Charles, and YOU his dearest Spouse,
with all your Noble Issue, that so the Center of all your designs may be fixed
in the fear of God; the Circumference exte^ded to your fruition of ^^l true
Temporal, and Eternal Felicity.

Your Majesty's most loyal and humble subject, and Beadsman. N. N.

An Advertisement of the Author, to the Reader.
THe Subject of this Treatise, is delivered in the form of a Dia^^gue. The
Interlocutors, are Maria^ulus, and Mariamastix. Maria^ulus (signifying a
servant of Mary) (...) supposed to be an English impriso^ed Priest, and
defends the Cause of ^he Blessed Virgin Mary, Mariamastix (or the scourge of
Mary) is an Imaginary Precisian, and a Minister, who is feigned (...) the
better drawing on of the Di^^ogue) to have preached at Paule^ Cross against
our B. Lady; in whom all Precisians (who are Enemies to the B. Virgin) are
personated.

Now, whereas in the beginning of this discourse, the immaculate Co^ception of
the Mother of God, is disputed of; the Author does not intend thereby, to
provoke other learned Catholics houlding the contrary, not the more sober
Protestants, as his Adversaries herein; But he writes only against the fiery
Puritans, who not only in this Point of the immaculate Conception, but touching
all other Passages of this Treatise, disgorge their poison against the said
most Blessed Virgin.

A Letter of Mariadulus.
To the learned Mariamastix (at least so reputed) all health of the Soul.
LEarned Mariamastix, Your late Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, is much
rumor'd abroad. At length the report thereof came to my ears, for by your
causing it (for its supposed worth) to be printed, I procured a Copy thereof.

Now, where your take those words of the Apostle (1. Cor. 15.) for your Te^^ In
Adam omnes moriuntur, (...) men do dye in Adam: and ^ereupon you amplifying and
sp^eading your self in a great profusion of words, (which do but beat the
ears of the more judicious Reader with a fastidious neglect) your main
Project is, to include the Immaculate Virgin within the limits of spiritual
death; so making her to become thrall to all humane imperfections, yea to sin
it self.

O, think what you have done, and against whom you speak. You speak against
Her, of whom it is said: Genuisti qui te fecit, and in aeternum permanes Virgo:
against her, who is the intemerate, and chaste Mother of God, even of that
Great, and puissant God, who is but One, yet all things; most Simple, yet
contains in himse^^e the perfection of all Cre^^^res, though most different;
W^o is Immense without Quatity Eternal without Time; Good without Quality;
Omnipotent, yet will do only what is Best; whose Prescience is so infallible
(for with him all things are present. Eccles. 3.) as that it gives a Being, to
that which is not, and makes that true with him, which with us seems false.
To conclude, who is a supernatural Nature, this other Nature being but his
Art; and all secondary Causes serving, but as so many subordinate wheels,
whereupon the frame of this whole Vninerse does turn: so true is that sentence
of Tertullian (lib. de Trinitate,) Quid sit Deus, mente intelligimus; si
cogitamus id, illum esse, quod, quale, and quantum sit, non possit intelligi.

Now the h^nour of the Mother of this g^^at Maiesticall God you have wounded
with your rasory tongue. Hope you then to escape with all impunity? Therefore
seeing every good Catholic ought to be zealous of her Honor, I by profession
(though most unworthy) a Catholic Priest, will undertake to vindicate, and
free that sacred Virgin from all indignities, and reproaches, with which either
you in your former Sermon, or any other Protestant by his pen is accustomed to
calumniate and wrong her. But being restrained of my liberty, I cannot come to
you, you may easily to me. Therefore if it please you, to repair to this my
Prison to morrow, and to bring a selected and fitting Audience with you, I do
hereby ^^^^oke you to enter into a sober Scholasticall Duellisme, touching the
subject of your Sermon. From my lodging in the Prison.

Yours in all Christian Charity, Mariadulus.

The answer of Mariamastix.
To Mariadulus (imprisoned in Body, but more in Soul) the liberty of the
Gospel.
I Have this day (Mariadulus) received your daring Letter. I did much wonder to
see a Babilonian to have the forehead to challenge an Israelite to dispute; I
mean, a Popish superstitious Priest, to provoke thereto a Minister, and
Preacher of the Word of the Lord. What I have delivered the a^^ day in my
sermon at the Cross, the same I am ready to ^ortify against any supercilious
and proud Romanist, with the testimonies of sacred Writ; in which I hope so to
supererogate (to speak in your own Brethrens Dialect) and abound, as that I
will even vye sentences of Scripture, with your poor sentences, and
authorities drawn from your Popish Fathers of former times. And I will make it
as illustrious and clear, as the Sun, that your superstitious devotions and
Prayers exhibited to Mary, are but your spiritual Idolothyta, sacrifized to
your false Goddess.

Therefore to morrow expect me infallibly at your lodging, whither I will bring
certain of the faithful Professors to be witnesses of your overthrow: so
assured I a^^^ come off Victorious. In the mean time Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, Mariamastix.

THE DISCOVRSE, OR DIALOGVE.
Mariadulus. Who knocks at my chamberdore? Come in.


Ma^amastix. It is Mariamastix. I am come to you, according to my promise in my
letter, with inte^tion to make good, what I have delivered lately in my Sermon,
and to pull you (if so the Lord assist my attempts) out of the mire of your
present Superstition.


Mariadulus. O Sir, Is it you? I see, your Word commands you at all times. You
and this your company are most welcome to a poor Prisoners lodging. I pray
you (Gentlemen) sit down, and take your ease.

I will send for some few Lay Catholics, my fellow prisoners here, to be
present at our discourse, for where the Auditors are but of one side, commonly
the Conference, or Disputation is voyced mo^^ partially.

Your charitabl^ intention toward me intimated in your former Words, I take
kindly. Yet I am assured, it will not be so easily accomplished, as you
imagine; But I trust rather to retaliate the like curtesy upon your self; for
I shall be ready to reclay me you from your Errors (to style them mildely)
committed in your Sermon, and to affoard you (if so I may speak without
offense) my best Instructions.


Mariamastix. Best Instructions? O the insolency of a Seminarians! I tell you,
I am instructed from the Lord himself; from whom, by the help of my own
neuer-erring spirit, I immediately receive his Enthusiasmes, and Illuminations.
But it is well, that such men as you are, for t^^n procacity and bouldnes,
remain shut up in a wearisome, and dark Prison, which does fitly adumbrate
and figure out the darkness of superstition, in which your souls remain.


Mariadulus. Good Sr. have patience. My intention was not to displease you.
Touching my imprisonment (though but impertinently urged by you) I hope I shall
endure with all cherefull alacrity, and resignation of my self to Gods good
pleasure therein; and the rather, since I suffer it for my defense of the most
ancient and Catholic Religion: Quid hic mali est, quo reus gaudet; cuiu^
accusatio votum est; and paena faelicitas? (Tertull. l. aduers. Gentes.

But (Mariamastix) what is delivered hitherto by either of us, is but a ^u^^^s
diuer beration of the air with froathy words. Therefore not idly to spin out
the time, I would entreat you, and the more for the satisfaction of these
Gentlemen here present, both Protestants and Catholics, that we may presently
descend to the subject of which we are to discourse; Which is touching Her, in
whom (as being the Mother of God) Eternity did (as I may say) proceed from
Time, Omnipotency, from Weakness, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth, from the
Loins of a poor Handmayd: Ecce ancilla Domini fiat mihi secundum Verbum tuum.
Luc. 1.)

But since I find, that in the very front and forepart of your Sermon, you make
violent incursions of speech, laboring by all means to prove (according to
your Tex^ that the holy Virgin (as well as others) was conceived in Original
Sin; and consequently, that she did stand obnoxious, and subject to all such
innate imperfections, and blemishes (the scars, or moales of Nature) whereunto
others in their birth are thrall; therefore, if it may stand with your good
liking, we will first discourse of this Point.


Mariamastix. I assent most willingly thereto; for seeing that very Point was
one chief Part of my Sermon, I hold it fitting, that it should be first
disputed of.


Mariadulus. Well then, for the more perfect illustration of that Point, I
hold it convenient, to prefix certain short Animaduersions; which may seem,
as so many brief Prol^g^^^a, conducing to the bewer unfolding of the question
here controuerted.

I am the more willing to use this cautelous proceeding, Because it is
observed, that you Protestants are often accustomed, to use a (...) in your
disputes; that is, through a false mistaking of the state of the Question, a
needles beating of the air, or fighting with a shadow with impertinent
allegations; since such their Scholasticall shot (as I may term it) is
directed to no controuersed Mark.

The first of these my Animaduersio^s may be, that we catholics do not
Categorically, and positiuely maintain, that it is to be holden as an Article
of our Catholic Faith, that the B. Virgin was conceived without sin: And
therefore Pomera^ the Protestant (...) one of Luthers first Pros^lites ( in
Comment. cap 1. and 44. Iere^.) thus falsely charges us: The Papists do hold,
as an Article of Faith, that the B. Virgin was borne without any sin (he
meaning Original sin) yea, that she was conce a^^d even of the Holy Ghost.
But this his saying is repugnant both to the Constitution of Sixtus qu^^tus (in
Constitut quae incipit, Grave in Mis.) as also to the Council of Trent ( Sess.
5.) both which do teach, that it is not any Atticle of Faith, to believe the B.
Virgin to be borne without sin: so much was Pomeran either through Ignorance
mistaken, or through Malice blinded.

The second Animaduersion, That the Opinion houlding the B. Virgin not to be
borne in sin, is not to (...) censured absolutely as erroneous, much less
Heretical; And this we maintain, contrary to the judgment of K^mpnitius ( in
exam. Council. Tridens. sess. 5.) Illyricus, ( Cent. 9.1.10.) and others. And
this assertion we justify by this ensuing argument: That is repugnant to true
Faith (to dispute only from your own grounds) which is expressly repugnant to
the Word of God; As for example, that God did not create Heaven, and Earth, and
the like: But the immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary is not contrary to
any express testimony of Gods Word; Therefore the maintayning of it is not to
be censured, as Heretical or erroneous.


Mariamastix. How dissolutely and loosely (Mariadulus) do you dispute in the
beginning? and therefore what arguments may we expect from you, in other
following parts of this our discourse? This reason of yours is most
transparent^ seeing by the like Inference it follows, that it were not against
Faith to maintain, that not only Mary, but also every particular Man is free
from Original sin, seeing the Scripture expressly affirms not of any one
man, that he was conceived in sin, excepting only David, of whom we thus
read: Ecce in iniquitatibus conceptus sum etc. ( Psalm. 50.)


Mariadulus. Your Answer hereto is easily avoided; for I grant, that all men
proseminated from Adam, did thereby contract Original sin, except such as by
singular Priu^^^ge are exempted from that Common Law, as I hold our B. Lady
was. But to proceed to my third Advertisement, which shall be, that this my Tenet
touching her Immaculate Conception, is not rash; but a pious and more probable
sentence, then the Contrary, which teaches, that the B. Virgin was conceived
in Original sin. For the proof of which point, you are not to expect
express testimonies either from Scripture, or any certain definition thereof
from the Church (for if this could be effected, then it would follow, that we
ought not only piously to believe her Immaculate Conception, but withal that
it were Heretical to deny it:) Therefore Arguments only of probability and
congruency are to suffice for the proof of this doctrine; they proceeding from
Scripture, from the Fathers, from the joint consent of the Church, or lastly
from force of Reason. And thus far of these few Annotations, which may serve to
us both, as a Rule, the better to guide ^s in out ensuing disputation.


Mariamastix. I do not wholly disalow these your cautionary Explications of your
sentence. Nevertheless I will produce such irresistible Arguments, as that in
a true judgment, they shall much preponderate and weigh down all other
proofs, brought by you to the contrary; of which I am so confident, as that I
may be bold to use here the words of the Apostle ( Galat. 1.) If an Angel of
Heaven preach to you otherwise etc. (...) him be accursed.


Mariadulus. Sr, You speak with great ventitation of performing no small
matters; Notwithstanding if I prove a true Sybill to my self, divining of the
event, your following Arguments will but resemble (to use the words of an
Apostle (Epist. of Jude) Clouds without water, carried about with wynds.

Therefore I would entreat, for the better trial of your Arguments, and how
they do beat upon the difficulty here questioned, rightly to conceive what we
Catholics mean, when we say, The B. Virgin did want Original sin: Since for
the more clearing of this point, it is to be understood, that the Sin of the
first Parent is communicated with his Sons and Posterity, three several
ways.

First then the sons of Adam are said to have sinned in Adam himself,
whereas Adam did transgress the precept of God in Paradise. And because the
sons of Adam were not then in actu, but only in potentia; therefore that
Sin they contracted not in actu, but only in potentia. And in this sense we
confess, it may be said, that the B. Virgin sinned in Adam.

Secondly, all the children of Adam are said to be conceived in sin, as soon
as the Child begins to exist in the womb of the Mother, although it be then
unformed and without life; for although sin cannot properly be otherwise,
then in a Rational Soul, and that the Foetus begins to be conformed and
perfected a long time after its animation: yet be cause a man then begins
truly to exist in respect of one of his parts, and that Part has its beginning
from a corrupt Nature, and may be said to be truly vitiated, and this by force
of its generation; as soon therefore as it has obtained its Rational Soul,
he presently does exist a sinner, and a son of divine Wrath: Therefore are men
said in this respect, even then at the first, to be begotten in Iniquities,
according to those former Words of the Psalmist ( Psalm. 50.) Ecce in
iniquitatibus conceptus sum etc. be hold I am conceived in iniquities. And in
this second sense also we acknowledge, that the B. Virgin had her beginning
from a corrupt nature, and that by force of such generation, it was due, that
sin should be contracted, as soon as her Rational soul was joined to Her
Body.

The third, and last manner, whereby men are said to be conceived in sin, is,
when their Souls are inspired into their Bodies; since at that time they begin
properly, and really to become Men, and to have their Will naked of Original
Justice, and consequently auerted from God, and in it self deformed, Now,
touching this third and last kind (upon the hinge whereof the may ne difficulty,
controuerted between the learned, chiefly rests) we hold it most probable
(though as before I intimated, not as a matter of Faith) that the soul of the
B. Virgin, even at the first instant of its Creation, and infusion into the
Body, was so without spot of Original sin, as that that person of hers
actually existing, never had any sin. And in this respect the B. Virgin
differs from all others, who through the Grace of God, and merits of Christ's
Passion, have been delivered from Original sin: To wit, that some men are
delivered from thence after their Nativity; some few a little before their
Nativity, but after their amination in their Mothers Womb: Whereas the B.
Virgin was freed from Original sin, even in the very instant of her
Animation.

Now ( Mariamastix) you are to direct your Arguments, only against this third
manner, or else you euict nothing. And if you do otherwise, where then is your
Enemy, against whom you fight?


Mariamastix. Tush, I do not like these your Metaphysicall and intentionall
distinctions, excogitated out of brains of your Schoolmen (as the Spider does
spin the thread of its Web, out of its own Bowels) and serving only to
intricate and perplex the judgment of Man. It suffices for me, to euict by
most necessary demonstrations (for meaner proofs I scorn to use) that your
Mary was conceived in sin.


Mariadulus. No more commonly in your mouth, then Mary? Sweet Jesus what secret
rancour lurkes in the breasts of the Sectories of this age, against the B.
Virgin? If your Puritanes name but Calvin and Beza (two Sodomiticall Persons,
even by the testimonies of their own See Schlusselburge the Protestans) in
Theolog. Calu^^ist. l. 2. fol. 721. and l. 1. fol. 83.
Brethren) then they commonly style them, Monsr. Calvin, and Monsr. Beza. In
like sort your Party speaking of Luther (who breathed nothing but I care not,
if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyptions, a thousand Churches stood against
u^e Luther. tom. a. lib. contra Regem Angliae fol. 344.
Pride, Cursed be the Charity and Concord of the Sacramentaries for ever etc.
Luther tom 7 VVittemb fol. 381.382.
Malice, and I am almost mad through rage of Lust, and desire of Women.
Luther. in Collo^^ Mensal. fol. 526. and 400.
Lust) aduanceth him with these titles: The M. For, in Act. Mon. page 416.
E^ias, Conductour, and Chariot of Israel; but mentioning our B. Lady, who is
an Immaculate Virgin, the Queen of Heaven, an Instrument of Man's Redemption,
the Mother of God, and of the Savior of the World, they bluntly and rudely,
without any further title of Honor, term her (as now you here do) only Mary.
But go on for the time, in this rusticity of your Idiome of speech, Qui
fordid^s est, adhue fordescat. Apoc. 22.

Now, touching your condemning of all distinctions in learning, I must tell you
(Sir) that if you will be accounted in the number of the learned, you must
approve just, and true distinctions in points of Doctrine: since you know (or
at least should know) that the use of distinctions is to unfold things (as it
were) confusedly hud led up together, and to fan, and sever away
impertinencies, from weight of true Reasons in dispute. Therefore according to
this my distinction of the former Proposition; To wit, How sin in the first
Parent is communicated with his Jssue, I hope (or rather I am assured) that
most of your ensuing Arguments, drawn out, touching this Point, will find
their Answers inuolued, within some one branch or other of the said
distinction, still glancing upon some one by impertinency or other: and
therefore for trial thereof, I could wish you to begin in your Arguments.


Mariamastix. Well, seeing it is so, I will satisfy your desire, and am content
for the time to yield to your imposed method. I will produce my Arguments in a
graduall manner; First beginning with Arguments drawn from Reason; Next from
the Fathers (so shall your own Friend, mortally wound your own Cause) and
lastly I will ascend to testimonies, taken from Gods sacred Writ.

And to begin with Arguments from Reason. First, I do object, that Mary
suffered many miseries and even death it self, all which are the punishments
of sin. Secondly, It seems most detractory from the honor of God, if the
privilege of Immaculate Conception should be given to any other, then to
Christ himself. Thirdly, Mary was neuertruly redeemed, if she was never
captive to sin. Fourtly, she was conceived with the lust, or sensuality of
the Parents: but this last is the Means or Instrument, by the which Original
sin is transiected, or transfused into the of spring. In this last place I
add, that Christ dyed for All; and yet he dyed not for the lust, but only for
sinners; Therefore dying (among others) for his Mother, it follows, she was
conceived in sin: so evident, we see (Mariadulus) this Conclusion of mine is,
as that it is proved with a whole teame or chain of most forcing Reasons, one
of them still following, or waiting upon another.


Mariadulus. I doubt not (Mariamastix) but that the ranks or links of this your
chain will be easily broken and dissolved: so you shall find, that you had little
reason, so pertinaciously to in^ist in these your Reasons.

And to your first. I answer, that the soul of the B. Virgin was preserved
from all spot of sin; Yet I grant, that her flesh was not redeemed, till
after her death (through the particular Grace of God) she did rise glorious.

To your second. I maintain, that the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin
cannot bring any dishonor to the glory of the son of God, but rather the
contrary: Seeing it is the peculiar honor of the Son of God, that being
conceived of the Holy Ghost, could not through force of his generation contract
sin. It further redoundeth to the glory of the son of God, if not only
those can be justified by his merits who had sin, but also that some one
might be preserved from sin, who otherwise, would necessarily have fallen
into sin.

Your third Reason is but weak, seeing (as is explayned) those are truly
redeemed, who had necessarily become captive to sin, had not the
interueniency of the favor and Grace of the Redeemer prevented them.

To your fourth, it takes its full solution, from what is above delivered: for
I grant the lust of the Parents is a sign of Nature being corrupted; and also
from Nature corrupted the flesh is conceived, as naturally vitiated; yet from
hence it follows not, but that God is able, when he conioyneth the rational
soul with the flesh vitiated, with all to infuse Grace of Justification; by
the which, the spot or blemish of sin may wholly be driven, and taken away.

To your last, I say, Christ died for all sinners, who either then were
sinners, or necessarily would have been sinners except the death of the said
Christ had defended them from sin, through his wonderful Grace and favor.


Mariamastix. I little regard these your conceyted Answers, able perhaps to
bleare the judgment of the Ignorant, but not of such as be judicious and
learned. But howsoever, I will in this place come to the testimonies of the
ancient Fathers, in whom you Papists pretend to have great confidence. And
indeed Ivrge their authorities, not so much with intention to fortify my cause
thereby (for I grant the Scripture is the sole Fort, in which I entrench my
self) as to deprive you of your supposed strength in them: so the Enemy in
besieging of a City, takes aforehand certain Sconses and little forts near
to the Town; not so much for any great advantage, that such places being
surprised, can affoard him; as thereby to weaken and lessen the besieged town
of its former strength.


Mariadulus. Howsoever (Mariamastix) you seem to disesteeme the ancient
Fathers; yet others of your Brethren, much exceeding you in learning, if so you
ca^ brook Comparisons, do give their due respect to the authorities of the
said Fathers. I will instance this only in one or two learned Protestants.
Kempnitius ( in Exam. Council. Trident. part. 1. page 74.) then thus says: We
are greatly confirmed in the true, and sound sense of the Scripture, by the
testimony of the ancient Church. And D. Bancroft speaking of Calvin and Beza,
with reference to the Fathers, thus writes (in his Surney of the pretended
holy discipline:) I do think of M. Caluiu, and M. Beza, as their Writings do
deserve, but yet J think better of the ancient Fathers, I must confess. But I
pray you (Mariamastix) proceed in your intended Method.


Mariamastix. I will. And only for a taste and delibation I will make choice of
some two of them; for I grant, I do not love to feed long upon this dish. And
first I find your own Bernard thus to write ( in Epist. 175 ad Canonicos
Lugdunenses) Excepto homine Christo etc. Except only Christ, as Man, that
saying respects all men to wit In iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and in
peccatis concepit me matter mea.


Mariadulus. To this I answer, that whereas S. Bernard seems to imply by
consequence, that the Virgin was conceived in sin, and therefore the
Conception of her was not holy; this Fathers meaning only is to be understood
of the first Conception, which is accustomed to be in the Act of Mariadge it
self, performed by the Parents; but not to be understood of the animation, or
quickening of the Foetus. Now, that S. Bernard did subject his judgment in this
point (as in all others) to the Church of Rome, appears, in that he even in
the same Epistle thus writes: Romanae Ecclesiae authoritati etc All this which
I here say, as also all other Points of like Nature, I refer to the authority
of the Church of Rome.


Mariamastix. Well, to pass from Bernard, in whom I will not much insist, as
being but of late age, What say you to the express Words of Leo, thus writing
of Christ (sermon. de Natinit. Domini.) Sicut null^^ a reatu liberum etc. As
Christ did synd not any free from guilt of sin; so he came to free all men
from sin.


Mariadulus. By these words are only understood, that not any can be freed or
redeemed, but such, as were truly, and really servants and Captives to sin;
or so ought to be, except the Grace and Favor of the Redeemer had prevented
them. Now, no man of himself ( Christ excepted is free from sin: therefore
Christ came to redeem all men.


Mariamastix. What say you to Austin, thus expressly teaching ( l^ de fide ad
Petrum Firmissime tene etc. Believe certainty, and doubt no^, but that every
Person, who is conceived by carnal Copulation of Man and Woman, is borne in
Original sin. Add hereto that sentence of Ambrose (in Comment. in Luc. l.
2.) Solus per omnia ex natis etc. Only our Lord Jesus, among all borne of
Women, did not know, through the unaccustomed manner of his immaculate Birth,
the contagion of human Corruption.


Mariadulus. These two testimonies do prove only, that every Man (Christ only
excepted) did contract Original sin, by force of generation. For all such do
contract sin either really and indeed, or else they avoid it not by force of
Generation, but through the Privilege of the singular Grace, and favor of
God, as we hold our B. Lady did. And this is coincident with that delivered in
one of my former Animaduersions, touching the several manners, how the sin
of Adam is communicated with his Issue. But (Sir) proceed further, I pray you,
in your testimonies from the Fathers.


Mariamastix. No: I will not dwell any longer in human authorities (sin it is
but a needles wast, and raueling out of the time.) Therefore I will ascend to
the sacred Word of God (the highest Tribunal in matters of faith) whereby this
your Phantasy, touching the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of Christ i^
mainely impugned, yea becomes even prostrate with the ground. And first, I urge
that sen^ence, which I did take for any Text in my late Sermon: In Adam omnes
moriuntur ( 1. Cor. c. 15.) All men do dye in Adam. Again, that other Text: In
quo omnes peccanerunt ( Romans 5.) In whom (meaning Adam) all men did sin. And
yet more: Eramus natura filij irae, sicut and caeteri (Ephesians. 2.) We were by
Nature the sons of wrath, as others were. See you not (Mariadulus) how you
are foiled with every little splinter of these divine Authorities?


Mariadulus. We see you are full of froathy ostentation. But to your Arguments.
We do not deny, but that the Blessed Virgin was dead in Adam: Therefore we
grant, that by Nature, she was the Daughter of Wrath: But we also add, that
throug Grace, she ever was the daughter of Mercy: For it pleased God in the
benedictions of his sweetness, so to prevent her, that she never was a sinner,
which Nature required; but that she was ever Just, which Grace did confer.

And according hereto we confess, that the B. Virgin (who then was not) did
sin in Adam, after that sort, which she could; I mean, in potentia only, in
respect whereof she stood obnoxious, that when she really did exist, she might,
reipsa, have had sin in her: Yet withal we add, that she was so prevented
through the singular Grace and Privilege of God, that all at one instant, she
should begin to be, and withal to be Just. Thus you may observe, that the true
ballancing and application of my former Annotations do even at the first sight,
blunt the force of your three scripturall Authorities. But proceed further.


Mariamastix. What say you to those other Words of the Apostle (2. Cor. 5.) Si
vnus pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo omnes mortui sunt, and pro omnibus mortuus
est Christus: If one be dead for all, then were all dead; and Christ dyed for
all?


Mariadulus. We freely grant, that the B. Virgin after a manner was dead,
through the death of sin; And so, as it is also true, that Christ dyed for
her Vivification, as he dyed for others. But withal we maintain, that the
Holy Virgin is said to be dead, because she stood subject to death, and
necessarily (as above is often inculcated) was to dye, by force of her
generation, except she had been prevented therein by the Grace of God. And thus
much touching the solutions of your Textes of Scripture. But now to reflect a
little upon your former windy Words: How is our Cause by these your authorities
of Gods Word (as you vaunte) become prostrate with the ground? or where are
your Demonstrations taken from Scripture, as you ambitiously style then? But if
you have any other proofs out of Gods Word, you may urge them.


Mariamastix. No, I will proceed no further: I have alleged enough, and so
much, as is able to convince any one illuminated from the Lord. And if such men
yield not to the Truth therein, it is to be feared, they are interested in
those words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost.


Mariadulus. Seeing then (Sir) you mean here to make a pause, I must entreat
leave, that you and I may change our Stations; I mean, that whereas hitherto
you have undergone the part of the Opponent, I of the Answerer; that now I may
be lincensed to urge my Authorities in proof of the immaculate Conception of
our B. Lady, and you to give your solutions thereto.


Mariamastix. I am well pleased, For this alternation, and vicissitude of
Opposing and Answering, is most reasonable in it self, and most warrantable by
the practice of all Schools. Therefore begin.


Mariadulus. Well then, I will tread your own path of Method; so beginning
with arguments drawn from Reason. And after I will ascend to higher kinds of
proofs. My first Reason shall be this. It is certain and explorate, that God
could preserve the B. Virgin from contagion of Original Sin: And it is also
probable, that he would do it: And therefore it is probable, that she was
preserved from all such contagion. That God could preserve her from Original
Sin, cannot be denied, seeing that there is no repugnancy therein either in
respect of God, or in respect of her, as being a Creature. Not in respect of
God seeing God is Omnipotent, and we read (Luc. 1.) Non est impossible apud
Deum omne Verbum. Neither is there any repugnancy with reference to the
Creature, seeing there is no hinderance or contradiction, why even in the same
moment of time, the Rational soul might not be created by God, and withal
replenished with Grace. Which point we believe was actually performed in the
Creation of the Angels, of the soul of the first Parent, much more in the
Creation of the soul of Christ.


Mariamastix. I grant indeed: It is not repugnant to the absolute Power or Will
of God, to preserve any from Original sin; Yet it is repugnant, once
admitting that divine and immutable Decree, by the which God has ordained,
that if Adam had not sinned, all men should have been conceived, being endued
with Original Justice: but if Adam did sin, then they should be conceived in
wickedness, and should by Nature become the Sons of Wrath.


Mariadulus. This your Answer is insufficient. The Reason being, because that
divine decree is so to be understood, as that if Adam should have sinned, all
men, who did take their origin from him, through force of their Conception,
should stand obnoxious to sin; neither should they have any title to that
Justice, the which they had received in their first Parent; Notwithstanding it
follows not, that through force of that decree, God should de^riue himself
of that power, but that he might out of his own Mercy and singular Privilege
really preserve any one from sin: For not only Sin, but also death, did
redound from Adam into all Mankind; and yet who doubts, but that God could
make, and effect, that some one or other man should not dye at all?

Thus much in solution of your former Reply. Now from the Premises we may
gather, that it was in the power of God, to preserve the Virgin Mary, free from
all sin and to make her holy, and just in the first instant of her Creation.
And that God actually would so preserve her, it may be made probably
demo^strable from those Reasons, by which S. Thomas in 3 part. quaest. 27.
Artic. 4.) proves, that it was convenient and best seeming, that the mother of
God should be free from all actual sin.

The Reasons are several, and these following.

The 1. Reason is, because as well the Honor, as the Ignominy of the Mother
redoundeth to the son.

The second. In that the son of God (who is the Wisdom of the Father) did
(as it were) inhabitate in the womb of the Mother, after a most peculiar and
wonderful manner; but it is said in holy Scripture: In maleuolam animam etc.
Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, nor dwell in the body, that is subi^ct
unto sin. ( Wisd. 1.)

The third Reason. Because the Mother of Christ has a singular affinity and
conjunction with Christ himself. But what agreement can be between Christ and
Belial?

The fourth. Because that testimony of the Heavenly Spouse ought to be
accomplished and fulfilled in the B. Virgin, Tota pulchra est amica mea, and
macula non est in te. Thou art all fair (my love) and there is not any spot in
thee. ( Cant. 4.)

The fifth. Seeing God did decree to advance the B Virgin to so supreme dignity,
that she should excel even the Angels themselves; therefore it was most
suitable and agreeable, that no privilege should be conferred upon any pure
Creature, which was not conferred upon the B. Virgin; except such a privilege
were repugnant to the Condition, state, Nature or Sex. But to be sanctified in
the first instant of Creation was given to our first Parents; As also to be
sanctified in the first instant of Creation, and never to be polluted with any
sin, was given to the holy Angels: But this privilege is in no sort
repugnant either to the Condition, state, Nature, or Sex of the B Virgin:
Therefore it is a pious thing to believe, that the Mother of God did not want
this Privilege.

Truly these former Reasons do no less prove, that the Mother of God ought to
be free from actual sin, then (if so it could be effected) from Original
sin: yea more from Original sin, then from actual Venial sin; seeing
Original sin does more defile the soul, and subiecteth both the body and
soul to sin, then Venial sin can do. Thus much of these Reasons, probably
proving the Immaculate Conception of the holy Mother of God.


Mariamastix. These your Reasons (Mariadulus) howsoever you set the best glass
upon them that you can, are no more preuay ling (if so much) in my judgment,
then the Reasons produced to the contrary by me. And thus supposing them both
to be placed in one Scale or Balance of equality, neither is your doctrine
herein any thing aduantaged, nor mine prejudiced. But ascend (if it please you)
to other proofs, I mean to the Fathers (if any such you can allege) those
Fathers to wit, whom you Papists call the Centinells of the Church in the
firster times; and from whose ioynt-consent (though they were but men, and
therefore subject to Error) in matters of doctrine to swerve and decline, you
account it no less, then Impiety.


Mariadulus. I will observe your imposed Method. And accordingly I will
precisely restrain my self (especially for greater breuity) to three of those
four Fathers, who lived within the first five hundred years, (the
acknowledged Periode of the Purity of Christ's Church) and who (...), and for
Honors sake, had the peculiar title given them of being called: The four
Fathers of the Church.

I will begin with S. Austin, who thus writes (lib. de Natura and Gratia.)
Excepta sancta Virgin Maria etc. Excepta sancta Virgin Maria etc. Except the
B. Virgin Mary, of whom, by reason of the honor of our Lord, when I dispure of
sin, I never speak; For we know, that more grace was conserred to her every
way to o^ercome sin^e, who conceived and brought him forth, whom to have no
sin, is evident.


Mariamastix. This authority I hold to be but impertinently alleged; seeing it
being truly (though not literally) understood of Actual sin, you will needs
ra^ke and tenter the words to Original sin. With such penury of good proofs
you labor, as that for want of better, you are forced to descend to these
poor shifts.


Mariadulus. Observe the words of this authority with a diligent eye, and then
you shall find no just reason of this your unkind exprobration. Therefore even
to dissect this aut hority more particularly. First, whereas S. Austi^^ says,
that he never makes any question of the B. Virgin, when he speaks of sin,
he intimates in these words, to make no question of her, when he speaks of
Original sin.

Secondly, whereas S Austin adds, that Grace was conferred to overcome all
sin, in any manner, or every way, how could these his Words be true, if the
B. Virgin ^^re contaminate with Original sin? Lastly, whereas S. Austin
professes to have no question of the B. Virgin, when he discourses of sin,
and this propter honorem Domins, for the honor of our Lord; now certainly the
honor of our Lord seems no less to require, that his Mother should want
Original sin, then Actual; seeing Original sin of its own Nature is
mortal; whereas Actual sin may be but venial. Thus you see, how this
authority of S. Austin (by reason of your former weak answer) rebuts upon
you, with greater strength, then ever you would have imagined.

In this next place I will produce S. Hierome, who handling that sentence
Deduxit eos in nube diei, ( Psalm. 77.) and saying, that by the word, Cloud, is
understood the Blessed Virgin, thus writes: Pulchre dixit, Dici, quia nubis
illa non fuit in tenebris, sed semper in luce: It was well said, Of the day,
because that Cloud was not in darkness, but ever inlight.

The third shall be S. Ambrose, who explicating the last Verse of the Psalm. 118.
thus writes: Suscipe me non ex Sara, sed ex Maria, vt incorrupta sit Virgo;
sed Virgo per Gratia^ ab omni integra labe p^ccati R^ceaue me not from Sara,
but from Mary, she being an intemerate Virgin; yet a Virgin by Grace, free from
all spot of sin. Thus far of these three most eminent Fathers.

I am loath to violate (Mariamastix) your prescribed Method of keeping me
within the circuit of the Primitive Church; Otherwise, if I should expatiate
out of those limits, I could produce many late Fathers (virtuous and learned
men I conspiring in judgment with the former three Fathers; as S. Anselme,
(lib. de concept. Virginal. and peccat. Orig. c. 18.)

Finally S. Damascene, who thus expressly writes (Orat. prima de Natali B
Virginis. Nature gratiam antenertere ausa non est: Nature was not so bold, as
to prevent Grace. By which words it evidently appears that the B. Virgin, in
S Damascenes judgment, had no sooner received Nature, then she had received
Grace. I do here omit diverse more modern Authors, who wholly conspire, in
their Writings, with me, touching the Conception of our B. Lady, as free from
Original sin.


Mariamastix. In answer of these your Authorities, taken from the Fa^hers, I
do not see, how they can prevail much: My reason is, because I have produced
as many Fathers to the Contrary. Again, there are diverse other Fathers of the
Primitive Church, who are omitted by you, who in likely hood maintained the
contrary to these by you urged.


Mariadulus. This your Answer does nothing eleuate, and lessen the veight of
the former Fathers proofs. For we are not to expect, that every Father should
dispute of every Point of doctrine, seeing they had not any just occasion
thereof. Again, it is most probable, that the other ancient Fathers, not
al^edged by me, did nevertheless agree in doctrine with the former; since
otherwise in a^llikely hood they would have been written against by some one
Father or other of the same times; As we see by the Examples of Cyprian,
Tertullian, and Origin, whose acknowledged Errors were recorued by S. Austin,
and several other Fathers of those days. Lastly if there be any such Fathers
contradicting the former in the doctrine touching the Conception of the o^
Virgin as free from Original finne, why did you not a^edge them above?
Therefore it was either your forgetfulness in omitting them, or your want of
reading, as being ignorant of them; Which later point (I presume) out of your
assumed Magistrality, you will be loath to acknowledge.


Mariamastix. How farsoeuer the testimonies of the Fathers may carry in point
of Doctrine, we are not much to regard, they being but Men, and we read. (Psalm
115.) Omnis homo mendax. And therefore that sentence of D. Whitakers, may be
true: The Popish Religion is but a paiched Couerlet of the Fathers Errors
sowed together. (Whitak contra Duraeum. l. 6. p. 423.) so just Reason had
Beza, not insisting in the Fathers, to appeal in these words; Ad verbum Dei
pronoco: Since it is the Scripture, which must inappealably determine all
Points of Doctrine. Therefore I could wish you Mariadulus to hasten to your
Scripturall Proofs, if any such you can pretend, in defense of this your
doctrine.


Mariadulus. That scurrilous Comparison of D. Whitaker discouers, that his Pen
brooks no other Idiome of speech, then Satyrs, and virulency of language. And
the former words both of the said Doctor, and of Beza proclay me, that the
ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, do wholly make against them in points
of Religion. But to give you content, I will hasten to the Scripture, which
af^oards two notable Figures of this Point.

First we read, that the first Man to wit Adam) did bear the those words of
the Apostle: (Romans 5. and 1. Cor. 15. Adam, qui est forma suturi, that is, of
Christ. Now it is evident, that the First Man was not generated of the
commixture, or congresse of Man and Woman, but was made by God himself, of
Earth, before it was accursed. In like manner I say, it is fitting, that the
Second Man (to wit Christ) who was not to be formed of the meeting together of
Man and Woman, but framed by the work of the Holy Ghost, should in like manner
be made of Earth, not accursed; that is of his Mother, being a Virgin, and free
from all malediction, and consequently not subject to sin. This figure seemed
first to be observed by S. Andrew the Aposile, whose words thereof are related
by the Priests of Achaia in this manner (Lib. de Passione S. Andreae Apost.)
Sic^t de terra immaculata factus suerat Homo Primus etc. As the first Man was
made of the Earth, not then defiled; So it was necessary, that Christ should be
borne of an immaculate Virgin.

Again Epiphanius (haeres. 68.) and many other Fathers, do teach, that Ene was
a Type, and figure of Mary. But it is certain that Eve, when she was first
made, was without sin; therefore it sorteth to all Reason, that the Mother of
all living, with a spiritual life, should be conceived without sin; seeing
the Mother of all living, with an Animal life, was created without sin.

To conclude, those Texts in the Canticles may seem well to prove no less:
Sicut lilium inter spinas, ita anaca mea inter filias. ( Cant. 2.) Like a lilly
among the thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters. Again: Tota pulcraes
amica mea, and macula non est in te, (Cant. 4.) Thou art all fair, my Love,
and there is no spot in thee. And more: Hortus conclusus, soror mea sponsa;
Hortus conclusus, fons signatus, ( Cant. 4.) My Sister (my spouse) is a garden
enclosed, and a fountain sealed up. Which Texts, although they may be
understood of the Universal church, especially of the Triumphant Church; yet
they most aptly agree to the B. Virgin; and the rather, seeing many of the
ancient Fathers have expounded them of Her. And the Catholic Church has
commanded, that the Lessons in the feasts of the most B. Virgin, and in the
Matin Office, and in the Sacrifice of the Mas^e should be recited, and taken
out of the Canticles. Thus far touching our proofs out of the Scripture, for
the more probable strenghtning of the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of
the Mother of God.


Mariamastix. These your Authorities of s^cred Scripture prove nothing, but by
way of Typical resemblances. Well, I will conclude this part of our discourse,
touching the Conception of Mary; That it is certain, that this your doctrine
touching her I^maculate Conception, was wholly unknown immediately before the
days of Peter Lombard, who first did excogitate and invent the same. And the
absurdity of this Opinion, cis made more clear, in that the Council of Trent
in Appendice de Conceptione B. Virg. when it allowed the Constitution of Pope
Sintur Quartus touching this point, in withal ordained, that it should be
lawful for any Man to believe, that the Virgin was conceived without sin,
though this Opinion were, extra, praeter, ant etiam contra Verbum Dei: So ready
your Papists are to stamp, and create new and strange Paradoxes, though never
so incompatible with the holy Scripture.


Mariadulus. To shape my answer, first, to the first Part of this your short
Paragraph; I say, we prove from the former Scriptures the probability, and
pious judgment only of the Immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin; for we
Catholics (as I premonished in the beginning of our discourse) do hold no more
therein. Now where you reject the application of the former Texts, because they
are urged, but as Types* and Figures, of what they do prove; this your refuge
crosses mainly the proceeding of God, who would have the Old Testament to
adumbrate and point out diverse things, performed in the time of the New
Testament: So deservedly and with just cause, did the Apostle leave written
those words for our instruction: Omnia in figura contingebant illis. (1. Cor.
10.)

Now touching the second branche of your Reply; I answer, You receive it from
the pen of Kempnitius ( p. 520.) that rigid, and censuring Aristarchus of the
Council of Trent, so ready some of you Protestants are, to lick up the
poison, which others of your Brethren have before disgorged. I wonder much he
blusheth not, thus to calumniate the honor of the Blessed Virgin; He seeking
to deprave that by imposture, which by force of Reason he could not: Dolus an
Virtus, quis in host requirat? (Virg.) For when he impudently affirms, that
the doctrine of the Conception of the B. Virgin, as free from Original sin,
was never heard of before the days of Peter Lombard, who (as he says) first
did dogmatize the same; this is a most vast Untruth, and so proved to be, even
by the Fathers above cited by us, and particularly from S. Anselme ( in
Comment. c. 5. poster. ad Corinth.) which Father was more ancient then Peter
Lombard. A point so evident, that Kempnitius himself (some two pages after the
place above cited) ascribes this very Opinion to S. Anselme, as to the Author
thereof: so prepared Kempnitius is, falsely to cross and impugn even himself;
How prepared then may we suppose him to be, falsely to cross and impugn his
Adversaries?

Now touching the Command or Precept of the Council of Trent, and the
Constitution of Sixtus the fourth, what a meretricious and shameless forehead
has Kempnitius in forcing hereof? Seeing both the Council of Trent, and Pope
Sixtus granted free Liberty of judgment touching the Conception of the B.
Virgin (as above is showed) because they were fully persuaded, that neither of
the different Opinions therein was expressly and manifestly repugnant to the
written Word of God. And thus far now of our Dispute concerning the Conception
of her, who was superior to the Angels in Grace, though inferior in Nature:
Only I will conclude, that it was most agreeable to the dignity of the holy
Virgin, that she, who conceived her Son above the course of Nature, herself
also should be conceived above the Course of Nature. But now (Mariamastix) it
is time to descend to other points of your Sermon, from the observation whereof
we may gather, that detraction ever treads upon the heels of Worth, and
Piety.


Mariamastix. What either of us have delivered concerning the contrary Tenets,
and Opinions in this point, I refer to the judgment of the Auditory here
present, who I hope are able to sever and divide illustrious Truths (for such
my proofs are) from bare probability of Truths.

But you may (Mariadulus) at your pleasure pass over to other passages of my
Sermon, and carpe at such thereof, wherein for your own advantage you may most
hope to anchor your self. I doubt not, but to warrant the Truth of every
syllable thereof, Veritas Domini manet in eternum. (Psalm. 116.) And for your
better remembrance, I will put you in mind, that the next point I touched upon
in my Sermon, was, that diverse of you Papists were not afraid to give to Mary
the title eve of Goddess, as appears in some of your Writings: A manifest
sign of your superstition, or rather Idolatry, committed to Her; depriving the
true God of his own incommunicable Title, and sacrilegiously transferring it
to a mere Creature.


Mariadulus. I do not think, you can allege any one approved Catholic
Author, so stiling the B. Virgin, and therefore I must imagine, that this
imposture is wrought only upon the Anuile of your Malice to her. For name the
Author, so calling her, if you can. But it seems, your own silence to this
my provocation even deposes the falsehood of your calumnious Accusation. But
admit for the time, that some one or other Catholic, out of a pious (though
not well regulated devotion, should term her Goddess: will you be so
uncharitable in your Censure, as to extend that word of Goddess (contrary to
the plain and simple intention of the speaker) to a literal Construction, as
if the party so speaking were verily persuaded, that the B. Virgin (as really
tra^scending the Nature of a Creature) were a true Goddess indeed? O
incredible torturing of Words, upon the rack of Malice! Do we not read in Gods
word, that Princes, and chief Magistrates are styled Gods? Ego dixi, Dij
estis, (Psalm 81.) This being spoken only with reference to their temporal
Soueraingty and Domination: Yet is there any Man so stupide, as to think, that
those Princes and Magistrates are not merely men, but really Gods? No* And
therefore in regard of their being but men, though surpassing others in dignity,
the Prophet pronounces of the true and only God, saying, it is He, qui inter
Deos diiudicut. ( Psalm. 81.)

But to descend lower. We find some Poets in dedicating their Poems to their
Prince, fear not for the time, to inuest him, or her, with the Name of God, or
Goddess. I will insist in Spencer, the chiefest English Poet in this age. He
dedicating his Faery Queen, to Queen Elizabeth, thus saluteth her.

-- O Goddess heavenly bright,
Mirror of grace, and Majesty divine,
Great Lady of the Greatest I Will. --
Now, who carps at the Poet herein? Or what Man thinks that the Poet did
truly commit Idolatry to that Queen, in taking her (who was a mortal sinful
Woman) to be a Goddess indeed? I know, you do not so think, and yet how ready
are you to throw upon Catholics, the like foul imputation upon the same
ground^? Therefore have the like charitable mind, if so you shall find (as I am
persuaded you cannot) the Word Goddess to be ascribed by any Catholic, to the
Blessed Virgin only in a secondary, and Analogicall Construction. I will
conclude this point with this one Animaduersion: To wit, That the Catholics in
former times, were embouldened out of a pious and innocent devotion to our B.
Lady, to give her many superlatiue praises (which in a riged censure of each
syllable, could not perhaps be fully justified;) because no other Religion them
being, but the Catholic Religion, they were assured, that other Catholics
would insist more in the intention of the speaker, then in the words. But if
they had forseene, that certain Innouatours should after rise up, who would
rack every word to it ones literal and worst sense; no doubt, they would have
been more cautelous, and wary in their wrytings touching the B. Virgin, or
other Saints.


Mariamastix. Tush. Howsoever you shift these matters of, yet it cannot be
denied, but you commit Idolatry in praying to Mary: a custom used by the
modern Papists, but altogether unknown (as I suppose) to the Doctors of the
more ancient times; So much do you Papists of these days decline from the
practice of the Primitive Church herein.


Mariadulus. We Catholics do pray to all Saints, and particularly to the most
glorious Queen of Heaven And whereas you intimate, that the ancient Fathers
and Christians did not pray to her; so charging the Catholics of these times
with Innovation therein: observe what follows, and be ashamed (if not of your
Ignorance, yet) of your frowardnes and contumacious disposition against so
confessed a Truth. Therefore to repress this your bold assertion. I allege
these ancient and learned Fathers following, directing their Prayers to the B.
Virgin herself.

First then S. Bernard thus writes: (Sermon. 2. super Euangel. Miss^s est)
Inpericulis, in angustijs, in rebus disbijs, Mariam cogita, Mariam innoc a etc.
Jn thy dangers, in thy necessities and troubles think of Mary, innoke and pray
to Mary. Let her not depart from thy month, let her not depart from thy heart,
that so thou maid obtain the suffrage of her Prayers. etc. Thou following her,
go not adray; imploring her, despayrest not; she houlding thee up, thou
fallest not; she protecting thee, thou fear not. etc. Thus far S. Bernard.

S. Anselme (lib. de excel. B. Virg. c. vlt.) Rogamus se Domi^^ peripsam
Gratiam etc. We be seech thee (O Lady) even by that Grace and fanour, through
which the omnipotent and Blessed God so exalted thee etc. That thou would
impetrate and obtain of him for us, that the plenitude and abundance of that
Grace, which thou did de serne, may so work in us* that thereby (...) ^ay
most mercifully be partakers of the Heaneniyre ward.

But to rise to higher times. Fulgentius (Sermon. de laudib. B. Mariae.) Ideo
omnes cursus etc. Therefore the Virgin Mary has taken all the sorts of Nature
in our Lord Jesus, to the end, that she may relieve, and succor all Women,
flying to her fore help.

S. Austine ( Sermon. 18. de Sandis) Holy Mary, succor he wretched; help the
faynt-harted; comfort those who weep; pray for the people. etc.

S. Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of a certain holy Virgin, the which Cyprian
(then a Heathen) did solicit to fornication, thus writes (Orat. in
Cyprianum:) Virginem Mariam rogauit, vt Virgini perichtanti opem ferret; She
besecched the Virgin Mary, that she would help and defend a Virgin, in danger.
And again, the same Father thus prays to the B. Virgin: Defend me (O Mary,)
and from Eternal fire and darkness free me. (Nazianz. in Tragaedia.)

Athanasius (Sermon in Enangel. de sanctissima Deipara, id est, de Annuntiat.
circa finem.) Inclina aurem tuam (Maria) in preces nostras etc. Inclyne thy
ear (O Mary) unto our prayers, and do not forget thy People. And after: Ad te
clan^amns etc. To thee (O Mary) we cry; most holy Virgin, remember us. And yet
more after: Jntercede Hera, and Domina, and matter Deipro nobis: Interceds, and
prayfor us, O Mistress, O Lady, O Queen, O Mother of God.

Not to insist in more of the ancient Fathers, Irenaeus thus writes (coutra
Haeres circa medium.) Et sicut illis (Eua) seduct a est etc. As she (to wit
Eua) was deceaned, that thereby the might fly from God: So, this (Mary) is
persuaded to obey God. vt Virgini^ En^ Virgo Maria fieret Advocate, that so the
Virgin Mary might be an Advocate for Ena the Virgin. Thus (Mariamastix) you may
perceive, what devotion the ancient Fathers, and other Christians of those
times did show toward the B. Virgin, in imploring her help by her mediation to
her dear Son, our Redeemer.


Mariamastix. It may be, such was their custom, but how warrantable their use
was therein, I refer to the true Professors of the Gospel. But how fa^ soever,
they may seem to have proceeded in their devotions to Mary, yet you Papists of
these days, go one step further: Since you are not content only to pray to
her; but in your Petitions (a thing most dishonorable to God) you expect your
salvation from her. Thus, whereas we Protestants hope for our salvation from
our Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man; you make to your self a She Savior, I
mean, a Woman. And according to this my Affertion, we read thus in your Hymns
directed to her, (in officio Mariae Virg.) Solue vinc^la rcis, profer lumen
caecis etc. Which acts are peculiar to Christ to affoard to Christians. And
again in the said Hymn, we thus read: Monstra te esse Matrem, show thy self
to be a Mother; You Papists willing her thereby to exercise her motherly
authority over christ; thus subiecting Christ, as inferior unto Her.


Mariadulus. O how inuentiue is Innovation in doctrine, thus to forge
Constructions against the Catholic Faith, never before entering into Man's
brain? And how wonderfully (Mariamastix) does Prejudice and dislike seal up
your judgment; you so litigioussy contending against the naked letters and
words of Sentences? Therefore to vnveyle your eyes, take notice, that all this
(by you repeated, and so much reinforced) we demand of our B. Lady, only by
her impetration and praying for us to her B. Son. And therefore in most of our
set prayers, to her we adioyne in the end of them these wolds following: Per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum; by which clause we fully acknowledge, that all
our spiritual Good proceeds originally from God, though mediatly by the
intercession of the Mother of God.

Now touching that short passage, Monstrate esse Matrem etc. We only understand
there by thus much: Show thy self a Mother, by appeasing thy Son in our
behalf: and this by the remembrance of all thy motherly tender care, and love
toward him in his Infancy, and through the whole course of his life; to the
end, that by thee he may receive our prayers; For thus it immediately in the
same Hy^nn^ follows: Sumat per te preces. But (Mariamastix) If these former
words be such an eyesore to you and yours; how will you except against those
words of Saint Paul? he thus saying of himself (1. Cor. 9.) Omnibus omnia
factus sum, vt omnes facere^ saluos; I am become to all men, all things, that I
might save all: Where you see, the Apostle assumeth to himself the salvation
of others; he meaning only, that by his preaching, instructing, and prayers, he
might be an inferior Cause, or Instrument under Christ, for the saving of
others. But of this point I will hereafter speak more in my defense of the
Autiphone, Salve Regina, the which you Protestants seek so much to impugn.

But to proceed somewhat further. Is the former Sentences and prayers directed
to the B. Virgin so much affright you, as that you think we Catholics ascribe
to her, our Salvation; and consequently think our Saviors Passion (according
to your most false suggesting) not sufficient for our Redemption; what would
you say to the other Text of former Apostle, thus leaving it recorded? (1. ad
Colos. 1.) Adimpleo quae desunt Passionum Christi in carne mea, pro corpore
eius, quod est Ecclesia. I do accomplish those things, which do want in the
Passion of Christ* in my flesh, for his body, which is the Church.

I hope, you are not here persuaded, that the Apostle thought the Passion of
Christ to be insufficient, without his own sufferings; for his meaning only
is, that as Christ the Head, and Members, his Body, make one Person Mystical,
the Church in this respect, being his Plenitude. Fullness, or Complement Ephesians.
1.: so the Passions of the Head* and afflictions of the body, and members, make
one complete mass of Passions. Thus there is no want of Christ's Passion, as he
suffered in himself, as Head; but there is want in those Passions of Christ,
which he daily suffers in his Body, the Church, and in the members thereof.

But now (Mariamastix) since these two former Texts of Saint Paul seem in an
ignorant eye, more derogatory unto our Savior and his Passion, then those
sentences by you urged, and practiced by Catholics; and seeing the said Texts of
the Apostle, are to be construed in a sober sense, and so are most true:
Therefore I could wish you not so earnestly to quarrel at the Passages by you
alleged; neither seek to disuest them of that pious sense and meaning, which
is ever intended by us Catholics; That is, that our most Blessed Lady
(according to the former words, Salve vinclareis, profer lumen caecis) would
vouchsafe to dissolve, and loose the bonds of the guilty, and bring light to
those, which are spiritually blind, by her Prayers, and most earnest
Intercession to her B. Son Christ INSVS, and not otherwise: So far we
Catholics are, from acknowledging a She-Sauiour, as you in your Lucian, and
scoffing Dialect do charge us.


Mariamastix. This your tedious discourse has small soueraingty over my
judgment, neither do the examples drawn from Paul advantage your Cause. For I
pere^ptorily maintain, that it is unlawful and most repugnant to the sacred
Scriptures, to pray either to Mary, or to any other Saint; it being the
doctrine only of Man, not of God.


Mariadulus. You now enter into a new Question touching the lawfulnes, or
unlawfulness of Praying to Saints in general, so fugitive and unsettled you are
in your discourse. The time is not now fitting for a perfect discussing
thereof. Therefore at this present in proof of the lawfulnes of Praying to
Saints, and to stir (as it were) a little the earth or mould, about the root of
that doctrine, I will (forbearing all other proofs) insist in one Argument
drawn from Reason. Thus the^ I dispute. S. Paul says to the Romans (Cap. 15.)
Obsecr^ vos fr^^res, vt adi^^etis me in Oration^hus pro me ad Deum: I beseech
you Brethren, that you help me in your prayers for me to God. And the same, the
Apostle repeateth in Ephesians. 6. 1. Thessal. 5. 2. Thessal. 3. Coloss. 4. and
Hebr. 13. Hence I say, I draw my inevitable inferences: It was lawful for the
Apostle S. Paul, to pray to some holy men then living, that they would pray to
God for him: Therefore it is now lawful to innocate them, they being Saints,
and reiguing with Christ. For if it be not lawful now to pray to them, the
reason thereof must be, Either because they will not hear us praying to them:
But this cannot be, seeing they are now endued with more Charity, then when they
here conuersed upon Earth, and being secure of their own felicity (as S.
Cyprian says, Ser^^. de mortalit.) are more sollicitous of our spiritual Good
and health. Or else, because the Saints cannot help us: But neither this. For if
they could help us with their Prayers, when they were but Pilgrims in this
World, much more are they now able, being arrived into their own Country. Or,
because they do not know, what we pray: But not this. Because from what ground,
the Angels do know the Conversion of sinners, for which conversion they so
much rejoice (as is said in Luke 15.) from the same ground the Saints do know
our prayers. Or lastly, because an injury is committed against God and Christ,
if any other be inuoked, and prayed unto, then he: But not this. For then it
were not lawful to invoke, or pray to the living, and consequently S. Paul
offended God therein. Thus you see (Mariamastix) how you are precluded on all
sides from giving any satisfying Answer to this demonstration.


Mariamastix. If we should admit for the time, that it were lawful to pray to
the dead; yet it is ever supposed, that they (to whom we should so pray) are
infallibly to be presumed to be Saints. Now, how can we rest assured, that one
praying to Mary, prays to a Saint? Since certain it is, that at her being
present at her Sons death, and making no resistance thereto, she actually did
break four of the ten Commandments together; To wit, the first, the fist,
the sixth, and the nynth Commandment. And you read, who commits sin is of
the Devil (1. John. 3.) And we are not ascertayned, that Mary any time after
had true repentance of her so great a sin.


Mariadulus. O that I could transform my tongue, into a scourge or whip of
Iron, where with to lash and tear with bloody strypes, the naked sides of
such, who first dared to disgorge such poisonous words against the Mother of
God! I well know, from what vessel you draw these your dregs. For I find M.
Bunny (the Protestant) to charge the B. Virgin (even in your own Words) with
the breach of the four Commandments reckoned by you, Because (says he) she
defended not her son upon the Cross. in his Pacfication p. 369.)

But to seal up the mouths of such venomous Beasts (for who positiuely
maintaynes this execrable Assertion, is to be reputed no better then a Beast;)
let us take in to our consideration the ten Commandments, and how, and in what
order they are rekoned. First then, the Catholics divide them in this sort.

The first Commandment: Thou shall have no strange Gods before me; nor make to
thy self any graven Idol, to adore the same. The fith: Thou shall not kill.
The sixth. Thou shall not commit Adultery. The nynth: Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife. But some Protestants thus alter them, making the fifth to be,
Honor thy Father and Mother. The sixth Thou shall not kills. The nynth: Thou
shall not be are false witurs against thy neighbor. And hear I demand, how
according to either of these different kinds of numbering the Commandments, it
can be with any show of Truth, maintained, that the B. Virgin, being then
encompassed with soldiers and Magistrates, did violate and break four
Commandments for her not defending her Son upon the Cross? But this may
serve as a document to teach all Men, that an inueterate Malice and rancour
against the Mother of our Savior, is the ordinary Attendant of Schism, and
Heresy.


Mariamastix. Well. I have (you see) the judgment of a learned Protestant,
warranting what I have here delivered. But to pass to other Points, touched in
my Sermon; I then did say, and now I do iterate it, that I do not see how you
can justify, not only the former Hymn to her, above discussed, but also some
others of your Prayers directed to her. I will insist first in that Antiphone,
beginning: Salve Luther in sermon de Natali B. Mariae; and Peter Mattyr in
Comment. ad c. 3. prior^ ad Corinth do much reprehead this Anti phone.
Regina, Matter Misericordiae etc. Next I will descend to those your Prayers,
commonly called, Our Ladies Litanies. Both which Prayers (I fear) you shall
find to be fraught with Blasphemies, at least with most unwarrantable Errors.


Mariadulus. I will soon free you (Mariamastix) of that fear: And to come to
the Antiphone, I will justify the most seeming hard passages thereof. And I
will begin with the last part thereof, and so ascend higher. In the end of which
Antiphone we thus read: Et Ies^^ benedictum fructum ventris tus, nobis post hoc
exilium oftende. And show to us after this our exile, Jesus, the Blessed fruit
of thy Womb. Though this much displeases our Anti-Marians, and Enemies to the
blessed Virgin; yet hereto I answer, That it is no less matter (but rather
far greater) to be said, To save men; then to be said, To show the Savior unto
them. But men may be rightly said (in a sober construction) to be saved by Men.
For to omit, what is already delivered of this point, do we not thus read (
Iame 15.) He, that shall convert a sinner from going astray out of his way,
shall save a soul from death? And in like sort the Apostle says (1. Timoth.
4.) Et teipsum saluos facies, and cos, quite audiunt: Thou shall sane thy
self, and them, that do hear thee. Now if the Apostles were not afraid to
pronounce, that Men were saved by such others, who by exhortations, by examples
of Virtuous life* by incessant prayer, labored for the good of our souls; Why
then should the Church of God be afraid to say, and pray to the B. Virgin,
reigning in Heaven with Christ, that she would show Jesus Christ to us, after
this out time of banishment? since these words are to be understood, that she
would perform, and effect so much for us, by her intercessions and prayers;
Even in the same manner as those other words are to be understood, Da mihi
virturew contr^ hosts ^uos: strenghthen me against thy Enemies. As also those
other, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe: defend us (O Virgin)
from our Enemy, and receive us in the hour of Death; And some other like
prayers of the Catholics, here omitted.

The next parcel of the foresaid Antiphone is, when the B. Virgin is styled,
Spes nostra: Our Hope. Now these Words are used, because next after our Lord
Jesus Christ, (being God and Man) we chiefly place our confidence in the
mediation of the B Virgin: since our Hope is not to be placed only in the
Authors of our good, but also in the intercessours and Ministers thereof. And
according hereto, when our Lord said to the Jews (John. 5.) It is Moses, who
accuses you; in quo speratis, in whom you hope; in which words our Savior did
not reprehend the Jews, that they hoped in Moses; but because they did not
believe Moses.


Mariamastix. How does this your Construction agree with that Sentence:
Maledictusvir, qui sperat in homine: Cursed is that man, who hops in Man. (
Ierem. 17.)


Mariadulus. I answer: These words are meant of those, who repose all their
chief Hope in man, and no confidence in Go^; for even immediately it there
follows, for the fuller explication of the former words: Et a Domino recedit
cor eius: and his Heart departs from our Lord: But who piously and truly
confide in the B. Virgin, have chiefly their Hope in God. But observe how
familiar and obuious this kind of phrase of speech, is to the ancient Fathers,
which is so distasteful to the fastidious and curious ears of our Sectaries.

S. Bernard (Sermon. do Assumpt.) fears not to call the Virgin Mary: Reginam,
and Domin^^^, Ma^^^m Miscricordiae, totam sua^^m: The Queen, and Lady, the
Mother of Mercy, and altogether sweetness it seize. And S. Ephrem (more ancient,
then S. Bernard by many ages, calls the B. Virgin, Spem suam, and omnium
Christianorum: His Hope and the Hope of all Christians. (Ephrem in ser^^. de
Deipara.)

To proceed further. The B. Virgin is called in the foresaid Antiphom, D^icedo.
To omit, that this phrase is warranted above by S. Bernard; this title does
most deservedly agree to the B. Virgin, in regard of her innumerable benefits,
wherewith she does comfort the afflicted; since there are few Parts of
Christendom, wherein does not shine the Memory of her Benefits.

The B. Virgin is also called there, Vita, life; Because she brought forth
Christ; and by him, she is made the Mother of all men, who lead a spiritual
life.


Mariamastix. To pass over for the time your warranting of her former Titles;
yet how can you salve that, where in the same Prayer, she is called: Matter
Misericordiae, the Mother of Mercy; seeing we find this title to be proper and
peculiar to God, And therefore he is called, Pater Misericordia^um? (2. Cor. 1.)


Mariadulus. I reply thereto, and say, that the Blessed Virgin may be so called
for several reasons. First, because she is the Mother of Christ, by whom we
obtain all Mercy from God. Secondly, because she daily impetrateth and prays
for us to God, for Mercy. And it is no good kind of arguing to say: God is the
Father of Mercy, therefore the Virgin cannot in any sense be so called, For we
read in John. 9. that Christ is called, Lux mundi; and yet Christ says of the
Apostles, Vos estis lux mundi ( Math. 5. Again, Christ is said in John 1. to
be plenus Gratiae; And yet we read in Luc 1. Maria, plena Gratiae: and in Act.
8. Stephanus plenus Gratiae. Thus the same Titles may be given to God, and men,
in a different relation, without any dishonor to God.


Mariamastix. Well to come to the last point of the foresaid Antiphone, or
Prayer. How do you plaster that ambitious Title of ealling Her, Regina, a
Queen? You see, that she is content to call herself only a Handmayd according
to her answer to the Angel, Ecce ancilla Domini: And yet you Papists, will
needs inuest her with the title of a Queen.


Mariadulus. I answer. The attribution of this title to her, is most
warrantable, seeing we read: Be^ti panperes spiritu quoniam ipsoru^ est reguum
caelorum: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven
( Matthew 5.) And further more it is said: Venite Benedicti Patris me^; possidete
paratum vobis regnum: Come you blessed of my Father; Possess the kingdom
prepared for you ( Matthew. 25.) Now then, if all such a^ do inherit Kingdoms,
may truly becaused Kings or Queens; why then should this title be denied to
our B. Lady? Add hereto, that since she is the Mother of the King of Kings,
she then most peculiarly, and pen excellentiam deserves the Title of Queen.

And thus far touching the explication of the Antiphone, or Prayer of the Salve
Regina; and how all those titles there, may in a sober and reserved
construction, be justly applied to the Virgin Mary, the sound of which Titles
does so much iarr in the ears of our new Gospelliers, (...) that the Dialect
of their speech against the Mother of God, is commonly delivered in the black
Notes of detraction and Obloquy.


Mariamastix. I grant (Mariadulus) you have playstered the Antiphone, with some
show of probability; I ever mean, in a vulgar and undiscerning eye only;
though to the judicious it still remaynes, as before it was. But to come to your
Litanies directed to Mary, and accordingly, by you called, Our Ladies Litanies;
You do by your titles therein ascribe such superlatiue and high praises to her,
as that they stand not compatible with the Nature of any Creature, Christ only
excepted, Upon whose Honor you Papists by this your irregular proceedings,
seem over near to trench. And therefore I could wish you, to show, how you
can apologize in her behalf herein; you thereby much dishonoring the Son, in
overmuch honoring the Mother.


Mariadulus. You are (Mariamastix) far transported with a secret (or rather
most manifest) sulluation, and repining against the Holy Virgin (her dear
Son alter your mind.) But know you, that the Praises given to her, are
Relatine to Christ; since they are given to her, because she is the Mother of
Christ. And thus, since the child is in some sort, the Image of its Parents:
the Proto^^^on after an accustomed manner, is here honored in behalf of the
Antitypon. But to remove the scales of prejudice and dislike (if it be
possible) from the eyes of your judgment; I will (as it were) anatomize little
by little, the before mentioned Litanies or prayers, that so you may evidently
discern, by what authorities we Catholics are secured, to imbalme her memory
in the sweet ointments of such her due Lauds.

But before I come to that, I must put you in mind, that since Gods universal
Church (which cannot err, (1. Tim. 3.) approves the foresaid Litanies, you
ought to have no reason to doubt of the warrantablenes thereof, except you will
advance your self, (for Pry de of Judgment is ever clyming) being but one
private man, but competently learned, and lately appearing, above the Authority
of Gods Church, consisting of men, in number many, for literature most
exquisite, and for time, most ancient. Which if you do, if you were in the
Schools among the grave and learned, you would rather be thought worthy to be
exploded from thence for such your procacity and petulant insolency, then to be
disputed with.


Mariamastix. Such your Authorities are but the Words of men; And we read (
Psalm. 115.) that all men are liars. And therefore I cannot hold it secure for
me, to entrench my self in any such doubtful and uncertain Proofs: for one
man illuminated by the Lord, may as infallibly find out the Truth, as several
other Hundreds: Spiritus vbi vult, spirat. ( Joan. 3.) Nevertheless you may
proceed to your Authorities.


Mariadulus. Well, seeing you neglect the authority of Gods whole Church, upon
whom Christ has bequeathed his spirit of not erring, Ego vobiseum sum, vsque
ad consummationem Mundi, ( Matthew. 28.) I can but commulerate your most
dangerous state of soul which treads such different tracts, not only to your
own learned M. Fox. Act. Mon. p. 999. D Bantroft in his Sermon preached, anno
15^^. The divines of Genous in their Propositions and Principles disputed page
141.
Brethren, but even to Gods Holy Writ; assuring us, that the Church of God is
the Pillar and foundation of Truth. (1. Tim. 3.) If then you will not
obediently submit your judgment to the judgment of the Universal Church, make
your shipwreck upon that dangerous rock of those Words: If he will not heart
the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen or Publican ( Matthew. 18.)

But to recall my self; and to show how warrantable with sufficient authority,
is every Article, or Point of the Lita^ies of our B. Lady; In the displaying
whereof, I will not be ryotous (as I may say) in alleging the Authorities of
diverse ancient Fathers and Doctors; but for greater breuity, and only for some
taste and delibation, I will content my self with the authority of two Fathers
commonly, in proof of every particular Article, or passage.

And to begin. The Blessed Virgin is in the Litanies, First, thus saluted,
Sancta Maria. Of which Title we thus read: Maria is interpreted, star of the
Sea: And the, as a remarkable star, shynes brightly by the grace of a special
Privilege, among the waves of this wavering World. So writes S. Bid. (ad
Euang in festo Annuntiat. B. Mariae. Isidorus Hispalensis, de vita and obitu
Sanctorum c. 48. (who lived in the sixth Century after Christ) thus accords
with S. Bid: Mary, it interpreted, Lady, and one, that gives light.

2. Sancta dei genitrix. Of which title the general Council of Chalcedon thus
decrees. ( Act. 5.) Holy Mary (^^^^dnes) the mother of God. Who bouideth not
so, is an Heretic. Proclus Constantinopolita^^s, who lived in the fourth age,
thus amplifieth of this point ( de Nati^itate Christi:) Who has heard of the
like? God; who cannot be contained in a place, wells in a Womb: Whom the
Heanens do not receane, a Virgins Womb comprehends. So deservedly (
Mariamastix) the Church in her Hymns, thus sings ( in offic. B. Maria:)

Quem berra. Pontus, Athera,
Colunt, adorant, praedicant,
Trinam regentem: Machinam,
Claustrum Maria haiulat.
3. Sanctia Virgo Virgi^^^ Of this Title thus S. Bid (olisupra.) It was by a
divine guist given to our Lady that the first among women, should offer up to
God the glorious Present of Virginity. S. Ambrose thus ( Lib. 2. de Virgin.)
Let the Virginity and life of Mary, be as a Picture, described to you; from
whom as in a Looking-glass, the Beauty of Chastity, and form of Virtue do
yield a glorious reflection.

4. Matter divine Gratie Gregorius Thanmaturgus, who lived 260. after Christ: In
that Virgin the treasure of all Grace was laid Sophronius, anno Dom. 400. (
Sermon. de Assumpt. Maria apud Hierou.) Grace is given to o^b^^^ b^^ by portious;
but in Mary the whole Plenitude of grace infused it self all at once.

5. Matter Purissima S. Austin (lib. de Natura and Gra. c. 66.) Whom we speak
of sinners (an authority upon another occasion above alleged) we will not for
the honor of our Lord, have any question of Mary. Elias Creatas, who lived in
the seventh Century ( in Orat. 4. Nazianz.) The Mother of God, was not so much
as desilo^ any time, with sinful thoughts.

6. Matter Castiss^^a. Ephrem (Orat. de laud. Sanctiss. Dei Matters.) The Mother
of God, purer then the beams and brightness of the sun. Saint Athanustus
(Serus. in descript. B. Maria and loseph.) After that Mary had concea^ed and
brought forth her Child; she never bore anywsore; neither knew she Man.

Matter inuiolata. Of this point, thus Gregory Nyssen ( orat. 2. in Not.
Christi.) The same is both a Mother and a Virgin; neither did her Virginity
take away her Childbirth, nor the Childbirth dissolve her Virginity. S.
Ambrose (l. 2. de Virginibus.) What is more chaste, then she, who has brought
forth a body, without pollution of body?

8. Matter intemerata. Origin thus discourses ( Homil. in diverse. Exodus 3.) As
in times past the Bush etc. And as the three Children etc. Or as Daniel etc. So
did the Virgin also bring forth God, yet remained untouched. S. Leo (Sermon. de
Natiuit. Domini.) She conceived, a Virgin; she brought forth her child, a
Virgin.

9. Matter Amabilis. Thou art all fair my friend, and no spot is in thee, as
the Scripture says (Cant. 4.) The Author named Idieta, who lived in the
seventh age, thus writes ( in contemplat. de B. Virgin. c 2.) Thou art all
fair in thy Conception, made only to this end, that thou might be the
Temple of the Living God.

10. Matter Admirabilis. S. Chrysostom. (Homil. in Hypopant. Dom.) This Virgin is
truly the great Wonder of the World. Methodius Bishop of Tyrus (Orat. in
Hypag.) Thou art the Circumscription of him, who cannot be circumscribed etc.
Thou art the Comprehension of him, who comprehends all things.

11. Matter Creatoris. Methodius (ibid.) Thou did lend to God, his admirable
Incarnation which sometimes he had not. And the same Author in the place
cited, thus further says: Thou in the end brought^t him forth, who was
conceived before all Ages. This Methodius lived in the second age after Christ.

12. Matter Saluatoris. Methodius (ibid.) Thou did disclose to the World the
Son of thy invisible Father, by whom all Peace is restored to us. S
Epiphanius (de laudib. B. Virg.) O blessed Virgin, thou art a bright Clonde,
which brought from Heaven that most clear lightning, Christ, to illuminate the
World: so answerably we read in her office: Quae est ift aquae progredi^um,
pulera^t Luna, elect a vt. Sol.


Mariamastix. You cloy my ears with these so many allegations of the former
Authors. They were but men as above I urged and therefore I have the less
reason to stand vnappealably to their Sentences. Therefore (Mariadulus) you may
descend to some other Passage, touching Mary, handled in my Sermon.


Mariadulus. Sir, you have no reason to take exception against these former
alleged Fathers. You say, they were but Men; And I pray you, are you any more?
Besides, these are most ancient Fathers, diverse of them living within the
compass of the Primitive Church; Of which time your own Brethen thus
confessedly write; ( In the Confess of Bohemia, in the Harmony of Confessions
page 400. The Primitive Church is the best Mistress of Posterity, and she
going before, leads us the way. But (Mariamastix) though your self be tired
with b^aring of these former unexpected authorities (so Error is agrieued to
be vphrayded with its own ouersights) yet for the more satisfaction of this
Company here present, I will (with their good license) proceed in my former
Method, touching the other following titles and Encomia given to our Blessed
Lady in her Litanies Yet for greater expedition. I will pass over some few,
being partly coineident with some of the former, and will chiefly insist in
such titles following, which may seem to be less warranted with Antiquity.
And to proceed.

13. Virgo Praedicanda. Epiphanius thus writes of this her Title ( Sermon de
laud. B. Virg.) A Heavenly and earthly tongue, no not the tongue of Angels can
suffice to rehearse thy praises. Basilius Selencius, who lived in the fourth
age, celebrateth her pray se in these Words Orat. in Annunciat. Deip.) Hayle
thou, who passing, as Mediatrix between God, and Man, procurest that the
interposed Enemies may at length be overthrown, and carthly things joined to
Celestial. Where this Author speaks of the Mediation of Intercession only;
not of Redemption, which belongs only to Christ.

14. Virgo Potens. S. Cyrill Alexandrinus (Homil. Ephesians. in Hest. By mary the
devils are put to flight, and by whom all Creatures possessed with rage of
Idols, are brought to the knowledge of the Truth. S. Bernard (Sermon. 1. in
Salve Regina.) Power is given to Mary, both in Heaven and earth; Which power is
to be able to help us.

15. Virgo fidelis. Eutichiannus ( in vita S. Theophili.) Who has (O Lady)
hoped in thee, and was after doceaned? Or what man has faithfully implored thy
allmighty help, and was ever forsaken? S. Austin directing his speeches to our
B. Lady, says thus ( De sanctis sermon. 18.) The World has made thee, the
pledge of their faith with God.

16. Speculum Iustitiae. Andraeas Cretensis Bishop, who lived in the fifth age,
thus writes (in Annunciatione B. Virg.) Rejoice (O Mirror) through which,
they who were in the thick shades of sinue, receiving the sun of Justice,
coming from Heaven, were enlightened. S. Ambrose (de Virgin.) Such an one was
Mary, that the life of her alone, is the instruction of all Men.

17. Causa nostrae laetitiae. S. A^stin de sanctis sermon. 18. The Mother of our
kind brought pain into the World; ^he Mother of our Lord, brought to the World
Health. S. Chrysostom (Sera^. de Genesis and interdict. arbor. ad Adam.) The
serpent seduced Ena, Mary consented to Gabriell. E^t the sedueing of Ena
brought death; the cousent of Mary brought tyse.

18. Rosa Mystica. S. John Damascene (Orat. 1. de Natinit. B. Virg.) Mary is
the Rose, which is sprung from thorns; that is, from the Jews, and has filled
all things with sweet adours. S. Beruard (Sermon. de B. Maria.) Mary was a Rose,
White by Virginity, Redd by Charity; White through her following of Vertus,
Redd through her trumpling on Vices; White in purisying her affections, Redd in
haning compassions of her neighbor. Now (Mariamastix) she being this Mystical
Ross, the more reason, in regard of the sweet fragrancy proceeding from her,
has the Church to say of her: Si^ut Myrth^ electa odo^^m dedisti s^auitatie,
sancta Dei Genetrix. (in offic. B. Marie.)

19. Turris Dauidies. Thy Neck is as the tower of David, which is built with
Bullwarks: A thousand Targets hang on it. Cant. 4.) Which sentence, though
immediately it be applied to the Church, or to a virtuous soul; yet
consequently, it is to be applied to the B. Virgin.

20. Domus aurea. Proclus Constantinop speaking of the B. Virgin, thus says
Homil. de Natinitate Christi.) This is the shop, where the Natures were united.
S. Chrysostom (Orat. in Annunciat B. Virginis.) Hayle, Olining Temple of God:
Hayle, O Mansion both of Heaven ano earth.

21. Faederis Arcae. S. Ambrose thus most Rethorically amplifieth, saying ( tom
3. serus. 80.) What other thing shall we say the Arc to be, but S. Mary? For
the Arc carried within it the Tables of the Yostament; but Mary did be are the
Heir of the Testament. That held within it the Law, This the Gospel. That
the Voice of God, this the Word etc. Andreas Cretensis (Orat. in Annunciat. B.
Virg.) Rejoice O new Ark of God, in which the spirit of God rests; Arc,
wherein Christ, our Noe, kept his Humanity.

22. Ianua Caeli. Fulgentius, who lived in the fifth age says ( Sermon. de land.
B. Virg.) Mary is made the Window of Heaven, because through her, God sent true
light to (all) Ages. S. Dawascene: ( Orat. 1. de Not. B. Virg.) This Woman (the
Mother of God) is the Gate of life, the fountain of light.

23. Salus Insirmorum. Chrysostom (Orat. in Annenciat. B. Virg.) By this
(Virgin) O beloved, the Physicians come to those, who are sick. S. Austin
(Sermon. de sanctis sermon. 18. She (Eua) ^aue the blow; this (Mary) did heart it.

24. Regina Angelorum. S. Athanasius (in Euang. de B. Virg.) Since He, who was
borne of a Virgin, is a king, a Lord, and God; therefore the Mother which
brought him forth, is propersy, and truly esteemed a Queen, a Lady, and Mother
of God. Ephrem (Orat. de land. B. Virg.) O Mary, higher then the Blessed of
Heaven etc. more Honorable, then the Cher^bims; Holier, then the Seraphims;
without comparison more glorious, then all the Hosts of Heaven.

25. Regina Patriarcharum. Andreas Crete^sis (in Ann^ne. B. Virg.) All Hayle, O
the Honor of ^ll Prophets and Patriarchs.

26. Regi^^ Prophetarum. S. Hisro^^ ( Orat. de S. Maria Virg.) To thee O
Virgin) the Prophets give Praise.

27. Regina Aposto^orum. Ent^ym^us Erem^ta, who lived in the fifth Century (
Hist. Eccles. l. 3 c. 40.) We have received by ancient and most true Tradition,
that at the time of the Virgins departure all the Holy Apostles, who travailed
the World for the Salvation of Nations, lifted up on high, in a moment met
together at Jerusalem.

28. Regina Martyrum. Epiphanius ( Haeres. 78.) Her glory is among Martyrs.
Basilius Sele^cius, who lived in the fourth Age. (Orat. in Annunciat.
Deiparae.) If the Apostle Paul do truly affirms of other Saines, whom the world
was not worthy of, what is sitting we should think of the Virgin, Mother of
God, who as far exc^edeth all Martyrs in brig^^tues, as does the sun the
other stars?

29. Regina Virginum. S. Ephrem (Orat. de land. B. Virg.) Thou art the
Ornament, Crown, and Joy of Virgins. Alcuinus Anglus, who lived in the
seventh Age ( de Trinitatel 3 c. 14.) Mary was most renewned for Virginity;
and purer, then all the Virgins, which were under Heaven.

30. Regina Sanctorum Omnium. S. Damascen ( Orat. 2. de germine viso etc.) She
(vz. Mary) is holy and holier, then all Saints. Gregorius Magnus (l. 1. Reg.
c. 2.) Is not Mary a high vountayne? For Esaias prophesing of the most excellent
dignity of this Mountain, says: The Mountain of our Lord shall in the later
days be prepared in the top of Mountains: Surely there was a Mountain in the
top of mountains, because the Height of Mary shyned gloriously above all
Saints.

Thus far ( Mariamastix and this present Company) I have thought good to
paraphraze in part the Litanies of our Blessed Lady; whereby you may see, that
no honor or dignity is therein attributed unto her, but what is warranted by
the testimonies of most ancient, learned, and virtuous Fathers of Gods Church.


Mariamastix. I have heard you all this time, with a patient ear, not so much
for any satisfaction I receive thereby, as that such gentlemen, as have hither
accompanied me, may see what you could say in defense of her, whom you so much
magnify: so loath I am to prevent any of them of their expectation. Now as for
my self, know you, I do so admire the Word of God, as that it preponderates,
and weighs down all other proofs by you produced.


Mariadulus. Well then good Mariamastix) since by these your words it appears,
you are more sollicitous of these Gentlemen's satisfaction, then of your own:
and that for their sake you have showed in hearing, such unaccustomed Patience;
Therefore for their more full satisfaction, I would entreat you to practice for
a short time more, this your great Virtue of Patience, and then, if it please
you, you may apply to your self (though I fear, but (...)) those words of
Holy writ ( Luc. 22.) In patientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras. My
meaning is, I would willingly unfold to this whole Auditory (though not to
your self) the many other praises and Lauds (besides the former rehearsed) not
belonging peculiarly to the foresaid Titles in the Litanies, with which the
former ancient Doctors and Fathers have most deservedly honored the Blessed
Virgin.


Mariamastix. You are pleasant (it seems) with me. But go on, I give you free
leave, further to deify your Mary (for little less you undertake) with what
unjust Praises soever those your superstitious (though Ancient) Writers have
cast upon her. For I doubt not, but such of this Auditory, who rightly profess
the Gospel, will measure all your proofs (though erroneous) by the square of
the Word of God, as a straight line does measure both straight and crooked
lines. Therefore you may solace your self for the time, with these your
froathy Authorities: And in the close of all, the Event (no doubt) will be, that,
Laboriose nihil agis, you fruitlesly (but with great toil and labor) do
diuerberate the air.


Mariadulus. Be it so for the time, as you may seem to dream. But howsoever,
resting in this your further Patience, I thus begin. First then, we find
Proclus Constantinopolitanus (an Author above mentioned) to celebrate the
Virgins Praises in these words: (Homil. de Natiuit. Christi.) Mary alone is the
briage, by which God descended unto Man. And yet the same Father more (vbi
supra.) This is the Bedchan. ber (meaning the B. Virgin) in which the Word
espoused Humane flesh.

Epiphanius ( Sermon de land. B. Virg.) God only excepted, thou (Mary) art above
all. And more (vbi supra.) Hayle (O Mary) who art a spring of everliving
Water. And yet more in the same place: Mary upon earth, conceived God dwelling
in Heaven.

S. Hierome ( Lib. 2. contra Pelag. c. 2.) Only Christ did open the closed gate
of the Virginal Womb, which notwithstanding always remained shut.

S. Austin (de Natura and gratia.) Mary received more Grace utterly to
overthrow sin, who deserved to conceant, and bring forth him, who it is
evident had no sin. And more: ( in Meditat. c. 35.) Give me the effect of my
Petition and desire, O Lord; the glorious Virgin, thy Mother Mary (my Lady)
entreating praying, and prenayling for me, with all thy Saints.

S. Chrysoctome ( de land. B. Virginis. Hayle, O Armory of life; Hayle, example
of a Gem exceeding all price; Hayle, Vine proo^cing fair Grapes.

Origin (hom. 1. de diuersis.) Christ's Mother, an immacula^^ Mother, an
incorrupt Mother, an untouched Mother.

Justinus ( quaest. 136.) God did not choose any one of the Ordinary Sex of
Women, to be his Mother, but her, who should surpass all other in Virtue.

Ephrem ( Orat. de land. B. Virg.) Thou (Mary) art the help of those, who
sin, and are destitute of aid. Thou art a Ha^^^ of them, who are troubled
with a (...); the comfort of the World, and hope of such, as true in the World.
And more (ibid.) Hoyle, O cloa^e, and beautiful Vessel of God. And further
ibid. Thou art my Port. O ^ndefi^ed Virgin, and present helper; I am wholly
under thy cust^^y and protection. And the same Father yet further enlarges
himself, saying (vbi supra.) All Hayle, O ^eace and Joy, and Health of the
World; Hayle the joy of Mankind etc. Hayle the calm Port and freer of them who
are tossed with waves; Finally, Hayle, O most bright star, forth of which
Christ came.

Gregorius Magnus ( in c. 1. l. 1. Reg.) Mary by the dignity of her Election,
transcends all height of a chosen Creature.

Cyrillus Alexandrinus Ho^. Ephesians. in Nector. Through Mary, Nations are brought
to Penance.

Sophrenius. (Sermon. de Assum* prio^e Mari^, agua Hier.) Whatsoever was done in
Mary was all Purity and simplicity, all grace and Truth, all Mercy and Justice,
which looked down from Heaven.

I will conclude (omitting diverse others for breuity) with S. Bernard ( Sermon.
1. in Salve Regina) who thus writes: Power is given to Mary, both in Heaven
and earth; which power is to be able to help us. And yet more (ibid.) Thou
Mary, the Nose of the Church, art like to a Tower; to wit, high in dignity, and
firm in granity.

And now, you Gentlemen, who are the Auditors of this our discourse, I refer
to your impartial Judgments, whether it is more probable, that all these
Ancient, Reverend, and Learned Fathers (and in them the whole Church of God)
being so luxuriant, and plentiful in writing the ( Panegiricks of our B. Lady
(as you have seen) should err in giving such their Praises to Her; or rather
some one or other Mariamastix should err, in seeking to disrobe her of all her
due Titles, Worth, and Dignity.


Mariamastix. Besides your former superstitious Laudatiues, given to Mary, I do
not see, how you can warrant the worship, which you give to her in practice,
and in your daily devotions. For besides your daily reciting those Prayers,
which you call the Ladies Office, you Papists do often say the Rosary, and the
Corone, as you call them, upon Beads. In which your practice, two things
occur, that lie open to superstition. First, the repeating of one Prayer (as
the Aue Maria, a prayer by you all, so much prized) so many scores of times in
one day, as you usually do. Secondly, your praying upon Beads, a doting
custom, fitting to be practiced by those only, who have mancipated their
souls to supine Ignorance, and Superstition.


Mariadulus. See, what strange Constructions Malice casts upon Simplicity,
and Devotion. To discourse therefore a little upon the Aue Maria (in which you
so much insist) and the often repeating of it; First then, you must know, that
the first part thereof was spoken by the Angel, in his salutation of the
Virgin. The second Part, to wit, Benedictus sructus ventris tui, are the Words
of S. Elizabeth to the B. Virgin when she came to visit her; all which is
recorded by the holy Evangelist ( Luc. 1.) The last Part, that is, Sancta
Maria, ora pro nobis etc. is the Addition of the Church to the two former
passages. Now what hurt or danger is there in saying this salutation? Since it
imprinteth in us a continual, and grateful Memory of the miraculous Mystery,
of our Redemption.

Touching the often repetition of it; in reprehending whereof, you idly beat
the air. For if our Savior praying in the Garden, did repeat one and the
same Prayer, thryce, to wit, Pater, sipossibile est, transeat a me calix iste:
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me: Of which Point the
Evangelist says, ( Math. 26.) Orauit tertio, cundem sermonem dicens; He prayed
the third time, saying the same Words: If our Savior (I say) repeated the same
Prayer thrice; Why may we not repeat the Aue Maria several times without
superstition? Again, if it be lawful to repeat once a day, the Pater noster
qui es in caelis etc. why may we not iterate twice or thrice a day the same
Prayer? And if so often, why then not so many scores of times, as we will? And
the like may be said of the often repetition of the Aue Maria; seeing no
reason, can be given for the restrayning the number, in saying of either of
them.

But to proceed further. The Rosary (mentioned by you) is also called the
Psalter of the B. Virgin. It consists of fifteen Pater nosters, and one
hundred and Fifty Aues. It was first instituted by S. Dominicke, to extinguish
the Heresy of the Albigenses. The number of the Aues, is invented after the
manner of the Psalter of David, which contains and hundred and fifty Psalms;
as the Rosary contains fifteen Pater nosters, and an hundred and fifty Aue
Maria's. You are to know further (Mariamastix) that there be fifteen Mysteries
of our Savior Jesus Christ, and the Blessed Virgin, touching the Incarnation,
the Passion, and what passed after the Passion; And that in the contemplation
or meditation of every one Mystery in particular, one Pater noster, and ten
Aues are to be recited. The first five of these Mysteries are called, Joyful,
the second five, Dolorous, the last five, Glorious

Concerning the Corone, in like sort specified by you: it consists of six
Pater nosters, and threescore, and three Aue's. Which number of 63. is
ordained, because the Church does hold, that the B. Virgin did live, till she
was threescore and three years of age. Now this devotion being peculiarly
directed to the B. Virgin, so many Aue's are recited, as she lived years. And
thus far touching the Rosary and the Corone of our Lady.

Now that the number of the Pater nosters, and the Aues both in the Rosary and
the Corone, is reckoned by help of Beads; this is only to ease and help our
memory in performing the due number. Neither is the use of praying upon little
stones (which is all one, as upon Beads) lately sprung up; for it is most
ancient (and therein warrantable) as appears from the acknowledgme^ts of the
Centurists Cent. 4. col. 1329. (...) and Osiander. ( in Epitom. Cent. 4. p 454.)

Yea Zozomenus records of S. Paul, the famous Monk who lived twelve hundred
years since in this manner ( Histor. l. 6. c. 29.) In dies singulos, trecentas
orationes Deo, velut tributum quoddam reddidit; Ac ne per imprudentiam in
numero erraret, trecentis lapillis in sinum coniectis, adsingulas preces,
singulos indc eiecit lapillos: Consumptis igitur lapillis, constabat sibi,
orationes, lapillis numero pares, absse expletas esse. Every day he (Paul)
paid to God (as it were a certain tribute) three hundred prayers: And to
prevent, that he might not err in the number, he took into his bosom three
hundred little stones: and at the saying of every Prayer, he did cast from him a
little stone; And then he seeing all his stones to be spent, and cast away from
him* he was assured, that he had performed so many Prayers as were in number
answerable to the stones. Thus Zozomene reports of the daily practice of S.
Paul the Monk herein: and therefore (Mariamastix) if you carpe at Catholics,
for their praying upon Beads, you insole^tly carpe at Reverend, and Grayhayr'd
Antiquity.

Now touching the Mysteries to be meditated upon, above spoken of: The first
five Joyful, are these following. 1. When the B. Virgin was saluted by the
Angel Gabriel. 2. When the B. Virgin went to visit S. Elizabeth. 3. When the
B. Virgin was delivered of our Savior. 4. When she presented our Savior in
the Temple. 5. When she did find Jesus, disputing in the Temple.


The five Dolorons. 1. When Christ did pray in the Garden, sweating drops of
blood and Water. 2. When he was whipped at the Pillar. 3. When he was crowned
with thorns. 4 When he bore his Cross to Mount-Caluary. 5. His crucifying
between two thieves.


The five Glorious. 1. The Resurrection of Christ. 2. His Ascension into
Heaven. 3. The descending of the Holy Ghost. 4. The Assumption of our B. Lady.
5. The glory of all Saints, and how the B. Virgin was crowned, and exalted
above all Angels.



Mariamastix. Well, this your superstitious devotion consisting in a fruitles
Battalogy and iteration (so many scores of times) of the salutation of the
Angel, might be more pardonable* if so this salutation, or Prayer of the Aue
Maria, did carry any peculiar Honor to Mary, which were not communicable to
diverse others. But seeing (as I partly touched in my late Sermon) nothing is
therein contained by privilege to Her, but it (and perhaps more) is found to
be given in the Holy Scriptures to others; I therefore see the less reason,
why you Papists should so much pryze (and consequently so often repeat) the
same.

And therefore to cut up (as it were) and anatomize every part and member
thereof: And first to begin with the Angel, who was sent to Mary; We read,
that Angels were usually sent to others, and employed in matters seeming of no
great importance: Thus for example (to omit many other such passages for
breuity) Angels were sent to Abraham ( Genes. 18.) as also to Tobias the
younger ( Tob. 12.) and conuersed with him diverse days together. In like sort
S. John the Evangelist saw an Angel standing by him before the Altar ( Apocal.
c. 8.) What great, and extraordinary privilege then did Mary enjoy by having
an Angel sent to her? Now to descend to the words of the salutation: And first
touching the Word, Aue, Hayle, used by the Angel to Mary; I do find little
respect or reverence, given to her by this Word. For do we not read, that the
Jews even with scorn and contempt, said to Christ himself, Aue, Rex
Iudeorum? ( John 19.) All Hayle, O king of the Jews? And did not Judas the
Proditour, salute Christ, at his apprehending of him, by the word, Aue Rabbi? (
Math. 26.) Thus you see, that the salutation used by this word, Aue, often
carries with it disgrace and contempt: so far was Mary from being much honored
by this Word, used by the Angel.


Mariadulus. Before you proceed further (Mariamastix) in this your
commentitious Comment (for I can call it no better) let me entreat you to pause
a little. I see, you inte^d to spread your self much therein; My memory is but
weak, and if I should suffer you to give the reins to your self in this your
discourse, before the last part were ended, I should forget, what the beginning
thereof was. Therefore you must give me leave to reply, to what you have
already disgorged. And first, touching the Angel, being sent to our Blessed
Lady; I do grant, that Angels were in like manner sent to others by God: yet
the difference between the several manners of sending was great, in two
respects. First in the Person, who was sent; Secondly, in the Embassage. The
Person sent, was Gabriel the second Angel, among many thousands of Angels;
And you know, that even among terrene Princes, the greater that the Noble Man
is, who is sent as Ambassador, the greater Honor is thereby given to the
other Prince, to whom he is sent.

Concerning the Embassage, about which the Angel Gabriel was sent to the B.
Virgin; It was of the greatest consequence and moment, that can be imagined: To
wit, the Nativity of him, who after was to redeem the World. Now, to parallel
these two Points, with that by you alleged: Those Angels by you mentioned
(though every Angel be almost of infinite dignity) were of an inferior degree
to the Angel Gabriel, as well may be supposed. And the business or employments,
about wh ^h they were sent to Men, was infinitely of a lesser weight, and
consequence, then the Redemption of Mankind. Thus you see (Mariamastix) the
more you seek to depresse the Honor exhibited to the Mother of Christ herein,
the more indeed by a true ballancing of the comparison here made, her Honor is
exalted. Now, you must further know hereby, that among the diverse functions or
offices of the Angels, one (and that the greatest) is, that they are sent, as
Gods Legates, to signify those things, which God will have to be signified to
Men, especially touching the business of Man's Redemption, and eternal
salvation. The truth of which point the Apostle contesteth in these Words:
Nonne omnes (Angeli) sunt administratorij Spiritus etc. Are they not all (vz.
the Angels) ministering spirits, sent to minister for them, who shall receive
the inheritance of salvation? (Hebr. c. 1.

Touching the manner of the salutation of the Angel, beginning with the word
Aue; I grant, that the same Word alleged by you in your former Examples, was
used by way of scorn, and treacherous intent. But what proves this? Does the
abuse either of Words or things, take away or diminish the worth of the true
use of them? Nothing less. For then it should follow, that it were no Honor
to the Creator of all things, to be called, Deus; since this Word is not only
applied to Men, of whom it is said, Ego dixi, Dij estis: I have said, you are
Gods, (Psalm ^.) but even to the devils, according to that, Dij Gentium,
Daemonia, The Gods of the Ge^tils are devils. ( Psalm. 95) Thus we gather from
hence, that the abuse of the word Aue, does not lessen the worth of the Angels
Salutation by that Word. But I pray you, proceed further in this your intended
Paraphraze of the Aue Maria. For hitherto you have brought nothing, but what is
triuiall, and unworthy the ears of the Judicious.


Mariamastix. Howsoever you seem not to praise these my arguments, yet I
cannot let go the hold of them, for to me they seem forcing. But I will
(according to your desire) proceed further. The next Passage presenting it
self, is contained in the words, Gratia plena, full of Grace. Here I first
say, that th^se two words are falsely translated by the old Interpreter out of
the Greek, in behalf of the Honor of Mary. Secondly, I auerre, that granting
the Translation were true and genuine, yet no extraordinary dignity does accrue
thereby to Mary, but such (or greater) as is attributed to others in Holy Writ.
For first touching the translation of the words, Gratia plena, you know
(Mariadulus) I presume, that the Greek Word here used by the Evangelist, is,
(...), which signifies only, Gratiosa, coming of the substantive, (...),
Gratia; yet for your advantage, you Papists do read, Gratia plena. But to
proceed to the next Point of my former supposall.


Mariadulus. Nay, I pray you good Mariamastix) before you go on further, let me
wype away the foul aspersion, which you cast upon our Translation of the
foresaid Greek Word. Here then I say, that S. Jerome (in Epist. ad Principiam
Virginem,) whose translation herein we follow; S. Ambrose (in hunc locum.) S.
Austin, (in Enchiridio c. 36. and sermon 13.14.15.18. etc.) Sophronius (in
Assumptione B. Mariae.) Eusebius Emyssenus, (in haec verba Lucae, Mislus est
Angelus Gabriel.) and diverse other later Doctors do with a joint consent
interpret the foresaid Greek Word, (...), Gratia plena. Whereas you
Protestants, not allowing this Translation, do agree only in disagreeing in
your several translations hereof. For some of you translate, Gratiosa, as it
seems you do: Others, Grata; Another, Gratis iustificata; another again,
Gratis dilecta; finally another, Gratiam consecuta. Now I refer to indifferent
Judges, not blinded with Prejudice, whether the construction of so many ancient
and learned Fathers, who with a mutual conspiration (or rather, by a certain
liuine Inspiration) have translated Gratia Plena, is to be preferred or not,
before any different construction thereof, given by any one Protestant?

Thus much in defense of our ^ncie^t Catholic Traslation of the Greek Word,
(...). But now (Mariamastix) you may proceed, according to your former intended
Method; To wit, touching the supposall, that admitting, we did translate the
foresaid Word truly, notwithstanding the Honor of the B. Virgin would not
appear to be greater thereby; I doubt not, but what you shall now deliver
Hypothetically, and by supposition, will prove as weak, and in it self loose
and dissolute, as what you have already spoken Categorically and positiuely.
But proceed, I pray you.


Mariamastix. I see, you ever disualew and slight all my arguments; yet (I
trust) the Event will prove of what force that is which I shall now allege.
Here then I say, that admitting for a time, your Construction of the former
Greek word were true, and that Mary were full of Grace; yet this privilege of
Grace is imparted to diverse others, and not to her alone. Therefore no peculiar
Honor arriseth to her thereby. According to this my assertion, we read, that
Elizabeth and Zachary were replenished with the Holy Ghost ( Luc. 1.) As also
the Apostles, ( Act. 2.) S. Peter, ( Act. 3.) S Paul (Act. 9.) and (besides
some others) all the disciples of the Apostles are said to be, pleni Spiritu
sancto, full of the Holy Ghost ( Act. 13.) Thus we see, that no Encomion, or
Laud is given to Mary by the words, Gratia plena, which is not attributed to
all these here alleged, yea in a more full manner; since these were Pleni
Spiritu sancto (as is said) and Mary was full but of Grace, which is but the
Effect of the Holy Ghost; But the Effect is ever inferior and less worthy,
then the Cause.


Mariadulus. It is strange, to see how you rack your wits against the
intemerate Mother of God. But to these your Examples I answer, That to those,
who rest more in the sound of the words, then in the use of the phraze of
Scripture, it may seem (I grant) a greater matter to be full of the Holy
Ghost, then to be full of Grace: But the custom of the Scripture impugneth
this Conceit: for since it teaches, that many were full of the Holy Ghost,
and but most few were full of Grace* it evidently shows, that this later, to
wit, to be full of Grace, is so much of greater worth, as falling out but
seldom, then the former, I mean to be full of the Holy Ghost, as falling out
more often. I mean not hereby, that the Holy Ghost (which is the fountain,
and author of Grace) should be of lesser dignity the^ Grace it self; but my
meaning is, that those, who are said to be replenished with the Holy Ghost, are
understood to be full of the spirit of the Holy Ghost, in respect only of some
particular gift of the Holy Ghost in them, as in externally working of
Miracles, or in some other such strange, and unaccustomed particular thing. But
who are said to be replenished, or full of Grace, are understood to be full,
and enriched not only with one gift of the Holy Ghost, but with Justifying
Grace, and abundance of all the gifts of the Holy Ghost, so far as Man's Nature
is made capable of them.


Mariamastix. Admit for the present, this your doctrine were true, touching
those, who are said to be full of the Holy Ghost, and those who are full of
Grace, and that my former Examples by this your wise distinction could be
avoided; yet is your cause little bettered thereby, seeing we find, that not
only our Savior, but also S. Steven ( Act. 6.) are said (to use the same words
given by the Angel to Mary) to be pleni Gratia. Thus S. Steven (and by the
same ground, many other Martyrs) does equal Mary herein.


Mariadulus. It is most wonderful, to observe the procacity, and insolency,
which the Sectaries of this age, do vent our against the B. Virgin, and how
they labor to make her become prostrate to all dishonor and contempt.
Touching this your poor argument (Mariamastix) you must understand, That all
those, who are said to be full of Grace, have not one, and the same measure and
proportion of Grace. For we see, The fountain or Wellspring is full of Water;
the River from thence streaming, is full of Water; yea the lesser riuelets or
brooks are also full of Water. Notwithstanding the Wate^ in the Fountain is
more in quantity, and better for purity and clearenes, then the Water in the
main River; and the Water in the River, greater and purer, then the Water in
the Riuelets, or small Currents.

So Christ is full of Grace, as the Fountain, or Wellspring, from whence Grace
does originally flow, and is derived to all Men: The Mother of Christ, a^ the
river next to Christ the fountain, is full of Grace; Which river, though it
has less water in it then the Fountain, yet it turns with a full stream.
S. S^^uen is also full of Grace, yet in compare of the River (our B. Lady) but
as a shallow Riuelet. And this is the judgment of these Fathers following,
touching this point; to wit, of A^^^^ose (in hune loeum.) Emyssenus ( in homil.
in haec verba, Missus est Angelus Gabriel.) Chrysologus ( Sermon. 142.) Beda (
Homil. ^. de B. Virgin.) and Ambertus ( lib. 6. in Cant. Cantiedrum.) But
pass on forward (Mariamastix) in this your undertaken Gloss.


Mariamastix. Well, to forbear (for greater expedition) to reply to this your
conceyted Answer, what construction can you give to those words following,
Dominus tecum; and the other, Beuedicta tu in ^^dieribus, to advance Mary's
honor thereby? Here I say, that these words, Dominas tecum, import no more,
but that the Angel prayed, that the Lord might be with Mary; Which I prove to
be true, since the very same Words are used in the same sense even by Angels
to Men ( Judic. c. 8.) as also by Men to other Men ( Ruth. 2.) In like sort,
those other Words following, vz. Benedicta it is in mulieribus, are to be
interpreted, to be a Prayer of the Angel, that Mary may be blessed.
Furthermore, this benediction of the Angel is not to bear comparison with the
blessedness of Men (which may be thought to be greater) but only of Women; and
so accordingly it is restrained by those words, in mulicribus. Now in either of
these short clauses, where is Mary extraordinarily honored by the Angel, since
the Angels pray for men in general?


Mariadulus. It seems (Mariamastix) you will ever be your self; I mean, you
will ever continue in your deplorable Malignity, against the Mother of the
Redeemer of the World. To come to your Objections, First, touching the words,
Dominus tecum; they signify not a precation, or prayer (as you surmize they do)
but an absolute Enunciation, delivered by the Angel, that our Lord is already
with the Virgin; For it is not to be doubted, but that these Words, Dominus
tecum, are an explication of the former Words, Gratia plena: And therefore both
the Sentences are to be understood after one and the same manner; To wit, that
seeing the B. Virgin was full of Grace, in that she was replenished with divine
Gifts; that consequently our Lord was with her, and did spiritually inhabit in
her. And accordingly S. Austin thus expounds the words, Dominus tecum saying,
( Sermon. de tempore 18.) It est Dominus tecum etc. Our Lord is so with thee (O
Mary) as that he is in thy heart, in thy womb; He does replenish thy soul,
replenish thy flesh: And conspiringly hereto all the Fathers above alleged,
touching our former interpretation, of the Words Gratia plena, do agree.

To descend to those other Words of the Angel, Benedicta tu in mulieribus, and
to your Scholia given of them; I affirm first, that these Words do not import
only a Prayer, but a positive Assertion, for the Angel does not pray, that the
Virgin should be blessed of God; but does only pronounce and affirm, that she
is already blessed. My reason hereof is this: In that she could not wish for
any greater benediction of God, then that she should be full of Grace; but at
that very instant she was full of Grace, as above is demonstrated. Furthermore,
the same appears even from the contexture of the words of the Salutation; For
since, these several short passages, Gratia plena, Dominus tecum, benedicta tu
in mulieribus, are in one, and the same period of Scripture, and are delivered
in the same Tenor; they ought therefore to be interpreted after one and the
same manner. But the two former Passages, to wit, Gratia plena, and Dominus
tecum (as we have showed I do contain a positive Annunciation or Affirmation,
and not a Precation, or Option and Wishing. Therefore we may irrepliably
conclude, that this third Passage also, vz. Benedicta tu in mulieribus, ought
to be interpreted in the same manner after the two first Clauses.

Now to that, where you say, that the Benediction here ascribed to the B.
Virgin, is restrained only to the degree and proportion of the Benediction
given to Women, and not to Men; since we read, in mulieribus, that is inter
mulieres, and not, in hominibus, and therefore ought not to be of that weight
and dignity with that benediction, which is given to Men: To this I answer,
that since our B. Lady is a Woman, and not a Man, therefore the Comparison of
the Benediction ought to be only of those, who are of the same Sex, or kind.
Thus much (Mariamastix) touching your Paraphrazing, and our Catholic
illustration of the Salutation of the Angel to the Blessed Virgin. If you have
any more dregs to draw out of your former Vessel, forbear not, but let them
run forth, without further delay.


Mariamastix. I will beat down the force of all this your former explanation
of the Angels Salutation, even with this one unanswerable, and choking
Argument. It is taken from Christ his own Words, and it is this. If Mary be
not blessed at all, how then can your former interpretation (by which you so
much magnify her) be true? That she was not blessed, Calvin, my Master (in his
Harmonia) and I do thus prove. You know, we read, that a certain Woman,
mentioned in Luke 11. saying to Christ, Beatus venture qui te portauit etc.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that thou did suck; Christ
answered (or rather reprehended) her in these words: Quinimo beati, qui audiunt
verbum Dei, and custodiunt illud: Yea rather, Blessed be they who hear the
Word of God, and keep it. Now from these Words of Christ I do euict, that they
did deny that (to wit, that she was blessed who bore Christ) which the Woman
before did speak; and did affirm that, which was not said; Which is as much,
as to say, that Christ denied Mary to be blessed, and did restrain blessedness
only to them, who hear and keep the Word of God. This is my Aries, wherewith I
beat to the ground the whole Systema and frame of your Romish explanation of
the Aue Maria.


Mariadulus. Peace (Mariamastix.) Tell me, what hope can he have to be
hereafter of the number of the Blessed, who endeauours to exterminate the
Queen of Heaven, out of the number of the Blessed? And have you not a horror
to wound the Mothers honor, with the Sons misconstrued Words? O serpentine
and almost unpardonable malice! But to your Reason, which you vauntingly call
your Aries; I grant, that Calvin (your Idol) argues according to your Method
herein. But let Calvin repent (but o! now it is to late, since his poor soul
remaynes in everlasting pains) and you repent also of these your both
plasphemous speeches. Take notice then, that our Saviors Words in his former
Answer to the Woman, imports thus much; Yea rather: But who says, Yea rather,
is presumed to affirm both that, which is said, and that which is to be said;
But withal prefers that to be said, before that, which is already said.

For example, if one saying, This is a fair Saphyre, you should answer, yea
it is rather a fair Diamond; you do not deny it to be a Saphyre, though
withal your Words implye, that a Diamond is a richer stone then a Saphyre. But
to proceed further in this my Answer. Admit, that Christ had said in express
Words: The Womb, that bare me is not blessed, neither the Paps, which I did
suck; but they are blessed, who do hear the Word of God, and keep it. Admit, I
say, so much for the time, yet could neither Calvin, nor you from hence infer,
that Christ denied that, which the Woman had spoken. For do we not thus read (
Ose. 6. Matthew. 9.) Misericordiam volo, non sacrificium: I will, or expect
Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and yet it cannot be necessarily deduced from these
words, that God would not have Sacrifice; but only, rather less to have it,
then, Mercy In like sort, it is said ( Matthew. 10.) Non estis vos, qui
loquimini, sed etc. It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father,
which speaks in you: Yet we cannot from hence conclude, that the Apostles did
not speak; but that it was rather the Spirit, which spoke in them, by way of
suggesting, what they were to speak. Thus in such kind of speeches, that which
seems absolutely to be denied, is not denied, but only in reference, or
comparison of some other thing. Now from these premises it follows, that
Christ in the former words, was so far from denying, that the womb was
blessed, which did bear him, as that he rather affirms the same, as Beda and
Theophilactus (in Comment.) and also S. Chrysostom (apud S. Tho^am) do teach.

Thus far Mariamastix) touching the Catholic Expositions of these former
Passages of Scripture, above insisted upon by you. Only before I give a full
stop hereto, I do demand of you, how you can Apologize for your self, at the
most dreadful day, when our Savior coming in all pomp and glory, to judge
the actions of every particular Man, shall say to you? Thou poor Miserable
Man, could not thou be content to perpetrate diverse sins, out of thy own
frailty; but that thy illimitable wicked disposition (for thy greater
damnation) must needs arrive to that ascent and stray^e, as that not only (by
way of inference) to depresse the worth of thy Redemption: but also to wrong
the Honor of my own most dear Mother (and in her, my honor and dignity)
with thy enuenomed tongue, by detorting my own words (delivered of her) to her
disgrace, and contumely; so making me to lessen her worth and excellency? I say
(Mariamastix) what can you plead at that time for your excuse? But proceed
further in this your undertaken Scene.


Mariamastix. You use a redundancy of speech, and fulness in words against my
arguments, thereby to seem to lessen their force; But I will proceed to other
Points. And next what say you to John Baptist? Whose worth the sacred Scripture
celebrateth in these Words, ( Matthew. 11.) Inter natos mulierum non surrexit
mayor, Iohanne Baptist^: There has not risen among the borne of Women, a
greater, then John the Baptist. Here you see, the Supremacy of all Makind is
ascribed to John Baptist. Hence then it follows, that Mary (whom you seek to
advance above all both Men and Women (since she was borne of a Woman) is
inferior in dignity to John Baptist. Here now (Mariadulus) I hope, you will
yield to the Words of Christ; And consequently, then must Mary yield all
superiority to John Baptist.


Mariadulus. The knot of this your difficulty is easily loosed. And first, if
the words by you alleged, were so strictly to be taken, as you pretend, then
should S. John Baptist be greater, then Christ, the Redeemer of the World;
seeing Christ is one of those, who are borne of Women.

Secondly, even Reason demonstrateth the contrary to your Assertion: For how
can any Man be induced otherwise to believe, that since S. Mary is the Mother
of the Redeemer of the World, S. John Baptist only the Precursour of the
Redeemer of the World, but that the B. Virgin should be so much greater, then
S. John Baptist, by how much she did stand more near in conjunction to Christ,
then S. John Baptist did stand?

Thirdly, and lastly, I say, that (as S. Jerome does teach) S. John Baptist in
these Words spoken by Christ, is compared only with the Holy Men of the Old
Testament; But Christ, and his Mother, as also all the Apostles, do belong to
the New Testament. Thus (Mariamastix) you may perceive, how the smoke
interposed between the Truth and your sight, touching the ballancing of S. John
Baptist (my holy Patron, and I his poor suppliant) with the Virgin Mary, is
easily dissipated, and dispelled (as a cloud before the sun) through the
clear illustration of the sense of the former Words of Christ. But continue
(Mariamastix) in your undertaken Province.


Mariamastix. How do you warrant so many Feasts and Holidays, celebrated by
you with great pomp (I may well say, with superstition) in remembrance of
Mary; A point, in which I insisted in my Sermon? I tell you plainly my Spirit
can hardly brook them: Christ himself has no more (if so many) peculiar
feasts appointed by the Church, then his Mother has. Do not then you Papists
equal her in honor with Christ; since in celebrating her Memory you do equal
her with Christ? O impious devotion!


Mariadulus. This your Cloud of Error is easily dissipated and dissolved.
First, I say, How many Solemnities soever are kept by the Church in honor of
our B. Lady, they all (though externally resting in the veneration of the Holy
Virgin) are by the mediation of her, terminated in Christ; And therefore they
may be truly and vertually called the feasts and solemnities of Christ, since
they are instituted in honor of the B. Virgin, only (and not otherwise) as she
is the Mother of Christ, our Redeemer. Thus (for example) the Honor exhibited
to any great favorite of a Prince, may be justly said to be given to the Prince
himself; since the true Cause of the exhibition of the Honor, is the Grace
and Favor, which the Prince bears to such a Worthy Personage.

Secondly, I answer, that if these several solemnities of our B. Lady may not
justly and deservedly be observed; then has the whole Church of God foully
erred (and this for many ages together) both for the Institution, and practice
of them; And such as you are, (Mariamastix) only hold the truth in impugning
of them; the grossenes of which conceit to apprehend, I refer to any man,
enjoying but his five senses.


Mariamastix. You seek (Mariadulus) to bear me down with the stream of many
impertinent Words, the refuse of discourse; but with force of reason you do
not. And were it not, I am loath to expatiate further in discourse, then the
particular subject now disputed off, would well suffer, I could easily dissolve
your argument drawn from the authority and custom of the Universal Church.
But this time, and the present Occasion do not permit it. But to give the
reins to your own desire, and seeing you speak so highly, and vauntingly of
the several feasts and solemn days of Mary, you may insist in them at your
pleasure, and produce your chiefest Reasons, upon which you anchour your
judgment therein.


Mariadulus. I will satisfy your motion. But before, I must tell you, that I do
not labor to bear you down (as your phraze is) with a stream of many
impertinent Words. No, for I acknowledge that an ouercharge of needles words,
is but smoke of speech. But to hasten to the several feasts of the immaculate
Virgin. I will begin with the feast of her Nativity, then of the Annunciation
next of her Purification, and lastly, of her Assumption into Heaven. As for the
feasts of her Prescutation, and Conception, because they are not kept with so
general a Solemnity of the Church, as the former are, I will pass them over.

Now touching the feast of the Nativity of our Blassed Virgin, which falls
upon the eight day of September; If we will take into our consideration, who
she is (whose Nativity we do celebrate) and to what end she was borne, we shall
easily give allowance of that festival Time. The Arc (we read) was curiously
wrought, only to the end to keep within at the Law of Moses; And shall not
then She be of an extraordinary Perfection (and consequently the time of her
Birth worthy all due veneration) within whose most chaste Womb was enclosed the
Savior of the World, and who abrogated the Law of Moses?

Again, this feast is the Birth day of Her, who being a Virgin, is the Mother
of God and of her Creator: Gen^isti, qui ^s feci^ (says the Church of her)
and (...) aeternum permanes Virgo. ( in officio B. Virg.) And hereupon it came
to pass, that the Ephesin Council (being one of the first four Counsels)
consisting of two hundred Bishops, was chiefly assembled for determining, that
it should be houlden as a Catholic Verity, and an Article of Faith, that the
most Glorious Virgin Mary was the true Mother of God; And thereupon she is
called, (...), that is, Deum pariens.

Now, what honor is due to Her, is partly known by this Axiom in Philosophy;
To wit, that there is such a near interlinking between the Effect and the
Cause, as that (if there be no rust hinderance) the one does participate of the
others worth and Perfections. Therefore it follows, that with what
accidental Perfections of Wit, of Beauty etc. Christ was endued, the same did
the B. Virgin (though in a lower proportion) enjoy. Have we not then just
occasion to say, that only such a Mother, deserved to bring forth so worthy a
Son, and only such a Son deserved to have such a Mother? For as she gave to
him the Humane Nature, so he gave to her Fulues of Grace. Thus the Glorious
Virgin for his humane Nature was his Mother, and she in respect of Grace, his
Daughter; And thus the Mother, is become the Daughter, and the Son, the
Father. Thus who will truly confider and ponder the dignity of the B. Virgin,
shall find he has just reason to say with the Catholic Church: Natiuitas tua,
Deigenetrix, Virgo, gandium annuncianit vniner so mun^o; Ex te enim ortus est
Sol Institiae, Christus Deus Noster. (in offie. B. Virg.) And thus far in
Apologizing for the feast of the Nat^uity of the Holy Virgin Mary; Only I will
conclude, that we see it is the custom (and most laudeble) that Princes will
have their own Birthday, or the Birthday of the Heirs apparent, to be kept
yearly, with all Royal Pomp and Solemnity; And shall then the Natiui^y of
Her, who brought into the World the King of Heanen and earth (in compare of
whom all terrene Princes are but poor worms of the earth) be wholly contemned?
Such is the blindness of Innovation in matters of Religion.

To descend to the feast of the Au^^^nciation of the Glorious Virgin being the
2^. of March. And hear we may well call to mind, that temporal Potentates do
use to send some one or other of the chiefest of their Nobility, as Ambassador
to other Princes, according to the greatness of the subject of their Embassage.
And by the worth of the Ambassador, we may make a coriecture of the Worth of
the Prince, to whom the Embassage is sent. If then the Angel Gabrial (being
the second, among so many Millions of Angels and Celestial spirits) was sent
by God, to bring the B. Virgin the comfortable Salutation of her future being
the Mother of the Redeemer of the World; does not this, most lowdely, even
trumpet forth to all Christians, both the supreme dignity of the Virgin, to
whom the Angel was sent, as also the insinite worth of the Embassy? And may
not then the remembrance of so Great an Embassage he year^^ kept with
solemnity? It being Great, for the Person, from whence it came, being God;
Great for the Person, to whom it came, the most blessed, and Holy Virgin;
Great for the Person, by whom it was sent, the second Angel of the Celestial
Court; and lastly Great, for the business and subject, which it concerned, to
wit, the Redemption of Mankind.

But to proceed further. The Reasons, which do warrant the solemnity of her
Nativity, do also warrant the institution of the feast of the Annunication;
Since the chief Mysteries were perfected in her Annunciation, for the
accomplishment whereof she enjoyed her Nativity. And therefore here we may
with exulation and joy sing, with the whole Church of God: Rorate Caeli
desuper, and unbes pluant Iustum; aperiatur terra, and germinet Saluatorem. (
Isa. 45.) For this was the time, when the Angel saluted the Virgin, unfolding
to her from God, that she being Earth, should nevertheless bring him forth,
who should save the World, drowned before for so many ages, in sin and
damnation. Therefore as that Nation, which has lived for many hundred years,
in extreme thraldom, and servitude to a most tyrannous Prince, could not but
justly rejoice, and with all cele brity much honor the time, when infallibly
it should be declared to the People, that at such a near ensuing time, their
Vassallage should cease, and that they should be restored to their former free
dome: Even so here, when the World did take notice, that the Eternal Word of
God should be inearnated in the womb of the B. Virgin, to redeem Mankind from
the Tyranny of the Devil, it ought highly to prize the Time, and celebrate it
with an yearly Iubily and Exultation, in remembrance of so most comfortable a
Message.

I say further more: Seeing Jesus Christ was to redeem the World with the
effusion of that blood, which he took of the B. Virgin, it therefore may be
said in a so ber Construction (for rack not my words unto a bad and
neuer-intended sense) that the said glorious Virgin in some sort, concurred to
the Redemption of Mankind.

I add to the former reasons, that true it is, that God could have made a
better Heaven, a better Earth, a better World, and better Men, then he has
made; but he knew not how to make a better and more worthy Work, then to make
God, Man. This then not to be denied, has not the Church of Christ most urging
inducement, to celebrate with an Anniuersary Honor and reverence, that most
happy hour, wherein the Work of our Redemption first took it beginning,
according to those words of the Angel to the Virgin: Ecce concipies, and
paries, and vocabitur filius Altissimi? ( Luc. 1.)


Mariamastix. You have spoken enough (Maria^ulus.) But howsoeuen, I do think,
that these two feasts already discoursed of, were sufficient (if not too many)
for the remembrance of Mary. Christ himself has but four or five special
sestiuall times, kept with celebrity of his remembrance; Two then are enough
for the remembrance of a Woman. In regard whereof, you may pass over in
silence those two other feasts usually celebrated by you; I mean the
Purification, and her Assumption.


Mariadulus. O, Envy not the glory of the B. Virgin! For how can it be
thought, that you truly reverence Christ, who endeavor to diminish the
reverence due the Mother of Christ? Concerning the other two feasts of the
Virgin (by you so much disesteemed) I will a little touch upon them; not so much
for your satisfaction (for none it seems you will receive) as to show to the
Auditory here present, the Reasons, which moved the Church of God to
institute, and yearly celebrate them.

First then touching the feast of the Purification, being the second of
February: For the better understanding of the reason of the Institution of this
feast, we are to remember, that the old Law appointed that if any Woman should
conceive with Child by a Man, and it to be Male, the mother should be accounted
unclean seven days, then the child should be circumcised the eight day. And
further, that she shall not touch any holy thing, nor enter into the Temple,
till the end of forty days; at what time she shall go into the Temple, and
offer her Son in the Temple, in memory that the Hebrews departing out of the
Land of Egypt, the Angels killed all the first. borne of the Egyptians. This
was the Law.

Now, though this Law did not bynd the B. Virgin (because she conceived not by
Man, but by the Virtue of the Holy Ghost, and therefore she was not unclean)
yet (as S. Bernard says) in imitation of her B. Son, when not being subject
to the Law of Circumcision, would neuerthelesle becircu^cised by the Jews: So
the holy Virgin through the same Reason would go to the Temple to be purifyed,
and there would offer up her dear Son. At what time old Symeon, of whom we
read, that he was Just and feared God, expected (as the Evangelist records (
Luc. 2.) the consolation of Israel; and had an answer from the Holy Ghost,
that before he dyed, he should see the Aunoynted of the Lord, that is, the
Messiah. And according hereto, Symeon fynding Christ in the Temple with his
Mother, took him into his armet, and in acknowledgment, that Christ was the
Messiah, he did sing that joyful song like a swan, which sweetly sings
before his near approaching death: O Lord, now bet thy servant depart in
peace, according to thy Promise; for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. (
Luc. 2.)

The Catholic Church at the institution of this feast, has appointed, that
the faithful Christians should make a solemn Procession. And every one of the
faithful should earry a litie candell in their hand, in representation of
carrying of Christ (who is the true light of the world) in S. Symeon his arms.
Now for the better Remembrance of all these former Mysteries, the Church of God
has thought it most expedient, by an annual Feast, to celebrate them. And
thus much briefly of the feast of the Purification.

Lastly, to descend to the feast of the B. Virgin her Assumption up to Heaven
in body, which is kept upon the fifteenth day of August: Which feast the Church
celebrateth in these words, Maria Virgo assumpta est ad Aethereum Thalamum, in
quo Rex regum stellato sedet solio: (in offic. B. Virg.) As also in these
other, Assumpta est Maria in caelum; Gaudent Angeli, laudantes benedicunt
Dominum. (vbi supra.)

Touching the Assumption of our B. Lady, two things are chiefly to be weighed.
The first, is the certainty of her Assumption; which all Sectaries with open
mouth deny, as you (Mariamastix) did in your late Sermon against the B. Virgin.
The second (which resulteth from the first) the just Reason of celebrating her
Assumption.

Touching the certainty of her Assumption, Dionysins Areopagita, (in his book,
de diuinis Nominibus.) lunenall Bishop of Jerusalem, (in his Relation to the
Emperor Martianus) and S. John Damascene who lived nine hundred years since
(in a certain Sermon of this subject.) do all jointly affirm, that by the
special privilege and Providence of God, it was granted to his B. Mother,
that all the Apostles (excepting S. Thomas, who came thither three days after)
were present at the death of the B. Virgin. The Apostles seeing the Virgin to
be dead^ infoulded her reverently in white liunen, and laid the Body upon a
Bear, and carrved it unto Gethsamini, with great solemnity of the Apostles,
Disciples, and other devout Persons, and there made a Grave, in which the Body
was laid.

The foresaid S. Damascone records, that S. Thomas (the Apostle) came three
days after her interring, and having a thirsting desire to see the dead Body,
in regard of his absence at her death, entreated the other Apostles to open the
Grave unto him, that he might see the dead Body, and do honor and reverence
unto it. At his request they opened the Grave, but found there no Body at all,
but only the linen, within which, the said sacred Body was infoulded, and
withal perceived a most sweet savor and smell in the same place. Upon the
wounderfull and unexpected fight whereof, all the Apostles concluded, that our
Lord, who had taken flesh of Her, would grant her the Honor of rising, before
the day of the Resurrection; and that she should as well in Body, as in Soul,
presently ascend up to Heaven. I will add hereto, what Iunenall, the foresaid
Bishop, says; to wit, That this stupendous Wonder was not seen by the
Apostles only, but also by Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Dionysius Areopagita;
both of them being Disciples of Saint Paul, and both being present thereat; as
also by Hierotheus; and diverse others Saints, witnesses thereof.

These Premises are the ground, whereupon the Catholic Church rests for the
belief of the B. Virgins Assumption into Heaven both in soul and Body, before
the Common day of the Resurrection. And to the former proofs I may adioyne
these following. The Centurists do witness ( Cent. 5. c. 10. col. 1127.) that
S. Austin did write a Book, entituling it, De Assumptione Virginis mariae. The
opinion of which doctrine was so anciently received, that the Emperor
Mauritius (more then a thousand years since) celebrated a festival day
thereof, as Nicephorus l. 17. c. 28. records. Yea the certainty of this
doctrine is further proved from the authority of S. Jerome, in a notable
Sermon, styled, De festo Assumptionis Mariae, though some others ascribe it to
Sophronius, in time his equal. In regard of the great Antiquity of which
Feast, we find Dretserus (the Protestant) to reprehend Pope Damasus herein,
thus saying: ( de festis diebus. p. 148.) Damasus ordained the feast of the
Assumption of Mary, in the year of Christ, three hundred, sixty four, with an
ungodly Use, that thereby Honor might be given unto Her, and Prayers offered
up etc. Thus this Protestant.

But I will conclude this point with one most conuincing argument, taken from
S. Bernard, who thus disputes hereof: Seeing God has discovered and revealed
the Bodies of many Saints (which lay hid in diverse places) that they might be
honored of faithful Christians; it then ineuitably follows, that if the
sacred Body of the Blessed Virgin had been still on earth, he would in like
manner have made known, no doubt, ^n what place, or Country it did lie: For
it not being certainly known, where that Body or any part thereof is in any
place of the World, allthough there be found and known some relics of her
garments; it may be irrepliably concluded, that her Body is not to be found in
earth, but only in Heaven. And this is S. Bernards demonstration in this Point.

Thus much in proof of the certainty of the Assumption of the B. Virgin Mary
Now it being once granted, that her Body was assumpted up to Heaven, how much
reason has the Church to record her Assumption, by instituting thereof an
yearly feast; And to read in that her Honor, Hodie ^aria Caelor ascendit:
gandete, quia cum Christo ^^gnat in aeternum: Exalt^ta est Sancta Dei Genitrix,
supra Choros Angelorum, ad c^lestia regna?

I will conclude this Point, only saying, that if most Countries do yearly
observe, with honor, the day of the Coronation of their Prince; May not then
we Christians keep with a more special Solemnity the time, when the B. Virgin
(who brought forth him, who is the King of Heaven and Earth) first by her
Assumption enjoyed, not a temporal Crown, but the Eternal Crown of Heaven?

Thus far ( Mariamastix, and the rest of you Auditors here present) for the
justifying of the Catholics their keeping all the former four yearly feasts,
and solemnities of the B. Virgin.


Mariamastix. Well, to let all this pass, touching the former feasts, as
enough (if not too much) discoursed of; I would have you (Mariadulus) to take
notice, that I have been a Trauayler, and have breathed the air of your
Popish Countries. And indeed these eyes of mine have been witnesses, that you
Papists do there give undue veneration, not only to Mary herself, but even to
her Image and Picture. How often have I seen (to my great disedification, but
strenghtning me in the Gospel) an Image of Mary placed, either in a Church, or
in the corner, and turning of a Street; To which some have kneeled down, and
prayed, whether to the Image of her, or to her, I know not; Others, as they
passed by, have made a knee, and put their Hat off. Yea I have seen some of
those Images clothed (as it were) with fine Vestments, and wax^n Candels
burning, before them. I have further observed, how in most great Towns, the
chief Church is dedicated to Mary; whereas all Churches are to be dedicated to
God alone. And therefore it seems Idolatry, to perform that worship to Mary,
which ought to be performed to God alone. Again, in most towns of Note, there
is a certain Sodality, or Company of Men and Women, who are called the
Sodality of the B. Virgin. Now to what end is this Sodality, if Mary be to be
worshipped of all? since this may be effected without making any peculiar
Sodality or Confraternity? To be short, I have observed, that three several
times every day, at the ringing of a Bell, to wit, at six of the Clork in the
morning, twelve in the day time, and six at the night, each Man ^s to fall down
on his knees, yea if it be in the streets, to say some Aue Maria's. O manifest
and gross Idolatry in you Papists!


Mariadulus. O manifest and gross Ignorance, in you Professors of the
Gospel! Touching your travel, it may be, you have been in Catholic
Countries; And if you have reaped no profit thereby, being on all sides
encompassed with the sight of devout Religious Men, and practice of Virtue,
thank your self* seeing it should seem, that during your stay in those
places, you labored to unite your own forces more strongly together; and so
your pertinacy and sti^nes in judgment increased, in it self (as I may say)
per (...). Now touching the Worship, which (you say) you have seen in
Catholic Countries, exhibited to the Image or Picture of the Blessed Virgin, I
can but grieve to see, how Ignorance is masked under the veyle of Satyricall
Reprehension; and that the show of Reason should produce in Man, the Effects of
the want of Reason.

Therefore, though the handling of this Point touches upon a new Question, to
wit, the worshipping of Images; Yet for your Instruction (though it seems you
can hardly brook this word) observe what the Cartholike Church teaches
therein. First, it teaches, that the honor is not done to the Image, as it is
wood, or stone, or the like, but it is done to the Saint, whose Image it is, by
the mediation whereof the Honor is so transferred. Secondly, the Learned do
teach, that so far forth, as concerns exterior Acts of worship, it is not
easy to distinguish the several kinds of Worship; of which some kind is due
only to God, other to Saints, and Men. For almost all exterior Acts are
common to every kind of adoration and Worship, excepting Sacrifice, which is
peculiar only to God. And according hereto we find, that Abraham with the same
exterior Act of bowing his body to the ground, did adore God, Genesis 17. did
adore the Angels, Genes. 18. and did adore Men, Genes. 23. Therefore to apply
this: Where you say, that you have seen diu^rs to kneel before the Image of
our B. Lady, or to put their hat off, as they passed by the Image; this proves
not, that they give the same Honor either to the Image, or to the Virgin
herself, which is due to God. For we see, the Subject kneeles to his Prince,
the Son to his Father, and yet the Honor given to the Prince by his Subject,
is different from that, which is given to the Parent, by the Child. Thus much
to take away this your stumbling Block; since (as is said) not the external
Act of worship, but the different internal Acts of the Understanding and Will,
consisting in a different apprehension of the worth and dignity of him, to whom
the Honor is given, distinguish the Honor due to God alone, from that which
is given to Saints, and other Creatures. And therefore S. Thomas truly
teaches, (2. 2. quaest. 103. art. 3.) That there are so many several kinds of
Adoration, as there are several kinds of Excellencyes.

Now, touching the costly Vestments of silk and gould, wherewith (you say) you
have seen the Image of our B. Lady to be (as it were) clothed: What proves
this? We read, that God would have the Taber^acle to be most ri^chly adorned;
so as all the Instruments of the Sanctuary were of gold, and the curtines of
the Taberuacle, and the Priestly Vestements were made of silk, purple,
coastly* cloth, inserted with precious stones; as appears in Exodus Cap.
25.26.27. and sequent.

This then being the pleasure of God in the old Testament, (which was but^^
Type or figure of the New Testament;) what dishonor to God, or Idolatry
otherwise do we commit, in adorning with curious Vestments; the Image of the
Mother of God?

And as concerning wa^en Candells burning before her Image; These lights do but
represent the light of the son of her, before whose Image they burn; since
he is the true light of the World: Eg^ sum lux Mundi. (so a^^ 8.)

And that lights were burning in the day time, in the Churches, and other holy
Places (and this Use to be in the Primitive Church) is proved, from the
Authorities of Euscbius, ( l. 4. d^ vita Constantini c. 66.) from the fourth of
Council of Carthinge, ( Can. 6.) from Icrom^, (coutra Vigila^tium. c. 3.) as
also from the Confession of the Centurists ( Cent. 4. col. 497.) Thu^ much
(Mariamastix) in full solution of your two former silly Objections. But to
proceed to the rest. Touching the dedication of Churches to the Mother of God;
I first say, True it is, that in most Cittyes, some fair and sumptuous Church
is dedicated to her; but this without any indignity to God, as if he were
deprived of his honor thereby. And therefore for your better instruction
(Mariamastix) you are to conceive, that where we say, S. Mary's Church, in such
or such a City (and the like may be said of all other Churches, bearing the
names of Saints or Angels) we mean thereby, That the Church is dedicated only
to God, but yet in Memory, and in the Name of S. Mary; and so dedicated to God,
as that therein we are (among other our Prayers) to pray to God, by the
intercession of S. Mary Now, how is God robbed of his honor by such a
dedication?

I also further say, that in taking exception against Churches, dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin, you do by such your proceeding quarrel at Antiquity. For
the two Popes, Liberius, and Sixtus (both which lived above a thousand years
since) did dedicate Churches to our Blessed Lady as appears in lib.
Pontificali. Touching the greater Antiquity of dedicating Churches to other
Saints, (and consequently, and by the same ground, to the Blessed Virgin) see
Cyrill, Cateches. 16. Athanasius in epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Chrysostom* homil. 28. ad Populum. Euscbius l. 4. de vita Consiantini^, c. 58.
Ambrose l. 1. Epist. 5. ad Felicem Episcopum Comensem. Jerome l. contra
Vigila^tium; Finally Austin l. decura pro ^ort^is. c. 1.

Touching your second Exception; I grant, there is a Company of devout
Catholics, which make (as it were) a body or Communalty among themselves, and
called the Sod^lity of the B. Virgin the Mother of God. But what can here be
disliked? It is certain, that all good Catholics do bear duty and reverence
unto Her; yet some of them in practice more then others. Now if a certain
number of them do oblige themselves to perform more Prayers, and austerities,
also to exercise more good Works, in the name and honor of the B. Virgin, as
being the Mother of our Redeemer, then other Catholics do; who can justly
reprehend this, except with all, they could justly reprehend all increase of
Devotion and Piety: An ocu^as tuus nequam est, quin ego boun^ s^^^? Math. 20.

To your last Eyesore; It is true, that all Catholics do repeat the
Salutation of the Angel to the Blessed Virgin, and this for the most part upon
their knees, if the Place will suffer. Now I much wonder, how you can be
disedified herewith; for since it is practiced in remembrance of our grateful
acknowledgment of the Benefit of our Redemption, you cannot be displeased with
this custom, but you must needs be also displeased, that Christ was borne of
the B. Virgin, and after dyed for man's salvation. And thus much to unloose
these your former knots, and difficulties.


Mariamastix. Cover stocks and stones with curious Vestments, and set before
them burning Tapers, as also practice these your other superstitions, as long
as you will; it shall move me nothing: Only I can but pity such your blindness.
But your superstition (Mariadulus) rests not here, for it passes further in
diuulging (as I proved in my Sermon) that infinite Miracles have been wrought
at the Images of Mary: So ready you Papists are to enchaunt the ignorant with
such doting fooleryes.


Mariadulus. Animalis homo non percipit ea, quae sunt spiritus Dei. (1. Cor.
2.) Because such Miracles do transce^d the ordinary Course of Nature, you
therefore reject them; in which your proceeding you interleague over nearly
with the Atheist (pardon my blunt, yet true, phrase of speech) who
acknowledging no other God then Nature (which is but the ordained and
prescribed connection of Causes, with their Effects) does repute all Miracles,
as fabulous. But to confront this your bold Assertion, I say, that though in
almost all Catholics Countries of Christendom, Miracles have been wrought
before the Images of the B. Virgin, and at sacred places to her devoted; yet I
will insist only in some few (among diverse hundreds) performed at Loreto in
Italy, and (in our days) at Sichem, in the Low Countries, and such as any
forhead (which has not abandoned all shame shall be loath to deny. I will begin
with the Miracles, wrought at Loreto; and will only allege for greater
breuity, six. In delivering of which, I will for the most, even literally
follow the Author of the Book, entitled, The History of Loreto.

1. The first then is of a Noble woman, who was cured of the Palsy in the
year 1508. And it is in this manner: The king of Naples had a certain Person
of his Council, called Longus, famous for many notable things; Whose wife
being a woman of great account, was also called Longa, after the Syr-Name of
her Husband. She was taken in all her Body, and tormented with such bitter
pain, that she led a miserable life. Who rejecting all the help of Physicians,
entreated her Harband, that she might be carried to Loret^. When she came
thither, she requested her Son in law (who accompanied her in that journey)
to procure a Mass to be said in that sacred Cell of the Virgin, agreeable to
her purpose; The beginning whereof is. Repleatur os meum laud: let my mouth be
fullfilled with praise; In the which is recited the Gospel of the Palsy man,
whom Christ our Savior did cure; though this kind of Introitus, was not proper
to that day. She had scarce given this commandment to her Son in law, when
she was brought (being attended on by her Son in law) into that sacred house,
and presented before the Image of the B. Virgin; not doubting, but that our
Ladies Prayers would be profitable to her; But behold, before her Son could
fulfill her command, a strange Priest came unto the Altar* who beginning divine
Service with this Jntroite: Let my mouth be fuifilled with praise; struck her
into so great admiration as that she re may ned a while dismayed thereat. But
presently turning unto her Sonin law, (who was not yet gone to procure that
Mass, but was prepared to go) stay (said she) for it is bootles for you to
go, for this is the Mass, I desired. And when it was come to the place of the
Gospel, He said to the sick of the Palsy, J say to thee, arysc, A
wounderfull thing to be spoken, and scene; the Palsy woman, perccauing, that
by a supernatural Grace, her Body was suddenly cured, and her soul
replenished with vnwounted sweetness, arose presently out of her Chair, with
great joy; All there present being amazed at the strangeness of the thing, with
flowing tears of joy, made no end of thanksgiving to the B. Virgin.

When Mass was done, she went on foot to her lodging, to the great amazement
of all her acquaintance, who were present at the miracle of so great a thing.
At which time the Duke of Termero being by chance at Loreto, and knowing Longa,
and her incurable disease very well; and also seeing her go on foot, was first
amazed at the nouelty of the thing; but presently being moved at so great a
Miracle, he joined with her in praising Allmighty God. And presently, a new
Wonder made the Miracle it self, most evident. For the Priest who had said
Mass to Longa, being long and much sought for, was not to be found, that you
may believe, he was sent by Miracle to be the Minister of the Heavenly work.
And Longa having obtained her Vow, purposed to consecrate to Allmighty God her
health, restored to her by Miracle: Whereupon she building a Monastery of
sacred Virgins at Naples, betook herself to the service of incurable
diseases, while Raymond Car^ona was Viceroy of Naples.

2. Erasiaas, Deane of the Cathedral Church of Craconia in Polonia, being
deaf in either ear, heard almost nothing at all; So that ^^^n did deal with
him by signs, rather then words: But before his hearing was taken away, he had
heard by report many admirable things of the B. Virgin of Loreto: And seeing he
could get no help by means of Physic: and that the Heavenly house of Loreto
came often into his mind, much grieved and perplexed with the Infirmity, it
moved him to come to the sacred House of our Lady, that with great confidence
he might say Mass in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, and implore
her help, where he found most present remedy for his grief. For as soon, as
he had ended Mass, he perceived, that his left ear was opened and cured; And
the next day, saying Mass in the same place, he likewise recovered the use of
his right ear: Where by he, who came to the most sacred House, deaf indeed,
within two days departed thence, full glad of having recovered the perfect use
of Hearing. He himself told the whole matter with tears of joy, to Rutilius
Benzonius then Bishop of Loreto, and to Andrew Bentiuoglio Governor of Loreto,
upon the Nones of April, the year of our Redemption 1590.

3. About the same time, a Knight of Flanders (his name is not set down,
because he would have it concealed) escaped manifest peril of life, by the
help of our Blessed Lady; Who by the commandment of the Prince of Parma, going
on improuidently with eight horsemen, to view the coast, fell into the Ambush of
the Enemy. The Enemies were about eight hundred, some horsemen, some footmen:
Who quickly spreading themselves abroad, took from them all hope of escape:
Notwithstanding the Flemish knight wanted not courage; For inuocating our B.
Lady of Loreto, and animating his fellows thereto, they valiantly fought with
them; their confidence in the B. Virgin preuayling so much with them, that it
easily put away the cogitation of so great a danger: Such was the courage and
strength, which was given to this small Company, by the virtue of the Heavenly
Help which they besought, not failing them in their fight. For when on the one
side they were assaulted with so many hands and Weapons, by the Protection of
the Mother of God, they sustained the violence of their Enemies, till the
Spanish forces came in, to rescue them. And then the danger turned upon the
Enemies themselves. And that there may be no doubt at all of the Virtue of the
heavenly help, neither the Knight himself, nor any of his fellows or company,
were hurt at all, in so cruel a fight, which held for the space of two hours.
In remembrance of which help of our Blessed Lady, the Knight gave for a gift,
a Votiue wax Candell of huge bigness, with intent that on festival days it
should burn before the Maiesticall House of Loreto; And it is said, that the
Knight gave also a certain stipend, that when the same was consumed, another
Candell of like bigness should be put in its place, for everlasting memory to
Posterity.

4. A young Woman of Sicily of more beauty, then honesty (her Name is concealed
in the history, to save her credit) living after in Venice, and there many
years together making gain of her dishonest Body, and heaping up good store
of wealth, at last had a desire to see her Country, and to return home.
Therefore curning all her wealth into money, with a familiar Companion of hers,
she went toward Loreto, intending to wash away the filth of her former life by
Confession, and to salute the B. Virgin of Loreto, that then she might go with
more joy into Sicily. But as soon, as they came to the wood of R^utnua, that
good Companion, seeing all round about secure, and the hope of the prey greatly
provoking him, did set on her at unawares with a naked sword. And the Woman
seeing herself to be set on with a deadly Weapon, inuocated the B. Virgin of
Loreto. But the thief (our Blessed Lady deferring the help, to have it more
notable) cast her from her horse whereon she rode, and persued her when she was
down, and gave her many blows, she earnestly imploring the help of the B.
Virgin. At length lest any hope of life should remain, the cruel wretch cut
her throat, when she was half dead; and taking away her gould, and Jewels,
and leaving her miserably wounded, departed from her; Who tumbling in her own
blood, ready to give up the Goast, recommended her troubled Soul to the B.
Virgin; and in that very instant was made partaker of the undoubted help of her
Patroness. For presently with a great glory of heavenly brightness our Lady
appeared unto her, in a white garment; bidding her to be of comfort, gently
embraced her, cherished her in her Lap in this her extremity, healed the wounds
of her Body with her touch, replenished her sorrowful heart with heavenly joy,
and then admonishing her to lead a chaste life, vanished out of her sight. The
woman thus viewing her body all over, saw that the scarres of her late wounds
were closed up, and that the deadly wound of her throat was perfectly cured.
Upon which sight with exceeding joy, she fell down upon her knees, and next
after God, gave manifold thanks to her good Patroness. Hereupon she went to
Loreto to wash away the blemish of her life by sacred Confession. Raphael Riera
(who did set this Miracle down in Writing) did (among many others) see the
scarres of her healed Wounds; and said, that about her Neck, did glitter a
golden scarre, in manner of a Chain, which was a second Miracle, added to the
former. The Woman thus miraculously cured, preferred Loreto before her own
Country, where she lived many years devoutly, and so piously ended her days.

5. About the year, one thousand five hundred fifty, and four, Night-fyers
(like unto stars) were seen to break out of the Thole of the highest part of
the Church of Loreto, and (as it were) in one stream to go sensibly toward
M^^te Filatra^o, the Village next to Loreto, where moving up and down a like
while in a round, over an ancient house of our B Lady, they retired straight to
the house of Loreto, from whence they came.

This wounder was seen first by Shephards, and after (as it happened several
times) by infinite multitudes of Persons, who did purposely lie our in the
night, to see these flames. This admirable spectacle lasted almost all the
night long, when once it did begin to show it self.

That they were no vain sights, the Miracles presently ensuing, do evidently
prove. For it is constantly reported, that many, which then came ^o visit that
little House, by the gift of God, and his B. Mother, were returned home, cured
of many diseases; whereof some were lame, deaf, ruptured, and Possessed people?

In like sort, in the year after, to wit, 1555. When one of the Fathers of the
Society of Jesus was preaching to the People, in the Church of Loreto, in the
clear day light, certain bright fires, falling down from Heaven, rested upon
the most sacred Chapel in the presence of many People, which presently by
spreading more and more abroad, went above the assembled multitude, and then
presently into Heaven, with great admiration and wounder of all the audience.
Raphaell Riera (a godly and learned Priest of the Society of Jesus) by chance
being present among the multitude, afterward did set down this very thing in
Writing; and much rejoiced (as many others there present did) that God had
vouchsafed them to be worthy, to be witnesses of so great a Miracle. That this
was no wayne sight, the iteration of the same Miracle does testify; for two
years after, when one of the same Fathers (according to to their Custom) was
preaching in the Church, to the Canons, and the assembled Multitude, suddenly
in the top of the Thole, a heavenly flame (like unto a Comet, or blazing
star) was perceived to glitter and shine; which falling down upon the Sacred
Chapel, stood there a little while; then going toward the multitude, made a
grateful show to all the Audience, much admiring so great a Miracle: but by
and by turning its course another way (to wit, toward the Place appointed to
hear Confessions, called the Paenitentiarie) it moved up and down over the
Heads of the Priests, and them that confessed their sins; and finally resting
awhyle over the Image of Christ Crucified (which is religiously worshipped in
the sacred Chapel) it moved again on high, ^eple. nishing their Hearts with
Devotion and Zeal, who had seen that heavenly Vision, with their eyes.

6. About the year 1533. Two Franciscan Capacius, having saluted the B. Virgin
of Loveto, set out of Ancona to sail to Dalmaria. But in the middle of their
voyage, a foul storm arising, thereatned destruction to them all of that
company. Therefore the Master of the Ship provided to disburden the ship of her
weight, and casting the baggage and Merchandise into the Sea, the Capuchins
began to pacify the Wrath of God by Prayer in an angle of the ship. But the
Merchants being mad, either with the grief of their loss, or else stirred with
devilish fury, turned their rage upon the two Capucins, saying to them; Seeing
the storm arose by your default, by your destructions it shall^ assuaged.
Exclayming in this manner, they flew upon these two good Religious Men, and
assaulting these Innocents, apprehended them, and cast them into the Sea. But
the Capucin Pranciscans calling upon the B. Virgin of Loreto (whom they
inuocated, when the storm began) ceased not to cry to her among the Waves. A
wounderfull thing to be spoken, and seen. For by the great goodness of God,
they were houlden up so high, that then breasts did appear all above the
Water, and singing praises to God and his B. Mother, and also lifting up their
hands toward Heaven, they were quietly carried amiddest the violence of the
outrageous Sea; whereby in short time by the guyding and direction of Allmighty
God, they arrived both together at the Haven of Ancona (from whence they did
first set out:) and in their wet garments (as they were) returning speedily to
Loreto, to render due thanks to our Blessed Lady, they prostrated their bodies
on the ground before the sacred Image, and with abundance of tears, gave hearty
thanks to God, and his blessed Mother for their delivery.

Thus far (Mariamastix) touching some few Miracles (among many hundreds)
wrought at Loreto by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God.

I have thought it expedient, to adloyne unto the former this ensuing. And this
I deliver, not in the person of Mariadulus the Interlocutour in this Dialogue,
but in the person of the Author of this Treatise. The party, whom it does
immediately concern, reputes it (at least) most strange. There is a Gentleman
of great years and good place (one of my near acquaintance) from whose mouth
I am able to justify it, as most true. This aged Gentleman was afflicted, with
a certain disease, which commonly increases with the increase of years. He
at diverse times in the day, for certain very short fits (besides the daily
languour thereof) was tormented with pricks of infinite pain; If they should
have continued but for half an hour, or much shorter, they had been unto Man's
nature insufferable. This Gentleman made a secret Vow to our Blessed Lady of
Loreto for the performance of certain daily Prayers unto her, during the space
of one year; and accordingly did send a small V^^ti^^ gift to Loreto;
beseeching her that she would by her intercession bea means to her Son, for
the easing, or taking away only of the sudden raging torment from him (for,
for a full relaxation of all his pain, he did not pray.) At the end of the
year, and some few months after (during all which former time, besides diverse
years before, he was most violently tormented with those sudden and short
gripes) he presently ceased from suffering of any such insufferable p ynes; and
so still continues free from them (one fit thereof only excepted) till this
very day; And how long hereafter, he humbly resignes himself to Gods, and our
Ladies good pleasure. Thus much this old Gentleman entreated me to insert in
this discourse, thereby in part, to acknowledge his thankefulnes to God, and his
Blessed Mother (for to her mediation to her Son, he refers this change in
himself) for the mitigation of such his (though most short) insupportable
colors; plainly confessing, that till this hour he has fully obtained that
particular ease and benefit of bodily Health, for which he in the beginning
made his private Vow to the B Virgin. And thus much of this aged Gentleman.

To these former Miracles of Loreto, it will not be (I hope) impertinent, if I
do set down the Names of certain Popes, Cities, Cardinals, Bishops, Princes,
Dukes, and Duchesses, who have most abundantly enriched the sacred House of
Loreto, with most munificent gifts. And all this in regard of the Honor,
which they bear to the Place; which honor and reverence of theirs was chiefly
grounded upon the consideration of the most stupe^dious Miracles, which they
heard to be daily wrought at that place; and diverse of them wrought upon the
giuers here mentioned.

Well then to begin. The names of the Popes, who sent their Donaryes, were
these following: Clement 7. Clement 8. Gregory 13. Innocentius 8. Julius 2. Leo
10. Martin 5. Paul 2. Paul 3. Pius 2. Pius 4. Sixtus 4. Sixtus 5.

The Cittyes, and Towns, from which donaries were sent to Loreto, are these
following: Puy, a City in France, Arezzo, Ascolo, Bologna, Camerino, Corneta,
Fahriano, Fermo, Lions, Marcerata, Millan, Monte-sancto, Palermo, Pisaurus,
Recanati, Spello, Vico-Varone, Viterbo, Vdine.

The Names of the Cardinals and Bishops, who sent their donaryes to Loreto are
these: Cardinal Ab-Altemps. Card. Alexandrino. C. Arigonio. Card of Augusta.
Card of Austria. Card. Cesio. Card. of Carpa. Card. Columna. C. Cusano. Card.
of Est. Card. Caietan. Card. of Lorayne. Card. of Madruzzo, C. of Mantua. C.
Medices. C. Montino. C. Mont. alto. Card. Paceco. Card. Palmerio. C. Perusino.
C. Riario. Card. Rusticucio. Card. of S. George. Card. of S. Praxedes. Card. of
the scuts Crowned Martyrs. Card. Sfondrato. Card. of Trent. C. Viuerio. Card.
of Vrbin.

The Archbishop of Alto-^ico. The Bishop of Cortona. The B. of Eug^bino. The B.
of Reca^ati.

The Names of the Princes and Noblemen, who have presented Loreto, with their
munificent and bountiful Donaries, are these: The Archduke of Austria.
Ascanius Columna. The Baron of Valcassano. Amadeus, a Nobleman of Sanoy. The
Earl Instus. The Earl Martin^^g^. The Earls of Olinario. The Earl of
Rangeno. The Earl Sfondrato. The Duke of Atria. The Duke of Albania, The Duke
of Banaria. D. of Albania. D. of Fe^r^ra. D. Joy use. D. of Granino. D.
D'Onmale. D. of Mantua. The D. of Millan D. Espernon. D. of Maestriche. D. of
Terra-nona. D. of Sanoy. D. of Sermoneta. D of Vrbin, Do^ John d'Austria.
Laurentius Medices. The Great Prior of Malta. The Duke of Tus^ any. The Marquis
of Aquavina. The Marquis Capursio. The Marq. of ^ito^to. The Marq. of the
Empire. The Marquis of Mantua. The Marq. Lippeo. The Marq. Riano. The Marq.
Roboreo. The Marq. of Tripaldo. The Marq of Guasto. The Prince of Bisinia. The
Prince Stilia^o. The Prince of Mantua. The Prince of Trans^nania. The Prince of
Venusino. The Viceroy of Naples. The King of France.

The Names of the Duchesses, Countesses; and other great Ladies, who have sent
their donaries (of which diverse were Voti^es) to Loreto.

Lelia Farnesta. The Countess of Briatico. The Countess of Palena. The
Countess of Populo. The Duchess of Amalpha. The Duchess of Brunswick. The
Duchosse of Cle^e. The Duchess of Lorayne. The Duchess Montalto. The Duchess
of Niuers. The great Duchess of Tuscany. The Duchess of Parma. Isabella of
Sanoy. Hieronyma Spinula. The Marquess of Est. The Marquess of Mantua. The
Marquess of the Holy Cross. The Marquess of Guasto. Margareta of Austria.
The Princess of Bisinia. The Princess of Castel-veterano. The Princess of
Sulmo. The Princess of Vastalla. The Vice-royes Wife of Bohemia. The
Vice-royes Wife of Naples. The Vice-royes Wife of Abruzzo. The Queen of
France. The Queen of Hungary.

Thus much touching the Names of all these former Worthyes (to pass over in
silence the names of Private Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, and of the Communalty) who
have honored and enriched the House of Loreto, with their most large gifts
and liberalities; And all this, partly in regard, that that House was the
place, where the B. Virgin received the Salutation of the Angel Gabriell,
touching the Incarnation of God: And partly, because it has so pleased his
divine Majesty, to grace that Place with the patration of many yearly
Miracles. Now here I demand, whether it is compatible with any true Judgment,
yea with Common Sense, and Reason, that so many Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Kings, Dukes, Princes, Earls, Queens, Duchesses, Marquesses, should suffer
themselves to be jointly befooled, and wronged, as to believe, and give credit
to any Reports, concerning the working of Miracles at Loreto, but to such, as
are true and undoubted Miracles; seeing they had all means for the full trial
and discussing of them?


Mariamastix. I cannot be induced to repute these Wounders of Loreto, by you
related, for true Miracles: let your Popes, Cardinals, and others by you
recited, believe them, if they will. My reason is, in that the groundwork of
them all seems to be a mere Legend, I mean, the removing of the House,
commonly called, the House of Loreto, three several times in the air, with
such incredible celerity, as that being settled in Nazar^^ in Galiley, it was
transported in one night to Dalmatia and from Dalmatia, in the like shor^^es of
time, into Italy, where it changed its situation twyse, before it came to the
place, where now it remains. What Man of judgment, can give assent to such
incredible Relations? But this is the weakness of Man's Nature, that a dumb
heap of stones and wal^ of Brick, which cannot tell us how, or what, or
whence it is, should thus mock our Credulity; Whereupon Ignorance with Fabulous
discourse strongly beats, and tells us (as is above signified) that the House
was thus carried from place to place in the air, by the help of Angels.


Mariadulus. O do not (Mariamastix) measure the work^ of God with the false
yard of Natural Reason, the accustomed Enemy of faith and devotion. Touching
the several remouals of the house of Loreto, you may be advertised, that they
are warranted with most ancient Tradition from hand to hand even to these our
days. And whereas you thus dispute: The several remoualls of the House of
Lore to are but fabulous; Therefore the Miracles said there to be wrought, are
but mere Impostures: I retort this upon you, thus urging; The Miracles of
Loreto are most true and undoubted Miracles; Therefore certain it is, that
that House, was the House, wherein the B. Virgin received from the Angel
Gabriel, the salutation touching the Redemption of Mankind. That such miracles
have been exhibited at Loreto, is more then eu^dent; since they are
circumstanced with all particularities of Truth: As expressing the Names of the
Persons there cured; the Diseases of which, and the Time when they were cured,
with many witnesses thereof. Again, neither would all the World suffer
themselves to be thus continually deluded, as to have such forgeries (if such
they were) to be obtruded upon them. Lastly it is observed by experience, that
most Pilgrims coming thither, do find during their short stay in that sacred
House, most sudden, wounderfull, and supernatural Rapts, or Motions of
devotion and Piety in themselves; through which strange changes every one of
them may say, Andiam quid loquatur in me Dominus Deus. ( Psalm. 84.)

Now (Mar^^mastix) where it seems, you hold the Relation touching the House
of Loreto, to be more improbable, because it is auerred, it was so often
carried in so short a time from place to place, by the Ministry of the Angels
(as if the Angels were not of force enough to perform the same;) Call to
mind, (and blush at your own diffidency) what is recorded by the Prophet
Daniel ( Dan. 14.) To wit, How one Angel in a most short time, did take up
Aba^^c; and carried him into Babylon, that he might provide dinner for Daniel;
and after recarryed him in the same shortness of time into Palestine. Again,
have you forget, what you read in the Book of the Kings, (4. Reg. 19.) that
one Angel did kill one hundred, eighty, and five thousands of the Assyrians?
So powerful is an Angel in his own Nature. But to leave Loreto, and to touch
upon Sichem, a place in the Low Countries (devoted to our B. Lady) and the
Miracles there done.

Iustus Lipsius (famous for erudition and literature, and one whose Pen would
scorn to record Impostures and Lies, for Truths) did write a little Treatise of
the Miracles of Sich^^: In which Treatise, he sets down betweent forty and
fifty Miracles, wrought at Sichem, not many years since; He particularly
regi^^ring all the Circumstances of each of them, and the approbation of the
Magistrates of them by Witnesses: Yea Lipsius is so assured of the truth of
them, as that speaking of some of there in particular, be thus confiden^ty
faith: Arbitris his Oculis; These mine own eyes are Judges, or Witnesses of
the infallibility of them.

But seeing I have been long in discoursing of the Miracles of Loreto, and that
I presume partly (Mariamastix) that you are soon cloyed with such Relations;
therefore referring you and this Auditory, to Lipsius book, touching the
Miracles of our Lady of Sichem for greater satisfaction, I will content my
self with setting down only one of them, of which a great Part of
Christendom takes notice, as most true and undeniable: It being so fully
acknowledged by multitudes of People, for an irrefragable Verity, as that it is
able even to stop the mouth of Incredulity.


Mari^mastix. What? Have we here a Lady of Loreto, as also a Lady of Sichem,
and both Mothers to Christ? I had never thought til now, that Christ had two
Mothers; into such gross Absurdities, you Papists (through a blind devotion)
do precipitate your selves.


Mariadulus. What fooleryes are these (for I can style them no better) unworthy
to proceed from any Grave, and learned Man. Be ashamed of such words of scorn,
and the rather, since -- Nescit vox missa reuerti. (Horat.) Know therefore,
that the B. Virgin is sometimes called the Lady of Loreto, sometimes the Lady
of Sichem, as also she is so called of diverse other particular Places in
Christendom, where God vouchsafes by her Intercession to work diverse
su^ernaturall and prodigious Acts* But does this prove your ridiculous
Inference? No. Be therefore hereafter agrieued of such your childish and
frivolous deductions. But to come to discourse of that most stupendous, and
astonishing Miracle, exhibited by God at Sichem, through the mediation of the
most B. Mother of God, in the year one thousand six hundred and four.


Mariamastix. Good Mariadulus, pass no further in this your miraculous Scene
(so to term it*) it has no Influence over my Judgment. And truly, where you
have above alleged so many Great Princes and Potentates sacrifizing (as it
were) to the House of Loreto, I hold all those Princes to be understood in the
Revelations, Who have committed f^^^^^ion (...) the great Where, ((...)
p^^^lyp. 17.) and have arunke of the ^^y^e of her Whore a c^^e; I mean
plainly, they are the Members of Antichrist.


Mariadulus. O! do not profane Gods holy Writ by this your most uncharitable,
and most impious detorsion of the Words: Neither cast so foul, and so untrue
an aspersion upon so many famous, glorious, and virtuous Princes; but remember,
that in regard of our due reverence to all such, whom God has placed upon the
pinnacle of Souerainty and domination we read Non est potestusnesi a Deo. ( Romans
13.)

But as I said, I will proceed further, though not for your bettering, for I
fear you are one of those who will not be bettered by this discourse: But that
the Auditor ^where present, may be acquainted with so rare and admirable a
Miracle.

The History here following concerns one John Clement. I will spend the more
time in my Relation thereof, because it is most Notorious, and in ec^ place
diuulged. This John Clement was borne in the City of Lucerna, in Switzerland,
and was of the age of twenty three years, when he was cured. What here
concerns him is literally set down, as I find it in a Translation out of a
French Copy, touching the Miracles of Sichem. This Man Clement, came into the
World, in a very deformed, and imperfect shape, having his Legs wholly fastened
against his Body, and his knees so fastened against his Breast, that none could
so much as put a singar between them, from the time of his birth, till the time
of his Cure. Moreover, his thighs, and the Calves of his legs were fastened
together, and covered over under one flesh and skin, together with his belly
and breast, in so much, that he could not stretch out his legs in any sort. And
as some Germans told him (who had heard it from his Father) his Mother dyed
in travail of him; and she was cut up, and opened, to save the child. He was
carried to many Baths to seek remedy by them, but obtained not any: As also he
was carried to diverse chief. Towns in Holland, and Zeland, where he remained
some years, and where he received six French Crowns for Alms of Count
Maurice, and some siluer^ of the Count of Hollack, they pitying his monstrous
shape and deformity. He at last was brought to Brussells, where he made his
stay. All this while, when he went in the streets, he did ever go upon his
hands, and two little Styles of wood, of a hands breadth, or half a foot in
height, touching only the earth with the top of his feet, which did hang before
his body, and they were very little, and his Legs not three inches thick under
his knees. And after this sort had he gone all the days of his lyse.

He being then at Brusselles (as is said) did maintain himself upon Alms,
and cutting of little wooden Crosses, and toothpyks, which he sold. His limes
still remained in the same monstruousnes and deformity, as they were at the
beginning; he ^reeping on his hands and little stiks upon the ground (as has
been said.) He did sit daily at the foot of the stayres, which asce^d up to
the Princes Palace; where for many years to gether thousands, and thousands
of People have scene and known him in the aforesaid miserable plight, and have
assisted him with their Alms as they passed by. At the last in the year one
thousand six hundred and one, certain Persons of the said City moved with
pity and compassion found means to have hi^^ learn the Art of Paynting, that
therewith in time to come he might gain his living, who also procured, that he
should have in certain houses every day a meals meat. Now having been some
two years and a half in the house of ^ne Vander Meren, a Painter, to ^earne
that Art; and hearing often of the Miracles recorded, which by the Intercession
of the Glorious Mother of God, were wrought at Mon^^ig^e near to Sichem, he
had a desire to go likewise thither in Pilgrimage, and to offer up his prayers
to the Virgin Mary, that she would procure him the cure of his body, or at
leastwyse that he might go with two crutches.

About some two Months before he took his journey, lying at that time in the
Prince of Orange his stable, twyce in one night (either in Vision, or in
sleep) he thought he had been at Montaigue near Sichem, and that he could
have stood upon his feet, which did breed in him a greater desire and devotion
to go thither, then before. So asking leave of hi^ Master, he was at last
carried (though with great difficulties) in Wagons, laden with Merchandise to
the Chapel of our Lady at Montaigne, where he heard two or three Masses. That
done, he after went to Confession, and communicated. And about an hour after
he had communicated, he began to feel a sadness and feeblenes at his Heart, and
withal a certain grievous and excessive pain in all the parts of his Body;
and thinking to creep out of the Chapel to take the air, he became much
weaker; whereupon he returned, and remained in Prayer all that day. In the
mean time, his Pain increased continually, until the Evening, after the
Salve: At what time being before the Altar at his devotions, he felt himself
^inuisibly lifted up from the ground, and his legs (which before were fixed and
fastened to his Body, and shrouded within his doublet (...) fell down of
themselves, and violently opened the said doublet, and so he found himself
standing upright upon his feet; whereat he was much astonished, and ceased not
to praise God, and his holy Mother, for the Mercy, which was showed to his
Unworthiness. And as it happened, that he was faint in this alteration, he
fell with his hands against the Altar, but was helped by those, that were
present, and placed in the Confession Seat, whiles they brought him some
apparel. Moreover at the said Instant, the same John Clement was healed of a
wound in his head, which he had gotten some fifteen d^yes before, and was not
cured thereof, till that very time. And all this happened in the Presence of
many Persons, who came from diverse places, and can bear witness of this most
miraculous and unexpected cure.

A little while after the said John Clement was led by two or three Persons (for
he was very weak) unto the Inn, where the night before he had lodged; the
Host thereof being amazed at this most wonderful Event, forthwith did take the
measure of the legs of the said John Clement, and some two hours after he
measured them again; and he found, that between the times of the first and
second measuring, his legs were grown bigger and grosser, by three inches. And
after that time they began to espy o^ his sinews and Veins to appear in his
legs, which were seen there never before. And so leaving his hand-stilts for a
memory in the Chapel, he resolved to stay there for the space of nine days,
going daily to the Chapel, and there hearing divine service: Walking the
first two days with a staff, but the other days following, without either
staff or help. A day or two after the said cure, having gotten a clean shirt,
and looking upon the places; where his legs did hang from his Body, he found,
that the holes and pits, within the which his knees did rest, and hang against
his breast, began to be filled up with flesh; and where his thighs were
fastened, there the color was as red as blood, and it put him to pain at what
time soever he touched ^^t: But after a little time all his pain passed away.

During the time he remained at Montaigue, he was visited by diverse Persons
from Die, a Town were unto Montaigue, who before had seen him going to
Montaigue, so miserably lame and deformed, and now saw him go upright. And
among others, he was twyce visited by Count Frederick Vandeberg, to his great
admiration of so notable a Miracle. Upon the fifteenth of July he returning
back by Wagon to Brusselles, at the entrance of the City he went some part of
the way on foot, until he came to the Church called Conberge, where Te Deum,
was sung, and thanks given to God, for this marvelous work, which it pleased
him to work i^ this Person, by the Intercession of his holy Mother. And upon
the eighteenth of the same Month, this John Clement was present with a white
wax taper in his hand, at the Procession of the Holy Sacrament of Miracles, the
which is yearly made upon that day. And he walked upright before the B.
Sacrament, in the sight of many thousands of People, who at that time were in
the said City of Brussells. Upon the same day, John Clement, being sent for, to
appear before the Archbishop of Macklin, who at that time was in the same
City, all the Contents of this passage were read unto him, the which under a
solemn Oath, the said John Clement affirmed to be true, in the Presence of the
same Archbishop, and of diverse others of worth and dignity.

And upon the nine and twentieth day of the same Month of July, the said John
Clement appeared before the whole Court of the Magistrates of Brusselles, where
in presence of the Burg^^aicters, Eschenins, R^^^^ners, and Council of the
said City (collegially assembled) he avouched again (under solemn Oath) all
that we have here related, the same having been once more read to him by the
Secretary. Upon the same day there appeared before this Assembly one M. William
de Coninke, an inhabitant of the City of Brusselles, and Practisioner in
Physic and Surgerie, who declared, under the like oath, that some three
years and a half past before, he (out of giving himself satisfaction)
searched the body of the said John Clement, vnbuttoning his doublet; and did
find, that his legs (which were very little) did hang against his Body, and that
his knees were thurst and made fast against his breast: He saw moreover (for
that he had curiously searched him with his hands) that his Thighs, and Calves
of his legs did grow all under one flesh and skin together to his belly, and to
the fore part of his body, against the which parts his said thighs were
fastened; and that his feet did hang right down to the ground. Thus much that
Physician deposed in the presence of that general Assembly.

There also appeared the same day, and in the same place, M. Antony Vander
Meren Paynter, who under the like oath declared, that for the space of eight
and twenty Months, the said John Clement had learned under him the art of
Paynting, in which time he had caused him twyce or thrice to open his doublet,
and to show to him his body, thereby to see his defect. And he did find, that
his thighs were fast in one flesh or skin with his body, and that he could not
move his legs, but only could open and separate the one leg a little from the
other, setting or laying them toward the one and the other arm pit; And that
he never went but upon his hands with his two little stiltes of Wood.

At the same time likewise appeared before the said Assembly of those
Magistrates, Michael Hardy Paynter, dwelling in the same City, who under a
solemn oath declared, that he had wrought some time in the house of the said
Antony Vander Meren, with the same John Clement; whom he knew to be so lame
and impotent, that he could not go, but only upon his hands with two little
stilts, and that so are or five times he had been with the said John Clement
at the river to wash themselves, upon which occasion he had seen his naked
body, and well and perfectly marked and considered, that his legs (especially
about his things) were fast, and fastened to his body before, with the same
flesh and skin his legs hanging down his body, even as a Woman's Papps hang
from her Breast, in such sort, as he could never stretch them forth, the which
he had marked diverse times.

Now to conclude, All these Premises, and many more which for breuity I have
omitted, are made most manifest, by the attestations and public Writings, both
of the City of Brussells, subsigned P. Numan Secretary; as also of Louaine,
subsigned R de Prince, Secret, dated respectively upon the 29. of July, and the
second of August, in the year one thousand, six hundred and four, and sealed
with the Seals of the said Cities. And I have been longer ( Mariamastix) in
relating this Miracle, because it is diuulged and made famous through diverse
parts of Christendo me, by reason of the multiplicity of most Countrymen in
Europe, residing in Brusselles, either at the Court, or Camp, even at that
time, when this Miracle was wrought. In the true Narration whereof, each man may
fully see, how cautelous and wary both the Magistrates of Brusselles, and
Louayne, as also the Archbishop of Macklin (by whose order and authority the
forsaid Testimonies were gathered) were to search out every particular point
thereof upon Men's oaths, for fear that any secret slight, or imposture should
be obtruded upon them, for a true Miracle.


Mariamastix. I have here heard a long and tedious tale. I imagine out of
Amadis de Ganle, or some other such Fabulous Book. I say plainly, I do not
believe neither this last recorded Miracle of Clement, not any of your former
for true. For either Clement was not eured at Montaigue, or else he was cured by
enchantment of the Devil, of whom, one Writer says, Curasse dicuntur, cum
desinunt laedcre. (Tertull.) And this answer I briefly give to all the
supposed Miracles by you heretofore related, and so much insisted upon.


Mariadulus. I greatly commiserate ( Mariamastia) the state of your Soul in
descending to such poor and needy Euasions. I will begin with the first branch
of our Answer. And First, if you will give any credit to History, recording
matter of fact, you cannot but grant, that these few Miracles insisted upon by
me (besides several scores of like Nature, here pretermitted) were truly and
really effected. You give full assent to such ancient Histories and Records,
which relate, How England was four times brought into Subjection by Strangers;
To wit; by the Romans, the Saxons, the Danes, and the Normans, If then you will
believe Holinshead, Stow, or Speed their Relations thereof, being borrowed from
more ancient Authors, why then will you not give the like assent to these
Miracles, and others, registered by Men of Integrity and Virtue; especially
seeing all, or most of them are circumstanced, with the time, places, persons
upon whom they were wrought, witnesses under Oath, not to be excepted against,
and finally with the attestations and Seals of most celebrious Cities?

Secondly, by what pretext of Truth can it be auerred, that these former, and
many others (here not spoken of) were forgeryes? Because (forfooth) they
transcend the settled Course of Nature. But in saying so, you may descruedly be
thought to trench ouer-^eere upon the Atheist (as before I said) who for the
same Reason, rejects all Miracles. But remember the Poets veyled Philosophy,
to wit, that the Chain of Natural Causes and Effects, reaching from Earth to
Heaven, is fastened to Jupiters leg, meaning thereby, that God (who is Natures
Nature) can at his pleasure dissolve and loose the ^^not of Nature, by
himself, being become the immediate cause and Author of super natural Effects.

Thirdly, in condemning all Miracles, you charge diverse Princes,
Co^mon-wealths, Ecclesiastical Prelates, and infinite mul^itudes of People
with extreme simplicity, yea Lunacy, in suffering forgeries to be put upon them
for Truths.

Lastly, if the said Miracles were but invented, and not really wrought; Why
then did not diverse, for example, living at Loreto, or in the Low Countries,
(being stored with Protestants) take exception against them? Or why is not
Lipsius his Treatise of the Miracles of Sicheus, or Moutaigue refuted as false,
and but coined? And yet no such opposition against the said Miracles (so far
forth, as I know) has been undertaken by any Man, though never so maleuolent
against the B. Virgin, or our Catholic Faith.

Now to come to the second Part of your former Tergiuersation, which consists
in granring, that perhaps the former reported Miracles were truly and really
wrought; but wrought only by the Ministry and endeavor of the Devil, and
Necromancy. To this, I First reply, that in ascribing these, and the like
Miracles to the Devil, you partake therein with the Jews, condemning the
Miracles of our Savior in these words: Hic non eijcit daemonia, misi in
Belsebub principe daemoniorum. ( Matthew. 12.)

Secondly, the prestigious and seeming Works of the Devil in this kind, are
ever done to some vain and pernicious end, and not for the good of the
particular Person, upon whom they are wrought, as the Miracles above recounted
are; as to give fight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, strength and agility
of body, to the lame and impotent, and the like.

Lastly, if the Devil be able to effect such stupendous works, how chances
it, that he would never concur with condemned, and on all sides acknowledged
Miscreants or Heretics, in seeking to strengthen, and countenance their I.
resies thereby? I mean Simon Magus, Porphiry, Julian the Apostata, Mah^met,
Triniturians, Anabaptists, and other Sects, condemned even by the Protestants
for most erroncous; seeing the accomplishing of any such strange Events, would
have greatly grated the former men's Infidelity, or Heresies, and would much
have confirmed the Professors of them still to con^inue in their state of
Misore ancy, or Heresy; which would much have aduantaged and enlurged the
kingdom of the Devil. And with this ( Mariamastix) I do close up this
passage, touching the Truth of the former alleged Miracles; In difcoursing
whereof, if I have been over lo^^, I hope this Worthy Assembly will pardon me,
sine^ my prolixity herein is directed to their (I could with, I might also say
to yours) good, and benefit.


Mariamastix. You do but obtund and wearirisomly beat my ears, with these
your cloying Words. I say to you once more, (if that will satisfy) I let the
regard these your Wounders; neither do I (or ever will) take them for any true
Miracles. And I do assure you) that I am persuaded, that my It is certain,
that some Ministers in England have in their discourses equalled in worth,
their own vviues, with out B. Lady.
Wife (you see, I am not ashamed of my Ministerial Character) is as good a
Woman as Mary, and can work as many Miracles, as ever she wrought, or caused
by her Prayers to be wrought: For she never by either means wrought any.


Mariadulus. Your Wife? o the impiety of these days! And sweet Jesus, what
pain is it to a true Christian ear, to hear thy dear Mother thus
opprobriously traduced, by such Men, who s^it nothing, but Malice against her?
And therefore seeing, it is a kind of Passion, to be void of Passion, pardon
you (my Auditors) this my warrantable Anger; for Anger upon this Occasion i^
but Zeal of Religion, and the want thereof, want of mature Apprehension: Shame
then, and Confusion be to all such Sectaries, who compare, or equal their own^
yoake-fellowes (being otherwise but base, ignoble, and sinful Wom^n) with the
Mother of God and Queen of Heaven. And you (Mariamastix* be afraid of thus
blaspheming against this sacred Virgin. And because I wish you, and all other
Sectaries well, in the bowels of Christian Charity, I will relate unto you (for
your own instruction, and for the preventing of the like chastisements) the
punishments and just revenge, which God has inflicted upon some Men, for their
like ^onuic^^ting and dishonor, committed against his Immaculate Mother.

The first example shall be of one recorded by Saint Damas^^ne, and Metaphrasict;
to wit, ^f a wicked Man, who when the ^ead Body of the B. Virgin was ^arried
upon a Bear to be bu^ied, did stretch out his arm, with intent to have cast
the Body to the Ground; But before ^etouched the same, his arm was suddenly
dried up, and withered; who after repenting his intended wickedness, was made
whole.

Another example is related in Prato spirituali, c. 47. of a^ Man, called
Gaianus, who several times blaspheming against the B. Virgin, had in his sleep
his hands and feet miraculously cut of from the rest of his body.

The third example (to omit diverse such others) happened at Loreto, forty
years since. When two or three men, having gotten means in the night time, to
open the doors where all the Treasure of the B. Virgin did lie; and having a
good part thereof put up together, labored to go out of the Chapel; when they
came to the chief door; being open, to carry away the Treasure, Behold they
saw i^ Company of armed Men (supposed to be a multitude of Heavenly Spirits)
there standing to watch the Treasure of the Lady of Loreto; this fear and
fight of the armed men appeared to them the second time, when they attempted to
go out of the Chapel. In the end, they were forced through the fear of this
sight, to stay within the doors, till it was day; at what time certain
Officers of the House coming to the Chapel (the armed men being vanished
away) the thieves were apprehended by the said Officers; and the Offenders
confessing their fault and intention, were presently executed, as we may read
in the History of Loreto, written by Horatius Turcellinus. l. 3. c. 31.

Thus (Mariamastix) you see, what did befall unto those former Wretches for
their Impietyes, perpetrated against the Mother of God: Whose Examples may well
serve for a wholesome document, to you, and all others, to forbear to
conuiciate the B. Virgin with blasphemous words and reproaches; for fear that
sentence of the Prophet be verifyed in you: In verticem ipsius iniquitas cius
descendet: His iniquity shall fall, or turn upon his own Head. ( Psalm. 7.)


Mariamastix. I account these your three Relations of Revenge touching Mary, as
true Miracles as the former which you above alleged; I mean, that all of them
are but Impostures, Lies, and Deceyts. But to pass on further: You are not
content only to believe these frivolous Reports, touching your imaginary
Miracles, wrough at Loreto, Sich^m, and other such Places, by the intercession
of Mary; But your Credulity reaches so far, as that (like men, void of all
reason and judgment) you can be content to make Pilgrimages to such Places, as
also to make Vows unto Mary. O that man should be thus blynd-foulded with
superstition, yea Idolatry; since Vows are to be made only to God: Vota
vouebunt Domino, and soluent. ( Isa. 19.)


Mariadulus. True it is, that Catholics go on pilgrimage to those ^oly places
of the B. Virgin, as also do make Vows unto her. Now here I say, first, Vf
there were no other apparent Authority to warrant all this; yet the fortunate
and most happy Events for the most part, I mean, the obtaining the Ends, for
which Pilgrimages and Vows are made to her, is of force to justify the
lawfullnes of them; Since certain it is, that God would not grant men's desires
sought by unlawful Means.

Secondly, I answer with S. Thomas (2.2. quaest. 88. Art. 5.) to that place of
Scripture, touching Vows; that you are to understand, that Vows made to the
B. Virgin, or any other Saint, contain in themselves a double Promise; The
one, to the Saint to whom it is made; But this is not formally a Vow, but only
the matter of a Vow; The second Promise is that which is made to God, which is
formally and really a Vow. For Example, I ^ow to our Blessed Lady, to go on
Pilgrimage to Loreto: Here I promise to the B. Virgin this Perigrination, but
this my Promise is not any Vow. And withal I promise to God, that I will
accomplish this my Promise made to the B. Virgin; and this second Promise to
God is truly and formally a Vow. Thus (Mariamastix) you see, that in such
Vows, we properly and truly vow to God, and not to our B. Lady.

Thirdly, I say, if it be lawful to make Pilgrimages to the holy places of
other Saints, or to vow. in a secondary acceptance of a Vow, to other Sain^s;
then by the same Reason we may lawfully make Pilgrimages to Loreto, or to any
other place devoted to the B. Virgin, or make a Vow; to Her. That both these
are lawful, appears from the great. Antiquity both of Pilgrimages and Vows.
And first, touching Pilgrimages, Osiander ( in Epitom. Cent. 4. page 393.) and
the Centurists ( Cent. 4. col. 457.) do confess, that in the fourth Age,
Pilgrimages were made to such places, where the Relics of Saints were kept.
And the said Centurists do further thus write of the days of Constantine
(Cent. ^bi supra.) Under Constantine, in that age, were Pilgrimages made to
Jerusalem.

Now touching the like Antiquity of Vows: We find Eas^bius, speaking of the
Martyrs in the name of all Christians, thus to write, ( l. 13. in praeparat.
Eaang. c. 7.) Nos vero pietatis milites etc. We coming to the Monuments of the
Martyrs, do honor them as the true soldiers of Piety, and friends of God:
Vota illis facinius etc. and we do make vows to them, at to holy men, through
who^e intercession to God, we profess, we are much helped. Thus Eusebius.

Theodoret, after he had declared, that diverse things are demanded of the
Martyrs, thus subioyneth ( l. 8 ad Graecos.) Pie fideliterque precatos etc. Men
praying piously and confidently to the Martyrs, do obtain those things which
they desire; and that it is so, restantur illa, quae Votorum rei persol^^unt,
those things do be are witness, which those, who have made the Vows, do
perform: for some of them do leave, or hang up golden or silver Jmages of
their Eyes, or Hands, or Feet etc.

To conclude, Prudentius telling how the Common People dwelling near, did use
to visit the place, where Hemiterius and Chelidonius were martyred, thus says:
(in hymno de SS. Hemiterio and Chelidonio.)

-- Incolae
Confrequentant obseruantes,
Voce, Votis, Munere.
The inhabitants there, did observe, or reverence their Martyrdomes, with
Prayers, Vows, and gifts.

Thus far (Mariamastix) in warrant of Pilgrimages and Vows; concluding, that
if it be lawful to go on Pilgrimage to the holy places of other Saints, and to
make Vows unto them; Then by the same Reason, it is also lawful to perform
both these two Acts of Religion to her, who is the Mother of God, and Queen of
Heaven.


Mariamastix. I neither approve your intentionall and
Metaphysicall-distinction, touching the diversity of Promises in Vows; neither
do I allow of the Authorities of those Fathers produced by you for the
Antiquity of Pilgrimages and Vows; for I hold them all to be superstitious
therein. But to proceed further touching Mary the Papists great sanctuary; I
observe, how all of you in naming her, do commonly give to her the Title of
Virgin. Now (Mariadulus) I will not absolutely deny, that she continued a
Virgin; yet I must needs say, that there are some Passages of Scripture, which
by implication and secret Inference, may seem to prove, that she did not ever
remain in her Virginal state. And therefore diverse of us are not to be much
blamed, if we suffer at so metymes a certain fluctuation of belief, touching
the Certainty of this Point. For what answer do you make to that Text of
Scripture: Et non cognoscebat came, donec peperit filium, Primogenitum. ( Matt.
1.) Which words scome to afford a double Argument, for the proof of Mary's not
continuing a Virgin. The first is taken from the Word, Donec, inferring from
thence, that after the Birth of her Son, she should carnally know Joseph. The
second from the other words following, Filiu^ Primogenitum. For the Word
Primogenitus, signifies properly that Son, which is first borne, in
reverence to those Sons, or Children which are after borne. Now (Mariadulus)
you may, if you can, explicate this thorny and difficult place, which seems to
make much against Mary's perpetual Virginity.


Mariadulus. O the Heathenisnesse of these days, so great an Enemy to Chastity
I Are any Christians ^riued to that ascent of Impiety, as to charge (at least
to doubt thereof) the Mother of God with want of inviolable Chastity? And are
they so ready to press the Written Word, to the dishonouring of the Mother of
him, who is the Eternal Word? O you Heavens be astonished at this, be afraid,
and utterly confounded. ( Ierem. 2.)

For we find Peter Martyr ( de Eucharist. and votis. col. 1609.) thus to
reprehend S. Austin herein: Austine in his book of Holy Virginity, believed
that B. Mary vowed Virginity etc. Which all easily know, how absurd it is. And
D. F^lke ( against the Rhemish Testament: in Luc. c. 1.) also ascribes to S.
Austin the former supposed Error, saying: S. Austin gathered, that the
(meaning the B. Virgin) vowed Chastity, yet i^ follows not. Thus did these
two innouatours (with whom it seems, you associate your self herein, suck
this poison from Ioninian, Heluidius, and such other anathematized Heretics.
Blush you not at these your. Progenitors? But to remove this stumbling block,
and to explicate, and unfold at large this your Text.

And first, touching the Word, Donec; I say, that in the holy Scriptures the
words Donec, and Vsque, do not ever signify an affirmation after the Time
expressed, if a Negation did go before; Neither always do they signify a
Negation; when an Affirmation did p^ecede, a^ S. Jerome (aduers. H^luidium.)
and S. Chrysostom (in hunc locum*) do well observe in these Texts of Scripture
here alleged, Ece^, Ego vobiscum s^m, ^^sque ad consumutatio^^^ M^rdi ( Math,
28.) Behold, I am with you until the consummation, or end of the World. Which
Sentence implies not, that Christ would not be with them, after the ending of
the World; but much more then to be present with his Apostles and Disciples.
Again ( Psalm. 109.) Sede a dextris meis, donec ponam I nimicos tuos,
scabellum pedum tuorum. Sit at my right hand, until I make thy Enemies, thy
footstool. Now these words do not import, that after he shall not fit at his
right hand. To conclude, that other Text, Donec transeat Caelum and Terra. Iota
vnum, aut vnus, Apex non praeteribit a ^ege. Till Heaven and Earth do pass,
one Jote, or Tittle shall not escape, shows not, that after Heaven and Earth
shall pass, any jo^e or tittle of the Law shall pass. Thus the Conclusion is,
that in all these locutions and sentences of Scripture, that which is doubtful
is expressed, but that which is certain is not expressed, or spoken of.


Mariamastix. Well. Let this your Conference of several Texts of Scripture,
touching the explication of the former Words by me urged, pass for the time,
as a poor answer: Yet what can you say to that other parcel of my former
Text, where mention is made of, Filius suus Primogenitus? Where (as I objected
before) the word Primogenitus, signifying the First Borne, seems to imply,
that some younger Son was borne by Mary after; and consequently, that she
vowed not perpetual Chastity.


Mariadulus. Touching this your latter doubt, I say first, that Epiphanius (
Haeres. 78.) auoydeth it in answering, that he denies, That Christ was called
Primogenitut Mariae, The Firstborn of Mary; for the Evangelist says not,
Donec peperit filium, primogenitum suum; but says, Filium suum, Primogenitum;
signifying thereby, that he was the Son of the B. Virgin Mary, but withal
the first begotten Son of God, seeing accordingly, we thus read: ( Colos. 1.)
Ipse namque est Primogenitus omnis Creaturae: He (to wit Christ) was the first
borne of all Creatures.

Now if this Answer shall not seem satisfactory to you, then hear what S.
Jerome (aduersius Heluidium.) writes of this point: He says, That Christ is
called Primogenitus Mariae, the first begotten of Mary; not because the brought
forth any other son after him; but because before him the brought forth no
other Son: For it is the phrase of the Scripture, that those, who are
Vnigeniti, only begotten, are called, Primogeniti, the first begotten; And the
reason of this appellation is, because he who is Vnigenit^s, is necessarily
before all others, that is, no other Son before him was begotten, and
therefore he is Primogenitus. And according to this acceptance of the word,
Primogenitus, we read, that God calls the People of Jsrael ( Exodus 4.)
Primogenitum suum, when as God then had no other. In like sort, God is said to
have stricken omnia Primogenita terrae Aegypti ( Exodus c. 12.) among whom (no
doubt) there were some Vnigeniti. And S. Paul ( Hebr. c. 6.) calls Christ,
Primogenitum Dei, the first begotten of God, for, the Only-begotten of God.

And that you shall perceive (Mariamastix) that my Answer irrepliably takes
away the force of your Argument drawn from that passage, Non cognoui^ virum,
donec peperit filium suum Vnigenitum. (Luc. 1.) I do maintain, that the Bl.
Virgin (before the salutation of the Angel to her) had vowed perpetual
Virginity. That she had so vowed, I prove from her Answer to the Angel. For
when the Angel had said to her: Ecce concipies, and paries filium: Behold
thou shall conceive, and bring forth a Son; The Virgin thus answered: Quomodo
fiatistud, quoniam virum non cognosco? how can this be, seeing I know not Man?
Where the word, I know not, does not signify the act it self (as then) of
knowing Man: since it is not to be doubted, but that the Blessed Virgin, when
she gave this answer, did not know any Man: but it signifies only a custom
of not knowing Man; As when one having a loathing to some particular meats,
says; I eat not such, or such meats, he means not hereby, that he eats
not them at that time, as he then speaks; but he means, that he is not
accustomed to eat of such meats at all. Thus we find the Disciples of John to
say: ( Math. c. 9.) Why do we, and the Pharisees fast and thy Disciples fast
not? That is, why are we accustomed to fast, and thy Disciples are not
accustomed to fast?

Neither does this word, Cognosco in the former Answer of the Virgin, signify
only a custom of not doing a thing; but a custom joined with a kind of
Impotency; As if our Lady should have said, How can this be, seeing I am neither
accustomed to know Man, nor can know Man? This is evident, for if only the
custom had been signified in the foresaid Words, the Angel might presently
have replied; Yet, know now Man, and thou shall conceive him whom I said thou
shall conceive. Thus we prove, that in our Lady there was an impotency of not
knowing Man. This Impotency was not natural, through any defect of her body,
since at that time, she was for years mariageable, and was really married: It
was therefore a moral Impotency in her; by the which moral impopotency a Man
is said, that he cannot do that, the which it is not lawful for him to do.
Now, every such moral Jmpotency is occasioned, either through the force of
some Law, or precept, or else of Religion of some precedent Vow made. But this
moral Impotency in the B. Virgi^ could not proceed from any Law or Precept,
since their wa^ no Law or Precept, prohibitin^ her to accompany her Husband*
therefore it clearly follows that in her Answer to the Angel, was
signified a moral Impotency in her, proceeding from her former Vow of
perpetua^^ Chastity and Virginity. And according to this delivered by me, we
find many of the Fathers to teach, that our Blesse^ Lady had made a religious
vow of Perpetual Virginity, before the Angel came to her; To wit, Gregory
Nyssene, (Orat. de Santiss. Christi Natiuitate.) S. Austin, lib. de sancta
Virginitat. c. 4.) S. Bid (in Homil. in illa verba: Missus est Angelus.) S.
Bernard, ( in Sermon. in illa verba Apocalyp. 12. Signum magnum apparuit.) S.
Anselme. ( lib. de Excellent. B. Virg. c. 4.) Rupertus, (l. 3. Comment. in
Cant.) and others. Yea it is most credible, that she made the Vow of Virginity,
rather before, then after she was espoused to Joseph; since the mind of a godly
and zealous Christian would have a horror to think, that the B. Virgin should
expose her Body at any time, to the danger of being corrupted and defiled; the
which she had done, if she had not obliged herself before by Vow, to the
contrary.


Mariamastix. Howsoever it may be thought, that Mary vowed Virginity; yet I
cannot be persuaded, that her Vow was made, before she was espowsed to Joseph:
for then how do you avoid the Reason of M. Calvin (in his Harmonia.) alleged
against this your Opinion, saying: Nonfuit passura Virgo etc. The Virgin did
not suffer herself to be married to Joseph, thereby to deceive him: And
certainly it would have been a persidy in her, deserving great reprehension,
if ^he should thus contemn the duty of Marriadge; and this not without even
mocking of God. Thus does Calvin write hereof, to whose grave judgment I must
fully subscribe.


Mariadulus. Animalis Homo non percipit (...), quae su^t spiritus Dei. (1. Cor.
2.) as I said before. Your conceyt here (Mariamastix) is over carnal and
sensual; And therefore both Calvin, and you, are greatly deceived, who do
think, that all those do contemn and wrong the state of Matrimony, who do not
use the act, or duty of Marriage. For whereas S. Paul calls Marriage, Holy (1.
Cor. 7.) yet withal he thought it convenient, that Man and Wife should
abstain from mutual rendering the due of Marriage, for the more exercise of
Prayer; yet will you say, that the Apostle in this his admonition, contemned
Marriage? Therefore the B. Virgin did not contemn the due of Marriage; but did
make choice of the better part, which should not be taken from Her. ( Luc. 10.)
Neither did she deceive her Husband S. Joseph, whom she before the marriage had
acquainted with her Vow; And he giving full allowance thereof, did after
espouse her. It is lawful for an impotent Man in body, to marry a woman,
acquainting her before the Marriage with his impotency, and she allowing
thereof, even as our Adversaries do grant; Therefore shall it not be lawful for
a Woman, making a solemn vow of Perpetual Virginity for Religion, to marry a
man, he knowing thereof before, and consenting thereto? To conclude, it is
lawful for both the Parties married presently thereupon without co^summation of
Marriage, with mutual consent to abstain for ever from the use or duty of
Marriage; And shall it then not be lawful (with the same condition before
Marriage) to contract Matrimony? Thus much touching the B. Virgin her vowing of
perpetual Virginity. But persevere further (Mariamastix) to some other
discourse.


Mariamastix. I see (Mariadulus) you are a great Advocate of Mary, pleading her
Cause to the fullest, by your conferring several Texts of Scripture for your
Purpose. But be it so. Belike, you expect a good Fee from her for your Pains.
But what say you to that Place, where Christ calls Mary, by the respectlesse
name only of Woman; not so much as there intimating her to be his Mother? You
see, he was far from ascribing unto her those high swelling Titles of praise,
which you Papists do daily attribute unto her.


Mariadulus. It seems (Mariamastix) you will leave no corner unsearched
against our B. Lady. Where you style me, Her Advocate, I will not assume that
Title to me, as being most unworthy thereof: Only I acknowledge my self to be
her poor Vassal, and Servant; hoping, that out of her own most pitiful
commiseration, she will vouchsafe me her help, by her intercession to her dear
Son at all times, but especially in the last hour of my dissolution of Body.
Now to the place by you alleged ( John 2.) The occasion of Christ speaking
these Words, Quid mihi and tibi mulier? What is it to me and thee, Woman? my
hour comes not yet, was, that at a Marriage in Cana (whereat Christ and his
B. Mother were present) there was want of wine; thereupon the B. Virgin
aduertizing Christ thereof, vertually desired him to procure some Wine by way
of Miracle; To which implicit request of hers, Christ uttered the former
Words, Quid mihi and tibi mulier? Nondum venit hora mea. Which words, though
perhaps in a sinister construction, might carry some show of his reprehending
the B. Virgin; yet Christ did not at all reprehend her therein. Therefore the
common Opinion of Origin, (in Graeca Catena.) of Austin, ( l. de fide and Symb.
c. 4.) of Gregory ( l. 8. Regist. c. 42.) of Gaudentius ( in tract. 9. de
sectionib. Euangel.) of S. Bid (in Comment. huius loci.) and others, is, That
Christ as God did speak these former Words to his Mother; because in respect
only, as he was God, he did work Miracles; And therefore he would perhaps
under a little show of some reprehension, make manifest, that he, not as Man
(that is, as he is the Son of a Woman) but as God, was to work Miracles; in
which respect as having no necessary intercourse with his Mother, he might well
say, Quid mihi and tibi Mulier? Yet from hence it does not follow, that he had
no respect of his Mother in working that Miracle; for he then had, and even to
this day has, seeing it is certain, that he not only worked a Miracle then,
touching Wine, but also works daily Miracles at her impetration and Prayers;
but this as God, not as Man; in respect of Charity, not of humane Affection.
And therefore it more clearly appears, why Christ did call the Virgin Mary
in this place, not Mother, but Woman; To wit, thereby to take away all
suspicion of working Miracles, as Man, out of a humane affection, but as God.

Now, to that which Christ said upon the Cross ( John. 19.) Mulier, ecee
filius tuus: Woman, behold thy Son (which place I much wonder not to be
produced by you (Mariamastix) being so luxuriant in your allegations against
the B. Virgin;) I do answer, that Christ called her Woman, not Mother, to
intimate that she was as a Widow, forsaken of the whole World: or as some
others do think, He forbear to call her Mother at that instant, in that he
would not increase her grief and dolor, by using the affectionate and sweet
Name of a Mother. Thus far of Christ's calling the Blessed Virgin, by the name
of Woman, not Mother.


Mariamastix. Well, Mariadulus, I see no Truth is so illustrious and clear,
but, for the time till more precise exammation be made, you will over cloud it
with a mist of sophisticated, and subtle Euasions, as appears by your
answers to all my former demonstrations* Therefore seeing the day is far spent,
it is high time to impose an end to this our disputation. What either of us
have effected herein, I leave to the Indifferency of these worthy Auditors.
Only before I end, I will close your Mouth with one Argument, which without
accession of any other, is able to prostrate and lay level to the ground the
whole Systema of all your former large discourse, touching the Veneration and
Worship given by you Papists to Mary: So one impetuous blast of Wynd over
turns in a Moment, what was long before in working.

My Argument is this. This your Paradox, concerning the Honor done by you to
Mary, is borrowed from certain ancient Heretics, called Collyridians: which
Collyridians worshipped Mary, as Epiphanius (an Orthodoxall Father) relates (
haer. 79.) and therein reprehendeth them; registring them for such their so
doing, in the Catalogue of Heretics. It is held a blemish for a Christian to
be descended from a Jew, whose Religion was once sacred and holy; What Eternal
reproach then is it to be proseminated in Faith, Belief, and in the practice
thereof, from the loins of the ancient stigmaticall Heretics, whose Religion
therein was never true? What plaster can you (Mariadulus) apply to this your
wound, given you? Will you persevere in giving worship to Mary? Acknowledge then
the old Heretics Collyridians, for your first Instructours therein. Will you
disclay me from them, as from your Grand-maisters? Disclay me then from this
your Heresy, first dogmatized by them. Extricate your self (if you can) out of
this Labyrinth.


Mariadulus. Good Mariamastix, touching the force of this our disputation, we
must leave it to the Censure of these Grave Men on both sides, being the
Hearers thereof. It is not in your power or mine, to command their Judgments:
The strength of our Arguments and Authorities, seconded with the Grace of God,
must only accomplish that.

This I must tell you before we depart, that throughout the whole Progress of
this our discourse, you have been very lauishing in the disgraces of the B.
Virgin ( God forgive your sin therein) your launcing tongue striking over deep
into her Reputation and Honor; when rather is had been your duty (so far
forth, as you could) to eternize her in Praises, who brought him forth, who was
from all Eternity: l^^ Principio crat Verbum, and Verbu^ crat apud Deum. Joan.
1.)

Now touching your Argument, drawn from the Example of the Heretics
Collyridians (so much by you prized) take notice hereby, that we Catholics
cannot brook to have any association with the said ancient Heretics, or any
others. This goodly Argument of yours was first objected by Doct. Su^cliffe,
whose words are these; ( in his challenge p. 131.) The Collyridian^ are
condemned, for worshipping the Virgin Mary; from whose pen, it seems you
borrow this Objection. Now for the trial, how the Heresy of the Collyridians
can be applied to the Catholics, let us recur to Epiphanius his own Words, and
then I hope, your Checkes (Mariamastix) will witness your dislike of your
foresaid Brothers proceeding therein. Epiphanius speaking of these Heretics
thus writes: ( haeres. 79.) Hi, qui hoc docent, qui sunt praeterquam Mulieres?
Who are they, that teach this, but only Women? Thus this Sect confisted only of
Women, who professed the same.

Again, Epiphanius in the same place thus further discourses thereof: Cellam
q^adra^am ^rnantes etc. panem propouunt, and offerunt in nomine Mariae. They
adorning a square table, did set bread thereon, and offer it up, in the name of
Mary; as though she were a God, and Woman-Priest. And therefore Epiphanius in
dislike hereof thus further says: Deo ab^terno nulla Mulier sacrificanite
Never did any Woman sacrifice unto God. And yet more: Neque Deus est Maria, and
nemo in nomi^e eins offerat. Neither is Mary a God, and let noman offer, or
sacrifize in her Name; And yet Epiphanius there says, Mariaest Sancta, and
Honorata. Now what does this Example concern us? Are the Women among us
Priests, or do they offer up Sacrifice? Or do any of us Catholics sacrifize to
B. Mary, or repute her a God, or Goddess? So impertinently and ^^properly
(...) he Heresy of the Collyridian^ ascribed, by your self and D. Sutclifie,
unto the Catholic.

Thus far hereof. And indeed (Mariamastix) to speak plainly, most certain it
is, that not any Arguments heretofore by you alleged, against the Honor of
the inremerate Mother of God, are able to win ground upon the judgment of any
man either of learning or piety; But that the force of them do (for the most
part) recoyle back to your greater disadvantage, and larger increase (at lest
in our eyes) of her. Honor. For have you not often observed (Mariamastix) ho^
the impetuous waves of the Sea* tending toward a Rock, and threarning with
their Violence even to tear it in pieces; and yet the event it, that their
own forces are broken upon the ^ome Rock, and so they finally loose their
strength, and vanish to nothing? The Queen of Heaven is a spiritual Rock,
against which you and other Sectaries in these our stormy and rugged days, do
labor to beat with the stream of your Philippicks, and Satyrs, as with so
many floods or inundations: And yet in the close of all, the vigor of this
your and their malignity is wholly crushed upon this Celestial Rock* so this
course becoming most displeasing to God, and exitiall to your own Souls: and
the Sacred Virgin, as betrampling upon your unworthy molitions and attempt^,
does thereby more and more show herself to be, Maria Triumphans.


Mariamastix. I grant, I was partly mistaken in this of the Collyridians, (...)
relying therein upon the affia^ce of the aforenamed Doctor. Nevertheless
there is great disparity between your Judgment and mine; for I rest
acertayned, that the Arguments by me drawn out, do wholly overthrow the Honor,
given by you Papists, to Mary; since they have not received any satisfying and
irreplyable Answers, or Solutions from you. And therefore concerning my self,
I would have you and all this Company, to rest assured, that all the
Authorities and other Reasons by you insisted upon, are not able to beat me of
my former Station of Faith. No* The fort of Truth is inexpugnable. But now
(Mariadulus) since I see my own Arguments have no Influence over you, nor
yours over me; and seeing that the Night draws on, I, and the Company brought
with me do give you our last farewell. So we will part friends to one another
Soul; but Adversaries to one another Faith and Religion.


Mariadulus. I much grieve, that you are resolved (with such a strong bent of
Will) to continue in this your peruersity of Judgment, (pardon me, for I can
call it no better) against Her, who gave life to him, who first gave life to us
all. And I will pray to Almighty (God in whose hands each Man's heart is) yea even
to Her whom you so much malign, to mediate to her Blessed Son, for the
mollifying and suppleing of this your stony-hart against her, that it may
become Cor curneum. ( Ezech. c. 11.) As also* I will pray for your final
Salvation; and with this I bid you, and your Worthy Company Adieu.


Mariamastix. I thank you for your charitable Intention toward me, though I
confess I put small Confidence in your Prayers. But howsoever, once more I
take my leave of you.


Mariadulus. Farewell Mariamastix, with all your Associates, and Followers
here present.

Well now, my Catholic Auditors, and Friends, Mariamastix (you see) with his
Company has left us. What has been our Disputation, touching my endeavor to
rescue and free (so far as in me lies) the Majesty and Honor of the B.
Virgin, from the slanderous calumnies and deprauations of her Enemies, you have
(I hope to your profit) heard. You may (if you will) draw a wholesome lesson
from the deportment and carriage of Mariamastix; My meaning is, you may learn
thereby, that a Man once rejecting the authority of Gods Universal Church, how
ready he is to precipitate and cast himself head long into the Abysmall, and
bottomless gulf of Errors and Blasphemies. For do you not observe, how
diverse Sectaries of this Age (I mean, the fiery Puritanes) do even with united
forces, and a joint consent, laboureo obliterate and blot out the chief Prints
and Memorialls of Christian Religion* For Her, who brought Christ first into
the World for Man's Redemption, they cannot brook; spurning at her Honor, with
most unchristian Inuectiues; And that, by the which, as by a preordayned
Instrument of God, Christ last left the World (I mean, the Holy Cross, upon
which our Savior shed his most precious blood for man's Salvation) they
contemn as superstitious and Idolatrous. Thus you see, how they act the
Prologue and Epil^g^e of Man's Redemption. And thus much for an Admonition to
your selves.

But now, to turn my thoughts, and words to thee (most Holy Mary) and to
unmask my self of my assumed, Title, or Name of Mariadulus (though I ever
hope to remain to thee a true Mariadulus and to speak in my own Person, the
Author of this short Treatise: Thou who art the Mother of God, so begetting
thy Creator: Genuisti (Natura mirante) tu^m sanctum Genitorem: (in offic. B.
Virg.) Thou, who art the Honor and glory of thy Sex; Who confoundest the Work
of Eua: Thou, who art Beauty it self, both in Soul and body: Pulcra es amica
mea, and Macula non est in te. ( Cant. 4.) Thou, who with thy Son, did
prevent, and hasten the time of thy fruition of Heaven; He by his Asccusion,
thou by thy Assumption: Thou, at whose impetration and prayers, the fastened
knot of Nature (for the good of believing souls) is untied, thy son by thy
solicitation working most astonishing Miracles in that kind. Finally, thou who
art the Ladder of clyming up to Paradise, and the Advocate of all humble,
supplicating Clients: Vouchsafe (most gracious Lady) to lend thy ears to me,
thy poor servant: Be thou unto (...) the Morning star, vshering the near
approach of my Celestial Sun. Procure, that of that main Ocean of Gods
Mercy, one small ri^cle^, or stream may runns toward me, for the washing away
the ordure of all my insi^^s sins, during the whole Course of ^^y wicked life.

Jnterc^^de to our Merciful Father of Heaven, at all times, and is all my
Neces^ities, with thy all obtaining Prayers; but especially i^ my greatest
Extremity and Ag^^y in my last sickness, (I m^^ns) wh^^ I tha^ lie g^sping, and
feighting for br^^th; and when the Dia^^ (...) most accustomed to trouble the
p^^^ la^g^is h^^^g so^^e of a dying Man. Th^^ (O then) most holy and pittif^ll
virgin, say to him in my ^eh^lfe: ^^ant, ^ho^^ soul stend, and M^ns G^^^tly
Enemy; thou sh^^^ not i^^^^ger him in this his deca^ing st^^, with thy wicked
Temptations; Neither shall thou force him to fluctuate, or waver in Faith, Hope
or Charity; He does ancker himself firmly upon my Sons Death and Passion. J
have received him into my Patronage, and will become a supplia^t to my Son,
even until the last minute of his dissolution; that his Soul, after it is
once disuested of its flesh, may presently enjoy the most comfortable and
ineffable Vision of the Blessed Trinity, for all Eternity. To which words, I
poor Wretch, burdened with an old, weak and languishing Body (but more
burdened with the heavy weight of my innumerable offenses) do most humbly,
penitently, and with all due prostration of Soul and Body, beseech thee
(Mother of God) even by the most bitter Passion, and Effusion of the precious
Blood of thy Dear Son Jesus Christ, to say. Amen.


Laus Deo, and B. Virgini Mariae.
FINIS.

