TO THE HIGH, AND MIGHTY, RIGHT VIRTUOUS, AND MOST CHRISTIAN PRINCE, KING
CHARLES, OUR DEAR, AND DRAED SOVEREIGN LORD. BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF
GREAT Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THis is usual, (since natural) that any good earnestly desired, when it is
tyMously offered, is then favorably received. Did Isaak love venisome? that
meat was acceptable to him. Did King David, a valiant warrior 2 Samuel 17. 8
affect victory and renown? a sword in season was most steadable 1 Samuel 21. 9
unto him. Did Solomon delight in policy and stately building? the wise
worke-men, and wood sent from Hiram was welcome unto 2 Chronicles. 2. 13
hi^^. Did Josiah rejoice in holiness and learning? the book of the Law which
was brought to him, 1 King. 22. 10
he heartily heard the same read before him. Did Charles the Great reverence
and regard rare knowledge, Chron. Carrion. lib (...) alii.
all virtuous good counsel and direction? then most worthy Alconius, disciple
to venerable Bede, who well instructed the Emperor both in Divinity and
Philosophy, was ever most lovingly and honorably entertained by his imperial
Majesty: and me thinks certainly, that this of all tended most to his
greatest honor and felicity, because it was spoken of him truly, Carolus
plus cum DEO quam cum hominibus loquitur.

Now this is most sure, (without any contraversie or contradiction) that true
prayer and earnest supplication is an incomprehensible and unspeakable good:
seeing it is 1 Cor. 3.9
Heavenly food for sustentation, a sharp sword for victory and protection,
which will make one GODS blessed building, which will beget all piety and all
happy learning; will bread saving knowledge, and all Heavenly virtues, wise
counsel and good direction, which will undoubtedly bring one to everlasting
glory and salvation.

For as much then your sacred Majesty (GOD be thanked) does delight your
self in the Lord GOD continually, who will give Psalm. 37. 4.
you your hearts desire for his own glory, and does earnestly love, affect,
and use frequently this most holy, honorable, and profitable exercise of prayer
and invocation, which will procure all spiritual and temporal blessings,
happiness eternal, praise and commendation. I therefore most humbly with all
submission, and reverence entreat your most excellent Majesty, to accept
favorably this small treatise, worthy indeed in respect of the matter,
albeit not so in regard of me the weak author, who ever shall most instantly
beseech the Almighty to watch over your Majesty, by his continual and
fatherly providence, which is as a wall of fire round about Zach. 2. 5
you, and to guard you by his mighty Angels, who will keep Psalm. 91.11
you in all your ways, and to give you an happy success in all your
honorable enterprises, and to compass you with his favor, as with a shield:
yea, to vouchsafe grace Psalm. 5.12
and honor here in this earth, with glory and happiness in his Celestial
Kingdom for ever.

From Dysart the 28 of May. 1630. Your Majesty's most humble, obedient, and
loyal servant, WILLIAM NARNE

AD Potentissimum, and Serenis SIMVM PRINCIPEM CAROLVM DEI GRATIA, MAGNAE
BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET Hiberniae Regem illustrissimum. De vi, and praestantia
orationis, Carmen.
ENthea stelliferum penetrans oration Coelum, Iudicis aetherei pergit ad ora tui.
Te columem, clarum, cumulatum laud perenni, Felicem Regem reddit and eximium.
gemma rutilante modo ditabere miro, Durabit firmum nobile stemma domus.
Hoc ense assuesces, tu debellare profanos Armipotens, magni muneris instar
erit.
Hac clavi claudes Orcum reserabis Olympum, Charus eris populo, charior atque
Deo.
Hoe libro doctus mysteria magna Tonantis Addisces, factis magnus, and eloquio.
Hoc curru vectus, trans ignea maenia mundi, Ingrediere locos palmifer
aethereos.
Sereniss. tuae Majest. humillimus, and addictissimus servus, GUIL. NARNE.

AD AMICVM FIDELEM, VIGILANTEM PASTOREM, ET ERVDITVM, GVILIELMVM NARNVM, CARMEN.
ORans exores qui sic ratione peroras:
Non deserta tua est (...) diserta docens.
Hac itur ad superos, infra tollure resticta,
Te monstrante, peto quaeroque pulso, viam.
Profice scribendo, seribas quoque proficiendo,
Scribas vt prosis frairibus atque tibi.
Aliud.

DEsertum nactus, Christi vt praecursor eremum,
Vtrumque at celebrem vos facitote locum.
Aliud.

CIrrha, Helicon, Pindus, Parnassus, Apollo, Aganippe,
Castalij latices, turbaque Pieridum.
Haec me si faciant vatem, divumque Poetam,
Haud caenerem ingenio carmina digna tuo.
Nostra tuo ingenio si non sunt digna beato,
Sat scio sunt genio carmina grata tuo.
IO. MICHAELSONE.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND Worshipful Patrons OF THIS FAMOVS CITY OF
EDINBURGH, DAVID AIKENHEAD, MOST WORTHY LORD PROVEST, James Cochren, William
Reid, Andrew Ensley, Edward Edgar, most just, and faithful Judges.

Joseph Marjoribanks, Dane of Guild, David Mackald Treasurer: And to the whole
Counsel within this flourishing Town of EDINBVRGH, wishes Grace here, and
Glory hereafter, Will. Narne.

SOmetimes, Right worshipful and reverend, coming unto your city, for
performance of some necessary duties of my calling: I did soon and clearly
perceive three most notable, commendable, and worthy virtues, wherewith by the
Almighty ye are truly beautiful and blessed.

First: Pure religion and piety.

Secondly: Affection to your King and sincere loyalty.

Thirdly: A care of your commoun-wealth and country.

Your religion (in whose bosom all other virtues are contained, which is the
belt and bond that unites Religionis gremio omnes virtutes continentur.
Idoneus.
and knitteth the heart to GOD, without the which men have no more to do with
Heaven; and Psalm. 86. 11 Si Relligio tollitur, nulla nobis ratio cum Coelo est.
Lactant. institut lib. 3. c. 10 1 Cor. 15. 19
of all creatures they are most miserable) does most evidently appear by your
frequent resorting to the house of GOD, by your diligent hearing of his holy
Word, by the great respect, and due regard ye have of your faithful Pastors,
and by your holy life and pious conversation, conform to the rule of the LORD
his Commandments; and shortly by your rare charity, in these last and worst
days of this dotting and decaying world, extending it self to the depauperate
and indigent members of the body of CHRIST.

Concerning your due affection to your supreme Sovereign, all who walk upon
your streets may easily observe the same: What earnest desire you have? What
preparation you have made for his Majesty coming into this Realm: And this
is most certain, that you have, and will continue lovingly, and willingly
subject, not for wrath only, but much more for conscience Romans 13. 5
sake, according to Christian duty.

Touching the third: Your W. care for your commoun-wealth is so great and
continual, so manifest and profitable; that it is worthis of admiration,
commendation, and imitation. Herein you need no words of exhortation: for to
all men is known your moderation: Your Philip. 4. 5
light so shines before them, that they may see your good works, Math. 5. 6
and glorify you Father which art in HEAVEN.

For which causes I have presumed to present next to his Majesty, this small
treatise unto your Wisdoms, praying that your succeeding posterity, and all
others of this Kingdom may be earnest followers of your godly virtues, and
diligent imitators of your pious proceadings, for GOD his glory, the welfare of
this Kingdom, the good of your City, your own praise, and eternal salvation
in the LORD JESUS, to whose grace and blessing I commend you for ever.

From Dysart the last of Maij. 1630. Remaining your W. most assured, and
affection at all power in CHRIST. WILLIAM NARNE

TO THE READER.
SOme Writers, both Christian and Heathen, do make mention of Gyges, his
admirable ring August. and Erasmus in adagii. Cicero and valor. Maximus,
affirming, that by virtue thereof, or of the stone therein, he received 3
great commodities, namely: 1. Victory over his enemies, for when he pleased he
became (says they) invisible. 2. He attained to an honorable marriage. 3. He
gained an earthly Kingdom, and so became happy and fortunate. This (in my
judgment) may be but a fable, or a tradition without a sure ground, or
certainty: But thou may persuade thy self, that this is a most certain
truth, a undoubted verity, without all contraversie; that true and earnest
prayer, is a most powerful and precious Pearl, by help and virtue whereof,
thou shall surely save thy Act. 2. 40
self from this naughty, crooked and untoward generation; thou shall subdue
sin and thy own fleshly corruption, thou shall be able Ephesians. 6. 16
to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, and in Romans 8. 37
all things thou shall be more than a Conqueror through him, who has loved
thee from the beginning.

2. Thou shall get CHRIST IEUS the prince of Glory, to be the husband of thy
soul eternally, thou shall be joined in most happy marriage with him,
inseperable and most comfortable, thou shall become a Ephesians. 5. 30
member of his most glorious body.

3. Thou shall gain a Heavenly Kingdom, which cannot be shaken, thou shall
be Revel. 1. 6
made a King unto GOD, and reign with Christ in Heaven, in all glory and
happiness for ever and ever.

I pray thee then to receive courteously, and to possess continually this
Pearl of inestimable worth, and commodity, that thou may receive grace here,
and glory in the life to come: In and through the merits of the LORD JESUS, to
whom with the Father and holy Spirit, be all honor, power, praise and
Dominion, forever and ever Amen.

AD. LECTOREM,
QVI cupis horrendos Erebi vitare caminos,
Deliciis Domini perpetuoque frui.
Hunc lege, perlectum decies imiture libellum,
Vespere, nocte, die cord precando Deum,
Quo duce per Christum vita potiere futura,
Hujus and innumeris tu potiere bonis.
RICHARDUS WRIGHT.

The Table of this Book.
Chap. 1 A Preparation to our confession. Page 1 Chap. 2. A confession of our
sin and iniquity. Page 47 Chap. 3 A preparation to lamentation. Page 80
Chap. 4 A lamentation for our woe and misery. Page 138 Chap. 5 A preparation
before petition. Page 164 Chap. 6 A petition for grace and mercy. Pap. 185
Chap. 7 A description of true prayer. Page 206 Chap. 8. A great sin not to
pray. Page 216 Chap. 9. A grievous punishment not to pray. Page 228 Chap. 10 Of
the good of prayer. Page 251 Chap. 11 Of the difficulty of prayer. Page 305
Chap. 12. Consolations for weak Christians. Page 352 Chap. 13. Of the causes
of prayer. Page 377 Chap. 14. Of the necessity of prayer. Page 390 Chap. 15 Of
the profit of true prayer. Page 401 Chap. 16 Of the dignity of prayer. Page
407 Chap. 17 Of the force of prayer. Page 414 Chap. 18 Of the circumstances of
prayer. page 434 Chap. 19. Of the signs of prayer. Page 450

FINIS.
THE PEARL OF PRAYER, MOST PRETIOVS, AND POWERFVLL.
The first Chapter.
Seeing by the Psalm. 124. 8.
help of the LORD GOD, which made Heaven and Earth, and by the gracious
assistance of his holy Spirit, we are now of purpose to handle that most
worthy and excellent matter, the doctrine of Iam. 5. 16.
fervent and powerful prayer: It is not only expedient and comlie, but also
most profitable and necessare, that every one of us in all humiltie and
sincerity, in John. 4. 24
truth and spirit unfeignedly first confess our sins and iniquity: next
deplore and lament our woeful estate and great misery: and thirdly that we
earnestly beg for grace and mercy. Augustine, Prius requirit Deus confessionem
quam orationem.


But before we come to this confession, we will declare three things, whereof
we must be certainly assured, and thoroughly persuaded, first, that sin and
iniquity cannot be for ever covered: next, of the great good, and profit of
confession: lastly, that there is a right manner thereof, and this will be for
our preparation before confession.

There Luke. 8. 17
is nothing so secreet (says our SAVIOR) but it shall be evident: neither
any thing hid that shall not be known, and come to sight.

Sin then cannot be concealed, In regard of GOD.
but at some time must be disclosed, and that in regard of GOD, of thy
conscience, of Satan, and of the nature thereof, and of other creatures. GOD
himself against whom it is principally Psalm. 51.4.
committed; and who therewith is highly offended, and heavily Sam. 11. 27
displeased, JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Glory, who thereby is Heb. 6.5.
again mocked and crucified: the holy Ghost, that sanctifying Spirit is
therewith Ephesians. 4.^0
grieved, These. 5. 19
quenched and Act. 7.5
resisted; even he who Job. 12.22
discovers the deep places from the darkness, and brings forth the
shadow of death to sight: He will (who sees and knows all things,
reveals wickedness, and Hos. 2.10
discovers lewdenesse, and no man can delyver out Nehem. 3.5
of his hand) show to Nations all filthiness. Again, the conscience cries,
and original sin that therein is written; Of the conscience.
at length that Revel. 20.12
book will be opened, all faults unrepented will be manifested, and the true
testimony thereof, which every one has had in his own custody, can not be
denied.

* Conscientia est codex in qua Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50.
quotidiana peccata conscribuntur.

The conscience (says a father) is a book wherein our daily sins are
written together. An other Ancient compares the conscience to a contentious
woman, chyding oftentimes, and clattering, casting up secreet sins, having no
discretion nor power to conceal things, not to be revealed: Like Samsons
wife, who could not keep secreet that riddle, which he did put forth to the
Philistimes, but Judge 14. 17
told the same to the children of her people.

Like Fulvia a whoorish woman, Salust bello Catilin.
who declared the secreets of her foolish lover Cneius, a noble Roman: he a
dissolute, and luxurious young man.

This conscience is as a thousand Cons^ientia mill reste^.
witnesses to tell the truth, and verity of all our proceedings: and as
Seneca says, O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem, that thou art miserable if
thou contemn this witness.

Moreover Satan, a malicious Math. 4. 3
Tempter, entysing thee to do Satan.
evil; he is a shameless and impudent Revel. 12.10
Accuser, judicially and openly challenging thee, laying thy crime to thy
charge to condemn thee: he who was not ashamed to accuse patient JOB. an Job.
2. 10
upright, and just man, that feaved GOD, and eshewed evil, as an hyrling, or
hypocrite: will he not more boldly accuse others, far inferior in piety, in
sobriety, and in righteousness, who are John 9. 24
borne in sin, and conceived in wickedness? Some rulers and governors full
of envy did accuse Dan. 6. 24
Daniell wrongouslie, where fore they were punished deservedly: But Satan more
full Revel. 12. 12
of wrath and envy, does declare and accuse sinners more earnestly, as
Tertullus an orator ^ppeared against St. Paul, Act. 24. ^.
and accused him vehemently; so the Devil, a more deadly adversare, will stand
up against a sinner seeking his perdition more carefully: For that evil Math.
13.19
one, and envyous, is most unlike a certain other famous orator Demosthenes,
who being commanded by the people to accuse a certain man; he refused so to
do and when the whole multitude did straightly urge him: he arose, and said; ye
shall have me a counselor to you against your will, but not a calumniator,
nor an accuser: Satan is not so; but most promptly and ready, ever willing
for to charge and accuse the LORDS most faithful and conscientious servants.

It is written of one Fimbria, Cicero pro Roscio Amerino, and Stephanus.
a most impudent and audacious accuser; who summond Scaevola to underly the
law, because he did not receive the whole weapon within his whole body,
alb^it it may be thought he was grievously wounded with the point thereof: But
the Devil that malicious deceaver, much more bold and shameless, who durst
presume to accuse the blessed GOD to our first Genes. 3
Parents of envy, and malice; he will be most eager and intentive to cast up in
thy teeth, thy most secreet and filthy sins, to challenge impudently thee
for the same for thy conviction and condemnation.

Besides these, the nature of sin declares plainly, that it cannot Of the
nature of sin.
be kept close and secreet perpetually: For sin is an evil Math. 13. 25
seed or tares sown by the enemy, while men sleept, it will not appear at
the first, but afterward, when the blade will spring up, sin is a debt, which
for a season may be committed and contained, but at length will be devulgate
and craved. That 2 King. 4. 1
son of the Prophet (in the days of Elisha) by all during her lyfetyme, took
order with his creditors, his debt was not so well known, as afterward it was
when he was dead, then his burden better appeared, his wife then a widow was
vexed, by the help of the Prophet she was releeved: So this fearful Math.
6. 12
debt s^nne, for a short season ( I say) may be cunningly obscured, but
afterward will be open and manifest.

Sin 3. is a Tempestuous wind who can hide Proverb. 27 16.
it, it is like oil in the right hand, it utters her self.

Sin 4. is thift or murder which may be done and committed, but will be
punished publicly and exemplarlie, when Hos. 4. 2.
by killing and stearing men break out.

Sin 5. is a fire, which for a space may be covered with ashes, and shortly
will kindle and burn violently, and shall Job. 31. 12
devour to destruction, and shall root out all increase, the smoke whereof
will mount up to HEAVEN as the smoke of Sodom, which Abraham saw.

Sin 6. is as an heavy sickness, or secreet corruption for a time lurking,
but afterward will spre^d, and 2 Timoth. 2. 17.
fret as a Cancer.

It is lastly like a treacherous enemy, who at last will utter his malice and
cruelty, albeit he appeared to be thy compainion, thy Psalm. 55. ^3 and 21.
guide, and thy familiar: his words softer than butter, and more gentle than
oil; yet these will prove swords to kill thee, and to be mortal and malicious
enemies to destroy thee.

And surely Genes. 4. ^.
Cains parricide, and cruelty, and Hebr. 12. 18.
Esawe his profainesse, Pharaoh Exodus 1. 10
his oppression, Saras 1 Samuel 15. 5
covetousness, Hamans hautinesse, Achitophels treason, Iezabels atheism,
Manasses sorcerie, Judas ^is thift, Ananias hypocrisy, Demas worldliness; all
shall be in their own time openly delated, clearly detected, evidently
published, and seveerely punished.

Finally other creatures will discover Many creatures do utter their sins.
secreet sins, and be witnesses against the same; whether they be creatures
that has no sense or life: for the Habb. 211.
stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer
it, and cry for a curse, and woe against iniquity: and Zophar speaks most
Job. 20.27
truly, that the Heaven shall declare the wickedness of the ungodly; and that
the earth shall rise up against him: the Heaven defiled, the earth burdened,
and other senseless creatures defiled, polluted; they Romans 8. 22.
groan and travel together, and they complain of the inhabitants of this
earth, or whither they be living creatures without reason, as Solomon says,
that the Eccles. 10. 20.
foul of the Heaven shall carry the voice of the curse against it, and that
which has wings shall declare the matter, albeit it be but in thought in thy
bedchalmber: Thus the Crows did detect the Ex Erasmo in Proverbiis Ibici grues.
secreet murder of the Poet Ibicus: Also the Crows brought to light the death
of a certain Ausonius Ibicus vt periit vindex suit alti^olans grus.
man; who traveling was killed by Robbers: these whom he did take for
witnesses, was the occasion of the manifestation of that murder, and of the
deserved punishment inflicted upon these malefactors. Likewise the swallows
did so molest and trouble one Bessus, (as Plutarch reports) Plutarch.
that he was compelled to confess his most unnatural and abominable
parricide, wherefore he was worthily tortured.

The histories record, that many Blondus Read the theater of Gods judgments.
Ah miser, and siquis multum periuria celet, Sera tamen tacitis p^na ^enit
pedibus.
secreet sins and robberies have been in diverse ages disclosed by dogs;
passing over these which have been discovered by men and women, conjunct, or
very near to the evil doers themselves.

Forasmuch that this is most clear and evident and altogether true without
doubt or contraversie, that thy sin can not be keept secreet perpetually;
but it shall be manifested and revealed openly, and at length (without
repentance) shall be punished publicly: ^he Gentiles by experience knew this
plainly, and confessed the same frequently.

It is then the safest and best way: (believe me) it is most profitable and
comfortable unto thee, that thou thy self make a true, humble, and sinceere
confession of thy own sins, since they can not be covered continually, but
will certainly be manifested; if not in this world, yet most fearfully in
that day of the Romans 2. 5.
declaration of the just judgment of GOD; when the secreets of all hearts
shall be revealed, and every Math. 12.38
idle word shall be brought to an account; and every privy action shall be
disclosed. And that thou may be thus moved: In the second place thou have to
consider of the profit and commodity Of the good of confession.
of confession.

And first here observe a great difference: yea, and manifest opposition
between the effect of the confession of the guilty, before the judgment seat
of men, or earthly judges, and of that confession which is made before the
Spineus in lib. de peccatorum confessione.
tribunal of GOD, the Heavenly judge who is the righteous and high judge
Genes. 18. 25
of all the world.

The confession before Magistrates, even at other times merciful, is very
dreadful, dangerous and deadly for evil doers; when Achan made his confession
of the thift, of the execrable goods, then Ioshuah, and all Judge. 7. 25
Israel stoned him his sons and his daughters, his oxen, his asses, and his
sheep with stones, and burnt them with fire, because of his trespass and
abomination.

When the Amal^ki^e, a stranger confessed the killing of Saul, then David
caused to kill him, and that justly; because his own 2 Samuel 16
mouth testified against him.

Thus after a confession made before earthly Rom, 12. 1
powers, who are Ministers of justice, follows death, sorrow, punishment, and
execution; and therefore it is no wonder although malefactors be very
unwilling to confess capital crimes. So these Eunuchs Bigthan and Teresh did
not acknowledge their conspiracy against Assuerus, until Ester. 2. 22
inquisition was made and it was found so, and therefore they were both hanged
on a tree, and died shamfullie.

But it is plain contrary in The fruits of confession.
regard of the confession of our sins to the Almighty. After the same
follows great good and unspeakable commodity, as most evidently appears,
by proof of sacred Scripture, by examples, by the testimonies of learned
writers, and by experience.

First: If Proverb. 28 13.
thou hide thy sins (says Solomon) thou shall not First Mercy.
prosper; but if thou will confess them, and forsake them, thou shall have
mercy. What more pleasant or more expedient to a miserable sinner then GODS
mercies? Secondly forgiveness of thy fault and remission: If John 1.9
thou acknowledge thy sin, (says St. JOHN) 2 Remission.
GOD is faithful, and just, to forgive thee thy sin: Thus forgiveness and
remission brings happiness, and salvation. Blessed is he Psalm. 28. 13
whose wickedness is forgiven him, so proclaims the Prophet DAVID.

Thirdly: If thou confess thy offenses, (the Apostle witnesses) 3
Sanctification.
that GOD will John. 2. 9
cleanse thee from all unrighteousness: so thou may be most sure of
sanctification, and Heb. 12. 14
holiness; without the which no man shall see the LORD in his eternal glory.

Fourthly: thou by confession 4 Knowledge.
shall get Heavenly wisdom, and instruction, as when Daniell was speaking,
and confessing his sins, and Daniel. 9.2^
presenting his supplications; in that same instant the Angel Gabriell gave
him knowledge and understanding: So when thou shall truly acknowledge thy
wickedness; the holy Spirit will be sent unto thee, to bestow upon thee
knowledge and understanding.

Fifthly: Joy and consolation shall 5 Consolation.
come to thee in time of anguish and affliction: If thou shall make to GOD a
right confession, as David was greatly greeved; and very sore troubled for his
murder and adultery, when he confessed that he had sinned against the LORD,
he was immediately strongly and joyfully comforted: when the Prophet Nathan
replied on this manner, the 2 Samuel 12.13
LORD has put away thy sins, thou shall not die: that was glad tidings, and
comfortable news unto his wearied and distressed spirit: So it is most
certain, that consolation will come to every Christian after confession.

Sixthly: if thou confess thy sin 6 Employment in the LORDS service.
in sincerity, the LORD then will more readily employ thee in his service, as
when the Prophet Esaias confessed his uncleanness and pollution, that he was a
man of polluted I saiah 6. 3
lips: there his iniquity was taken away, and his sins purged; and he was
in the business of the LORD employed, and in his service directed, and he was
sent by GOD to the people of the Jews.

Lastly: if thou conceal not thy 7 Furnitur^ of necessaries.
offenses, nor thy distress, but will confess the same ingenuoussie, the LORD
will furnish thee good things abundantly: as when the Egyptians confessed to
Joseph their want and great poverty: when they said, we Genes. 47.23
will not hide from my LORD our pittiefull indigence: then Joseph did furnish
them food, and seed to sow the ground.

So will GOD do to thee, if thou on this manner will deal faithfully and
truly: He will give unto thee that bread, John 6. 37
which came down from Heaven, which gives life to the world: He will give
thee that good feed of his Luke 8. 21
Word, and make it Zach. 8. 12
prosperous to bring forth good fruit in thee.

And shortly after the right confession, thou may assuredly persuade thy
self of absolution, of justification, and of thy glorification: For the LORD
Psalm. 103 8. 9.
is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness; he
will not always chide, nor keep his wrath for ever.

And most sure it is: if the LORD absolve thee, who shall lay Romans 8. 33
any thing to thy charge? If GOD justify thee, who shall condemn thee? If the
Almighti glorify thee, who shall disgrace or bring infamy upon thee: Again
hearken, and take heed diligently; consider and meditate carefully, what the
ancient, wise, true, and judicious fathers tell to thee plainly of the profit
that comes to thee by humble, and sincere confession. One says, cessat
vinaicta divina, Ambros. Beati immaculats.
si confessio praecurrat humana, the revenge of GOD ceasseth, if the confession
of man preceedeth: and in an other place he thus exhorts, Fatere peccata o
homo, vt Idem lib 1. de interpellatione and cap. 5.
veniam consequaris, dic iniquitates vt justificeris, quid erubescis fateri ea
in quibus natus es? O man! acknowledge thy faults, that thou may have
pardon; tell thine iniquity, that thou may be justified: wherefore art thou
ashamed to confess these in the which thou art borne? An other Ancient
affirms Gregorius Nazianzen in oratione consolaorta de pacis silentio.
thus: Magnum remedium malitiae, est confessio and fuga peccati: that
confession is a great remedy of maliciousness, and a flight of sin. An
other so speaks: Basilius in Hexamero homilia vndeci ma.
Septuplam retributionem peccatoribus delatam remittet DOMINUS, in hac vita,
per confessionem ac resipiscentiam a nobis placatus: the LORD being pleased by
us in this life by confession and repentance will forgive that sevenfold
retribution objected to sinners: dicito peceata (says Chrysostom) vt
Chrysostom. homilia 2.
deleas, dicito in hac vita vt requiem habeas: tell thy sins that thou may
put them away; tell them in this life, that thou may get rest in an other
life. Absque confessione Bernard. 2 ^ep. cap 14.
justus judicabitur ingratus, and peccator mortuus reputatur: confessio igitur
peccatoris est vita, and justi gloria: without confession, the just is judged
unthankful, and the wicked is esteemed dead: confession then is the life of
the sins, and the glory of the just. Moreover another writes thus: Confessio
sanat, confessio justificat, confessio peccatis vemam donat, omnis spes in
confessione consistit, in confessione locus misericordia est, nulla est tam
gravis culpa, quae per confessionem non habeat veniam: Confession heals,
confession justifies, confession gives pardon to sins; all hope consists
into confession, in confession there is a place for compassion, there is no
fault so greevous, but by confession it will be pardoned.

But principally let us give attendance August. pas sim in multi. locis.
to Augustine in this point; assevering, Damnaberis tacitus, qui possis liberari
confessus: being silent thou shall be condemned, who being confessed may be
delyvered. Again, Confessio malorum operum, initium bonorum operum est: the
confession of evil works, is the beginning of good works: And furthermore,
Confessio nos humiles facit: Confession makes us humble: Confessio jungit nos
DEO: confession conjoyneth, or unites us to GOD; Confessio judicat vivos:
confession declares that we are alive, now enjoying the life of grace,
referved to have eternal fruition of the life of glory: yea, that Philosopher
Seneca.
Seneca says, Somnium narrare vigilantis est, and vitia confiteri sanitatis
indicium est: It is a token of one awake to tell their dream, and of health to
confess their sins.

And not to be too tedious in such try testimonies, for conc^ution of the
same, we will offer to your due consideration, that fathers saying, Ratio DEI
inducendi, August. citante Spinaeo in lib depeccatorum confessione.
vt peccata nosira excuset, ac tegat^ ea est si ea detegamus, ac nos ipsos
accusemus, nos ille evehit: cum ipsi nos abijcimus: nos justificat cum nos ipsi
condemnamus: obliviscitur peccatorum, cum nos ipsi meminimus eorum: denique nos
in prctio habet, cum nobis ipsi vilescimus: nos invenit, cum nobis ipsis
perditi videmur, and pluriminos facit, cum nos ipsos nihili facimus. ^he m^ane
(most remarkable are the sentences) to move GOD, that he may excuse and cover
cur sins, is, that if we shall uncover them, and accuse our selves, he
exalts us: when we cast down our selves: he justifies. us, when we
condemn our selves: he forgets our sins, when we remember on them:
Finalie we are precious unto him, when we are vile in our own sight; he
finds us, when we seem lost to our selves; and he makes much of us, when
we make nothing of our selves. Sicut sumus praecedit incendium, sic flammam
Similitude.
fidei and charitatis praecedit peccatorum confessi^: As smoke goes Primasius
in Apocalypsin.
before burning, so confession of sins goes before the flamme of faith and
charity.

Thirdly: Experience shows us, that the parient will declare his disease to
the Physician, the wounded man will uncover his soars to the Chirargion: the
Client will manifest the weakness of his cause or action to his Advocate: the
poor Beggar will utter his wants to the helping Passenger, and cry pitifully
and earnestly for some support, that the child will tell his necessity to his
loving parents: that the oppressed subject will signify his hurt to a gracious
King, or pittiefull Magistrate.

Now answer me truly, is not GOD thy perfect Physician, who will heal all
thine Psalm. 103. 3
infirmimities? Is not CHRIST a faithful 1 John 2. 1
Advocate, who will defend thy right, and be thy reconciliation for thy
sins, to purchase an Heavenly Kingdom for thee? Is not thy LORD a most
liberal benefactor, who Job. 22. 18
can fill the house of the wicked with good things, at sometimes; and will
multiply his Hezek. 36.11
benefits toward thee, more than at the first? Is not He the Father 2 Corinthians 1.3
of mercy, and the GOD of all consolation? Will not He satisfy Psalm. 91. 16
thee with long life, and glorify thee with salvation? Is not He the King of
Isaiah 44. 6
Israel, the LORD of Hosts, and thy Redeemer? Will not He look Psalm. 102
19. 20
down from the hight of his Sanctuary, out of Heaven? Will He not behold the
Earth, that he may hear the mourning of his prisoners, and delyver the
children of death? Wherefore then will thou hide thy woes and offenses from
him? Wherefore will thou John 8. 24
die in thy sins, and perish eternally in thine iniquities? Why concealeth
thou thy cancred corruption for thine own destruction, in 2 Pet. 3. 47
the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, or before that dreadful
day? Why will thou vex thine own soul with continual grief and
molestation. When DAVID himself did hold his Psalm. 32. 3.
tongue, his bones consumed fearfully, his hand was upon him continually, his
very moisture was turned into the drought of summer. But when he did not hide
his iniquity, but acknowledged his trespass, then he got remission, and so
joy and consolation.

It is written of Creusa, by an Ethnic, that being troubled in Euripides in
Iovem.
her mind, and grievouslie perplexed in conscience; to mitigate the extremity
of that vexation, she did use the remedy of confession: and she did discover
her secret fornicatios; and did declare openly her whoordome, that she had
borne a bairne quietly, and exposed him. Should not a Christian then privily
confess his faults, and enormities, to be delivered from the anguish of an
evil conscience, and to obtain peace and tra^quillitie to himself.

Think not in thine own mind that this sentence was only said to David this
sin thou did 2 Samuel 12. 12
secretly, (says GOD) but I will correct thee before the sin most openly:
but also to every one of us without confession, so says that father, and it
is also contained in the canon law.

Is it not then m^st fit, commodious, and necessary for thee, that thou thy
self make a plain, and open confession of thine own fearful sins, and
terrible transgressions? that thou may altogether eshew that Math. 37
wrath to come, that also Luke 21. 36
thou may be counted worthy, to escape the vengeance of the Almighty; even
the curse of GOD, and the damnation of the ungodly: yea, that Heb. 4.16
thou may receive mercy and find grace to help thee in time of need; that
thou may obtain ^anctification, which is a maine end of thy vocation: For 1 Thessalonians. 4.7
GOD has not called thee unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, that thou may
obtain wholesome instruction, and the knowledge of GOD, when rightly to know
is John. 17. 3
life eternal, that thou may get constant consolation 2 Cor. 1. 4
to comfort thee in all thy tribulation, that thou may serve GOD in sinceririe:
For thou can do no ser^ice acceptable to an unknown Eccles, 27. 33
God: that thou may get furniture from him, who Psalm. 104. 27
gives food to every living creature in due season, and fills them with his
free benefits: Shortly that thou may receive remedy for trespassion,
absolution from thy sin, reconciliation with GOD, and conjunction with him,
peace here, rest, honor, and happiness in the life to come.

To the end that thou may receive this incomprehensible good, and unspeakable
blessings, go on to make this confession of our sin, and heinous iniquities.

But in the third place advert The right manner of confession.
attentively, and take diligent heed, that thou acknowledge and confess thy
faults in the right manner, and form; otherwise assuredly thy confession will
never neither comfort thee, not profit thee; for thou may know by the reading
the sacred Scripture, that many wicked wretched men, who lived lewdly, and died
profainly, have made a fashion of confession, as Exodus 6. 27
Pharaoh, Numb. 22 34
Balaam, Joshua 7. 20
Achan, 1 Samuel 26. 21
Saul, wicked 1 King. 21 27
Achab, yea the the traitor Math. 27. 4
Judas. Their confessions brought to them no consolation, but pain and
confusion.

Therefore if thou desires thy confession acceptable to GOD and steadable to
thy self, labor with most diligent endevoure, that the same may be well
conceived, and in the right manner uttered having all the good properties
belonging thereunto.

Thy comfortable confession must See By. Thom
conteene sixteen conditions composed in these verses by the school men.

Sit simplex, humilis confessio, pura, fidelis,
Atque frequens, nuda, and discreta, lubens, verecunda, Properties of
confession.

Integra, secreta, and lachrymabilis, accelerata,
Fortis, and accusans, and se punire parata.
For a brief explanation, 1. let thy confession be without hypocrisy: ^
plain.
If ever thou lay aside guile Pet. 2. 1
and dissimulation, remove the same chiefly in this action, and study most
carefully to be an r Israel indeed, to be the true son of Iakob, who was a
plain Genes 25
man or simple, and so is all his posterity sinceere and ingenuous in all
their proceedings; and particularly in this point.

Secondly: thy confession must 2 Humble confession.
be without pride or arrogance: for the proud Luke 18. 12
Pharisees confession shall never bring joy nor justification, as the earth
wherein Ieremias Ierem. 13. 7 Similitude.
(...) girdle was hid, and wherewith it was covered, made the gird^ corrupt,
and profitable for nothing: So will pride make thy person, as it were putrified
before GOD, to be as the Ammonites were to DAVID, to stink 2 Samuel 10 6
in GODS sight, and all thy actions to be but abominations

Let thy confession therefore be in great humility and submission, as Genes
18. 27
Abraham's, like the Publicans, like St. Timoth. 2. 15
Paul's, like all the godlies^ this humility will be to thee in all thy
proceedings, like as Benjamins was to his brethren, without him they would not
have been accepted by Joseph, nor their gifts received, but having him in
their company, they were welcomed, they were brought Genes. 43. 16
to Joseph's house, they were feasted, and got gifts before their departure.
So without humility thou will be despised of GOD, and punished: but loving
humility, GOD will greatly regard thee, He will accept of thy offerings,
and give gifts unto thee most plentifully.

Thirdly: thy confession must be without filthiness or pollution, 3 Holy
confession.
thou should with David wash thine b Psalm. 26. 6
hands (yea thine heart first) in innocen^ie, and compass GODS Altar; and then
acknowledge thine iniquity: If thou have Cains wickedness, the LORD will have
no Genes. 43.16
respect to thy sacrifice: and as Abraham left his servants and beasts behind
him, when he was to go to the mountain to Genes 22.4 Similitude.
worship: So when thou art of this purpose, for to go to do this service,
leave thy sins, and wickedness behind thee, which otherwise will altogether
hinder thee, and take great care to bring holiness, with which will make thee
most to resemble thy GOD, and be most acceptable to his Heavenly Majesty; as
David said to Abner, that he was content to make a covenant with him; but upon
this condition, see 2 Samuel 3. 13
my face no more, except thou bring Michall with thee, when thou comes to
me: So as it were, GOD says unto thee, I am content to have a covenant with
thee, but come not in my sight, except thou bring piety with thee.

Fourthlie: Let thy confession 4 Faithful confession.
be without infidelity: Take heed least Heb. 3. 12
at any time there be in thee an evil heart, and unthankful to depart from
the living GOD. If it was evil for Lot, to depart from Abraham to go to
Sodom, then vexation 2 Peter. 2.7
of heart, and captivity Genes. 14. 12
came upon him. Was it not worse for Gehazi, when he departed from Elisha,
then an incurable disease, and filthy 2 King 5. 27
leprosy did cleave unto him, and his posterity? but worst of all it is to
depart from the living LORD: then anguish, affliction, captivity, calamity,
death, and eternal misery will come unto thee, without faith, confession,
repentance, or turning again to the Almighty. So then let this work be done
in faith; without the which, it Heb. 11.6
is impossible to please GOD. As the LORD did prohibit his people in his law,
to offer any oblation Levit. 2. 13
to him, without it were seasoned with salt: so no service without faith will
be acceptable to GOD; but the virtue of faith will make the same pleasant, and
savorie to GOD.

Fifthly: Let thy confession be almost without intermission, and 5 Frequent
confession.
very frequent: for if thou drink in Job 15. 16
iniquity like water frequently, should not thou cast forth the same
frequently by confession, as Mariners very often times will draw the pumpe,
that they nor the passingers be not offended, nor endangered by abundance of
water? So all Christians should use frequent confession, that their consciences
may be cased, and themselves preserved. And if men commonly will sweep their
houses Similitude.
for health and honesty: Art not thou GODS house? Know 2 Cor. 3. 16
thou not that thou art the temple of GOD? Thou have need to sweep this house
daily, and ofter for thy health and souls safety, and that by confession and
conversion, since thou art exhorted to pray These. 5. 17
continually; thou should acknowledge thy trespass also continually.

6 Seeing Hebr. 4. 13
all things are naked, 6 A naked confession.
and open before his eyes, with whom thou have to do, let then thy confession
also be naked; and never prease to paint thy vice with virtuous colors. Be
not thou like Iehu, who did call his pride and desire of authority the zeal 2
King. 10.12
which he had for the LORD: wherefore he was not praised, but punished; and
thus by GOD threatened, that he would visit the Hosea. 1. 4
blood of Israel upon the house of Iehu.

Neither think thou it possible for thee to hide thy faults, as Rachell her
Idols: she indeed did hide them from Genes. 31. 35
Laban, but not from Genes. 35. 4
lakob, who did find them, and buried them. Thou may conceate thy self, that
thou can conceal thy faults from men, but thou can not cover them from the
LORD GOD.

Seventhly: Let thy confession 7 A wise confession.
be with wisdom and discretion, having a due consideration to all convenient
circumstances; and specially the maine point, that it redound to GODS glory, to
thy profit and consolation. Let not thy confession be like Lamechs, Genes. 4
23 It a interpretatur Avenzra Calvinus. Pataeus, and orthodoxi.
for vain glory and ostentation. Let it not be like the wicked, entising
Prover. 1. 10
the evil, (them selves without doubt confessing their ungodliness) to stir
up others to the imitation of the like naughtiness; neither let it be for
thine own perishing pleasure or delectation, in remembering upon them, for so
thou will possess Job 13. 26
the iniquities of thy youth: but let thy confession (I say) be with wisdom,
leaving, and abhorring all thy faults and abominations.

Eighthly: Let thy confession be A willing confession.
from a free and willing mind; not urged nor constrained: for as the LORD
loves a cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful confessor.

Ninthly: Thy confession must not be with too great boldness and audacitie,
but with some shame 9 A shamefast confession.
and modesty. For we should be ashamed, (says one) and condemn our sin,
and not defend the same, quoniam pudore culpa minuitur, Ambros. de Abel, and
Cain
defensione cumulatur, because by shamefastness a fault is diminished; by
defending, it is aggreged: And acknowledge with Daniell, that as righteousness
Daniel. 9.7
belongs to the LORD, so to thee open shame and confusion. If thou love the
LORD (as he requires thee to do) with thy whole heart, then make a full, and
a whole confession of all thy sins in particulare; and more-over, pray with
the Prophet, LORD Pfal. 19. 12
cleanse me from secreet sins.

10. Seeing thou art commanded by thy Master to pray b privily, 10 A^ secreet
confession.
or in secreet, it is good to confess thy hid sins to GOD in secreet. It is
written of a Lacedemonian Christian Lysander, that when he was consulting with
an oracle, he was desired by the Priest to declare the most heinous sin that
ever he had committed in all his lifetime, he then asked the Priest, whether
he behoved to do so by his direction, or by the Gods commandment: Plutarch
in La conicis and Bruson.
who answered, by the Gods commandment: then replied he, grant thou this to
me, that if thou ask me I may tell them, he said discretly: So if thou has
offended thy GOD secreetly; acknowledge thy offense secreetly: if thy
transgression be public; let thy confession be also public, for thine own
profit and absolution.

11. Thy confession must be with sorrow and contrition: if 11 A weeping
confession.
thou may with tears and weeping, it will then bring unto thee great joy
and consolation: for a natural man may show thee, -- Est quaedam flore
voluptas, Expletur lachrymis, exeriturque dolor. Ovid, 4. de Trist.
That there is a certain pleasure to weep, that sorrow by tears is
fulfilled, and also expelied: yea, the LORD will Psalm. 56. 5
put thy tears in his bottell: he will write them into his register, and at
length will wipe c them all from thee.

12 Thy confession must be like thy converssion to GOD, 12 A tymous confession.
without delay or procrastination, with all diligence and expedition. Let it
not be like the cursed catiues, already under the sentence of condemnation:
for they at length when the time of mercy is gone; and they plunged in woeful
misery, and when they are punished with endless torment, will be constrained
to confess that they Sapientia Salonis.
have erred from the way of truth, and wearyed themselves in the way of
wickedness and destruction, thus their too late confession will nothing avail
them.

Acknowledge therefore thy transgression I say. 49. 8
in a time acceptable, in due season, in the day of salvation: Behold (says
the Apostle) the 2 Cor. 6.2
accepted time, behold now the day of salvation: It is a most good thing for
thee to keep the fit opportunity of true confession before Zeph 2.2
the decree of desertion (or damnation) come forth, before the fierce wrath of
the Lord come upon thee, and before the day of GODS anger and indignation
overtake thee. Confessionis negligentia Augustinus.
(says a wise father) periculosa est: the sloathfulnesse of confession is very
dangerous: delay not therefore this duty, perform the same with expedition
most diligently and speedily.

13. If the crying of CHRIST in Hebr. 5.7
the days of his flesh was a 13 A strong confession.
strong crying: let thy confession also be a strong confession; if thou
desires to have strong Hebr. 6.18.
consolation to uphold thee in the day of tentation: then also use a strong
confession of thy sins and transgressions: never go about to extenuate thine
offenses, but rather labor to aggrevate, and to aggrege the same.

1 In regard of the person against whom thou have offended, who has been so
patient 2. Pet. 3.9.
in sparing a guilty malefactor, and would not thee to perish, but to come to
repentance; and is so bountiful and merciful toward thee, whose mercies
Lament. 3.21
fail not, but are renewed every morning: Who Exodus 34. 6
is strong, gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and truth: who
Psalm. 68. 19
ladeth thee daily with his benefits: who so loved thee, that he Romans 8. 32
spared not his own Son, but gave him to death for thee, and for thy
redemption; and for thine eternal glorification.

2 Of JESUS CHRIST, who made himself of no reputation, but humbled Philip. 2. 8
himself to the death of the cross for his affection toward thee: who Revel
1. 5
shed his precious blood to wash thee, and to make thee a King and Priest to
GOD.

3 In consideration of the season, the Romans 13. 12
night is past, the day is at hand, that thou have sinned, when salvation was
near thee, in the revelation of his glorious Gospel, when his light has
shined clearly before thine eyes; when his trumpet has frequently,
fearfully, and comfortably sounded in thine ears, that thou have not only
trespassed in Act. 17. 30
the time of ignorance, which GOD regarded not; but after so many instructions,
admonitions, reprehensions, counsels, and consolations, comminations, and
commandments in the contrary.

4 In consideration of the occasion, or matter wherefore thou have so
transgressed for so small and base thing; for some Genes. 25.33
pottage with Esau, to sell thy birthright; or for a cup Judge. 4. 14
of milk with Sisera, to lose thy life; or for some beasts with Saul, Sam.
15. 28
to be deprived of a Kingdom, not earthly or temporary, but Heavenly and
eternal, for a triffle, for vanity, and perishing pleasure, a short and
filthy delectation, to loss GODS favor, to be plagued with his anger, to
destroy thine own soul, to be miserable for ever: confess thy sin
vehemently, that GOD may the more pity thee.

15 In thy confession transfer 15 An accusing confession
not thy faults upon others, to lay the blame upon them, or cleareing, and
excusing thy self: for now they be many like that foolish man, (of whom Seneca
speaks) Seneca de tranquillitate animi.
who having a fore foot, and so crooking, he imputed the cause of his limping
to the sharpness of the way, and not to the thorn pricking his foot within,
or like one that is sea-sicke, ascribing the cause of his diseas^ to the
swelling of the sea, and not (as the truth is) to the corrupt Simile
humors of his own stomach: or like that blind woman Harpasta, Seneca epistola
^0.
who would not be persuaded of her own blindness, but found fault with the
house wherein she remained, as being void of light, and over dark.

So I say, with too many it is, who in their spiritual crookedness, their
inward sickness, and in their own spiritual blindness would lay the fault
upon other outward occasions, but not upon themselves.

But in thy confession charge thine own self for thy transgressions; blame
thine own self and thine inward corruption: accuse thy self principally, and
only with DAVID, It 2 Chronicles. 21. 17.
is I, even I that have sinned; but these sheep what have they done? By such
confession thou will obtain the free absolution of GOD, and stop the devils
mouth from thine accusation.

16 Lastly: let thy confession 16 A punishing confession.
be without flattering of thy self, and let it be with some holy indignation,
and with a desire to take some punishment 2 Cor 7. 11
of thy self for thy foolishness. For thy beastliness, with JOB abhor Job.
42. 6
thy self in dust and ashes: with the Prophet JEREMY smite thine own Ierem.
31. 19
thigh, and say, what have I done: with the Publican, knock thine Luke 18. 14
own breast: with St. Paul beat thine own body, and bring it into subjection.

Thus thou have more than reason to take heed most diligently and carefully
that thou confess thy sins arightly, and in due manner, or else know for a
surety that thy confession will be altogether improfitable, and never comfort
thee, without the forsaid conditions in some measure be keept therein: and
first of all, labor to get a sure notice, and exact knowledge of thy secreet
sins, and privy corruptions, of thy predominant, profitable, (as thou
dreams) and pleasant vice: Take travel with all industry to try them with
the Proverb. 20 27
light of the LORD, with the Lantern Psalm. 119. 115
of his Word, by searching Zephan. 2. 1
thy self narrowly, by 1 Cor. 11. 28
examining, by 2 Cor. 13. 15
prooving thy self most accurately and continually; and thereafter go to a
sinceere, humble, and most serious confession, and prying into thy self
profoundly, be persuaded that thou cannot confess thy sins sufficiently.

Thus far for preparation, come now to thy right confession, as it shall
please GOD to help thee, and strengthen me to further thee.

PSAIME. 102. 6. I am like a Pelican of the Wilderness.

A CONFESSION OF OUR SIN, AND INIQVITIE.
The second Chapter.
Almighty GOD, and most merciful Father: Now I thy poor servant am here
Act. 10. 33
present before thee: and it is of truth thou see 1 Samuel 16. 7
not as man sees: for man looks only to the outward appearance, but thou o
GOD beholdest mine heart, and searchest Ierem. 17. 10
my reins, thou understand Psalm. 135 2
my thoughts a far off. I take thy self to record, O Lord GOD Numb. 27.16
of the spirits of all flesh, that I desire greatly to confess my sins in
sincerity, humility, and tymouslie, as it becomes me to do, And I
acknowledge before thee, who know the hearts Act. 1. 24.
of all men, that my transgressions are many; they Psalm. 49. 12
are more 1. Many sins.
in number than the hairs of my head, my trespasses are multiplied before thee
as the Isaiah 40.12
waters: As the waters in the deludge were increased exceedingly, to Genes. 7.
18
drown the old and wicked world, so are my sins to destroy me everlastingly.

Certainly it was easier to Ioab to 1 Samuel 24. 9
number the thousands of Israel, than it is for me to number the millions of
mine iniquities.

It was as easy for Abraham to number the Genes 13. 16
dust of the earth, the Genes. 22.13
sand which was upon the sea shore, and the stars of Heaven, as it is to me
to number my innumerable offenses, and manifold enormities, whereby I have
offended thy godly Majesty: I 2 Great sins.
am compelled also, (O gracious GOD) to confess unto thee, that mine
iniquities Psalm. 25. 11
are great my wickedness Iocl. 3. 13
is grievous; it is also grown to a terrible hight: it is mounted up to the
clouds. Nebuchadnezar but dreamed that Daniel. 4. 8
the hight of that tree, which he saw in a^ vision, reached up to the Heaven;
but I am persuaded that my sin is ascended higher: It is come up to Revel.
18. 5
Heaven, and cries Genes. 18.20
upon GOD for wrath and indignation against me.

I do acknowledge, (O Heavenly and merciful Father) that my 3 Heavy sins.
sins are wondrous weighty, and infinitely heavy: The Psalm. 70.27
stones are weighty, and the sand is heavy, but light in respect of my
iniquities; for Psalm. 23. 4
they are grown over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for
me; the iron thereof is importable. Manasseh In the prayer of Manasses.
was bound down with many iron bands, that he could not lift up his head unto
Heaven: I am bund down with many heavy bands of sin, that I can not lift up
my heart to thee, as I most earnestly desire to do.

The people of Israel protested that 2 Chronicles. 10.4
Salomons yoke was heavy, and his servitude sore upon them, and prayed that it
might be made lighter; but LORD I find the yoke of sin much more bitter, and
the slaverie thereof more intolerable, I long to be eased thereof.

The Israelites sighed, Exodus 2. 23
and cried to GOD, when they were kept under with the heavy burdens of the
Egyptians: I have greater cause (O LORD) to be vexed and wearied with the
burden of sin, which Heb. 12. 1
hangs so fast, and presses so sore down, which without help from thy
Majesty would thrust my soul to the lowest hell. I confess (O GOD) that as
my 4 Filthy sin
sins they are not few, but many; they are not small sins, but great
sins, they are not light, but very heavy sins, so they are most vile,
filthy, and abominable, polluting, and defiling me both outwardly and
inwardly in soul, spirit, and body.

It is truth, pitch Eecles. 13. 4
defiles him that touches it, and mirie clay contaminateth him that walloweth
in the same: The excrements of men, which thou most holy GOD commanded to be
dug in Deuteronomy. 23. 13
the grave, and to be covered with earth: the dung of beasts do not so
defile the body, as the excrements of filthy sin has polluted my soul and
inward man.

The corruption of dead Carions, and carkases Levit 11. 39
made the handlers thereof unclean, but LORD my continual doing of dead Heb.
12. 1
works has made me much more polluted and detestable in thy presence. The
Ammonites for their wrong to DAVID did 2 Samuel 10. 6
stink in his sight, but LORD I am more loathsome in thy pure eyes.

I do acknowledge before thee 5 Odious sins.
(O Genes. 18.25
righteous judge of the whole world) that my heinous sins makes me odious
unto thy Majesty: for I know well, that thou hate Psalm. 5. 5
all them that work iniquity: and even at this time my conscience cries to
me, that I have committed many enormities, justly O LORD may thou hate me,
and set Psalm. 50. 21
all my sins in order before me, and therefore take vengance upon me most
deservedly.

O my GOD! I confess also that Scandalous sin
my sins are exemplary and scandalous: I have (alace) caused the 2 Samuel 12. 14
enemies of the LORD blaspheme: They Romans 3. 19
who obeyed not the word, have not been won by my holy life and
conversation: I have not stopped, but rather opened the mouths of the ungodly:
I have strengthened them in their wickedness and impiety: as also I have
scandalized, but not bettered the weak ones: I Levit. 19. 14
have put a stumbling block before my blind brethren: I have caused them by
mine evil example to go astray, and to fall into the pit: I have been an
offense to some little ones that dwelt with me: Thou thy self (O my SAVIOR!)
has said, it Math. 18.7
must needs be that some offenses must come: Many (alace) have come by me;
for the which without thy mercy I would be wrapped up in woe and endless
misery.

I can not deny, (O most righteous 7 Pernicious sins.
judge) but I must acknowledge of necessity that my filthy faults and
terrible transgressions are most hurtful and pernicious to my self, for
weakening, and wounding me, for binding and blindfolding me, for sundering me
from thee, and swallowing me up in woe and calamity: I say with thy servant,
O Psalm. 6. 2
LORD I am weak and feeble, my sins have made my strength to fall; neither
am I able to rise again: my Psalm. 38. 4. 5.6.7.8.
wounds are putrified and corrupt, because of my foolishness, I am bowed and
crooked very sore; my reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in
my flesh, I am weakened and sore bowed: I roar for the very grief of mine
heart: I find O LORD that mine own Proverb. 5.22
iniquities do take me, and Satan by them has caught me, and I am holden
with the cords of sin; and by them the Devil is drawing me unto
everlasting damnation: And as the blind Aramits were 2 King. 6.19
led to Samaria; so am I carried to hell, and without spiritual eyes am
brought to perdition, without thy help and salvation: for Isaiah. 59.2
they do hide thy face from me, that thou will not hear: they do separate
between thy Majesty and me: they will make me (alace) to perish eternally,
to be deprived of all comfort and glory, and without true repentance, to be
tormented continually in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
Revel. 21. 8 Original sin.
is the second death.

And yet O LORD, when I descend more deeply, by thy assistance of thy grace
into mine heart; and narrowly examine my conscience: I do confess in
sincerity, that I am guilty of original sin: I want that righteousness,
wherewith man was endued in his creation: I have a bent desire, a bad
inclination to do evil, wickedness, and abomination: Behold Psalm. 51.5
I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: I Romans 7.23
see another law in my members, rebelling against the law in my mind, and
leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is into my members. O LORD!
this is the evil seed, which brings forth evil increase: This is the
bitter root, which bears bitter branches, and corrupt fruit: Here
springs the Vine Deuteronomy. 32.32
of Sodom, the grapes of gall: This is the poisoned fountain, which sends
forth bitter streams.

I acknowledge (O LORD) before Actual sin.
thy Majesty, that I am guilty of innumerable actual sins, and has
offended in thought, in word, and in deed: I Dan. 9. 5
have sinned hainouslie; I have done wickedly, and have broken thy
commandments continually.

Thou (O LORD) may be Sins of omission.
higly offended against me, for the sins of omission, and neglect of my
duty. Thy servant Elisha (O most merciful GOD) was angry at the King of
Israel, because he 2 King 13.19
did smite the ground but three times, and ceased: whereas it had been
better, and more profitable for him to have done so many times, for his honor,
pleasure, utility; and for the destruction of his enemies: but thou LORD have
much more cause to be angry against me poor catiue, because I have so
seldom knocked Math. 7. 7
at the gate of Heaven; and neglected that special service of prayer, tending
to my good, tranquillity, and overthrow of mine enemies.

And truth it is, that thy Apostle St. John. 20. 25
Thomas did receive great hurt spiritually, that for a time he was faithless,
and remained in his incredulity, by being absent from that pious company; and
was not present with the rest at one time, when thou (O my SAVIOR) appeared:
but I have not so frequented the assembly of the godly, as I might have done
conveniently; and as I was bound to do of duty: I have Psalm. 26. 8
not so loved the habitation of thine house, nor the place where thine Honor
dwells, as it became me. I Psalm. 122. 1
rejoiced not to go unto the house of the LORD. I Psalm. 27. 4
did not desire to dwell in the tabernacle of the Almighty all the days of my
life; but I have delighted my self, to go to the places of vanity, and of
impiety, therefore justly ignorance, infidelity, and prophainesse abides with
me.

I confess (O LORD) before thy Heavenly Majesty, that I am unwilling and
slothful to do the works of charity, of compassion and of mercy: I forget
to James. 1. 27
visit the widow, and the fatherless, in their adversity: I am not careful
to support the needy, the poor, and the indigent members of Christ my
Savior; but I am too ready to abuse thy benefits, to spend my substance, to
wast my goods upon perishing pleasures; and to fulfill the noisome lusts of my
corrupt nature. I confess I am one like the inhabitants of Meroz because I
came not to help Judge. 5. 23
the LORD against the mighty enemy, and thus I have many times omitted and
neglected to do my bounden duty.

Moreover I plainly protest unto thee, that I have fearfully, and Sins of
commission.
frequently transgressed thy commandementes, and most holy precepts; Now wicked
Shimei was obedient to the charge of Solomon for many years, and 1 King. 2.3.8
sundry days he did dwell in his house, and did not depart from the place
appointed, and did not pass over the bounds prescribed, but I in few days, in
a short time, have I often times transgressed the limits of thy holy Law: I
have deborded into the evil way of iniquity; and against thy precepts, I have
taken Exodus 20. 7
THY HOLY NAME IN VAIN: I have wronged my neighbors, and I Math 33. 8
have robbed thee O LORD of thy due: I Hosea. 8 1
have surely transgressed thy covenant, and trespassed against thy law: and
has sinned hamously, both against my particulare calling, and my general
calling of Christianity: I Math. 1. 12
have polluted thy name, which from the rising of the sun to the going to of
the same is great amongst the Gentiles.

I have (my conscience cries to me) many a time, with the carnal Jews Numb.
11. 6
loathed the Heavenly MANNA: I have wearied of thy holy worship, I have 1 Thessalonians. 5.20
snuffed at thy service: I have Maiach. 1 13
despised prophecy; I have 1 Samuel 15 20
cast away thy blessed word from me; I have most fearfully rebelled against
thy Majesty, Numb. 20.10
who has power to destroy both sour, and body in hell fire eternally.

I acknowledge (O my GOD) Secreet sins.
that I have sinned privily, and am guilty of many Psalm. 19. 12
secret faults: I have had fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, and Ephesians. 5. 12
am ashamed of these things to speak, which I have done in secret: and that I
have offended also Public sins.
publicly, and impudently: I have had a Ierem 3. 3
whoorish forehead, and would not be ashamed of mine own wickedness, and
filthiness

For I have not only (O most merciful GOD) transgressed ignorantly,
Presumptuous sins.
and by infirmity; (For I Romans 7. 15
do not that good thing, which I would do; but the evil which I would not
do, that do I) but also (alace) I have sinned Psalm. 19. 13
presumptuously, which is the greatest misery. Woe is me! (O gracious LORD)
it fears me, that I have come to the hight of impiety, that when thou have
been threatening, I have been flattering: When Deuteronomy. 29. 19
thy Majesty has been cursing, I have been blessing, saying, I shall have
peace, adding drunkenness to thirst, most miserably, and mishantly.

For (O LORD) I see truly, Inward sin in heart.
that by nature the Genes. 6. 5
imaginations of my heart are evil continually: I 2 Timothy 3. 8
am of a corrupt mind, there is nothing pure in me: my conscience Titus 1. 15
is defiled within me.

My judgment and understanding is so weakened, and vitiat; Sin in
understanding.
that 2 Cor. 2. 14
I perceive not the things of GOD: without thy special grace, they are
foolishness to me: Mine 1 Cor. 37. 5
understanding (without thee) will puffed me up, and not edify me: It Isaiah
47. 10
will deceive me, and cause me to rebel against thy Majesty: It Ierem. 4.22
will make me wise to do evil, but to have no knowledge to do well.

But truth it is, (O most merciful Sin in will.
Father!) that I am the son of Adam: I find sensibly my will to be rebellious
against thy will, and contrary thereto: for thy will (O loving GOD) is holy,
heavenly, good, Romans 12. 2
acceptable, and perfect: but my will is wicked, earthly, perverse, and
imperfect.

Furthermore I acknowledge O LORD, Sin in affection.
that my affections are lewd, and earthly: they are crooked and unruly: I
Coloss. 3. 2
have set them on things, which are on the earth; and not on things which are
above: They Heb. 12. 1
are a heavy burden unto me, pressing me down grievously, and hindering me
from running the race of my spiritual journey: They Isaiah 1. 4
move me to go backward from GOD, in the broad way of impiety.

I confess (O LORD) my ignorance Sins of ignorance.
and foolishness: So Psalm. 73. 22
foolish and ignorant am I, I am as a beast before thee: yea, much worse than a
beast: For the Isaiah 1. 3
Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters cribbe: but I, whom thou have
nourished, whom thou have brought up, and often-tymes preserved, have not
known thee The sin of infidelity.
rightly, to honor and worship thee, as it becomes me: But albeit Math. 6. 3
thou have never grieved me, I can not testify against thee, I Ierem. 2. 5
never found iniquity in thee: Thou have not been to me a Ierem. 2. 31 and
verse 12
barren wilderness, nor a land of darkness, yet I have gone far away from
thee, and have walked after vanity. O ye Heavens be astonyed! be affrayed!
and utterly confounded! I have forsaken the Wel-spring of living water: I have
turned my back upon thee, O my GOD! who Psalm. 84. 11
art my sun, and my shield, for my illumination and direction; for my
consolation, and my protection: I Psalm. 119. 170
have gone far astray from my shepherd: I have run away from my kind
Master: I have left my loving Father by my infidelity; by mine untowardness
and wilfulness.

Now (O LORD) I have great Sin of disobedlence.
cause to be ashamed, and to abhor my self, for my continual disobedience,
and rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.23
which is as the sin of Witchcraft: when I consider the ready obedience, not
only of thy holy Angels, thy Messingers, Psalm. 104. 4
and ministering spirits, but also of other unreasonable creatures, the 1 King.
17. 4
fowls of the Heaven, the Jonas 2 10
fishes in the sea, the Genes 6. 19
wild beasts in the field: yea the Numb 6. 32
dead earth, the deep Exodus 14 21
Waters, the Genes. 10. 24
consuming fire are all subject to thy commandment, and senseless creatures
yield thee obedience, and do thy holy will: but (alace O LORD!) I to whom thou
have been very favorable and beneficial, to whom thou have given sense and
reason: yea, to whom thou have given thy blessed Word, to be a rule to my
life, and a Lantern Psalm. 119.
to my steps: yet I have remained refractarie, and repining: I abide
rebellious and transgressing.

But now also (O LORD) I Sin of ingratitude.
call to mind, and sorrowfully I remember upon my vile ingratitude, and
beastly unthankfulness, when I think seriously thereof, I do protest, and
proclaim unfeignedly, that Daniel. 9. 7.
righteousness belongs unto thee, and to me appertains open shame and
confusion, for I have forgoten the Deuteronomy. 32.18.
mighty and gracious GOD that formed me, in whom I Act. 17. 28.
live, and move, and have my being: It is thought a fault in Pharaohs chief
butler, because he did not remember Joseph, but forgot him: Oh! what
abominable crime it is to me, that that I do not thankfully remember JESUS
my SAVIOR; because I forget CHRIST my redeemer the Heb 1^ 2
Author and finisher of my faith; my John. 2. 1.
advocat with my Father, and my reconciliation for my sins.

Moreover: This is shameless ingratitude in me, that I recompense not a good
deed for an other bestowed: but truth it is (O LORD) that Psalm. 16. 2
my well-doing extends not to thee, who is the Allsufficient GOD of all
perfection, and felicity, but Math. 25. 43
I show no kindness to any of thy Saints, as I am obliged to do: I know well
that 2 Samuel 9. 1
David did show great mercy, and kindness to Mephibosheth, lame of his feet,
for lonathans sake: he enriched the poor man, and honored the contemptible
man: but little kindness have I shown to thy dear servants, to the
distressed members of the mystical body of JESUS; In regard of them I have
had an Esaias. 46. 12
hard heart, a withered Math. 12. 10
hand, lofty Psalm. 131. 1
eyes, and a tied tongue: I would not truly pity them, nor help them, nor
look upon them compassionatly; nor speak to them comfortably: alace I am not
like thy servant JOB, who was eyes Job. 26. 15
to the blind, feet to the lame, and a father to the poor: I have been
uncharitable, and without pity: I have not visited duetifully the
fatherless, and widow in adversity.

Further (LORD) I confess that I am come to the hight of the worst
ingratitude, for I Prover. 17.13
have rewarded many times evil for good: thy Psalm. 3. 23
mercies are renewed every morning upon me; but my transgressions are
multiplied against thy Majesty: yea, (LORD) when thou sendest down thy
benefits every moment to uphold me, even at that same instant I send up my
sins to anger thee. O my Savior! I acknowledge, that I do dishonor, and
displease thee; when thou art honoring and pleasing me, I poor Catiue am
wounding, and pearcing Revel. 1.7
thee; when thou art healing, and preserving me assuredly.

And further: I think this to Stubburnesse.
to be the heap of my wretchedness, that to all my heinous sins, I add
stubbornness, and yet do remain wicked, and contumacious: I Deuteronomy. 9. 6
am stiff-necked, alace it fears me, that I am Isaiah. 48. 4
obstinate; that my neck is an iron s^new; and my brow brass: when thou
cryest to me, I will not answer thee: when thou speak unto me, I will not
hearken to thee: when thou denouncest threatening against me, I will not fear,
nor tremble Isaiah. 66 2
before thy Majesty; When thou Revel. 3. 20
knockest at the door of my heart mercifully, I will not open to thee
immediately: when thou command me righteously, I will not obey thee
duetifully; I will not forsake Ierem. 13 23
my evil custom, nor leave my sins at thy direction; but I still continue
in them, without any care of my salvation, without any fear of my condemnation.

I do yet continue negligent, Idleness.
and idle Math 1 20
all the day, albeit I should not be slothful, but Heb 6. 12
a follower, of those; which through faith, and patience, inherit the promise,
yet I remain a sluggarde, and remiss in my christian calling, rather a
foolish companion of slothful sinners; than a careful imitator of thy
laborious servants.

As also: I fear that I will not leave my luckwarmenesse; I am Luckewarmnesse.
afraid, lest I be luckwarme; Revel. 3. 16
neither hot, nor cold, and content my self with indifferency of religion;
and that my devotion be in my tongue only; and not ruling in my heart
powerfully, and so many sorrowful sinners; a penitent Publicane may Math. 21.31
go to the kingdom of GOD before me.

And truth it is, (O LORD!) that I so stubbornely persevere in Malitiousnesse
my wicked wilfulness, that I will not put Coloss 3.8
away, nor 1. Pet. 2. 1
lay aside my sinful wrath, my anger, my envy, hatred, and maliciousness; but
I delight still to bear in my breast that fire, which burns me, to foster
in my bosom that serpent, which will sting me; and to keep fast in my
stomach that poison, which will destroy me, without any regard of thy
wholesome admonitions, or of mine own safety.

O righteous Judge! I confess Intemperance.
that I do delight too much, for to satisfy the filthy lust of my vitiate
nature: for by the corruption thereof, I have walked Romans 13. 13
in gluttony, and drunkenness, in chalmbring, and in wantonness, and has
not cast away the works of darkness.

Moreover: albeit (LORD) I Pride.
know assuredly, that Pet. 5. 8
thou resists the proud, and give grace to the humble, and lowly: yet I
do remain in my pride, and arrogancy: I 2 Cor 8. 1
am puffed up and Isaiah 3. 18
haughty: when in the mean time, Barueh. 2. 18
my soul should be vexed within me, for the greatness of my sin and
iniquity: Covetousness
and I weak in grace, should go crooked, who am so wrapped in woe and misery.

For I remember with fear, and anxietie: that I continue also in
covetousness, Coloss. 3. 5
which is Idolatry, which is the 2 Timothy 6.10
root of all evil, and misery: this Mark. 4. 16
deceitfulness of riches has entered in me subtillie: it remains in my heart
firmly, and chokes the word of GOD within me: It may at sometimes make me
merciless, without pity; as was the rich Luke. 16. 19
Glutton: at other times deceitful, without honesty, as was Genes. 24.29
Laban: and often hurtful to my self, without wisdom, as was 1 King. 2. 48
Shimei.

But now LORD! I am compelled to confess, that most abominable Hypocrisy.
sin, of my dangerous and deadly hypocrisy, (O merciful GOD) I have come
Isaiah 29. 13
near thee with my lips, and have honored thee with my mouth, but I have
removed my heart far from thee: I am utterly astonished, for that I have
spoken 1 Timothy 4. 2
lies with dissimulation, and have done deeds deceitfullie: I Psalm. 125. 4
have turned aside by my crooked ways: I am plunged in this pudle: I am almost
drowned in this deluge of hypoc^isie, which is the bane of all grace and
piety: I by nature am like a beautiful apple rotten within, who without help
of thy Majesty, will incontinent putrify: I am like a whyted tomb, which
Math. 23. 27
appears beautiful outward; but within, is full of dead men's bones. I am
like that Mark. 11.13
fig tree, which had leaves, but no fruit.

And truly (O LORD) I acknowledge ingenuously, Thou R^^^l. 3.2
haste not found my works perfect before Icrem. 17.10
thee, who searchest the heart, and tryest the reins, to give to every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruits of his works,

O gracious GOD, when I think and consider the infirmities, imperfections,
Sins more than the sins of others.
and sins of thy own servants, and of others also, where with thy Majesty
was displeased; and wherefore they were corrected, and punished, their small
faults, their little and light sins. (if so their may be any called) do
aggrege the heinousness, the great nesse, and wideness of my most filthy,
and scandalous sins, and of my notorious, and terrible transgressions. Thy
own faithful Moses Deuteronomy. 1. 37
was chastened for his short misbeleeving, at the waters of Meribah: and Miriam
an holy Prophetess, for Numb. 12. 18
speaking against her younger brother, in the matter of his marriage: and king
Saul, and his posterity, were deprived of his kingdom, for z Sam. 15.23
sparing old Agag; and some of the best bestiall: yea, an honest man of thy
own, who did faithfully, courageously, and duetifully discharge his calling,
and being seduced by an other old Prophet, because of his eating of 1 King 13.22
bread, and drinking of water, in a place forbidden, he did not come to the
Sepulcher of his fathers; but in the way was slain by a Lion: Also thy servant
Hezekiah, who did uprightly in thy sight, was proved for showing 2 King. 20.17
his treasure to the Babylonian Ambassador: And how fearfully was Ananias and
Saphira punished for Act. 5.3
keeping away a part of the possession, which appertained to themselves, and
was once in their own power.

The fault of Vzzah, wherefore he was slain, was the 2 Samuel 6.6
putting his hand to the Arc, and the holding it, when the oxen did shake it.
The fault of the people of Bethshemesh, (O holy LORD GOD!) wherefore so many
thousands perished* was their 1 Samuel 6. 19
looking unto the Ark of the LORD The fault of Lots wife, whom CHRIST
commands us to Luke. 17 33
remember, was, her looking back to Sodom, wherefore she became a Pillar of
salt; and was made a fearful spectacle of thy terrible indignation. The fault
of the Jews was their Numb. 11. 5
rememberance of the fish, and flesh pots of Egypt, wherefore they Cor. 10 5
were overthrown in the Wilderness,

Alace: (O LORD) if my sins, and offenses were woyed Dan. 5. 27
in the balance, they are more heavy and grievous, more displeasant to thy
Majesty; and pernicious to my self: I for a long season have had within me
an evil, Heb. 3. 2
and unfaithful heart, to depart away from thee the living GOD: my infidelity
is of longer continuance, and durance: I have not been contented with my
estate, nor approved thy wise dealing toward me but has Exodus 16. 7
murmured and uttered my impatiencie.

I have not mortified Coloss. 3. 5
my lusts, and affections; but I have spared my strong sins, which have Romans
6. 11
had dominion over me: I have fostered my pleasant and profitable sins,
albeit most dangerous and hurtful unto me.

I have drunken in iniquity Job. 34. 7
like water abundantly; and I have delighted my self to glutte Psalm. 141. 4
in the delicates of the ungodly: I have been puffed Habb. 1. 14
up with vain glory: and ostentation: I have been given to fraud and
oppression: I have been a bussie 1 Timothy 5. 13
body; and has passed the limits of my vocation: I have been given to
curiosity, and have been Romans 11. 20
high minded: I have looked frequently upon sin, and the world, with the
which I was wedded: I have remembered the Titus. 3. 3
deceitful pleasures thereof, wherewith I was entangled: I am bent to the vile
Romans 13. 14
lusts of my flesh; wherein I am defiled miserably, and almost drowned
eternally.

O LORD I find sensitlie, that Capital crimes.
I am not able to express sufficiently the heinousness, the grievousnesse of
my filthy enormitie: for frequently I Timoth. 5. 4
have turned the grace of GOD into wantonness: I have despised Romans 2. 4
the riches of the bountifulness of thy patience: without Ephesians. 4. 15
feeling I have given my self to commit uncleanness, to commit wickedness;
even with a vehement desire* and with greediness.

Alace! (O mighty GOD) if it was said of thy servant JOB, that he added
rebellion Job. 34. 37
to his sin; may not I say rather of my self, that I have added high treason
to my manifold transgressions: In so great a light of the GOSPEL, I Ezech 16.49
have exceeded the people of sinful Samaria in ungodliness: Alace (O LORD)
without mercy, and amendment, I have justified the sin of Sodom and Gomorah,
in pride and abundance of idleness.

If the prophet DAVID protested, (O LORD,) that Psalm. 73. 22
he was a beast before thee, how can I declare my beastlynesse unto thee? For
Psalm. 119.176
I have gone astray like a lost sheep: I am now in great danger, and
jeopardie: I, who should have been upright, am like Deuteronomy. 32. 15
a horse, waxing fat, have spurned with my heel, and forsaken thee, who made
me: I have not regarded; but I have offended the GOD of my salvation: I have
been like an Hosea 10.12
heifer, used to delight in threshing, but have no desire of the painful work
of plowghing.

I am like a vile 2 Pet. 2. 22
dog returning to his vomit again: I am like the filthy Sow once washen,
and yet turns back to the pudle and filthy mire: like 2 Timothy 4. 17
a cruel Lion devouring; and like a false fox Luke. 13 31
deceiving: like a bold Psalm. 22. 12
bull of Bashan pushing, and wronging; or like a subtle Serpent, and like an
Levit. 11. 41
unclean creature, creeping on my belly, and licking the dust of the earth,
altogether abominable, and unmeet to be offered up upon GODS Altar. And I
confess that by nature I am like Ierem. 13. 23
a Leopard, that cannot change his spots.

I do acknowledge (O LORD!) Worse than senseless creatures.
that Isaiah 5. 4
I have been an evil vine in thy vineyarde: thou look that I should bring
forth sweet grapes, but I have brought forth sour: I, as I am the son of
Adam, have not the fatness of the olive; but am as a wild olive: I am Romans
11. 7
as a brier, or thorn of the garden worthy to be cast in the fire. I am
alace like a barren, and unprofitable husbandry, for Job. 31. 40
thistles do grow in me in stead of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley: I
like earth do drink in the rain, that comes upon me; but I am hurtful,
and noisome, and near Heb. 6. 8
to cursing, whose end (without repentance) is to be burned.

O pitiful GOD! I have reason to cry to thy Majesty, that ^ Tim. 1. 15
I am the least of thy Saints, that I am Luke 17. 10
the chief of all sinners: I am an unprofitable servant: I have not done that
which was my duty to do: and (LORD) most justly may thou cast Malach. 2.3
the dongue of our confession back upon our faces, and reject me with all my
service: but now (O LORD) by thy help I will assay to lament before thee most
bitterly, my woeful state, and great misery.

A PREPARATION TO LAMENTATION.
The third Chapter.
THou! to whom the Alsufficient GOD, the Iam 1.17
giver of every perfect gift and donation, has vouchsafed upon thee this
Heavenly wisdom: that thou art of this resolute purpose, as to 1 Samuel 7.2
lament after the LORD, to 1 Samuel 1.15
power forth thy soul with Hannah before thy GOD, to deplore thy miserable
estate, and wretched condition,

Know thou must certainly, and be persuaded in thy mind assuredly, Three
things needful for true lamentation.
that first thou must have three things necessary, namely, a sure sense, and
feeling of thy unspeakable misery: again a great fear, and terror
therewith: lastly, an unfeigned sorrow, and heavy displeasure for the same. No
lamentation will bring to thee Feeling life.
solid joy, and consolation, without a sure sense, and painful feeling of
thy sore disease, and doolefull calamity.

Before thou attain to this feeling, thou must of absolute necessity, and
without any controversy have two things: First, spiritual quickening:
Secondly, tymous awaking, unless thou be quickened inwardly, unless thou be
awakened thoroughly, thou shall neither have knowledge, nor feeling of thy
wretchedness and misery.

And yet before this Galat. 6. 15
new birth and regeneration there must be Death of sin.
in thee undoubtedly, a Coloss. 3. 5
true mortification, and Heb. 2. 15
deliverance, from the death of sin, and impiety, which by many degrees is
worse, than natural death, the separation of the soul from the body.

This natural death brings to Death of sin worse than natural death.
the body seven evils: Namely, senselessness, weakness, heaviness,
ugliness, coldness, rottenness, and stink, or an evil savor: Now, albeit
this be most evident, and manyfold by the proof of daily experience, so that
it needs no probation, yet we will insist a little therein, for our memory
and consideration.

1 Saul being slain had no feeling, Senslesnesse.
when the Philistims abused his body, and 1 Samuel 31. 10
hanged up the same on the wall of Bethshan.

2 A dead body, wanting vital Heaviness.
spirits, is heavier than it was when the soul remained therein: this
heaviness of body apparently made these Jews, when they were burying 2 King.
13.21
a corpse, when they saw the Soldiers of Moab, they cast his corpse in the
sepulcher of Elisha.

3 Seeing there is weakness Weakness.
in man while he lives, (for all flesh is as grass) how weak is he wanting
life? That Giant Goliath being dead, had 1 Samuel 17.46
no strength to keep his carkase from the fowls of the air.

4 If old age brings coldenesse Coldness.
to the feeble body, (for David himself being stricken in years, albeit 1
King. 1. 1
they covered him with cloths yet no heat came unto him) death much more makes
the body cold as a key, or as clay.

5 The body by death grows Ugliness.
ugly, and unprofitable to behold. when beautiful Genes. 12. 11
Sara her self was deprived of life, then her loving husband Abraham had no
pleasure to look on her, he Genes. 23.3
arose from the sight of the corpse, he made request and gave money for a place
to bury his dead wife from his sight.

6 Putrefaction, and rottenness follows death; The body will Rettennesse.
return to the dust, and be putrified: albeit the Genes. 13. 16
Physician embalmed Joseph and put him in a chest, yet they could not preserve
his frail flesh from putrefying; Exodus 13. 15.
for Moses took but his bones with him from Egypt.

7 A dead body becomes loathsome, and has an evil smell, A evil savor.
therefore, Mark said of Lazarus whom CHRIST John. 11. 39
did raise from the grave, LORD! he stinketh already, he has been dead
four days.

Yet, notwithstanding this natural death brings not wretchedness, but
rather happiness to the bodies of the godly.

For their bodies being dead, shall Isaiah. 57. 2
have peace and shall rest in their beds for a time: They 2 Cor. 15. 42 43. 44
will be sown in corruption, but raised in incorruption: They will be sown
in dishonor, but raised in glory: They will be sown in weakness, but
raised in power: They will be sown natural bodies, but raised spiritual
bodies. Now the death of sin will bring such senselessness, that albeit the
Prover. 23.35
wicked be stricken yet they are not sick, albeit they be beaten, yet they know
not, they have no feeling nor pain of their misery, their heart is dead within
them, and they are like a stone.

2 This death it will bring such heaviness, so that the sinner cannot lift up
his soul to GOD, it will be disquieted, Psalm. 42. 11
and cast down within him.

3 It will bring such weakness, that one cannot rise inwardly: unless he be
lifted: one cannot stand, unless he be strengthened: one cannot go forward,
except he be borne in GODS bosom: one cannot do good, except he be
helped; Iam. 4. 6
neither resist the Devil, or the smallest tentation, except Ephesians. 6. 13
14.15.16.17. 18
he put on the whole armor of GOD.

4 Coldness comes by the death of sin, and no wonder, for as a father
says, Frigus DEI est, cum deserit peccatorem, nec vocat, Augustine.
nec aperit sensum, nec infundit gratiam. GOD leaves that sinner, he calls
not on him; neither opens he his senses, neither infuseth grace: He
remains like to the Salamander, who as they say, walking upon the fire, does
extinguish the same: And Hab. 1. 6
albeit he cloth himself, yet shall he not be warm.

5 By this death of sin one becomes abominable, and ugly in the eyes of
the Almighty: The LORD cannot endure to look upon such a one: If hunger or
bodily famine will make the Lament. 4.7
Nazarites, who were purer than snow, and whyter than milk, and rudier than
the red precious stones, to have a visage blacker than a coal and to be
withered like a stock; will not this death bring greater blackness, and
deformity, it will surely remove all comeliness, and beauty.

If DAVID said, in regard of his afflictions he was become a Psalm 71. 7
monster unto many; surely much more a sinner, in respect of his transgressions
appears a monster in the eyes of the Almighty: He is Titus. 1. 16
abominable, and to every good work a reprobate.

6 By this death a sinner becomes like Isaiah. 14. 16
a carkase, trodden under foot, such a one Job 13. 24
consumes like a rotten thing; and as a garment that is moth-eaten, he is
corrupt and putrified.

7 Yea Joel. 2. 20
his stink shall come up, and his corruption shall ascend: and his Isaiah. 34.
3
stink shall come out of his body, and the mountains shall be melted with his
blood.

But which is worst of all, this death of sin, without regeneration, brings
the Revel 21 8
second death, which is eternal death, anguish and tribulation. Mors prima
animam nolentem pellit de corpore; Augustinus
Mors autem secunda animam nolentem tenet in corpore. The first death thrusts
the unwilling soul out of the body; the second death detaineth the unwilling
soul within the body. Mors nulla major est, quam vbi non moritur mors, Idem.
and surely there is no greater death, than when death dies not: This
brings everlasting misery, and perpetual wretchedness, the abundance of
all affliction, the want of all consolation. Ingressus humanae conditionis,
miserabilis, progressus humanae conversationis, culpabilis, Hugo de vilitate
humanae conditionis.
egressus humanae dissolution is damnabilis: The ingresse of man's condition is
miserable, the progress of man's conversation is culpable; and the egresse of
man's dissolutionis damnable.

Now contrariwise, if thou shall be quickened with spiritual life, thou shall
surely attain to happiness, and felicity, then thou have Revel. 20. 6
part in the first resurrection: the second death shall have no power over
thee, thou are blessed, and holy, thou shall be nourished in this life, and
glorified in the life to come: Resurgat in prima resurrectione, qui non vult in
secunda damnari. Let him rise in the first resurrection, who in the second
would not be condemned.

2 Thus, thou living the life of grace shall be nimble, light, and spiritual
discerning al things; 1 Corin. 5. 14
seeking Coloss. 3. 1
those things, which are above: While thou art in nature, thou art like an
egg, heavy and dead, Similitudo Zanchii.
but in, and by grace hatched, thou art like a bird moving, seeking, and
flying.

3 Then the love of GOD shed 2 Cor. 5. 14
abroad into thy soul, constraining thee to do thy duty, shall strengthen
thee for thy calling: 2 Cor. 12. 9
His grace shall be sufficient for thee: thou shall be more strong, than
Goliath: than Milo, who with a Sam. 17. 5
stroke of his fist did kill a Cow, than Polydamas, who trusting to their own
strength, died all miserably, Franciscus Patricius lib. 2 de institutione
reipubl.
but thou shall live most happily, overcomming the Devil thine adversary:
Yea, in Romans 8. 37
al things through CHRIST thou shall be more than a conqueror, Philip. 4. 13
through him, thou shall be able to do all things necessary.

4 When thou enjoys that spiritual life, thou shall be warm with the heat
of the holy Spirit, and of the Malach 4. 2
sun of Righteousness, which shall arise unto thee, wherewith thou shall be
so inflamed, that the extremity of cold shall never prevail against thee.

These forty Martyrs, who (that father writteth) in the days Basilius
Magnus in 40 Martyros.
of cruel Licinius, were cast into a pond of water all the night, suffering
the cold Northern wind, and their bodies being frozen, and almost senseless;
their souls remaining hot, with the flammes of GODS love, endured that pain
of these Northern blasts most patiently; as also the torments of the fire most
courageously.

5. Then thou shall be comely, and pleasant in the sight of thy LORD: Thou
Psalm. 45. 13
shall be fair, and all glorious within, the Psalm. 90. 17
beauty of GOD shall be upon thee, which fades not, but ever shall remain
with thee: wisdom also and joy shall never depart from thee: it is much
better than earthly beauty.

A fair woman, coming to Coelius Rhodius lib 6. cap. 15. and Stephan.
old age, looking into a glass, when she saw her comely countenance, and
well-favourdnesse altered, and wrinkled, for sorrow she lost her wit; and fell
into madness: but thou being thus beautified. GOD Psalm. 30. ^^
shall turn thy mourning into joy, he shall loose thy sack, and gird thee
with everlasting gladness.

6. Thou 1 Pet. 1. 23
being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, and continually
nourished with the sweet milk of GODS Word, and 1 Pet 2. 2
anointed with fresh oil, thou shall not rotte, nor decay: thou Psalm 92. 10
shall still bring forth good fruit in thine age: thou Isaiah 53. 15
shall be the true Israel of GOD, who shall be saved in the LORD with an
everlasting salvation: thou shall stand before his sight for ever.

Lastly: If Romans 12. 1
thou be a living sacrifice, thou shall be holy and acceptable to GOD, thou
Philip. 4. 18
will be an odor that smells sweet, and the LORD will fulfill all thy
necessities: He will also give thee a feeling of thy misery, that thou may
lament the same in a right manner, to thy eternal comfort afterward.

Now if thou ask how this life is obtained, that thou may attain to a sense
of thine own distress, and dangerous calamity, I answer thee by four
means ordinarily: first, by receaving of the holy Word preached: for CHRIST
has 2 Timothy 1. 10
brought life unto light, through the Gospel, by holding Philip. 2. 16
forth the Word of life: Secondly, by praying: the Prophet cried fervently and
frequently: LORD Psalm. 119. 25
quicken me according to thy Word: again, quicken me Psalm. 119. 149
according to thy loving kindness: Moreover, quicken Psalm. 119.149
me according to thy judgment, or custom. Thirdly, by the application of
CHRIST, who will do to thee in a manner, as Flisha 2 King. 4.33
did to the dead son of the Shunamite, he will (as it were) ly upon thee,
and put his mouth upon thy mouth, and his eyes upon thine eyes, and his hands
upon thy hands, and stretch himself upon thee, till thy soul wax warm, and
thy self reviue: Also by participation of the virtue, and vigor of that most
precious, and meritorious blood of that immaculate lamb, slain Revel. 13. 8
from the beginning of the world, who (as the Pelican) quickneth thee, when
thou art dead in thy sin, and as Plinius lib 2. cap. 20.
polium is a preservatiue against serpents; even so he preserves thee from
that old Revel. 12. 9
serpent Satan, persuing thee.

Fourthlie: by the operation of GODS sanctifying Spirit, whom Similitude.
in this action, and in all other service thou by no means may want: for as
the absence, or the want of food brings leanness: want of clothes,
coldness, or filthiness: want of light brings darkness: The want of this
Spirit will bring Psalm. 106. 15
leanness unto the inward man: it will bring pollution, and Revel. 3. 17
filthiness to thy soul: it will bring the blackness of Jude. verse. 13
darkness, and everlasting misery and wretchedness.

But by the gracious presence, and powerful operation of this Spirit, thy
Psalm. 63. 6
soul shall be satisfied with fatness and marrow: thou shall Cantic. 6. 9
^ooke forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, terrible as
an army with banners: then Job 34. 30
thy soul shall be turned back from the pit, to be illuminated in the land of
the living: Thou John 6. 63
shall get the life of grace, (for the spirit quickneth) and all other things
necessary.

The notable effects, the good fruits, and properties of the holy The holy
Spirit compared to the wind, by ten similitudes.
Spirit, are largely declared in the fifth chapter of our first treatise,
entitled CHRIST'S Star: where it is likened to fire, water, and oil: now in
this place we will compare it (with the Scripture) with wind, for these ten
respects.

First: the wind is free, blowing where John. 3. 8
it lists: it is unsearchable, Effects of the wind.
thou can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it goes, it is subtle and
powerful.

Secondly: Wind dries the watery, and durtie ground, and fitteth the same for
tillage, and manuring: After the deludge, GOD made Genes. 8. 11
a wind to pass upon the earth, the waters ceased, and the ground was dried.

Thirdly: wind blowing on ones back, will promoue him on his way, and help
one in his journey: yea, it will be comfortable unto the godly, for gaining of
victory, and destroying of their enemies, as it was Exodus 14. 21
to the Israelites in Moses days, as it was to Christian soldiers, in the
days of Marcus Aurelius, as in that Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 5
bloody battle of Theodosius the first, against the tyrant Engenius, Socrat.
lib. 5 cap. 25
the darts of whose army were turned back on their faces, as it Claud. Et
coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
was (GOD be praised) to the inhabitants of this Island, in the 1588 year of
CHRIST, against the Spainyards.

Fourthlie: A moderate wind will cool, and refresh (...), in time of the
heat of summer.

Fifthly: in the clean Math. 3. 12
floor wind will purge the corn, and separateth the same from the chafe,
which will be burned with fire.

Sixthly: Wind will raise corn fallen down with weight of rain, and cause the
same to grow.

Seventhly: Wind will win the corns, and preserve them from rotting.

Eighthly: Wind will further navigation, and bring Psalm, 107. 30
the ships and Mariners unto their haven where they would be.

Ninthly: Wind melts hard ye: he Psalm. 147. 18
causes it to blow, and the waters flow.

Tenthly: It purifieth the air, the Job. 27. 21
wind passes, and cleanses the clouds.

Lastly: the wind increases the flammes of fire, and makes it to burn more
vehemently.

Now these, and many more, more comfortable, and more profitable are the
effects of the holy Spirit, which,

First is a most free Spirit, most penetrating, and most powerful in
operation, whom he pleases, teaching, John 14. 26
and illuminating, and remembering. 2. regenerating, John 3. 5
and converting. 3. conjoyning, Cor. 12.13
and uniting us with CHRIST, that being made members, we may be quickened and
revived. 4. ruling and Romans 8.14
governing us, who are unruly, and subject to wander, and go Psalm. 119.167
astray, like lost sheep, even leading us in the right way to happiness. 5.
comforting John 1. 16
us in all troubles and afflictions, and sealing Ephesians. 1. 18
us, wavering in faith, and assuring us of our salvation.

Secondly: (to insist shortly in the comparison) by this Spirit, we will
become GODS 1 Cor. 3. 9
husbandry, to bring forth fruit plentifully and constantly.

Thirdly: by the help of this Spirit, we go forward in the strait gate, in
the narrow Math 7. 44
way, that leads to life, overcomming all impediments and enemies.

Fourthly: when thou walk through Isaiah. 43. 2
the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee;
but thou by the Spirit shall be refreshed joyfully, and cooled comfortably.

Fifthly: by this Spirit, the Lord will fine Mal. 3. 3
thee, and purify thee as gold and silver, and separateth thy sins, and
dross from thee.

Sixthly: GOD by the virtue of his efficacious Spirit, will raise thee up, when
thou fallest. When the holy Prophet Ezechiel saw that glorious, and Heavenly
vision, he Ezech. 2. 2
fell upon his face, and the LORD said to him: Son of man stand up upon thy
feet, and I shall speak unto thee, but of himself he had no strength to
arise, until the Spirit entered into him, and set him upon his feet: So it is
with thee, and the strongest Christian also, thou have no power to arise, and
stand, unless the Spirit enter into thee.

Sevently: So Psalm. 12. 7
the Lord will preserve thee from perishing, or rotting from generation to
generation, for ever.

Eighthly: then he will direct thee in the right course to Heaven, that Job 17.
9
thou Who are righteous, should hold on thy way, and thou Whose hands are
pure, shall increase thy strength.

Nyntly: his Spirit will work true says in thee, which Act. 15. 9
Will purify thy heart, and make clean thy conversation.

Tenthly: he will give thee an heart Ezech. 11. 19
of flesh, and mollify and soften the hardness, and obduration of the same.

Lastly: it will kindle the fire of grace within thee, and inflame thee with an
ardent zeal of GODS Glory: it shall be like the Levit. 6. 12
fire, burning on the Altar evermore, never to be put out, or extinguished.

Seeing then such is the necessity of the presence of the holy Spirit, seek
the same most earnestly, and continually: Entertain the same most carefully,
and conscientiously, never Ephesians. 4. 3^
grieve this Spirit, by which thou art sealed unto the day of redemption:
quench not These. 5 19
this holy Spirit by thy filthy sins, and stubbornness, for it will procure
to thee endless joy, it will work in thee new life and regeneration, and so
bring thee to a sense of thy misery, and to a deploration of thy calamity.

Without the power and asistance of this Spirit thou can never be revived and
quickened: As Ezech 17. 9
the dry bones which were scattered and dispersed, being conjoined, and having
flesh, sineues, and skin: but had no breath nor life, until the Prophet did
prophecy unto the wind, and life, and breath came unto the slain and they
stood up upon their feet a great army.

So, thou who by nature was Ephesians. 2. 5
dead by sins, will be quickened by GOD in CHRIST, by the breathing (as it
were) of the wind of the holy Spirit, thou shall line spiritually.

Now, seeing it is so sure, that without the Spirit thou know not Romans 8. 26
to pray as thou ought to do; seek for the Spirit, seek for this Spirit,
which will quicken and help thy infirmity, and make request for thee, with
sighs, that cannot be expressed, and then, the words of thy mouth, and
meditation of thy heart shall be acceptable in the LORDS sight,

Secondly: Before thou can truly lament thy wretchedness, Wakening be fore
true lame^ting.
and miserable estate, thou must not only be quickened with the life of grace,
but also awakened from thy deep sleep of sin, and security.

In this place we will declare (Godwilling) four things. 1. The evil of such
sleeping. 2. Who do sleep, and the difference between them. 3. The means of
awakening. 4. The good thereof.

First: the great evil, that fearful hurt, which comes by this sleep, can
not be sufficiently declared. The evil of sinful sleep.


First: The Talent given from Idleness.
GOD is not well used, the LORDS gifts are not duly employed: one when he is
sleeping, is Math. 25. 26
that unprofitable servant, that careless ^^gerer, from whom, that which he
has shall be taken away: he is not worthy of any reward.

Secondly: If natural sleep of Poverty.
the body be an occasion of indigence and scarsitie, for this is the saying of
Solomon himself, love not Prover. 2^.13
sleep, least thou fall into poverty: open thine eyes, and thou shall be
satisfied with bread: much more that spiritual slumber of the soul is a cause
of poverty, lamentable and shameful poverty proceeds therefrom: One Revel.
3. 17.
will be poor, and wretched: miserable, and naked. Qui modo dormit in
cupiditatibus suis, postea nihil inveniet in suis manibus.

Thirdly: Shame and infamy follows Infamy.
this security: for the wise man, he Proverb. 10.5
that sleeps in harvest, is a son that causes shame; he is a child of
confusion that sleeps vntymously, when he should be diligent about his
business. If ignominy follow sleep natural, it will rather follow
spiritual. When Noah after wine was sleeping, he Genes 9. 22
was uncovered in the midst of his tents, his shame and nakedness was seen,
and told to others. Our shame, and filthy nakedness will be seen of the
Almighty GOD, and of his holy Angels; and many others, when we are sleeping in
sinful security.

Fourthly: Our Math. 13.2^
enemy that Polluion or an evil mixture.
envyous one, while men sleep, will come, and sow tares amongst the wheat in
the husbandry of our hearts. If Abimelech did harm to the city of Shechem,
when Indg 9. 45
he sowed salt in it, for a token of perpetual detestation; will not Satan
do much more harm to a Christian, when he shall sow salt, and tares in his
soul; evil thoughts, and most wicked lusts to defile the same?

Fifthly: Our vigilant adversary Spoil of goods.
will also be most diligent, to bereave us of the gifts, which we have
already received: As that harlot took her neighbors living son, and 1
King. 3.20
laid her dead son in her bosom; so that deceaver will most craftily labor
to make a living soul a dead soul in sin, and in trespasses. During Samsons
sleep, one Judge. 16. 19
did shave off his seven locks of his head, and took away his consecrate
hair; then his strength was gone from him: yea, the LORD for a season departed
from him: therefore the Philistims, his enemies they took him, they put out
his eyes, and bound him with fetters, and he did grind in the prison house; so
while a Christian is sleeping, Satan will be most ready to spoil him of his
strength, and other gifts, wherewith he was endued.

Sixthly: By such sleep, man becomes most unlike to GOD, Unlikeness to GOD.
whom he should most of all resemble: for the keeper of Israel will Psalm.
122. 4
neither sleep nor slumber: GOD Job. 28. 24
beholds the ends of the world, and sees all that is under Heaven, ruling,
and governing all things, by his mighty providence: his eyes are looking, his
ears patent, his hand sustaining continually; and Psalm. 104. 27
giving food in due season to every creature: wherefore his servants should
study to show themselves, to be obedient children of their good Creator, to
be like to him in holiness, in righteousness, and in watchfulnes, That every
one may say Psalm. 25. 1
unto the LORD, I lift up my heart, and I Psalm. 123. 1
lift up my eyes (O LORD) to thee, that dwells in the Heavens, and I 1 Timothy
2. 8
pray every where, lifting up pure hands.

I will altogether, with all vigilance, and diligence, consecrate my self,
soul and body, unto the LORD his service, and Romans 6.13
give all my members to GOD, as weapons of righteousness.

7 Death, and destruction will Destruction.
ensue thereupon: if that young man Eutychus, Act. 20. 9
fallen into a deep sleep, and overcome therewith, fell down and with that
fall he died: whom the Apostle Paul raised up, and restored to life again.
Sisera Judge. 4 21
a valiant man, being fast a sleep was killed by a woman as Judge. 8. 11
the host of the Midianits which were careless, was easily destroyed in the
night.

Chedarlaomer, with the rest of the Kings, and their victorious army, being
Genes. 14.15
secure, sleepie, and drunken, as Josephus writes were surprised and smitten.
We Antiquitatiud. lib. 1. cap. 1. Franc. Patric. de inst. reip. and Herod.
read that Spargastes son to Thomyris, queen of the Scythians, and all his
army being buried in sleep and wine, was destroyed by Cyrus. Thus, if so many
has been overthrowen in sleep natural, many more have perished. while they
have been sleeping in sin and security.

Yea we read that a weak, Plinius.
and contemptible enemy, will overcome, and kill a strong adversary, being a
sleep: for albeit the Crocodile, an hudge and a savage Serpent, be of great
strength: yet a very weak beast, of a little more quantity, than a ratte:
while the Crocodile sleeps, creeps in at the mouth of the strong fish, it
goes down to the belly, and lacerateth the same: the Crocodile dies and it
escapes: No marvel then that Satan, who is strong, and subtle, get
advantage to overcome, and overthrow weak men, especially, when in security
accompanied with infirmity.

These, and more being the discommodities of that fearful sleep, namely, 1.
idleness, 2. indigence, 3. infamy, 4. pollution, 5. loss, 6. vnliknesse to
GOD, and 7. destruction. It is much to be wondered, and much more to be
pitied, that (Alace) so many should so carelessly continue in their let hargie.

Here in the third place we Who do sleep A difference between the godly and
the wicked.
will breefly declare, who they are that sleep. 1. The godly sleep. 2. The
wicked also, but with this maine difference; albeit while the Cant. 5. 2.
bridegroom tarieth, both the wise Virgins, and the foolish Virgins slumber,
and sleep, yet the wise have oil in their lamps, even, faith in their
souls; but the foolish are empty, and have not the oil of grace in their
hearts. Again the faithful sleep most unwillingly: they are sorrowful for
their slumbring: he sleeps, but his heart waketh, and it is oftentimes, that
he Numb. 15.27
sins through ignorance, so they sleep: But the wicked, he does Numb.
15.30
presumptuously, he sleeps willingly, as Prover 15.21
foolishness is a joy to him, so sleep is a pleasure, and delectation. This
may be esteemed a wonder in Gippius, that Roman, Lucilius apud Beraldum.
who would desire; yea, feign himself to sleep, and swore that his own wife
might play the harlote, more easily, and commit adultery. But it is very
usual to many, calling themselves Christians, who desire to sleep, that their
souls may the more readily commit great whoredom, Hos. 1. 2
departing from the LORD, a most pitiful, and mavelous matter. Few men will
sleep naturally, to prostitute their wives, but many will sleep spiritually,
to prostitute their souls.

Fourthly: Let us consider, by what means, and how we are awakened. 1. by
GODS Word. 2. by his rod. 3. by his benefits. 4. by the operation of his
holy Spirit,

First: The Word is a clear light, that shines Prove. 4. 12
in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our
hearts, it is a Lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths, that Psalm. 2.
9.
the way of righteousness may shine, as the light, which shines more and
more, until the perfect day.

The Word of the LORD, is his Numb. 10.2
voice, Which is mighty and glorious, like the silver trumpets, which were
used for the assembling of the congregation: Now shall the light so long time
shine in thine eyes, and shall this voice, and trumpet so long time sound in
thine ears; telling thee with many cries, and advertisements, that thou
sleep in a most perilous place, as Prove. 23.34
one that sleeps in the top of the mast in the midst of the sea. 2. In a most
dangerous case, having more cruel enemies in this wilderness, compassing thee
round about for thy confusion, than DAVID had in the wilderness Maon, where
he sleeped not, but made 1 Samuel 23. 36
haste to get from the presence of Saul, pursuing him. 3. In a most short and
troublous time, when other Saints, some of them are sore working for ^ Cor. 9.
24
their penny, some of them are fast Heb. 12. 4
running for their prize: some are praying, and weeping in calamity: some are
fighting for victory: some are suffering and resisting Act. 21. 13
unto blood, striving against sin, ready to die and give their lives for the
name of the LORD JESUS, for to obtain an incorruptible Crown of glory.

What now art thou (I pray thee) doing? Is this a fit time to sleep in? yea,
the Heavens are swiftly moving: the sea incessantly flowing and ebbing: the
earth is now decaying: All creatures Romans 8. 22
together are groaning: Our corruption is ever defiling: The world deceaving
continually: The Devil destroying bussily: The glorious Bridgrome Math. 25. 6
is coming: The righteous Judge approaching: The great GOD is already
executing his determined decree: and art thou yet slothful, yet securing, yet
sleeping?

What Jonas. 2. 6
meanest thou O sleeper? Thou sleep in such estate as Jonas: The heavy
tempest of GODS wrath is raised: the tempest of his indignation is increased:
the sea of misery highly swelled: the weak ship of thy rotten body is
fearfully cracked, it is like to be broken: thy neighbors have labored; and
death is present before thee: hell it self has gaped for thee; yet (alace)
thou sleep, when thou should awake: thou loyterest, when thou should
work: thou tarriest, when thou should run: thou go backward, when thou
should go fordward: ^hou rejoycest in wickedness, when thou should lament
in heaviness: thou art yielding, when thou should be fighting: thou art a
prisoner, when thou should be a conqueror; that thou Revel. 21. 7
may be GODS son to inherit all things.

What meanest thou O sleeper? Know thou not, that in the mean time thou art
contracting debt, which Math. 6. 12
vnforgiven will molest thee: thou Psalm. 51. 2.
art gathering filthiness, unwashed will pollute thee: thou art breeding a
Psalm. 36. 3
sickness, which unhealed will weaken thee: thou art making Prover. 5. 22
cords, which unloosed will bind thee: thou art Romans 2. ^
heaping coals, which vnremoved will burn thee, against the day of judgment,
and the declaration of the judgment of GOD.

What meanest thou O sleeper? to hinder Ier. 5. 25.
the good things of GOD from thee, to procure his anger and displeasure against
thee, to hasten his heavy curse and malediction upon thee, to deprive thee of
his blessed society, to bring everlasting Math. 25.12
pain and grief upon thee.

When the LORD called, Sam. 3. 4
and spoke to Samuel, he awaked, and answered, When Act. 12 7
an Angel of light came into the prison where Peter was, he awakened, he
arose, he followed, and obeyed: The LORDS voice has come ofter unto thee: his
marveilous light has shined longer unto thee: Awake, Awake.

It was holden a wonder, and a very rare thing, because that Plutarchus in vita
Alexan. and Iustinius.
Conqueror did sleep deeply, contrare to his custom, as oppressed therewith,
a little before he was to fight, that last, and great battle against Darius,
his Captains marveiled at him, Parmenio reproved him.

But this is an evil custom of many, that they are secure and sleepie in time
of greatest danger and difficulty; while they have to encounter with a subtle,
and puissant adversary, and to wrestle, Ephesians. 6.12
not against flesh and blood, But Ephesians. 2.2
against that prince, that rules in the air, and that spirit, which rules in
the children of disobedience, which is a great wonder, especially, seeing GOD
he calls upon them to be awaking.

Secondly: GOD has his rod, GODS rod.
who will not hear his Word, let him fear Math. 6.9
his rod: If an earthly father should (according to SOLOMON) smite Prover.
23.14
the child with his rod, to delyver his soul from hell: will not rather our
Heavenly Father, more wise and more loving, correct his child with his rod, for
his deliverance and instruction? Has thy LORD GOD this delight with thee? Art
thou not awakened? Have thou not turned Isaiah. 4
to him that smites thee? Have thou not sought the LORD of hosts, who
visits thee? thy case is most dangerous, thou have to be afraid
greattumlie, least Psalm. 2. 9.
he crush thee with his scepter of iron, least he break thee in pieces, like
a potters vessel: Thou Lament. 3. 1
shall be much more miserable than that man, who saw affliction in the rod of
GODS indignation.

Many are in regard of their estate like unto Dionisius Heracteol: in regard
of his godly estate, who was so corpulent, that albeit needles were thrust into
his belly, being asleep, yet he was senseless; and not touched with pain.
Many Prove. 25. 36
they are stricken, and not sick: they are beaten, and know not: they are
chastised, and amend not.

Ah! If Amos. 4. 6
the LORD give thee cleanness of teeth, and scarsnesse of bread, return unto
him. If GOD shall punish thee with thirst, and with drougth that thou shall
wander far to drink watter: Awake, and turn in time to GOD: If he shall
smite thee with blasting, and mildew, return unto him. If he shall send thee
pestilence, and sword, and a great overthrow; prepare to meet thy GOD O
Israel! See that thou be wearied of thine own ways: awake, and by unfeigned
repentance turn unto thy GOD, least he forsake thee altogether, and punish
thee with utter destruction and ruin.

Now when the LORDS hand shall be heavy upon thee, and his rod painful unto
thee, when thy cross shall be sanctified for thy conversion, be not Heb. 12
3. 5. 6
weary, neither faint in thy mind: forget not the consolation, neither
despise the LORDS chastenings: For whom the LORD loves, he corrects, and
he scourges every son, which he receaueth, even for thy profit: that thou
may be partaker of his holiness, and bring unto thee the quiet fruit of
righteousness.

When thou art corrected, hope thou that thy sin is remitted. Nullus fructus
correctionis, sine Augustine.
spe remissionis: There is no fruit of correction, without hope of remission:
Remember if the Lords Word had awaked, and amended thee: his rod had not
lighted upon thee: But, Quem non corrigunt Augustine.
verba, corrigunt experimenta: whom words will not amend, then let trial amend
them; and let him, who with the Word is bettered, and converted, confess with
the Prophet, It Psalm. ^^. 6
is good for me that I was afflicted.

Thirdly: Let the benefits which GOD bestows upon thee, be GODS gifts.
means for to awake thee: As when Elijah sleept naturally, under the juniper
tree: Behold 1 King. 19. 5
an Angel touched him, and brought benefits unto him; so oftentimes while thou
do sleep spiritually, GOD he comes and gives gifts unto thee: Thou
sleep, when thou forgettest the LORD. So says the Ancient, Quaecunque anima
oblita fuerit Dominum Augustine.
suum, dormit; What ever soul forgets the LORD, sleeps.

Thou cannot deny, but when thou have forgotten the LORD, he has been then
mindful of thee: he then has been beneficial unto thee. Israel Hos. 8. 14
has forgotten his Maker: His Ier 2. 32
people has forgotten him, days without number, who is only the good portion,
and ornament, and attire of his people. But has thy Wellbeloved come unto
thee, who art sleepie, and drousie? Has he for a long time knocked at the
door of thy heart: Open, Cant. 5. 2
open: has he put his hand in at the hole of the door, and powered in pure
mirrhe? Has he vouchsafed benefits abundantly upon thee? Has he Hos. 11. ^
healed thee, and thou know not? Has he drawn thee with the cords of men,
even with the bands of love; and thou awakest not; yet let the remembrance of
his blessings, which he has multiplied upon thee; seeing Cant. 3. 22
his compassions fail not, but are renewed every morning; let those be forcible
means of thy waking.

Fourthly: The operation of his holy Spirit, is most avai^eable, The holy
Spirit.
and effectual to this purpose: The 2 King 4. 3
servant alone with the staff is unprofitable, he returned, and confessed,
that the child was not wakened, the master behoved to come for the raising of
the Shunamits son: that lively Spirit, which 1 Cor. 15.45
quickens us: that lightsome Spirit, which illuminateth us, and John. 14. 26
teaches us by his forcible power, principally does waken us, neither the
word of GOD, nor his rod, nor his benefits will bring us out of that deep
lethargy, unless the LORD help us, by the powerful presence of his Spirit,
which is the Spirit of grace, and of compassion, which is that seed remaining
within us; whereby our corrupt qualities are so renewed that we die to sin,
and live to GOD: Spiritus sanctus, habitator noster ipse facit, augit, perficit
Augustine.
justitiam nostram: That holy Spirit, our indweller, works, perfitteth, and
augmenteth our righteousness, must awaken us, for these uses; and if by the
bountiful favor, of thy gracious GOD, thou have obtained this great gift; I
may speak unto you in these words, that CHRIST spoke unto Peter, Blessed Math.
16. 17
art thou, for flesh and blood has not done this unto thee, but thy heavenly
father, by his Spirit, which shall be a Romans 8. 2
Spirit of life, of truth, and John. 14 17
consolation unto thee,

Fourthly: Touching the good which we get, by wakening, it The profit
proceeding from this duty. Escape danger
is manifold. First we will perceive, and use means to eshew the danger into
the which we remain, as Genes. 32. 7
Jacob was in perrill; when Esau his cruel brother came against him, with
Exodus 14. 10
four hundredth men. As the Israelites were sore afraid, when 1 Samuel 11. 2
Pharao, and his chariots marched after them. The people of Iabesh-gilead were
in great hazard, when Nahash, the Ammonit beseiged them, who would accept of
no condition of peace, but to thrust out all their right eyes; and the Apostle
Paul, while 1 Cor 15. 35
he was fighting with the beasts of Ephesus, had great travel, all their
laborious, and religious men were not sleeping, but awaking: they saw their
danger, and were careful to eshew it, by wrestling, by crying, by praying, and
by fasting.

And seeing our estate spiritual is all hazardous; and we remain in as great
jeopardie, for so we have many enemies before us, profane like Esau, meeting
us, and as many behind us, like cruel Pharaoh, pursuing us: their be many
adversaries, like Nahash, beseiging us: and many beastly men fighting against
us: thou thy self by nature, (if thou have grace to consider) art riding on a
headie horse, like with a fall to bruise thee: thou art dwelling in a rotten
house, ready to smother thee, thou art sailing in a laiking ship, like to
drown thee: thy life is a warfare, wherein thou have many crafty foes,
desirous to destroy thee; that battle continues, that fight endures, unto
thy life's end.

Nunquam bella piis, nunquam Cvpr. demortalitate.
discordia desunt;
Et cum quo certet, men's pia semper habet.
And what, art thou sleeping most carelessly? Art thou yet oppressed with that
deep lethargy, and overgone with that heavy slumber of fearful security:
It may be cried to thee with compassion, with admiration,

Nate Deo potes hoc sub casu Propertii Epigramma.
ducere somnos? Thou who art John 3. 9
borne of God, art thou sleeping in so great an adventure?

O marvelous wonder! When Daniel was cast into the den of Lions; and in
danger, then King Darius remained fasting: and Dan. 6. 18
the sleep went from his eyes, Was he sollicitous for an other man? and will
not thou be careful of thy self, for thy own sake? I tell to thee with
tears, that thy estate is in perrill, thy soul is in manifest danger: Cruel
Psalm. 28. 13
dogs have compassed thee: mighty beasts have environed thee. The assembly
of the wicked have enclosed thee: thou art in the den of ramping, and roaring
Lions, seeking to devour thee: Let sinful sleep go from thee: awake out of
thy lasie slumber, to the end thou may perceive, and prevent extreme danger.

Secondly: If we be awake, we will be the more ready Strengthen.
to Revel 3. 2
strengthen the things that are ready to decay: for during our sinful sleep,
our spiritual life languisheth: our gifts many of them are gone from us: our
grace is sore decayed, and diminished, yea, come to that ebb, that we are at
the point of death. Let us awake in due time, to Math. 29. 4
provide more oil to our lamps, to get more grace to our souls. Let us take
wine Isa. 55. 2
and milk, and bread without money; that we may be satisfied, and
strengthened.

Then we will be soon moved, with all diligence to follow Use our talent.
our vocation, to employ righty our talent; and to behave our selves according
to our calling: remembering that we 1 Pet. 2. 9
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy Nation, That we are
Revel. 1. 6
made Kings and Priests unto GOD: That it is no ways beseeming to us, to give
our selves to security and idleness; to live James. 5. 5
in pleasure on the earth, and wantonness: when as in the mean season, we
have to perform a great business.

(...) It is not fitting to a counselor (who has a great charge) to sleep
all the night over.

Thus Nehemiah, (whose name signifies the consolation of GOD) who was sent to
restore the Jews to their own country; and rebuild Jerusalem, he Nehemi.
2.12
arose in the night, to view the walls of that city: he lay not still in his
bed. Also it is written of that famous Scanderbeg, that while he was delivering
himself, and his subjects of Epirus, from the slaverie, and tyranny of the
fierce Turks: and while with valor and See Rolls in the Turks story.
wisdom he was to fight against the strong enemy, to possess an earthly
kingdom, then he never sleeped above two hours in the night; but with
endless labor, and careful vigilancie repelled his enemies, and prosecuted
his affairs. We have great reasons to awake, to rouse up our selves from
security. seeing by nature we are Heb. 2. 15
subject to bondage, and spiritual slavery; that we may be delyvered from
thence; and 2 Pet. 1. ^1
to strine, that an entering may be ministered unto us abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST our Savior. This is a pitiful and
marveilous matter; for wicked men will absteene from natural sleep, to do
evil: Vt jugulent homines, surgunt Lucan. lib. 5 Non meiam Mart parato:
Securos caepisse pudet cum coniuge somnos.
de nocte latrones:
Vt teispum serves, non expergisceris autem.
Robbers, and throat-cutters will rise in the night to kill men, but we will
not absteene from spiritual sleep, to do good: we will not awake from this
security, wherein we have been wrapped up, both Tim. 4. 6
to save our selves, and others with whom we have to do.

Fifthly: When we awake tymously we 1 Cor. 13. 34
will live righteously; and every one thus awakened, delivered, and
strengthened; and well exercised, will at length say, It Galat. 2. 20
is not I that live, but CHRIST that lives in me.

We by waking and watching, Keep our garments.
will d keep our garments, we shall not walk naked; our filthiness will not
be seen; and we shall be blessed perpetually, we will be happy and
honorable: Blessed Luke 12. 37
are these servants, whom the LORD when he comes shall find waking.

Thirdly: As Genes 28.17
Iakob, awaking from his natural sleep, where he saw an Heavenly vision, and
received a comfortable promise, and a favorable revelation, was afraid: so a
Christian, awaking out of his sinful sleep and security, out of his deep
lethargy, will have great fear and terror, for GODS wrath and indignation,
for his own danger and destruction; and it will move him greatly, to make a
pitiful moan, and an heavy lamentation. The fear of God is the best
furnisher.


This holy and filial fear, is most requisite, and necessary for thee, and
that in three respects. 1. because it is the best furnisher. 2. the best
counselor. and 3. the best preserver.

First it is the best furnisher, for the Psalm. 3. 5
LORD will give a portion to them that fear him: nothing Psalm. 34. 9
shall be wanting to them that fear GOD.

This fear it will suppeditat Wisdom.
and furnish. 1. wisdom; it Prover. 1. 7
is the beginning of knowledge, it Ecle. 1. 24. ibid. and passim
is the root of wisdom, it raineth down knowledge, and understanding: It
fills the whole earth, v. 22.
with all things desirable.

Secondly: This fear will furnish Joy.
peace and l perfect health. Thirdly: Glory, gladness, and rejoicing, and a
joyful crown comes therewith.

Fourthly: It will bring courage Courage.
and magnanimity, thou need not to fear what man can do: Though Psalm 46. 2
. the earth be moved, though the mountains fall into the midst of the sea:
Though the waters thereof rage, and be troubled, and the hills shake at the
surges of the same: Though Psalm. 27. 3
war be raised against thee, and though an host should encampe against thee,
thy heart needs not to be afraid. yea, though thou Psalm. 33. 4
should walk through the valley of the shadow of death; and the devil
Ephesians. 6.16
throwing his fiery darts at thee, thou have not cause to fear an evil, for
the LORD is with thee, his Psalm. 138. 7
right hand will save thee, he will Psalm. 91. 4
cover thee with his wings, and thou Isa. 40 11
shall be sure under his feathers: he will carry thee in his own bosom; Et
quid timeret homo, in Dei sin positus: What should a man, placed in GODS
bosom fear? And thus thou shall have continual courage, thou shall be Pror.
28. 15
bold, as a Lion.

Fifthly: This fear of the Lord shall furnish thee all good riches: for Isa.
33.6
the fear of the LORD shall be thy treasure; and no Math. 6. 20
thief shall steal this treasure from thee.

Secondly: This holy fear is The fear of GOD is the counselor.
the best counselor, it will not (with Satan, the world, nor the flesh)
counsel thee to do any wrong, or evil. 1. Not to any person; although weaker
than thou; and in thy reverence: thus Joseph Genes. 50.15
a powerful governor did not harm his base brethren, being strangers. 2. Not
in any place: David fearing GOD, will not wrong Saul 1 Samuel 24.17
in the cave. 3. Not in any time; abeit it were in an universal defection: so
Noah fearing GOD was a 2 Peter. 2. 5
preacher of righteousness to the ungodly world. 4. Not for any cause: No: not
for a Kingdom: thus Jonathan fearing GOD, came 1 Samuel 23.17
and comforted distressed David, and no ways wronged him: Again, this fear
it will counsel thee Titus. 2. 12
to live godly, and religiously in this present world. A godly father says
truly, Connexa sunt timor, and religio, nec Bernardus in sermon de donis
spiritus.
potest manner alterum absque altero: Fear, and religion are knit together,
that the one cannot remain without the other.

Thus if Cornelius Act. 10. 2
fear GOD, he will be a devote man, praying continually.

Secondly: To do the works of charity: thus happy Obadiah, 1 King 18.13
who did fear the LORD from his youth, when wicked Iezabell slew the LORDS
Prophets, he hid an hundredth of them, and sed them by fifties in a cave, with
bread and water: and the former Cornelius did give much alms to the poor
people. Also it will counsel thee to suffer wrongs patiently: by this David
endured 2 Samuel 16. 11
the contumelious injuries of Shimei.

Thirdly: This fear is the best 3. Fear is the best preserver.
preserver of all grace and innocence: it is so to thy soul, as the ballast
is to the ship; and as the Imocentiae custos, and omnium bonorum.
eyelids to the eyes; and as an hedge to a garden, saving thy soul from
drinking in the sea of sin, preserving thee from thy devouring enemy,
delivering Psalm. 91. 3
thee from the snare of the hunter, and from sin and impiety, keeping all
righteousness in thee: Nemo nisi Deum Augustine.
timeat, potest servare justitiam.

Surely this fear will guide and defend thee from yielding to the tentation of
fleshly pleasure and sensuality, as it did Genes. 39. 9
Joseph from the filthy tentation of gain and commodity: as it did 1 King. 5.
16
Elisha from yielding to the tentation of worldly honor, and dignity: as did
Moses, who Heb. 11. 24
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Timentis DEVM bona est
Augustine.
anima, and a tentatione diabolica tuta: the soul of one that is godly is
good, and sure from the tentation of the devil.

Excellently writteth Bernard, Bernardus in sermon de dono Spiritus.
Omne virtutis adificium ilico vergit in praecipitium, si hujus gratiae
amiserit praesidium: all virtuous building will fall flat down to the ground
incontinently, if it loss the help of this grace: Sine hac gratia prima
gratiarum, que totius religionis exordium est, nullum bonum pull^lare, aut
manare potest: Without this grace, the first of graces, which is the beginning
of Religion, no good thing can spring up unto thee. If thou be GODS 1 Cor. 3. 9
building, let not this keeper depart from thee, lest thou fall to ruin, and
destruction.

Wise Abraham judged, that there was no good in Gerar; neither pity, equity,
or civilitie, when Genes. 29.11
the fear of GOD was not in that place: and surely, according to Peter's
preaching in every Nation. He that Act. 10. 35
fears GOD, and works righteously, is accepted with him.

Lastly: Thou being quickened, awakened, and somewhat afraid: Sorrow before
lamentation.
thou will have that godly 2 Cor 2. 16
sorrow that causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: then
thou will set thy self to deplore thy miserable estate, and woeful condition,
thou will give thy self to earnest prayer, and supplication, that the LORD may
refresh thee with his inward consolation, that he may Psalm. 106.4.5
remember thee with the favor of his people, and visit thee with his
salvation: that thou may see the felicity of his chosen, and rejoice in the
joy of his Sancts, and glory with his inheritance.

Now, persuade thy self assuredly, as it is Heb. 9. 27
appointed, that man should once die naturally: so it is appointed that every
man should lament once pitifully: The wicked indeed are most unwise, and
unhappy, for they shall be constrained, to you will and lament eternally, for
their unspeakable pain, and punishment with Genes. 4. 13
Cain. 2. In an evil time with Heb. 12. 17
Esau, the season of repentance being past. 3. In an evil place, in Hell, in
the Revel. 21. 8
lake, which burns with f^e and brimstone. 4. In evil company, with the
Math. 25.41
reprobat, with the Devil, and his angels: yea, sometimes in this life the
strongest and best hearted of them, will you will with bitter lamentation. So
Eras. in Adag.
did the Emperor Bassianus, when he saw the image of his brother Geta, whom
he slew. So did courageous Pericles, at Plutarchus in Pericl.
the death of his son.

But the godly, they are wise and blessed, they lament. 1. For a good cause,
even for their sins, with Romans 7. 24
St. Paul. 2. In a good time, where their is hope of comfort, with Psalm. 6. 6
David. 3. In a good place, in the LORDS Sanctuary, with 1 Samuel 1. 9
Hannah. 4. With good company, with the Church militant, Which Revel. 7. 14
shall come out of their great tribulation; and remain in the LORDS presence
to be partakers of his joys forever.

If thus thou complain, and lament arightly, for thy grievous sins and
misery, thou shall not find the LORD, as Pharao Exodus 5. 17
to the Israelits, misregarding thee, refusing thee; and more vexing thee: But
certainly, at length thou shall find the LORD Exodus 34 6
merciful to thee, slow to anger, and abundant in kindness, saying to thee
comfortably, and doing commodiouslie, as David Sam. 22. 23
said to Abiathar, declaring Saul's cruelty, abide with me, fear not, for
with me thou shall be in safegarde.

Let us go on now to this lamentation, as it shall please our GOD to assist us
by his Spirit, and help us by his Alsufficient grace.

A LAMENTATION FOR OUR WOE AND MISERY.
The fourth Chapter.
ALmighty, and most dreadful GOD! thou who art the Genes. 18. 28
righteous judge of the whole world, who makes not the Exodus 24.7
wicked innocent, who is most fearful and terrible, a Heb. 12. 29
consuming fire against ungodliness. I thine own poor servant, a wretched
worm, who Isaiah. 1. 4
am a sinful creature, ladened with iniquity; overburthened with misery,
altogether polluted with impiety, most guilty for my transgression, subject
to thy wrath and indignation, worthy of death and eternal damnation: It is
impossible to me, to hide my self from thy Al-seing eye: Whether Psalm. 139.
7. 8. 9.
shall I go from thy Spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy presence? If I
ascend unto the Heaven, thou art there: If I flee down to hell, thou art
there: Let me take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the earth, yet there shall thine hand find me, and hold me: Though I hide
my self in the top of Carmell, thou may search me; and take me out thence:
and though I hide me in the bottom of the sea, yet there thou may command a
serpent to bite me.

Therefore O LORD my GOD, I desire earnestly to Iam. 4. 8
draw near unto thine Heavenly Majesty, to prostrate, and Psalm. 95. 6
fall down before thee my Maker in humility, to lament also my woeful
estate, and great misery. Now truth it is O LORD. that I am insufficient to
express Psalm. 106. 2
thy noble acts, and worthiness, so am I as unable to deplore my calamity
and wretchedness.

At this time I am persuaded GOD complains.
certainly, that thou my Creator, my preserver, and gracious benefactor, does
complain of me, for my manifold sins, and heinous iniquities: Ah! Isaiah.
1. 4
I am a seed of the wicked, a corrupt child, that I have forsaken the LORD,
that I have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger; that I have gone
backward: And that my Savior, CHRIST lamenteth.
my Redeemer has: egrated, has Mark. 6.6
mervailed, has mourned at mine unbelief.

When Luke 19.41
he beheld Jerusalem, he wept, because in her day she did not know these
things, which belonged to her peace: that I in the day of merciful visitation
am ignorant of these things, which concern my peace and aeternall salvation.

All the holy Saints, the chosen Saints do mourn.
of the LORD, who Math. 5 4
are blessed, they mourn now, that they may be comforted: They sow Psalm. 126. 5
in tears, that they may reap in joy everlastingly: Yea, the p dead earth The
dead earth lamenteth
lamenteth and falls away: the world is feebled, and decayed: the earth is
utterly broken down: the earth Isay 24. verse 4. and 19
is clean dissolved: the earth is moved exceedingly: the earth does reele to
and fro, like a drunken man: the inhabitants thereof are heavy upon it: it
shall be removed, like a tent: Yea, I know, All creatures groan.
that every Romans 8. 22
creature groneth with me also; and travelleth in pain together unto this
present, desiring to be delyvered from this bondage of corruption.

Seeing it is so: Have not I (forlorn miscreant, the chief cause of all
calamity) great reason seriously to deplore my lamentable misery; to bewail
my deplorable estate, and unspeakable calamity? Have not I reason to pour out
1 Samuel 1. 15
my soul before thee; and to walk Isaiah. 38.15
weakly all my years in the bitterness of my Spirit.

And first, (O LORD) I find Lament thy loss.
my self insufficient to lament duly the manifold, and great losses,
sustained by me, through my default, through my sin, and iniquity.

If the child of the Prophet sorrowed for a piece iron, 2 King. 6. 5
for an axe head, that fell into the river of Jordan, and thus cried to Elisha;
Alace Master! it is but borrowed.

And no question (O LORD) that Paul's companions, were then somewhat greived,
for the hurt and damnage they suffered in that dangerous navigation, where they
lost their lading, Act. 27. 10
and their ship also. If thy servant King David mourned, for the loss of his
dear friend Jonathan, with lamentation: Woe 2 Samuel 1.26
is me (cried he) for thee, my brother Jonathan: very kind have thou been to
me, thy love toward me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

If thy servant Jacob Genes. 37.34
rent his clothes, and did put sackcloth about his loins, and sorrowed a long
season, for his son Joseph, whom he supposed to have been lost.

And if without doubt Naomi lamented greevously, when her husband Abimelech
Ruth. 1.3
died in a strange land.

And if Jeremiah sorrowed heavilie, for the life of a good King, because the
breath Lamen. 4.20
of their nostrils, the anointed of the LORD was taken in the nets of the
enemy.

Yea, Ioash, King of Israel 2 King. 13.14
did weep upon the face of sick Elisha. If wicked 2 Samuel 14.32
Absalon was no way contented, when he saw not his fathers face: and if
profaine Esau cried Genes. 27.34
out with a great cry, and bitter, out of measure; when he wanted the blessing
of Isaak. Manasseh Manasseths prayer.
mourned for the loss of a worthy Kingdom.

Alace (O LORD!) when I consider deligently, the wonderful great loss, and
damage, which I have sustained spiritually, by reason of the multitude of my
sins, and iniquities, I cannot deplore, nor condignelie lament the same.

How is it possible to me, to sorrow sufficiently, for that I have lost that
fine Revel 3. 18
gold tried by the fire, enriching me? That Revel. 2.4
I have lost my first love beautifying me? I have wasted the portion of goods,
which my father gave unto me at my creation? How can I bewail my
foolishness, who have done, what in me lies, to loss the kindness of my
first, and best John. 15. 15
friend, so beneficial, and loving to me? Woe is me! because I have Revel.
1. 7
pierced my dear Savior: I have crucified Heb 6. 6
again the Son of GOD; my most worthy Ephesians. 5.32
husband, and have made a mock of him.

How can I deplore my misery and great loss? which I have gotten by my
rebellion against thee Iere. 10. 7
O KING of all Nations, unto whom appertains the dominion for ever? Who Math.
10.28
is able to destroy both soul and body, in Hell eternally? How can I,
foolish creature! lament my loss, for not harkening to thy Heavenly
instructions, and not receiving thy healthsome admonitions, who is my Math.
23.10
only doctor, and my John. 3. 2
teacher come from GOD?

I am much troubled, because Psalm. 101.29
thou hidest thy face from me, and for that, the light of thy loving
countenance does not shine upon me, because by my sins, I have almost lost
thy favor; Psalm. 30. 5
in which is life and felicity, and thy Prove. 10.22
blessing, which makes rich; and the Math. 6.33
Kingdom of Heaven in regard whereof, all the earth is but vanity and mere
misery.

Now truth it is, (O merciful GOD) that many have sustained Lament thy
poverty.
great loss; and yet has some good remaining behind: but I am redacted to
extreme poverty: I may lament grievouslie, because I Revel 3. 17
am miserable, and wretched; poor, and most indigent; empty and naked.

That widow 1 King. 17.12
of Sarepta, O my GOD! was greatly impoverished, and redacted to a mean
estate: She had not a cake, but even an handful of meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruse, she resolved, after that it was eaten to have dyed.

But O bountiful LORD! thy wisdom knows, that I poor wretch spiritually,
do remain in greater penury: I have not of my self a sanctified thought, an
holy word; no, not a small tear, one sorrowful sigh Psalm. 51 16
of a contrite spirit, or broken heart: For I truly know, that in me, in Romans
7. 18
my nature dwells no good thing at all: I am like one, who has made
shipwreck of all his goods: I am like Lazarus, Luke 16. 20
I have nothing of my self, not a morsel of bread, not a cup of cold water,
but that which I get by crying, and begging of thy Alsufficiencie. Now Lament
thy debt.
which is much worse O LORD! I am not only thy poor beggar; but also I am thy
debtor, wonderful great is my debt, terrible is mine obligation; and Colos. 2.
14
thine handwriting against me is fearful: That 2 King. 4. 1
poor widow cried for her earthly debt, because the creditor would take her
two sons, to be his bond men for the same: I have much more reason to cry
and mourn to thee for my spiritual debt, which without a discharge, will take
my soul from me: Alace Debt is easily contracted but hardly removed.
(O LORD) it was easily, and pleasantly contracted; but it is like to be with
pain and difficulty removed.

Satan has deceaved me: he made it to seem light and easy at the
beginning; but now it is too heavy, and very displeasant unto me: and if I
get not an acquittance from thine Alsufficient Majesty, I Math. 18. 34
will be delyvered to the jaylors; and cast into the prison, out of which,
there is no forth coming, nor redemption.

In the mean season (O LORD) albeit I be so drowned in debt, Lament thy
unfruitfulness
and misery; yet I remain as Math. 3. 10
a barren ground, as an unfruitful tree: woe is me, the axe is put to the
root: in danger to be hew^n down, and cast into fire, which is unquenchable,
I am (O LORD) by nature, like that unprofitable Luke 13. 4
fig tree, planted in thy wineyarde: Thou have for many years suffered me
patiently; thou have taken pains upon me: Thou have dug about me, thou
have sought figs and fruit from me. But (alace) thou have found none:
justly THOU may cut me down, and cast me out of thy wine-yarde to rotte
and putrify.

I lament bitterly, (O my KING and my SAVIOR!) that I Psalm. 39. 12
am Lament thy banishment.
not only a stranger, and sojourner, as all my fathers were; but also that now
I do remain in exile, and banishment, for my transgressions; a most just
punishment. The Israelites being banished from Jerusalem, did Psalm. 13. 2
weep when they sat at the river of Babel: And out of all question our first
parent Adam was perplexed, and sore grieved, when for his sin thou Genes. 2.
24
did cast him out of the garden of Eden; and banished him from a terrestiall
paradise.

But (LORD) I want words to bewai^e the evil of my trespasses, which without
forgiveness, will cause me be banished from IIeb. 12. 22
the city of the living GOD; from the Cel^stiall I^rusalem; and to be Luke 23
43
exiled from that Heavenly Paradise; the Luke 16. 22
bosom of Abraham, and to be tormented in Hell, in everlasting perdition.

Further (O LORD) I mourn 6. Lament for thy servitude.
with tears, and dolor, because I continue by nature a Romans 7. 10
servant of sin unto death, and of 2 Pet. 2 19
corruption; a slane to satan, unto damnation. If the Luke 15. 15
prodigal son did regrate his pitiful estate, when he served a stranger,
when he was sent to his farm to feed swine: and if that Egyptian 1 Samuel 30.13
the servant of an Amalekite, could complain of his masters cruelty, and
unkindness, who left him sick in the wilderness, destitute of all comfort
and necessaries: I have (O LORD) more cause to lament my sore servitude and
thraldom; in that I am slave to mine enemy, serving him in hunger, in thrist,
in need of all spiritual things, who will not go from me; but does abide
to torture me, and does put a Deuteronomy. 28. 48
yocke of irone upon my neck, and to destroy me.

Now (LORD) thy wisdom 7 Lament for thy burden.
knows, how greatly I am displeased, and how I bewail this burden of
sin, that Heb. 12. 1
preasseth so sore down, and this iniquity that hangs so fast on: They
Psalm. 38. 4
are as a weighty burden, too heavy for me, I am wonderful weary and
Math. 11.28
laden with them.

The Israelites in Egypt were cruelly oppressed, and vexed with bodily
burdens, they Exodus 1.11
sighed Exodus 2. 23
in their bondage; and cried to the LORD, who heard their moan, and had a
respect unto them* but I miserable wretch, am more overcharged with the heavy
burden of sin, if I were sensible thereof: The Scribs, Luk 11. 6
Pharise^s, and interpreters of the Law, did lade men with burdens of
ceremonies, grievous to be borne; but Satan, the world, mine own lust, and
concupiscence, do lay more heavy burdens of sin upon my conscience.

And thus (O LORD) being 8 Lament thy filthiness.
overburthened, I am altogether defiled, and filthily polluted, with the
turpitude, and pollution of my filthiness: I have remained in Psalm. 40 2
myrie clay, I am the dung upon the earth, I have wallowed my self in the
filthy puddle of this prophaine world, I am spotted, and altogether defiled, I
Ier. 8.2.
am filthy within and without: Nitre and Ier. 2.22
much soap will not wash away mine iniquity: All the water of the Ocean cannot
cleanse me, for I am unclean from my nativitie: I Ezech. 16.6
ly polluted in my own blood lamentably, I Job. 9. 31
am plunged in the pit, and mine own clothes make me filthy. Albeit the
water of the river Alpheus did cleanse the stable of Augeus, where dung lay
heaped up, the space of thirty years, yet all the waters of the rivers of the
Word cannot cleanse, Ier 4. 14
and wash my heart from wickedness: For alace (O LORD) I 2 Pet. 2 22
am like the dog returning to his vomit, and like the sow that was washed
coming again to the wallowing in the mire. I lament that I am bound in the 9
Lament thy bands
m^st miserable form: for Genes 42 26
Simeon, Judge. 15. 13
Samson, Daniel. 3. 20
Shadrah, Meshah and Abednego were bound bodily; but shortly loosed and
gloriously delivered: Thou (O LORD) laid Ezech. 4. 8
bands upon thine own servant Ezechiel; so that he might neither turn
himself from the one side to the other: But alace heavy bands are laid upon
me.

That Luke 13. 11
wretched woman, who had a spirit of infirmity; and was bound together
eighteen years, that she could not lift up her self in any wise: Satan had
bound her so, that none could relieve her of her bands; but thou O LORD could
loose her: she questionless did mourn grievouslie, in hard distress and
misery: but I poor catiue am detained in straiter ^etters and bands, (it
fears me for more years) so that I can not lift up my eves, nor my soul to
thee, as I desire, and should: for I (O LORD!) am sore smitten and wounded:
There is nothing sound 10 Lament for thy wounds.
in me, but wounds, and swelling; and Psalm. 69. 26
soars full of corruption. Alace! (O LORD) I Isa. 1. 6
have fallen amongst thieves, who have robbed me of my raiment; and of all
goods: they have wounded me, and left me half dead. Albeit King Ioram was
sensible of his hurt, and had a feeling of the pain and danger of Luke 10 30
the wound, which the Aramits had given him at Ramath: yet LORD I have little
sense, or feeling of the dolorous, and dangerous wounds, that Satan and sin
has given me, in this my warfare, and perilous fight: I have 2 King. 8. 29
small grief for them. I cry not to thee, who only is able for to heal Isa
30. 26
the stroke of my wounds, putrefying, and bringing destruction both to soul
and body.

And moreover, I am captivated, and by my foes strately imprisoned: Many (LORD)
of thy 1. Lament for thy imprisonment
servants were detained in earthly prisons; and questionless did mourn
bitterly, for their miserable estate and calamity Godly Joseph Genes. 32.20
was put in prison: They Psalm. 105.18
laid his feet in the stocks, and he was laid in iron. Strong Samson,
Judge. 16. 21
bound with fetters, did grina in the prison. Faithful 1 King. 22.27
Micajah was put in prison, and fed with the bread and water of affliction.
The holy Prophet Jeremiah was vexed in a dungeon; where he stack Ier: 38: 6
fast in the mire. And when thy holy Apostle St. Paul Act: 16: 25
with Silas were beaten wiih rods, and thrust into an inner prison, they
prayed: But (O my GOD) this spiritual dungeon, wherein I am holden fast, is
far more dangerous, and deplorable. How should I poor wretch, weep and
sorrow for my mishappe, and misery. Am Job: 7: 12
I a sea fish, that thou keep me in ward? When Psalm: 4: 1
shall I be delyvered, and set at liberty, from my deep distress?

Now by my imprisoning (O 12 Lamentthy weakness:
LORD) I am become very weak, and by my wounds infirm: I Psalm: 38. 8
am weakened, and sore broken: I roar for the grief of mine heart. I go
mourning Psalm 66: 2
all the day long: LORD I am weak; my bones are vexed. I Rom: 14: 1
am weak in faith. I 1 Cor: 14. 20
am a child in understanding. I Heb: 5, 13
am a babe, inexpert in the word of righteousness. I Psalm: 22: 6
am but a silly worm, and not a man: a shame of men, and contempt of the
people. I Job: 13: 52
am like a leaf, driven to and fro: and like the dry stubble. I Zach 3^: 2
am a burnt stick: a brande taken out of the fire. I Psalm: 119: 141
am small and despised. I Psalm: 119: 83:
am like a bottle in the smoke. There is no strength, nor 13 Lament thy
sickness:
beauty in me, poor miserable wretch! Let Psalm: 119. 169
my complaint come before thee, for my great sickness; and manifold diseases,
for my inward deafness. I am (alace) like many of the obdured Jews, who Act:
7: 57
stopped their ears, and would not hearken to the Sermon of Steven: Or like
the deaf Psalm: 58: 4
adder, which stops his ear; and will not hear to the charming of the
inchauter. I Zach: 7: 11
have often refused to hearken: I have pulled away the shoulder, and stopped
the ear, least I should hear the law of GOD, and the word, (O LORD of
hoastes) which thou have sent in thy spirit, by the Ministry of thy Prophets.
I am like the Heathens Idol, I Psalm: 115: 6
have ears but hear not.

Woe is me (O LORD) for my spiritual blindness: I am like one of the
unrighteous Egyptians: I am Wisdom: 17: 2
blind, and bound in the bands of darkness: I Isa: 59: 10
grope for the wall, and I stumble at the noone day.

If Samson was sorrowful for his sight, and desired to be avenged on the
Philistims, Judge: 16: 28
because they did pluck out his two eyes; and for that he was a laughing
stock to them: Have not I a greater cause of sorrow, and hatred, against my
sins, which has plucked out the eyes of my soul, and made me a gazing
stock to all creatures. Alace (O LORD) how can I pitifully eneugh make my
moan unto thee, for the frowardness, foolishness, doubleness, and hardness
of my filthy heart: for it Psalm: 101: 4
is froward: it Eceles: 1: 33
is double and divyded: it Hos: 10: 2
is foolish; impenitent, Rom: 2: 4
and earthly: it Ezech: 11: 19
is obdured, hard, and stome.

O my GOD! I have great reason to lament the spiritual leprosy of mine inward
man: I may most justly have my cloths Levit. 13 45
rent my head bare, my lips covered, and cry, that I am unclean: If the
bodily leprosy of Oziah, King of Judah, caused him 2 Chro 26.21
to be cut off from the house of the LORD; and to lose an earthly Kingdom;
may not my spiritual leprosy separate me from the society of CHRIST, from
the communion of the Saints, and deprive me of an Heavenly Kingdom.

But now (O merciful Father) I want words to deplore my 1^ Lament for thy
wickedness
wickedness, and my 1 Peter 2. 1
maliciousness, the very root, and welspring of all my woe and misery: I
delight to foster that serpent in my bosom, which does sting me, to carry
that fire in my breast, which does burn me, to keep still on my stomach that
poison that will infect me, and destroy me.

Alace! miserable is my madness: Should it not be my principal care, and my
continual indevoure? Should not I take all possible pains, to shake off that
serpent as Act. 28. 5
Paul did the viper, to cast away these coals, to vomit out that noisome
poison, that I may live, and not perish eternally?

Yet (LORD) this is worse, that I cannot condignelie complame 15 Lament thy
stubbornness.
of my contumacie, and stubbornness, (O my GOD,) I spoke in sincerity, many
Isa. 66. 4
times thou have called, but I would not answer; thou have spoken, but I would
not hear: Many times (Lord) have thou early Ier. 11. 7
rising, protested, saying, obey my voice: but I am disobedient, and
refractorie. Thou have come to me, when I have departed from thee: Thou have
followed me, when I have fled away from thee: Thou have stood and Revel. 3. 20
knocked at the door of my heart, but I would not open unto thee: I have not
(O LORD) been thoroughly moved with the love of mine own salvation: I have not
been arightly terrified with the fear of my condemnation: I Isaiah. 66. 3
have not trembled at thy Word, or threatenings: I have not been joyful of thy
sweet promises, and consolations. Alace (O LORD!) and woe is me, Isaiah. 43. 4
I am obstinate, and my neck is an iron sinew, and my brow brass. I am
senseless of my sin and past feeling. Yea O LORD I am dead in my
transgressions, and putrefying in my abominations: I have Revel. 3.1
a name that I live while I am dead: I 2 Timothy 5. 6
live naturally, but am dead spiritually.

O my merciful Father! I lament Lament thy curses.
bitterly, that by nature I am subject to thine heavy curse; and has deserved
thy terrible malediction, in respect I Ier. 11. 3
have not obeyed the words of thy merciful covenant: in respect I Mal. 1. 14
have sacrificed to the LORD of hosts, who art a great King, whose name is
terrible, a corrupt thing, a torn, and unworthy offering. Albeit I had a male
in my flock, in respect I Ier. 48. 10
have done thy work negligently: in respect I Isaiah. 5. 20
have been wise in mine own eyes, and prudent in mine own sight: in respect
I have fled Hos. 7. 13
away, and departed from thee my gracious GOD: in respect I have Habb. 2. 9
coveted an evil covetousness to mine house, that I may set my nest on high;
and in respect I Galat. 3. 10
have not continued in all things that are written in the book of the LORD to
do them.

Alace (O LORD) what shall I say to thy Majesty? How can 17 Lament thy
condemnation
I excuse my self before thee? I cry unto thee pittiefully: My condemnation
Hos. 13.9
comes of my self, but my salvation is from thee only: It Lament. 3.22
is of thy mercy, that I am not already consumed, because thy compassions
fail not: thy mercies are renewed unto me every morning.

Albeit (O most merciful GOD) thou Pet. 2.4. 5. 6
spared not the Angels that sin^ed, but cast them down to hell, and delyvered
them to the chains of darkness, to be keept into damnation: Neither spared
thou the old world, but brought in the flood upon the ungodly: and turned the
cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, thou condemned, and overthrew them
perpetually: yet LORD it has pleased thee of thy goodness to spare me into
this present time, who am worthy of that same punishment and condemnation.

O LORD! like Isaiah; 8. 14
a crane, or a swalow so should I chatter, and as a dove mourn before thee.

I am like Psalm. 102. 6
Polica^e of the wilderness: I am like an Owl of the deserts. I am as a
Sparrow alone upon the house tops. Oh! that Ier. 9. 1
mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night, for my misery and iniquity. O Psalm. 42. 7
LORD, all thy waves, and floods are gone over me: Sorrow for sin, grievous
calamity has so choked me, that I can not more speak to thy Majesty. Let
my secreet sighs, and my salt tears, and Psalm. 19 14.
the meditation of mine heart, be always acceptable in thy sight: O LORD my
Strength, and my Redeemer.

A PREPARATION BEFORE PETITION.
The fifth Chapter.
ALthough the due, and diligent practice of the promises of humble co^^ession,
and bitter lamentation, may very forcibly urge thee to earnest petition, yet
for preparation to the same, consider diligently, what graces, and good gifts
are absolutely necessary to prepare thee arightly, that thou may be a
true, and sinceere supplicant unto the LORD.

Now, lest James. 4.3
thou ask amiss and receive not; lest when thou stretchest out thy hand, the
Lord hide his eyes from thee: and though thou Isaiah. 1. 15
make many prayers, yet God will not hear thee* le^t thy Prover. 28. 9
prayer it self be abominable: Lest albeit thou Prover. 1.26
call yet the LORD laugh at thy destruction; and mock when thy fear comes:
Thou must take much diligent heed, with earnest endeavor, that in some measure
thou be endued with these good gifts, that are absolutely requisite, to the
end that thy prayer may be effectual, and comfortable unto thy self: the
want whereof, will make thy petition to be effectlesse; yea to be but
abomination.

Therefore come on, and consider with me carefully, what graces must
accompany thy petition, and convert (as it were) the same to Heaven.

First thou must have knowledge, Iraeneus lib. 15 (...). Justin. Mar. quaest.
1. d^ gent.
saving knowledge: Cognitio Dei renovat hominem: The knowledge of GOD will make
thee a new creature. It is the greatest good to man: It will bring thee to
salvation; for this John 17. 3
is life eternal to know the LORD, to be very GOD: and whom he has sent
JESUS CHRIST. Thou should not be a Samaritan, to worship that which thou
know not. Content not thy self with worldly wisdom, which is but sensual
Iam. 3.15
and divelish. Be not like an Basilicus.
Owl, blind in the day, but sees somewhat in the night.

A people that is of no understanding, he that made them, shall have no
compassion on them: and he that flamed them, will have no mercy on them
Shortly if thou know not CHRIST, thou shall never with Christians cry to
CHRIST; but with the Jews, thou shall kill him, and crucify Act. 3. 17 Faith.
him. Fides est seala, a terra in Coelum. Ambros. Fides est lumen animae,
ostium vitae, fundamentum salutis arternae Chtysost.


Secondly: Thou must have true justifying faith: This is the ladder of Iaakob,
from earth to Heaven: This is the light of the soul; the d^^^e and foundation
of life cternall: This is the golden port, by which the KING of Glory enters
into our mind: This is the first word of a Christian, I BELIEVE: This is the
ear, by which we hear CHRIST our good John. 10. 11
Shepherd: the eye, by which with MOSES we Heb. 11. 27
see him: The mouth by which we do receive: the tongue, by which we pray to
him, saying, Abba Romans 8. 15
Father.

This faith procures our adoption, that we are John 1. 12
the sons of GOD: This makes us the habitation of CHRIST, that he will
Ephesians. 3. 17
dwell in our hearts: It is the hand whereby we take hold on him; the Luke 2. 28
arms by which with Simeon we embrace our Savior CHRIST, and then we pray
to GOD, and praise his Majesty.

Now as this was a great point of wisdom in Themistocles, that when he came
in the presence of his enemy Admetas, King of Molossi, he took the Kings
son in his arms, and then made his petition to Admetus, of whom Thucydides
and Chytraeus.
he received favor and kindness: So thou, if thou desire to Iam. 4. 8
draw near to thy GOD, to go Hebr. 4. 16
boldly unto the throne of grace, and present thy self before him, from whose
Revel. 20.11
face both the earth and Heaven shall flee away: It shall be greatest wisdom
for thee to take CHRIST JESUS, in whom the Math. 3. 17
Father is well pleased into the arms of thy soul, and then make thy petition
to the Almighty, who will delyver Psalm. 91. 16
thee, glorify thee, and show thee his salvation: otherwise thy supplication;
yea, thy self shall be like Cains Genes. 4. 5
offering, whereunto the LORD will have no regard; because without Heb. 11. 6
faith it is impossible to please GOD, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and will procure but a punishment from him, who is the just Psalm. 94. 1
Avenger.

Thirdly: Study most carefully, and continually, to be graced with true
holiness and piety, without the Heb. 12. 15 Sine pictate virtues non possunt
esse in hac vita
which, no man shall see the LORD in mercy in the life to come, and without
it, there can be no virtue in this present life. If Psalm. 66. 18
I regard wickedness in my heart, (says the Psalmist) the LORD will not
hear me. If the Leviticall Priests of necessity, under pain of death, were
ordained to wash Exodus 30. 28
themselves with water, when they did go into the tabernacle; much more must
the Priest Evangelicall wash Ierem. 4. 14
his heart from wickedness, and his Psalm. 26. 6
hands in innocence, and then compass the LORDS Altar: he must put Exodus 3. 5
off his shoes, and cast Heb. 12 1
away his sins, and put Romans 13. 14
on the LORD JESUS, and be arrayed with his righteousness: Thou must have
written on thine head, HOLINESS Exodus 39. 30
TO THE LORD, and sanctify 1 Pet. 3. 15
GOD in thine heart; and be renewed according to his glorious image, and then
send up thy prayers into the Highest: for it is most true, that GOD John. 9.31
hears not sinners, who continue in their sin with delectation.

Fourthly: to the end thy supplication may be acceptable to Charity.
the Almighty, thou of necessicie also must have toward thy neighbor true
love and charity, in the which if thou John. 4. 12
dwell, thou dwell in GOD, and GOD in thee: So thou may know, that thou
John 3. 14
art translated from death to life, because thou love the brethren. If thy
soul 1 Pet. 1. 22
be purifyed in obeying the truth through the Spirit, thou will love
brotherly, without faining; then thou may pray comfortably without any
Isiodor. Etym. lib. 6. Nullum in vul nere proficitmedicamen tum, si adhuc in eo
ferrum sit. sic nihil proficit oration illius, cuius adhuc odium in pectore, vel
do lus maneat in mente.
doubting: As no salve, nor medicament will profit, or bring health to a
wound, if the iron remain therein; so thy petition will be unprofitable, if
hatred abide in thy breast, or deceit in thy mind: If thou have not the fire
of GODS Spirit within thee, and ardent affection to warm thee, then doubtless
thou shall have the fire of malice, anger, and hatred, which will consume thee.
If thou with Nahab Levit. 10. 2
and Abihu offer strange fire before the LORD, a fire may come^ out from the
LORD to devour thee: and albeit thou would 1 Cor. 13. 3
give thy body to be burned, and wo^l lest feed the poor with all thy goods,
and has not love, it profits nothing: thy self, thy prayer shall not be
regard^d, nor acceptable to GOD; neither profitable to thy own self; because
(as an ancient affirms) Nihil est pretiosius DEO virtute dilectionis, nihil
desider abilius diabolo extinctione charitatis: Their is nothing more precious
unto GOD, than the virtue of love, their is nothing more desired to the devil,
than the extinguishing of charity.

Leave l therefore thy offering before Math. 5. 24
the Altar, (says our Savior) go thy way, first be reconciled unto thy
brother, and then come, and offer thy gift, and send up to GOD thine humble
supplication.

Fifthly: thou who desire to Sobriety.
pray arightly, thou must be endued with temperancie and sobriety, and so as
CHRIST commands thee more conveniently, thou will watch Math. 26.41
and pray, that thou enter not into tentation, thou will be 1 Pet. 5. 8
sober, vigilant, and fit for prayer: This virtue of temperance is the leader,
and moderatrix Temperantia est actionum auriga and moderatrix.
of our actions.

Intemperancie will greatly sunder thee from this holy duty, it is the
greatest degree of filthy shame, and misery: And therefore Xerxes, after
deliberation did Spinaeus in vo lupt. lib. 5
inflict the highest punishment upon the Babylonians, when again he subdued
them after their rebellion; he did prohibit the virtuous exercises of arts,
and sciences; and enjoynd them to give themselves to idleness, play,
banqueting, and surfeiting, and to all luxury and voluptuousness.

Take Luke 21. 34
heed therefore to thy self, lest at any time thy heart be oppressed with
sursetting* and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, least that day come
on thee at unawares. Watch therefore, and pray continually. Join 2 Pet. 1. 5
therefore with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperancie: (which as the
Philosopher affirms is Arist. Ethic. lib. 6 cap. 5 Fervencie.
the preserver of all other good qualities) and then surely Iam. 5. 16
thou shall not be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

Sixthly: If thou wish thy petition profitable, thou must pray with an vehement
and earnest affection: for Genes. 32. 28
the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. Remember well
I beseech, that all pious professors, who has s had power with GOD, were ever
most ardent in their requests.

Consider diligently, and follow faithfully, in the uttermost of all thy power
the fervencie, and ardor of good Kings: David says, As Psalm. 42. 1
the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pan^et my soul after thee O GOD:
and Hezekiah, incline Isaiah. 37. 17
thine ^are O LORD, and hear: open thine eyes O LORD, and see: And godle
Prophets, Daniel crying O Dan 9. 19
^ LORD hear! O LORD forgive! O LORD consider and Habbak^k praying, O LORD
Habb. 3. 2
reviue thy works in the midst of thy people, in wrath remember mercy.

But principally consider Heb. 3. 1
the Apostle, and high Priest of our profession CHRIST JESUS, which in Heb. 5.7
the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears Our blessed MASTER in Luke 22. 44
his most bitter and heavy agony, He prayed most earnestly with great
fervencie, and his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground.

Many indeed do mervell at that most illustrious George Castriot Abrahamus
Scultetus in lib. de precat. cap. 19.
Scanderbeg, the peerless Prince of Epirus, in whom (they write) was so great
ardor into fighting, that the blood would burst forth out of his lips, but
surely, one has greater cause to wonder at the fervencie of our SAVIOR, who
was so vehement in praying, that a bloody sweat came not from his lips
only; but also from his whole body in great abundance: Follow then the ardent
zeal, and fervencie of thy Master, and take good heed, (I beseech thee) that
thou do Ier. 48. 10
not the work of GOD negligently, least thou be subject to GODS curse, and
misery, that thou Revel. 3. 16
be not cold nor luckewarme, least CHRIST spue thee out of his mouth most
shamefully. Quomodo Cyprianus in sermon de oratione Domini.
te audiri a DEO postulas, cum ipse te non audias? How can thou require thy
self to be heard of GOD, when thou hear not thy self by sloathfulnesse,
coldness, or distractions: But thou call upon GOD with a vehement desire, and
earnest affection: So did Samson for earthly water, saving, LORD Judge. 15. 18
shall I die for thirst: more fervently should thou pray for the water of the
Well of life, for thine aeternall consolation.

Seventhly: Above all labor Sincerity.
with continual care and industry, that thou may ever be graced with
uprightness of heart, and sincerity, to the end, thy prayer may have force
with GOD, and tend to thy solicitie: Content not thy self to be like the
hypocritical Jews, of whom GOD complains; because they Hosea. 7. 14
cried not unto him With their hearts, When they houled upon their beds, and
because Isaiah. 29.13
they came near to him With their month, and honor him With their lips, but
had removed their heart far from him: And truly this is a most grievous
complaint, also of that same Evangelicall Prophet; There Isaiah. 64. 7
is none that calls upon thy Name. What did that holy and wise Prophet
lament? did not that people appear Isaiah. 1. 12
before GOD, and did tread in his courts, and brought oblations, and kept
Sabbaths, and solemn assemblies. Did Amos. 5. 22
they not then pray to GOD, when they offered burnt offerings, meat offerings,
and peace offerings? The Prophet yet spoke truly, they did not call upon GOD,
because they did it not rightly, but lypocritically, and the prayer of the
hypocrite shall turn to sin, and be esteemed transgression. A Father makes
a notable comparison in affirming, that the hypocrite, Augustine.
and counterfaite Christian, is like that golden Revel. 17. 4
cup, which was in the hand of that whoorish woman, full of abomination and
filthiness, of her fornication: His prayer then can not be acceptable: Yea,
though Job. 20. 6. 7
his excellency mounted up to the Heavens, and his head reach to the clouds,
yet he shall perish for ever like his doung, and they which have seen him,
shall say, where is he? But worship thou thy GOD (as he requires) John 4. 23
in Spirit and Truth with an upright and honest heart in true simplicity,
which is the whole grace of our oratrie, which covers Tota Rheto ricae
nostrae gratia. est mera simplicitas
and ^^^eth all other infirmity, which is the highest perfection of
Christianity: for GOD P^al. 51. 4
who loves truth in the inward affection, he will ever do Psalm. 125. 4
good to them that are true in heart. He will hear their prayers, and in his
own good time grant them their requests, and fu^fill their desires.

Moreover in the eight place, yea in the first, study principally Humiliue.
to have true humility: because as excellently says the Wiseman, The Ec^l^s.
35.17
prayer of him that humbles hiraselfe, goes through the clouds, and cease
not till it come ^^ere; and will not depart, till the most ^^igh have respect
thereunto, to judge righteously, and to execute judgment, and doubt^^sle,
Isaiah. 66. 2
the LORD will look to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at his Words, Cae^e^ a vitia in peccatis, superbia vero in Augustine.
recte factis timend^ est; Other vices in sins, but pride is to be seared in
weldoing: And questionl^sse all Prove. 16. 5
that are proud in heart are an abh^mination to the LORD. The ambitious
p^titioner shall not be rewarded, but punished: learn Mat 11. 29
then of thy Savior to be m^^ke and ^o^lie in heart, and thou shall find rest
unto thy soul. Thou shall be contented, and thy petition granted: Prove 29. 23
For the humble in s^irit shall receive glory, and enjoy mer^ie. O felix
humilitas, quae DEI trahit ^lementiam, Augustine.
and ejus ligat omnipotentiam. O happy humility, which draws GODS mercy,
and binds his omnipotency.

Nynthly: Take good heed to Oppurtunitie.
the time 2 Cor. 6. 2
accepted, and to the day of salvation, wherein GOD will hear thee and succor
thee. Be not thou like profaine Esau, Heb. 12. 12
who afterward, out of t^me, seeking the blessing with tears, was rejected.
Follow not the joolish Math. 25 12
Virgins, who vntymously, when the gate was shut did cry, and were repulled:
but be careful Isaiah. 55. 6
to seek the LORD, while he may be found, and to call upon him, while he is
near. As some Emperiours, namely VESPASIAN had a time, even when he was going
to the baths, wherein he did principally show his liberality, and
bountifulness. So the great and most Genes. 4. 22
High GOD, possessour of Heaven and earth, has his own season when he will
bestow his rich mercy, and unspeakable goodness, when he will Hos. 10. 12
come and rain righteousness upon his people, which occasion if thou
^loathfully neglect, the LORD will not admit thy request, nor grant thy
petition.

Tenthly: As the holy Apostle Constancy.
exhorts thee, to These. 5. 17
pray continually: be Galat. 6. 9
not weary of welldoing, for in due season thou shall reap, if thou faint
not. Consider diligently that parable of thy Savior, of the importunate widow,
and unrighteous Judge; who Luke 18. 5
did her justice against her adversary, because she did make him weary. Let
thy prayer be li^e St Stevens looking, he Act 7. 55
looked to Heaven stead^astly, and therefore comfortabl^, for he saw the
glory of GOD, and JESUS standing at his right hand, ready to receive him, so
pray thou constantly, and ever with vehement affection. But use Math. 6 7
not vain repetitions, as the Heathen or ^dolaters, who think to be heard for
their much babbling: like Baals 1 King. 18.26
priests, who called from morning till noone, saving no other thing, but O Baal
hear us, all that labor was lost, there was none to answer them, or help
them: But I say pray continually with (...), and so thou may do
comforta^^^e, for Christ will have a ^are of thee, because if he gave acc^^^
to thee, being far d^^tant from him, much more will he hold thee, when thou
are more near to him: and if thou Psalm. 37. 4
delight thy self in the LORD, surely he will give thee thy hearts desire in
due and convenient time for to comfort thee.

Lastly! in the first place, most carefully and continually labor, Spirit.
to be possessed wholly with the san^tifying Spirit, who is GOD, and the gift
of GOD, which Romans 8. 26 Deus, and donum Dei.
will help thy infirmities, when thou know not to pray as thou ought,
the spirit it self will make request August.
for thee with sighs which cannot be expressed, which will work hope and
confidence in thee, so that thou Heb. 10 22
shall draw near to GOD, with a true heart, in the assurance of Faith: so that
thou shall give thy self to true fasting and almsdeeds. This hope and
confidence will not make thee Romans 5. 5
ashamed, but encouraged; and if thou desire thy prayer to flee up to Heaven,
thou must have (as that Father cou^selleth) two August.
wings, namely, this right private fasting a frequent custom of a good Heb.
13. 16
doing and distributing, for with such sacrifices GOD is pleased: thou with him
will be reconciled, and thy request granted.

This Spirit will cause thee to continue Col. 1. 21
grounded and stablished in faith, and not to be moved away from the hope of
the Gospel, to be so rootted and builded in CHRIST, that thy heart shall not
be distracted with vain cogitations, or worldly cares in time of this holy
service, neither shall thou waver Iam. 1. 6
and be like a wave of the sea, tossed with the winds and carried away.

If in time, and in the practice Plutarch, in vita coriola.
of the blind superstition of the old Romans, a crier proclaimed, Hoc age, do
this only; much more in the sincere service of our GOD, we should be most
intentive, and only diligent to perform this duty.

Now seeing the true supplicant must be graced with all these qualities, thou
may soon perceive the difficulty of this exercise, it is wondrous hard, to
be adorned with so many properties, and more of the difficulty of this action,
thou shall find in the 12. Chapter following.

Thus after confession, and lamentation, Remember to note well that all these
good gifts and qualities. are both purchased and increased by prayer.
go on to an earnest and sinceere p^tition, with consideration of thine own
indignity, and of the necessities of those good things to be desired and
asked, and let this petition be to thee an information of the principal
graces, which ought fervently to be required.

A PETITION FOR GRACE MERCY etc.
The sixth Chapter.
O Almighty GOD, and most merciful Father, truth it is, that in regard of my
wickedness, and wretchedness, the Psalm. 116. 3
snares of death have compassed me, and the griefs of Pray for the Lords
remembrance.
the grave have caught me; I now find trouble, sorrow, and misery. But O
LORD I humbly pray thy Majesty, to Psalm. 40. 16
think upon me, who am poor, and needy; and to remember Psalm. 106. 4
me with the favor of thy people, and to visit me with thy salvation, by
this thy merciful rememberance (O my gracious Redeemer!) albeit I remain in a
deludge of dangers, yet with Noah Genes. 8. 1
I shall be delivered: albe^t I be in doolefull distress, yet with Rachell
Genes. 29. 22
I shall b^e comforted: albeit I be in pain, in shame, and cala^nitie, yet
with the Luke 23. 43
penitent thief, I shall get pleasure, honor and felicity.

Write m^ nam^ ^ bese^ch thee in that Book Mal. 3. 16
of rememberance, which is before thee. Isa. 49. 16
Grave me upon the palm of thy own hands: set Cant. 8. 6
me O LORD as a seal upon thy heart, and as a signet upon thy own arm, that
^o thou may ever think upon me, and that I may remember upon thee
continually, and Cant. 1. ^
remember thy love more than wine, and that I may rejoice, Psalm. 97. 12
and gave thee that for thine holy rememberance.

O gracious GOD! look Isaiah. 63.15
down 2 For Gods gracious look
from the Heaven, and behold from the Genes. 16.13
dwelling place of thy Sanctuary, me thy own poor servant; loo^e LORD upon
me, as thou looked n upon Hagar, Abraham's maid: s^^e then received
instruction and consolation; so I shall be wel^ instructed, and comforted;
turn Psalm. 25. 16
thy face unto me to regard me, who am deso^ate, and needy: look upon me,
as thou did to thy servant Peter, Luke 22. 6
that I may remember thy Word, and weep b^tterly for my transgr^ssions, and
gran^ (O my Savior!) that as Psalm. 123. ^
the eyes of the servants, look unto the hand of their masters; and as the
eyes of a maid unto the hand of her mistress; so my eyes may wait upon thee
O LORD my GOD! until thou be beneficial unto me.

O m^rcifull Father! Psalm. 77. 7
absent not thy self for ever, not only 3 For GODS good coming.
remember me, and look upon me, but come quickly Revel. 22. 20
to be my deliverer and to be my comfortable helper, Psalm. 90. 13
return (O LORD how long) and be paci^ied toward thy servant.

If the Gibeonits, being in danger of their enemies, thus besought Joshua*
saying, Josh. 10. 6
withdraw not thine hand from thy servants, come up to us quickly, and save us,
and help us: I have greater need to cry to thee O JESUS, withdraw not thine
hand from me: Psalm 18. 9
Bow the Heavens, come O LORD my GOD! bring to me (who 4 Pray for mercy.
am miserable) m^rcie under Mal 4. 2
thy wings: Have compassion upon me, a wretched tre^passer: for with thee O
LORD there is abundant mercy, Psalm. 130 7
and great redemption! I rejoice O good GOD! that thy mercies Psalm. 36. 5
do reach unto the Heavens, and thy faithfulness, unto the clouds: that the
shining sun in the firmament, shall sooner want light, and the great Ocean
shall sooner want water; than thou, O infinite in goodness, shall want mercy
for a poor penitent sinner. Give some portion thereof to me, who am most
indigent. Have Psalm. 6 2
mercy upon me, who am weak, and who desires to repent: without this
me^cie, all other gifts O LORD, as an abortiue birth is to the mother: As Psalm.
58. ^
the untimely fruit of a woman, which has not seen the sun, which will
bring pain, and peril to the parent; but no pleasure, no profit at all.

O LORD! thou art the fountain 5 Pray for grace.
Ier. 2. 13
of living water: thou have the fullness Ioh. 1. 16
of grace and truth: O most loving Father, give grace to me, who of my self
am void of all good, and graceless: whereby I may so serve thee, that I may
please thee, with reverence and fear: Albeit sin Heb. 12. 28
abounds in me, yet grace Romans 5. 20
much more abounds in thy Majesty: Grant O Heavenly Father, that I may trust
1 Peter. 1. 13
perfectly on that grace that is brought to me by the revelation of JESUS
CHRIST: And I entreat 6 Pray for Gods favor.
thy Majesty, to lift Psalm. 4 7
up the light of thy countenance to shine continually upon me: bestow thy
favor Psalm. 30. 5
in which is life upon me, who has so often deserved thine anger, give to me
O LORD thy loving kindness, which is better than ten thousand worlds, which as
it is most profitable and pleasant, so it is most sure and permanent. Thou O
LORD endurest and art Psalm. 102.27
the same, thy years fail not, thy favor alters not, thou O LORD a^t never
changed, and thy children therefore are not Mal. 3. 6
cons^^ed. O my blessed Savior! who art 7 Pray for peace and recon^iliati^n.
the Prince Isaiah. 9. 6
of peace, and reconciliation, which has Ephesians. 214.17
broken the partition wall, and ^^th preached peace unto me, that thou might
reconcile me unto thy GOD: give unto me Job. 34. 29
peace and quietness, and who then can make trouble and vexation, be thou my
advocate ^ John. 2. 1
with the Father, and the recon^iliation for my soul, be thou my attonem^nt
and propitiation.

If the inhabitants of Tyrus and Sidon, did earnestly labor to have peace Act.
12. 20
with Herod, an evil and earthly King: O LORD what pains should I take to
have concord and unity with thee, a good and Heavenly King, O LORD make me
diligent 2 Pet. 3. 14
that I may be found of thee in peace without spot, and blameless, let the
Col. 3. 15
peace of GOD rule in my heart: let O LORD thy peace Philip. 4.7
which passes all understanding, preserve mine heart, and mind in CHRIST
JESUS, for ever, and ever.

And for this purpose, most ^ Pray for remissi^^ of sin.
merciful GOD, forgive me Math. 6. 12
all my debts: grant unto me a free discharge of all my sins, and a
comfortable acquittance of all mine iniquities, written, subscribed, and sealed
with the Blood of m^ faviour: Put Col. 2. 14
out that hand writting, and obligation, that is against me, and cortrarie to
me, take it out of the way, and fasten it upon the cross. Let it never be of
power to shame me in this world, or to condemn me in the world to come. As
Psalm. 103.12
far as the East is from the West, so far remove thou my sins from me:
Let Romans 6. 12
not finne rule in my mortal body, that I obey the lusts thereof: But O LORD!
subdue Math. 7. 19
mine iniquities, and cast all my faults into the bottom of the sea. I humbly
beseech thee to Col 3. 5
mortify, and slay my sin in me, least it slay my soul eternally: Bury
all my offenses in the grave, of CHRIST; Let them never rise against me, for
my conviction, and eternal confusion.

Now almighty GOD! Seeing by 9 Pray for life spiritual.
nature I am Ephesians. 2. 1
dead in sin and trespasses, I pray thee to quicken me: Let 2 Cor. 4. 16
my inward man be renewed daily: Grant that I may be borne John. 3. 3
again, and be partaker of regeneration; and so enter into thy Kingdom: Thou
who art the John. 11. 2
resurrection, and the life, who raised from death Lazarus, who was stinking,
and rotting in the grave, and gave him natural life; breath spiritual life
into my dead soul, that thou who art the GOD Math. 22.32
of the living, thou may be my GOD, and guide for ever.

O thou, who art the Mal. 4. 2
Sun Pray for spiritual light
of Righteousness, and the true light of the world, who have abundance of eye
Revel. 3. 18
salve, arise, and shine upon me; anoint the blind eyes of my mind;
illuminate my dark understanding. Thou who opened the Genes. 21.19
eyes of Hagar, and made her see a Well of water, wherewith her dying son was
refreshed, open thou the eyes of my inward man, that I may see that Well of the
John 3. 10
water of life, that my dying soul may be comforted, and thou O powerful
SAVIOR, who did give sight to that man, who John 9.7
was borne blind, give spiritual sight to my blind soul, that I may see thee,
and follow thee continually. O my GOD! thou who opened the Math. 7. 33
ears of that deaf man, grant Pray for in ward hearing.
that mine inward ears may be prepared, Psalm. 40. 6
and opened, to hear thy holy, and blessed Word, that my body Heb. 10. 5
may be ordained, and made fit for thy continual service and worship.

For O my gra^ious GOD, while Pray for health.
I have been walking in the wilderness of this world, I have fallen Luke. 11.
30
amongst cruel, and covetous thieves, who have robbed m^e of my raiment, and
riches: they have wounded me grievously: I am now lying waltring in my blood,
and half dead: Many miseregarde me, and pass by me without any pity, I can
not pity mine own self, but O sweet Samaritan, come near to me, and have
compassion on me: Bind up Ibidem.
my bleeding wounds: power in wine and oil: carry me in thy own arms, and
heal me: Have a continual care of me, that I may have a care to honor thee,
and glorify thy Majesty.

O my blessed Red^emer, in whom Pray for wisdom
are Coloss. 2. 3
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, give unto me true
wi^edome, and Heavenly knowledge and understanding, so that I Prover. 5. 23
may not die for fault of instruction, and that I go not astray through my
great folly, that I may be wise Proverb. 16 20. 21. and
in mine own business, and prudent in heart, that my understanding may be a
welspring Pro. 16. 23
of life unto me, that I may trust in thy mercy, and be blessed aeternally.

O LORD! thou who art able to break Psalm. 107. 16
the gates of brass, and to brast the bars of iron asunder, Pray for
liberty.
I pray thy Majesty to set me at liberty, who am a capti^e, and miserable
prisoner: loose me from the bands of the devil, for spiritually I am bound,
and bowed Luke. 13. 11
together, and can not lift up my soul in any wise without thy help: Bring
me out of the snare 2 Timothy 2. 26
of Satan, that I may come to amendment: Take 2 Samuel 8. 1
the bridle of bondage out of the hand of mine enemy: Be thou LORD my
goodness, Psalm. 144. 2
and my fortress, my tower my shield and delyverer: Restore me to the
glorious freedom of thy children: Give me strength to stand Galat. 5.1
fast into that liberty, wherewith thou have made me free, that I never be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

And because in the devils dungeon, and in the stinking puddle Pray for
purgation.
of sin I am filthily polluted, and miserably defiled: O holy God! wash Psalm.
51. 2
me througly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins and
pollutions: If thou wash me John. 13. 8
not, I shall have no part, nor portion with thee: and I know perfectly, that
no Revel 21. 27
unclean thing shall enter in Heavenly Jerusalem, nor within thy holy
Sanctuary: therefore O gracious GOD, I humbly and heartily entreat thy
Majesty, to wash Ierem. 4.4^
mine heart from wickedness, and my whole man from vngod^ines, even in the
laws of regeneration, in that ^^ch. 13. 1
fountain opened to the house of David, for sin, and for uncleanness: Grant
LORD that with endeavor, and industry, I keep my self pure, and holy,
unspotted Iam 1. 27
of this wicked world, that I may cast Romans 13. 12
away the works of darkness, and so walk honestly, as in the day
continually.

And seeing (O LORD) like ^sal. 119.176
a Pray for conversion.
lost sheep I have gone astray, and wandered far out of that narrow way,
seek thy servant, and find me; turn me that I may turn: convert Ierem. 31.18
me, and I shall be corverted: turn me O most mighty and merciful GOD,
from the devil mine adversary, a John 8. 44
liar, and a murderer, who would deceive me, and destroy me to JESUS CHRIST,
my Savior, and Ephesians. 5. 29
husband, who will teach me, and glorify Psalm. 91. 15
me: turn me from Coloss. 3.13
darkness to thy joyful light, from nature to grace: turn me from the broad
Math. 7. 13
way that leads to hell and damnation, to the strait way, which leads to
Heaven and salvation: turn me from wickedness to holiness, from
wretchedness to everlasting happiness.

O my GOD! draw Cant. 1.3
me after thee, knit Psalm. 86.11
and unite my heart inseparably with thy Majesty: teach me thy ways to
fear thine holy name continually, to Genes. 17. 1
walk before thee, and with thee consciensciously, and be upright in thy sight
continually.

And for this effect, O thou All-sufficient GOD! take a merciful Pray for Gods
good dealing with thine heart.
dealing with my faulty heart, that the same which by nature sin and Satan
has locked with Lydias Act. 16. 14
heart, it may be opened, by thee who has Revel. 3. 7
the key of David: Grant that my narrow heart may be Isaiah 60. 5
enlarged, to receive within me the LORD JESUS, the King of glory. O holy and
Heavenly Father! soften e my hard, and obdur^d heart with the oil of grace,
with the precious blood of my Savior, Job. 23. 16
that it may receive the impression of the image of CHRIST, that I 2 Cor. 3. 18
may be changed into the same image from glory to glory: Bow my stiff Ezech.
2 4
heart: Incline it Psalm. 119. 36
to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness: O LORD give me a wise and
understanding 1 King 2. 9
heart, that I may discern between good and bad.

O LORD vouchsafe upon me an honest Luke 8 15
and good heart, that I may hear thy Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit
with patience: and O my GOD! I most willingly give Prover. 23 26
mine heart to thy Majesty, requiring the same from me, beseeching thy
goodness to take such full possession and government of my heart, that thou
may Romans 9. 23
declare the riches of thy glory upon me a vessel of mercy, that I may be
most certainly persuaded a chosen Act. ^ 15
vessel appointed for honor, and everlasting happiness.

O my blessed Creator! assure Pray for the grouth of all good.
me that I am thine own 1 Cor. 3. 9
husbandry. Grant that I may be as good Math. 13. 8
ground to receive the good seed of godliness and pieti^, and to bring forth
fruit abundantly, that I may grow 2 Pet. 3. 18
in grace, and in the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST my LORD and Savior: O LORD
help Mark. 9. 24
my unbelief, and increase my faith, my love, patience, zeal, fear, hope,
courage, and all Christian virtues: make my good ^orkes Revel. 2. 19
to be more at the last than at the first.

O my most merciful Father^ Pray for the Lords presence
Teach Psalm. 27. 11
me thy way, and lead me in a right path: Forsake Psalm. 38. 21
me not O LORD, be not far from, me my GOD: Thou Psalm. 27. 9
art my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O GOD of my salvation:
Though my father and my mother should forsake me, yet thou O LORD will gather
me up: Though Psalm. 38. 10
the Light of mine eyes be not mine own, my sight will fail me, my senses
will depart from me, my soul will be separate from my body, yet abide thou
with me continually.

O gracious GOD I most humbly entreat thy Majesty, give me Romans 1. 24
not up to my hearts lusts, nor vile affections, for that I will be but a lost
creature; and of all most wretched and miserable.

But O LORD of thy unspeakable Pray for God his blessing.
kindness, and endless mercy, vouchsafe thy Heavenly and spiritual
blessings upon me: O GOD bless me with the blessing of election, that thou
may choose me, Psalm. 65. 4
and cause me to come to thee, that I may be satisfied with the pleasures of
thine holy Temple. Bless me with the blessing of effectual vocation, that
thou may call me inwardly, and powerfully to thee, that I may answer and
obey thy blessed calling, and say, here Genes. 22 ^
am I, ready to do thine holy will. Bless me O LORD with the blessing of
true sanctification, that I may be holy, Levit. 11. 24
as thou my GOD is most holy, that I may keep Isaiah. 56. 2
judgment, and do justice, and restrain my hand from doing any evil. Bless
me with the blessing of spiritual joy and consolation, that I may ever
rejoice Psalm. 40. 4
in thee my LORD, and walk in the light of thy countenance. Bless me O my
GOD with a settled purpose and resolution to serve thee continually, that I may
determine Psalm. 119. 57
to keep thy Words constantly. Bless me with the blessing of true repentance
through all my life, that I may Revel. 20. 6
have part in the first resurrection, that the second death have no power to
hurt me. Bless me with an happy end, that I may die Revel. 14. 13
in the LORD, and receive the blessing of glory, and inherit Math. 25.34
the Kingdom, prepared from all eternity. As also O LORD I most humbly beseech
thy goodness to bless me with thine own self to be Psalm. 16. 5
my lot and portion, to be the GOD Psalm. 27. 9
of my salvation: For whom Psalm 73. 25
have I in Heaven but thee, and I have desired none in earth with thee. Grant O
gracious GOD, that as Psalm. 42. 1
the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so my soul may pant after thee the
living GOD, until thou come to be favorable unto me.

Bless me with CHRIST JESUS, that he may be my Heb. 7. 2
King, governing me: my Math. 1. 21
Savior, saving me: my high Heb. 10. 21
Priest, reconciling me: my Math. 13. 10
Prophet, and Master, instructing me: my John 11. 52
Pastor, nourishing me, that he may be my wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: mine Philip 1. 21
advantage in life and death, that he may be All in all unto me.

Bless me with thine holy Spirit, to be John 14. 26
comforter, rememberer, my Romans 1. 4
sanctifier and directer. Grant O LORD that I may labor most earnestly to
^ntertaine that good Spirit most carefully, consc^entio^^ly and continually.

Bless me O LORD with earthly Pray for temporary benefits.
benefits also according as thy wisdom shall think necessary for me, I ask
them for thy glory, for the good of thy Church, for my own necessity. Let me
not want these gifts, without the which I cannot well serve, but be so
beneficial to me, that I may be rather helpful and comfortable, than
chargeable to others.

But grant O Lord: that I may first Math. 6. 33
seek the kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness thereof, and then other
things needful shall be ministered unto me.

O LORD teach me to Psalm. 90. 12
number Pray for the best things.
my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom: teach me to Ephesians. 5. 15
redeem the time, which I have foolishly and miserably lost: give me grace
to be have my self, as a 1 Pet. 2. 11
pilgrim, a stranger, as a sojourner in this earth, abstaining from those
filthy lusts, that fight against the Soul, Titus 2. 12
denying ungodliness.

Grant that I may live soberly, quietly and godly, Romans 12. 1
offering up soul and body an holy, living, and acceptable sacrifice to thy
Majesty. LORD, let me not fashion my self like unto this world, which will
surely and suddenly perish: but grant that I may be changed by renueing of
my mind, that I may prove and do thy holy good will, which is perfect and
acceptable, that I may walk Ephesians. 4. 1
worthy of that heavenly vocation whereunto I am called.

O Lord give me the gift of perseverance, that I may persevere unto the end,
that I may be Math. 24. 13
saved. LORD grant that I may be faithful Revel. 2. 10
unto the death, that I may get the Crown of life.

Let Psalm. 19. 14
the words of my mouth, and the meditation of mine heart be acceptabe to thee,
O LORD my strength and my Rede^mer! Let my life and death be precious in thy
fight, and receive me in thy rest, that I may inherit eternal glory, and
endless felicity with thee in thine Heavenly Kingdom, to remain and reign
with thee for ever, and ever. So be it, even so be it.

A DESCRIPTION OF TRVE PRAYER.
The seventh Chapter.
THus after the confession of our sins, after bitter lamentation for the
^ame, and earnest petition, let us come to a plain description of prayer,
which may be in this manner, Prayer is a principal part A description of true
prayer.
of GODS service, wherein a true Christian, leaving the earth in his heart and
affections, ascending into Heaven in his mind, approaching unto the throne of
grace, presenting him self before the glorious GOD, he conferreth, and
speaks familiarly with his CREATOR, he offers a spiritual sacrifice unto
his Majesty, he wrestleth with the Omnipotent, he gives a comfortable
victory, he becomes the 1 Cor. 3. 16
Temple of GOD, the holy Spirit dwelling in him, and obtains every Iam. 1. 17
good gift, that is necessary for him.

In the forsaid description I say, Three reasons wherefore prayer is the
principal part of Gods service.
that Prayer is a principal part of GODS service, for three reasons: first,
because under the name of invocation all the LORDS worship is comprehended, as
is written in the book of Genesis, Then Genes. 4. 26
began men to call upon the name of the LORD: that is, at that time the Church
began to The 1. reason.
be manifest, and to exercise the the LORDS public worship: Again, it is
said that in Canaan, Abraham Genes. 12. 8
called upon the name of the LORD: that is, he served GOD openly, and wholly,
altogether, as the LORD appointed by faith, obedience, prayer, and
thankfulness.

Contrariely: the heathen rebels, reprobats, and atheists, upon whom GOD Psalm
79.6
will power out his wrath, are thus marked, that they Psalm. 79.7
have not called upon the name of the LORD: that is, they prayed not unto GOD.
Again the Prophet complains, that there Isaiah 64. 7
is none that calls upon the name of the LORD: as if he should say, there is
none that worshippeth thee rightly: so it is most manifest, that whosoever do
pray truly, he then serves his Majesty also: who neglecte^h this duty, is
a rebel to the GOD of glory.

Secondly, by reason, that prayer The second reason wherefore prayer is the
principal part of Gods service.
is most honorable to GOD, seeing the supplicant does ascribe most justly all
his holy, and true attribute to his Majesty, acknowledging the same in all
sincerity, let me remember six of them briefly: namely, GODS omnipresence,
omniscience, and his omnipotency: also, his rememberance, his goodness, and
his fidelity.

The petitioner, honors GOD as present everywhere, with his The true
petitioner honors GOD, as omnipresent.
own in Psalm. 91. 15
trouble chiefly, and more to be magnified than all mortal and miserable men:
for Abraham was not ever present with his beloved wife Sarah, when she was
Genes. 12.14
taken to Pharaohs house, and when Abimelech Genes. 20. 2
sent and took her: Neither was Iaakob ever present with his own son
Joseph, when he was cast Genes. 37.20
in a pit, and and after sold to the Ishmaelites: Neither was David ever
present with Abner, but being out of his sight, Ioab 2 Samuel 3. 2
killed him: Neither was St. Paul a teacher ever present with the Galatians:
for after his departure they Galat. 1.6
were soon removed away unto an other Gospel, they were seduced, and
bewitched, Galat. 3. 1
that they did not obey the truth.

But this is the glory of our GOD, upon whom we depend, and unto whom we
pray, that he is our husband, who will marry Hosea 2. 19
us for ever: he will never be absent from us, but at all occasions in every
place present with us, so that we shall not be defiled by the foul and Zach.
13. 2
unclean spirit, and be unspotted Iam. 1. 27
in this filthy world.

That GOD is our Math. 23. 9
Father, to keep us continually, that we perish not in the Job 33. 24
pit of sin and damnation, that he is our everlasting King, to delyver Luke 1.
74
us out of the hands of all our enemies, who would destroy us, that he is our
instructor, who Revel. 1. 18
lives for evermore, who Math. 28. 20
is with his own always until the end of the world, so teaching them, that
they shall never be finally forsaken, deceaved, nor destroyed.

Secondly: By praying thou acknowledgest that the LORD The petitioner honors
the Lords omniscience.
searches Ierem. 17.10
the heart, and tries the r^ines, that GOD Psalm. 139. 2
understands thy thoughts a far off, that all Heb. 4. 13
creatures are manifest in his sight, that all things are naked, and open in
his eyes, with whom thou have to do.

Albeit Joshua knew not the distress of the Ios. 10. 6
Gib^onites, until he was advertised: and that great Prophet knew not the
grief and vexation of the 2 King 4.27
Shunnamite, until it was uttered: neither did the Apostles themselves know of
of the death of John. 11. 13
Lazarus, until they were informed.

GOD, who fills Ierem. 23.24
the Heaven and earth, in prayer is glorified, that he thoroughly, easily, and
exactly knows all secreets both in Heaven and earth, that he perfectly
knows the distress, danger, trouble, and all the calamities of his Church.

Thirdly: Who calls upon the In prayer God is praised, as Omnipotent.
LORD, honors his Majesty as Omnipotent, protesting, that he do^th Psalm
115. 3
whatsoever he will: that he who delyvered David Psalm. 69. 2
out of the deep mire: From Psalm. 18. 4
the snares of death, and from the cords of the grave: That he who pres^rved
these three young men in the Dan. 3. ^6
fiery furnace: and his Daniel Dan. 6. 22
in the den of lions: and also brought Jonas 2. 10
Jonas from the sea, out of the fish belly: and Peter Act. 1^. 7
from the prison, will also in his Almighty power delyver his own from all
perils, and desperate danger, and glorify them with his salvation for ever.

Fourthly: The pious petitioner In prayer God is prai^ed for his rememberance.
will in this service praise GOD for his holy Psalm. 97. 12
rememberance, and that his Maker will never be unmindful of him: although
men may forget, as the butler, Genes 40.23
Joseph: as the Sechemits, Judge 9.17
Gideon, and as Ashuerus Esther 2. 22
forgot Mord^cai, who deserved well of him, by discovery of a dangerous
treason, yet albeit a man does forget himself in the night time, while he is
sleeping, yet the LORD will never forget his own servants, but will ever be
mindful of them, to do good unto them continually.

Fi^thly, by praying thou will acknowledge The petitioner acknowledgeeth Gods
good nesse.
the riches Romans 2.4
of the Lords bountifulness, thou will honor his great Nehem. 9.25
goodness, and will also Psalm* 138. 2
praise his Name, because of his loving kindness, thou will magnify his
Psalm. 36.7
excellent, and manifold m^rcies and compassions, because with him is favor
and plentiful redemption. Psalm. 130. 7


Sixthly, by praying thou believe in thy LORD, and honor God his
sidelitie is praised in pra^er.
him as most constant, true, and faithful, that he Psalm. 146.6
keeps his fidelity for ever. If God gave goods, and performed his promise
to profane Esau, whom he Romans 9. 13
hated, the Genes. 27.39
fatness of the earth was promised to him, he afterward is increased in
Genes. 36.7
riches, his substance is great, and his succession ample: much rather may the
chosen and elect be assured of the performance of all his promises, for most
surely, no Josh. 23. 14
thing shall sail of all the good things which the Lord promises, but all
shall come to pass.

Thirdly, Prayer is a principal Prayer is most profitable.
part of Gods service, seeing it is most profitable to the supplicant: 1. thou
shall get Psalm 91. 15
deliverie from all evil: thou shall be Math. 1. 21
saved from all thy sins: 2. thou shall get plenty of all good, and if thou
Deuteronomy. 28. 47
servest not GOD with joyfulnesse, with a good heart in the abundance of all
things, therefore it is just with GOD to give thee to thine enemy, to ser^^
him in hunger and thirst, in nakedness, and in need of all things. 3. Thou
shall get a perpetua^l blessing, for if Salomons 1 King. 10. ^
servants who stood before him were happy, doubtless the servants of God,
with whom is fullness of selicitie shall be more blessed and happy. 4. Yea,
thou shall receive the holy Luke. 11. 13
Ghost, if thou desire him, if thou seek him, to teach, sanctify, and guide
thee for ever. 5. Thou shall receive a Kingdom which shall never be shaken,
thou shall be made partaker Luke. 12. 32
of the godly nature, Christ shall be thy head, thou shall be 2 Pet. 1. 4
flesh of his flesh, of his bones a member Ephesians. 5. 39
of his body conjoined with him for ever.

But because we will Godwilling afterward speak more of the profit of prayer,
in the tenth chap. following we continue the discourse thereof: for the
present let us considder some necessary conclusions clearly a^ysing from the
description.

1. It is then evident, that it is a great sin to neglect prayer. 2. Then it
will bring a great punishment. 3. That it is good to pray. 4. Of the
difficulty of prayer; of these in order.
FINIS.
A GREAT SIN NOT TO PRAY.
The eight Chapter.
WHoever thou be, of whatsoever estate, sex or degree that do not pray nor
call Psalm* 53. 4
upon GOD, thou art miserable and wretched, Prover. 1. 27
thy destruction shall come like a whirlewind, affliction, and anguish shall
come upon thee s^ddainlie and most certainly.

Thy misery is great in regard of thy great sin, and grievous punishment:
thou unhappy wretch who will not seek the Lord while Isaiah 55. 6
he may be found, nor call upon him while he is near, thou art guilty of
most manifest and heinous sin, Romans 6. ^^
the wages whereof is death, the end whereof is doolfull damnation, and I
beseech thee to consider hereof with earnest and continual meditation.

Thou sinnest (I tell thee) fearfully, because thou neglectest, and omittest
the performance of duty, which is frequently prescribed.

Thou gives a refusal to GOD of that gift, which most joyfully thou should
give, thou reiectest, and castest off the LORD, who most willingly should be
received, thou despisest the Almighty, who most principally should be
honored; thou art not only an alian^ Ephesians. 2. 12
from the commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger from the covenants of
promise; but also thou art a mere Atheist without Christ without GOD in the
world, thou art fruitless and barren: thou art perverse, wicked, and vicious.

First, thou art faulty by neglecting that service so seriously recommended
The sin of omission of a necessary duty.
and commanded by GOD thy Creator (saying) Psalm. ^0. 15
call upon me by Jesus Christ, thy Prince and Savior, (saying) ask Math. 7. 7
seek, knock, and by the LORDS messi^gers exhorting to pray always, pray
Ephesians. 6. 18
always with all kind of prayer and supplication in spirit.

If Moses highly offended by omitting, or continuing the circumcision of his
child, for Exodus 4. 24
the LORD therefore met him, and would have killed him: Is not thy offense as
heinous, if thou omit the exercise of prayer so often required, whereby is
procured the circumcision of Romans 2. 29
thine heart.

If Titus Vespasian lamented when he did not his duty as to Amici diem
perdidi.
gain a man's friendship every day; may not thou lament in bitterness,
when thou neglectest thy duty to GOD, as not to seek his favor and loving
kindness; who is the Psalm. 65. 5
hope of all the ends of the earth: and that for many days, and for many
years: beware I beseech thee of rebellion 1 Samuel 15.23
which is as the sin of Witchcraft, and of stubbor^nesse, which is
wickedness and Idolatry.

Secondly, by not praying thou art very culpable, seeing most A refusal given
to GOD.
unthankfully thou refu^est the most reasonable request of GOD, who gives to
all Iam. 1. 5
men liberally.

The LORD thus entreats the^ My Prover. 23.26
son, give me thine heart,

Will thou deny to GOD his own due, and his right? he has made Psalm* 100. ^
us and not we our selves: He who created thy heart requires thy heart: will thou put back thy Princes just petition? Will thou so shamefully g^ue unto the
LORD a flat refusal, who Genes. 14.22
is the most high Possessour of Heaven, and Earth?

Churlish Nabal 1 Samuel 25. 14
did foolishly, who mis-regarded, and refused David seeking some benefit to
himself: Do not thou more foolishly? and is not this thy fault more filthy
when thou refusest the King of Kings? to whom belongs the World Psalm. 50. 12
and all that therein is, who is seeking to bring a benefit to thy self: not
that he needs it, but to soften and sanctisie, to possess and preserve thy
heart for everlasting felicity, and yet thou continuest a stubborn and
impudent recusant.

We read that the Romans Valor. Maxim. lib. 7. cap. 5
sometime did commit a great oversight, which afterward they repented, when for
their error they were punished, they refused to bestow a gift to Porcius Cato,
Stephan.
a notable wise, and very worthy man, who had well deserved of Vatinius
(inquit) assiduo con^itio depuder^^didicit.
them: and gave that same gift to one Vatinius, a shameless and foolish
fellow, who could not govern them. Seneca thus described him; Vatinius by
continual ^eproach has learned to cast off all shame. But alace many who call
themselves Christians do at all times commit a far greater oversight. They
stubbornely refuse to give their heart to their Creator, who Romans 1. 25
is blessed for ever, and will give the same to Satan, an impudent Revel. 12 10
accuser, a liar John 8. 24
and murderer from the beginning,

Thirdly, by not praying thou departest from GOD, to whom The sin of
rejecting God.
thou should Iam. 4. 8
draw near: thou separatest thy self from GOD, unto whom thou should Deuteronomy.
10.20
cleave and adhere, for he is thy praise, who has done for thee great things.

Thou forsakest GOD whom thou should embrace, I^rem. 2 19
thine own wickedness therefore shall correct thee, and thy turnings back
shall reprove thee: Know therefore, and behold that it is an ^vill thing and a
bitter, that thou have forsaken thy GOD, Thou rejectest him: thou thus surely
say unto him, depart Job. 21. 14.15
from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways, who is the Almighty that I
should serve? or what profit should I have if I shall pray to him? Is it not
an abominable fault to cast off thy Creator, who offers life to quicken thy
dead soul, to cast off thy Savior, who off^reth grace to thee who a^t
graceless: to cast off thy Comfort^r, who offers grace and sanctification:
to cast off thy Physician, who offers health and preservation shortly: to
cast off thy heavenly Father, who offers thee an immortal heritage, and a
fair portion: to forsake thy kind husband, the guide Prover. 2. 17
of thy youth.

If thou call not upon GOD, thou castest off GOD: the Jews sinned against
GOD, when they did cast Samuel 1 Samuel 8. 7
amay: Is not thy offense more heinous to cast The sin of the contempt of GOD.
GOD himself away.

Fourthly, by not praying thou plainley declarest that thou contemnest
Contemptus est trans^^ess^o legis, ex hoc quod voluntas renuit subiici regulae.
and despis^st God, which is a sin and transgression of the Law, for this,
because thy will (as the Schoolman tells) refuses to be subject to his
rule. Thom. Sec. 2
qu^s^ 136. art 9.


The holy Apostle Peter justly calls them 2 Pet. 2. 10
presumptuous standing in their own conceit, who despise earthly government,
and speak evil of them that are in dignity.

The holy Apostle Saint Paul blames the Corinthians for 1 Cor. 11. 22
despising the Church of GOD: The wi^e King Solomon forbids thee to Prover.
23. 22
despise thy mother when she is old: Our Savior says see that Math. 18. 10
ye despise not one of those little ones, he will not have children nor babes
contemned.

Now what a terrible trespass is it to contemn the Nehem. 1. 5
LORD of Heaven, the great and terrible GOD, the Revel. 18. 8
strong Lord, which may condemn thee to prease to Psalm 2. 3
break his bands, or cast his cords from thee: to despise his holy, and
heavenly commandments of government: to vilipend the Almighty, who has
Isaiah 66. 1
the Heaven to be his throne, and the Earth to be his foot-st^ole.

This was esteemed a fault in Scipio Nasica, otherwise a worthy personage,
because he misregarded, Valor. Maxim. lib. 7. cap. 5
and mocked a poor Countryman, whose hands were made hard by labor; whom
he asked in derision, saying, Whether he was accustomed to walk on his hands,
or not; this contempt or disdainful speech of his brought him great sorrow,
and anger and afterward some dishonor.

But if thou a poor wretch, and a Job. 2^. 6
weak worm, shall continue to contemn the Almighty, and Tit. verse. 16
deny by thy works, and disdain by thy deeds the most high and excellent GOD,
Psalm. 139. 7
from whose presence thou can no ways fly: thy sin is abominable, like
Herod's* who Luke 23. 11
despised, and mocked the King of glory; thou art so culpable that thou art
inexcusable; for a contemning Scholar (says a Father) cannot be excused,
who Augu^^in.
learned what he should do, and contemned.

Fifthly, if thou pray not, thou plainly declarest thy self to be The sin
of Atheism.
guilty of that detestable sin of Atheism, thou have no hope, thou Ephesians.
2. 12
art without GOD in this world: a mere Atheist, I do thee no wrong, but tells
the truth, according to the verity of the sacred Scripture; The fool has
said in Psalm. 14.1.2
his heart (says the Prophet) there is no GOD: how is it known that the
foolish so think? thus he calls not upon the LORD; pretend what thou will,
thy not praying to GOD bewrays thy Atheism, that thou do^st x d^ny Iudeverse
4
GOD.

It is written of the Athenians that they banished and thrust out one of their
Philosophers, named Suidas ex Lil. lib. 1 de natura ^eorum
Diagoras, and promised a talent to any that would kill him, because by his
speech he denied their false gods and idols: The Heathen accounted his sin
to be very heinous: but is not his fault by infinite degrees more grievous,
who in his heart 2 Pe^. 2. ^
denies the true GOD who made him, and his only Lord that has bought him.

Sixthly, if thou pray not, thou art barren and unprofitable, and in a worse
estate than that Math. 21. 16
fig Barrenness
tree, which had leafes only, but no fruit: but thou have neither leases nor
fruits, I mean neither a true prof^ssion, nor true action.

Thy LORD has come ^undrie years to seek fruit, but has ^uke. 13. 7
found none: thou art a ^ude v^^s. 12
corrupt tree without fruit, tuice dead, and pluck^d up by the roots: thou
then art but the st^ck of a rotten tree, Arboris exesae ^runcus Telluris
invtile pondus.
an vnprofi^able burth^n of the earth: thou art a John 15. 6
withered branch and the unprofitable wood Of the vine tree, shall Ezech. 15 3
wood (says GOD) be taken thereof to any work, or will men take a pin of
it to hang any veshell thereon, amongst all the trees of the forest is it meet
for any work?

Last^ie, if thou continue not in prayer, thou art not only a dry Wickedness.
and with^r^d ground, (for ^arren ^and will sometimes be profitable for
bringing forth the strongest men, a^^ for containing the Petraris Dial. Saepe
^orti^res viros plaga fert sterilis.
^ chest minera^^s,) but also like that earth, which Hebr. 6.7. 8
drink^^^ in the rain, which comes o^t upon it, yet bears thorns and
bri^rs. The Psalm. 53 1.2.3
fool who has said in his heart there is no GOD. Now who is this fool? Even
he who will not seek GOD, nor call upon the Lord: he is corrupted, he is a
worker of iniquity, and does abominable wickedness Assure thy self in thy
own conscience, that not praying, ma^eth evil doing: that the want of
godliness, and the spirit of supplication is the mother of pro^^inesse, and
abundance of abomination* Then persuade thy self that thou will Hebr. 6. 6
crucify again to thy self the Son of GOD, and make a mock of the Lord of
glory; then (I truly tell thee) that it shall be Math. 1. 24
easier for them of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee, if thou
continue still without repentance in thy mani^old sin and ha^ous iniquity.

A GRIEVOVS PUNISHMENT NOT TO PRAY.
The ninth Chapter.
THE Job 27 33
Almighty who is excellent in power and judgment, who is abundant in justice,
who Isaiah 2^.17
will lay judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the balance will not
suffer such a griev^us sinner so stubbornely disobeying his Majesty, by
neglecting his duet^e, refusing him his due most v^reasonabl^e, rejecting God
most vnworthi^ie, Romans 2. 4
despising the riches of his bountifulness continually, living on this earth
an Atheist impiouslie, a fruitless creature: a vicious and perverse wretch to
escape v^punished, as the sin is great, so will the judgment be heavy and
grievous: the Lord who is slow to wrath, and abound^nt in goodness, yet Exodus
34. 7
he will not make the wicked innocent, he will not suffer the faulty go free
v^judged. If the trespass be ma^ifold and multiplied, he will Deuteronomy. 28 59
make the plagues many and wonderful, of long continuance, and long d^rance,
Seeing it is most true that our Savior tells us, with Math 7. 2
what measure you met, it shall be measured to you again.

First then, if thou be careless GOD will be ca^elesse of thy saf^tie.
of thy service, GOD will be careless of your safety, he will speak, and
perfome this: that Zach. 11. 9
which dies, let it die, that which perishes let it perish, and let the
remnant every one eat the flesh of his neighbor: He Revel. 22. 11
that is unjust let him be v^just still, and be that is filthy let him be
filthy still.

If the LORD carel^sly misregarde thee, what (I pray thee) will become of th^^?
In what lamentable estate will thou remain into? Thou will be ^^e a wast
vineyard, which is (...) her cutre nor digg^^, but Isaiah. 5. 6
where briers and th^rnes will grow up, until it be consumed. Thou (...) a^ an
adulterous wife, Hosea 2. 3
dishonored, diverced, and stripped, naked, made as a wilderness, and left like
a dry land, (...) for thirst. Thou will be li^^ a weak new infant, whose
Ezech. 16. 4
navel is not cutted. who in water is not washed, nor with salt seasoned, nor
with cloutes swadled, but in thine own blood polluted, exposed, and cast
forth to the open fields, to the contempt of thy person, to thy endless
perdition.

When the Emperor Honorius Carrion. Chr^ lib. 3
became a little careless of his government, and Italy ^eft destitute of a
Praesident and chistane: what woeful calamity? what doolefu^l destruction did
then come unto the subjects of the Roman Empire? What desolation came to that
realm? it is well known by the records of historic: for by Alaricus, King of
the Goths the coun^rey was wasted, Rom it self bese^ged, taken, and spoiled,
people captivated, and many riots committed.

If then the Genes* 14.22
most high GOD, possessor of Heaven and earth shall neglect thee of whom he is
neglected: and so behave himself to thee, as he justly behaved himself unto
the undutiful Jews, whom he brought out of Egypt, for it is written, that
he regarded Hebr. 8. 9
not them who continued not in his testament, into what pitti^full case will
thou abide into, then thou Zach. 2. 9
will be a spoil to those that served thee: thou will be as Samson. who was
but a laughing Judge. 16. 25
stock to thy disdainful adversaries, and so thou will be p^unged, and
overwhelmed with manifold misery.

But secondly, most horrible will GOD will den^ the request of the wicked.
thy punishment be, during the time that thou continuest in this extremity,
there is no appearance of thy help or remedy, because thou have Prover. 1. 29
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD, thou shall call upon
him, but he shall not answer: thou shall seek him, but thou shall not fi^d
him: When Isaiah 1. 15
thou shall stretch out thy hands, he will hide his eyes from thee, and though
thou make many prayers, he will not hear thee.

Seeing thou have refused GOD his m^st reasonable request, he will justly
refuse thee the smallest request that thou will make to his Maj^stie, the
meanest benefit, the shortest refreshment shall be denied, an ho^res space for
repentance, a moments mitigation of thy pains shall not be granted unto thee.

King Saul because he refused GOD, and 1 Samuel 15.19
obeyed not the voice of the Lord, but did wickedlie in his sight: therefore
he being affrayed, and his 1 Samuel 25. 8
heart sore astonished, when he sought GOD, the Lord refused him: he asked
counsel of the Lord, but the Lord answered him not, nether by dreams nor
visions, nor yet by the Prophets.

If Pharaoh who denied to obey GOD, shall seek the Exodus 10. 26
hoof of a beast, (a very mean gift) it shall be denied to him. If the rich
Glutton shall Luke 16. 24
seek a drop of cold water from the tippe of ones finger, he will get a
refu^all.

If thou be unfaithful, proud, dissobedient: if thou be cruel, vnmercif^ll,
and intemperate, albeit thou would require the smallest benefit, a ^rumme of
bread, a spoone-full of water in thy greatest necessity, thou should not
obtain the same.

And seeing it is appointed to men that they Hebr. 9. 27
shall once die, and when that unhappy prefixed hour shall come upon the
vngod^^e, no request nor supplication shall procure any de^ay, or prorogation
thereof: And very likely that rich man whose ground brought fruits,
plent^ousl^, who did pull down his old Barnes, and did build new and greater,
and gathered goods in great abundance, resolving long to live at ^ase, to eat,
drin^e, and take his pastime, and Luke 12. 20
when GOD said to him, O fool! this night they will fetch away thy soul from
thee: it is likely ^ say, that he requested that his life might be
lengthned, but he was refused, and his request not granted. Tullius in
Philippi^. and alii multi.


If that Roman ambassador Popilius would not yield to the request of a great
King, enteating Chron. Cario. lib. ^. Antiochus, Epiphanes Livius lib. 45. and
Valor.
for few days a short space of deliberation, but making a circle about him
with his rod, said, Answer thou my d^mands before thou pass these bounds.

Think thou that the almighty GOD will be moved by the request of the
wicked to give them the shortest space or an hours continuation of their life
who refused him, he will not do it, but incontinently Psalm. 73. 18
he will cast him them down into desolation, ^ow suddenly shall they be
destroyed, perished, and horribly consum^d, he will Amos 8. 9
cause the Sun go down upon them at noone, yea, when they shall be
punished 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9
with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord: and remaining Jude
verse. 13
in the blackness of darkness for ever, shall be tortured with unspeakable
torments, in that unquenchable fire, if they shall make ^upplication for the
smallest, or ^h^rtest mitigat^on, i^ will be al^og^ther de^^^d them.

That valian^ man GIDEON, when f his Warriors were weary, and Judge. 6. 12
^aint by fighting and pursuing his enemies, he requeasted the princes and
elders of Succoth to refresh his army with m^rsel^ of bread, and other such
provision; but they refusing, and vpbra^ding him, he threatened, that after
victory, when the Judge. 8.7
LORD would delyver his enemies into his hands, to tear or to thresh their
flesh with thorns of the wilderness, which thing he did accordingly as he
determined: Now questionless in their grievous pain and misery, they
earnestly requeasted for some relief and remedy, which apparently was wholly
refused: So will Simile.
the LORD deal with thee, who denied him his most just petition, because when
Prover. 1. 22
he called they refused, he will laugh at their destruction, and monk when
their fear comm^th, and tribulation.

Thirdly: Albeit in thine own GOD will cast away all these that prays not.
conceate and imagination: yea in other men's judgment and aestimation, thou
were as a ^erem. 13. 11
girdle tied to the LORDS loins, or a bracelet Cant. 8 2
on his arms, or with Coniah, Ierem. 22.24
King of Judah, the signet of GODS right hand: yea, albeit thou appear very
dear, and near unto GOD, as it were pleasant food, received in CHRIST'S own
stomach: yet because thou prayest not, GOD who loses Job. 12. 18
the collar of Kings, he will cast thee from him, as corrupt and unworthy, he
will break thee as a vess^ll, wherein Hosea 8. 8
is no pleasure, but deformity, and impuritie: he will cast thee away, as a
Ierem. 22.28
despised and broken idol, full of filthiness and vanity: It will surely
come to pass, that the Revel. 3. 16
LORD will spue thee out of his mouth, as most noisome, and abominable, he
will so sweep 1 King. 14.10
thee away, as a man sweepeth away dung, till it be all gon^: he will cut
thee off, and cast thee away suddenly and violently, as a Revel. 18.21
great millstone cast into the sea.

Now if it was a great punishment to Jeroboam, that his ^ King. 14.11
seed that dyed in the city should be cast out to the dogs to be devoured:
and if it was a fearful punishment for Absal^m 2 Samuel 17. 18
to be cast into a pit in the wood, and a great heap of stones laid upon
him: or if it was an heavy pain to these who accused Daniel, Dan. 6. 24
they were cast into a den of Lions, that had the masterie over them, and brake
all their bones in pieces: What a plague will b^fall the ungodly, who pray not,
for he will not only appoint dogs to Ierem. 15. 3
tear in pieces their bodies, to devour and to destroy them; but also will
delyver the souls and bodies of the wicked to devils, to torment and annoy
them for ever: Fear Isaiah 24. 17
and the pit of perdition, and snares are upon them.

Fourthly, if thou pray not, Shame will come to these that pray not.
shame and disgrace will come upon thee, yea, thou Psalm. 109. 29
shall be clothed with shame, and covered with confusion as with a cloak: may
not the Almighty, who Job 12. 21
pours contempt on Princes, and makes the strength of the mighty weak,
soon set a Genes. 4. 1^
mark of infamy on thee, to thy everlasting woe and mi^erie; who has
despised the riches of his mercy.

Consider now of two things: Cause of shame.
1. Thou have great reason to be ashamed. 2. That this shame is a grievous
punishment, thou have cause of shame. 1. For thy nakedness. 2. For thy
filthiness. 3* For thy unthankfulness. 4. For thy wickedness, and
wretchedness. 1. Our first parents were ashamed of their nakedness, Genes. 3.
8
therefore they hid themselves from the presence of the LORD, amongst the trees
of the Garden. 2. Jacobs son Judah, was ashamed of his whoordome, and desired
rather to want his seal, Genes. 2^.3^
his cloak and his staff, then to be blotted with that note of ignominy. 3
The prodigal son was ashamed of his ingratitude, and unkindness, when he
confessed that Luke 15. 19
he was no more worthy to be called his son. 4 Daniel himself was ashamed
for the sins of his people, and the lamentable estate under the thraldom and
captivity: he Dan. 9. 7
with sackcloth, fasting, and ashes prayed; and protested that righteousness
belonged to GOD, and to them open shame and confusion. Thus if thou pray not to
the Almighty, thou Psalm. 49. 12
shall not continue in honor and dignity: but shame and disgrace will abide
with thee, seeing thou despises thy GOD so vnduetifully.

Again, Remember that sin Sin it is a great plague.
is a great judgment, which appears evidently both in this life, and in the
life to come, not only by the testimony of godly, and wise men, who (as
Solomon says) have Eccles. 2. 14
their eyes in their head, and Eccles. 10. 2
their hearts in their right hand, who Iam. 3. 13
are endued with true wisdom, and knowledge, and are Prover. 8. 10
prudent to understand their own way; for David himself did thus pray, remove
^ Cor. 4. 13 Hisp. mag^^s Ten 3. cap. 10 Livius.
from me shame Psalm 119.22
and contempt, and the holy Apostle with all the Saints did truly complain,
that y we are made as the filth of the world, the ofscourings of all things.
Thus Origin, son to Leonides, so renowned, and respected in his life, for
many gifts which he had received, esteemed shame more heavy, and grievous
than death, for from his childhood, he desired to die and to loss his life,
for the love of CHRIST: But he so feared and eshewed shame, that rather than
his chaste body should be defiled with a filthy Ethiopian, he chose to offer
incense to an Idol, which brought great sorrow and lamentation to him
afterward; But also of civil Ethnicks: for Cato a natural wise man, choose
rather to kill himself, than render himself unto Caesar's power, or with shame
and Tullius 1. offic.
ignominy, look on his face, which fact Cicero labors to defend, albeit with
little reason: yea, Saul desired rather to be killed, then by his enemies 1 Samuel 31.4
mocked. Also Decius a Roman Emperor, a pitielesse persecuter, a cruel
monster, being in battle vanquished by the S^ythians, and fearing to come
under the reverence of the proud Barbarians, to eshew that shame, he cast
himself into a deep pit, where he end^d his miserable life, and wanted the
honor of burial: Again shame and ignominy, is a great punishment in the
life to come: for the wicked shall rise to Daniel. 12.^
s^ame and perpetual contempt.

Fifthly: If thou pray not, thou art a stranger from GOD, and as They are
spiritualy possessed who pray not.
an abominable atheist will be most severely punished, for GOD not only will
give Romans 1. 24
thee up to thy hearts lust, but also will deliver thee to the Devil, to be
if not Augustine.
bodil^, yet spiritually possessed. Qui ^ult possidere terram, videat ne ^ ter
ra possideatur
A judicious father advises men to be circumspect, lest they be possessed of
the earth, as it is certain that the estate of that man who was Math. 9. 32
dumb, and could not speak to man, being bodily possessed by a devil, was
very miserable: but the case of that ca^ine, who is inwardly dumb, and can
not speak to GOD, being possessed by a devil spiritually; is far more
pitiful and lamentable: think^st thou that bodily possession is very
fearful, and a great plague, assure thy self that spiritual possession by
the evil spirit is far more grievous and fearful. Punishment for barrennes.


Sixthly: If thou pray not, thou art a fruitless corrupt Math. 7. 17
tree, and s^relie thy imminent judgment shall be great and terrible, i^ shall
be inevitable and rem^dilesse.

First: Thy punishment will be very grievous, much more heavy indeed, then
thou conceivest; for the LORD has a scepter Psalm. 2. 9
of iron to crush thee, he Isaiah. 27. 1
has a sore, and great, and mighty sword to smite thee: Yea: he Math. 3. 10
has an axe to hew thee down: Yea, he Ieremi. 18. 7
will speak suddenly against a Nation, or against a Kingdom, to pluck it up,
or to rootte it out: If thou pray not, he has a Revel. 21 8
lake which burns with fire, and brimstone, where he will for ever to^ment
thee: he will not so deal with thee as he deals with the godly, who do
incall upon his name, and pray to his Majesty, for he will chasti^e them with
a fatherly affection: Though for Isaiah. 58. 7
a little while he fors^ke them: if for a little season, or for a moment he
hide his face from them, yet with great compassion he will gather them, and
with everlasting mercy he will p^ttie them: Certainly, There Ieremi. 30. 12
bruising is not incurable, their wounds are not for ever dolorous: GOD will
apply a plaster, and there are medicines, and help for them: He will Iere. 30.
11
correct them by judgment, and not v^terly cast them off: He will 2 Samuel 7. 14
chasten them with the rod of men, but his mercy shall not depart from them.

Secondly: If thou neglectest this exercise of prayer, thy punishment, which is
great, wi^^ come upon thee suddenly: for i^ thou Genes. 4 7
do not well, sin lies at thy door: If Luke 3. 9
thou bringst not forth fruit, worthy of amendment of life, the axe is
laid to the root of the tree. Nadab and Abih^ were incontinently destroyed, a
Levit. 10. 2
fire went from the LORD and destroyed them. Nebuchadnezar, Daniel. 4. 28
while the word was into his mouth, the same very ^oure was fearfully
punished: The Act. 12. 23
Angel of the LORD smote Herod, so that he was eaten of worms, and dyed
miser^blie.

And surely if one consider duly, it is not wonder albeit the LORD plagne the
wicked suddenly: For Zach. 5. 2
he has a flying book of his curse, which goes forth over the whole earth:
He Psalm. 45. 5
has arrows that are sharp and swift, to pearce the heart of his enemies
suddenly: For Zach. 9. 14
they shall go forth as the lightning: ^he ungod ie shall be visited Isaiah
29. 6
with thunder, and shaking, a great noise, a whirlewinde, and a flame of
devouring fire.

And alb^rt the punishment of the pro^ane before a short season Sera
tamentacitis paena venitpedibus.
su^pended and continued, yet certainly it will come to pass at the appointed
time: for it i^ most sure, and without all question, that the Revel. 1.3
time is at hand, that day Romans 13.12
draws near, the m^ssinger death comes: The Revel. 1. 7
Master, the judge comes quickly with clouds, in Math 24. 50
a day that one l^oketh not for, and in an hour that one is not a-ware off.

Thirdly: If thou prayest not, thy punishment is inevitable: If thou Amos 9
verse. 1. 2. 3
fleest, thou shall not flee away: If thou escapest, thou shall not be
delyvered: Though thou dig into hell, thence shall his hand take thee: though
thou climb into Heaven, thence will he bring thee down, and though thou hide
thy self in the top of Carmell, thence will he find thee out, and take thee
hence: and though thou be hid in the bottom of the sea from his sight, there
will he command a serpent, and it shall bite thee. Albeit 1 Samuel 19. 12
David did escape the fury of Saul his cruel enemy: Elijah 1 King. 19. 3
did flee from Iezabell, who threatn^d to take his life from him, and that
suddenly. Peter was Act. 12. 11
delyvered from the hands of Herod, who intended to kill him, as he did lately
to JAMES before: Yea, although that m^st worthy Sozom. lib. 3 cap 7. and hist
Magd.
admired Athanasius, when mighty Emperors, Constantius and ^ulian, almost
with the whole world conspired against him, (no Doctor, no Bishop did ever
suffer such persecution) and by all means labored to procure his disgrace and
destruction; yet by the power of GODS grace he was delyvered out of all his
troubles, and being full of days and honor, dyed peaceably: But who shall
eshew, or flee away from GODS punishment, seeing that all things Hebr. 4. 13
are naked, and open to his eyes: Whether Psalm. 139.7
shall one flee from his spirit, or go from his presence? None Ierem. 50. 29
of his enemies shall escape: for it is remediless which is sent from Heaven,
like to the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrha.

Lastly: If thou call not upon Wretchedness.
GOD, thine Act. 8. 21
heart is not right in the sight of GOD: thou Romans 3. 12
art made not only unprofitable altogether, but also wicked and abominable:
Thou Heb. 6. 8
art the earth that drinks up the rain, and bears thorns and briers: thou
art near unto cursing, thy end is to be burned: For if the deceaver be cursed,
that Malach. 1. 1^
has a male in his flock, and yet offers a corrupt, and unworthy sacrifice:
will not far rather that ca^iue be cursed with an heavier curse, that
offers no sacrifice at all? They Psalm. 53.4
go back, they are altogether corrupt, they dishonor GOD: they devour his
people, they seek not GOD, they call not upon him: and because of their
wickedness, unspeakable will be their wretchedness, grievons pain and
destruction will be upon their bodies: Anguish and Romans 2. 9
tribulation shall be upon their souls.

NOW consider Christian with carfulness and with attention the number and
weight of those fearful judgments that Illy^icus.
will befall the wicked who call not upon GOD: surely none can declare
sufficiently their punishment and misery, and shortly concluding this with the
learned and judicious divines. Sine oratione res in oratione Dominica
compraehensas I^dex ^aber.
habere non pot^rimus quibus destituti, quid potest nobis esse aerumnosius?
Without prayer we can not receive these good things, which are contained in
the LORDS prayer, whereof if we be deprived, what can be more miserable and
wretched than we? This is also most seriously to be remarked, that other
duties of the LORDS service for a time may be omitted, as to give alms, when
one is altogether unprovided, as to hear the holy Word, and to receive the
blessed Sacraments, when one is heavily diseased, and such like: But no
impediment, no sickness, no cross nor calamity should hinder us from this
duty, and divine exercise, there is nothing into this point that can, or may
excuse us.

OF THE GOOD OF PRAYER.
The tenth Chapter.
Wonderful, and manifold is the good of prayer: it is incomprehensible and
^nspea^able: a^beit o^e had a wise 1 King 3.12
and understanding heart, as Salomons; and 1 Cor. 13. 1
the toungue of Angels, and Psalm. 45. 1
the pen of a swift writter, yet neither could he consider in himself, nor
utter with Et precibus sanctis quaena^ solatia quinam Exsurgunt fructus, nemo
refer potest.
his mouth, no^ write unto others how great is the excellency and profit of
prayer: what inestimable blessings they receive who truly call upon GOD: As
none can tell the sweetness of honey but these who have tasted it; so none can
declare the comfort and contentment which the sanctified soul enjoys by that
familiarity that she has with her GOD in her fervent prayers, she is privy
thereto, and rejoyceh therein.

Let us consider some of these Great profit in prayer.
commodities: 1. When thou art careful of his service, GOD will be careful
of thy safety, when thou humbles thy self under the mighty hand of GOD, and
prays earnestly; thou declarest that thou 1 Peter. 5. 7
casts thy care on him: then thou may be persuaded assuredly, that he
cares for thee; O how great a benefit is this? The properties of GODS care.
how comfortable will this care be unto thee, seeing it has so notable good
properties: 1. It is It is Heavenly.
Heavenly, and so from all eternity; GOD cared for thee, his eyes did Psalm.
119. 16
see thee, when thou was without form, and in his Book were all things
written; which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them
before. If he Math. 25. 34
prepared a Kingdom for thee, before the foundation of the world; he then
cared for thee, before Psalm. 90. 2
the mountains, or earth were formed, from everlasting to everlasting, he
has been thy GOD. Again, this divine care is not like the care of mortal
men, that has pain and Attenuant vigiles corpus miserabile cu^ae, Cura quoque
interdum nullo medicabilis a^^e.
trouble with it, which weakeneth the body, and vexes the soul; and can by
no worldly means be well helped: but it is an easy care, with alsufficiencie
of pleasure, for he that bears Heb. 1. 3
up all things by his mighty Word, may with all facility care for his own,
and that particularly: therefore thou may think upon this care most
comfortablie: Habebit curam tui qui fecit te, quique habuit curam tui priusquam
esses: GOD who made thee, will have a care of thee, who had a care of the
before ever thou was; he will so regard thee, that thou shall be a Isaiah 62. 3
crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of
thy GOD.

Secondly: GODS care toward It is a great care.
thee will be a great care: if a mortal man will care for his inheritance to
keep the same: this did 1 King. 21.3
Naboth who refused to s^ll his heritage to king Ahab: much more w^ll the LORD
care for the god^ie souls who pray to him, he does esteem of them greatly,
as the sanctified soul will cry unto GOD; thou Psalm. 142. 5
art my portion, so the LORD will answer and assure that soul, that she is
his 1 Cor. 3.9
building, his temple, his husbandry, and p^rpetuall possession.

Thirdly: ^he LORDS care will be m^st joyful to thee and eff^ctuall; It is
effectual.
a fatherly care, a princely care: Seeing he is ^ur Heavenly Father, yea the
Heb. 12. 9
Father of our spirits, much more rich tha^ Abraham, who could not make all his
children his heirs, for he sent Genes. 25. 6
them away from him and Isaac himself also while he was living: but our most
wealthy and heavenly Father, will make all his children also Romans 8. 17
his heirs annexed with Jesus Christ.

Our heavenly Father is much more powerful than David was, who had no
sufficient power to make all his sons Kings: but our liberal Father gives
us Pet. 1.14
an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, that fades not to all his children
whom he cares for sufficiently.

Haereditas non minuitur copia possessorum, nec fit angustior numerositate
Augustine.
cohaeredum: sed tanta est multis, quanta paucis, tanta singulis, quanta
omnibus. This inheritance is not diminished by abundance of possessours,
neither becomes strait by number of coheires: for it is as much to many, as
few, and as much to every one, as to all: for he that is Romans 10. 12
Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, and will give every one
of his Saints a Heb. 12. 28
Kingdom which can not be shaken, which endures for ^ver and ever. Now
during the time of our pilgrimage, whiles 2 Cor. 5.6
we are at home in our body and absent from the Lord, and has not attained to
the present possession of that Kingdom. 1. ^e will have a care of our
sustentation. 2. a care of our preservation. 3. a care of our instruction. 4. a
care of our consolation. 5. a care of our marriage band. 6. a care of our
blessedness and happiness. Behold Math. 6 ^6
the fowls of the heaven for they sow not neither reap, nor carry into the
Barnes, yet our heavenly Father feeds them: are we not (says our Savior)
much better than they? Did Genes. 28.2
Isaac care through his fatherly affection for Jacobs safety, will not GOD in
greater affe^tion regard the safety of our ^^ules, who do consecrate our
^^l^es to his service.

Also, if that royal Prophet was very careful to gi^e good instruction, and
Prover. 4. 2
good doctrine to his wise son Solomon, tender and dear in the sight of his
parents: will not our most wise, and provident Father, be more careful to
Isaiah. 44. 3
pour his spirit, and his blessing upon his own? to Ier. 31. 33
put his Law in their inward parts, and to write it in their hearts, and to
give 2 Peter. 1. 3
unto them all things that pertain unto life and godliness through the
knowledge of him that has called them to glory and virtue?

Moreover he is 2 Cor. 1. 3
the GOD of mercies, and the Father of all consolation, he will have a special
care to comfort all his children in all their tribulation. If Edna was careful
to comfort her daughter Sarah, who Tob. 7. 17
wiped away her tears, and spoke comfortablie unto her, much more our LORD,
who (though Psalm. 27. 10
father and mother should forsake us, yet will he gather us up) will also
comfort us, and providentlie prepare a better marriage for us, than Genes. 24. 3
Abraham did for Isaac; namely the King of glories own son to be our
husband, who Ephesians. 5. 25
will sanctify us, nourish us, and cherish us, who will make us honorable and
happy for ever and ever.

4. If thou shall invocat GOD Gods ca^e is te^^de^ and c^m passionat.
arightlie, he will have a tender and compassionate care for thee, who John.
3. 16
has so loved thee, that he has given his first borne for thee, who Romans 8. ^2
has not spared his own son, but gave him to the death for thee: that John.
4* 9
thou may live e^ernally through him, he will take care of thee as of the
member of his own body: thus Zech. 2. 8
will the LORD of hosts say, that he that touches you, touches the apple of
his own eye.

And if Zaleucus a ruler and law giver of Locris did so pity his Valor maxim.
son found guilty of the crime lib. 6. cap 5
of adultery, who therefore conform to a constitution made by his Father,
should have lost both his eyes, and so be deprived of all sight: this Zaleucus
did not spare himself, but pulling out one of his own eyes, and another of his
sons, left the use of seeing to them both, and so behov^d himself a merciful
and pitiful Father, and a just or upright Lawgiver.

Also if Codrus a ^ing of Athens of great nobility and greater affection and
pity, who for his subjects safety did suffer, yea seek death most willingly:
for when he received a response of an oracle, that his enemies the people of
Peloponesus should be victorious and rulers, if they did not Virgilius in
F^logis.
kill the King of their adversaries: Codrus deceived them, for in the Aut
Alconis habes lauds aut iurgia Codri.
habit of a beggar by chyding, and vpbraiding, he provoked them to slay him,
and unknown to any, he died for his subjects safety such was his care of
their welfare.

Will not thy heavenly Father lighten Psalm. 13. 3
thy eyes that thou sleep not in death, when the eyes Psalm. 69. 2^
of the wicked shall be blinded that they cannot see, and having Ephesians. 4.18
their cogitation darkened, as strangers from the life of Christ, shall walk in
the vanity of their mind; When their Job. 21. 17
candle shall be put out, when they shall be as stubble before the wind, and
as the chafe, that the wind and st^rme carri^th away. In the mean s^ason,
surely Psalm. 18. 28
the Lord will light thy candle, and lighten thy dark^^sse: he will illuminate
the ey^s of thy mind, 2 Timothy 2. 7
and gi^e thee understanding in all things: the LORD will never leave thee,
though Psalm. 27. 10
Father and mother should forsake thee, yet the ^^rd will gather thee up, and
regard thee: though thy Prince and ruler would mi^-know, yet the LORD more
loving than Moses (who for the welfare of his people, would have been content
to have ^ab his Exodus 32.32
name rased out of the book of life) will never depart from thee, nor cast
Psalm. 51. 11
thee away from his presence, neither take his holy presence from thee: but he
will give thee good counsel, and show thee the Psalm. 16. 11
path of life, and will set thee at his right hand, where there are pleasure
for evermore.

Fistly: Seeing that GODS care is continual, most firm and permanent, Gods
care is continual.
which will not decay, nor be diminished by length of time, he will care for
thee, when thou art young and foolish, as he cared for Moses Exodus 2. 5
of three months age, when he was put in the river: he will care for thee,
when thou art old and ^eeble, as he cared for Simeon, Luke 2. 28
and rejoiced him by beholding CHRIST, the LORD of consolation: he will have a
care of thee when thou art living, as he had of his servant David: he will have
a care also of thee while thou art dying, as he had of his servant Steven, 2 Samuel 16.12 and passim.
who then saw the glory of GOD, and CHRIST standing at his right hand: Yea,
GOD will have a care of thy burial after death, as he accompanied Iaakobs
Genes. 46. 4
funeral: he will have a care of thy dead body, he will lose John. 6. 39
nothing, but he will raise it up again at the last day. The LORDS care is not
like the care of man, which continues not, but evanisheth and wears away by
time: but GODS care is constant and permanent, as Psalm. 136. 1 and passim.
is his mercy which endures forever.

Secondly: If thou prayest arightlie, thou may be surely persuaded The Lord
will perform the request of the that pray.
that thou shall receive this exceeding great benefit, and strong consolation,
to wit, the Almighty GOD will give ear unto thy supplication, he will
perform thy request, and grant thy petition.

Behold (says the Prophet) the LORDS Isaiah. 59. 1
hand is not shortened, that he can not sau^, neither is his ear heavy, that
he can not hear: for certainly GOD Isaiah 65. 1
himself was found of them that sought him not, as he himself assures us,
will not thou then find him comfortably, if thou seek him diligently, then the
LORD Psalm. 21. 2
will give thee thy hearts desire, and will not deny thee the request of thy
lips: he will look to thee with the eyes of his pity, he will declare
himself a liberal, and bountiful GOD toward thee.

It was thought that Salom^n would not refuse the request of his mother
Bethsheba, nor say he^ nay: and thus he promised, saying, Ask ^ King 2. 20
on my mother, for I will not say thee nay, undoubtedly he was most
respective and loving: Also Assuerus showed great kindness and affection unto
Esther, while he thus offered, What Ester. 5. 6
is thy petition that it may be given thee? What is thy request, it shall even
be performed unto the half of my Kingdom. Yet Salom^n will sooner deny the
Marcellinus.
request of his mother Bethsheba, and Alexander the great, will sooner deny the
request of his mother Olympias, remembering him that for the space of nine
months she had borne him in her womb: And Constantine the great, a Isaiah 49.
32
nursing father to the Church, and a great comfort, will rather give a refusal
to Antonius an holy and famous man, whom for his virtues and devotion he much
honored and respected, when he His^. Magd. Cent. 4 lib. 9
was interceeding for the return of Athanasius from banishment; than the LORD
will deny the supplications of his own servants: and therefore shall every
one of the godly make Psalm. 32. 6
his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be found.

If thou ask then grace to thy self who art grace^^sse, of John. 1. 19
his fullness thou shall receive grace: If Iam. 1. 5
thou lack wisdom, ask it of him that reproacheth no man, and he will give
it liberally: If thou shall seek his holy Spirit with Psalm 51. 12
David, he will vouchsa^e it on thee comfortably: yea, thou will sooner weary
in asking, than he will weary in granting, as it may appear in Genes. 18.22
Abraham's requesting clearly, who first de^isted in ^^cting, before GOD l^ft
off yielding to his supplication: GOD sometimes will give more than is asked.
yea, which is very admirable and most comfortable, thy bountiful ^ather will
often-tymes bestow more than his servants will request for Abraham wished, Oh
that Genes. 17. 18
Ishmael might live, then GOD said to him, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a
son. Iaakob wished with the LORDS presence and protection bread Genes. 28.20
to eat, and clothes to put on, only food and raiment, yet the LORD did more
to him than he desired, ^ee gave him before his return to his father, wife,
children, and a family! he Genes. 30.42
increased exceedingly, he had many slockes, and ma^^e-servants, and
man-servants, and camels, and asses, he was made very rich. Solomon required of
the LORD only wisdom 2 Chronicles. 1.10
and knowledge: the most bountiful GOD most graciously answered, I u have
done according unto thy 1 King. 3. 13
word, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart; and I have given to
thee also that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor. The prodigal
son resolved to pray his father to Luke 15. 16
make him o^e of his hired servants: but his father deals not so with him, to
wit, as an hireling, but received him as his own son, and entertained him
accordingly. The LORD JESUS was requested to put Mark. 7. ^3
his hands upon one who was dease and stammered in his speech, but CHRIST did
more, he did put his finger in his ears, and did spit, and touched his
tongue, and looking up to Heaven, he sighed, and said unto him EPH^HATH^, that
is, be opened. Some Ieves came to CHRIST for bodily nourishment, because they
John 6. 26
ate of the loa^es, and were filled: but JESUS best^wed on them more, even
spiritual refreshment for their souls, and offered them meat th^^ endures
for ever unto everlasting life: And thus it is most sure and certain, that GOD
will vouchsafe more good upon his Sa^^cts than they will require, or ask of
his blessed Majesty: for as much as bountifulness, and la^ge liberality is
natural and essential to his high honor, and great glory: He Zeph. 3. 17
will quiet himself, and rest in his love: He delights to do good
abundantly in all plenty and stately royalty: We read that when Perillus
one of Alexanders friends asked him dowry to his daughters, the King commanded
him to take fifty talents: Perillus answering, that ten talents would be
sufficient: the King replied. Tibi quidem satis est tantum accipere; mihi v^^o
non satis Seneca, and al^i plerique.
est tantum dare: it is indeed sufficient to thee to rec^aue so much, but so
much is not sufficient to me to give: that King had a respect to his hon^ur,
and not to the man's deservings. Thy great and immorta^l King, (who ^aveth unto
thee, Open Psalm. 81.11
thy mouth wide and I shall f^ll it^) in giving he regards more his own
glory, and great^^sse, than thy merits, and worthin^ss^: For Isaiah 48 9
his names sake he deferreth his wrath, and for his praise will he refrain
from it: The LORD led Isaiah 62.14
his people with his own glorious arm, divyding the waters before them, to
make himself an everlasting and glorious name: He Ezech. 20.44
will have a respect unto us, for his own Names sake: He will be beneficial
unto us, and not after our wicked ways, nor according to our corrupt works.
GOD will give to his own a new heart, and a new spirit he will put within
them: he will gather them out of all countries, and bring them to their land:
But thus Ezech. 36.22
says the LORD GOD. I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel^ but for
my holy Names sake.

And surely in thy conscience thou may be fully persuaded and firmly assured,
that thy most gracious GOD will Dan. 9. 18
incline his ears to hear thy prayers, that he will yield to thy desires,
and sati^^ie thy requests for three causes: first, because John 2. 1
thou have an Advocate with thy Father CHRIST JESUS the just, his Math. 3. 17
beloved Son in whom he is well pleased: who Hebr. 9. 24
appears now in the sight of GOD, to make request and intercession for thee:
seeing Heb. 7. 25
he ever lives, he is able perfectly to save thee, and to bring thee honor
and felicirie.

Albeit Const^ntine the most worthy Emperor, by his great moyen, Theodoret.
lib 1 cap. 24, and Eusebius. ^^b. 4
and letters of recommendation made intercession for the Saints, who were
gr^evouslie afflicted, and by barbarous cruelty persecuted in the Kingdom of
Persia: when he did plead the cause of innocent Christians, who in great
number were tortured unto death; and entreated their King Sapores to deal
mercifully, to embrace them kindly: it is yet uncertain if the intercession
of Constantine prevailed any thing; or if any mitigation of that horrible
pers^cution was granted: seeing we read that in Constantius his sons days
under that same Barbarian it endured: yet this is most sure and certain, that
CHRIST'S intercession will ever prevail, and be effectual, seeing Isaiah 42. 1
in him GODS soul delights, and whatsoever he wills GOD works:
whatsoeve^ he Psalm. 2. 8
asks GOD gives; and he will never g^t a refusal If his Father who loved
John. 17. 24
him before the fundation of the world, unto Math. 28.^8
whom is given all power in Heaven and in Earth, who Ephesians. 4. 8
ascended up in high, who led captivity captive; and gave gifts unto men.

The second cause of thy sure certification, that GOD will grant thy
supplication, is this: For Romans 8. 26
that the spirit also helps thine infirmities, for thou know not what to
pray, as thou ought; but the spirit it self makes request for thee, with
sighs which can not be expressed, according to the will of GOD: and he that
searches the heart, and tries the reins knows 27.
the meaning of the spirit: and because thou art Galat. 4. 6
the son of adoption, GOD has sent forth the spirit of the Son in thine
heart, which cries, Abba father: who is (as a learned man testifies) Hilarious.
Advocatus nobiscum perpetu^ manens, an Advocate for ever abiding with us: and
as the John 3. 8
wind blows where it lists, so the SPIRIT effects whatsoever he requires.

A third cause of thy undoubted assurance, that the Almighty will yield unto
thy petition, is this: albeit himself be the most worthy and mighty party
offended; yet he first seeks thee: yea, by his 2 Cor. 5. 20
ambassadors beseeches thee to be reconciled with his Majesty: As Psalm. 103.
13
a father has compassion on his children, so the LORD has compassion on them
that fear him.

As the most gracious GOD is of unspeakable love, of great pity, and ardent
affection; so he is omnipotent, whose Dan. 7. 14
Kingdom shall never be destroyed, who has an everlasting dominion.

That mighty monarch Alexander, gave commandment to his Thesaurer for to
bestow upon Anaxarchas a Philosopher, whatsoever he should require, who asked
a very great sowme, which the Thesaurer hearing, and being troubled, declared
the same to Alexander, who thus answered; Plutarch. in apophtheg.
Recte facit, sciens se habere amieum, qui tantum dare, and possit and velit.
He does well, knowing he has a friend, who both will and may give so much.
As GOD is our friend, so he calls us his friends: not only as Abraham Isaiah
4^. ^
GODS friends, but also as his John. ^. 39
children, which do his works. The LORD as he is good so is he great, and
above all GODS: whatsoever pleases Psalm. 135. 5
the LORD he may do in the Heaven, in the earth, in the sea, and in all the
depths: the Omnipotent may give what he pleases: no creature whatsoever may
do so, for the devil he lied, and spoke untruth, when he said, all Luke
4.6
power, and glory of the earth was delivered to him, and that he may give it
to whom-so-ever he will.

No man, nor potentate in this Plinius lib. 7 cap. 2 Cic^ro Tuscul quaest lib
5. and August. lib. 15 de civitate de^.
earth can do so. It is said of that same mighty man Alexander, that he
came to see the gymnosophists Philosophers of India, wise naturalists, and
wonderful patient: (as Historiographers write) The King said unto them; ask
of me whatsoever you desire: who answered; give unto us imm^rtalitie, which
above all other things we desire: who unto them thus replied; seeing my self
am mortal, I can ^ouch^afe upon none immortality, the King declared plainly
that he had no power to bestow immortality. But the Tim. 9. 16
blessed and only Prince, the King of kings and Lord of lords, who only has
immortality, and dwells in that light that none can attain unto, he has
power to grant to his people what he pleases, and 1 Cor. 15.53
will ca^se this corruption put on incorruption, and this mortal put on
immortality, for his Psalm. 14. 66
favor is exceeding great, and his love is unspeakable, which keeps his
fidelity for ever: Let Psalm. 130.7
Israel wait on the LORD, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great
redemption, and he shall rede^me Israel from all his iniquities.

Thirdly, thou have this gain, and shall reap this commodity, Thou have
communion with GOD.
i^ thou shall call upon GOD instantly, that when thou approach^st to the
throne of his grace, that Iam. 4. 8
thou do^st draw near unto GOD, and he does draw near unto thee: and may
not thou say with that royal Prophet; It Psalm. 73. 28.
is good for me to draw near unto GOD: and if it was profitable to the
Patriar^h Genes. 44. 18
Judah, when he did draw near to Joseph: or if it was comfortable unto Queen
Esther. 5. 2
Esther, when s^e^ did draw near and touched the top of the scepter of King
Ahashuerus; will it not bring far more profit, and greater plenty of
consolation to the devout soul, humbled before GOD, and drawing near his
sacred Majesty? Then the LORD will Psalm. 86. 11
knite and unite thy heart vns^parablie unto him, then thou shall be combined
with his holiness: thou then will be partaker of Hebr. 3. 14
the Heavenly v^cation: yea, thou will be made partaker of Christ and of
eternal salvation. Seeing thou even then art partaker 2 Pet. 1. 4
of the godly nature: thou art (as the Apostle affirms) of 1 Cor. 1. 30
GOD in CHRIST. yea thou art a member Ephesians. 5. 30
of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.

So by praying thou shall have an happy change in thy self, and an happy
communion with thy Savior. Now if it be great Art to turn contemptible ashes
into the curious wor^emanshippe of g^asse: yea, to make such temperature
thereof, that glass was made flexible, and pliable, as mettle which was
brought to pass in Plinius and Isido^us.
Tiber^^^ days as is record^d: and if the Philosophers stone (if any such
thing be) be so precious, that it will change any mettle that it touches to
gold or silver, and will bring from the hig^est Heaven a certain first
^ssence, as they call it. (I think it but a ^able, or a dream) which will not
only bring with it vn^peakeable riches, surpassing that of Craesus; ^ide
Cornelium Agripp. de vanitat^scient. cap. 90.
but also by removing old age will bring youth-head again, and perpetual
health with the best disposition. But most sure it is, by devote prayer and
supplication, and without all contraversie, thou shall obtain a more happy
change and renovation. Though 2 Cor. 4. 16
thy outward man perish, yet thy inward man shall be renewed daily, thou shall
Ephesians. 4. 23
be renewed in the right spirit of thy mind: Yea, thou Col. 3 10
shall be renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created thee.
Certainly, by the use of thy conference with the Almighty, thou shall be
changed wonderfully, and most comfortablie: thou who was once Ephesians 5. 8
darkness, is light in the LORD: thou who was unrighteous, shall become
righteous; Seeing CHRIST Peter. 3. 23
suffered for thee, the just for the unjust, to bring thee to GOD, and to make
thee holy: thou who was earthly shall become Heavenly; thou who was weak and
an old creature, shall become Psalm. 103. 5
strong in the LORD, and a new creature, thy youth shall be renewed like the
Eagles. Isaiah. 58. 8
Thy health shall grow speedily, thou shall not faint nor weary, Job. 17.9
but shall increase thy strength continuelly: Because CHRIST and thou art
actually coupled; and really conjoined in one body, by that unspeakable and
inseparable conjunction in the Spirit, that surely thou art of 1 Cor. 1, 30
GOD in CHRIST, who Psalm. 16. 5
shall maintain thy lot, and thy fair heritage: who shall be the Psalm. 73. 26
strength of thine heart, and portion for ever.

Fourthly: If thou shall call upon God will honor those who pray.
GOD earnestly, and pray unto GOD instantly, the LORD will be with thee, and
glorify Psalm 9. 15
thee: thou shall surely have honor from GOD, when thou have familiarity, and
secreet conference with him: the Almighty he will favor thee, and glorify
thee, he will hold out his golden scepter toward thee, speak to thy soul
secreetly and most lovingly, he Ester. 15. 15
will kiss thee, and say, talk with me: so he will b^stow upon thee greater
honor than Assuerus upon Ester.

By prayer thou will be one of the LORDS privy counsel, for thereby thou
declarest thy fear of GOD, and Psalm. 25. 14
then the secreet of the LORD will be revealed unto thee. Indeed it is most
sure, that by fervent prayer, and frequent supplication comes the greatest
honor and commendation: Moses often prayed, he was greatly honored, he Exodus
11.32
was v^rie great in the land of Egypt: So David rejovcing to Psalm. 122. 1
go to the house of the LORD, compassing his Al^^r, who did mourn in his
prayer, and make a noise, who Psalm. ^. 4^
powered out his heart before the LORD: He behaved 1 Samuel 18.30
himself wisely, and his name much set by: he was exalted to high honor and
dignity. So Daniel he humbled himself before the LORD, he prayed and fasted,
He Daniel. 2. 48
was made a great man, and a Govern^ur over all the province of Babell, the
chief of the rulers, and above all the wisemen of that Kingdom.

The Saints in the Primitive Church, who gave themselves to praying, albeit
the Preistes and Pharisees did persecute them: nevertheless Act. 13
the people magnified them. If any be, who make conscience of this holy duty,
and exercises himself in this most holy action, and offers up his suits and
true supplications: If I say such a one remain in contempt, and disgrace in
this earth, certainly it will be for a short time, and a little season: Every
contemned Christian in some respect, may be compared to Menedemus a notable
Philosopher, Cum primo ab omnibus ludibrio haberetur, postea in tanta
admiratione habitus est, vt civitatis gubernacula ei traderentur: Stephanus.
who at the first was mocked and derided of all, but afterward he was so
honored and admired that the government of the City was committed unto him,
and was in greatest estimation. The LORDS supplicant may be humbled for a
while, but surely he shall be exalted, if he be casten down, undoubtedly
he will be preferred: surely Wisdom* 5, 4
the fools who thought his life madness, and his end without honor, shall
wonder to see him counted among the Children of GOD, and his portion among the
Saints: yea, it may come to pass that these who most disdained him, shall
be compelled, even in this life greatly to reverenc^ him: the LORD may Revel.
3. 9
make them that they shall come and worship before his seete, with a most
reverend regard and estimation of him.

Fifthly, By praying thou will They who pray are kings and priests unto GOD.
not only be honored and greatly preferred; but also thou will attain to
that high excellency of greatest dignity: that thou will be Revel. 1. 6
made a King and a Priest unto GOD thy Father: when thou off^rest up
spiritually sacrifices to his heavenly Majesty, every Tim. 2. 8
where lifting up pure hands, without wrath or doubting undoubtedly, then thou
shall get a sure right, and tittle to a Kingdom, so thou shall receive the
beginning of the possession of that Kingdom, which is not earthly but
Heavenly, which is not outward but inward, not bodily but spiritual, not
decaying but eternal, which Hebr. 12. 28
cannot be shaken, which stands now Romans 14. 17
in righteousness, in peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Albeit by nature thou
be a base and contemptible creature, yet if thou pray to GOD fervently, he
will speak to thy soul assuredly, and say, Fear Luk* 12. 32
not, it is my pleasure to give thee a Kingdom: yea, who by nature have Job.
17.14
corruption to thy father, and the worm to thy mother, which is worse, thou
who for thy sin and wickedness have John. 8. 44
the devil to thy father: by grace and prayer shall have the blessed GOD to
be thy Father; he will give thee prorogatiue John. 1. 1^
and power to be the son of GOD; to be a King indeed, and Romans 8. 27
more than a conqueror through him that loved thee.

This was thought a wonderful Ci^^ro Tuscul quaest lib 5. and Livinius lib. 1
and a rare thing, that Tarquinius Priscus the son of a merchant of Corinth,
named Demarathus a fugitive, and a stranger should be so highly exalted, and
come from so low a degree, to such a great estate and dignity, that he was
made a King of the people of Rome, and did reign many years with valor and
wisdom, subduing his enemies on every side, and governing his subjects. It is
written also which is admirable, Florus and Valor. maximus. lib. 3. cap. 4
that Tullius Servius, who borne a base slave, was yet advanced to that
Kingdom, and governed the R^m^^es very discreetly, and did three times
triumph gloriously.

Remember the Isaiah. 51. 1
rock whence thy self was hewn; and look into the hole of the pit whence
thy self was dug. Consider that thy self was an aliant Ephesians. 2. 12
from the commoun wealth of Israel, and a stranger from the covenant of
promise: yea, thou was a servant Romans 6. 17
to sin and a s^aue to Satan, yet by frequent and fervent praying, and by
GODS special blessing, thou shall be wonderfully preferred, and most highly
graced, so thou shall receive a Tim. 4. 8
crown of righteousness: a Revel* 2.10
crown of life, yea an incorruptible 1 Peter. 5. 4
crown of glory, thou shall be a Isaiah. 62. 3
royal diadem in the hand of GOD. Thou art a heir of the James 2. 5
Kingdom promised, of the everlasting ^ Pet* 1. 11
Kingdom through CHRIST, which shall not decay: which is not subject to
alteration, and none shall take it from thee. Many indeed of the Roman
Emperors were very unfortunate and miserable, they remained in a dangerous
and lamentable estate, for their whole dignity and safety consisted in the
power of their unruly Legions, and base soldiers, who lived most inordinatly;
so that it was a wonder to the wise and judicious* that there were any who
would embrace the condition, Vide Sleidanum lib 2. de quatuor summis Monarchiis
and Erasmum.
or take upon them that perilous and painful function, seeing from C. Julius
Caesar, who was slain in the sight of the Senators, into the days of Charles
the great, about thrittie of the Emperors were killed, four of them did put
violent hands in themselves, yea these disloyal and outrageous soldiers,
destroyed some, whom against their will they had drawn on to the height of
that honor, which befell Aelius Pertinax.

But all devote Christians, who are earnest petitioners, incalling arightly
upon the blessed name of the Almighty, they shall all be for ever most happy
and blessed, they shall abide continually in a most glorious, happy, and sure
estate, they shall stand Revel 7.9
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robs, and
palms in their hands: Yea, the LORD JESUS shall gran^ unto them, to sit Revel.
3. 21
with Himself and his Father in his Heavenly Throne; and they shall be more
Romans 8. 37
than conquerours through him that loved them.

Sixt^y: If thou ask, Math. 7. 7
it shall be given thee, thou shall not be an empty Hos. 10. 1
vine, neither shall thou bring forth fruit, to thy self but shall bring
forth ^uk 3. 8
fruit worthy of amendment of life, and Ephesians. 4. 1
walk worthy of the vocation whereunto thou are called, b^having thy self
du^tifully, both in regard of thy self and others: in respect of thy self,
thou will take heed to thy self, thou will judge thy self and thou will rule
over thy self, and thou will furnish thy self with wisdom, courage, comfort
and constancy.

First: If thou pray fervently, considering thy royal dignit^e, thou will
keep Prover. 4. 21
thy heart diligently, that it be not polluted with wickedness, and
impiety, thou will resolve with thy self wisely, if thy estate be high and
honorable, that then thy fault is the more pernicious and discommendable: If a
pri^ate soldier should De^t. 23. 9 Omne animi vitium unto conspectius in se
crim^ habet, quantum qui pec^at mayor habetur.
keep himself from all wickedness, much more a c^mmander should do so, for
his vice as it is most conspicuous, so it is most exemplarie and dangerous.

Secondly: Seeing thou art a King who is an absolute judge, and at length
attain to that honor, as to be one who with CHRIST shall judge 1 Cor. 6. 2
the world and the Angels: in this world thou must of nec^ss^^ie judge thy
self: by summonding thy self, who by nature art a fugi^iue, by trying thy
self, delated by thine own conscience, by accusing thy self, justly called
culpable, and by cond^mning thy self, truly found gu^^tie: and by this mea^e
thou shall be surely fred from the fearful judgment to come: for (as the
Scripture says) if we would 1 Cor. 11.31
judge our selves, we should not be judged narrowly, by James* 2. 13
a merciless judgment into eternal condemnation: for blessed be our GOD,
the Father 2 Cor. 1.3
of mercies, and the GOD of all consolation: he is most unlike that cursed
catiue Caligula, who compelled his deputy of Judea Petronius, ^oseph antiq.
lib. 18 cap. 11
to give out a sentence of death against his own life, and to be both judge
and burrio to himself: but it is clean contrare in our favorable Father, who
will certainly absolve all that judge, and condemn themselves.

Thirdly: By praying fervently, and by seeking Math. 6. 33
the Kingdom of GOD principally, thou will obtain this favor and felicity,
that thou shall get power and dexterity to rule thy self arightly.

Wise Solomon says very worthily, he who Prove. 16. 31
rules his own mind, is better than he who wins a city: and what will
it profit any (says Ach^tophell who dyed miserably) to put 2 Samuel, 17. 23
his house in order, and in the mean season to have his heart out of order? Or
what will it avail thee, with Elah King. 16. 9
King of Israel, who commanded and ruled over many, who being overcome in his
stewards house with drunkenness and intemperancie, was slain by his servants
suddenly, and so perished perpetually.

Or can thou be content with Cocceius Nerva, the 13 Roman Traheron in vitis
imper atorum.
Emperor, (who dyed of anger, taken against one Regulus a Senator) he gu^ded
others, but could not contain his own passion, neither guide himself, he
ended his days by choler and displeasure.

Or with Valentinianus the first, who albeit he vanquished others, E^^ugere
cupidit atem regulum est vincere Pub. Minist. lib. 4 Sic agitur censura and sic
exempla par^tur, Cum iudex alios quod monet ipse facit.
yet he could not vanquish his passion of anger, through vehemen^^e whereof an
artery bursted with in him, and his blood did gush out of his mouth in such
abundance, that he dyed shortly.

Or yet what will it profit thee albeit with renowned Attolus thou subdue
whole Italy, if with him thou thy self be subdued with surfeiting and
venerie, and spend thy days in shame and misery. Is it not much better, and
by infinite degrees more profitable and more honorable, to be thy own judge,
never to be condemned, to be thy own ruler never to be misguided, to be King
over thine own self, never to be degraded nor deposed, but ever to be
obeyed, honored and reverenced.

Fourthly: If thou pray earnestly, by this means, an 2 Pe^. 1. 11
entry shall be minis^red unto thee abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our LORD and Savior IES^S CHRIST. If thou pray 1 Thessalonians. 3.10
exceedingly, thou shall be furnished plentifully: if thou lack wisdom Iam.
1. 5
seek it of GOD, which will give it unto thee liberally; Sapientis ^st non
^am cui^slib^trei prin cipium quam exitum providere. August.
then thou will not so much look to the beginning of any thing, as to the
issue thereof: then thou will be Deuteronomy. 32. 29
wise and consider the latter end.

And thou shall have wisdom, both in thy learning, and in thy life, in thy
lips, and in thy heart. As the sight is needful for the Simil. Bion. and
Laer. lib. 4. cap 7
traveling body, and strong walls for a besieged Town, as an expert
commander to a fighting Army, as a skillful pilote for a ventring Navy: So
this wisdom and prudencie is most necessary for every true Christian,
desiring eternal selicitie: for a prudent man sees Prove. 27. 12
the plague, and hid^th himself when the foolish go on still, and are
punished: he Prove. 19. 20
hears counsel and receives instruction, and i^ wise in his latter end.

Secondly: by praying, thou will be furnished with strength, and courage, and
be endued with true magnanimity, which for rulers is most necessary, both for
doing of good courageously, and for suffering affliction, and pain patiently.
Thus by true valor n Nehemiah Nehem. 2. 20
did build the walls of Herusalem, neither was he discouraged by the force,
or flattery of Nehem. 6. 1
Sanballat and Tobiah, and other adversaries; nor yet dismayed by the direction
of the false Prophet Shemeiah. Thus by the strength of GOD, the Apostles
rejoiced in their afflictions; that they Act. 5. 41
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for CHRIST'S Name.

So many faithful Martyrs as that notable Laurentius, and a Eusebius lib 5 cap.
3 hist. Eccl.
noble Roman Attalus, who albeit they were tormented and roasted by a long small
burning fire, yet died most pleasantly, and finished their course courageously,
even deriding and victoriously triumphing over their fierce enemies, and
wretched tormentors.

Thirdly: Thou have by praying in consideration of thy sure Kingdom, a good
occasion of great joy and consolation, in time of most bitter anguish and
grievous afflictions, so that thou may both say and do with that royal
Prophet, In Psalm. 94. 19
the multitude of the thoughts of mine heart, thy comforts have rejoiced my
soul, and when he was in great sorrow, his Samuel. 30.6
house and Towr^ burnt with fire, his wife and children taken prisoners, and
his own people, whose duty it was to defend him, intended to stone him,
being in grievous perp^exitie, he comforted himself in the LORD GOD.

Consider rightly with thy self, if thou be in poverty, here, that all 1
Cor. 3. 21
things are thine: yea the world is thine: Though Psalm. 34. 10
the Lions lack and suffer hunger, yet if thou seek the LORD thou shall want
nothing that is good: If thou be in sickness, comfort thy self, for that
sickness John. 1^. 4
is not unto death, but for the glory of GOD, for thy life and felicity:
Indecde yet John. 3. 2
it does not appear what thou shall be, and know that when CHRIST shall
appear, thou shall be like him in honor, in health and happiness eternally:
If thou be put in prison, and detained in a dongeon, be of good courage, and
Zach. 9. 12
turn thee to the strong hold, thou prisoner of hope: Albeit with Joseph thy
Psalm. 105. 18
feet be held in the stocks, and thou laid in yrons: yet in the appointed
time thou shall be loosed, delivered, and exalted; As Manasses was brought from
^etters, from chains, from Babell to Jerusalem, and 2 Chr. 33.13
to his Kingdom; or as Mathias, a mighty and happy King of Hungary, was
freed from prison, and with great Vide Spinaeu^. lib. 7. in metu^.
pomp and solemnity carried to Buda, the Metropolitan city, and there with
contentment and acclamations of the people was joyfully crowned: So the LORDS
anointed shall surclie come out of great a tribulation; albeit he be in
prison, and the Psalm. 18. 4
snares of death compass him, and the griefs of the grave caught him; yea
though he were in the very agony and pang of death, when natures debt must
needs be paid, and this outward man dissolved, our earthly 2 Cor. 5. 1
house of this Tabernacle destroyed, and soul and body separated, yet let him
remember with comfort, that his light 2 Cor. 4. 17
affliction which is but a moment, causes unto him far more excellent and
eternal weight of glory; and that death it self is but GODS messinger,
Similit.
to call thee out of this wearisome world, to the perpetual possession of an
Heavenly Kingdom: as it would have been a great delight to David, to follow
the m^ssi^ger sent 1 Samuel 16.^^
to him by Samuel, that of a shepherd he might be the LORDS Anointed King
over Israel: So death may be very welcome to thee, who is the LORDS messinger,
to bring thee a ^ Peter. 2.11
Pilgrim, and Psalm 39. 12
Sojurne here to his Heb. 2. 11
rest; to bring thee, a miserable and contemptible creature to glory and
endless felicity.

Lastly: By hearty praying thou shall be furnished with constancy and
perseverance, and so shall be comfortably and as^^^ed^y persuaded, that thou
art not only a King into the LORDS house, but also Heb. 3. 6
the very house of CHRIST, if thou hold fast the confidence; and the rejoicing
of the hope unto the end.

This stabilitie in we^^doing, and continuance in goodness is most necessary
for thy Christian calling, and ^oyall dignity: as the Patriarch laakob in his
journey from Mesopotamia to Canaan, his native country, and to his earthly
father Isaac, was hindered with many impediments, namely Laban behind him,
detaining him, and determining to Genes 31. 25
do him evil: Esau before him, afraying and sore troubling Genes. 32. 7
him; himself going more slowly, and halting Genes. 32. 31
upon his thigh, yet he continued constant in his intended course, he would
not decline, nor go backward, but did ever proceed, and go forward with true
piety and lawful policy, as is at length expressed in the same history, he
was much given to fervent prayer, and earnest supplication, and so wrestled
Genes. 32.31
and prevailed, until he received a blessing by Hos. 12. 4
weeping and praying, unto him whom he found in Bethell.

So thou in this thy warrefare and pilgrimage, looking to Christ, going to the
land of Canaan the ^^tie Heb. 12. 22
of the living GOD, the celestial Jerusalem, to Heb. 12. 9
the Father of the living spirits, that thou may live, thou will be
detained with many stays, and crossed with many calamities, for some times
thou Lament. 1 19
shall call upon thy lovers who will decea^e the^: som^tymes thou shall meet
with false 2 Cor. 11. 26
brethren, who will annoy thee, and bring thee in greater perrill: the world
like Laban will hinder thee, the devil worse than Esau will tempt thee, and
^phes. 6. 1^
Wres^le with thee; cra^^^^ flatterers like Achitophell Sam. 15. 12
desirous to betray thee, will trouble thee: thou will sometimes find thine
own hands weak and Hebr. 12. 12
thy knees weary; thy Math. 4. 6
self halting and fainting, yet go not backward, but fordward hold on thy
course with constancy, run thy Heb. 12. 1
race with patience, cry to GOD, crane help of the Almighty, implore GODS
mercy; and with sighs and tears, that rare gift of perseverance, which is
most necessare for thy salvation and glory: for (as CHRIST cer^ifieth thee) if
Math. 24.13
thou endure unto the end thou shall be saved: for that effect ask GOD
courage, and constancy, which is most necessary: Sicut oculis corporalibus
necessaria Similit.
est lux, vt suo fruantur fine; ita omnibus praedestinatis ac vocatis, ad
regnum Coelorum necessaria est perseverantia: aut sicut absque luce frustra
aperitur oculus, codem modo inaniter currit, qui vsque ad vitae finem non
perseverat: As light is necessary to the bodily eyes, that they may enjoy
their own end; so perseverance to all those who are predstinate, and called to
the Kingdom of Heaven: or as without light there is no sight, the eye is
opened in vain, so in that same manner he runs in vain who does not
persevere unto the end of the race, to his lives end.

By fervent prayer also thou shall be endued with such discretion and
dexterity, that carrying thy self duetifully, in respect of all, in whatsoever
estate, sex, condition, or degree they be: Thou will 1 Thessalonians. 4.12 Principis
est virtus maxima nosce suos.
behave thy self honestly toward them that are without: Thou will labor to
know the conditions, and to acquaint thy self well with thy own friends, for
that is the chief duty of a commander: Thou will study then, if Romans 1^. 18
it be possible to have peace with all men: but knowing well that thou have
mortal and irreconciliable enemies; thou will travail with all the force of
thy soul, to scatter, subdue, and overcome them, who go about to tyranize
over thee, to bring thee to perpetual slauer^ and end^^sse misery: A wise
King (says Solomon) scatters Prove. 20. 18
the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them.

A wise Christian will use all means to punish his sins, his most cruel and
deadly fo^s, to smite them with a mighty destruction, as Judge. 15.8
Samson the Philistims, and so to do with his corruptions, (as the Prophet
speaks of the Babilonians) Psalm. 137. 9
to put them to the sword, to mortify them with anger, and indignation: And
yet persuade thy self, that thou have great need of watchfulness and
consideration of prayer and earnest supplication, for this victory over thy
ghostly enemy, ^^onne and gotten with much travel, tu^m^il^, and trouble with
vexation, and much wrestling, in regard of the multitude, might and
maliciou^^^ss^ of thy enemies: considering thy own sins, also other soes who
in number, will be ^erie many, as Bees, or as the hairs of our head: they will
be also cruel in ma^^ce, they having no compassion, strong and might^e, they
being principalites and powers and worldly governors.

Briefly: By the help of prayer, thou will behave thy self discreetly, and
wisely toward all, thou will comfort These. 5. 14
the feeble minded, bear with the weak: If Galat. 6. 1
any be fallen into any fault or distres, thou who art spiritual, will
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted.

Lastly: When thou prostrates, and presents thy self before GOD, Regia (^rede
mihi) r^s est succcurrere lapsis.
and ferventlie do incall upon his blessed Name, thou may be persuaded in
thy own conscience, that thou art a pious, a devote Priest unto GOD: and that
the LORD will furnish thee with these gifts and graces needful for the
discharge of so holy a function.

First: With saving wisdom and knowledge, and 2 Pet. 3. 18
so thou will both grow in this knowledge, and thy lips shall preserve the
same: thou shall Mal. 2. 7
be a teacher in Israel, and a John. 2. 10
strengthner of thy brethren: Without this knowledge a man is not teachable, as
a swallow which (as the naturalistes writ^th) is indocill and cannot be brought
to learn; he is blind and without Plin Not. hist lib. 19. cap 32 Sacerdos
s^ne literis tauqu^ navis absque v^lis
eyes like the seawinkle, he is unprofitable, like a ship without sails, he
is beastly, more brutish than the Isa. 1. 3
ox, than the ass, knowing his owner, and masters cryb, he is wretched and
miserable, as a Isa. 27. 11
people of no understanding, he that made them shall have no compassion on
them, and he that formed them shall have no mercy on them.

Secondly: With this gift of prayer, praying continually, thou shall not pray
for thy self only, but also for others: This did Moses, Exodus ^. 2
who stood before the LORD in the gape: Thus did Samuel, saying, 1 Samuel 12.^^
GOD forbid that I should sin against the LORD, in not praying for you: So
did David for the people, and CHRIST made this his special duty John. 17. 20
praying for all bele^vers: This gi^t of prayer is the key of Heaven, if prayer
ascend, GODS mercy will descend unto thee.

Thirdly: By praying, as the LORDS Priest, thou shall 1 Pet. 3. 9
love blessing, and hate cursing, thou will not render evil for evil, neither
rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise bl^sse, knowing that thou art thereunto
called; that thou should be the heir of blessing, thou will bless GOD and his
Saints, not in words only, but also in works: Noli gloriari, (as an Ancient
^elleth) si lingua benedicas and vita, and meritis maledicas: Rejoice not
August.
if in thy words thou bless, and in thy life and conversation curse: but if
thou love blessing, thou shall be Galat. 3. 9
blessed with faithful Abraham.

Fourthy: By prayer thou shall entertain the holy Spirit, as the Lev^ticall
Priests under the law, behoved to Leu^t. 6. 13
keep the fire ever burning upon the Altar, and never let ^t go forth; but
feade it carefully, and continuaily: So preser^e thou the fire of GODS grace
upon the Altar of thy heart, and be thou most watchful and solicitous, that
thou never 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19
quench the Spirit.

Lastly: Thou will be heartly content, to have the LORD thy portion and
habitation: For Deuteronomy. 10. 19
as the Levits had no portion in the land of Canaan, but dwelt in tents and
Psalm. 119. 57
the LORD was their portion. So thou being a Priest to GOD, and praying
duetifully to his Majesty, thou will not seek so much to have any inheritance
upon this ^ar^h, as to desire Psalm. 16. 6
that fair heritage in Heaven, where thou shall have food and raiment: Thou
will be content, knowing thou brought nothing 1 Timothy 6. 7
into this world, and it is certain thou can carry nothing out of it: and
during the short time of thy momentaniall life, thou will abide in CHRIST, and
bring soorth much fruit, and then John. 15. 7
ask what thou will, and it shall be given to thee, for GODS glory, and thy
eternal felicity.

We will speak more God-willing of the good which is gotten by earnest
prayer, when we shall declare the utility, efficacy, nec^ssitie, and effects
thereof; but first of the difficulty of this divine exercise of prayer.

OF THE DIFFICVLTIE OF PRAYER.
The eleventh Chapter.
SVch is the Revel. 2. 15
depth of the deceit of the Devil, a liar from the beginning, who can
transform himself into an angel of light, that most frequently, and
lamentably he deludeth, and deceaveth an infinite number of people of all
sorts, in making them to d^^me, (yea rather to dream) that that service which
is most painful, w^ightie, laborious, of greatest importance and difficulty,
to be most light, easy, of small effect, and greatest facility; as the work
of faith, of repentance, and prayer.

But be not dec^aved by the illusions of thy false enemy: give great
diligence for ^shewing and espying his craft and machinations: For all they to
whom the secreets of the LORD is revealed, who have their eyes in their heads,
who have their hearts at their right hands, who have their witness in Heaven,
who are prud^nt in spirit, they know full well by proof of experience, they
will acknowledge with sorrow, and heavy displeasure, that it is a most hard,
and difficult thing to pray arightly, and to ca^l upon GOD in spirit and
verity.

This unknown difficulty will appear more clear and evident to all in a
fourefold respect or consideration: first, in respect o^ the very a^t of
prayer it self: secondly, in regard of the parts of pray^r: thirdly, in
respect of all those g^aces, which of necessi^ie must ^^ncurre to adorn the
true supplicant: Lastly, by considering of these manifold impediments that are
multiplied, for the hindering of such a profitable, and godly exercise.

First then in the a^t of prayer, it is most certain, thou shall surely find
sundry (if thou pray a^^ghtly) d^ffi^ile, and laborious works: let us
consider of some of them.

In true and acceptable prayer, the first work is a departure from the world,
or a separation of our hearts from this earth: The second is the ascension of
our mind to Heaven: the third work in prayer is an approaching to GOD, and a
presenting of our ^elues be, fore his glorious and sacred Majesty: the fourth
is a speaking and conference with the most high, holy, and wise GOD: the fifth,
an offering or oblation to GOD the possessor of Heaven and earth, who is of
greatest perfection and sufficiency: The sixth, an combat or wrestling with
the Almighty: The seventh a prevailing, or an obtaining of the victory: The
last a building of a temple to GOD: all these are works of turmoile and
difficulty.

The world is like Egypt, Exodus 3. 8
a place of bondage and slavery: It was an hard matter for Israel to depart
from it, Pharaoh a mighty King to hinder them; the taskmasters cruel to
detain them, and vex them: GOD 1 Pet 2.7
himself did come down, and delyver them.

Secondly: this world is like Sodom, a place of filthy pleasure and impiety:
Just Lot, albeit advertised of the punishment of the city, yet prolonged his
departure, and delayed his obedience, while the Genesis 19. 16
Angel caught him by the hand, and pulled him from out the fire.

Thirdly: This world which is not our native country, but a place Mundus non
patria sed captivitas nobis est.
of banishment and confusion, it is like a Babylon, a city of disorder and
confusion, go Revel. 18. 4
out of her, thou who art the LORDS servant, that August.
thou be not partakers of her ^innes, Babi^^nia, idest confusio, significat
mun dum desertum malum and horribile mundus.
and receive not of her plagues, depart, depart, thou that art clean, that
thou may pray and prosper, separat Isaiah. 51.11
thy self from her, and touch no unclean thing, that the LORD may receive
Cor. 6. 17
thee and be thy father.

Fourthy: This world is like an evil and horrible wilderness, and waste
wilderness of Arabia, there was scarcely of good things necessary: No h
bread, little water, and plenty of hurtful things, as Deuteronomy. 31.10
fiery Ser^ents, Scorpions and drought thou shall wander in this de^art, both
Deuteronomy. 8. 15
hungry, thirsty, and diseased, thy very soul Psalm. 107. 4
fainting within thee.

Fifthly: This world is like a Labyrinth, a place intricat by many ^lin. lib.
30 cap. 13.
wyndings and turnings, far easi^r to rid thy self out of the four chief
labyrinths of Crete, of Egypt, of L^mnos, and of Italy, than to be delivered
from Galat. 1. 4
this present evil world.

Sixthly: This world is like a strong prison, a p^ofound pit where are sharp
st^^^s to hurt one, where is filthiness, a more to de^^^e one, wor^e than the
prison Genesis ^9. 20
of Egypt, where Joseph was bound, (...) also than the du^ge^n Ier. 38. 6
of (...), where the holy Prophet ^^remi^h sta^ke fast in the myrie ^ung with
hunger.

Seventhly: Yea, it was difficile and impossible for Dan. 6. 2^
Daniel to come ou^ of the d^nne from among the Lions, unless his GOD had sent
an Angel to stop their mouths that they might not hurt him: so it is as
diffici^l, yea, more impossible for us to g^t forth of the den of this
world, where remains our adversary the 1 Pet. 5. 8
devil like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us.

Lastly: the world is like a tempestuous and dangerous sea troublesome and
raging, as when Io^as was in the ship sleeping: as when Paul and his company
were carried to and froe in the Adriaticke sea, fasting, far from the haven
where they would be.

Mare significat hoc seculum, (says Augustine) quia habet amaritudinem, habet
fluctus tribulationum, tempestates tentationum, and pisces se devorant^s.

This world signifies a sea, because it has great bitterness, it has
floodes of tribulations, tempests of tentations, and fish devouring one another.

Now advise thy self (considerat Chrstian) diligently, and after due
deliberation tell plainly, is it an hard matter or no? a laborious work of
wonderful great d^fficu^tie to go forth from this Sodom, from this Egypt,
and from Babylon, to be delivered from this wildern^sse, from this labyrinth,
from this ^ungeon, and from such a sea, to have thy soul separated from the
profit, pleasures, and preferments, from the crosses, and distra^tions of this
world, to have thy conversation in Heaven, and Colos. 3. 2
to set thy affections on things which are above,

O how painful, and toylesome is it to rid our selves from Luke. 8. 7
these thorns which spring up with the seed of the word: and as they choke the
word, so they hinder the exercise of prayer.

The second work no less difficile than the former, is the ascension of our
minds to Heaven: W^e ascend and go upward (says a Father) two ways; by
meditation Bernard in Ser^ de ascensione.
and by prayer: Meditation teaches us that which is lacking: and prayer
obtains that it be not inlaking. If it was painful and tedious to ascend and
go up to earthly Jerusalem, for they Psalm 85. 6
going up through the valley of Baca did make wells, they were weak and
weary, feeble and thirsty, is it not more laborious to go up to the
heavenly and holy Jerusalem, the great and glorious city of GOD? the way
whereunto is narrow Math. 7. 14
and strait, and few there be that find it. If it was an hard matter to
Jonathan and his armourbearer to climb 1 Samuel 14. 13
up betwixt the sharp rocks, that they might fight against the Philistimes,
they w^nt up upon their hands and seete with difficulty and jeopardie. Is it
not as difficile to ascend on high, going through many d^fficulties and
distractions.

This was esteemed a great and Livius and al^i.
weighty work of Hanniball to pierce through the high Alps in his journey to
Italy: but it is much more weighty to Eccles. 35.15
pierce the clouds, to mount above the Sun, Moon and Planets, Hebr. 12. 21
to pass through the visible Heavens, and to enter into the palace of glory.

It was ter^ible to Moses himself he did Galat. 4. 25
quake and fear to go up to mount S^nai, a mountain in Arabia, it is
diffici^^ also Psalm. 15. 1
to ascend unto S^on the mountain^ of GOD.

That Act. 3. 2
^reple from his mothers wonsb^ could not come up to the T^mple, but was
carried: it was impossible for E^as himself by his own power to be taken up
to heaven, the 2 King. 2.11
charet and horses of ^^re, the wh^rle-wind did mount him up: it is a^
impo^^ible for thee to come to the LORD, to Cant. 1. 3
ascend to his (...), unless D^ut. 1. 31
the Lord (...) thee and b^are thee, as a man b^ar^^h (...): unless the holy
(...) thee, and conduct thee (...): For as none durst att^mpt Dissi^illa quae
pul^hra Si^^ilit.
to as^^nd to that admirable hill Amara, where none may come but an Ethiopian,
and that Sam. Purchase pilgrimage. lib. 7. cap. 5
by express license, under the pain of leaving his hands, and feet, and eyes
behind him, the price of his curiosity, seeing it is a place of greatest
pleasure on the earth, some taking it for Paradise.

So none dare presume to pass to the Celestial Paradise, Luke. 23. 43
which CHRIST promised to the penitent thief; but John. 1. 43
a true Israelite in whom there is no guile: a sincere Christian and constant,
who has received Romans 8. 15
the Spirit of adoption, whereby he cries Abba Father; if any other ascend,
it will be with the lose of his soul though it were possible to him to do so.

The third work to be performed in this exercise, (which m^st not seem a small
thing but of moment and importance) is, when the Number. 19 9
LORD shall tak^ th^e nearer to himself, considering thy bas^nesse,
guiltiness, and wr^tchednesse: again GODS holiness, and righteousness, to
think that thou art Psalm. 73. 22
a beast before the Almighty, a 2 Samuel 9 8
dead dog, unworthy to be respected of the King of Glory, that thou Psalm.
22. 6
art but a worm^ and the contempt of the people; that thou art but Genesis 18 27.
dust and ashes, that thou of thy self art more unprofitable than the
sea-weede, where Pro^ecta vilios alga. vi^ga.
with many at sometimes do good the ground: yea, by nature, without the Luke.
14 34
spirit of prayer, thou will be as unsavory Math. 5. 13
salt, which is neither meet for land, nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast
it out to be trodden under foot, as Ecbolius a Sophister in Constantinople, (a
timorous temporizer) who altered his religion as times altered that followed,
who following the profession of sundry Emperors in his time, was inconstant
in his profession; yet at length he was so troubled in his conscience, that
lying down at the Church door, he cried to the people to t^ample him under
foot, for he was but vnfavory salt: Surely before GOD thou art as Isaiah 40.
17
a drop of a bucket, as vanity, as nothing, as less than nothing: Again
think seriously upon thine own guiltiness, and thou shall acknowledge it an
hard matter to compeere in the LORDS presence, as our first parents knowing
their nakedness, did preasse to Genes. 3 ^
hide themselves (if they could) from the face of the LORD.

The Patriarchs after Joseph had uttered himself to them, and remembering their
cruelty and unnaturalness toward him, they could not endure to draw near to
him, or look him in the face: but shame, fear, and astonishment did suddenly
oppress them; they Genes. 45. 3
went back, and were astonished at his presence: Seeing thou have dealt more
unkindly with thy blessed GOD. and Act. 2 23
has cruc^fied to thy self the King of Glory: may not thou justly be
dismayed for thy guiltiness and iniquity? and confess ingenu^usly, ^aying, O
Daniel. 9.7
LORD! righteousness belongs to thee; but to us open s^ame, and everlasting
ignomi^ie.

If there was dang^r and difficulty to any to come into the presence of an
earthly King, for whosoever Esther. 4. 11
man or woman did come to the King Ahasuerus, into the inner court uncalled,
there was a law that he should die, except him to whom the king h^ld out his
golden rod, (...) scepter, that he might liu^. If thou appear before the
king of Kings, and Lord of glory; unless it pl^a^e his godly Majesty, to
hold forth unto thee, the golden scepter of his compassion, th^n art but a
l^st catiue, the^ will be justly punished, with endless wo^ and mi^^rie.

And as thou remembrest thy fo^lorne estate, and wretchedness, that thou art
Revel. 3. 17
miserable and weak, blind, and naked: the Ephesians. 2. 3
ch^l^e of wrath by nature, from CHRIST a stranger, to GOD a re^ell, and
d^sloyall traitor; a slave to sinn^, a vassal to Satan; subject to the
Miseria est comes individuae malitiae.
^urse of GOD, and heavy mal^diction: and so by reason of thy wickedness,
thou still rem^inest in misery and wretchedness.

Also consider carefully the LORD greatness first, and Majesty, from whose
face, both Revel. 20 11
the Heaven and the earth will ^^ee away: He is most high over all the earth:
The Psalm 83. 18
whole world is full of his glory: Whose Isaiah. 6. 3
Name is great from the r^sing of the Sun unto the going down of the sa^e
among the Gentiles: The S^raphims them^elues, in ^^gard of the ^urpassing
greatness, and brightness of his most excellent glory, with their Mal. 1. 11
wings they cover both face and feet: He Isaiah. 6. 2
looks on the earth and it tr^mbl^th; he touches the mountains and they
smoke, the sea roareth and all that is therein: He Psalm. 96. 11
creates the wind: and declares Amos. 4. 13
to man what is his thought, he makes the morning darkness; his anger is the
m^ssinger of death: his wrath as a hot consuming fire: his indignation is like
a terrible tempeit, we by nature are like dry sticks or with^ed branches, we
are as weak stubble, as light chafe, which the wind drives away.

Again, If thou think upon the LORDS holiness, thou will think it difficill
to compeere in his presence: His Isa. 67. 15
Name is the holy One; his Name is high and excellent: the Revel. 4, 8
Angels say, holy, holy, LORD GOD Almight^e! which was, which is, and which is
to come: Behold (said Bildad) power Job. 25. 5
and fear is with him, and the stars are unclean in his sight, how much
more man which is but a worm.

If a Captain of Damas^us esteemed the body of that crafty See Purchase
pilgrimage lib 3 cap. 6
seducer Mahomet* that he both made great request, and offered a great ^umme
of money to the idolatrous Priest, for the obtaining of a sight of the same,
and when the Priest had proudly answered, how can those eyes wherewith thou
have committed so many evils in the world, see him by whom GOD has created
both Heaven and earth? The Captain replied, truth Sir, but grant me this
^avour, that I may see his body, and I will presently pluck out mine eyes:
That man in his blind superstition, thought it a great matter to compeare
before the rotten carrion of that vile deceaver, is it not by infinite degries,
and without any compari^on, much more difficill to appear before the glorious
Majesty of the Almighty, and everli^ing GOD, who Isaiah. 44.6
is the first, and the last: a small sight of whose glorious presence is so
terrible, as to make Moses, Hebr. 12. 21
who was the Lords friend, to quake and fear. And lastly, remembering GODS
righteousness, who Ier. 31. 19
is great in counsel, and mighty in work, whose eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men, to give to every one according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his works, who Exodus 34. 7
will not make the wicked innocent: the Genesis 18. 25
true judge of all the world will do rightly: for if Romans 11. 21
GOD spared not the natural branches, take heeds also least he not spare
thee, behold therefore both GODS bountifulness and severitie.

Now if natural men civilie, or morally righteous, were fearful to some,
very near to themselves, in ^egard of their strict severitie, and just
rigor, for they punished such whom nature would have spared, in the highest
degree of justice: Such was the famous Ti^us, Manlius, Torquatus, who caused
kill his victorious son, overcomming Stephanus.
his proud provoking enemy, because against his commandment, and the manner
of military discipline he had foughten: Again that same man, because his
son Decius Sylla^us, Valerius max. lib. 5. cap. 8.
had received money from the Roman confederates, he therefore being judge,
adjudged his son unworthy of the commonwealth, or of his family, and
commanded him to depart out of his sight incontinently: Also an other renowned
Roman Mar. Scaurus, Eras* lib. 7 Apopth.
because his son had fled the battle and left the Con^ull C^tulus, he
for^ade him to look him in the face any more, or to come in his presence: and
with greater sort of severitie Suetonius Gallus did repudiate his wife, because
she came out of her house uncovered, her face being naked, h^e had more skill
in astronomy, than in governing his wife and family, for he comforted the
Soldiers of Pub. Aemilius, who were Plinius lib. 12 cap. 2. and Cicero. 1.
offic.
cast down and discouraged for the eclipse of the moon, by telling them the
natural cause thereof.

Have not thou oftentimes been found a Act. 5. 39
fighter even against God: yea, thou have Act. 7. 51
resisted the holy Ghost, thou have done wrong not only to the LORDS servants,
but also thou have Mal. 3. 8
spoiled GOD, even this whole Nation, very many are guilty of this
abomination: yea, thou have Ezech. 16.26
committed fornication with others, and increased thy whooredomes, thou have
done shamesullie and foolishly, thou have played Hos. 2. 5 Adulter serpens
antiquus. Aug.
the harlot with the world, and with impiety, and with the devil, a filthy
and a cruel enemy.

Is it not a great matter then for thee to appear personally in the presence
of so righteous a judge, who may justly condemn thee, even in the presence of
thy own husband, who may justly repudiat thee, and consume thee: for the LORD
destroys them all that go a whooring from him: Remember that when the LORDS
Priests Nadab, Levit. 10.i, 2
and Abihu, because they offered strange fire before the LORD, which he had not
commanded them: therefore a fire went out from the LORD, and devoured them: so
they died even in the LORDS presence.

If 1 Pet. 4. 18
then the righteous shall scarsly be saved, where shall the wicked and sinners
appear: If then the holy Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 1. 29
at one sight of the glory of the LORD, fell upon his face: If the holy
Apostle beloved of CHRIST St. JOHN, shall see a vision of Christ's Majesty,
shall Revel. 1. 17
be afraid and astonished, and fall at his feet, as dead: how will thou be
able to come before him, so dreadful and righteous? that the ungodly will wish
Revel. 6. 17
hills and mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the presence of him
that sits on the Throne.

The fourth work which must be done in true prayer is yet more hard and
di^ficill: Namely, speech with GOD, a duetifull and familiar conference, or
communication with the A^mightie: For it is usual, and easy for a mean man
of good behavior, and having honest apparel, to come within a Kings palace:
yea, in his sight and presence, in his chamber of State, to look to him at
dinner or past^me: But to speak pertinently and wisely, to discourse
discreetly and pleasantly, it is a Simit.
rare thing of greater d^fficultie: also as it is an easy thing to speak of a
King, but not so easy to speak to him: so is it easy to speak of GOD, but
not to GOD, in regard of his eternity, wisdom, power, and glory, and of thy
own ignorance, unworthiness, and infirmity.

First he is Dan. 7.9
the Ancient of days, before Psalm. 90.2
the mountains were made, before the world was formed, from everlasting to
everlasting.

If Job. 32.6
Elihu a wise noble man, young in years was afraid to speak before old men;
much more may thou be to speak before the eternal GOD, whose Psalm. 102. 27
Aeternitas dei neseit tempora August.
years shall not fail, without beginning or ending, who lives and reigns
for ever, whose eternity is his substance, which has nothing mutable, nothing
bygone, nothing to come.

Again, If thou shall think diligently of the unsearchable wisdom of the
Almighty, who is so replenished with knowledge and wisdom: Behold Job. 4.1^.19
he found no steadfastness in his servants, and be charged his Angels with
folly, how much more them that ^well in a house of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, and die without wisdom?

Now if that wise man Agur thus protested of himself, saying, Surely Prove. 30.
2
I am more foolish than any man, and I have not the understanding of a man in
me. It is most certain that we are inferior in any sort of knowledge, or
Heavenly wisdom to that most humble and prudent man.

And it is of verity, if GOD most Job. 9. 3. 14
wise in heart and mighty in strength, will dispute with thee, that thou could
not answer him one of a thousand, how much more less shall thou find out thy
works with him.

Secondly: Consider diligently of this great power of the Omnipotent GOD, which
is Math. 10. 2^
able to destroy both soul and body in hell, and thou shall confess it is an
hard and fearful matter to confer with his glorious Majesty: For if the
Patriarch Judah, in regard of Joseph's power, did est^eme it a hard matter to
request his unknown brother, as appears plainly by his preface, saying, O
Genesis 45. 18
my LORD! let thy servant now speak a word in my Lords ears, and let not thy
wrath be kindled against thy Servant, for thou art even as Pharaoh: What more
patheticallie, more humbly, and with more reverence, and fear can be said:
may thou not much more upon the due consideration of the infinite power of the
Almighty think it a wonderful difficill, and a fearful matter, to speak
frequently and to confer familiarly, with the supreme divine Majesty, the
GOD of all power and glory.

And also on the other part, let a 1 Cor. 11. 2^
man examine himself of his ignorance, and want of knowledge, and then he
will say, So Psalm. 73. 22
foolish am I and ignorant, I am but a beast before thee; as did the royal
Prophet: yea, worse than a beast, for the Isaiah 1. 3
ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crybbe, but I have not known
GOD to honor and serve him duetifully.

Thou will find that thou cannot so much as Isaiah. 19. 19
speak the language of Canaan, of the LORDS people, neither by nature, art,
or industry, and GOD will not hear an other language.

Again, Judge Psalm. 58. 2
wisely, and thou shall soon know that thou art unworthy to take GODS
covenant Psalm. 50. 16
in thy mouth.

Thou may say truly with that worthy and holy man JOHN the Baptist, that thou
art John. 1. 27
unworthy to loose the latchet of CHRIST'S shoe, and with that humble and
happy Centurion that thou art not Math. 8.8
worthy that CHRIST should come under thy roof, and think seriously that for
thee it is a point of great difficulty, to call upon the name of the LORD
arightly, because it is not easy altogether, to Tim. 2. 19
depart from iniquity.

Thirdly: When thou shall consider diligently of thy own spiritual weakness
and infirmity, thou will think it a hard matter, to lift up thy voice, and
cry to the Almighty: for that effect, seeing thou art Act. 20 25
weak, thou have need to be supported: I say, thou art Romans 14. 1
weak in the faith which thou have, and have need to be received,
instructed, and strengthened, thou in grace art as a 1 Pet. 2. 2
new b^rne babe, thou have neither skill nor strength to speak: as an
Ephramite had no skill to Judge. 12. 16
say shibboleth, he could not so pronounce; so many Christian (called) can not
say Abba Father: the one was slain at the passage of Jordan; but the other
will be punished and tormented in Revel. 21. 81
the lake which burns with fire and br^mstone.

The fourth work in prayer is of greater difficulty than any of the former:
namely, to offer 1 Peter. 2. 5
up a spiritual sacrifice to GOD acceptable by JESUS CHRIST: for sometimes
thou will want a sacrifice, while GOD provide Gen ^2. 8
the same, as he did to his own servant Abraham. 2. Sometimes thou will have
but a base and unworthy offering; not Exodus 25. 4
gold, nor silver, but goats hair. 3. Sometimes thou will have a Mal. 1. 8
blind, lame, or sick sacrifice; and ever a filthy and polluted sacrifice,
while it be cleansed not in John. 3. 2
the poole of Bethseda, where they were wont to wash the sacrifice that was
defiled by the way, and therefore it was called (...), neither with Ier. 2. 22
nitre, or much soap, but in the ^itus 3. 5
lawer of regeneration, by the washing Zach. 12. 1
of the new birth, in the fountain Revel. 1. 5
opened up to the house of David, for sin and for uncleanness, with Romans 4
the precious blood of our LORD JESUS, by o the renewing of the holy Ghost.

Now certainly, as the Father of the faithful found it very laborious to offer
a sacrifice to GOD, after he had received direction and information from the
LORD himself; and that in regard of three impediments: 1. the Genesis 15 11.12
fowls fell on the carkeise, while he did drive them away: 2. an heavy sleep
came upon him: 3. a fearful darkness f^ll on him.

If thou be the child of Abraham, thou shall find it very hard and wonderful
painful to pray arightly, thou will find great lets to hinder thee, from
offering a spiritual sacrifice: 1. the fowls will come and stay thee; Satan,
and unclean spirits, that Math. 13. 19
evil one, and Pet. 5. 8
our malicious adversary, who will not only devour Luke 5
the good seed, and hinder us from ^ructifying; but also in sacrificing, and
that in sundry respects. First of their number and multitude, they are many
devils, and wicked spirits, their are troops, and legions Mark. 5. 9.
to possess, and vex a poor man: Secondly, they are above us, they have
advantage of the place, spiritual wickedness in Ephesians 6.1 2
high places: we can less hinder them from tempting, than the fowls from
flying in the air: Thirdly, in regard of their agilitie and nimblenesse, they
are swift and nimble to annoy us, they can Job. 1.7
compass, and go about the earth very quickly, in a short time: Fourthly, in
regard of their devouring, greedy, and ravenous nature, like the Eagles,
Math. 24. 3
who resort wheresoever the dead carkeise is.

So the similitude of our Savior, comparing wicked spirits to fowls, shows
danger and difficulty, but the dissimilitude shows greater danger and
difficulty, for the evil spirits are unlike fowls, and so much worse.

First, the fowls are visible, and objects of our outward senses; but the
spirits are not so, but are Col. 1. 19
invisible: 2. The fowls generally are weak, and infirm creatures; but the
spirits are very strong, and of power, Thrones, Ephesians. 6. 12
Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, wicked Governors, Princes of
darkness: 3. Fowls are fearful, and of a ^imorous nature ordinarlie, they
may be driven Genesis 15. 10
away easily; but the spirits are bold, and audacious, like roaring and
devouring Lions, not sparing to tempt Adam Col. 2 9
in his innocence, not CHRIST JESUS our Captain, in whom is the fullness of
all glory and honor, and far rather frail flesh, miserable man, loadned
with sin and iniquity: 4. The fowls Math. 13. 4
do feed upon the seed that falls by the way side, or which is sown in
the ground, remaining uncovered, or upon dead carkeises, lying forth in the
fields; but the evil spirits will enter within ones heart, within the most
secreet closet of our breast subtily: Satan Math. 4. 15
comes, and takes away the Word that was sown in the heart: 5. The fowls
are mortal, subject unto slaughter; but the spirits they die not, they Ephesians. ^.
2
live for ever, working in the children of disobedience, tempting the godly to
sin, accusing them before GOD day and night, hindering them in all good
courses of piety, making war against thee continually. Lastly: S^ing by
nature thou have but a dead sacrifice, profa^e and abominable: it is truly an
hard matter to get a living Romans 12. 1
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to be offered to his divine Majesty, in the
right manner, as he has prescribed.

The sixth work which is to be Militia nobis est assidua. August.
performed in prayer is yet more hard and difficile, namely, to fight and
wrestle against all opponents, as first, the wickedness of the world: 2. our
inward corruptions and sins: 3. the evil spirits: 4. GOD himself.

A godly soul will be in a continual warrefare: The John. 15. 24
world hates the LORDS beloved: The holy Apostle Paul behoved to 1 Cor. 15.22
fight against beasts at Ephesus, The LORDS Saints must st^iue against
beastly men. The royal Prophet thus prayed, give Psalm. 74. 1^
not the soul of thy turtle dove unto beasts: Surely thou must fight against
Lions, cruel men like Nero: against foxes, crafty men like Herod: against
bulls, strong men, as that Egyptian, whom Benaiah slew, a man of great stature
and strength: and against ^ Sam. 23.21
dogs, shameless and impudent men like Doeg: yea, against subtle serpents,
false, flattering, and betraying men, as Ahitophell.

This is an hard matter, but also honorable: for as faith an holy Father,
Milites suos CHRISTVS August.
reges appellat, CHRIST calls his soldiers Kings, and will give to them an
everlasting Kingdom.

But if thou say, I find worldlings to be my friends; and not my foes, I hope
to get good and favor by them: I answer, The In Carrinensi Hispaniae agro
^ons est, aurei coloris omnes ostendens pisces, nihil extra illam aqua^ a
caeteris differentes. Plinius nature. hist. lib. 2. cap. 103
wicked of the world are like the fish of that river, which is in the country
Carrinensus in Spain, they appear to be like gold in the water, but taking
them in thy hand, thou will perceive them neither in nature or color to be any
ways discrepant from other fifties: So the ungodly will seem not to fight
against thee, but to favor thee; not hurtful, but profitable to thee, yet
look to them narrowly, and bring them to the touch of truth and verity: thou
shall confess all is not gold that glistereth, thou shall try at length that
they are false friends, ever hurting thee, and fighting against thee.

Yet if thou affirm, I have sensible proof^ of the contrary, that I smell,
and taste sweenesse in them: I answer, that this world is like a Pa^ther, that
carries with him a sweet sent, but an ugly face: ^lin^natur. hist lib. ^.
cap. 17
the one entycing beasts to sollow him; the other affrighting them from him,
therefore craftily he hides his head, till assuredly the prey be in his
power to destroy the same: So this world will show forth a fair color, and
give a pleasant taste, and smell at the beginning, and allureth many to follow,
and to embrace the same, but it hides the end thereof, which is deceaving, and
destroying: for the whole John. 5. 1^
world lies in wickedness, and therefore fights against us, to bring us to
death and wretchedness, unless we be helped by JESUS CHRIST, who says to
his di^ciples, Be John. 16. 22
of good comfort, I have overcome the world.

Secondly: How hard is it to fight against thine own filthy, and faulty
flesh, thy corruptions, sins, and terrible transgressions, these are the
Exodus 17. 8
Amalekits hindering thee, in the way to Heavenly Canaan: These 1 Samuel 11. 1
are the Ammonits besciging thee, who will agree with thee, upon no other
condition, but to thrust out thy right eye, to bring shame and pain upon thee:
These are the Cananits, Josh. 23. 13
a snare and destruction unto thee, a whippe to thy side, and a thorn in thine
eyes: These are like the governors of 1 Samuel 23. 12
Keilah, traitors to David, ready to betray thee, and to delyverthee to the
devil thine enemi^.

These thy sins are as the Rev. 9.7.8.10
locusts, like horses prepared for the battle, they promise honor and
victory, but will give shame and misery, for they have on their heads as it
were crowns like unto gold, they promise friendship and favor, their faces
being like unto men, they promise profit and pleasure, for they have hair as
the hair of women: but yet be not deceived, look and consider their teeth,
and their tails, their teeth are as the teeth of lions to devour thee: their
tails are like a Scorpions to sting thee, and to annoy thee.

Thou must strive against them at all times, but chiefly at prayer, for then
they will strive to separate Isaiah 59. 2
you between you and your GOD, to blind-solde thee, to cast thee into the pit
of eternal perdition.

Thirdly as when Zech. 2. 1
Iehoshua stood before the Angel of the LORD, Satan stood at his right hand to
resist him; so when the devoute Christian shall Psalm. 42. 2
come and appear in the presence of GOD, the devil will draw near to
molest, and fight against him.

But it was more easy for young David 1 Samuel 17. 3^
to overc^me Goliath: albeit others, as Saul said, he was not able, who was but
young to go against a strong man of war, than it is to a Christian by
himself to foil Satan, and put him to flight, who never cease, sed Gregori.
lib. 18 moral.
viventem accendit ad vitia, morientem trabit ad tormenta, while one lives he
stirs him to vice, when he dies, he draws him to torment.

Fourthly, which without doubt is yet more diffici^e, in prayer thou must
wrestle with GOD himself, as did Genesis 32. 24
Israel, so must all true Israelites, thou must Hos. 12. 4
have power over the Angel by weeping and praying. Now consider I beseech
thee, if there be between such parties any appearance of equality. What is
man? frail flesh, a Isaiah 41. 14
weak w^rme, a Nehem 13 17
silly grassehopper, a fading flower, a decaying dream, Psalm. 90. 5
grass from ^ithering dry stubble, light Psalm. 1. 4
chafe, which the wind drives away: Again, ^he other party is GOD
Almigh^ie, who Amos 5. 9. 6
builds his spheres in the Heavens, and has laid the foundations of his
globe of elements in the earth: whose Psalm. 29.47.8
voice is mighti^ and glorious, that divides the slammes of fire, and makes
the wilderness to tremble: the Job 29. 11
pillars of Heaven quake at his reproof: Job. 9. 7
the Sea by his power is made calm, and he smites the pride thereof: yea,
he commands the Sun, and it rises, he closes up the stars as under a
signet. Behold, all Isa. 40. 15
nations before him are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the dust of
balance, they are as nothing, and they esteemed of him l^sse than nothing,
even vanity: ^et thou who art so filthy and wea^e by nature must strive and
wrestle with the Almighty by Heb. 5. 7
prayer and supplication, by strong crying and tears, and so only thou must
fight while thou get the vi^torie, and prev^ile with the Cr^ator: and Romans 8. 37
in all these things thou will be more than a conqu^rour through him who
loves thee so plentifully, freely, and continually.

But seventhly, thou shall find it most painful and laborious to gain such a
notable and comfortable victory, for nothwithstanding of all thy travailes and
turmoyle, GOD 1 Cor. 15.57
himself must give the victory through Jesus Christ: thou must John. 5.4
be borne of GOD, if thou purchase victory to overcome the world, and them
that fight against thee; yet if thou continue to call upon GOD fervently, thou
may well persuade thy self of the certainty of this victory, for nec
vulneratus, nec prostratus, nec conculcatus fraudaberis Lactant, firmian.
^ victoria; neither albeit thou be wounded, casten down, and trampled
underfoot thou shall be frustrated of the victory, for albeit thou be
slain, stoned, Heb. 11. 37
or hewn asunder, dead, and buried, yet thou shall rise again with CHRIST,
and triumph gloriously, and remain with him in perpetual felicity: but of
this more Godwilling, when we shall treat of the effect of prayer.

Lastly, Albeit thou shall find sensibly that thou art a strong Israelite,
that thou have Genesis 32. 28
had power with GOD and have prevailed with men, yet be not secure, and
sloathfull; far less proud, Romans 1^. 20
and high minded: but labor carefully, albeit with difficulty to build an
house for thy GOD, who has ever helped thee, whose presence is most necessary
for thee.

When Moses was delivered from the bondage of Egypt, and Pharaoh with his
enemies drowned, then he remembered with thankfulness, I Exodus 15. 2
will build a Tabernacle to GOD.

When GOD did remember David mercifully, and freede him from all his
adversity, he thus protested that he Psalm* 132. 4
would not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eyelids to slumber, until he had
found out a place to the GOD of Iaakob, an habitation to the mighty GOD of
Israel. So when thy GOD shall think upon thee, who art poor and needy, and
shall succor thee with his strength joyfully; then labor thou carefully to
prepare a place for thy GOD, that he may delight to dwell with thee, that
Revel. 2. 6
his soul may never loath thee: take pains that thou may be 2 Cor. 6. 16
the temple of the living GOD, who has given the victory.

If these martial men, two great commanders and conquerours, Plutarch. and
Stephanus.
Alexander and Augustus, did build or repare that city called Nicopolis, were
careful when they gained an earthly victory, to have a remembrance and
monument of that glory: Thou have greater cause to build an house for thy God,
and adorn the same continually; to proclaim his praises publictly, and with
his Prophet to sing thankfully; Blessed Psalm. 144. 1. 2
be the LORD my strength, which teaches my hand to fight, and my fingers to
battle, he is my goodness, and my fortress, my tower and my deliverer, my
shield and my buckler, in him will I trust: but know this for a surety, that
it shall be a matter of great importance and difficulty*

If Tatnai and Shetherboznai with Ezra 5. 3
their companions, did labor to hinder the material temple from being built:
will not Satan and sin, with the wicked world labor and indevoure, to their
uttermost, to stay and impede the building and reparing of that inward temple?

Secondly, prayer is wonderful Prayers difficle in respect of the parts
thereof.
difficile, in regard of the practicing of all the parts thereof, for it is a
hard matter to make true conf^ssion of thy sins and transgr^ssions Of
confession.
with a contrite Psalm* 51. 17
and broken heart, with a faithful and believing heart; that thou may say
sincerel^, yet Daniel. 9. 9
compassion and forgiveness is with the LORD, and with an upright and honest
heart of purpose to Ezech. 10. 3
make a covenant with the LORD, for to Ephesians. 4. 1
walk worthy of that vocation whereunto thou art called.

Again, it is very difficile to Of Lamentation*
lament for thy sin and iniquity, for to Luke. 22. 62
weep bitterly, with repenting Peter, and to power out thy Psalm. 56. 8
tears in the Lords bottle, into his own register.

As it was a very hard matter to Psalm. 105.41
open the Rock, and to cause Ezech 17. 6
water come out of it: so it is to soften the Ezech. 11. 19
stony heart, and to bring out thereof the tears of godly sorrow, and
contrition, which lead to repentance, or conversion.

Moreover it is an hard matter to make a petition to the Almighty, Of petition.
for if Genes. 44. 18
Judah the Patriarch, a man of wisdom, courage, and a^tion, est^em^d it both
difficile and dang^rous to make a petition to ^oseph, for his innocent brother
Benj^min; thou may think it hard for thee to make request to the Almighty for
thy self, who art so gui^tie, that thou may come to Heaven and felicity,
seeing thou have deserved hell and endless misery.

Lastly, because thou may 1 King 2.44
know Of request for others
the wickedness whereunto thy heart is privy, and thy own conscience
condemns thee for thy trespass and iniquity, thou may well be ashamed, and
think it hard to make request for others, seeing thy self is most unworthy,
and ungodly.

Thirdly: The difficulty of this exercise evidently appears: in regard the
supplicant must of necessity be adorned with many other graces, which must
concur to make thy prayer effectual, these Thou must have patience
were mentioned in the fist chapter praeceeding: namely, knowledge faith,
piety, charity, sobriety, fervencie, sincerity, humility, opportunity,
constancy: Good GOD! how hard matter is it, with so many gifts to be endued,
as also to join 2 Pet. 1. 5
other virtues with these rehearsed: Give moreover all diligence for to add to
the ^est of these properties true patience, for thou have great need thereof,
that Heb. 10. 38
after thou have done the will of GOD, thou may receive the promise: Behold Iam
5. 7. 8
the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the former and latter rain, so be thou
patient, (in prayer) and settle thine heart, for the coming of the LORD
draws near, who will hear thy request, and grant unto thee thy petition.

Furthermore thou must take diligent heed, that thou at this action Thou must
have godly anger.
flatter Deuteronomy. 29. 19
not thy self in thine own heart, but thou must be very angry at thine own
self, for thy manifold, and filthy sins, thou must have this holy 2 Cor. 7.
11
indignation, if thou have not this godly anger, assure thy self thou shall
not get the LORDS favor.

Lastly: Remember thee that it Thou must use good attention.
is a difficile work, to give good attention in this action, to keeps thine
Prover. 4. 23
heart with all diligence, that it be not as 2 Samuel 14.14
water spilt on the ground, which can not be gathered up again: And as the
lame man, creeple from his mothers womb gave Act. 3 5
heed, and diligent attention to the Apostles, Peter and John when he got
health; so do thou in time of prayer, that thou may obtain health, and
salvation.

Fourthly, and finally: Wonderful Thou shall find ^undry im pediments.
great is the difficulty of prayer, in regard of these stays and impediments
that will meet with thee, partly in respect of Satan thine adversary: Surely
as he These. 2. 18
hindered the Apostle Paul from going to the Thessalonians, much more will he
strive to his uttermost power to hinder thee from going to thy GOD, and from
making of prayers and supplications: and as Amalek Ezech. 17. 8
faught with Israel, when they were in their journey to earthly Canaan, so
much rather will the devil fight against thee with all his force, and fiery
Ephesians. 6 16
darts, when thou art in thy journey, and making humble prayer and petition:
Again partly in respect of thy self, for with the Disciples thou shall find
thy eyes Math. 26.43
heavy, thy self subject to sleepiness: and with Moses, thy hands Ezech. 17.
12
heavy, thou will let them fall down, and thy knees Heb. 1^. 12
weak, that thou can not endure of thy self, unless thou be strengthened.

Thus far of the wonderful great difficulty of prayer, now it is meet to
give some consolations, that thou be not too much discouraged and dismayed.

CONSOLATIONS FOR WEAK CHRISTIANS.
The twelfth Chapter.
FOR as much as the weak Christian, a 1 Cor 14.20
child in understanding, upon the deep meditation of the difficulty of
praying, may be heavily perplexed, and greatly discouraged, and with fear,
sorrow, and bitterness of mind: thus reason, if so it be that true prayer be
so hard a work to do, it is impossible for me to perform the same.

Surely I say, as a faithful Messinger, Job. 33. 23
a wise interpreter is very rare, one of a thousand, who can declare to a man
his righteousness, so a feeling petitioner is also very rare, who with a
wounded conscience complains in this point of his own weakness, and of the
Rara avis in terris nigroque simillima ^igno.
difficulty of this exercise.

But of a great number if one be found, who is exceeding sorrowful, that he
can not pray powerfully as he desires to do, and therefore lamenteth
bitterly* and is troubled 1 Samuel 1. 15
in spirit inwa^d^y, when he considere^h that d^fficultie, and these many
impediments which trouble him*

I most humbly, and earnestly entreat GOD, who 2 Cor. 1. 4
comforte^h his own in all trib^lation, to ma^e me a^^^ to comfort these that
are in this affl^ction and ^o give them some conte^tment in this tribu^ation.

Now first if thou complain that thy heart is tied, and so fixed into this
vain world, so that as A comfort to a Christian co^plaini^g that he
cannotleaue the world
Moses Heb. 11. 27
forsook Egype, so thou can not forsake this present world: I say it is of
truth, and verity thou can not do it boldly, yet if thou labor to leave it
spiritually, it is very well for thee, and if as Hadad the Edomite in Egypt,
enjoyed honor, pleasure, and plenty, taking 1 King 11. 22
nothing, yet would not remain there, but in any ways would go to his own
country, so if thou abiding in this earth, where is Ecles 1. 14
vanity and vexation, sin and transgression, and weary of this world, which
1 John. 5. 19
lies in wickedness, shall in some measure have thy conversation Philip. 3. 20
in Heaven, seek those Col. 3. 1
things which are above, beg for the help of GODS Spirit, that the LORDS power
1 Cor. 12. 9
may be made perfect in thee: that he who did separate Gal. 1. 15
thee from thy mothers womb, and who did separat the Genes. 1 4
light from darkness, may also give thee grace, to 2 Cor. 6. 17
come out from among the wicked, and separate thee to himself; that thou
may sit Ephesians. 2. 6
together with the Saints in such Heavenly places prepared for thee, before the
foundation of this world was laid.

Secondly: If thou be sorrowful, that it is too hard for thee yea, altogether
impossible ^or to go up to Heaven, yet I may be Comfort to one who cannot
ascend to Heaven.
bold to pers^ade thee, that thy Savior ascended Ephesians. 4. 10
far above all Heavens, to fill all things: He will Psalm 37. 24
put his hand under thee: He will John. 12. 32
draw thee to himself: If there be force, and ve^tue in that Similit. Plinius
and August.
precious stone the Magnet, to draw heavy iron to it: assuredly there is much
more st^ength in CHRIST JESUS to draw Cant. 1. 3
thee unto him: to knitte Psalm. 86. 11
and unite thine heart unto him, that thou may fear his holy Name. And
Similit. A^is^ot. and Zan^hius.
if there be power in the natural Sun, by the hot vigor thereof, to d^aw
up from the sea and earth, vapors and exhalations, to the mid region of the
air. (experience and Naturalists teach the same) Certainly, there is much more
power (without comparison) in the SON Mal. 4. 2
of Righteousness, CHRIST JESUS; to draw up thy heart and affection unto the
third Y Heaven: He in his own time will give grace, and furnish strength to
thee, that thou shall say with DAVID: Psalm. 25. 1
Unto thee, O LORD lift ^ up my soul: and ^ lift Psalm. ^21. 1
up my eyes above the mountains, unto thee O LORD, from whence mine help
comes; I 1 Timothy 2. 8
lift up to thee pure hands without wrath: And Act. 4. 24
I lift my voice to GOD, to pray to thy Majesty, to praise thy holy Name as it
becomes me.

Thridly: If thou think it both dreadful, and dangerous for thee, Comfort for
a Christian to draw neer^ to GOD.
who art filthy, who art guilty, who art as chafe before the fire, and dust
Gen 18. 25
and ashes before the wind, for to approach and appear before GOD, who Job.
15. 15
found no steadfastness in his Saints, and in whose sight the Heavens are not
clean, not Job. 25. 4
the Moon nor Stars.

I answer thee, albeit that be of verity, yet thou may come before his
Majesty with courage, and thou may be well hearted to go boldly Heb. 4. 16
unto the throne of grace, for these reasons: 1. because he Math. 11. 28
calls upon thee favorably, who art weari^ and laden; as the Patriarchs were
Genes. 45. 3
astonished at Joseph's presence, because of their sin against him, and of their
evil conscience: yet when he said to them, come k near unto me* they came
near. 2. As Ahasuerus Esther 5. 2
held out his golden scepter to Esther, fearing danger, she found fa^our: so
the breaking Ierem. 10.7
of the nations holds out the golden scepter of his compassion to thee, his
rod and Psalm. 23. 4
his staff may sufficiently comfort thee 3. Because that GOD will run
Philip. 5. 14
with the loving father to meet thee a forlorn son, and will have compassion
on thee, and sufficiently satisfy thee: if thou be blind, he will Psalm 103. 14
englighten thee: if thou be creple, he will Revel. 1 5
heal thee: if thou be weak, he will strengthen thee. 4. CHRIST if thou be
ashamed for thy pollution and filthiness will wash Revel 3. 18
thee with his own blood: if thou fear for thy nakedness and sintu^ness^: He
has white Revel. 3. 1^
raiment: He shall b^ to thee true righteousness 1 Cor. 1.30
and sanctification, who will procu^e thy peace and reconciliation.

Fourthly: Thou may say, it is a very hard matter, and of great Comfort to
speak to God.
difficulty, to speak and con^e^re with the LORD of Glory: But this may
encourage th^^, GOD is thy I^r. 31. 20
father, thou art his child: As an earthly father will d^light and Similit.
take pleasure in the bab^i^g of his young bairne, who by his speech can not
perfectly utter his own mind; so thy Heavenly Father will have m^re
comp^ssion Psalm. 103.13
upon thee, and will take greater pleasure in thy childish speaking: yea, in
thy babbling, than in all the oratorie of the wicked: if thou ^hink thy self
weak, im^otent, and ignoran^, that as M^ses was before men, so thou art before
GOD* slow Ex^d 4. 10
of speech, and slow of tongue: yet content thy self with this comfort, that
the LORD may soon open Psalm. 51. 15
thy lips, and loose thy tongue, that his Spirit Romans 8. 26
will help thine infirmities, and when thou know not to pray as thou ought,
that Spirit it self will make request for thee with sighs which can not be
expressed.

Fifthly: If thou be perplex^d, and sorrowful, that thou have not a sacrifice
to offer to thy GOD, Comfort to a Christian who lack a sacrifice.
I tell thee certainly, that GOD who provided Genes. 22. 8
a burnt offering in the mountain for Abraham, he will provide a sacrifice
for thee also, that will be pleasant and acceptable to himself: the Psalm. 51.
17
sacrifices of GOD are a contrite and broken spirit, a mur^ing and melting
heart he will never despise.

Sixthly: if thou shall think it too hard and d^ffi^ile for thee a weak Psalm.
22. 6
worm, a Nehem 3.13
grasshopper, a flee to wrestle with the Almighty GOD, the Creator, and
vpholder of Heaven and earth, who will confound the mighty and malicious
adversary: the Antichrist with the ^ Thessalonians. 2
spirit or breath of his mouth, or with the blast of his nostr^ls. I answer
thee, the LORD will give grace, and furni^h streng^h to thee, albeit he does
appea^e to be ang^ie and thine en^mi^, yet then H^e is most favorable and
frie^^d^y: he se^m^th to shake thee, and to cast thee down yet then he
vphold^th th^e: he alone g^veth thee power to stand, and w^^h Iaakob to wrestle
with himself: he will so h^pe thee, that with Fpaphras Coloss. 4. 12
in thy prayers thou shall stri^e with the Almight^e.

Seventhly: He will so i^able thee with the strength of grace, that thou shall
preva^le with him, and obtain the victory: this his Majesty will do most
willingly, and mercifully: as a strong father Similit.
skillful in sencing, will suffer his young weak son (as it were) to
overcome him; so will the LORD d^ale pitifully and lovingly at length with
thee, and o^ his free will and good pleasu^e exalt thee to that dignity and
sonour, that in CHRIST Romans 8. 37
JESUS thou shall through GODS love in all things be more than a Conqueror.

And lastly per^wade thy self certainly, that GOD who is thy habitation Psalm.
90. 1
from generation to generation, will bu^^d thee upon a sure fundation, so that
thou shall grow Ephesians. 2. 21
unto a^ holy T^mple unto the LORD.

Moreover, if thou be d^^quieted, because thou can not confess Comforts for
these who can not pray perfectly.
thy sins vnsai^edly, thou c^nst not lament thy wr^tchednesse grievous^: thou
can not ask good gifts a-rightly, thou can not request for others, as it
becomm^^h thee: I answer thee, if there he but a willing 2 Cor* 8. 12 Vt
desint vires tamen est ^audanda voluntas, Hoc ego contentos augu^or esse Deos.
mind in thee, it is accepted, according to that thou have, and not according
to that thou have not: ^f thou have not gold Exodus 25. 4
and silver, silk, nor scarlet to offer to thy GOD, yet he will be content
with brass, with goats hair, with rams skins, if thy heart g^ue them
freely: Yea, if thou have a ^ervent desire to do this duty, the LORD will
hear that Psalm. 10. 17
desire of thine heart, and bend his ears unto thee.

The royal Prophet had a purpose and a desire to build a house to GOD; the
LORD was well pleased with his intention, and so was delighted with that
desire, that he made him a sure 2 Samuel 7. 16
house he established the same, and his throne for ever, Comfort thy self if
thou find but a willingness and a pronn^sse unto prayer, for GOD will so
mercifully help thee, that thou shall practice the same, and in his appointed
time thou shall get grace to Psalm. 62. 8
power out thy heart before him, who is thy hope, glory, and salvation.

Finally: If thou complainest, that it is too d^fficill and laborious, Comforts
for these that have not all these graces needful.
for to acquire all the graces necessary for so holy an exercise, as to be
endued with saving knowledge, lively faith, true piety, fervent cha^itie,
temperate sobriety, with the rest of these gifts which must accompany prayer,
acceptable to GOD: This I d^c^are unto thee, that albeit thou can not attain
unto these benefits in full measure, perfectly and in ab^olute quantity, yet
if thou have them in part, in a m^ane measure, in true sinceriti^, and in right
quality, then thou have good cause of joy and consolation for: assuredly the
Psalm. 125. 4
LORD will do good to thee that art true in heart, he who loves Psalm. 51. 6
truth in the inward affections, will give unto thee an ample commendatio^:
Behold John. 1. 47
a true Israelite, he will give to thee a great recompense, his Revel 22.12
reward is with him, he without doubt will increase Col. 2. 19
thee with the increassing of GOD, he will make thy good works Revel. 2. 19
more at the last then at the first: He will augment his benefits, and multiply
his gifts, if so be that with the true believers, thou have singlnesse Act. 2.
46
of heart: as that poor pe^itent thief, at the beginning (I think) had but a
mean measure of knowlegde, faith, charity, and repentance, yet having
sincerity, all these graces i^cres^d he was accepted, and with CHRIST shortly
after was r^ceaned in Luke 23. 43
Paradise: So it will be with all GODS sincere servants, although they have but
small beginnings, yet the mcrease of their graces will be plentiful and
copious, they shall surely grow 2 Pet. 3. 18
in grace, and in the knowledge of our LORD and Savior JESUS.

Lastly: If thou be much troubled because of these manifold impediments,
Comforts against man^ (...)
which do hinder thee from this holy exercise: thou have sin, thou have
Satan, thou have the world, thou have thy corruption, and many crosses and
great tribulation: I reply shortly, if CHRIST ^ee Rev^. ^. 31
on thy side, who can be against thee? 1 In regard of thy transgfessions
troubling thee, thou have an 1 John. 2. 1
Advocate with the Father JESUS CHRIST the just: 2. I regard of thy enemies,
thou have a Chi^tane; even, CHRIST the Captain Josh. 5. 14
of the LORDS host. 3. In regard of thy self, of thy own weakness, and of
thy own vncleannesle, thou have also a good guider and governor, to help
thee, and direct thee continually in all distresses and difficulties.

CHRIST JESUS is of all the Christ is the best Advocate for seven reasons.
best Advocate in seven respects, of his Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Fidelity,
Diligence, Love and happy success.

First: He is a most wise Advocate, Of his wisdom
for Colos. 2. 3
in him are hid all the treasurs of Wisdom and knowledge, seeing in him Col.
2. 9
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

We read that of Anaximen^s, that he prudently procured the peace and safety
of the people, Pausa^ias. lib, 1. 6
Lampsaceni, for when Alexander the Great was highly offended against them, and
had threatened their utter ruin and destruction, and because they were
favorers and protectors of the Persians, against him: the people being
perplexed by fear and darg^^, did send this Anaximenes to the Conqueror, to
make request for them: the King knowing the cause of his coming, did swear
so^^mnly by his great Oath, that whatsoever he required, he would do the
contrary. Then wisely replied the Philosopher: My petition is that thou O King
would kill the men of my City, sell the women and children; burn the
Churches, destroy the City, and overthrow the same utterly: Alexander Veniam
dedit Lampsacenis invitus
having nothing then to say, unwillingly pardoned that people.

But our Advocate is 1 Timothy 1. 17
only wise: He may declare Amos 4. 13
unto man what is his thought; all creaturs are but fools, in c^mparison with
Him who of 1 Cor. 1. 50
GOD is made unto us wisdom, to teach us true knowledge and discretion.

Secondly: CHRIST is an Advocate of greatest strength and Of his power.
power, for to Math. 28. 18
him all power is given, both in Heaven and earth: Thus in him thou may have
great cause of gladness and rejoicing: As a certain old Soldier Macrobius
lib. 2. Satut. cap. ^
being accused, and so in danger was well hear^ened, when he got Augustus
Caesar a mighty Monarch to be his Advocate, for so without doubt he was
absolved and altogether delivered. So thou albeit thou have the Devil, the
Revel. 1^.10
accuser of the Brethren, to challenge thee, and accuse thee: Yet, having the
most mighty Monarch, JESUS; whose Dan. 7. 14
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, whose Kingdom is eternal, and ^ever
shall be destroyed; who Math. 9. 6
has authority in earth to forgive sins; (who may easily rebuke and
con^ound Satan,) having him I say, to be thy Advocate, and intercessour, who
Romans 2.33.34
shall lay any thing to thy charge? it is GOD who justifies, who shall
condemn, it is Christ who (by his own mighty power) is risen again, who also
at the right hand of GOD makes request for thee.

Thirdly: CHRIST is most holy In respect of his holiness.
and righteous, one Advocate appears John. 3. 5
that he may take away our sins, in him is no sin: neither 1 Pet. 2. 22
was their guile found in his mouth.

It is written of St. James Gal. 1. 19
the LORDS brother, that he was holy, for his knees by often sitting on them to
pray; did lose all sense of feeling, also that he was righteous, because for
the excellency Clemen Alex and^rinus and Eus^bius lib 2 cap. 1 Epipha.
of his righteousness, he was called Just, that he was so beloved of GOD,
that in a burning drouth when men and beasts with the v^hemenci^ of heat were
troubled, when trees, corns, and grass were withered, that by his prayer and
supplication, he brought abundance of rain from Heaven, yet he as Helias ^
was a man subject to the like passions as we are, he wanted not his
infirmities. he was guilty of original and actual sin.

But JESUS CHRIST he is an Advocate, holy, Heb. 7 25
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens: He Isaiah 53. 9
who did no wickedness, neither was deceate in his mouth: He that beloved
Math. 3. 17
Son, in whom GOD is well pleased, by his mediation, and effectual
intercession, will bring unto thee his dew Isaiah 26. 19
of grace, as the dew of herbs, whereby thy withered heart shall be watered,
thy dry heart and barren shall be refreshed, and bettered; and thou shall be
GODS 1 Cor. 3.9
husbandry, to bring forth fruit plentifu^ly, whereof thou may be
comforted continually.

Fourthly: He is such an Advocate, In respect of his fidelity
which Psalm. 146. 6
keeps his fidelity for ever: He who John 14. 6
is truth it self, is most unlike that false Ovid. lib. 3. and Stephan.
and unfaithful Ulysses, who did feign himself to be a friend, and an
Advocate to worthy Palamedes, but he filthily deceived and destroyed him: but
he who is Amen, Revel. 3. 14
the true and faithful witness, is also a true and faithful Advocate, on him
thou may rely with sure hope and confidence.

Fifthly: CHRIST is a most diligent Advocate: for if Satan day In respect of
his diligence.
and Revel. 1^ 10
night accuse thee before GOD: He Hebr. 10. 12
who sits at the right hand of his Father for ever, will continually day and
night desend thee, and make request for thee.

Sixthly: CHRIST is a most loving In regard of his love.
Advocate, who Isaiah. 53. ^
has borne thy sins, who has carried thy sorrows, who was wounded for thy
transgressions.

As the Patriarch Judah in tender love and affection offered himself to Genes.
44.33
be a servant for his brother Benjamin, while with Joseph he was interceeding
for him: so CHRIST Philip. 2. 7
made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form a servant, and in
his unspeakable love, for thy sake became obedient unto the death of the
cross, that he might be thy most affectioned Advocate.

If Pylades so pleaded for his dear Cice^o de amicitia.
friend Orestes, that for the favor he carried toward him before King Thoas,
he was willingly content to lose his life, and die for him: much more will
CHRIST, who calls John 15. 15
thee his friend, plead more lovingly for thee in respect he has John 10. 15
laid down his life for thee.

Lastly: CHRIST is a most happy Advocate, for the cause In respect of the good
success.
was never lost which he maintains, that person never perished whom he
defends: That woman John 8. 12
taken in the act of adultery was accused, but not condemned, CHRIST being her
Advocate: who as he most sufficiently and perfectly performs his own part;
so he gives strength and grace to his Client to behave himself duetifully.
Albeit Cicero Plutarch. in vita Ciceron.
in the defense of Milo, by his wiledome and eloquence so moved, and persuaded
the Judges, that they were of purpose to absolve him, but he could not cause
his Client to behave himself humbly, and therefore because of his proud
car^age, and for his arrogancy he was condemned, and banished: Yet CHRIST
being thy Advocate by his Spirit, will so move and persuade thee, that thou
shall continually, and most willingly, do that which the Mich. 6. 8
LORD requires of thee: even, to do justly, to love mercy to humble thy self
greatly, that thou may walk with thy GOD worthily, he will bestow grace Heb.
12. 28
upon thee, whereby thou may serve GOD, that thou may please him with
reverence and fear, for ever and ever.

Secondly: If thou be terrified, in respect of thine adversaries fighting
Christ is thy Chi^taine to pres^rue thee.
against thee, thou may be of good comfort, because thou have a strong
Captain, and most valiant, and expert Chiftaine: even that Lion, Revel. 5. 5
which is the of tribe of ^udah, to support and help thee. Philip did say,
that an army of Hearts, having a Lion their governor, Stobaeus sermon 52.
is better than an army of Lions having a Heart their commander, albeit thou of
thy self be weak and timorous: ^et thy Captain and defender, is most
courageous and valorous.

As Joshua disconfited mighty Kings his enemies, and made his people come
Josh. 10. 24
near, and set their feet upon their necks: so CHRIST shall Romans 16. 20
trod Satan and all enemies under thy feet shortly, and give unto thee a
most notable and glorious victory.

Thirdly: If thou be dismayed, because of th^^e own weakness, Christ is thy
good guide.
of thy sl^^pinesse: of thy own uncleanness, and of thine own poverty and
indigence, yet rejoice 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16
continually: hope Psalm 27. 14
in the Lord be strong and he shall comfort thine heart: for CHRIST shall be
thy governor and Master, Isaiah ^5. 4
he will show thee the path of life, and lead Psalm. 16. 11
thee in the right way wherein thou should walk, and furnish thee with all
necessary good things.

CHRIST JESUS a most blessed guide, is not like Iehonam, the son of Carcah,
who guided the people from Judea into Egypt, where they Ierem. 44.27
were consumed by the sword, and by the famine until they were utterly
destroyed.

Neither is he like Arimenes an Arabian Prince, who circumveined Plutarch. in
vita Crassi.
Crassus, and brought him to desert wilderness, and sinking sands, where many
of his army were destroyed, and his own son killed.

Nor yet like a more guilfull guide Andromachus, who led him to watrie ground
and marrishes, Ibidem.
where he was compelled to render himself to the will of his enemy, and then
was slain pitifully.

But JESUS he is a most true and loving guide, who will lead thee Psalm. 23. 2
by still waters, and make thee rest in green pastures: He will strengthen
thee in weakness, preserve thee in dangers, comfort thee in miseries, furnish
thee in necessities: he surely will bring thee with Jacob from Genes. 31. 1
Sechem, a place of perplexiti^: to Bethel, a place of peace and safety: he
will bring thee speedily from Exodus 15. 27
Marah, a station of bitterness, unto Elim where are twelve fountains of
water,: he certainly will bring thee from Egypt, a place of slaverie to
Canaan, a country of plenty and liberty: he will turn thy shame to honor,
thy pain to pleasure, thy sorrow to gladness, thy misery to happiness: he
will make Romans 8. 28
all things work together for thy best. If Isaiah 44.7
for a little while he has forsaken thee, with great compassion will he
gather: if for a little season, for a moment he has hid his face from thee:
Yet with everlasting mercy will he have commiseration on thee: If John 16. 33
in this world thou have affliction, content thy self with thy portion, and
persuade thy self, that in CHRIST in due time thou shall have peace, and
endless consolation.

But now let us come to speak of the causes of prayer, of the necessity
thereof, of the profit of prayer, of the dignity thereof, of some
circumstances, of the signs of prayer, and of the force and efficacy thereof,
and that briefly and plainly, as GOD of his good grace shall assist us, by his
Holy SPIRIT.

OF THE CAUSES OF PRAYER.
The thirtenth Chapter.
SVrely thou have many causes of fervent prayer: 1. If thou look to GOD Seven
causes of fervent prayer.
thy Father, If thou look to ^^sus CHRIST thy Savior, if thou look to the
holy Spirit thy sa^ctifier. 2 If thou look to the Devil, a liar a and John ^.
44
murderer. 3. If thou consider other Christians, for whom thou should pray,
and whose good example it becomes thee to follow. 4. If thou consider the
wicked, whom thou should eshew. 5. If thou take heed to thy own self, to
thy necessity and misery. 6. If thou bebold the worldly vanity, pollution,
danger and impiety. 7. If thou shall remember the necessity, utility,
dignity, and efficacy of prayer, in the Chapters following* all are causes of
sufficient force, to move this holy duty, chiefly considering thy Christian
calling.

First: The Great and glorious GOD, thy loving Father: he GODS command who is
thy Father, Master, and King.
commands thee to Psalm. 50. 15
call upon Him in the day of thy trouble, Now seeing Joseph Genes. 38.14
obeyed his earthly father: thou have great reason to obey thy Heavenly Father,
who is also a most righteous and gracious Malach. 1.6
Master. If Absoloms 2 Samuel 13.29
servants obeyed him, an evil Master, in an unlawful and wicked action: far
rather art thou oblished, to obtemperate thy good Master in a lawful dead.
Absalom commanded that his brother Amnon should be slai^e; GOD commands this
service, that thy soul may be saved, and therefore absolutely ought to be
obeyed: Seeing, moreover he is King Almighty, who Math. 10.28
is able to destroy both soul and body in hell eternally: and to give thee a
great reward for thy obedience and loyalty; when King David but desired to
drink of the water of the well of Bethlem, three 1 Samuel 25.15
of his subjects brake through the host of the Philistims, and brought unto
him that water longed for: thus they ventred their lives for David's sake and
for his pl^asure: And should not thou much more willingly hazard thy life,
to give unto GOD obedience, to do his Majesty acceptable service? Who Gods
promise
makes also unto thee most sweet and comfortable promises, to deliver Psalm.
50.1^
thee, to Psalm. 91. 1^
glorify thee, to satisfy thee with long life, and to show thee his salvation

He perfitly performed his promise given of a Kingdom, not only to 2 Samuel 5. ^
David whom he loved, but also to 1 King. 11. 3^
Jeroboam, an idolator whom he hated, Josh. 23. 14
all his promises shall in due time undoubtedly come to pass, nothing shall
fail thereof: So he promises if thou pray Ierem 29.12
to him, to hear thee, if thou seek him, to be found of thee.

Again when thou considerest CHRIST JESUS thy Savior, thou shall confess
that thou have good CHRIST'S example.
cause of prayer: Consider thy redemer remaining in this earth, he Math. 14.23
went up into a mountain alone to pray for a long-space of time, In Heb. 5. 7
the days of his flesh, he offered up prayers and supplications, with str^ng
crying and tears. Quod si ille orabat qui sine pecato crat, quanto magis
peccatores oportet orare? If he prayed who was without sin, how much more
behooves it sinners for to pray?

His precept also and promises, Christ his precept and promise is cause of
prayer.
may cause thee to call upon GOD: Ask Math 7. 7
(says He) and it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you.

Moreover, Seeing he Heb. 9. 24
is entered into Heaven himself, to appear CHRIST'S intercession.
now in the sight of GOD for thee, to make continual request and intercession
for thee: Have not thou great reason to make request for thy own self?

When the Levit. 16. 17
high Priest went into the holy place, to make atonement, then the whole
multitude of the people stood without, in Luke. 1. 10
prayer while the incense was in burning.

Seeing therefore thou have Hebr. 4. 14
a great high Priest, which has entered into Heaven, even JESUS the Son of
GOD, who now is at the Ephesians. 1. 20
right hand of the FATHER; to make request and intercession for thee, to
procure thy peace and reconciliation: have thou not who are without in this
earth great reason, to continue thy self in earnest prayer and supplication,
to the end thou may obtain eternal salvation?

Furthermore: If thou desire The desire of the grouth of the graces of Spirit
a cause of prayer.
an increase of the graces of the holy Spirit, that they may the more
abundantly be bestowed upon thee thou have cause to pray for the same more
earnestly, for thy Heavenly Father Luke 11. 13
will give the holy Ghost (a greater measure of his gifts) to thee that
desires him: for the same Spirit is both the cause and effect of our prayer
Scultet. cap. 3 de precatione.
and petitions.

Secondly: If thou take heed Cause of prayer, Satan's power.
to the Devil, thy mortal enemy, thou will pray to GOD most fervently: he
thy deadly adversary, 1 Pet. 5. 8
like a roaring Lion, walks about seeking to devore thee: He is stronger
than 1 Samuel 17.4
Goliath desirous to destroy with fiery Ephesians. 6. 16
darts. 2. He is much more crafty than 2 Samuel 16.23
Achitophell, by his wicked counsel and machinations, plotting to supprise
thee. 3. He is more false than Ierem. 41. 6
Ishmael, promising to pleasure thee, but will punish thee for ever. 4. He is
more cruel than Herod, who slew Math. 2. 16
the male children, that were in Bethlehem, but he would kill body and soul
eternally. 5. Satan is more malicious than Esther 3. 6
Haman, who purposed to put to death Mordecay, and all the people of his
country. So desires the Devil to destroy thee, and all thy offspring and
posterity. 6. Satan is much more treacherous than Saul, who albeit he 1 Samuel
18.29 and verse 21
became always David's enemy, yet in appearance of love and familiarity, he
gave his daughter to him in marriage, for to be a suare to him: So Satan
although he would give the whole world to thee, and although he spoke to thee
the truth and verity; yet it is ever his mind to hurt thee, to ensnare thee;
and altogether to overthrow thee. 7. He is restless, and Job. 1.7
never ceasseth, but with shameless impudency, with continual celeritie and
agilitie he accuses thee, he persueth thee, for thy perdition, and endless
torment and destruction.

Seeing then such is the strength, craft, cruelty, deceate, malitiousnesse: The
estate of the Church is a cause of prayer.
treachery, and vigilancie of thy spiritual enemy: thou have great cause to
pray most earnestly and incessantly.

Thirdly, if thou consider other Christians of the family Galat. 6. 10
of faith, thou knowing some, yea too many molested and vexed on every side
with Zach. 1. 14
the four horns of persecution, thou then should be sorry Nehem. 1. 4
for Joseph's affliction: and with Nehemiah fast and pray for the reproach and
misery of Jerusalem. Certainly, seeing thou art a member of Christ's body, the
Church militant, it is thy duty to Psalm. 1^2.6
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, when thou shall see the graces of GOD
multiplied upon thy brethren, and them walking Ephesians. ^. 1
worthy of their Christian calling, and living an holy life: and godly
conversation, thou should ask of GOD, that thou thy self may become an
earnest imitator of t^e^r good courses and true religion, that GOD always may
be more and more glorified, his kingdom enlarged, Satan and his power
confounded, and thy self surely perserved, yea that the whole Ephesians. 5. 23
spirit, soul and body of all Saints may be kept blameless until the
coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Fourthly, when thou shall behold The wickedness of the world is a cause of
Prayer.
the multitude of the wicked and ungodly sinners: if David's Psalm. 119 130
eyes gushed out with rivers of water, because they transgressed Gods
commandment, and did not keep his holy Law, then thou have cause to power
forth thy prayers, when thou see sinners continually offending God.

2. When thou perceivest them desirous to defile and destroy thy self thou,
have reason to beseech GOD to Act. 2. 40
save thee from the froward generation. 3. When thou see them walking in the
Math. 7. 13
broad way, and working their own destructions without remorse of conscience,
being Ephesians. 4. 19
past all feeling: thou have cause with pity and commiseration to pray for
their amendment, conversion and eternal salvation, that their soul Job. 33.
30
may be preserved from the pit, and they illuminated in the light of the
living, that they Psalm. 106. 5
may see the felicity of his chosen, and glory with his inheritance.

Fifthly, Act. 20. 28
take heed to thy self, Consider thy self.
and have a respect to thy own safeguard and happiness, if thou fear
spiritual deadness, thou have cause to beseech GOD to quicken thee according
to his loving kindness, if thou know thy self to be Revel. 3. 17
blind and ignorant, thou have reason to entreat God to open Ephesians. 5. 18
the eyes of thy understanding, and Psalm. 146. 8
to give sight to thee, who art blind: if thou think thy self that thou art
weak Romans 14. 1
in faith, then call upon GOD to increase the same, if thou judge thy self
Job. 39 37
vile and filthy, pray to God to wash Psalm. 51.2
thee thoroughly, and to cleanse thee from all thy iniquity: if thou be prosane,
poor Revel. 3. 17
naked, diseased, and in deformity, have thou not very great need to pray
for holiness, riches, the white raiment of Christ's righteousness, health, and
that thou may ever appear before the LORD in holy beauty;

Thou have just cause truly to send up thy supplications vnc^ssantly, if thou
shall arightly consider of thy danger and j^opardie: thou remainest in as great
danger spiritually, as Isaac, Daniel, and Peter were into bodily.

The Patriarch Isaac being young, was Genes. 22. 9
bound to the Altar, under him was the wood to be fire, above his head the
knife of his father to kill him, no person was near him to deliver him:
without question he was then praying to God and making earnest supplication.

But thou by nature art bound and holden by Prove. 5. 22
the cords of thy own sin, under thee is that everlasting fire, Isa. 66. 24
which never shall be quenched to torment thee, above thy head is the sharp
Ezech. 21. 9
sword of GODS justice ready to kill thee, if thou look about thee, there is
none near thee to Isaiah. 63. 5
help thee, thine own arm cannot save thee: thou then in such peril have
cause to cry unto GOD most instantly that it would please his goodness to
deliver thee. And as Daniel when he was in danger in Dan. 6. 16
the den of Lions, did pray earnestly unto GOD, by whom he was preserved, and
his accusers punished: ^o thou who may protest with the Prophet, saying, Psalm.
57. 4
My soul is among Lions, seeing thou art in danger to be devoured
continually, have thou not great cause to pray fervently, LORD, deliver Psalm.
35. 17
my desolate soul from the Lions, which would cruelly destroy me.

Though thou art like Math. 14. 30
Peter walking on the water, when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid, and
as he began to sink, he cried Master, save me: thou art now come unto Psalm.
69. 2
deep waters, the streams run over thee, thou art in danger of spiritual
drowning: thou art sinking in the sea of sin: thou will perish certainly,
both soul and body; unless thou cry, and pray tymouslie, that thy Master
would be pleased to save thee.

Sixthly: If thou think wisely of The world is a cause of payer.
the worlds vanity, that all in this earth, Vanity Eccles. 1. 2
of vanities* (says the Preacher) vanity of vanities, all is vanity: thou
have occasion to pray earnestly, that thou be not bewitched with the vain
pleasures and allurements of the same, that thou love Ioh. 2. 15.16
not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him: for all that is in the world (as
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of the life) is not
of the Father; but of the world which passes away, and destroys most
f^arefully and certainly.

Thou have most just cause, to crave of GOD, that thou be not filthily defiled
nor polluted by the filthiness thereof, seeing it is pure religion, Iam. 1. 27
and undefiled before GOD, to keep thy self unspotted of the world: And that
thou Philip. 2. 15
may be blameless and pure, and the son of GOD, without rebuke into the
mids of a naughty, and crooked nation, amongst whom thou may shine as a
light in the world.

Lastly: The necessity, dignity, and utility of prayer: and that thou may
walk Ephesians. 4. 1
worthy of the vocation whereunto thou art called, may forcibly move thee to
perpetual practicing of this holy duty.

OF THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER.
The fourtenth Chapter.
GReat indeed and unspeakable is the necessity of Prayer, which by some
comparisons will clearly appear, and become manifest.

As the Samarit^nes had need Prayer compared to a bucket.
of a bucket, or some other vessel, to draw John. 4. 11
water out of Iaakobs deep Well; so all Christians have need of prayer, to
bring to them the living water of refreshing grace, from that John. 13. 1
fountain odened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for sin and for uncleanness.

As a ladder is necessare for one that would clim^e over a wall, or that Math.
5. 30
would assault to take a To an ladder.
sort: so is prayer requisite for every one, who desires to ascend to Heaven,
by it one will take hold on the true ladder, by whom he may have access to
the Father.

Thirdly: They that Genes 28.12
go down to the sea in ships, and occupy by great waters, does soon know To
an anchor.
how needful an anchor is to a ship; so as needful is prayer to the soul.

The most sure anchor in the Anchora ^utissima in tempe^tatibus fortunae est
precatio, quae defigitur sursum in Coelo, v^ ancho^a figitur deorsum in fundo
maris.
tempests of estate, is Prayer, which is fixed above in Heaven, as a material
anchor is cast downward in the ground of the Sea: it will work hope, which e is
an anchor to the soul, both sure and steadfast, and it enters into that which
is within the veil.

Fourthly: A Messinger is sometimes Psalm* 107. 23
very needful and requisite, To an Messinger.
So Genes. 32. 3
^aacob had need of them ^o send to his Brother Esa^, when he desired
reconciliation with him: So the Josh. 10. 6
men of Gibeon had need of a messenger to send to Joshua, for their
preservation from the Amorits fighting against them: The people also of Iabish
Gilead, when Nahash the Ammonite besieged 1 Samuel 11. 3
them, and would accept of no other condition, but to pluck out their right
eyes, they had need of messingers to send to all the coasts of Israel for
their deliverance, from that hurt and shame.

Thus, that distressed Adherball, a unfortunate King of Numidia, Multa
pollicendo.
being besieged in his City Cirta by his malicious and unnatural Brother
Ingurtha, with many promises did require two messingers to declare his
perplexed estate to the Senate of Rome, and yet received Salust. in bello
Iugur^^ino.
no relief, nor comfort for all his care and request.

But thou Christian Reader has as great necessity of Prayer, which is a a
most faithful and diligent messinger, if thou desire reconciliation, with
thy good elder Brother JESUS CHRIST; if thou require preservation from
in^umerable sins; if thou seek deliverance from the Devil, thy mortal
enemy, if thou wishest victory over thy own inbred corruption: let thy
earnest request be a special messinger to thy Heavenly Father, from whom every
Iam. 1 17
perfect gift comes.

Fifthly: As a Charet is requisite for a long journey, Candaces Act. 8. 27
her To a Charet.
chief governor had need of one wh^ he came from Ethiopia to Jerusalem to
worship: And for a tempestuous season, that 1 King. 14. 44
the rain stay not: a charet is also requisite. So in thy journey toward the
Kingdom of Heaven; to l the celestial Jerusalem, prayer is most requisite and
necessary, as a charet to carry thee. As Elijah 2 King 2. 11
was taken up to Heaven bodily, in Eccles. 48. 9
a charet of fiery Horses; so thou spiritually by fervent prayer, and holy
meditation in thy soul, will ascend unto the City of the living LORD.

Sixthly: As the sling 1 Samuel 17.50
and stone were needful to David to smite To Armor.
and overcome Goliath his enemy: so is prayer needful for thee, that thou may
resist Iam. 4. 7
the Devil and he will flee from thee. It is the most excellent peace of the
Ephesians. 6. 13
whole Armor of GOD, that thou may be able to resist in the evil day, seeing
it is both offensive and defensive, for destruction of the adversary, and for
thy own preservation, because it is grounded upon the word of GOD, which is
the Ephesians. 6. 17
sword of the spirit, it is most offensive, and because it proceadeth from true
faith, it is a shield Ephesians. 6. 16
wherewith thou may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, it is most
defensive and so most necessary and exp^di^nt.

Seventhly: As a key is needful for To a door.
opning of a shutdoor^: so is prayer necessary for the opning the shut door
of thine heart, for opning of Act. 14. 27
the door of faith unto thee, and for opning Coloss* 4 3
the door of utterance unto thee: yea, for op^ing of the O^atio ^^st^ est
cl^^^s Coeli. Augu^t.
door of Heaven unto thee, that thou Ephesians. 2. 18
may have entrance unto thine holy and Heavenly Father, to remain with him in
eternal glory and ^elicitie.

Eighthly: In the mean time of To Samson his hair.
thy warfare and pilgrimage he^re upon this earth, as Sampsons consecrated
Judge. 16. 17
hair was most needful for him, for victory, liberty, safety; for his
honor and dignity: while he did keep his hair he was victorious, true,
sound, and honorable: but when he was shaven, and wanted the hair of his
consecration, he became weak, and so was soon overcome: he was a bound
slave; he was blinded, he was by them disgraced and mocked.

Even so true prayer is as nec^ssarie for thee, for by it thou shall be
strong, vi^torious, and more Romans ^. 37
than a Conqueror: thou shall be fr^e as a puissant King: thou shall be safe
and sound, g^orious, and honorable before GOD, and all people.

Ninthlie: If raiment be needful To many necessare things.
to cloth thee: if food be necessare to sustain thee: if water be requisite
to wash thee: if gold and pearl be fit to adorn thee: if thou have need of
balm and salve to heal thee: if thou have need of good company to comfort,
and give contentment unto thee, then fervent prayer is more necessare and
requisi^e for thee: for to the help thereof thou shall receive spiritual
food, even the bread John 6. 4
of life, the body and blood of CHRIST, that meat which endures to eternal
life: thou shall get that white Revel. 3. 18
raiment of Christ's righteousness to cloth thee, that thy filthy nakedness
shall not be seen: thou shall get the water Zach. 13. ^
of the fountain of David, to purge thee from pollution and uncleanness: thou
shall obtain fine Revel. 3. 18
gold to enrich thee, that ring Luke 15. 22
and pearls to decore thee: thou shall get good and sufficient salve, healing
balm, better than the balm of Gilead to cure thee: thou shall have the
company of holy Psalm. 54.7
Angels to keep thee, to comfort and content thee in all thy crosses and
calamity, to carry Luke 16.^2
thy soul to Abraham's bosom, and to everlasting felicity.

10. If natural life be necessare, so is prayer more necessare, whereby Prayer
is necessary as life.
natural life is prolonged, and spiritual: yea, eternal ly^e is obtained.

Holy Daniel albeit he had determined Dan. 1. 8
in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings
meat: yet he was thoroughly resolved; even with the perrill of his ly^e, to
pray to his GOD continually and openly.

No decree, no statute, no prohibition, no punishment could deteine Dan. 6.10
him from that holy duty: but no commandment, no exhortation, no commodity,
nor example can move to send up prayers to his glorious Majesty.

If thou pray, GOD Almighty will keep his promise assuredly: And John 2. 25
this is his promise that he has promised thee, even that eternal life.

Lastly: If the holy Spirit, (without Prayer is necessary for the holy Spirit.
the which none can John 3. 5
be borne again and renewed, none can be instructed, none Romans 1. 5
sanctified, none can be John 14. 16
comforted, confirmed, nor glorified) if I say this sanctifying Spirit be
necessary, so also is prayer, seeing our Luke 11. 13
Heavenly Father will give the holy Ghost to them that desire him.

But if thou shall say, that prayer is not so needful, because many evil
doers have gotten good gifts, and have not prayed arightly for the same, as
Cain Genes. 4 8
a vagabound and runnagate received strength: Esau Hebr. 12. 16
a profane person, his fathers Genes. 25.2^
favor: Naball a foolish man received ^ Sam. 25. 36
riches: traitorous Achitophell 2 Samuel 16.23
worldly wisdom: wicked Esther. 3. 1
Haman worldly honor: cruel Iezabell 2 King 9. 30
was fair and beautiful: wretched Luke 9. ^
ludas had learning: yea, the gift of preaching: and proud Exodus 1. ^
Phara^h received an earthly Kingdom, that these cursed catiues did not pray,
nor call upon the name of the LORD.

I answer, albeit GOD Math. 5. 45
makes his sun to arise both on the evil and the good, and sends rain on
the just and unjust: yet these be commoun and earthly benefits, temporary
gifts: these will be but as Romans 12.20
coals of fire upon their heads, and aggravate their just condemnation: but
the godly, who call upon the LORD conscientiously, they receive true grace,
spiritual, Heavenly, and eternal blessings, unto their everlasting salvation.

OF THE PROFIT OF TRVE PRAYER.
The fifteenth Chapter.
ALbeit the Atheist (whose candle shall be put out, who shall be as stubble
before the wind, as cha^fe which the storm carries away: or as Isaiah 1. 31
tow before the fire) will thus foolishly say, Who Job. 21. 15
is the Almighty that I should serve him? and what profit shall I have, if I
pray unto him? Yet let the faithful Christian certainly be persuaded that as
godliness 1 Timothy 6. 6
is great gain; so is prayer, which procures godliness, Prayer is profitable
for keeping of good.
it must be great gain.

Vtilitas (as the natural Philosopher says wisely) est praesentium bonorum
conservatio, aut absentium Arist. Rhetor. ad A^exan.
comparatio, aut malorum instantium propulsio, aut futurorum incommodorum
inhibitio: and hoc dividitur in corpus, animam, and res ^ternas: that is to
say, This is utility, the keeping of good things which are present, the
acquiring of good things which are absent: or the holding off, and propulsion
of evil things, which are near and instant, or the staying and inhibition of
hurts and detriments to come: and this is divided to the body, soul, and
eternal things.

Prayer then is profitable for preserving true light, and saving knowledge in
thy mind, least the devil blindfold thee, and pluck out the eyes of thy
soul, that thou may have 2 Timothy 2. 7
understanding in all things, necessary and expedient, for keeping holiness in
thine affection, and in thy conversation: for preserving of health, strength,
riches, good name, children, and posterity, for keeping of all publict and
private good.

Secondly: Invocation, or calling upon GOD is most commodious, Prayer is
profitable for purchasing good.
for purchasing of good things that are lost or absent. If therefore thou
Revel. 2. 4
have lost thy first love, and have lost that sweet familiarity and
acq^aintance, which sometimes most comfortably thou have had with thy GOD: if
thou have lost his precious p^^sence, his gracious favor, his sanctifying
Spirit, peace of conscience, health of body, worldly honor, earthly wealth,
dear friends, loving children, or what ever is beloved of thee.

True prayer is most profitable to recover all, that GOD may lift up Psalm. 4. 6
the light of his countenance upon thee, that he may vouchsafe his love and
favor upon thee; that again thou may renew thy acquaintaince, Job. 22. 25
and make friendship with thy GOD, that thou may love Deuteronomy. 6.5
him with all thine heart, soul, strength, and mind: that thou may find
the LORD always 2 Chronicles 15.2
with thee, and thou with him: that GOD may create Psalm. 51. 10
a clcane heart, and renew a right spirit within thee, that all good things
lost may be restored unto thee: that the LORD I^b 42. 12
may bless thy last days more than the first, that thou ma^est receive
whatsoever good thou requirest for this life, or the life to come.

Thirdly: Prayer is profitable, for removing of punishment already Prayer is
profitable for ^em^ving of present (...). ^^s.
in^^i^ted, whither they be commoun judg^ments, as sword, ^^ fam^^e pestilence;
or particulare judgments 1 King. ^.37
and corrections for sickness, ^anishment, want, and distress. Consider the
example of David, Hez^ki^h, Manasse, Samson, and others.

Fourthly: Prayer is profitable for averting plagues that are threatened P^^yer
is profitable for averting of punishments threatened.
and denunced: A plain proof hereof in the Ninivits, when they did Io^. 3.8
cry unto GOD mightily: the LORD inclined his ear mercifully, and delivered
them from that destruction which was denounced.

Again, an other man speaks pertinently to this purpose, that Vtilitas in
continua rei bo^ae possessione consistit.
utility consists in a continual possession of a good thing.

Then prayer is most profitable, for by the help thereof, the blessed GOD
shall be thy Psalm. 16.5
portion, thy lot, thine inheritance, and perpetual possession, thy
everlasting habitation Psalm 90. 1
from generation to generation: all things, whether 1 C^r. 3. 22
they be things present, or things to come, shall be th^ne, and thou Christ's,
and Christ Gods, thou shall surely have a continual p^ssession of GOD
himself, and Romans 8. 28
all things shall work together for thy best.

True prayer assuredly is profitable, for people of all age, ^exe, estate, and
condition at all times for ever: m^st profitable for young Genes 25 63
Isaak, ^or old Luke 2. 29
Sim^on, for 1 Samuel 1. 10
Hanna, a woman, as for E^canah her husband, for rich King 1 King. 8^ 23 Aequ^
pauperibus prodest l^cupletib^s aeque: Aeque neglectu^^ pueris; senibusque
nocebat.
Solomon, as for poor Lazarus, in time of health, and in time of sickness,
during lifetime and at thy dy^^g day. For if thou pray du^^^fully, if thou
hear GODS word ^^^gently, then Isaiah 48. 17
the LORD will teach thee to profit, ^^a (...) ^^^e by the way thou sho^^^^^
(...).

If the Apo^^'e (...) John Mark, to be bro^ght to him, because he wa^
pro^^^^ 2 Timothy 4. 11
unto him to minister, th^^ sho^'dest desire that thou may be ^^^tinuallie
p^^^e to (...), which is most (...) to minister unto (...) necessiti^s, to
m^^^rat all thine affairs, to ma^e thee happy h^ere and for eve^, Amen.

OF THE DIGNITY OF PRAYER.
The sixteenth Chapter.
Faithful and ^ervent prayer (persuade thy self) will bring to thee, 1. True
honor and dignity. 2. Nobility and generositie. 3. A sure Kingdom and
royal. 4. A happy marriage and a blessed matrimony.

First: By true prayer, as thou will be delivered from the slaverie of Satan
and iniquity, that from henceforth Romans 6. 6
thou should not serve sin, nor thy corrupt lusts and affections, nor thy
^ilthie rotten Titus 3. 3
pleasures; so thou shall attain true liberty, thou shall be John ^. 36
made free indeed, and Abraham's spiritual child: Thou shall be honorable,
preferred to see a citizen Ephesians. 2.19
with the Saints, and of the household of GOD: yea, certainly, thou shall be
advanced to such dignity, that thou shall become the LORDS secretary: The
Psalm. 25.14
secret of the LORD shall be revealed to thee that fear him, and does pray to
his Majesty; he will show Job. 11.6
thee the secreets of wisdom, and of thine own salvation.

As the poor penitent Luke 23.42
thief, praying to CHRIST, had more honor and understanding, and a better
judgment in matters concerning GODS Kingdom, than the whole body of the
Jews, than the learned Scribes and Pharisees, to his everlasting joy and
consolation; so thou by praying diligently shall get honor and dignity, and
have comfortable knowledge of the LORDS mysteries, and so shall have more Psalm.
199.99
understanding than the Ancient, than teachers: yea, in some measure thou shall
be like holy Daniell, he prayed, the Dan. 2. 19
secreete to him was reveiled, he Dan. 2. 48
is made a great man, and honored: so I say, thou calling upon GOD arightly,
shall become the LORDS secretary, and exalted to 2 Timothy 1. 10
immortality of true honor and dignity.

Secondly: Albeit by nature, corruption Prayer brings nobility.
John 17. 14
be thy father, and the wo^me thy mother, and which is worse in respect of
sin, thou have Satan to John 8. 44
be thy father when thou do his lusts, yet by fervent prayer thou shall have
GOD to be thy father; thou shall be borne John 1. 13
not of blood, but of GOD: CHRIST will Hebr. 2. 11
not be ashamed to call thee his brother: thou shall be truly and
continually noble: for supplication, a true token of religion, and
Christianity ever yields the best reputation and nobility,

Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros
Cui quisquis servit, ille vere est nobilis Prudentius.

The generous race of CHRIST nobilitateth men, whoever serves him is truly
noble, what ever their condition be in this world.

Is not Piety the mother of prayer of greater power to nobilitate than
Philosophy? Now this is the testimony of Seneca, that Platonem non Seneca
Epist. 44. ad Lucull.
accepit nobilem Philosophia, sed fecit, Philosophy received not Plato a noble
man, but made him one.

Also Anacharsis of admirable wisdom, when by reproach he Stobaeus sermon. 84.
was named a Scythian, he thus answered, I am so by birth and by kind; but not
so in my conditions, manners, and ingine: he would show that true nobility
proceeded not from parentage, but from virtue and industry, but much rather is
of verity, that it comes by true prayer and piety.

Thirdly: Prayer will make a By prayer thou will receive a Kingdom.
King Revel. 1. 9
unto GOD. Abraham was reputed, and called a Genes. 2^. 6
Prince amongst strangers: not for his land, nor ample possession; but for his
godliness and devotion.

Thus King JAMES of blessed memory, present in the Church Patric. Scharpius in
Epist. dedica^. ad illustrissimum Regem.
general assembly, protested publicly, most worthily and wisely, that he had
far rather be a Christian calling upon GOD, than an earthly King and no
Christian: his Majesty knew well that he received a better, and a surer
Kingdom by holiness and invocation, than by heri^^ge or succession.

So by holy praying thou will come to the p^rpetuall possession of an Heavenly
Kingdom, Heb. 12. 28
which no ways can be shaken: it is an 1 Pet. 1. 4
inheritance immortal and vnde^iled, it fades not, it is reserved in the
Heavens for thee, and so well keept, and thou shall be well preserved for the
same: thou shall not John. 10. 28
perish: None shall plu^ke thee out of CHRIST'S hand, he will give unto thee
eternal life.

Fourthly: By prayer thou shall By prayer CHRIST shall be thine husband.
be blessed with an honorable marriage, as Isaaks Genes. 24. 12
marriage was comfortable, which was begun, continued, and ended by prayer:
so thou by calling upon GOD shall get CRRIST to be thy husband, who will make
Ephesians. 5* 27
thee unto himself a glorious spouse, holy, and without blame; who will marry
thee Hos. 2. 19
unto himself for ever in righteousness, judgment, mercy, compassion and
faithfulness, who will continually remember Ierem. 2. 2
thee with the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy marriage.

Wise Mordecai (without contraversie) esteemed the marriage of Esther 2. 17
Esther with Ahasuerus both honorable, comfortable, and profitable: may not
thou (if thou be a considerate Christian) esteem thy marriage with CHRIST
JESUS the King of Glory, to be much more profitable and honorable: yea, he
will set a fair diadem upon thi^e head, and Reve^. 2. 10
give to thee the crown of life, and make thee partaker of his Heavenly
blessings for ever.

This marriage and happy conjunction, has sweetness, steadfastness, and
continual durance without separation: thou will delight Psalm. 37.4
thy self in the LORD; if his promises Psalm. 119.10^
be sweet to thee as honey to thy mouth, his presence who is thy husband, will
be most pleasant also unto thee.

This honor will be also durable, for seeing CHRIST Philip. 1. 21
is the advantage both in life and death, he will be thine husband, honor
and happiness, both in life and death continually.

The due consideration of true prayer, should encourage thee to the fervent and
frequent practice thereof, notwithstanding it be a Magnum iter ascendo, sed
dat mihi gloria vires. Propert. lib 4 Et in imme^sum gloria calcar habet. Ovid.
lib. 1 de Ponto.
work of difficulty: It is I say a far journey to go up to Heaven, etc. as
has been before declared more particulary, yet let this profit and glory be
a mean to strengthen thee; when thou art weak, and a spur to urge thee when
thou art weary.

Worldly men by the instinct of nature, know this to be of truth and verity:
But now let us consider of the force and efficacy of true Prayer.

OF THE FORCE OF PRAYER.
The sevententh Chapter.
GReat and wonderful is the force of Prayer: the effects thereof, and the
fruits are innumerable, and unspeakable: This strength may be known in some
manner, by these comparisons of wine, of an horn, and of the word.

First: Wine is of great force, it Job. 32. 19
will make new bottles to burst, ^rayer strong as wine.
it Psalm. 104. 15
makes glad the heart of man: Wine has a purging Luke 10. ^4
and healing power, to cleanse and cure filthy wounds: This was the sentence
of the wise man, How 1 Esdr. 3. 18
strong is wine, it turns every thought into joy and gladness, so that one
remembereth* no manner of sorrow, nor debt. It has also (as experience proves)
a refreshing power, which causes one Isaiah 55. 1
that thirsts to buy it.

But prayer is of far greater strength, it will break Psalm. 107. 14
bands a-sunder: it will bring an Act. 16. 26
earthquake, and make the fundation of a heavy house to shake.

Prayer will bring gladness and comfort to 1 Samuel 1. 1^
Hannah: when her husband can not comfort her, she pouring out her soul before
the LORD, looked no more sad; but exceedingly rejoiced. It has a purging and
curing power, to heal all the wounds, and Psalm. 103. 3
infirmities of the soul: it will not only bring to thee forgetfulness; but
also forgiveness of debt, which is true blessedness: for Blessed Psalm. 32. 1
is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: it will bring
refreshment to thy thirsty and ^orrowfull soul, to thy great joy and
everlasting contentment.

Secondly: Prayer ^ay be compared to an horn: as the royal Prayer compared to
an horn.
Prophet prayed, so he protested, saying, Thou Psalm. 92. 10
shall exalt mine horn, like the Unicorns: Naturalists write of the Unicorns
horn, that it has three properties. Read B. Couper of Gall^way upon the fifth
chapt. of the Revelation
1. That of all others it is the most strong, firm and solid. 2 That it is
most beautiful and pleasant. 3* That it is most profitable, as being a
soueraig^e preservatiue against all poison.

So prayer will procure to the inward strength, and true fortitude, that thou
shall Ephesians. 6.11
be able to stand against the assaults of the Devil, thou shall overcome the
world, and prevail against thy enemy, and subdue sin, and all thy iniquities:
so it will bring beauty to thee, that thou shall be very pleasant, and
C^^tic. 4. 1
fair, and Psalm. 45. 13
all glorious Psalm. 45. 13
within, and it will bring unspeakable profit to thee as has been declared
to thee already.

Thirdly: As the word of GOD Prayer is powerful as the Word.
is of admirable force and power: So is fervent prayer grounded upon the Word,
very operative and powerful.

The Word of the LORD is like a Ier. 23. 29
fire which burns, and like an hammer which breaks the stone. The Heb. 4. 1^
Word of GOD is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper than a two edged
sword, and enters through, even to the dividing a-sunder of the soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart.

So prayer is forcible as a fire, to burn and consume away the dross of thy
sin: it is powerful to break and bruise thy Ezech. 11.19
stony hard heart.

It is like a sword, wherewith (with CHRIST) thou shall prevail against thy
enemies, as the sword Iud. 7. 20
of GIDEON was powerful to destroy the Midianits, and to preserve himself and
the ^sraelites, so is prayer very powerful for thy preservation, for thy
adversaries destruction.

We read that in the Battle at Pyd^a* Mar. Cato Son to Read the consent of
^me.
great Cato, fighting valiently, he lossed his sword, that fell out of his
hand suddenly, amongst his enemies, which he took so gri^vously, that coming
to his companions, he prayed them to help him that he might recover his
sword; protesting he thought it greater honor for him to die there Pr^^er is
more to be regarded than a matrial sword.
and to loss his life, than living to want his sword, whereupon a number of
his faithful friends assisting him by their courage and valor, did so scatter
the enemies, that the sword of Cato was found again to his great joy, and
contentment: Now if that man made such an accoumpt of an earthly, or material
sword: how should a Christian esteem of prayer, a Heavenly and spiritual
weapon, by the help and virtue thereof, thou will attain to honor,
happiness and eternal salvation.

The great efficacy and strength The force of prayer in diverse respects.
of prayer, is most clear and evident, in regard of the effects thereof. 1. In
respect of creatures without sense or fealing, the speedy Sun Josh. 10. 12
did stand still and stay his swift motion, by the power of the prayer of
Joshua. The swelling sea was Exodus 14. 21
divided and made dry land by the cry of Moses: The Numb. 16.31
ground claue a-sunder, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up Korah,
and his family, by the request of that same holy man: 1 Samuel 7. 10
a great thunder scattered and smote the Philistimes, by the force of Samuel
his supplication: The rain Iam. 5. 17
was restrained from the earth for three years and six months, Then he 1
King. 18.45
prayed again, and the Heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her
fruit.

Secondly: In respect of creatures without reason and understanding: Prayer
prevailed against the teeth of Deuteronomy 6 22
Lions, the sting of Numb. 21. 9
Serpents, the venom of a Act. 28. 5
Viper, the multitude and swarms Exodus 8. 21
of flies, frogs and lyce, as may be seen in the sacred story.

Thirdly: In respect of men, whither cruel as Esau, crafty as Achitophel,
hautie as Haman, many as the Isa. 38. 36
host and army of Senacherib.

Fourthly: In respect of the most wicked spirit and powerful, which goes
Math. 17. 21
not out of one but by prayer, and fasting.

Fifthly: In respect of good Angels, when devout Cornelius Act. 10. 30
prayed, an holy Angel from Heaven was sent to him for his instruction,
direction, and eternal salvation.

Sixthly: In respect of the holy Ghost, as when CHRIST Luke. 3. 21
did pray, the Heaven was open^d and the holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape
like a dove upon him: So when a Christian prays fervently, the blessed Spirit
will come unto him inwardly, will assist him comfortablie, and direct him
continually: As when the faithful Apostles were Act. 3. 4
all with one accord in one place, undoubtedly praying to GOD, they were all
filled with the holy Ghost, and were fitted for their publict charge and holy
ministration: So when the true Christian shall call upon GOD a^rightly, the
good Spirit will come^ possess him assuredly, and more enable him for his holy
calling and function.

Seventhly: Most principally, In this may be known the virtue and ^fficacie
of prayer, since it (in some manner) prevails with the Almighty himself, as
it overcommeth our adversary against his will: So it is powerful with GOD
with his will: thus Israel Genesis 32 28
by prayer had power with GOD, and obtained his special blessing: Thus also
the Omnipotent the Creator, says to his servant, Let Exodus 32. 10
me alone: as if by his prayer he might have constrained him, and have gotten
victory over the Almighty.

Nobile vincendi genus est, mala vincere posse,
Prosper in Epigram.
Nobilius multo vincere posse DEVM.
It is an honorable kind of victory to vanquish evil, but much honorable
to be of power as to prevail with GOD.

Moreover: The power of The power of prayer is good for others.
prayer extends it self for the good of others, albeit far distant:
Nehemiah Nehem. 1. 6
in Shushan in the palace of Artazerxes, when he prayed day and night, for the
children of Israel and inhabitants of Jerusalem; th^n the wall of the City is
builded, the people of GOD are comforted, the poor are relieved, their
knowledge by reading of the Law is increased, and an act or ordinance to serve
GOD is established.

The prayer of the faithful is powerful, for the safety of such who are in
their society and company: As when St. Paul prayed in that great and long
danger, the LORD Act. 27. 24
saved all that were in the Ship with him, there was no loss of any man's
life amongst them.

The prayer of a master is power full, to bring a benefit to the servant; so
by the supplication of the Math. ^. 13
Centurion, his servant is healed of his grievous pain of the palsy.

By the prayer of the Math 15.28
mother, the daughter is delivered from a devil, by whom she was vexed. The
prayer of Mark. 9. 24
the father is profitable and powerful for his son possessed by a dumb
spirit.

By the force and ^fficacie of the prayer of a pious Prea^her people are
preserved, by the power of Stevens Act. 7* 60
prayer, many were saved, yea, Paul is converted, as August. Si Stephanus non
orass^t, Ecclesia Paulum non haberet.
is thought by the learned.

Finally: Seeing the power of true prayer is ^orcible for the profit of others:
how will it redound to thine own utility and commodity?

First: for the gifts of the mind: by it thou shall receive faith, and
obedience with Genes. 12. 8
Abraham: wisdom 1 King. 3.12
and understanding with Solomon: love and patience Job. 1. 20
with Job: victory, and Psalm. 18. 43
glory with David: repentance 2 Chronicles. 3.15
and newness of life with Manasseth.

Secondly: Prayer is powerful for the gifts of the body: Samson Jude. 16. 28
obtained strength: David Psalm. 18. 33
agilitie and nimblenesse: Hezekiah Isaiah. ^8. 5
health, and deliverie from his sickness.

Thirdly: For the gifts of fortoun: (as they are called) thou by the virtue of
prayer shall receive food, ^a^ment, and riches, necessary with Genes. 32.10
Iaakob: A happy marriage and hopeful succession with Genes. 25.21
Isaak: Also a good name, honor, and preferment with Esther. 8. 2
Mordecai: a holy life, and a happy death with Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 6
whom the LORD himself buried in an unknown sepulcher: Yet in this
particulare point, take heed to The testimony of fathers concerning the force
of prayer.
the testimony of wise, and godly fathers, what they say of the sure effects
of powerful prayer.

Precatio est oranti subsidium, DEO sacrificium, daemonibus flagellum. Prayer
is an help to the August.
supplicant, a sacrifice to GOD, a scourge to the devils.

Per orationem ira DEI suspenditur, venia procuratur, paena refugitur, and
praemiorum largitas impetratur. Cassiodor.


By prayer the wrath of GOD is continued, pardon is procured, and a large
reward is obtained.

Oration serenat cor, abstrahit a terrenis, mundat ^ vitiis, sublevat Idem.
ad coelestia; cor capacius, and dignius ad accipienda bona spiritualia.

Prayer appeaseth the heart, it pulls back from earthly things, it cleanses
from vice, and lifts up to Heavenly things, and makes the heart more capable
and worthy to receive spiritual blessing.

Thus undoubtedly many are the good effects, and great is the strength of
earnest and hearty prayer.

But if the sinceare servant of CHRIST shall say or think with An ob^ection
answered.
himself, that he has prayed frequently, and incalled upon the Name of the
LORD ^ervently, and yet in his sense, by all appearance The Lord either
grants, or denies, or delayeth the petitions of his servants.
that his prayers have been fruitless and effectlesse, and that in his own
judgment GOD has misregarded him, and all his supplication: that he does
hide his face, and close his eyes, and stop his ears; and will have no respect
to him nor to his petitions.

This is answered, that when the Almighti^ does not perform the request of his
servant, nor grant his petition immediately, that then God either delayeth the
same, or denies the same: this follows of necessity after serious
invocation, there is either a yielding, or a denying, or a delaying of the
petition.

Now truth it is, that the LORD will sometimes delay the request of his own
chosen, so he did to David, complaining, How Psalm. 13. 1
long will thou forget me O LORD for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me: And thus GOD deferreth their petitions for five causes: First for
their instruction, to teach them to pray diligently, and a rightly: to double
and reiterate their requests the more v^hemently.

As the mothers in the Yles called Baleares, did teach their children Similit.
by this mean to be very persite, and cunning in casting of stones out of
slings; they placed food every morning upon some high Lycophron.
place before their hungry children, which the young ones might not touch nor
taste, until they had casten the same down with a stone; this the mother did
not of Florus lib. 3 cap. 8
purpose to defraude their own bairnes of sustenance, but to make them
diligent and skillful in that exercise: So the Almighty at some times delayeth
the desires of his children, not that he is of intention Stephanus.
to frustrate them of things necessary, but to teach them to pray more
fervently, frequently, and in a manner most accuratly.

Secondly, To make one to know GODS gifts, that he may love the same, so when
Hanna, questionless, had oftentimes entreated the LORD (who Genes. 30.22
opens the womb) to cure her barrenness, and to give her a son, when she
received Samuel with thankfulness, she acknowledged the same and loved Samuel
and praised GOD the giver in her notable 1. Sam. 2. 1
song.

Thirdly: The LORD will delay thy petitions, that thou may keep his benefits
with great care and watchfulness: An Ancient shows the reason, (...)
Basilius in Asceti^.
(...): All which one possesses with great travel and industry, he studieth
to keep the same diligently.

Fourthly: For trial of thy faith, hope, love, patience, and constancy: Thus
holy JOB was exercised, when seriously, and continually he had prayed.

Lastly: For imitation, that thou may be content to follow other holy
Saints. Did not David pray many times, to be delivered from the fury of
Saul, persecuting him? Did not 1 King 18.43
Helias send his servant seven times to look toward the way of the sea, while
rain did come upon the earth? Did not St Paul 2 Cor. 12. 8
thrice beseech the LORD, that the messenger of Satan, buffeting him, might
depart from him?

GOD delayeth thy petitions, that thou mayed be well content to follow his best
beloved servants.

Yet thou may be persuaded of this saying of the Father, Deus quod
conc^ssurus est, si differt, non August.
a^fert: quod promisit, est fixum; fallere non potest, habet vnde faciat: GOD
which he is to grant, if he delay it, he will not take it away: it is sure
which he has promised, he cannot deceine, he has whereof he may do.

Again, If the LORD shall deny the requests of his own servants, and give
them a refu^all; then they may be assured, that their prayer is neither
agreeable to his holy will and good pleasure, nor yet profitable to themselves,
for their eternal salvation, and so it is a great benefit, and a good d^^d,
done by GOD to them, when things hurtful are refused.

If a young ignorant babe would desire of his father a sharp knife that would
wound him, or an hot candle that would burn him, yet his loving and wise
father would not give the same, that would bring hurt and pain to him: We as
Similit.
ignorant babes often ask of GOD things, which we suppose to be pleasant and
profitable: But our wi^e and loving Father, Psalm. 103. 3
having great compassion on us, knowing that they would be noisome and
pernicious to us, in wisdom and mercy denies the same.

According to the judgment of an Ancient, these are the causes, wherefore thy
requests are not ever granted; (...) Basilius in As^etic.
(...): Often (thou will say) I have asked, and have not obtained: it is of
truth, because thou have prayed wickedly, or insufficiently, or inconstantlie,
or unprofitably, which were not expedient for thee.

And surely it is of verity, Deus dabit quod petimus, aut quod Benharelus
Sermon. 5. in quadrag.
n^verit esse vtilius, GOD will give us these things which we seek, or which
he knows to be more profitable for us. An other Ancient says, Saepe multos
DEVS Isidorus lib. 3. de summo bono.
non exaudit ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad salutem: Often times the LORD
hears many, not according to their will, that he may hear them to their
salvation.

Again it is said, Mal^ vsurus August.
eo quod vult accipere, DEO potius miserante non accipit: who is to use
wickedly that which he would have, he receaveth it not, GOD rather having pity
upon him.

And therefore think never that thy earnest prayers shall lack force and be
fruitless: albeit the LORD condescend not to grant thy earthly petition, yet
try; and Mal. 3. 10
prove thy GOD, who will open the windows of heaven unto thee, and power thee
out a blessing without measure.

A Christian Poet writes very pertinently for this purpose in these most
worthy verses,

Cum DEVS effectum precibus non praestat iniquis:
Multum concedit; quod nocitura negat. Prosper.

Errantes voto, non vult delinquere facto:
Iratus sineret. quod prohibet placidus.
Discat felici, supplex gaudere repulso,
Incipiatque animo pellere quod voluit.
That is: When GOD gives not an effect to thy wrongful prayers, he grants
much, because he denies hurtful things. He wills not these who go astray
in there wish, to do a fault by fact: being a^gry he would suffer, which being
pacified he prohibiteth. Let the supplicant learn to rejoice by an happy
refusal: and let him begin to put out of mind which he desired.

Thus of the force of prayer, let us consider of some necessary circumstances.

OF THE CIRCVMSTANCES OF PRAYER.
The eightenth Chapter.
COncerning some circumstances of prayer, we will speak of sour: namely, of
the Circumstances of persons.
persons, place, time, and gesture.

First: Persons praying comfortably, are the members of the body of CHRIST,
his holy Heb. 3. 1
brethren, partakers of that Heavenly vocation; Saints 1 Cor. 1. 2
by calling, who are under the covenant of grace, with whom GOD Ezech. 37.26
makes an everlasting covenant of peace: in whom Romans 8. 11
the spirit of the LORD dwells; for Romans 8. 26
whom the spirit it self makes request, with sighs which can not be
expressed; the chosen of the Church militant, chi^fly, in time of their trouble
and ^ff^ction: they will Hos. 5. 15
seek then the LORD diligently, with hum^itie, and with devotion: ^n trouble
Isaiah 26. 16
they will visit GOD they will power out a prayer when his chastning is upon
them: The Godly (...) can pray a^ghtly; but the wicked, vn^aithful^, and
reprobat^s, without Ephesians. 2. 12
CHRIST, al^ants from the commoun-wealth of Israel, strangers from the
covenants of promise, which have no hope, Atheists in this world, false
Hypocrites: what ever be their prof^ssion, if they be of ungodly conversation,
howsoever they do appear to be honorable, wealthy or happy, yet they can
not pray to GOD duetifully, neither praise his holy Name worthily.

Secondly: Thou Math. 4. 10
shall worship the LORD thy GOD, and him ONLY thou shall serve: Call upon
Psalm 50. 1^
me (says the LORD) in the day of thy trouble, so will I delyver thee, and
thou shall glorify me: The Almighty GOD who is alsufficient, is only to be
adored and invocated.

It thou know any of such knowledge, and wisdom, of such strength and
perfection, of of such love and affection, of such mercy and compassion, of
such truth and fidelity, of such rememberance, of such presence, of such
sted^astnesse, and constancy, then thou may call upon him conscientiously:
Now most sure it is: That 1 Timothy 1. 17
GOD is only wise, he knows Psalm. 139.2
thy sitting and thy rising (all thy necessi^ies) he understands thy
thoughts a far off.

Secondly: GOD is Omnipotent, most strong, his Math. 6. 15
is the Kingdom, and the power and the glory for ever. Thou Psalm. 135. 5
may know that GOD is great, and that the LORD is above all gods: Whatsoever
pleased the LORD, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea and in all
the depths.

3. He is of greatest kindness and affection, that GOD John. ^. 16
so l^ued thee, that he has given his only begotten Son for thee, that thou
believing in Him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Romans 8. 32
He spared not his own Son, but gave him for thee to death, that thou
might live an happy and everlasting life.

Fourthly: GOD is of greatest pity and commiseration: As Psalm 102. 13
a father has compassion on his children, so has the LORD compassion on them
that fear him: CHRIST himself (not his Disciples) Math. 15.32
had compassion on the multitude remaining three days with him, and he did
give food to them: Christ himself had Luke. 7. 13
compassion on the Widow of Naim, and restored to life her d^ad ^onne.

If a Heathen man Xenocrates pitied and pre^eru^d a bird, a Aelian. lib. 13
de varia. Histor,
Sparrow persued, that came flying to him, much more will our blessed GOD
pity and preserve all who resort to him and call upon his blessed Name.

Fifthly: The LORD (...) most true to perform a^ hi^ ^^^mises, he Psalm. 146. 6
keeps his fi^^lit^e for ever. If 1 King 1. 30
David did faithfull^ keep his promise to Bath^^h^ba, (...) bestowed a
kingdom^ (...) ^on Solomon, much more (...) O^nipotent and (...) GOD, gi^e
Luke. 12. 32
unto his little ^l^^k^ (...) everlasting Kingdom.

Sixthly: GOD ha^h a Mal. 3. 16
(...) of rememberance written (...) him: albeit a Isa. 49. 15
Woman would for^^^ her child (which indeed^ is (...) ^rall,) yet the LORD will
(...) forget his own, for that were altogether impossi^^^: (...) his Psalm. 34.
15
eyes are ever looking upon them ^is ears are open to their cry, (...) does
grave them upon the p^lm^ of his hands, and does set Cant. 8. 6
them as a seal upon his heart, and a signet upon his arm.

We read that King Cyrus was of a good memory, who Plini. Hist. nature. lib.
7. cap. 24.
did call all his Soldiers by their proper names: But he was no thing in
respect of GOD, who counts Psalm. 147. 4
the number of the stars, and calls them by their names. Seventhly: The
LORD is always present with his own, to help them, and hold Psalm. 73. 23
them by their right hand, though Psalm. 27. 10
their father and mother should forsake them, Yet the Heb. 13. 5
LORD will never ^aile them nor forsake them.

Lastl^: Our GOD is most constant, For John. 13.1
as much as he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end he loved
them: With Iam. 1. 17
him there is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning: The Mal. 3. 6
LORD changes not, and therefore the sons of Iaakob are not consumed.

It is written to the praise of that Roman Fabricius, that the Idenius and
Valor.
Sun would sooner leave his natural course, than he would forsake his
honesty: But it may be more truly spoken of our blessed GOD, that the Sun
will sooner change h^s course, than GOD will change his mercy which is
constant and everlasting.

Thou should only therefore pray to GOD, and call upon him, for thou may do
so with j^^: true faith, and a sure hope and persuasion to be heard and
regarded, and rewarded. Our Savior thus promitteth by affi^mation: John. 16.23
Verily verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you: O^serue the certainty, and generality of that gracious
promise.

No Angel in Heaven, no Saint upon Earth, no glorified soul is to be adored,
n^r invocated, for why should any with the reprobate serve Romans 12. 5
the creature, forsaking the CREATOR, who is blessed for ever.

Concerning the place of prayer, thou may well follow the Circumstance of
place.
rule of the Apostle: Saying, ^im. 2, 8
I will that the men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or
doubting.

A place is either private or publict, and so are prayers, either private or
publict, any place was and is ever free for a supplicant. The examples of
CHRIST and of good men, confirm this, for Isaak Genes 24. 6^
prayedin the field, Iaakob in Genes 49. 18
his bed, Moses ^xed. 15. 25
prayed in the Wilderness, Joshua Josh. 5. 14
ne^re Jericho, Elias 1 King 18. 20
prayed upon the mountain, Hezekias ^ King 20. 3
in his ch^^nb^r, The Prophet I^r^mi^ Lam. 3. 55
in the low dungeon, Jonas Ion. 2. 1
in the ^ishes belly, Daniel Dan. 6 11
in Babylon, CHRIST prayed Luke 23. ^4
upon the Cross, The Disciples Math. 8. 25
in a ship, Peter Act. 10. 9
upon the house: and truly according to our Masters direction; thou Math. 6. 6
may enter into thy chamber, and s^utte thy door, and pray unto thy Father,
which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee
openly.

August. speaks pertinently to this purpose, In oratione non quaeritur August.
locus quantum sensus, Hi^remias confortatur in carcere, Daniel inter Leones
^xultat, tres pueri in furnace tripudiant, Job nudus in sterquilinio triumphat,
Paradisum de cruce latro invenit, non est locus, vbi non sit Deus.

In prayer the place, is not so much sought, as the sense of feeling, Jeremy
is comforted in the prison, Daniel amongst the Lions rejoices, the three
Children do d^nce in the fiery furnace, naked Job triumphs in the dung hill,
the Thief upon the cross finds Paradise, There is no place where GOD is not.

Yet notwitstanding thou ought with the two great Apostles, Peter and John
resort into the Act. 3. 1
temple, which is called by our Savior, the Luke. 19. 46
house of prayer, and there publictly, in the assembly of the godly, call upon
GOD duetifully. This is the fittest place where thou may pacify GODS'
anger, to obtain his special favor, and to receive benefits from his
merciful hands.

As that Roman. M. Coriolanus, in time of his trouble and distress, Plutarch
in vita Coriolia.
being of purpose to seek the friendship, and to gain the kindness of Tullus
Amphidius, his great enemy, a noble man amongst the people Volsci, Coriolanus,
went to Autrum, and entered into Amphidius house, and there a supplicant did
mitigat his wrath, did receive relief, and protection.

So let every Christian, who by nature is an enemy to the Alm^ghtie: if he
be resolved to seek reconciliation with GOD, let him go to the LORDS own
house, and there to beg his favor, and blessing, with earnestness, with all
humility and submission, that he may receive mercy, grace and consolation.

Not thinking that the Church will make his prayers more holy and acceptable,
but that in such a place, he shall have fitter occasion and more motive of
servent supplication. As also that the conjunct prayers of the faithful, in a
sweet harmony sent up to our Heavenly Father, will be more powerful and
effectual to procure a blessing: For, if Math 18. 19
two (says our Savior) agree upon earth any thing, whatsoever they desire,
it shall be given them of my Father which is in Heaven.

And an Ancient says, Non aeque exoras, cum solus Dominum obsecras, atque cum
fratribus tuis: ^st enim in hoc plus aliquid, videlicet, concordia,
conspiratio, copula amoris, and charitatis: Thou do not alike obtain thy
desire, when alone thou prayest the LORD, as with thy brethren, for in this
there is some more, namely, concord, conspiration, a conjunction of love and
charity.

Quod quis apud seipsum precatus accipere non poterit, ho^ cum multitudine
precatus accipiet. Quare? quia etiam si non propria virtus tamen concordia
multum potest. That which one within himself praying, could not obtain
praying with a multitude, he shall receive the same, wherefore because albeit
his proper virtue avails not, yet concord avails much.

Thus in the days of M. Aurelius, when the whole Roman army was in great
danger and extreme necessity through thirst Vide histor. Magdeburg.
and scarsitie of water, the Christian Soldiers with one consent instantly
praying, so prevailed with GOD, that he sent incontinently sufficient rain
for the refreshment of their company, and fireflaughts for the destruction of
the adversary: The Emperor perceived this clearly, and did write the same to
the senate immediately.

St. Jerome compares this conjunct praying of the LORDS congregation to an
thunderclap of great noise, and Basil to the roaring of the sea, of a loud
sound.

Thirdly, touching the time of Circumstance of time.
prayer, let us hearken the holy Scripture: Christians ought Luke 18. 1
always to pray, and not to wax faint, pray 1 Thessalonians. 5 17
continually, continue in Romans 12. 12
prayer: again continue Colos 4. 2
in prayer, and watch in the same: furthermore, in Philip. 4. 6
all things let your request be showed unto GOD in prayer and supplication.

More particularly, let it be thy first care with David Psalm. 5. 4
in the morning to direct thy prayer unto GOD, and to wait upon his blessed
Majesty: to Psalm. 57. 9
awake right early to pray and to praise GOD duetifully: Evening Psalm. 55. 17
and morning, and at midde time of day, to make a noise.

As under the Law, GOD commanded his people to Exodus 28. 38
present upon his Altar a continual offering, and to offer a daily, morning
and evening sacrifice, a lamb of a Pray in the night.
year old: So the LORDS servants in the new Testament should at the least,
send up their morning and evening sacrifice of prayer, yea, in the night time,
they will call upon the LORD fervently, and protest with the Prophet, With
Isaiah 26. 9
my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit within me, will
I seek thee in the morning. And with King DAVID, My Psalm. 63. 6
soul shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee on my bed, and when I think
upon thee in the night watches. Again, Psalm. 11^. 62
At midnight will I arise and give thanks (and to pray) to GOD, because of
his righteous judgment.

But in this place thou must be advertised. that the error and heresy The
Euchites condemned.
of the Euchites, (who thought that we should do no other thing at all,
neither exercise any calling but pray ever, neglecting all other labor,) is to
be eshewed.

Let it be thy chief care and indevoure with Enoch q to walk with GOD, to
live conscientiously and godly, with Abraham Genes. 5. 22
to walk before GOD, to live uprightly, and with David Genes. 17. 1
to set the LORD always before thee, and that Philip. 1. 27
thy conversation be always as it becomes the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS.

Fourthly: As for thy gesture, and behavior, in time of prayer, The
circumstance of ges^ure.
it is free to thee, in thy own option and power, so it be with decency and
reverence, thou may prostrate thy self and fall down upon thy face: So did
Moses Numb. 16.22
and A^ron, when they did pray for the safety of the congregation of Israel.
So did Joshua, Josh. 5. 14
when CHRIST told him, that he was come as a Captain of the LORDS Host. So
our Savior, Math. 26. 39
when his soul was heavy in His great agony.

Thou may stand up upon thy ^eete, thus did the servant Genes. 24.15
of Abraham: Thus did CHRIST John 11 41
also, this likewayes did the Luke 18.3
Publican in the Temple.

Thou may^st hum^le thy self, and bow thy knees, as 1 King. 8. 54
Solomon, as Act. 7. 6
Steven the Martyr: as St. Act. 26 ^6
Paul: as the Mark. 1. 40
Leper, as our blessed Luke 22. 41
advocate and Redeemer.

Thou may lift up thine eyes to Heaven, as Psalm. 121. 1 and passim.
David in many places, as CHRIST Math. 14.1^ and alibi.
Himself the pattern of all godliness: And albeit some were of such a foolish
opinion, that kneeling in time of devotion, was and is only unlawful, and
that standing in that service is only acceptable: Yet Agnoclytae. Damascen. de
haeresia.
thou will be soon persuaded, (if thou be truly informed) that a Psalm. 51.17
contrite spirit a broken (and a upright heart) shall never be despised,
whatsoever thy behavior be before GOD, who is the searcher of all hearts.

OF THE SIGNS OF PRAYER.
The Ninetenth Chapter.
BEcause a great number of people is thus miserably deceived, who do imagine
in their own conceat that they pray to GOD duetifully, and acceptablie, when
as notwithstanding, seeing they Prover. 28.9
turn away their ear from hearing of the Law, their prayer is abominable:
Therefore in the last place, let us briefly consider some sure signs, and true
tokens, whereby a Christian may know assuredly, if he prays to GOD
arightlie, I reckon five of them principally.

First: Heavenly wisdom and Wisdom.
discretion, for if (according to Salomons saying) He Prover. 13.20
that walks with wise men, shall be wise; much more he that often walks,
and talks with the most wise GOD, shall attain to true wisdom and
understanding: Psalm. 14. 1. 4
The fool, who has said in his heart, there is no GOD, can not call upon GOD,
but does abominable works, who continues in foolishness, and wickedness,
does not pray fervently, but shall come to wretchedness and mi^erie.

Secondly: Holiness and sanctification, Sanctification.
is a most sure note, and charecter of one that frequently gives himself to
earnest prayer and invocation.

For as Moses Exodus 34.25
his face did shine bright, when he was conversant with GOD forty days upon
the mount; so a devote Christian oftentimes conferring with GOD by prayer and
earnest meditation, will surely be endued with holiness and sanctification:
His Math. 5. 16
light shall so shine before men, that they may see his good works, and
glorify their Father in Heaven.

If one with Ahab 1 King. 16.33
shall proceed to provocke the LORD, or lewdness of life, or continue to be
a profane Heb. 11. 16
person as Esau, he uses not the exercise of true prayer and invocation,

Thirdly: Humility and submission, is a sure sign of prayer, Humility.
and supplication: For Isaiah 57. 15
GOD who is high and excellent, and that inhabiteth eternity, who dwells in
the high and holy place, he dwells also with him who is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to give life, light, humility, and all good blessings.

Abraham praying to the LORD was humble* and called himself but dust Genes.
18. 27
and ashes.

All who are proud in heart, are abomination to the LORD, they are far from
GOD, their ^ride Prover. 16.18
goes before their destru^^^n.

Fourthly: Mercy and compassion is an evident of prayer, if thou Mercy.
have gotten mercy from GOD, thou will be pitiful to thy brethren, And there
^am. 2.13
shall be judgment merciless to him who shows no mercy nor compassion.

Lastly: Thou shall have some Comfort.
joy and consolation in time of trouble and affliction: David who did delight
in prayer, when 1 Samuel 30
he was in great sorrow, his people intending to stone him; yet David
comforted himself in the LORD his GOD.

In the last days when GOD will show wonders in Heaven above, Act. 2. 19.
and tokens in the earth beneath, blood and fire, and vapor of smoke: The
Sun being turned into darkness, and the Moon in blood: It shall be, that
whosoever shall call upon the Name of the LORD shall be saved.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 4. Line 6. qua read qu^. page, 5. lin. 24. he re^^ but. page 7 lin. 24
committed, read concealed ibid. (...) contained read continued. page 7. lin.
27. it lacks appearance. page 8. lin. 1. her, read his page 9 lin. 20 Sara,
read Saul. page 10 lin* 25. it, read the rich. Crows, read Cranes* page 25.
lin 17. his, it lacks God. page 27. lin. 15. when, read whom. page 27. lin.
27. trespassion, read transgression. page 28. lin. 9. our, read thy. page 37.
lin. 20. Christian, read chieftaine. page 38. lin. 5. thou, read they. page
73. lin. 21. proved, read reproved. page 79 lin. 14. ou^ read my. page 107.
lin. 6. Spargastes, read Spargapises. page 109 lin. 15. swore, read snore.
page 115. lin 24: delight, rea^^ dealt page 116. lin. 13. godly, read bodily.
page 122 lin. (...) their, read these. ibid. lin. 20, all read as. page 123.
lin. 14. discerdia, read discrimina. page 144. lin. 1. worthy, read
worldly. p. 164. l. 2. promises, read premises. p. 165* l. 1^. convert,
read convoy. p. 1^7 l. 22 that, read thanks p. 196. l. 25. laws, read
lawer. p. 207 l. 10. gives, read gets. p. 208 l. 12. prayed, read served.
p 234. l 25. enteating, read entraitted. p. 240. l. 17. sin, read shame. p
259 l 5. behoved, read behaved. p. 288. l. 25. says, read with. p. 290. l.
1. Attolus, read Attalus p. 309. l. 23. scarcely, read scarcetie. p. 353. l.
25. boldly, read bodily. p. 354. l 3. taking read laking. p. 433. l. 10.
repulso, read repulsa p. 443. l. 9. Autrum, read Antiu^.


