THE Mirror of Mutabilitie, or Principal part of the Mirror for Magistrates.

Describing the fall of diverse famous Princes, and other memorable Personages.

Selected out of the sacred Scriptures by Antony Monday, and dedicated to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Oxenford.

Honos alit Arts:

IMPRINTED at London by John Allde and are to be sold by Richard Ballard, at
Saint Magnus Corner. 1579.

VERO NIHIL VERIVS


A happy race God grant the worthy wight,
to whom this Creast of honor does pertain:
To live in joy, unto his hearts delight,
and after death among the Saints to reign.
TO THE RIGHT HOnorable and his singular good Lord and Patron, Edward De Vere,
Earl of Oxenforde, Uicount Bulbeck, Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and Lord
great Chamberlayne of England, Antony Monday wishesh in this world a triumphant
tranquillity, with continual increase of Honorable Dignity, and after this
life, a Crown of everlasting felicity, in the eternal Hierarchy.
AFter that I had delivered (Right Honorable) unto your courteous and gentle
perusing, my book entitled Galien of France, wherein, having not so fully
comprised such pitbines of style, as one of a more riper Invention could
cunningly have carved: I rest Right Honorable on your Clemency, to amend my
errors committed so unskillfully But at that time being very desirous to
attain to some understanding in the languages, considering in time to come: I
might reap thereby some commodity, since as yet my vvebbe of youthful time
was not fully woven, and my vvilde oats required to be surrovved in a
forreyne ground, to satisfye the trifling toys that daily more and more
frequented my busied brain: yielded my self to God and good Fortune, taking on
the habit of a Traueler. And having sustained in the cold Country of France
diverse contagious calamities, and sundry sorts of mishaps. As first, being
but newly arrived, and not aquainted with the usage of the Countref, betvveene
Bulloin and Abeui^e, my Companion and I were stripped into our shirts by
Soldiars, who (if rescue had not come) would have endamaged our lives also.
Me thought this was but an vnfreendly vvelcome, considering before I thought
that every man beyond the Seas was as frank as an Emperor, and that a man
might live there a Gentleman's life, and do nothing but walk at his pleasure,
but finding it not so: I wished my self at home again, with sorrow to my
sugared sops. But calling to mind that he which faints at the first assault:
would hardly endure to fight out the Battle: took Courage afresh, hoping my
hap would prove better in the end, since it had such a bitter beginning, and
so passed forvvard to Paris.

Being there arrived, to recompenee my former mishaps: I found the world well
amended, for not only I obtained new garments, but diverse Gentlemen to be my
friends also, some that had sustained as ill fortune as I, and therefore
returned back again into England, and other some that were very glad of my
coming, in hope I had been such a one as they looked for. But repelling such
Sathanicall illusions such golden proffers of preferment, to advance me un to
my larger contentment: I gave them the hearing of all their politic devises,
which (as they thought) had taken deep root at their first planting. And
considering that I had enterprised this journey for my pleasure, and in hope to
attain to some knowledge in the French tung, if that I should seem to
scripulous in their presence: it might turn to my farther harm. For there no
friends I had to help me, no wealth to maintain me, no succor near to save
me, but if I denied, my new friends would disdain: persvvaeded my self in
their presence to do as they bad me, but when they were absent: to do then
as pleased me. By these means I obtained their lavvfull favor, in so much,
that they thorovvly provided me for my journey to Room. Where for my more
preferme^t likvvise, they delivered me diverse let ters, to sundry persons
(whose names I remit) that there I should be placed in the office of a Priest.
Well my friend and I gave them a thousand thanks for their liberal expenses,
and freendly Letters, and so we departed.

But when we had with an nights rest pondered of our journey, and considered
the emminent dangers before our eyes. First how ready Satan stood to tempt
us, and prick us forvvard still to the eternal perdition of our souls.
Secondly, that we should forsake so soon the title and name of a Christian,
and yield our necks to the yoke and slauerye of the Roman Decretales, in that
we professing our selves before faithful followers of our dear Master
Christ, should now so vvilfully for sake him. Thirdly, unto all our friends,
(espetially our Parents) what an heart sorrow it would be, to hear how
their liberal enpences bestovved on us in our youth, in trayning us up in
verteous educations is now so lightly regarded: as able to cause the Father to
yield his breath, for the sorrovve conceived through the negligence of his
Son, and all ingenerall lament our unnatural vsages, Fourthly, from the
Servants of one eternal true God, to come to be Idolaters, VVoorshipers of
stocks and stones, and so forsake the fear of God, our duty to our souereign
Prince, and our love to our parents, and all affection to our friends. All
these (being the principal points) thorovvly considered: vvithdrevv my mind
from my former intent, as having knowledge of my Lord the English Ambassador
then lying in Paris, to him we went, and delivered our aforsaid Letters,
desiring the prudent coun cell of his Honor therein. His Honor perceiving our
imbi cilitie, and opening the Letters: found therein where of I have before
certified your Honor, which when he had vvoorthily balanced in the breast of
a second Solon said.

My dear and faithful Countrymen (as I hope you are) not so glad of your
vvelfare, as sorry for your ariuall, in that you hazard your selves on such a
staylesse state, to become as friends to your enemies, and foes to your
Country, here standing at the mercy of a ravening Wolf, who not on ly
would devour you from your Country: but both body and soul from Heavenly
felicity, Better therefore to abide the poverty, of this your want and
necessity, then to sell your selves vvilfully into such perpetual slavery,
and not on ly to your great ignomy, but to your friends perpetual infamy, to
your Prince and famous Country, if you leave your Captain thus covvardly.
Take heart afresh corragiously, and dread no calamity, take patient all
adversity, and God vvil assist ye.

This excellent Discourse pronounced by so prudent a per sonage, me thought did
demonstrate the excellencye of true nobility. And then departing from his
Honor, I iournied into Italy, to Room, Naples, Venice, Padua, and diverse o
there excellent Cities. And now returned, remembering my bounden duty to your
Honor, I present you with these my si^ple labors, desiring pardon for my
bold attempt.

Faccio fine, e riuerentemente baccio le vostro valorose Mani.

Humilissimo, e Diuotissimo, e sempre Osseruandissimo Vasallo, e Seruitore.

Antony Monday.
The Authors Commendation ofthe Right Honorable Earl of Oxenford.
Except I should in freendship seem ingrate,
Denying duty, where to I am bound:
With letting slip your Honnors worthy state,
At all assayes, which I have Noble found.
Right well I might refrain to handle pen:
Denouncing aye the company of men.
Down dire despair, let courage come in place,
Exalt his fame whom Honor does embrace.
Virtue has aye adornd your valiant heart,
Exampled by your deeds of lasting fame:
Regarding such as take God Mars his part,
Each where by proof, in Honor and in name.
Each one does know no fables I express,
As though I should encroche for private gain:
Regard you may (at pleasure) I confess,
Letting that pass, I vouch to dread no pain.
Each where, against such as can my faith distaine.
Or once can say, he deals with flatterye:
Forging his ta^es to please the fantasye.
Of mine intent your Honor judge I crave,
Xephirus blow your Fame to Drient skies:
Extol I pray this valiant Brittayne brave,
Not seeming once Bellona to desp^se.
For valliantnes behold young Caesar here,
Or Hanniball lo Hercules in place:
Ring forth (I say) his Fame both far and near,
Dout not to say, De Vere will soes deface.
Verses written by the Author upon his Lords Posey. VERO NIHIL VERIVS.
Virtue displayes the truth in every cause,
Each vain attempt her puisance does disprooue:
Repelling falsehood, that does seek each clause,
Of dire debate Dame Truth for to remove.
Nothing we say that truer is then truth,
It folly is against the stream to strive:
Hard is the hap that unto such ensues,
In vain respects the truth for to deprive,
Let such take heed for folly does them drive.
Vaunt not to much of thy vainglorious state,
Esteem the truth for she vvil guide thee right:
Refrain alvvay to trust to fickle fate*
In end she fayles so simple is her might.
Use tried truth so shall thou never fall:
Svveet is the yoke that shall abridge thy thrall.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
YOur freendly courtesies considered (gentle Readers) I find my self more
largely inde^ ted: then any possibility that lies in me is able to
counteruayle. But more building on thy bounty, then my simple demerits, more on
thy freendship, the^ any deserved favor. I have now the third time presumed on
thy clemency. Confessing it might have been far better delivered, if a more
expert and cunning Artificer had taken it hand. But some I know will find
more fault then needs, some will carp upon no occasion, and some will condemn
before they have read. Yet some again, though they find a escape, they will
bear with the Authors simplicity, and consider his good will indiffer^ ly /
concerning his want of learning, and also his Adolocencye. Not as yet able to
vaunt his Muse so Heroycally, as writers of longer liberty / who are daily
practiced in the rules of Poetric. To all those he gives place, and suffiseth
his want on courser cheats, till time serves to prefer him to a daintier dish.
Thus desiring thee to accept this till the third part of this woork be
finished: I leave thee, listening to the clock, to take up my books and hye me
to School.

Nil tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat.

Tuus dum suus. Antony Monday.

Claudius Hollyband, in the Commendation of his Scholars exersise:
SItu veux fuir plusieurs vices damnables,
Moyennement au monde te tenir,
Et voir aloeilles chooses conuenables:
Lis moy cest oeuvre, pour te bien contenir:
C'est un Flambeau ^our clairement venir
Au lieu ou fait Virtue sa demeurance,
Sanspoint avoir du peruers l'accointance,
Qui ne peut point a ce bien paruenir:
C'est le guidon droit, facile et plaisant
De bonnes moeurs, et miroir euidant,
Te dirigeant a fuir toute meschance.
M. Claudius Hollyband, his Verses thus Englished.
IF thou will fly from diverse Uices vain,
And in this world abide in quiet stay:
And with thine eyes perceive a Mirror plain:
Of things convenient for thy self each day.
Peruse this woork, where thou no dout shall find:
A rule to keep thy state in steadfast kind.
For like a Torche it clearly gives light,
Unto Dame Uertues famous Mansion place:
Without acquaintance with the wicked wight,
Which by no means such honor can purchase.
This is the guide of manners proved plain:
To teach thee fly the fear of farther pain.
Dum spiro spero.
Finis.
C. H.

Thomas Procter in Commendation of this Woork, and the Author thereof.
WHat, shall I speak, or shall I hold my peace?
I know not well which of them both were bes^
If of my friend my pen in praise should preace,
Some would allege of freendship I expressed.
But since his matters are so manifest.
To speak my mind what shall I need to fear:
Since good report his Woorks well worthy are.
If I should seem having perusde the same,
And see no cause why I should not commend:
To let it pass I should deseru^ but shame,
Beside displeasure of my loouing and.
I would be loath in either to offend.
But to say truth, both dangers to prevent:
He well deserves because so well he meant.
He shows how frail our earthly Honor is,
How soon our pleasures perish unto naught:
What danger turns to bale our worldly bliss,
By elder Age which have such frailty sought.
At length how Death ^che state to earth has brought.
The hautyest heart that vaunts of Uictors force:
His direful dart vnbreaths without remorce.
The Wise whose wit inferior unto none.
Through his abuse bewayles his follyes fall:
The Ualliant yields, and conquered makes his moan,
The Rich complains to mind his fault to call,
By these estats he seems to warn us all.
Lest through our Wit, our Strength and Riches store:
We vainly vaunt, and last their loss deplore.
Of pamperd Pride, of Envy and of Wrath.
Of loathsome Lust and filthy Gluttony:
Of Covetousness and sluggish Sloth he has,
Prescribde the shame and grief that comes thereby.
Last bids us such shameless sius to fly.
For fear as those who have them selves abusde:
We wail to late their warnings good refusde.
Some of these Men were Kings, Dukes, Earls and Lords,
Some worthy Knights some learned Judges wear:
But what of that? no favor Death affordes,
He strikes us uncertain when or wheare.
He vnregardes of what estate we are.
As soon the King that rules the regal Crown,
Yields unto him as does the siely Clown.
And piercst with Death whereto we all shall yield,
Their shameless sins wit^ sorrow they bemone:
Whom neither Wit (...) force of Mars his sheeld,
Can sauegarde them through their abuse orethrone,
Ne Worldly Wealth may proffit any one.
Nor earthly joys wherein the seemd to trust.
Auailes a whit to help their suits unjust.
Of Elder Age he shows the ^il estate,
Who in their lives Inferiors were to sin:
Besides he does unto us all relate,
A perfect path for us to walk therein,
And to amend he wills us ^o begin.
For at the length each one account shall give:
If one the Earth he well or il did live.
He well deserves because he ^ught so well.
To publish that might teach us what we are:
And took in hand our Elders lives to tell,
Whose shameless sins might warn us to beware.
And by their fall wills us to have a care.
Wherefore let me your Uerdits wholely tell:
And MONDAY thank that used his Wit so well.
Nil melius art. T P.
T N. in commendation of this vvoork.
THe Caruer often cuts from hard and craggie stone*
Some rare devise (...) curious woork in hope to please each one
But some that look thereon often times at rando^ talk / chalk
When they them selves can hardly ^me the like of te^er
So likewise he that p^d with pain this (...) ^y ease
Is sure though some slow his pains that that some ^e shall displease.
The woork it s^f no fables are but wouen from holy (...).
Whereto he has in Tragic wise some pretty S^oues kni^.
All which are done for thy delight wherein he freendly shows:
That lofty minds are subject sure unto a thousand woes.
^eerin he shows example wise / the guerdon due to pride:
To Treason / Wurder / Lechery / and (...) beside.
Which if you shun or if it be thou fee^ some privy prick: quick.
Then thank him who does wish thee well though he do ^outch the
And if thou know thy self for to be (...) from these*
Lend him good will (...) he deserves who seeks none to displease.
Who though he have not loomd so far as f^er wits could weaue it
yet as it is unto thy skill he is content to le^e i^.
Allow his labor yet accept what he has du^*
And thou (...) see the (...) s^eps that Wun^y means to run:
And I his Friend and thine shall think as well of thee*
As Wundayes woork does well deserve accounted of to be.
Petit ardua Virtus.
Finis.
T N.

E K. Gentleman in commendation of the Author.
THe heart of man ^ightly each gift should commend,
that man unto man for freendship does send.
For so Christ him self left ensample behind,
As Scripture does declare concerning such mind.
The gift of the rich men Christ did reject,
But to the poor VViddowe he gave good respect.
For she of her need did offer mi^es twain,
And they of their plenty, abundan^ and gain.
Her mind was the cause that Christ^ did behold,
The smalnes of the gift and not handfuls of Gold.
My goodwil therefore likewise must commend,
The labors of any that to Virtue does tend.
VVherin is contained things worthy of sight,
Heerin well performed and now brought to light.
Finis.
Ed. Knight.

Matthew VVighthand in the behalf of his Friend Antony Monday.
SVch woeful vvights as vvayle the want of wealth,
And drovvnes their days in gulfs of ga^ing grief:
Such siely ^oules as scorns their wholesome health,
To run a race deuoyd of ^re releese.
Such vvilfull vvights that svvims in follies fond:
And drovvnes their days in depth of dollours pond*
Such simple Sots as sits in sullen seats,
And s^oules to shroud in seas of stayed state:
Such mirthlesse mates as mouths no sugared meats,
But drencht in dole and drovvnd in dark debate.
If such (I say) would once peruse this vvoork,
They would denounce in lothed life to lurk.
Each fond attempt with grief they would bemone,
Each heavy hap that has them past of yore:
And in this Glass discern their faults each one,
And frame their lives for to offend no more.
Their Ancesters does them here warning give:
In what estate beseemes them best to live.
Then let my friend obtain your good report,
Since for his pains he craves no other hire.
His hope is good, that of ^e freendly sort,
He shall receive the which he does require.
I leave you here to judge and say the best:
So Monday shall obtain his due behest.
Ad huc Coelum voluitur.
FINIS.
M. VV.

William Hall in commendation of ^is Kinseman Antony Monday.
Thy tender time to take such task in hand,
Demonstrates plain thy zeal and good intent:
Which when I had at leisure over scand,
And finding proof whereto thy mind was bent.
I thought it good in mine unskillful verse:
A Kinsemans love in brief for to rehearse.
Yet lest some think that I affectly use,
My pen in praise thy deeds for to display:
To wiser wits I leave the same to choose,
And let them judge if I do rightly say.
So shall I rid my hands of farther blame:
And nerthelesse thou shall obtain thy fame.
Use time therefore as Wisdom shall direct,
And take thy time as leisure shall admit:
Lest in thine age Dame Science thee reject,
And so thy time with speedy foot does flit.
Few words and sweet, occasion bids me end:
A thousand thanks I yield unto my friend.
Ovid. Dum vires annique sinunt, tolerate laborem:
Nam veniet tacito curua senectapede.
Respice finem.
Finis
W H.

Thomas Spigurnel in praise of the Book and the Author.
FOr all that Chaucer had great praise*
For penning verse which he did use:
By prattling pen his fame to raise*
And so to occupy his muse.
Yet therein sure he did abuse,
His muse, his mind and eke his wit:
By leaving things that were more fit.
My Friend here paynfully has pend,
A Mirror plain for us to view:
A Blasse whereon we may depend,
To see what mischeef does ensue,
Of wickedness and eke the crew.
Of such as do delight therein:
And so their own destruction win.
The Historyes be sacred sure,
And such as be most worthy praise:
For Virtue by them shall endure,
And so cut of all wicked ways,
And so I leave by pen to praise,
The same of this most worthy Book:
And eke the pains that Monday took.
FINIS
TS
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Mirror of Mutabilitie, rightly named, the Principal
part of the Mirror for Magistrates.
The Author.
MARCUS, TVLLIVS, CICERO, that flourishing flower of all Eloquence, has in
diverse and sundry places prescribed the direct rule of a verteous life,
declaring many excellent exhortations to avoid the vices which are incident to
the weakened mind. As the Pride of life. The Envy of the mind at the
prosperity of an other. The Wrath which wastes and molesteth the heart. The
Bluttonous excess of belly Gods and pampred paunches, in their dainty fare
and drunken delights. The lascivious and unlawful desire of the flesh. The
Covetous consciences of welthie worldly misers. And lastly, the sluggish Sloth
and idle life, enemy to all verteous actions. The consideration whereof: caused
me to write this Discourse, as a plain and sufficient example to all
ingenerall, wherein they may see, the dissolute life of diverse personages
forepassed, as the Scripture by credible authority makes deliberate mention.
And first for the entrance in to these Discourses, since occasion serves so
fit: I have elected and chosen King Nabuchodonozor, sometime King of Babylon,
who through the great and inordinate Pride, from his regal dignity: was
brought to such base extremity, that in shape of an Ox he was made to eat on
the ground in the company of other beasts and Dxen. Therefore this Discourse
following, suppose it to be spo ken by the King himself, sorowfully lamenting
for his former offenses, and so all the rest in their order as follows.

PRIDE.
PRIDE is the root, from whence all vice does spring,
Rich is that man, that can avoid the same:
Infernal vvoes for guerdon it does bring,
Deserved due to their perpetual shame:
Each one therefore regard his verteous name.
THE COMPLAINT OF King Nabuchodonozor, some time King of Babylon, for the
inordinate and excessive PRIDE, that he used in his life time. Caput. 1.
OR highest tipe of Honors lofty name,
I some time did in Princely pomp remain:
Both far and near I bore the golden fame,
And who but I in chief estate did reign?
Till suddenly in all my peacocks plumes:
I was thrown down for all my freating fumes.
What so thou be that feign would know my name,
And how I lived, attend unto my tale:
Nabuchodonozor, I am the very same,
Who suddenly was turned from bliss to bale.
In Pride I ruled, and flaunted with the best:
Who me denayd, by power I suppressed.
I am that King which did the Image frame,
Whereto all men should treble homage give:
Those that rebeld should taste the scorching flame,
This in my Pride I vsoe while I did live.
Blood, blood, was all I daily did desire:
Such was the rule whereto I did aspire.
When Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago,
To homage did my golden God disdain:
In flaming Furnace soon I did them throw,
Wherein I thought to woork their cruel pain.
But of my will, see how I was deceived:
God by his might my puissant pomp bereued.
His Angel did preserve them in the flame,
So that they did no harm at all sustain:
No, not one hear did perish out of frame,
This when I saw, did gorge me with disdain.
I thought my self inferior unto none:
But I as God triumphant ruled alone.
I thought each wight was subject unto me,
I thought it praise to bear a lofty name:
Pride ruled my heart, I could not Virtue see,
Uice did abound my pleasure for to frame.
A mortal man? no, no, a God and eke obayd:
My whole estate in pamperd Pride I swayd.
No one I thought that could my power suppress,
Much less I thought to find my equal mate:
With words I causde to bow both more and less,
With hauty deeds I maintaynd still my state,
This stomach stout disdaynd to stoop all:
This mighty mind no fear could once apall.
But yet the Lord to make me feel his might,
Bereft me clean of mine Impeeiall seat:
For seven years space, my Pride for to requi^e,
In shape of Ox on ground he made me eat.
A just reward which I did well deserve:
Since so I did disdain his name to serve.
Yet at the length his mercy took such place,
That he restorde me to my Seat again:
And where before I ran an uncouth race,
With treble joy my Crown I did attain.
Now I perciu'ed God brought my state so low:
And raysd me up, that I my self might know.
Behold how gracious was the Lord to me,
That lined long most odious to behold:
See how at length his mercy set me free,
And brought me home again into his fold.
And though that I did run awhile astray:
Loath was the Lord to see me cast away.
You Potentates that rule in high degree,
Remember how your state is here unsure:
And though on Earth a while your bidings be,
It is but lent, it does not aye endure.
Think as to day your life you do sustain:
To morrow dead, the proof heerof is p^yne.
Think not to live as Gods upon the land,
Remember still that Pride will have a fall:
Consider you are Subject to Gods hand,
And in a moment pass away you shall.
Live still to dye, that you may ready be:
When God shall call each one in his degree.
See how my Pride was quickly laid in dust,
Behold you may my Mutabilitie:
My Princely rule whereon I whole did trust,
Did naught avail my state to fortify.
He set me up, again, he brought me low:
That I to you a warning plain might show.
Remember diverse past in preter time,
That have received as sudden fall as I:
And have likewise offended in this crime,
Now wisely look, you like tread not awrye.
Proud Lucifer fell down from Heaven hye:
And all through Pride God did in him espy.
Beware of Pride therefore my Brethern all,
With your estates still hold your selves content.
Pride, Pride, was only cause of my great fall,
And for my Pride behold how I was shent.
Example take, be warned now by me:
Let me suffice your pattern for to be.
And to my grave with speed I haste again,
Since I have told that which I did destre:
For now I hope that you will shun the pain,
T^t comes through Pride, whose lew is lasting fire.
And thus adieu, God grant each one may see:
Unto his state, and so content to be.
FINIS.
The Author.
NABVCHODONOZOR, having thus ended his doleful Discourse, and heavily from his
heart lamented his strange preter Mutabilitie, yet reioysed heartily, that God
had so bou^tefully extended his mercy upon him, as to recall him from his
former follyes, and given him the Spirit of true repentance. Quoth he unto the
Author. My friend, since thou have heard this my sorrowful discourse, how
lewdly I spent my life, and how wavering I went from princely poten cye, from
regal rule wherein I should have show en dutiful authority, and blind
Ambition having so secretly seduced me, as to bend and bow at every wanton
beck: I ran into utter oblivion of my self, and also of the Almighties
Majesty. But being now reclaimed, and having thoroughly surviewed my lewd and
lothesome liberty, as thou have heard: for the better warning therefore, of all
other which shall come after me: I have re hearsed this mournful tale, and (as
my friend) my confidence I repose in thee, to publish this my preter pleasure,
mingled with a grieslye gall, as a Marck whereat all men may perfectly level
with their steadfast eyes, and so to shun the dangers emminent to follow. Well
(quoth the Author) my good will shall not want heerin, though my skill be but
base and simple, wherefore refer this unto me, and dout not but I will do
mine endeavor with as much diligence as lies in me to do, wherefore return,
and trouble yourself no more, for my plighted promise shall be presently
fulfilled. With that he departed. And then appeered in sight a griesly Ghost /
with long shagged hear / grim visaged / and attired in Black, a most ougly
creature to behold, he desired the Author that he would also attend unto ye
strange Mutabilitie of his estate. Well (quoth the Author) proceed / and let me
hear what thou have to say.

Then stretching out his arms, grinning with his teeth, and frowning in the
face: he began his sorrowful Complaint.

ENVYE.
ENVYE disdaines his neighbors prosperous state,
No Love can live where ENVYE bearethsvvay:
Use therefore so your dealings in such rate.
You need not shame your living to display.
Exile all fraud, serve GOD, thy Prince obey.
THE COMPLAINT of King Herod, the first Stranger that reigned over the Jews,
for the exceeding ENVYE that in his life he used. Caput. 2.
WHat, shall I speak? or shall I hold my peace?
What shall I do? all lothes my face to see:
The more I muse, the more does woe increace,
The more I shun, the more it follows me.
My former deeds I wish recalld to be.
But ^arlet fie, thou speak to to late:
For right revenge is fallen upon thy pate.
Why should I shun, or hide to show my name?
To all the world I am an open gaze:
The infant young on Herod cries shame,
So black Defame my name abroad does blaze:
That to look up, oh how I stand in maze.
To Heaven, no, cast down thy head to Hell:
There is the place, where thou of right must dwell.
But that all men may mirror take by me,
List to the tale that here I will unfold:
Here warning take, let me your mirror be,
See how at length I trapped a^ in hold:
You Gallants gay, take heed, be not to bold,
Least that you run to soon in Enuyes snare:
And so be caught before you can beware.
I Herod am, whose heart with grief did gore,
When Christ was borne, whom men their Savior call:
I sent forth Mages to foresee therefore,
Which way I might procure him for my thrall:
In heart I still desirde his final fall.
But God who saw such Envy in my breast:
Did me bereave of that I hoped best.
Unto my heart it was an endless spite,
That of the ^evves a King he named should be:
O then (quoth I) if catch that wretch I might,
All were mine own, mine honor then were fr^,
The pomp of all might then redound to me.
But they in whom I fully fixed my trust:
Returned no more, their promise was unjust.
I vowed to come with homage to this King,
Dissembling then my ardent zeal of heart:
Hoping that so I might him under bring,
And by this drift fulfill my bloody part.
But all in vain, the more returned my smart.
And how I frye, and freat in spite therefore:
Judge you if one may any ways do more.
Condemd I am to the infernal flame,
For loathsome life which I would not prevent:
Proud Pluto now torments my noble name,
Now to to late I loathe my life lewd spent.
Be warnd therefore, each man keep him content.
Clime not to high, for sudden comes the fall:
Which leads you to an everlasting thrall.
You stately Kings that have the charge in hand,
To govern those that do them Subjects vow:
Forese by me such sin for to withstand,
Be not to proud, unto your duties bow.
Rememember you but Subjects are as now.
I can instruct how other should deplore:
But I my self could not take heed before.
Call unto mind the slaughter that I made,
Of tender infants from their mothers breast:
See how Dame Envy led me by her shade,
That merciless poor Sucklings I oppressed.
And through my Realm none could have any rest.
But what revenge did light on me therefore:
Is to well known, I need to speak no more.
For suddenly I caught a bloody knife,
Incenst with ire, to work mine own decay:
My Servant would not let me spill my life,
But he perforce constraynd my hand to stay.
Else desperately I meant my self to slay.
But now at last, behold a greater change:
Woe to report the matter is so strange.
A loathsome creature then I was to see,
Upon my carckasse Uermin vile did eat:
Such odious savors did proceed from me,
None could abide for to approach my Seat.
For to behold my body vermins meat.
My friends and all, now suffered me to lie:
My stinck was such, that none could come me nigh.
A just reward for Envy that I used,
A mirror plain for all that come behind:
To think how much my self I have abusde,
And altered clean from out of natures kind.
A man, a beast, such doom was me assignde.
And as I was, even so I do remain:
Til judgment come, to quit me for my pain.
Sufficient warning here I have you told,
For to beware how like you do offend:
Now hence I must to troubles treble fold,
Which will abide continual without end.
If therefore thou will to thy self be friend.
Shun E^yes snare, take heed of lofty mind:
So never shall thou waver out of kind.
FINIS.
The Author.
THe Author having well and diligent ly attended to this Discourse, uttered of
this hellish Herod: would ^ry feign have entered into some tal^ with him, but
seeing him so terribly turmoyled with a multitude of griesly assaults, so
greedily gnawing on his cursed carkass^, was content to let him pass, yet
seeing that he would not depart out of presence, but expected yet (as it were)
to declare some what more of his mishap. The Author said. Thou hateful Herod,
when in thy surpassing pleasure, thou had the world at will: little was these
afterclaps in thy remembrance, but now being woorthiy punished for thy former
offenses: thou lamentest when it is to late. O my friend (quoth Herod) thy
words I have approved, for indeed my lawless li^ertie with vn^ridled
affection: has trained me in to these merciless misseries, which perforced I
constrained to abide. But being thus broyled in this bathe of bitterness: feign
would I dye, and can not, feign would I escape and may not. So that woorthily
and deservedly, I abide this my unlooked for destiny. With that (giving a
hidious groan) he departed. And presently there entered as grim a Sire as he, as
ougly to behold, as beastly in behavior, and as deformed in his stature.
After he had awhile well beheeld him self, and looked in each place about him:
he began his Discourse as follows.

WRATH.
Where vvrathfull vvights in common vv^ale remain,
Regarded small is v^itie of life:
All vice abounds, Discord, does Reason stayne,
Truth lies in dust, and still increases strife.
Have good regard in all thou go about:
Esteem Dame Truth for she will bear thee out.
THE COMPLAINT of King Pharao, sometime King of Egypt, vvoorthily punnished of
GOD, for his vvrathfull dealings tovvard the Children of Israel. Caput. 3.
AM I that Phar^o that did guide,
The noble Land of Egypt late?
Am I that Pharao that did slide,
From happy health, to wayling w^*
And am I he, that sought each way*
For to subvert the Isreal's state;
Then justly is mine own decay.
Feign down on me, for doing so.
I have dese'ud the truth to say,
A thousand times as many more.
For all the Plagues that God me sent:
Could not enforce me to repent.
Ten several Plagues God sent to me,
Ere I would let his Children go:
With Frogs and Lice most strange to see,
To move my hardened heart with all:
With diverse Plagues he paid me pat,
For to reclaim my stoutnes so.
But I esteemed not of that,
I thought my state should never ^ll.
I thought to beat all nations flat,
Before that I would gain the thrall.
But who so fights against the Lord:
He speeds but bad, as I accord.
I did persevere in my thought,
I did not force the Lord on hye:
I thought my power should ever speed,
And that his might I could deface:
My har^ned heart with Wrath was bent,
I thought to mount up to the Sky.
But cli^ng, see how I was shent,
For down I fell i^ lothesome case.
And now my deed I do repent,
For running such a wretched race.
Behold how here I d^ue in pain:
Yet can not dye though almost slain.
The furious Fiends torment my ghost,
For pleasure used in my life:
Trounst and turmoyld in freesing frost,
Ye burns this frost as whot a ^re
Thus do I pass my dollye days,
Amid a thousand heaps of strife:
And from them can escape no ways,
To late it is for to retire.
But just desert (as all men says,
Fell down on me in midst of ire.
O loathed life, feign would I dye:
Cease Pharao, thou in vain do cry.
Be warned now you Lordings all,
Let Pharaos fall teach you beware:
Spit forth that griesly goring gall,
Which makes you Enuyes servile sla^e:
See Pharao, who of late inioyd,
What heart could wish, deuoyd of care.
And see, how now I am annoyd,
Judge if a guerdon right I have.
Because my time I aye imployd,
To fancyes fond which I did ^aue.
And now my pleasure spent before:
With sowry s^ce I do deplore
Say now you see a pattern plain,
That you the like mischaunce may shun:
See here the lue of deep disdain,
That fostred was in Enuyes lay:
Respect your state ere you begin,
How you yaur after steps may run,
So shall you escape the sinck of sin:
Which Pluto proud does round bewrap,
When you espy another in:
I think you may escape the trap.
Say notbut you have warning had:
Ofenc that feels his state to bad.
And thus adieu, I must return,
As Gally slave unto my pain:
To place where sily souls do mourn,
In lothsom lake of Envy fell:
I must not slack my service due.
But with all speed must turn again,
And there be locked fast in mue:
Among a thousand feends of Hell,
Take heed therefore, think on my lue:
And of the place where I do dwell.
Then never will you fall in this:
But still take heed to do a miss.
FIMIS.
The Author.
PHARAO, having thus full ly finished his mournful Discourse: soon after
departed, which when the Author perceived, and calling to mind his former
talk: took his pen and noted it down, as near as he could in the same order as
he pronounced it. And before he had brought to full effect his pretended
purpose: he espied appro ching in place a modest and comely Personage, attired
in the weeds of a Gentleman, very sorrow fully walking, drying the tristfull
tears which flowed from the Fountain of his eyes with a Handkertcher. The
Author perceiving this: labored very diligently, till he had ended King
Pharaos Discourse, greatly desiring to know the name of this pensive person.
For still he erected his eyes, and heaued his hands up to Heaven, representing
the form and manner of a sorrowful Sinner, bemoning his former offenses, and
only aspecting for his eternal comfort from the joyful habitation of the
perpetual Paradise. This so sudden and sorrowful sight, so amazed the Author:
that he stood in a great quandary, not know ing what were best to do. But at
last this woeful wight gave a grievous sigh. and folding his arms together:
began his tale.

LECHERYE.
Life better lost, then live in such a sin,
Eternal shame does follow lavvlesse Lust:
Corrupted minds do first this vice begin,
Hating the truth whereon they ought to trust.
Each one therefore his staylesse state regard,
Remember (man) the day draws very near:
In which all sin shall have his due revvard,
Erect thy mind, that then thou may be clear.
THE COMPLAINT of King David, (by Gods permission) annoi^ted King of Israel,
sorovvfully from the bottom of his heart, bemoning his unbridled Lust of
Lecherye, committed with BERSABA the Wife of VRIAS, and for the procuring of
her Husbands death, thereby obtaining his purpose. Caput. 4.
DId Adam fall for breaking Gods behest,
From tipe of joy to den of wayling wo^?
And did his fact deserve to be suppressed?
Then David's deed, deserves treble so.
Did Cayne offend when he his Brother sieve,
And was subornd from presence of Gods face?
And if his fact did force his heart to rue,
O David, then thy doed deserves like case.
What greater sin then soeke the guiltless Blood?
What greater shame then loathsonie Lecherye?
The World my fact has open understood,
My cruel deed of lawless liberty.
O Bersaba which so did blind mine eyes.
That I forgot my rule and Princely sway:
Her seemly shape did force me to devise,
A thousand thoughts my purpose to assay.
O when as thou did laue thy body white,
As in my window thee I did behold:
Me thought I saw a Gem of rare delight,
A Phoenix fair stamped out of bea^en Gold.
Then that I might my purpose bring about,
On thy sweet shape to mittigate my pain:
To bloody Wars I sent thy husband out,
With giving charge that there he should be stain.
Then did I gain my long desired trust,
Thoe Bersaba for to suffice my will:
But I a wretch to deal with lawless Lust,
Thoe to defile, and husband thine to kill.
O wicked deed, me thinks I still do hear,
Vrias blood for vengeance on m^ call:
O mazed man, where was thy heavenly fear?
What, did thou think there was no God at all.
O yes (my God) but sore deceived was I,
Before thy face so wretchedly to sin:
Thy mercy mild (O Lord) do not deny,
That yet I may thy dwellings enter in.
O Bersaba, forgiveness I do crave,
For that I wretch thy body did defile:
Unlawfully desiring thee to have,
To spot thy name by such an unkind guyle.
And thou Vrias through my deed was siayne,
O where remaind the bounds of Princely sway:
That for my Lust should so desire thy pain,
And to thy foes unjustly thee betray.
Thy doleful death in heart I do Lament,
And sorry am for this my wicked deed:
Behold (O Lord) my fact I do repent,
Whereon to think does make my heart to bleed.
You Princes great that rule in regal state,
Behold how I did blindly run astray:
And brought my self unto destructions gate,
But that my God redeemd me thence away.
Take hee^ how you do lawless love require,
Fly from such vice as from a Serpent vile:
In fear of God your pleasures do require,
Then shall you not seduced be with guyle.
Be warnd by me who am your preter past,
See how I fell that never thought to fall:
Gods mercy yet received me at last,
And sorowing tears did make a mends for all.
Direct your ways as Justice does beseem,
Assure you, then you can not walk a stray:
And of this crime none can you guilty deem,
Remember me, and thus I haste away.
FINIS.
The Author.
THe Author stood meruelously amazed, to hear this doleful Discourse uttered
by King David, to see how sorowfully he bewept his so unjust attempt, and how
earnestl^ he craved pardon for his lewd offense. Atlast the Author approached
ne^rer unto him and said. Undoutedly my most gracious and Sovereign Prince,
this your careful complaint / wilmooue ye mides of other such like si^ers, to
drive into utter obliuio^ their vnsatiat desires, whereby most grievously they
offend in the presence of the Almighty. O my friend (answered King David) this
my fact, was both odious in the sight of God and man. yet chiefly in
disobedience of the Almighties commandments / but heartily I lament the same,
and wish that this deed may be a mirror unto all to beware how they fall in to
the like, and thee my friend and all other, I wish wisely to foresee unto your
selves, be fetuent in prayer, and continual in contemptation, so the Adversary
shall have no power to assail, and so my Free^d far well. Adieu good King
(answered the Author) and GOD of his inestimable mercy, arm us all constantly
in thy repentance.

After this entered a crabbed creature, deformed to behold, his belly so
monsterous and huge, and his visage so ougly to behold, and after a whiles
pausing he began to speak as follows.

CLVTTONY.
GL^ not thy self with vain desire of wealth,
Let modest mean alvvay thy state suffice,
Use not excess for to impair thy health,
The drunken S^ all virtue does despise,
The (...) paunch his belly makes his God.
O happy man that keeps the golden mean:
Naught more reproach, or more deserves his r^d,
You ^vel may see then such a life unclean.
THE COMPLAINT of Dives for his Gluttony used in bi^ life time: Caput. 5.
DRound in the gulf of endless woes am I,
A Glutton vile, most odious to behold:
My life I led so lewdly out of frame,
That all the World my presence do despise.
"And why, for that I might have shund before:
"But fond desire to that repugnant was.
"I Lordly lived and fared of the best,
"I like a Prince had all the World at will:
"To see the poor did gorge me with disdain.
"I thought all much that went beside my mouth.
"No, at my gate they should for hunge^ ^ye:
"Ere I a whit w^ld pity their estate.
When Lazarus lay begging at my gate,
I gave great charge that none should him relieve:
No not the crummes that from my table fell,
To save his life he should them not obtain.
The dogs to him more gentle was then I:
They lickt his sores when else he naught could get.
And now behold what have I for my hire,
An endless flame where I ^ry my heart:
The helhounds stand and claw me with their (...)*
A thousand plagu^ I suffer in a day,
And all not half so much as I deserve:
Though ten times more they were adioynd to me.
Poor Lazarus that p^ing lay in (...),
In Abraham's bosom (...) from ha^ (...):
Where I had all the pleasure on the (...),
And he the woe, his joys are treble fold:
My dainty diets now has la^e full sower,
Now simple meat would seru^ for dainty fare.
But he they say, that will ^o warning take,
Deserves well to have a like reward:
And he that makes a God upon his dross,
Must buy it deer, as I alas have done:
The pleasure that I had on earth before:
Full hard I now do buy it to ^hy cost.
See what it is to trust in massy murk,
see what it is to make a God of dross:
Behold what gain returns unto my share,
for thinking that my life would always last
I am the wretch that did contemn the poor:
but for contempt, behold what did ensue.
You Wordlings all that yet remain behind,
remember Dives drencht in deadly dole:
See how desartful rightly has him sped,
for lawless life deuoid of any gr^.
Who scorns at God, God sure will scorn at him:
Let him not trust that weith wi^ ^negarde b^.
Well since you have my fatal fall beheld,
I doubt not but you will prevent the like:
If so you d^, your pleasure may be more,
If not, your woe shall be as great a^ mine.
But while you have a space allotted you:
Remember me, and fear will force you (...).
And so Adieu, to (...) I ^st retur^.
Where tr^l (...) ^se my caren corse:
There must I li^, there must I never dye,
O gri^ly greef that never will have end.
Fie on all mu^ that brought me unto this:
Farwell my Friends, still think on Dives life.
FINIS.
The Author
THis grisly tale of Dives perplexed ye Author in a daz^ed dump, to consider
with him self, what desert obtained the excessive desire of Gluttony, what au
irksoe sore it is unto the soul, brings the body into a brutish beastlines,
and makes him consue his days in canckred conceits, the flaunting fare, used
at their tossing tables, ye rietous regard they have their own s^ish sloth,
from morning to night passing their pleasure in irksome excess of detestable
drunkenness, then wallowing in the mire of mortal miseries pamperd with all
secucurities possible to bring him to ye b^ck of subtle Satan, then is hedlong
hurled, into a thousand crabbed cares, a multitude of mischeefs, compa ssed
with cruel calamities, all hope abandoned, faith utterly suppressed, and vice
egregiously embraced, no tung can possible express ye diverse dolors brought
about by slavish sin, and man so unsteadfast by nature, to run hedlong into the
^ame.

But then to drive him out of his former fanta sies, approached one in place
with a currish coun tenance, his paunch corn out and round about beset with
fearful flames of fire: (...) sight where of the Author stood quaking and
qu^ering, yet refreshing him self with assured hope he atte^ded to hear what he
would say.

AVARICE.
As God has sent and well increast thy store,
Vaingloriously do not therein excel:
And eke again, do not disdain the poor,
Regard on earth thou but a time shall dwell,
In time therefore this odious vice expel.
Consider wealth does flourish but a space:
Erect thy mind in heaven to gain a place.
THE COMPLAINT of Judas bemoning his Auaritious heart in selling his Master
Christ for thirty pence. Caput. 6.
WHat do I live, will death not end my car^
is crooked fate so luckles unto me:
that will not end my mortal misery,
No greater plagues must be thy shameless share
For lothed life which thou before did use,
In craving that which most did the abuse.
Loathe cruel wretch to show thy filthy face
Or that the World should think upon thy deed:
For whose offense full many hearts do bleed.
For that I wretch transgrest in cruel case.
My Master mild for lucre t^ betray:
Woe worth thee wretch to think upon that day.
I Iuda^ am that once Disciple was,
To Christ that was my Lord and Master deer:
Behold me wretch that stands in presence here.
Who Traitor like his sorrows brought to pass.
For being greedy of a golden gain:
For money put my Master unto pain.
I am the Wretch that dipped in the dish,
When as he said, even he shall woork my woe:
And see bow I assented to do so.
For in the Garden with a traitorous kiss.
I brought to pass how he should Captive be:
Led like a Lamb his slaughter for to see.
I thirty pence received for my deed,
Which after ward when I recalld to mind*
For my offense great wrath to me assignde.
Before the Preests I hasted then with speed,
And threw the money in despite away:
Confessing I the guiltless did betray.
And forth I went ashamed to show my face,
For still my deed did gore me to the heart:
In that I had done such a vilain^ part.
I could not rest nor bide in any place.
But went and hanged my self upon a tree:
In place whereas all might me plainly see.
Then Belzabub began to play his part,
He came to fetch my sinful soul to hell:
Where to to bad in torments I do dwell.
Without remorce as is my just desert.
Lo what an end my Avarice did gain:
For preter joys, an after treble pain.
Learn you therefore that see my greenous fall,
To fly from that which will incur your woe:
If on your wealth you set your pleasure so.
Undoutedly to Satan rest you thrall.
From whom be sure you cannot start awrye,
But in the lake of deadly dole shall lie.
Take warning now from heart I you desire,
Let Judas stand a mirror in your eyes:
That Avarice in heart you may despise.
And not to hye abooue your reach aspire.
For if you do, your fall is strait at hand:
Prepare before, seek therefore to withstand.
And now I turn unto my lasting pain,
Destrous still to end my Iingring life:
But stay a while, I must have longer strife.
Example take, to you I call again.
Fly, fly I crave from presence of this vice,
Who will your woe a thousand ways entice.
FINIS.
The Author.
IF now this rare report uttered by this Jewish Judas, may move a man to
mind his mazed miseryes, procured by his insatiable auaritious heart: Judge
you, to whom is permitted the perusing of this Craiterous treachery, for
minding more his money then regard to his Master beca^e merchant to barter
his Master away for a small va lue, an entire love proceeded from this
seruisable servant, who exempting all courteous constancy, all faith and
fidilitie, all love and obedient duty, toward his Masters safety, with a
flattering face, in deep deceit betrayed him with a cur sed kiss. O wretch far
beyond desert desetuing such a Master, whom neither outward virtue could
persuade thee, miraculous dealings content thee / nor loouing loyalty move
thee, rightly did thou gain the name of the Child of perdition as thou
proouest periurde in thy great inconstancy: so justly and deservedly reapest
thou thy duty. Then to drive the Author out of du^ps wherein he remained at this
tale of Judas approached one in place seemly apparailed like a preacher or Pro
phet very modest and sage, to whom the Author listened to hear what he would
say,

SLOTHE,
Sloth is a foe unto all virtuous deeds,
Learning surmounts the golden heaps of gain:
Of Idle life therefore destroy the weeds,
Think what renovvn Dame Science does maintain.
Hence forth subdue all idle thoughts in thee:
Example good to all thy life vvil be.
THE COMPLAINT OF Jonas for his slothful slacking the commandment of the
Lord being sent to preach to the Ninevites, Caput. 7.
MUse not my Friends though Jonas now,
appear before your face:
I come to utter forth my crime,
against Gods Almighty grace.
For being straightly chargde by him,
that I to Niniuie:
Should go and fell the People how,
they lived in great miserye.
I would not do as I had charge,
but went an other way:
To Ioppa where in secret sort,
to Tharsus I would stray.
And finding hoyssed sails at hand,
and ready to depart:
I entered ship not minding that,
which was my cheifest part.
So forth we launcht and under hatch,
I went to take my rest:
Desiring for to sleep my fill,
for that did please me best.
But suddenly unlooked for,
a mighty storm did rise:
The anger of the God abooue,
was threatened in the skies.
The ship was tossed wunderously.
a grievous sight to see:
For death each man did then awayt,
no way else might there be.
And still the Master plied his charge,
to ease the heavy wait:
Suspecting that should be the cause,
wherewith the ship was frayght.
So forth he cast his merchandise,
into the swelling seas:
When that was done, yet nere the more,
the tempest did appease.
Then every man fell on his knees,
and loud to God did cry:
Yet was the tempest terrible,
and raged cruelly.
Then under hatch the Master came,
where me a sleep he found:
Awake quoth he, and pray with us,
shun Sloth we now are bound.
Then to our prayers fell we hard,
yet all would not content:
For still it raged more and more,
in vain their time was spent.
At last the Master thus began say,
my Friends if you agree:
We lots will cast which of us all,
procures this rage to be.
The Lots were then immediately,
divided twixt us all:
And when each one had took his chance,
the lot on me did fall.
Well then (quoth I) since that this rage,
procured is by me:
Into the seas do cast me strait,
then all content shall be.
To which for sauegarde of their lives,
they gladly did consent:
But God though I offended had,
would not my perishment.
But present sent a mighty VVhale,
when I was thrown in sea.
Within whose paunch free from all harr
I did remain three days.
And at the last delivered was,
this did my God for me:
So that by this the seas were calm*
and they escaped free.
And though that I offended had,
and slackt my duty so:
God would not leave me succourle^e,
but sheelded me from w^.
For when I called unto mind.
my great and lewd offense:
The sighing sorrows from my heart,
made speedy recompense.
For God delights more to see,
a sinner wayle his sin:
Then he should vengeance present*
or judgment enter in.
So for example you may see,
my sin which was so sore:
Gods mercy soon did mittigate,
to make me sin no more.
You therefore that remain on earth,
let this your mind suffice:
Fear still for to displease the Lord.
be not to worldly wise.
Fix still your mind on heavenly th
that never will decay.
The rest are but as shadows here,
and soon will pass away:
What vantage is it for a man,
to have of riches store:
And for to want the fear of God,
which still should be before.
The more a man does fix his minds,
upon that filthy dross:
The more endamagde is his soul,
unto the utter loss.
For wealth does pamper him so much,
that God is clean forget:
And then at last unto his pain,
upon him falls the lot.
So that all good and verteous men,
from company refuse him:
And where before he was esteemd,
now they disdain to use him.
Then is he thrown into the lake,
of everlasting pain:
Where as no fish shall rescue him,
to cast him up again.
But shall among the damned souls,
in endless torments dwell:
Where weeping wayling does remain,
even to the pit of hell.
Bear this in mind in all your woorks,
before you do begin:
Remember God is merciful,
and be afraid to sin.
Turn unto God, and God to you,
will turn his cheerful face:
Fly slavish Sloth, and then be sure,
that God will you embrace.
For idleness is enemy,
to goodness as men say:
Therefore do shun the enemy,
and one the Virtue stay.
Let all that have you preter past,
examples be to you,
How you may learn in all assayes,
vile sin for to eschew.
And thus if you direct your ways,
you walk the path so right:
That heaven is your inheritance,
in foil of Satan's spite.
FINIS.
Antony Monday.
Memor esto breuis aeui.
THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK of the Mirror of MVTABILITIE.
THE SECOND BOOK OF the Mirror of Mutabilitie, discoursing of diverse other
excellent Historyes, both pleasant and profitable.
To the Reader.
SOme men fix their fancies on simple shadows / esteeming Vanity as a Virtue
to vaunt of addicting their m^des to Carnal (...), wishing their Bags well
st^ed with (...), which is their whole pleasure. Some again to hautines of
heart, which (as they think) is a goodly (...) ry. Some to seek the ruinate
spoil of his Prince and Country to pleasure the Enemy, and thinks his deed
worthy of eternal memory. Some to the utter undoing of their Neighbors,
laboring by all means possible to deprive him of his honest name, hoping
thereby to get great commendation. Some to vn^awfull liking, which moves their
unbridled nature to stretch beyond the bounds of loyalty, and hops for
praise allthough it be with great infamy. Some also delights in corragious
Carowsing, with the superficial qualities of Quaffing, the which some frequent
only for the name of a Lusty Carovvser, though ^all honesty is used with such
an Artificer. And some give themselves to sluggish Sloth, wishing rather three
hours sleep* then one inch of profit. Of all which, severally in these
Chapters before passed: I have drawn some declaration, compacting therein (The
seven deadly Sins) with their due obtained hire. And now for that some
occasion is offered unto me, to proceed farther in my enterprise: I have
adjoined heerto diverse other exeellent Historyes, selected out of the most
sacred Scripture, desiring (Gentle Reader) thy freendly ind^erencye, although I
want the rules of practiced Poetrye / wherewith I might have flaunted it more
gallantly, I refer that to those of more riper excellencye, and accept this
(though homely) yet offered willingly / and if I had been experienced, or e^s
might have come aquainted with such eloquent spe (...): be sure that I would
have then launched it out with an Emperors liberality.

But finding my store house so far unfurnished, and that truth need not be so
bravely burnished, I yield my self to thy gentle courtesy, and bu^d my defense
on thy freendly clemency.

Sempre Amico vostro. A. Monday.

The Induction.
ABSALON, Son to the illustrious King, and peerlesse Prophet David King of
Israel, who was so adorned in Beauty so bou^teous, in stature so excellent,
and in all points of personage was so comely and apparent: stretching beyond
the bounds of natural affection, and more regarding Vanity, then the welfare
and pro speritie of his father David: disloyally desired his Kingdom, and
proceeded so far in his purpose: that he forced his father to fly out of his
Realm / requesting counsel which way he might clean vanquish and overcome
his Father. But this his bold enterprise turned to his own destructi on, for
both the Armies being joined in Battle: Absalon and his company sustained the
foil. And he seekig to escape secretly away, as he rode the h^e (...) head ^ed
about the branches of a tre^ and his h^sse ^ning away left him hang ing there.
Then I^ (...) Captain of King Da^ids host, and the Son of (...) King David's
Sister pursu^ him* (...) through with his Spear, a just (...) for his wicked
attempt.

BE AVT IE.
Be not to proud of that which is but vain,
Esteem not BE AVT IE as a thing of price:
As Scripture does to us give credit plain,
Vain BE AVT IE has often times deceiude the wise.
Take heed therefore, she slyly does intise.
Infairst words, does deep deceit often lie:
Each man therefore lift up his heart on hye.
THE COMPLAINT of Absalon, for his vain aspiring to the Imperial Crown and
Diadem of his Father King D'AVID, and for his sudden fall he obtained in his
pretended purpose. Ca. I.
ON whom the fates in lowering sort did frown,
I am the wight and Absalon by name:
Who^ hauty heart (at last) perforce threw down
Unto my woe, and thrice eternal shame.
But he that ^eeks to clime beyond his reach:
In end does fall, experience does me teach.
So I for proof the son to David King,
Presumde (...) unto my Fathers place:
A thousand woes I compast for this thing,
And wished as King his kingdom to embrace.
For still desire ^id prick me to the same:
But duty said that I deserved blame.
Well what o^ that^ let duty quake with cold,
Let wanton will prick forth his lusty prime:
My Fathers Age still made me very bold,
And still me thought he liude to long a time.
His hoary hears were far unfit to guide:
So great a charge, this thought I in my pride.
Well at the last betide me weal or woe,
I would adventure for this rare renown:
By puisant force my might I meant to show,
(...) that thereby I might a^ (...) the crown.
In (...) of (...), (...) co^ld:
His crown and rea^ obta^ perforce I would.
My Fathers force I naught esteem (quoth I)
I (present) will erect a martial ^and:
For either he will grant, orels will fly,
Then David's seat comes pat into thy hand.
O Absalon cheer up thy noble heart.
Proceed in this to play a Uictors part.
Then lu^y Lad^ I present did prepare,
In ^led co^es t^ bring my purpose right:
A mighty band I levied for my share,
Not doubting but to foil my Fathers might.
Both noise of Drum, and clangering trumpet shril,
Did prick me forth for to obtain my will.
For what more same unto a hauty heart,
Then to encounter with his mortal foe?
What infamy obtaines he that will start?
And Cowardly like from out the skirmish go.
So every hour I tho^ a year o^ twain:
Til I by fight m^ Father^ crown did gain,
Well then at last with courage forth I went,
And all my train for to perform the deed:
At last we came where ^onter for^ was bent,
Against me and mine for to resist with (...).
With Cannon cracks* the (...) then began:
Each one to show him self a martial man.
On each side then began the bloody blows.
Assault, assault the Captains cry amain:
The Ensigns spread the battles force forshowe^,
The horsemen they the ranks have broke in twain.
the hurling sha^ts and ^ery balls d^ fly:
With such a force as darkened is the sky.
My men although they were the greater part,
A number slain, the rest began to faint:
The other side are Uictors by desert,
then dark annoy my courage did attaint.
I had the wurst I thought it best to fly:
Without I would before mine enmyes dye.
Then fled I thence, and glad my life to save,
For God was angry with my unkind act:
Considering I my Fathers crown did crave,
And entered feeld, which was a bloody fact.
For this my deed reuengement soon he sent:
to make me know my heart was wicked bent.
For in my flight my hear caught on a (...),
Out of my saddle it did take me quite:
And there I hung most woeful for to see,
And could no way redress my heavy plight.
A guerdon just thus fell unto my share:
Because against my Sire I would prepare.
Then knew I well my heinous great offense.
Had brought me to my due deserved hire:
Which from the heavens was sent for recompense,
Because so hye in heart I did aspire.
Then wished I all were to do again*
Because as now I felt thereof the pa^.
So long I hong in this my doleful pain,
That Ioab did at last retire that way:
When he me saw, incenst with ire amain,
At me he ran perforce, and did me s^ay.
This sharp revenge from heaven on me fell:
to teach me against my Father to rebel.
See gallant Brutes by me a pattern plain,
Of hauty heart aspiring to renown:
Who did attempt my Fathers right to gain,
And would have robde him of his stately crown.
But lo what guerdon does on me betide:
To pay me home for my excessive pride.
Content your selves therefore with mean estate,
Keep that which Justice does to you allow:
Take heed by me remember this my fate,
Perforst the wrath of God on me to bow.
Wherefore beware this filthy vice prevent:
Least as I am, like case you may be shent.
FINIS.
The Intduction.
TRIPHON, a man of great reputation, who assisted Alexander in fight against
the noble King Ptololomye, when this Alexander was de parted his life, by
subtle sleights, and crafty conceits, found such means, that he got the yung
Antiochus the only heir, to this King Alexander, from the Arabian Emascuel,
who nourisht him up in virtuous educations, to obtain the crown after his
Fathers death.

And when he had obtained the yung King under his jurisdiction, he began to
compact (...) against him, which he could not fully compass, so long as
Ionathas (whom the King had made high Priest) enjoyed his life, wherefore to
prevent the same, he sought which way he might slay Ionathas, and being at
Bethsan where Ionathas met with him, accompayned with fortye thousand men, was
greatly discouraged because the force of Ionathas was so great, and therefore to
coullour the matter, he commanded his Army to yield as due renerence unto
Ionathas in all respects as to him self, And being met together / quoth
Triphon in dissembling sort, upon what occasion compellest thou these thy
People to take such tedious trauail, consdering we be at peace / and no wars
is between thee and me, return them home again, reserving those whom thou
please to have to attend, and to weight upon thee, and so walk with me to
Ptolomais, for I will frankly bestow it upon the, beside diverse other strong
and fortified holds, and for no cause else come I, and so I will depart.
Ionathas reposing confidence in the disse^bling tale of Triphon: commanded his
Army to depart, and then went with Triphon to Ptolomais, where as soon as
Ionathas with his men were entered the City: the gates were fast shut, and
Ionathas put in Prison and all his men slain.

Then afterward departed Triphon in to the land of Judah leading Ionathas with
him as prisoner: and having intelligence that Simon the Bro there of Ionathas
stood up in resista^ce against him: in flattering sort he sent word to Simon
that the cause why he kept Ionathas in ward, was but for certain money due by
him in the King's account, and if so he would send an hundred talents of
Silver, and also the two sons of Ionathas for surety in their fathers behalf,
Ionathas should return home again.

But Simon well perceived the crafty deceit of Triphon / and yet douting least
he should become a greater enemy to the people of Israel. and that they should
an other day report that because no money was sent by Simon his Brother
Ionathas was dead, did send him both money, and the two Children.

This fell right even as Triphon did wish for and would not release Ionathas,
but soon after / put both him and his Children to death, and now at last
begins he to bring about his long and ancient grudge toward the yung King,
for as he walked abroad to disporte with him: traitorously did murder him, and
so obtained the realm crowning him self King of Asia, and did much hurt in the
land. But in the end this Triphon became so hated of all men, that when
Antiochus Son unto Demetrius came against him: the most of his men returned,
and he being so per secuted by Antiochus, that he took ship on sea / after
which he was never seen.

CRVELTIE.
Content thy self to live in quiet stay,
Remember sti! the end ere thou begin:
Vaunt not to much of thy poor (...) pray,
Except thou ^nk that thou (...) ^uer si^.
Let CRVELTIE in thee be clean suppressed,
Think that thou can not alvvay Victor be:
In thine affairs respect thy quiet rest:
Esteem thy Friend that well does council thee.
THE COMPLAINT of Triphon for his cruelty committed against the yung King
ANTIOCHVS, whom he cruelly murdered as he vvalked to disporte him, and for
his cruel putting to death IONATHAS, and histvvo Children, through which he
crowned himself King of ASIA. Caput. 2.
IF lofty looks might gain immortal Fame,
Or double dealing merit worthy praise:
Then Triphon I by right deserve ye same,
Because long time I sought it many ways
But if that Virtue vaunteth for her fee:
Destance then is open come to me.
Promotion still did prick my heart on hye,
With whole desire to gain a Princes place:
For by deceit I thought to mount the s^ye,
But at the last deceit did (...) deface.
Deceit they say so long may used ^ee*
That at the length his Master shame will he.
For so by me the proof appears plain,
When Alexander shrined was in grave:
Antiochus his Son I did obtain:
Thinking by him that I the Crown might have.
But Ionathas did make me still to doubt:
Wherefore for him I brought a fetch about.
When he me ^t with forty thousand Men,
A mighty host that made me for to quake:
A subtle shift to gloze that matter then,
Dissembling I this drift did under take.
And set my tung a philed phrase to frame:
That no suspect there might be found of blam^.
I promised him full many a gentle gift,
So that at length his men he sent away:
I seeing I, so fine had played this drift,
This Ionathas for Prisoner I did stay.
And at the last went out through Judah Land:
That they abroad my fame might understand.
To Simon who my prisoners Brother was,
I message sent declaring that the cause:
Why I retaind his Brother in this casse,
Was for due det claimd by the Princes laws.
And if that he would seek to set him free:
His Children he with speed should send to me.
Of Silver eke an hundred talents more,
To me should come, else would I keep him still:
My wish was sent, of money I had store,
And eke his Children resting at my will.
Whom afterward to death I did commit:
That so thereby my purpose might fall fit.
Then I of Asia was proclaimed King,
This was the wish I looked for so long:
But Fortune fell reuengement sharp did wring,
And made me for to sing an other song
Demetrius Son Antiochus by name:
Pursued me fast to woork my open shame.
And to my ships perforce made me to fly,
Else had I death sustained at his hand:
But ne the less on seas I wretch did dye,
Deserving wursse if that my fault were scand.
But God this sharp revenge on me did taite:
A guerdon (...) for treason I did maite.
Fly, Fly therefore take warning by my fall,
Let this my deed take place within your breast:
To make you fly the sudden sweetened gall,
Which in the end provoke your unrest.
Fie on all treason, woe unto the day:
When first I sought this most accursed way.
Well since I have so slyly fallen in snare,
And have to me incurrde an endless pain:
You gallant wights I wish you to beware,
Betime, see you from wi^ (...) refrain.
So of my woe for ever you shall miss,
And for my greef, shall reign in lasting bliss.
FINIS.
The Induction.
ACHAB King of Israel espoused Iezabel Daughter of King Ethbael of the
Sidonites, by means of the which Sezabel, he fell into all strange Idolatry,
and ex treame persecutions, for which offense he received such a plague of
God: that in three years should no rain nor dew fall from heaven on the earth,
whereby ensued a great death both of men and beasts (that a number dyed through
his wicked offense.

This King as report is made in the sacred Scriptures was so wicked, that even
it was his whole delight to do lewdly contrary to his duty, and yet God
suffered him to obtain a vaitant victory over Benhadab the Sirian King, who
retained in his company xxxii. Kings, and twice he harmed him by great and
blody skirmishes but ye third time he was forced to come prostrate before this
Achab* who for all his cruelty yet pit tied the case of Benhadab, and making a
bond with him, gave him license to depart, now for the mercy shown to this
wicked Benhadab, whom God had cursed and brought into the subjection of Achab
to the intent he should be slain: GOD was very wrathful against Achab*
promising his ruinate destruction for the same.

Shortly after, this greedy Gainer not satisfied with his own kingdom and
signories, with his battles, spoils, and wunderful victoryes, which God had
suffered him to conquer: but the guiltless and inocent Naboth he forced to
be cruelly murdered, for naught but for a Uiniard pertaining unto this silly
wight, whose innocent death such vengeance obtained in ye sight of God that the
Prophet Elia brought him message that where the Dogs had licked the Blood of
Naboth, in the same place should they lick his also.

And ye God to him and his posterity would do a^ had done to the house of
Jeroboam and Baasa.

These fearful threatenings sent from GOD, so terrified Achab: that with
repentance he humbled him self in sorowing Sackcloth / which did move the
Lord to permit his plague farther of. But this his repentance was but plain
dissimulation, to win the hearts of men, wherefore he refused the council of
Micheas the true Prophet of GOD: and reposed confidence in four hundred false
Prophets, and after their council took his iour ney to Ramoth, where being in
Battle with the Sirians: an Arrowe pierced into him sitting in his Chariot, of
which wound he died. And then his Chariot going toward the Poole of Samaria to
be washed: the Dogs licked up his blood. So was the promise of the LORD
fulfilled upon this wicked and cruel King, for his great trangression.

WICKEDNESS.
While time thou have, remember life misspent:
In all thy thoughts respect a Christian care:
Consider still the end ere thou attempt,
Know that thy sins innumerable are.
Examine well therefore each fault amiss,
Dread that the LORD will angrye with thee be:
Now seek therefore to gain the lasting bliss,
Erect thy heart, that men good vvoorks may see,
So then to all thy life shall witness be.
THE COMPLAINT of King Achab King of Israel, for his wicked life led in
IDOLATRY and cruel Persecutions, and for sparing the life of the wicked
BENHADAB, King of Siria, whom GOD had delivered into his hands only to put to
death. Also for his procuring the poor NA BOTH to be cruelly murdered, thereby
toget his Viniard, by the counsel of IEZABEL his Queen (whose blood the Dogs
licked up on the ground) and also his own blood, in the Battle fought at
RAMOTH, according to the word of the LORD. Caput. 3.
Lascivious life deserves like reward,
And disobedience must have punishment:
Where falshod rules ye truth cannot be heard
The rod must come to force them to repent.
Where man disdaynes to stand of God in aw:
Reuengement needs must come by Justice law.
Where Cruelty does harbor in the breast,
And Rigor puts poor seely souls to pain:
Where fear of God is utterly suppressed,
And eke the mind addicted to disdain.
The sharpened sword does hang abooue his head:
If God so please, to strike him present dead.
"For proof whereof, I Achab may suffice,
"Whose wayward will from Wisdoms ways was bent
I lawless lived my God I did despise,
In Idols I did fix my whole delight:
That Iezabel whom I did take to Wife:
Maintaind me still in this my loathsome life.
For mine offense no rain for three years space,
Fell on the earth, all barren was and dry:
So that by this a murrain came a pace,
That man and beast a multitude did dye.
The Prophet I Elia did disdain:
Auouching he was cause of all my pain.
But most of all. that wicked cursed King,
Dispisde of God for wickedness of life:
God did vouchsafe into my hands to bring,
That so I might abridge him with my knife.
But for because he homage did to me:
I saved his life, and so did set him free.
But yet alas poor silly Naboths death
Puts me in mind my vile and lewd desire:
By wrongful means to stop his guiltless breath
Procured vengeance on me for my hire.
His viniard I perforce would take away:
So by these means poor Naboth I did stay.
The Lord then sent his Prophet unto me,
Who thus did say, for this thy wicked deed:
In place whereas all men did plainly see,
The Dogs on Naboths guiltless blood to feed:
There shall they lick thy blood in self same case:
Because thou did all fear of God deface.
When this I heard, because all men should say,
That I was sorry for my great offense:
I sackcloth got and so began to pray,
But this I faind, and glozed with pretense.
And God who knew how I did glozings fain.
Preparde a mean to pay me for my pain.
For as I sought how I might get again,
The City Ramoth which to me was due:
The Council of Micheas did refrain,
And followed those that false wear and untrue.
So there in fight an Arrow perced me:
Of which I dyed in my tranquillity.
Let now therefore this tristful tale of me,
Give warning how you run likewise astray:
Fear God and keep your selves in your degree,
Follow the truth, exile all fraud away.
And think on me that passed you before:
To give you warning that you sin no more.
FINIS.
The Induction:
IEPHTAH the Son of Gilead base borne, and hated of his Brethren, was fain
to fly, and so went and remained in the Land of TOB, as a Stranger from his
Brethren and Familiars, but within a while it fortuned ye Ammonites oppressed
the Israelites greatly with wars, and stood in hazerd of subuertion, so that
the Elders of Gilead remembering Iephtah was so goodly a man of personage,
strong and coragious: they went to desire him to be their Captain. But he
alleged unto the^ ye small regard they had of him before, and now in their
distress came to seek succor of him. So at last through pro^ising to make him
their go uernour: he returned with them. And preparing him self against the
Ammonites. he vowed unto GOD that if the Uictory might redound into his hands:
the first quick thing that should happen to meet with him at his return, he
would sacrrfise in honor to the LORD, It so fortuned that GOD gave him such
good success in Battle: so that he returned Conqueror. And as he came
homeward: the first he met withal was his own belooued Daughter, who met him
with pleasant Hermony, at sight whereof he rent his hear, tearing his garments,
with many sorrowful lamen tations, declaring to her his vow. Well Father (quoth
she) content your self / and that is said fulfill it, although it be I. And
then for two months space among the Mountains she bemoned her virginity /
with other virgins of her company, and then returned, and was sacrifised of her
Father as his promise was. I right and rare exam ple for all men to take heed
of vain oaths.

RASHNESS.
Regard alvvay to live in modest mean,
ARASH attempt thou after may repent:
Shun such vain thoughts as make thy life unclean,
Have good regard lest thou be sharply shent,
Now is the time thy dangers to prevent.
Esteem therefore that which shall last for aye:
So shall thou live when Satan would say nay.
THE COMPLAINT of Iephtah sometime Judge of Israel, for his so rash vo vv, in
the sacrifising of his Daughter, for the foyling of his enemies. Caput. 4.
THe loftiest mind does catch the fall at length,
The Wisest man is subject to a stroke:
The Champion stout ye vau^teth in his strength
Is forste at length his boasting to revoke.
All is but vain to purchase mortal praise:
Which lasts awhile, and soon departs his ways.
Man does appoint, but God does all dispose,
Even so by me that sought vainglorious Fame:
I vowde to God if I might foil ^y foes,
And to return as Uictor of the game.
I vowed what thing did meet me by the way:
As sacrafice to him I meant to slay.
Welfoorth I went, such good success God gave,
That all my foes by force I did suppress:
I had the wish that I did wholely crave,
I bare the name among both more and less.
My vow I made remained yet behind:
I little knew what shing I first should find.
Returning home with all my mighty train,
My Daughter first in presence I did spy:
A treble greef did agrauat^ my pain,
My mirth was turned to many a doleful cry:
My hear I rent, and garments did deface:
Twixt weal and woe I stood in doutful case.
My promise made alas perfourmd must be,
For unto God I firmly vowde the same:
My Daughter eke brought treble woe to me.
That I on her my sacrafise should frame.
No remedy but death she must sustain:
And unto her this tale I told with pain.
O Daughter deer which erst was cause of joy,
Unto thy Sire to blemish dark debate:
Now art become (alas) his great annoy,
In that thy death is wrought by lucklesse fate,
My rash attempt to purchase lasting praise:
Has wrought the mean to end thy tranquil days.
To God I vowed if I the feeld might win,
What first I met, his sacrifise should be:
My foes now foyld that would have entered in,
Behold (my Dear) the lot does fall on thee.
If I should seek to save thy tender life:
My promise made would more procure my strife.
What shall I say (alas) amazde I stand,
My promise I must bring to full effect:
Thy life therefore yield subject to my hand,
And be content this World for to reject.
The Maiden mild this answer made her Sire:
Content to grant to that he did require.
Since you (O Father) have suppressed your foes,
And since your vow does fall so right on me:
I yield my self to ease your after woes,
I shall suffice your sacrifise to be.
But for two Months to Desert I must wend:
My state to moan before my life does end.
The time expirde, the Maiden turned again,
Then offered I to God my Sacrifise:
Thus my rash vow, returned to my pain,
To hunt for praise, which did me most despise.
When Man will make a vow without respect:
It God offends, his soul it does detect.
You yunger years therefore be warnd by me,
Unto your vows always have good regard:
Respect in time the danger for to flee,
Least unto you do happen like reward.
Still vow no more then well perform you may:
And so be sure you cannot go astray.
FINIS.
The Induction.
SAMPSON, a man thought invincible for his strength and magnanimity received a
woman of the Philistines to his wife, whereby he came to his distructio^, for by
her alluring words did open the Riddle put forth at the marriage, how out of
the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. This Sampson after
that he had sent the Foxes through the Philistines corn had three thousand
men against him / who by his own permision suffered them to bind him, and
they seeing that they had gotten him: greatly triumphed, where withal he brake
his bands, as though they had been of no force. And presently caught up the
Iawbone of an ass / and therewith all killed a thousand Philistines, and after
fainting for drink, God forced the water to issue forth of one of the teeth,
and therewith refreshed him self. Then he perceived the Citizens of Gaza laid
wait for him to kill him, he rose at midnight, and rent the bars of the gates
of the City, and bare the^ on his shoulders to ye top of an hill before the
City of Hebron. But at length through his fond affection to his wife Dalila,
he lost Gods excelent gift, in cutting the here from his head, wherein co^sisted
his strength, and so was he betrayed to the Philistines, and had his eyes put
out, and was made to grind in a mill like a slave. But in their day of delight
holding ye feast of their God Dagon. Sampson was sent for out of Prison to play
before them and make them sport, the house being full of people, so that in
the rofe there was three thou sand. But as Sampson was playing before them: he
caught the two great Pillars that bare up the house, he called upon his GOD
saying. O Lord strengthen me at this time only, that (according to my vocation,
executing thy judgment) I may be avenged on the Philistines for my two eyes.
And saying so: he shook the Pillars saying. Let me dye with the Philistines,
and so the house fell down and killed them all, his body by his Brethren was
taken and buried with his Father Manoath.

MAGNANIMITY.
Muse with thy self the subtlety of sin,
As entered has the vvisest men alive:
Great is the fraud, she slyly does begin,
None can escape so near she does them drive.
As she has Beauty trained to her lure,
Next flaunting pride she forced has to bend:
In all estates of this I am right sure,
Mere shifts she has, her craft for to defend.
If then the stout, the proud and all do yield,
The simple wretch has need to walk a right:
If she perceive him in the openfeeld,
Even then she comes to harm that simple vvight.
THE COMPLAINT of Sampson, for his fond declaring to his wife where his
cheifest strength was, which made his eyes be pulled out by the Philistines.
Caput 5.
IF I be he whose hauty heart and strength,
Throughout the world extelled was by fame
Survey my life, peruse my deeds at length,
And see how Women brought me unto sha^e.
For I bewraid my Riddle to my Wife:
Which did procure to me a heavy strife.
When as I set the Corn in flery flame,
The Philistines conuincst me through the deed:
They bound me strait in hope to spoil my name,
But yet the Lord did aid me at a need.
For nothing I esteemed of my bands:
But valiantly broke them between my hands.
Then Gaza gates on shoulders I did bear,
Remoouing them unto the Hebron hill:
My might was such, of none I stood in fear,
Til at the last through fondnes of my will.
Unto my Wife my secret did bewray:
And so by her obtained my decay.
I had example twice of her before,
But yet (alas) no warning would suffice:
If I had kept my self in Wisdoms lore,
And her refraynd that did me so despise.
I had not fallen so soon into mishap:
Nor over whelmd with terrors tristfull trap.
But now to late my folly I repent,
And now I move when as it is in vain:
When vnaduisde I sought my self to shent,
And willing run upon my bitter bayne.
Well may you say his payment he deser'ud:
that saw his pain, and would not have it sweru'd.
For twice the guyle I plainly did espy,
When as she said, O Sampson now arise:
The Philistines do seek to make thee dye,
But quickly I prevented their devise.
Yet foolish man could not be warnd by this:
But needs must tell whereas thy secret is.
Her Sirens songs laid me a sleep on lap,
Then she from me my valiant force bereft:
The Philistines then caught me in their trap,
And then (alas) small comfort had I left.
But that in God my trust I firmly heeld:
Protesting him my Buckler and my Sheeld.
They traitor like mine eyes pulled from my head,
And in the Mill did use me like a slave:
Behold my Wife what courtesy she bred,
See for my love what recompense I have.
Now grind poor wretch thy living for to get:
To find thee clothes, and also bread and meat.
O seely Sampson now deprived of joy,
Where is the life that thou did lead of yore?
Is comfort turned to direful dark annoy,
Is all thy fame now dead thou hadest before?
Why? is it thou that burnt thy enmyes Corn?
Behold thy self (alas) thou art forlorn.
Why, is it thou that shund the piercing paws,
Of Lion fierce that sought thy dire decay?
And is it thou that rent his ravening jaws,
And Honny had as thou wentst by the way?
Look on thy self (alas) to much unwise:
See how the world thine honor does despise.
If with the Iaw of on poor stely Ass,
So many men thou broughtest to the ground?
Why then relieve this thine afflicted case,
And haste thee strayt thy fo^s for to confound.
Nay, stay a while, thy folly ^rst lament:
Remember well how Wisdom has thee shent.
Would thou to feeld to fight against thy foes?
O naked man, where is thy chee^ defense:
How can thou now resist the battering blows?
Fie, Coward fie, go shroud thy hot pretense.
Think on the state thou did^ enjoy before:
And sit thee down thy folly to deplore.
Say, once thou had, that which thou now do miss,
Say, once thou wast free from all women kind:
Say, Sampson, once thou did remain in bliss,
And now report, O Sampson thou art blind.
Thou well may say, that once thou had the power:
But now Dame Folly clean has cropped the flower.
Go carry Gaza gates unto their place
First take thy strength that brought them thence away:
And then perhaps thou may thy foes deface,
But til that time in thrall thou needs must stay.
The scourging whip must tear thy tender skin:
A guerdon just which thou of right do win.
This is the thing the Philistines did crave,
Thy thrall it is procures their iocond joy:
Since they have got stout Sampson for their slave,
They him detain their pleasure to employ.
And as a fool they use thee at their Feast:
With thy blind sport to frame some merry Jest.
But yet one day as they did celebrate,
Their Dagons Feast, I being then in place:
To make them sport, to God did yield my state,
Desiring then I might them all deface.
The house with old, yung, great and small:
I pulled it down, so killed my self and all.
Woe worth Dalila that so wrought my shame,
Woe worth Dalila my unconstant foe:
Example take, let Sampsons bitter blame,
Forewarne you how you trust to Women so.
No more in secret to a Woman show:
Then you would have that all the world should know,
See here stout Sampson valiant in his strength,
Yet could he not a Loouers look resist:
For all his might, see how he fell at length,
And forste to yield to Wom^ as they list,
Take heed by me, let Sampsons great mishap:
Learn you beware to fall in such a trap.
Full many more have fallen in like case,
And all through this, wherefore I warning give:
Remember Beauty bears a fickle face,
And Beauty asks a treble cost to line.
You have your choice, which you will take or leave
Refuse the bad, the best you may receive.
FINIS
The Induction.
SOLOMON being the Son of Bethsabe, was anointed King to reign after his
father David, and when he was established in his Kingdom: first executed
Justice upon Adonia his Brother, who would have aspired to the Kingdom.
Secondly upon Ioab, who had slain Abner and Amasa, and he also conspired with
Adonia. Thirdly upon Semei, who cursed his father David. This King was so great
ly belooued of GOD: that in a dream he had him ask what so ever he would, and
he should have it. Solomon considering his youth, and ruling in a Kingly
office, how difficil a thing it was to rule: desired of GOD to have an
understanding heart, to judge the people with Justice and equity, and to
discern good from evil. His request found favor in the sight of GOD, and not
only he gave him such great and excellent Wisdom: but also abundaunce of
worldly Riches, wherein he excelled all the Kings of the Earth, that were either
before or after him to this day. So that all the World came to see and hear
his grave and excel lent Wisdom, which far surpassed Ethan, Herman, Chalcal
and Darda, who were four of the notablest men that then lived in the World.
But the rare Wisdom of this Sapient Solomon: caused them all to stand
astonished, both for his excellency, and also for his Riches. For he had
twelve Officers, which daily provided the victuals for his household, and his
ordinary expenses, was every day thirtye quarters of fine Manchet flow er, and
sixty quarters of meal, ten stalled Oxen, and twenty out of the pasture, one
hundred sheep beside Hearts, Bucks, wild Goats, Capons and other Fowls. Also
he had forty Thousand Horses, and xit. Thousand Horsemen to keep them. And the
weight of Gold that came every year out of Ophir to Solomon: was six hundred,
three score and six Tallents, beside the bringing in of Merchaunts and other
men. His riches was so abundant: that he made all the ornaments of the Lords
Temple of pure Gold, and every drinking pot in his house was of clean Gold,
and he used Silver as plentifully as the stones in the street. But yet (alas)
for all the worldly possessions and Wisdom that he had: he fell into
vnlawfulllyking of Outlandish women, whereof he had such store: that he made
seven hundred Queens, and three hundred Concubines, all which turned his heart
to strange Gods, and of a wise King, made him in manner a stark fool and
wicked Idolater. So that for this his grievous offense, he lost the favor of
God, and so after he had reigned fortye years / he dyed, and was buried in the
Cittye of David.

SAPIENCE.
Since man's estate corrups as does the Flovver,
And in short time his pomp is laid in dust:
Perceive you may, how that this earthly hour,
Is still unsure, Man's pleasures vade as rust.
Eftsoons we see as soon goes yung as old,
No King nor Keysor, Wise nor yet the Fool:
Can Death deny, they all must to one Fold,
Earth must to earth, so teaches Wisdoms school.
THE COMPLAINT of King Solomon King of Israel, for his inordinate love borne
to Outlandish Women, who brought him from the vvisest and richest King that
ever was, to be cast out of Gods favor, and to be even in manner, like a stark
fool. Caput. 6.
Behold (my friends) the wight whose fickle safe
Through wanton will procurde his woeful fall:
See here the man that thought his steadfast state
Unlikely was to come in such a thrall.
But well ye see that Sin deceiues the Wise:
When fond conceits has power to blind his eyes.
I Solomon whom God with Wisdom decked,
And worldly Wealth whereof I had great store:
Did think that sin could never me infect,
Because Dame Folly still did stand before.
And through the world blew forth a golden blaze:
That thousands came on Solomon to gaze.
For when I had given sentence on the Child,
For whom two women strove before my face:
Such rare report went of my Justice mild,
That Solomon was known in every place.
Lo thus my God adornd me frank and free:
That all the World amazed stood at me.
Beside of wealth I had the World at will,
To strange it is to hear my large expense:
Of golden gifts I aye enjoyed my fill,
My princely port, my Garders and defense.
Were to to long to you for to recite:
For all this wealth did naught but blind my sight.
So that alas I cruelly transgrest,
For fond delight entangled had my mind,
Outlandish Dames did like my pleasure best,
I clean forgot the wrath to me assignde.
Seven hundred Queens I Solomon did make:
Of Concubines three hundred I did take.
O wicked wretch, where was the fear of God,
where was the wise foresights ye thou did use:
what did thou think there was no scorging rod
That would correct thy heinous vile abuse.
If so thou thought? why then ye did but well:
To live so lewd, against duty to rebel.
Why? did not God in dream appear to thee,
And bad thee ask what best thy heart could crave?
Did God not grant thy wish perfourmd to be,
And did permit that thou should Wisdom have?
How think thou? this can thou not denay:
How happens then thou wentest so astray.
Alas, because thou did not God regard,
But in thy wealth did set thy whole delight:
Each wanton Dame with wealth ye did reward,
This made thee fall in such a woeful plight.
And where before thou west esteemed wise:
Now as a fool each man does thee surmise.
What will thou do? thou sinned have so sore,
By kneeling down to Gods of stocks and stones:
That God will now respect thy case no more,
Down on thy knees, sound forth thy heavy gro^es
Lament, lament (O wretch) thy wicked crime:
Desire thy Lord to save thy soul in time.
You Potentates behold my woeful fall,
How wanton will has thrown me in the dust:
That now to sin I rest a servile thrall,
Lo what reward obtaines unlawful Lust.
My heinous faults recount before your eyes.
And learn in time such vices to despise.
Remember me that thought my self so wise,
That I no way could gain so great a fall:
But when I did the fear of God despise,
Ah woeful man, my comfort then was small.
My trickling tears found favor in Gods sight:
And for my greef did yield me hearts delight.
So shall your lives be free from spotted blame,
Your whole delight shall be in fear of God:
Then after death you gain immortal fame,
If so your lives be swayd with Wisdoms rod.
Then shall you live, and evermore be blessed:
Among the Saints in the eternal rest.
FINIS.
The Induction.
AMMON the eldest Son of the famous King David, was so raui shed with the
beautye of his Sister Thamar: that he refrained the sustenaunce of his body,
only la^guishing for his deep desire. Ionadab his Kinsman often espying the
crooked cares wherewith poor Ammon was oppressed: demanded of him one day by
chance, what should move his mind to such strange motions? To whom Ammon
brake forth and said. O Love it is to whom I am enthralled, and except I may
obtain my love: I am but dead, but yet I blush to show on whom I am so
affectioned, yet unto you it skilleth not greatly, it is my Sister Thamar that
procures my sorrowful sighing. Ionadab being one who furdered his intent
said. Feign thy self vanquished with debilitie of sickness, and when thy Father
David comes to visit thee: desire that thy Sister Thamar may dress meat for
thee, and also bring it thee. The which counsel Ammon fulfilled, and when
Thamar brought him meat: he never reste^d until he shamefully forced her. And
having obtained his pleasure he utterly disdayned her, thrusting her out of his
Chamber. To whom she said. In thy using me th^s discourteously, and in
repugning now: is far greater then the villainy thou did unto me. But for
this his wicked deed: his Broth^r Absalon afterward slew him at a Banquet in
cheifest of his pleasure.

THE COMPLAINT of Ammon, the eldest Son of King David, for the rauishing of
his Sister THAMAR, accomplishing his desire, through the crafty devise of
IONADAB his kinseman, who causing AMMON to feign him self sick: obtained of
his Father DAVID, that THAMAR his sister should come and visit him, and when
she came, bringing with her a dish of meat: rauised her, and afterward
cruelly despised her. Ca. 7.
INCONTINENCYE.
If men respect their fickle date of time,
Now in delight, then drovvnd in dark annoy.
Computing Age with their unbridled time,
Of all estates how brittle is their Joy.
Needs must they say they taste a svveetned gall,
That as to day their pleasure does procure:
In tract of time it leaves their comfort small,
No Rock it is that ever will endure.
Exampled be by preter time unsure.
No man (although he live in worlds of joy)
Can keep him there as in a certain stay:
You see the proof, what greef it does employ,
Even at a clap does fetch all pomp away.
OAmmon fond, borne unto great mishap,
O lawless Lust that made thee do the deed:
O wicked wretch now thrown in terrors trap
Where griefly gripes upon thy carcass feed.
Fie on thee wretch, loathe for to show thy face:
Thy heinous act condems thee in each place.
Had thou the heart to woork such villainy?
No point of manhood did remain in thee:
So to dispoyle thy Sisters dear virginity,
A wicked wish desired for to be.
No merueil though at sound of Ammons name:
That all the world cries on thee open shame.
What art thou now? a man deprived of joy,
And subject to a thousand heaps of woes:
Thy pleasures past is sunk in dire annoy,
Behold thy fate how froward still it goes.
Thy deed is more then is thy punnishment:
Yet wicked wretch thou can not be content.
But most of all when thou the deed had done,
And gotten that which thou did wholly crave:
Then in despite her presence thou did shun,
And thought great scorn her company to have.
O hardened heart yfraught with malice fell:
So against all law thy Sister to compel.
O Thamar, I my wicked deed lament,
I sorrow sore for my unkind offense:
Deserved doom, full right my state has shent,
And for my deed, behold my recompense.
A just reward, since so I did neglect:
My duty bound to God in each respect.
For as I sat in midst of mirth of joy,
At Banquet with my Brother Absalon:
Not thinking to receive so great annoy,
With bloody blade he killed me annon.
Lo what a guerdon did befall to me:
That so from natures law did disagree.
If I had ruled my self in Reasons law,
And framde my life unto a good intent:
Or if I had of God remaind in awe,
Then had not I my time so vayuly spent.
But where self will is suffered so at large:
Great is the pains that after will him charge.
For idle life procures this lawless Lust,
And idleness is foe to Learnings lore:
Where wants faith, hope and assured trust,
There Satan still has liberty the more.
And Satan aye does forward frame the will:
To that which would both soul and body spill.
Therefore of Ammon here a warning take,
Learn in your youth to walk in virtues ways:
Least sin in age your pleasant joy does slake,
And so forget both God and blisfull days.
Remember God, always set him before:
And your affairs shall better speed the more.
Then vain desire can never you assault,
Nor no such sin as I wretch did commit:
Be warnd therefore by this my present fault,
And shun such drifts as does no Christian fit.
In all thy thoughts, woorks, words, or deeds I say
For good success to God continual pray.
FINIS.
The Induction.
ADONIA Son to the Godly Prophet king David, perceiving his father convinced
with debilttie in his aged years: began with proud Courage to exalte him self
to the Kingdom, and provided for him self both Chariots, horsemen, and
footmen, to go before his father, as though he were King. Which his father
well perceived, but yet he said nothing, because he would not displese him / to
incur his envy toward him. So Adonia went forward in his pretended purpose,
and following the counsel of Ioab the Captain, and Abiathar the Priest (who
greatly took his part heerin) he made a sacrifise of Oxen and Sheep, whereunto
he invited his Brethern and the kings Servant, who in his presence reioyling
said. God save King Adonia. But when as Bersaba his mother and Nathan the
Prophet had given knowledge to King Danid of his wicked intent: he caused
Sadock the Priest, and the Prophet Nathan, to an anoint his Son Solomon, and
to set him up on his own Mule, and then go forth and proclaim him King.
These tidings blazed in the new up start Kings Court: caused all his company
for to shrink away from him, and so Adonia was left all alone, who for his more
safety sted to the Tabernacle of the Lord, and would not depart from thence:
till Solomon had granted his pardon, so at last upon this condition that
afterward there should no more disquietnes arise by him: remitted him free.
The^ he departed home to his house and when David his father was dead. Adonia
fell in love with Abisag the sunamite* and so desired) Bethsaba Salomons
mother to speak to the king that he would give him Abisag to his wife. Solomon
hearing his mothers request, and seeing that Adonia (being his eldest Brother)
through his Pride would aspire to the Kingdom: thought it good to cut of his
pretended purpose, and so put him to death.

VOLVPTVOVSNES.
Virtue surmounts all vain desire of wealth,
Orpriuate gains got with dishonest use:
Let man therefore consider of his health,
Vainglory does both mind and life abuse:
Proou'd it has been by reasons manifold,
That mortal Fame does run by he adlesse chance:
Virtue, her Fame cannot to often be told,
Ordained aye the Godly to advance.
Vain then it is on bad I wist to glaunce.
Stay fast thy faith in him that rules abooue:
No time defer to turn from wickedness:
Eternal Fame, Faith and assured Love,
Shall you adorn in worlds of rich increase.
THE COMPLAINT of Adonia Son, to King David, for his proud aspiring to his
Fathers kingdom, and also for his pride used against his Brother King Solomon,
in craving ABISAG the Sunamite to his mate who was a fair and verteous yung
Damsel, and nourished King DAVID in his extreme age, thinking by that means
to attain to his desired pretense. Caput. 8.
ALthough my deed does well demerit blame,
My stately Pride and hautines of heart:
Although my life so far spent out of frame,
Needs no report for such a vicious part.
Yet that the world may warning take by me:
I Will tell my tale that all my life may see.
And when you have perusde my life at large,
My malice bent against my Fathers state:
How blind ambition did me ouercharge,
With peevish Pride (alas) unfortunate.
Report that I did well deserve my fall.
In running headlong in to such a thrall.
I Adonia Son to David King,
Perceiving age bedewe my Fathers state:
By sundry sleights I sought about to bring,
Presumpteously to perch to be his mate.
I thought his years were so far gone (...) spent:
that well I might presume to my intent.
O what renown did I in pride suppose,
To be a King and bear the souereign sway:
By force of Arms to irritate my foes,
By words to cause my Subjects to obey.
No life me thought in all the world more fit:
Then princely pomp in regal throne to ^t.
It did me good to hear the brave report,
Of boldened breasts endued with valiancy:
Who try their fate in mighty Mars his Court,
Protesting faith to Magnanimity.
On carved Creast to shake the shiuering Lance:
This valiant sport their honors does advance.
This is the way to win them rare renown,
This is the joy that cheeres a Princes heart:
This is the way to vaunt on Honors crown,
And lasting Fame does quit them with desert.
O valiant youths, welfare your plied pains:
Whose happy helths are valiant Wictors gains.
Well in this mind so far I did proceed,
That I had got such as would take my part:
Abiathar and Ioab both indeed,
Ood give consent to my presumpteous heart.
A feast I made, where many did resort:
Wishing me King as words did make report.
O gallant joy to hear so many say.
With valiant voice erected to the skies:
God save our King, our worthy Adonia,
O wished pray so gladsome to mine eyes.
But when my Father of my deed did know:
My lofty pride was quickly laid full low.
Those which before had called me their King,
Left me alone, they durst it not avouch:
O strange event to see such sorrows spring,
So soon a king and made so soon to couch:
Dame Justice scornd that I should mount so hye:
And threw me down in twinkling of an eye.
With that I fled and hid my self for fear,
To see what tidings would approach of this:
Then Solomon for to prevent this gear,
Was crowned King in most triumphant bliss.
At last of him my pardon I did gain:
So that I would in quietness remain.
Yet wicked wretch through loftines of mind,
I could not hold my self with state content:
But once more would reuert to former kind,
Aspiring still my purpose to attempt.
And for to bring my matter more about:
This prettye shift on sudden I found out.
I sought to have Abisag fair to wife,
Which when my Brother Solomon did spy:
I could not keep my self in quiet life,
But still I sought to perch my head on hye.
Deserved death for pride I did attain:
So all my pomp on sudden did distayne.
Now Lordings see my proud presumpteous heart,
What liew I gaynd in recompense for all:
See Justice scornd at my unlawful part,
And from the top did headlong make me fall.
I which was Son unto a famous King:
By pamperd pride my ruin great did bring.
Consider (...) will have her rightful place,
(...) touchstone tries and sounds each man's intent:
Though for a while Uaine glory her deface,
Yet at the lengh her foes she will prevent.
For Falshode does a while hold on her gloss:
But truth at length her dealings will disclose.
Now what auailes my lostines of mind,
My princely pomp in midst of all my flowers:
My hauty heart which made my senses blind,
And made me seek to rule in Kingly bowers.
What, have I gaind immortal fame thereby:
Or such renown to perch the azured sky?
O no my friends, small honor is my share,
Small is the fame that will redound to me:
Shame is my due for this my rechelesse care,
My wicked life so lothesome for to see.
Rebelling so against Natures stayed state:
And seeking so to be my Fathers mate.
What, did thou think thy Father lived to long,
And duty bad thee to cut of his days?
And did obedience move thee offer wrong,
To him whose life so many men did praise.
Or can thou judge Dame Wisdom did agree:
That so thou should vsurp his dignity?
Alas, no, no, thy duty had thee seek,
To serve thy Sire with reverence in each place,
To stand in awe to show thy self so meek,
In every point Obedience to embrace.
How say thou how, have thou done so or no?
Alas my friends in life I thought not so.
Remember me which past before your time,
Remember how I fell from bliss to bale:
Be mindful still of my presumpteous crime,
Which forced me to tell this tristfull tale.
Respect the end before you do begin:
Fear to offend in such a grievous sin.
Consider life is but a puff of wind,
And worldly pomp is but a brittle blaze:
Your earthly dross does naught but make you blind
while you abide within this mortal maze.
Full many sin, but few their lives repent:
Nor think how soon their folly will them shent.
Gods Judgment stands to cut down lofty grafts
As seem to reach more then they can aspire:
Though for a time you feign such cunning crafts,
As well you think to gain your whole desire.
The end brings all, the proof has often been seen:
Pride has his due, judge what thereof I mean.
And thus I wish you well your lives to frame,
In modest mean to keep your selves content:
Avoid this vice, and so you shun the blame,
Which does belong to such as it frequent.
Let Adonia serve example due:
For perfect proof that this his text is true..
FINIS.
The Induction
PTOLOMYE King of Egypt, espoused his fair Daughter Cleopatra to Alexander the
Son of the Noble Antiochus, the which contracted between them two a great
bond and league of ami tie / the which Ptolomye afterward periurd ely forlook,
in recalling his former favor from Alexander, laboring by all possible means
for to defeat him of his Kingdom, and Alexander remaining for a time out of
his Realm: served fit for the pur pose of Ptolomye, for he leuyed a great
Army of men, and iournyed into Siria, where he was very honorably received
into every City, because it had been so commanded before by Alexander, and
his treacherous treason was not suspected / for be cause he was the Kings Father
in law. But Ptolomye whose going was only for that intent: in every City left
certain well armed men, to fortifye them for his practice. And having subdued
all the Cities on the Sea coasts: joined in League with Demetrius, and took
Cleopatra his daugh ter from Alexander, and gave her to Demetrius, raising up a
slanderous report of Alexander, how that he sought all means to kill him.
When as his greedy and insatiable covetousness was noted and espied: he departed
to Antioche, where he set two Crowns upon his own head, the one of Egypt /
the other of Asia. Alexander at that time making his abode in the dominions of
Cicilia, and having been ixcitated with the cruel attempt of his rather in
law: returned home, making open wars against him. But Ptolomye being more
puisant in strength: forced him for to fly into the Country of Arabia, whereas
the king of that land smot of his head, and sent it unto Ptolomye, which was
the thing he chiefly desired. But small joy had he thereof, for within three
days after he was slain, and after his death, his men that were left in the
Cities: were all put to death.

VAINGLORY.
Vaunt not to much of that which is but vain,
And bear in mind thy state is here unsure:
It is not wealth that can abridge thy pain,
Nor lofty looks thy vvelfare can procure.
Grieve not to see thy neighbor prosper well,
Let blind Ambition rule thy heart no more:
Or seek not against the simple soul to swell,
Regard to have discretion good before.
Your happy health shall aye increase the more.
THE COMPLAINT of King Ptolomye King of Egypt, for his unnatural cruelty used
tovvard the Famous ALEXANDER, who was his Son in Law. Caput. 9.
NO greater Foe, then greedynes of mind,
No servile life like to contemptuous pride:
No greater sin then willing to b^ blinds,
No folly more then in vain hope to bide.
What more deceit? then look thy Friend in face:
And woork his death, in most ungentle case.
For proof whereof I Ptolomye may serve,
Whose hauty heart, and most ambitious mind:
Procured me from Princely rule to swerue,
And cruelly to stray from Natures kind.
Wherefore my tale let pierce the flinty heart:
How like they fall in such unlawful part.
My Daughter fair that Cleopatra hight,
To Alexander of illustrious fame:
In nuptial band contented I did plight,
Til Envy vile contempt did seek to frame.
My greedy mind my honor soon let fall:
That in the end I lost both fame and all.
My former vow I wretch did clean revoke,
Of faithful freendship to my son in law:
Now perching pride had quickly struck the stroke
Against verteous life whereof I had no awe.
But banishing all favor from my heart:
Did seek to frame a most unlawful part.
My noble Son from Kingdom being gone,
Whose absence wrought the more for my intent:
I ruled at home and none but I alone,
Now thought I good my Son for to prevent.
And of his Kingdom clean him to bereave:
By traitrous deeds I purposde to deceive.
Then I likewise to all his Cities went,
Wherein I left of armed men good store:
That at such time as serude for mine intent,
I might obtain that long I wished before.
Yet for his sake unto his Cities all:
I was receiude with Fame imperial.
More Traitor I that such a deed could frame,
Considering that I was receiude so well:
And only he did yield to me such fame,
Against whom I did unkindly so rebel.
Well, love nor favor could my mind entreat:
But enuiously I went about this feat.
When as I had each City fair subdude,
That on the seas did harbor there about:
By other shifts my fetches I renude,
And now I had an other plat drawn out.
Demetrius I did join in league with me:
And so to war til all consumde might be.
My Daughter fair I took from rightful mate,
And to Demetrius did her give again:
Then had I raysde a slander up of hate,
How Alexander sought to have me slain.
And so through this such envy vile I bred:
That Kingdoms twain I crowned on my head.
O brave delight as brave as beaten Gold,
O happy life long looked for before:
I drove my Son into Arabian hold,
Whereas to make my honor larger more.
His head was sent as present unto me:
Oh how I ioyd when I this sight did see.
But yet this pomp to short a time did la^,
Within three days I dyed in grievous case:
What vauntage then when honor all was past,
Did I obtain in my new Kingly place.
My sons deer blood for vengeance still does cry:
Against me a wretch that wrought this villainy.
You Noble hearts see here a pattern plain,
Of painted Pride contemning verteous life:
See here a gulf of Envy and Disdain,
A mortal foe that still procured strife.
See here the wight whose folly made him fall:
In seeking that which did return his thrall.
See what I gaynd for greedines of mind,
See how the Lord did pay me for my pain:
In that I went so far from Natures kind,
As woork the means to cause my son be slain.
Whose guiltless death behold I now lament:
Desiring pardon for my life misspent,
Learn now therefore like Envy to eschew,
Least that your selves do fall into like snare,
Dout not but you shall find the end to true,
Therefore in time I wish you to beware.
So are you sure the danger to prevent:
Of such a sin as I poor wretch am shent.
FINIS.
The Induction.
IEZABEL espoused to king Achab, pricked her husband forward unto all wickedness
and Idolatry, and also caused the Prophets of the Lord to be slain, and was
chief cause that Naboth was stoned to death, thereby to enjoy his Uiniard. But
when she had intelligence of the coming of Iebu: she tricked her self up in
her flaunting fines, and looked out at her window as he came in at the gate,
to whom she said in this manner. Had Zimei peace which slew his maistere
meaning. Could a Traitor, or any that presumes against his superior have
good success in his enterprise. After which words she was thrown out at the
window, with such great violence: that her bones were all bruised in pieces,
and so tramped on with horses / that when they came to take her up to bury her:
no more was found, then her scull, her feet, and the palms of her hands.
Heerin was Elias Prophecy brought to pass, when he said. That Dogs shall eat
the flesh of Iezabell, and her carcass shall lie as dung upon the earth, so
that none shall say This was Iezabell.

VANITY.
Vivv well the state of every mortal VVight,
Although they boast of Beauties beams so much:
Note how that Death does equal all aright,
Ineath degree he spares not to touch.
The Wise, the Fool, the King and Beggar bace,
Is all alike that comes in his cloutch.
Excepteth none, he takes in every place.
THE COMPLAINT of Iezabel Wife to King Achab, for her enforcing her Husband to
all kind of wickedness and Idolatree, and causing the Prophets of the Lord
to be slain, and procuring the guiltles death of Naboth she being justly
therefore plagued of the Lord. Caput. 10.
IF Beauty be a thing of such respect,
If hauty heart the Body do adorn:
Why did my shape and beauty me detect?
Why did my pride make me so much forlorn
And if all these were Uertnes in a Wife,
Why did so soon my pleasure turn to strife?
O no deer Dames these vaunts are worldly vain,
These are the pomps wherein you glory so:
This painted pride procures your after pain,
Which you lament dist^est in double woe.
And why? because you did not seek before:
A souerain salve to cure so vile a sore.
But lo deer Dames to much you be deceiude,
To much you trust to that which is unsure:
For peevish pride your senses has bereude,
Which makes you think for aye you shall endure.
O think not so, for beauty is but vain,
To day a joy, tomorrow, pinching pain.
Behold by me if bea^tie might have boast,
Or hauty heart to have Dame Honors place:
Behold her here who through each foreign Coast
Knew not her Peer for lofty looks in face.
But now what does my mounting mind avail
So long on flote, that glad to strike my sail.
I Iezabel, soometime King Achabs Wife,
Disdaining God and Idols did obey:
Surmounting in all viciousnes of life,
And only Pride did force me run astray.
For Pride from God did force my wilful fall:
That grace nor virtue I esteemd at all.
But in a World of pranked pleasures gay,
I flaunted forth as much as heart could crane:
I was the cause the Preests of God to slay,
And Naboths death desired for to hane.
Why who but I. so many fetches had:
With subtle sleights to make my fancy glad.
But what at length was my deserved due,
From window down I fell and brake my neck:
By prophecy which I approved true,
This hire I had that Virtue would detect.
In ^inders small my Body lay on ground:
Trod so with Horse that little could be found.
Now see what came to Iezabel at last,
See what became of my alluring face:
My Peacoks plumes down in the dust were cast,
What guerdon did my lofty pride purchase.
Behold my deeds, and then behold my fame:
Behold my life, and then behold my shame.
Now dainty Dames your Mirror take by me,
To warn you pull your hauty heads more low:
Let me you learn your welfare to foresee,
And teach you how more gravity to show.
Let Modesty your outward vestures be:
And Virtue deck you inward frank and free.
Leave of these brave and sundry flaunting suits,
Leave of to wish for every strange devise:
Mild Modesty your statelines rebultes,
She would not have you go so coy and nice.
But prudently to guide your dealings so:
That in each place with virtue you may go.
Now when I smart I can you warning give,
That you may shun the sorrows which I have:
Now I confess, that verteously to live,
By due desert does endless honor crave.
Counsel once had is better suer then never:
Fear God, and then thou shall be crowned ever.
FINIS.
The Induction.
ZEDEKIA Son unto Iosia was by Nabucodonozor elected and made King over Judah,
in the sted and place of Ieboachin his Brother, to whom he made him faithfully
to vow that he would truly obey the Chaldeis, and so in toke^ thereof from
Mathania he changed his name to Zedekia. But he neglecting his duty and
falsifying his oath, suffered sin and wickedness to reign and abound in his
Land, even as well among the cheef Rulers and Preests / as also among ye mea^ and
common sort. So that God was not regarded, his word utterly despised, and his
Prophets unlawfully misused: therefore the Lord stirred up the Chaldeis with
whom he had before broken league, and falsified his faith, that they came and
ruinated the City of Jerusalem and sacked the Temple with fire, and there
took the King Zedekia his Army being scattred abroad, in the plain of Jericho
and led him to the King of Babylon, where first his two Sons were destroyed
in his presence and then his own eyes pulled out, and then led him Captive to
Babylon, bound in chains, whereas he dyed, and his People remained threescore
and ten years in captivity, til the days of King CIRVS.

WILFVLNES.
Where men do more respect their private gain,
In vain excess, then Wisdoms stayed state:
Light to contemn, slovve to release their pain,
From whom both health and riches is ingrate.
Using them selves as belly Gods so rude,
Leaning upon the honor of their pelf:
Not scorning still them selves for to intrude,
Each man to pole, for to enrich him self.
Soslides from God to greater grief renewed.
THE COMPLAINT of Zedekia sometime King of Judah, for neglecting his vowed oath
and faithful promise made to King Nabuchodonozor, in suffering all sin and
wickedness to abound in his Kingdom, being justly plagued of GOD therefore.
Caput. 11.
AMid the rest give Zedekia place,
Josias Son to tell his great mishap:
Whom Folly fond so grievous did deface
As in my pomp depriu'de me at a clap.
Such crooked chance that for a time did smile:
But at the length displayed a hidden guyle.
First was I King and ruled Judah Land,
In promise that I constant would remain:
When as this Wealth was brought into my han^
I suffered sin to much to have the rain.
Gods word was clean suppressed in the dust:
The Preests and Rulers find in filthy lust.
The Chaldies then Jerusalem destroyed,
The holy Temple burnd with flaming fire:
My Soldiars all with terror were annoyd,
I taken was, so did my sins require.
My sons were slain (O grief) before my face:
Mine eyes pulled out in most accursed case.
Then captive I to Babylon was led,
In fettered chains with direful dole yfraught:
My people poor with tirrany were fed,
All long of sin which I (alas) have wrought.
Thrice twentye years and ten they bid the pain:
Till Cirus came their freedom to obtain.
Lo thus I lived, lo thus I had my shame,
A guerdon just to counteruaile my hire:
take heed therefore how you contemn Gods name,
For your reward is everlasting fire.
My sinful life, my death so void of grace:
Let now suffice to warn you in each place.
Few words shall serve, in haste I go my way,
And wish you well my peril to foresee:
Be ruled by truth, let Virtue bear the sway,
Think on the end the danger for to flee.
For I have proou'd that which I rue with pain:
And wish to late I had not lived so vain.
FINIS.
ADPRECLARVM et nobilissimum Virum EO.
NAuta Mari medio vectus spuma^tibus vndepositis portu, sperat re^erire
salute^: dis,
Conscius extremo procumbe^s Carcere latr^ sperat fortunam lucis sentire
ministram.
Pallidus attonito vultu tardatur Amator Finem tamen dominam confidit habere
benignam.
Apatrijs sperat Petigrinus finlbus exul:
Orb pererrat^ sibi, conciliare quietem.
Hac ratione meum viuo visurus Alexin,
Tristitiaeque meae let as perstringere fines,
Speque rereabor, medicum Fortuna resistat,
Donec opemferat, et morbo mediatur acerbo.
No^ aliquando diem tantae peresfere tenebrae,
quin redeat spargens glebis sua fulmina Phoebus.
Aequora quando metam certam posuere furendi,
Gaudia securis ego sic possessa tenebo.
Mi formose vale, valeat tua grata voluntas,
Deprecor optata tutus potiaris arena.
Te, canctosque tuos CHRISTO committo tuendos,
Donec praestentes sermon fruamur amico.
FINIS.
Honos alit Arts.
THE TABLE discoursing the sum of the Chapters contained in this BOOK.
The contents of the first BOOK.
THe complaint of King Nabucodonozor, sometime King of Babylon, for the
inordinat and excessive pride that he used in his life time. Caput 1 The
Complaint of King Herod, ye first Stranger, that reigned over the Jews, for
the exceeding Envy that in his life he used. Ca. 2. The Complaint of King
Pharao, sometime King of Egypt woorthily punished of God, for his wrathful
dealings toward the Children of Israel. Caput. 3. The Complaint of King David,
(by Gods permission) an noynted King of Israel, sorowfully from the bottom of
his heart bemoning his unbridled lust of Lechery, committed with Bersaba the
Wife of Vrias, and for the procuring of her Husbands death, thereby obtaining
his purpose. Caput. 4. The Complaint of Dives, for his Gluttony used in his
life time. Caput. 5. The Complaint of Judas, bemoning his Auaritious heart in
selling his Master Chirste for thirty pence. Ca. 6. The Complaint of Jonas
for his slothful slacking the commandment of the Lord, being sent to preach
to the Ninevites. Caput. 7.
Here ends the sum of the Chapters contained in the first BOOK.
The Contents of the second Book.
THe Complaint of Absalon for his vain aspi ring to the Imperial Crown and
Diadem of his Father King David, and for his sudden fall he obtained in his
pretended purpose. Caput. 1. The Complaint of Triphon for his crew 'tie
committed a against the yung King Antiochus, whom he cruelly murdered as he
walked to disporte him, and for his cruel putting to death Ionathas and his two
Children, through which he crowned him self King of Asia. Caput. 2. The
Complaint of King Achab King of Israel, for his wicked life led in Idolatry
and cruel persecutions, and for sparing the life of the wicked Benhadab King of
Siria, whom God had delivered into his hands only to put to death. Also for
his procuring the poor Naboth to be cru elly murdered, thereby to get his
Uiniard, by the council of Iezabel his Queen whose blood the Dogs licked up on
the ground, and also his own blood in the battle fought at Ramoth, according
to the word of the Lord. Ca. 4. The Complaint of Iephath sometime Judge over
Israel, for his so rash vow, in the sacrifising of his Daughter, for the
foyling of his Enemies. Caput. 4. The Complaint of Sampson, for his fond
declaring to his wife where his cheifest strength was, which made his ey es be
pulled out by the Philistines. Ca. 5. The Complaint of King Solomon king of
Israel, for his in ordinate love borne to outlandish women, who brought him
from the wisest and richest King that ever was: to be cast out of Gods favor,
and to be even in manner like a stark Fool. Caput. 6. The Complaint of Ammon
the eldest Son of K. David for the rauishing of his Sister Thamar,
accomplishing his desire, through the crafty device of Ionadab his kins man,
who causing Ammon to fain him self sick, obtained of his Father David that
Thamar his Sister should come and visit him, and when she came, bringing with
her a dish of meat, ravished her, and afterward cruelly despised her. Caput. 7.
The Complaint of Adonia, Son to King David, for his proud aspiring to his
Fathers kingdoome, and also for pride used against his Brother King Solomon, in
cr auing Abisag the Sunamite to his mate, who was a fair and vertuons yung
Damosel, and nourished King David, in his extreme Age, thinking by that means
to attain to his desired pretense. Caput. 8. The Complaint of Ptolomye King of
Egypt, for his unnatural cruelty used toward the famous Alexander, who was
his Son in law. Caput. 9 The Complaint of Iezabel, Wife to King Achab, for
her enforcing her Husband to all kind of wickedness, and Idolatrye, and causing
the Prophets of the Lord to be slain, and for the procuring the guiltless
death of Naboth, she being justly therefore plagued of the LORD. Caput 10. The
Complaint of Zedekia sometime King of Judah, for his neglecting his vowed oath
and faithful promise to K. Nabuchodonozor, in suffering all sin and wickedness
to abou^d in his Kingdom, being justly plagued of God therefore. Caput. 11
The end of the Table of the Chapters contained in this BOOK. Honos alit Arts.
FINIS.
Antony Monday.


