A VVatch-vvoord to England To beware of traitors and tretcherous practices,
which have been the overthrow of many famous Kingdoms and commonweals.

Written by a faithful affected friend to his Country: who desires God long
to bless it from Traitors, and their secret conspiracyes.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens Injunctions.

Joshua. 1. verse. 5.

Take a good heart, and be strong, fear not, I say fear not: because that I
which am the Lord thy God will be with thee in all thine affairs.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop in Lumberd
street, under the sign of the Popes head. 1584.

ANglia quae gestatregni (...) faelix.
Est pagina hac oculis forma notata tuis.
Anglorum clypeos, Insignia Martia cernis.
Aptatur meritis digna corona bonis.
E R


In laudem Elyzabethae Reginae.
TVrba maligna papae tibiterra Britanna minatur;
Non minus illa ferox Elyzabetha tibi.
Insidijs vnaes saeuis elapsa tyranni,
Te magijs, ferro, sortibus atque tetris
Tollere conatus serpens: sed quid furor ardens
Profuit? es Christi, qui tuus vnus erat.
Ingenium, pietas, virtus te ex omnibus vnam
Esse docent, in quam nil potuere mali.
Exemplis varijs opere hoc est res manifesta,
In quo ^udantur facta nefanda virum;
Elyzabetha Deo fidas (vt coeperis) vni;
Hosts contundet, teque tuosque teget.
R. W.

To the high, mighty, and right excellent Princess, Elyzabeth, by the grace
of God, of England, France and Ireland Queen, defendresse of the true,
ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith, etc. A. M. her Majesty's most
humble Subject and Servant wishes continual felicity in this world, and in
the world to come.
THe consideration of your rare and incomparable Virtues, which are such
Iewelles of estimation in the eyes and ears of your faithful Subjects, and
the care how to continue and enjoy them long, which is the study and practice
of all them that truly honor you; has constrained me at this time (right
excellent and famous Queen) to exceed the bounds of ordinary love, which is
only but to please the eye, and to wade into the depth of entire affection,
wherewith the heart may be oftentimes quieted, but hardly thoroughly satisfied,
by reason the conceit takes so deep an impression, and every cause
concerns it so nearly, as, what with hazard of peril, and fear to forgo,
affection is so vehement, as nothing can go beyond it.

Let then (most noble Queen) this my poor affection, carry that credit in
your Princely mind, as your nature affoordeth to every loving Subject, and
let such account be held of my earnest intent, as both the waightinesse of the
cause, and circumstaunces of the whole considered, shall deliver reason. I (in
the mean time) shall continue in prayer, that long this Land may be partaker
of your gracious presence, and the good will of every true Subject may be
thankefully entertained.

Your Highness obedient Subject and Servant. A. M.

To the right Honorable Master Thomas Pullison, Lord Mayor elected of the
famous City of London, and to the worshipful Master Stephen Slanie, and
Master Henry Billingsley, Sheriffs of the same City, with all the rest of
their worshipful Brethren.
WE find it by common experience (right Honorable and Worshipful) and the
effects are too much seen and proved amongst us, that as there are many
dangerous diseases, which happen to a man's body, whereof some are so hurtful to
the same, and work by such outrageous means; as they not only threaten great
hazard of death to the body, but at length (after many calm showers) do
utterly waste and deprive it of life. So in a kingdom or common wealth, which
may by A comparison between a man's body and a common wealth.
comparison very well be resembled to a man's body, there often chances very
sore and doubtful sicknesses, which grow in time to such forcible and
extreme occasions: as they not only danger the perishing of the most part,
but in conclusion work the utter ruin and destruction of the whole. Yet when
the body is offended by sickness, the friends of the diseased party do
dilligently enquire after Physicians: then what medicines his Art can devise,
or what wholesome potions good council can minister, are presently prepared for
ease of his vexation.

In like manner, in any common wealth, that is thus touched with any disease
that foresheweth peril: All men are bound in duty to defend their Country.
every one that is faithfully affected to the same, or employ their lives (as
they ought) for the benefit thereof, are bound with heedfull care to seek
remedy for such malladies, yea, it is a principal article of their duty, to
let slip no occasion that may be judged helpful in such a case. For if
freendshippe cause men for their private familiars sake, to travail in
knowledge of the cause of his infirmity, and then to provide such apt
necessaries, as may yield hope to qualify his agony, and restore him to his
former health: much more ought duty to be effectual in such men, as make
estimation of their Country and common wealth, at what time any troublesome
annoyaunce does mollest it, or any danger whatsoever may be thought toward
it: to show themselves earnest and forward in search of the grief, and then to
apply such due and necessary medicines, as may expel the very thought of
threatened danger.

The excellent Historiographer Herodotus shows Herodotus in his Book called
Clio, which is the first Book of his Story.
us a notable example, how the Babilonians made this law amongst them, that
when so ever any man fell sick within their dominions, he should presently be
brought into the market place, and there be laid on his bed: to the intent that
he might demand of every one that came to him, whether they had been troubled
with the like disease or no, and by what means they recovered their health,
that he might by knowledge thereofattayne to the same. And by the same law
likewise, every man that came to him was bound, both to ask the man what
sickness he had: and also to show him (if it lay in him to do it) what might
soonest deliver him from that state. By which example, every one that bears a
true and faithful zeal to his Country, and earnestly tendereth the health and
wealth thereof: when so ever he sees the body thereof (which lies open before
all men's eyes) to be infected or touched with any infirmity, and can either by
experience or otherwise deliver, what in his conceit may be imagined
auayleable: he is bound in conscience to express it, and great is the penalty
if he conceal it. For in helping the whole body, he has benefit thereof
himself, in that he is a member The whole hody being out of quiet, the members
must needs fare the wurse.
thereof: for let the body be sick, the members must needs be partakers of
the grief, and at what time it finds health again, the members likewise
have comfort by the relief. The consideration of these precedentes (right
Honorable and Worshipful) with the earnest care, zeal and love I bear to my
Country, which I see (for the happy and flourishing estate thereof, and for the
maintenance of Gods true Religion, and defense of his Church and congregation)
wants no enemies to pursue the danger of it, nor coullorable friends that
seek to betraye it to spoil, which could they as easily accomplish, as they
willingly put in practice, and had not GOD more care of his chosen, then their
malicious stomachs can afford: God knows the heavy burden should lie on our
necks, which I pray God they never live to lay on, nor we ^o feel.

But as the mark is easily seen, which they so mightily and continually
aim at, and for that The mark that these Traitors aim at, may be easily
discerned.
God (praised be his name therefore) has hitherto prevented all their
traiterous attempts, turning their daggers into their own bosoms, and causing
them to fall into the pit they made for others: so is it expedient for us to
continue in prayer, that it may please him long to vouchsafe that prouide^t
care over us, and that we likewise apply our own duetifull wisdom and
policy, to uphold that plant by whose means we prosper, and prevent their
devises, who would rob us of so high a treasure.

It is our dread and sovereign Lady, whose shyning virtues fret the polluted
eyes of these unnatural Subjects: whose heroical government (which no
Realm in the world is able to match for peaceable continuance) that sticks
like sharp needles in their venoumed and disdainefull stomachs; and it is the
rare president of her famous life, her Christian zeal, and abundance of all
excellent gifts, which woorthelie wins the hearts of her true Subjects,
and inflameth them with desire of her long prosperity, that calling their
barbarous conceit into question, thundreth such Majesty into their deceived
ears, as they pollishe their tongues to deprave, spare no penne-worke to
slander, whette their weapons, and devise all tretcheries that lost and
forsaken minds can do, to extinguishe the light of that Sun, whereon their
seared-consciences will not suffer them to look, and to deface that perfect
Emeralde, which the more they seek to blemishe with the oil of venomous
reports, the more perfect it shows it self in beauty.

I need not report unto you, for that your wisdoms The prosperity of the
Prince, is the safety of her Kingdom.
and judgments are very well acquainted therewith, that the prosperity of
the Prince, is the assured safety of the whole Kingdom and common wealth, and
the least motion of grief that touches her, concerns the whole state
ingenerall; by reason that her Highness is the most loving Mother and Nurse of
all her good Subjects, and is likewise the husband of the common weal, married
to the Realm, and the same by ceremony of Ring as solemnly signified, as any
other marriage.

Can we then that are her Majesty's children, her true and faithful subjects
endure to see our mother wronged, her authority defamed, her life endaungered:
and shall we not think the same concerns us? Can we see proud reprobates
seek to sever the knot of love and agreement, which has been justly and
lawfully united between her and us, to yield our lives in slavery and
servitude to an usurping tyrant: and shall not the breach of this bond of
sacred wedlock, move us to regard how highly it harmeth us? Nature causes
the child to work all policies he may for his Mothers defense, and the
estimation of that holy league of love, is of force to compel the faithful,
to maintain and continue it.

The case then touching us so neerelie as it does, The ear of the Princes
safety concerns the very meanest Subject, much more the Magistrate, to
whom she has given office of honor.
the very meanest subject is bound for his Princes defense, much more they
whom God has called to office of Magistracy and bearing rule: their care
ought to be both night and day, how to set down good laws and orders, to be
vigilant and careful in dilligent search and inquiry, to bring such stubborn
and graceless men to open light, who spurn at her Majesty, that has put the
Sword in your hands of honor and authority, and trying their deeds to be
contrary to the duty of good Subjects, to let them be soon cut off by
the sword of Justice.

And if I may (without offense) speak one word to your Honor and
VVorshippes, not by way of teaching, but for vnlading some part of the burden
of true love I bear to my Country: I would desire you to have an especial
eye to the City of London, for it is a receptacle to many of these bad
people, and many favorers and friends they have in the City, who bearing the
countenance of good and honest Subjects, are nevertheless but hollow
hearted, and give aid and relief to such as seek the ruin of the whole
state.

Your Honor and Worships shall notably witness the love you bear to God
and his Church, and the zeal, affection and duty you owe to her Majesty: in
being respective to this especial cause, for it is high time, the enemies are
now grown so bold and full of mischief, as if such as are in authority do
not lay too their helping hands to repress them, they will in time beso
wild, as they will be past bridleling.

This shall be therefore my last request unto you, that the premises
considered, the effect may be put in execution: and when you have perused this
small work, I doubt not but you will think my request honest and lawful, and
expedient to be redressed to the uttermost of your powers. Thus wishing
prosperous success to all you go about, that may set forth Gods glory, and
be to her Majesty's defense from her enemies: I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors and Worships well-willer. A. M.

A VVatch-vvoord to England.
THE state of this Realm considered, and specially such accidents touching
the same, as late troubles have ministered, do make it daily more and more
evident, how precious and how dear a Jewel is the safety of the Queens The
safety of her Majesty, a thing most precious to all good Subjects.
most excellent Majesty, our most loving and beloved Sovereign Lady. Compare
the time of her most noble and gracious government, with the times and ages
long since past and gone, and especially with the miserable and dangerous
days, immediately preceding her most happy, princely and comfortable
reign: call to mind the weakness and perils wherein the common weal stood,
before the coming of her highness to the Crown: weigh the infinite benefits,
both bodily and ghostly that the whole Realm has, and all her Subjects
both have had, and do enjoy by her means: think upon the grievous and
unspeakable miseries, that we all shall be like to sustain by the loss of her
invaluable presence. It shall be plain, that he is wilfully blind that cannot
see: he is wickedlie malicious that will not acknowledge: he is obstinately
stone hearted, that will not with sorrow and trembling deeply imprint in
careful heart, those motions and thoughts, that such consideration shall lay
before him. Remember the quiet of conscience, the comfort of true serving of
GOD, the freedom of the The Queens Majesty's government, ought with heedefull
care to be considered.
Realm, the deliverance of souls from foreine thraldom, the escape of the
heavy yoke of strange Dominion, the recovery of wealth, the benefit of
peace, the common and equal distribution of Justice, the familiar cherishing
of Nobility, the good preserving and love of the Commonaltie, the mutual and
tender kindness at home, the amity and awe abroad, the sweet enjoying of all
these happy commodities: match heerewith the danger and fear of loosing them,
how can it then be, but that the mind shall be meruailouslie distracted? Great
and full of diversities are the fittes of a passioned Lover: but yet greatest
where reason rulest least. Far greater to a good mind must be the panges of
consideration in this case: but yet greatest where reason rules most. The
silly Lover is transported (as they complain poor souls in their ditties)
sometime with joy of his enjoying, sometime with fear of his foregoing, there
is no mean or order of his excessive affection: and all is because the abused
creature has set his felicity in a wrong conceit. But if such vain, short,
repentable, and feeble delight of fancy, have such force upon the mind of
man: how much more ought the deep, wise, natural, and true impression of the
eternal comfort of the soul, the good and safe estate, both of the common
weal, and of the private hauiour of himself, and of those things and persons
that he holds dearest, yea, and of his posterity for ever, work more
mighty, violent, and continual effects in the mind of an honest good man, that
sets his thoughts upon just and assured grounds? All these contemplations
cannot but fill a good Christians, and a good Subjects eye with sight and
knowledge, how inestimable a treasure our noble and virtuous Queen Elizabeth
is to the Realm of England, and the same cannot but The Queens Majesty, a
Iuell of most high estimation, to the Realm of England. Res est solliciti
plena timoris amor.
pierce his heart with strong fear and care for her preservation, so far as
surely it were able (as in the dumb borne son of Cresus) break the stringes
of a tied tongue, to draw speech out of the most barbarous and rudest
Subject: to cry out at her Highness peril, and with such noise as he is able
to make, though it were but as a Goose of the Capitole, to give warning to the
watchmen of the Tower of our safety. This has moved me to forget how
unskillful and how unapt I am, to treat of matters so far above me: and only
to remember, how meet it is for all men to think of those things that touch
them so nearly, and when they have from point to point made due examination of
them, to ring out the larum bell of good council to their Country, or give
them some watchword of passed perils, whereby they may the better prevent
imminent extremities: wherein they may both manifest the care they have of
their Princes safety, as also the unfeigned affection they bear to their
Country. It has been, and yet remains extant to be seen, the many and
sundry disordered attemptes, which have threatened danger to her Majesty's
most royal person, and peril to the whole state ingenerall, whereby many good
minds have been greatly discomforted, and those bad spirits, which have
thirsted and labored in these undutiful actions, have been encouraged to
run on in their disloyal determinations. A thing much to be lamented, that
in the Sunshine of so many happy blessings, whereof this Realm (so long The
Realm of England never so long time together, more godly and quietly governed.
time together) never heretofore tasted, such wicked and malicious natures
should breed amongst us, both to overthrow our selves, and the quietness of
a number well affected. It is good for such wilful heads to take heed in
time, and that the overthrow of such seditious practices (wherewith this
Realm from time to time has been too much troubled) may remain for a warning
to them: and in midst of their secret confederacies to remember this, that to
exalt their hearts against Gods anointed, is the very ready way to bring
themselves to confusion. The only root and original of such unnatural
humors in men, is Treason, which of all other things is most odious in the
sight of God, and amongst men has least prosperous success: for proof
whereof, and because this Watchword may the more deeply enter the thoughts
and cogitations of them, to whose hands it shall happen, it shall not be much
amiss for me to make repetition of former tretcherous practices, and withal
to declare their end and success, which happily may cause some men to alter
their bad affections, and seeing the accidents that has heretofore chanced
in their own Country, they may forsake those contrary natures whereby they
are governed, and so in time show themselves more vehement in duty.

In the reign of King Richard the first.
THere was one William Fitz Osbert a Citizen of London, William Fitz Osbert
got him a traiterous company, and rebelled against the King. 1196.
a man but of poor and mean degree, yet endued with a quick wit and an
eloquent tongue (as many of these secret perswaders are) he persuaded the
people to seek liberty and freedom, and so provided himself of two and
fifty thousand Londoners to rise against the King. And to maintain his
traitorous enterprise, he took the Steeple of Bow Church in Chepe, and
fortified it with Munition and victualles: but in the end the Church was
assaulted by the Citizens, and William with his Accomplices were taken, and so
brought to the Archbishop in the Tower, where he was condemned, and by the
heels drawn from thence to a place called the Elmes, where he was hanged with
nine of his fellows.

In the reign of King Henry the third.
KIng Henry the third lying at UUoodstocke, a Scholar A Scholar of Oxford
attempted to kill the King. 1239.
of Oxforde fayning himself mad, enterprised to have slain the King in his
Chamber: but he was taken, and after long imprisonment, was torn in pieces
with horses at Couentrie.

In the reign of King Edward the second.
THere was one John Poydras, a Tanners son of Excester, who in diverse places
of England named himself John Poydras, a Tanners son of Excester, claimed to
be King. 1316.
the Son of King Edward the first, and said, that by a false Nurse he was
stolen forth of his Cradle, and Edward that then was King put in his place:
but shortly after he was convict of his untruth, when he confessed, that he
did it by the motion of a familiar spirit, which he had in his house in the
likeness of a Catte, whom he had served for three years (as all Traitors
else forget God, and serve the devil) but for this his service, he was not long
after hanged at North-hampton.

Edward de Bruis the King of Scotts Brother, who for Edward de Bruis for
unjustly crow ning himself King of Ireland, was beheaded. 1317.
the space of three years had assaulted Ireland, and unjustly usurping the
King of Englands title, crowned himself King thereof: was at length taken by
the King of Englands subjects, and was beheaded at Dundalke.

The Town of Bervvicke was betrayed to the Scots, They that betrayed the Town
of Berwick, were hanged for their labor. 1317.
through the Treason of Peter Spalding, and other English men: whom the King
of Scotts (in reward of their tretcherie) caused to be hanged, for being
Traitors to their own Country.

Thomas Earl of Lancaster, having provided himself of a great number of his
confederacy, rebelled against Thomas Earl of Lancaster beheaded, for
rebelling against the King: and many of his confederates executed. 1321.
King Edward the second, whereupon the King pursued the Rebels, and at
Borowbridge the said Earl of Lancaster, with Lords, Knights and other, to
the number of three score and five were taken. All these were condemned by the
judgment of Andrew Herkeley Earl of Carlisle, and on the two and twenty of
March following, Thomas Earl of Lancaster was beheaded, and Warin de Lile,
William Tochet, Thomas Manduit, Henry Bradbourne, William Fitzwilliam the
younger, and William de Cheyney Barons, were hanged and quartered at Pomfret.
John Mowbray, Roger Clifford, and Goceline Deynvile, were drawn and quartered
at York. Bartholmew Badlesmere at Canterbury. Henry de Mountfort, and Henry
Willington at Bristow. John Clifford and Roger Elinbrough at Gloucester. William
Kerdife and Henry Chies at London. Frances de Aldham at Windsor. Thomas
Culpeper at VVinchelsea. The rest of their accomplices were bestowed in diverse
prisons.

Andrew Herkeley Earl of Carlisle, under color of Andrew Herkeley Earl of
Carlisle hanged and quartered. 1322.
peace, feigned a marriage, which by the King and his Nobles was reputed for
Treason: whereupon he was apprehended by his trusty friend Sir Anthony de
Lucy, and afterward was disgraded of the Earldom, by the taking the sword
from him, and cutting off his spurs, then was he hanged and quartred at
Carlisle, his head being sent to London, and his quarters to four parts of the
land.

Hugh Spencer the elder, and Hugh Spencer his son, The two Spencers very
trouble some traitors to the Realm: in the end had their just deserts. 1326.
were very troublesome persons to the Realm, and caused many seditious
treasons to arise daily: but the Father was taken at Bristowe, where he was
drawn to the Gallows in his Armor, and so hanged, then was he taken down
and beheaded, and his body hanged up again, and after four days his body was
cut in pieces, and cast to the Dogs to be eaten, but his head was sent to
Winchester. Hugh Spencer his son was brought to Hereforde, where he was
condemned without answer, and was drawn and hanged upon a pair of Gallows
thirty foot hie, and afterward was headed and quartered. Simon Reading and
Robert Baldocke, Bishop of Norwich, and the Kings Chauncelour, who were
pertakers with them in their traitorous rebellions: the said Simon Reading was
drawn and hanged on the same Gallows, but ten foot lower, and Robert
Baldocke died in Newgate with many torments. And many of their confederates
were executed in other places, so that but few of them escaped without
punishment.

In the raygne of King Edward the third.
ROger Mortimer, for consenting to the murdering of Roger Mortimer, and others
executed, for consenting to the murdering of the Kings Father. 1330.
the Kings Father, and many other notorious treasons, was condemned at
Westminster in the presence of the whole Parliament, and afterward was drawn
to the Elmes and hanged on the common Gallows, where he hanged two days and
two nights by the Kings commandment: there were hanged with him, Sir Simon
de Burford Knight, Sir William Burford that was Justice, and John Deuerel
Esquier, who was desirous to have made open confession of the Kings Fathers
cruel death, but he could not be suffered.

The Londoners sought to kill John of Gaunt the Kings The Mayor and Aldermen of
London deposed, because the Londoners sought to kill the Kings Son. 1377.
Son, Duke of Lancaster, for a word which he had spoken against their
Bishop: whereupon the King deposed the Mayor and Aldermen of London, and
appointed other in their places, and Sir John Minsterwoorth Knight, with
others, were drawn and hanged for the same.

In the reign of King Richard the second.
BY the wicked persuasions of John Ball a seditious The Commons of Kent and
Essex, rebelled against the King, their Captains being Jack Straw and Watte
Tyler. 1381.
Priest, the Commons of Kent and Essex rebelled against the King, choosing for
their Captains in their rebellion, Watte Tiler and Jack Straw. They came to
Black Heath, and so on to London, and entered the City on Corpus Christi day,
where they destroyed many goodly places of the Nobles and others, as the Sauoy,
Saint John's by Smithfeeld, the Manor of Highburie by Yseldon, and the Temple,
where the Prentises of the Law were lodged for the increase of their Study.
They took out of the Tower of London (where the King was then lodged) Simon
Sudburie Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chauncelour of England, Robert Halles
Priour of Saint John's, and Treasorer of England, William Apelton a Friar Minor
the Kings Confessor, and John Leg a Seriant of the Kings, and beheaded
them all on the Tower Hill. They beheaded diverse other in many places, as Sir
John Cauendishe Lord chief Justice of England, the Priour of S.
Edmundes-burie, and other. Richard Lions a famous Lapidary of London, was
drawn out of his house, and beheaded in Chepe. They beheaded all men of Law,
as well Prentises and utter Barresters, as Justices and all Iurers that they
might get into their hands. They spared none whom they thought to be learned,
were it never so little, especially if they found any to have pen and ink,
they pulled off his hoode, and cried out all with one voice, hale him into the
streets, and cut off his head. The King to pacify their The King offers the
rebels peace,
fury offered them peace, on condition they would cease from burning of houses
and slaughter of men, which the Essex men took, and returned home, but the
Kentish men remained burning and killing still, as before. Whereupon the King
sends Sir John Newton Knight to Wat Tiler their Captain, to entreat him to
come talk with him about The King sent to Wat Tyler.
his own demaundes: the Knight having done his message, Wat Tiler
mallepartlie answered, that he would come at his own pleasure, nevertheless,
he followed softly after the Knight, and when he came near Smithfeeld, where
the King tarried his coming, the same Knight was sent again to meet him, and
understand his requests. Wat Tiler seeing the Knight come near unto him on
horse back, proudly said, it had become him better to be on Note the pride
of a traitor.
foot in his presence: the Knight answered, that it was no harm, since
himself was also on horseback, therewith Wat Tiler drew his Dagger, and
offering to strike, called the Knight Traiteur, whereupon the Knight drew his
dagger too, and answered him that he lied. The King seeing the Knight in
danger, commanded him to alight on foot, and to deliver his Dagger to Watte
Tyler, whose proud mind would not be so pacified, but would needs run on the
Knight: whereupon there came to the King William Walwoorth the Mayor of
London, and many other Knights and Esquiers, who affirmed that it would be a
shameful reproach, if they should suffer the Knight to be murdered. At last the
King commanded the Mayor to arrest the Rebel, which Mayor being a man of
very valiant Wat Tyler arrested by the Mayor of London, and afterward slain.
courage, arrested Wat Tyler on the head with such a mighty stroke, as he
caused him to fall down greatly astonished, then a number more environed the
Rebel round about, and gave him so many wounds, as he had no life left in
him, etc. Jack Straw being likewise taken, when at London he should lose his
head, by the judgment of the Mayor, confessed as follows.

The same time (says he) that we came to Black Heath, The confession of Jack
Straw.
when we sent for the King, we purposed to have murdered all Knights, Esquiers,
and Gentlemen that should have come with him, and to have led the King
(royally used) up and down, that with the sight of him, all men (especially
the common people) might have come unto us the more boldly. And when we had
provided our selves of a sufficient multitude, we would have suddenly put to
death in every Country, the Lords and Masters of the common people, in
whom might appear to be either council or resistaunce against us. And
specially we would have killed the Knights of Saint John's, lastly, we would
have killed the King himself, and all men that had been of any possession,
Bishops, Monks, Chanons, Parsons: to be brief, we would have dispatched all
such, only begging Friars should have lived, that might have suffised for
ministering the Sacraments through the whole Realm. And we would have made
Kings at our pleasure, as Wat Tiler in Kent, and in every Shiere one: but
because this our purpose was hindered by the Archbishop, we studied how we
might shortly bring him to his end. Against the same day that Watte Tyler
was killed, we purposed that evening (because the poor people of London seemed
to favor us) to set fire in four corners of the City, so to have burnt
it, and to have divided the riches at our pleasure amongst us. He added, that
these things they purposed to have done, as God should help him at the end
of his life. After this his confession, he was beheaded, and his head set on
London Bridge, by Watte Tylers, and many other.

When these Rebels burned the Sauoy, one of them One of the Rebels cast
into the fire by his fellows.
took a goodly Silver piece, and hid it in his bosom, but an other had spied
him, and told his fellows, who hurled him and the piece of Plate together
into the fire.

Two and thirty of them entering the Seller of the Sauoy, Two and thirty of
the Rebels mured up in a Seller.
drunk so much of sweet wines, that they were not able to come out again,
but were shut in with wood and stones that mured up the door: they called
and cried seven days after, and were heard of many, but none came to help
them, so they died there.

After a number had sacked the new Temple, what with labor and exceeding
drinking of white Wine, they lay The Rebels murder one an other.
down under the walls and houses, and were slain like Swine: hatred and
contention so arose amongst them, as they cruelly murdered one an other, and
others also made quick dispatch of them, thus the just judgment of GOD
brought the Traitors to their deserved end.

John Ball Priest, who encouraged these traitors in their John Ball Priest, the
comforter of the Rebels, hanged 1382.
rebellion, was brought to Saint Albones, and there before the King was hanged
and quartered: he would not ask the King forgiveness (as all traitors do the
like) but utterly despised him.

The principal leaders of the Commons in rebellion, were Wat Tyler, Jack
Straw, John Kirkbie, Allen Threder, The names of the Rebels that would have
made themselves Kings.
Thomas Scot, and Ralphe Rugge: these with other were leaders of the Kentishe
and Essex men. At Mildenhall and Bury in Suffolk, was Robert Westbrome, that
made himself King, and was most famous after John Wraw: who being Priest would
not set crown upon crown, but left the name and crown to the said Robert.

At Norwich, John Leicester a Dyer, exercised the name and power of a King:
till he was taken and hanged for his pains, and so were most of them in many
places.

John Wraw, who was leader of them that rose at Mildenhall John Wrawe one of
the leaders of Rebels, hanged. 1383.
and Bury, was drawn and hanged, though many thought he should have been
redeemed with money.

In the reign of King Henry the fourth.
KIng Henry the fourth enjoying the Crown of England, and keeping his
Christmasse in his Castle at The Noble men rebelled against King Henry the
fourth, and privily conspired to murder him. 1399.
Windsore, John Holland late Duke of Excester and Earl of Huntington, Thomas
late Duke of Surrie and Earl of Kent, Edward late Duke of Aumerle and Earl of
Rutland, son to the Duke of York, John Montacute Earl of Salisburie, Thomas
Spencer Earl of Gloucester, Sir Ralphe Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedic
Cely Knights, with other that joined with them, conspired against King Henry,
and appointed privily to murder him, under the couller of Iusting and other
Pastimes pretended. But the King understanding of their pretense by the Mayor
of London, left Windsor, and came in his company to London, so that they
missed of him when they came to Windsor, where they entered the Castle with
four hundred men. When they saw how they were deceived, they came to Sunning,
where the Queen that was wife to King Richard deposed lay, where they persuaded
the household, that King Richard, who before was deposed from his authority,
and kept prisoner in Pomfret Castle, was as then escaped out of prison, and
they would go to him. From thence they went to Wallingford, afterward to
Abington, warning the people to take Arms upon them, and to go meet their
old King Richard. Then they came to Circester, where they bruted that King
Richard was in company with them, and to make their words of the better
credit, they had gotten a Chaplain of King Richards called Madeleine, so like
him in all proportion and favor, as the one could hardly he known from the
other. This Chaplain they had put in The people of the Town fought against
the Rebels, and took the cheifest of them, and beheaded them.
Armor, with a Crown on his Helmette, that all men might take him for King
Richard: but the people of the Town remembering their duty to their Prince,
mislyked of their proceedings, whereupon they fought against them, and at
length took the cheifest of them, and led them to the Abbay there, where they
put them in a fair chamber under safe custody. Then the Lords seeing the
people so vehement in duty to their King, stood in great fear, and imagined
by what means they might escape forth of their hands, so they caused some of
their servants to set fire on certain houses in the Town, thinking the
people would have such regard to slake the fire, as they would be glad to
forsake them: but it chanced far contrary, for the people then increased
more and more in rage against them, and drew them by violence into the Market
place, where they beheaded the Duke of Excester and the Earl of Salisburie,
and six and twenty of their attendants were led to Oxforde, where they were
beheaded in the Castle, also Sir Thomas Blunt Knight was beheaded with them.
The week next following, Thomas Spencer Earl of Gloucester was beheaded at
Bristowe, and at the same time, John Holland Earl of Huntington, and brother
to King Richard on the Mothers side, was beheaded at Plashie in Essex, and at
London was beheaded Sir Barnard Brocas, John Madeleine the Priest that was so
like King Richard, and an other Priest called William Feribe, and thus the
traitors sped for rebelling against their King.

There was found in the Kings bed clothes, an iron with three sharp pikes,
slender and round standing upright, King Henry escapes a great danger. 1401.
laid there by some traitor, that when the King should have laid him down,
he might have thrust himself upon them: but by Gods assistaunce he escaped
that traiterous devise.

A Priest of Warwick, who conspired against King A Priest, a Prior, and a
Doctor of Divinity being a Gray Friar, were all executed for treason. 1403.
Henry, was drawn, hanged, and quartered. Also Walter VValdocke Priour of
Laud in Leicester sheyre, for traiterous speeches against the King, was hanged
and headed. Moreover, one Richard Friseby, Doctor of Divinity, avouched, that
in the quarrel of King Richard, (who was deposed for his evil government,
and was likewise dead) he would fight against any man, even to the death: for
which traitorous words, he was condemned, drawn and hanged in his religious
habit and weed. And not long after Sir Roger Claringdon Knight, with him an
Esquier and a Yeoman were beheaded, and eight Gray Friars hanged and headed at
London, and two at Leicester, all of them executed for traiterous words
against the King.

Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, Sir Richard Vernon, The Earl of Worcester,
Sir Richard Vernon, and the Baron of Kinderto^ beheaded, for rebelling against
the king. 1404.
the Baron of Kinderton, with diverse other rebellious persons, put themselves
in Arms against the King, near unto Shrewesburie, in a place called Old
Feeld, alias Bull Feeld: but the Earl of worcester, the Baron of Kinderton,
and Sir Richard Vernon, were taken and beheaded at Shrewesburie.

Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, Richard Scrope Archbishop of York,
Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall, Thomas Lord Bardolphe and other, conspired
against the King, and caused the Citizens of York to take part The Archbishop
of York, and the Earl Marshall beheaded, for rebelling against the King. 1406.
with them in their rebellion: but the Kings power following them, forced the
Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolphe to take their flight into
Scotland, but the Archbishop of York and the Earl Marshall were taken, and
beheaded at York.

A Squire of Wales named Rice ap Dee, who had A Welsh Rebel executed. 1412.
long time rebelled against the King, was brought to London, and there was
drawn, hanged and quartered.

In the reign of King Henry the fifth.
THe King keeping his Christmasse at his Manor of Eltham A secret conspiracy
against the King, according as it is set down by I. Stowe.
seven miles from London, was given to understand that certain had conspired
against him, either to have taken, or suddenly have slain him and his
brethren on Twelfth day at night: whereupon the King sent word to the Mayor of
London, that he should arrest all suspicious persons. The Mayor forthwith
caused every Alderman in his Ward to keep great watch, and about ten of the
clock at night went himself with a strong power, to the sign of the Axe
without Bishops gate, where he apprehended the man of the house, named John
Burgate Carpenter, and seven other, and sent them to Eltham: where they
confessed before the King, that they were confederat with Sir John Oldcastel,
to fight against him and his Lords in S. Gyles Feeld above Holbourne. On the
morrow after Twelfth day, the King removed privily to UUestminster, and with
King Henry kept the Feeld by Saint Giles above Holbourne.
a great Army kept the Feeld by Saint Gyles, for he was warned that Sir John
Oldcastell, and Sir Roger Acton, would be in the same Feeld on the next day
following, with five and twenty thousand people: and the same night were taken
more then four score men in Armor of the same faction. Also the King being
told of an Ambushment in Harengay Park, sent thither certain Lords, who
took many of them: among whom was one William Murle, a rich Malt man or
Brewer of Dunstable, who had his two horses trapped with gold following him,
and a pair of gylt Spurs in his bosom, for he thought to have been made
Knight on the morrow. The twelfth day of January, three score and nine of
them were condemned of treason at Westminster, and on the morrow after, seven
and thirty of them were drawn from the Tower of London to Newgate, and so to
Saint Gyles, and there in a place called Fickettes feeld, were all hanged, Many
of the Rebels hanged and burnt in Fickets feeld, and others executed soon
after, for the same offense. 1414.
and seven of them burnt gallows and all. The ninetenth day of January were
drawn and hanged Sir John Beuerley Priest, John Burgate Carpenter, a text
writer in Saint John's street, and a Glouer on London Bridge, and shortly
after Sir Roger Acton Knight was taken, who on the tenth of February was
drawn, hanged and buried under the gallows.

On the last of Iulie was discovered a great conspiracy against the King by
three Lords, in whom above all the Three Noble men, whom the King best
trusted and made great account of, conspyred his death. 1416.
rest he reposed greatest trust and confidence: the cheifest of them was Henry
Scrope Lord Treasorer, the second was Richard Earl of Cambridge, brother to
Edward Duke of York, and the third was Sir Thomas Gray a Knight of the North.
These three had caused Edmund Earl of March to swear upon a Book, not to
disclose their council, and then they told him, that they intended to kill
the King, and to make the said Edmund King, the which if he refused to take
upon him, they would likewise kill him. The Earl prayed them to give him one
hours space, to take aduisement what he were best to do, which being granted
him, the Earl went secretly and told the King thereof, who caused them
forthwith to be apprehended and brought before him, where they confessed the
treason: for the which, on the sixth of August they were arreigned in the Kings
presence, and the same day all three beheaded. The Earl was buried head and
all: but the other two headdes were sent the one to York, and the other to New
Castle upon Tine to be set up.

John Bennet Woolman, who had scattered about London John Bennet, executed for
scattering seditious Lybelles in London. 1417.
diverse Scedules full of sedition, was drawn, hanged, and beheaded on
Michaelmas day: and the eight day of October, a Parchment-maker of Trylmell
street, was drawn, hanged and headed, for harboring Sir John Oldcastell,
contrary to the Kings commandment.

In the reign of King Henry the sixth.
AT Abington were gathered together a great many William Mandeuill, Captain of
a lewd company of rebellious persons at Abingto^, executed there, and others
of his company in diverse other places. 1433.
of lewd and rebellious persons, who sought to make a great uproar in the
Realm: but the Lord Protector rode thither with his company, and arrested
there the Bayliffe of the Town, named William Mandeuill a Weauer, who was
appointed for their Captain, and he had named himself Jack Sharp of Wigmers
Land in Wales. When he was examined, he confessed that he meant to have done
many mischeefes, especially against Priests, so that he would have made their
heads as cheap as Sheep heads, that is to say, three for a penny, or as
some write ten for a penny: he was drawn, hanged, and headed at Abington, and
his head was sent to London and set on the Bridge, the rest of his company were
executed in diverse other places, for example to other.

The thirteenth day of Iulie following, one Richard Russell Richard Russell
executed.
Wooll-man, was drawn, hanged, and quartered: for that he would have made
Dukes and Carles at his own pleasure.

Roger Bolingbrooke a great Astronomer, with Thomas Southwell a Chanon of Saint
Stephens Chapel at Conspiratours of the Kings death by Necromancy.
Westminster, were taken as conspiratours of the Kings death: for it was
said, that the same Roger should labor to consume the Kings person by way
of Necromancie, and the said Thomas should say Masses in the Lodge of Harnesey
Park beside London, upon certain Instruments, with the which the said Roger
should use his craft of Necromancie against the Faith, and was assenting to the
said Roger in all his works. And the five and twenty day of Iulie being
Sunday, Roger Bolingbrooke with all his Instruments of Necromancie, that is to
say, a painted Chair wherein he was wunt to sit, upon the four corners of
which Chair stood four swords, and upon every sword an Image of Copper
hanging, with many other Instruments beside: he stood on a high Scaffolde
before Paul's Cross, holding a sword in his right hand, and a Scepter in his
left, arrayed in a marvelous strange attire, and after the Sermon was done,
by Master Law Bishop of Rochester, he abiured all Articles belonging to the
Art of Necromancie, or against the Faith. Afterward, these two were condemned
of Treason, Thomas South well died in the Tower of London, but Roger
Bolingbrooke Roger Bolingbrook executed. 1442.
was drawn from the Tower to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.

John David servant to William Catur, an Armorer A Combat between a Master
and his servant, who appeached him of treason. 1447.
dwelling in Saint Dunstones Parish in Fleetstreete, appeached his Master of
Treason: and a day being assigned for them to fight a Combat together in
Smithfeeld, the Master was there slain by his said servant.

The Duke of Gloucester being arrested by the Lord Beaumont The Duke of
Gloucester arrested, died soon after, but five of his men were hanged, and
after pardoned. 1448.
high Constable, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Duke of Sommerset, and other,
for special matters, within few days after he died with sorrow: but two and
thirty of his principal servants being sent to diverse prisons, five of them
were arraigned and condemned at London, whose names were Sir Roger Chamberlain
Knight, Middleton, Herbert, and Arteyse Esquiers, and Richard Nedham Gentleman,
all which five were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there
hanged, but they were let down quickly, stripped naked, marked with a knife to
be quartred, and then a charter was showed them for their lives: but the Yeoman
of the Crown had their liuelode, and the hangman had their clothes.

Thomas Thany, otherwise called Blew beard a Fuller, Blew beard hanged for
raising rebellion. 1450.
was taken beside Canterbury for raising a rebellion: who afterward was hanged
and quartered.

The Commons of Kent arose against the King, having to their Captain Jack
Cade who named himself Mortimer, The Commons of Kent rebelled, Jack Cade
being their Captain. 1451.
Couzin to the Duke of York, and of some he was called John Amend all: this
Captain and his company came to Black Heath, and there kept the Feeld more
then a month, pilling and spoiling the Country round about. At length the
Kings Proclamation going abroad against the Rebels, Jack Cade was taken by
a Gentleman of Kent named Alexander Eden, in a Garden in Sussex, there was he
slain at Hothfeeld, afterward brought in a Cart to London, where he was
quartered, his head set on London Bridge, and his quarters sent to diverse
places in Kent: eight men were executed at Canterbury for the same offense,
and in other Towns of Kent and Sussex was done the like execution.

In the raygne of King Edward the fourth.
WAlter Walker, a Grocer that dwelt in Chepe, for Walter Walker beheaded for
words against the King. 1461.
certain words that he spoke touching King Edward, was beheaded in Smithfeeld
on the twelfth day of March.

Nicholas Faunt Mayor of Canterbury, Spicing, Quintin and other, were hanged
and headed at Canterbury, for rebelling The Mayor of Canterbury and other
executed for rebellion.
against King Edward: the heads of Spicing and Quintin were set on Algate of
London.

Thomas the Bastard Faulconbridge, who took part The Bastard Faulconbridge
lost his head. 1472.
with the Rebels in Kent against the King, was taken at Southhampton, and was
beheaded at the Castle of Mildeham in Yorkeshiere, his head was sent to
London, and there set on the Bridge.

Thomas Burdet an Esquier of Warwickeshiere, son to Sir Nicholas Burdet, for
speaking of Treasonable Thomas Burdet beheaded for treason. 1478.
words against the King: was condemned of Treason, drawn from the Tower of
London to Tiborne, and there beheaded.

In the reign of King Edward the fifth.
TO set down the troublesome accidents happening in this Kings reign, would
require a very large discourse, and grow to greater quantity then the scope
that I have intended: beside, for that troubles did still follow one in an
others neck, both in his life time, as also after his death, by reason he left
two Sons, who were so young in years, as they could not take the government
upon them, I will therefore refer you to the Chronicles, which at large will
certify you of that, which I am loath here to rehearse: yet it shall not be a
miss to report unto you, how the King lying on his death bed, desired to
pacify and set in good agreement, those that had long time been heavy
enemies, especially the Lord Marquis Dorset, the Queens The Lord Marquis
Dorset, and the Lord Hastings, great enemies.
Son by her first Husband, and William the Lord Hastinges, a Noble man then
Lord Chamberlain: and for his Highness would gladly see all enmity ceased
before he died, he called them into his Chamber, when lifting himself up, and
being up held with pillowes, he uttered to them a worthy Oration, which
Oration, for that it shows notable examples to vnsteadie and wilful heads,
and delivers good council to all ingenerall, I have been so bold to insert
it here, to show the Princely advise of so noble a King, as also to give some
light of the troubles in those days.

The Oration of the King, which he spoke lying on his death bed.
MY Lords, my dear Kinsemen and alyes, in what plight I lie you see, and I
feel, by which the less while I look to live with you, the more deeply am
I moved to Note the care of a Prince for his Country.
care in what case I leave you: for such as I leave you, such be my children
like to find you. Which if they should (as God forbid) find you at variaunce,
might hap to fall themselves at war, ere their discretion would serve to set
you at peace. Ye see their youth, of which I reckon the only surety to rest
in your concord, for it suffiseth not that all you love them, if each of you
hate other: if they were men, your faithfulness happily would suffice, but
childehoodde must be maintained by men's authority, and slipper youth
vnder-propped with elder council, which neither they can have, but ye give it,
nor ye give it, if ye gree not. For where each labors to break that the
other makes, and for hatred of each others person, impugneth each others
council: there must it needs be long ere any good conclusion go forward. And
also while either party labors to be chief, The danger where flattery is
more esteemed, then true and faithful dealing.
flattery shall have more place then plain and faithful advise, of which
must needs ensue the evil bringing up of the Prince, whose mind in tender
youth infected, shall readily fall to mischief and riot, and draw down with
his noble Realm to ruin: but if Grace turn him to wisdom, which if God
send, then they that by evil means before pleased him best, shall after fall
furthest out of favor, so that ever at length evil driftes draw to naught,
and good A special note for all traitors.
plain ways prosper. Great variaunce has there long been between you, not
always for great causes: sometime a thing right well intended, our miss
construction turns unto wurse, or a small displeasure done us, either our
own affection, or evil tongues agreeueth: but this I wot well, ye never had so
great cause of hatred, as ye have of love. That we be all men, that we be
Christian men, this shall I leave for Preachers to tell ye: and yet I wot nere,
whether any Preachers words ought more to move ye, then his that is by and by
going to the place that they all preach of. But this shall I desire you to
remember, that the one part of you is of my blood, the other of my alyes, and
each of you with other either of kindred or affinity, which Spiritual kindred
of affinity (if the Sacraments of Christ's Church bear that weight with us,
as would God they did) should no less move us to charity, then the respect
of fleshly consanguinitie. Our Lord forbid, that you love together the wurse,
for the self cause you ought to love the better: and yet it happens, and no
where find we so deadly debate, as among them, who by nature and law ought
most to agree together.

Such a pestilent Serpent is ambition, and desire of Ambition a pestilent and
deadly Serpent, whose infection where he comes, turns all to mischief.
vaineglorie and sovereignty, which among States where he once enters,
creeps so far forth, till with division and variaunce he turns all to
mischief: first longing to be best, afterward equal with the best, and at
last chief and above the best. Of which immoderate appetite of worship, and
thereby of debate and discention, what loss, what sorrow, what trouble has
within these few years grown in this Realm, I pray God as well forgette,
as we well remember: which things if I could as well have foreseen, as I have
with my more pain then pleasure proved, by Gods blessed Lady (for that was
ever his oath) I would never have wunne the courtesy of men's knees, with the
loss of so many heads. But seeing things past cannot The remembrance of
misfortunes past, ought to teach us to be fearful of the like.
be called again, much ought we the more beware, by what occasion we have
taken so great hurt before, that we est soones fall not in that occasion
again. Now is all these greefes past, and all is (God be thanked) quiet, and
likely right well to prosper in wealthfull peace under your Couzins my
children, if God send them life, and you love: of which two things, the less
loss were they, by whom though God did his pleasure, yet should the Realm
always find Kings, and peradventure as good Kings. But if you among your
selves in a Childs reign fall at debate, A good note for this present time of
peace.
many a good man shall perish, and happily he too, ere this Land find peace
again. Wherefore in these last words that ever I look to speak with you, I
exhort you and require you all, for the love that you have ever borne to me,
for the love that I have ever borne to you, for the love that our Lord bears
unto us all, from this time foreward all greefes forgotten, each of you love
other: which I verily trust you will, if you any thing regard, either God or
your King, affinity or kindred, this Realm your own Country, or your own
surety.

And therewithal the King enduring no longer to sit up, laid him down on
his right side, his face toward them: and none was there present that could
refrain from weeping. But the Lords recomforting him with as good words as
they could, and aunswering for the time as they thought to stand with his
pleasure, there in his presence (as by their words appeared) each forgave
other, and joined their hands together, when (as it after appeared by their
deeds) their hearts were far a sunder.

The young King (after the decease of his Father) came toward London, when
the Duke of Gloucester his Uncle began greatly to thirst for the kingdom, and
wexed very envious that so young a Prince should reign: whereupon he deprived
the young King of them that were nearest about him, and whom he thought would
hinder his aspiring mind. First Sir Anthony Wooduile Lord Rivers, The Lord
Rivers put in ward.
and brother to the Queen, who had the governance and ordering of the young
King, he caused to put him in duraunce, and afterward even in the Kings
presence, he procured a quarrel to be picked with the Lord Richard Gray, the
Kings other Brother by the Mother, and arrested him and Sir Thomas Vaughan
Knight, and so far The Duke of Gloucester caused the Lord Rivers, the Lord
Gray, and Sir Thomas Vaughan to be beheaded.
proceeded he in his determination, by the aid of the Duke of Buckingham and
others, as the Lord Rivers, the Lord Gray and Sir Thomas Vaughan were sent into
the North parts to sundry prisons, but afterward were all beheaded at
Pomfret. Then did he take upon him the governance of the young King, and was
called the Lord Protector: when having the King in his custody, he could not
be yet contented, except he had the other brother too, and therefore by means
of the Lord Cardinal, he prevailed in his purpose, and brought the other
Child to the King his Brother into the Bishops Palace at Paul's, and from
thence through the City honorably into the Tower, out of The young King and
his Brother brought to the Tower.
the which after that day they never came abroad. When the Protector had both
the Children thus in his custody, he opened his intent more boldly, both to
certain other men, as also chiefly to the Duke of Buckingham, that he would
needs be King himself in all the haste, and he should have the Dukes aid to
make him King, besides, the Protectors only lawful Son should marie the
Dukes daughter, and that the Protector should grant him the quiet possession
of the Earldom of Hertforde, and beside these requests of the Duke, the
Protector promised him of his own mind a great quantity of the Kings
Treasure, and of his household stuff.

In brief, the Protector takes upon him to be King, The Protector crowned
King, by the name of King Richard the third.
and so prevailed that he was crowned King: but when he remembered that his two
Nephews were living in the Tower, and one of them the right King in deed, he
persuaded himself (as very well he might) that men would account him to have
no right to the Realm, therefore he thought to dispatch them out of the way,
as though the killing of his kinsemen could amend his cause, and make him a
kindly King. Upon this he sent one John Green whom King Richard sends to
have the two young Princes put to death in the Tower.
he specially trusted, to Sir Robert Brakenburie Constable of the Tower, with a
letter and credence also, that the same Sir Robert should in any wise put the
two Children to death: but when John Green had done his errand to Sir Robert,
he plainly answered, that by no means he would put them to death. When King
Richard perceived he could not prevail that way, he brake the matter to Sir
James Tirrell, whom he found very tractable to his intent, wherefore he sent
him on the morrow with a Letter to Sir Robert Brakenburie, by which Letter he
was commanded to deliver to Sir James all the keys of the Tower for one
night, to the end he might there accomplish the Kings pleasure, in such
things as he had given him commandment. After which Letter delivered, and
the keys received, Sir James appointed the night ensuing to destroy the two
young Princes, devising before and preparing the means.

The Prince so soon as the Protector had left that name, and took upon
himself to be King, was thereof infourmed, The young Prince informed that his
Uncle would be King, and his answer to the same.
that he should not reign, but his Uncle would have the Crown. At which
words the Prince being greatly abashed, fetching a heavy sigh, said: Alas,
I would mine Uncle would let me have my life yet, though I loose my kingdom.
Then he that told him the tale, used him with good words, and put him in the
best comfort he could: But forthwith was the Prince and his Brother both shut
up, and all other removed from them, only one The Prince and his Brother
shut up close prisoners.
Black Will, or Willam Slaughter excepted, who was set to serve them and see
them sure. After which time, the Prince never tied his points, nor did any
thing of himself, but with the young babe his Brother lingered in thought and
heaviness, till this traitorous death delivered them out of that wretched
estate. For Sir James Tirrell devised that Sir James appointed who should
murder the Princes.
they should be murdered in their beds: to the execution whereof he appointed
Miles Forest, one of the four that kept them, a fellow fleshed in murder
before time, and to him he joined John Dighton his own horse-keeper, a big,
broad, square, strong knave.

Then all the other being removed from them, this Miles Forest and John
Dighton, about midnight (the sielie Children lying in their beds) came into
the Chamber, and suddenly lapped them up amongst the clothes: and they had so
bewrapped them and entangled them, keeping down by force the fetherbed and
pillowes hard unto their mouths, that within a while, smoothered and stifled,
their breath failing them, they gave up to God their innocent The young King
and his Brother murdered.
souls into the ioies of Heaven, leaving to the tormentors their bodies dead
in the bed. Which after that the cruel wretches perceived, first by
struggling with the pains of death, and after long lying still to be thoroughly
dead, they laid their bodies naked upon the bed, and fetched Sir James to
see them: who upon the sight of them, caused those murderers to bury them at
the staire foot, meetlie deep in the ground, under a great heap of stones.
Then rode Sir James in great haste to King Richard, and King Richard thanketh
Sir James for murdering the Princes.
showed him all the manner of the murder, who gave him great thanks, and (as
some say) there made him Knight: but he allowed not their burying in so vile a
corner, saying, that he would have them buried in a better place, because they
were a Kings sons. Upon this, as it is reported, a Priest belonging to Sir
Robert Brakenburie, took up the bodies again, and secretly enterred them in
such a place, as by the occasion of his death, who only knew it, could never
since come to light. Uerie troth it is, and well known, that at such time as
Sir James Tirrell was in the Tower, for treason committed against the most
famous Prince King Henry the seventh, both Dighton and he were examined, and
they confessed the murder in manner above written, but whether the bodies were
removed they could nothing tell.

And thus were these two noble Princes, these innocent tender children, borne
of a most royal blood, brought up in great wealth, likely long to live,
reign and rule in the Realm, shortly shut up in prison, and privily thus
murdered, their bodies cast God knows where, by the cruel ambition of their
unnatural Uncle, and his despightfull tormentors. Which things on every
part well pondered, God never gave this Realm a more notable example, neither
in what uncertainty stands this worldly weal, or what mischief works the
proud enterprises of an high heart, or finally, what wretched end ensues
such unnatural Miles Forest rotted in pieces to death.
cruelty. For first to begin with the bloody actors of this murder, Miles
Forest at saint Martins peece-meale rotted away. Dighton yet walks (as are
mine Authors Dighton in good forwardnes to be hanged.
words at that time) in good possibility to be hanged ere he die. Sir James
Tirrell died at the Tower Hill, being Sir James Tyrrel beheaded for treason.
beheaded for treason. King Richard himself was afterward slain in the feeld,
hacked and hewed at his enemies hands, harried on horseback dead, his heaire
in despite King Richard himself slain in the feeld.
torn and tugged like a curre Dog. In his life time, by credible report of
such as were secret with his Chamberlain, after this abominable deed was
done, he never was quiet in his mind: he never thought himself sure, where
he went abroad, he still privily looked about him, his body was secretly
fenced, his hand ever upon his Dagger, his countenance and manners like one
always ready to strike again, sore wearied with care and watch, he rather
slumbred then slept, troubled with fearful dreams, suddenly sometime he
sterted up, leapt out of his bed, and ran about the Chamber, so was his
restless heart continually tossed and tumbled, with the tedious impression
and stormy remembrance of his abominable deed. A notable example doublesse,
to all such as take like enterprise in hand, that cannot be contented to live
within compass of duty, but their aspiring thoughts must stretch further,
then either their habillitie will serve them, or God suffer them. The seat of
a Prince is a place of great Majesty, and none but such as GOD has appointed,
can contain themselves in that Royal room: then if they wilfully covet that
place, for which both reason and duty says, they are far unfit, such is
the justice of him, by whom Kings rule, and Princes swaie their Sovereignty,
as the pleasure they thought to have in that high Office, is a very dagger to
their hearts, and such an eating woorme to their consciences, as by this
example before you may plainly perceive. Let Princes therefore be honored
and feared as they ought, and let Subjects live in true and faithful
obedience to them, because it is a chief and an especial article of their
duty.

In the reign of King Henry the seventh.
ON the two and twentieth day of February, were arraigned Certain persons
executed for making seditious and slanderous Lybelles against the King. 1494.
in the Guild Hall of London four persons, to wit, Thomas Bagnall, John Scot,
John Heth, and John Kennington, who were Sanctuary men of Saint Martins le
Graund in London, and lately before were taken out of the said Sanctuary,
for forging of seditious Bills, to the slander of the King and some of his
Council: for which, three of them were adjudged to die, so on the five and
twenty day of February, the said three persons, with a Flemming and a Yeoman
of the Crown, were all five executed at Tiborne.

Pierce or Perkin Werbecke, a Flemming borne, by the Peter Werbecke a Flemming,
named himself King Edwardes second Son: for which diverse of his company were
executed in sundry places. 1497.
council of Margaret Duchess of Burgoigne, named himself Richard of York,
King Edwardes second Son: he and his company arrived at Deal in Kent, where
when they perceived they could have no comfort of the Country in their
rebellion, they withdrewe themselves to their Ships again. But the Mayor of
Sandwich encountered with them, and took alive of them one hundred, three score
and nine persons, among the which were five Captains, Mountford, Corbette,
Whitbelt, Quintine and Gemine. And on the twelfth of Iulie, John Peche Esquier
and Sheriff of Kent, brought unto London Bridge these hundred three score and
nine persons, where the Sherifes of London received them, and conveyed them
in Carts and long ropes to the Tower of London, and to Newgate. Not long
after, a hundred and fifty of them were hanged in Kent, Essox, Sussex and
Norfolk, the residue were executed at Tiborne, and Wapping in the Wose beside
London.

A Commotion was made by the Commons of Cornevvall, who under the leading of
James Tuchet of Audley, A commotion against the King by the commons of
Cornwall, under the conduct of the Lord Audley, and Michael Joseph a Black
Smith. 1498.
Lord of Audley, with Michael Joseph, a Horse Farrer or Blacksmith of Bodman,
and other, came to Black heath, where the King met with them, and
discomfited the Rebels, taking their Captains: and there were slain of the
Rebels about three hundred, and a thousand and five hundred of them taken,
the King gave to them that took them their goods. The Lord Audley was
beheaded on the Tower hill, and the Black Smith, and Flamoke a Lawier were
hanged, headed and quartered at Tiborne.

A Shoomakers son in Bishops gate street of London, was hanged at Saint
Thomas Watrings on Shroue A Shoomakers son hanged, for fayning him self to
be the Earl of Warwick. 1499.
Tuesdaie, for naming himself to be Edward Earl of Warwick, Son to George
Duke of Clarence: which Edward Earl of VVarvvicke was then (and had been all
the reign of this King) kept secret prisoner in the Tower of London.

The aforenamed Perkin Werbeck, that named himself Perkin Werbeck hanged. 1500.
King Edwardes Son, and John a Water Mayor of Corfe, were executed at Tiborne.

In the reign of King Henry the eight, of famous memory.
EDward Duke of Buckingham was accused of high treason, Edward Duke of
Buckingham condemned for treason, and beheaded 1522.
for which he was apprehended and sent to the Tower of London on the sixteenth
day of April, before which time the Dukes Chancellor was taken, who had
confessed matter of high treason concerning the Kings person. Shortly after
the Duke was arraigned at Westminster, where were brought against him as
witnesses, Sir Gilbert Perke his Chancellor, John de la Court his Confessor,
Charles Kneuet Esquier, and a Monk, Priour of Henton. In the end he was found
guilty, and had judgment to be drawn, hanged and quartered: so on the
seventh day of May following, the said Edward Duke of Buckingham, Earl of
Hereford, Stafford and Northhampton, was beheaded on the Tower hill: such is
the end of ambition, the credit of false Prophecies, and of evil life.

In December, at the City of Couentrie, Frauncis Phillip, Conspiracy at
Couentrie, to have taken the Castle of Killingwoorth, and to make war
against the King. 1524.
Schoolemaister to the Kings Henxmen, Christopher Pickering Clarke of the
Kings Larder, and Anthony Manuile Gentleman, intended to have taken the
Kings Treasure of his Subsedie, as the Collectours of the same came toward
London, and therewith they intended to have raised men, and to have taken the
Castle of Killingvvoorth, and then to have made battle against the King: for
the which, they were drawn, hanged and quartered at Tiborne the eleventh of
February, the rest of their conspiracy were executed at Couentrie.

Elizabeth Barton the holy Maid of Kent, and diverse The holy Maid of Kent
and other executed. 1535.
other of her faction, were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and
there hanged and headed, etc. for sundry conspiracies by them committed, in
the matter of divorce between the Kings Majesty, and Queen Katherine.

The nine and twenty day of April, the Priour of the Certain Charterhouse
Monks, and other executed for treason. 1536.
Charterhouse at London, the Priour of Beuall, the Priour of Exham, Reinoldes a
Brother of Sion, and John Hail Uicare of Thistlewoorth, were all condemned of
high treason: so the fourth day of May following, they were drawn, hanged and
quartered at Tiborne, their heads and quarters set on the Gates of the City,
all saving one quarter, which was set on the Charterhouse at London.

The eighteen day of June, three Monks of the Charterhouse Charterhouse
Monks executed for treason.
at London, named Exmewe, Middlemore, and Nidigate, were drawn to Tiborne, and
there hanged and quartered for treason.

The two and twenty day of June, Doctor John Fisher Bishop Fisher and Sir
Thomas More beheaded. 1536.
was beheaded on the Tower hill, and his head was set on London Bridge: and the
sixth of Iulie following, Sir Thomas More was beheaded on the Tower hill, for
denying the Kings supremacy.

Thomas Fitz-garret, Son and heir to the Earl of The Earl of Kyldare and
five of his Uncles executed.
Kildare, was beheaded, and five of his Unckles were drawn to Tiborne, and
there hanged and quartered for treason. In the same Month, which was
February, Nicholas Rebellion in Yorkeshiere.
Musgraue, Thomas Gylbie and other, stirred a new rebellion, and besieged the
City of Carlisle, from whence they were driven, and many of them taken and put
to death. Also the same month, Sir Frauncis Bigot, Sir Robert An other
conspiracy.
Constable, and other began a conspiracy, and for the same were attainted.

The nine and twenty day of March, twelve men of Lincoln Lincolneshier
rebels executed at Tiborne. 1537,
were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered, for the rebellion in
Lincolneshiere: five were Priests, and seven were Lay men, one was an Abbot, a
Suffragan, Doctor Mackerell, an other was the Uicar of Louthe in
Lincolneshiere, and two Priests.

In April, through certain Commissions sent into A commotion in
Sommersetshiere, and diverse of them executed, 1538.
Sommersetshiere to take up Corn, the people began to make an iusurrection,
which was by Master Pawlet and others alayed: the beginners thereof to the
number of three score were condemned, whereof fourteen were hanged and
quartered, one of them was a woman.

Friar Forest was hanged by the middle in a chain of Friar Forest hanged and
burnt. 1539.
iron, and then burnt in Smithfeeld, for denying the King to be supreme head
of the Church, and with him was burnt the Image of Daruel Gatherine of Wales.

Hugh Ferringdon Abbot of Reading, and two Priests Abbots of Reading and
Glaste^burie executed. 1540.
named Ruge and Onion, for denying the Kings supremacy, were hanged and
quartered at Reading: the same day was the Abbot of Glastenburie Richard
Whitting, hanged and quartered on Torre hill beside his Monastery, for the
same cause.

Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex, being in the Council Chamber, was
suddenly apprehended and committed The Lord Cromwell beheaded.
to the Tower of London: the nine and twenty day of Iulie following, he was
attainted by Parliament of heresy and treason, and the eight and twenty day
of Iulie he was beheaded on the Tower hill, with the Lord Walter Hungerford of
Heitisburie.

Rober Barnes, Thomas Gerrard and William Jerome Six Priests, three burnt, and
three hanged.
Priests, were burnt in Smithfeed: and the same day Thomas Abel, Edward Powel
and Richard Fetherstone, were hanged and quartered, for denying the Kings
supremacy.

Laurance Cook a Priour of Dancalfe, William Horn Seven executed at Tyborne
for treason. 1541.
a lay Brother of the Charterhouse, Giles Horn Gentleman, Clement Philpot,
Edmond Bromham, Darby Kenham, Robert Bird, and Iaruis Carrowe, were all put to
death for treason.

In April certain persons began a new rebellion in A new rebellion in
Yorkeshiere.
Yorkeshiere, who were shortly after taken and put to execution in diverse
places: of which Leigh a Gentleman, Tatarsal a Clothyer, and Thorneton a
Yeoman, were put to death at London. Sir John Neuell Knight, and ten persons
more, were put to death at York.

The Lord Leonard Gray being endighted of certain The Lord Leonard Gray
beheaded.
points of treason, by him committed, and was alleged against him, was
arraigned at Westminster: but he discharged the Jury, and confessed the
endightment, whereupon he had judgment, and was beheaded on the Tower hill on
Saint Peter's even.

The first day of Iulie a Welsh minstrell was hanged A Welsh minstrell hanged.
1542.
and quartered for singing of Songs, which were interpreted to be prophesying
against the King.

German Gardner, and Lark Parson of Chelsea, were German Gardner and other
executed. 1544.
executed at Tiborne for denying the Kings supremacy, with them was executed
for other offenses one Singleton: and shortly after, Ashbie was executed for
the supremacy.

In the reign of the noble Prince King Edward the sixth.
IN the month of May, by means of a Proclamation for A commotion in
Sommersetshiere (...)
enclosures, the commons of Sommersetshiere and (...) made a commotion: but Sir
Willam Herberd slew and executed many of the rebels.

Also the commons of Cornwall and Deuonshiere rose Commotion in Cornwall and
Deuonshiere.
against the Noblemen and Gentlemen, and besieged the City of Excester, which
was valiantly defended. Against these Rebels was sent John Lord Russell,
Lord privy Seal, with a number of Soldiers, who entered the City of
Excester the fifth day of August, where they slew and took prisoners of the
Rebels more then four thousand, and after hanged diverse of them in the Town
and Country about.

Diverse persons were apprehended as aiders of the foresaid Certain executed
for ayding the Rebels.
Rebels, of the which one was hanged within Algate, and an other at the Bridge
foot toward Southwarke, both on Marie Magdalens day.

The Rebels in Norfolk and Suffolk encamped them The Rebels in Norfolk
and Susfolke encamped themselves.
selves at Mount Surrey, in a wood called Saint Nicholas Wood, near unto
Norwich, against whom, Sir John Dudley Earl of VVarvvicke, went with an
Army, where, both he and a great number of Gentlemen meeting with the
Rebels, were in such danger, as they thought all to have died in that place.
But God that confounds the purpose of Rebels, brought it so to pass, that
as well there as in all other places, they were partly by power constrained,
partly by promise of their pardon, persuaded to submit themselves to their
Prince. The Earl of Warvvicke Robert Ket Captain of the Rebels taken, and
many of them slain and executed.
entered the City of Norwich the seven and twenty day of August, when he had
slain above five thousand of the Rebels, and taken their chief Captain
Robert Ket of Windham Tanner, who might dispend in lands fifty pounds by
year, and was worth in mooueables above a thousand Marks, and when he had
put to execution diverse of the Rebels, in sundry places about Norwich, he
returned.

About this time also, a commotion began at Semer in the North Riding of
Yorkeshiere, and continued in the East Riding, Commotion in Yorkeshiere.
and there ended: the principal raisers whereof were William Ombler of
East-hesterton Yeoman, Thomas Dale parish Clarke of Semer, and Steuenson of
Semer. They being prevented by the Lord President from rising at Wintringham,
they drew to a place at Semer by the Sea coast, and there by night rode to the
Beacon at Staxton, and set it on fire, and so gathered together a rude route.
Then they went to Master Whites house, and took him, and Clopton his wives
brother, Sauadge a merchant of York, and Berie servant to Sir Walter Mildmay,
which four they murdered a mile from Semer, and there left them naked, their
number increasing to three thousand. On the one and twenty day of August the
Kings pardon was offered, The Rebels refusing the Kings Pardon, were
shortly after executed at York.
which Ombler and other refused: who were shortly after taken and brought to
York, where Thomas Dale and other were executed the one and twenty of
September.

The seven and twenty day of January, Humfrey A, Captains of the Deuonshiere
rebels executed.
rundell Esquier, Thomas Holmes, Winslowe and Berie. Captains of the Rebels
in Deuonshiere, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne.

The tenth of February, one Bell a Suffolk man, was Bell a Suffolk Rebel
executed. 1550.
hanged and quartered at Tiborne, for moving a new rebellion in Suffolk and
Essex.

Richard Lion, Goddard, Gorran, and Richard Ireland, Rebels of Kent executed.
1551.
were executed the foureteenth day of May, for attempting a new rebellion in
Kent.

In the reign of Queen Marie.
WIlliam Constable alias Fetherstone, who caused Letters to be cast abroad,
that King Edward was alive, A Millers son fayning himself to be King Edward,
executed. 1556.
and to some he had showed himself to be King Edward, was arraigned at the
Guild Hall of London, having been once before whipped for the same behavior,
and delivered: but now he was condemned, and the thirteenth day of March he
was drawn, hanged and quartered at Tiborne.

One Clober, who sometime kept a School at Dys in Four Rebels executed at
Saint Edmundsburie. 1557.
Norfolk, with three brethren whose names were Lincoln, made a conspiracy:
and being driven to flight, one Master Shirman pursued, and took him at a
Town called Eye in Suffolk, where he was kept in prison till the next
Sessions at Saint Edmundsburie, whether his three mates being brought to him,
they were altogether drawn, hanged and quartered.

Queen Marie deceassing, Elizabeth, our most gracious and sovereign Lady,
second Daughter to the noble and victorious Prince King Henry the eight, to
the great comfort of England enjoyed her lawful, right and just title, being
proclaimed Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
Now ceased the time of grievous vexation both in soul and body, and the sweet
comfort that every godly mind desired, did show it self shining in glory
and majesty: the greater cause have we therefore to love and honor that
gracious Lady, who brought with her such abundance of happiness, as neither
tongue can woorthelie express it, nor any pen sufficiently set it down.
Thanks be to God who preserved her Grace so woonderfullie, in the time of many
threatened troubles and dangers, which by his providence she happily escaped,
to our no small joy and perfect consolation: which troublesome time of her
Graces suffering, I have heerto annexed, according as it is set down by that
worthy man Master John Fox in his Acts and Monuments, the remembrance
whereof, may whet us to be more duetifull unto her, then a number are, and
rejoice in God for our deliverance by her admirable patience.

The myraculous preservation of Lady Elizabeth, now our most dread and grations
Queen of England, from extreme calamity and danger of life, in the time of
Queen Marie her Sister.
BUt when all has been said and told, what The blessed protection of
almighty God, in preserving the Lady Elizabeth, in her manifold dangers and
troubles.
soever can be recited, touching the admirable working of Gods present hand, in
defending and delivering any one person out of thraldom; never was there since
the memory of our Fathers, any example to be showed, wherein the Lords
mighty power has more admirablie and blessedly shown it self, to the glory
of his own name, to the comfort of all good hearts, and to the public
felicity of this whole Realm, then in the miraculous custody and outscape of
this our sovereign Lady, now Queen, then Lady Elizabeth, in the strait
time of Queen Marie her Sister. In which story we have first to consider, in
what extreme misery, sickness, fear and peril her Highness was: into what
care, what trouble of mind, and what The troubles of Lady Elizabeth in Queen
Mary's time.
danger of death she was brought. First with great routes and bands of Armed
men (and happy was he that might have the carrying of her) being fetched up as
the greatest traitor in the world, clapped in the Tower, and again tossed from
thence, from house to house, from prison to prison, from post to pillar, at
length also prisoner in her own house, and guarded with a sort of cutthroates,
which ever gaped for the spoil, whereby they might be fingering on somewhat.

Secondly to consider again we have, all this notwithstanding, how strangely,
or rather miraculouslie from danger she was delivered: what favor and grace
she found with the Almighty, who when all help of man and hope of recovery
was past, stretched out his mighty protection, and preserved her Highness, and
placed her in this Princely seat of rest and quietness, wherein now she
sits, and long may she sit, the Lord of his glorious mercy grant we
beseech him. In which story, if I should set forth at large and at full, all
the particulers and circumstaunces thereunto belonging, and as just occasion of
the history requires, besides the importunate length of the story
discoursed: peradventure it might move offense to some being yet alive, and
truth might get me hatred. Yet notwithstanding, I intend (by the grace of
Christ) therein to use such brevity and moderation, as both may be to the
glory of God, the discharge of the story, the profit of the Reader, and hurt
to none, suppressing the names of some, whom here although I could receite,
yet I thought not to be more cruel in hurting their name, then the Queen has
been merciful in pardoning their lives.

Therefore now to enter into the discourse of this tragical matter, first
here is to be noted, that Queen Marie The history of Lady Elizabeth.
when she was first Queen, before she was crowned, would go no whether, but
would have her by the hand, and send for her to dinner and supper: but after
she was crowned, she never dined nor supped with her, but kept her aloof from
her, etc. After this it happened, immediately upon the rising of Sir Thomas
Wiat, that the Lady Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney, were charged with false
suspicion of Sir Thomas Wiats rising. Whereupon Queen Marie, whether for that
surmise, or for what other cause I know not, being offended with the Lady
Elizabeth her Sister, at that time lying in her house at Ashridge, the next
day after the rising of Wiat, sent to her three of her Counsaylours, to wit,
Sir Richard Southwell, Sir Edward Hastings, then Master of the Horse, and Sir
Thomas Cornewalles, Sir Richard Southwell. Sir Edward Hastinges, and Sir Thomas
Cornwalles sent to fetch up Lady Elizabeth.
with their retinue and troop of Horsemen, to the number of two hundred and
fifty. Who at their sudden and unprovided coming, found her at the same
time sore sick in her bed, and very weak and feeble of body. Whether when
they came, ascending up to her Graces privy Chamber, they willed one of her
Ladies, whom they met, to declare unto her Grace, that there were certain
come from the Court, which had a message from the Queen. Her Grace having
knowledge thereof, was right glad of their coming: howbeit being then very
sick, and the night far spent (which was at ten of the clock) she requested
them by the messenger, that they would resort thither in the morning. To this
they answered, and by the same messenger sent word again, that they must
needs see her, and would so do, in what case so ever she were. Whereat the The
unmannerliness of the Knights.
Lady being aghast, went to show her Grace their words: but they hastily
following her, came rushing as soon as she into her Graces chamber, unbidden.
At whose so sudden coming into her chamber, her Grace being not a little
amazed, said unto them: Is the haste such, that it might not have pleased you
to come to morrow in the morning? They made answer, that they were right sorry
to see her in that case. And I (quoth she) am not glad to see you here at this
time of the night. Whereunto they answered, that they came from the Queen to
do their message and duty: which was to this effect, that the Queens
pleasure was, that she should be at London the seventh day of that present
month. Whereunto she said: Certes, no creature more glad then I to come to her
Majesty, being right sorry that I am not in case at this time to wait on her,
as you your selves do see, and can well testify. In deed we see it true
(quoth they) that you do say, for which we are very sorry. Albeit we let A
strait Commission from the Queen, to bring the Lady Elizabeth either quick or
dead.
you understand, that our Commission is such, and so strayneth us, that we must
needs bring you with us, either quick or dead. Whereat she being amazed,
sorrowfully said, that their Commission was very sore: but yet
notwithstanding she hoped it to be otherwise, and not so strait. Yes verelie
said they. Whereupon they called for two Physicians, Doctor Owen and Doctor
Wendie, and demanded of them, whether she might be removed from thence with
life, or no. Whose answer and judgment was, that there was no impediment to
their judgment, to the contrary, but that she might travail without danger
of life. In conclusion, they willed her to prepare against the morning, The
gentleness of Queen Marie to send her horse Lytter to bring her Sister to
trouble.
at nine of the clock to go with them, declaring that they had brought with
them the Queens Litter for her. After much talk, the messengers declaring how
there was no prolonging of times and days, so departed to their Chamber, being
entertained and cheered as appertained to their worshippes. On the next morrow
at the time prescribed, they had her forth as she was, very faint and feeble,
and in such case, that she was ready to swound three or four times between
them. What should I speak here that cannot well be expressed? What an heavy
house there was, to behold the vnreuerent and doleful dealing of these men,
but especially the careful fear and captivity of their innocent Lady and
Mistress.

Now to proceed in her journey from Ashridge, all sick in a Litter, she came
to Redborne, where she was guarded Lady Elizabeth takes her journey toward the
Queen.
all night. From thence to S. Albones, to Sir Ralphe Rowlets house, where she
tarried that night, both feeble in body, and comfortles in mind. From that
place they passed to Master Doddes house at Mymmes, where also they remained
that night: and so from thence she came to Highgate, where she being very
sick, tarried that night and the next day. During which time of her abode
there, came many Pursuiuants and Messengers from the Court: but for what
purpose I cannot tell. From that place she was conveyed to the Court, where by
the way came to meet her many Gentlemen, to accompany her Highness, which
were very sorry to see her in that case: but especially a great multitude
Lady Elizabeth brought up to London.
of people there were standing by the way, who then flocking about her Litter,
lamented and bewailed greatly her estate. Now when she came to the Court, her
Grace was there strait ways shut up, and kept as close prisoner a fortnight,
which was till Palm Sundaie, seeing neither King nor Queen, nor Lord nor
friend all that time, but only then the Lord Chamberlain, Sir John Gage, and
the Uicechamberlaine, who were attendaunt unto the doors. About which time Sir
William Sentlowe was called before the Council, to whose charge was laid, that
he knew of Wiats rebellion. Which he stoutly denied, protesting Sir William
Sentlowe committed to the Tower.
that he was a true man both to God and his Prince, defying all Traitors and
Rebels: but being straightly examined, he was in conclusion committed to the
Tower.

The Friday before Palm Sunday, the Bishop of Winchester, with nineteen
other of the Council, who shall be here namelesse, came unto her Grace from
the Queens Lady Elizabeth charged with Sir Thomas Wiats conspiracy.
Majesty, and burdened her with Wiats conspiracy: which she utterly denied,
affirming that she was altogether guiltless therein. They being not contented
with this, Lady Elizabeth charged with the business of Sir Peter Carew.
charged her Grace with business made by Sir Peter Carew, and the rest of the
Gentlemen of the West country: which she also utterly denying, cleared her
innocence therein. In conclusion, after long debating of matters, they declared
unto her, that was the Queens will and pleasure Lady Elizabeth threatened to
go to the Tower,
that she should go unto the Tower, while the matter were further tried and
examined. Whereat she being aghast, said. That she trusted the Queens Majesty
would be more gracious Lady unto her, and that her Highness would not
otherwise conceive of her, but that she was a true woman: declaring furthermore
to the Lords, that she was innocent Lady Elizabeth purges her self to the
Lords.
in all those matters wherewith they had burdened her, and desired them
therefore to be a further mean to the Queen her Sister, that she being a true
woman in thought, word and deed toward her Majesty, might not be committed
to so notorious and doleful a place, protesting that she would request no
mercy at her hand, if she should be proved to have consented unto any such
kind of matter, as they had laid unto her charge. And therefore in fine,
desired their Lordshippes to think of her what she was, and that she might not
so extremely be dealt withal for her truth. Whereunto the Lords answered
again, that there was no remedy, for that the Queens Majesty was fully
determined, that she should go unto the Tower: wherewith the Lords departed
with their cappes hanging over their eyes. But not long after, within the space
of an hour or more, came four of the foresaid Lords of the Council, which
were ye Lord Treasurer, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Steward, and the
Earl of Sussex, with the Guard, who warding the next Chamber to her, secluded
all her Gentlemen and Yeomen, Ladies and Gentlewomen: saving Lady Elizabeth's
servant removed from her.
that for one Gentlemen Usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms of her
Chamber, were appointed three other men of the Queens, and three waiting
Women, to The Queens men and women attendaunt upon the Lady Elizabeth.
give attendance upon her, that none should have access to her Grace. At which
time, there was an hundred of Northen Soldiers in white coats, watching and
warding about the Gardens all that night, a great fire being made in the
midst of the Hall, and two certain Lords watching there also, with their
band and company.

Upon Saturday following, two Lords of the Counsel, (the one was the Earl of
Sussex, the other shall be namelesse) came and certified her Grace, that
forthwith she must go unto the Tower, the Barge being prepared for her, and
the tide now ready, which tarieth for no body. In heavy mood her Grace
requested the Lords, that she might tarry one other tide, trusting that the
next would be better and more comfortable: but one of the Lords replied, that
neither tide nor time was to be delaied. And when her Grace requested him, that
she might be suffered to write to the Queens Majesty: he answered that he
durst The hard dealing of a certain Lord with the Lady Elizabeth.
not permit that, adding, that in his judgment, it would rather hurt then
profit her Grace in so doing. But the other Lord more courteous and
favorable (who was the The Earl of Sussex gentle to the Lady Elizabeth.
Earl of Sussex) kneeling down, told her Grace that she should have liberty
to write, and as he was a true man he would deliver it to the Queens
Highness, and bring an answer of the same, whatsoever came thereof.
Whereupon she wrote: albeit she could in no case be suffered to Lady Elizabeth
writes to the Queen, but it would not serve.
speak with the Queen, to her great discomfort, being no offender against the
Queens Majesty. And thus the time and tide passed away for that season, they
privily appointing al things ready, that she should go the next tide, which
fell about midnight: but for fear she should be taken by the way, they durst
not. So they stayed till the next day, being Palm Sunday, when about nine of
the clock these two returned again, declaring that it was time for her Grace
to depart: She aunswering, if there be no remedy, I must be content, willing
the Lords to go on before. Being come forth into the garden, she did cast up
her eyes toward the window, thinking to have seen the Queen, which she could
not. Whereat she said: She meruailed much what the Nobility of the Realm
meant, which in that sort would suffer her to be led into captivity, the
Lord knew whether, for she did not? In the mean time commandment was given
in all London, that every one should keep the Church, and carry their Palms,
while (in the mean season) she might be conveyed without all recourse of
people into the Tower. After all this, she took her Barge with the foresaid
Lords, three of the Queens Lady Elizabeth sent to the Tower.
Gentlewomen, and three of her own, her Gentleman Usher, and two of her
Grooms, lying and houering upon the water a certain space, for that they
could not shoot the Bridge, the Barge men being very unwilling to shoot the
same so soon as they did, because of the danger thereof: for the stern of
the Barge struck upon the ground, the fall was so big, and the water was so
shallowe, that the Barge being under the bridge, there stayed again a while.
At landing, she first stayed, and denied to land at those stairs, where all
traitors and offenders customablie use to land, neither well could she,
unless she would go over her shoes. The Lords were gone out of the Barge
before, and asked why she came not? One of the Lords went back again to her,
and brought word she would not come. Then said one of the Lords, which shall be
namelesse, that she should not choose, and because it rained, he offered to her
his cloak, which she (putting it back with her hand with a good dashe)
refused. So she coming out, having one foot upon the staire, said: Here
landeth as true a Subject (being prisoner) as ever landed at these stairs, and
before thee The words of Lady Elizabeth entering the Tower.
O God I speak it, having no other friends but thee alone. To whom the same
Lord answered again, that if it were so, it was the better for her. At her
landing, there was a great multitude of their servant and Warders standing in
their order. What needed all this (said she.) It is the use (said some) so to
be, when any prisoner came thither. And if it be for my cause (said she) I
beseech you that they may be dismissed. Whereat the poor men kneeled down,
and with one voice desired GOD to preserve her Grace: but the next day they
were (therefore) released of their old coats. After this, passing a little
further, she sat down upon a cold stone, and there rested her self. To whom
the Lieuetenant then being, said: Madame, you were best to come out of the
rain, for you sit vnholsomely. She then replying, answered again: Better
sitting here then in a wurse place, for God knows, I know not whether you
will bring me. With that her gentleman Usher wept, she demanding of him what
he meant, to use her so vncomfortablie, seeing she took him to be her
comforter, and not to dismay her, especially for that she knew her truth to
be such, that no man should have cause to weep for her: but forth she went
into the prison. The doors were locked and bolted upon her, which did not a
little discomfort and dismay her Grace, at what time she called to her
gentlewoman for her Book. Desiring God not to suffer The christian prayer of
Lady Elizabeth.
her to build her foundation upon the sands, but upon the rock, whereby all
blastes of blustering weather should have no power against her. The doors being
thus locked, and she close shut up, the Lords had great conference how to
keep ward and watch, every man declaring his opinion in that behalf,
agreeing straightly and circumspectly to keep her. Then one of them, which was
the Lord of The Lord of Sussex speaks for Lady Elizabeth.
Sussex, swearing, said: My Lords let us take heed, and do no more then our
Commission will bear us, whatsoever shall happen hereafter. And further, let
us consider that she was the King our Masters Daughter, and therefore let us
use such dealing, that we may answer unto it hereafter, if it shall so
happen, for just dealing (quoth he) is always aunswerable. Whereunto the other
Lords agreede that it was well said of him, and thereupon departed. Being in
the Tower, within two days commandment was, that she should have Mass
within her house: one Master Young was then her Chaplain, and because there
was none of her men so well learned, to help the Priest to say Mass, the
Mass stayed for that day. The next day two of her Yeomen, who had gone long to
school before, and were learned, had two Abcies provided and delivered them,
so that upon the Abcies they should help the Priest. One of the said Yeomen,
holding the Abcie in his hand, pretending ignorance at Kirieleyson, set the
Priest, making as though he could answer no further.

It would make a pitiful and a strange story, here by the way to touch and
recite, what examinations and rackinges of poor men there were, to find out
that knife that should cut her throat: what gaping among my Lords of the
Clergy, to see the day when they might wash their goodly white Rochets in her
innocent blood. But especially the Bishop of Winchester Stephen Gardener, then
Lord Chau^cellour, The Bishop of Winchester enemy to Lady Elizabeth.
ruler of the roste, who then within few days after came unto her, with
diverse other of the Council, and examined her of the talk that was at
Ashridge, betwixt her and Sir James Acroft, concerning her remoouing from
thence to Dunnington Castle, requiring her to declare what she meant thereby?
At the first, she being so suddenly asked, did not well remember any such
house: but within a while, well aduising her self, she said. In deed (quoth
she) I do now remember that I have such a Place, but I never lay in it in all
my life: and as for any that has moved me thereunto, I do not remember. Then
to enforce Lady Elizabeth examined by the Bishop of Winchester.
the matter, they brought forth Sir James Acroft: the Bishop of Winchester
demanded of her, what she said to that man? She answered, that she had
little to say to him, or to ye rest that were then prisoners in the Tower. But
my Lords (quoth she) you do examine every mean prisoner of me, wherein me
thinks you do me great injury. If they have done evil, and offended the
Queens Majesty, let them answer to it accordingly: I beseech you my Lords,
join not me in this sort with any of these offenders. And as concerning my
going to Dunnington Castle, I do remember that Master Hobby and mine
Officers, and you Sir James Acroft had such talk: but what is that to she
purpose (my Lords) but that I may go to mine own houses at all times? The Lord
of Arundel kneeling down, The friendly speech of the Earl of Arundel to Lady
Elizabeth.
said: Your Grace says true, and certainly we are very sorry, that we have
so troubled you about so vain matters. She then said: My Lords, you do sift
me very narowly, but well I am assured, you shall do no more to me then God
has appointed, and so God forgive you all. At their departure, Sir James
Acroft kneeled down, declaring that he was very sorry to see the day, in
which he should be brought as a witness against her Grace. But I assure your
Grace (said he) I have been meruailouslie tossed and Sir James Acroft examined
touching the Lady Elizabeth.
examined touching your Highness, which the Lord knows is very strange to
me. For I take God to record before all your Honors, I do not know any thing
of that crime that you have laid to my charge, and will thereupon take my
death, if I should be driven to so strait a trial.

That day or there about, diverse of her own Officers, These were not the
Officers of the Tower, but such as went in white and green.
who had made provision for her diet, brought the same to the utter gate of the
Tower, the common rasall soldiers receiving it: which was no small grief to
the gentlemen, the bringers thereof, wherefore they required to speak with the
Lord Chamberlain, being then Constable of the Tower. Who, coming before his
presence, declared unto his Lordship, that they were much afraid to bring her
Graces diet, and deliver it to such common and desperate persons, as they were
which did receive it: beseeching his Honor to consider her Grace, and to give
such order, that her viands might at all times be brought in by them, which
were appointed thereunto. Yea Sirs (said he) who appointed you this office?
They answered, her Graces Council. Council (quoth he?) There is none of them
whith has to do, Lady Elizabeth's servant restrained from bringing her diet
to the Tower.
either in that case, or any else within this place: and I assure you, for that
she is a prisoner, she shall be served with the Lieuetenaunts men, as other
prisoners are. Whereat the gentlemen said, that they trusted for more favor
at his hands, considering her personage, saying: that they mistrusted
Displeasure between the Lord Chamberlain. and the Lady Elizabeth's men.
not, but that the Queen and her Council would be better to her Grace then
so, and therewith showed themselves to be offended, at the ungrateful words of
the Lord Chamberlain, toward their Lady and Mistress. At this he swore by
God, striking himself upon the breast, that if they did either frown or shrug
at him, he would set them where they should see neither Sun nor Moon. Thus
taking their leave, they desired God to bring him into a better mind toward
her Grace, and departed from him. Upon occasion whereof, her Graces Officers
made great suit unto the Queens Council, that some might be appointed to
bring her diet unto her, and that it might no more be delivered unto the common
soldiers of the Tower. Which being reasonably considered, was by them
granted, and therevppon were appointed one of her Gentlemen her Clerk of her
Kitchen, and her two Purueiours to bring in her provision once a day: all which
was done, the warders ever waiting upon the bringers thereof. The Lord
Chamberlain himself being always with them, circumspectly and narrowly
watched and searched what they brought, and gave heed that they should have no
talk with any of her Graces waiting servant, and so warded them both in and
out. At the said suit of her Officers, were sent by the commandment of the
Council, to wait upon her Grace, two Yeomen of her Chamber, one of her Lady
Elizabeth's waiting men in the Tower.
Robes, two of her Pantrie and Ewrie, one of her Buttry, an other of her
Seller, two of her Kitchen, and one of her Larder, all which continued with her
the time of her trouble.

Here the Constable, being at the first not very well pleased, with the
coming in of such a company against his will, would have had his men to have
served still with her Graces men: which her servant at no hand would suffer,
desiring his Lordship to be contented, for that order was taken, that no
stranger should come within their Offices. At which answer being sore
displeased, he brake out into these threatening words: Well (said he) I will
handle ye well enough. Then went he into the Kitchen, and there would needs
have his meat roasted with her Graces meat, Variaunce between the Lord
Chamberlain and Lady Elizabeth's servant.
and said that his Cook should come thither and dress it. To that her Graces
Cook answered: My Lord, I will never suffer any stranger to come about her
diet, but her own sworn men so long as I live. He said, they should: But the
Cook said, his Lordshippe should pardon him for that matter. Thus did he
trouble her poor servant very stoutly: though afterward he were otherwise
advised, and they more courteously used at his hands. And good cause why, for
he had good cheer, and fared of the best, and her Grace paid well for it:
wherefore he used himself afterward more reverently toward her Grace. After
this sort, having been a whole month there in close prison, and being very
evil at ease therewithal: she sent for the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord
Shandoyes, to come and speak with her. Who coming, she requested of them,
that she might have liberty to walk in some place, for that she felt her
self not well. To the which they answered, that they were right sorry that
they could not satisfy her Graces request, for that Lady Elizabeth denied the
liberty of the Tower.
they had commandment to the contrary, which they durst not in any wise
break. Furthermore, she desired of them, if that could not be granted, that
she might walk but into the Queens lodging. No nor yet that (they answered)
could by any means be obtained, without a further suit to the Queen and her
Council. Well (said she) my Lords, if the matter be so hard, that they must
be sued unto for so small a thing, and that freendshippe be so strait: God
comfort me, and so they departed, she remaining in her old dungeon still,
without any kind of comfort, but only God.

The next day after, the Lord Shandoyes came again unto her Grace, declaring
unto her that he had sued unto the Council for further liberty. Some of them
consented thereunto, diverse other dissented, for that there were so many
prisoners in the Tower. But in conclusion, they did all agree, that her Grace
might walk into those lodginges, so that he and the Lord Chamberlain, and
three of the Queens gentlewomen did accompany her, the windows being shut,
and she not suffered to look out at any of them: wherewith she contented her
self, and gave him thanks for his good will in that behalf. Afterward
there was Liberty granted to Lady Elizabeth to walk in a garden.
liberty granted to her Grace to walk in a little garden, the doors and
gates being shut up: which notwithstanding was as much discomfort unto her,
as the walk in the garden was pleasant and acceptable. At which times of her
walking there, the prisoners on that side were straightly commanded, not to
speak or look out at the windows into the garden, till her Grace were gone
out again, having (in consideration thereof) their keepers waiting upon them
for that time. Thus her Grace with this small liberty contented her self in
God, to whom be praise therefore.

During this time, there used a little boie, a man's child in the Tower, to
resort to their chambers, and many times to bring her Grace flowers, which
likewise he did to the other prisoners that were there. Whereupon naughty and
suspicious heads, thinking to make and wring out some Suspicious heads.
matter thereof, called on a time the child unto them, promising him Figs
and Apples, and asking of him when he had been with the Earl of Deuonshiere,
not ignorant of the childs wunted frequenting unto him. The boy answered,
that he would go by and by thither. Further, A young child examined for
bringing flowers to Lady Elizabeth.
they demanded of him, when he was with the Lady Elizabethes Grace. He
answered: every day. Furthermore they demanded of him, What the Lord of
Deuonshiere sent by him to her Grace. The child said, I will go know what he
will give me to carry to her. Such was the discretion of the child, being yet
but four years of age. This same is a crafty boie (quoth the Lord
Chamberlain) How say you my Lord Shandoyes? I pray you my Lord (quoth the
boie) give me the Figs you promised me. No marie (quoth he) thou shall be
wipped, if thou come any more to the Lady Elizabeth, or to the Lord Courtney.
The boie answered: I will bring my Lady my Mistress more flowers. Whereupon
the childs father was commanded, to permit the boie no more to come up into
their chambers. The next day as her Grace was walking in the garden, the child
peeping in at a little hole in the door, cried unto her, saying: Mistress, I
can bring you no more flowers. Whereat she smiled, but said nothing,
understanding thereby what they had done. Wherefore, afterward the L.
Chamberlain rebuked highly his Father, commanding him to put him out of the
house. Alas poor Infaunt, (quoth the Father.) It is a crafty knave (quoth the
Lord Chamberlain:) but let me see him here no more.

The fifth day of May, the Constable was discharged of The Constable of the
Tower discharged of his Office, and Sir Henry Benifield with his company
placed about the Lady Elizabeth.
his Office of the Tower, and one Sir Henry Benifield placed in his room, a
man unknown to her Grace, and therefore the more feared: which so sudden
mutation was unto her no little amaze. He brought with him an hundred Soldiers
in blew coats, wherewith she was meruailouslie discomforted, and demanded of
such as were about her, whether the Lady Ianes Scaffold were taken away or
Lady Elizabeth both in great fear and doubt of her life.
no, fearing by reason of their coming, least she should have played her part.
To whom answer was made, that the Scaffold was taken away, and that her
Grace needed not to doubt of any such tirannie: for God would not suffer any
such treason against her person. Wherewith being contented, but not altogether
satisfied, she asked what Sir Henry Benifield was? And whether he were of the
Lady Elizabeth in doubt of Sir Henry Benifield.
conscience or no, that if her murdering were secretly committed to his
charge, he would see the execution thereof. She was answered, that they were
ignorant what manner of man he was: howbeit they persuaded her, that God would
not suffer such wickedness to proceed. Well (quoth she) God grant it be so:
for thou O God can mollify all Lady Elizabeth's prayer.
such tirannous hearts, and disappoint all such cruel purposes. And I beseech
thee to hear me thy creature, which am thy servant and at thy commandment,
trusting by thy grace ever so to remain. About which time it was spread
abroad, that her Grace should be carried from thence, by this new iollie
Captain and his Soldiers, but whether, it could not be learned: which was
unto her a great grief, especially for that such a company was appointed to
her guard, requesting rather to continue there still, then to be led thence
with such a sort of rascalles. At last plain answer was made by the Lord
Shandoyes, that there was no remedy, but from thence she must needs depart to
the Manor of Woodstocke, as he thought. Being demanded of her, for what
cause: for that (quoth he) the Tower is like further to be furnished. She being
destrous to know what he meant thereby, demanded, wherewith: with such matter
as the Queen and the Council were determined in that behalf, whereof he had
no knowledge, and so departed. In conclusion, on Trinity Sunday, being the
nineteen day of May, she was removed from the Tower, the Lord Treasurer
being then there for the lading of her Carts, and discharging the place of the
same: where Sir Henry Benifield (being appointed her Jailer) did receive her
with a company of rakehelles to guard her, beside the Lord of Darbyes band,
wafting in the Country about for the Moone-shine in the water. Unto Lady
Elizabeth remooueth from the Tower to Woodstocke.
whom at length came my Lord of Tame, joined in Commission with the said Sir
Henry, for the safe guiding of her to prison: and they together conveyed her
Grace to Woodstocke, as hereafter follows.

The first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she Lady Elizabeth
secluded from her servant.
continued all night, being restrained of her own men, which were lodged in
out Chambers, and Sir Henry Benifieldes Soldiers appointed in their rooms,
to give attendaunce on her person. Whereat she being meruailouslie dismayed,
thinking verily some secret mischief to Lady Elizabeth in despair of her
self.
be working toward her: called her Gentleman Usher, and desired him with the
rest of his company, to pray for her, for this night (quoth she) I think to
die. Wherewith he being stricken to the heart, said: God forbid that any such
wickedness should be pretended against your Grace. So comforting her as well
as he could, at last he burst into tears, and went from her down into the
Court, where were walking the Lord of Tame and Sir Henry Benefield. Then he
coming to the Lord of Tame (who had proffered to him much freendshippe)
desired to speak with him a word or two: unto whom he familiarlie said, he
should with all his heart. Which when Sir Henry (standing by) heard, he asked
what the matter was? To whom the Gentleman Usher answered: No great matter
Sir (said he) but to speak with my Lord a word or two. Then when the Lord of
Tame came to him, he spoke on this wise. My Lord (quoth he) you have been
always my good Lord, and so I Lady Elizabeth's Usher talks with the Lord of
Tame.
beseech you to remain. The cause why I come to you at this time, is to desire
your Honor, friendly to declare to me, whether any danger is meant to my
Mistress this night, or no, that I and my poor fellows may take such part as
shall please God to appoint: for certainly we will rather die, then she should
secretly and innocentlie miscarie. Marie (said the Lord of Tame) God forbid
that any The gentle heart of the Lord of Tame to Lady Elizabeth.
such wicked purpose should be wrought: and rather then it should be so, I with
my men are ready to die at her foot also. And so (praised be God) they passed
that doleful night with no little heaviness of heart.

Afterward, passing over the water at Richmond, going toward Windsor, her
Grace espied certain of her poor servants standing on the other side, which
were very desirous to see her. Whom when she beheld, turning to one of her
men standing by, she said: Yonder I see certain of my men, go to them, and
say these words from me: Tanquam ouis. So she passing forward to Windsor,
was lodged Tanquam ouis. Like a sheep to to the slaughter.
there that night in the Deane of VVindsores house: a place in deed more meet
for a Priest then a Princess. And from thence her Grace was guarded and brought
the next night to Master Dormers house, where much people standing Lady
Elizabeth honorably received, and beloved of the people
by the way, some presented to her one gift, and some an other, so that Sir
Henry was greatly moved therewith, and troubled the poor people very sore,
for showing their loving hearts in such a manner, calling them Rebels and
Traitors, with such like vile words. Beside, as he passed through the
Uillages, the Townsemen rang the Belles, as being joyful of her coming,
thinking verily it had been otherwise then it was in deed, as the sequel
proved after to the said poor men. For immediately the said Sir Henry
hearing the same, sent his Soldiers thither, who apprehended some of the
Ringers, setting them in the stocks, and otherwise vncourteouslie misusing
othersome for their good wills. On the next morrow her Grace passing from The
gentle entertainment of Lady Elizabeth, at the Lord of Tames house.
Master Dormers (where for the time of her abode there, was a strait watch
kept) came to the Lord of Tames house, where she lay all that night, being
very Princely entertained, both of Knights and Ladies, gentlemen and
gentlewomen. Whereat Sir Henry Benifield grunted, and was highly offended,
saying unto them: That they Sir Henry Benifield grudged at the gentle
entertainment of Lady Elizabeth. The rude and ungentle behavior of Sir Henry
Benifield.
could not tell what they did, and were not able to answer their dooinges in
that behalf. Letting them to understand, that she was the Queens Majesty's
prisoner, and no otherwise: aduising them therefore to take heed, and beware
of afterclappes. Whereunto the Lord of Tame answered on this wise: That he was
well advised of his dooinges, being joined in Commission as well as he, adding
with warrant, that her Grace might and should in his house be merry. The next
day, as she should take her journey from Kichmond toward VVoodstocke, the Lord
of Tame with an other Gentleman being at the Tables, playing and dropping vye
Crowns, the Lady Elizabeth passing by, stayed and said, she would see the
game plaide out, which Sir Henry Benifield would scarce permit. The game
running long about, and they playing drop vye Crowns: Come on (says he.) I
will tarry (says she) and will see this game out. After this Sir Henry went
up into a Chamber, where was appointed for her Grace a Chair, two Cushions,
and a foot Carpet, very fair and Princelike: wherein presumptuouslie he sat,
and called one Barwicke his man to pull off his Boots. Which as soon as it
was known among the Ladies and Gentles, every one mused thereat, and laughed
him to scorn, observing his indiscreet manners in that behalf, as they might
very well. When Supper was done, he called my Lord, and willed him that all the
Ladies and gentlemen should withdraw them selves every one to his lodging:
meruailing much that he would permit there such a company, considering so great
a charge committed to him. Sir Henry (quoth my Lord) content your self, all
shall be voided, your men and all. Nay, my Soldiers (quoth Sir Henry) shall
watch all night. The Lord of Tame answered: it shall not need. Well (said
he) need or need not, they shall so do: mistrusting belike the company,
which God knows was without cause.

The next day her Grace took her journey from thence Lady Elizabeth, comes
to Woodstocke.
to Woodstocke, where she was enclosed, as before in the Tower of London: the
Soldiers garding and warding both within and without the walls, every day to
the number of three score, and in the night without the walls forty, during
the time of her imprisonment there. At length, The strait watch kept at
Woodstocke.
she had gardens appointed for her to walk in, which was very comfortable to
her Grace: but always when she did recreate her self therein, the doors were
fast locked up, and in as strait manner as they were in the Tower, being at
least five or six locks between her lodging and her walks, Sir Henry
himself keeping the keys, and trusting no man therewith. Whereupon she called
him her Jailer: and he kneeling down, desired her Grace not to call him so,
for he was appointed there to be one of her Officers. From such Officers (quoth
she) good Lord deliver me.

And now by the way as digressing, or rather refreshing the Reader, if it be
lawful in so serious a story to recite a A merry story concerning the
strait keeping of the Lady Elizabeth.
matter incident, and yet not impertinent to the same, occasion here moves,
or rather enforces me, to touch breeflie what happened in the same place and
time by a merry conceited man, being then about her Grace. Who noting the
strait and strange keeping of his Lady and Mistress by the said Sir Henry
Benifield, with so many locks and doors, with such watch and ward about her,
as was strange and wunderful: espied a Goat in the ward where her Grace was,
and whether to refreshe her oppressed mind, or to notify her strait handling
by Sir Henry, either else both, he took it upon his neck, and followed her
Grace therewith, as she was going into her lodging. Which when she saw, she
asked him what he would do with it, willing to let it alone. Unto whom the
same party answered: No by saint Marie (if it like your Grace) will I not,
for I cannot tell whether he be one of the Queens friends or no, I will
carry him to Sir Henry Benifield (God willing) to know what he is. So
leaving her Grace, he went with the Goat on his neck, and carried it to Sir
Henry Benifield: who when he saw him coming with it, asked him half
angerlie what he had there? Unto whom the party The straitness of Sir Henry
Benifield merrily noted.
answered, saying: Sir (quoth he) I cannot tell what he is, I pray you
examine him, for I found him in the place where my Ladies Grace was walking,
and what talk they have had I cannot tell, for I understand him not, but he
should seem to me to be some stranger, and I think verily a Welsh man, for
he has a white freese coat on his back. And for so much as I being the
Queens subject, and perceiving the strait charge committed to you of her
keeping, that no stranger should have access unto her without sufficient
license: I have here found a stranger (what he is I cannot tell) in place
where her Grace was walking, and therefore for the necessary discharge of my
duty, I thought it good to bring the said stranger to you, to examine as you
see cause: and so he let him down. At which words Sir Henry seemed much
displeased, and said: Well, well, you will never leave this geere I see, and
so they departed.

Now to return to the matter from whence we have digressed, Lady Elizabeth,
with much adoo, suffered to write to the Queen.
after her Grace had been there a time, she made suit to the Council, that
she might be suffered to write to the Queen: which at last was permitted. So
that Sir Henry brought her pen, ink and paper, and standing by her while she
wrote (which he straightly observed) always she being weary, he would carry
away her Letters, and bring them again when she called for them. In the
finishing thereof, he would have been messenger to the Queen of the same, whose
request her Grace denied, saying: One of her own men should carry them, and
that she would neither trust him, nor none of his therein. Then he aunswering
again, said: None of them durst be so bold (he trowed) to carry her Letters,
being in that case. Yes (quoth she) I am assured I have none so dishonest, that
would deny my request in that behalf, but will be as willing to serve me now,
as before. Well (said he) my Commission The cruel dealing of Sir Henry
Benifield to the Lady Elizabeth, reproved.
is to the contrary, and I may not so suffer it. Her Grace replying again,
said: You charge me very often with your Commission, I pray God you may
justly answer the cruel dealing you use toward me. Then he kneeling
down, desired her Grace to think and consider, how he was a servant, and put
in trust by the Queen to serve her Majesty: protesting that if the case were
hers, he would as willingly serve her Grace, as now he did the Queens
highness. For the which his answer, her Grace thanked him, desiring of God,
that she might never have need of such servants as he was: declaring further
to him, that his dooinges toward her were not good nor aunswerable, but more
then all the friends he had would stand by. To whom Sir Henry replied and
said: That there was no remedy but his dooinges must be answered, and so
they should, trusting to make good account thereof. The cause which moved her
Grace so to say, was, for that he would not permit her Letters to be carried
four or five days after the writing thereof. But in fine, he was content The
Letters of Lady Elizabeth carried to the Queen.
to send for her gentleman from the Town of Woodstocke, demanding of him,
whether he durst enterprise the carriage of her Graces Letters to the Queen,
or no: and he answered, yea Sir that I dare, and will with all my heart.
Whereupon Sir Henry (half against his stomach) took them unto him. Then
about the eight day of June, came down Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendie, sent
by the Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendie, Queen Mary's Physicians sent to Lady
Elizabeth.
Queen to her Grace, for that she was sickly: who ministering to her, and
letting her blood, tarried there and attended on her Grace five or six days.
Then she being well amended, they returned again to the Court, making their
good report to the Queen and the Council, of her Graces behavior and
humbleness toward the Queens Highness. Which her Majesty hearing, took
very thankefullie: but the Bishops thereat repined, looked black in the The
popish Prelates repined against the Lady Elizabeth.
mouth, and told the Queen, they meruailed that she submitted not her self
to her Majesty's mercy, considering that she had offended her Highness. About
this time, her Grace was requested by a secret friend, to submit her self Lady
Elizabeth requested to submit her self to the Queen.
to the Queens Majesty, which would be very well taken, and to her Grace
great quiet and commodity: unto whom she answered: That she would never
submit her self to them whom she never offended. For (quoth she) if I have
offended and am guilty, I then crave no mercy but the law: which I am
certain (quoth she) I should have had ere this, if it could be proved by me.
For I know my self (I thank God) to be out of the danger thereof, wishing
that I were as clear out of the peril of mine enemies: and then I am assured,
I should not be so locked and bolted up within walls and doors, as I am, God
give them a better mind when it pleases him.

About this time, was there a great consulting among Council of the Papists,
to marie the Lady Elizabeth to a Spaniard.
the Bishops and gentlemen, touching a marriage for her Grace, which some of
the Spaniardes wished to be with some Stranger, that she might go out of the
Realm with her portion: some saying one thing, and some an other. A Lord (who
shall be here namelesse) being there, at last Wicked council given against
Lady Elizabeth.
said: That the King should never have any quiet Common wealth in England,
unless her head were stricken from her shoulders. Whereunto the Spaniardes
answered, saying: God forbid that the King their Master should have that
mind, to consent to such a mischief. This was the courteous answer of the
Spaniards to the English Spaniardes more favorable to Lady Elizabeth, then
some English men.
men, speaking after that sort against their own Country. From that day the
Spaniardes never left off their good persuasions to the King, that the like
honor he should never obtain, as he should in delivering Lady Elizabethes
Grace out of prison: whereby at length she was happily released from the same.
Here is a plain and evident example, of the good clemency and nature of the
King and his Councellers toward her Grace, praised be God therefore, who
moved their hearts therein. Then heerevpon, she was sent for shortly after,
to come to Hampton Court.

But before her remoouing from VVoodstocke, we will a little stay, to declare
in what dangers her life was, during this time she there remained. First
through fire, which began to kindle between the boordes and seeling, under the
Lady Elizabeth, in danger of fire.
Chamber where she lay: whether by a spark of fire gotten into a creuis, or
whether of purpose by some that meant her no good, the Lord does know.
Nevertheless, a woorshipfull Knight of Oxfordshiere, which was there joined
the same time with Sir Henry Benifield, in keeping that Lady (who then took
up the boordes and quenched the fire) verily supposed it to be done of
purpose. Furthermore it is thought, and also affirmed (if it be true) of one
Paul Penny a keeper of VVoodstocke, a notorious Lady Elizabeth, in danger of
kylling.
Ruffian, and a butcherly wretch, that was appointed to kill the Lady
Elizabeth: who both saw the man, being often in her sight, and also knew
thereof. An other time one of the privy Chamber, a great man about the Queen,
An other conspiracy of murder against Lady Elizabeth.
and chief darling of Stephen Gardener, named Master James Basset, came to
Blandenbridge a mile from UUoodstocke, with twenty or thirty privy coats,
and sent for Sir Henry Benifield to come and speak with him. But as God
would, who disposed all things after the purpose of his own will, so it
happened, that a little before, the said Sir Henry Benifield was sent for by
a Post to the Council, leaving strait word behind him with his brother,
that no man whatsoever he were, though coming with a Bill of the Queens hand,
or any other warrant, should have access to her before his return again. By
reason whereof so it fell out, that Sir Henry Benifieldes brother coming to
him at the Bridge, would suffer him in no case to approach in: who otherwise (as
it is supposed) was appointed violently to murder the innocent Lady.

At what time likewise that the Lady Elizabeth was in Lady Elizabeth preserved
by the Lords providence, from execution in the Tower.
the Tower, a Writ came down subscribed with certain hands of the Council,
for her execution: which if it were certain as it is reported, Winchester (do
doubt) was deviser of that mischeuous drift. And doubtless the same
Achitophell had brought his impious purpose that day to pass, had not the
fatherly providence of Almighty God (who is always stronger then the devil)
styrred up Master Bridges, Lieuetenaunt the same time of the Tower, to come in
haste to the Queen, to give certificate thereof, and to know further her
consent for her Sisters death. Whereupon it followed, that all that devise was
disappointed, and VVinchesters Winchesters platform overthrown.
deuillishe platform (which he said he had cast through the Lords goodness)
came to no effect. Where moreover is to be noted, that during the imprisonment
of this Lady and Princess, one Master Edmund Tremaine was on the Rack, and
Master Smithwike, and diverse other in the Tower were examined, and diverse
offers made them, to accuse the guiltless Lady, being in her captivity.
Howbeit all that notwitstanding, no matter could be proved by all
examinations, as she the same time lying at Woodstocke, had certain
intelligence, by the means of one John Gayer: who under a coullorable pretense
of a Letter to Mistress Cleue from her Father, was let in, and so gave them
secretly to understand of all this matter. Whereupon the Lady Elizabeth, at
her departing out from VVoodstocke, wrote these Uerses with her Diamond in a
glass window. Much suspected by me: Verses written by Lady Elizabeth in the
glass window.

Nothing proved can be.
Quod Elizabeth prisoner.


And thus much touching the troubles of Lady Elizabeth at VVoodstocke.
Whereunto this is more to be added, that during the same time, the Lord of Tame
had labored to the Queen, and became surety for her, to have her from
vvoodstocke to his house, and had obtained his grant thereof: whereupon
preparation was made accordingly, and all things ready in expectation of her
coming. Lady Elizabeth not suffered to come to the Lord of Tames house.
But through the procurement either of Sir Henry Benifield, or by the doing of
winchester her mortal enemy, Letters came over night to the contrary,
whereby her journey was staide. Thus this worthy Lady oppressed with continual
sorrow, could not be permitted to have recourse to any friends she had: but
still in the hands of her enemies was left desolate, and utterly destitute of
all that might refreshe a doleful heart, fraught full of terror and thraldom.
Whereupon no marvel, if she hearing upon a time out of her garden at
vvoodstocke, a certain Lady Elizabeth wishes her self to be a Milk maid.
Milk maid singing pleasauntly, wished her self to be a Milk maid as she
was, saying: That her case was better, and life more merier, then hers was, in
that state as she was.

Now after these things thus declared, to proceed further where we left
before, Sir Henry Benifield and his Soldiors, with the Lord of Tame, and Sir
Ralphe Chamberlain garding and waiting upon her: The first night from
vvoodstocke, she came to Ricotte. In which journey such a mighty wind did
blow, that her servants were feign to hold down her clothes about her: in
so much, that her Hood was twice or thrice blown from her head. Whereupon she
desirous to return to a gentleman's house there near, could not be suffered by
Sir Henry Benifield so to do: but was constrained under a hedge, to trim her
head as well as she could. After this, they iourneied the next night to Master
Dormers, and so to Colbrooke, where she lay all that night at the George. And
by the way coming to Colbrooke, certain of her Graces Gentlemen and Yeomen
met her, to the number of three score, much to all their comfortes, who had
not seen her Grace of long season before: notwithstanding, they were
commanded in the Queens name immediately to depart the Town, to both their
and her Graces no little heaviness, who could not be suffered once to speak
with them. So that night all her men were taken from her, saving her gentleman
Usher, three gentlewomen, two Grooms, and one of her Wardroppe, the Soldiers
watching and warding round about the house, and she close shut up within her
prison. The next day following, her Grace entered Hampton Court on the back
side, into the Princes lodging, the doors being shut to her, and she guarded
with Soldiers as before, lay there a fortnight at the least, or ever any had
recourse unto her. At length came the Lord William Haward, who marvelous
honorably used her Grace: whereat she took much The Lord William Haward
gentle and favorable to Lady Elizabeth.
comfort, and requested him to be a mean, that she might speak with some of
the Council. To whom (not long after) came the Bishop of winchester, the
Lord of Arundell, the Lord of Shrewesburie, and Secretary Peter, who with
great humility humbled themselves to her Grace. She again likewise saluting
them, said. My Lords (quoth she) I am glad to see you: for me thinks I have
been kept a great while from you desolately alone. Wherefore I would desire
you, to be a mean to the King and Queens Majesty's, that I may be delivered
from prison, wherein I have been kept a long space, as to you my Lords it is
not unknown. When she had spoken, Stephen Gardener the Bishop of winchester
kneeled down, and requested Lady Elizabeth requested by Winchester, to submit
her self to the Queens mercy.
that she would submit herself to the Queens Grace, and in so doing, he had
no doubt but her Majesty would be good unto her. She making answer: That
rather then she would so do, she would lie in prison all the days of her
life, adding: That she craved no mercy at her Majesty's Lady Elizabeth
stands to be tried by the law.
hand, but rather desired the law, if ever she had offended her Majesty, in
word, thought, or deed. And besides this, in yielding (quoth she) I should
speak against my self, and confess my self to be an offendour, which never
was toward her Majesty: by occasion whereof, the King and Queen might ever
hereafter conceive of me an evil opinion. And therefore I say my Lords, it
were better for me to lie in prison for the truth, then to be abroad and
suspected of my Prince. And so they departed, promising to declare her message
to the Queen.

On the next day, the Bishop of Winchester came again unto her Grace, and
kneeling down, declared that the Talk again between Winchester and Lady
Elizabeth.
Queen meruailed, that she would so stoutly use her self, not confessing to
have offended: so that it should seem, the Queens Majesty wrongfullie to
have imprisoned her Grace. Nay (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) it pleases her to
punish me as she thinks good. Well (quoth Gardener) her Majesty wills me to
tell you, that you must tell an other tale, ere that you be set at liberty.
Her Grace answered, Lady Elizabeth denies to confess any fault done to the
Queen.
that she had as liefe be in prison with honesty and truth, as to be abroad
suspected of her Majesty: and this that I have said, I will (said she) stand
unto, for I will never belie my self. Winchester again kneeled down, and
said: Then your Grace has the vauntage of me and other of the Lords, for your
so long and wrong imprisonment. What vauntage I have (quoth she) you know,
taking God to record, I seek no advantage at your hands, for your so dealing
with me: but God forgive you and me also. With that the rest kneeled down,
desiring her Grace that all might be forgotten, and so departed, she being fast
locked up again. A seuen-night after, the Queen sent for her Lady Elizabeth
sent for to the Queen.
Grace at ten a clock in the night, to speak with her: for she had not seen
her in two years before. Yet for all that she was amazed at the so sudden
sending for, thinking it had been wurse for her then afterward it proved:
and desired her gentlemen and gentlewomen to pray for her, for that she could
not tell whether ever she should see them again or no. At which time Sir
Henry Benifield, with Mistress Clarencius coming, her Grace was brought into
the garden, unto a stayres foot that went into the Queens lodging, her Graces
gentlewomen waiting on her, her gentleman Usher and her Grooms going before
with Torches: where her gentlemen and gentlewomen being commanded to stay,
all saving one Woman, Mistress Clarencius conducted her to the Queens bed
Chamber, where her Majesty was. At the sight of whom her Grace kneeled down,
and desired God to preserve her Majesty, not mistrusting but that she should
try her self as Lady Elizabeth, brought to the Queens bed Chamber.
true a subject toward her Majesty, as ever did any, and desired her
Majesty even so to judge of her, and said: that she should not find her to
the contrary, whatsoever report otherwise had gone of her. To whom the Queen
answered: Talk between the Queen and Lady Elizabeth.
You will not confess your offense, but stand stoutly to your truth: I
pray God it may so fall out. If it does not (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) I
request neither favor nor pardon at your Majesty's hands. Well (said the
Queen) you still stiflie persevere in your truth: belike you will not confess
but that you have been wrongfullie punished. I must not say so (it it please
your Majesty, quoth she) to you. Why then (said the Queen) belike you will
to other. No, if it please your Majesty (quoth she) I have borne the burden,
and must bear it. I humbly Small comfort at the Queens hand toward her Sister
beseech your Majesty to have a good opinion of me, and to think me to be
your true Subject, not only from the beginning hitherto, but for ever, as
long as life lasts. And so they departed with very few comfortable words
of the Queen in English: but what she said in Spanishe, God knows. It is
thought that King Phillip was there King Phillip thought to be a friend to Lady
Elizabeth.
behind a cloth, and not seen, and that he showed himself a very friend in
that matter, etc. Thus her Grace departing, went to her lodging again, and the
seuenight after was delivered of Sir Henry Benifield her Jailer (as she Lady
Elizabeth, by Gods providence set at liberty.
termed him) and his Soldiers, and so her Grace being set at liberty from
imprisonment, went into the Country, and had appointed to go with her Sir
Thomas Pope, Sir Henry Benifield discharged.
one of Queen Mary's Counsaylors, and one of her gentlemen Ushers, Master
Gage. And thus straightly was she looked too all Queen Mary's time: and this is
the discourse of her Highness imprisonment.

Then there came to Lamheyre Master Ierningham, and Master Norris gentleman
Usher, Queen Mary's men, who took away from her Grace Mistress Ashley to the
Fleet, and three other of her gentlewomen to the Mistress Ashley sent to the
Fleet.
Tower: which was no little trouble to her Grace, saying, that she thought they
would fetch away all at the end. Three gentlewomen of Lady Elizabeth's sent to
the Tower.
But God he praised, shortly after was fetched away Gardener, by occasion of
whose oportune decease, the life of this excellent Princess, the wealth of all
England, was preserved. Note the wonderful working of the Lords providence,
in saving of Lady Elizabeth.
For this is credible to be supposed, that the said wicked Gardener of
Winchester, had long labored his wits, and to this only most principal
mark bent all his devises: to bring this our happy and dear Sovereign out
of the way, as both by his words and daily dooinges Lady Elizabeth,
delivered by the death of Stephen Gardener.
sufficiently appeared. But such was the gracious and favorable providence of
the Lord, to the preservation not only of her Royal Majesty, but also the
miserable and woeful state of this whole Island, and poor Subjects of the same,
whereby the proud platformes, and peeuishe practices of this wretched
Achitophell prevailed not: but contrariwise both he, and all the snares and
trappes of his pernicious council laid against an other, were turned to a
net to catch himself, according to the Proverb: Malum consilium consultori
pessimum. After the death of this How the Lord here began to work for Lady
Elizabeth.
Gardener, followed the death also and dropping away of other her enemies,
whereby by little and little her ieopardie decreased, fear deminished, hope of
comfort began to appear as out of a dark cloud. And albeit her Grace (as
yet) had no full assurance of perfect safety, yet more gentle entertainment
did daily grow unto her, till at length to the month of November, and
seventeen day of the same, three years after the death of Stephen Gardener,
followed the death of Queen Marie. After whose deceasse, succeeded her
foresaid Sister Lady Elizabeth into her Lady Elizabeth proclaimed Queen, the
same day that Queen Marie died.
right of the Crown of England, who after so long restraintment, so great
dangers escaped, such blustering storms ouerblowne, so many injuries digested
and wrongs sustained, by the mighty protection of our merciful God, to our no
small comfort and commodity, has been exalted and erected out of thrall to
liberty, out of danger to peace and quietness, from dread to dignity, from
misery to Majesty, from mourning to ruling: breefelie, of a prisoner made a
Princess, and placed in her throne Royal, proclaimed now Queen, with as many
glad hearts of The Lord make England thankful to him, for his great
benefits.
her Subjects, as ever was any King or Queen in this Realm before her, or
ever shall be (I dare say) hereafter, the Lord long hold his hand over her,
and send her to rule many and happy years I beseech him. Amen.

In this pitiful and rufull History, thou have (O England) three especial
things to consider. First, the hardness of the time then being, and the
unmercifulness of those men's hearts, who prepared all their deuillishe
policies, Consideration of the hardness of the time then, and the cruel
dealing against Lady Elizabeth.
and invented a world of wyles and deceites, whereby they might gain
opportunity to destroy this worthy and famous Lady, whose innocence could not
appease their blood thirstinesse, nor whose virtues could not assuage their
cruel dealing: but even as the wicked Jews cried death against our Savior,
even so these unnatural men did their uttermost against this Noble Lady.
Secondly, thou art to note her wonderful patience, her assured trust
Consideration of the wonderful patience of Lady Elizabeth.
in God, who never failed her: and even when death was most of all threatened to
her, and that many occasions was given for her to doubt the same, her patience
was not any jot the more moved, but being confident in God, to whom she
referred the state of her innocence, and extremity of their rigorous
intentes, she passed through all those agonies with a cheerful and undaunted
heart, and their practices to fear her was not so horrible, but her patience
in suffering was as admirable. Thirdly, thou must remember, Consideration of
the present help of God at all times to Lady Elizabeth.
the ready working hand of God for her in all her dangers, how graciously he
prevented their devises, and had such an especial care over his Daughter, as
no extremity whatsoever could prevail against her. For which exceeding love
toward thee, how highly thou art bound to his heavenly Majesty, the
manifold happy blessings thou have and do receive by her, can sufficiently
tell thee. But as I have heretofore given thee to understand, the punishment
of Treason and tretcherous practices, in the reigns of the Kings before
passed: so likewise I must crave leave a little, to speak of such matters as
has happened since the reign of our Sovereign Lady and Queen, and then will
we proceed on with the rest of our intent.

Since the reign of our most gracious and Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.
THe fourth and fifth day of January, did suffer at Durham to the number of
three score and six Constables and Rebels executed at Durham. 1570.
other, who were pertakers in the rebellion in the North, with the Lords of
Westmerland and Northumberland: amongst whom an Alderman of the Town, and a
Priest called Plometree were the most notable. Then Sir George Bows Marshall,
finding many to be faultors in the foresaid rebellion, did see them executed
in every markette Town and other places, betwixt Newcastell and Wetherbie,
about three score miles in length, and forty miles in breadth.

On good Fridaie, the seven and twenty day of March, Simon Digbie of Askew,
John Fulthorp of Isilbecke in the Rebels executed at York.
County of York Esquiers, Robert Peneman of Stokesley, Thomas Bishop the
younger of Poklinton in the same County of York Gentlemen, were drawn from
the Castle of York, to the place of execution called Knaues-myre, half a
mile without the City of York, and there hanged, headed and quartered: their
four heads were set on the four principal gates of the City, with four of
their quarters, the other quarters were set in diverse places of the Country:
Oscolph Clesbe was with them drawn to the gallows, and returned again to the
Castle.

One Hillyard the Earl of Northumberlands man, and Rebels executed at
Berwicke.
a vagraunt person named William Godswher, were taken among the other rebels,
and were brought to Bervvicke, where they were executed the four and twenty
day of May.

The seven and twenty day of May, Thomas Norton The Nortons executed.
and Christopher Norton of Yorkeshiere, being both condemned of high treason,
for the late rebellion in the North: were drawn from the Tower of London to
Tiborne, and there hanged, headed and quartered.

A conspiracy was made by certain Gentlemen and other, in the County of
Norfolk, whose purpose was on Conspiracy in Norfolk.
Midsommer day, at Harlestone Fair, with sound of Trumpet and Drum, to have
raised a number, and then to proclaim their deuillishe pretense against
Strangers and other. This matter was uttered by Thomas Kete one of the
conspiracy, unto John Kensey, who forthwith sent the same Kete with a
Constable to the next Justice, before whom and other Justices, he opened the
whole matter. Whereupon, Master Dreugh Drewrie immediately apprehended John
Throckmorton, and after him many Gentlemen of the City of Norwich, and the
County of Norfolk, who were all committed to prison. And at the next Sessions
of Jail delivery at the Castle of Norwich, the seventeen of Iulie, before
Sir Robert Catlin Knight, Lord chief Justice, Master Gilbert Gerrard, the
Queens Attorney general, and other Justices, ten of them were endighted of
high Treason, and some others of contempt, diverse of them were condemned, and
had judgment the one and twenty of August, and afterward three of them were
hanged, bowelled and quartered, which were John Throckmorton of Norwich
Gentleman, who stood mute at his arraignement, but at the gallows, confessed
himself to be the chief conspiratour, and that none had deserved to die but
he, for that he had procured them. With him was executed Thomas Brook of
Rolsebie Gentleman, the thirty day of August, and George Redman of
Cringlefoord Gentleman, was likewise executed the second day of September.

The eight day of August, John Felton, who before had John Felton executed in
Paul's Churchyard in London. 1571.
been condemned in the Guild Hall of London, for hanging a Bull at the gate of
the Bishop of Londons Palace, was drawn from Newgate into Paul's
Churchyard, and there hanged on a gallows new set up that morning, before
the Bishops Palace gate: and being cut down alive, he was bowelled and
quartered.

The first day of June, John Story a Doctor of the Cannon Doctor Story
executed at Tyborne. 1572.
Law, who had been a great persecutour of Gods flock in the reign of Queen
Marie, having been before condenmed of high treason: was drawn from the Tower
of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, his head set on
London Bridge, and his quarters on the gates of the City.

The eleventh day of February, Kenelme Barney, and Kenelme Barney, Edward
Mather, and Henry Rolfe executed for treason.
Edward Mather, were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and Henry
Rolfe from the Marshalsea in Southwarke, to the same place of execution: where
they were all three hanged, bowelled and quartered for treason. Barney and
Mather for conspiracy, and Rolfe for counterfeiting the Queens Majesty's hand.

The sixteenth of January, the Lord Thomas Haward, Duke of Norfolk, was
arraigned in Westminster Hall, The Duke of Norfolk condemned for high
treason, and beheaded on the Tower hill.
before George Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewesburie, high Steward of England for
that day: and there by his Peers found guilty of high treason, and had
judgment accordingly. So on the second day of June following, in the morning
between the hours of seven and eight, the said Thomas Haward Duke of
Norfolk, was beheaded on a Scaffolde set up on the Tower hill.

The two and twenty day of August, Thomas Percie The Earl of Northumberland
beheaded at York for high treason.
Earl of Northumberland, late of Topcliffe, who had been before attainted by
Parliament of high treason, as being one of the principal conspiratours in the
late rebellion in the North, and now brought out of Scotland, whether he had
fled: was beheaded at York, about two of the clock in the after noone, on a
new Scaffolde, set up for that purpose in the Market place.

The eight and twenty day of November, John Hall Gentleman, and Oswalde
Wilkinson late of York, and John Hall and Oswald Wilkinson executed. 1573.
Jailer of York Castle, being before arraigned and condemned of high treason:
were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and
quartered.

The sixteen day of June, Thomas Woodhouse a Priest Thomas Woodhouse executed.
1574.
of Lincolneshiere, who had been long prisoner in the Fleet, was arraigned in
the Guild hall of London, and there condemned of high treason: who had
judgment to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at Tiborne the nineteen
day of June.

Cuthbert Main, being condemned of high treason, the Cuthbert Main executed.
1577.
thirty day of November, was drawn, hanged and quartered at Lawnceston, in
the province of Cornwall.

The third day of February, early in the morning, John John Nelson executed.
Nelson, being condemned of high treason against her Majesty: was drawn from
Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered.

The seventeen day of February, one named Thomas Thomas Sherwood executed.
1578.
Sherwood, having been before condemned of high treason, was drawn from the
Tower of London to Tiborne, and was there hanged, bowelled and quartered.

William Lacie, and one Kirkman a Priest, being condemned William Lacie and
Kirkman executed at York.
of high treason, were drawn, hanged and quartered at York.

Euerard Haunse alias Ducket, an obstinate and a wicked Euerard Haunse executed.
Traitor, having been condemned of high treason, was drawn from Newgate to
Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered, according to his judgment.

The first day of December, Edmund Campion Jesuit, Edmund Campion, Ralphe
Sherwin, and Alexander Briant executed. 1581.
Ralphe Sherwin, and Alexander Briant Seminary Priests, were, drawn from the
Tower of London to Tiborne, where they were hanged, and afterward were bowelled
and quartered for high treason.

On Monday the eight and twenty day of May, Thomas Thomas Foord, John Shert,
and Robert Johnson executed.
Foord, John Shert, and Robert Johnson Priests, who were copartners with
Campion in his traitorous enterprises, were drawn from the Tower of London to
Tiborne, where they were hanged, bowelled and quartered for high treason.

On wednesday following, being the thirty day of May, Luke Kirbie, William
Filbie, Thomas Cotta^, and Lauraunce Richardson. 1582.
Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottam, and Lauraunce Richardson, who were
likewise of Campions confederacy: were drawn from the Tower of London to
Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered for high treason.

John Slade and John Body, two obstinate and notorious John Slade, and John
Body executed.
Traitors, being condemned of high treason: John Slade was drawn, hanged and
quartered at Winchester, on Wednesdaye being the third day of October, and
John Body executed in like manner at Andouer on the Saturdaye following.

Edward Arden Esquier, being condemned of high treason, Edward Arden executed
in Smithfield. 1583.
was drawn from Newgate into Smithfield, where he was hanged, bowelled and
quartered. And John Sommeruile, who should have been executed with him, being
condemned for the same offense, destroyed himself in Newgate the day before.

William Carter, a Stationer by Occupation, for printing William Carter
executed.
of traitorous Books and other notorious offenses, was drawn from Newgate to
Tiborne, where he was hanged bowelled and quartered.

On Wednesday being the twelfth day of February, Haddocke, Haddock, Fenne,
Hemerfoord, Nutter and Mu^den executed.
Fenne, Hemerfoord, Munden and Nutter, were all five drawn from the Tower of
London to Tiborne, where they were hanged, bowelled and quartered for high
treason.

Fraunces Throckmorton Esquier, for diverse traitorous Frances Throckmorton
executed. 1584.
practices attempted against the Queens Majesty, was arraigned and condemned
in the Guild hall of London, and afterward on the tenth day of Iulie, he was
drawn from the Sessions house in London to Tiborne, where he was hanged,
bowelled and quartered.

Here may thou O England (as in a Glass) behold the success of treason
from time to time, by these so many and sundry examples here offered unto
thee, whereof full many remain fresh and quick in remembrance, thou may
discern, how God, who places Kings and Princes in their seats and
Signories, and by whose appointment they have their ruling on earth: does
sharply chastise such wicked branches, as deal otherwise then beseemes them
with their Princes and Governors. Be their minds God sharply scourges al
traitors, who practice any evil against their Prince.
never so hautie, be their devises never so subtle, yea, and let them work
never so closely: his eye discerns them, and seeing their secret intentions
is against them whom he has anointed, he brings them and their practices
to open view, that the world may see their undutiful dealing, and by the
punishment which he woorthelie imputes to such offenders, the rest may learn
and dispose themselves to better government. But let me England come a little
nearer thee, and order the matter so, as thou may find thy self touched in
deed. Perhaps thou will say these things are done and past, and they were
but a certain few that thus have offended, and being justly scourged for
their misdemeanors, they are now quite worn out of remembrance, in hope
there remains none such as they have been. Alas, can thou thus blindlie
overthrow thy self in conceit? Do thou not consider, that England has
been greatly endaungered by traitorous practices.
all these evil impes have been of thine own breeding, and that thou have
fostred such Children, as have pierced into thy bowelles, shaken all thy
sinews, yea, and almost have wrung the very marowe out of thy joints,
whereby thou have been so feebled, and thy strength so far decayed, as
without Gods great mercy thou had been unable ever to arise again? And
cannot these irking occasions yet make thee mindful of thy good? Cannot these
bitter passions cause thee to look better to thy children? To train them up in
more awe of God, in better affection to their Prince, and in more effectual
love (then they yet show) to thy self? If thy children be so unnatural, as to
make their mother smart, thou shall but show thy self natural in ministering
correction: for better they weep then thou bleed, so shall they in time find
it to their benefit, and thou thy self live to be a happy mother. But if thou
seek that state The cause of an evil cut off, the effect can take no place.
of quietness, and art desirous to weed out such badde plants as trouble thy
whole Soil: thou must look into the dealinges of thy Children more
heedefullie then thou do, and spying where the inconvenience lies, rather
slip off that branch suddenly, then hazard the perishing of the whole body,
and then thou shall take an undoubted good course: then treason and tretcherous
practices will never be so rife, and such queazie stomachs as cannot brook
necessary council, but follow every disordered humor, will be glad to call
themselves home again, and live within compass of duty and modesty.

But whence grow these dangerous practices? And who are they that set foot in
these traitorous attempts? Alas it is soon seen, by reason the open
apparaunce from time to time, does make it evident. There is no one that
repineth No greater enemies to the safety of England, then Papists.
at her Majesty's safety, no one that lifts at the well settled government of
this Realm, nor any one more ready to pull down the chief pillar of our
happiness: but either he is a Papist, or else meruailously addicted that way.
And have we not good cause so to persuade our selves, when we see it daily
before our eyes, that they are men of that coat, and either have received
encouragement amongst their fellows beyond Seas, or else have been imboldened
by such as secretly flippe over into the Realm, to follow that traitorous
intent which they long time have practiced. And then when God reuealeth their
wicked spirits, and brings them into the light that they may be example to
The common speech of Traitors at their death.
other: then they cry out, I am a Catholic, I will dye in the Catholic
cause, and thus under show of Religion, they would deceive the world with
their horrible treasons. It is now hie time therefore, when Traitors themselves
have given warning of their own treasons, to search the confederacy, yea, and
as Miners follow the signs every way as they spread in the ground, till they
be guided to the trunk or body of the Metal: so to follow the apparaunces
of suspicions and likelyhoods, till it appear plainly what light made the
shaddowe, or what fire made the smoke. It is not good tarying, till the flame
mounting in the air above the house top, the principals and pillars
consumed, and each part so embraced with fire, that no aid dare approach: do
plainly declare, the whole building past hope of recovery. Fires oftentimes
negligentlie raked up, sticks ends not thoroughly quenched, embers not
regarded, a candles end not looked unto: have brought many an honest man to
pitiful calamity. I like therefore better the honest wisdom of those, that
study It is the duty of every good subject, to have a special care of the
safety of his Prince.
how the Queens Majesty our most gracious Lady may stand and not fall, then
the reaching policy of those, that devise how themselves may stand when the
Queen is fallen. God preserve her Highness long, for her falling would make a
Sampsons post with us all: yea, and rightly a Sampsons post, for no doubt it
would broose them too, that be busiest to pull it down. But now (England) I
will be so bold as to emblazon the Papists a little better, that thou may be
the more heedfull to them, and give no credit to their secret persuasions,
and according as a worthy learned man, has heretofore painted them forth in
notable conclusions: even so since the time, place and matter requires it so
fitly, it shall not be a miss here to remember thee of the very same
conclusions, and surely all true Christians, and all true English subjects
ought to believe, and may well know, that these are very true and undoubted
conclusions.

First that every Papist, that is to say, every one that The first
conclusion, of such as hold all the Popes doctrine to be true.
believes all the Popes doctrine, to be true: is an enemy and traitor,
against the Majesty and honor of God, against the Crowns and dignities of
all Kings and temporal Princes, and against the wealth and safety of all
civil Kingdoms, policies, and Commonweals.

Secondly, that every such English Papist is a traitor The second
conclusion, of such as expect their Golden day.
to the Queen of England, and hates her life, wishes the alteration of her
government, and lives in hope of an other world: which even by an ordinary
byword, it is said themselves do call their Golden day.

Thirdly, that every such English Papist is a special The third conclusion,
of such as would overthrow theys Country, for their Idolatrous Religion.
traitor to the Realm of England, and has no regard into what slavery,
subjection to foreign tirannie, dishonor or other misery it be thrown: so
that their false, Idolatrous and superstitious religion be restored, with
liberty to spoil and murder, without respect of dignity, age, sex, learning,
reverence, honesty or nature.

Fourthlie, that no clemency, gentleness, benefits, or loving The fourth
conclusion, of such as can not be wun to love her Majesty.
dealing, can win a Papist, while he continues a Papist, to love her Majesty,
how much so ever he dissemble, nor bring them to ascribe their safety to any
her benefits, nor to any praise of her own goodness: but either to their
own dissimulation, practice, and falsehood, which some call cunning, or to the
holiness of their cause, for whom God forsooth so provides, as his anointed
ones may not possibly by Law, or at least execution of Law, be touched.
Where in deed, if they continue still unpunished, it must be thought that GOD
so purueyeth, because the punishments of this world are not sufficient for
them: but yet in the mean time it serves to make them inexcusable, by whose
default so dangerous Woolues remain in the flock.

Item, that Papistry has this property of heresies, contrary to the nature
of Gods truth: that is, to be thrown The fifth conclusion, of the property of
papistry.
down with adversity, and to flourishe with indulgence and lenity.

Item, that as it is reason, that the owner of a sheepbiter The sixth
conclusion, of such Papists as are mur derers of Gods flock.
Mastife, knowing his dogs quality: should either hang up his dog, or pay
for the sheep that his dog worrieth. So those that have notorious
Sheepbiters, murderers of Gods flock, in their custody and power, must make
their account, either to hang up or otherwise dispatche their curres: or else
to answer to God for the blood of his sheep, both such as they have destroyed,
and such as they may destroy by any possibility hereafter.

Item, that all aduises to great personages, to persuade The seventh
conclusion, of the causes of supplan ting assured safety.
neutralitie, or an entertaining of contrary sides in Religion, with
uncertainty of countenance and favor: is the way to supplant assured
safety, to make sure enemies and unsure friends, to lie open to parasites and
traitors, to be unknown to other, and to be unable to discern what other be
to them.

Item, that timorous policy is the wurst policy that The eight conclusion,
how tymerous policy is wurst, in a good cause.
may be, whatsoever the cause be, good or bad, and wurst of all it is in best
causes. Wherein as her Majesty has neither want of constaunt magnanimity,
nor cause of fear: so is it meet that her enemies have no stomach to
contemn her, nor by excess of clemency, to misconstrue her goodness as
lack of daring.

Item, that by the great novelties and alterations of The ninth conclusion, of
zealous boldness in serving the Queen.
times, that have happened within our memory, there is risen a common policy
among the people, to join to strong and safe sides, whereby they are aliened
from the fearful: and therefore it is to be provided, that there be a
boldness of safety, to serve the Queens Majesty truly and zealouslie, and
an assuredness of danger to her enemies.

Item, by boldness, and sharp execution upon enemies, The tenth conclusion,
that boldness does encourage the friends.
the friends are encouraged: and contrariwise, if the dangerous traitor be
not removed, the true Subject may be left in peril, and thereby the rest of
good Subjects disabled, or at least discouraged to venture so far again, and
the freedom of consultation (in the mean time) for preserving the Prince,
impeached.

Item, that it is as truly said: Improbum hominem The eleventh conclusion,
of the danger in meddling with a naughty man.
praestat non accusasse quam absoluere. It is better not to meddle with a
dangerous naughty man, then to let him go: for what were it else, but to set
an house on fire, and run away by the light.

Item, that occasions and ^^tte oportunities over slipped, The twelfth
conclusion, of time.
are not recouerable.

Item, that many times it is as small an offense, to give The thirteenth
conclusion, as good the killing a true man as sparing a traitor.
a warrant to kill a true man: as to pardon a murderer or a traitor: as a wise
Shepherd will rather give leave to a Hunter, to kill the best Lamb in his
flock, then to let go a Fore or a Woolfe.

Item, that the lives of Kings and Princes, are the The foureteenth
conclusion, that the life of a king, is the life of his kingdom.
lives and souls of their Kingdoms and Commonweals, whereby they are to
consider, that in being prodigal of their own safeties, in excess of
clemency to traitors, or in security of exposing their persons to
perilles: Largiuntur ex alieno, they be liberal of that, which is not their
own to give.

Item, that no Traitor is more perilous, then he that The fifteenth
conclusion, the most perilous traitor.
wresteth the Law, to raise an underminer of the Princes Crown, to her
danger.

Item, that he is justly to be suspected, that shall practice The sixteenth
conclusion, of such as stand against the Princes defense.
with any vain devise of pacification, or coullored clemency, to rebate or
blunt the edge of the Princes sword, or so to tie it in the scabberd, that it
may not be drawn for her defense: as if such qualifiers, hiders and cloakers,
should seek to abuse that most reverend and holy figure of Majesty to no
good end, or other end then God ordained it.

Item, that God cannot well take it, if he be less zealouslie served then the
devil, that there be less feruencie The seventeenth conclusion, when God is
less served then the devil.
showed by truly learned Princes, for auauncing of Gods honor against his
enemies: then has been by abused and deceived Princes, for setting up of the
kingdom of the devil and Antichrist.

Item, that Gods commandments of placabilitie and The eighteenth conclusion,
that no attempt against her Majesty, ought to be accounted a private cause.
forgiveness, extend to our own enemies, but not to his enemies, against
revenge of private displeasures, and not against severity and sharp
execution, in cases of Gods honor and Commonweals: wherein is always to be
noted, that the Prince is so not a private but a public person, as no attempt
against her Majesty's safety, can or ought to be accounted a private cause.

The full proof and large explication of these conclusions, though it be
easy, as a thing which not only all conueniencie of reason affirms, but
also daily experience lays before all men's eyes, that have a free
consideration, not accombred with corrupt zeal and affection: so yet surely
were it a meet thing to be handled by some man, as could add thereto such
ornaments of speech, such strength of eloquence, and pith of persuasion, as
might not only be understood and believed, but be felt and move. Here any
most excellent Orators special virtues might be well employed. A fit argument
sure it were to show wit and knowledge, but specially truth and good
meaning. But till some fit person shall take it in hand, to bestow his more
profitable travail that way: let us yet for vnlading of some of the
abundance of entire devotion for Gods truth, for her most excellent
Majesty, and our Country, have some remembrance of the particularities
thereof.

For the first article that defines Papists, that accuses The meaning and
proof of the first conclusion.
them of treason to God, to Kings, and to Realms: if it be well weied, it
cannot but quickly be seen for undoubted truth. Though it be true, that
every one that holds any one error, or article of doctrine that the Pope
teaches, varying from the word of God, is in that article a Papist, as for
example, the heresy of Transubstantiation, the blasphemy of popish Mass, or
any such other: yet count I not every such a one wholly a Papist within
compass of this article, that is, under the title of a traitorous Papist. But
such a one as holds all the Popes doctrine to be true, that Not all Papists
are traitors.
the Roman Church erreth not, that it has rightfully such superiority and
primacie in others Kingdoms and Dioceses, Note this England.
as it has proudly claimed and usurped, and that Christians are bound to
refer their faith unto it, and to hang upon the Popes determinations. Many
men otherwise good and honest Subjects, are not purged of all errors,
wherewith Rome has infected them, and must have their time to be better
instructed. But those that are perfect Papists, that publishe the Pope to be
head of the Church (which yet in deed is no member of the true Which Papists
are traitors.
Church) and would have us with an implicit and bond faith, to depend upon
that Sea, and for that reason will refuse by all means, to confess the right
of Princes in their Kingdoms over all their Subjects: they be perfect
traitors in deed, yea, and the learned sort of them be wilful Heretics and
Traitors. For though in the dark Learned Papists wilful traitors.
times, when controversies of Religion were not brought into searching, the
stream of error carried men away without doubting: yet since that by debating,
the light has been evidently opened, and men have sought and thoroughly
examined the matter, there is no learned Papist, but he knows that he
maintains error, and in defending and spreading the same, he defends and
spreads, and so directly, advisedly, wilfully and maliciously, puts in
execution to his uttermost power, high treasons against God, against Kings and
their Kingdoms. Against God I call them treasons, though our Law, the judge
of civil treasons in England, have no such name, because the Treason, offense
against Majesty.
nature of the offense so properly receives that title, and also the usual
name of high treason in Iure gentium, in the common law of Nations, and in
other languages, does so plainly express it. High treasons are in their
true nature, offenses against high Majesty, that is, either to the destruction
of the persons, or denial and defacement of the just dignities and
authorities, of those that bear the name of Majesty, and to whom the highest
duty of obedience, faith and alleageaunce extends. And therefore is treason
called Crimen lesae Maiestatis, the crime of violating or abating Majesty.
Greater Majesty then the Majesty of God cannot be: therefore higher and
verier treasons then against God cannot be. His person cannot be destroyed, or
Treason against God.
touched: but his dignity, honor, glory and authority may be slaundered and
blasphemed, and his Subjects, who are mortal men, may be withdrawn from their
due obedience, and drawn into rebellion against him. And this I say is high
treason to God, to violate or abate the Majesty of God: and this do Papists.
For though God be King of Papists violate the Majesty of God, which is high
treason against him.
the whole world, and so is rightly called the Lord by universal name, yea,
even of deuilles: yet is his Church his more proper and certain kingdom,
whereby he is more restrainedlie and aplie called our King and our Father, and
so more fitly called our head in respect of the body, which is his Church, and
not the rest of the world. In this Kingdom his highest dignity is to be the
only head thereof, which the Papists take from him, and derive it to their
Pope. And though with gloses they excuse it, that their Popes take it not from
God, but use it under God, as his Uicares: yet must they be admonished, that
without sufficient deputation, and warrant from the King him self, (which the
Pope has not) the Subject to thrust him self into the governance of the
kingdom, is high treason, where he that being a stranger would seek to
conquer it, were but an enemy. And so is it rightly to be said, that The
Pope an high Traitor against God, and the Turk but an enemy.
the Turk is to God an enemy, and the Pope is to God a traitor, and all his
adherents are principal traitors: for treason admits no accessaries.

But now let us come to that part, which touches men Papists Traitors to
Kings and Kingdoms.
more neerelie then any love of God. Let us now see how they be traitors to
Kings and Kingdoms. If we have mind to see that Papists, which hold all
the Popes doctrine to be true, are traitors in deed to Kings and Kingdoms:
it behooves us to call to mind what are the Popes doctrines, dooinges and
practices concerning the Crowns of Kings, and states of Kingdoms. Popes have
challenged, and Papists (that affirm the Popes to be free from error, their
doctrine to be true, and their authority to be lawful) do also hold, that
it is their due which Traitorous doctrines of Popes for Kings and Kingdoms.
they challenge, that is: To have authority of both Swords, Spiritual and
Temporal, the one in exercise, the other in power: To have the disposition of
all the Crowns of Christian Princes: To have the judgment of deciding, to
whom the right of any kingdom belongs: To have power for disobedience to
him, or by his discretion, to transfer the Crowns of Kings to whom he
will: To have lawful power, to give Kingdoms to prey, spoil and conquest, to
such as can invade and possess them: To have power to assoyle and discharge
Christian subjects, from faith and alleageaunce to their lawful and natural
Sovereign Lords, Kings and Princes: To have power to give leave, yea,
commandment, blessing, reward, forgiveness of sins, and Heaven it self,
to Subjects to rebel The Pope will give heaven to Subjects, to rebel against
their Prince.
against their Prince, to depose the Prince, disherite and destroy him: That
there is of common right, and by the mere law of God, reserved to the Pope a
special subjection, resort, appellation, and obedience of one great part of
all Princes Subjects, yea, and of all Subjects of all Princes in one great
part of their causes. Be not these heinous treasons? And these cannot be
denied, to be the natural and very treasons of all Papists, that is to say,
of all that depend upon credit of the Pope, that hold him for Gods Uicar, for
Peter's successor, for whom Christ prayed, that his faith should not fail,
that apply to him this title: Ad quem perfidia non potest accedere, to whom
falsehood cannot reach, that hold him for a constant Rock, an assured
Preacher of truth, an Apostolical man, if he be not some other thing then a
man, to whom our belief is bounden: with such other false tytles, wherewith
Popes themselves, have garnished themselves, and their Parasites have ouerloden
them.

Consider the ordinary practice of Popes and Papists according to these
doctrines, and then you shall see, that Traitorous dooinges of Papists against
Kings and Kingdoms: special matter for England to mark.
from the most high treason, which the Pope committed against his Sovereign
Lord the Emperor: the renting and destruction of the Empire: all the victories
and successes of the Saracens and Turks against Christendom: all the tearing
away of most noble and large Kingdoms and provinces, from the body of
Christianity: all the subduing and thralling of infinite Christian souls, to
Mahomet and the Devil: all the deposinges, murderinges, turmoylings, civil
wars, debates between Christian Princes, shedding of Christian blood,
indignities and oppressions of Christian Kings and Emperors, conquestes,
rebellions and mischeefes, for these five hundred years and above: are wholly
and cheefely to be imputed to the treasons of Popes and Papists. All Grecia
(sometime most noble and learned) yet lamentably rueth it. All Africa, the
mother of most constaunt Martyrs, feels it. The Germane Emperors, with most
heinous reproaches, and foul treading on their necks, may not forget it. The
Kings of France and Spain, both at home in their native Kingdoms, and
abroad, as well in Naples, Sicilie, Lombardie, as in other territories of
Italy and of the Empire, have sharply felt it. The Lords and States of
Italy, have been daily and long shaken with it. The Kings of England have
been poisoned, whipped, beaten with rods, murdered, deposed, the Land given in
conquest, interdited, made tributarie, robbed, pylled and scraped of their
treasure, brought into slauishe subjection, deprived of honor and estimation,
every way most villainously abused. To let pass the elder times and further
Realms, let us speak of deposing of old Emperors, erecting of new, setting
the Son against the Father, the Subject against his Lord, making them come
bare footed, themselves with their wives and children long waighting with
submission Behold the horrible pride and villainous dealing of Popes and
Papists, and slavery of Princes.
in cold frostes, treading on their necks, spurning of their Crowns, and a
thousand such abominable prides of Popes, and slaueries of Princes. Let us
deal but with our selves, and with our own feeling, knowledge and memory.
The accursing of King John: the receiving him vassaill: the making his Realm
subject and feudatorie to the Example of the Popes and Papists dealing with
King John.
Pope: the arming his Subjects against him: the poisoning of him at length: the
giving the Land to the French Kings son: the inuading thereof by the Dolphin
of France: his so long possessing a great part of it: the rebellion of the
Barons to take the French men's part: all the mischeefes that fell in all this
while, were they not the good works of Popes and Papists? The great division
of the two noble houses of Lancaster and York, which cost The great division
between the two noble houses of Lancaster and York, caused by the Popish
Clergy and Papists.
so much English blood, that there remains no house of high or mean
Nobility, that has not smarted for it. So many foughten fields within the
Realm, so long and so great uncertainty, which side were true men and which
were Traitors, and for how many days or hours they should be so esteemed:
such desolation and miseries, to whom are they to be imputed, but to the
Popish Clergy and Papists, and among other to Thomas Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, that trayterouslie practiced the deposing of his lawful
Sovereign Lord King Richard the Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, practiced the
deposing of King Richard the second.
second? But come yet to later times. How was the Queens Majesty's most noble
Father, assaulted by the Pope and Papists? His Realm was interdited, and
given away to him that could catch it. Legates, and one notable English
traitor, were sent about to persuade Christian Princes, to invade England, to
destroy and depose King Henry the eight, assaulted by the Pope and Papists.
King Henry, and to take the Realm in reward for their labor. When Charles
the late Emperor was setting forward against the Turk, Cardinal Poole being
sent by the Pope, made a solemn Oration to him, which is yet extant in print:
to persuade the Emperor, to turn his prepared power from inuading the Turk,
and to bend it against King Henry the eight, as one wurse then any Turk. What
turmoile was then raised by the Northren Rebels against him, whereof some by
his clemency (a good example) have lived to this day to raise a new rebellion?
How troubled they her Majesty's most excellent Brother with unhappy seditions?
How vexed they, and King Edward the sixth vexed by the Papists.
how endaungered they the Realm, and the Queens own person in her Sisters
time, as in the Story before rehearsed you may read at large? What might
Charles the Emperor have done, for recovery and enlarging of Christendom, if
his force that way intended, had not by the Popes practice been perverted
sundry ways and times, to ^^^in shedding of christian blood, and wasting of
Christendom, and to the overthrow of his victorious course? What tempests
has the late conspiracy of Trent blown The conspiracy of the late Counsel
of Trent.
up in Christendom, that cannot yet be quieted: and all because the Pope has
instilled an opinion into his Papists, that Princes, if he dispense with them,
are not bound to The Pope teaches to keep no faith.
keep faith and promise, no, not the word of a King, whereby no peace can be
assured? Whereof yet ryseth one good admonition, to trust them no more, and to
be well ware of them, and specially to think of this one particular: that
wicked persons, who have given occasion of dangerous rebellions against the
Queens Majesty, their chief and only succor and refuge, will never be
withholden by any respect, from attempting, or procuring to be attempted, any
most high and heinous treason and mischief, against our Sovereign Ladies
safety, if an auauntageable opportunity may serve them, so long as such
persons are infected with Papistrie, and can think the Pope able to pardon, or
rather willing to reward them, yea, so far as they shall suppose themselves,
not only to win the Kingdom of England thereby, but also the kingdom of
Heaven. It is perilous to think what traitorous rage may do, being armed
with drunken superstition. It is a sore thing to consider the impotencie of
ambition, specially when it is joined with the fury of reasonlesse love. The
The whore of Rome an actual dealer in all wicked practices against Kings and
Kingdoms.
common experience is, how dangerous those knottes of thieves be, where there
is a woman in the company. Thus is it plain, that for as much as the Pope
claymeth such wrongful usurpation and tyranny, over Kings and Realms, and since
Papists hold that he says true, and claymeth but his right, and cannot err
in discerning it: all such Papists are Traitors to all Kings and Kingdoms.

As for the second Conclusion, which accuses English Papists of treason to
the Queens Majesty: it is sufficiently The second conclusion, proving
English Papists traitors to the Queen.
proved, for that it is a particular within a general, included in the
former. Yet for the special confirmation of it, it has certain private and
several reasons. It is well known, and you have read the whole discourse
before, how they sought her Graces death in her Sisters time, what practices,
what fetches were used for it, what examinations, what searchinges, were to
find couller of her destruction: yea, how far without couller they
proceeded, if God had not miraculouslie kept her, to the preservation of this
Realm, and the comfort of all Christendom. But to make some demonstration of
their hatred to her Majesty by reason, and after to descend to the examples
and practices: let us examine the causes.

Whereas the Papists hold, that the Pope is head of Papists that hold the
Pope head of the Church in England, are traitors to her Majesty.
Gods universal Church, and that such authority as the Queen claims in
England, over Ecclesiastical persons and in Ecclesiastical causes, as due to
her Highness in right of her Crown, is not due to her, but belonging to the
Pope: in so saying, they must say that her Majesty claymeth an unjust
tyrannical power. And who so ever shall so say, though not in the same
sillables: is an unjust and an errant traitor, and cannot love her that has
pull led him down whom they call head of their Church.

Where the Pope has accurssed the Queens Majesty as an Heretic and
Scismatique, all those Papists which Papists that hold the Popes
excommunication against the Queen lawful, are traitors.
suppose, that the Pope having the disposition of Gods sentence, and the
thunderbolte of excommunication in his hand, cannot err: do also suppose that
the Queens Highness, (our Queen Elizabeth I mean) is not lawful Queen of
England, (as many of them have not spared to say) for so must all Papists
hold, that hold the Pope to say true, for the Pope does not so accept her.
And Papists have published, that Gospellers, whom they call Heretics, ought
not to have any office among Gods people, much less a Kingdom. And this point
is well to be considered, that they which take from the Queens Majesty, the
Supremacy over Ecclesiastical persons and causes: do transfer the same
jurisdiction to the Pope, for they never yet vouchsafed to give it to any
other. And yet I am sure, that after so many examples of Bees and Beasts and
other things, they will not now have any particular Church headless, and
destitute of a supreme Governor: either universal like a Monarch as they would
have it, or special under God of each Kingdom or Dominion, as Gods good
disposition has forced it. If then the Pope have (in their opinion) any
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in England, he must The Pope cannot excommunicate
in England, unless he had just authority so to do.
have I us excommunicandi, lawful power and authority to excommunicate in
England: without which the Ecclesiastical power cannot stand. Which power if
he justly have, and has excommunicated and accurssed her Majesty, either by
especial name (as he does) or generally under title of Heretics, of which
sort he esteems her: then has he therein done Pro suo iure as he might
lawfully do. And this being so supposed true, then is it good to consider
what is taken for Gods law, and the law Ecclesiastical De vitandis
excommunicatis, for shunning of excommunicate Papists draw obedience from the
Queen.
and accurssed persons, which yield not to any repentaunt submission, or
reconciliation to the Church. Forsooth, that every christian on pain of
excommunication De iure (wherein to dye, is thought to dye in state of
damnation) is bound to withdraw from such accurssed persons not repenting, all
friendly or loving company and countenance, all aid and relief, all service
and obedience. Which doing, for Papists meritorious treason.
these good Subjects of England, to put in execution toward the Queen, were a
very meritorious act. But what does it merit? The just pains of treason,
for breaking their due alleageaunce, and eternal damnation (if they repent
not) for resisting Gods lawful ordinance. This geere goes sore, it is very
evident and plain, that by necessary consequence, to this confession of
trayterousnesse they must be driven, if they will continue Papists, that is,
will affirm the Popes sentences not to err, or will give the Pope any
spiritual jurisdiction in England. But such salues are not unlike to come out
of his shop, that dispenses with breach of faith, yea, that openly
proclaymeth, that there is no faith to be kept with Christ's friends and his
adversaries. His shop that can send out badges, with leave to swear and
vnsweare, with so lyberall permission, as to say: Give me thy heart and it
suffyseth. And well may it suffice, for the heart will carry the hand too,
when opportunity serves, and when their Golden day approaches, of which they
make so great account. Such fellows would be well looked on. And because they
cannot get her Highness to cease to be their lawful Queen, themselves
have ceased to be her actual Subjects. Because they cannot shifte her
Majesty from her Crown, they have shifted themselves out of her Highness
Dominions, and are fled beyond the Seas. Some being there, send hither their
heretical, seditious and traitorous Books: Seditious writers that send their
traiterous Lybelles into England.
yet licenced there, against good president of Princes, and against the example
of her Majesty's demeanor toward the same Princes, which by themselves or
their Officers, rather ought to have restrained such doings, then to leave so
shrewd occasion, of taking harm themselves by the like. In these Books her
right is impugned: her faith is defamed: her government is discredited: her
honor is touched: The circumstances of those traiterous Books.
her Majesty is many ways violated and abated: the Religion that her
Highness holds and publishes, is called Scismaticall, Heretical,
Deuillish, and with as many ill favored names as they can rehearse, being yet
in such eloquence perfect Orators. The Preachers and professors of the
Religion, that her Highness sets forth and professes, are termed wurse
then Infidels: her title of Supremacy over all her Subjects, is defaced for
an usurped and undue name, and her Subjects hearts alienated and persuade to
grudge against her. These wicked and traiterous Pamphlettes want no favorers
to spread These traiterous Books want no favorers to spread them abroad, and
to credit them with what co^mendations they may.
them abroad, nor do they that disperse them lack any boldness, to read
them in audiences and in corners: where they commend them, defend them, give
them great praises for learning and substantialnesse, as matters unanswerable,
when God he knows there is no such surpassing excellency in them, as they
that have the spurs yet sticking in their sides, and have been broken winded
with over gallopping them, yea, they that are of their own faction have not
been ashamed to speak it, how notably they have been wounded by many of her
Majesty's learned subjects. Nevertheless, they continue writing still, and
all pretenses that both the Pope and Papists can devise, are daily and hourly
spread abroad in the Realm, to weaken the good wills of her Majesty's
Subjects toward her, and by all false and vain coullers they can imagine, they
practice how to draw more subjects to take their parts. But in the mean
time, as God gathers his glory out of all things, yea, even out of sins:
so England, out of this great The evil dealing of Papists, a good lesson for
England.
evil thou may gather some good, a good example and good lesson for thee to
learn, that Papistrie is treason, and he that is infected with treason is a
traitor, and so provide against them hereafter. Let them follow what humors
they please, do thou in the mean time take a contrary course. Where they
look for an other time, do thou endeavor to maintain this time: Where they
reach with expectation to altering of government, do thou bend all thy force,
policy and means of service, to the defense of this estate: Where they pray
for change, specially of Queens, do thou pray for the long and happy
continuance of her Highness reign: Where they hide rebellious stomachs, do
thou and thy Children show true and faithful hearts: Where they desire, that
her Majesty and her Council may be deceived, with flattering and erroneous
pretense of policy, and couller of clemency, that under ye shadow they may
lurk, and be nourished as serpent in bosom, do thou pray to God to give
judgment to discern them, to search the bottom of their treasons, that they
may be shaken out, and used as dangerous vipers: Where their trust is in the
Pope, and popish treasons and conspiracies, let thy confidence be in God and
his providence, not shrinking from the same with thy best courage and prudence:
Where they will not stick to use all subtle vndermininges, and will not lose
the vauntage of times, that they may one day triumph in cruel violence, do
thou pray, that on this part be used all good policies, that Gods offered
means and good opportunity be not refused and ouerslipped, that God rent not
the Kingdom from his anointed, for sparing of his enemies: but that it may
long flourishe in the hands of his most noble and virtuous handmaid, our most
excellent and gracious Sovereign Lady. Thus is it evident by reasons and
examples, what hearts Papists bear to her Majesty.

The third Conclusion, that such English Papists are traitors to the Realm
of England, etc. has received two The third conclusion proouing English
papists, traitors to the Realm of England.
proves already: the one in the general treasons of all Papists to all
Realms, wherein England and English Papists are included, the other in their
traitorous minds to the Queens Majesty's person and dignity, which is the
highest treason that can be to the Realm of England. Yet are there some other
particular dooinges more specially to enforce it, namely the experience that
has been, of their casting away the care of their Country, and all other
natural affections: to the end with all immanitie, and outrageous unnatural
cruelty, to torment English Christians, and to subject the Realm to foreign
power, for their false religions sake. I am assured there are enough, and too
many that can remember, both that they have read in credible Histories, and
seen in lamentable experience: how the Papists have showed themselves so
addicted to their The Papists reverence to their Pope, has made them
careless of their Prince and Country.
superstition, and so captiued to an undue reverence of their tyrannous Pope,
that they have for it rejected the care of Country, and of those to whom
natural duty bound them.

It is certain, that that English man which can be contented for Papistrie,
to raise or favor rebellion in our Country: to join in conspiracy with
Strangers, to help to invade and spoil our Country: to convey the Crown of
our Country to a forreiner: to agree with them in faction, that offer our
Country to prey, spoil and conquest: to submit his faith to that Potentate,
that has accurssed and given our Country, their souls to the Devil, and
their bodies, lands and possessions to them that can catch them: to believe or
favor them, that spread all vile dishonours against our Country: to like
well of his doings, and to hold that he does no more then he lawfully may
do, which being an Alien, a foreign Bishop, shall take upon him to extend
his curse to the Prince of our Country, and all the people thereof, and that
he has power to discharge the Subjects of the Realm from their faith and
alleageaunce, and has authority to bind their obedience to whom he will,
and is able to give Heaven to rebels, that shall venture their lives in
wasting and Such an one as allows of all these wicked causes, must needs be
a traitor to his Country.
destroying our Country: He, I say, that can yield his consent to these
dooinges and thinkinges, must needs be a Traitor to his Country. And such a
one is every such English Papist as I have described, and can be none other if
he hold the Pope for a true teacher, and have good opinion of the Popes
doctrine and examples.

That clemency and gentleness cannot reclayme them from traiterous minds,
while they continue in Papistrie, Clemency cannot win a Papist while he
continues a Papist: special examples for England to remember.
is as plain and as true a form of speech: as if a man should say, they
must needs be traitors, so long as they remain full of treason, for treason
and Papistrie are inseparable while they be kept under, even as cruelty and
Papistrie are inseparable when they are gotten above. Surely, he that
regards not the highest duty, will never regard the meanest. The duty of
the love or fear of God, cannot hold a Papist from blasphemy against God.
The duty of faith and alleageaunce to his Prince, cannot keep a Papist from
treason to his Prince. The duty of dear love to his natural Country,
cannot withdraw a Papist from assenting to, yea, and procuring the spoil,
destruction, bondage, and alienation of his Country, as I have already
proved. The duty of kind and natural pity, cannot stay a Papist from
murdering the feeble sex, nor the sielie tender infancy, nor reverend eldest
age. The duty of familiarity in youth, of freendshippe in grauer years, of
continual society during all the life passed, with heaps of mutual
commodities, cannot pull back a Papist from immanitie of Sacrificing his
dearest friends. The duty of honor of Children to Parents, or love of
Parents to Children, remooueth not a Papist from unnatural cruelty. The
duty of entire love and fellowshippe between man and wife, holds no place
in the heart of a Papist. No duty of kindred, no estimation of Learning and
Virtue, no good respect, that moves good men to love and compassion, once
touches a stubborn Papist.

All these duties we have seen broken, yea, neglected All duties of love,
kindred and nature broken by Papists.
and thrown away by Papists. And is there hope that clemency can so far
win them, as to hold them in truth to the Prince, from whom they receive
it: if opportunity serve to bring them out of her danger, or her Highness
into their danger, which God forbid? But let us see a little of their
thankfulness. Did ever those Papists, whose lives were saved by good Bishop
Cranmers Example of the Papists thankefulnes to Bishop Cranmer.
means, who were brought up, who were defended, who were auaunced, who were
shielded from harm and peril by him: once requite him with one drop of
kindness? And yet they spoke him fair in his prosperity. Auailed the great
liberality of King Henry the eight, to raise up any kind remembrance in
Papists, that were great in Queen Mary's days: to stay them Example of the
Papists kindness toward her Majesty, for the great lyberalitie of her most
noble Father.
from the assenting to the captivity and danger, and seeking the blood of his
most noble Daughter, our most gracious Sovereign Lady? And yet during King
Henry's reign, they showed a serviceable face: as if they would have spent
their bloods, to keep wrong from him and his, and did serve against Papistrie
it self, till their treason and Papistrie was ripe to be advanced. A number
like examples of their gentleness and kindness might be alleged, but
because I would be brief, these few shall serve at this time.

Of like truth it is, that Papistrie being an Heresy, or rather a bondle made
up of an infinite number of Heresies: must needs have the property of
Heresy, to flourishe Papistrie increases and flourishes by lenity.
with indulgence and lenity. We see the like example in the sect of Arrians,
which under heretical Emperors exceedingly increased: and being once
condemned and restrained by punishment, has worn away to a few. So far as
King Henry the eight went in reforming Religion, which was to abolishe the
primacie of Rome out of this Realm (a noble conquest) with certain gross
Idolatries: did not the severity of his Laws, the awe of his person, and the
dread of due execution, so hold down those parts of Papistrie which he
suppressed, that they durst not once show themselves in his days? And yet in
the same time, the grievous law of six Articles made against Gods truth, and
sinisterlie procured by the Popish Clergy, nor yet the earnest inquiry, nor
cruel executing of it by Bishops and other, could hold down the truth of
the Gospel: but that it brake out more and more upon them.

The reason is, that Papistry and Christian truth have Christian truth
respects Heaven, and Papistry the world.
two several ends: truth respects Heaven, and Papistrie the world. Whereby
their adventures and enterprises are commonly diverse: the Papist dare boldly
set upon any mischief, where he has hope to auaunce his falsehood: the
Christian dare constantly abide any torment, to give witness of Gods truth.
And such quality of Gods truth have the ancient Fathers described, when one
of them calls the blood of Martyrs: The water to water Gods Garden, an other
says: That they increase with cutting down, and other in other manner have
expressed the same meaning.

But now being under a Christian Prince in days of rest (blessed be almighty
God, and long preserved be her Majesty the instrument of it) as it is not
meet that Gods Church, after Julian the Apostataes manner, be persecuted to
make it increase, but holden down with good discipline for manners, that it
grow not wild and run into wantonness: so is not the Church of the Devil
to be maintained and multiplied with indulgence, winking and slacknesse of
correction, but with good severity to be restrained, that it grow not to such
rankness, as to choke the true Church in deed. Mercy may have her excess,
Too much clemency may be great cruelty.
and clemency may be great cruelty, when it ouerfloweth to the good men's
danger.

The other Conclusions that follow, have great difference from these whereof I
have made some explication, yet have I not made so large an explication, as
truth is well and easily able to furnishe, neither can I so well make it, as
the expedience of the cause asks, to give the vauntage of eloquence to the
goodness of the matter, to help to draw it into credit, and effect of well
moving. But being as it is, rude and true, great cunning and finenesse is the
less needful: where those (for whom it is intended) are so wise, as it is
far more easy for naked troth to inform them, then for any gaie speech to
leads them.

As for the other Conclusions that follow: I neither have nor will wade so
far in them, because they are matters of consultation and meditation. The
effect thereof, which is the safe preservation of the Queens royal Majesty
and the Realm, the avoiding of dangers that threaten the same, the
establishing of assuredness, boldness, courage, and freedom of her Highness
most good Councillors and Subjects, the taking advantage of opportunity and
occasions, the weeding out of deceivers and underminers, the defense of her
Majesty's honor and dignity, the means to answer their charge toward God,
and namely, in dealing with men as they be affectioned to or against God.

The effect I say of these other Conclusions, I know do continually busy
her Majesty and her most honorable Counsailours, in thinking on them, and
providing for them: therefore it shall no further occupy me and other mean
Subjects, then in prayer and readiness to serve, as her Majesty and her
Council shall see fit to employ us. It shall suffice me, and so ought it to
content all other, to know as we do know, what a wise Prince we have, what
good Council she has chosen, how well they have governed, what fruit we have
had of it: so as nothing is left to us, but to give thanks, to beware that our
sins give not the occasion of loss and change, to serve duetifullie, and to
pray devoutly.

The Conclusion.
THus have I England breefelie collected such matters here together, as if
thou heedfullie mark, thou may make great profit of them. And in truth
great need thou have to be careful of them, for Papists were never bolder,
nor treason put more in practice, then it has been of late days.

Remember that cruel murder in France at the marriage, when the famous
Admiral Shatilion, was so unnaturally murdered. Remember the late and
horrible murder of the noble Prince of Orange: and let these teach thee to be
more circumspecte to that dangerous brood.

I could wade into further matters, as to tell thee of many other crimes and
offenses, which thou have marvelous need to look unto: but because I
intended this present purpose in this Watchwoord, I refer the rest to my
other Book called the Court of Conscience, which A Book called the Court of
Conscience, which I entend (God aiding me) to publish very shortly.
thou shall shortly receive from me. And I dare awarrant thee, that thou never
readst not such a Book in all thy life, both for the circumstances of the
matter, and the worthiness of the whole in general: but till it come, that
thou thy self may judge of it, I will breefelie desire thee to join in
prayer with me, for the good success of all happiness, that may please God to
send thee.

Let us pray, that we may see when those that shall wrest or procure to
change Law, to erect the courage of any dangerous Uiper to such ends, or to
any aspiring hope of preventing and undermining, under what couller, name,
pretense, or otherwise, or to the safegarde of their persons that have so
attempted: that they may be declared, and executed as enemies to the state,
and to the Queens safety.

Let us pray, that we may see such Laws provided for her Highness
preservation, and the same so executed God grant that such Papists as be
enemies to her Majesty and the Realm, may be quickly cut off.
without restraint or slackenesse for any respect: as the hope of Papists,
such as be enemies to God, the Queen and the Realm, may (if they repent not)
be cut off for ever.

Let us pray to live to see, that none may have place, Office, or access into
her Majesty's Court nor household, no, nor once into her presence: that shall
not be known to favor both God and her, so far as any circumspection or
policy can provide it.

Let us pray, that no Office of dignity, Law or Justice, may be in their
hands, who do not favor the Law of God, and acknowledge her Majesty's
right, that is head of Law and Justice in this Realm.

Let us pray, that her Majesty and her Council may have such particular
knowledge of men, that those that have well deserved, yea, have and yet do
hazard their lives in her Majesty's defense, and have utterly wasted
themselves and their friends in her Majesty's service, yet remaining
unrecompensed: that they may not loose the benefit of their labors, that no
evil tongue may raise slander to their discredit, but that they may
according to their good service, be effectually and duly rewarded, the
only mean to encourage other to earnest taking of pains.

Let us pray, that all such as be her Majesty's enemies may be weakened, and
her faithful friends and well-willers strengthened: that all advantages may
be used for her safety, and all subtle devises and practices may be
supplanted.

We trust it will be so, for God has not drawn these late mischeefes into
light for nothing. But before all things, let us pray to GOD to send us true
repentance, more joyful and effectual receiving of his Gospel, and more and
more virtuous ensuing it: least as we lost our best King with living ill, we
loose our best Queen with living wurse.

And that therewith it may please him, to direct all the dooinges of her
Majesty and her Council, to proceed in their good aduauncing his glory, and
preservation of the estate: which without ielous circumspection, for preserving
the Queens most royal person, can not be done. And that such good means
and provisions, as GOD offers to that end, be not refused or neglected:
which were to tempt GOD, to forsake his cause, to betraie our noble Prince, and
to give away, or rather cast away the Realm.

These be the daily and nightlie prayers of good Subjects, and while we busy
our selves with these prayers, we do, after our principal confidence in Gods
goodness, rest our selves upon the trust of her Majesty, and her most
honorable Council: for whom we praise God, and to them we refer the
guiding of us and ours, ready to follow them when we are commanded, with the
uttermost of our power and peril, knowing how they spare not their uttermost
endeavor and peril, with susteining the most unpleasant life (God knows)
that may be, for our sakes, for our quiet, profits and defense.

FINIS.
God long preserve and bless our Queen Elizabeth, and confound all her
enemies. Honos alit Arts. A. M.

