THE Tragical Death OF SOPHONISBA. Written by DAVID MVRRAY. SCOTO-BRITTAINE.

NON ALTVM PETO. I. S.
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed for John Smethwick, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet, under the Dial. 1611.

To the high and mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
Thrice Noble Prince, by birth, by blood, by fame,
Renowned by all, whom all men do adore,
Not so much loved for greatness of your name,
As for those virtues does your name decore:
Young Haeros, whose haeroick actions sore
Beyond the limits of your yet-spent years,
Brave stately mind, wherein this time does glore,
Whose praises praising parts, the world admires:
Under the shadow of your Eagles wings,
(Since no where else she can for safety fly)
My humble Muse, most royal impe of Kings,
In tragic verse, presents your Princely eye,
With a true story of a Queens sad case,
Who gave her life to flee a foul disgrace.
Another to the Prince.
EVen as the Eagle through the empty sky,
Conuoies her young ones on her soaring wings,
Above the azur'd vaults, till she them brings,
Where they on Phoebus glorious beams may pry:
So (mighty Prince) my Muse now soars on high,
Above the vulgar reach, to higher spheres,
With this scarce ripened Eaglet-birth of hers,
Unto the view of your Maiestick eye,
But if it hap, as hap, I fear, it shall,
She may not bide your censures dazeling touch,
The higher flight, the more renowned fall,
It shall suffice, that her attempt was such,
But if in ought she please your Princely view,
Then she attaines the mark, at which she flew.
Your Highness most loyal and affectionate servant, DA: MVRRAY.

The Argument of this Poem.
AT what time that great and fatal enemy of Rome, Hannibal (after that he had
won those memorable and famous battles of Ticenum, Trebesa, Thracimen, and
Cannes) had ouer-run and subdued the most part of all Italy, putting Rome her
self into a marvelous fear to have been surprised if he had then followed
his fortune: Of all her great Captains and Commanders (she then had) Fabius
Maximus was esteemed the most wise and politic, Marcellus the most valiant,
because by experience in sundry conflicts, he made the Romans know, that
Hannibal was not invincible: yet of them all none so much repined to see the
Majesty, and greatness of her state limited, as it were, within her own walls,
as young Publius, Corn. Scipio, the son of that Publ. Scipio, who first
fought with Hannibal at his coming into Italy, and afterward killed, valiantly
fighting against his enemies, in Spain, with his brother Cne. Scipio. They both
thus dead, and the army there destitute of a Commander, the Senate long time
consulted to find out some worthy Captain to supply that room, but could find
no man that durst undertake so dangerous a charge, considering the loss of two
so great and famous Captains before. Til at length, the whole assembly being
called, to choose a Vice-consull, all the other Princes and Peers of the Realm
being silent at so worthy a motion, Scipio being but 24. years of age,
accepted the charge, and immediately thereupon departed for Spain, which to his
immortal glory, he quickly subdued again to the Roman abedience; from
whence returning to Rome, he was presently chosen Consul, with the great joy
and applause of the people: and had Cicill assigned to him for his Province,
with power (if he pleased) to make war in Aphrick. So being stirred up thereto
by the often entreaties, and great promises of Massinissa king of Numidia, a
valorous and coragious young Prince, and a great friend of the Romans, he
leauied new forces, and having prepared ships and munition in Sicill fit for
such a journey, went thither: and after many famous baettels, at the last he
overcame Hasdrubal, and Syphax king of the Mascaecilians; who to enjoy the
beauty of Sophonisba, the daughter of the said Hasdrubal, had but lately left
the Roman friendship, to take part with the Carthaginians; to follow whom
Scipio sent Massinissa, with Caius Laelius and his light horsemen, whom they
pursued to his own country, and there in a new conflict took him prisoner.
Thereafter Massinissa went to Cyrtha the chief city of his Realm, which he
took, and there at the first view became enamoured with the matchless and
incomparable beauty of Sophonisba, whom not only he promised to free from
Roman bondage, but also took her to his wife: which Scipio understanding,
sharply rebukes him for his fault, telling him that no Roman confederate was
able to give liberty to a prisoner taken by the Roman arms, who heavily
regrating his offense, to so courteous and continent a Captain, and lamenting,
he could not observe his promise to Sophonisba, sends her a cup of poison,
with a letter, showing her, he could not else observe his faith given to her
but by that potion, which she immediately drinks, to prevent all further misery,
and gives me the Argument of this Poem.

To my loving Cousin Da: Murray.
Fair Sophonisba on her tragike stage,
(To death, or bondage worse then death designed)
Does show the grea^nesse of a proud grieved mind,
The ambitious thoughts of Scipio to assuage:
With courage far above her sex and age,
She quafs the cup her loue-sick Lord propin'd,
By which although her liues-thred was vntwyn'd,
Yet she triumphs above the Roman rage:
Thrice happy Queen, and more then happy thrice,
Who finds a rare Physician with such skill,
To rob the Fates of thee there lawful prize,
By virtue of his everliving quil,
And makes that poison which bereft thy breath,
By power of his pen, to poison death.
Your loving Cousin. JOHN MVRRAY.

To my kind friend Da Murray.
IN new attire (and put most neatly on)
Thou Murray make thy passionate Queen apeare,
As when she sat on the Numidian throne,
Decked with those Gems that most refulgent were.
So thy strong muse her maker like repaires,
That from the ruins of her wasted vrne,
Into a body of delicious airs:
Again her spirit does transmigrated turn,
That scortching soil which thy great subject bore,
Bred those that coldly but expres'd her merit,
But breathing now upon our colder shore,
Here she has found a noble fiery spirit,
Both there, and here, so fortunate for Fame,
That what she was, she is every where the same.
M. DRAYTON

To my dear friend DA: Murray.
FAme (slave to Time) still flying here and there,
Tells what sad wonders in this world has been,
Wrought with the tragike pencil of despair,
Which does naught else but horri'd woes contain,
Brave Sophonisba, fair, and stately Queen
Whom Murrays wits, for virtue, now adores,
None but this age her (matchless) like has seen
And none so high, her well deserving sores:
For what she lost, his Muse again restores,
Her life adornes his everliving lines
His pen, her praise, each other still decores,
So in here worth, his verse, most brightly shines:
Fair Queen whose death did end the Romans strife,
Has made his Muse give her a brauer life.
SIMON GRAHAME.

The Tragical Death of Sophonisba.
SAD Massinissa, swoolne with grief and rage,
When all his credit served not to entreat
His brave victorious friend, to dis-ingage
His late-spous'd Lady from a servile state:
Half mad, distraught, confusedly does he write,
To show, the Roman Conqueror thinks to send
Her as a slave his triumph to attend.
But lo (quoth he) t'auoyd this unkind doom,
And that my oath vn-uiolate remain,
Made once to thee, thou never should see Rome:
That her proud Dames might glory in thy pain,
And point their fingers at thee in disdain:
I send thee here a potion with my letters,
To save my faith from foil, and thee from fetters.
Yet if my unfeigned tears can have the force,
(Dear Idol of my soul) with thee so much,
I pray thee only have this small remorse
Of thine own life, this cup thou never touch,
Till that thou see thy haples fortune such
As nothing else can serve: I say (though loath)
Drink this to save thine honor, and my oath.
In this mean time il' labor with thy foe,
In whose assistance I have spent my blood,
To pity thy estate, and ease my woe,
In the releasing of thy servitude;
Which if his gentle Nature shall think good,
Straight you shall know, if he refu^e, too soon,
These lines, aye me! have said what should be done.
Thus having written, with a sighing spirit,
He foulds those black news in a snow-white sheet,
Vtt'ring these speeches, to the scroll; her merit
Deserved a better present then this writ:
Yet shall she see so sare a thing in it,
From servitude and shame shall save her now,
And likewise me from a polluted vow.
Then quickly calls he unto him a post,
Whose secrecy he oftimes used to prove,
Whom straight-waies he commands to leave the host,
And bear these gifts of death unto his love;
Who does no sooner from his sight remove,
But straight his conscience summons out his fact,
TO appear before him in a shape most black.
Behold the resolutions of man,
How vnaduisdly, sometimes, they proceed
Breeding repentance oftimes, when they can
Not bring a back that which they once decreed;
The al-ruling heavens being the cause indeed,
Which scorhing humane wisdom lets vs-know,
The imperfections of our thoughts below.
For lo this Prince who lately thought his faith,
And his sweet Ladies liberty to stand,
In the post-speedy acting of her death,
Which made him this sad message to command,
Which being past he rewes it out of hand.
But can not now remend it which is worse,
"Too late repentance ever breeds remorse.
The messenger whom time and use had learned,
Obsequious duty to his masters will,
Hasts to his journey, having not discerned,
The soddaine passion that his soul did kill:
Each cannot gaze a Princes breast in till.
Whose outward-iestures seldom do bewray,
Those inward griefs, whereon there thoughts do prey
So is it with him who on his journey goes,
Thinking on nothing but a quick return,
Leaving his master so or-come with woes,
That down he lies upon his bed to mourn:
Whose scalding sighs which inwardly do burn,
The perly conduites of his tears up dries.
As Phoebus, drinks the May dew from the skies.
It was the time by this the post departed,
That golden Phoebus hides his glorious beams,
Low in the Western Ocean, when vncarted:
His neighing steeds leaving their wearied teames.
Whose mouths through travel yet the froth out fumes.
Goes to their nightly manger, and their guide,
In Thetis lap his hoary head did hide.
(...) His sorrow-silent-stricken-toung, cannot
Keep back the passage of his sighs, no more
Which so assailes it, that it leaves his throat,
Returning thither whence it fled before,
While coming to his breath's fair Iuory door,
It begs a pasport from his lips of new,
To those greefe-boyling sighs which so pursue.
But they like volleys, willing to be wrocken,
On it poor tongue, that staid their course so long,
Disorderly do march, their ranks being broken
All would be first for to reueng their wrong,
Even as we see a mad unruly throng,
Of country Clownes, to sack some bordering town,
Run swarming from the hills and mountains down.
Or as a Crystal current, that is staid,
To pay his debtfull tribute to the sea,
His channel stopped, whereby his course delayed,
He Is forced a back unto his sourse to fly,
Till that his streams increased, he grows so high,
That over banks and braies he runs a maine,
Impetuously unto the sea again.
So his unruly sighs all headlong follow,
Each striving first who shall prevent an other:
But his throats entry being straight and hollow,
And they in number numberless come thither,
Cannot afford them passage altogether.
While striving for the place each in disdain,
Sends one another smothered back again.
His eyes which all this time enclosed lie,
Gazing upon the motions of the thought:
How soon those civil broils they do espy,
That sorrow had to his minds kingdom brought,
No longer in their Couerletts they might
Behold the tragic view of their friends dying,
But straight retires them to their former being.
His tongue and eyes now com'd to their own place,
It enters to complain, and they to weep,
For since the ardor of his sighs did cease,
The humid vapors which his heart did keep,
Vnboyld by them, to his eyes cesterns creep.
From thence upon his tender cheeks down hopps,
Hanging like Perles upon his soft-downe cropps.
And after long spent tears, his tongue at length
In pittious sort those woeful words did breath,
Wretch'd Massinissa, had thou not the strength,
To save one poor distressed Dame from death,
Brought under by unconstant fortunes wrath?
Who only under safety of thy shield,
Poor Lady, life and liberty did yield.
And that on such a covenant alas,
She thee engaged these Jewels of her mind,
That thou should still preserve her from disgrace,
Which thou to do, thy self by oath did bind,
O cruel, cruel, thousand times unkind,
That could not else observe thy passed faith,
But by thy hapless lovers woeful death.
Ah! who had seen her, when thou did behold her,
Heauing her fair and snow-white hands to thee.
Craving thy pity, as thy self then told her,
(Though in the extremest state of misery)
Became much rather her sweet self to be
A pity giver, then to beg the same,
That so with looks the conqueror ouer-came.
Thrown down by fortune, plunged in deep distress,
Cros'd with affliction, overcome with sorrow:
Touched with each passion, could a mind oppress;
Captived or night, that was a Queen at morrow,
Yet her sweet looks, though sad sweet looks did borrow,
Both pity, and compassion, to her grief,
Deferring present evil, to a worse mischief.
Vindictiue thoughts, calamity and care,
Foes unto beauty, majesty, and grace,
Made her not seem less beautiful, less fair,
For though that sorrow seemed to mask her face,
Yet her fair eyes, as if they scorned disgrace,
Whiles floods of liquid pearls down from them powers,
Did glance like Phoebus rays in April showers.
Ay me! unhappy, thus to mind her rarieties,
To which all hearts and eyes did owe their beauty,
Whiles all her virtues (as contesting parties;)
Do now vpbraid me with the breach of duty,
For had she not been of such birth and beauty;
And always matchlesse-excellent, God knows,
Her mischiefs had been less, and less my woes.
For, oh! this grieves me more then death ten-fold,
To think that one of such desert must dye,
And that I have not power to control 't,
Yea that I must the author thereof be,
Oh wondrous! wondrous contrariety!
Oh woeful chance! grief past compare to give
Death to that life, by which I only live.
Oh this it is torments my martyred mind,
That my unhappy destiny is such,
To prove most cruel, where I would most kind:
Is this the effect? o gods! of loving much,
If it be so, let never love more touch
The plagued heart of such a woeful wretch,
Cursed be that love that cruelty does hatch.
Sweet Sophonisba, when thou shall receive,
That hateful potion, which I now have sent thee;
It will not grieve thee half so much to leave
(I know the heavens so great a spirit have lent thee)
Thy lingering life, as that it will repent thee.
Thou was not killed in that unhappy day,
When in proud Cyrtha thou became my prey.
For had thou then by rage of victors wrath,
Been cruelly killed by force of Sword or Dart,
More happy thrice had been thy hapless death,
And gladlier might thy Ghost to Styx depart,
Nor left to dye by one to whom thy heart
Thou gave in pledge of liberty and life,
Who saved a captive Queen to kill a wife.
But now to die when life was most assured
By oath and promise sealed with wedlockes knot,
An heavy burdning n'ere to be endured,
Detested fact which cannot be forgott,
Heinous offense which never Time shall blot:
But that it shall by all-relating fame,
Fly through the world to my eternal shame.
Why did I not fore-warne thee at thy taking,
Freely to death or bondage to give place?
But then (alas) was no such bargain making,
For the nere-like-seene beauty of thy face,
Bewitched me then with such enchanting grace,
That in despite of all the Roman swords,
I vowed thy safety and defense by words.
Which oh! has proved a weak and strengthlesse vow
Afoording nothing unto thee but death:
For had thou daign'd thy haughty heart to bow
To th'meanest soldier that our Legions has,
He rather would have sacrifiz'd his breath,
Or that he would have suffered thee to be
Used by constraint, much less have seen thee die.
But I much more then common soldiers be:
A Captain, a Commander, and a King,
Whom Fortune in her grace advanced so high,
That mighty Princes I to bands did bring,
Cannot (alas) O to be wondered thing!
Thee poor distressed Dame from bondage shield,
Who to none living but my self would yield.
Thou neither life, nor kingdom did implore,
Nor yet thy husband Syphax his relief,
Nor that they would thy royalty restore,
Nor that thy followers might avoid mischief,
No, hapless Queen, this was thy only grief,
And woeful suit, that to no Roman borne,
Thou might be given to live in servile scorn.
Innated hatred, bred in either blood,
Of Carthaginian and of Roman race,
Far worse then death, fear of their servitude,
Made thee alas, to think it less disgrace,
To have been sacrificed in that place,
By some -- blood guilty hand, nor lived a Queen,
In chains of gold, in Romes fair City seen.
Which made thee to rely thy hopes on me,
Whom neighborhood and nature did combine,
Com'd of Italian blood by no degree,
But of that ancient great Numidiau line,
Which ever at Romes greatness did repine:
And most of all, this one thing moved thy mind.
That I was theirs by chance, and not by kind,
And on my part much more did challenge love,
Then country, blood, or birth, or high degree,
Maiesticke courage, beauty, grace, did move,
And plead compassion in the cruellest eye,
Hard Tygrist hearted, and remorselesse he,
Hearing thy sighs and plaints, veiwing thy tears,
Would not have freed the scorning world of fears.
Is death a ioynter equal to thy dower?
Should such a beauty be bereft of breath?
But feeble Massinissa see thy power,
Behold the fruits are frustrate of thy faith,
Who could not save a Lady fair from death,
To whom (alas) were left no other means,
But she must die a Queen, or live in chains.
O Liberty! too dearly, dearly bought
At such a rate, so ransomed and obtained,
And who procures you so, may well be thought
Of his own life too prodigal a friend:
O cruel freedom! that must be maintained
By bloods expense, and by no other way,
As this unhappy wretched Queen may say.
Yet wronged Lady, thou art not to blame,
Now to exchange thy life for liberty:
I must sustain the blot thereof with shame,
As the only author of thy misery;
Happy, (though haples I) thou ay shall be,
For thy brave mind into renown be had,
Though still detested I who thee betrayed.
What shall the world and coming ages speak,
When they shall read the story of thy fall?
Shall they not swear that I might justly break
To flinty Scipio, and the Romans all?
A traitor to my heart they shall me call:
To thee but mercy: cruel, and unkind,
And justly all to me may be assigned.
Both to my Dear ungrateful, and to Nature
I shall be thought (alas) for ever still,
That furnished death, unto so rare a creature,
Whom even Deaths self did pity (oh) to kill:
O to be thought-of-memorable ill!
Which by no tract of time shall be forgotten,
But shall grow ever green, when it seems rotten.
What rests there then (detested wretch) to thee?
But that thou find out some repairelesse place
To wail thy woes: but whither shall thou fly
To save thee from the sting of thy disgrace?
For no where great Apollo shows his face,
To Indus, Tagus, Tay, nor Nilus stream,
But all shall know vile Massinissa's shame.
Mourn forth thy shame with neuer-stanching tears,
Sigh for thy error till thy heart be broken,
Acquaint thy wrong to Tigers, Wolfes, and Bears,
Whose quenchles thirst of blood, thy blood may slocken,
That so thy fault may be severely wrocken:
And for thy beastly cruelty, that they
To stanch their hunger, on thy corpse may prey.
But if more pity in their savage hearts,
There be nor was in thy remorslesse mind,
Think that the same naught else to thee imparts,
But as thou nature, so they will pass their kind,
Which being to rapine and to blood inclined,
Yet least it were a benefit to thee,
From tortring thoughts deny thy soul to free.
And sometimes while the Turtle moanes her make,
With many a heavy, shrill, and piteous cry,
Leaning her soft breast to a withered stake,
Still craving death, (poor bird) but cannot die:
No other beast neere-hand, nor no foul nigh,
Who having lost her love, does hate repair,
Be thou her Echo to resound her care.
Sing thou the treble to her mournful songs,
Reply her sad notes with thy dying groans,
While she bewailes her griefs, bewail thy wrongs,
And as she sits on pricks, sit thou on stones:
This sympathy shall best become your moanes;
This harmony of neuer-dying playnts,
Best fits the humors of such malcontents.
This Purgatorie-penance to endure,
With patience thy self till death content,
Into those deserts where thou must immure
Thy errors everlasting penitent,
Never finding one with whom thou may frequent;
Unless thou hap upon some homely cell,
Where Pilgrims haunt and hoary Hermits dwell.
Live then this death, or rather dye this life,
Let it be death to live, and life to die:
Let thy own soul be with thy soul at strife:
Let thy own heart, thy hearts own bourreau be,
Let all the evils on death triumph in thee,
Let still thy self be of these evils the worst,
In actions all, in life, in death accursed.
Thus all the night he did his plaints renew,
Mourning his sweet loves wolfull misery:
And now the Morning lent a loathed adieu,
Till amorous Titan in a scarlet die,
And the swift-winged Consort mounting high,
Tun dout their sweetest warbles in the skies,
Till Phoebus wakened with their restless cries.
Who piece and piece his golden head vp-heaues,
Above th'vnconstant watery liquid Maino,
There weeping Memnons loss, Aurora leaves,
Whose tears for pity he quaffes up again,
Which all the night bedewed had each plain:
The tender grass seemed by their withered crops,
To wail the wanting of these wholesome drops.
And now the Light (expelling darkness) shined
Through Sophonisba's chamber where she lay,
Who all this night was most extremely pined,
With ugly visions did her mind astray,
That she can naught discern: if it be day,
She thinks she dreams that which she waking sees,
Scarce if she will give credit to her eyes.
But whether that accustomated time,
Or then the loathing of a restless rest,
Or of imagination of some crime,
The waking Sent'nell of each careful breast:
Or then the nature of a mind oppressed:
Made her to know's, or if that all in one,
But now she finds the night away is gone.
Then enters she for to bethink what end,
The Oracles imported she had dreamed,
To which her fancies Commentar's do lend,
Direct contrare to that they had proclaimed,
To apprehend the worst she is ashamed:
Love makes her judge of things in such degree,
Not as they were, but as she wished to be.
But now t'auoyd those ominous conceits
Sleep did afford, she quickly up arose,
Leaving the snow-white, soft, and lawny sheets,
Impouerish'd thereby to enrich her cloes,
Which to presage her worser-comming woes,
That day by fortune were of color black:
And thus unawares deaths livery she does take.
In which her heart-bereauing beauty shined,
Like fair Diana in the fable night,
Or like a polisht Diamond of Ind,
Set in black Iet, to give a glance more bright,
Or like the great bright Pattern of the light,
When that his glorious glistering beams do chase
Some ouer-shadowing clouds that mask his face.
Her conquering eyes were in ambuscad laid
Of golden glittering heir, where twinkling they
Send forth such dazeling glances from that shade,
As Phoebus brighter never did display:
There wanton Cupid sporting himself lay.
In those pure streams, which from those eyes distilled,
From whence vn-wares the haughtiest bears he killed,
Her smooth cheeks whiter then the whitest lawne,
Or winter snowes which cover Atlas face,
Where Nature artificially had drawn,
Her fairer nose, that fairer part to grace:
On whose each side a little distant space,
Vermillion Roses, and sweet Lillies grew
Which checkered that fair field^ with crimson hew.
Her teeth like ranks of oriental pearl,
With corrall died lips were compas'd round,
From whence far sweeter then the well tuned merle:
Her heart-bereauing tongue did softly found:
Words of such force the flintiest heart to wound.
Her baulmy breath, in worth, in taste, in smell,
Did ciuet, musk, and amber-greaze excel.
Her dimpled chinne (loves cabinet) where he,
To gaze on hidden beauty often repar'd,
Their sat the wanton, and with lusting eyes,
Now on her breast, now on her belly star'd:
Whose amorous soul with such hid joys ensnared.
Betwixt her milky globes skipt often from thence,
A littler lower to delight his sense.
Her marble neck did underprop those graces,
Which from her line straight-body stately sprung,
Her foulding arms into there several places,
Close by her tender dainty sides down hung:
From whence her snow white hands, smooth, sleeke and long
In Iuory colums, did themselves forth spread,
Whose smallest touch the heaviest heart could glad.
Her breast the cabin of her Princely mind,
Whereon two alablaster globes were fixed,
Whose wounding aspect the beholders pin'de:
Being here and there with azur'd veins commixt,
To tell her other rar'ties were prolixt.
Imagine all her clothes of cristall glass,
Where eyes cannot, let apprehension pass.
But lively to express her right idea,
And in a word her matchless parts to tell,
Such was sweet Sidneis fair, fair Philoclea,
When her brave riuals at contention fell
By Ladons streams, yet ours did her excel.
In that his brain but dreamed of such as she,
Ours was that which, his brain dreamed her to be.
Thus decked (sweet Lady) both by Art and Nature,
Viewd, woundred at, admired by each eye,
She leaves her chamber like some heavenly creature,
Adorned with all the pomp of Majesty,
But ah! who can avoid the Fates decree?
What power can fly death, when he list to strike,
In court and cottage priuiledg'd a like?
Nor does this breath-bereauing monster keep,
A certain diet, or appointed date,
For sometime they who most securely sleep,
Who do on nothing less then death conceit,
There life then hangs into most dangerous state:
For why unawares he oftimes comes to many,
But being called for, seldom comes to any.
And when he comes, request, nor yet entreat,
With this remorselesse catife naught availes,
For when he finds aproach the fatal date:
The execution never in him fails,
So many kind of ways this thief assailes,
That where so e're we go, we walk, or fare,
Head-longs we run the post into his snare.
Ten thousand diverse means he has, whereby
He does destroy this little world of man,
Sometime by natural sickness makes him lie,
Till Atrop's cut the thread her sister span:
Sometime by sword, by pestilence, or than
By cruel famine, which of all is worst,
Poor silly man to quit his breath is forced.
He sometime stirs up brother against brother
To cruel iarres, like earth-borne Cadmus brood,
And which is more unnatural, makes the mother
TO inwombe again her child for want of food,
And sometime makes within the raging flood,
The monstrous great Balena to intombe,
Poor wretched man within his hollow womb.
And in this last age among so many hunders,
Of diverse kinds of instruments he has,
The devil has molded one engine that thunders
Destruction, ruin, horror, terror, death;
This mercy-wanting frame, this birth of wrath,
Not only brai's to ashes, flesh and bones,
But ruins mountains, hills and towers of stones.
Yet notwithstanding all those diverse ways,
He has reserved secret means, where by,
To kill whom neither sword nor famine slaies,
Nor natural death, nor pestilence makes die:
Nor that is swallowed by the raging sea.
With powerful poison secret and unseene,
He can dispatch, as he did serve this Queen.
For now the post, who, as you heard, was gone,
From Masinissa so his journey hied
That by the swift paced horses of the Sun,
Were in their places to his Chariot tied.
He Sophonisbae's palace had espied.
And even as from her chamber she did go,
He does his letters and his credit show.
But he no sooner does approach her sight,
When lo her always harme-misdeeming mind,
Takes apprehension all things went not right:
Whether it were that her Genius so deuin'd,
Or that her thoughts suspiciously inclined,
Marking the letters date and his great speed,
Conjectures some sad matter to succeed.
Yet does she all that lies in her to cover,
This sudden fear that so appales her heart,
And to that end ask's for his Lord her lover:
In what good health he was, and in what part:
And with that word her stagring tongue did thwart.
For the remembrance in what part he was,
Enforced her mind to sadder thoughts give place.
Then with a houering silence still she stands
And gazes on the ground with staring eyes,
The simple swain to such abrupt demands,
Ere he could answer long amazed stays;
At last with bashful tongue he thus replies,
Your royal husband, Madam, and my Lord,
Rests in good health as I can well record.
Of which (said he) I hope his princely letter.
Can better far then I inform your grace,
I thank thee friend (said she) but sighs did let he*
To say the rest, such was her careful case:
Transported for a while, she held her peace.
Words killing sighs, sighs killing words again,
So that betwixt them her discourse in slain.
This airy combat, this debate of breath,
This speech restrayning, strife, this sighing war
Did even bewray what she to show was says:
And makes the carrier to discern her care,
Who sad to see a beauty matchless fair,
In such a plight (poor swain) he smiling told her,
How much his loving Lord longed to behold her.
By speech and iesture she remarkes him then,
Undoubted badges of a troubled mind,
And neither token, nor appeerance can
Of any harm by his behavior find;
So that her fears they vanish with the wind.
And her disturbed thoughts of new takes hold,
Of better hopes which makes her somewhat bold.
She takes the letter and with smyling cheer,
She opens and vnfoulds the seals with speed,
At the first view whereof it did appear,
The crimson beauty of her cheeks did fade
Which straight returns into a brighter red,
In scarlet color dying all her face,
Which to pale whiteness soon again gives place.
But howsoe'r her blood thus went and came.
Vn-interrupted she reads out the letter,
And having read it still reads over the same:
The more she reads it seems she likes it better,
The standers-by thought it some lovely matter,
Which in the reading bred her so great pleasure,
Leaves her alone to read it at more leisure,
Thus left, and left in such a taking to,
She takes the poison and remarkes it well,
Which she could not so vnamaz'dly do,
But that her heart a sudden change did feel.
Her dazzled eyes began for fear to reell,
And if that honor had not come to aid her,
Frail flesh and life to view it more had stayed her.
Then enters straight a combat in her soul,
Betwixt her honor and her fearful life,
Life wishes her to shun a death so foul:
Honor by death prays her to end all strife:
Life yet entreats for respit to her life,
And honor still protests that in no case,
But by her death she can avoid disgrace.
And adds this more, that if she meant to live,
She needs would leave her, and with her also,
Her chastity which heavily did grieve,
To be a prey to an insulting foe:
And prays her to accept of either two,
A glorious death with honor and with fame,
Or still to live with foul reproach and shame.
But life again those reasons t'overthrow,
A thousand sweet alluring baits does lay
Before her eyes, thereby to make her know,
It Was inhumane her self to kill and slay:
Said she let skil-contending Doctors play.
Such tragic fits that do maintain like fools,
This honor in their Academicke schools.
And whereas honor now would threaten thee,
That if thou live, thou must quite claim, for aye
Thy wonted fame and spotless chastity,
Who shall accuse thee for the same I pray?
Thy husbands lost, captived, gone, and away,
For that no ransom ever can redeem him,
So that for dead I doubtless do esteem him.
Dead must to dead, the living to the living,
The grave cannot be capable of love,
It ill beseemes thy youth to be thus greeuing:
Must thou a mourner restless ever prove?
Thy beauty was not framed to such behoue,
That thy sweet years should still consumed be,
A votresse unto loues-foe, chastity.
Let vestalls, who all other Nuns excells,
Closely immured from men's society,
While as they chat in their religious cells,
Maintain this idle theme of chastity,
Let this their Euen-song, and their Matins be,
A text more fitting that retired sort,
Then for the tender beauties of the Court.
Beauty (God knows) was not ordained to moan,
Nor to live chastely at her first creation:
For skillful Nature, who has made the Sun
To give us light, made her for procreation,
Not Image-like for ostentation,
But as choice fruits are made-of for choice seeds,
And stately Stallions to breed stately steeds.
As The Apple to the taste, the Rose to smell,
The pleasant Lilly to delight the eye,
Gould for the touch, sweet Music grief to expel,
So rarest beauty was ordained to be,
The minds desired full saciety,
The ^reasure of the soul, the hearts delight,
Loves full contentment both by day and night.
Stray but along the pleasant fields and see,
If that each creature loves not in some measure,
The wanton birds sit billing on each tree,
To see the fair Pawn woo, it were a pleasure,
Beauty alone is not the Princes treasure,
Mark well each flock, by mountain or by plain,
Is followed by some loving Nymph or Swain.
There feeds the Heifer, and the gentle Ewe,
Courting the proud Bull, and the sawey Ram,
There does the courser his hot love pursue,
With his brave breeder in a mutual flame:
The timorous Hare, and Conie does the same,
So does the princely Stagge, the milk white Hind,
All love according to their course of kind.
And if it be not that sole bird of wonder,
The Arabian Phoenix, nothing breath's but loves,
Which vestall like, does spend of years five hunder,
And never loves sweet operation proves;
The thought thereof, so much her chaste mind mooues,
That as agreeu'd to live so long alone,
At length she burns for sorrow in the sun.
How then unkindly honor with thee deals,
Who so untimely would thy life bereave?
As if that nothing now save death auailes,
Nor that thou could not live unless a slave,
How fondly lo, she seeks thee to deceive,
There Is no such danger, if thou will believe,
From hence therefore, let no such thoughts thee grieve.
The meekest conquerors to a yielding foe,
That ever yet aspired to greatness hight,
Are the brave Romans, who as wisely know,
To use their mercy as they do their might;
Let not despair so much thy soul affright,
For why thy fates more good to thee design,
If thou do not against thy fates repine.
Conceit that thou must bravely live in bliss,
Think that thy mind and fortune shall agree,
Who knows but that thy noble friend ere this,
Has mollified proud Scipios hard decree?
'T'is time enough sweet Queen for thee to dye,
When thou art not thy self, even then alas,
When thy true glass shall show thy wrinckled face.
Thy dainty corpse fits better to receive
The sweet imbracements of a loving friend
Then to be made a morsel for the grave,
From whence again it cannot be redeemed:
Oh! that from thence it might be still exeem'd,
Thy beauty is too delicate a prey,
By loathsome worms to be consumed away.
Thus fearful life did for her self protest,
Still seeking intertainment by delays;
Till Honor mad to see her so possessed,
With such enchanting, false, and Siren says,
Her conquering colors boldly forth displayes,
Into the face of life, and in this sort,
Her arguments and errors does re^ort,
And what O life! and must thou too conspire
With her disgrace t'out-liue a glorious name?
Fie dastard, banish such a fond desire,
And blush thou did conceit the same for shame,
I put the case thou pass the date of fame,
And that thou escape the insulting victors wrath,
Yet what assurance have thou of thy breath?
Which like a dream, a smoke, a vapor flies,
Without assured or prefixed date,
How many well at morn or evening dies?
"Such is the frailty of our human state,
"Most certainly uncertain of our fate.
Yet this we know for certain, we must dye.
When, where, or how God knows, uncertain we.
Then peevish hagge, how dares thou thus presume,
With thy be-lying reasons to persuade,
This fortune-wronged Lady to see Rome,
As if no danger thereby might be had?
Shall it of Sophonisba (ah) be faid,
That she t'shunne a transitory pain,
Made choice to live unto her honors stain.
No, no, it were an unadvised choice,
Great Queen, for thee to live with such disgrace,
What more dishonor could thou do to those,
I mean to Syphax, Carthage, and thy race,
Then that thou should now fearfully give place
To life's allurements, which does seek with shame,
To kill thee by the killing of thy same?
Would not great Syphax blush to hear it told,
His souls chief minion, darling of his heart,
T'inioy whose love, he was so fondly bold,
From the great Romans friendship to depart,
Which makes him live captived in endless smart,
Should now to his eternal^ grief be made,
A lustful prey unto a lawless bed?
And would not Romes Corriuall to be sorry,
Great Carthage that her Sophonisba should
Be made a trophae to the Roman glory,
Whose matchless beauty oft-times purchase could
Mo friends to her then all her wealth or gold,
It doubtless would breed in that famous city
More hate to her then either love or pity.
What would thy parents, friends, and kindred say,
If thou should yield a captive now to be?
But all bewail the cursed unhappy day
Of thy conception and nativity:
Then drink this potion, that thou may set free
Thy matchles-noble mind from being thrall,
So shall thou be most famous in thy fall.
Look how we see on glassie Neptunes face,
Two warlike ships a furious fight begin,
Now flies the one, the other now takes chase,
Now by the loofe, now by the lee they rin,
The liquid Main with their sharp beakes they twin:
At length they grapple, and then boords in have,
And who first enters back again is chac't.
No otherwise within her care-fraught breast,
This powerful combat twixt her life and honor,
Is still maintained by turns, whiles the one is chac't,
Whiles the other flies, whiles both do set upon her,
Yet neither of them to their side can win her:
But now to honor, now to life gives place,
And dares not either freely to embrace.
Now in the midst of this intestine war,
Uncertain thus to either side to yield,
Her passions still augment, more grows her care;
Her woes the greater that they are concealed:
"Sorrow is lightest when it is revealed:
"A heavy burden to a troubled heart,
"Is much to feel, and little to impart.
Yet in this sad and silent agony,
While life and honor furiously contend,
Enters brave Courage with audacitie,
And gives this inward strife a fatal end,
And Honors high attempt does so commend,
That in despite of what her life could say,
Makes her resolved to die without delay.
At last she gently enters to unfold
Her currall lips, from whence her balmy breath,
Even loath to leave that paradized hold,
Where it so long time sweetly soiourn'd has,
Flies houering bout her lips afraid of death,
Till gentle Zephir's gales finding it there,
Does softly blow it to perfume the air.
Look how in clear Meanders winding brinkes,
The snow-white Swan her exequies does sing
In sweetest notes, till that for pain she shrinkes,
And does her music with her breath resign:
Even so does she, O to be wondered thing!
Unto the poison such sweet speeches breath,
As she had courted Cupid and not Death.
Thrice-happy welcome gift (said she to me)
And much more welcome had thou bin (God knows)
If husbands hands had not affoorded thee,
For Deaths more grievous friends do give then foes,
Yet art thou not to blame, thou knewst my choice
Was ever to prefer a glorious death
Before an ignominious servile breath.
I thank you hartly for your kind regard,
And for the due advertisement you give
Of Scipio's plots, against poor me prepared,
Who for his own sake suffers me to live,
The period of Ambition to atchiue,
To lead in triumph such a mighty Queen,
Who never shall at Rome alive be seen.
Nor shall that proud ore-all-empiring city,
Or her more proud inhabitants, whose rage
My father, friends, and kindred all but pity,
Killed and undid their fury to assuage,
Behold me captive closed up in a cage,
Or lead in triumph to their Capitol,
I rather choose a thousand deaths to tholl.
Where her fair glorious Dames enricht by spoil
Of an unlawful conquest, daily wears
Those robes and jewels which with great turmoyle,
Others have conquered to their hapless heirs:
Who overcome with this great power of theirs,
Give all they have to ransom their poor lives,
Which they send home to beautify their wives.
Shall they into their windows richly decked,
To gaze upon my miseries remain?
Or shall they with their longing looks expect
My wished approach, their eyes to entertain
With the sad object of my glories waine?
But ere their sights be satisfied so,
I rather choose quick to my grave to go.
No, none ore me shall so insult or vaunt,
Whom slave nor captive they shall never see,
Though conquered and ore come my self I grant,
In all things else, yet of my liberty
None other living shall commander be;
Which I esteem and prize at higher rate,
Then whatsoever riches, wealth, or state.
Shall I who in the highest chief degree
Of Fortunes favor lately shined in grace,
Abase my self so low a slave to be,
To those who ruined me and all my race?
No, no such thought nor motion shall have place,
Though all the evils on earth should me oppress,
I lived a Queen, and I must die no less.
Let Rome triumph to hear of my distress,
But never glory to behold my woe:
Scipio my wrack in words may well express,
But me a captive shall he never show:
Go who so list, I never mean to go
One foot, to grace his victories, I vow,
With his designs being so acquainted now.
Have not mine eyes as yet beheld alas,
To many woeful objects, but of force
They must behold and view their own disgrace,
To grace the breeders triumph which is worse:
Is there no other pity nor remorse?
My crown's bereft, what rests there more to do,
Must they bereave me of my honor to?
The gods and nature to the world did give me,
Most free by birth, and so I Have lived as yet,
And of my birthright would they now bereave me
To curb me with captiuities hard bit?
I mind not so from Natures gift to flit.
My freedoms lease till death does not expire,
Which I to forfit never shall desire.
Thrice happy ye that spent your blessed breaths
In the defense of country liberty,
Who by your glorious and renouned deaths,
Expressed your minds great magnanimity:
And left sad tokens to the enemy
Of your great valor and courageous spirits
While each his death, with his foes death acquits.
As most kind children to your native soil,
In her defense ye spent your dearest blood,
Your eyes never vewing the regratefull spoil
Heavens having your attempts and force withstood
Which the proud fortune-follow'd multitude,
Of your fierce foes took on your hapless airs,
Being plagued both in this your loss, and theirs.
Of which none iustlier may lament then I,
The woeful type of fortunes fickle grace,
Who with those hapless eyes (alas) did spy:
My noble father slain before my face:
And by his side the most part of our race.
My husband conquered and captived also,
In whose each grief I felt a several woe.
But fortune never wearied of change,
Unconstant goddess which affects naught more,
As if alone on me she meant revenge,
While death and horror stood my eyes before,
Did then present me with a show of glote,
As if repenting of her former wrong,
And yet meant greater injuries ere long.
Who would have thought amidst a world of woes,
While nothing but destruction did appear,
All being in power of the insulting foes,
Life, liberty, or what I held most dear:
Tears in my eyes, my heart possessed with fear,
Looking for nothing but a shameful death,
That fortune then had mitigate her wrath?
Oh! had I died when death was so expected,
It had not seemed so grievous far (alas)
For while I stood at under and dejected,
Bearing the burden of a sad disgrace,
I would have thought he pitied had my case
Who had me killed in such a woeful plight,
For death, in sorrow and despair, seems light.
But fortune false, her fury to fulfill,
Reserved me then to a more wretched end,
As to make him the author of my ill,
Who from all evils did ever me defend,
But pardon me dear friend if I offend,
In counting thee a partner of my wrack,
Since death seems grievous which from thee I take.
Scarce have I dreamed yet of that matchless pity,
Which undeserved you did extend to me,
When in the ruins of this sacked city,
Thou did preserve my wished liberty,
And which is more, vouchsafst me then to be,
Thy blist and happy, now cursed hapless bride,
Since this sad potion must our loves divide.
How can I but regrate, complain and moan,
When scarcely yet I have begun to taste
Those speachlesse pleasures that attend upon
The sweet fruition of a Nuptial feast,
Where sacred Hymen should be chiefest guest,
Sweet Madrigalls, and blessed hymns be sung,
And no sad toales of buriall-bells be rung.
Oh let them judge, who with delight and joy,
Have felt the pleasures of sweet wedlocks bed,
What grief, what care, what sorrow, what annoy,
It Is to forsake the same ere it be had!
Thus only this, and nothing else that's said,
Makes me to hate this woeful gift of thine,
Which otherwise seems a most blessed propine.
But what, O love! and must thy passions be
So powerful in my soul, that they must move
Me to accuse him of severity,
Who in his actions al, most kind does prove?
No rather far detested be all love,
Or it enforce me in a thought to fall,
To him I honored aye, and ever shall.
Sweet Massinissa, courteous, gentle, kind,
That you are so, i will seal it with my blood,
Nothing torments so much my dying mind,
Thou wast not in my better fortunes loved,
And O that thou, if fates had thought it good,
Had cropped the blossoms of my beauties prime,
Which now you scarce have tasted out of time.
This, this it is, breeds my eternal smart,
That in the desolation of my glory,
My wayning beauty did surprise thy heart,
Dear Lord, this makes thy dying spouse most sorry,
To think that she must be the woeful story,
A registered remarkable mischief,
Whose love had birth and burial both in grief.
That you are guiltless of my hapless death,
I both attest the heavens and spirits above,
In witness whereof here I do bequeath,
My heart to thee, in token of our love,
From hence no amorous motion shall me move:
Farewell therefore, to life, to love, and thee,
True witnesses of dear bought liberty.
Go wanton Cupid, sport thee with thy mother,
In some more happy climate then is ours,
Here thou and Death will never agree together,
He likes the Graves, and thou the reuelling Boures,
Lascivious Rome with her skie-mounting towers,
As Empress of all kingdoms and Empires,
Seems fittest place for fuel to thy fires.
Whose amorous youths, when once they feel the force,
Of thy enuenomed shafts, shall freely story
Me and my Masinissaes sad divorce,
Feeding their Ladies ears with farre-fetchd glory,
Straining their toungs, their wits and memory,
In their best form, with eloquence to show,
Such accidents as they desire to know.
One in his arms holding his dearest dame,
May happily court her with such words as these:
Fair worlds admired beauty, here I am,
Who not long since, amid ten thousand foes,
Most valiantly did this pure breast oppose,
Against the fury of the cruell'st fight,
Yet never wounded till approch'd thy sight.
Hard by my feet, great Hasdruball lay slain,
Who to all Romans, bare innated hate,
Not distant far from him was Syphax taken,
Who to oppose himself against our state,
Received in Dower his Daughter but of late,
Who now attends Scipios triumphant carre,
As the proud trophae of this famous war.
Let them thus vainly prattle of my grief,
And mock my woes, my miseries and wrongs,
Let them spend time in telling my mischief,
Let my disgrace be subject to their songs,
And let them all, these jolly things amongs,
Proclaim their valor, and reveal our wrack,
Yet in my bonds they shall no pleasure take.
For death and I are now agreed together,
Even from this moment never more to sunder,
Who by no means will grant I should go thither,
Where worlds of eyes upon my fall shall wonder,
Scipio may threaten, and proud Rome may thunder,
That I shall rest their everlasting thrall,
Yet death has vowed to set me free from all,
Welcome thy friendship, sweet confederate Death,
Who still most faithful in distress do prove;
Who would not gladly yield to thee their breath,
Since only thou can miseries remove,
O how my soul with thee is fallen in love!
Knowing how quickly thou her pains can finish,
Haste then sweet death, ere she her love diminish.
How falsely have they wronged the truth, that feign,
(Thereby to make thee odious to our eyes)
Thee to be ougly, cruel, meager, lean,
Drawing thy portrait with deformities?
Some paint thee fleshlesse, all but bones and knees:
Most like a withered vile Anatomy,
Some with a lethall Dart do picture thee.
But let the world thus paint thee as they list;
Yet thou appeers most lovely to my sight,
Who in this cup comes but to quench my thirst,
And not my soul with ougly shapes t'affright:
Well may that torment be accounted light,
That emptying with one draught this little boule,
From all disasters so may free my soul.
Why stay I then to surfeit out this potion,
Whose drousie liquour shall breed such a slumber,
As I shall need to fear no careful motion:
Nor with my sad disgrace my thoughts to cumber,
My woes, my griefs, and my mishaps past number
Shall all be buried in eternal sleep,
My heart, and eyes shall no more sigh and weep.
This body thereby shall be saved from scorn,
These hands from bands, mine eyes from misery,
This head, which late imperiously has worn
A Princely crown shall not so abject be,
As from another liberality.
Which tyrannizing did the same bereave,
In servile manner it again receive.
Victorius Scipio, Carthage fatal foe,
The scourge of Afric, and the glore of Rome,
Whose chiefest drift and aim is to have me go,
TO attend his triumphs vainly shall consume,
Those idle hopes by which he does presume,
With my disgrace, to grace his high renoune,
In his proud entry, to that more proud town.
For why my better destiny now says,
From Afric, Europe shall no way divide,
This wretched remnant of my worser days,
The best being spent already here in pride:
How can it justly be to me denide?
But as kind Afric, gave me life and being,
To her again I give her own, I dying.
Then O dear country! yet in love receive,
This hateful life that still your harm procured,
And in compassion grant my bones a grave:
Which while I breathed your quiet still injured,
Wherefore from hence that you may rest secured:
Dear soil disdain not such a small request,
That breeds thy peace, and my desired rest.
Yet one thing let my dying ghost entreat,
(Which to my grief thy ruin does presage)
Live still with Rome, and Romans at debate,
Let arms against arms, rage be opposed to rage:
Kill, murder al, forbear no sex, no age.
Agree at last, and that will be to soon,
When either Rome, or Carthage is undone.
To thee then freely, now I drink my last,
With that the poison to her head she hied,
And while her looks she does about her cast,
Least any had this act of hers discried:
Her staring eyes unawares by chance espied,
The woeful story of Queen Didoes fall,
Drawn by some curious pensel on the wall.
Which with attention she remarkes and viewes,
Wondering the beauty of the work-mans art,
Who in a thousand strange and diverse hewes
Of choicest colors had discharged his part,
All was so portrayed in this matchless Chart,
That liueles shadows living bodies seemed,
The paynter had each lineament so lim'd.
Aeneas Navy on the wauing Main,
Spread forth their proud sails for to catch the air,
Here sweld a billow, there it fell again:
A thousand Daulphins skip up here and there,
The mariners ay two and two by pair,
With supple palms did span their heavy oars,
At whose sad strokes the wounded ocean roares.
High in a turret wretched Dido stood,
For to behold her faithless lovers flight,
From whose fair eyes distilled a crystal flood
Of briuish tears when she beheld that sight,
Each thing was framed so curiously and right,
That whatsoever was to the eyes presented,
Seemed in effect far rather, them invented.
A little lower did present to view,
The saddest object in this matchless frame:
There one might see how in despair she drew
The cruel sword, then fell upon the same.
O how the streams of purple blood forth came!
From which, as it had bin yet warm, did fly,
A little smoke which purld into the sky.
Look how a rose which from the stalk is cropped,
Leaves here and there some blossoms on the ground,
So here and there the place was all bedropt
With her vermilion blood about her round:
The Painters skill in painting of her wound
Seemed most divine and exquisit indeed,
For still therefrom the drops yet seemed to bleed.
Sad Sophonisba wistly notes the story,
And giving forth a death-presaging groan:
Dear wronged Lady (quoth she) I am sorry,
That time will not permit me to bemone
Thy sad mischance, nor shall thou grieve alone;
For why I hope our ghosts shall meet ere long,
Where each to other shall complain our wrong.
O how my fortune does resemble thine!
How like thy sorrows are (alas) my woes!
Affricke thy country, Affricke likewise mine:
Both our destructions from one fountain flows:
Aeneas thine, his offspring now my foes;
He bred thy ruin, they my sad distress;
He wronged a Queen, they wronged me now no less.
And since the greatness of thy mind was such,
Death to prefer unto a living shame,
Shall not thy brave example move as much
Desire in me for to perform the same?
Let coming ages hear it told by Fame,
How Sophonisba imitating thee,
Chus'd rather death, then living Infamy.
This spoke without amazement, fear or dread,
She drinks the fatal poison (noble Dame)
Which straight his venim through her veins does spre*
Scorning resistance whereso ere it came:
Even as we see a little spark or flame,
When once it kindles where it finds fit matter,
From place to place his furious flames does scatter.
Now while this powerful potion in her veins,
So fiercely wrought, her life began to fail,
Which no more lordship in her breast retains:
So bitterly death did it their assail,
Which having bidden to her heart farewell:
Her chiefest dwelling straight for fear she flies
For safety upwards to her lips and eyes.
There as if death had com'd awhile to play
Under the shadow of discheuild hair,
Which dangling over her face and shoulders lay,
She yet retains a countenance most fair,
Her gesture did her willing death declare:
And as her breath by intermission dies,
So piece by piece her beauty fades and flies.
Most like unto a tender Lilly fair,
That Is ouer-blasted with some raging storm,
Whose sauory blossoms late perfumed the air,
Hangs down his head, losing his wonted form,
Or as a flower chokt with a canker worm,
Even so the native beauty now ore-blowne,
Of this fair Queen seems borrowed, not her own.
Thus while her life stays in an houering fear,
Within the precinct of her currall lips:
Finding grim death had taken possession there,
Not willing more to enter in his grips,
Giving a bitter sob from thence she skips,
Leaving free passage to her soul oppressed,
To leave the dainty prison of her breast.
But soul and body loath to part asunder.
Both seem some little respite to entreat:
Yet the one must go, the other stay: a wonder
For all the world that viewes it to regreet:
Victorious death now strikes, he leaves to threat:
So this brave Dame her gallant ghost up yields,
Which flies with triumph to th'Elizian fields.
FINIS.
CAELIA. Containing certain Sonets.

BY DAVID MVRRAY, SCOTO-BRITTAINE.

To the right Noble and his most honored good Lord, RICHARD Lord DINGWALL.
LEet it not seem offensive to your sight,
(Most noble Lord) that here my Muse propines
You, with her youthful follies, in those lines
Decked with Invention of conceits so light?
For the dread sounds (which dastard minds affright)
Of neighing coursers, and of trumphets shrill,
Had bin a Subject fitter for my quill,
To Have bred unto thy haught eres delight.
But since my Muse, as yet, did never frame,
Her sporting vain, to sing of Martial blows,
(Which Mirror-like, your valorus arm often shows
Both to your own, and to your countries fame)
Yet deigne to view, there loue-sicke verse mean while:
Mars oft-times joys to see fair Venus smile.
And if unto this idle humerous Vain,
Where Youth and folly show their skil-lesse Art,
She breed acceptance, she her wits shall strain,
(Ere it be long) a subject to impart,
That to your noble ears shall seem more worth:
Till when, accept this her abortiue birth.
Your LL. to be commanded, DA. MVRRAY.

Sonet. 1.
MY infant Muse, when I began to write,
Led by the fury of my vnstay'd years,
Sung ever as my fancy did conceit,
As by her method-wanting-layes appreares:
Now praised she Caelia's beauty, then admires
The enchanting Music of another quill:
And now again she would bewail with tears,
The untimely falls of some whom death did kill.
Thus never staying at one settled theme,
Till that she grew more grave, and I more old,
Under protection of a royal name,
Fair Sophonisha's tragic death she told.
Yet lest poor Muse her first conceits were smor'd,
She here presents them to a NOBLE LORD.
Sonet 2.
KInd Nature once did labor so in birth,
That all the gods to help here were conuein'd,
All Is Mother then such bitter throws sustaind,
Or she this child of wonder could bring forth:
At length supported by celestial might,
She Is brought to bed even of a girl divine,
Whom all the present Deities propine
With what rare graces could enrich the sight,
Loves Queen gave Beauty, Dian Chastnes rare,
Minerua Judgment, thundering Jove the Name,
Apollo graced her with her golden hair,
Juno the Heart that should all hearts in flame,
Cupid gave her his own two lovely eyes,
Wherewith all the ^are darted who her sees.
3. Sonet.
BEauty being long a resident above,
With importune celestial suits was deau'd,
Of sacred sprites who still her favor craved,
That she from thence resolved to remove:
And so at last from top of all the Rounds,
Love on his wings conuoy'd her here below,
Where she not willing any should her know,
Sought out the North to be her resting bounds,
There she remains her name being changed, yet still
For beauty now fair Caelia she is called,
Whose sight sometimes, as it the gods all thral'd,
So now her looks poor humane souls does kill.
And oh no, wonder! if they thus do end,
Since th^^ ^ut fail where gods could not defend.
4. Sonet.
THy beauty Caelia so betrayed mine eyes,
That at the first they forced my heart to yield:
Thus overcome into a bloudlesse field,
A yielding slave unto thy mercy flees,
Where humble prostrate on affections knees,
Tide with the chains of strongest love (alas)
I do entreat thy pity to my case,
Pity but which thy hapless captive dy's,
Then as thy beauty did but stroke or come,
So let thy mercy without rigor save,
Remorse and pity shall thee best become,
Remorse and pity which not else I crave.
Thrice happy thraldom if thou p^^y move,
Unhappy, bondage if disd^^^^ (...)
5. Sonet.
MY griefs increase still urged me to impart,
My souls felt-paine unto my fairest fair,
And that she might b' acquainted with my care:
I choos'd my tongue the agent for my heart,
Which being well instructed as I thought,
In all the passions which oppress a mind,
And being glad to show how I was pined:
With swift winged have I Caelias presence sought:
But I no sooner had attained her sight,
When lo my tongue betra'd me to her eyes,
And dastard-like into my throat straight flies,
Leaving me clean confounded with his flight,
Beat back with sighs, yet it returned again*
But spoke of pleasure when it should of pain.
6. Sonet.
STill must I groan, still must I sigh, still mourn,
And cannot groans, nor sighs, nor tears have place,
To make fair Caelia one sweet smile return*
Or at the least to show some sign of grace?
Ah! who would say that one so fair of face,
So rare of beauty, so divine in all,
Disdained to pity one in such a case,
And one poor soul who leaves her beauties thral?
Still must I breath those grievous groans in vain:
Still must my sighs euanish in the air,
Still must those tears be spent in waste I strain,
Still must my passions all increase my care.
Then gentle death come and dissolve my pain,
Since sighs, tears, groans and passions bred disdain.
7. Sonet.
PAle, sad Aurora leave thy showers to rain,
Of perl-like cristall tears thou daily sheds,
In tender bosoms of the flowery meads,
Wayling his death wh'at llions siege was slain:
Oh let thy soul appeased! with this remain.
That those thy tears pleads pity by there sight,
And more, the great bright pattern of the light,
To quench his drought carrouses them again,
Cease then to weep, and leave me still to mourn,
Complaining best becomes my mirthlesse state,
Wh'in quenchlesse flames of lucklesse love does burn:
(Thy Memnons loss requires no more regrate)
And since my own cannot procure but scorn,
Lend me thy moving tears, sweet weeping morn.
8. Sonet.
ANd is it true dear, that you are unkind?
Shall I believe sweet Saint that you are so?
I fear you are, but stay, oh! stay my mind:
Too soon to credit that that breeds thy woe,
Yet whether shall my resolutions go,
To think you are, or not unkind I must
The effect says I, and yet my fancy, no,
Being loath such undeserved harm to trust;
My passions thus such opperations breed,
In my divided soul that I can not,
Conceit you are that which you are indeed:
Imperious love does so control my thought,
Unhappy I that did such love embrace,
Unconstant you that bates such love (alas)
9. Sonet.
BRight Angels face, the paradise of Love,
High stately throne where Majesty does shine,
Beauties Idaea, sweetness sweetened shrine,
Clear heavens, wherein proud Phoebus daz^ers move,
Fair pearly rolls that stain the iuory white,
Environed with corroll died walls,
Sweet-nectard breath, more soft then Zephir's gales,
Heart-reauing-tongue whose speech still breeds delight,
Smooth cheeks of Rose, and Lyllies interlac'd,
Art-scorning-nose, in framing which no doubt
Nature of her whole skill played bankerout.
When it in midst of such perfections placed.
Gold-glittering-tresses, and soules-wounding-lockes,
Only proud ears, more deaf then flinty rocks.
10. Sonet.
MY Caelia sat once by a crystal brook,
Gazing how smoothly the clear streams did slide,
Who had no sooner her sweet sight espied,
When with amazement they did on her look,
The waters slyding by her seemed to mourn,
Desirous still for to behold her beauty,
Neglecting to the Ocean their duty,
In thousand strange Meanders made return,
But oh! again with what an heavenly tune,
Those pleasant streams that issued from the spring,
To see that goddess did appear to sing,
Whom having viewed did as the first had done.
If those pure streams delighted so to eye her,
Judge how my soul does surfeit when I see her.
11. Sonet.
THe Suns fond child when he arrived into,
The sights inueigling palace of his sire,
Incensed with a praeposterous desire,
Would needs to guide his fathers cart step to,
So fondly I once, entering (alas)
Her chamber who bereaues not eyes, but souls,
And whiles my bold approach there is none controules,
I needs would venture to behold her face,
But as Appolloes child more rash then wise,
Did manage those fierce steeds with skillesse Art,
They like a firebrand flang him from the skies:
Thus while I eyed her, beauty fier'd my heart:
Only this difference rests betwixt us two,
I ceaseless burn, his flames were quenched in Po.
12. Sonet.
AS Icarus proud of his borrowed wings,
Following his flying father through the skies,
Above the ayery region did arise,
And for to gaze on Phoebus upward springs,
Where while with houering pens he staring hings
Thinking the glory of that cart to tell,
From which his match in fondness headlong fell:
Appolloes rays his waxen feathers sings:
So I resembling him like fondly flew,
For my desire being winged with fancies plumes
To gaze on brighter rays then those presumes:
Wherewith the Sun, the son of Dedal slew.
And as our flights so were our falls (alas)
He in the sea, I into black disgrace.
13. Sonet.
A Due sweet Caelia for I must depart,
And leave thy sight, and with thy sight all joy,
Conuoi'd with care, attended with annoy:
A vagabonding wretch from part to part,
Only dear Caelia grant me so much grace,
As to vouchsafe this heart befraught with sorrow,
TO attend upon thy shadow even and morrow:
Whose wonted pleasure was to view thy face,
And if sometimes thou soliter remain,
And for thy dearest dear a sigh lets slide,
This poor attender sitting by thy side
Shall be thy Echo to repli't again.
Then farewell Caelia for I must away,
And to attend thee my poor heart shall stay.
14. Sonet.
FOrsaken whether shall I go (alas)
What place to me can any comfort grant,
Since I must leaueth' only happy place,
That does retain the worlds admited Saint?
Oh never let the rising Sun auant,
I saw his brightness! not her brighter face;
Nor let the night in sable shadows hant,
If that I dream not of my dear some space.
No longer wish I to enjoy this air,
No longer crave I breath, no more to live,
Then that I may still gaze upon my fair,
Whose sweetest smiles all kind of comfort give.
Days, hours and nights, and places where I go,
Til I her see shall but procure my woe.
15. Sonet.
Days, hours and nights thy presence may deteine,
But neither day, nor hour, nor night shall not
Bar thy sweet beauty from mine eyes unseen,
Since so divinely printed in my thought,
That skilful Greek, that Loves Idaea wrought,
And lim'd it so exactly to the eye,
When beauties rarest patterns he had sought,
With this thy portrait could not matched be,
Tho on a table he, most skilful he,
In rarest colors rarest parts presented,
So on a heart if one may match a tree,
Tho skillesse I thy rarer shape have painted.
Not by Loves self, Loves beauty formed he,
But by thy self, thy self art formed in me.
16. Sonet.
MOunt Etnas flames may peradventure cease,
Yet my true heart shall burn still in a low,
The swelling streams over banks and brayes that flow,
By miracle may stay their swiftest race.
But restless streams of liqui'd tears (alas)
Shall never stay from my poor eyes to rin,
The congeald ice long frozen may grow thin,
By the reflex of bright Appolloes face,
But ah! my hopes shall freeze still in despair,
Til I enjoy again fair Caelias sight,
Whose beauties beams which shined over me so bright,
Through longsome absence thus procures my care.
Sweet Caelia then make speed my flames to quench,
To raise my hopes and those my tears to stanch.
17. Sonet.
GAzing from out the windows of mine eyes,
To view the object of my hearts desire,
My famished looks in wandering troops forth flies:
Hoping by some good fortune to epsy her,
But having flowne with staring wings long space,
And missing still the aim that caused them soar,
Scorning to feed on any other face,
Turns to their cabins back and flies no more,
And there enclosed disdaines to view the light,
Shadowing my face with sable clouds of grief:
And thus I breath in cares continual night,
Till that her sight afford me some relief.
Sweet then make have these cloudy cares to clear,
And glad those eyes that holds thy sight so dear.
18. Sonet.
Dear once you told me that you dreamed my breath
Was past, and that your eyes beheld my grave,
Likewise you said that sorrow for my death,
From out those eyes distilling tears beraue,
Ah it was no dream! if you will but perceive
How in effect for you I hourly die,
Think that no vision did you then deceive,
Since you may view the very truth in me,
If so you dreamed this only seems to be:
A dream that for my death such tears you spent,
Worse then a thousand deaths for you I dry,
Yet for my grief you never tear once lent.
But if for dreaming so you mourned so much,
Far rather mourn that in effect its such.
19. Sonnet. Being accused by a Gentlewoman for stealing of a Book.
LEt not thy self, fair Nimphe, nor none of thine,
Accuse me of no sacriligious theft,
For by the world, and by the starry lift,
And by the honor I do owe thy shrine,
By the infernal spirits, and gods divine,
And by the hallowed stately Stigian brayes,
I never meant (sweet dame) thee to displease,
For why thy grief had likewise then been mine,
If ever ought deare-loue from thee I stale,
I both protest and swear it was no book,
No nothing but a poor inueighling look,
For which again I left my freedom thrall,
Then blame me not for stealing of thy books,
Since you steal hearts, I only steal poor looks.
20. Sonet.
POnder thy cares, and sum them all in one,
Get the account of all thy hearts disease,
Reckon the torments do thy mind displease,
Write up each sigh, each plaint, each tear, each groan,
Remember on thy grief conceau'd by day,
And call to mind thy nights disturbed rest,
Think on those visions did thy soul molest,
While as thy wearied corpse a sleeping lay,
And when all those thou have enrold a right,
Into the count-booke of thy daily care,
Extract them truly, then present the sight,
With them of flinty Caelia the fair,
That she may see, if yet more ills remains,
For to be paid to her unjust disdaines.
21. Sonet, Made at the Authors being in Bourdeaux.
THou Sun, those trees, this earth, fair river clear,
Vouchsafe to attend my pittious plaints, alas,
And if remorse of a distressed case
Can plead for pity, listen oh to hear!
Then be reporters to my fairest fair,
To Phoenix Caelia of my restless pains,
This ages glory, whom the North retains,
Enclosed by Neptune for his darling there,
But ah! those trees, this earth cannot remove,
And Phoebus fears her rays shall dim his pride,
And if this river should my complaint guide,
Then Neptune would grow jealous of his love,
So that I crave all these supports in vain,
I plagued alone, alone must bear my pain.
22. Sonet: On the misfortune of Bellizarius, great Lieutenant to the Emperor
Justinian.
STay passenger, and with relenting look,
Behold here Bellizarius, I pray,
Whom neuer-constant fortune, changing aye,
Even at the top of greatness quite forsook,
And which is wondrous, in a moment took
Me from the hight of an Imperial sway,
And placed me here, blind begging by this way,
Whose greatness sometime scarce the world could brook,
And while thou daignes thy pitiful aspect,
Ah sorrow not so much my fortunes past,
As I beseech thee to bewail this last!
That from such honor abiect-lie deiect,
I yet am forced a spectacle to live,
Glad to receive the meanest alms thou't give.
Sonet to the right worthy Gentleman, and his loving cousin M. John Murray.
WHile Eagle-Like upon the lofty wings
Of thy aspiring Muse thou flies on hie,
Making the immortal Sprites in love with thee,
And of those Ditties thou so sweetly sings,
Where quaffing boules of their Ambrosian springs,
And sweetest Nectar, thou divinely stays:
Low by the earth (poor I) sings homely lays,
Till like desire of fame me upward brings,
Then borrowing, from thy rich Muse, some plumes,
Icarian-like beyond my skill I soar,
While coming where thy songs are heard before,
My lines are mocked, that thine to match presumes:
And thus I perish in my high desire,
While you are more praised, the more thou do aspire.
Idem.
Enriched sprite by great Apollo crowned
With cirkling wreaths of stately laurel Bays,
Scorning as't seems that thy enchanting lays
Should have their praise but of immortal sound:
For heavens seeing earth, so be thy songs renowned,
Draw up thy sweetest Ditties to the skies,
Whose well tuned notes Phoebus to his harp applies:
While as his chariot wheels about the Round.
And thus thy diuine-sprite-inspired Muse
Has made thee here admired, beloved above,
She sings so sweetly that she does infuse
Wonder in mortals, in the godhead love:
No marvel if thy songs b'admired then,
That yield both music unto gods and men.
The complaint of the Shepherd Harpalus.
Poor Harpalus oppressed with love,
Sat by a crystal brook:
Thinking his sorrows to remove,
Oft-times therein did look.
And heating how on pibble stones,
The murmuring river ran,
As if it had bewailed his groans,
Unto it thus began.
Fair stream (quoth he) that pitties me,
And hears my matchless moan,
Is thou be going to the sea,
As I do so suppone,
Attend my plaints past all relief,
Which dolefully I breath,
Acquaint the sea Nymphs with the grief,
Which still procures my death*
Who sitting on the cliffy rocks,
May in their songs express:
While as they comb their golden locks,
Poor Harpalus distress.
And so perhaps some passenger,
That passes by the way:
May stay and listen for to hear,
Them sing this doleful lay.
Poor Harpalus a shepherd swain,
More rich in youth then store,
Loved fair Philena, hapless man,
Philena oh therefore!
Who still remorceles-hearted maid,
Took pleasure in his pain:
And his good will (poor soul) repayd
With undeserved disdain.
Never shepherd loved a shepherdess
More faithfully then he:
Never shepherd yet beloved less,
Of shepherdess could be.
How often with dying looks did he
To her his woes impart?
How often his sighs did testify
The dolor of his heart?
How often from valleis to the hills,
Did he his griefs rehearse?
How often re-eccho'd they his ills,
A back again (alas?)
How often on barks of stately Pines,
Of Beech, of Holen green,
Did he ingraue in mournful lines,
The dole he did sustain?
Yet all his plaints could have no place,
To change Philena's mind:
The more his sorrows did increase,
The more she proved unkind.
The thought whereof through very care,
Poor Harpalus did move:
That overcome with high despair,
He quat both life and love.
Sonet on the death of the Lady Cicily Weemes, Lady of Tillebarne.
Fair Cicil's loss, be thou may fable song,
Not that for which proud Rome and Carthage straue
But thine more famous, whom ago not long
Untimely death entombed so soon in grave.
Dear sacred Lady, let thy ghost receive
These dying accents of my mourning quill,
The sweetest-smelling incense that I have,
With sighs and tears upon thy hearse to spill.
To thee (dear Saint) I consecrate ay still
These sad oblations of my mirthlesse mind,
Who while thou breathed, this wondering world did fill
With thy perfections, Phoenix of thy kind;
From out whose ashes hence I prophecy,
Shall never such another Phoenix fly.
Epitaph on the death of his dear cousin, M. David Murray.
Receive (dear friend) into thy tomb those tears;
Those tears which from my griefe-fraught eyes distill,
Whose drearie show the true resemblance bears
Of those sad cares which inwardly me kill:
Take them dear friend, since sent from such a one,
Who loved thee living, wailes thee being gone:
No fained tear, nor forged sigh (God knows)
I sacrifice upon thy woeful hearse,
My mournings are according to my woes,
And correspondent to my grief my verse,
My sighs are ceaselesse echoes, that replies,
For thy sad death my hearts relenting cries.
Aye me! how can I but regrait thy case,
Who in the full Meridian of thy years.
While strength of body held the chiefest place,
And while thy self, thy self even most appears:
Death so untimely should thy life bereave:
Impouerishing thy friends, t'inrich the grave.
Ah! had thou not been sociall, gentle, kind,
Most loving, courteous, liberal by measure,
Rich in all parts, but most of all in mind,
Which thou instord'st with virtues precious treasure:
Had thou not been I say repleat with those,
Less had thy praises been, and less my woes.
In nothing more thy virtue proou'd her power,
Then in thy friendships well advised choice:
Who loved thee once, still loves thee to this hour,
The grave their fight, but not their love does close,
And which was more, the mightiest of the land,
She joined to thee into affections band,
And well the greatness of thy mind did merit,
Even that the greatest spirits should thee cherish,
Who of it self, did from it self inherit,
That which in great men does but greatness perish:
"True worth is not discerned by outward show,
"Virtues Idaea by the mind we know.
Ah foolish they that brag so much in vain,
Only by blood nobilitate to be,
While in their bosoms they do scarce retain,
The smallest spark of magnanimity!
I hold this for a general Maxim good,
True honor comes from virtue as from blood.
And yet I cannot but confess indeed,
That virtue in a generous stomach still,
Does shine more clear then when it does proceed,
From out a base-borne breast, mark who so will,
For why thy worth had never so clearly shined,
Had not thy birth been equal to thy mind.
Without affection I must truly say,
Thou wast a well-borne Gentleman by birth,
Com'd of a race nere spotted to this day,
Thine ancestors were men of noble worth,
Famous in blood, in virtue and in name,
And all, as thou, went to the grave with fame.
Whereof this comfort does arise I see,
To those that loved thy life, condoles thy death,
Though thou be dead in part, all cannot dye,
Thy minds brave conquest shall survive thy breath,
Death may well triumph on thy bodies fall,
But thy great virtue ever flourish shall.
Then let thy ghost go in eternal peace,
To the Elisian sweet desired rest,
There with the happy to enjoy a place,
To taste the speechless pleasures of the blessed:
(...) surfitting those everlasting joys,
That never feel dist^rbance, or annoies.
There live still happy, while I hapless here,
Must celebrate thy exequies in sorrow,
Paying this tribute to thy tomb each year,
Of sighs and ^eares, which from my greifes I borrow:
And ah! no wonder that I do the same,
For both I bear thy surname, and thy name.
Sonet on the death of his cousin, Adam Murray.
I Know not whether discontent or love,
(Dear friend) has bred this thy abortiue death:
Or if that both united showed their wrath,
To make thee this thy fatal last to prove,
But be the motion what it list, did move,
This thy unlooked for sad untimely fall,
Yet with the loss of breath thou losd not al,
Thy better part still lives the heavens above,
And here thy pen immortalized thy name,
From time, oblivion, envy, and the grave,
That to corruption now thy bones receive,
But can no way deface thy glorious fame,
Which still must sore on wings of endless praise,
While years have months, months weeks, and weeks have days.
FINIS.

