The survey of Popery

Wherein the reader may clearly behold, not only the original and daily
incrementes of Papistrie, with an evident Confutation of the same; but also a
succinct and profitable enarration of the state of Gods Church from Adam until
Christ's ascension, contained in the first and second Part thereof: and
throughout the third Part Popery is turned vp-side down.

1. Cor. 13.11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child: but when I became a
man, I put away childish things. LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims dwelling on
Adling hill at the sign of the white Swanne. 1596

To the right Honorable Lords, John the L. Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy counsel; Matthew the L.
Archbishop of York, Primate and Metropolitan of England; Sir Thomas Egerton
Knight, the L. Keeper of the great Seal of England; and to the right reverend
father in God, Tobie the grave and learned Bishop of Durham; Grace and peace
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IF many have laudably employed much time and study (right honorable and my
very good Lords) and that only to attain skill in profane stories; much more
doubtless are their studies commendable, who have spared no time, no labor,
no watchinges, no lucubrations, to atchieue exact knowledge in the holy
scriptures and histories ecclesiastical, very necessary for the
accomplishment thereof. In which kind of never enough commended exercise sundry
virtuous and learned men have so profited the church of God; as their worthy
monumentes have gotten the^ immortal fame, before God and al mortal men. Yet
such is the condition of our state during this pilgrimage of mortality* that
the best learned neither have said, neither can say so much, but still more very
fruitfullie may be said therein. For which cause very wisely wrote S. Austen*
that he did learn and would learn daily, even to the last hour. While I
reuolued these matters deeply with my self; I found some writers tedious,
some obscure, some confuse, some abounding, some wanting, no one answerable to
al desires. In regard whereof, albeit I cannot bring gold, silver, pearls,
hyacinths, and precious stones; yet am I very desirous to carry mortar to the
building up of the walls of Gods Sion: not for that I think I can say better
then is already said by others (as who acknowledge my self the meanest of
many thousands;) but because I covet to supply for the measure of my small
talent, such wantes, for the common good of the simple sort, and of others who
have not store of books, as heretofore I find omitted in far more learned
works. What variety, what confusion, what obscurity, what uncertainty is
amongst historiographers and Chronographers, none does know or can know
sufficiently; but he that does study the same seriously. What is more
necessary for the vnderstandig of the prophecy of Daniel, then the perspicuous
and exact enumeration of the 70 weeks? the^ the ready explication of the 2300
days? the^ the lively purtra^te of the four monarchies what helps more for
the true understanding of the former and latter prophets? then to know when,
where, of what matter, and before whom they did pronounce their prophes^es.
What is more expedient then to know the two captiuities, When, where, by whom,
and for what causes the Israelites and the Jews were so afflicted? what can
y^eld greater solace to a christian heart, then to behold as in a glass of
crystal the original and daily incrementes of popery, lively discovered
before our eyes? when, where, and by whom, and upon what occasion, al popish
errors, heresy, and superstitions have crept into the church* what shall I say
of the time, reigns, and acts* of the Emperors of Rome? of their kings, their
Consuls, their Dictators? what of the kings of Babylon, Ashur, Egypt,
Macedonia, Persia, Syria? what of the kings of Judah and of Israel? What of the
birth of our savior Christ, of his baptism, of his corporal conversation
among us? what of other infinite memorable acts recorded in the old and new
testament? what of many excellent and golden lessons, specified in the
histories of the church? All which and many other important matters, are
compendiously and yet sufficiently handled in this small volume* and so
contrived I hope, as obscure things shall seem plain; with such brevity, as
nothing can be thought tedious; with such plenty of matter, as no necessary
point will be found wanting, and with such method, as every child may with
facility bear the same away.

The usual manner is in all such kind of exercises to make choice of some worthy
personages for the honest and lawful protection of the same* You my L. of
Canturburie, did harbor me a long time in your own house. There I enjoyed
every thing not as a prisoner, but as a brother, not as a stranger, but as a
dear friend; not as a mean person, but as one of far better account, then I
either was then, or yet am indeed. You my L. of York, for rare courtesies
received both of old and late days, have made me greatly bound unto your
grace. You my L. Keeper, to speak nothing of your great zeal for the free
passage of Christ's gospel; for the sincere preaching of his sacred word, and
for the common good of this realm, have as well for your rare honorable favor
toward mine own seely self, as for your late kind acceptance of my
treatise of usury, deserved a far better thing at my hands. You my L of
Durham, although as yet ye never saw my face, have nevertheless affoorded me
such christian affection and rare benignity, as I have not often found the
like. I therefore present unto you (my reverend fathers and honorable Lords
all four) these fruits of my late studies, as an infallible argument of my
unfeigned good will, for your honorable and manifold courtesies, countenances
and other benefits received at your hands. Accept the present (my honorable
Lords) in good part: respect not so much the person that gives, as the thing
it self that is given; not the value of the gift so much as the mind of the
giver; not so much what is done, as what the party was willing to have done:
who if it shall so please the Almighty, will hereafter present larger gifts as
time, place, and other circumstances shall afford. God vouchsafe to increase
his manifold good graces in you all, and to multiply your days upon the earth,
for the free passage of his holy gospel, and the peace of his church. From my
study this tenth of August. 1595.

Your Lordships in all dutiful manner. THOMAS BELL.

To the Seminary Priests in Wisbich Castle, and elsewhere dispersed in this
Realm.
TWo years are fully complete and expired, since my book of Motives came
abroad, and was in your hands. In it I promised to subscribe, if either any one
among you, or other Papist in Europe whosoever, could effectually confute the
same. Your own Papists here at home, greatly wonder at your silence in that
behalf: Some (God be thanked for it) are wholly and soundly reformed: Othersome
are enforced so to doubt of your doctrine, as they know not in the world what
to say or think thereof: Othersome either seduced by your sinister report, or
else to save your credit, if it would be, affirm very desperately, that you
have answered my Motives already: and all generally both think and say, that
ye will shortly answer them, if there be any truth on your side. One whole
year I have expected your putatiue answer, as who had then, and still have, a
most fervent desire, speedily to reply upon the same. Now, since mine
expectation is in that point frustrate: in this second year I have addressed
my self, to give you a further provocation. In this Book I have not concealed
any thing, that I knew or could possibly say for you. I have not dissembled the
mightiest objections that can be made in your defense, neither have I passed
slenderly over them, but confuted them so pithily and so exactly, as if any of
you, or of your brethren abroad, shall be able to yield a sufficient answer
in your defense, I promise unfeignedly to subscribe unto his doctrine. Remember
therefore what the Orator says: to wit, that to err stands with man's
infirmity: but to persevere in error, is proper to fools alone. If you can
devise, how and in what sort to answer me: all wise men both say and think,
that ye will do it undoubtedly. If you know not how to defend your cause,
because the truth prevails so mightily: then show your selves to be wise men
by embracing the truth willingly, and not to be fools, by striving against
the same wilfully. Have the fear of God before your eyes: pray that your
hearts may be enlightened with the true knowledge of his sacred word; and let
not the shame of the world keep you back, from the public confession of the
known truth. Peruse my Book seriously, ponder my discourse deeply, contemn
nothing wilfully, examine all my reasons sincerely: and that done, give your
indifferent censures accordingly. If you find Popery confuted effectually,
then yield to the truth, and give God the glory: if you think I fail in
proving my intended purpose; then use your wits and your pens, as well for
my confutation, as for the credit of your cause, and the expectation of your
seely brethren, who shortly will renounce all Popery, if ye with speed do
not defend the same.

Amen.
To the Christian Reader.
IN this small volume (gentle reader,) thou may behold the original of
Popery with the daily increments thereof, lively discovered before thine eyes;
as also an evident confutation of whatsoever can possibly be said in defense of
the same. Thou have together with this, a fruitful summarie of the old and
new Testament; contained in the first and second part of this present Survey.
Throughout which discourse thou must ever remember, that in the books of the
Kings, and of the Psalms, I commonly follow the supputation of the latins. And
if thou can reap any commodity by this my labor, then thank God for it, and
pray that my daily studies may still tend to his glory, and the common good of
his church. I have long expected an answer from the Papists, either severally
from some one, or jointly from many. If they be still silent; the world must
needs judge, that the truth is not on their side. How sincerely I am
persuaded as I write, to God the just judge I appeal for witness: Albeit, the
malicious and mal-content, seek by the contrary and like slanderous reports,
to bring me in disgrace. But (as Christ's Apostle says;) to them that love God,
all things (in the end) will turn to the best. Fare well in Christ Jesus; and
continue in loving me christianly, as I hope thou do.

The postscript to all the readers of this Survey in general.
AFter that I had accomplished this present volume, a friend of mine gave me to
understand, that some persons were offended, because I say in the epistle
dedicatory of my Motives, that S. Paul erred gentilizing. For whose
satisfaction, if they will be satified with reason; I say first, that the nature
and condition of some persons is such, that though they be slow to do well
themselves; yet are they very propense to reprehend that, which is well done by
others. I say secondly, that if such persons would deeply consider the prudent
law of the sage and wise Persians, other things well said should have moved
them to conceal that fault, though it were as ill as they imagine. I say
thirdly, that such persons seek Nodum in scirpo, and that it is no fault at
all. I prove it evidently, because to gentilize is nothing else, but to play
the part of a gentile, and consequently, since S. Paul, then named Saul, did as
cruelly persecute the Christians, as ever did the tyrannical gentiles, Nero,
Domitian^, Traiane, Seuerus, Maximinus, D^cius, or Dioclesianus: It follows
of necessity, that he did gentilize indeed. For as holy writ records, He
breathed out threatninges and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. Act.
9.1. and 2.
He desired letters to Damascus, that he might bring bound to Jerusalem, all
as well women as men, that professed the name of Christ Jesus, insomuch, that a
voice cried from heaven unto him, Act 9.4. 1* Cor. 15.9.
and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? He likewise says of himself,
that he is not worthy to be called an apostle, because he persecuted the
church of God: and all this doubtless he did in error, because as himself
says of the Jews his brethren if they had known, 1. Cor. 2.8.
they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. Yea he himself says of
himself, 1. Tim. 1.13.
that he was received to mercy, because he erred ignorantly through
unbelief. S. Paul therefore erred gentilizing, though he were a Jew, in that
he persecuted Christ and his church, even as did the Gentiles, and in the error
of Gentilitie. Which thing being spoken obiter in the way of mine honest
purgation, and not to establish any point of doctrine, was not a sufficient
motive to offend any well affected reader. Well, I say with the apostle, Gal.
^.10.
Si hominibus placerem, Christi seruus non essem. As before, so now again, I
willingly employ my whole industry to glorify my God and to profit his
church, if by any means I can. And as I greatly wish to pleasure thankful
persons, who ever accept in good part godly labors so do I make no great
account to discontent malicious Zoili, who seldom or never broke that well,
which is well done by others.

THE FIRST PART Contains the state of the Church; from Adam, until the
Monarchy of the Romans.
The first book is of the time and memorable acts, from Adam, unto the
captivity of the two Tribes.
The first Chapter, of the Creation, and other things coincident.
The first Section of the creation of Man.
GOd created heaven, the four elements, Genes. 2. verse.
and all things contained therein; and this he did of nothing, that is, without
any antecedent or preiacent matter. He created man in such state, The state of
(...) in his creation
as he never needed to have sinned: and consequently, as he might have lived
for ever, although he were indeed mortal. For, as by eating of the tree of
knowledge he sinned, and consequently died; even so by eating of the tree of
life, he might have preserved his life from time to time. The meat of other
trees yielded food to man; the tree of life as an wholesome medicine, defended
him from all corruption: The virtue of the tree of life
which virtue was either in the tree by some supernatural inherent quality,
as sun dry of the ancient fathers hold; or else the tree was a sacrament of
Gods divine grace, by which man might have lived eternally if he had never
sinned, as other learned writers think. Which latter opinion I prefer for the
better, as which I judge to be saint Austens; ^ugust. de ciuit. (...) 3 cap. 20.
yet the former is probable, and can not easily be refeiled.

The second Section, of man's sustentation.
Meat was necessary for man's sustentation, even in the state of innocence;
and it should ever so have continued, albeit man had never sinned: for to this
end did God plant so many trees in paradise, ^enes. 2.16. ^enes. 3.19.
giving man leave to eat thereof: neither after sin came any new necessity
to eat, but a special modification of eating was annexed thereunto: for,
before sin, man did eat without labor; but after sin, he was appointed to
eat with the sweat of his brows.

The third Section, of eating flesh.
^enes. 1.^9.
Albeit the eating of flesh before the flood was not in use, as not then
approved for good; yet after the flood, to eat flesh was granted unto man.
^enes. 9.3.
Why it was then prohibited, and after the flood granted, no infallible reason
can be alleged; yet two probable conjectures may be yielded in that behalf:
the one, because in the beginning men's bodies were stronger, and so needed
less norishment; the other, because in those days, the earth brought forth
better, and more wholesome fruits.

CHAP. II.
The first Section, of the ages of the world, and the duration thereof.
THe Jews had a prophecy of Elias, not Thesbites, but one of their own
Rabbis, a Cabbalist, mentioned in their Talmud, or canon law, that the world
should continue six thousand years, that is to say, two thousand years before
the written settled law published by Moses, two thousand years in the time of
circumcision, and two thousand years after Christ's incarnation. Which opinion
wants not learned patrons, for defense of the same; albeit (in my judgment)
it cannot stand, as shortly shall appear.

The second Section, of the ages of the world.
There be six ages of the world, designed by all approved antiquity. After
saint Austen, Aug. de ciuit. libr. 22. cap. 30.
the first age is from Adam to the flood, the second to Abraham, the third to
David, the fourth to the captivity, the fifth to Christ, the sixth to the end of
the world: which sixth and last age (says he) cannot be measured, with any
number of generations, because the Father has reserved in his own power, the
knowledge of the last day.

This division of ages which saint Austen assigns, The difficulty consists
not in the ages, but in the supputat^^on of the yeare^
may well be holden; nevertheless, because the division of ages into six before
Christ's first sacred aduent, brings greater perspicuitie to the understanding
of the scriptures; I will follow that course with other skillful writers, and
make a pithie brief declaration of the same.

The variety of writers, concerning the years of the world until Christ's holy
incarnation is wonderful; even so many opinions almost of those that I have
read (and I have read a good many) as there be writers that handle the same.

After Eusebius Caesariensis, Exceeding gre^^ variety of opin^^ons.
the duration of the world till Christ, is 5199: after the Hebrews, 3962:
after the Septuagints, 5328: after others, 4121: after others, 3929: after
others, 3969: after others, more: after some, less. This being true (as it is
most true indeed) commendable must that labor be, if any such can be found;
which in such different confusion, shall deliver a plain manifestation of the
truth.

And because the truth ought ever to be embraced, by what mouth soever it be
uttered; albeit I seem to swerve both from old and later writers, yet let the
gentle Reader afford me his indifferent censure, at least so far forth as my
just and irrefringible probations, shall evidently convince and deserve. Mark
therefore my discourse attentively (gentle Reader) and then I trust this great
and mighty controversy, will be plain and easy to thee.

The first age.
(...) first age.
The first age from the creation of the world to the flood, contains 1656.
years; whereof for the Readers better satisfaction, I put down this plain
demonstration.

Adam was made of the dust of the earth, in the end of the sixth day Genes. 1.
verse. 27, 31.





















The whole sum of years is 1656. and six days.

The particular sums of the years be these;
130 105 90 70 65 162 65 187 182 600
1656
Make addition, and this sum will amount to 1656, to which add six days
before Adams creation.

The second age.
second age.
The second age, from the deluge, to the birth of Abraham, contains 353.
years, and ten days; whereof this is a plain demonstration.

The flood endured one whole year, and ten days, Gene. 8.

Sem the son of Noah begat Arphaxad two years after the

Arphaxad begat Shale or Shelah, when he was 35. years

Shale begat Heber, when he was 30. years old Genesis 11.

Heber begat Peleg, being 34. years old, Ge. 11. verse 16.

Peleg begat Rehu, being 30. years old, Genesis 11. verse 18.

Rehu begat Sarug, when he was 32. years old, Genesis 11.

Sarug begat Nahor, being 30. years old, Ge. 11. ver. 22.

Nahor begat Their or Terah, at 29. years, Ge. 11. v. 24.

Their begat Abraham, when he was 130. years old, Genesis

The whole sum of years is 315.

The particular sums of the years be these;
1 2 35 30 34 30 32 30 29 130
353
Make addition, and this will be the sum 353.

A grave objection against the supputation last rehearsed.
It is written Genes. 11. verse 26. that Their begat Abraham, when he was but
70. years old: therefore three score years must be subtracted from the
number abouesaide; that is, from the 130. years assigned to Their, before he
begat Abraham: which three score years, the greater part, even of the best
Chronographers have hitherto omitted.

The answer.
I say first, that we ought not to consider so much what others aliquando bonus
dormit Homerus: to which this other is consonant; Bernardus non vidit omnia.







The reply.
The text says plainly Genesis 11. verse 26. that Terah was but 70. years old
when he begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

The answer.
August. quaest. sup. Genesis q. 25.
I answer with saint Austen, that the scripture only avouches Their to have bin
70. years old before he begat his children, Abram, Nahor, and Haran: and that
Abram was not first borne, although he be first named. For as saint Austen
considered gravely, he is the first named, by reason of his excellency and
prerogative above the rest; Mal. 1. verse 2, 3. ^* Par* 4. v* 1.
even as Jacob was named before Esau, and Judah before his brethren, though
indeed he were but the fourth in number. This answer I make good by sundry
reasons; first, because these are the words of the text; Terah lived 70. years
and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Now it is manifest, that he begat them not
all three in the 70. year of his age, as saint Austen well observed; and
consequently, that he begat some of them in his riper years. Abram therefore
was not borne, till Terah was 130. years old. For Terah was 205. years old at
his death in Charran Genesis 11. ve. 32. at which time Abraham was 75. years of
age Genes. 12. verse 4. which thing saint Steven confirms in these words;
Acts 7. verse ^.
then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran, and
after that his father was dead, God brought him from thence into this land,
wherein ye now dwell. Lo, by the testimony of Moses in the book of Genesis,
Abraham was but 75. years old when he went out of Charran; and by the report
of saint Steven in the acts of the apostles, he came not out of Charran until
his fathers death. So then he could not be more then 75. years old when his
father was 205. years of age; and consequently he was not the eldest son of
Terah, begotten in the 70. year of his age; but his younger son, borne when
he was 130. years old, and so we must have 60. years more in this second age
then the Chronographers commonly do allow. But the truth must prevail,
howsoever man's reason deem.

A difficulty of the word Haran.
Since the name of Abraham's brother was Haran, as well as the place where he
dwelt, how shall we discern the one from the other? I answer to this, that if
we will observe the strict and precise manner of pronunciation, we must call
the brother Haran, and the place Charran. For in the original, the Hebrew
tongue, the brothers name is written with (...), and the place of Abraham's
abode with (...): so as Abraham's brothers name ought to be termed Haran, and
the place where Abraham dwelt, Charran; which variety of writing, some
translations have well observed. See the 17. chapter following, in the third
difficulty of the fifth section.

The third age.
The third age from the birth of Abraham till the departure of the children of
Israel out of Egypt, contains 505. years: The third age.
whereof behold this plain demonstration.







Eusebius Caesariensis, and Marianus Scotus: yea, many later writers come short
of that supputation by 5. years. The truth of this important difficulty,
shall (by the power of God) be decided shortly.

The whole sum of years is 505.

The particular sums of the years be these;
100 60 130 215
505
Make addition, and this sum will appear 505.

An important objection.
We read in Genesis cha. 15. ver. 13. and in the Acts cha. 7. ver. 6 that the
Israelites were in Egypt 400. years, and Moses in Exodus cha. 12. ver. 40.
avouches constantly, that they were there 430. years: so then, to affirm
their abode there to be no more but 215. years, is far different from the
truth.

The answer.
^ee the Fifth Secti^n of the eight ^hapter, where ^his is handled more at large.
may easily be accorded; if we duly consider the variety of time, from which
the same supputation is derived. For the 400. years must be reckoned from the
birth of Isaac, until the departure out of Egypt; and the 430. years from
Abraham's going out of his country, for the seed of Abraham was so long
afflicted in a land not their own.



Jacob was 130. years old when he went into Egypt, Ge. 47. verse 9. and he
died at the age of 147. years, so as he lived in Egypt no more but 17. years,
Genesis 47. verse 28.

Jacobs third son Leui of his first wife Leah, Genesis 29. ve.

Rohath or Caath the son of Leui lived but 133. years

Amram the son of Rohath lived but 137. years Exo. 6. v. 20

Moses the son of Amram was but 80. years old when he

Now for perspicuous conceiving of this so intricate a doubt,

I note secondly, that if we grant Leui to have been 100.

I note thirdly, that if we grant Caath, Amram, and Moses, Eusebius and
Marianus Scotus have put down.

An other probation of this difficulty.
Iochebed was the own daughter of Leui, and the natural mother of Moses, for
so we read in the 26. chapter of the book of Numbers, and in the sixth chapter
of the book of Exodus: and yet if we grant Leui to have bin 120. years old
when he begat Iochebed; and Iochebed to have bin 100. years old at the birth of
Moses, (both which are impossible by the course of nature,) and if we add
thereunto eighty years, the full age of Moses, at the departure out of Egypt,
yet will all this be no more but bare 300. years: so then, we are short of the
supputation mentioned in Genesis by one full hundred years; and of the reckoning
specified in Exodus, by an hundred and thirty years. Therefore the undoubted
meaning of those scriptures must needs be as I have already showed.

The corollarie.
First therefore, since Moses brought the Israelites out of Egypt: secondly,
since he was the son of Iochebed: thirdly, since Iochebed was the daughter of
Leui: fourthly, since Leui was with Jacob at his going into Egypt, we must
perforce deduce the time of their abode, from Leui, Iochebed, and Moses. Let us
therefore assign 85. years, to Leui, when he begat Iochebed; 50. years to
Iochebed when she bare Moses; and 80. years to Moses when he brought them out
of Egypt (which is as much as can be granted by the course of nature) and we
shall find the just number of 215. years: and so the supputation of this third
age is consonant.

The objection.
Eusebius and Marianus Scotus say plainly, that the Israelites abode in Egypt
no more but 144 years.

The answer.
I grant, that some otherwise very learned have so written: but I think their
meaning is, according to the words of the authors plainly uttered. For albeit
they both say, that they abode but 144. years there; yet do they affirm alitle
after that, that their whole abode was 215. years. So then, when they term
their abode but 144. years, they mean of their grievous servitude after the
death of Joseph: for Eusebius (whom Scotus does imitate) has these express
words; Postcuias interritum, Hebraei Aegyptijs seruierunt annis 144. fiunt
autem omnes anni quos Hebraei in Aegypto fecerunt 215. qui ab eodem tempore
computantur, quo Jacob cum filijs suis descendit in Aegyptum. After the death
of Joseph, the Hebrews or Israelites were in bondage to the Egyptians 144.
years: but all the years that the Hebrews were in Egypt make 215. which we
must reckon from that time, when Jacob with his children went into Egypt.

The fourth age.
The fourth age, from the coming out of Egypt, until king Solomon began to
build the temple, contains 480. years, hereof this is an evident
demonstration.

Moses governed the Israelites in the wilderness, the space

Iosue and Othoniel judged Israel 40. years Iud. 3. v. 11:

Ehud or Shamgar the son of Anath judged the Israelites

Deborah and Barak judged Israel 40. years Iud. 5. v. 31

Gedeon judged the Israelites 40. years Iud. 8. ve. 28. but

Abimelek judged 3. years Iud. 9. verse 22.

Thola the son of Puah judged 23. years Iud. 10. verse 2

Iair judged 22. years Iud. 10. verse 3. from this time the

Iephtee judged six years Iud. 12. verse 7.

Abesan or Ibzan judged 7. years Iud. 12. verse 8, 9.

Elon judged Israel 10. years Iud. 12. verse 11.











The whole sum of years is 477.

The partial sums of the years be these;
40 40 80 40 40 3 23 22 18 6 7 10 8 20 40 40 40
477
Make addition, and this will be the sum 477.

To these we must add three years of king Solomon, because in the fourth
year of his reign he began to build the temple, and so the whole number
will be 480. to which must be added one month and one day. This sum is
confirmed by the testimony of holy Writ, in thief express terms; in the 480.
year (after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt) and in
the fourth year of the reign of Solomon over Israel, he built the house of
the Lord 1. King. 6. ve. 1. Again, it is thus written; so Solomon began to
build the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, in the second month, and the second
day, in the fourth year of his reign, 2. Para. 3. verse 1. and 2.

The fifth age.
The fifth age, from the building of the temple to the captivity of the Jews
in Babylon, contains 432. years, whereof this is the demonstration.

King Solomon reigned after that he began to build the

Roboam or Rehoboam reigned 17. years 2. Par. 12. v. 13.

Abias reigned 3. years 1. King. 15. verse 2.

Asa reigned 41. years 1. King. 15. verse 9 and 10. this Asa per totum.

Iehosaphat or Iosaphat reigned 25. years 2. Par. 20. ve. 31

Iehoram reigned 8. years, 2. Par. 21. v. 5. 2. Kin. 8. ve. 26

Ochozias or Ahaziah reigned 1. year, 2. Kin. 8. verse 26.

Athaliah the mother of Ochozias reigned 7. years 2. King.

Ioas or Iehoash reigned 40. years 2. King. 12. verse 1.

Amaziah reigned 29. years 2. King. 14. verse 2

Azariah or Ozias reigned 52. years 2. King. 15. verse 2.

Ioatham or Iotham reigned 16. years 2. King. 15. ver. 33

Achas or Ahaz reigned 16. years, 2. King. 16. verse 2.









Ioachaz or Iehoahaz reigned three months, 2. Ki. 23. v. 31.



Iehoiachim, or Iechonias, or Coniah the son of Iehoiachim reigned three
months and ten days 2. Par. 36. verse 9. 2. King. 24. verse 8. Ierem. 37.
verse 1. In the time of this Iechonias began the second captivity, which
(...) has simply the name of captivity, and therefore do I follow the same,
in this my supputation of the first age. See the second book and first
chapter, in the fourth section.

ibid. ver. 20. wherefore after the siege of two years, Nebuchad-nezar carried
him captive to Babel: in the eleventh year of his reign his own eyes were
put out, his sons were first slain in his sight, and then he was bound in
chains, and so led away to captivity, 2. King. 25. ve. 1, 2, 7. he was uncle
to Iechonias, and his name was Mattanias, but the king of Babel changed it to
Sedechias 2. Kin. 25. verse 17.

The first addition.
We must first add to this supputation, for the complement of the first age,
eleven years of the inter-reigne, which are found wanting between the death
of Amaziah, and the reign of Azariah; for so long was the kingdom of Judah
void, as holy Writ hears record. I prove it thus: Amaziah reigned 29.
years, 2. King. 14. verse 2. and he began his reign in the second year of
Ioash king of Israel, and lived 15. years after him, 2. King. 14. verse. 1.
and 17. Jeroboam the son of Ioash was made king over Israel in the fifteenth
year of Amaziah, and he reigned 41. years, 2. Kin. 14. verse 23. Let us adioyne
hereunto, that Azariah began his reign in the seven and twentieth year of
Jeroboam, 2. Ki. 15. verse 1. and then perforce shall we find 11 years
wanting, This point must be well noted.
from the death of Amaziah, til the first year of the reign of Azariah. These
things I grant be very intricate; yet if my words he well marked, the Reader
may conceive the matter with all facility: the cause of the inter-reigne, was
the traitorous conspiracy against Amaziah, 2. King. 14. verse 19.

The second addition.
Although Iechonias (in whom I begin my supputation of the captivity) be
said in some place of the scripture to have reigned but three months and ten
days, yet do I ascribe one whole year to his reign: my reason is this;
because he was not carried away to Babel, until the whole year was expired,
2. Par. 36. verse 10. these are the words: and when the year was out, king
Nebuchad-nezzar sent and brought him to Babel with the precious vessels of the
house of the Lord, and he made Zedechiah king over Judah and Jerusalem.

The first objection.
The scripture says in one place, that Iechonias reigned but three months, 2.
King. 24. verse 8. in an other place, that he reigned three months and ten
days, 2. Par. 36. verse 9. in another place, that he was eighteen years old
when he began to reign, 2. King. 24.8. in an other place, that he began to
reign in the eight year of his age, 2. Par. 36. ve. 9. all which can neither
agree with three months, nor yet with one only year.

The answer.
I answer, that he began to reign when he was eight years old, and
reigned ten years with his father: and after the death of his father he
reigned three months and ten days, which was in the nineteenth year of his
age, and so every text of holy Writ is clear.

This my answer is confirmed by the express words of holy scripture, 2.
King. 25. verse 8. where it is said, that Nebuzaradan chief steward to the
king of Babel came in the nineteenth year of the kings reign, to make havoc
of the city, and to carry Sedechias into captivity: for Iechonias was carried
away in the eight year of the king of Babel, 2. King. 24. verse 12. and
Sedechias reigned eleven years, 2. King. 24.18. this case is so evident, as
every child may perceive the same.

The reply.
The scripture tells us, that the king of Babel carried Iehoiachim into
captivity in the third year of his reign; and yet do you ascribe eleven
years to his reign.

The answer.
I answer, that Iehoiakim was carried away in the eleventh year, if we reckon
from the time in which Pharao Necho made him king: but in the third year, if
we reckon from that time, in which he became servant to the king of Babel, 2.
King. 23. verse 34, and 36. 2. King. 24. verse 1.

The second objection.
The scripture calls Sedechias the brother of Iechonias, therefore it is not
consonant to the truth, to say he was his uncle.

The answer.
I answer with saint Austen and saint Hierome, that the custom of the
scripture is, to term kinsemen by the name of brothers, and therefore
Sedechias is indifferently called uncle, 2. King. 24. verse 17. or brother, 2.
Par. 36. verse 10.

The particular sums of the years be these;
37 17 3 41 25 8 1 7 40 29 52 16 16 29 55 2 31 11 11 11 1
443
Make addition, and the sum will be found 443. To the which add three
months for the reign of Io^chas.

The sixth age.
The sixth age from the beginning of the captivity till the sacred passion of
Christ Jesus, contains 660. years, whereof let this be the demonstration.

The captivity (in which are inuolued the eleven years of Sedechias)
continued the space of 70. years. Ierem. 25. verse. 11. and 29. Daniel 9. verse.
2. Esdr. 1. verse 1. 2. Paralip. 36, verse 22.

This is confirmed by the reign of the Monarchs; for Nebuchad-nezzer (from the
beginning of whose eight year, the second and chief captivity began)
reigned 45. years.

Euilmerodach his son reigned 30. years. And Balthazar reigned 3. years. Al
which put together, make the 70. years of the Jewish captivity. For in the
first year of king Cyrus (who succeeded Balthazar,) the Jews were set at
liberty, Esdr. 1 verse 1. S. Clement, Eusebius, and all approved writers do
constantly affirm the same.

The seventy weeks in Daniel make just 490. years, as al writers do affirm.
Concerning which weeks (because there is very great variety amongst
historiographers) I will here suppose that, which (by Gods grace) I shall prove
effectually, when I come to the fourth chapter of the third book of this first
part: whither I refer the Reader, for his full resolution in this intricate
and important controversy. In the mean season, remember that the 490. years
are but 475. years after

From the end of the captivity until the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus inclusiue (where I hold that the 70. weeks do begin) are just
115. years and two months:

The particular sums be these;
70 475 115
in all 660
Thus we have it perspicuously proved, even by the testimony of holy Writ,
that from the beginning of the world, until the time that Christ suffered on
the cross for our sins, be just ^ure thousand, four score and seventeen
years, three moneth^ and sixteen days.

Thus in particular manner:
The first age, 1656 The second 353 The third 505 The fourth 480 The fifth 428
The sixth 660
in all 4082.
Now, because the exact knowledge of the reign of the kings of Judah,
depends more then a little of the reign of the kings of Israel; I purpose in
God to adioyne hereunto a manifest declaration of the same, specially, because
without the knowledge thereof; the books of the Kings and Chronicles can never
be rightly understood.

The Kings of Israel.
Jeroboam reigned 21. years, which I prove thus: Asa king of Judah began to
reign in the twentieth year of Jeroboam,

Nadab reigned 2. years, 1. King. 15. verse 25.

Baasha reigned 24. years, 1. King. 15. verse 33.

Elah or Hela reigned 2. years, 1. King. 16.8.

Zimri reigned 7. days, 1. King. 16. verses 15, and 16.

Amri or Omri reigned 12. years, 1. King. 16.23.















We must here observe as a necessary rule, that between













In the days of this king, about the year of the world 3304. began the
captivity.

Of the ten Tribes;
whereof see more at large in the eight chapter next following, in the sixth
Section.

CHAP. III. Of the state of the Hebrews.
The people of ye Jews, the elect people of God
lived under the protection and empire of Patriarchs. Chiefetaines or
Governors. Judges. Kings: again, Chiefetaines after the captivity. Priests
before the captivity. and Priests after the captivity.
had to do with the kings of the Persians. Egyptians. Syrians.
strangers, and with the emperors of Rome.

The Israelites were governed 3. ways, by
Judges, from Iosue to Saul. Kings, from Saul to the captivity. Priests, from
the captivity to Christ.
For exact understanding of this chapter, it is expedient to note well the fifth
book of this first part; from the second chapter, to the end of the same book.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Patriarchs.
^he Patri^^kes of the ^ebrewes were, Abraham Isaac lived years one hundred,
and begat Isaac, Ge. 21.5. threescore, and begat Jacob, Ge. 25.26
Jacob caled also Israel, Ge. 35.10 he had 12 children with Lea, Ruben Ge.
35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes. Simeon Ge. 35.22. these were
the heads of the twelve Tribes. Leui Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the
twelve Tribes. Judah Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes.
Isachar Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes. Zabulon Ge.
35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes.
Zilpha the handmaid of Lea, Gad Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve
Tribes. Aser Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes.
Rachel Joseph Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes. Benjamin
Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes.
Bala, Dan Ge. 35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes. Nephtali Ge.
35.22. these were the heads of the twelve Tribes.

he lived 147. years, Genesis 47. ve. 28. he was 70. years in Egypt.
Joseph, was ruler of Egypt 80. years: he died when he was one hundred and
ten years old, Genesis 50. verse 26.


After these Patriarks, the Hebrews lived in bondage to the Egyptians, but 144.
years; albeit (as is already proved) their whole abode in Egypt was 215.
years. See the third age, and the probation thereof.

CHAP. V. Containing a Table, of the Princes and Judges of the Hebrews.
The princes of the Hebrews were these two, Moses he ruled 40. years. Iosue
he ruled 27. years, or 40: together with Othoniel.


Moses and Iosue are not reckoned among the Judges, because they did not only
judge, but also rule the people. Lyranus.

There were 13. Judges over the Hebrews, among whom Othoniel A. M. 2572 ruled
years A. M. 2852 40 Aioth A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 80 Barach A. M.
2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 40 Gedeon A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 40
Abimelech A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 3 Thola A. M. 2572 ruled years A.
M. 2852 23 Iair A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 22 Iephthe A. M. 2572 ruled
years A. M. 2852 6 Abesan A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 7 Ahialon A. M.
2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 10 Abdon A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 8 Samson
A. M. 2572 ruled years A. M. 2852 20 Heli ye priest A. M. 2572 ruled years A.
M. 2852 40
All this is proved in the second chapter aforegoing in the fourth age.

Here is to be observed, See Athanasius in synopsi.
that from Iair to Iepthe there was no judge, which was for the space of
eighteen years together, Iud. 10. verse 4, 5, 8, and seq.

The prophet Elias was Gods messenger in Samaria, in the days of Asa and
Iosaphat the good kings of Judah, 3. Ki. 15.24. and in the time of Achab, the
bad king of Israel, 3. Ki. 18. the heart of king Asa was perfect all his days,
2. Paralip. 15.17. and king Iosaphat sought the Lord, Anno mund^ 3088
and walked in the ways of his father David, 2. Paral. 17. about the age of
the world 3088.

CHAP. VI. Containing, a Table of the kings of Judah and of Israel.
The kingdom of the Hebrews
united under king Saul, with whom was Samuel, Acts 13 David. Solomon.
divided into the kingdom of Judah, or the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
whose kings were, Roboam Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 17 years
Abias Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 3 Asa Anno mundi 3030 and
reigned Anno mundi 3410 41 Iosaphat Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410
25 Ioram Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 8 Ochozias Anno mundi 3030
and reigned Anno mundi 3410 1 Athalia Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi
3410 7 Ioas Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 40 Amazias Anno mundi
3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 29 Ozias Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno
mundi 3410 52 Ioathan Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 16 Achaz Anno
mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 16 Ezechias Anno mundi 3030 and reigned
Anno mundi 3410 29 Manasses Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 55 Amon
Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 2 Josias Anno mundi 3030 and
reigned Anno mundi 3410 31 Ioachas Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410
3 months Eliachim or Ioachim Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 11
years Iechonias or Ioachim or Coniah Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi
3410 3 months Sedechias Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3410 11 years
Israel or Samaria, whose kings were, Jeroboam Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno
mundi 3283 21 years Nadab Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 2 Baasa
Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 24 Hela Anno mundi 3030 and reigned
Anno mundi 3283 2 Amri or Omri Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 12
Achab Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 22 Ochozias Anno mundi 3030
and reigned Anno mundi 3283 2^ Ioram Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi
3283 12 Iehu Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 28 Ioachas Anno mundi
3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 17 Ioas Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi
3283 16 Hieroboam Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 41 Zacharias Anno
mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 6 months Sellum Anno mundi 3030 and
reigned Anno mundi 3283 1 month Manahen Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi
3283 10 years Phaceas or Pekahiah Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283
2 Phacee or Pekah Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 20 Ose^or
Hosheah. Anno mundi 3030 and reigned Anno mundi 3283 9 years.


Peruse the second chapter aforegoing, where these things are proved
sufficiently.

CHAP. VII. Of the captivity and circumstances thereto pertaining.
The first Section. Of the time of the Captivity.
THe Babylonians besieged the city of Jerusalem and took it in the eleventh
year of the reign of Sedechias in the ninth day of the 4. month; to whom
Nabuchodonozor had given commission for the siege, while himself was at
Reblatha. The city being taken, king Sedechias with his wives, children,
nobles, and friends, fled away by night into the wilderness. But the
Babylonians pursued after them, and Sedechias with his wives, children and
friends were brought before the king Nabuchodonozor: whom after the king had
sharply reproved for the breach of promise, he caused his children and
friends to be slain before his eyes. That done, 4. Reg. 25. Ier. 52.
he caused Sedechias to be bound in chains, his eyes to be pulled out, and so
to be carried to Babylon. In the first day of the first month he commanded to
burn the city, to bring away all the vessels of gold and silver out of the
temple, and to lead all the people captive unto Babylon. Joseph. 10. lib.
antiq. cap. 11.

The temple was burnt after the building thereof, 470. years, months six,
days ten: after the departure out of Egypt 1062. years, months six, days
ten: Josephus his ^^^putation (...) be allowed. (...) from the (...) to the
(...), be (...) 443. years (...) my discours^^ well obserue^*
after the deluge 1950. years, months six, days ten: after the creation of
Adam. 3513. years, months six, days ten: so writes Josephus, who was
himself a Jew, a Priest, otherwise of good credit, and wrote the things that
were done in his time: nevertheless I have proved in the second chapter,
where the fifth age is handled, that the temple could not stand so long. For
from the building thereof, until the captivity, be only 432. years, and
eleven years after that was it burnt, as is proved in the second doubt of
this present chapter.

The captivity began the fourth year of Ioachim, alias Eliachim, Iere. 25.
ver. 1. Daniel with others of the Nobility were carried captives. Dan. 1. ver.
3. yea, Ioachim himself was bound with chains, and so carried to Babell. 2.
Paralip. 36. ver. 6. Nabuchodonozor carried away into Babell, Ioachims mother,
his wives, his Eunuchs, and the mighty of the land carried he away into
captivity, from Jerusalem unto Babell, 4. King. cap. 24. verse 15. The king of
Babell made Matthanias his uncle king in his steed, and changed his name to
Sedechias, verse 17. ibid.

The first doubt.
The captivity began, when Ieconias was carried away captive to Babylon, as
it seems in S. Matthew. cap. 1. v. 11. And yet was he eight years old, when
he was carried into Babylon. 2. Par. 36. ver. 9. before which time he did not
reign, ibid. Therefore the captivity could not begin in the 11. year of
Sedechias, as Josephus, and the Hebrews reckon, neither at the birth of
Ieconias, as S. Matthew writes.

The answer.
For the manifestation of this difficulty, we must observe that Jerusalem was
thrice taken by the Babylonians; to wit, in the days of Ioachim, Iechonias,
and Sedechias. 4. King. ca. 24. and 25. By reason whereof some reckon the
beginning of the captivity from Ioachim, some from Ieconias, and other some,
as the Hebrews do generally, from the 11. year of king Sedechias. See the
answer of the third doubt: hereof I have spoken more at large in the second
chapter in the handling of the fifth age.

The second doubt.
The Prophet Jeremy writes, that the City of Jerusalem was burnt, together
with the kings palace, and the temple, in the tenth day of the fifth month in
the 19. year of king Nebuchad-nezar. Iere. 52. verse 12. but as the book of
Kings says, it was burnt in the seventh day of the said month. 2. Kin. 25.
verse 8.

The answer.
I answer, that the city was three days in burning; to wit, from the seventh
day until the tenth; Jeremy therefore speaking of the end, is not contrary
to the book of the kings; speaking of the original thereof.

The third doubt.
The prophet Daniel says, that the calamity began in the third year of king
Ioachim or Iehoiakim, Dan. 1 ver. 1. but the prophet Jeremy affirms, that it
was in the fourth year of Iehoiachim, and in the first year of Nabuchad-nezar
king of Babell. Ier. cap. 25. verse. 1.

The answer.
We must here observe, that the captivity the first of the three was in the
end of the third year of Ioachim as Daniel truly writes in rigor of
supputation; yet may it be well said, that it began in the fourth year, as we
read in Jeremy; because the remnant in the third year was in effect nothing
at all.

The second Section. Of the time of the siege.
The city of Jerusalem was besieged the space of two years, that is, from the
ninth year, until the eleventh of king Sedechias. 4. Kin. 25. ver. 1, 2.
during the time of which siege, the famine was so sore and urgent that the
hands of pitiful mothers sod their own children to be their meat. Lam. Ier.
ca. 4. verse 10. which thing seems so repugnant to nature, as it were
ineredible to be told, if holy writ had not first reported it. The like horror
was among mothers in murdering their children, when Titus in the second year
of Vespatianus his father besieged it: and many murdered themselves, because
the famine was so great.

The 3. Section. Of Noe his flood.
The scripture records that when God saw the wickedness of man to be great on
earth, and all the thoughts of his heart to be naught continually; it repented
him that he had created man. Wherefore his holy will was this, to destroy from
the face of the earth, the man whom he had made; from man to beast, to the
creeping things and to the fowls of the air. And this God purposed to do by
drowning of the world with a general flood of water. Yet Noah found favor in
Gods sight, so that himself, his wife, his sons and their wives, eight
persons in all, with cattle, fowls, and all living things, two of every
sort, were saved in the arc. Genesis 6.7. Noah was 600. years old, when the
flood was upon the earth. Genesis chap. 7. ver. 6. the flood prevailed on the
earth. 150. days. Genesis 7. ver. 24. The flood continued a whole year. Genesis 8.
ver. 13. It was in the year of the world, 1656. For from Adam to the birth of
Noah are 1056. Genesis 5. And from the birth of Noah till the flood are 600.
years.

The fourth Section. Of the building of the temple.
King Solomon builded the temple in the fourth year of his reign, ^^sephus
antiq. (...) 8. cap. 2.
which was in the 480. year after the children of Israel were come out of
Egypt, 3. Kin. 6. ver. 1. And in the year of the world, after Josephus, 3102.
after others 3149. but after the exact supputation 2994. as is already proved.

While the temple was a building, K. Solomon appointed seventy thousand to
bear burdens, four score thousand to hew stones in the mountains, and three
thousand six hundredth overseers to cause the people to work. Par. cap. 2.
ver. 18.

The fifth Section. Of the abode of the Israelites in Egypt.
There is a great controversy and variety not to be dissembled, (...). 12.
ve. 40. (...). 15. ver. 13. ^ctes. 7. verse. 6.
amongst Historiographers and learned writers, concerning the time that the
Israelites were in Egypt. For Moses says that the Israelites were in Egypt
430. years. In Genesis it is said, that they were there only 400. years. S.
Stephen says that Abraham's seed should be a soiourner 400. years in a strange
land. And yet it is very certain by authentical supputation of the
Scriptures, that they were in Egypt only 215. years; so that we want two
hundredth years and odd, of the account made in Genesis, Exodus, and the
Acts. S. Hierome confessed freely, that he knew not how to reconcile these
places of the holy scripture. S. Chrysostom reconcileth the places thus: to
wit, that God appointed the Israelites to abide 400. years in Egypt: yet for
the heinous sins of the Egyptians, he shortened the time, even as he abridged
the 120 years, which he granted before the flood unto men, Genesis cap. 5.32.
cap. 6.3. c. 7.6.
that they might repent, and brought them to one hundredth. Neither was Niniuie
destroyed after 40. days. This appears to be so.
Neither died Ezechias as God had said. I answer therefore with Saint Austen
and other learned writers, that the 400. years mentioned in Genesis, and in
the Acts, must be reckoned from the birth of Isaach, Jonas. 3.10. Is. 38.5.
until the departure out of Egypt: and the 430. from Abraham's going out of his
country. For the seed of Abraham was so long afflicted in a land not their
own, as the scripture speabeth. Partly in Palestine, partly in Mesopotamia,
Genesis 15. ver. 13.
and partly in Egypt. This answer is confirmed by the testimony of S. Paul,
in his Epistle to the Galathians, where he says that the law was given 430.
years, after y^ the promise was made to Abraham. Gal. 3. ve. 16.17.
For the law was given when the Jews came out of Egypt, as all writers agree
with uniform consent, Genesis 17. ver. 19.
and the promise was made to Abraham, in his son Isaac.

The sixth Section. Of the captivity of the ten Tribes.
About the year of the world, A.m. 3292.
3292. the Israelites or the ten tribes that were in Samaria, were carried away
captives in the third year of the siege, unto Ashur or Assyria, in the ninth
year of Hoseah or Osee the son of Elah king of Israel, in the fourth year
of Ezechias king of Judah. 4. Reg. 17. v. 5.
At this time ended the race of the kings of Israel: for after this captivity,
did the ten tribes never return: see the 12. chapter, 4. Reg. 18. ver. 9.
in the end of the first section.

The captivity of the ten tribes (says Josephus) endured 240 years, seven
months, and seven days, after their reuolte from king Roboham their lawful
Sovereign. Josephus antiquit. lib 9. ca. 14.
For they would neither be subject to law, nor obey their Prophets of God that
reproved their sins, and therefore were worthily afflicted by the Assyrians:
see the second chapter in the end thereof.

In the days of king Osee, was the kingdom of Samaria, that is, Athanas. in
synop.
of the ten tribes, ended. For then was Samaria utterly destroyed, which
afterward the Assyrians did inhabit, of whom came the Samaritans (those wicked
heretics.)

The Israelites would neither obey their king nor Gods prophets.
Which subjection of the said ten tribes, may be a parpetuall document to all
christian people; ever to exhibit loyal service to their Sovereigns, and due
reverence to Gods ecclesiastical messengers, the preachers of his sacred word:
which thing notwithstanding is little regarded in these days, through the
antichristian doctrine of seditious semenaries.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Prophets and Priests of the Hebrews until the
captivity.
The Prophets and priests of the Jews, Prophets, Jonas who lived in the time
of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the
time of the captivity of Babylon. Oseas who lived in the time of both
kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the
captivity of Babylon. Abdias who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is
to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of
Babylon. Amos who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah
and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon. Esaias who
lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel,
especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon. Iohel who lived in the
time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in
the time of the captivity of Babylon. Michaeas who lived in the time of both
kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the
captivity of Babylon. Nahum who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is
to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of
Babylon. Abacuc who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of
Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon.
Hieremias who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and
of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon. Baruch who
lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel,
especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon. Sophonias who lived in the
time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in
the time of the captivity of Babylon. Ezechiel who lived in the time of both
kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the
captivity of Babylon. Daniel who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is
to say, of Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of
Babylon. Aggaeus who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of
Judah and of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon.
Zacharias who lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and
of Israel, especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon. Malachias who
lived in the time of both kingdoms, that is to say, of Judah and of Israel,
especially in the time of the captivity of Babylon.
Priests, Sadoch in the time of all these the children did ever succeed their
fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise.
Achimaas in the time of all these the children did ever succeed their fathers,
until the captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise. Ioram in the
time of all these the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the
captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise. Auxieramus in the time
of all these the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the
captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise. Nidaeas in the time of
all these the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity.
but after the captivity it was otherwise. Sudaeas in the time of all these the
children did ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity. but after the
captivity it was otherwise. Hilus in the time of all these the children did
ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it
was otherwise. Ioathan in the time of all these the children did ever succeed
their fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it was
otherwise. Vrias in the time of all these the children did ever succeed their
fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise.
Nerias in the time of all these the children did ever succeed their fathers,
until the captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise. Odaeas in the
time of all these the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the
captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise. Sellum in the time of
all these the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity.
but after the captivity it was otherwise. Helchias in the time of all these
the children did ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity. but after
the captivity it was otherwise. Zara in the time of all these the children did
ever succeed their fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it
was otherwise. Iosedech in the time of all these the children did ever succeed
their fathers, until the captivity. but after the captivity it was otherwise.



CHAP. IX. Of the Acts and times of the Prophets i^ brief manner.
A. M. 3180. The Prophets of the old testament, A. M. 3504. Jonas prophesied to
the Ninevites, in the time of Ozias. Osee prophesied against Samaria, in the
time of Ioatham. Abdias prophesied against the Idumeans and other enemies of
the Israelites, in the time of Ioatham. Amos prophesied against the nations
adjacent to them, in the time of Ozias. Esaias prophesied against Judah and
Iurasalem, in the time of Ioatham. Joel prophesied to Judah and Jerusalem. in
the time of Ozias. Michaeas prophesied against Jerusalem and Samaria, in the
time of Ioatham. Nahum prophesied to the Assyrians and Ninevites, in the time
of Ioatham. Abacuc prophesied against Babylon and Nabuchodonosor, in the time
of Manasses. Ieremias prophesied to the city of Jerusalem, in the time of
Josias, and Zedechias. Sophonias prophesied against Iurusalem and Judah, in the
time of Josias. Ezechiel prophesied to the captives in Babylon, in the time of
Ioachim. Daniel prophesied to his country men in Babylon, in the time of
Ioachim. Haggaeus prophesied to all the people in Jerusalem and Judah, in the
time of Zorobabel. Zacharias prophesied to the people of Jerusalem and Judah, in
the time of Zorobabel. Malachias prophesied to the people of Jerusalem and
Judah, in the time of in the end of the captivity (...)


CHAP. X. Containing a particular description of the time of the Prophets
called the greater.
The first section, of the Prophet Esaias.
THe Prophet Esaias was the son of Amos, not of that Amos who was the third of
the 12. lesser Prophets; but of another Amos, having different characters with
the Hebrews. Aug de ciuit libr. 18. cap. 27. Hier. in. 1. cap Esaiae.

Esaias prophesied to Jerusalem and Judah; that is, to the two tribes of Benjamin
and Judah. Hier. in 1. cap Esaiae.

Esaias (who was also called Azarias) Osee, Joel, and Amos, prophesied at the
self same time, in the days of Osias, A.M. 3307.
Ioatham, Achas, and Ezechias kings of Judah. Hier. in princ. Esaiae.

The wicked king Manasses, caused the prophet Esaias to be sawed in pieces with a
wodden saw. Wherefore, that which the Epistle to the Ebrewes says of the
tortures of Gods Saints, that they were hewn in sunder, is very fitly
referred to the prophet Esaias. Hier. lib. 15. cap. 57. in Esaiam.

The second section, of the prophet Jeremy.
Jeremy prophesied to ye two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, he foretold their
captivity in Babylon, he began his prophecy in the days of Josias, A. M.
3380.
he continued the same in the days of Ioachim, and until the eleventh year
of Sedechias in the time of the captivity. Orig. hom. 1. in Hier. Aug. de ciu.
lib. 18. c. 33.

Between the time of Ieremias and Esaias, were one hundred and fifty years.
Hier. lib. 9. cap. 30. in Esaiam.

He was the son of Helkias the priest. cap. 1. Iere. v. 1. the tradition of
the Hebrews is, that whenever the father or graundfather of any prophet is
put in the title, such a one was also a prophet himself. Gloss. ordinar.

Sophonias prophesied at the same time with Ieremias. Athanas. in synop* Aug.
de ciu. lib. 18. cap. 33.

Iehoiakim king of Judah burnt the book, which Baruc wrote wrote at the mouth of
Ieremias; in which book the prophet showed, what punishment God had determined
to bring upon Judah and Israel* if they would not return every man from his
evil way, and bring forth worthy fruits of repentance. But Jeremy at Gods
appointment wrote another book, which contained the afflictions of Judah and
Israel, in a far larger manner, Ierem. cap. 36. Where we may note by the way,
that the wicked do ever kick against the preachers of Gods word, especially
when their sins are reproved. But at length they taste of the cup of Gods
wrath, for their great contempt and disobedience. And our papists are now
become Iehoiakims, as who both burn the writers of all books, that reprove
their superstitions and idolatry; and also cast the books into the fire. Yea,
even the holy bibles, ^he papists are ^ecome Iehoia^ims.
if they be once translated into the vulgar tongue.

Jeremy began to prophecy when he was a child, in the 13. year of Josias
king of Judah, A.M. 3318.
he continued his prophecy during the reign of Josias the son of Amon. 19.
years, and after that under Ioachim 11. years, and under Sedechias 11. years,
who was the last king of Judah. The three months of Ioachaz and Iechonias, are
reckoned in the years before named. So that from the beginning of his
prophecy, until the captivity of Jerusalem, (in which himself was taken) he
prophesied, 41. years, over and besides that time, in which he was carried away
into Egypt, and prophesied in Taphins. Hier. in cap. 2. Ierem. at which Taphins
in Egypt, as some write, he was stoned to death. But before that time, he was
put in a deep dungeon of mire. Iere. 38.

The third section, of the prophet Ezechiel.
Ezechiel followed Jeremy, and began to prophecy in the fifth year of the
transmigration of Iechonias, which was the same year of the reign of
Sedechias. Hier. lib. 5. cap. 29. in Ieremiam. in the 30. year (after some) of
his age. Ezechias c. 1. but as S. Hierome writes, the 30. years whereof the
Prophet speaks, are not the years of the age of Ezechiel himself, but the
years from the 18. of king Josias, at what time the book of the law was
found, until the fifth year of the captivity of Iechonias. Hier. in cap. 1.
Exech. 2.

Ezechiel was carried away captive into Babylon, together with Iechonias,
Daniel, and the three children. Hier. in princ. Ezech. Aug. de ciu. lib. 18.
cap. 34.

This holy prophet foretold the destruction of Jerusalem, and the captivity
of the Jews for their manifold sins and wickedness, earnestly exhorting
them to repentance. For which cause the Jews were so exasperated against him,
(as the wicked are this day against the preachers of Gods word, that they
trailed him on the ground amongst the stones, till his brains went out.
Author. oper. imperf. in Matt. cap. 23. hom, 46. prop. finem.

A golden observation.
In the days of Josias king of Judah, Helkiah the Priest found the book of the
law of the Lord, given by the hand of Moses. Which when the good king
understood, he gathered together all the inhabitants of Jerusalem and of
Judah, and the Priests and the Levites, and all the people from the greatest to
the smallest; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the
covenant, that was found in the house of the Lord: Kings are supreme governors
in causes ecclesiastical.
and the king caused all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to
it, and he compelled all the people of Israel to serve the Lord their God. 2.
Par. 34.4. Kin. 22. Thus says the holy scripture. By which we see evidently,
that the oversight of all persons in all causes as well ecclesiastical as
civil, pertains to the king: and that the king has the charge of religion
committed into his hands, and also that he may compel priests and Levites to
do their duties in that behalf. On the other side we may note the
intolerable impiety of our disholy fathers the late bishops of Rome. Who most
irreligiously and very impudently excommunicate christian kings and monarchs,
because they appoint the word of God to be preached in their dominions, read
the holy bibles in their vulgar tongues, and cause their subjects to do the
like: a thing never heard of, by any writers of approved antiquity.

A doubt.
S. Peter says, that certain places of S. Paul's epistles be hard to be
understood; and S. Hierome in his Commentaries upon Ezechiel says, that
amongst the Jews none could be permitted to read the beginning of Genesis,
the Canticles, the beginning and ending of Ezechiel, until he were 36. years
of age.

The answer.
I answer with S. Austen, that whatsoever is necessary for man's salvation, is
plainly set down in holy scripture: and that which is obscure in one place, is
made manifest by another. his words I have alleged, in my book of Motives, in
the tenth chapter, and second conclusion.

The fourth section, of the Prophet Daniel.
A. M. 3397.
Daniel was a prophet of the tribe of Judah, descended of noble parentage, and
being a child was carried from Jury to Babylon Epiphanius de vit. and
interrit. Prophet.

Of Daniel he was called Balthazar. Which name was given him, either (as
Josephus says) of king Nabuchodonozor; or (as Lud. Viues says) of the kings
Eunuche, who had charge of the kings children. This is certain, that he was
called Balthazar in Babylon. Orig. in Number. cap. 31. hom. 25.

Daniel preached in Babylon, in the very time of the captivity. Dan. 1. ver 7.

Daniel departed out of this life in Babylon, and was buried with great honor:
his sepulcher is this day to be seen in Babylon, renowned throughout the
world. Epiphanius vbi supra.

CHAP. XI. Of the Prophets called the lesser.
The first section, why some were called the greater, and other some the lesser.
Four, to wit, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and Daniel, were called the greater
Prophets, because they wrote greater and larger volumes. Twelve, to wit, Osee,
Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias, were called ye lesser, because they wrote smaller and
lesser volumes. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 18. c. 29. in princ.

Of these Prophets, as the latter were nearer the time of Christ, so had they
clearer revelations of Christ, then the former. Gloss. in 1. Reg. 3.

The second Section, of Osee.
Asarias who was also called Ozias, of the stock of David, reigned in
Jerusalem over the two tribes, which were called Judah, 52. years. After him
Ioatham his son reigned, 16. years: after Ioatham, Achab his son reigned
in like manner, 16. years: in the eleventh year of whose reign, the ten
tribes which were called Israel, were taken of Salmanasar the king of the
Caldees, and placed in the mountains of the Medes. After Achas reigned his
son Ezechias 28 years: whereby it is clear, that when Osee, Esaias, Joel,
Amos, Abdias, Jonas, and Micheas prophesied, (who were all at one time) then
was the kingdom of the ten tribes ended. Which continued from Jeroboam the
first king, until Osee the last; the space of 250. years. The same time that
Osias began to reign over Judah, Jeroboam king Iehu his Nephews son reigned
the 12. year over Israel, because God had promised, that his seed should
reign until the fourth generation, for smiting two wicked kings of Judah and
Israel; this I write (...) S. Hierome, to show that Osee wrote both before and
(...) the captivity of Israel. Hier. in 1. cap, Osee. see the eight ^^^pter
and sixth section. per tot. sect.

Osee prophesied, that the Jews should be converted at the latter end of the
world. He preached against the ten tribes, of their fornication, and of the
destruction of Samaria, he spoke something also of the other two tribes. Gloss
in princ. 1. ca. Osee.

Osee foretold the coming of the Messiah, and that this should be the sign
of his coming. To wit, if that oak in Selom be cloven of it self into twelve
parts, and be made so many oak trees, and it came so to pass. Epiphan. de
Prophet. vit, and eter.

The third section, of Joel.
The Prophet Iohel the son of Phatuel was borne in the territory of Bethor,
descended of the tribe of Ruben. He prophesied much of Jerusalem, and of the
consummation of the Gentiles. He died in peace, and was buried with honor in
his own country. Epiphan. vbi supr.

Like as in Osee under the name of Ephraim, the prophecy is extended to the
ten tribes, who are often called Samaria or Israel; even so whatsoever Joel
says, pertains to Judah and Jerusalem. Hier. in 1, cap. Joel.

Joel prophesied in the days of king Ioatham, who succeeded king Ozias. Aug.
de ciuit. lib 18. cap 27. but S. Hierome extends the time further, even to
the reigns of Ozias, Ioatham, Achas, and Ezechias. Hier. in Joel.

The fourth section of Amos.
Amos was borne in Thecue, descended of the tribe of Zabulon, he was father to
Esaias the Prophet: so says Epiphan. de prophet. vit and inter. but saint Austen
and saint Hierome think otherwise, as I have showed. Amos was of Thecue six
miles South from holy Bethlehem, where our Savior Christ was borne. Hier. in
comment. Amos.

S. Basil says, that Amos was a shepherd, but God instructed him with his
holy spirit, Amos. 7.14.
and so advanced him to the dignity of a prophet. Basilius, Epist. 55.

Amos prophesied in the days of Ozias, when Esaias began his prophecy. Hier.
in Esaiam. lib. 3 cap. 7. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 18 cap. 27 He prophesied also in
the time of Jeroboam, the son of Ioas king of Israel. Hier. in 1. cap. Amos.

The fifth section, of Abdias.
Abdias or Obadiah was the steward of king Achabs house, the king of Israel. 3.
King. 18. verse 3. he hid Gods prophets in caves, and fed them with bread and
water, ver. 4. he gave over the kings court, joined himself to the prophet
Elias; and became his disciple. Epiphanius and, Hieronymus.

Abdias is brief in words, but pithie in matter, because he hid the 100.
prophets in caves, he was advanced to the dignity of a prophet; and where
before he was the captain of an army, he now became the captain of Gods
Church; then he fed a little flock in Samaria; now he feeds Christ's
churches in the whole world. Hier. in Abdiam: yet saint Hierome upon Osee
makes Abdias (...) to Esaias, which seems very probable.

The sixth section, of the Prophet Jonas.
The prophet Jonas was appointed of God to preach to the Ninevites, that the
city after three days should be destroyed: but he being afraid to preach to
that great city of the Assyrians, fled from the presence of the Lord, and went
down into a ship that went to Tarshishe: but when a great tempest arose, the
mariners cast Jonas into the Sea, and he was in the belly of a great fish
three days and three nights, and after that he was delivered out of the
Whales belly, and brought to the dry land. The^ the word of the Lord came to
Jonas the second time, and he preached to the Ninevites, and they by repentance
appeased the wrath of God. Jonas. cap. 1. and 3 Athanas. in synop.

Jonas lived in the days of Elias, who reproved Achab the king of Samaria. He
was the son of the widow of Sarepta, whom Elias restored to life, for her
hospitality toward him: So writes Epiphanius, but others think otherwise.
Let the Reader use his own judgment herein.

Jonas did prophecy Christ's death and resurrection, more significantly by his
passion, then by his word or preaching. For to what end was he swallowed up of
the Whale, and restored again the third day, but to signify Christ's rising
from the dead the third day? Aug. de ciuit* lib. 18. cap. 30. Yea, Christ
himself interpreted the prophecy of Jonas, even as S. Austen does: For he
objected against the Jews for their incredulity, Jonas his coming out of the
Whales belly, as a most undoubted sign of his resurrection. Mat. 12. ver. 40.
Luc. 11. verse 30.

The Hebrews say, that Jonas was the son of the widow of Sarepta, whom the
prophet Elias restored from death. They also write, that Osee, and Amos, and
Esaias, and Jonas, prophesied at the self same time. Hier. hic in prooem.

The seventh Section, of the Prophet Micheas.
Micheas the Moralist (which is by interpretation humble and fellow heir with
Christ, was a prophet of the tribe of Ephraim. Epiphanius. He was so charitably
affectced toward the Israelites his brethren, that he wished himself to have
bin destitute of the spirit of Prophecy, to have been reckoned amongst the
false Prophets, to have preached an untruth, and himself to have perished
alone; so that such a multitude, should believe in Christ, and not be delivered
to captivity everlasting. Hier. in cap. 2. Mich.

Albeit Micheas was of the same time with Osee, Amos* and Esaias, who prophesied
in the time of Osias king of Judah; yet did not Micheas preach in the days of
Ozias, but in the time of Ioatham his son, after whom Achas reigned, Ezechias
succeeding in the empire of his father Achas; in whose days the ten tribes,
felt their captivity amongst the Assyrians. Hier. hic in cap. 1. Aug. de ciu.
lib. 18. cap 27.

Micheas prophesied against Jerusalem and Samaria, and against Achab. Mich cap.
1.3. Reg. 22. Athanas in Synopsi.

The eight Section, of Nahum.
Nahum even as Jonas did, directs his prophecy to Niniuie the great city of
the Assyrians, which is now called Ninus. And because ye Ninevites, after God
had mercifully released the punishment foretold by Jonas, committed greater
offenses then before; this Prophet Nahum does denounce unto the said Ninevites,
and to al ye persecuters of Israel, Gods judgment and everlasting captivity.
And withal he comfort the faithful, showing that the destruction of their
enemies shall be for their consolation. Nah. cap 1.2.3. Hier. in proaem.

Nahum was the son of Helkeseus, who after the tradition of the Hebrews, was
also himself a prophet. He prophesied in the time of Ezechias. Hier and Gloss.
After Josephus he prophesied in the time of Ioatham king of Judah. Joseph.
antiq. lib 9 cap. 11. All things foretold of Niniuie, were fulfilled in the
hundred and fiteenth year, Josephus Ibidem.

The 9. Section, of Abacuc.
Like as Nahum whom Abacuc follows, prophecieth against Niniue, and the
Assyrians, who destroyed the ten tribes called Israel; even so Abacuc
prophecieth against Babylon and king Nabuchedonosor, by whom the two tribes
called Judah, as also the temple were overthrown, Hier hic in proaemio.

Abacuc prophesied many things of the aduent of our Savior, and 2. years before
the Jews returned from Babylon, he died, and was honorably buried in his own
house. Epiphanius.

The 10. Section, of Sophonias.
Sophonie was of the tribe of Simeon, borne in the mount Sarabatha. Epiphanius.

Sophonias the prophet, descended of noble progenitors. Chusa was his father,
Godolias his grandfather, Amarias his great grandfather, Ezechias father to his
great grandfather: who all by the tradition of the Hebrews, were also
prophets. Hier. in 1. cap. Sophon.

Sophonias prophesied in Jerusalem, and in all Iewrie: he foretold the day, in
which all their idolles should be overthrown, and affliction come upon them.
He also prophesied of our Savior, and of his resurrection. After that he
preached against Gaza, Ascalon, Azoto, Accaron, Moab, Ammo^, Damascus, Niniuie,
and against the Aethiopians. Athanas. in synopsi.

Sophonias prophesied in the days of Josias the son of Amon the king of
Judah: and so it is evident, that he prophesied before the captivity of
Babylon. cap. 1. Sophon. and Lyranus ibidem.

The 11. Section, of the prophet Aggaeus.
Aggeus directed his prophecy specially to Zorobabel, and Jesus the son of
Iosedech, and then to all the people in Judah and Jerusalem, commanding them
to build up again the temple of the Lord. Lyranus in princ.

S. Austen says, that these three prophets, Aggeus, Zacharias and Malachias
prophesied in the end of the captivity. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 18. cap. 35. which
yet must be understood, after the return from the captivity: whereof saint
Austen could not be ignorant, since it is plainly said in the first of Haggai,
that in the sixth month of the second year of the reign of king Darius, he
received the gift of prophecy. This case shall appear more clearly in the
second book, in the discourse of the first monarchy. In which place, mark
this point attentively.

Haggeus, so soon as he saw the temple of Jerusalem builded with his corporal
eyes, (for he saw it before in vision) so soon did he sing praises to the
Lord; and that done, ended his life in the same place, where he was very
honorably buried. Epiphanius.

The 12. Section, of the prophet Zacharias.
Zacharias son of Barachias, the son of Addo the prophet, began to
prophecy two months after Aggeus; that is, in the eight month of the second
year of Darius. chap. 1. Zachar.

There were sundry Zacharies, one, the son of Ioiada, another, the son of
Barachias, an other, the father of saint John the Baptist. Whereupon arises a
great controversy amongst the learned, which of all these was that Zachary
whom the Jews (as Christ charge them in the 23. of Matthew) murdered between
the temple and the altar. Hier. in Matt. lib. 4. cap. 23. prope finem.

Zacharias after he had prophesied many things of Jerusalem, and animated the
people to build the temple, and had also reproved the sluggishnesse of the
prophets and priests; he died in his decrepite age, and was buried with
Aggeus. Epiphanius.

The 13. Section, of the prophet Malachie.
The prophet Malachie was of the tribe of Zabulon, borne after the return of
the Jews from Babylon, in Sopha the land of Zabulon. Epiphanius.

Malachias was the last of all the prophets, who after the return from the
captivity, and building again of the temple, foretold the desolation thereof,
and the ceasing of their sacrifice. Hier. apud Eder.

Malachie prophesied of the day of judgment, and of the incarnation of our
Savior: he foretold that Elias (to wit, John the Baptist) should be sent
before his aduent. Athanas. in synopsi.

CHAP. XII. Of the diverse names of the tribes, and of the use thereof in
reading the Prophets.
The first rule.
Whenever the prophecy is directed to the ten tribes, it is signified by one
of these names; Ephraim Samaria Israel Joseph Iezrael Bethel Bethauen Jacob


The second rule.
Whenever the prophecy is directed to the two tribes, it is signified by
some one of these names; Judah Jerusalem Benjamin the house of David, and
sometime Jacob.


The third rule.
The scripture sometime refers Israel, to all the twelve Tribes generally.

CHAP. XIII. Of the destribution of the offices of the 12. lesser prophets.
These pro^hets were ^ppointed, ^ome of the^ to threaten the captivity; as
Osee against both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Joel against the two tribes
only. Amos against the two tribes, and the kingdoms adjoining. Micheas
against the kingdom of Israel especialy, because it was ye cause of ruin to
ye rest.
to comfort the Jews; as Abdias With threats against the kingdom of the
Idumeans. Jonas With threats against Niniue and the Assirians. Nahum With
threats against the Ninevites for their revolt the second time. Abacuc With
threats against Nabuchodonosor and the Chaldeans, who al were enemies to the
Jews.
to call home from the captivity; as Sophonias who preached return to come.
Aggeus who preached return present. Zacharias who preached return present,
with advise to build the temple. Malachias who preached return past, with
exhortation to piety.



CHAP. XIIII. Of the time when they prophesied.
Of the prophets, some prophesied before the captivity, as well of the ten
tribes of Israel, as of the two tribes Judah and Benjamin; as Esaias Osee Joel
after the captivity; as Daniel Aggeus Zacharias.
when the captivity was at hand; as Jeremy in Iewrie Ezechiel in Babylon



Ex Hier. in 1. cap. Ieremiae.

The final scope of all the Prophets.
The prophets of God, because they would neither discorage the Jews with
threatenings, nor make them careless by the sweetness of Gods promises, sought
throughout their books to set before their eyes, the two principal parts of
the law; to wit, the promise of salvation, and the doctrine of good life. For
the first part, they direct the Jews, and in them all the faithful, to the
true Messiah Christ Jesus, by whom only they shall have true deliverance: for
the second part, they use threatenings and menaces to bring them from their
vices. For this is the chief scope of all the prophets, either by Gods
promises to allure them to be godly; or else by threatenings of his judgments,
to fear them from sin and wickedness. And albeit that the whole law
contain these two points, yet the prophets note particularly, as well the time
of Gods judgments, as the manner of the same.

CHAP. XV. Of the division of the Books of the Prophets.
The books of the prophets contain nine common places; to wit, Doctrines Ex
Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio. Speculations Ex Epiphanio, de men's.
and pond. in initio. Exhortations Ex Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio.
Co^minations Ex Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio. Lame^tations Ex
Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio. Consolations Ex Epiphanio, de men's.
and pond. in initio. Prayers Ex Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio.
Histories Ex Epiphanio, de men's. and pond. in initio. Predictions Ex Epiphanio,
de men's. and pond. in initio.


CHAP. XVI, Contains the acts, age, time, and death of famous men that were
before the captivity of Babylon.
The first Section, of Adam.
Adam was created upon friday, the day before the Jewish sabbath, Genes. 1.
verse 27.

He was 130. years old, when he begat Seth, Genes. 5.3. after Josephus, he was
230. years old. he lived 930. years, and then died, Genes. 5. verse 5.

He was buried (as the Hebrews write) in the land of Israel. Rabbi Isaac apud
Genebr.

He had three sons, Cain, Abel, and Seth. Cain murdered his brother Abel; and
for no other cause, but even for the true service of God. Which, when it is
truly done, the devil can not abide it; and for that end does he always stir
up the wicked against the godly, as he did Cain against his brother Abel, that
the word of God and his doctrine may be extinguished and trodden under foot.
Adam had many sons and daughters, as Josephus writes.

The second Section, of Seth.
The posterity of Cain was wholly extinct in Noah's flood, but the stock of
Seth was multiplied upon earth, as of whom descended all the patriarchs,
prophets, and holy men, Gene. 5.6, 7. The nephews of Seth made two pillars, the
one of brick, the other of stone, in which they ingraued the word of God and
his prophecies, for the perpetual conservation thereof. They also divided the
year into twelve months; and first observed the course of the stars, and
taught astronomy. Josephus antiq. libr. 1. ca 2. they are therefore grossly
deceived, that either make the Egyptians, or Mercury, or Atlas, or Actinus the
authors of Astronomy and other liberal sciences: for as Josephus says, the
Egyptians were utterly ignorant in such sciences, before Abraham's coming unto
them: which knowledge came first from the Chaldeans to the Egyptians, and from
the Egyptians to the Greeks, by the means of Abraham. Josephus libr. lib. 1.
antiq. ca. 6, 7, 8.

Seth lived 912. years, and then died, Genes. 5. verse 8.

Of the ungodly marriages between the posterity of Seth, in whose families
God was truly worshipped, and the posterity of Cain, who served idolles, came
giants or men of huge magnitude. By means of which wicked conjunction, the
knowledge of God was utterly abolished in all, but in Noah, The flood came A.
M. 1656
his three sons, and their four wives; so that God destroyed the remnant of
mankind in the general deluge, Gene. 6. verse 2, 7, verse 21.

The third section, of Noah.
When the earth after the flood returned to it former state again, Noah
began to play the husbandman, to till the ground, to plant vines, to gather
the grapes, and to find out the use of drinking wine, Genesis 9. verse 20.

Noah had three sons, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. Sem with his children, inhabited
that part of the world which is toward the east. For of his son Aram came
the Syrians; of Assure, the Assyrians; of Arphaxad, the Chaldeans; of Ela the
Persians.

Cham inhabited that part of the world, which is toward the south: for of
Canaan came the Cananites; of Mizraim, the Egyptians; of Chus or Cush, the
Ethiopians; of Saba the Arabians: and Chanaan is now called Iewrie.

Iapheth inhabited the west and north parts, and had many sons; to wit,
Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Mesech, and Tyrus. Of Iauan came the Greeks,
whom the Latins call Ianus and who are now termed Jones; of Madai came the
Medes; of Gomer the Cimerians or Simbrians; of Ascanes Gomers son the
Germans; of Magog the Scythians, of whom came the Turks; of Thyras the
Thracians, Genesis 10. Joseph. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 6. Cari. page 14.

The tradition of the Hebrews is, that Iapheth was the eldest son of Noah,
borne in the 500. year of his age; Cham or Ham his second son, borne in the
501. year of his age; Sem his third and youngest son, borne in the 502. year
of his age. Which tradition is very probable, though not altogether certain
and undoubted; for Sem is said to be but 100 years old, 2. years after the
flood, Genes. 11. verse 10. yet is Sem named first in the scripture, because
the history of the church is continued in his line.



An. M. 2606
From Adam to the birth of Noah, are 1056. years, Genesis 5.3. from Adam until the
death of Noah, are 2606. years.

The fourth section, of the tower of Babel.
The tower of Babel was built, about 130. years after

The place where the tower stood, is now called Babylon; that is to say,
confusion, because from thence came the confusion of tongues. Joseph. antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 4.

Nimrod was a mighty hunter, and the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, in
the land of Shinar, for there was an other city in Egypt, called also Babel,
Genesis 10. verse 10.

Nimrod was a cruel oppressor of the people, and a very tyrant, so as his
tyranny came into a Proverb, (as, Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord.
Genesis 10. verse 9.

Before the building of Babel the whole earth was of one language: but they
were puffed up with pride, and sought to build a tower to reach up to heaven;
that so their name might be magnified, and their power united on earth. Yet
suddenly such division of their uniform language was made, as one of them
understood not another; they were scattered abroad, and the tower left
imperfect, Genes. 11. verse 4, 7, 8.

Nimrod was the nephew of Cham, who was son to Chus or Cush, who first affected
empire, and began the form of a kingdone in Chaldea; his palace was Babel.
He was the first that exercised hunting after Noah's flood, Genesis 10. verse 7.10.

About this time began a new kingdom amongst the Assyrians, by Ashur, the
son of Sem: An. M. 1758
his chief city was Nineveh: but he builded also Rehoboth, and Calah, Genes.
10. verse 11. Genebr.

The fifth section, of Abraham.
Abraham was borne 352. years after the flood, in the year of the world 2008.
the promise was made to Abraham 427.

The first difficulty.
It seems by the twelfth chapter of Genesis, that GOD spoke to Abraham after
the death of his father Their or Terah, when he was in Haran. And it is evident
by Genes. 11. that God spoke unto him when he was in Chaldea. I answer, that
God spoke to Abraham when he was in Chaldea his native country, from whence
he went with his father to Haran, where he abode by reason of his fathers
infirmity, until his death. After the death of his father, he went from
Haran with Sarai his wife, to Canaan the land of promise, accordingly as God
had commanded him: which resolution will be clear, if we join the beginning
of the 12. chapter, with the latter end of the eleventh.

The second difficulty.
Saint Steven says in the seventh of the Acts, that Mesopotamia was Abraham's
native country, from whence he went to Charran. Therefore it cannot be, that
Chaldea was his country. I answer, that Chaldea was his country, and that his
country was indifferently called, either Mesopotamia, or Chaldea. Which I
prove by two reasons. First, because Plinius lib. 6. cap 26. says, that
Chaldea is a city in Mesopotamia. Secondly, because S. Steven, Acts 7. verse
4. confirms the same: neither does any grave writer deny, but that
Mesopotamia joins to Chaldea; and so Chaldea being in the confines of
Mesopotamia, may not unfitly be taken for the same.

The third difficulty.
It is said in the 11. of Genesis, that when Abraham went from Vr of the
Chaldees, he dwelt in Haran: but in the 7. of the Acts it is said, that when he
went out of Chaldea, he dwelt in Charran; so it seems, that either holy
Moses, or S. Steven must utter an untruth. I answer, that that word which
Moses in Genesis calls Charran, is also called Charran by S. Steven in the
Acts; although the Latin vulgata editio, and other vulgar translations term
it Haran. The reason hereof is this, because the first letter of that word in
Hebrew ((...),) is of diverse pronounced diversely. See the second chapter
aforegoing, in the end of the second age.

The fourth difficulty.
This is a great difficulty, and worthy to be well observed. The doubt
stands thus. Moses says, Genes. 11. verse 26. that Terah begat Abraham when
he was 70. years old. In the same place he says, that Terah died when he was
205. years old: in the twelfth of Genesis he says, that Abraham was 75.
years old, when he departed out of Haran or Charran; for all is one (as is
already said:) so that by this reckoning, we must want 60. years of Terahs
age: for albeit the scripture say, that Terah lived 205. years; yet by the
computation already made, we cannot find more then 145. years. I answer
first, that this difficulty has troubled many learned men. Some think, that
God would conceal the 60. years, that so the end of the world might be kept
secret from us. Others think that Abraham stayed those 60. years, with his
father at Charran. I answer secondly, that Terah was 105 years old, when he
begat Abraham. Neither is holy writ repugnant, to this my answer. For although
it say, that Terah was 70. years old when he begat Abraham, Nachor, and Haran;
yet does it not deny him to have been more, but does connotate the less by
the more, by the usual figure synechdoche; very frequent in the holy
scriptures. See the second chapter aforegoing, and the objection made in the
second age.

The sixth section, of Isaac.
When Izhak was borne, Abraham was 100. years old, Genesis 21. verse 5.

Isaac was circumcised, when he was eight days old, An. M. 2108
Gene. 21. verse 4. in the age of the world, 2108.

Circumcision of every man child was appointed by God, Genes. 17. verse 10.
in the age of the world 2107.

Sodom about this time was destroyed, with brimstone and fire descending from
heaven, Genes. 19. verse 24.

The promise was made to Abraham, in Izhak his son, Genesis 17. verse 21. in
the age of the world 2083. from Acts 7. verse 6. Galat. 3. verse 17. for the
promised seed began in Isaac, Genesis 21. verse 12.

Abraham was appointed by God, to sacrifice his only son Isaac, in whom the
promise was made, Genesis 22. ver. 2. whose faith was so strong, that he
neither disobeyed Gods commandment, neither distrusted his promise, ver. 9, 10.

The doubt.
How could Isaac be his only son, since Ismael was borne before him, A. M.
2083
and even then living? I answer, that after Ismael was by Gods appointment put
out of Abraham's family, he became as dead, and had no place amongst Abraham's
children, Genesis 21. ver. 12.

An observation.
Although circumcision be called Gods covenant, Gene. 17. verse. 10. yet was it
not the covenant indeed, but a sign or feale of Gods covenant* made to
Abraham and to his seed after him, Genesis 17. ver. 7. It was called the
covenant, because it signified the covenant, and had the promise of grace
annexed to it, as all sacraments have. And as circumcision was called Gods
covenant, and yet but a sign or sacrament thereof; even so in the Lords
supper, the bread is called his body, albeit it be but a sign and sacrament
of the same. For which purpose S. Austen in his epistle to Bonifacius, has a
very fine saying, well worthy to be engraven in golden letters. His express
words be these. For if sacraments had not a certain resemblance, of those
things whereof they be sacraments; they could be no sacraments at all. By
reason of the similitude or signification, they oftentimes take the names of
the things themselves: as therefore in a certain manner, the sacrament of the
body of Christ is Christ's body; and the sacrament of the blood of Christ is
Christ's blood; even so the sacrament of faith is also faith.

The seventh Section, of Jacob.
A. M. 2298
Jacob was 130. years old, when he went into Egypt and came before king
Pharaoh, Genesis 47. verse 7, 9.

Jacob and his sons in the time of famine, came from Canaan to soiourne in
Egypt, and they dwelt (by Pharaohs grant,) in Ramesis a city in the country
of Goshen, Genes. 47. verse 4, 11.

Jacob died in Egypt, Genesis 49. verse 33. he was buried honorably in his own
country, Genesis 50. he lived 17. years in Egypt, Genesis 47. verse 28. The
children of Israel (the posterity of Jacob) went into Egypt together, Genes.
46. verse 6. they were all 70. in number, Genes. 46. verse 27. Deuter. 10 verse
22.

The first doubt.
In Genesis and Deuteronomie the kindred of Jacob surpasses not 70. persons,
yet saint Lukes computation is 75. I answer, that as saint Austen says, lib.
16. ciu. cap. 40. Saint Luke speaks not precisely of the time when Jacob went
into Egypt, but of the whole time during Joseph's abode there: in which time
Joseph had children to supply the number.

The second doubt.
The persons that came into Egypt (if they be reckoned particularly) are only
66 which descended of Jacob, Genes. 46. I prove it, because Er and Onan died
in the land of Canaan, and so could not come with Jacob into Egypt. No more
could the two sons of Joseph, Manasses and Ephraim, who were borne in Egypt
and there continued. I answer, that the two children of Joseph must be in the
computation, as I have showed out of saint Austen: to whom we must add Dina,
and the patriarch Jacob himself; and so the number of 70. is accomplished.

The third doubt.
The children of Israel were but 70. persons, when they went into Egypt; Exodus
12. ver. 37
and yet they came out of Egypt about six hundred thousand men of foot,
besides children and women; which multiplication is not possible by the course
of nature. I answer, that the multiplication is possible, even by the course of
nature. First, Josephus lib. ^. antiquit. cap. 6.
because they were in Egypt about 215. years. Secondly, because perhaps the
men had many wives, as which was in those days an usual thing. Thirdly,
because one woman might have many children at once: for women in Egypt (as
writes Trogus) have seven children at one birth, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Fourthly, because God promised to multiply the seed of Abraham, Gene. 17.

The fourth doubt.
The Israelites were 400. years in Egypt, as we read in Genesis, and in other
places of the scripture; therefore it is false to say, that they were there but
215. years. I answer, that those 400. years must be reckoned from the birth
of Isaac, or from the expulsion of Ismael; because even then that seed began
to be afflicted. See the eight chapter in the fifth section, where this
difficulty is handled at large.

The fifth doubt.
God is not the author of sin, neither tempts he any man James 1. ver 13.
but to spoil our neighbors of their own goods, is a great sin, and flat
theft: which thing for all that God commanded the Israelites to do, Exodus 12.
verse 35. but that which was his own, and by best right due unto him. Yea, as
a most just judge he appointed them so to do, A. M. 2513
in recompense of their labors.

The eight section, of Moses.
Moses was son to Amram the Leuite, his mothers name was Iochebed the
daughter of Leui. Aaron was his brother, A: M. 2434
Miria his sister, Numer. 26. verse 59. Exodus 2. verse 1. The king of Egypt
commanded the midwiues of the Hebrew women, that when they did the office of a
midwife, then they should kill all sons, but suffer daughters to live. This
notwithstanding, the midwiues feared God, and therefore preserved alive the men
children, Exodus 1. verse 15, 16, 17.

A great doubt.
God rewarded the midwiues, for telling a lie to the king; therefore to lie is
no sin. I say first, that to lie is never lawful, 1. verse 21. neither could
an officious lie committed by humane frailty, make frustrate their lively
faith.

Moses, when he was forty years old, A. M. 2474
fled from king Pharaoh, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, Acts 7.
verse 23. verse 29.

Moses being a fair child, was hid three months in his fathers house, Acts
7. verse 20.

After three months the mother of Moses (because she could hide him no longer
from the tyranny of the king,) made a basket of reeds, and laid the child
therein, and put it among the bulrushes by the rivers brincke, where Pharaohs
daughter espied him, and caused him to be brought up as her own child. Yea by
Gods providence, his own mother became his nurse, Exodus 2. verse 3.7, 10.

The Egyptians made the Israelites weary of their lives, by sore labor in clay
and in brick, and in all manner of bondage, which they laid upon them most
cruelly, Exodus 1. verse 14. but God (whose providence is never wanting to his
children) raised up Moses, who in the 40. year of his age, avenged the cause
of his brethren the Israelites, and slew the Egyptian that smote an Hebrew,
Exodus 2. verse 11. Act. 7. ver. 23.

The children of Israel were 40. years in the wilderness, by the holy and
valiant conduction of Moses: in which time, neither their clothes waxed old
upon their backs, neither their shoes upon their feet; such was the
omnipotent power and merciful goodness of their good God and ours, Deuteronomy 29.
verse. 5. They were fed with manna forty years in the wilderness, until they
came into the land of Canaan, Exodus 16. verse 35.

A. M. 2513
The law was given 430. years after the promise made to Abraham, Galat. 3.
verse 17. in the age of the world 2513. which was 480. years before Solomon
built the temple, 3. King. 6. verse 1. It was given in mount Sinai, which was
al on a smoke: the Lord came down upon it in fire, and all the mount trembled
exceedingly. Thunders and lightnings were upon the mount, and the sound of the
trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people in the camp was afraid, Exodus
19. ver. 16, 18. which fearful signs God showed in exhibiting his law; as
well to cause it be had in greater reverence, as also to make his majesty more
feared.

The law written with the finger of God in tables of stone, was given the third
day of the third month, after the coming of Israel out of Egypt, so that from
the 14. day of the first month (in which the Israelites eat the passover)
until the day in which the law was given, are reckoned iump 50. days. First,
17. of the first month; then, 30. of the second month; lastly, three days of
the third month. The law therefore was given the 50. day after the departure
of the Israelites out of Egypt. August. tom 4. libr. 2. quaest. supr. Exodus
cap. 70. pa. 103.

A. M. 2554
Moses died when he was 120. years old, neither was his eye dim, nor his
natural force abated, Deuteronomie 34. verse 7.

Moses was buried in a valley in the land of Moab, but no man knows of his
sepulcher unto this day. Deuteronomy, 34. ver. 6. least the Jews should thereby have
occasion to commit Idolatry, as people most prone thereunto, even as they
adored the Serpent, which he had made. Aug. lib. 1. de mirab. S. Script. cap.
35.

The whole life of Moses, is divided into three quadragenaries. For he learned
forty years in Egypt, in the house of king Pharao. He was forty years in
exile in Egypt, in the house of a priest of Madian: and he was 40. years in
the desert, leader to the Israelites. Aug. vbi supra.

There was not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face. He did miracles and wonders before Pharao in the land of Egypt,
and before all his servants. Deuteronomy. 34. verse 10.

The blessed man Moses in his infancy, was put in a basket daubed with clay,
and so exposed to Gods providence upon the water. Whereupon he was so called:
for Mo in the Egyptian tongue, signifies water; and Yses signifies saved: So
that Moses in the Egyptian language, signifies, saved out of the water.
Josephus, lib. 2 antiquit. cap. 5.

The ninth section, of Joseph.
Joseph was the son of Israel, otherwise called Jacob, beloved of his father
above all his brethren: his brethren hated him mortally, because he complained
to his father of their naughty dealing: they consulted to slay him, and to
tell their father that a wicked beast had devoured him. But Ruben (being more
merciful then the rest) willed them not to shed his blood, but to cast him
into a dry pit in the wilderness, thinking by that means to redeem him.
After by the advice of Judah, they sold him to the Ismaelites, who sold him to
Putiphar, steward to Pharao king of Egypt. Genesis 37.

The doubt.
In the 37. of Genesis, verse 28. and in the 39. of Genesis, verse 1. It is
said that the Ismaelites bought and sold Joseph: but in the 37. of Genesis,
verse 36. it is said, that the Madianites sold him into Egypt. I answer, that
Moses speaks indifferently of the Madianites and Ismaelites, using them both
for one and the same people.

Joseph was blessed of God, and all things prospered under his hands. Which
when Potiphar saw, he made him ruler of his house, and put all that he had in
his hand. Yet by the naughty dealing of Potiphars wife, he was cast in prison.
Gene. 39. verse 2.3.20.

Joseph expounded Pharaoh his dreams, for which cause he was delivered out of
prison, highly honored of the king, and made the chief governor of the land
of Egypt. Genesis 41. ver. 25.43.

Joseph was a figure of our Savior Christ, lively declared by S. Austen. For
as Iosephes brethren when they saw him, consulted to put him to death; even so
the Jews when they saw Christ, took counsel him to crucify. Iosephes
brethren took from him his motly coat, and the Jews took from Christ his
corporal coat. Joseph spoiled of his coat, went down into the pit; and
Christ spoiled of his body, descended into hell. Joseph coming out of the pit,
was bought of the Egyptians; and Christ arising from the dead, was bought of
the Gentiles by faith. Joseph was sold for 30. pence, by the counsel of Judah
his brother: and Christ was sold for 30. pence, by the treachery of Judas his
Apostle. Joseph saved Egypt from famine, and Christ saved the world from sin.
If Joseph's brethren had not sold him, Egypt had starued; even so if the Jews
had not sold Christ, the world had perished. Aug Sermon. 81. de temp.

Joseph was 80. years ruler in Egypt, Genesis 41. verse 46. Gene. 50. verse 22. He
lived a 110. years, he died in Egypt, was there enbalmed, and chested, Gene.
50. verse 22.26. But he was carried thence, and buried with his ancestors.
Exo. 13. verse 19.

The 10. section, of Iosue.
Iosue or Jesus the son of Nun, was a zealous servant of God, and a valiant
governor. He brought the Israelites by Jordan into the land of promise, and
they served the Lord all the days of his life. He lived 110. years, and then
died, A. M. 2574
Ios. 24. verse 29.31. He was buried in the borders of his own inheritance,
which is in mount Ephraim, Ios. 24. verse 30.

Iosue slew five kings (the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king
of Ierimoth, the king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon,) and he hanged them on
five trees. Ios. 10. verse 26.

Iosue his faith was so strong in the Lord, that when he fought against the
Amorites, he prayed that the sun might stand until he were avenged of his
enemies; and not only the sun stood still in Gibeon, but the Moon also in
the valley of Aialon, Ios. 10. ver. 12.13.

Iosue subdued all towns and cities (save Gibeon,) he slew much people,
killed 31. kings, and gave the whole land for an inheritance to Israel,
according to their portions through their tribes. Ios. cap. 11. cap. 12.

The 11. section of the Rechabites.
The Rechabites would drink no wine all the days of their lives, because
Ionadab the son of Rechab their father, A. M. 3373
had so commanded them. Iere. 35. verse 8.

The observation.
Upon the Rechabites abstinence from wine, the papists of latter days have
falsely grounded their superstitious fastes. I say superstitious fastes, because
I reverence and highly commend fasting; when it is done christianly, according
to the word of God. I therefore say first, that the whole scope of the Prophet,
their commandementes are agreeable to Gods holy laws. So

The first proposition.
All mortal living creatures of God (man excepted,) may lawfully be eaten with
giving of thanks. I say first (mortal) by reason of the incorporall angels. I
say secondly (living) in respect of things inanimate, not apt to yield
nourishment. I say thirdly, (except man;) because God made the other things
for man, but not one man for another, Genesis 9. verse 3.5. The proposition is
thus proved. Christ reproouing the Pharisees, for their fond opinions in
superstitious observance of external ceremonies, (which he termed the
traditions of men;) willed all the multitude to hearken unto him, and to
understand, that whatsoever was without man, could not defile him when it
entered into him, Matt. 15. verse 11. Mar. 7. ver. 15. I know and am persuaded
through the Lord Jesus, (says the Apostle) that there is nothing unclean of
it self (or by nature:) but to him that judges it to be unclean. Romans 14.
verse 14. Saint Peter was long in doubt, concerning this proposition. His
reason was, because some meats were made unclean by the old law. For which
cause he in a vision saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel come down to
him, wherein were all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the heaven. And there came a voice
to him, bidding him kill and eat. Yet Peter durst not eat, but answered, that
he never ate any polluted thing. And the voice spoke the second time, willing
him not to repute the things polluted, which God had purified. Thus Peter did,
and thus he erred at that time. And even so do many silly souls this day, who
make less scruple to rap out great oaths, horrible blasphemies, and
slanderous speeches against their neighbors; then they do in eating a piece
of cheese, or an egg in Lent: and yet is the one directly against the law of
God, the other only against the tyrannical constitution of the pope.

The second proposition.
There are sundry kinds of fastes. To wit, natural, civil, christian,
miraculous, coactiue, religious. Natural fasting is, Natural fast.
when we fast for physic sake, either to recover our health lost, or to
preserve us from diseases to come. Of which kind of fast, who list may read at
large, in Hippocrates his Aphorisms, and in Galens Commentaries upon the same.
Civil fasting is, Civil fast.
when men are so seriously bent to their civil affairs, that they will use no
intermission at all, either for meat or drink. This kind of fast used king
Saul, when having the victory in his hands, he pursued the Philistines. For
even then commanded he all his army, that none should eat or drink till
night. 1. Sam. 14. verse 24. So did the wicked Hebrews, who vowed that they
would neither eat nor drink, until they had slain S. Paul, Acts. 23. verse
21. This fast practiced Iosue, when he charged the Sun and Moon to stand
still, till he was avenged of his enemies. Ios. 10. verse 12. The christian
fast is to keep sobriety in our diet. That is, neither to eat too often,
Christian fast.
neither immoderately. Which kind of fasting ought to be more familiar, then
it is to many a one: for want whereof the country abounds, with drunkardes,
gluttons, and idle belly-gods. Miraculous fasting was practiced by the
apostles, when our Savior did thereby confirm the preaching of his gospel.
Moses, Elias, and Christ himself, used the same kind of fast. Coactiue
fasting is, Coactiue fast.
when by reason of famine or want of food, we are enforced to abstain. With
this fast soldiers are afflicted in wars, poor folks in their own
houses: rich seldom or never. Wherefore wisely said the Philosopher, touching
the hour of dining; that a rich man may dine when he list, a poor man when
he can get meat. Religious fast.
The religious fast is abstinence with a penitent heart and true faith, not
only from all meats and drinks, but even from all things whatsoever, that
may any way nourishe or delight the body. The form of which fast, is
abstinence: the matter is meat, drink, and whatsoever brings corporal
oblectation; the efficient cause is faith and repentance for our sins; the
end is to appease Gods wrath, and either to procure deliverance from our
miseries or some mitigation thereof.

For which cause fasting in the Scriptures, is continually joined with prayer:
and being used as is said, God does accept it for the merits of Christ Jesus,
not for any worthiness in it self.

The third proposition.
To fast rightly and christianly, is to abstain from al meats, all drinks,
and from all corporal pleasures, until the end of the fast; and to bestow
the whole time in praying, in lamenting our sins, and in hearing the word of
God, especially godly sermons. For the external affliction of our bodies, by
abstaining from meats and drinks, 1. Tim. 4. verse 8.
has no other end, effect, or use, but to dispose and prepare us as is already
said. This proposition is proved, by the usual practice of holy people in all
ages, recorded in holy writ for our instruction, holy king David, so soon as
he understood that his child should die for his sins, gave himself to
fasting and prayer, 2. Sam. 12. v. 5.17
and never ate while the child was alive. 2. Sam. 12.5.17. The Ninevites
understanding Gods commynations and wrath for their sins, sat in ashes, put
on sackcloth, gave themselves to earnest prayer, and absteined from all meats
and drinks, until God showed mercy toward them, Ion. 3.5.7. Holy queen
Hester, when she joined fasting with prayer: neither ate nor drank at all
until the end of her fast, Ester. 4. verse 16. Neither can it ever be proved
by the authority of holy writ, or by the practice of the primitive Church, or
by the testimony of the ancient fathers; that Gods people did in any age, at
any time, in any place or country, use either to eat or to drink before the
end of their fast, whereby appears the absurdity of all popish fasting,
which thing is most evident, by the story of S. Spiridion, handled in the next
proposition.

The fourth proposition.
Popish choice of meats in their late invented fastes, is wicked and
intolerable. I say first, (popish choice) because to put merit or religion in
abstaining from one meat more then another, is the peculiar badge of papists;
or at least common to them with the Eucratites, with the Tatians, with the
Catherans; with the Manichies, or like heretics. I prove it, because the
Apostle says plainly, Tit. 1. ver. 15.
that all things are pure to the pure; but the papists and other old
heretics tell us, that certain meats, at certain times, as in Lent, in the
imber days, and Fridaies, are vnpure, and polluted; yea so vnpure, that they
pollute all the eaters thereof, 1. Tim. 4. verse 4.
and make them guilty of eternal death. Yet the Apostle avouches boldly and
expressly, that every creature of God is good, and that nothing ought to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. In the first verse of the same
chapter, he tells us, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, and give heed to the doctrine of devils. In the third verse he shows
what doctrine of devils he means: To wit, prohibition to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with giving of thanks. Out of
which words, I note first; that no creature of God is impure at any time,
which is appointed for received with thanksgiving. I note thirdly, that
prohibition To make choice of meats for religion, is the badge of an Infidel.
yea; he did not only eat flesh himself, but withal he entreated a stranger
that lodged with him, to do the same. And when the stranger refused to eat
flesh with him: saying, that he was a christian, and so prohibited to eat
flesh at that time: S. Spiridion replied upon him, and said, that the rather he
ought to eat flesh, Sozomenus hist. lib. 1 cap. 11. trip. hist. lib. 1. cap.
10. Nicephor. lib. 8. cap. 42.
because he was a christian; for all things were pure to the pure. Thus did
the blessed bishop, and man of God, renowned for his rare gift of working
miracles. Whom the pope would burn for an heretic with fire and faggot, if he
were this day living in Rome, and would not retract his opinion. For first,
he eat flesh himself contrary Tit. 1. verse 15. Romans 1^. ver. 14. Romans 14.
ver. 17.
I am persuaded, says the Apostle, that no meat is unclean. And he adds
the reason, because the kingdom of God, is neither meat nor drink. Wherefore
we ought not to destroy the work of God, for meats sake. In another place, he
says, that if he should please men, he were not the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.
ver. 10*
To please men is good and godly, so long as their pleasure is measured with
the holy will of God: but when men would spoil us of our christian liberty,
then must we fight against their wicked pleasures. So S. Paul expounds
himself in these words. The false brethren cre^t in privily, to spy out our
liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, yt they might bring us into bondage. And
why? ye are bought with a price, Gal. 2. ver. 5. 1. Cor. 7. v. 2^.
be not the servants of men. Christ himself forewarned us, to beware of the
hypocritical doctrine of the Pharisees; because they corrupted the pure word
of God, Math. 15. v. 3.
with the mixture of their own foolish traditions. Secondly, because the
apostle teaches 1. Tim. 4. v. 4.
if it be received with giving of thanks. Thirdly, because no power on earth,
Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2. Tit. 1. ver. ^5.
because to command the choice of meats for religion sake, is to appoint a
new God.

The fifth proposition.
Albeit a certain kind of fast (now in our English tongue called Lent) was
of old observed before Easter: yet is that fast neither warranted by the
Scriptures, neither commanded by the apostles; neither uniformly practiced in
the primitive church; but left indifferent to be used, as it seems good to
every one. I say, first (called in English, Lent:) because in the learned
tongues and of al writers, it is termed ye fast of 40. days. Why it should be
so called, the common people and latter papists give this reason; because
forsooth, Christ fasted forty days: but that this their wise reason so
supposed, is most absurd and too too childish; I will convince by manifest
demonstrations. First, because if Christ's fast were a pattern of our Lent,
then should One silly papist urged by this reason, said that the paschall
lamb was a fish indeed.
unless they will say, that the Paschall lamb was no flesh indeed, but a
fish of the Sea. Fourthly, because Christ fasted not at that time of the year,
in which the papists keep their Lent. Add hereunto, that the said number of
forty days fast, was ever too too variable, Mat. 4. Mark. 1. Luke 4.
as all approved ecclesiastical histories make relation. The old Romans
fasted three weeks before Easter, intermitting their fast weekly upon their
Saturdaies and Sundaies. The Slauonians, Alexandrians, and Grecians, fasted
six weeks. Others continued their fast for the space of 7. weeks: Trip. hist.
lib. 9. cap. 38.
but they fasted only 5. days in every week. Our latter papists perceiving a
gross error in the reckoning or supputation of Lent, invented a new no
fortified bulwark. That is, ye pope added four days in the beginning, (which
they commonly call clensing days,) to supply the want. And yet have they not
the number, as they wish. For if the Sundaies be not in their computation,
then have they a mingle mangle Lent. If they be reckoned, they surpass their
number by six days: So that their number, no way falls iumpe.

Secundo principaliter.
I say secondly (not warranted by the Scriptures) because neither the old nor
the new Testament makes any mention thereof. Christ indeed willed us to fast
and pray; but he neither assigned the time, nor limited the days. Besides
this, the popish manner of fasting, is neither agreeable to Christ's fast,
neither to the fast of the apostles, nor of Moses, nor of Elias, nor of David,
nor of Hester, nor of Spiridion, nor of any other authentical fast, as I have
proved.

I say thirdly, (not uniformly observed in the primitive Socrates writes,
some eat nothing that lives; some of living things eat only fish; some eat
fish and birds; some eat herbs and eggs; Trip. hist. lib. 9. c. 18.
Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 19. Eusebius. ^ib. 5. cap. 24.
some eat only bread; othersome eat nothing at all; other some at night eat
all kind of meats.

I say fourthly (not commanded by the Apostles, but left indifferent) First,
because we find no such commandment in the Cassiodorus) there is no law made
for fasting; I think the Apostles left this matter to our own consideration:
that every one should do without fear or necessity, what seemed convenient
for him.

The sixth proposition.
Popish fa^^ing is ridiculous, and hurtful both to soul and body. I say
first (ridiculous) first, Primo principaliter.
because they prohibit to eat

Fifthly, because they use to stuff their paunches so full at At Rome they are
more liberal in eating, because the pope knowing their liberal collations,
and not reproouing them, is deemed to dispense with the same. This is sound
popish doctrine, I assure the reader.
or at least have money enough to provide the same; others have all the three;
other some want all; yet does the Popish ridiculous law abandon the poor as
well as the rich, from Eggs, Cheese, Butter, and Milk, the only food that
they have to live upon. Seventhly, because all the day long, they commonly will
drink wine, eat bread, Simnels, Manchetes, and Fruits; and feed thereon at
night, as if it were an ordinary settled dinner. And if they refer their
dinner till night, as sundry do for better liking sundry times; and as
English themselves sick that were not so; See and note well Aquinas, 22. ^.
147. ar. 6. ad. 2.
other some have ridden abroad of purpose, that so they might fill their
bellies without suspicion. Yea, though one drink every day, till he be
drunken, yet does he not break his fast by popish doctrine. I say secondly
(hurtful to the soul) because by means hereof, Secundo principaliter.
many have believed false doctrine to be the word of God: and not only so, but
they have also judged and condemned themselves, for transgressing men's
traditions, as the very laws of God. Wherein while they sought to establish
their own righteousness, they fell from the righteousness of God. Romans 10.
ver. 3.
For to put religion in men's traditions, is flatly to abandon the worship of
the living God. Mat. 15. v. 9.
Yea, by reason of these fastes, their souls were after in damnable state. I
prove it, because they persuaded themselves that they were as well bound to
keep the popes laws therein, as the flat commandments of God; and
consequently, so often as they brake them (which was no rare thing) so often
did they commit damnable sin, Romans 14. v. 23.
because their acts were not of faith.

I say thirdly (hurtful to the body) first, because many have Tertio
principaliter.
through fond persuasion of popish holiness. Secondly, adulti must that day
first receive, and then follows as is said. And on the Sundaies in Lent, they
are so glad, because they be but days of abstinence, as if they were at Rome
in time of Carniuale, transformed under visards. Thirdly, because Lent fast is
not proportionable to man's The art of physic condemns popish fast in Lent.
must eat according to the force and equabilitie of his digestion, and
consequently, he ought to moderate and rule his diet, after the qualification
of his body, and season of the year. Calor natu^al^ cibum digerit.
Native heat is the proper workman of digestion, as grants every good
physician: and consequently, because our bodies are most hot in Winter (as
records the ancient and grave physician Hippocrates) at that time they stand
in need of most meat; Winter.
Hippocrates. Aphor. 15. sect.
And because our bodies be then cold and moist, hot and dry meats be
convenient. Summer.
In Summer because native heat is dispersed by exhalations, concoction is
weakened, and so less meat required. And because our bodies then be hot and
dry; cold and moist meats are proportional. In autumn, because the
extrinsecall heat is more remiss then in Summer, Autumn.
and the natural heat thereby more united; meat more largely ought to be
used. Spring time.
The spring time keeps a mean between winter and Summer, and takes part of
them both; and therefore our diet then, must neither be altogether of hot and
dry meats as in winter; neither yet altogether of cold and moist meats, as
in Summer: and consequently, popish institution of Lent was not only
superstitious and ungodly, but altogether prejudicial to the health of the
body. I prove it, first, because as Hippocrates writes, all sudden mutations
are dangerous; When their (...) come (...) Rhemes.
they at Rhemes give not at the first bear only; but they give them wine
also. This notwithstanding, after all their pleasant belly cheer, during the
whole time of their Carniuale at Rome, they must suddenly, even the next
morning, both with alteration of diet and parsimonie, begin their Lent fast
solemnly. It is yet further confirmed; first, because there is like proportion
in eating fish suddenly after flesh, as there is in eating flesh after fish.
Which alteration, how dangerous it is, the usual infirmities in Easter week
do witness. Secondly, Antiperistasis, as by reason of long sleep; and
therefore since much meat is necessary, our popish Lent fast must perforce be
prejudicial. But some will say: your selves this day command to eat fish in
Lent. I say first, that Esaiae. cap. 58. ver. 5.7

The seventh proposition.
Popish fastes are not fit means for their pretended end; to wit,
mortification. I prove it, because not only sundry kinds of fishes (as both
learned men and experience teaches) but wine especially; (which in popish
fasting is ever approved) is altogether against mortification. For as Solomon
says in their approved Latin Edition, Luxuriosa res vinum. Wine makes a man
wanton, Pro. 20. verse 1. And again, Nolite inebriari vino, in quo inest
luxuria. Be not drunken with wine, which makes the body too lusty. Ephesians. 5.
verse 18. Yea, our religious English moonkes, were so given to mortification,
as they could not be content to live one day without good store thereof. For
this is true, as I will answer upon the charge of my soul; Sir Thomas Bedell
the moonke (with whom I was sometime fellow prisoner in York upon Owse-bridge)
used ordinarily to send every day for a quart or pint of wine. Popish moonk
lived very delicately.

He yields a reason of his drinking of wi^^*


For (quoth he) I was used to such store of wine in our Monastery, that I
cannot refrain it now. O mortified popish moonkes! O religious professed
Romish Friars! O men of holy perfection! O hypocritical painted poverty! To
this may be added, the diet of his brother Comberforth the secular Priest.
Moonks pro^e* poverty but (...) feel none.
For he made a vow never to eat flesh, neither to drink wine, during his
abode in prison. By means of which hypocritical fast, as it seemed, he got
great credit amongst popishly affected persons. Yet did the said Comberforth
continually drink very strong finely brewed ale, always so compounded with
variety of spices, as it was more pleasant, then pure wine, Hypocrisy gains
souls to the devil.
if happily not so costly as the wine. Such has been, and is the mortification
of popish fastes. John True and the other Sergeantes at that time, can give
reasonable testimony hereof if they list.

The eight proposition.
The council of Chalcedon (one of the first four famous general Synodes,
which pope Gregory reverenced as the four Gospels) avouches popish fastes to
be no fastes at all. De consecr. Dis^* 1. cap. Solent.
These are the express words of the council, as they are alleged by
Gratianus in the popes own Decrees. Solent plures qui se ieiunare putant in
quadragesima, mox vt signum audierint ad horam nonam comedere; qui nullatenus
ieiunare credendi sunt, fi ante manducauerint, quam vespertinum celebretur
off^cium. Many who think they fast in Lent, use to eat so soon as they hear
the bell at the ninth hour; who by no means can be thought to fast, if they
eat before the evening prayer.

Out of which words of the ancient holy council, I note this constant
decree* to wit, that whosoever eat before the ninth hour, cannot truly fast.
And consequently, that no papists fast in their holy Lent, howsoever they
brag or boast thereof. The reason hereof is evident, because all papists
usually dine at noone; that is, three hours at the least, before the time
appointed by the council. I say at the least, because they use to anticipate
noone, some more, some less. For better explication whereof, we must observe
two things; the one concerning noone; the other concerning the evening prayer.
I say therefore that by the ninth hour, the council with all antiquity,
understands three of the clock at afternoon: for in the time of the
Apostles and long after them, the day was divided into twelve hours; which day
was again distributed into four Vigils, whereof every Vigil contained three
hours: so that their ninth hour was with us, three of the clock in the after
noone. Now for the obscuring of this evident confutation of the popish supposed
fasting; the papists of latter days have devised this miserable shift, a fit
invention of their newly hatched Romish religion.

The Pope forsooth has dispensed with his greedy religious godless people,
(who will needs be thought devout fathers, albeit they fast not one day in the
whole year;) that they may huddle up their vespertine hours, or evening
prayer, at any time before twelve of the clock, and then at their pleasures,
to eat, drink, and make good cheer. And (if it please your worships) this
done; with full panches to begin their discontinued disholy fast again.

The ninth proposition.
Of fastinges, some are private, and some public. Private fastes may be used
of ones own accord, when and so often as shall seem convenient; so they be
referred to the glory of God, and true mortification of the body, or be used
for the good of our neighbor.

Thus fasted king David, all the time his child was sick. After the death
whereof, he surceased from prayer and fasting, and ate meat. 2. King. 12.
Thus fasted Nehemiah, when he understood the affliction of the Jews; he sat
down, wept, and mourned certain days; he fasted and prayed before the Lord
of heaven, Nehem. 1.4. Thus fasted Daniel, when he perceived the captivity of
his countriemen, spoken of by the prophet Jeremy. He confessed his own
sins, and the sins of the people, and turned to the Lord in fasting and
hearty prayer, Dan. 9. verse. 2, 3, 4, 5. Public fasts are appointed either
by God in his holy word, or by the magistrate having his authority. Thus did
Samuel appoint the Israelites to fast, at such time as the Philistims did
grievously afflict them, 1. Kin. 7. ver. 3, 6. Thus king Iosaphat proclaimed a
fast throughout all Judah, when the Ammonites, Moabites, and Idumeans oppressed
them, 2. Par. 20.3, 10, 22. Thus did queen Hester appoint a public fast to
all the Jews by the mouth of Mardocheus, Hest. 4. v. 16. Thus did the king of
Nineveh command a public fast, after he understood Gods wrath by his prophet
Jonas, 3. verse 7.

Here ends the first Book, containing years, 3426.
The second book contains the description of the first Monarchy, that is, of
the Assyrians or Babylonians.
The first chapter, of the original and continuance of the monarchy.
The first Section, of the reason of the inscription.
ALbeit this first Monarchy was, either wholly, or in effect expired, before
the accomplishment of the captivity of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin; yet
have I thought good to had le it in a several tract, after the said
captivity, so to avoid confusion, and for perspicuitie sake.

The second section, of the original of the monarchy.
King Ninus the son of Belus, was the first king of Asia, except the Indians,
whom the Assyrians named their god: he reigned 52. years; and in the 43.
year of his reign was Abraham borne. He builded the city Ninum in Assyria,
now called Nineveh, Eusebius. in chronico.

When Ninus was dead, Semiramis his wife reigned; she feared, lest for the
tender years of her son Nunas, and for her feminine sex, the people should
revolt from their due loyalty. For which cause she clad her self in man's
apparel, A great policy in a woman.
and fained her self to be the kings son. She excelled in heroical feats,
and reigned 42. years in great felicity. She fortified the city of Babylon
(which Ninus had conquered from the Chaldeans) with rampires, ditches, and
walls. After her death Zameis alias Ninias reigned 30. years in all peace and
tranquillity, Eusebius. Carrion.

The kings of the Assyrians. Ninus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi
3197 52 Kings 36 Semiramis Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 42
Kings 36 Ninias Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 ^8 Kings 36 Arius
Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Arelius Anno mundi
1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 40 Kings 36 Xerxes Anno mundi 1948 reigned
years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Armametres Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno
mundi 3197 38 Kings 36 Belochus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197
35 Kings 36 Baleus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 52 Kings 36
Altadas Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 32 Kings 36 Mamitus Anno
mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Mancaleus Anno mundi 1948
reigned years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Iphereus Anno mundi 1948 reigned
years Anno mundi 3197 20 Kings 36 Mamylas Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno
mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Spa^etus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197
40 Kings 36 Ascades Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 40 Kings 36
Amyntas Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 45 Kings 36 Belothus Anno
mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 25 Kings 36 Bellepares Anno mundi 1948
reigned years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Lamprides Anno mundi 1948 reigned
years Anno mundi 3197 32 Kings 36 Sosares Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno
mundi 3197 20 Kings 36 Lampares Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197
30 Kings 36 Pannias Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 45 Kings 36
Sosarmus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 19 Kings 36 Mitreus Anno
mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 27 Kings 36 Tantanes Anno mundi 1948
reigned years Anno mundi 3197 32 Kings 36 Tantens Anno mundi 1948 reigned years
Anno mundi 3197 40 Kings 36 Thineus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi
3197 30 Kings 36 Dercilus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 40
Kings 36 Eupales Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 38 Kings 36
Laosthenes Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 45 Kings 36 Piriciades
Anno mundi 1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 30 Kings 36 Ophrateus Anno mundi
1948 reigned years Anno mundi 3197 20 Kings 36 Ophratanes Anno mundi 1948
reigned years Anno mundi 3197 50 Kings 36 Ocrazapes Anno mundi 1948 reigned
years Anno mundi 3197 41 Kings 36 Sardanapalus Anno mundi 1948 reigned years
Anno mundi 3197 20 Kings 36


Sardanapalus was the last king of the Assyrians, that possessed the whole
monarchy: he was a man of very bad behavior; and being ^^ercome in battle by
Arbaces, he burnt himself to death by fire.

This monarchy endured 1240. years after Eusebius: but see the fourth section
following, and mark it attentively.

After that Sardanapalus the vicious and effeminate monarke, had burnt
himself, together with his riches; Phul Belochus the president of Babylon, and
Arbaces ruler of the Medes, The kingdom of Assyria divided.
divided the monarchy between them. Phul Belochus had Babylon and Assyria;
Arbaces enjoyed Media and Persia. The kings that took part with Arbaces, were
termed the Kings of the Medes. Such as followed Belochus, the Kings of the
Assyrians, Chaldeans or Babylonians. The court lay first at Nineveh, after at
Babylon.

Arbaces the Mede subdued the Assyrians, and translated the Empire to the
Medes. From henceforth many alterations chanced in the monarkie. After
Herodotus, the Assyrians held the monarchy 500. years: from which time, now
the Assyrians, now the Medes, now the Chaldeans had the upper hand. At the
length, the Medes being more mighty then the rest, subdued Babylon, and
quietly enjoyed the whole empire.

The kings of ye Medes Arbaces Anno mundi 3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 28
Sosarnus Anno mundi 3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 30 Medidus Anno mundi
3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 40 Cardiceas Anno mundi 3195 reigned years
Anno mundi 3456 15 Diocles Anno mundi 3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 54
Phaortes Anno mundi 3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 24 Cyaraxes, or Cyaxares
Anno mundi 3195 reigned years Anno mundi 3456 32 Astyages* Anno mundi 3195
reigned years Anno mundi 3456 38


The monarkie of the Assyrians (which is also called the monarkie of the
Chaldeans, and of the Babylonians, because they sometime inioyed it, though
with small felicity,) began about the age of the world 2008. and continued
about 1470. years, at what time Darius king of the Medes, with Cyrus his son
in law wanne Babylon and killed Balthazar, Dan. 5. verses 30, 31.

The third section, of Balthazar.
Balthazar king of Babylon, when he was drinking wine, commanded the golden
vessel^es which his father had brough from the temple in Jerusalem, to be set
before him, that he, his princes, his wives, and his concubines might drink
therein: they drunk wine, and praised the gods of gold, silver, brass^ and
stone. But what followed all this idololatricall joy? in the very same hour,
there appeared fingers of a man's hand writing upon the wall of the kings
palace, so that the kings countenance changed, and his thoughts troubled him.
The joints of his loins were loosed, A wonderful punishment for idolatry.
his knees smote one against the other, and he cried mightily, Dan. 5. verse 2,
3, 5, 6, 7. Behold here, the end of idolatry and superstition. Balthazar
forthwith, after he had adored his false gods, was tormented as is said; the
same night he was stain, and Darius the Mede inioyed the kingdom, verse 30,
31. A wonderful example for all kings and monarkes, ever to serve the living
God, and to set forth his pure religion.

The fourth section, of the diversity in computation.
Eusebius and some others, reckon the monarchy of the Assyrians from Ninus;
and so it continued, 1240. years, as is said in the second section. Yet
others (who seem to follow Philo and Metasthenes) begin the monarchy in
the 8. year of Nabuchodonosors reign; See the first part, first book, and
second chapter, in the fifth and sixth age.
and then it endured only seventy years, for Nabuchodonosor reigned 45.
years, Euil-merodach his son 30. years, and Balthazar his son 3. years.
Such as will in this manner make their supputation, must reckon the first
monarchy to be of the Babylonians, and not of the Assyrians. Genebrardus
reckons the monarchy to have continued 78. years, that is, eight years
before the captivity, because the first year of Nabuchodnosor fell in the end
of the third year of Ioachim, Dan. 1. and was the fourth of Ioachim, Iere. 25.
but so the verity of the history be granted, it skilleth not much to vary
the name.

CHAP. II. Of the kings of the Assyrians and Babilonians, after the death of
Sardanapalus, and the division of the monarchy.
Phul Belochus.
PHul Belochus was the first king of the Assyrians, after the division of the
Empire, and death of Sardanapalus: he was a magnificall and fortunate Prince,
and Niniue was his palace, he was president of Babylon, in the time of
Sardanapalus, after whose miserable death, he enjoyed half of the monarchy,
as I have showed in the first chapter and second section: he ruled 48. years
in all.

Phul. Assar.
Phull Assar surnamed Tiglath, was the second king of the Assyrians: he was a
very bad king, he destroyed Galile, and led some of the tribes into
captivity: he reigned 23. years.

Salmanasar.
Salmanasar was the third king of the Assyrians, he was a tyrannical and
cruel king: this Salmanasar destroyed the kingdom of Israel, besieged
Samaria, took it, battered it down, slew the king, and led away into Media,
the people that remained after the slaughter: for he was ruler in that
country, and he reigned eleven years.

Sennacherib.
Sennacherib the fourth king of the Assyrians, was an arrogant, wicked and
godless man: he bent himself against god, with sacrilegious and blasphemous
speeches: he sent a great host against Jerusalem, but Gods Angel smote in his
army an hundred, four score and five thousand; insomuch that he was enforced
to retire, and to dwell again in Niniue. For his blasphemy against god, an
horrible death befell upon him, for as he was in the temple worshipping his God
Nisroch, Adramelech and Saresar his own sons, smat him with the sword, and
they escaped when they had slain him, into the land of Armenia, 4. King. 18,
19, chap. so was he murdered even before the idol, whom he adored for God, and
by them by whom he ought by nature to have bin defended: he reigned 15. years.
That the wickedness of this Senacherib might be noted of all posterities, his
image was set up in Egypt, with this inscription over it as writes Herodotus.

(...), That is to say,

Whosoever shall behold me with his corporal eyes let him learn by my
calamity to honor the everliving God, and not to blaspheme him as I did: for
which cause I made this miserable end, being murdered by mine own children.
Note here, that after Eusebius, Senacherib was also called Salmanasar, which I
think consonant to the holy scriptures.

Assar-addon succeeded Senacherib his father, but was not fortunate: for the
strength of the Assyrians began to decay, even while his father was yet living.
Besides this, the mighty prince Merodach-baladan the Chaldee made wars both
with him and his father before him: forthwith after the death of Senacherib he
wanne Babylon, and enjoyed it with other territories in Assyria, until the
death of Assar-addon, from whose death he possessed the whole Empire: He
reigned ten years.

Merodach-baladan the first king of the Babylonians, for the fame and memory
of the ancient kingdom of Assyria, was called king of the Assyrians also, as
were likewise other kings that followed him. He first transported the majesty
of the Assyrians to the Chaldees or Babylonians, for the glory of Niniue,
where the kings palace was of old, was now translated to Babylon: for which
benefit Merodach after his death, was honored for a God of the Babylonians,
Ier. 50, ver. 2. he reigned 40. years.

Ben-merodach the second king of the Babylonians was a mild and mighty
Prince: he reigned 21. years.

Nabuchodonosor the first or the old, the third king of the Babylonia^s after
Merodach, Nabuchodonosor priscus.
was father to that Nabuchodonosor who subdued Jerusalem, and erected the
Babylonian monarchy: he made two great battles, the one against Phaortes
alias Arphaxad king of the Medes; the other against Nechao the mighty king of
the Egyptians. He slew king Arphaxad in the mountains of Ragau, as the story
of Judith makes mention. But Nechao overcame him, and enjoyed all Syria: he
reigned 35. years.

Nabuchodonosor magnus.
Nabuchodonosor the great, son of Nabuchodonosor the first, shortly after his
fathers death wanne again all Syria. He was the mightiest king of all the
kings of Babylon, much spoken of in holy Writ. He subdued the city of
Jerusalem, and led away the inhabitants thereof captives to Babylon. This
Nabuchodonosor, as he was mighty in power, so was he proud in heart. He made
an image of gold and set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of
Babylon. Which done, he commanded all his princes, nobles, dukes, judges,
receivers, counselors, officers, and all governors of his provinces, to come
to the dedication of the image. He appointed an herald to cry aloude, that
when they heard the sound of the cornet, trumpet, harp, sackebut, psalterie,
dulcimer, and other instruments of music, then they should fall down and
worship the image. And because the three holy Jews Sidrach, Misach and
Abednego, would not adore the image, he caused them to be cast into a very
hot burning oven: from which fiery furnace, God delivered them myraculously.
In regard whereof Nabuchodonosor magnified the living God, and made a decree,
that al people and nations which spoke against the God of Sidrach, Misach, and
Abednego, should be drawn in pieces, and their houses made a iakes, Dan.
3.29. After this, the king still swelled in pride; so that he was cast out from
his kingdom, driven from men, ate grass as oxen, and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven; till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his
nails like birds claws, Dan. 4. verse 30.

Euil-marodaco.
After Nabuchodonosor magnus succeeded Euil-merodach; after him, Balthazar.
Balthazar: of which two, see the first chapter in the fourth section.

CHAP. II. Of the destruction of Troy
THe kingdom of Troy was of great antiquity; it began as sundry
Chronographers write, a little before the death of Moses, about the 32. year
after the departure of Israel out of Egypt. They write that Dardanus was the
first king of the Trojans, and Priamus the last.

Alexander the son of Priamus surnamed Paris, took away violently Helena
wife to Menelaus king of the Lacedaemonians, which fact was the occasion of the
most bitter and bloody battle of the Troyans. This battle was fought of the
most valiant people in Asia and Europe; with mortal enmity and inestimable
loss on both sides; with the blood and destruction of many most flourishing
regions.

Troy was taken, burnt, A. M. 2935
and utterly destroyed 340. years before Rome was built, in the age of the
world 2935.

From the captivity of Troy, until the first Olimpias, were complete 340.
years: albeit Liui^s and some other have their different supputations.

CHAP. III. Of the supputation of the Greeks.
THe old Greeks did account as we do now, by the years of our Lord, the
first Olimpias, the second, the third, the fourth, and so forth.

Some hold that Olimpias is the space of five years, but if thou will not be
deceived therein (gentle reader) reckon it but for the space of four years.
The supputation of the Greeks by the Olimpiads is of all writers deemed true;
and therefore albeit before their Olympiads every one wrote as pleased
himself, yet after their Olympiads, we ought greatly to respect their account.

Africanus writes that the first Olimpias was in the first year of Ioatham
king of Judah, and so it should be in the age of the world 3251. others dissent
fro that computation and affirm it to be in the time of Ioas; and then it
chanced in the age of the world 3130. which supputation seems not so
probable, and therefore with Affricanus, Eusebius, and others, I imitate the
former: but in reckoning the time of Iotham and Ioas, I dissent from them both
as is already showed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the city of Rome.
ROme was builded in the end of the sixth Olympias, in the age of the world
3218. after the destruction of Troy 340. before the incarnation of our savior
Jesus Christ, about 729. years.

Romulus and Rhemus were brothers, twins, both of one age. Contention and
controversy fell between them, after whether of them the city which they had
newly built should be named. The contention grew from words to tumults, from
tumults to strokes, from strokes to bloody battle; insomuch as in the bickering
Rhemus was slain: after his death Romulus enjoyed the Empire alone, of whom
the City was called Rome.

Rome has been sundry times sacked and overthrown by the Goths and
Vandals: ^laricus.
first by Alaricus the Gothe, in the year of our Lord God 412. Anno Dom. 412
This king besieged Rome, and after burned it; during which siege such famine
was in the city that the mothers were constrained with hunger to eat their
own children.

It was besieged, taken and sacked the second time, by Gensericus the Vandal,
Gensericus.
in the year of our Lord 456.

An. Dom. 456
It was besieged, sacked, and subverted the third time by Totilas king of the
Goths in the year of our Lord 548. in the year after the city was built,
^otilas.
1300, in which siege as in the first, An. Dom. 548
the famine was exceeding great; mothers were enforced contrary to nature and
kind, to kill and eat the flesh of their own children. Procopius, Palmerius,

The same Totilas about three years after began to repair and build up the
city of Rome, Totilas built up the city of Rome.
and gave leave to the citizens to return into the city in the year of our
Lord 551.

The kings of the Romans; Romlus Anno mundi 3220 reigned and was king of Rome
Anno mundi 3438 38 244 Numa Pompilius Anno mundi 3220 reigned and was king of
Rome Anno mundi 3438 43 244 Tullus Hostilius Anno mundi 3220 reigned and was
king of Rome Anno mundi 3438 33 244 Ancus Martius Anno mundi 3220 reigned and
was king of Rome Anno mundi 3438 24 244 Tarquinius priscus Anno mundi 3220
reigned and was king of Rome Anno mundi 3438 37 244 Seruius Tullius Anno mundi
3220 reigned and was king of Rome Anno mundi 3438 44 244 Tarquinius Superbus
Anno mundi 3220 reigned and was king of Rome Anno mundi 3438 25 244


Kings first reigned over the Romans 244. years. After kings, the common weal
of the Romans was governed by Consuls, then by Tribunes and Dictators, and
again by Consuls, for the space almost of 464. years, even until Julius
Caesar, who was the first emperor of Rome, Julius Caesar.
A. M. 3924
and reigned 5. years, seven months, in the second year of the 183.
Olympias, and in the age of the world 3924.

The first observation.
A Consul was a chief officer amongst the Romans, whereof two were chosen
yearly to govern their city.

A Tribune was an officer among the Romans, that had chief jurisdiction among
the commons. His office was to maintain the liberty of the poor people against
such as sought to do them wrong.

A Dictator was a chief officer amongst the Romans, who had a kings power: he
was never chosen but in some great danger of the commonweal. His authority
endured but half a year, which at the half years end, he was to yield up
under pain of treason.

The second observation.
Valerius fellow Consul with Brutus died in such poverty, as the Romans were
enforced to disburse the common tresure for his funeral: so writes Eusebius.
What was the cause of his poverty I do not read: but this I say, that many
rich men are often oppressed with poverty suddenly after the abundance of
their wealth: and I add further, that no effect can be without the cause.

The explication.
Some men are very rich in lands, goods, and possessions, which they enjoy
either by their patrimony, or by dissent of blood, which rich men are
sodenlie afflicted with poverty, when oftentimes the cause is not known to
any neighbor: but as the proverb says, after great getters come great
spenders, and how is abundance of riches so soon gone? doubtless it falls
out commonly, for a just punishment of sin. Some rich men get their riches by
usury, some by deceitful dealing, some by extortion, some by bribes and gifts
for furthering evil causes, some by niggardly and miserly locking up in chests
and coffers, that which ought to have been bestowed for the relief of their
poor neighbors. All which because they are abominable in Gods sight, God
punishes the same diversely, sometime in the getters themselves, (though that
chance but seldom) and commonly in their successors: so as it may be truly
said, evil gotten goods seldom prosper to the third generation. For some
successors to those greedy unconscionable getters, spend their goods
lasciuiously, some by carding and gamning, some by foolish bargaining, some by
prodigality, some by flattery, some by credulity, and some by other means:
yet few or none were ever impouerished, for bestowing their goods charitably
upon the poor, for as Gods prophet wisely says, from his youth up till his
old age, he never saw the righteous man forsaken, nor his seed begging
bread. Psalm. 37, 25. but in these our days we are so wedded to worldly
riches, that we will rather bestow twenty pounds upon our own inordinate
pleasures, then twenty pence upon an honest poor needy neighbor, and yet
when rich men have scraped together all the wealth they can, sometime it so
falls out, that some of them have not at the hour of death, to discharge the
very funeral, even as it befell to this honorable Consul of Rome. It
therefore behooves al christian people, that have regard to their salvation,
first never to set their affections upon worldly goods inordinately: secondly,
to get their riches honestly and truly: thirdly, to dispense their riches
liberally and chearefully, to all their needy neighbors. God is the giver of
all riches; for as the Apostle says, Paul planted, and Apollos watered, but
God gave the increase, 1. Cor. 3 ver. 6. he makes some poor to try their
patience and faith in him: other some he makes rich, to prove their fidelity
in disposing his treasures: for the rich men are but stewards of their riches;
God is the chief owner and Lord thereof, to whom they must one day make a
reckoning, and as Saint Hierom says, he never knew man make an evil end,
that in his life time did the works of charity chearefully.

CHAP. V. Of the Emperors of Rome.
The names of the Caesar's; The reign of the Caesar's; 1 Julius Caesar was the
first emperor of Rome, of whom all emperors were afterward called Caesar's.
Anno Mun. 3924 5 years and 7 months 2 Octauius or Octauianus Caesar Augustus
was the second, of whom all the rest were afterward called Augusti: he died
in the 76. year of his age, and was buried in Campo Martio. 56 years 3
Tiberius Caesar Augustus was the third Caesar he died in Campania in the
village Lucullana, in the 78. year of his age. 23 years 4 Caius Caesar
surnamed Caligula was the fourth: he was slain by his protectors in his own
palace in the 25. year of his age. 4 years and 10 months 5 Claudius Caesar
was the fifth, who died in his palace, the 64. year of his age. 13 years and 8
months 6 Nero was the sixth Caesar of the Romans, he flew him self in the
32. year of his age: in him was ended all the family of Augustus. Anno Dom.
55 13 years and 7 months

The names of the Caesar's; 7 Galba, Otho, Vitellius succeeded by murdering one
another. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 1 year and 9
months 8 Vespasianus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 9
years, 11. mon. 22. days 9 Titus eius filius. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 2 years, and 8 months 10 Domitianus. Anno Dom. 69 The
reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 15 years, and 5 months 11 Nerua. Anno
Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 1 year, and 5 months 12
Traianus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 19 years, and 6
months 13 Adrianus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 21
years, and 10 months 14 Antoninus Pius. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 23 years, and 3 months 15 M Antoninus Verus with his
brother L. Aurelius Commodus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
237 19 years 16 Commodus the son of Antoninus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of
the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 13 years 17 Aelius Pertinax. Anno Dom. 69 The
reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 6 months 18 Seuerus. Anno Dom. 69 The
reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 18 years 19 Antoninus Caracalla. Anno
Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 6 years 20 Macrinus. Anno
Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 237 1 year 21 Marcus Anton.
Aurelius alias Heliogabalus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
237 4 years 22 Alexander. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
237 13 years 23 Maximinus. Anno Dom. 69 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
237 3 years


The names of the Cesars, 24 Gordianus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the
Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 6 years 25 Philippus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the
Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 7 years 26 Decius. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the
Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 1 year, and three months. 27 Gallus cum Volusiano.
Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 2 years and 4 months
28 Valerianus and Galienus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom.
387 15 years 29 Claudius. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom.
387 1 year, and nine months 30 Aurelianus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the
Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 5 years and 6 months 31 Probus. Anno Dom. 240 The
reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 6 years and 4 months 32 Carus with his
sons Carinus and Numerianus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno.
Dom. 387 2 years 33 Dioclesianus with Maximianus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of
the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 20 years 34 Galerius was Augustus, together with
Constantius. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 2 years
35 Constantinus magnus. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387
31 years 36 Co^stantinus, Co^stantius, and Constans, the 3. sons of
Constantine the great. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387
24 years, and 12 days 37 Iulianus Apostata. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the
Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 2 years and 8. months 38 Iouinianus. Anno Dom. 240 The
reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 8 months 39 Valentinianus and Valens.
Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 13 years, and five
months 40 Gratianus with his brother Valentinianus, and Theodosius the first.
Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 6 years, and 10
months 41 Arcadius. Anno Dom. 240 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 387 5
years


The names of the Caesar's; 42 Honorius Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's;
Anno Dom. 314 9 years 43 Theodosius 2. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 29 years 44 Martianus alias Martinianus Anno Dom. 392
The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 7 years and 2 months 45 Leo 1. Anno
Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 16 years 46 Zeno Anno Dom.
392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 11 years 47 Anastasius 1. Anno
Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 16 48 Justinius 1. Anno Dom.
392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 8 49 Iustinianus 1. Anno Dom. 392
The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 38 50 Justinius 2. Anno Dom. 392 The
reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 7 51 Tiberius 2. Anno Dom. 392 The reign
of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 29 52 Mauritius Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 8 53 Phocas Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's;
Anno Dom. 314 17 54 Heraclius Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno
Dom. 314 27 years 55 Constantinus 3. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's;
Anno Dom. 314 2 56 Constans Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
314 17 57 Constantinus 4. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom.
314 10 58 Iustinianus secundus, Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's; Anno
Dom. 314 4 59 Leo secundus alias Leontius Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 7 years 60 Tiberius 3. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 2 years 61 Philippicus Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 7 months 62 Anastasius 2. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of
the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 3 years 63 Theodosius 3. Anno Dom. 392 The reign
of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 2 64 Leo 3. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 24 65 Constantinus 5. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 35 66 Leo 4. Anno Dom. 392 The reign of the Caesar's;
Anno Dom. 314 6 67 Constantinus sextus. with his mother Irene Anno Dom. 392 The
reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 314 19 years


(...) names (...) Cesars, 68 Carolus magnus. 1. after the translation of the
Empire. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 743 14 years 69
Ludouicus 1. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 36 70
Lotharius 1. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 15 71
Ludouicus 2. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 11 72
Carolus 2. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 743 6 73 Carolus
3. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 12 years 6 month 74
Arnulphus. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 12 years 75
Ludouicus 3. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 6 76
Berengarius 1. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 4 77
Berengarius 2. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 4 78
Lotharius 2. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 12 79 Otho
1. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 2 80 Otho 2. Anno
Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 17 81 Otho 3. Anno Dom. 333
The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 16 82 Henricus 1. dux Bat. Anno Dom.
333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 19 years 5. months 83 Henricus
2. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 17 years 84 Henricus
3. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 48 85 Henricus 4.
Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 29 86 Lotharius 3. Anno
Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 12 87 Conradus sucuus Anno
Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 15 88 Fridericus 1. Anno Dom.
333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 37 89 Henricus 5. alias 6. Anno
Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 743 10 years 90 Otho 5. alias
4. Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno. Dom. 743 13 91 Fridericus 2.
Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 33 92 Rodulphus. Anno
Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 19 93 Aldulphus. Anno Dom.
333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 1 year 3. months 94 Albertus.
Anno Dom. 333 The reign of the Caesar's. Anno Dom. 743 9 years


The names of the Caesar's; 95 Henricus 6. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 5 years 96 Ludouicus 4. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 33 97 Carolus 4. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 32 98 Venceslaus. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 22 99 Robertus Bat. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 10 100 Sigismundus. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 27 101 Albertus 2. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 2 102 Fridericus 3. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 53 103 Maximilianus. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of the
Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 26 104 Carolus 5. Flandr. Anno Dom. 752 The reign of
the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 30 years 105 Ferdinandus. Anno Dom. 752 The reign
of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 6 years, 4. (...) 106 Maximilianus. Anno Dom. 752
The reign of the Caesar's; Anno Dom. 998 11 years


Of these Emperors more shall be said in peculiar (...) when I come to the
second part and first book thereof.

The third book contains the description of the second Monarchy, that is,
of the Persians.
CHAP. I. Of the original of the monarchy and succession in the same.
GOd most mighty and most faithful, for his power does whatsoever pleases
him; and for his promise sake, he undoubtedly accomplisheth whatsoever he has
said. He suffered the Jews his peculiar people to be long afflicted by the
Babilonians; but after that 70. years were fully complete and expired,
according to his promise, Isai. 45 1.48.20. He with great joy wrought their
deliverance. He appointed king Cyrus to set them at liberty, whom for that
purpose he called his anointed, Es. 45.1. Which Cyrus having conquered the
kingdom of the Medes against Astyages, left the said kingdom to Darius his
uncle, by whose aid he took Babylon, and so transported the Monarchy of
Babylon to the Persians.

Cyrus delivered the Jews from captivity, the very same year that he took
Babylon. He also gave them great treasures to build the temple of Jerusalem,
and sent them home again under the conduct of Zorobabel, Esd. cap. 1. cap. 2.
2. Par. 36. ver. 23. Esd. 7. v. 15. (...) 5.8.
He commanded to give them of his own revenues day by day, so much as should
be necessary. Esd. 6. verse 8.9. (...) 7, 2.


Cyrus king of Persia brought forth by the hand of Mithridates the treasurer,
all the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosor had taken out of
Jerusalem, and placed in the house of his false God. Cyrus numbered them unto
Sesbazer the Prince of Judah. To wit, 30. Chargers of gold: a thousand chargers
of silver; 29. knives, thirty basins of gold 410. basins of silver, and of
other vessels 1000. all which with other rich gifts, the king bestowed on the
Jews, to build up again their Temple, Esd. 1. 2. Par. 36.

The building of the Temple was hindered by the adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin, that is, An. mundi. 3300
the inhabitants of Samaria (whom the king of Assyria had placed in the stead
of the ten tribes,) which ten tribes he had carried away unto Ashur, and put
them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan and in the city of the Medes:
4. King. 1^*
for at that time the Medes and Persians were subject to the Assyrians; which
vexation and hindering of the Jews in building their Temple, The Hebrews call
Darius Assuerus. Bergom. lib* 5. p. ^^1.
continued about the space of thirty years; that is, until the sixth year of
Darius the son of Histaspis surnamed Assuerus, and Artaxerxes, indifferently,
Esdr. cap. 4.

The difficulty.
The Prophet Daniel (who lived even in the time of the captivity of Babylon)
affirms constantly, that the same night in which Balthazar the king of the
Chaldees was slain, Darius King of the Medes took the kingdom, being 62.
years of age, Dan. cap. 5. verse. 31. and the said Daniel says, that he
understood the time of the captivity by the books of Jeremy, in the first
year of Darius son of Assuerus, who was of the seed of the Medes, Dan. 9.
verse. 1. but Esdras writes plainly, that Cyrus was king of Babylon, and gave
the Jews leave to build their temple: to whom also he gave great treasure, as
is already said, Esdr. 1. Esdr. chap. 6. verse. 3.

The answer.
I say first with Saint Hierome upon Daniel, that Cyrus gave the title of
honor to Darius as well in respect of his old age, as for kindred sake. I say
secondly, that Cyrus went about wars in other Countries, and so had not the
title, though he were king indeed. I say thirdly, that Darius died the same
year that he and Cyrus wan Babylon, so as the Monarchy of the Medes, Persians
and Babylonians, descended wholly unto Cyrus.

The names of the kings of the Persian Monarchy Darius A. M. 3426 the time of
their reign A. M. 3655 9 months Cyrus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A.
M. 3655 30 years Cambyses A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 8
years Smerdes magus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 7 months
Darius Histaspis alias Artaxerxes, alias Assuerus A. M. 3426 the time of their
reign A. M. 3655 36 years Xerxes A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M.
3655 20 years Artabanus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 7
months Darius Artaxerxes (Longimanus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A.
M. 3655 40 years Zerxes A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 2
months Sogdianus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 7 months
Darius Nothus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655 19 years
Artaxerxes Mnemon, alias Memnon A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M. 3655
40 years Darius Ochus alias vagosus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M.
3655 26 years Arsames son of Ochus A. M. 3426 the time of their reign A. M.
3655 4 years Darius Arsami filius, alias Arbelas or Melas. A. M. 3426 the time
of their reign A. M. 3655 6 years


The first observation.
It is to be observed, that Artaxerxes was the common name of all kings of
Persia, as Pharaoh was the common name of all kings of Egypt, and as Caesar
was the common name of all the Emperors of Rome.

The second observation.
The custom of the Persians was this, that when any king went to war
against any strange nation, he left his son, or the next of the blood
royal, to be king in his place. The custom of the Persians.
Cyrus therefore when he had war against the Scythians, and marched toward
them, appointed Cambyses his son king of the country in his absence,
according to the custom of the Persians. Xerxes likewise the son of
Histaspis succeeded his father, but left his kingdom to his son Longimain
when he went to war against the Greeks; in regard hereof, sundry writers
do not place Cambyses and Xerxes in the lineall order of succession, which
point must be well observed to avoid obscurity, and to reconcile the
dissenting historiographers.

CHAP. II. Of the time of repairing the temple in Jerusalem.
KIng Cyrus in the first year of his reign, as he was the Persian monarke,
Esdras. 6* verse 3.
set the Jews at liberty and appointed them to build the Temple again in
Jerusalem. I say (as monarke) because (as learned men write) he had reigned
certain years in Persia, before he took Babylon and became the monarke.
Cambyses and other adversaries did a long time hinder the building of the
Temple, so as it had not the accomplishment until the sixth year of Darius
Assuerus, Esdr. 6. verse. 15. Albeit Darius in his second year gave
commandment, that the work should go forward, Esdr. chap. 4. ver. 24.

The first difficulty.
The Jews objected against our Savior Christ, that their temple was 46.
years a building. Ioh. 2. verse. 20. yet by the supputation already made, in
the fourth section of the first chapter and second book, it cannot be so much.

The answer.
I say first, that concerning the supputation of years, there is great
variety amongst historiographers. Eusebius reckons the time from the 55.
Olympiade to the 64. Olympiade inclusiue, that is, 40. years: others reckon.
21. years; others 23. others 30. neither agreeing with the account of the Jews,
neither yet with the reign of the monarks. I say secondly, that the temple was
46. years in building, as the Jews affirmed who best knew the time: and their
assertion is not dissonant from the reign of the monarks: for Cyrus reigned
30. years, Cambyses 8. years, Smerdes 7. months, Darius six years, and
Nehemias after that builded up the walls.

The reply.
The temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius, as records Esdras,
Esdras* 6. ver. 15.
and so we want one whole year and five months of the 46. years, whereof the
Jews spoke.

The answer.
I answer that the temple is said to be finished in the 6. year of Darius,
because all the work in effect was then accomplished; nevertheless some part
thereof was left undone, because Nehemias after that builded up the walls, as
we read in the first, second and third chapter of his book.

The second difficulty.
Cambyses (Esdras, 4. verse. 6.7) is called Assuerus and Arta^^rxes, so as the
names seem to be confounded.

The answer.
I say first, that Cambyses successor to king Cyrus a loving and merciful
Prince (who furthered in all respects the godly desire of the Jews) was a
naughty, wicked and tyrannical regent, one that wholly bent himself against
God, and against his peculiar flock. Wherein appears the uncertainty of
man's felicity in this world, while a godly father has to his successor, a
wicked and ungodly son; a son that reuoketh the privileges which his
father gave to the people of God. But his life was short, miserable and bloody,
the proper reward of all brutish tyranny. For as he mounted upon his horse,
he suddenly fell upon his dis^ased sword, and so had a bloody end. I say
secondly, that Artaxerxes is a name common to all the kings of Persia; to
which name Assuerus is equivalent with the Hebrews; and so Cambyses is
indifferently called Artaxerxes or Assuerus, as is said in the first
observation.

The third difficulty.
Esdras writes that the Jews were appointed by three several kings of
Persia, to rear up again their temple. Esdras 6. verse 14. and therefore not
only at the first by Cyrus, and afterward by Darius, but also by Artaxerxes
the third.

The answer.
I answer as I said before, that Artaxerxes is the common name to all the
kings of Persia; which observation, if it once be forgotten, many difficulties
will ensue thereupon. When Esdras therefore says (by the commandment of
Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes) it is all one as if he had said (and
Darius, which is also called Artaxerxes:) for the particle (and) is there not
copulative, but expositiue, as in other places also.

CHAP. III. Of the continuance of the monarchy.
Darius Ochus was a tyrannical and bloudthirstie king; he murdered his two
brethren, that so he might enjoy the kingdom. He made war with the
Egyptians, and by that means cruelly vexed the Jews. By this prince, and
until the time of Alexander the great, the church was ever in great misery and
affliction: All the privileges granted by Cyrus and Darius, were utterly
taken away; but God (who never will forsake his church, though he suffer it to
be tossed and turmoiled for a time) in the end brought solace and true joy unto
the Jews. ^he Persian mo^^rchie endured ^49. years, and ^^ght months.
For shortly Darius Ochus was slain of Bagoses, by whom also Arsames was
murdered: and Darius Arbelas the last king of the Persians, was overcome and
slain of Alexander the Great. So that the monarchy of the Persians endured
249. years, and eight months: after the supputation of others, 191. whereof
more at large hereafter. The resistance was so great, that the Jews were
enforced to build with one hand, and to hold their weapons in the other.
Nehe. 4. verse 17.

The Monarchy of the Persians reached from India, even to Ethiopia over an
hundred and seven and twenty provinces, Est. cap. 1. verse 1.

Darius Assuerus king of the Medes, Persians, and Chaldeans, to show the
riches and glory of his kingdom, and the honor of his majesty, made a feast
to all his princes and servants, and to all captains and governors of his
provinces, for the space of an hundred and fourscore days. And when these
days were expired, the king made another feast, to all the people of Susan the
chief city, both unto the great and small, (...) very magnifi^^all feast, and
be^^ming so migh^^e a prince.
none excepted. This he did for the space of seven days, in the court of the
kings palace, under an hanging of white, green, and blew clothes, fastened
with cords of fine linen, and purple, in silver ringes, and pillars of
marble. The beds were of gold and of silver upon a pauement of porphirie and
marble and alabaster, and blew color. They gave them drink in vessels of gold,
and changed vessel after vessel, and royal wine in abundance, according to
the power of the king, and none was compelled to drink more then as best
pleased him, Est. cap. 1. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The difficulty.
In Ester the Provinces are reckoned to be 127. but in Dan. cap. 6. verse 1.
reckoning is made only of six score: seven wanting of the number in Ester.

The answer.
I answer that the usual manner and course of the holy scripture is this, to
recite the perfect number, and to omit the odd and imperfect. Even so Daniel
expressing the perfect number, was careless for the odd.

CHAP. IIII. Of the weeks mentioned in Daniel.
The first section.
The Monarchy of the Persians contained the kingdoms of the Persians, of the
Medes, of the Assyrians, of the Chaldeans, a great part of Asia and of other
regions adjacent. It began in the age of the world, 3425. In the 20. year of
Darius Longhand, alias Darius Artaxerxes, began the seventy weeks
foreshewed by Daniel, cap. 9. See the fourth section.

No place of holy scripture is more excellent, more worthy or more necessary
to be understood of every christian man, then the 70. weeks revealed by the
angel to Daniel: For no place in all the old testament, does more clearly set
Christ with all his glory and manifold gifts before our eyes: no place does
more firmly strengthen our faith; no place does more effectually convince the
Jews; no place does more strongly confute all heresies; all fantastical
opinions, and all pestilent errors against our Savior Christ, then this place
of Daniel. Worthily therefore ought we to employ our whole care, study and
industry, for the exact understanding of the same.

The second section.
All writers agree in these two points. First, that weeks in the ninth chapter
of Daniel, are not taken for common weeks, but for weeks of years, even as
we find in Leuiticus, cap. 25. verse 8. where it is thus written: Thou shall
number seven Sabbothes of years unto thee, even seven times seven year: and
the space of the seven Sabbothes of years will be unto thee nine and forty
years. Secondly, that the 70. weeks make seventy times seven, according to
the phrase of Leuiticus, and so the just number must be 49. years. In this
point the very Rabbis of the Jews do agree with our Christian interpreters
and historiographers. And necessity without more ado enforces us to admit
this gloss and exposition of the weeks: because otherwise the assertion of
the angel of God notified to us by the Prophet Daniel, should be absurd and
utterly swaruing from the truth.

The third section. Of the probation, for the exposition of the seventy
weeks, Dan. 9. verse 24.
That 70. weeks do neither signify weeks, as a week imports seven days;
neither yet 70. weeks only, as weeks angel needed not to have been sent from
heaven to instruct Daniel, if the 70. weeks had no mystical nor secret
meaning far above the common and literal signification of the words.
Secondly, because the vision which Daniel had, and which the angel 70. weeks
and 70 years. Thirdly, because Gods mercy does seven fold exceed his
judgment; 70. years in captivity; and that it shall be accomplished in the
aduent of the true Messiah Christ Jesus: By whom and through whom, wickedness
shall be finished, sins sealed up, iniquity reconciled, and our
righteousness purchased everlastingly. Fourthly, because no other
interpretation of the 70. weeks, can S. Hierome, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullianus, Africanus, 70. weeks; that is, in what year of what king we
must begin the supputation; yet do they all iumpe in the signification of
the 70. weeks, as who al do constantly write that they connotate, 490. years.
Sixthly, because the supputation of every writer, brings us to Christ, From
the captivity to Christ. 490. years.
which is the scope intended

The fourth section. Of the variety in writers touching the time of the 70.
weeks.
Some writers begin the supputation of the 490. years, in the second year of
the 80. Olympias, Accidental variety in fundamental agreement.
which was in the 7. year of Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus. Some begin, in
the 32. year of Darius Histaspis. Others begin in the first year of Cyrus.
Others sooner, others later. Some end their supputation in the birth of Christ,
some in his baptism, some in his preaching, some in his death. So that all
agree in the substance of the thing, though they dissent in the modification of
the same.

Affricanus (whose opinion I prefer) begins the supputation in the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longhand, ^ffr. in. 5. ^olum. temp.
because then received Nehemias commandment to build up the walls of the
City of Jerusalem, and to consummate the whole work of the temple, walls,
and city. Nehe. 2.1.8. from which time if we reckon (says he) until Christ,
we shall find the 70. weeks. But if we begin out computation from any other
time, neither the times will be consonant, and many absurdities will ensue
thereupon. And we must (says Affricanus) reckon our years, after the
supputation of the Hebrews, ^^ntentia Affri^^ni.
who do not reckon months after the course of the Sun, but of the Moon:
for from the 20. year of the said Artaxerxes, that is, from the fourth year of
the 83. Olympias unto the 202. Olympias and second year of the same Olympias,
and 18. year of Tyberius Caesar, (in which year Christ was crucified) are
gathered 475. years, which do make 490. years after the supputation of the
Hebrews and course of the Moon. (...) death of ^^rist.
Whosoever lists may read this matter handled at large in Saint Hierome in his
excellent Commentaries upon the ninth of Daniel, where he cites the
variaable opinions of Hippolitus, (...) S. Hierome.
Tertullianus, Clemens, Affricanus, Eusebius, and others; and seeing the
difficulty to be great, refers the judgment to the reader; although he
seem indeed to prefer the opinion of Aff^icanus before the rest.

That this opinion of Affricanus is grounded in the true meaning of the
prophecy of Daniel, I will prove by sundry 490. years according to the
course of the Moon, or after the supputation are the words; And after
threescore and two weeks, Dan. 9.26.
shall Messiah be slain: so then the true account of the weeks must so
begin, as they may end just with the death of Christ: but so it is, that no
account save only this of Affricanus which I prefer, does or can agree with
the death of Christ, ergo it and none but it, is consonant to the Prophets
meaning. Fifthly the abridgement of the 70. weeks, whereof the Prophet

The first objection.
The supputation of the monarchy of the Persians and of the Romans does far
exceed the number of 490. years, whereof the Prophet speaks.

The answer.
I answer that from the twentieth year of Artaxerxes inclusiue until the
time of Christ's sacred passion, we find 475. years, neither more nor less, a
few odd months excepted. This is the demonstration.

Artaxerxis. 20. Darius Nothus. 19. Mnemon. 40. Ochus. 26. Arsames. 4. Arbelas.
6. Alexander. 6. Ptol. Lagus. 40. Philadelphus. 38. Euergetes. 26. Philopator.
17. Epiphanes. 24. Philometor 35. Euergetes. 29. Phiscon. 17. Alexander. 10.
Lathurus. 8. Dionysius. 30. Cleopatra. 22.
But two only thereof must be reckoned, because she lived until the 15. year
of Octauianus. Add heereunto the reign of the Romans, thus.

Julius Caesar. 5. Octauianus. 56. Tyberius. 17.
In the beginning of the 18. year of this Tiberius, was our savior Christ
crucified.

The reply.
Your own reckoning in this your answer, is far different from the truth:
for 475. can never make 490. years, unless ye will superadde 15. mo, as every
child can tell.

The answer.
I answer that as you willingly acknowledge one truth; so do ye unwittingly
err about another truth. For 475. years after the course of the Sun, do
make 490. years abridged after the course of the Moon. Of which abridged
years does the prophet Daniel speak, as Aphricanus, Beda, and Marinus Scotus,
have skilfully observed. Yea, the Prophets express words will effectually
make good this exposition. I prove it out of the original Hebrew text, which
tells us that ye weeks, whereof mention is made in Daniel, be not usual
weeks, but weeks abridged: (...)
For (...) in Niphal signifies cut off or abridged, and the root (...) in kal
whereof it descends, figfieth as well to cut off or abridge, as to determine:
and therefore has the old Latin interpreter, well translated it in this
manner; Septuaginta hebdomades abbreuiatae sunt super populum tuum. Seventy
weeks are abridged upon thy people. Lo, the weeks which the angel came to
expound, are not to be understood of years after our usual supputation and
course of the sun, but of shorter years, after the course of the moon: for
this respect significantly writes Marianus in these words, Sed notandum est,
quod non simpliciter sed breuiter dixit computatas, id est, breuiores solitis
annis: but we must note that he said not, reckoned simply, but briefly, that
is, shorter then the usual years.

The second objection.
Cleopatra reigned 22. years, and so are there 20. years in the monarchies,
more then your account.

The answer.
I told you before, that we must reckon only two years in her reign, the
reason is evident, because she reigned until the 15. year of Octauianus; and
so those 15. years in Octauianus Augustus, and 5. years in Julius Caesar,
which concurred with the 20. years of Cleopatra, must either be omitted in her
or in them. For since they do concur, they cannot be reckoned in both; and so
they be omitted in either, it skilleth not in whether.

The third objection.
The weeks take place from the going forth of the commandment to bring
again the people and to build Jerusalem; but this commandment was given even
in the first year of Darius.

The answer.
I answer, that the commandment, by which the temple was wholly and totally
accomplished, was given in the twentieth year of Longimanus, as is already
proved: for then went Nehemias with his letters patents to Jerusalem, and
built up the gates and the walls thereof. And therefore it is precisely said
in Daniel, that after 62. weeks, the street shall be built again, and the
wall; even in a troublous time, as also that even then shall the Messiah be
slain.

The reply.
The Messiah was slain in the last week of the seventy, as you said before,
and not in your two and threescore week, as you now affirm.

The answer.
I say first, that it is not said in the two and threescore week, but after
threescore and two weeks: to which 62. we must adioyne the 7. weeks spoken
of before, which added to 62. do make 69. weeks, after which 69. weeks the
Messiah shall be slain, that is, in the end of the seuentieth week, and so
every thing is clear and plain by this my exposition.

The supplement, for the exact understanding of the seventy weeks.
For the exact understanding, how 475. years after the course of the sun do
make 490. years after the course of the





We must observe fourthly, that albeit the Romans with Intercalation every
third year.
Now these embolismes and intercalations being complete, do amount to fifteen
lunary years: and if they be adjoined to the 475. years, they will make the
just number of the 70. weeks mentioned in Daniel, that is to wit, of the 490.
lunarie years. Hereof this is a perspicuous demonstration.

If ye multiply 475. years of the sun by 11. days which are the
surplussage in every year of the moon, ye shall find the total sum to be
5225. days in this manner.

The sum to be multiplied, 475 The multiplier, 11 475 475 The sum
amounting, 5225
Again, if ye divide the 5225. days by 30. you shall find 174. months, and
five days thus; The number to be divided, 5225 5 days 174 months The
divisor, 30


To these you must add 87. days, because the moon has not above 29. days,
and the half of one day.

Thirdly, if ye will divide the 174. months by 12. ye shall find 14. years
and 6. months, thus; The number to be divided, 174 6. months. 14 years The
divisor, 12


Let this be well noted.
Now, these 6. months remaining, together with the 92. days, od hours and
minutes, will suffice to make up the 15. year that is wanting in the last
division. So then, this supputation is consonant to the years of the monarkes,
and to the just record of the Olympiades of the Greeks, (which by uniform
consent of all learned writers are most certain,) as also answerable to every
thing in Daniel, which no other supputation is able by any possibility to
afford. For it is without all controversy, that the weeks of Daniel were
ended in the 4. year of Tiberius Caesar, at which time Christ was crucified:
from which year until the fourth year of the 83. Olympiade, which was the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, where I hold the 70. weeks of
Daniel to begin, be just 475. years after the course of the sun, which
make (as is already proved) 490. years after the course of the moon.

CHAP. V. Of the sabbath and festival days of the Jews.
WHen the children of Israel were come again out of captivity, they, and all
such as had forsaken heathenish idolatry, and joined themselves unto them, kept
the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy. And after the temple was
finished in the sixth year of Darius, the Priests, Levites, and residue of the
children of the captivity, kept the dedication thereof, Esdr. 6.16, 22.
Concerning which festival days and the like, because many are superstitious,
and some very ignorant, it shall not be impertinent, in this place to set down
a brief discourse thereof.

The first Section.
Of sabbaoths, one is legal, an other spiritual, the third celestial. The
spiritual sabbath is a ceasing from sin, and is peculiar to the godly and
regenerate: for with it dissolute livers and carnally affected persons (such as
Sardanapalus was) can have no fellowship at all: albeit they profess a
certain external observance of the ceremonial sabbath, and glory no little
therein. For as the apostle says, Romans 8.13. they that live after the flesh
must die, but they that mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, shall
live. This sabbath is not tied to any certain time or days, but ought to be
kept every day without any intermission: for we must ever believe, ever hope,
ever love, ever bring forth the fruits of the spirit. Otherwise there should
be no proportion, between the spiritual sabbath, and the spiritual man.

The second Section.
The celestial sabbath is it, in which we shall rest both in body and soul,
from the labors and vexations of this present mortality. Yet in this life we
may labor in the body, although the mind regenerate do sabbatize unto the Lord.
For the spiritual sabbath does not so prohibit the regenerate from corporal
labors, but that they may in due season exercise the same, for their own
honest sustentation and of others. Yea, the minds even of the godly, albeit
they sabbatize in the Lord, yet are they often afflicted, now with tentations, now
with errors, with tribulations, now with anguishes, with charitable
co^passions over their brethren. These are the imperfections of this present
life, which the spiritual sabbath cannot take away, but the celestial sabbath
in the heavenly Jerusalem, will utterly make an end thereof. For in that
sabbath there shall be no place, to any labors, errors, tentations, or
miseries whatsoever. For the vision beatificall will wipe away all tears from
our face. This is the pure and perfect sabbath, not of the body only as the
legal (whereof I am to speak by and by) nor of the mind only, as the
spiritual, but of soul and body both together; which sabbath was shadowed in
the old law, begun in the new law, and shall be accomplished in the
kingdom of heaven, where we shall celebrate the sabbath of all sabbaoths,
world without end.

The third section.
The legal, ceremonial, and external sabbath is a certain set time
appointed in the church, for the ministry of the word and administration of
the sacraments. And it is of two sorts, immediate, and mediate; the immediate
is that, which was instituted immediately in the old Testament: and this kind
was manifold, because there was the sabbath of days, as the seventh day of
the week, which was termed by the peculiar and proper name of sabbath; as
well in respect of the divine rest which God had from creating new creatures,
as of the rest which Gods people must keep that day. There were also other
sabbothes of days, though not properly so termed, but by the names of feasts;
to wit, the feast of the Passover, the feast of Pentecost, the feast of
Tabernacles, the feast of expiacion, Leuit. cap. 23.
the feast of blowing trumpets, the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of the
first fruits. Again, there was the sabbath of months, called neomeniae, 2.
Paralipomenon the second chapter and the fourth verse. Thirdly, there was a
sabbath of years, Leuit. 25. verse. 11, ^1, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
as every seventh year, Leuiticus chapter 25. verse. 4. in which year the
Israelites were prohibited to till the ground, to sow their seed, and to cut
their vineyardes. Fourthly, there was also the sabbath of Iubilee, which came
every fiftieth year, Leuit. 25. verse. 12. in the which year liberty was
proclaimed to all that were in bondage: in which year, none might sow, none
might reap, none might gather grapes: in which year, every one returned to
his own possession: in which year, all land that had been sold, returned to
the family: which year when it was far off, they might sell dearer, but the
nearer it was, the better cheap ought they to sell their land. An apishimitation
of this Iubilee, the late Bishops of Rome pretend unto the world. The popish
Iubilee.
But alas, who sees not what a diabolical illusion it is? In this Iubilee none
did or could pardon their neighbors sins; but the Pope pardons al, as well
great as small: in this Iubilee, all bond men were set at liberty, but in the
Popes Iubilee, the Turks still row in galies, in bondage they still remain, both
in Italy and in Spain: in this Iubilee, all sold lands had an end, and
returned again to the seller; but in the Popes Iubilee, not only sold lands
do not return again, but lands bought with other men's goods do still remain.
Note well (gentle reader) what I say, for of late years, An execrable plain
diabolical dispensation.
since the Pope by diabolical persuasions of ambitious and seditious Jesuits,
intended the invasion of this land, he has promised faculty to his Jesuits
and seminaries, that they may dispense with all popish recusants, never to pay
their debts to loyal christian subjects. This assertion, because it is strange
to good christian ears, cannot but be obscure, and hardly understood: for
explication sake, we must note two principles, of lately coined romish
religion. First, The principles of romish religion.
that our most gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and al her faithful
subjects, are flat heretics. Secondly, that all her majesty's dominions,
with all the lands and goods of her loyal, obedient, and christian subjects,
are the Popes, due unto him from the first day of the profession of their
loyal obeisance, and of the true, ancient, christian, romain, catholic and
apostolic faith. That these be their principles; their best writers do
testify, their Jesuit Bellarminus their Canonists Nauarrus and Couarrunias,
their Divines Syluester and Medina, their religious friars Fumus and Alphonsus
with many others. Upon these rotten principles of their new no religion, they
ground their most execrable dispensation, to wit, that it is lawful for all
popish recusants, by reason of such dispensations, to withholde what lands and
goods soever, from all such as will not yield themselves captives, to the
brutish bondage of popery. Hereof it comes first that

Hereuppon it comes secondly, that many repute it away their goods, (and
that of late years;) as no Fraudulent deeds of gift.
the Popes vassals enriched, the laws of the realm contemned, and domestical
rebellion fostered. It therefore behooves good Magistrates to have special
regard hereof. Good laws are established, but slowly in many places executed,
God of his mercy, either convert dissembling hypocrites soundly, or else for
the common good of his church, Dissembling magistrates. ^
confound them everlastingly: for a greater and more pestilent plague cannot
come unto the Church, then to have such magistrates as pretend publicly to
favor it, Mat. 19.12.
and yet are secret enemies to the same: qui potest capere, capiat: this kind
of popish pardoning, my self though then a papist could never brook, but so
soon as I understood it, did sharply impugn the same.

The mediate external sabbath is that, which God appoints mediately by his
church in the new Testament; to wit, the sunday, which is our christian
sabbath. And here observe, that when I say (by the church,) I specially
understand the supreme governor of the Church, much less do I exclude the
same; which observation shall be made manifest, before the end of my discourse.
And because no verity does clearly appear, until the difficulties and
doubts be plainly unfolded; I will propound in order the greatest objections
that can be made against the same, framing brief, pithie, and evident
solutions thereunto.

The first objection.
The Sabbatharies contend with tothe and nail, that christians are no less
bound this day to keep the legal sabbath, then were the Israelites in time of
Moses law, and they prove it, Genes. 2. verse 3
because God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, which sanctification
was nothing else, but a commandment to keep it holy, as appears, by the
declaration made by Moses: Again, because this sanctification was forthwith
after the creation, and therefore as all nations are bound to make a memorial
of the creation, as well as the Israelites, so must all nations as well as the
Israelites, keep holy the seventh day, that is, the day of rest after the
creation, which is our saturday; and upon which day the Jews still keep their
sabbath.

The answer
I say first, that there is no precept in the old or new Testament, by which
either the Gentiles then, or christians now, are bound to keep the legal
sabbath. I say secondly, that albeit it could be proved, that the fathers
before the law had kept it, yet would it not follow, that we were bound by
their ensample this day to keep the same: for otherwise we should be bound to
offer up bloody sacrifices, as they did both before and after the deluge.

The second objection.
God speaking of the sabbath, said it should be a sign between him and the
children of Israel for ever; and he added, Exodus 31. ver. 17
for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and in the seventh day
rested, therefore all nations are bound to keep the sabbath of the seventh
day.

The answer.
I say first, that the word (ever) is not taken there simpliciter, but secundum
quid, as the schools term it; that is, not for eternity or for the duration
of this life, but for all the time from Moses unto Christ, (which was 1495.
years.) I say secondly, that though the sabbath be not eternal as it is
ceremonial, (which I shall prove by and by,) yet is it eternal in the thing
signified, that is ceasing from sin and rest in God, which shall be
accomplished in heaven for evermore.

The third objection.
The decalogue was before Moses, and this day is of force: Exodus 34. verse. 4
Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 1.
for the Gentiles were bound before the promulgation of the law written in the
tables of stone, and we christians after the translation of the law, to
abstain from blasphemy, perjury, theft, murder, whoredom, covetousness,
fraudulent dealing, and the like, as were the Jews in time of the law.

The answer
I answer, that whereas the law of Moses was partly judicial, partly
ceremonial, and partly moral, the moral part being the very law of nature,
engraven in men's hearts in the hour of their natiuities, as it was before
Moses, so shall it endure to the worlds end; but all ceremonies which were
types and figures of the promises made in Christ Jesus, were accomplished and
abolished in his sacred aduent: such was the circumcision given to Abraham, the
sacrifices commanded to our first fathers, and the sabbath in respect of the
determination upon the seventh day, Re exhibita, ^esat figura.
for it was not Gods will to continue shadows, after the things indeed were
exhibited.

The fourth objection.
A perpetual cause requires a perpetual law, and consequently, since the
memory of the creation and meditation of Gods works, is a perpetual cause of
the law of the seventh day; it follows necessarily, that the law of the
seventh day must still abide in force.

The answer.
I answer that the memory of the creation is indeed a perpetual cause of a
perpetual sabbath, but not of a perpetual, precise and determinate sabbath;
the reason hereof is evident, because the memory of our creation may be done
as conveniently upon another day, as upon the seventh day: thus my answer is
confirmed, because the sabbath which we now keep, is not the seventh day but
the eight; for our sunday is the first day of the week, and the day on which
God began the creation of every thing.

The first objection.
We christians observing the first day after the sabbath (which we call sunday)
are charged odiously with superstition, by the wicked Anabaptists; and they
prove it by S. Paul, who forbids the difference of days in the Christian
Church, upon which prohibition it follows, Coloss. 2. ver. 16. Gal. 4. verse
10, Romans 14. verse. 6
that it is as unlawful to keep the first day, as the seventh.

The answer.
I answer, that the Apostle exclaimeth not against every difference of days
simply: but against that sole and only difference, which is observed with
opinion of necessity or worship. After which manner our christian sabbath or
sunday is not observed. For first, in the old testament, the old sabbath was a
figure of things to be accomplished by Christ, yet in the Hebr. 7. ver. 12.
is proved by S. Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews; where he avouches
expressly yt the law must perforce be changed with the priesthood. Neither will
it help to say, Mark well this point.
that we keep a day different from the Jews (mark well my words gentl
reader) because if we keep our day with necessity of the day, so as it may not
be altered into another day, Coloss. 2. ver. 16
then such our observation of days, is reproved to the Colossians, and is
become a flat ceremony of the Jewish law. For, this strict point ( tempori
obligari, to be tied to determined time) is that only circumstance or
ceremony, wherein the Jewish sabbath differs from ours. Which point, I
hope, will shortly be more evident. My negative reason is this; No text of holy
scripture, either in the old or new testament can be alleged, which
commands to keep our christian sabbath, either upon the first day, or upon
any other determinate day; therefore it remains in the liberty of the church
to change that day, as the circumstances of times, places, and persons shall
require. The consequence is good, and so the consequent ought not to be denied:
for whatsoever is not commanded by the holy scriptures, but appointed by the
law of man; all that may be altered even by the law of man. The antecedent I
prove sundry ways; 1. Cor. 16.2.
wills only that collections be made for the poor when the congregation is
assembled on some sabbath day. But he neither commands christians, to observe
the first day after the sabbath; neither yet does he affirm, that christians
then kept their assemblies upon that day. Yea, the learned and zealous writer
master Calvin denies flatly, that (...) does either signify the first day of
the sabaoths, or the sunday. He opposes himself against the patrones of that
opinion, and says flatly that the apostles did at that time keep the Jewish
sabbath. Apoc. 1.10.
And that of the Revelation proves nothing else, but that S. John had his
revelation upon the day of our Lords resurrection. But saint John neither
says, that christians must observe that day for their sabbath, neither yet
that the Apostles kept the same. 1. Cor. 16.8.
Which thing both Petrus Martyr, and Erasmus do willingly grant. Yea Erasmus
avouches that the christian Penticost was not yet ordained. And therefore
does he by Penticost in that place understand saint Paul's abode at Ephesus to
be 50* days. Calvin and Martyr understand the Jewish penticost properly,
because the christian penticost was such controversy about that matter, as was
in the est and west Churches long after the Apostles time, which thing I have
showed at large in my book of Motives. Thirdly, if it were Exodus 12. ver. 19.
and yet Act. 15. v. 6.20.
decreed to abstain from eating Vide Socrat. 5. cap. 21.
that much less does their practice bind the church for ever, to a strict
ceremony of the Jews. Fourthly, because we may justly be accused of that
Coloss. 2. v. 16. Gal 4. verse. 10.
and so the Anabaptists shall have their intended purpose. My second proof is
this, Socrates a famous writer, who lived above 1150. years sithence, has
these express words: Men's namque fuit Apostolorum, non de diebus sancire
festiuitatum sed conuersationem rectam and dei praedicare culturam: mihi ergo
videtur, Histor. tripar. libr. 9. cap. 38.
quod sicut multa alia per prouincias ad consuetudinem venerunt, sic and
Paschae festiuitas tradita sit, eo quod nullus Apostolorum aliquid huic
sanxisset.

For the meaning of the Apostles was not to make laws for keeping holidaies,
but to preach the word of God, and holy conversation. I therefore think, that
as many other things grew to a custom in diverse countries, so did also the
keeping of Easter; because none of the apostles made any law for the 20. year
of his reign, to take away all contention in the church, made a flat Edict
for the keeping of Friday and Sunday throughout the year. Of this none can
stand in doubt, that shall pervse that fine Oration which Eusebius made,
Eusebius de laud. Constant.
de Laudibus Constantini, the three and thirtieth year of his happy reign.
This controversy (by the Emperors appointment) was handled in the council of
Nice, and immediately after his decree: which thing is evident by the said
Eusebius in his third book de vitae Constantini: De vita Constable. ^ib. 3. cap.
13 and ^^^inceps.
and in his fourth book he affirms plainly, that all subject to the Roman
empire, were commanded to abstain from all bodily labor, upon the sundays
and fridayes.

Cassiodorus does prove the same out of Sozomenus, in these express words,
^^stor. tripart. ^ib. 1. cap. 10.
Die vero qui Dominicus vocatur, quem Hebraei primam vocant, Graeci autem soli
distribuunt, and qui ante septimum est, sanctuit a iudicijs aliisque causis
vniuersis habere vacationem, and in eo tantum orationibus occupari. The
Emperor Constantine decreed, that all people should cease from al suits and
other civil causes, and consecrate themselves wholly unto prayer upon the
Lords day, which the Jews do call the first day of the week, and the
Greeks do term Sunday, as also upon the friday. The learned divines in
Germany affirm directly, that the Sunday may be altered. These are their
words; (...) artic. cons^s. ^^gust*
Nam qui iudicant ecclesiae authoritate, pro sabbato institutam esse diei
Dominici obseruationem tanquam necessariam, long errant: for they that think
the church appointed the sunday to be kept for the sabbath of necessity, are
deceived grossly.

My third proof is this; Philippus Melancton, The third (...)
Erasmus Roterodamus, Johannes Caluinus, Petrus Martyr, Bullingerus and
Vrsinus, do all with uniform consent, yield so manifest testimony to mine
assertion; as none doubtless that read them attentively, can without blushing
deny the same. Martyr in 1. Co^^ cap. 16.
Petrus Martyr has these words; Quod vnus dies certus in hebdomada cultui
diuino mancipetur, stabile and firmum est; an vero hic vel alius constituatur,
temporarium est ac mutabile: That one day in the week must be assigned for
divine service, it is constant, firm and perpetual: but whether this or that
day ought to be appointed for that purpose, it is a thing that respects the
time, and may be changed. Calvin in his Institutions, after he has commended
the alteration of the saboth in the primitive church affirms flatly, that the
day may yet be changed: these be his words; Neque sic tamen septenarium
numerum mor^r, vt eius seruituti ecclesiam astringam; Calvin. libr. 2. cap. 8.
34.
neque enim ecclesias damnauero, quae alios conuentibus suis solemnes dies
habeant, modo a superstitione absint. Quod erit, si ad solam obseruationem
disciplinae and ordinis been compositi referantur. Neither do I for all that
make such account of the seventh day, that I will have the church tied to keep
the same, for I will not condemn churches which appoint other solemn days
for their meetings, so they be void of superstition. Which shall be done, if
they appoint such tdayes only for discipline, Vrsinus in 4. pr^cept. p. 223.
and for comely order sake. Vrsinus has these words; Summa est, alligati sumus
sabbato moraliter and ceremonialiter in genere, sed non in specie. Hoc est, ad
aliquod ministerii public exercendi tempus, sed non ad septimum vel aliquem
alium certum diem. This is the effect, Vrsinus p. 23^.
we are tied to the saboth morally and ceremonially in general, but not in
special: that is to say, we are bound sometime to exercise the public
ministry, but we are neither tied to the seventh, nor to any other certain
day.

And again he says, that all ceremonies appointed by the church, ^^rsmus, p.
226.
may be altered again by the counsel of the church. Again in another place,
he has these express words; Ecclesia christiana primum vel aliumdiem tribuit
ministerio salua sua liberate: the church of Christ has liberty, to appoint
either the first day or some other day, for Gods service. To what end should I
allege more authorities? for nothing can be more plainly spoken.

^^ullingerus praecepto 4. ^oc. 2. sermon. 4
And as the church has authority to alter the sabbath day, so has it power
also (which B^llinger has well observed,) to appoint for the service of God,
certain other festival days; as the feast of the birth of our Lord, of his
incarnation, circumcision, passion, resurrec^ion, ascension, and such like. All
which is this day very prudently and laudably, practiced in the church of
England.

An objection.
If this your doctrine were true, as you bear the world in hand it is, then
would it follow necessarily, that there should be no difference between the
ordinance of God and man: the reason seems evident, because they both should
be of like authority.

The answer.
I answer, that they are not of like authority, and I yield a double
disparitie thereof: for first, the sabbath day is de iure diuino in general,
albeit the determination thereof to this or that day in special, be de iure
humano: but the other holidayes are both in general and in special, de iure
humano. Secondly, because other holydaies are as well generally as specially
appointed by man, and therefore may be wholly abolished by the power of man.
But the sabbath day is generally appointed by God, although the limitation
thereof be reserved to his church: and therefore notwithstanding that the
church can limit the observation to this or that day, yet can no power upon
earth wholly abolishe the same.

The fourth book, contains the description of the third Monarchy, that is,
of the Greeks, from Alexander, until the Machabees.
CHAP. I. Of the original of the monarchy, and the circumstances of the same.
ALexander king of the Macedonians, for his martial prowess and heroical
virtues surnamed the Great, began to reign in Macedonia, when Darius Arbelas
was made king of the Persians. He made war with the said Darius, he conquered
and slew him in Asia, and so translated the Monarchy from the Persians, unto
the Greeks.

The monarchy of the Greeks, An. mundi. 3641
began in the seventh year of Alexanders reign, in the age of the world, 3641.

The histories of the Greeks are much more recent, then the stories of the
Jews. For all their histories, are after the first monarchy of the
Babylonians and Assyrians; neither have they any thing certain, which is more
ancient then their Olimpiades. Which Olimpiades had their beginning in the
first or second year of Ioatham king of Judah, (as Glareanus* Paulus Phrigio,
Bibliand^r, and others do write,) though some writers otherwise of credit,
hold the contrary, in the age of the world, 3251. which was about, An. mundi.
3251
230. years before the monarchy of the Persians.

This Monarchy took the name of king Alexander, and was termed indifferently
the monarchy of the Greeks, or of Alexander: because he so excelled all
others, in power, valor, fortitude, and other virtues, as none in the world
were deemed comparable to him. He is highly commended by the prophets, I^remie
and Daniel, as a most valiant and happy emperor. Daniel describes a Goat,
Dan. 1. verse 5*20.21.
which overcame the Ramine: and he declares manifestly, that the goat was
the king of the Greeks, the Ram of the Persians. His fathers name was Philip,
his mothers name Olympias.

Olympias was the mother of Alexander, and was also taken for the space of 4.
years, as I have already proved. But Olympias is a mountain in Greece between
Thessalia and Macedonia, above the which there appears no cloud: In regard
whereof, it is usurped of the Poets for heaven. This hill as Plutarchus
writes, is ten furlonges in height.

Dan. 8. v. 8.22.
The prophet Daniel speaking of the goat: that is, of Alexander, foretold that
his Empire should be divided into four kingdoms, and so it came to pass.
For Cassander had Macedonia; Seleucus, Syria; Antigonus, Asia the less, and
Ptolemeus Egypt. For the exact understanding of Daniels prophecy, it is
necessary to understand the succession of the kings and their reigns,
especially of the kings of Syria, of whom the Scripture makes precise mention.

King Alexander reigned six whole years, and died in the seventh; after his
death, the nobles had mortal domestical wars amongst themselves, striving
for the space of thirteen years, who should have dominion. This chanced
after that the Empire was divided, as is already said; and shall appear more
at large, in the third chapter following.

CHAP. II. Of the kings of Syria, succeeding Alexander.
The kings of Syria and Asia 1 Seleucus Nicanor Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of
every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 31 years 2 Antiochus Soter. Anno
Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 19 3
Antiochus Theos Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno
Dom. 3877 15 4 Seleucus Gallinicus Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of
Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 20 5 Seleucus Ceraunus Anno Mun. 3647 the reign
of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 3 years 6 Antiochus Magnus
Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 36 7
Seleucus Philopator Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia
Anno Dom. 3877 12 8 Antiochus Epiphanes Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king
of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 12 9 Antiochus Eupator Anno Mun. 3647 the
reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 2 years 10 Demetrius
Soter Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877
10 11 Alexander filius Epiphan. Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of
Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 5 12 Demetrius Nicanor Anno Mun. 3647 the reign
of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 2 13 Antiochus Sedetes Anno
Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 3 14
Tryphon Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom.
3877 3 15 Antiochus pius Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and
Asia Anno Dom. 3877 12 years 16 Demetrius Nicanor Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of
every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 4 17 Alexander Anno Mun. 3647 the
reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 2 18 Antiochus Gryphus
Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 29 19
Seleucus son to Gryphus, was at strife with his uncle and others of his
kindred, for the space of ten years. Anno Mun. 3647 the reign of every king of
Syria, and Asia Anno Dom. 3877 10 years


The first observation.
Seleucus the son of Gryphus king of Syria warred against Cyzicenus the son
of Antiochus Sedetes, whom after he had taken him, he put to death. By and by
mortal wars arose between the brethren. Wherewith the Syrians were so grieved,
and so annoyed with the civil wars; that they knew no other fitter means to
redeem their vexation, then to yield up the kingdom to Tygranes the king of
Armenia. Which Tygranes enjoyed Syria until such time as he was overcome of
Pompeius, who delivered Syria up to the Romans. This kingdom of Syria
continued about 240. years, and was delivered into the hands of the Romans
17. years after Julius Caesar was first Emperor of Rome.

The second observation.
Seleucus Callimcus, the son of Antiochus, had two sons; to wit, Seleucus
surnamed Ceraunus, and Antiochus Magnus. Seleucus Ceraunus lived but three
years, and then left ye kingdom to his brother Antiochus Magnus. Which
Antiochus made war against Ptolemeus Philopator the king of Egypt and his
son Epiphanes, by means whereof the Jews and church of God, was in
continual affliction. This Antiochus had the repulse in his first attempt; yet
after ye death of Ptolemeus, (who before his death commended his son to the
protection of the Romans,) he returned with a great army into Egypt. By this
occasion, long wars were between the Romans and Antiochus. Hanniball and
many Regions in Greece, joined themselves to Antiochus. Nevertheless he was
so often discomfited in battle, that he was enforced to seek for conditions
of peace. And besides this, he was glad to send his son Epiphanes to Rome
for an hostage. In the end, when he went about the sacking of the rich Temple
of Belus in Syria, the multitude of the Citizens slew him and all his guard.

The Jews (says Carrion) lived in great peace, from the time of Alexander to
Antiochus Magnus. But when wars began between the Assyrians and Egytians,
then ye Jews being seated in the mids, were oppressed on both sides. At
length (says Josephus) Antiochus was victor, and brought the Jews under his
subjection. But so soon as Philopator was dead, his son Ptolomeus Epiphanes
sent a mighty army into Syria; under the conduction of Scopa: who recovered
certain Cities in Syria, and a good part of Judea. Yet within a short space
after, Antiochus skirmishing with Scopa, near to Jordan, had the upper hand,
and took the cities again from Scopa. Then the Jews yielded them selves to
Antiochus, received his army voluntarily within the walls, and affoorded him
large help against the garrisons of the said Scopa. In respect of which
favor, Antiochus dealt very favorably with them: gave them rich gifts, and
granted them liberty to call home again, all the Jews that were in
dispersion.

The third observation.
Antiochus Epiphanes was hostage at Rome, where he learned by the Example of
the Romans, flattery, deceit, and other bad qualities, to accommodate
himself to the time and manners of men. He was famous not for his virtues, but
for his naughty dealing. He was called (as some write) for his dissolute life,
not Epiphanes, but Epimanes; that is, not noble, but mad. He began his
reign about 134. years after the death of Alexander; at which time his
brother Seleucus ceased by death to reign in Syria. At the same time Ptolemeus
Epiphanes dyed in Egypt, leaving behind him to young sons, Philometor and
Physcon. Ptolemeus had these sons with his wife the queen Cleopatra, who
was sister to Antiochus. Under this pretense Antiochus went into Egypt, and by
fair speeches got the regiment, during the nonage of Philometor the young
prince. And when he had contrived all things so, as he might take the
kingdom upon him at his pleasure, he went to Jerusalem at the entreaty of
Jason, who sought ambitiouslie to be made the high priest by his procurement:
even as popes of late years are made at Rome, as hereafter shall be proved.
Where (as writes Josephus,) so soon as he came, the gates were opened to him
by men of his own faction. Which usurped dominion, he exercised cruelly and
sacrilegiously; neither sparing the goods nor the lives of those that willingly
opened the gates unto him.

The fourth observation.
Demetrius Nicanor, the twelfth king of Syria, was driven out of his kingdom
by his brother Antiochus Sedetes, by the aid and means of Tryphon. Yet
afterward he was restored to his kingdom again, and ruled Syria peaceably,
until Alexander surnamed Sabineus of the house of Seleucus took him prisoner
at Tyrus, where he put him to death.

CHAP. III. Of the kings of Macedonia, and of the division of the Empire after
the sixth year of Alexander.
THe holy will of the living God was, that four mighty kings should succeed
Alexander the Great, after the sixth year of his reign, whereof every one
should possess a part, and no one be so mighty as himself, which thing was
evidently foretold by the Prophet Daniel. Daniel cap. 8. ve. 22.


The four kings that succeeded Alexander, to wit, Cassander, (who reigned in
Macedonia and Grecia) Seleucus (who reigned in Syria) Ptolomeus (who reigned in
Egypt, and Antigonus (who reigned in Asia) did all descend of the house,
Petigree, and blood royal of Alexander that most puissant and valiant
Emperor, and for that cause surnamed the Great.

Cassander caused Olympias daughter of Neoptolemus and mother to Alexander,
Cassander a cruel prince.
a most chaste and virtuous Queen, to be beheaded cruelly, that so he might
reign more licentiously: but God the just judge, (who for his wisdom sees
all things, and for his justice sake lets no sin pass unpunished) did so
in his eternal providence dispose of Cassanders issue, as it was a worthy
spectacle to the world. For Antipater and Alexander his sons, had mutual
mortal bloody wars the one against the other, as concerning the kindgome of
Macedonia. But what was the end? Antipater was slain by Lysimachus his father
in law, and Alexander by Demetrius the son of Antigonus; who both were their
own accomplices, to whom they trusted and sought for help at their hands.

A worthy observation.
King Alexander the great was not only full of valor and prowess, but
thoroughly garnished with heroical and moral virtues, amongst which this was
not the least, A worthy fact right seemly for a king.
that so often as he heard the complaint of one against another, the accused
party being absent, his continual custom was, to open one only ear to the
plaintiff, and to keep the other closely shut: by which ceremony he lively
expressed unto the world, the office of every good Prince and righteous judge:
to wit, that they should never have respect of persons, as holy Writ bears
witness; but hear all parties indifferently, and judge ever according to law
and equity. Which indifferency king Alexander fitly practiced even with the
admiration of his auditory, while as he granted to the accuser one ear, so
did he to the accused reserve the other, never condemning the one nor
justifying the other, before he understood perfectly the truth of the matter.
But in our time we may justly exclaim with holy Polycarpe; O God, to what
worlds have thou reserved us? for nowadayes judges and lawyers are so corrupt
with bribes, that when a poor man cries he can not be heard with neither
ear, because both are shut at once: on the other side, so soon as they grope
the rich man's gold, they open both the one ear and the other, there is no stay
at al. Of such judges, magistrates, and lawyers, speaks wise Solomon when he
says, that many reverence the person of the mighty, Prouer. cap. 15. verse. 6.
and every one is friend to him that gives gifts. When a rich man commenceth
any suit against the poor man, every judge, every lawyer, every justice,
every bailife, will for money be ready to further his cause; for gold and
money with a beck they come anon, and with a wink they will be gone: though
their matter were very badde in the beginning, yet will it be right good in the
ending: Ambrosius.
money works so forcibly with them, that it may be said to alter the case,
and to change the nature of the thing. Gifts says Saint Ambrose, dazzle the
eyes of judges and weakeneth the force of their authority. Contrariewise, when
the poor man comes to them, either without money or but with a little, they
are dumb, deaf, and senseless, they can neither hear, see, nor understand:
they will use such dallying, such demurring, such shifts, and delays until
the poor man be exhaust and spent; so as perforce he must let the matter
fall, and sit down with the loss. For albeit his cause were right good in the
beginning, yet will it be stark naught in the ending. Wherefore Innocentius
his words are well verified in this kind of people; ^nnocentius.
You respect (says he) not the causes, but the persons, not laws, but bribes;
not what reason prescribes, but what will affects; not what the mind
thinks, but what it coueteth, not what should be done, but what ye list to
have done; your eye is not single, which should make your body bright; but ever
ye mingle a piece of leaven, which corrupts the whole dowe.

The kings of Macedonia after the death of Alexander the Great, Philippus
Aridaeus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 7 years
Cassander Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 19 years
Alexander and Antipater, or after others Antigonus Anno mun 3647 The reign of
the said kings Anno mun 3805 4 Demetrius Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said
kings Anno mun 3805 6 Pirrhus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno
mun 3805 6 months Lysimachus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno
mun 3805 5 years Ptolomeus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno
mun 3805 1 Meleagres Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805
2 months Antipater Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 1
year Sosthenes Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 2
Antigonus Gonatas Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 36
Demetrius Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 10
Antigonus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 15
Philippus Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 42 Perses
Anno mun 3647 The reign of the said kings Anno mun 3805 10


Note here, that some think Aridaeus to have succeeded Alexander; yet that
Cassander was his immediate successor, I repute more probable.

CHAP. IIII. Of the kings of Egypt.
Anno mun. 3608
PTolomeus the son of Lagus began his reign in Egypt, immediately after the
death of Alexander, though not without bloudshedding and great wars for
sundry years, as is areadie said. He was one of Alexanders captains, as were
also Antigonus, Nicanor, and Cassander.

The names of the kings of Egypt Ptolomeus Lagi Filius Anno Mun. 3647 the time
of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 40 years Ptolomeus Philadelphus Anno Mun. 3647
the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 38 Ptolemeus Euergetes Anno Mun. 3647
the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 26 Ptolomeus Philopator Anno Mun. 3647
the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 17 Ptolemeus Epiphanes Anno Mun. 3647
the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 24 Ptolomeus Philometor Anno Mun. 3647
the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 35 years Ptolomeus Euergetes Anno Mun.
3647 the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 29 Ptolomeus Soter alias Physcon,
filius Cleopatrae Anno Mun. 3647 the time of their reigns Anno mun. 3921 17
years Ptolomeus Alexander, Anno Mun. 3647 the time of their reigns Anno mun.
3921 10 Ptolomeus Phiscon, alias Lathurus Anno Mun. 3647 the time of their
reigns Anno mun. 3921 8 Ptolemeus Dionysius Anno Mun. 3647 the time of their
reigns Anno mun. 3921 30 Cleopatra Anno Mun. 3647 the time of their reigns Anno
mun. 3921 22 years


The first observation.
It is to be observed, that as of Julius Caesar, every Emperor of Rome was
afterward called Caesar; and of Octauius Augustus, Augustus; so was Artaxerxes
the common name of all the kings of Persia; so was also every king of Egypt,
called indifferently Ptolomeus, or Pharao. Which observation helps more then
a little, to understand sundry textes of holy scripture.

The second observation.
We must observe secondly, that albeit a monarche have the chiefest
sovereignty on earth, yet is he not the sole and universal governor, so as
there is no other king over any other nation. For though the highest and
supreme power, authority, and dominion be in every monarchy, so as no other
power, no not independent, is able to ouerrule or prevail against the same;
yet were there ever powers independent over and besides the said monarchies,
not subject to the jurisdiction thereof. In the time of the monarchy of the
Babylonians or Assyrians, worthy kings (though of less might and authority)
reigned in Egypt, in Israel, in Greece, and else where. In the time of the
Persian monarchy, the Macedonians and the Romans had their authority; so
likewise when the Greeks and Romans had the monarchical and imperial
seat with them, other kings had their several dominions, albeit very small in
respect.

The third observation.
Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt, expelled her son Lathurus from the kingdom,
by reason of his tyrannical regiment, and made his brother Alexander king of
Egypt in his place. Lathurus fled away into Cypres, and Alexander reigned not
long, for he was so afraid of his mothers cruelty, that he forsook the
kingdom, and fled away. And so Cleopatra, for the greater part of the 18 years
ascribed to Lathurus and Alexander had her reign alone. But at length
Alexander her son stew her, and possessed the kingdom again. Yet this
Alexander was expulsed by the Egyptians for his cruelty, and Lathurus again
restored, who reigned a few years, and then dyed. This must be diligently
observed for the clearing of many difficulties, which otherwise will not easily
be understood, touching the years and reigns of the kings.

The fourth observation.
Cleopatra was the last Queen of Egypt, succeding her brother Dionysius. But
after that she loved Antonius and rebelled against Augustus, he overcame both,
for which cause they murdered themselves, and so Egypt became subject to the
Empire of the Romans.

The fifth observation.
Ptolomeus Phisco, was a cruel filthy beast, he married his own sister, ^
beastly and ^ost cruel fact.
lay with his own daughter, killed his children with his own hands, and gave
them to be eaten of his own wife their mother. This Ptolomeus some think to be
all one with Euergetes: some deem him to be his successor, otherwise called
Soter, which opinion I prefer as more probable.

CHAP. V. Of the Septuagints.
PTolomeus Philadelphus had a library so well furnished with all kind of good
books as the like was not to be found in all the world: Anno Mun. 3643
this king was highly renowned for his manifold virtues, especially for his
peaceable government, and for his forwardness in furthering of learning. He
was very beneficial and friendly to the Jews. Learned men of all nations had
concourse unto him, whom he ever received honorably, and rewarded them
bountifully: he sought diligently the original of all nations, arts, and
religions, and he perceived that the Jews were most ancient, and that no
certainty touching the creation of the world could be found any where, but
in their histories and among them. Wherefore he desired of the Jews that
their scriptures might be translated into the Greek tongue, and that they
would send him 72. of their best learned men, for that end and purpose. To
which godly motion the Jews did willingly condescend, and sent unto him 72.
learned men, very expert in the Hebrew and Greek language. These learned men
the king received honorably, and by their help had the holy Bible translated
into the Greek tongue. Of this interpretation called the Septuagints, diverse
write diversely: some writers otherwise learned and of great account, as
Ireneus, Chrysostomus, Justinius, Augustinus, and others, do think that these
72. Jewish priests sent by Eleazarus the hie priest, brother to Simon Priscus,
into Egypt to king Ptolomeus to translate the old testament out of their vulgar
tongue, that is, the Hebrew into Greek, did translate the same severally,
being placed in 72. distinct celles, so as no one could know what another did,
without divine inspiration. This notwithstanding, The translation of the
septuagints.
they all agreed so perfectly when their interpretations were compared
together, as if they had been all in one place, and one acquainted with
another act. Which if it were true (the decision whereof I leave in suspense
to the judgment of the reader, it could not but pr^ceede of the holyghost.
Others as saint Jerome, Aristeas, Josephus, and all the Jewish Rabbis, hold
the flat contrary opinion, and avouch boldly, that the report of the 72.
celles, and of the translation accomplished in so many several places, is
nothing else but a fable. Which latter opinion seems more probable (though
not certain,) because the Jews could best tell the case, of whom S. Hierome
received his opinion. Howsoever it was, two things are certain, first, that
the Hebrew text is the foundation and original, and only to be stood upon,
so often as any difficulty arises in the old testament. Secondly, that
howsoever they did translate, yet was there such corruption of their
translation, even in saint Hieromes time, and before his days; as it was found
in very many places, ^rer. ad Chrom. ^m. 4. fol. 8.
to swerve wholly from the Hebrew. Which thing not only Saint Hieerome, but
Origin and other writers do witness: ^enebrarda ^eat papist con^^steth no
less.
for which cause Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine do very wisely and gravely
exhort, to have recourse to the Hebrew in the old Testament, and to the Greek
in the new Testament, so often as any variety does appear. And here we must
note two things; first that those priests which Eleazar sent to Ptolomee, were
72. in number, as sundry think, albeit the two odd persons be omitted of
others, for brevity sake. Secondly, that they translated only the
Pentateuche, as writes Josephus in his first book of antiquities. Add
heereunto with the same Josephus that they were sent to his library at
Alexandria, where if we will believe Genebrardus, were 54. thousand and 800.
books.

CHAP. VI. Of Esdras, Zorobabel, and Nehemias.
God, albeit he does often afflict and exercise his people, with the cross of
temporal punishment for their good, that so they may behold their own
vnworthienesse, and appeal to his mercy, and wholly depend upon his holy
providence, yet for his mercy sake, he does in all ages and at all times
excite worthy persons, for their great commodity and solace. For after that
he had visited the Jews, and kept them in bondage seauentie years in a
strange country among infidels and idolaters, he raised up diverse excellent
men for their preservation, to wit, Zorobabel, Esdras, and Nehemias. Zorobabel
was the captain that brought them home, and caused the temple to be builded:
Nehemias builded up the walls of the city, delivered the people from
oppression, and provided that the law of God was put in execution among them.
This Nehemias was in great favor and authority with king Artaxerxes, and so
obtained most honorable and ample letter patents, for the accomplishment of
whatsoever he did desire.

Esdras descended of the kindred of Aaron, he was a priest well learned in the
law of Moses. He was called Esdras the scribe, that is, one who had authority
to write the law and to expound it. Saint mark calls such a one a Scribe:
Saint Matthew terms such persons Lawyers, and doctors of the law, which is
a point well worthy the observation.

This Esdras performed the office of a true priest indeed, for he collected the
books of holy scripture, which were dispersed after the destruction of
Jerusalem in time of the captivity, without which books pure and sincere
religion could not consist. Yea, Hier. praefat. in libr. reg. to. 4. fol. 7.
so soon as the temple was builded again under Zorobabell, he is noted (as
Hierome records,) to have found out the Hebrew letters, we now use, whereas
until that time, both the Samaritans and the Hebrews had the self same
characters. Eusebius Caesariensis a man as well of great antiquity as of
learning, calls Esdras the most excellent divine, Eusebius. in chro^. 4^4^*
and skillful doctor among the Jews; affirming that he changed the Hebrew
letters for this end and purpose, lest the Jews should converse with the
Samaritans. He adds further, that his memory was so great, as he could
recite the scriptures without the book. Some write that he invented the
pricks annexed to the text, but others hold the contrary.

The fifth book, of the Monarchy of the Greeks, from the Machabees until
Christ.
CHAP. I. Of the partition of the Monarchy, and the reason of the same.
THe former part of the Monarchy of the Greeks which is from King Alexander
the great, unto the Machabees, contains 155. years, and may be proved
exactly, by the chronographie of holy Writ. The latter part of the Monarchy,
(which is from the Machabees unto Christ, or if ye will, from Antiochus
Epiphanes, to Herodes Magnus, which is al one,) contains 173. years; but
cannot be proved out of the holy scriptures as the former part, (which is the
cause of this my partition for perspicuitie sake;) yet may it be gathered
sufficiently out of the books of the Machabees, Josephus, Julius Africanus,
and Egesippus.

The observation.
A. M. 3641.
As Alexander began this monarchy in the seventh year of his reign, in the
age of the world 3641. so did Antiochus Epiphanes, son to Antiochus Magnus,
the sixth king of Syria, begin the time of this partition, that is the second
part of the Monarchy, A. M. 3749.
in the age of the world 3749. He was hostage at Rome, from whence he fled, and
usurped the kingdom of Syria from his brothers son: he pretended to protect
his sisters son Philometor, the young king of Egypt, and by that means sought
craftily to get the kingdom of Egypt into his hands. For better expedition of
his wicked purpose, he procured certain cities to be yielded into his hands. In
his return from Egypt, he took Jerusalem and spoiled it. The Agyptians
peruing his crafty dealing, received their cities again; in regard whereof
he entered Egypt with a strong army, but had the repulse by aid of the
Romans, after which repulse he retured in great rage and tyrannically bent his
force against Jerusalem: he constrained the Jews for the space of two years,
utterly to forsake the law. Dan. 11.21.
Machabeus therefore and his sons being priests, rose up in arms against his
brutish cruelty, and delivered the people.

CHAP. II. Of the government of the Jews after the captivity.
A triple government was among the Jews, between the captivity and the
aduent of our savior Christ Jesus, for they were governed first by princes of
the tribe of Judah and royal

After that they were governed by priests, who were not of

They were governed thirdly, by kings, being partly of their

The first Section, of the governors of the Jews, from the captivity to the
Machabees.
The names of the governors or rulers of the Jews Zorobabel Anno mun. 3425 the
time of their rule Anno mun. 3610 67 years Rhesa Miseolana alias Mensonla Anno
mun. 3425 the time of their rule Anno mun. 3610 66 Ioanna ben Resa Anno mun.
3425 the time of their rule Anno mun. 3610 52 Judas Hircanus the first Anno
mun. 3425 the time of their rule Anno mun. 3610 30 years


Note here that these four governors were before the monarchy of Alexander
the great: whereof Zorobabel was he that conducted the Jews from the
captivity, and encouraged them to build the temple. These other eleven were
after Alexander.

The names of the governors or ru^ers of the Jews, after King Alex^nder.
Joseph the first An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 7
years Abner Semei An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788
11 Eli Matathia An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 12
Asar Mahat An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 9 years
Nagid Artaxat An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 10
Haggai Eli An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 8
Maslot Nahum An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788 7
years Amos Syrach An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788
13 Matathia Siloah An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi. 3788
10 Joseph the second An. mundi. 3641 The time of their government An. mundi.
3788 60 years Ianna Hircanus the second An. mundi. 3641 The time of their
government An. mundi. 3788 16 years


This Hircanus was the last prince of the Jews, that descended of the blood
royal, and posterity of king David. The catalogue of the priests, who
executed priestly function amongst the Jews after the captivity, shall be
set down in the chapter following.

The second Section, of the Machabees.
The names of the Machabees Judas Machabeus Anno mun. 3805 the time of their
rule Anno mun. 3837 6 years Ionathas Anno mun. 3805 the time of their rule
Anno mun. 3837 18 Simon brother to Judas Anno mun. 3805 the time of their rule
Anno mun. 3837 8 years Io. Hircanus the son of Simon Anno mun. 3805 the time
of their rule Anno mun. 3837 31 years


These four were priests of the tribe of Leui, not of Judah, or the blood
royal; which ought ever to be kept in memory, as hereafter better shall
appear.

The third Section, of the Kings of the Jews, that descended of the Leuiticall
tribe.
The names of the kings who were Jews Aristobulus the son of Hircanus An
mundi. 3868 The time they ruled An. mundi. 3909 1 year Alexander the second
son of Hircanus alias Ianneus An mundi. 3868 The time they ruled An. mundi.
3909 27 years Alexandra the wife of Alexander An mundi. 3868 The time they
ruled An. mundi. 3909 9 years Aristobulus An mundi. 3868 The time they ruled
An. mundi. 3909 4 years Hircanus An mundi. 3868 The time they ruled An. mundi.
3909 22 years


The fourth Section, of the Kings that were strangers.
The names of the kings Herodes magnus An. mundi 3937 The time of their reign
An. mundi 4014 37 years Archelaus dux An. mundi 3937 The time of their reign
An. mundi 4014 9 Herodes Tetrarcha, qui and Antipas An. mundi 3937 The time of
their reign An. mundi 4014 24 Agrippa Herodis filius An. mundi 3937 The time
of their reign An. mundi 4014 7 Agrippa rex Agrippae filius An. mundi 3937 The
time of their reign An. mundi 4014 26 years


As there is great variety in Historiographers and Chronographers in other
matters, so is there no where more obscure difficulties to be found among them,
then about the contents of this present chapter. The exact knowledge whereof is
nevertheless so necessary, as without which, sundry places of the new
testament, can never be rightly understood: which obscurity, together with
the difficulty, shall (I hope) be manifest, by the observations annexed
thereunto.

The first observation.
No governor amongst the Jews, would after the captivity wear the diadem
and be called King, until Aristobulus the son of Hircanus a virtuous priest
did advance himself to royal dignity, and put the crown upon his head. But
alas, Good parents have not ever godly children.
godly children do not always succeed godly parents: For, not only Hircanus
his father, but Simon also his grandfather, were very virtuous priests,
governors of great fortitude, and zealous favorers of the common weal; yet
was this Aristobulus a wicked and cruel man, he made no account of religion,
he put his own mother and brethren in prison: and because he feared that his
virtuous brother Antigonus would take the kingdom from him, he slew him
suddenly, as Cain did his brother Abell.

The second observation.
Seleucus surnamed Nicanor, the first king of Syria after the division of the
Empire, began his reign (that is the kingdom of the Greeks,) in the 14.
year from the death of Alexander, which was the second year of the 117.
Olympiade, and in the 3660. year of the age of the world. A. M. 3660.
Here begins the author of the first book of the Machabees his
supputation, calling the kingdom of Syria, the kingdom of the Greeks, which
must be well remembered or else many things will remain both confuse and
obscure.

The Empire of king Alexander was divided (as is already said) into four
parts, according to the prophecy of Daniel. Ptolomeus had Egypt, Antigonus
Asia, Seleucus Syria, and Philippus Arideus had Macedonia and Grecia: Philippus
or rather Ca^lander, see the beginning of the third chapter.
which is the cause that Chronographers begin these kingdoms in the first
year of the 114. Olympiade, immediately after the death of Alexander. Yet the
truth is, that Antigonus and Seleucus began not so soon to reign. For mortal
wars amongst the governors, continued 12, or 13. years, and then they began
to bear rule indeed, not before.

The third observation.
Hircanus had three sons, Aristobulus, Antigonus, and Alexander. Aristobulus
would needs be called and crowned king, and slew his brother Antigonus, lest
he should get the kingdom from him.

Alexander had two sons, Hircanus and Aristobulus: this Aristob. was brother
to Mariamne, who was married to K. Herod; 30. years before Christ, the family
of the Jews was at an end.
for which cause Herod about two years after the death of Antigonus his uncle,
made him hie priest: shortly after this Aristobulus was drowned, and so the
family of the Jews was at an end, about 30. years before Christ's incarnation.
Herod the stranger was successor to this Aristobulus, in the kingdom and
priesthood of the Jews. Anno mun. 3937
In the third year of the 186. Olympiade, and in the age of the world 3937.
years, then in the 32. year of Herod was our Savior borne.

The fourth observation.
Herod the great had many children, Aristobulus, Alexander, Antipater, Antipas,
Philippus and Archelaus. Of which Aristobulus and Alexander were his children
by his beloved wife Mariamne: which Mariamne he put to death, causing his
children Alexander and Aristobulus to be strangled in Samaria.

Archelaus, Herodes called Antipas, Antipater, and Philip yet lived, amongst
whom the kingdom was divided. Herodes the Great designed his son Archelaus
to be king, by his last will and testament: Archelaus non rex, sed dux.
but the Emperor Augustus would not confirm Herodes will, and so he was not
king at the first. yet Augustus was content that he should be Tetrarke, and
upon hope of his good regiment, to be king afterward.

This Archelaus (says Rhegino) did reign in Judea, when our Savior was
brought out of Egypt: for fear of which king, he returned into Nazareth a
town in Galile, Matthew. 2.19.
where he abode till his baptism. This was done in the seventh year of
Christ, and in the 15. year of his birth. Archelaus being accused of treason
before Augustus, was banished out of Iewrie, and the kingdom was divided among
his 4. brethren, Herod, Antipater, Lysanias, and Philip. Yet this Antipater
(after Carrion) was slain long before.

The first observation.
Whether Antipater was slain (as writes Carrion) or living still with Philip,
and the rest, (as says Eusebius) certain it is, that four only are mentioned
in the holy scripture; to wit, Archelaus, who reigned in Jury after Herod the
great: Antipas, (whom S. Luke calls Herod) who was Tetrarke of Galilie;
Philip, who was Tetrarke of Iturea and Trachonitis; Luke 3.1.
Matthew. 2.19.
and Lysanias, who was the Tetrark of Abilene, Pilate being then president in
Iewry: which Lysanias (after Eusebius) was one of the brethren, albeit other
writers affirm no such thing.

CHAP. III. Of the 2300. days.
Daniel had a vision of great persecution, that should come unto the church:
Dan. 8. v. 12, 13, etc.
that the daily sacrifice should cease, and Gods truth be trodden under foot.
And that the sins of the Jews, were the cause of such horrible afflictions.
Yet for the solace of Gods children (whom he never forsakes finally) the time
of the desolation is appointed and pronounced, in these obscure words: Unto the
evening and morning, two thousand and three hundredth; then shall the sanctuary
be cleansed.

Sundry (as S. Hierome witnesses) trouble themselves miserably, about the
exposition of this place. Some for, 2300 read 2200, least six years and three
months abound. Other some understand the place of Antichrist, and that this
shall be reallie complete in him, which was spoken typically of Antiochus. And
this childish imagination, do our late Jesuits and other papists imitate:
whose fantastical interpretation was confuted by S. Hierome before they were
borne.

The temple was profaned six years, three months, and an half.
But the meaning is plain and easy; that is, until so many natural days be
past, which in all make six years, three months and an half. For so long
was the temple profaned, Hieromes testimony, Hier. in cap. 8. Daniel^^.
whose express words are these, Vespere autem and mane, successione^ diei
noctisque significat. The evening and the morning does signify, the succession
of the day and the night. And in the very same place he proves by Josephus,
and the books of the Machabees, that the setting up of Jupiters Image in the
Temple, and the time of the desolation wrought by Antiochus, is correspondent
to the 2300. days.

CHAP. IIII. Of the priests of the Jews after the captivity, unto Alexander
the Great.
The names of the priests Jesus Filius Iosedech Anno mun. 3427 the time that
they lived Anno mun. 3645 72 years Ioachim Anno mun. 3427 the time that they
lived Anno mun. 3645 30 Eliasib, alias Nechasib Anno mun. 3427 the time that
they lived Anno mun. 3645 40 Ioiada Anno mun. 3427 the time that they lived
Anno mun. 3645 24 Jonathan, alias Ioannan Anno mun. 3427 the time that they
lived Anno mun. 3645 52 Iaddo, alias Iaddua Anno mun. 3427 the time that they
lived Anno mun. 3645 28 years


Jesus or Ieshua was the high priest in the return, even as Zorobabel or
Zerubbabel was the civil governor. Esd. 1. and 3. verse. ^
Diverse think diversely, of this succession; but I deliver plainly, what I
judge most probable.

CHAP. V. Of the priests of the Jews, from king Alexander unto the Machabees.
The names of ye priests Onias Priscus A. M. 3643 the time that they lived A.
M. 3805 25 years Simon Priscus A. M. 3643 the time that they lived A. M. 3805
13 Eleazar A. M. 3643 the time that they lived A. M. 3805 20 Manasses A. M.
3643 the time that they lived A. M. 3805 27 years Simon Junior A. M. 3643 the
time that they lived A. M. 3805 28 Onias Junior A. M. 3643 the time that they
lived A. M. 3805 39 Jason A. M. 3643 the time that they lived A. M. 3805 3
years Menelaus A. M. 3643 the time that they lived A. M. 3805 7 years


This Menelaus was a very wicked priest, whom Antiochus put to death at
Berytus. Antiochus moreover inhibited Onias his son to succeed him, and
appointed Alcimus alias Iacimus the high priest: which Alcimus was of the race
and petigree of Aaron, but not of the same family. Onias therefore son to
Menelaus went into Egypt, and insinuating himself into the amity of Ptolomee
Philometor and Cleopa^ra his wife, persuaded them to build a temple in
Heliopolis, like to that of Jerusalem, and to make him priest in the same
place.

Joseph. antiq. lib. ^0. cap. 8.
Iacimus after he had been high priest three years, died; leaving no successor
behind him, and so the city of Jerusalem, was seven whole years together
without a priest.

Afterward the government of the Jews, was committed to the family of the
Assamoneans, and then they rebelled against the Macedonians, and made Jonathan
the high priest.

These points, and specially the case of Iacimus or Alcimus, ought diligently
to be marked, against the mangled and fondly commended popish succession,
whereof by the power of God, more shall be said hereafter.

From about this time until Herod the great, Judas Machabeus and others of his
race, had the government and priesthood among them.

From Herod until Christ our redeemer, were years 32. plus minus. During
which time, priests were not made of the line of the Assamoneans; neither could
Aaronicall succession, be found any where at all: priesthood was bought with
money, and the hie priest was changed every year. Josephus. lib. 20. antiquit.
cap. 8.
Which observation, if it be annexed to the case of Alcimus, will confound our
papists utterly. So write Josephus and Eusebius. Yea Josephus adds, that
from Herod until the city was burnt by Titus, there were 28. priests, who
lived 107. years.

CHAP. VI. Of the variety of religion before the incarnation of Christ our
Savior.
Epiphanius, in praefat. contr. haereses Barbarism, before the flood, from the
time of Adam. Scythisme, after the flood, from ye days of Noah. Grecisme,
which began of the idolaters, and was divided into the sect of Pythagoreans
Platonickes Stoickes Epicures
Iudaisme, which was from the time of Abraham; it was divided into the Scribes
Pharisees Sadducees Hemerobaptists Osseans Nazareans Herodians
Samaritisme, from the time of Nabuchodonozor, it was divided into the
Gorthenes Sebneans Essenes. Dositheans.



At what time as the Church was miserably afflicted, with the tyranny of
Antiochus; sects and divisions every where arose, and pure doctrine was trodden
under foot. Before Christ these three were the principal; the sect of the
Pharisees, the sect of the Sadduces, and the sect of the Essenes.

The Pharisees as some thinke^, had their denomination according to the
etimologie of the word; that is, of separation, because they did separate
themselves from the common sort of Gods people, and lived after another manner.
Yet others think more fitly, that they had y^ name of ye interpretation of the
holy scriptures, because they taught out of the chair of Moses, and declared
the scriptures unto the people. So write Reuchlinus and Josephus: Josephus de
Bello. Iud. lib. 2. ca. 7.
and the etimologie of the name is consonant thereunto. For the Hebrew word
(...), does as properly signify to expound, as to divide. (...)
For which consideration (says Josephus) they are called Pharisees, that
profess the knowledge of the legal rites.

The Sadducees were corrupt with the Philosophy of the Greeks, they had many
things common with the Epicures, they denied the resurrection, they held that
there were neither Angels nor spirits, they rejected the books of the
prophets; and all this notwithstanding, they would be called Sadducees, that is,
just men, as the word sounds in the Hebrew tongue.

The Essenes, that is workers, were even such and none other, then this day be
our popish Monks and Jesuits. For the Essenes fled from the common people, they
dealed not with secular affairs, they gave themselves to contemplation, they
had all things in common, they would not marry, they had precise hours
appointed for reading, and prayer, they lived in great abstinence, they dwelt
in celles, and were clad in poor attire. These were the Essenes says
Josephus, who best knew the sects of his own time, Josephus de bello. Iudaico
lib. 2. Cap. 7.
and of his dear contrymen, and who knows not our popish Dominicans,
Franciscans, Scotsts, Thomists, and Jesuits, to be the self same sectaries?
They differ only in these six points; first they use not so strict
abstinence, as I have proved in the first book, in the 17. chapter and
eleventh section. For our Jesuits will converse with the best, and eat of all
meats that are the best; yea, they are so far cons^med with severe
abstenicie, that their great doctor Heywood, when he did sow sedition in this
Realm, against his natural sovereign and native country, pronounced before
a great assembly (after he had been reproved for not keeping the popish
fasts) that he could dispense both with himself and others, to eat upon all
days at their pleasures: which thing nevertheless the common people deluded
with their doctrine, think verily to be the ready way to hell. Secondly, the
Essenes were distinguished from other people, by their usual precise kind of
abstinence, where and with whom soever they did converse: but our Jesuits are
so far from that, that if you meet them in the common inn upon the friday at
Dover, or other place of arrival on what day soever; yea, though it be good
friday, they will eat flesh with you for company, Our Jesuits can temporize.
and so accommodate themselves to the time, as you may worthily deem them
worldelie politikes, and not religious Jesuits as they profess to be.
Thirdly, the Essenes were lovers of peace; but our Jesuits are fosterers of
rebellion; the Essenes sought quietness, but our Jesuits stir up sedition in
every country. Fourthly, the Essenes dealt faithfully with all men, but our
Jesuits deal unfaithfully and glory in the same. Their constant doctrine is,
(mark well my words,) that one may say and swear clean contrary to his
mind, so these three points concur. First, if the judge or magistrate before
whom he swears, be not a competent judge or lawful magistrate; such a one is
not in England by their opinion, the Papists only excepted. Secondly, if the
matter be not an article of their faith. Thirdly, if they dissemble to redeem
their vexation or trouble: and this kind of dealing is with them, a godly
politic equivocation. The doctrine (...) the Jesuits, to dissemble with God
and man.
This rotten foundation once laid, they make many sandy buildings thereupon:
for they will both say and swear to their neighbors, judges, and magistrates,
here in England, that they have not said mass, bin in such places, reconciled
such persons, been in such company, and so forth, when for all that they have
daily practiced the same; yet they persuade themselves, that all this may
lawfully be done. The like execrable and plain diabolical equivocation they
use, when to avoid the danger imminent, they are content with their lips to
acknowledge our most gracious sovereign for their Queen, but in their hearts
think the flat contrary. Which thing is evident, by the detestable
excommunication of their pope Pius, whereof I have spoken at large, in the
preface of my Motives. For in that deuillish curse proceeding fro the master
devil himself, her most excellent M. is not called the true and lawful
Queen, but the pretensed Queen of England; which their dissimulation, is the
flat herisie of the Helchesits. Fifthly, the Essenes taught to yield faithful
service and obedience to all magistrates, specially to princes: but our
Jesuits stir up their Popes to sow sedition, and to make wars against
Princes, to excommunicate them, and to dispossess them of their royal
scepters. Sixthly, the Essenes professed humility as well in deed as in word:
but our Jesuits profess nothing less indeed, though they desire to be so
reputed. This is to be proved many ways, for first, whereas every sect of
their Religion, the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the Carthusians, the
Carmelites, the Capuchenes, and the rest, has some one cardinal for their
protector; the late hatched Jesuits being rumors to all the rest, cannot be
content to submit themselves to any cardinal; for which their hautie minds,
they are justly despised of them all. Again, for a show of humility, their
professed fathers so termed, will have no possessions: yet they labor closely
tooth and nail, to get large possessions to the Seminaries, to their
penitentiaries, readers, students, and nouices; of whom all, and their
livings, they are to dispose at their pleasures. Thirdly, albeit cardinals be
next to the pope, and above all, but the pope; and albeit also that our Allen
was made cardinal by their procurement, that so he might advance them at the
recovery of England, which they thought certain by their politic intended
invasion; yet were, and are they so hie minded, that such Jesuits, as they
odly send into this realm, must have greater privileges then any that he can
procure, although there be never so great odds in the persons: yea, the
Jesuits do this day so rule in this realm among the papists, as they may
rather seem Cardinals or Popes, then humble friars professing poverty. For
they place and displace the rest of the Seminaries, at their good pleasures.
They have their intelligencers, their spies, their collectors, their spare and
fresh horses, (...), our Jesuits humble holy (...).
their fine lodgings, their secret places, their sanctuaries in every shire,
good town, and city. They sease and tax the richer sort of papists, to whom,
when, and how much they shall contribute. Of their cruel dealing and pride
intolerable I have spoken more at large in my Motives.

The names of the Kings that continually afflicted the Jews.
Antiochus Magnus Filius 2 Antiochus nobilis vol Epiphanes. Antiochus, filius
Antiochi, Eupator. Alexander filius Eupatoris. Antiochus adolesceus Alexandri
filius. Tryphon
Filius 1 Seleue^s Philopator. Demetrius filius Sele^^s Demetrius secundus
f^lius D^m^trii. Antiochus filius Demetrii





Here ends the first part; containing the state of Gods Church, from Adam,
until the monarchy of the Romans.
THE SECOND PART Containing the state of the Church; from the beginning of the
Monarchy of the Romans, until Christ's ascension.
The first Book, of the Monarchy of the Romans, being the fourth in number.
The first Chapter, of the original of the Roman Empire and fourth Monarchy.
ALexander by testament assigned the administration of the kingdom of the
Jews, unto Queen Alexandra his wife. After whose death Aristobulus rose up in
arms against his brother Hircanus, and dispossessed him as well of the
priesthood, as of the kingdom. Hircanus therefore (by the persuasion of
Antipater father to Herod the great, a very factious and cruel man, whom king
Alexander had highly advanced) fled into Arabia, there humbling himself to the
king, who (through the fair speeches and large promises of Antipater) prepared
a strong army, and by that means placed Hircanus again in his kingdom. But
Areta king of Arabia was no sooner departed, then Aristobulus came upon
Hircanus with a fresh might^e supply. At that time Pompeius that worthy and
valiant captain, being then Consul of Rome, and having conquered Tigranes the
king of Armenia, thought the cruel wars between the two brethren, to be a
fit occasion to dispossess them both of the kingdom. He therefore came with
a mighty power to Jerusalem, where he slew 1200 Jews: restored the pristhood
to Hircanus, carried away Aristobulus prisoner to Rome for a triumph, and made
the Jews subjects and tributaries to the Romans. This was done in the age of
the world 3909. after Rome was built 691. years, A. M. 3909.
in the third year of the 179. Olympiade.

Pompeius surnamed the Great for his incomparable victories (for he subdued
Armenia, Spain, Africa, Judea, Colchis, Albaina, Syria, Iberia, Arabia) did
wonderfully enrich the Romans, bringing at one triumph into their common
treasury 2000. talents of gold and silver. It is written of him that he
excelled in martial prowess: he subdued the valiant captain Sertorius, and
vanquished Mithridates the mighty king of Pontus. This Pompeius took to wife
Iulia the daughter of Julius Caesar, who lived not long: after her death, the
amity between Pompey and Caesar decreased; and by reason of their insatiable
ambition, civil war brast out, in which Caesar vanquished Pompey, and Pompey
fleeing into Egypt, was there slain deceitfully. After whose death Julius
Caesar enjoyed Asia, Africa, and all the Roman empire, in the year of the
world, three thousand, nine hundred, and four and twenty, which was five and
forty years before the birth of Christ, 706. years after the city of Rome
was built, in the second year of the 183. Olmypiade. Yet for the space of five
years or more, he was grievously molested with wars, and could not quietly
enjoy the Empire: he lived in peace little more then five months.

Julius Caesar was a very virtuous, valiant, and merciful Prince. When he came
out of Egypt to Rome, he brought an excellent and skillful mathematician with
him: he caused the years to be observed after the course of the sun, and
procured the mathematical science to be taught throughout all Italy.

After the death of Julius Caesar, Octauius Augustus succeeded, and reigned as
Emperor after him, and was surnamed Caesar. From henceforth all Emperors of
Rome were called Cesars, of Julius Caesar, and Augusti, of Octauius Augustus,
their two first Emperors.

CHAP. II. Of the Emperor Nero.
NEro was the sixth Emperor or Caesar of the Romans, in whom ended all the
family of Augustus. In the beginning of his empire; he lived for some years
honestly: afterward he became horribly vicious; he exceeded in all naughty
dealing and tyranny, and yet had his education under the grave, reverend, and
wise Seneca.

Nero was adopted into the empire by Claudius, who married his mother
Agrippina. He was so blodthirstie and cruel, that he caused his own mother,
his wife, his brother, and his dear friend Seneca, to be murdered cruelly.

In the days of Nero, a comet appeared for the space of six months; which
was a rare and wonderful thing.

Nero was the first Emperor of Rome, that by public edict caused the
christians to be tormented: about the tenth year of his reign saint Peter and
saint Paul were put to death at Rome. Saint Peter was crucified with his head
downward; and saint Paul was beheaded with the sword.

Nero, besides all other his wicked acts, burnt Rome, and in the foureteenth
year of his reign (which was the two and thirtieth year of his age) he
received condign punishment for his due deserts. He cut his own throat
with his own knife, and uttered these most execrable words, Haec est fides.
This is my faith and belief.

CHAP. III. Of the ten persecutions of the christians, made by the ten
Emperors of Rome.
THe first persecution was made by Nero, as is already said, the second by
Domitianus, the third by Traianus, the fourth by Antoninus, the fifth by
Seuerus, the sixth by Maximinus, the seventh by Decius, the eight by Valerianus,
the ninth by Aurelianus, the tenth by Dioclesianus.

The tenth and last persecution exceeded all the rest, as ecclesiastical
histories make relation: the persecution was furthered by Maximianus, and
continued by Maximinus; Maximianus in the east, and Dioclesianus in the west
made such havoc of the church, as the christians could abide no where,
without most bloody persecution: the temples were set on fire, the books of
holy scripture were burnt, and many thousands slain within the space of 30.
dais. This persecution endured sundry years, to which the faithful souls
seemed to allude in the Revelation; when they desire God the just judge, to
avenge their innocent blood. Apoc. 6.10


Dioclesianus restored Egypt to the empire, and when he perceived his
authority to be weakened by reason of tumults and dissentious; he sought to
strengthen himself by joining Maximianus unto him, whom he made equal to
himself in imperial regiment.

These two Dioclesianus and Maximianus being now equal in authority, were
called Augusti: they both afterward gave over the administration of the empire,
and betook themselves to the quiet state of a private life: Dioclesianus chose
Galerius to supply his place, and Maximianus appointed Constantius in his stead.

Galerius and Constantius were not equal in power and authority, but as
viceroyes and substitutes; and therefore they were not called Augusti, but
only Cesars.

Maximianus would afterward have returned to the administration of the empire,
to the end that he might have advanced his son Maxentius to the imperial
regiment; for which cause Constantius his son in law caused him to be slain.

Dioclesianus having lived many years as a private man, at length slew
himself; so to avoid the displeasure of Constantius and Licinius, to whom he
was suspected to take part with Maxentius their enemy.

Constantinus surnamed the Great, succeeded his father Constantius, when he
had reigned four years after the death of Dioclesianus. This Constantinus was
the first christian Emperor, a zealous favorer of Christ's gospel, and the
only patron of Christianity.

CHAP. IIII. Of the siege of Jerusalem by Titus.
Titus the son of Vespasianus the Emperor of Rome, was a man of such valor,
prudence, and humanity, and so beautified with all kind of heroical virtues,
that he was commonly named in the mouth of every man, Amor and delitiae humani
generis, the only delight of mankind. In the second year of Vespasianus, in
the month of April, when the Jews did celebrate their Passover, (at which
time great concourse of people was assembled from every coast,) he besieged
the city of Jerusalem, and the eight day of September, he conquered the same
by force and assault.

Although the city of Jerusalem, Josephus de bello. Iud lib. 7.6, 18
was five times taken and destroyed before, by Nabuchodonozor* Asocheus,
Antiochus, Pompeius, and Herodes; yet was there in the siege made by Titus,
such famine, sedition, and domestical desolation, as the like has not been
known in any city. The mothers murdered their own natural children, and
that done, boiled them, so to saturate their insatiable hunger. This seems
incredible, but holy writ reports no less, as I have proved in the first
book, and the eight chapter of the former part. The wives snatched meat out of
the mouths of their husbands, the children from their parents, and the
mothers plucked it out of the mouths of their infantes. When they killed their
children, and one another for want of food; they could not do the fact so
secretly, but it was espied, and taken from the^ by others of greater force:
for so soon as their doors were shut, others suspecting that they were eating
meat, came violently upon them, and took from them the meat already chewed
in their mouth. Yea it is incredible to be told (says Josephus) what tortures
and afflictions many suffered, Joseph. vbi sup. ca. 11.
to enforce them to disclose, where they had hid but one loaf of bread.

Josephus being a Jew himself, and greatly favoring his country men, (being
taken prisoner of the Romans long before, and at that time in great credit
both with Titus and Vespasianus his father,) labored by all means possible to
persuade the Jews, that they well considering their own distress and the
mighty force of the adverse part, would in time while there remained place
for mercy, yield themselves to Titus, and give up their city into his hands.
But in vain was his oration; he had not eloquence to persuade them.

From king David to the siege made by Titus, were 1179 years, and from the
building of the city to the destruction thereof, 2177. years. Yet such was the
deformity of their sins, and their ingratitude in Gods sight; as neither the
antiquity of their City, neither their wonderful riches, neither their renown
throughout the world, nor the glory of their religion, was able to defend it
from utter desolation.

A noble woman, Marie by name, daughter to Eleazer, dwelling beyond Jordan, and
flying to Jerusalem for aid, was there besieged with others. An horrible
fact, and ugly to behold.
In the time of the great famine, she killed her own son; and when she had
eaten part, she reserved the rest. Others perceiving that she had gotten some
meat, did manace death unto her, unless she would tell where it was hid.
Which she doing for fear, they were all astonished at the sight thereof. It is
my son (says the woman) eat thereof, for I have eaten before you. I would
neither have you more effeminate then a woman, nor more pitiful then a mother.
O horrible monster of the world! What can be more unnatural, then the fact?
What more cruel, then the words? Over and besides those that were slain in
the famine, plague, and the sword; sixteen thousand were sent by Titus to
Alexandria, there to do servile works, as bondmen. Two thousand he carried
with him for a triumph, whom in public spectacles he proposed to be devoured
of wild beasts.

CHAP. V. Of Constantinus surnamed the Great.
COnstantinus for his piety and heroical virtues, surnamed the Great, was the
first Caesar that professed Christ and christianity. He was a right christian
in deed; as who for a manifest sign of his true zeal in religion, had the
gospel of Christ Jesus carried publicly before him.

He commanded the holy Bibles to be copied out of his own private charges, and
to be sent into all parts of Christendom.

He called together the learned men, from all parts of the world, to consult
and give their opinions, concerning controversies in religion. During which
time of disputation, as also for their iournies to and fro, he granted them
free allowance, of all necessary provision. He withstoode the tyranny of
Maxentius, and restored peace unto the Church.

He builded the city of Constantinople, terming it by his own name; where was
before a goodly mart town, Sozom. lib. ^. c. ^.
then called Bizantium. Thither was the empire translated, and the city called
new Rome. For he environed it with large walls, and added magnificall building
thereunto.

The observation.
The papists here babbling after their woonted manner, tell us a tale of Robin
hoode and little John: that forsooth Constantine was baptized in Rome of
Siluester, that the very font in which he was christened, is this day to be
seen there, and many other fabulous illations grounded thereupon. To which I
answer first, with their own dear friar and learned schooleman Victoria;
Victor. in relect. 1. de potest. eccles.
that such doctrine was first invented by their flattering and beggarly
Canonistes. I say secondly, that their own canon law in the 96. distinction,
terms this kind of doctrine, Did. 96. cap. Constantinus.
false, counterfeite, and not worthy of any credit. For the very inscription
it self, avouches roundly and boldly, that that which follows, is but
chafe. Out of which words I note first, that the pope has a long time
seduced the world, 96. distinction of their own decrees (I do not belie
them, read the place who lists, and he shall find it to be true) the popish
Canonists make this plain inscription, ( Palea, Chafe:) as if they should
say; Gentle reader, be no longer seduced with such doctrine; for that which
follows, is but chafe. If any living can yield a fitter exposition, I desire
to know his skill. I note thirdly, that since the papists are enforced by the
spirit of God, Popery has long bewitched us.
bewitched and dazeled the eyes of many men. I answer thirdly, that although
they would have us to believe as an article of our Creed, that Constantine was
baptized at Rome by Siluester. whereupon they ground many absurd consequentes;
yet do most holy, learned, and ancient writers, (S. Hierome, Eusebius,
Socrates, Theodoritus, Sozomenus, Pomponius, and Cassiodorus,) affirm the same
to be a fable, and that Constantine was christened at Nicomedia.

CHAP. VI. Of the wars between Constantine and Maxentius.
The most religious Emperor Constantinus, preparing for wars against
Maxentius, who had thirsted the blood of christians, and fearing greatly the
danger of the battle imminent, did often lift up his eyes toward heaven, and
humbly requested help at Gods hands. Being at that time a great favorer of
christian religion, and a zealous worshipper of the everliving God, (albeit he
had not as yet received the sign of Christ's passion) he saw in the firmament
the evident sign of the cross; which so glistered with fiery brightness, as
he was astonished at the sight thereof. While he was doubting with himself, he
beheld the angels of God standing by him, and saying thus unto him.
Constantine, (...). O Constantine, in this sign get thou the victory.
Constantine being joyful with this vsion, and assuring himself of the
victory against Maxentius; made in his own forehead the sign of the cross;
which before he had seen in the firmament. So write Eusebius Caesariensis,
Socrates, Sozomenus, Cassiodorus, and many others of approved antiquity.
Whereupon the papists would infer, that it is lawful to make images, to set
them up in churches, and to adore the same religiously. For perspicuous
confutation whereof, with a manifest declaration of the state of the
controversy (because it is maliciously defended by some, unsoundly impugned by
others, of others not thoroughly understood,) I purpose to set down these few
conclusions.

The first conclusion.
The sign of the cross appeared to the Emperor Constantine in the firmament,
at what time as he was afraid to join battle with Maxentius. Eusebius. de vit.
Constan. lib. c. 22
This conclusion is granted and approved, by the uniform consent of all
learned writers. Constantinus himself (as Eusebius reports) affirmed the
same to Eusebius, and confirmed the verity thereof with an oath: and not only
Eusebius, but all the world for many hundredth years, gave credit thereunto.
Hereupon Constantinus and other christian kings generally, used the sign of
the cross upon the garments of their soldiers; so often as they had wars
with Infidels, and such as were enemies to the name of Christ Jesus. For then
there was great cause so to do, as since just occasion has been given to take
the same away; which thing hereafter by Gods assistance more planly shall
appear.

The second conclusion.
Simply and absolutely to make images for civil use, is not prohibited by the
word of God. This conclusion is to be proved, three special ways: By the
authority of holy writ, by the testimony of learned writers, and by the
general practice of christian kings. Touching the first, God himself endued
Bezaleel with the spirit of wisdom, Exodus 35. ^. 30
understanding, and knowledge, that he might work curiously in gold, silver,
and brass, in grauing stones, and in caruing wood, and in all manner of fine
work. In the temple of Solomon, were graven Lillies, Pomegranates, Cherubins,
Lions, and Palm trees. God commanded Moses to make two Cherubines above the
mercy seat. ^. Reg. 7. Exodus 25. v. 22. Number. 21. ver. 8.
He also commanded to make a fiery or brazen Serpent, and to set it up for a
sign.

Touching the second, S. Basil is so far from condemning the civil use of
images, that he has commended the making, and the utility thereof. These are
his express words; Nam magnifica in bellis gesta, Basilius in quadrag.
martyrs. to. ^. p. 397.
and oratores saepenumero, and pictores pulcherrime demonstrant. Hi oratione,
illi tabulis describentes atque ornantes, amboque plures ad fortitudinem
imitandam inducentes. Quae enim sermo historiae per inductionem praebet, eadem
and pictura tacens per imitationem ostendit. For not only Orators oftentimes,
but even painters also do finely pourtray, worthy martial exploites: the one
sort, by their fine oratio^s; the other, by their fitly pourtraied tables; both
persuading many, to the imitation of fortitude. For whatsoever the history
does perform by persuasion, the same does the silent picture declare by
imitation. In which words it is clear, that S. Basil approoueth the civil
and historical use of images. Eusebius Caesariensis makes mention of the
images of our Savior, of Peter, and Paul, which were not only in his time, but
long before his days. The historical use whereof, he neither reprooueth nor
condemns. S. Ambrose, Gregorius Magnus, Eusebius hist. eccles. libr. 7. c. 1^.
and many ancient fathers hold constantly the same opinion.

Touching the third, Constantinus the first Christian Emperor surnamed the
Great, caused after his couersion, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 4.
his own image to be engraven in his coin: whose example therein, all
christian kings at all times in all ages, have de facto, approved to be good.
For all kings no one or other excepted, have their inscriptions and images
upon their gold and money; neither were they at any time in any age, reproved
by any learned writer for the same. Yea, Math. 22. Mark. 12. Luke 20.
our Savior Christ himself seems to approve the same, when he requiring
to know whose inscription the money had; charged to give to Caesar, that which
was his own. In fine, the reformed churches in Germany, this day allow
thereof; and the church of England approoueth the making of the sign of the
cross, in the forehead of baptized infantes.

The third conclusion.
To worship and adore images religiously, is superstitious and idolatricall.
This conclusion is proved, by the express commandment of God. For in Exodus
it is written thus: Exodus 20. v. 4*
Thou shall not make any graue^ image, thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. And in Matthew; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Math. 4. v 10
and him only thou shall serve. For which cause, S. John could not be
permitted to adore the Angel, but was bidden to worship God. Apoc. 19. v. 10.
For which cause Moses cast the Tables out of his hands, brake them in pieces
beneath the mountain, burned the calfe in the fire, Exodus 32. v 20.
and grounded it unto powder. For which cause the holy ghost commends
Ezechias, for breaking in pieces the brazen serpent. 2. Kin. 18. ver. 4
For which cause Marcellina was condemned as an heretic, who worshipped (as
S. Augustine records) the Images of Jesus, of Paul, of Homere, of Pythagoras.
Aug. de haeres. haer. 7.
For which cause S. Epiphanius seeing the image of a saint hanging in the
Church, tare the same in sunder, Epiphan. in epist. ad Io. Hier. haer. 79.
and advised the wardens to bury some poor body with the veil, and that no
more any such vailes should be hanged up in the Church. Yea, the same
Epiphanius will not have the blessed virgin Mary to be adored; much less her
image. And if her image must be excluded, what image I pray you, Concill.
Elibert. can. 36.
can be approved? for which cause, the council of Elibertine decreed gravely,
that nothing should be painted on the church walls, which is adored of the
people. For which cause Lactantius pronounced freely, Lactant. libr. 2 cap. 19.
that where images are, there is no religion. Neither will it help the papists
to answer after their woonted manner; that Lactantius speaks of such images
as are adored for gods. For Lactantius makes the self same objection, in the
person of the Gentiles; and inueyeth against it bitterly, as a vain,
frivolous, and ridiculous thing. And because I will proceed sincerely in this
point, as in all other matters; I think it convenient here to allege his
express words, Lactant. lib. 2. de origin erroris cap. 2.
which are these; Non ipsa, inquiunt, timemus, sed eos ad quorum imaginem
ficta, and quorum nominibus consecrata sunt; nempe ideo timetis, quod eos in
caelo esse arbitramini, neque enim si dij sunt, aliter fieri potest: curigitur
oculos in caelum non tollitis? ^^ur ad parietes, and ligna, and lapides
potissimum, quam illo spectatis, vbi eos esse creditis. We fear not, say they,
the pictures or pourtraies, but them after whose images they be made, and to
whose names they are consecrated. Doubtless ye therefore fear them, because
ye think they are in heaven. For if they be gods, it cannot otherwise come to
pass. Why therefore do ye not lift up your eyes to heaven? why do ye rather
look upon the walls, upon stocks and ston^s, then thither, where ye think
they are? In which words I note first, Lactan. speaks indifferently,
throughout the whole chapter) and yet are they sharply reproved for their fact.
I note secondly, that we must Aquinas, Aquin. pa. 3. q. 25. ar. 2. and 3.
of the image of our Savior Christ. For which respect Gregory surnamed the
Great (who himself was a bishop of Rome) sharply reproved the adoration and
worship of images, Gregor. ad Seren. epist. libr. 9. cap. 9.
albeit he admitted and well liked ye civil use thereof

The second Book, of Christ's birth, baptism, preaching, passion,
resurrection, and ascension into Heaven; with other things coincident.
CHAP. I. Of Christ's birth.
ABout the time that Elias the Cabbalist foretold, in the age of the world
3969. the eight calends of January, in the third year of the 194. Olympiade,
the 32. year of king Herod, and the 42. year of Augustus Caesar, was our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus borne into this world. For albeit the 4000. years were
not complete and fully ended, yet was his prediction true (as some report it)
because he added, that God would shorten the time for his elect.

Our Lord and Savior was conceived by the holighost, Philip. 2. verse. 7. 1.
Pet. 2. verse. 2^.
taking flesh, blood, and bone of the blessed virgin Mary, made like unto us in
all things (sin only excepted) true man and true God, having two perfect
natures subsisting in one divine person; by reason of which hypostaticall
union, his holy mother was truly called deipara and (...) as well the mother
of God as of man.

Christ assuming the perfect nature of man, lost no part of his nature divine,
and consequently he must have two wills, divine and humane, of God and of man.

Christ assuming the perfect nature of man, must needs have every thing
pertaining to the perfection thereof, among which the sensitive appetite is
one, which we call sensuality, yet in Christ Jesus there was no motion of
sensuality, which was not ordered by reason, and wholly obedient to the same.
For the sensitive appetite to be moved according to the course of it own
nature, was nothing repugnant to the divine and reasonable humane will of
Christ. The blessed virgin being 14 years of age, conceived Christ her son by
the power of the holy ghost the 25. day of March. He was before all worlds,
and by him al things were made; Luc. 1.31.
yet was he incarnat in the end of the world, borne after a new and miraculous
manner of the virgin Marie, Matthew. 1.18.
who was Saint Joseph's lawful wife.

Christ the son of the everliving God, took upon him the form of a servant,
was poorly borne in a stall, and made him self of no reputation; Philip. 2.7.
and all this he did for the love of man, to teach man humility, and to abase
himself as Christ his Lord and master gave him ensample. Luc. ^.1, 2.
In those days Cyrenius being governor of Syria, Augustus Caesar sent out an
edict, to tax all that were subject to the Roman empire. Then Joseph being of
the house and lineage of David, went up from Galile to be taxed in Bethlehem
with Mary his wife, being then big with child, where she brought forth Christ,
and wrapping him in swaddling clothes, laid him in a cratch, because there was
no room for them in the Inn.

So soon as Christ was borne, the angels of God nothing regarding the pride of
mighty men, declared to the poor shepherds the godhead and office of the
child lying in the cribbe; how that he was borne to be the savior of the
world. Luc. 2.9, 16, 17
After the departure of the angels, the shepherds went to Bethlehem, where
they found Marie, Joseph, and the sweet babe lying in the cribbe: at their
return they published abroad, that which was told them of that child.

CHAP. II. Of the infancy of our Savior Christ.
Luc. 2.21.
WHen Christ Jesus was but eight days old, he was circumcised, even then
beginning to spend his blood for the love of man: for albeit he was the head of
the church, yet was he subject to the law, to deliver man from the curse of the
law.

Epiphan. haer. 51
The 13. day after Christ's nativity, certain wise men came a long journey out
of the East, to adore the Savior of the world. And albeit Epiphanius affirms
constantly that this coming was the second year after Christ's birth; yet S.
Hierome, S. Augustine, and other learned writers receive the former opinion as
most authentical: and they have great reason so to do, because the scripture
seems to say no less. For first, the wisemen or astronomers are said to
come, when Christ was borne. Which phrase can not be fitly verified, but of a
thing present or lately done. Again, the wisemen found the babe in Bethlehem,
and consequently they came before the day of the purification: for after that
time, Christ is not known to have bin in Bethlehem. The Papists claim the
wisemens bodies in diverse places.
And though the papists hold by a vain tradition, that these wise men were
three kings of Cullen, Gaspar, Melchi^r, and Baltasar, yet is it neither
certain, that they were kings, neither yet that they were no more but three.
And their own reason thereof is very frivolous, because their bodies are
challenged, to be as well at Millaine as at Colen. But here I must answer to
some objections, which seem to fortify Epiphanius his opinion.

The first doubt.
The parents of Christ were so poor at the day of purification, Leuit. 12.6, ^*
that they were not able to offer a lamb according to the law for rich men,
Luc. 2.^4.
but were enforced to offer a pair of Turtle doves, or two young pigeons: and
therefore doubtless they had not received the rich treasures, which the wise
men brought to Christ. I answer, that the blessed and humble virgin, as she
was free from all pride and ostentation, so was she not willing to change her
poor state and condition, which she knew well pleased her son the son of
God.

The second doubt.
King Herod slew all the male children in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts
thereof, from 2. years old and under, according to the time which he had
diligently learned of the wisemen. Among the rest, he slew his own son, as
writes Macrobius, who therefore wished rather to be Herodes hog, then his
child: which certes he would never have done, if there had been but 13. days
between the apparition of the star, and the coming of the wisemen. I answer
(which is the opinion of saint Austen, and saint Chrysostom) that the star
appeared so long before the nativity of Christ, as was sufficient for the wise
men to dispatch their journey, and to adore Christ shortelie after he was
borne. Neither is it of force to object (as some do) that the wise men could
not come so far in so short a space: for first, whether these wise men were
of the posterity of Balaam, and so came from Mesopotamia, as saint
Chrysostom, saint Jerome, Amb. in Luc.
and saint Ambrose think; or they came out of Arabia, which is the constant
position of Justinius; Justin. in tryph.
or they were Persians or Chaldeans, which the very name seems to
prognosticate; Number. 23. verse. 7.
yet might they have dispatched their journey, in less then ten days. For
Jerusalem is distant from Aram (from whence Balak brought Balaam,) but 72.
miles, from Vr of the Chaldees 212. miles. Again, the star appeared long
before Christ's birth, so that they might be there in time convenient. Thirdly,
in those countries they have plenty of dromedaries, A dromedaries journey.
one of which will carry a man (as writes Philostratur) 1000. furlongs in one
day, that is, 125. English miles,

CHAP. III. Of the perfect age of Christ.
Jesus Christ when he was 30. years of age, left Galilee, and came to the
flood Jordan, Math. 3. verse. 13.
where he was baptized of saint John his precursor. By which act, he sanctified
our baptism in himself: the outward sign whereof puts us in mind, that
we must change our lives, and become better; assuring us as by a seal, Romans 6.
verse. 3, 4.
that we are ingraffed into Christ; whereby our old man dies, and the new man
rises up again.

So soon as Christ was baptized, a voice came down from heaven saying; Math.
3. verse. 17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Math. 4. verse. 1.
This done, he was tempted in the wilderness of ye devil. Christ having fasted
40. days, Math. 4. ver. 2, 14, 15, 16.
and being tempted of the devil, returned by the power of God into Galile; and
after that a great fame was spread abroad of him in all the region, he came to
Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as his custom was, went into the
synagogue on the sabbath day, to expound the scriptures

Christ the third day after he came to Cana a town in Galile, was present at a
marriage, where he made water wine, the first miracle that ever he wrought.
John. 2. verse. 1, 9.


After Christ was baptized, he began to preach the Gospel, being 30. years of
age, as is already said. Which holy exercise, he practiced almost three
years before his passion: his preaching was in the year of Iubilee, because
he preached the glad tidings of the gospel, the remission of sins, the
salvation of his people.

CHAP. IIII. Of Christ's death and passion.
CHrist called twelve unto him, whom he named Apostles, and sent them into the
whole world, to preach the gospel to al nations; that so they might be
witnesses of his doctrine confirmed with many myrracles. Which doctrine being
accomplished, he offered up himself an unspotted sacrifice upon the altar of
the cross, for the expiation of the sins of the world. And this he did the
18. year of Tiberius Caesar, Tertull. aduersu Iudaeos. p. 134.
in the eight Calends of April, if we follow Tertullians supputation against
the Jews.

Christ's passion began not only in his taking and delivery unto death, but
even from the very instant of his conception, and continued until he yielded
up the ghost. For as Ludolphus writes learnedly, when Christ, as God foresaw in
his divine wisdom, the cruel and bitter torments, which he was to suffer
infallibly, he could not but naturally sorrow for the same: as which were
throughout all his body, throughout all the members of his body, and throughout
all the inferior powers of his soul. He suffered in all his time, in all his
body, in all his works. In time of his infancy, baseness of his mothers womb,
poverty, asperitie, vilitie in the manger, persecution of ye adversary,
flight into Egypt. In time of his adolescencie, frequent disputations, painful
peregrinations, loathsome precipitations, In his iuuenile age, most bitter and
cruel death: for in his whole body, he sustained pains intolerable; in his
eyes the effusion of tender tears, in his delicate ears, the hearing of
contumelies and execrable blasphemies; in his eie-lids the pangs of buffetting;
in his nostrils the stinch of ugly spitting; in his sweet mouth, the
bitterness of vinegar and gall, in his hands the prints of the nails,
whipping and often scourging, throughout his blessed body. What he sustained in
his works, cannot easily be expressed by the tongue of man. For they reviled
his divine preaching, his most sacred conversation, his miraculous operation.
He was led as a lamb to be slaughtered, and as a thief to be hanged; yet
neither did he show any impatience, nor sought any revenge, albeit he could
have caused a legion of Angels, to have attended him at his only word: he was
bound as a thief, accused as a thief, condemned as a thief, he was crowned
with a crown of thorns among thieves, as if he had been the master thief
of all thieves; the judge was judged, the King was derided, the Lord of all
lords was turmoyled. And yet behold the wisdom of our heavenly Solomon; for
as Adam trespassed on Friday, so did he suffer on Friday, as man's salvation
seemed to require. Where we have to consider his patience, who was led as a
lamb to be slain, his humility, who was condemned with thieves; his
charity, who died for his enemies, his poverty, who was borne in a manger,
and this done, we may worthily exclaim; O captain where is thine ensign? O
prince, where is thy palace? O bishop, where is thy my^er? O king, where is thy
diadem? After the consideration hereof, we must acknowledge, that Jesus Christ
our sweet redeemer, suffered all these pangs, tortures, torments, and
villainies, for the sins and love of man, and therefore that man's part and
duty is to abhor, detest, and eschew sin, and that for his sake and love,
who has first so tenderly beloved us.

CHAP. V. Of the hour of Christ's death, and the circumstances of the same.
CHrist was led out of the walls of the earthly Jerusalem, into Golgotha, a
foul place of dead men's carkases, so to declare uncleanness indeed, not of
himself who was most holy, most pure, most innocent, but of us most wretched
sinners, whose sins he willingly took upon him, to the end that we by faith
in him, being made clean through his blood and passion, might be brought into
the heavenly Jerusalem, the joy of all joys, the kingdom of heaven.

Christ suffered his bitter and healthful passion, without the walls of the
city, a little before the sixth hour, and gave up his blessed ghost at the
ninth hour: Heb. 13. verse. 12 Mat. 27. verse. 50 Mark. 15 verse. 25. Ioh. 19.
ver. 14.
so as he was about three hours, in most cruel torments upon the cross. In
which time from the sixth hour to the ninth, darkness arose over all the land.
Whereby we may sensibly perceive, how angry God was against our sins, which
he so severely punished in his only son. For even at the feast of the
Passover and in the full Moon, when the sun shined over all the rest of the
world, and at midday, that corner of the world, wherein so wicked an act was
committed, was covered with extreme darkness three hours together.

Christ hanged naked upon the cross, and was vilainously reproved, as if he
had been the most wicked caitife that ever was in the world, to the end, that
we being clothed with his righteousness, and blessed with his curses, and
sanctified by his only oblation, may be cleansed from our sins and exalted
up to heaven. But here it is expedent, that I answer to an important doubt.

The doubt.
Saint John says, that Christ suffered about the sixth hour, but Saint Mark
affirms expressly, John. 19. verse. 14 Mar. 15. verse. 25.
that he was crucified the third hour.

The answer.
For the exact explication of this grave objection, we must diligently observe
three things. First, that the Jews divided as well the night as the day, into
four equal parts. Secondly, that they termed the four parts of the night,
vigils, and the four parts of the day, hours. Thirdly, that the names of ye
four hours were these, the first, the third, the sixth, and the ninth, so that
all the morning to nine of the clock with us, was called the first hour with
them: from nine to twelve, the third hour; from twelve to three the sixth
hour; Partition of the day and night.
from three to night, the ninth hour. I therefore answer to the objection,
that S. John and saint Mark do well agree; neither is the one dissonant to the
other: for when S. Mark says, that Christ was crucified the third hour, he
means in the end thereof, which was about noone, or almost the sixth hour, as
S. John declares it: for every one of their hours contained three of our
hours as is already said. And every day with them, both began and ended at
six of the clock with us. Where I note by the way, that these hours are
sometimes dilated, and made four threes, Mat. 20. verse. 1 etc.
like to our hours; for so we read in S. Matthew, at the hyring of the
laborers into the vineyard. But howsoever the supputation was made, the midday
ever iumped with the sixth hour, either in the end or in the beginning
thereof. Which observations an^ distinction well remembered, many obscure places
in the scriptures will be evident.

CHAP. VI. Of Christ's resurrection, and the adjuncts thereof.
AT such time as Christ the son of the everliving God suffered his passion,
wonderful and strange sights happened. The Sun was darkened, the Moon being
in the full gave no light, (a thing so repugnant to nature, that Dionysius
Areopagita pronounced boldly (though then an Ethnicke) that either the son
of God was tormented, Mar. 15. ver. 33.
or else the world would be dissolved;) the veil of the Temple was rent in
twain, earthquakes were seen, the rocks were cloven asunder, Math. 27. verse.
51
the graves were opened, and such as slept, arose with Christ to life again.

Christ after his resurrection appeared sundry times; first, to Marie Magdalen,
when she tarried still at the sepulcher, to see Christ after his disciples were
gone away to their own home. ^ohn. 20. ve. 10 11.


Christ appeared the second time the self same day to two of his disciples,
li^. 24 verse 10, 13, 15, 17.
as they went to a town called Emaus, which was distant from Jerusalem about
three score furlongs. The cause of the second apparition was this; because the
said disciples would not believe that which Mary Magdalen, and Ioanna, and
Mary the mother of James, and other women, told them of Christ's resurrection.

Christ appeared the third time to all the Disciples, (Thomas only excepted,
John. 20. ver. 1^.
who was then absent) which apparition was done the first day of the week, and
when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the
Jews, and then Jesus stood in the mids of them and bestowed his peace upon
them.

Christ after eight days appeared the fourth time to his disciples, John. 10.
v. 26, 27
coming into the midst of them even when the doors were shut, and bidding
Thomas to see his hands, and to put forth his hand into his side, and to be no
longer incredulous, but faithful.

Christ appeared the fifth time to his Disciples, at the sea of Tiberias, where
they were fishing, at whose word they casting out their net, Math. 28. v. 16, 17
were not able to draw it at all for the multitude of fishes. By these and
other his apparitions, he made his resurrection manifest unto the world.
Sixthly, he appeared to the eleven Disciples in the mount of Galile. John. 21.
ver. 1.9
But from hence arise doubts very worthy the examination.

The first doubt.
Christ says in John, that he appeared but thrice after his resurrection. To
this I answer, John. 21. verse. 14. non sunt verba Christi sed evangelist.
that the ternarie number does not determine the apparitions in themselves, but
the diversity of days and times in which they were made, for all apparitions
made in one and the same day are reputed and named one

The second doubt.
It is said in these apparitions, that Christ came into the mids of his
Disciples and stood among them, Ioh. 20. verse. 26.
even when they were within the house, and the doors closely shut. Whereby it
appears evidently, that Christ's body may be both in heaven, and in the
sacrament at one and the same time, for it no more repugneth, for one body to
be in diverse places at once, then for diverse bodies to be in one place at
once. Which latter is here verified, of Christ's body and the door or walls of
the house.

The answer.
I answer, that God cannot by his absolute power, make Christ's body to be in
diverse places at once: not because there is any defect in God, who is
omnipotent; but because contradiction is implied in the thing which should be
done. Which point I have proved evidently, in the 12. preamble of my Book of
Motives. For the reasons there alleged are effectual, if they be applied to
this purpose. In like manner I say, that two bodies cannot be in one place at
once; because to have parts without parts and to occupy place, is of the
formal and intrinsecall conceit of every organicall and quantitatiue body,
such as Christ's true body is. Whereupon S. Augustine said truly and
learnedly, August. ad Dardanum. Epist. 57.
that if occupation or spaces of places be taken away from bodies, they shall
lose their essence, and be no bodies at all. So then, the entrance of Christ
into the house when the doors were shut, and also his coming out of the
sepulcher, when the stone was vnrolled away; neither does nor can prove, that
two bodies were in one place at once, but that the door and the stone gave
place for the time to Christ's mighty power; like as the red Sea gave place to
the Israelites, and they passed through the midst thereof. And as S. Peter's
chains gave place to his hands; Exodus 14. ver. 21. Psalm. 136. ver. 13. and
14. Act. 12. v. 7.10.
and as the Iron gate opened to him of it own accord. Furthermore, if Christ's
body can be in ten thousand places at once, as the papists impudently avouch;
it must also follow, that it may be in infinite places at once, which is the
heresy of the Vbiquitaries.

For after this manner did S. Hierome reason against John the Bishop of
Jerusalem, when he labored to prove that our bodies may live without meat
after the resurrection. Hier. ad Pammach. to. 5. p. 80
If a man may live forty days without meat, says S. Hierome, as Moses and
Elias did by the power of God; then doubtless may he live eternally, by the same
power of God. In fine, this verity is made evident, by that argument, which
Gods angel made to Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary coming to see the
sepulcher. And because the argument is of force to confound all papists in the
world, if it be well urged; I will allege the argument as it is in the
original, and then make effectual application thereof. Math. 21. v. 1.6.
These are the express words of the holy Evangelist Saint Matthew: (...). He
is not here, for he is risen, as he said. Where I observe first, the
assertion simply in it self. Secondly, the cause and reason of the same
assertion. The assertion is this; Christ is not in the sepulcher: the reason
hereof is this; because Christ is risen. Now then, since Christ cannot be in
the Sepulcher because he is risen; it follows of necessity, that either the
angel of God inspired with Gods holy spirit, made a very foolish and frivolous
argument, (which to affirm, is void of all christianity) or else, A flat
demonstration against popery.
that Christ's body cannot be in two places at once; which is that, that I
intend to prove. For if it were not as I say, the women might have replied
effectually against the angel thus; albeit Christ be risen as you say: yet may
he be in the sepulcher also; because his body may be in two places at once: but
the angel reputing it a thing clear and evident, that Christ's body could not
be in two places at one and the self same time, concluded directly and
forcibly as he thought, Christ's absence in the sepulcher, because he was
risen again. See the 3. part, 10. chapter, 4. conclusion, and 3. paragraphe.

CHAP. VII. Of Christ's ascension and being in heaven.
CHrist having presented himself by many infallible tokens, after that he had
suffered his passion, conuersing visibly with his disciples by the space of
forty days (in which time he spoke of th^nges pertaining to the kingdom of
God, and told them that they should be his witnesses in Jerusalem, Act. 1.
ver. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and de inceps.
and al Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth) he
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but should wait for
the promise of the father; which things when he had spoken, he was taken up in
a cloud out of their sight. While they looked steadfastly toward heaven, two men
stood by them in white apparel, and said to them; ye men of Galilee, why stand
ye gazing into heaven? this Jesus which is taken up fro you into heaven, shall so
come as ye have seen him go into heaven. Then ye disciples returned to
Jerusalem from the mount Oliuet which is near to Jerusalem, being from it a
sabaoths days iorny, which is about 2000. paces or two English miles.

While the Apostles (whose names are Peter, James the son of Zebedeus, Act. 1.
v. 13.14
John, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alpheus,
Simon Zelotes, and Judas Thaddeus,) expected the coming down of the holy
ghost at Jerusalem; there abode with them certain women, and Mary the mother
of Jesus, and his brethren (that is his kinsfolks.) For it was as well
behooueable, to have the wives confirmed, as the husbands; because they were
afterward, to be partakers of the dangers with them. All which prayed with one
accord, not only for the sending of the holy ghost, but also for deliverance
from present dangers, wherewith they were beset.

Act. 3. v. 21.
Christ ascended up into heaven, must there remain until his second aduent,
the day of doom general. And so he neither is, nor can be, in the round cake,
as papists impudently contend.

After Christ's ascension and coming of the holy Ghost, his apostles went
abroad preaching the gospel to all nations: whose limits, acts, and death,
the next chapter in particular manner shall describe.

CHAP. VIII. Of the several precinctes, lives, and deaths of the Apostles,
taken out of Epiphanius, Tertullian, Optatus, Eusebius, Oecumenius, Nicephorus,
and others.
Of Peter, and Philip.
S. Peter after that he had preached the gospel of Jesus Christ, A. D. 44
in Po^tus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithyma, and Italy, was crucified at Rome with
his had downward under the emperor Nero, and buried there the third Calendes
of Iulie. S. Paul the chosen vessel of God omnipotent, and the immovable
pillar of his church, was beheaded the same year, and the same day at Rome: and
S. Philip that blessed disciple of Christ, was about the same time crucified at
Hierapolis, a city in Asia.

Of Andrew and Bartholomew.
S. Andrew preached the gospel in Scythia, Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, and
Achaia. Anno dom. 45
At the length the proconsul Aegaeas caused him to be crucified, because he
persuaded Maximilla his wife and Stantocles his brother, to detest his
unchristian impiety, and to embrace the faith of Christ Jesus. He was buried
in Achaia, with his ancestors. S. Bartholomew after he had preached the gospel
to the Indians, Iudaeus erat and Galileus.
was at length rewarded with the cruel torture of the cross, and buried in
Armenia the great.

Of James the son of Zebedee.
S. James the son of Zebedeus preached the gospel to the twelve tribes which
were in dispersion, A. D. 44
and for his pains was at the length beheaded of Herod the Tetrarch, who was
also called Agrippa. He was buried in the city Marmarica, and king Herod (who
beheaded him) was eaten up with worms. Act. 12. ver. 23*


Of John.
S. John his brother preached the gospel in Asia, and being driven into exile
in the I Will Pathmos by Domitian the emperor, he there both wrote the gospel,
and had his revelation. A. D. 104
He died at Ephesus, in the time of Traianus the Emperor. Where note by the
way (to avoid the variety which seems in some of the ancient fathers, and
historiographers) that albeit Domitian banished S. John into Pathmos, yet did
S. John survive Domitian, and died in the days and reign of Traian.

Of Thomas.
S. Thomas called also Didymus, after he had preached to the Parthians, Medes,
Persians, and Indians, A. D. 45
was wounded with darts in his sides; and so being buried in Calamina a city
in India, came to him, whose sides he before had felt, Christ Jesus.

Of Matthew.
S. Matthew of a publican became an Apostle, A. D. 41*
preached the gospel of Christ zealously, and converted many to the christian
faith. He wrote the gospel in the Hebrew tongue, and was buried in Hierapolis.
Where note by the way, that although many of the old writers affirm S. Matthew
to have written in Hebrew, yet some learned do think that he wrote in greek,
which opinion I prefer as more probable: but how soever that be, it skilleth
not much; for the Greek which now is only exstant, is admitted of all as
authentical. Yea, as Theophilactus records, they that hold saint Matthew to
have written in hebrew, do not deny but Saint John translated it into greek,
and consequently, since S. John was no less inspired with the holy ghost, then
Saint Matthew, it must needs follow, that the greek copy is as authentical
as the Hebrew, if any such could be found.

Of James the son of Alphee.
Anno Dom. 63.
Saint James the son of Alpheus the brother of our Lord, surnamed Iustus, after
he had preached at Gaza, Eleutheropolis, and other countries adjacent, was
made the Bishop of Jerusalem, where he was stoned to death of the Jews, and
buried in the temple.

Of Judas Thaddaeus.
Saint Judas Thaddeus called also Lebbeus, preached in Judea, Anno Dom. 44.
Galilea, Samaria, Idumea, Arabia, Syria, and Mesopotamia, at the length he
came to Edessa, where preaching the gospel of peace he died in peace.

Of Simon Zelotes.
Saint Simon surnamed Zelotes for his great zeal toward his master Christ
Jesus, Anno Dom. 107.
called also Cananeus because he was borne in Cana Galilea, after he had
preached the gospel in Egypt, Africa, Mauritania, Lybia, and in the
occidentall parts, and had confirmed the same with many miracles, he was
crucified under Traianus, being 120. years of age.

Of Matthias.
Anno Dom. 43.
Saint Matthias one of the 70. disciples, was reckoned with the eleven in stead
of Judas Iscarioth. He preached in Ethiopia, where he suffered many tortures,
was almost stoned to death, and then beheaded.

An addition for the complement of this chapter.
Saint James the Great, and Saint John the Evangelist, were the sons of
Zebedeus, the husband of Salome. Saint James the less surnamed Iustus, and the
brother of our Lord, Saint Judas, Thaddeus, and Simon Zelotes, were the sons of
Cleophas the husband of Mary, who was sister to the blessed virgin Mary.

CHAP. IX. Of the three sons of Constantine.
COnstantine when he had reigned 38. years appointed by his last will and
testament, that his three sons, Anno. Dom. 342.
Constantinus, Constantius, and Constans should rule the Empire in several
parts severally: to wit, Constantinus, in France, Spain, and Germany;
Constantius in the East, and Constans in Italy and Illyricum.

Constantinus was not content with partial assigned government, but desired to
have the sole and only administration of the Empire: for which cause, having
too much confidence in the power of man, specially in an evil cause, he made
wars against his brother Constans in Italy; but by that occasion he was
slain, and so his brother Constans possessed all the West Empire.

CHAP. X Of Iulianus apostata.
IVlianus Apostata was nephew to Constantius and brother to Gallus: he was so
excellent well learned, Anno Dom, 365
that in his youth he read the scriptures publicly in the church of Nicomedia:
afterward he went to the famous university of Athens, and studied there; but
after the death of his brother Gallus, Constantius sent him into France and
Germany. Not far from Argentoratum he put to flight 30 thousand Almains,
for which cause by the favor of the soldiers, he was suddenly at
Argentoratum designed Emperor.

At such time as great dissension arose among christians, through diversity of
opinions in Religion, in so much that some dispaired, and other some fell to
Idolatry, then the new Emperor Iulianus preferring his own son before the
true worship of God, and thinking that to abandon the christian religion, was
to advance his royal and imperial estate, forsook the Christian faith,
denied Christ openly, and became an Apostata.

He inhibited christians to serve in wars amongst the Romans, he overthrew
the schools of learning, and spoiled the churches of their treasures. Which
thing he did in derision, telling the Christians that he favored them in so
doing, because through poverty, they might sooner come to heaven.

CHAP. XI. Of the Manichees.
An. Dom. 274
THe Manichees began their heresy in the days of Aurelianus Emperor of Rome,
whose grand-master was Manes a Persian borne. This Manes dispersed his poison,
in very large circuits: First in Arabia, after that in Africa. This heresy
increased so mightily, as it could not be quenched, by the space of two
hundred years: this was the fundamental ground of their false and heretical
doctrine, that there are two Gods, the one good, and the other bad, and yet
both to be eternal. This doctrine seemed plausible to man's reason, at the
first publishing thereof: for since God is good of his own nature, and yet
evil abounds in the world, it seems to follow necessarily, that as there
is a good God, so there must also be a peculiar evil God, equal to the good
God in power and eternity.

The Manichees will neither eat flesh, neither eggs, neither milk, August.
de here is. ad q.v. deum, 46. D.
neither do they drink wine, albeit they will eat grapes; they think that
herbs, trees, and plants, have life in such manner, as they feel great pain
when one cutteth or plucketh them up by the roots, or otherwise: for this
respect they deem it an heinous offense, to purge the field from thorns and
thistles, and so they condemn husbandry, (the most innocent art of all,) as
guilty of many murders, yet they think husbandry or tillage of the ground
to be pardonable in their auditors, because by that their labor they bring
food to their elect; in whose bellies the substance is purged, and the offense
taken away. And consequently, although themselves do no murders actually, as
they pretend; yet do they live of manifest murders, practiced by others really.
Where note by the way, that the church of the Manichees consisted of two sorts
of people, their elect and their auditors.

They held this fantastical opinion, Epiphan. haer. 66. lib. 2. to. pa. 205.
that whosoever did eat flesh, should be made the same thing which he did
eat. As for example, if a man did eat an hog, he should be made a hog; if a
bull, he should become a bull; if a bird, he should be a bird; if a fish, a
fish, and so in the rest.

The Manichees held also, that if any man marry a wife, Epiphan. vbi sup.
that same man so soon as he passes out of this life, is changed into another
body, and becomes a woman. Yea they say further, that if a man kill a man, an
ass, or other living thing, that man straight after his death, is changed into
that living thing which he killed, be it a mouse, serpent, or whatsoever else.

The Manichees use to bless their meats in this manner: O bread, neither did
I reap thee, Epiphan. in catal. dogmatum Manich.
neither did I grind thee, neither did I make thee, neither did I bake thee;
but an other did al these things, and brought thee to me, my self therefore do
eat thee without offense. These and other like monstrous assertions did this
heresy bring forth. This is the grace that they use.

CHAP. XII. Of the Pelagians, taken out of Saint Augustine.
PElagius sometime a monk, and a Brytan borne, extolled free will so much,
Anno. Dom. 413
that he ascribed little or nothing unto grace. He affirmed that man may keep
all Gods holy commandments, without his divine grace: and being reproved
(says saint Austen) for derogating so much from the grace of God; he answered
with unchristian subtlety, that grace was therefore given to man, that he
might keep Gods laws with more facility.

That grace (says Pelagius) without which we can do nothing that good is, is
only in our free will: which free will God ingraffed in our nature, without
any our deserts: so that God helps us by his law and doctrine to this end
only (says Pelagius) that we may learn what to hope for, and what to do;
but not to do, what we know ought to be done.

The Pelagians hold (says S. Austin) that infants in their carnal nativity,
are so pure and free from original sin; that they need not the second and
spiritual regeneration, of water and the holy ghost. Now if any man would
ask the Pelagians, to what end infants are baptized: They will answer
forsooth (says saint Austen) that by this external regeneration they may
have access into heaven, and not thereby to be absolved from the guilt of
sin. For if they die without Baptism, yet do they promise them eternal
life, but without the kingdom of heaven. This is the heresy of Pelagius,
which I have sincerely recited out of saint Augustine, that excellent writer
and immovable pillar of Christ's church, because many talk thereof, who seem
not thoroughly to understand the same. With which heresy how the papists agree,
and how they dissent from the same, shall (God willing) be showed when I come
to the next Book, in the chapter of man's Justification.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Arrian heresy.
ARrius the heretic was the reader of divinity in Alexandria, a man of great
learning and eloquence, Anno Dom. 323
but withal, proud and ambitious. He denied the divinity and godhead of Jesus
Christ, affirming him to be pure man, and a mere creature. Which his
blasphemous doctrine was dispersed throughout Egypt, Lybia, Alexandria,
Thebais, and many other provinces.

Alexander a godly bishop labored by all means possible, to dissuade Arrius
from his pestiferous and execrable heresy: but all his travel was in vain,
because many other bishops and clergy men embraced the opinion of Arrius, and
obstinately defended the same.

The most christian emperor Constantinus worthily surnamed the Great, deeply
lamenting the church of God to be divided with schism and dissension, Niceph.
li. ^. c. 1^ Euleb. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 5.6.
sent Hosius the Bishop of Corduba in Spain, to Alexander and Arrius with his
own handwriting, earnestly exhorting them to set all dissension aside, and to
agree in unity, peace, and truth. But when the blessed Emperor could not
prevail in his holy purpose, he commanded al christian bishops to resort at
a certain day designed, to Nice a city in Bithynia, where this great
controversy was decided before Constantine himself; and Arrius with his
accomplices driven into exile.

The Emperor Constantinus sent for Arrius into his palace, so meaning fully
to make trial of his opinion: Socrat. li. 2. ca. 2^ Nicephor. libr. 8. histor.
cap. 51.
who when he asked Arrius if he were of the same opinion with the council of
Nice; Arrius without all deliberation and stay, subscribed in the presence of
the Emperor to the decrees of the said council. Then the emperor greatly
admiring that fact, willed Arrius to confirm his subscription with an oath: to
which Arrius yielded deceitfully, as he had done before: insomuch, that the
Emperor being per^waded that Arrius was an orthodox and good christian,
charged Alexander the bishop of Alexandria severely, to receive Arrius again
into his woonted place and dignity. Yet Alexander knowing Arrius to be an
enemy to God and his holy religion, and suspecting his dissimulation with the
Emperor his sovereign; fearing God on the one side, and reuerencing his
sovereign on the other; gave himself to devout and earnest prayer, so
commending the whole cause unto God. While Alexander was thus devoutly
occupied, behold, news came unto him, that as Arrius came from the emperors
palace, the worm of conscience did wonderfully trouble him, and solubilitie
of body did so vehemently assault him, that he was enforced suddenly to
withdraw himself to a common place, where while he sought to have the ordinary
course of nature, blood gushed but, all his inwards fell from him, and so he
perished most miserably.

The secret subtlety, wherewith Arrius fought to deceive the godly and most
christian Emperor, was this: Arrius wrote his execrable opinion of Christ, in a
piece of paper kept closely under his arm holes: that (...), he subscribed in
the presence of the Emperor: then the Emperor maruelling that he would so
do, urged him to confirm the same with an oath. Arrius roundly took an oath,
that he thought as he had written, meaning indeed of his first writing, which
he kept secretly under his arme-hole. Where every one may see how grievous a
sin it is to dissemble with God and his anointed magistrate; for so much the
rare inflicted punishment does evidently convince.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Nestorius and his heresy.
NEstorius Bishop of Constantinople, albeit he denied not Christ to be god as
Arrius did, Anno Dom. 433
yet he affirmed pure man to be borne of the blessed virgin, and that she
therefore ought not to be called (...), the mother of God. Whose heresy was
condemned in the Ephesine council, under Theodosius junior then Emperor of
Rome.

Nestorius his heresy consisted in this, that since the blessed virgin was a
woman, God could not be borne of her, and consequently she ought not to be
called the mother of God. For although he neither denied in Christ, the deity
nor the humanity, yet did he place two persons in Christ together with the
two natures: and consequently he denied the wonderful hypostaticall union,
which our christian faith acknowledges.

Arrius held, that Christ was only man, wholly void of the nature and person
of God: but Nestorius held, that Christ had both the nature and person of God,
as also both the nature and the person of man: which last was the formalitie of
his heresy, and therefore ought well to be observed of the reader. For albeit
there be two natures in Christ, the nature of God, and the nature of man, yet
is the^re but one only person in Christ, which is the person or subsistence of
God: for in that divine person by unspeakable hypostaticall union, the true
nature of man subsisteth, without the person of man. By reason hereof it is
truly said, and christianly believed, the son of God was borne of the
blessed virgin, the son of God did suffer torments, the son of God was
crucified, the son of God rose again the third day; the son of God
ascended into heaven: All which Nestorius denied, because he severed the
natures, by multiplying persons in Christ Jesus. Christ therefore taking upon
him the nature of man, Note this poin^ well.
did single it from the person of man, uniting it to himself, and making it
subsist in his divine person; by reason of which supernatural union, Christ
became perfect God and perfect man, having two distinct natures, subsisting in
one indistinct person*

CHAP. XV. Of Macedonius and his heresy.
MAcedonius the Bishop of Constantinople, denied the holyghost to be God: he
said the son was God indeed, Anno. Dom^ 383.
and equal with the father in substance, but the holyghost (with him) was
without honor and dignity, a servant and minister, little better then the
Angels.

For the condemnation of this wicked heretic and heresy, the second general
council was holden at Constantinople, under the Emperors Gra^ianus and
Theodosius: where were assembled 150. fathers, for that only end and purpose.

CHAP. XVI. Of Eutiches and his heresy.
EUtiches (whose accomplices Dioscorus and Seuerus held the same opinion,) was
the Abbot of Constantinople, who, Anno Do^ 456.
while he sought to avoid the opinion of Nestorius dividing one Christ into
two sons and two persons, fell into another mischief, and taught more
absurdly then Nestorius, to wit, that Christ had but one only nature, after
the hypostaticall union was accomplished, because the humanity was absorpte of
the divinity: for so Christ's divinity incapable of all mortality, was
pe^force made partaker of the bitter death upon the cross: as therefore
Nestorius to avoid the confusion of natures, multiplied the persons; so
contrariewise Eutiches, to avoid the multiplicitie of persons, admitted the
confusion of natures.

These heretics, Eutiches, Dioscorus, and Seuerus, were condemned by the
fourth famous general council of Chalcedon, celebrated under Ualentinianus and
Martianus the Emperors, where were present 360. Bishops.

CHAP. XVII. Of Mahomet and the Saracens.
MAhomet descended of the Image of Ismael and Agar, and being a very poor
orphane, joined himself to his kinswoman Chadiga; first, as an hired servant,
afterward as her betrothed husband; and so was greatly enriched by her, as who
was a woman of exceeding wealth Which Chadiga, when she took very heavily, that
Mahomet was troubled with the faling evil; he told her, it was no disease, but
that the archangel Gabriel then appeered to him, whose wonderful majesty
because he was not able to behold, he fell groueling upon the ground.

An. Dom. 623
This Mahomet professed himself to be the mighty prophet of the everliving God,
and by that means stirred up to sedition, great troops of men as well in Asia
as in Africa: which people he infected with a new kind of religion, and
persuaded them that they were called Saracens by Gods holy decree, of Sara the
wife of Abraham; and that they were the lawful successors of that divine
promise that was made to Abraham and his seed for ever.

The form of the aforesaid mangled religion, Mahomet (who was borne and buried
in Mecha a city in Arabia) composed by the help of the Arrian monk Sergius,
and called it the Alcoran: which word (Alcoran) in the Arabian language,
signifies (law or doctrine.) In which Alcoran they profess that Christ is a
prophet, and an excellent doctor; but withal, they deny him to be God, and
the true Savior of the world.

The Saracens called Arabians of the place, Ismaelites of Ismael, and Agarenes
of Agar, being in wages under Heraclius the emperor, Genes. 16.4. Genes. 17.20.
rebelled for want of pay about the year of Christ 628. and within 38. years
they conquered all Syria, Damascus, Jerusalem, much of Assyria, and the greater
part of Asia: al which they subdued to the religion of Mahomet, at that time
but newly broched, and of the Arabians or Saracens first of all received. For
so soon as the Agarenes dwelling in Arabia, and serving in wars under Caesar,
understood by proclamation that they could no longer have the emperors pay;
they stirred up sedition against the Roman captains: by the means whereof
the power of Mahomet increased; to whom the common people being destitute of
an head, and in some distress for want of money, did submit themselves, as well
for his great riches, as for other his singular gifts.

The Jews, Arrians, and pseudochristians, did al embrace Mahomets Alcoran and
mangled religion: they first subdued Arabia and part of Syria; for in Damascus
Mahomet had his palace.

The Saracens having mightily enlarged their dominions, divided themselves into
several gouernements: they termed their chief lord Caeliphae, their next
governor, Seriphes, next to him a Sultan, who was over every province: at
length, the empire was translated to the Turks.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the original of the Turks.
THe Egyptians wearied with the yoke of the Romans, submitted themselves to the
Saracens, and received their religion. They continued Saracens above 400.
years, until such time as the Sultan of Syria conquered them, which was about
the year of our Savior Jesus 1170. at which time he made himself Sultan of
Egypt also: at length the multitude of captives, Anno Dom 1203
which the Sultan had brought from the Tartarians for his wars, growing
mighty, killed the Sultan, and took to themselves the kingdom of Egypt. They
called their king Turquemenius, and conquered al Asia the less from the Sultan
of Asia, which they termed Turkia. And thus they continued till Zelimus the
great Turk conquered Egypt, and destroyed the government of the Mamaluchies,
Anno Dom 1517
which were christians that had denied their faith; so it remains until this
day, under the Turk, holding the new no religion of Mahomet, as do all of the
east for the greater part.

This kingdom or empire of the Turks, began about the year of our Lord 1300.
in the days of Othomannus the rich and mighty Turk; for before it was of no
reputation, Anno Dom 1300
though it had some being. The church of God flourished before this tyranny,
one full thousand years, even from the days of Constantine the great. From
this time the kingdom of Mahomet was called the empire of the Turks.

THE THIRD PART of the original of Popery; with the successiue Increments
thereof, and an evident confutation of the same.
The first Chapter, containing certain Preludes, no less necessary for the
intelligence of the Chapters following, then for the exact discovery of long
hidden Popery.
The first Prelude.
POpery was not hatched al on one day, month, or year, but crept into the
church by little and little: and that because the late bishops of Rome, were
not Lines, Clements, and Syluesters; Victor. de pot. pap. relect. 4. page 151.
but naughty and most wicked men. For so says their own dear friar and
great schooleman, Franciscus a Victoria. Yea, some of them began as foxes,
continued as wolves, and ended as dogs. This to be so, Carr. in Epit. conc.
page 369.
will witness with me Bartholomaeus Carranza their learned dominican doctor.
Yea Irenaeus, who lived within 200. years of Christ, avouches, that before his
time, ignorance and negligence had brought many abuses into the Church. And
what may we think then of abuses in our days? Read his words, apud
Eusebium, histor. lib. 5, cap. 24.

The second Prelude.
August. libr. ad Bonefaccium, c. 4 ^o 7.
MAny things may evidently be proved to have been done, whereof for all that
we can yield no sound reason, when, where, and by whom they were done. For
first, we know which the Papists can not deny, that in the primitive church
infants received the holy communion; yet neither we nor they can tell, when,
where, and by whom, that indiscreet custom first began and was abolished: it
was usually practiced in S. Austines time. Secondly, we know and they know,
that the Lords supper in the Romish church is ministered under one kind contrary
to Christ's institution, yet neither we nor they can tell, when, where, and by
whom, that execrable custom first began. Thirdly, we know and they know yt
private mass has bin long practiced in the church of Rome; yet can we neither
tell, when, where, nor by whom it first began. But this we are assured of, that
it is repugnant to Christ's institution, wholly dissonant from apostolical
doctrine, and utterly condemned by all approved antiquity.

Fourthly, we know and they know, that their reformed Franciscans (now commonly
called Capuchens) can tell right perfectly, that their other dissolute
Franciscans have swarued fro their ancient order, albeit they can neither tell,
when, where, nor by whom, that dissolution first began: but they prove it
aposteriori, by their ancient rules manifestly. And even so do we prove by the
holy scriptures, (the true touchstone of all verity) that the papists have
swarued from apostolical doctrine, albeit we could not (as yet we can) assign
the time, place, and persons; when, where, and by whom such antichristian
alteration began.

The third Prelude.
THe usual practice of papists in their commentaries, bookse, and glosses, has
bin such and so intolerable in wresting the holy scriptures, as their own
dear brethren and great doctors, cannot deny or conceal the same. And
because this may seem strange unto the reader, their own words shall bear me
witness: Victor. de potest^ Eccl. relec. ^. sect. 6.
for besides this, that Victoria confesses their beggarly and unlearned
Canonists to have wrested the scriptures, in the behalf and favor of their
Pope; these are the express words of Polidorus Virgilius, their own professed
and sworn brother. Non secus isti iurisconsulti aliquoties detorquent sacras
literas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus extendere pelles. These
popish Legists and Canonists, P. 39. Poly^^* Virg libr. 4. cap. ^.
do now and then so wrest, and writhe the holy scripturs; even as cobblers do
gnaw with their teeth and stretch out their filthy skins. Out of which words
I note first, that this Polidore was a great Hostiensis, their grand and famous
doctor. Thirdly, that their mangling and wresting

CHAP. II. Of the usurped primacie in the Church of Rome.
About the year 590. John bishop of Constantinople sought by all means possible
to have yt primacy of al other bishops, Anno Dom 590.
and for that end termed himself universal bishop. This proud appellation (to
be called universal bishop) was so strange a thing in Christ's church in those
days, that S. Gregory surnamed ye great, the holy and learned bishop of Rome,
Gregor. lib^. 7 Epist. cap. 194.
stoutly withstood I. of Constantinople, calling him antichrist, and the name
antichristian. And because his own assertion plainly recited, is most able to
persuade the Reader, I will allege his words, which are these, Ego autem
fidenter dico quia quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari
desiderat, in elatione sua antichristum praecurrit, and I speak boldly, that
whosoever either calls himself universal priest, or desires so to be
called, is for his intolerable pride, become ye precursor of antichrist: and
that because in his proud conceit, he preferres himself before al other.

This notwithstanding, Bonifacius the bishop of Rome and third of that name,
Anno Dom 607.
obtained of the emperor Phocas to be called the chief of al bishops, and that
Rome should be the head of all Churches: for so soon as Boniface had invaded
Peter's seat, (which was about 607. years after Christ,) and had with much
ado obtained of the bloody and cruel tyrant Phocas, (who ravished many
virtuous matrones, Nicephor, Sigeb^^^.
and murdered the good Emperor Mauritius with his wife and children,) that
Rome should be called the head of all churches, even then, even then doubles,
the beast of the revelation, began to prepare the way for Antichrist. Lo,
whoredom and murder, were the preparitiues to Romish primacie
This point is so evident, as their own zealous papists, and renowned
chronographers, Sigebertus, Palmerius, Platina, Bergomensis, Polydorus, and
others, are enforced to confess the same. And for the better satisfaction of
the reader, I will allege their own words. Thus therefore writes their own
learned and beloved monk Marianus Scotus; Hic impetrauit a Phoca Caesare, vt
seeds apostolica Romanae caput esset ecclesiae, quum antea Constantinopolis
primum omnium se scribebat. This Bonifacius obtained of Phocas the emperor,
that the apostolic sea of Rome should be the head of the church, Marianus
Scotus in Chron.
when before Constantinople wrote her self the chief of all.

Sigebertus Gemblacensis an other of their monks, writes in this express
manner: Post quem Bonifacius Romanae ecclesiae praesidet. Sigebert. in in Chron.
Hic obtinuit apud Phocam imperatorem, vt ecclesiae Romana caput esset omnium
ecclesiarum, quia ecclesia Constantinopolitana scribebat se esse primam omnium
ecclesiarum. After whom, Bonifacius governed the church of Rome: and he
obtained of the emperor Phocas, that the church of Rome should be the head of
all churches; and that because the church of Constantinople wrote it self the
head of all churches. Palmer in Chro.
Palmerius has these words; consentiente Phoca institutum fuit, vt ecclesia
Romanae caput esset ecclesiarum omnium, cum prius Constantinopolitana id
vsurpare tentasset. It was ordained by the consent of Phocas, that the Church
of Rome should be the head of all churches, whereas the church of all
Constantinople, had before usurped that dignity. The other writers have words
of like force, which I omit for brevity sake. Peruse Martinus, Polonus, and
Philippus Bergomensis, who both teach the same doctrine.

The first objection.
Phocas did not give the primacie to the church of Rome, but only declared by
his decree, that authority which of right pertains to the same.

The answer.
Note this point well.
I answer, that neither Scripture, council, nor any authentical w^iter can be
alleged; who before the said constitution of Phocas, did at any time ascribe
the headship and universal government of all Churches, to the Church of Rome.
Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 24.
For first, S. Policarpus would not yield to Anicetus bishop of Rome, in the
controversy about Easter, as witnesses Eusebius. Secondly, Irenaeus and other
bishops of France, reproved Victor the bishop of Rome very sharply, bidding
him to have respect to peace and unity of the church. Thirdly, Polycrates and
many bishops of Asia did stoutly withstand Victor, in his Cyprian.
S. Cyprian rou^dly opposed himself against Stephanus the bishop of Rome,
contemned Epist. 74. ad Pomp.
to confirm the faithful in Samaria. And consequently, if the pope be not
above Peter, he may be sent as an inferior, or at least as an equal, Act. 4.
ver. 17.
even as Peter was. Sixthly, the fathers of the Affrican council, would not
yield to Celestine the bishop of Rome, in the controversy Appiarius. Epist
conc. Affr. ad Celest. tom. 1. conc.
And when pope Celestine alleged, that the counsel of Nice gave liberty to
appeal to Rome; the fathers of the council answered, that the true copies of
the decree were otherwise. Seventhly, the famous general council of
Chalcedon, gave the bishop of Constantinople Conc. Nic. can. ^ did. 35. cap.
Mos. antiquus, in gloss.
Which conclusion is proved more at large, in the sixth chapter of my second
book of Motives.

The second objection.
You are not able to name the pope and time, that first swar^ed from the
doctrine of his ancestors.

The answer.
I say first, that many things have bin done in your church, which your selves
can never prove, when, where, and by who^ they were done: this is evident by
the 2. Prelude and 1. chapter of this third and last part. I say secondly, that
Pope Boniface the third of that name, did degenerate from Gregory his
predecessor, as is already proved. I say thirdly, that the absurdity of this
objection shall be discovered, throughout the chapters following.

The third objection.
You confess in your Motives, that in the church of Rome for many years
together, were sundry learned and godly bishops, who lived orderly, preached
the word of God sincerely, and fed their flocks carefully: but we are able to
show a lawful succession of our Bishops, even from saint Peter to him that now
sits in his chair. And therefore granting the former, you seem impudent to
deny the latter.

The answer.
I answer, that the succession of your Romish bishops is not so certain, The
first reason
as ye would bear the world in hand it is. For first, many grave and learned
writers do vary exceedingly, in setting down that succession wherein you so
glory. S. Clement (whose epistles the papists magnify when they seem to make
for their purpose) testifying for himself, Clemens, ep. 1. Irenaeus, lib. 3.
cap, 3. Epiphan. Haer. 27. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. ca. 13, 14, 15,
that S. Peter appointed him to be his successor. Irenaeus, Epiphanius,
Eusebius, and the canon of the popish mass, do all with uniform consent,
place Linus, and Cletus, before the said Clemens; yet Sophronius, Met^phrastes,
and the Popish Pontifical that cannot lie, affirm roundly, that Saint Peter
lived after Linus.

Secondly, many schisms have bin in the church of Rome, and amongst our romish
bishops, The second reason.
even for many years together: so that the succession of the latter, can never
be proved constantly, to have descended without interruption from the former.
Their own Onuphrius Panuinius, reckons up thirty schisms in the church
of Rome, but I will content my self with two only, Onuphr. in chron
whereof their own dear friar Bartholomeus Carranza can instruct them
sufficiently. The former schism endured for the space of 64. years, Carranz.
in epit. p. 370. and. p, 373.
during which time, their godly popedom was at Auinion in France, and not one
only day at Rome, though at Rome (as they prate) God placed their holy seat.
In the latter schism of the twain rehearsed, three of their holy bishops were
popes at one and the self same time, to wit, Johannes the four and twenty of
that name, Benedictus the thirteenth, and Gregory the twelfte. From which
three striving and grinning as dogs for a bone, I would learn how they can
derive, their holy so supposed succession.

Thirdly, a woman as Saint Paul teaches us, The third reason
is not capable of ecclesiastical function. And so the succession derived from
our holy mistress John pope, cannot possibly be of force: 1. Tim. 2. v. 11, 12.
1. Cor. 14. ver. 39
which story of Pope John the woman if it be true, let the Papists for ever
hold their peace, and brag no longer of their succession. And that the said
story of their woman pope John is true indeed, I will prove by the testimony
of such writers, as the Papists hitherto have ever thought well of, Seven
popish approved writers, agree to this story of Pope John^
and reputed for their own: that is, by Sigebertus, Marianus Scotus,
Palmerius, Martinus Polonus; Phillippus Bergomensis, Bapt. Platina, and
Bartholomeus Carranza. For all these sing one and the self same song, that
pope John was a woman though not an holy nun.

The first reply.
These writers lived long after Pope John, and therefore knew they nothing but
by report of others.

The answer.
I say first, that these seven writers lived longer one after another, then
Sigebertus and Scotus lived after Pope John. Syenna. Which painting our newly
hatched Jesuits, sought earnestly to have had defaced, in the late repairing
of that church; but the bishop would not suffer them to prevail. I say fifthly,
that these seven writers who were all papists, and lived

The 2. reply.
They say only and barely, vt ferunt, as men say. And other grave writers that
lived before them all, and nearer the time of pope John, make no mention
thereof.

The answer.
I say first, that to reason ab auctoritate negative, is not holden Palmerius
and Segebertus both have these express words; Palmerius and Sigebertus in
chro.
Fama est hunc Iohanne^ faeminam fuisse, and vni soli familiaritantum cognitam,
qui eam complexus est, and grauis facta peperit papa existens. Quare eam inter
pontifices non numerant quidam, ideo nomini numeru^ non facit. The report is,
that this John was a woman, and known only to one that was her familiar
friend. By whose familiarity she became with child, and was delivered even
while she was pope (of Rome.) For which cause some do not reckon her amongst
the popes, and so she makes not up the number. Marianus, Polonus,
Bergomensis, Platina and Carranza already named, teach the same doctrine,
writing upon the same John. And note well, that M. Scotus affirms the story
constantly, without al ands or ifs. And so does also M. Polonus, who was the
popes own penitentiarie. To these I may fitly add, Bernard. ad Gaufrid.
epist. 1 25
that which your L. Abbot Bernard says; the beast (says he) mentioned in the
revelation, to whom was given a mouth speaking blasphemies, and to make wars
with the Saints, sits in Peter's chair. His words are cited verbatim, in
the preface to my book of Motives.

The third reply.
S. Austen avouches plainly, Aug. co^^r. ep. Manich. cap. 4.
that the succession of the Bishops of Rome, was one of the chiefest motives,
that kept him in the catholic church.

The answer.
I answer that succession is of two sorts, material and formal. Material is
the succession of persons, one after another in the same place. Formal is the
succession of persons, one after another in the same doctrine in what place
soever. Now S. Austen in deed writing against the Manichies, says that
succession of priests from S. Peter's seat, kept him in the unity of the
church. And no marvel, because the Bishops of Rome until the days of S.
Austen and long after; were very godly men, and taught the same doctrine, that
S. Peter had done before them: and so they joined succession formal with
material; which if the bishops of Rome would this day perform, all godly
christians would now join with them, Irene. libr. 4. c. 43
as S Austen did in his time. For as S. Irene says; we ought to obey those
priests, that with succession keep the word of truth.

The third objection.
S. Paul says plainly, that there must be bishops and pastors in the church,
even until the worlds end. Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
Whereupon it follows, that you protestants have no church at all. For
before Luther departed from us, all bishops and priests for many years
together (as your selves can never deny) embraced our Romish religion. This
objection does so gall you all, as ye cannot tell in the world, what answer to
frame thereunto.

The answer.
Gentle words I pray you, Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
the matter is not so dangerous as ye think. I therefore say first with saint
Paul, that Nicolaus de Lyra, after he has told us that many Popes have swarued
from the christian faith, and become flat apostataes, concludes in these
words, Lyranus in 16, cap. Matthew.
Propter quod ecclesia consistit in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera,
and confessio fidei, and veritatis. by reason whereof the church consists in
those persons, in whom there is true kn^wledge and confession of the faith and
of verity. So then by the confession of your own approved doctor, not they
that sic in saint Peter's chair at Rome, are the true and lawful successors of
Saint Peter; but they that confess and preach saint Peter's doctrine. I say
thirdly, that our reformed

The first reply.
Howsoever you wrangle about your formal succession, yet is it clear to all
that have eyes; that you have no material succession at all, unless you
term it material succession, when lay persons possess the rooms of lawful
Bishops. For I pray you (good sir) who ordered your Bishops and Priests in king
Edwardes days? Who sent your Ministers that this day preach and minister your
sacraments? Can you for shame deny that they were ordered by such as were
runnagates from us in Queen Mary's time? All the world knows, ye cannot do
it. And yet must you be sent by ordinary vocation, or else confess that you
most shamefully usurp that holy function. For as saint Paul says, How shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14.
And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach except
they be sent?

The answer.
Our succession is both material and formal, christian and apostolical, as
which is consonant to the holy scriptures, and to the usual practice of the
primitive church. For first our bishops can prove their doctrine by the
scriptures, and by the testimonies of best approved writers, as I have already
proved in my Motives, and shall by Gods assistance prove more at large in this
discourse. Secondly, our bishops have mission and imposition of hands,
according to the practice apostolical and of all approved antiquity. Thirdly,
our bishops are made in such form and order, as they have ever been
accustomed, a few popish, superstitious, and beggarly ceremonies omitted,
which of late years had crept into the church; that is to say, be free
election of the Chapter, by consecration of the archbishop, and other his
associates, and by the admission of the prince.

The second reply.
S. Epiphanius inueyeth bitterly against one Zachaeus, Epiphan. lib. 3. page
355. Hier. contr. Lucifer.
who being but a ^ay man, presumed impudently to handle the holy mysterie^.
And saint Jerome says of Hilarious the heretic, that he could neither baptize
nor administer the eucharist; because he was but a deacon, when he went out of
the church. And therefore the man being dead, the sect also died with him. And
what are you but deacons? Nay, what are you but mere lay men? For you are
neither consecrated after the old manner, nor confirmed by the Pope; but ye are
accursed long sithence, by his holy anathematismes.

The answer.
I say first, that if mere lay men should presume in our churches, to handle
the holy mysteries; they could not escape condign punishment, according to
their demerites. I say secondly, that the want of your greasing and other your
beggarly ceremonies, can not make the consecration of our Bishops unlawful. I
say thirdly, that our bishops are consecrated and 2. Tim. 1.6. 1. Tim. 4.14.
Acts. 13 ver. 3. Act. 1. ve. 21.
Of prayers with laying on of hands, S. Luke speaks in the Acts. Of
election by voices of the people, S. Peter makes relation: but of popish
paltry ceremonies, I find no where any word at all.

That election ought to be by consent of the people, S. Augustine showed
plainly in a most godly and prudent epistle, Aug. in Epist. 11. (...). 2.
when in the presence of Religianus, and Martinianus, bishops, and of
Saturninus, Leporius, Barnabas, Fortunatianus, Rusticus, Lazarus, and Eradius
priests; he humbly requested of all the people that by their consentes,
Eradius might be chosen bishop after his death. I wish the reader to peruse
the whole epistle, as which is replenished with all spiritual sweetness. But S.
Cyprian is so plain and copious in this point of doctrine, as who soever shall
once read him with judgment, can no longer stand in doubt thereof. And that
which I say of S. Cyprian in this behalf, must also be understood of Caecilius
Primus, Polycarpus, and other bishops of Afric, assembled together for this
purpose. For the Bishops and people of Spain wrote letters by Felix and
Sabinus to the African bishops; requiring their advise concerning the factes of
Basilides and Martialis. The bishops of Africa with S. Cyprian, among other
things answered to the churches of Spain in these words.

Quando ipsa (plebs) maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes
vel indignos recusandi: ^pud. D. Cypria. b. 1. epist. 4.
quod and ipsum videmus de diuina authoritate descendere, vt sacerdos plebe
praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur, and dignus atque idoneus public^ iudicio
ac testimonio comprob^tur.

Because the people has proper power to elect worthy priests, or to reject
the unworthy: which thing we see descends from Gods own authority, that
when the people shall be present, then the priest be chosen before all their
eyes, and so be pro^ued worthy and fit by their public judgment and
testimony.

Out of these words I note first, that the people may choose or refuse him for
their bishop, whom they like or dislike. I note de iure diuino granted Iacobus
Pamelius is enforced to grant, Iacod. Pamelius in annot.
that this was the practice of the primitive church, and continued many hundred
years, to wit, until saint Gregory the first of that name, Anno Dom. 590
who lived above five hundred and ninety years after the incarnation of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and so long by Pamelius his grant, this was
the practice of the primitive church. Yea, this practice was of force indeed,
until our disholie father Pope Boniface the third invaded saint Peter's chair,
from whom proceeded all idolatry.

To this Pamelius obiecteth first, Ob. 1. Pamelii*
that though the voices of the people were required, yet did they not subscribe
to the election.

I answer, that that skilleth not, because the subscription was not any
purpose, unless it had the consent of the people.

But Pamelius replieth that the bishops were not enforced to admit whomsoever
the people did require. Ob. 2. Pameli^*


To the which I answer, that neither were the people enforced to receive,
whomsoever the Bishops would intrude upon them.

This practice of the ancient Church will some men say, is not this day
observed in our reformed Churches of England.

I answer, that it is virtually observed, Virtuall election remains yet in
the people*
though not formally. For after the election is made by the Deane and Chapter,
liberty is granted to the whole congregation, freely to declare their like or
dislike, and what exception they can give against the party: which their
freedom and liberty therein is made known, by letters affixed in public
place.

Now that the Bishop ought to be confirmed by the letters patents of the
Prince, and not of the Pope, which is the third and last thing to be proved, I
will unfold to the gentle reader, by three important and irrefragable reasons,
grounded in the very bowels of that self same practice, The Pope must be
confirmed by the letters patents of the Prince.
which the papists will they, nil they, must perforce admit for good. The
practice whereof I speak, is evident in the confirmation of these three Popes,
Pelagius the second, Seuerinus and Benedictus the second. For all these three,
and al other Bishops of Rome till the said Benedict inclusiue, were ever
elected and confirmed, by the emperors commandment. Which verity is freely
confessed in express terms, by four famous popish writers, who therefore
are and ought to be of more credit and force against the papists then any
other authors whosoever: the names of the Popish doctors are these. Bapt.
Platina, Bar^hol. Carranza, Anastasius Bibliothecarius, and Onuphrius Panuinius.

Platina writes thus, touching the creation of Pelagius; Nilenim tum in
eligendo pontifice actum erat, Platina in vita Pelagii secundi.
nisi eius electionem imperator approbasset.

For at that time, (which was after the incarnation of our redeemer 579)
nothing was done effectually about the election of the Pope, unless the
Emperor had confirmed the same.

Platina in vita Seuerini.
Touching the creation of Seuerinus, the same Platina writes in this manner.

Vana tunc enim habebatur cleri ac populi electio, nisi id imperatores auteorum
exarchi confirmassent.

For the election of the clergy and the people, was of no force at all in
those days, Anno Dom 637
unless the Emperors or their lieutenants, had confirmed the same. This was
done 637. years after Christ's incarnation.

Concerning the creation of Benedicte, Platina has these words.

Platina in vita Bened. secundi.
Ad hunc Constantinus imperator sanctionem misit, vt deinceps quem clerus,
populus, exercitus que Romanus in pontificem delegisset eundem statim verum
Christi vicarium esse omnes crederent: nulla aut Constantinopolitani principis,
aut Italiae exarchi expectata auctoritate, vt antea fieri consueuerat: id enim
ratum erat in creando pontifice, quod princeps confirmasset, vel qui eius vices
in Italia gerebat.

The emperor Constantine sent a decree to this Pope* that whomsoever the
clergy, people, and Roman soldiers should henceforth choose for their bishop,
all people should by and by believe him to be the vicar of Christ ( scilicet)
if they would.

Bartholomeus Carranza a dominican Friar, Carranza in epit. p. 301.
has the very same assertion ad verbum.

Anastasius and Onuphrius have these express words, Anastas. apud Onuphr. in
ch^^ico.
pontifices qui deinde fuerant, creati and consecrati sunt sine
Constantinopolitani imperatoris iussione.

The Popes that lived afterward, were made and consecrated, without the
Emperor of Constantinople his commandment: as if they had said, in the old
time and in the ancient Church, no Bishop of Rome could have been
admitted at any time, unless he had brought letters patents from the
Emperor, though now the practice be far otherwise.

Out of which doctrine, The first corollarie
I gather these three evident and most necessary corollaries. First, that the
vulgar and common sort of people are grossly deceived, when they term
papistrie the old religion, and repute them for the Catholics. For we
indeed are the true and ancient Catholics, and the Papists are nothing else
but flat Heretics. For this Benedict could not be made Bishop of Rome,
without the Emperors Letters Patents. This primacie of the Emperor over the
Bishop of Rome, was six hundred, Anno Dom 684
four score and four years after the incarnation of Christ. For at that time
was this Benedict made the Pope. So then the Bishop of Rome, for the space
almost of seven hundred years after the incarnation of Christ Jesus,
acknowledged the Emperor for his superior and Lord, as without whose Letters
Patentes he could have no Jurisdiction. For, as in civil causes, many are
debarred from their lawful inheritance, The popes tyranny debarred us from our
an^ient right.
and that by the violent dealing of mighty men; even so we catholics have
been many years excluded from our own churches, our ancient and lawful
possessions, and that by the force, violence, and tyranny, of the bloody
Romish antichrists. And as temporal men are in time restored unto their
ancient right, by just and godly magistrates, even so were we, and are we, by
the goodness of God and most christian princes, king Henry the eight, and king
Edward the sixth of famous memory, and our most gracious sovereign Elizabeth,
restored to the old, christian, catholic, and apostolic religion, and placed
again in our own churches, the spiritual birthright of us and our ancestors.

I gather secondly, that our Bishops in England are made and consecrated, The
second corollarie.
according to the ancient, christian, catholic, and Roman manner, that is,
by the Letters patents of the Prince.

I gather thirdly, that Christian Emperors upon a certain zeal not grounded
upon knowledge, The third corol^^rie.
yielding up their sovereign rights to the Bishops of Rome, opened the
window to all antichristian tyranny. For in short time after, the Romish
Bishops became so arrogant and lordly, that they took upon them to depose the
Emperors, to translate their Empires, and to dispose at their pleasures, of
their royal scepters and regalities.

The third reply.
The church of God cannot be without Bishops and priests, ^phes. 4. verse. 11.
as you have already gran^ed, and as I have proved out of Saint Paul: but so it
is, that when ye first reformed the church as you term it; ye neither had
any Bishops nor any priests of your own, neither could you find any but
with us and in our church, when Martin Luther went out from us. Our church
therefore and none but ours, is the true church of god. This reason is so
strong, as it can never be truly answered.

The answer.
it, and a very plausible show of truth, and therefore did it a long time
fascinate and seduce my self, yet I trust by Gods holy assistance so to solue
it, as no papist shall have cause any longer to glory therein. I say secondly,
that if our bishops

The fourth reply.
How can the pastors of the church, be without the doctrine of the church: for
the church cannot be without the pastors, as I have proved and you also
admitted? this is it, that I desire to learn.

The answer.
The reason hereof is this, because God promised to give always pastors to his
visible church: but he never promised this, to put the truth always in their
mouths. For this cause says Saint Paul, that God has given pastors and
teachers to his church until the end: but he never said, Ephesians. 4. verse. 13.
that he gave them his holy spirit always to preach and teach the truth: no,
no, he never promised any such thing. You brag of your succession, you say you
are the church representative, and that your pope cannot err, but whatsoever
he defines iudicially, that must be as true as the holy gospel. Even so did
the wicked Jews boast when the Prophet of God reproved them: come said they,
let us imagine some device against Jeremy; for the law shall not perish from
the priest, nor counsel from the wise, Ier. 18. v. 18.
nor the word from the prophet. Thus did the Jews boast then, and thus do
the papists boast now. Ezech. 7. ver. 26
But what says God by his Prophet, to these your arrogant and Pharisaical
conceits? doubtless clean contrary; to wit, but the law shall perish from
the priest, and counsel from the elder: as if he had said; notwithstanding
your great bragges of your privileges, yet shall ye be infatuated, and spoiled
of all counsel, truth, and doctrine.

The fifth reply.
The Apostle says, that God gave pastors and teachers to his church for this
end, Ephesians. 4. v. 14
that they should not be carried away with false doctrine. But if the pastors all
have erred, as you would have us to believe; then in vain did God give pastors
to his Church to preserve us in the truth. For they that should have taught
the truth, did even themselves swerve from the truth; and so they became
unfit instruments, to do the will of God.

The answer.
I say first, that albeit Gods will be one as himself is one, willing by his
own essence and by one eternal and immutable act, whatsoever he wills; yet
is his will said to be manifold, Let this solution be well observed, and never
forgotten.
for the variety of the manner, by which God seems to will things. Hereupon
arise many divisions of Gods will, assigned by learned writers for explication
sake.

Some divide Gods will, into antecedent and consequent. Some others divide it,
into the will of sign, and will of good pleasure. Others, into the will
revealed, and will not revealed. Others, into the will absolute, an^ will
conditionate, Esaias. 46. verse 10 Psalm. 135. ver. 6.
that did he in heaven and in earth, and in the Sea, and in all the depthes.
And the Apostle says: for who has resisted his will? Of the latter, we have
many examples in the holy Scriptures. First, Romans 9. ver. 19
God commanded Pharao by Moses to let his people go, but Pharao would not obey.
Secondly, Exodus 4. ver. 22 Math. 23. ver. 37
God would have gathered the Jews together, even as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, 1. Tim. 2. v. 4
but they would not have it so. Thirdly, God would have all men to be saved, as
Paul bears witness; and yet we know by the holy gospel, that the greater
part shall be damned. Mat. 20. ver. 16


I say thirdly, that Gods will mentioned in S. Paul, and now objected against
my resolution; is only voluntas signi (his will of sign: Voluntas signi non
beneplaciti.
) and not voluntas beneplaciti (his will of good pleasure:) and therefore it
can never be effectually concluded out of this text, (which hitherto has ever
been reputed the strong bulwark of popery, and either dissembled or lightly
passed over by the grauest writers;) that the pastors of the visible church
always teach the truth, and never swerve from the same. Thus more plainly for
the simple and ignorant sort. When the apostle says, Ephesians. 4. v. 14.
that God placed pastors and doctors in the church, that the people be not
carried away with false doctrine; he neither means that the pastors shall
always infallibly teach the truth, nor that the people shall always
constantly embrace the truth. I prove it, because the apostle speaks
indefinitely and indifferently, of all teachers and of al hearers, of al
shepheardes and of all sheep, neither excepting one nor other; and yet both ye
know and we know, that many preachers preach false doctrine, Mark this well
for Christ's sake.
and that many hearers embrace the same. Whereupon it follows necessarily,
that if the Apostle meant as ye would have him to mean; then Christ's intent
and purpose should be frustrate indeed, which yet is it that your selves
impugn. The apostle therefore means only this, to declare voluntate signi,
what he would have his shepherds and sheep to do; albeit voluntate
beneplaciti, the same be not ever accomplished.

This my explication of S. Paul's meaning, is confirmed not only by the holy
Scripture, but also by the express testimonies of renowned popish writers.
Touching the holy Scripture; First, it is evident, that God would have al men
saved, for Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri. 1. Tim. 2.4
Gods will is, that all men shall be saved, and come to the acknowledging of the
truth. Whereby we see, that Gods will and intent is to save all: and yet do we
know assuredly, that al shall not be saved. Mat. 20. ver. 17
For the gospel says plainly: Multi vocati, pauci vero electi. Many are
called, but few are chosen. Secondly, it is Ipsius enim sumu^ factura, creati
in Christo Jesus in bonis operibus, quae praeparauit deus vt in illis ambulemus.
Ephesians. 2. ver. 10
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has ordained that we should walk in them. And yet we see by daily Exodus
18.20. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luc. 10.28. Math. 22.37. Mar. 12.29.
to the intent that we should accomplish it: (for so the scripture tells
us, and no papist does or can deny the same:) and yet have we infallible
knowledge out of the same scripture, that none living can keep and fulfill the
law in all points. For if we could have kept the law in all points, Romans 7. per
totum.
we should have been justified by the observation thereof, and so Chr^stes
passion and his satisfaction had been needless. In all these places therefore,
and the like: Voluntas signi must be understood, but not voluntas beneplaciti.

Touching the popish Doctors, the Jesuit Bellarmine has these words: At fine
dubio singuli episcopi errare possunt, and aliquando errant, Bellar. lib. 2. de
conc. c. 2.
and inter se quandoque dissentiunt, vt nesciamus quisnam eorum sequendus sit.
But without doubt all bishops may err severally, and do err sometime, and
sometime dissent one from another, insomuch that we cannot tell whom we Numb.
22.28.
has enforced our Jesuit to confess the truth. I note secondly, that there
is no Bishop Every bishop may err.
Which point I have proved copiously, in my book of Motives.

I note thirdly, that by our Jesuits confession, every bishop that the pastors
and doctors of the church, should always teach the truth.

I note fourthly, that since every ancient father both may err, and does
err, and that by popish grant; there is no reason Panormitanus has these
words: Nam in concernentibus fidem* etiam dictum vnius priuati esset
praeferendum dicto papae, Panorm. de elec^ cap. significati. p^ope finem.
si ille moueretur mel^oribus rationibus noui and veteris testamenti, quam
papa. Nec obstat, si dicatur quod concilium non potest errare, quia Christus
orauit pro ecclesia sua vt non deficeret; quia dico, quod licet concilium
generale repraesentet totam ecclesiam vniuersalem, tamen in veritate ibi non
est vera ecclesia vniuersalis sed repraesentatiue: quia vniuersalis ecclesia
co^stituitur, ex collectione omnium fidelium. Vnde omnes fideles orbis
constituunt istam ecclesiam vniuersalem, cuius caput and sponsus est ipse
Christus. Papa aute^ est vicarius Christi* and non vere caput ecclesiae, vt
notat glossa in Clem. Ne Romani de elect. quae notabiliter dicit, quod mortuo
papa ecclesia non est sine capite, and ista est illa ecclesia quae errare non
potest Vnde possibile est, quod vera fides Christi remaneret in vno solo, ita
quod verum est dicere, quod fides non deficit in ecclesia. Sequitur: Christus
ante passionem orauerat pro Perro* vt no^ deficeret fides sua, ergo non dicitur
deficere nec etiam errare, si remanet vera fides in vno solo. For concerning
matters of faith, even the judgment of one that is a mere lay man, ought to
be preferred before the sentence of the pope; if that lay person could bring
better reasons out of the old and new testament, then did the pope. And it
skilleth not if one say, that a council cannot err, because Christ prayed for
his church, that it should not fail. For I say, that although a general
council represent the whole universal church, yet in truth there is not
truly the universal Church, A lay man's judgment is to be preferred before the
popes.
but representatiuely. For the universal church consists, of the collection
of all the faithful. Whereupon all the faithful in the world, make this church
universal, whereof Christ himself is the head. The pope is the vicar of Christ,
but not truly the head of the church, as notes the gloss upon the
Clementines; which says notably, that when the pope is dead, the Church
wants not an head, and this is that Church which cannot err. Whereupon it is
possible, that the true faith of Christ might remain in one alone, and so it
may truly be said, yt the faith fails not in the church. Christ before his
passion prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail; therefore the church
is not said to fail, neither to err, so long as the true faith abides in one
only.

Lo* the papists acknowledge our doctrine.
then the pope does. Which saying doubtless is the foundation of the doctrine,
this day established in the church of England, and in all other reformed
churches throughout the world. Neither do we crave more of the papists, then
their own doctors will afford us. I note secondly, that a general

I note thirdly, that that church which cannot err, is not the 3. Reg 19.10
For albeit it be true, that there was a visible church in Judea under the good
kings, Asa and Iosaphat, 3 Reg. 15 and 18. and 22. 3. Paral. c. 16. etc. 17.
even when Elias made his complaint that he was left alone: and although also
that Abdias had told Elias, that he had hid an C. prophets by L. in a cave, so
as Elias could not be ignorant of a visible church in the world; yet is it
most true with all this, that the universal church as universal, was
invisible to Elias; and that there were many thousands of true believers even
then in Samaria, whom ^lias neither saw nor knew. And therefore did God answer
him, saying: I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, which have not
bowed the knee to Baall. Romans 11. v. 3.


I note fourthly, that howsoever the visible bishops and pastors err, yet does
not the universal church err, so long as the The church invisible among the
papists.
when Martin Luther began his reformation, many thousands among the papists
that sincerely believed the gospel, whom he neither saw nor knew.

The 6 reply.
The scripture tells us, that the church cannot err. For, as the Apostle
says, it is the house of the living God, 1. Tim. 3 15.
the pillar and ground of truth. Therefore either Gods apostle teaches false
doctrine, or else doubtless the truth must ever be in the church.

The answer.
I answer, that the true church of God (which is the mystical body of Christ)
does never err wholly and generally in the fundamental points of religion,
and such as are necessary for our salvation. I say first, (the true church of
God) because the society of the visible pastors, are not ever the mystical
Note how the Church cannot err.
either all generally, or any one finally. For whom and in respect of whom, the
church is rightly called the pillar of truth.

This my exposition is made good by the testimony of S. Austen, whose words be
these: Secunda^ ergo Sabbathi non debemus intelligere nisi ecclesia^ Christi,
sed ecclesia^ Christi. in sanctis, ecclesiam Christi in his qui scripti sunt in
coelo, ecclesia^ Christi in ^is qui mundi huius tentationibus non cedunt.
August. in Psalm. 47. in praef.
Ipsi enim digni sunt nomine, firmame^ti. ergo ecclesia Christi in his qui
firmi sunt, appellata est firmamentum; quae est, in quit, ecclesia dei viui,
columna and firmamentum veritatis. Therefore we may not understand the second
of the sabbath to be any other then the church of Christ, yet the church of
Christ in the saints, the church of Christ in those, which are not overcome
with the tentations of this wicked world: for they are worthy the name of
firmament; therefore the church of Christ is called the firmament in those that
are firm, which is (says he) the church of the living God, Vide Augusti.
lib. 7. de bapt. c. 51. tom. 6.
the pillar and firmament of truth: The like saying has S. Augustine in many
other places, but especially where he writes against the Donatists.

Saint Chrysostom expounds this place of the verity it self, and not of
the pastors as you papists do: these are his express words, quippe veritas
ecclesiae, and columna and firmamentum est; for the verity of the church, is
both the pillar and the firmament. And Anselmus holds flatly the opinion of
Saint Austen, Chrysostom. homil. 11. in 1. Tim. 3.
expounding the words of Saint Paul so plainly of the elect, as no papist is
able to avoid the same, unless they will reject Anselmus, because they cannot
answer him: and yet they cannot so do without blushing, because they have
hitherto reputed him for their own: these therefore are his express words.

Domus in qua Deus habitat, ecclesia est ex multis collecta fidelibus qui
variis modis sunt docendi, Ansel. super hunc locum.
and ipsa eius ecclesia est in perfectis columna, id est, sublimis and recta,
and inconcussibilis and sustentans iuniores atque sustollens, and in eisdem
perfectis est ipsa firmamentum veritatis; quia verbis and exemplis firmat in
cordibus infirmorum, veritatem fidei and mandatorum Dei.

The house in which God dwells, is the whole congregation of the faithful,
who are to be taught diversely: and the same church is in the perfect a pillar,
that is, sublime, straight, inconcussible, supporting and lifting up the younger
sort, and in the same perfect, it is the firmament of truth, because both by
words and examples it confirms in the hearts of the weak, the verity of
faith and Gods commandments.

Out of these words I gather first, that the house of God, whereof the Apostle
writes to Timothy, is (not the rabble of Popes and popish prelates) but the
congregation of the faithful. I gather secondly, that it is meant as well of
the laytie, Anselmus, (who are to be taught;) for the pastors ex officio must
teach the flock, and not be taught of the flock. I gather thirdly, that it
is meant specially of the elect; and my ground is this, because Anselmus says,
it is a pillar in the perfect For if there be any perfection, it is doubtless
in the elect and none else.

The Popes own Doctors* Syluest. de eccl.. 4.
Panormitanus and Syluester do tell us in plain and manifest terms, that it
is the whole congregation of the faithful that cannot err: these are
Syluesters words.

Et sic intellige glossam dicentem, quod ecclesia quae errare non potest,
dicitur non papa, sed congregatio fidelium, quae scilicet tenet fidem quam
Petrus cum aliis populis docuit. And thus must the gloss be understood, which
says, that the church which cannot err, is not the pope, but the congregation
of the faithful, that is, such as hold firmly that doctrine, which Saint
Peter with other (godly) people taught.

Panormitan writes thus, Ecclesia vniuersitatis errare non potest scilicet in
fide vel articulis fidei: Panormit. apud Sylues. de fide. 9
and pro hac tantum Christus in Euangelio orauit ad patrem: in aliis autem non
solum ecclesia particularis, verum etiam vniuersalis, id est, collecti^
fidelium seu concilium generale, errare potest.

The church universal cannot err, that is to say, in the faith or in the
articles of our belief: Vide ipsum Panormi^ de electione, cap. significasti.
and for this church only was Christ's prayer, when he prayed to his father in
the gospel; yet in other things, not only the particular church, but the
universal likewise may err, that is to say, the collection of the faithful,
or a general council. Yea, the Popes own decrees affirm so much, to wit,
that the church is catholicorum collectio: the congregation of the (faithful)
catholics. And the popes own dear gloss upon his own decrees, can. 14.
quaest. ^ can. a recta, in glossa.
does most lively describe that church which cannot err, to be the
congregation of the faithful: thus is it there written in express terms.

Quaero de qua ecclesia intelligas, quod hic dicitur, quod non possit errare si
de ipso papa, certum est quod papa errare potest: respondeo, ipsa congregatio
fidelium hic dicitur ecclesia, and talis ecclesia non potest non esse.

I ask thee (O Pope Luci) of what church thou understand that, which thou
tellest us in this place: to wit, that the church cannot err. For if thou
understand it of the Pope himself, it is very certain that the Pope may
err. I answer therefore, that the church is here taken for the congregation
of the faithful, and such a church can never err (indeed.) Out of these
words of Pope Lucius I note first, that de facto. I note thirdly, that that
church in which the truth always Augustine, Saint Chrysostom, Anselmus,
Syluester, Panormitanus, the Popes own canon law, and popish interpreters upon
the same, that the congregation of the faithful, is the pillar and ground of
truth, and that church which cannot err.

The seventh reply.
Christ promises to be with his disciples until the worlds end, but the
Apostles departed hence long sithence: therefore as the fathers truly gather,
Mat. 28.20.
he means of being with the catholic bishops, the true successors of the
Apostles.

The answer.
I say first, that your popish Bishops of late years are neither catholic
bishops, nor successors of the Apostles, as I have already proved* I say
secondly, that Christ promises his spiritual and invisible presence, not
only to the Apostles for their time, but also to the congregation of the
faithful til the worlds end: and I prove it by the testimony of the holy
fathers, Saint Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine; Saint Chrysostom has these
express words.

Nam cum dicit: ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem
seculi, no^ ad eos tantummodo loquitur, sed per eos ad vniuersum prorsus orbem.
Chrysostom. in cap. 5^ Mat. hom. 15. tom. 2.


For when he says, behold, I am with you always until the end of the world,
he speaks not only to them, but to all doubtless that are in the whole
world^ which assertion he has in many other places of his works.

Saint Augustine has words so important for this end and scope, as more shall
not need to be alleged. Thus does he write in flat terms; Non itaque fi^
dictum est apostolis, eritis mihi testes in Jerusalem and in tota Iudaea, and
Samaria, Agu. in Epist. 80. prop^ finem. tom 2. page 238.
and. vsque in extremum terrae, tanquam ipsi foli quibus tunc loquebatur tantum
munus fuerint impleturi; sed sicut eis solis videtur dixisse quod dixit, ecce
ego vobiscum sum vsque in consummationem seculi quod tamen eum vniuersa
ecclesiae promisisse quae aliis mortentibus, aliis nas^e^tibus hic vsque in
seculi consummationem futura est, quis non intelliga^? sicut eis and iliud ait,
quod ad eos omnino non pertinet: and tamen sic dictum est, tanquam ad solos
etiam pertineret, cum videritis haec omnia, scitote quia prope est in ianu^^:
ad quos enim hoc pertinet, nisi ad eos qui in carne tunc erunt, eum omnia
complebuntur?

It is not therefore so said to the Apostles, ye shall be my witnesses in
Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and in Samaria, and even to the utmost parts of
the world, as if they only to whom he then spoke, should have accomplished so
great a matter; but as he seems to have said only to them, that which he
said (in these words) behold, I am with you to the worlds end. Which thing
nevertheless every one perceives, that he spoke it to the universal church;
which by the death of some, and by the birth of other some* shall continue to
the worlds end; even as he says that to them, which does nothing at all
pertain to them; and yet is it so spoken as if it only pertained to them, to
wit, when y^^ shall see these things come to pass, know that it is near
(...) the doors. For to whom does this pertain, but to those who shall then
be living, when all things shall be accomplished* In these words Saint
Austen proves plainly, that this objection wherein the papists glory so
greatly, make the (...) for them: for (says he) these words already recited,
one spoken to the whole congregation of the faithful* which are or shall be to
the worlds end, and this Saint Austen shows by two reasons:





The eight reply.
(...). 16.^3.
Christ himself says* that the holy ghost shall teach the Apostles al truth,
even many things whereof they were not capable then; and therefore did he be
serve those things, till the coming of the holy ghost.

The answer.
I answer, that the holy ghost after Christ's ascension taught the Apostles al
truth, even such things as Christ had reserved; and that by reason of their
^uditie and imperfection in concei^^^g heavenly doctrine: yet those things so
reserved, and the truth so taught was nothing else, but a manifest explication
of the self same verity, which they in brief before had heard. For the holy
ghost did coin no new doctrine, The holyghost ^aught no new ^octrine, but
only revealed ^he true sense of such things ^s the Apostles did not vnder^^and.
nor reveal any new articles of faith: but only taught the Apostles the true
s^nse of Christ's words, which before for their dullness, they were not able to
perceive which sense they being directed by the instinct of the holy ghost,
delivered to the whole world; first, by word, and afterward by writing.

All this I prove by two evident demonstrations: first because He shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance which I have told you:
which saying must be well noted, John. 14 verse. 26.
because the latter words are a plain declaration of the former; as if Christ
had said: all things which the holy ghost shall teach the apostles after my
departure, It is the self same doctrine but more plainly declared.
are no new doctrine, but the very same things which they heard before of me,
and they differ only in this, that the Apostles do more plainly understand
them, by the assistance of the holy ghost.

Secondly, because the best learned popish doctors, do hold Melchior Canus
has these words: Nec vllas in fide nouas reuelationes ecclesia habet: Canus de
locis lib. 3. c. 4.
for the church has no new revelations in matters of faith. Thus says Christ
himself, and thus teaches their own doctor, and yet would the papists
enforce us, daily to admit new doctrines from the church of Rome.

The ninth reply.
Peter is the rock of the church, against which hell-gates shall never
prevail: Mat. 16. verse. 18.
therefore Saint Peter's successors can never err.

The answer.
I answer, that not Saint Peter, but the confession which he made, is that
rock of the church, against which hell gates shall not prevail. And this is
not my opinion only, but Saint Beda, Saint Austen, Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Hylarie, and sundry very learned papists, do teach the same doctrine
constantly. These are Saint Austens words: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram
quam confessus es, Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 13.
super hanc petram quam cognouisti dicens, tu es Christus filius Dei viui,
aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Id est, super meipsum filium Dei viui, aedificabo
ecclesiam meam: super me edificabo te, non me super te: thou art Peter (says
Christ) and upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this rock which
thou have acknowledged, These are most plain words.
saying: thou art Christ the son of the living God, will I build my church,
that is, upon my self the son of the living God will I build my church,
upon my self will I build thee, not my self upon thee.

Saint Chrysostom writes thus: Columnae quidem, quoniam virtute sua ecclesiae
robur sunt: Chrysostom. sermon de p^nt. tom* 3.
fundamentum, quod in confessione insorum fundata est ecclesia, dicente domino:
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram fundabo ecclesiam meam. The Apostles are
the pillars, because by their virtue they are the strength of the Church: they
are the foundation, because the Church is built in their confession; when the
Lord says: thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. Lo,
this text upon which the Papists build their popish primacie, is understood of
all the Apostles, not of Peter alone; neither is the church built upon any of
their persons, but upon the joint confession of them all: Saint Bede holds
the same opinion.
for Peter made the confession in the name of them all, as Saint Chrysostom
truly says, which confounds the Papists utterly.

S. Hylarie has these words: Haec fides ecclesiae fundamentum est: Hila^. de
Trinit. lib. 6. P. 103.
per hanc fidem, infirmae aduersus eam sunt portae inferorum: haec fides regni
caelestis habet claues: this faith is the foundation of the church: by this
faith hell gates shall not prevail against it; this faith has the keys of
heaven.

The received popish gloss upon this text, does understand by the rock,
Peter's faith, and the confession which he made. Panormitan and Syluester both
being great papists, Gloss. in mat. 16. See Panormitan, de electione, cap.
significasti.
are of the same opinion.

The tenth reply.
Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith should never fail: therefore the Pope
cannot err. Luke. 22. ver, 32.


The answer.
de facto, as I have proved at large in my book of Motives.

Concerning your Pope, all wise men in the world worthily deride you papists,
for your vain, ridiculous, and fabulous conceits, of his faith. For first the
truth enforces you to grant (as I have proved in my Motives) that your Pope
may hold Bel-videre, or riding on his white palfrey, or lying in his bed
waking, or at the table eating, or while he gives pardons and Jubilees.
Secondly, that he may utter the same error and false faith, 3. Three grants
of the papists do vterly overthrow the popes supposed privilege.
Concerning Peter's faith, it is certain, that Christ prayed as well for all the
elect as for Peter, and directed his words not to Peter, as to one private man,
but as to one representing the whole church: and consequently, whatsoever
Christ said or did touching Peter's faith, must perforce be understood of the
faith of the whole church; which, as is proved, shall never fail indeed. This
being once made good, your mighty objection (wherein ye glory much,) will be
of no force at all. My first reason is contained in Christ's own words, which
are these: Ioh. 27. verse. 9
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they
are thine. In which words it is clear, that Christ prays only for Peter,
but for all his disciples as well as for him; and he shows the equity of his
petition, by sundry reasons. First Ioh. 17. verse. 20.
Again, Christ says, I pray not for these only, but for them also, that shall
believe in me through their word. In which words his former prayer which seemed
to be made for his disciples only is now extended to all the faithful until
the worlds end, a sentence doubtless replenished with all solace, toward us
and the whole Church of God, as which is the only foundation of our salvation,
to wit, that Christ did no less pray for us, then he did for his own
apostles. And this reason is confirmed in an other place, where Christ
promises to be among those that are gathered in his name, Matt. 18.19, 20.
though they be but two in number. Which words (as our Jesuit Bellarmine does
grant) are meant as well of the Laicall as Ecclesiastical sort.

The second reason.
My second reason is grounded upon the interpretation of the ancient fathers. S.
Austen has these express words; Et Petro dicit, Aug. in quaest. mixtis. q 75.
to. 4
Ecce Satanas expostulauit vt vos ventilet sicut triticu^, ego autem rogaui pro
te, vt non deficiat fides tua, and tu tandem conuersus, confirma fratres tuos.
Quid ambigitur? pro Petro rogabat, and pro Iacobo and Ioanne non rogabat vt
caeteros taceam? manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri, quia and in alio loco
dicit, ego pro his rogo, quos mihi dedisti pater, and volo vt vbi ego sum, and
ipsi sint mecum. And he says to Peter, Behold, satan has desired to winnow
you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; therefore
thou once converted, confirm thy brethren. What doubt is there? Did he pray
for Peter, and did he not also pray for James and John, to say nothing of the
rest? It is plain, that in Peter all the rest are meant, because he says in
an other place: I pray for these, O Father, which thou have given me, and
desire that they may be with me where I am. Orig. homil. ^. in Matthew,
Origin, who lived many years before saint Austen, affirms in a large
discourse upon saint Matthew, that all things spoken of Peter touching the
church and the keys, are to be understood of all the rest. And the collection
of Origin is evident, even by natural reason: For if Christ prayed not as well
for the rest as for Peter, of small credit were a great part of the holy
scripture. An argument insoluble.
A reason doubtless insoluble for all papists in the world. For if they
could fail in their faith, they could also fail in their writing: and yet
that they could not so fail, was by virtue of Christ's prayer.

The third reason.
My third reason is the flat opinion and constant doctrine of great learned
papists. Panormitanus was their skilful Canonist, their religious abbot, and
their renowned archbishop: and consequently, his authority must needs gall and
confound them all, Panorm. apud Syluest. de fide. 9. de conc.. 3
his words are these; Et pro hac tantum Christus in euangelio orauit ad
patrem, ego rogaui prote. And for this (he means the universal church)
Christ only prayed to his father in the gospel, when he said; I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not. Behold here (gentle Reader) and yield thine
indifferent censure. When Christ (says the great papist Panorm.) prayed that
Peter's faith should not fail, he prayed for the faith of the universal
church, whose faith shall never fail indeed. The place is worthy to be noted.
And the said Panormitan proves his opinion directly, by many texts of the
popes Canon law. de Elect. cap. significasti.

Alphonsus a Castro a religious popish Carthusian has these words; Non
dubitamus an haereticum esse, and papam esse, Alphons. lib. 1. de haeres. c. 4.
coire in vnum possint, infra: Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem
papae assentatorem vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare, nec in
interpretatione sacrarum literarum hallucinari possit: We doubt not, whether
one man may be a pope and an heretic both together. For I believe there is
none so shameless a flatterer of the Pope, that will ascribe this unto him,
that he can neither err, nor be deceived in the exposition of the scriptures.

The eleventh reply.
All Christ's sheep are committed to Peter, Ioh, 21. verse. 16
and consequently to the pope, Ergo

The answer.
I say first, that the bishop of Rome is not saint Peter's suc^essor, Austen
shows excellently, in the person of saint Peter to be accomplished: his own
words are these; Ecclesiae catholicae personam sustinet Petrus, and cum ei
dicitur, August. de agon. Christ c. 30. to. 3.
ad omnes dicitur: amas me? pasce oues meas. Peter represents the person of
the church catholic, and when it is said to him, it is said to all: Love
thou me? Feed my sheep. Lo, the popish bulwark is battered down.

CHAP. III. Of the marriage of priests and ministers of the church.
The first Proposition.
AL Ministers which are not papists, nor subject to the laws and rules of
Popery, may lawfully marry, even by the doctrine of the Church of Rome: albeit
the vulgar sort of Papists, most bitterly exclaim against the same. I prove
it, because all such ministers are mere lay men, by the judgment of the
church of Rome: Let the seely vulgar papists note well this proposition.
which church for all that, only debarreth persons ecclesiastical, from the
freedom of honorable wedlock. This probation is so evident, as no learned
papist can or will deny the same. Peruse the end of the seventh proposition
following, and it will satisfy thee in all respects.

The second Proposition.
Marriage was lawful for all priests and other ministers of the church, during
all the time of the old Testament. This proposition is clear, to all such as
diligently reuolue the holy Bibles; neither do I know any learned papist,
that by word or writing denies the same. For the holy prophet Jeremy was
the son of Helkiah, Ierem. 1.1. 1. Sam. 1. verse. 3. Exodus 18.1, and 2.
who was one of the priests that were at Anathoth. Hophni and Phinehas were the
sons of Heli the priest, Sephora was the daughter of Iethro the priest of
Midian: and Saint John Baptist was the son of Zacharias the priest, to whom
the angel of God was sent to bring him glad tidings. The tidings were these,
that Elizabeth his wife should bear him a son, Luc. 1. verse. 8, 9, 13, 14,
18, 19.
albeit she was barren, and well stricken in age. And he received the message
while he was occupied in prayer, and in burning of incense at the right side of
the al^are. Whereby it clearly appears, how acceptable the both just, and
walked in Gods commandments without reproof. Thirdly, the angel of God was
sent to Zacharias, to

The third Proposition.
Marriage is lawful for priests and other ministers of the church, even now in
the time of the new testament. Where by the word (priests) I understand all
such as are admitted to preach Gods word, and to administer the holy
sacraments. This proposition may be proved, by many weighty and important
reasons. First, because no text in the new Testament can be alleged, which
debarreth the ministers thereof from

Secondly, because the apostle proves in two several places, that all
priests may be married. Where, what I mean by 1. Tim. 3. verse 2.
This text of holy scripture (if it be thoroughly marked) does plainly
convince, that it is lawful for a Bishop to marry. Let us therefore exactly
examine the true meaning and sense thereof.

The Papists to maintain their diabolical doctrine of single life, would rack
this text to those wives, which bishops had before they were admitted to
ecclesiastical function, A shameful wresting of the holy scripture.
but that is a forced and violent exposition, contrary to the true meaning of
the apostle. For Saint Paul among other virtues convenient for a Bishop,
requires this for one, that he be not coupled to more wives then one at
once. Nneither is it possible to imagine any other true sense, of this present
text.



The true meaning of S. Paul.
Therefore thirdly, this must needs be the true meaning thereof: to wit, that
a bishop may marry if he list, but yet not have many wives at one and the same
time, as the Jews and the Gentiles had. And to this exposition do accord not
only S. Chrysostom and Theophilact, but also their own dear Cardinal
Caietane.

Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. c. 3. hom. 10.
S. Chrysostom has these express words; Non hoc veluti sanciens dicit, quasi
non liceat absque vxore episcopum fieri sed eius rei modum constituens. Iudaeis
quippe licitum erat etiam secundo matrimonio iungi, and duas itidem simul
habere vxores; honorabiles enim nuptiae.

Behold how the fathers and scriptures agree with priests marriage.
He says not this, meaning to establish a law, as though none could be a
bishop, who has not a wife; but his purpose is, to appoint a measure in that
behalf. For the Jews might not only be twice married, but also have two wives
at once. For marriage is an honorable thing. The apostle therefore speaks
against Polygamie. Hier. in cap. 1. ad Tit.
Yea, S. Hierome confesses that sundry writers expound this place, against the
Polygamie of the Jews.

The same S. Chrysostom in another place, has these golden words; Chrysostom.
in 2. c ad Titum, hom. 2
Obstruere prorsus intendit haereticorum ora qui nuptias damnant, ostendens eam
rem culpa carere, imo ita esse pretiosam, vt cum ipsa etiam possit quispiam ad
sanctum episcopatus solium s^buehi.

The Apostle intends to confound the heretics, that condemn marriage;
declaring that it is faultlesse, and a thing so precious, as a man may with it
be promoted to the holy function of a bishop. Thus says S. Chrysostom, whose
words are so plain and pithie, as no papist is able to wrest and writhe them
to serve his turn. For first, Note well what is here said.
S. Chrysostom proves marriage to be honorable and holy, against the
heretics that condemned it, and that because a Bishops function is
honorable and holy, who for all that may be a married man. Which argument
were vain and frivolous, if Saint Chrysostom should speak of a Bishops
marriage, while he was a mere lay man. For hereupon would it follow
necessarily, that tyranny, persecution, adultery, and murder, should be
honorable, as well as honest wedlock. I prove it, The probation conuinceth.
because no disparitie can be given between S. Chrysostomes reason* and this
of mine. For first; as the function of a bishop is honorable, so Paul was
both: so may an adulterer, so may a murderer be an holy prophet: for good king
David was all three. Thirdly, as tyranny is a great sin, ^lbeit once a tyrant
may afterward become an apostle: and as Chrysostom could not well conclude
marriage to be lawful, because once a married man may be a Bishop. Answer, O
Seminary priests, or else recant your doctrine.
S. Chrysostom says yet further, that even with it, eumea, with holy
wedlock, one may be made a bishop; even while he is a married man. For as the
father and the son, so also the husband and the wife be relatiues and
correlatiues, whose nature is (as all Logicians grant) to place and displace,
be and not be, live and die all at once. For so soon as a man begins to be
a father, so soon has he a child; and so soon as he cease to have a
child, so soon cease he to be a father, although he still remain a man.
And even so is it with the husband and the wife. Add hereunto, that S.
Chrysostom should not say, (with wedlock,) but, (after it,) if he meant as
the papists would have him to do. I therefore conclude, that if S.
Chrysostom mean not of a Bishops marriage, during the very time he is a
bishop, Theoph. in hunc loc^m.
his argument is vain and frivolous. And in this argument, Theophilactus
subscribeth to S. Chrysostom.

The second place is that reason, which S. Paul makes to the Corinthians, and
is contained in these words; (...); 1. Cor. 9. v. 5.
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as the rest of the
apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas?

By this it appears manifestly, (if it be well marked,) that S. Peter and
other of the apostles were married; and that they did lead their wives about
with them, The popish exposition of this place, is ridiculous.
when they went abroad preaching the holy gospel. For first, the Greek word
in the Cl^ment, and Eusebius Caesariensis, expound this place of S. Paul's
wife, Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. secundum. Ruffi.
and not of any other woman.

Johannes Christophorsonus, a great papist, alleges S. Clements words, out
of Eusebius in this manner.

Clemens deinceps apostolos qui matrimonium contraxisse reperiuntur, Eusebius.
lib. 3 hist. cap. 24. secundum Christophor.
en^merat, idque contra eorum sententiam, qui nuptias tollere abrogareque
instituerent Numinquit sunt apostolos improbaturi: Petrus enim and Philippus,
liberos procrearunt. Philippus filias viri collocauit in matrimonium. Paulus
etiam non veretur in quadam epistola, contugis suae mentionem facere; quam eo
minime secum circumduxit, quo facilius liberiusque suo fungeretur ministerio.

Clement afterward reckons the apostles, who are known to have been married
men; and that against their opinion, who endeavored to abrogate and take away
marriage. Will they (says he) condemn the apostles? for both Peter and Philip
begat children, and Philip bestowed his daughters upon husbands in marriage.
Paul also blusheth not in one of his Epistles, to make mention of his wife*
Phil. cap. 4. v. 3
whom he would not carry about with him, to the end he might preach the
gospel more freely. See the first proposition following.

The first objection.
It is clear, that S. Paul would not marry his own sister; and therefore the
woman he speaks of, could not be his wife.

The answer.
I answer, that the names of brother and sister in the primitive church, were
proper to the faithful and true believers. Sundry wives also in those days,
were of a dissonant religion from their husbands. S. Paul therefore to show
his wife to be a christian, and a true believer, calls her a sister. As if he
had said, the woman I speak of, is not only my wife, but withal a christian
and a true believer.

The 2. objection.
These women that S. Paul speaks of, were not the wives of the apostles, but
cer^aine devout women, that followed the Apostles for zeal of the gospel; as
we read of many women that followed Christ, and did not thereby commit any
scandal at all.

The answer.
I say first, that the women S. Paul speaks of, were the wives of the
apostles as I have proved. I say secondly, yt it is to resort to Jerusalem,
whither these women followed Christ. I say fourthly, that these wom^n were many
together, and 1. Tim. 5. v. 9.14
And if they were young women, or under threescore, they ought to marry
according to Paul's doctrine.

The 4. proposition.
Marriage was deemed lawful for all sorts of people; as well for ecclesiastical
persons as others: and that for many hundredth Greg. Nazianz. Orat. de funer.
Pat. orat. 28.27.
had wives and children. S. Gregory Nazianzene was a bishops son, and
admitted to the pastoral charge by his father in his life time. S. Cheremon
the bishop of Nicopolis in Egypt, was a married man and a stout confessor. For
both he and his wife being well stricken in year^s, Eusebius hist. lib. 6. ca.
31. Chrysostom. in oratione de Philog.
fled from persecution to a mountain in Arabia; from whence they neither
returned, neither were after that seen of any man. S. Philogonius so highly
commended by S. Chrysostom, was a married bishop, and had a daughter.

S. Spiridion, who wrought wonderful miracles in his life time, Socrates hist.
lib. 1. cap. 8. Hist trip. lib. 1. cap. 10.
was the bishop of Cyprus, and a married man; he had a daughter Irene by name:
who being full of piety and sanctimonie of life, died a virgin. This married
bishop lived about 350. years after Christ. Hist. trip. lib. 6. cap. 14.
Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 10.
Eupsychius the bishop of Caesaria was a married man, and soon after his
marriage martyred for Christ Jesus. For (as Nicephorus and Cassiodorus report
in their ecclesiastical histories) he was put to death, being as yet in manner
a new married man. Thirdly, because the Popes own canon law tells us, that
many Popes were the Bonifacius, Agapitus, Theodorus, Syluerius, Foelix, Hosius,
Gelasius, Deusdedit; and many others. But perhaps our papists will say, that
all these were bastards, Did. 56 cap. O^^us.
and answer with their gloss, that vitium tollitur per successionem, the fault
is taken away by succession. Oh, Glossa ibidem.
what will not popery do? But yet we may put them in mind of another canon,
which tells them, Did. 56. cap Cenom^ncus.
that al these Popes aforenamed were legitimate children, because in those
days Popes and Bishops might marry lawfully. Which assertion, proves exactly
my proposition.

Fourthly, because many councels have decreed this verity; and the Apostles
themselves in their canons, have set down

Episcopus, aut presbyter, aut diaconus, Can. 6. Apostol.
vxorem suam praetextu religionis non abiicito: si abiicit, segregator a
communione; si perseuerat, deponator:

Let neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor Deacon, put away his wife under pretense
of religion: if he so do, let him be excommunicate; if he cont^^ue, let him
be deposed.

Out of these words I note first, that in the days of the

In the council of Ancyra it was decreed, that the deacons, who in the time of
their orders said they would marry, should continue still in the
ministry, Con. Ancyr. can. 10.
even after the celebration of their marriage. Where note, that this council
was holden about three hundred and eight years after Christ's incarnation.
Anno. Dom. 308


The council of Gangra accursed him, that thought a married priest might not
minister the holy communion. Conc. Gangr. cap. 4. Sozome^. ib. 3. cap. 13.


The third council of Constantinople (the sixth general synod so called)
decreed, that Priests, Deacons, and subdeacons, Conc. Constan^in 3. can. 13.
should continue with their lawful wives, and bege^te children, at al such
time and times, as they were not in actual execution of the ministry: The
council confesses that they hold against the Church of Rome.
albeit they knew the church of Rome to have another custom. This famous
general council was holden about the year of our Lord 681. where were present
two hundred eighty and nine bishops: al which though so many in number, Anno.
Dom. 681
and living so many years after Christ, confessed nevertheless, that the
marriage of Priests was a lawful thing.

The fifth Proposition.
Note the eight proposition in the third building.
The prohibition of marriage in ecclesiastical persons, is not only against
Gods holy ordinance, but withal, the flat doctrine of the devil.

The former part of this proposition, I prove sundry ways: First, 1. Cor. 7.
verse. 2
Saint Paul wills every man to have his wife, and every Paphnutius spoke
openly in the council of Nice, that it was unlawful to debar Bishops and
Priests from their wives, but hereof more at large hereafter.

1. Cor. 7. (...).
as more convenient and profitable; does forthwith wish those that cannot
abstain, to use the remedy of marriage. And he yields this reason, because
it is better to marry then to burn.

Thirdly, marriage is honorable among all, and the undefiled Hebr. 1^. verse. ^*
Out of which words I note first, that since marriage is honorable in all
sorts of men, it ought not to be blamed in persons ecclesiastical, unless
happily which the Apostle perceived not, their function takes from them the
nature of men. I note secondly the antithesis, which the Apostle here makes,
for as adultery shall be punished in all sorts of people none at all excepted,
even so must marriage be honorable in all sorts, no one or other exempted
from the same. And where the wound is common to all, Haymo in (...) Locum.
there the medicine must not be applied only to some few: For as Haymo
gathers learnedly, adulterers are therefore justly punished, because the
remedy of wedlock is granted to them: now if this learned writer (who lived
above 700 years ago,) conclude effectually out of S. Paul, as every
indifferent reader will say he does, then doubtless must it follow
necessarily, that either ecclesiastical persons may as lawfully marry as
others; or else that they cannot be so justly punished for fornication, as
other men ought to be. This illation is so evident, Note well thi^ illation*
as none with right reason will deny the same

Fourthly, Saint Paul confesses plainly, that he has no authority to
command single life or verginitie; 1. Cor. 7. verse. 25
therefore

Fifthly, Christ appoints marriage for all such as are neither Mat. 19. ver. 12
nor by the gift of continency; but the pope charge them that are eunuchs
no way, to abstain from marriage solemnly: therefore the popes commandment
is against Gods holy ordinance. Theodoretus confirms this point, in these
words; Theodoret. in 1* Timoth. 4.
Recte autem posuit illud, prohibentium contrahere matrimonium. Neque enim
celibatum ac continentiam vituperat sed eos accusat qui lege lata ea sequi
co^pellunt: He put that rightly, forbidding to marry: he blames not single
life and continency, but accuses them that by positive laws, compel to put
such things in execution. This law therefore of the pope is intolerable.

For which cause saint Clemens avouches them to do injury to nature, Clem.
Alexand. in paedagog. lib. 2. cap, 10.
that will not use wedlock for procreation of children.

The latter part of this proposition the apostle sets down so plainly, as
it is needelesse to say any more in that behalf. These are Saint Paul's own
words: But the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times, some shall
depart from the faith, ^. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3
and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of deuilles, which
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot
iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. In these
words it is very clear, that saint Paul terms the prohibition of marriage
and of meats; the flat doctrine of the devil. For, after he had declared
wherein the mystery of true religion consists, which is taught in the true
church of Christ: Prohibition of marriage is the doctrine of An^^christ.
he forthwith gives evident marks of the mystery of iniquity, which is
maintained in the false church of Antichrist, in whose synagogue the highest
points of religion are the prohibition of marriage and of meats. And who sees
not this day, this to be the state of the church of Rome? as in which church
they are specially, and in a manner only reputed religious, who obey the
prohibition of marriage and also of meats.

And it will not help the Papists to say, as their woonted manner is; that
they neither prohibit marriage generally, Paul speaks not generally of
marriage, but of the precise marriage of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. This
do I prove, because so soon as he had declared the duty of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, with their wives and children; by and by in the
beginning of the next chapter, he adds; that in the latter days marriage
shall be prohibited, by the doctrine of the devil. Where the word (But)
does effectually insinuate; that he speaks precisely of the marriage of
ecclesiastical persons by him above named.

(Forbidding and Commanding) argue authority in them that restrain marriage:
and so it partaineth not only to the old heretics, the Manichees, the
Tatians, the Eucratites, the Marcionists, the Patritians, and the Apostolickes,
but much more to the late Popes of Rome, who strictly command the whole world
to abstain from that, whereof God himself has granted the lawful use. For
what is to be extolled above God, 2. These. 2. ver 4.
if not to alter and chang his holy words?

Bishops, Priests and Deacons, have always been married in the East church,
even from our Savior Christ, until these our days. This I prove by the
testimony of the sixth general council of Constantinople; where 289.
Bishops were assembled, in the year of our Lord 677. In the thirteenth
canon of this famous council, three special things are decreed: First, that
Priests, Deacons, and subdeacons, may Small account of the church of Rome.
that they have thus decreed, albeit the laws of Rome be otherwise. Where I
note by the way, that so many learned bishops contemned the usurped primacie
of the church of Rome.

I prove it secondly, by the verdict of their own canon law, which is the
flat opinion of Pope Urban, as their own Gratian

Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati, Did. 56. cap. Cenomanens.
in summos pontifices supra legantur esse pro^oti; non sunt intelligendi de
fornicatione, sed de legitimis coniugiis nati, quae sacerdotibus ante
prohibitionem vbique licita erant, and in orientali ecclesia vsque hodie eis
licere probantur.

When therefore we read, that the sons of Priests are made Popes, we must
not understand bastardes, but sons borne in honest marriage, which marriage
was every where lawful for Priests, before the (late) prohibition, and is also
lawful this day in the East Church, for which cause the late council of
Florence, left the marriage of Priests to the free election of the Greeks.
Yea, their own dear Friar, and grave archbishop Antoninus, Antoninus. p. 2.
Tit. 11. ca. 2.. 9
confirms the same in these words; Quia Graci etiam in sacerdotio coniugio
vtuntur. For the Greeks join the use of matrimony, even with the priesthood.

Priests were married for the space of 400. years after Christ.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, were likewise married in the West and Latin
church, for the space almost of four hundred years, without any prohibition
at all. And afterward in some places, for many hundredth years. This is the
probation.

After that Christ had granted marriage for all men, appointing such to use
it, for an wholesome medicine, as wanted the gift of continency; after that
Saint Paul had pronounced freely, marriage to be honorable in all sorts of
men; after that the Apostles had decreed, that neither Bishops, Priests, nor
deacons, should leave the company of their wives under pretense of religion;
after that many holy Bishops, priests, and deacons, had lived laudably in the
Church, and had used the honest hel^ of holy wedlock above three hundredth,
eighty and five years, (al which I have already proved;) then one Syricius
advanced to the popedom, in the year of Christ 385. seduced by Satan,
published wicked doctrine, and prohibited marriage as an unlawful thing. Anno
dom. 385
Which matter because it is very impor^ant, and the words of our holy father
the pope so blasphemous, as hardly any will believe him to have so written,
Videtu did. 8^. cap. proposuist. etc. plurimos.
but he that reads the same; I will allege his words at large. Thus
therefore does he write in express terms.

Quod dignum, and pudicum, and honestum est, suademus, vt sacerdotes and
Leuitae cum suis vxoribus non coeant, quia in ministerio diuino quotidianis
necessitatibus occupantur: ad Corinthios namque sic Paulus scribit, Syritius in
Epistola ad Aphric. tom. 1. conc.
Abstinete vos vt vacetis orationi: si ergo Laicis abstinentia imperatur, vt
possint deprecantes audiri; quanto magis sacerdos vtisque omni momento paratus
esse debet munditiae puritate securus, ne aut sacrificium offerat, aut
baptizare cogatur? quisi contaminatus est carnali concupiscentia, quid faciet?
excusabitur? qua conscientia exaudiri se credit? cum dictum sit, omnia munda
mundis, coinquinatis autem and infidelibus nihil mundum. Qua d^re hortor,
moneo, rogo, tollatur hoc opprobrium quod potest iure etiam gentilitas
accusare. Infra: qui autem in carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt.

We council that, that is meet, chaste and honest; that Priests and deacons
have no copulation with their Wives, because they have daily business in the
divine ministry, for Paul writes thus to the Corinthians; do ye abstain,
that ye may give your selves to prayer. If therefore Lay men be commanded to
abstain, that they may be heard when they pray, how much more ought a Priest
alwaie to be ready in the purity of cleanelinesse, lest either he offer
sacrifice, or be constrained to baptize? who if he be pulluted with carnal
concupiscence, what shall he do? shall he be excused? With what conscience
does he think to be heard? when it is said, all things are clean to the
clean, but to the polluted and infidelles nothing is clean. Wherefore I
exhort, admonish, and require, that this rebuke be taken away, which even the
Gentiles may justly reprove: for they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

Out of these words of our disholy Syricius, I note first, cum suis vxoribus,
with their wives.) I note secondly, that in his time, Priests and Deacons,
had the use of holy wedlock, vt sacerdotes and Leuitae cum suis vxoribus non
coeant, that Priests and Deacons have not copulation with their Wives) For if
Priests and Deacons had then abstained from copulation with their Wives, Pope
Syritius found priests married when he came to the popedom.
he needed not to have forbidden the same. I note thirdely, that for the space
of three hundredth eighty five years (for so long after Christ was Syritius)
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons were married

I note fourthly, that this Syritius terms holy wedlock, the pollution of
carnal concupiscence; which I gather out of these words, Si contaminatus est
carnali concupiscentia, quid faciet? If he be polluted with carnal
concupiscence, what shall he do? ^. Tim. ^.1, 2, 3.
I add hereunto, that this is the flat doctrine of the devil; and saint Paul
is my witness therein.

Quod potest iure etiam Gentilitas accusare, which the Gentiles may justly
accuse.

Qua conscientia exaudiri se credit* With what conscience does he think to be
heard? Out of these words also, Qui autem in carne sunt, Behold here the ^lat
doctrine of ^euilles.
Deo placere non possunt: but they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
For these are the weighty reasons; by which, and through which, our holy
father Syritius, would dissuade Bishops and priests from holy wedlock: to
wit, because marriage is uncleanness, filthtenesse, carnal concupiscence;
because married men can not be heard of God; because married men can not
please God: which to have only recited, is a sufficient confutation.

The probation of the second ^art of the pro^osition.
I say in my position, that after the wicked prohibition of Syritius, priests
were afterward married in some places for many Did. 28. cap. de ^yracus. vrbis.
Pelagius the second was content to admit the bishop of Syracusa, although he
were a married man, and had a wife and children. Neither was that Bishop then
urged to forsake the use of holy wedlock. Panorm. de cleri^is coniugatis, ^ap.
Cum olim.
For as cardinal Panormitan tells them, experience teaches their
prohibition of marriage to be most wicked, as which enforces their priests to
sin grievously by ungodly copulation, whereas they might live chastely with
their own wives. Their own Polidore sings the same song; both their
express words shall be alleged in the end of the next chapter.

Did. 28. cap. de Syracus.
Their own Gratianus in the before named distinction, does infer out of Pope
Pelagius his words in this manner:

Sieve ergo presbyter, sieve diaconus, sieve subdiaconus fuerit; apparet, quod in
praefatis ordinibus constituti, licite matrimonio vti possunt.

Whether therefore he be priest, deacon, or subdeacon, it is clear, that such
as are within the aforenamed orders, may lawfully have the use of matrimony.

Out of these words of Gratianus, who was a papist, and a great favorer of the
pope; I infer against the doctrine of the pope, that priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, may not only be married, but even while they be married, have the
use of holy wedlock, which is a point doubtless, very well worthy the
observation. To this testimony of Gratianus, the papists cannot possibly
frame any answer, unless they will cry, fire and faggot, for their own
Doctor.

I prove it secondly, because Pope Nicholas, who lived Pelagius, was so far
from disquieting married priests, Did. 28. cap. vit.
that when the Bulgarians complained of that fault so supposed, he persuaded
them to be content, and not to dishonor their married priests. This the
Reader shall find to be so, in the popes own Canon law.

I prove it thirdly, because the constitution of Pelagius Syritius. Thus
therefore does pope Gregory write:

Ante triennium omnium ecclesiarum subdiaconi Siciliae prohibiti fuerant, Did.
31. ca pri^^.
vt more Romanae ecclesiae suis vxoribus nullatenus misceantur; quod mihi durum
atque incompetens videtur, vt qui vsum continentiae non inuenit, neque
castitatem promisit, compellatur a sua vxore separari.

Three years ago, all subdeacons in Sicilia were charged to forbear the use
of holy wedlock, according to the custom of the Roman church. Which seems
to me a very hard and inconvenient thing, that he who neither has the gift of
continency, neither has vowed chastity, should forcibly be separated from
his wife.

Out of these words I gather first, that the laws of single life took only
place in Sicilia, about three years before the Gregory, because none of them
are votaries. For to the vow which they call annexed, they are no more bound
in the weast church then in the east. And yet all of the east church are free,
as you have heard in the sixth proposition. But this pope was not constant to
him self in this point of doctrine, and therefore was his constitution
disanulled by the sixth general synod, Anno Dom 680
about fifty years after.

Lambert. in chron. an. 1074
In other countries, at other times the marriage of priests was abolished. They
were married in Germany above 1000. years together. See Lambertus.

The objection.
The marriage of bishops and priests was forbidden by the general council of
Nice: therefore Syricius was not the first author thereof, as who lived almost
100. years after the same.

The answer.
Peruse the first proposition.
labored busily to have his doctrine established by the famous council of
Nice. For as I have proved out of S. Paul, the prohibition of marriage even in
priests is the doctrine of the devil.

Paphnutius, a man famous by manifold miracles in his life time: and that for
this end and purpose, that he might gainsay and hinder that wicked and ungodly
law, which the fathers assembled at Nice, were about to bring into the church.
I say thirdly, that Paphnutius excited by the spirit of God, stood up in the
midst of the council, and cried aloud; Sozo. lib. 1. c. 22.
Thus writes Cassiodorus; thus writes Socrates; thus writes Sozomenus. I say
fourthly, that the law which the fathers then thought to have made, was a new
law, never heard of before. Socrates has these express words; Visum erat
episcopis legem nouam in ecclesia^ introducere. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 8.
The bishops thought indeed, to have brought a new law into the church. I say
fifthly, that the council was persuaded with Paphnutius his oration, and
referred the whole matter to every priests free Cassiodorus has these express
words; Synodusque laudauit sententiam cius, and nihil ex hac part sanciuit,
sed hoc in vniuscuiusque voluntate, Hist. tripart. lib. 2. c. 14.
non in necessitate dimisit. And the Synod commended his opinion, and so
decreed nothing in the matter; but left it in every man's election, to do what
he thought good without compulsion. I say sixthly, that Paphnutius affirmed the
coniugal acts Sozomen. and Socrates vbi supra.
yet did the spirit of God speaking in Paphnutius, utterly dissuade them from
that ungodly purpose.

The reply.
It was sometime lawful for married men to be made priests, (because in the
beginning necessity so required) but it was never lawful for priests to be
married men; and therefore Paphnutius pleaded only for the former, alleging
the old custom of the church against the latter.

The answer.
I affirm first, that Paphnutius pronounced it an honorable thing, even for
priests to lie with their lawfully married lie with them; (for if it had not
been lawful, the council would not have yielded to Paphnutius therein) it must
needs follow, Note well and keep it mind.
that either the pope has power to alter Gods law, which no papist will
avouch; or else that it is this day lawful by Gods law for priests to marry
wives, and to have conjugal acts Socrates and Sozomenus ascribe it to the old
tradition of the church, for unmarried priests so to continue; yet does not
Cassiodorus make any mention thereof, in his Tripartite collection. And
howsoever Paphnutius alleged tradition, to mitigate the severe laws intended
by the council; yet it is very certain, that such tradition was neither
general nor divine. I prove it first, because otherwise the Greek church See
the seventh proposition.
(...) 4. c. cum in (...)
there Gratianus steppeth in and tells us, that the apostles taught so by
example, Syritius: These are the express words of the gloss (For I will
neither conceal any thing that makes for them, neither invent any thing of
mine own brain to prevail against them) A tempore Syritij, Glossa. did. 84
c. Cum in praeter.
hic vocat antiquitatem. Antiquity here named is from the time of Syritius.
And a little before, the same gloss has these memorable words; Dicunt, quod
ista capita facta fuerunt ante tempus Gregorij qui introduxit continentiam
subdiaconibus* presbyteris vero and diaconibus Syricius introduxit Imo dicunt
quod olim sacerdotes poterant contrahere ante Syricium. They say that these
chapters were made before the time of Gregory, who debarred subdeacons of
marriage; b^t Syritius made the law against priests and deacons. Yea, they say
that Priests might of old time have married, even till the of Syritius. Lo,
Pope Syritius the first man, that forbad marriage to priests.
all this devilish doctrine against the marriage of priests, began of pope
Syritius by their own confession. Let this be noted.

I say fourthly, that the tradition which Socrates and Sozomenus speak of, was
by example, and not by doctrine, as both Gratianus and the gloss expound them.
For these are the express words of the gloss; Ergo apostoli docuerunt
exemplo, Glossa vbi supr.
and opere, and admonitione, non institutione, vel constitutione. Therefore the
apostles taught it by example, deed, and admonition, and not by any law or
constitution. And so the Nycene council, makes in every respect against the
papists.

The 6. proposition.
The marriage of moonkes, and other votaries is true and lawful matrimony,
See the first proposition, and confer it with this.
and cannot be dissolved by the power of man. This proposition consists of
two parts, as is apparent. Touthing the latter part, no power upon earth has
authority to institute sacraments, or to alter the same. For no inferior
has authority over his superior, no subject over his Sovereign, no creature
over the creator. This point I have proved sufficiently, in my book of
Motives. The difficulty therefore rests in the former part, which it
remains that I prove.

The papists assign two kinds of vows; to wit, votum simplex ac solenne, a
single vow, and a vow solemn. They call that a solemn vow, which moonkes,
friars, nuns, and other religious persons make; and all the rest, they repute
vows simple. This distinction laid as a sound foundation, they erect a
manifold building thereupon, in manner and form following.

The first building.
Whosoever marries after the single vow of continency, he or she sins
mortally, but the marriage holds, and is of force. Thus teach all popish
doctors with uniform consent. Angelus, Rosilla, Calderinus, Couarrunias,
Paludanus, Mayor, Siluester; Nauarrus, Fumus, Scotus, Sotus, Aquinas, and the
rest. I will only allege the words of ^umus in the name of all, who writes
in this manner; Fumus de matr.. 55.
Secundum impedimentum est votum simplex. Nam qui vouit castitatem simpliciter,
si contrahat, mortaliter peccat, violans fidem deo datam, tame^ tenet
matrimonium. The second impediment is a single vow: for he that voweth
chastity simply, if he afterward marry, commits a mortal sin in breaking
his promise made to God, but yet the matrimony holds and is of force.

The second building.
Every marriage of man and woman made after the solemn vow of approved
religion, is not only damnable in the party contrahent, but also void and of
no force at all. This likewise teach all popish doctors, Aquinas, Couarru^ias,
Siluester, Navarre, and the rest. Fumus has these words.

Fumus de matr.. 8 and lib. 6. de vo^o cap. vnico.
Tertium impedimentum est votum non quodcunque sed solenne religionis
approbatae, sieve fuerit professio express sieve tacit facta, quia impedit, ne
quis possit contrahere matrimonium, and si contrahat, est nullum.

The third impediment is a vow; yet not every one, but the solemn vow of
approved religion, whether profession be made expressly or virtually,
because it so hinders as none can marry; and if they do marry, such
matrimony is none at all. Where note, that the papists call that only
approved religion, which is confirmed by the pope or bishop of Rome.

The third building.
Matrimony even after the solemn vow of religion, is lawful and of force; so
it be done by and with the popes dispensation. This doctrine is taught us, by
many learned papists, Antoninus, Richardus, Hugo, Innocentius, Couarruuias, and
by the real practice of sundry popes. Thus writes Antoninus, whom I allege
in the name of the rest.

A^ton p. 2. tit. 11 cap 2.. 9.
Papa dispensare potest in statuto concilij vniuersalis. De voto solenni per
professionem etiam patet, quod licet papa non possit facere quod professus non
fuit professus, potest tamen facere quod non sit obligatus religioni, and ad
votum religionis; quiae in omni voto intelligitur, excepta authoritate papae.
Infra; and communiter canonistae tenent quod papa potest dispensare in voto
solenni religionis, non quidem tantum vt sit religiosus and non seruet vota;
sed de religioso potest facere laicum, ex magna causa vrgente.

The pope can dispense, in the decrees of a general council. It is also
clear, that he can dispense in a solemn vow by profession. For although the
pope cannot make a professed person not to have been professed, yet can he this
do, What is it, that the pope cannot do?
that the professed person shall neither be bound to his religion, nor to his
vow: because we must understand, that in every vow the popes authority is
excepted: and the Canonistes do commonly hold, that the pope can dispense in
the solemn vow of religion, not only that one be still a religious person and
keep not his vow; but of a religious person he can make a mere lay man, upon
an urgent cause.

The fourth building.
A solemn vow has not force of it self, and of it own nature, to dissolve
matrimony, and to make the solemn votaries incapable thereof: but all the
force and efficacy it has therein, is wholly derived from the ordinance of
the church of Rome. This teaches their own dear friar, and reverend bishop
Josephus Angles, whose doctrine is approved by the late popes of Rome. Thus
therefore does Josephus write:

Ratio praecisa ob quam votum solenne dirimit matrimonium contrahendum, and
vouentes solenniter inhabilitat, Josephus Angl. in 4. s. p. 2. q. de voto, at.
6. diffic. 1.
est ecclesiae institutio; quae vt consanguineos intra quartum gradum, ita
huiusmodi personas ad contrahendum inhabilitat. Definita est a Bonifacio 8.
cap. vnico, de vo^o in 6. vbi solum constituit Romans pontif. discrimen inter
votum solenne, and matrimonium. Deinde quia possit ecclesia instituere, vt in
mundo nullum sit votu^ solemn matrimoniu^ dirimens; quare voti solennitas est
ab ecclesia, and no^ a deo; ex nullo enim loco sacrae scripturae colligitur
inhabilitas vouentis solenniter, vt contrahere non possit. Nam per traditionem
quae fit in voto solenni, non est ex iure diuino and naturali inhabilis vouens
adalium statum* quia subdiaconus and diaconus tradunt se deo voto solenni
castitatis and obedientiae, and tamen papa cum illis saepissime dispensat, vt
Soto concedit.

The precise reason, for which a solemn vow dissolueth matrimony to be
contracted, O wicked church of Rome? most happy are they, who are made free
from thy brutish thraldom.
and disableth those that solemnly vow it, is the institution of the church
(of Rome,) which as it inableth kinsfolks within the fourth degree to contract
marriage, so does it also the said votaries. Bonifacius the eight has so
defined, where the bishop of Rome only appoints the difference, between a
solemn vow and matrimony. Again, because the church (of Rome) might make a
law, that no solemn vow in the world should dissolve wedlock; wherefore the
solemnity of the vow is of the church, and not of God. For the inabilitie of
the solemn vower, so as he cannot marry, is not gathered out of any place of
the holy scripture. For by the tradition which is in the solemn vow, the
person vowing is not enabled to another state, either by the law divine, or law
of nature; because Deacons, and Subdeacons deliver up themselves to God, by the
solemn vow of chastity and obedience; and for all that, the pope often
dispenses with them, as Soto grants.

Nauarrus avouches constantly, and without blushing, that many popes have
dispensed, de facto, with professed moonkes, and that in the way of marriage;
these are his words:

Nauarrus de iudiciis notab. 3. p. 275.
Papa potest dispensare cum monacho iam professo, vt contrahat matrimonium; imo
de facto multi papae dispensarunt.

The pope can dispense with a moonke already professed, that he may become a
married man. For many popes, de facto, have dispensed so.

Couarruuias, Richardus, Paludanus, Scotus, Caietanus, and Antoninus, hold the
self same opinion.

The fifth building.
The vow single is of one and the same nature with the vow solemn, not
distinguished by any essential but mere accidental difference. For thus
writes their own Josephus Angles.

Joseph. Angles in 4. q. de voto, ar. 6 diffic. 2.
Votum solenne and simplex, ex part subiecti specie accidentali differunt,
propterea quod voti simplicis subiectum est ad co^trahendum matrimonium habile,
licet contrahendo peccet. At vero subiectum voti solennis, est ad contractum
matrimonialem inhabile, transgressiones voti simplicis and solemnis eiusdem
speciei sunt, etiamsi qui solenniter vouet grauius peccet: ratio est, quia
specifica differentia actuum est penes obiecta; and cum idem sit vtriusque voti
obiectum, nempe seruare continentiam, erunt actus eiusdem speciei, erit tamen
voti solemnis transgressio grauior, ratione perfectioris status.

The vow solemn and single differ accidentally in respect of the subject,
These buildings and distinctions well observed, popery will receive a deadly
wound.
because the subject of the single vow is able to contract matrimony, albeit
he sin in so contracting: but the subject of a solemn vow, is enabled to
matrimonial contract: the transgressions of the vow single and solemn are of
the same nature or kind, albeit he that makes the solemn vow, sins more
grievously: the reason is, because the specificall difference of acts, rests
in the objects; and since there is one object of both the vows, to wit, to
keep chastity* the acts shall be of the same nature or kind; nevertheless,
the transgression of the solemn vow shall be greater, by reason of the
perfecter state.

Thus reasons Friar Joseph, after the opinion of other popish doctors: and
his discourse is evident, because every specificall difference moral, arises
of the objects; and consequently, since the object of vow single is one and the
same with the vow solemn, the difference between them can no way be
essential.

The sixth building.
All secular Priests are so free from the solemn vow, annexed by the church of
Rome to ecclesiastical orders, as their marriage is perfect and of force,
notwithstanding the supposed dissoluing impediment thereof. I prove it first,
because Scotus, Navarre, Josephus Angles and others do grant, that this vow is
only annexed by the ordinance of the church, as shall

I prove it secondly, because if the secular priests ^^e votaries, their vow
must either be by the word spoken, or by the deed done: not the first, This
dilemma catches the Pope by the nose.
because no such word can be proved; necessarily, that the Greeks likewise
should become votaries, as who do the self same thing. Who for all that were
never votaries, as Gratianus, Syluester, and other popish doctors do affirm.
I prove it thirdly, because when two things are essentially and really
distinguished, the grant of the one does necessarily include the grant of the
other: and yet is the solemn vow of chastity, Nauar. in e^chir. cap. 22.. 18.
essentially and really distinct from sacred orders; as I have proved out of
Josephus in the fourth building, and as is apparent by Navarre in his
Enchiridion. Gratian their own doctor makes this case clear: see his
assertion in the next chapter, in the answer to the first objection.

The seventh building,
The solemn vow of chastity imposed only by the power of man, cannot alter
the institution of God, and take away the liberty by him granted unto man. For
proof hereof, their own dear friar Antoninus, some time archbishop of
Florence, shall suffice, who tells our holy father the Pope, that God is his
superior, and that he therefore cannot alter any one i^te of his law: these
are his express words.

Anton. de potest. papae p. 3. Tit. 22. cap. 3.. 1.
Quantum vero ad illa quae sunt de iure naturali vel diuino iurisdictio seu
potestas papalis non se extendit, sic vero quod ista possit mutare, vel etiam
dare eis vim obligandi: and ratio est quia inferior non potest mutare leges
superioris: Deus autem superior ad papam.

Concerning those things which are of the law of nature, or law divine,
jurisdiction or papal power does not extend it self, so to wit, that the pope
can change these things, or give power obligatiue unto them: and the reason is,
because an inferior cannot change the laws of his superior, and God is
superior Franciscus a Victoria, and other learned Papists hold the same
opinion, but Antoninus his testimony is sufficient.

The proof of the proposition.
This foundation and these seven buildings only considered, my proposition
before rehearsed will be clear and manifest: for first, if single life be only
imposed by the law of man, as the seventh building proves; secondly, if
secular priests can no

An important objection, against the sixth proposition.
Refuse the youger widows, for when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry, having damnation because they have broken the first
faith. 1. Tim. 5. v. 11.2^
This place of S. Paul, sundry of the fathers expound of the vow of
chastity, neither can it possibly admit any other sense.

The answer.
I say first, that though sundry of the fathers think it sin to marry
after the vow of chastity, and that by reason of this Epiphanius writes in
this manner.

Melius est itaque vnum peccatum habere, and non plura: melius est lapsum a
cursu, palam sibi vxorem sumere secundum legem, and a virginitate multo tempore
poenitentiam agere and sic rursus ad ecclesiam induci, velut qui mala operatus
est, Epiphan. h^res. 61 libro. (...) page 167.
velut lapsu^ and fractum, and obligatione opus habentem; and non quotidie
occultis iaculis sauciari ab improbitaete quae a Diabolo ipsi infertur.

It is better therefore to have one sin, and not many: it is better for one that
is fallen from his course, openly to marry a wife, according to the law, and
to repent a long time from his virginity, and so to be restored again into
the church, as one tha has done wickedly, as one that is fallen and broken,
and has need of binding up, and not to be daily wounded with the secret darts
of that wickedness which the devil puts in him. Thus writes Epiph^nius,
showing plainly to the reader, that he condemns not the marriage in vowed
persons, monks, or nuns, but the falling from their gudly purpose.

S. Cyprian having sharply inueyed against the licen^ious life of certain
deacons and vowed virgins, exhorts them at the length to marry, that cannot,
or will not live continent and chaste: these are his words: Cypri. libr. 1 epist.
11. ad Pompon.
Quod si ex fide se Christo dedi^auerunt, pudice and cast sine vlla fabula
perseuerent; ita fortes and stabiles praemium virginitatis expectent si autem
perseuerare nolunt, vel non possunt* melius est nubant quam inignem delictis
suis cadant.

If they have betrothed themselves to Christ by faith, let them continue
honestly and chastely without all mockery; so as they may in fortitude and
stabilitie expect the reward of virginity: but if they will not, or cannot
persevere; it is better that they marry, then that they fall into the fire with
their misbehauiour. Thus says saint Cyprian, declaring very plainly, that he
approoueth the marriages of affianced and vowed virgins.

S. Austen, although he understand by the first faith, the vow of chastity;
yet does he flatly allow marriage after the breach thereof: August. in Psalm.
75. prope finem tom. 8.
these are his express words: Hoc dico nubere licet antequam voueat,
superbire nunquam licet. O tu virgo Dei, nubere noluisti quod licet, extollis
te quod non licet. Melior virgo humilis, quam maritata humilis; sed melior
maritata humilis, quam virgo superba Que autem resp^xerit ad nuptias, non quod
voluit nubere damnatur, sed quod iam ante recesserat and fit vxor Loath
respiciendo retrorsum This I say, it is lawful to marry before she vow, it is
never lawful to be proud. O thou virgin of God, thou would not marry, which
is lawful for thee to do, (...), damnation is not for marriage, but for the
breach of promise.
but thou waxest prou^, which thou may not do. An humble virgin is better
then an humble married woman; but an humble married woman is better then a proud
virgin. Yet she that has looke^ back to marriage, is damned; not because she
would marry, but because she had already departed (from her holy purpose) and is
become Lots wife, in looking back again.

The same S. Augustine has in another place of his works such a plain
declaration of his mind in this point, as whosoever shall once read or hear
his words, cannot but perceive the same. Thus therefore does he write
expressly, I will not alter or change one word. Postremo, damnantur tales,
Augustine. de ^e no viduitatis. cap 9. and cap. 1^ tom. 4^
non quia coniugalem fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia co^tinentiae primam
fidem irritam fecerunt. Quod vt breuiter insinuaret Apost. noluit eas dicere
habere damnaetionem, quae postamplioris sanctitatis propositum nubunt, non
quiae non damnentur, sed ne in eis ipsae nuptiae damnari putarentur. Infra:
proinde qui dicunt talium nuptias non esse nuptias, sed potius adulteria, non
mihi videntur satis acute ac diligenter considerare quid dicant. In fine, such
are damned, not because they are afterward marri^d, but because they have made
void the first promise of chastity: which thing the Apostle intending briefly
to insinuate, would not say that they were damned, who marie after the purpose
of larger sanctimonie, not because they are not damned, but lest he should seem
to condemn their marriages in them: therefore they that say the marriages of
such are no marriages, but rather adulteries; seem to me, not to consider
exactly and advisedly what they say. By which words of S. Austen it is clear,
that he is so far from co^demning the matrimonies of those v^tiue widows,
which cannot live continently as he reputeth them for perfect, true, and
lawful marriages.

I say secondly, that marriage after a solemn vow, ought to be deemed perfect
and of force, even with the Pope himself: Caelest. 3. extra. qui clerici and
vouent. lib. 4. Tit. 6 cap. 6.
for thus is it written in his own canon law; votum simplex apud deum non
minus ligat, quam solemn: the simple or single vow binds no less before God,
then does the solemn: and yet as I have already proved, marriage is perfect
after the single vow, even by the popes alowance; therefore with no reason can
he deny it to be perfect also, after the double or solemn vow: for unless the
pope will impudently say, yt his power is greter then gods, he must perforce
admit this to be so. And it is a frivolous supposed evasion to say, that there
is a delivery of the party in the vow solemn, not so in the single: for thus
writes their own doctor Scotus. Alia ratio est, quod vouens solemniter,
Scotus in. 4. S. did. 38. quaest. 2 in mod.
mittit in possessionem illum cui vouit solemniter, vouens autem private; non,
sed quasi promittit: sed haec valet minus quam secunda, quia omnia intrinseca
voto, vt respicit actum voluntatis, per quem ob ligat se vouendo, and transfert
dominium suum in alterum; omnia inquam, istae sunt aequalia hinc jude. Igitur
non magis datio hic, quam ibi; nec promissio ibi, quam hic. Another reason is
this; that he who makes a solemn vow, puts him to whom he voweth, in
possession; but so does not he that makes a single vow, but only gives his
promise. This reason is worse then the second; for all things that be of the
substance of the vow, as a vow concerns the act of the mind, whereby the mind
binds it self by vowing, and transposeth the ownership of it self to
another, al these things I say, are of like weight on either side: therefore
there is no more delivery in the vow solemn, then in the single; nor more
promise in the one then in the other.



promise was that, which these widows made when they were married, to wit,
that they would be loving, diligent, careful, and obedient to their husbands;
and above all the rest, keep their conjugal faith. The third faith was that,
which these widows made to the bishop and the whole church; to wit, that they
would execute their deaconship honestly and faithfully, and constantly persevere
therein to the end. The younger widows waxing wanton against Christ, did not
only break their last promise, forsaking the ministry of the church: but
their first and most holy promis made in baptism, while they departing from
the purity of honest life and religion, consecrated themselves to paganism and
infidelity, and so purchased to themselves Gods wrath and eternal damnation.
The first faith i^ baptism, what i^ was, and how it was broken.
Therefore the apostle makes no mention of any vow, but only reproves
unconstant women, who being relieved a long time by the common tresure of the
congregation, to minister to the sick persons, did afterward both forsake
their promise and Christ too, and became heathens running after satan. For this
is evident by the words of the 15. verse of the 5. chapter, from whence the
objection is taken: where the apostle says, that some widows are already
turned back (from Christ their guide, to whom they had dedicated themselves in
baptism, and followed) after satan. It will not serve the papists to say after
their wonted manner, that marriage breaks not our promise made in baptism.
The confirmation of the answ^^
For albeit the faith of baptism be not broken by marrying absolutely and
simply, yet is it indeed broken by marrieng against Christ; that is, by
marrying in such manner, as they renounce christianity. And this my answer is
confirmed, because, if the apostle had meant otherwise, he would have called it
the last faith, and not the first.

I say fifthly, that these words (for when they shall wax wanton against Christ,
they will marry) do evidently prove, that S.

I therefore note first, that these four things are really distinguished



Non concupisces, Thou shall not lust.

Romans 7.7.
Romans 6. verse. 23
for ye reward of sin is death. And another scripture says; (...)
Deuteronomy. 27.26.
(...)
Accursed be he that confirms not the words of this law, Galat. 3.10.
in doing them: for as saint James says, though a man keep all the residue of
the law, James 2. verse 10
yet if he offend in any one point, he becomes guilty of all.

I note fifthly, that by Gods law we are bound to refer all our 1. Cor. 10. ver.
31
These points observed, I conclude, that the younger widows had damnation, not
for marrying, but for being wanton before their marriage. For in being wanton
against Christ, they brake their first faith made in baptism, that is, they
performed not that obedience they promised in baptism; and in not performing
that obedience they deserved eternal death; and so they had damnation, because
they were wanton against Christ. S. Paul says not, that they had damnation
because they married, (which must be well marked) but because they made void
their first faith in breaking Gods commandments, as ye have heard.

14. verse; forthwith in the 15. verse, he yields the reason of that his
advise, to wit, because certain are already turned back after Satan. Now, in
the 15. verse he must needs speak of such widows, as were received into the
ministry of the church; because none could be turned back from that, to
which they never were admitted: he therefore speaks likewise of the betrothed
widows, in the next verse before; which I make evident three ways; first,
because otherwise his illation in the 15. verse, should be 14. verse;
frivolous, for that it could not conclude his purpose: secondly, because he had
already in the 11. verse charged 60. years. This conclusion therefore being
made touching the widows not yet admitted, he goes forward and gives his
advise, for the younger widows then received of the church: as if he had said;
for as much as some of the younger sort have already been wanton and followed
satan, and there is also danger in the rest: I decree, that hereafter none
under 60. years be received; and I exhort the younger already received and
desirous to marry, to betake themselves to holy wedlock, to bring forth
children, to be housewiues, and so to give no occasion to the adversary to
speak evil. Thirdly,

CHAP. IIII. Of certain general objections against the marriages of Priests,
with brief solutions of the same.
The first objection.
BE sanctified therefore and be holy, Leuit. 11.44.
for I am holy (your lord and God:) I answer, that all the Israelits were
commanded to be sanctified and to be holy, as well as were the priests, and so*
if this argument were of force in popish sense, al people as well as priests,
should abstain from the use of holy wedlock, yea, the priests were even then
married, as is already proved.

The second objection.
I would have you without care: the unmarried cares for the things of the
lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married cares for the things
of the world, 1. Cor. 7. verse 32.
how he may please his wife: therefore priests ought not to be married.

The answer.
I say first, that S. Paul prefers the state of the unmarried, ^^ngle life,
how it is better.
yet this is not in respect of any holiness that resulteth out of single life,
but because the unmarried is more free from the cares of the world, and so more
apt forstudie and the service of God. I say secondly, that S. Paul never
Hierome though a great patron of single life, both gravely considered, and
sincerely acknowledged: for he says, that Abraham pleased God no less in
wedlock, then virgins do in their single life: these are his express words,
as the popish canon law recites them: C. 32. q. 4. c* 7.
Abraham placuit in coniugio sicut nunc virgins placent in castitate: seruiuit
ille legi and tempori suo seruiamus and nos legi and tempori nostro, in quos
fines coelorum deuenerunt. Abraham pleased (God) in marriage, even as virgins
now please in chastity: he served the law and his time; let us also upon whom
the ends of the world is come, serve the law and our time. Yea S. Nazianzene
says, that his father being a bishop, was greatly helped in piety by his
wife: and the same S. Gregory says in another place, Nazianz. in o^at. ^un^b.
pro patre orat. 28. tom. 2.
that neither marriage nor single life, does either join us to God or to the
world, or withdraw us from god, or from the world. This is confirmed by S.
Chrysostom in these words: In epitaph. Gorgoniae orat. 25.
Nuptiae licet difficultatis in se plurimum habeant, ita tamen assumi possunt,
vt perfectiori vitae impedimento non sint. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. homil. 10.
Although marriage have great trouble in it self, yet may it so be used as it
shall be no hindrance to per^^t life. S. Austen after that he had avouched holy
life to be nothing abated, August. in quaest. mix. q. 12. in fine.
in holy Samuel and Zacharias by reason of their marriages: by and by he adds
these words: Qua ergo ratione accusatur quod minime obesse probatur? and quis
neget bonum debere dici, quod neminem laedit. How therefore is that thing
accused, which is proved to do no hurt? and who denies that that ought to be
called good, which brings harm to none? S. Clemens Alexandrinus gives a
sufficient solution to this objection, Clemens Alex. lib. 3. stromat.
in these express words: Annon permittitur etiam ei qui vxorem duxit, vna cum
co^iugio etiam esse solicitum de iis quae sunt domini? sequitur: ambae enim
sunt sanctae in domino: haec quidem vt vxor, illa vero vt virgo: cannot she
also that is married together with her marriage, seek the things that pertain
to the Lord? for they both are holy in the lord: this as a wife, she as a
virgin. Nicephorus though he were carried away with sundry errors of his time,
Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 19.
yet does he make S. Gregory who was a married bishop, equal with S. Basil his
brother who led a single life: these are his words: Et quamuis is coniuge^
habuerit, rebus tamen aliis fratri minime cessit: and though he were married,
yet was he nothing inferior to his brother in other things. In fine, S Ambrose
says thus: Amber. in cor. cap. 7. prope ^^dem.
Quid ergo dicimus si virgins de deo cogitant and iunctae viris demundo, qu
espes relinqutur nubentibus apud deum? si enim ita est, dubium est de salute
eorum: nam videmus virgins de seculo cogitare, and matrimonio iunctos
dominicis studere operibus. What therefore say we, if virgins think of god, and
the married of the world, what hope have the married with God? for if it be so,
their salvation is in doubt: for we see that virgins do think of the world,
and that married men are careful for the works of the Lord.

The third objection.
Defraude not one another but for prayer sake, says S. Paul ergo priests that
must ever pray, must ever abstain.

The answer. 1. Cor. 7. verse. 5.

I say first that S. Paul does here show the necessity of marriage, in that he
disswadeth not from abstinence save only for prayer sake. I say secondly, that
priests must not ever be occupied in prayer no more then lay men: their nature
and condion, requires convenient recreation.

I say thirdly, that ye apostle speaks not here of every kind Leuit. 10. v. 9.
which I ween their fatted headed moonkes will never agree unto, or at least
never put in practice. Yea they must continually abstain from wine, for so the
law required.

The fourth objection.
When David to satisfy his hunger being urgent, required of Abimelech the
priest, 1. Kin. 21. v. 3.4.
some cakes of bread, or what else came to hand; Abimelech answered that he had
no common bread: but if he and his company were not polluted with women he
would give them hallowed bread. Now it is clear, that Abimelech meant of their
lawful wives, because he could not suspect holy David, to have been polluted
with naughty women. If therefore lawful wedlock did so pollute secular
persons, that for the use thereof, they might not eat the Show bread: how much
more shall the use of wedlock pollute priests of the new testament, that they
may not eat Christ's body in the holy mass?

The answer.
Paphnutius durst not have defended the same publicly, in the presence of so
many learned men at Nice: who for all that did so, and was therefore not only
highly commended, but the whole council alsagreed to his godly motion. I say
thirdly, that there were many who list may see at large in Leniticus,) but
neither was the lawful matrimonial act reputed any of them; Leu. 15. per
(...) See cap. 21 22.
neither do those legal ceremonies concern us of the new testament, but the
true purity signified by the same; that is, Christian purification wrought in
the blood of Christ Jesus, and apprehended by a true, sincere, and lively
faith. I say fourthly, that many legal contam^nations were no other sins,
then the manifold popish saltem desiderio) purification accordingly. I say
sixthly, that the high priest in the old law was married, and begat children,
and that even in those days Exodus 30. v. 7.8.
not this day or that day only, but every morning and every evening throughout
their generations for ever. Since therefore the high priests marriage and
conjugal acts, were nothing prejudicial to his holy function; it follows
consequently, that neither can holy wedlock be now prejudicial, to the
ministry of the new Testament.

The fifth objection.
The councels of Carthage, Toledo, Agatha, and some others, have flatly
prohibited the marriage of priests: which doubtless they would never have
done, if it had been a lawful thing.

The answer.
I say first, that man's authority cannot abridge and take away from man, that
liberty which God himself has granted unto man. For the inferior cannot
alter the law of his superior, as is already proved. I say secondly, that
though the pope and his late councels, do roundly impose laws against holy
wedlock; Praeceptum inquit, domini non habeo, consiliu^ autem do: I have no
commandment of the Lord, but I give mine advise. 1. Cor. 7. v. 15
I say thirdly, that the council of Agatha does Conc. Agath cap. ^8.
These are the words of the council; Presbyteri, diaconi, subdiaconi, vel
deinceps, quibus ducendi vxores licentia modo non est, etiam aliarum nuptiarum
euitent conuiuia. Priests, deacons, subdeacons, and the rest, who this day have
not license to marry, must not be present at the feasts of other marriages.

This council was holden in Narbon, about 439. years after Christ, which was
51. years after Pope Syricius, who first abandoned the marriage of priests as
I have proved. Anno Dom 439
To which time this council of Agatha alludeth, when it says; (who are now
debarred from marriage:) as if it had said; Before they might have married, but
now it is forbidden them. I say fourthly, that their own dear Gratian in his
gloss upon Martins words, confesses matrimony to be of so great force, even
in deacons that marry after their orders: that neither the popes decree, nor
the vow by him annexed to orders, is able to dissolve the same. These are his
express words; Si vero diaconus a ministerio cessare voluerit, contracto
matrimonio licite potest vti; Did. 27. cap. 2. diaconus.
nam etsi in ordinatione sua castitatis votu^ obtulerit, tamen tanta est vis in
sacramento coniugij, quod nec ex violatione voti potest dissolui ipsum
coniugium. But if a deacon will cease from the ministry, he may lawfully
have the use of wedlock contracted in time of his deaconship: for although he
offered the vow of chastity when he took orders, yet so great is the force of
matrimony, that it cannot be dissolved by breaking the vow. Out of which words
I note two things; the one, that Gratian speaks of that matrimony, which
deacons contract after they be made deacons: the other, that such matrimony is
perfect and of force, notwithstanding ye vow annexed by popish law. To which I
add other two things: first, that Gratian avouches S. Austen to be of his
opinion, This is a whip to all popery.
whose words he alleges in the next canon. Secondly, that since marriage is
of force after orders in a deacon, it is so also in subdeacons, priests, and
the rest. The reason is evident, because the vow is of the same force in all:
neither can or will any learned papist say the contrary.

I say fifthly, that it skilleth not much what many councels say; as I have
proved at large in my book of Motives: yet here I add one decree out of one
of their councels, which makes Toledo or Toletanum.

Si quis habens vxorem fidelis concubinam habeat, non communicet. Caeterum is
qui non habet vxorem, and pro vxore concubinam habet, a communione no^
repellatur, Conc. Tolet. 1. Can. 17.
tantum vt vnius mulieris, aut vxoris, aut concubinae, vt ei placuerit, sit
coniunctione contentus.

If any of the faithful having a wife have also a Concubine, let him not
receive the holy communion: but he that has no wife, and keeps a concubine
in steed of his wife, let him be admitted to the communion; yet so as he be
content with one only, either woman, wife, or concubine, as pleases him. Lo,
this council gives a man free liberty, to keep woman, wife, or concubine at
his pleasure, so he be content with one at once. Neither does it forbid such an
one, to receive the holy communion. Yet it prohibiteth every priest from the
communion, that keeps his lawful wife: but the famous councels of Nice and
Constantinople, were of another mind as I have proved.

The 6. objection.
Vow says the prophet, and perform unto the Lord your God, all ye that be
round about. Psalm. 76 v. 11. Esaia^, 19. v. ^^.
Therefore priests and religious men and women which have vowed, cannot marry
at all.

The answer.
I say first, that this objection can at the most prove only

I say secondly, that they are not only true marriages and of Judge. 11. v.
31.39 Mat 14. v. 7 10. Act. ^3. v. ^1.
because as it is sin to make ill vows, so is it lawful to break the same, and
double sin to perform them. This is evident in Iephthe, who to accomplish
his vow, became the murderer of his own only daughter. In wicked king Herod
the Tetrarch, who for sake of his vow beheaded S. John the baptist. In the
forty Jews, who to perform their bloody vow, say in wait to destroy S.
Paul. These wicked votaries, as they sinned most grievously in making their
vows; so did they iterate their sin in performing the same. Who
nevertheless should have sinned but once, if after the making of their
ungodly vows, they had ceased from the performance thereof. For which cause
holy Bernard advises his sister gravely, not to keep and perform any ill
vow. Bernard de modo been viuendi, Sermon 62. to. 1. p. 1699.
Thus does he write; Rescinde fidem in malis promissis: In turpi voto muta
decretum. Malum quod promisisti, non facias; Quod incaute vouisti, no^ impleas;
Impia est promissio, quae scelere adimpletur. Break thy faith in evil
promises; Isidor. ap. Great. C. 22. q. 4. in m^lis.
change thy purpose in dishonest vows: do not that evil which thou have
promised; perform not that which thou have rashly vowed. That promise is
wicked which is performed with wickedness. S. Isidorus has the self same
resolution concerning ill vows, as he is alleged by Gratian. S. Bid after
he had largely discoursed upon evil promises, and withal showed that it is
better even to be perjured, then to perform naughty and wicked promises;
alleged for the confirmation of his opinion, Beda apud Great. C. 22. q. 4, si
aliquid.
the fact of holy David in the death of Nabal. These are his words: Denique
iurauit David per Deum, occidere Nabal virum stultum and impium, atque omnia
quae ad eum pertinebant demoliri; sed ad primam intercessionem Abigail foeminae
prudentis mox remisit minas, reuocauit ensemin vaginam, neque aliquid culpae se
pro taliperiurio contraxisse doluit. Finally, David swear by God, that he would
kill Nabal a foolish and wicked man, and that he would destroy all his both
small and great: yet so soon as Abigail (Nabals wife) a wife woman, made her
petition to him, he abated his anger, put up his sword, and nothing lamented
the breach of his oath.

S. Ambrose having at large proved by many golden testimonies, that it was
sin to break ill vows then to perform the same, at length alleges the
ensample of Christ himself, for that only purpose; these are his words: Ambr.
lib. de ^^fic. cap. 12.
Non semper igitur promissa soluenda omnia sunt: denique ipse dominus
frequenter suam mutat sententiam, sicut scriptura indicat. Therefore all
promises ought not to be kept at all times: for even our Lord God himself
does oftentimes change his purpose, as holy Writ bears record. Aug. apud
Gr^^ C. 22. q. 4. c^^. magna.
S. Austen reputeth it a great point of wisdom not to do that which a man
has rashly spoken: thus does he write: Magnae sapientiae est reuocare hominem
quod male locutus est: It is great wisdom for a man to call back (and not
perform) that which he has spoken unadvisedly.

Soter who himself was the bishop of Rome, teaches expressly, that rash
promises ought not to be kept: these are his words: Si aliquid incautius
aliquem iurasse contigerit, Soter in epist ad episcop. Italiae to. 1. conc. C.
22. q. 4. ^i aliquid.
quod obseruatum in peiorem vergat exitum, illud salubri consilio mutandum
nouerimus, and magis instante necessitate periurandum nobis, quam pro facto
iuramento in aliud crimen maius diuertendum. If any man shall swear
unadvisedly, which if it be performed brings greater harm; that ought to be
changed, by prudent advise: for we must rather be perjured, if need so
require, then for performance of our oath, to commit a greater sin: so then
it is evident, that ungodly and unlawful vows ought not to be kept. But such
is not the vow of single life, say the papists. This therefore must be examined.

The vow of single life is a godly vow, and so liked of Saint Paul, as he
reputed them damned that kept not the same. The reply.


I answer, that it is a wicked and ungodly vow, The answer
to tie our selves from marriage all the days of our life: and I will prove the
same, by the best approved popish doctors, and by the doctrine established in
the Romish church, and that because the reply contains such matters as is no
less intricate then important.

Sunt enim pleraque negotia, quae sine peccatis exhiberi aut vix aut nullatenus
possunt: Gregor. hom. 24. in euange.
quae ergo ad peccatum implicant, ad haec necesse est vt post conuersionem
animus non recurrat.

For there be sundry arts, which can hardly or not at all be practiced
without sin: therefore after our conversion we may not have recourse to
such, as any way draw us to sin. Now let us apply this to the matter in
hand, for it is most certain that he exposes himself to sin, that binds
himself never to use the remedy against sin: for example, if a man should
vow, that he would never use the help of surgerie or physic, that man
should doubtless expose himself to the peril of death: none but senseless
bodies, will or can this deny: So in our case of single life, because God has
appointed matrimony for a remedy against sin, so says the Apostle, to
avoid fornication, let every one have his wife, and let every woman have her
husband. For which respect Saint Gregory Nazianzene says, 1. Cor. 7. verse. 2.
Nazianz. in laudem. Gorgo. 2.
that marriage is not so subject to peril as single life.

Aquin. 22. q^ 64. ^r. 5.
as their angelical doctor Aquinas proves thereby the murdering of ones
self to be sin, because it is against the inclination of nature. Now let us
make application hereof, for the propension to beget children is natural, as
which was before sin in the state of innocence, and so he that makes a
perpetual vow of chastity feeling in himself this propension, commits a
grievous sin.

I say thirdly, that it is a damnable sin to tempt God, for Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 16.
ye shall not tempt the Lord your God. Upon which words the gloss received
of all papists; says thus: Deum tentat, qui habens quid faciat, sine ratione
committit se periculo, he tempts God who having ordinary means, commits
himself to danger without cause. This exposition is so agreeable to the text
as Aquinas willingly admits the same. Now let us apply it to the matter in
hand. He that refuses ordinary means, and so commits himself to peril,
tempts God grievously, as both the popish gloss and Aquinas grant; but the
ordinary means to avoid fornication is marriage says the Apostle: 1. Cor.
7. ver. 2.
therefore he that voweth never to marry, exposes himself to the danger of
fornication, and thereby tempts god grievously, and consequently his vow is
wicked and damnable.

I say fourthly, that that vow which for the obedience of man's Quarto
principaliter.
but such is the vow annexed in popish priests (mark well my words) therefore
the vow imposed to popish priests is wicked and damnable. I say first the vow
annexed, because the priests 1. Cor. 7. v. 25. Mat. 19, v. 11.12
but also charge every one that has not the gift of continency to take a
wife, and to use holy Gratian in express words.

Copula namque sacerdotalis vel consanguineorum, nec legali, C. 26, q 2, sor^*
nec euangelica, vel apostolica auctoritate prohibetur, ecclesiastica tamen
lege penitus interdicitur.

For the marriage of priests or kinsfolks, is neither forbidden by the law of
Moses, nor by the law of the gospel, nor by the law of the apostles; yet is
it utterly interdicted, by the law of the church (of Rome.)

Mark well these words for Christ's sake (gentle christian reader) for they
are able to confound al obstinate papists in the 400. years ago, even then
when the pope was in his greatest pomp and tyranny. Observe thirdly, that
this Gratian being so learned and so renowned among Psa. 127. verse 1. Hebr.
11. ve. 29. Number. 22. verse. 28 Dan. 3. verse 25 4. Reg. 6. verse 6. Act. 12.
ver. 7, 10
Unless the Lord defend the city, in vain do they labor that keep the same.
Thou, O God, who causest the red sea to give place to the Israelites; thou who
causest Balaams ass to speak; thou who causest the fire to suspend it force
in the burning furnace; thou who causest iron to swim upon the water; thou
who causest locks and brazen gates to open voluntarily; thou, thou, O mighty
God of Israel, have enforced Gratian that learned, famous, and zealous papist,
to confess openly for the battering down of al popery, that the marriage of
priests (which the Pope enforces upon them under pain of damnation
everlasting) is neither forbidden by the law of Moses, nor by the law of thy
holy gospel, nor yet by the law of thine apostles.

Caiet. in quodlibet cont. Luth*
Caietanus their own dear Cardinal and learned schooleman confirms that
which Gratian has already said. These are his words;

Nec ratione, nec authoritate probari potest quod absolute loquendo, sacerdos
peccet contrahendo matrimonium. Vignerius is of the very same opinion, De
differentii^ voti.. 5. ver. 14.
Nam nec ordo in quantum ordo, nec ordo in quantum sacer, est impeditiuus
matrimonij: siquidem sacer^otium non dirimit matrimonium contractum, sieve ante,
sieve post, seclusis omnibus legibus ecclesiasticis, stando tantum ^is, quae
habemus a Christo and apostolis.

It can neither be proved by reason nor yet by authority, if we will speak
absolutely, that a Priest sins by marrying a wife. For neither the order (of
priesthood) in that it is order, neither order in that it is holy, is any
hindrance unto matrimony: for priesthood breaks not marriage, whether it be
contracted before priesthood, or afterward, setting al ecclesiastical laws
aparte, and standing only to those things, which we have of Christ and his
Apostles.

Antoninus is consonant unto Caietane, Antonin. cap. 3. Tit. 1. cap. 21.. ^
and writes in this manner: Episcopatus ex natura sua, non habet opponi ad
matrimonium; the office of a bishop of his own nature, is not opposite unto
marriage.

Saint Clement tells it as a wonder, that the Apostle giving so many rules
and precepts touching matrimony, Clemens Alexand. lib. ^ stromat
should say nothing of the marriage of Priests, if it had been a thing
necessary: these are his words.

Omnes Apostoli Epistolae, quae moderationem docent and continentiam, cum and
de matrimonio, and de liberorum procreatione, and de domus administratione
innumerabilia praecepta contineant, nusquam honestum moderatumque matrimonium
prohibuerunt.

All the Epistles of the Apostle, which teach sobriety and continent life,
whereas they contain innumerable precepts touching matrimony, bringing up of
children, and government of house, yet did they no where forbid honest and
sober marriage.

I say fifthly, that to take away the christian liberty from man which God has
granted to man, is a wicked and damnable 1. Cor. 7. v. 23*
to persevere constantly therein. For after that he has exhorted every one to
continue as God has appointed, and withal has showed the freedom of marriage
to be granted to all, he forthwith adds these words; Ye are bought with a
price, be not the servants of men: as if he had said, to marry or not to
marry is in your own election, let therefore neither Jew nor Gentile ouerrule
your liberty, let none entangle your consciences, let none bring you into
faithless bondage, let none impose that heavy yoke upon your necks, which ye
are no way able to bear. Now by due application hereof, the vow of single
life, at the least the vow annexed to priesthood, which by the law of man,
spoileth us of our christian liberty, must needs be a wicked and damnable
vow. Victor. demur. sect. 2. relect. 7. p. 280.
For as the learned papist Victoria has well observed, the gospel is called
the law of liberty, because christians after the promulgation of the gospel,
are only bound to the law of nature. And yet our late popes have made our case
more intolerable, then ever was the heavy yoke of the Jews. For Saint Paul
charge us, to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Galat. 5. verse 1.


I say sixthly, that to abandon Gods holy ordinance is a wicked

I say seauenthly, that every vow must be de meliori bono, Aquinas in his
theological Sum: Aquin. 22. q. 11.
and therefore because the popish perpetual vow of single life is not of such
a better good, it must needs be a wicked and unlawful act. To prove the said
popish vow, is not of a better good, the reader must diligently observe these
points: first, that it is one thing to speak of virginity in it that such
entangle themselves in snares by Saint Paul's doctrine, 1. Cor. 7.
and for all that make a popish vow of single life for ever: fourthly, that it
is a Romans 14. ver. 23.
for so says the apostle. Hereupon it follows first, that the vow of single
life or virginity, is unlawful: the reason is evident, because it is not a
better good. I prove it, by the flat testimony of Saint Gregory Nazianzene,
a most eloquent and learned father, who was S. Hieroms master, and taught him
the holy scriptures, and for his wonderful knowledge therein was rightly
surnamed Theologus, as records Simeon Metaphrastes, these are his express
words;

Cum in duo haec genera vita nostra omnis diuisa sit, Gregor. Nazian. orat. 25.
in laudem Gorgonia tom. 2.
nimirum in matrimonium and caelibatu^, (quorum alterum vt praestantius and
diuinius, ita maioris quoque laboris and periculi alterum humilius quidem and
abiectius, caeterum minori periculo obnoxium) vitatis vtriusque status
incommodis, quicquid in vtroque commodi erat, delegerit, in vnumque coegerit,
alterius nempe sublimitatem, alterius securitatem, fueritque citra supercilium
pudica, caelibatus commoda matrimonio temperans, ac reipsa ostendens neutrum
horum suapte natura tale esse, vt nos prorsus vel Deo vel mundo astringat, vel
ab his penitus nos separet: Sic quidem vt alterum natura omnino fugiendum sit,
alterum prorsus expetendum; verum mentem esse, quae and nuptias and
virginitatem recte moderetur, atque vtrumque horum instar materiae cuiuspiam ab
artifice ratione componi, and ad virtutem elaborari.

Whereas our whole life is divided into these two kinds, to wit, into
matrimony and single life, (whereof the one as it is more excellent and
divine, so is it also of greater labor and danger; the other more base and
vile, but subject to less danger) (Gorgonia) eschewing the discommodities of
either state, has chosen and gathered into one, what commodity soever was in
both, that is, the sublimitie of the one and the security of the other. She
was chaste and nothing proud, tempering the commodities of single life with
marriage, and showing in very deed, that neither of the twain is such of it
own nature, as can either join us wholly to God, or to the world, or withdraw
us wholly from God or from the world. So verily as the one ought of it own
nature be avoided, and the other to be required: but that it is the mind that
does rightly moderate both marriage and virginity, and that either of them
must be by reason composed of the artificer as certain unwrought stuff, and
so be made a virtue. These are the words of this great clarke and holy father,
in which he has learnedly described the natures and properties, both of
marriage and virginity; which I have alleged at large, because they are
worthy of our consideration, and do exactly explain this intricate and
important matter. Out of them therefore I note first, that as virginity is
Clemens. Alexander. lib. 3. stromat.
Clemens Alexandrinus taught this doctrine long before Saint Gregory.

It follows secondly upon the four observations, that if The disparitie
ought to be noted well.
as it is vowed of him or her that has not ye gift: the reason is evident,
because our savior has appointed such persons, to use the sovereign medicine
of chaste wedlock: and so single life is so far from being a better good in
such persons, that it is no good at all, but a flat damnable sin. Mat. 19.
verse. 11.12. 1. Cor. 7. verse 2.
Besides this, such persons expose themselves to great peril, that is, to
commit fornication, because they know not their own future state.

It follows thirdly, that such a vow cannot be of a better good, because it
is not of faith. I prove it, because his act cannot Mat. 19 verse 11
and saint Paul after he had wished every man to be as himself, added
forthwith; but every one has his proper gift of God, one after this manner,
and another after that. Saint Ambrose says, sola est virginitas quae suaderi
potest, imperari non potest; 1. Cor. 7 verse. 7. Ambros. exhort. ad virgins.
tom 1. p. 106.
only virginity is a thing which may be counseled, but commanded it cannot
be.

I say eighthly, that a lawful and godly vow must be of such things as are in
our own power, and that otherwise it is of Numer. 30. pertotum.
without the consent of their husbands and masters, yea, all vows of monks and
other religious persons so called, which are made without consent of their
abbots, and generals, are for this cause void, and of no force at all: so
write Aquinas, Caietanus, Couarruuias, Nauarrus Syluester, Mat. 19. verse. 11.
Fumus, Antoninus, and the rest. And yet is it evident, that Chastity is not
in the power of man, for so Christ himself has taught us. And it is a
frivolous evasion to say, that by prayer it may be obtained. For who knows
that God will grant his prayer for single life? to whom has God so promised?
Certes, the holy Apostle prayed instantly three times, that the prick of the
flesh might be taken from him, 2. Cor. 12. v. 7, 8, 9,
and yet could not attain the same. Nevertheless every idle Monk, Friar,
and Nun, when they have presumptuously entangled themselves in the snare, and
that without Gods appointment, nay contrary to his commandment, will enforce
God to yield to their desire. In this their impious doctrine, our papists
doubtless become flat Pelagians, and either for their pride will not, or for
their just blindness cannot see it. For Iulianus the Pelagian taught the self
same doctrine, The papists are become Pelagians.
and for that was christianly confuted by S. Augustine. These are S. Austens
express words; Dicis enim quod dominum continentiae gloriam liberate
electionis honorauerit, dicens, qui potest capere capiat; tanquam hoc capiatur
non dei munere, sed arbitrij liberate, and taces quod supra dixerit, August.
cont. Julian: Pelagian. lib. 5. ca. 7. tom. 7.
non omnes capiunt verbum hoc, sed quibus datum est. Vide quae taceas, quae
dicas. Puto quod te pungat conscientia: sed vincit rectum timorem, cum ingerit
peruersum pudorem, quoquo modo iam defendenda praecipitata sententia.

For thou say, that our Lord has honored the glory of continency with
the freedom of election, saying; He that can take, let him take; as if this
were taken not by Gods gift, but by ye free will of man, and thou concealest
that which Christ said before, al men do not receive this word, but they to
whom it is given. Consider well, what thou concealest, and what thou say. I
verily think, that thine own conscience pricketh thee: but when a rash
sentence must be defended, it brings in perverse shame, which overcomes
godly fear. Thus says S. Austen.

Out of these words I gather first, that Iulianus held this Iulians own
conscience condemned him for this his foolish opinion, as S. Austen thought:
and so gentle reader, thou see evidently, that late popery is become flat
Pelagianisme.

But our papists in great fury exclaim bitterly against us and say, yt God
denies us nothing, that is necessary for our salvation: which I willingly
admit, telling them withal, that we may attain eternal salvation, as well by
marriage as by single life. 1. Cor. 7. v. 9.
And heereunto I add, that matrimony is ordained for the salvation of al such
as cannot live a continent single life: and therefore says the Apostle; if they
cannot abstain, let them marry, for it is better to marry then to burn.
Again, albeit God should grant their requests for a time, yet would it not
follow that they should so continue to the end of their lives. 1. Cor. 7. verse
12
For as S. Paul advises, he that seems to stand, ought to take good heed
least he fall.

I say ninthly, that vows which are not voluntary and free from all coaction,
are not only wicked, but of no force at all. So Aquinas, Lombardus, Aquinas 22.
q. 88 ar. 2. corp. Lomb. in 4. did. 38. Anton. p. 2. tit. 11 c. 1.. 1. Fumus,
de vo^o,. 1. Syluest. de voto primo.. 1.
Antoninus, Nauarrus, Syluester, Angelus, Fumus and the rest. And who knows
not that Romish priests, moonkes and others of that irreligious crew, do
yield to the perpetual vow of single life by coaction, and reluctante
conscientia? it is manifest doubtless in all such as want the supernatural
gift. For since they can neither freely be admitted to the ecclesiastical
ministry, nor yet professed in the monastery, and so enjoy the expected
commodities thereof: at length they condescend by popish restraint, to admit
the vow of single life. For howsoever God shall bestow his gift of continent
single life, it is decreed before hand, that the younger brothers of the house
of Farnesus, and Columna, Vrsinus, and such like, shall be cardinals bound to
single life. So is it commonly intended by gentle men, otherwise virtuous and
of good worship, that their younger sons shall be the parsons of such and such
fat livings, whereof themselves are the patrones; although they be as unfit for
the popish annexed vow, as ever was Sardanapalus that effeminate wanton.

I say tenthly, that al vows are wicked and unlawful which Antoninus, Fumus,
Vignerius, Vigner. de virtu^ inst. c. 5. 5. v. ^4. Ant. and Fum. v^i supr.
and other approved papists. All which nevertheless are truly verified, of
the popish vows of single life. For first, virginity is a thing mere
indifferent, and no virtue till it be rightly Gregory Nazianzene* Secondly,
the vow of virginity or 1. Cor. 7. v. ^. Mat. 19. v. 1^
but also in his holy gospel. For when Christ says, he yt can take, let him
take; he says also consequently and virtually, he yt cannot take, let him not
take: as if he had said; whosoever can with a good conscience abstain from
wedlock, let him so do; but he that cannot, let him marry a wife, because
that is expedient for his salvation. S, Paul does so interpret Christ, in other
words equivalent. I say unto the unmarried, and unto the widows, it is good
for them if they abide even as I do: 1. Cor. 7. v. 8.9.
but if they cannot abstein, let them marry, for it is better to marry then to
burn. Thirdly, virginity vowed as a work of supererogation, of merit, and
perfection, is a wicked and superstitious thing, and yet is this the popish
manner of vowing the same: for thus writes Viguerius, their learned professor
of divinity and Dominican friar. Viguer. vbi supr.
Dicitur melius bonum, quia est supererogationis, and quia iuducit ad
perfectione^, vt castitas, paupertas, and obedientia. It is called the better
good, for that it is a work of supererogation, and because it brings us to
perfection; as chastity, poverty, and obedience. Now that none of our works
be perfect, or rightly termed works of supererogation; I have proved
copiously, in the fifth conclusion of the second chapter of my Motives. I
therefore conclude, that perpetual vows of single life in the Romish Church,
are vain, rash, impious, and most execrable in Gods sight.

The perioch of the chapter.
Priests were married in the old law, and in time of the new testament, in
the East church, and in the West: Many popes of Rome, were the sons of
priests: neither were they bastardes, but legitimate children. Many holy and
learned bishops, were married men* S. Gregory, S. Spiridion, S. Cheremon, S.
Philogonius, S. Eupsichius. S. Paphnutius defended the marriage of priests
publicly in the council of Nice, and avouched in the spirit of God, that the
use of holy wedlock was honorable in them, even in time of their priesthood.
S. Cheremon and his wife fled together from persecution, even at that time when
he was Bishop of Nicopolis. Eupsichius was the bishop of Cesarea and forthwith
after his marriage martyred for Christ Jesus. The apostles themselves were
married, begat children, and carried their wives about with them, while they
preached the gospel abroad in the country. Clergy men used the benefit of
marriage as well as secular persons, until the untimely birth of wicked pope
Syritius. Bishops, priests, and all religious persons so termed, may most
lawfully marry by the laws of God, and are only debarred thereof by the
odible laws of man, or rather to use the apostles words, by the detestable
doctrine of Satan. All this I have proved effectually in this present chapter.
Yea, the marriage of priests was used without restraint in Germany, for the
space of a thousand seventy and four years, after Christ's sacred
incarnation. Anno Dom. 1074.
That is, until the days of the ungracious pope Hildebrand, who termed
himself Gregory the seventh, who crept into the popedom by naughty means,
in the year of Christ 1074. And because I will charge the Papists with
nothing, but that which they shall never be able to deny; their own dear
moonk Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, (a man whom their trusty friend Ar. Pontacus
Burdegalensis, affirms to have handled the histories of his time very
exactly) shall be my witness against the pope, and popishly prohibited
marriages. This writer so authentical as ye hear, writes in this manner;

Hildebrandus papa cum episcopis Italiae conueniens iam frequentibus synodis
decreuerat, Lambert. Sch^^nab Chron.
vt secundum instituta antiquorum canonum presbyteri vxores non habeant,
habentes aut dimittant, aut deponantur; Anno. Dom. 1074.
nec quispam omnino ad sacerdotium admittatur, qui non in perpetuum
continentiam vitamque caelibemprofiteatur. Sequitur; aduersus hoc decretum
protinus vehementer infremuit tota factio clericorum, hominem plane haereticum
and vesani dogmatis esse clamitans, qui oblitus sermonis domini, quo ait, non
omnes capiunt verbum hoc, qui potest capere capiat; and Apostolus, qui se non
continet, nubat; melius est enim nubere quam vri, violenta exactione homines
viuere cogeret ritu angelorum, and dum consuetum cursum naturae negaret,
fornicationi and immunditiei fraena laxaret.

Pope Hildebrand together with the Bishops of Italy decreed in frequent
Synodes, that after the ordinances of old canons, priests should not have
wives; and that such as had wives, should either put them away, or be
deprived of their liuinges; and that none should be admitted to the order of
priesthood, but he that would profess the perpetual vow of single life.
Against this decree the whole faction of the clergy stormed wonderfully,
exclaming that Hildebrand was mad and a flat heretic, as who had forgotten the
words of the Lord, who says that all cannot live continent, and the Apostle
says, he that cannot abstain, let him marry; for it is better to marry,
then to be burnt; and would violently compel men to live like angels; and while
he denied the accustomed course of nature, gave liberty to fornication and
uncleanness. Out of which words I note first, that this Lambertus was a

Polidorus another dear friend of the papists, shall tell them what he thinks
of the Popes proceeding, touching the marriage of priests: thus does he write.

Illud tamen dixerim, tantum abfuisse, vt ista coacta castitas illam coniugalem
vicerit, Polidorus. lib. 5* cap. 4. in fide.
vt etiam nullius delicti crimen maius ordini dedecus, plus malireligioni, plus
doloris omnib bonis impresserit, inusserit, attulerit, quam sacerdotum
libidinis labes: proinde forsitan tam e republica christiana quam ex ordinis
vsu esset; vt tandem aliquando ius publici matrimoni^ sacerdotibus
restitueretur: quod illi sine infamia sancte potius colerent, quam se
spurcissime eiuscemodi naturae vitio turpificarent.

Yet this I will say, that this compelled chastity (of priests,) was so far
from excelling chastity in wedlock, as no crime whatsoever has brought greater
shame to priesthood, more harm to religion, more grief to all good men, then
the unchaste life of priests. Therefore, perhaps it were no less necessary for
the public weal of christendom, then for the order of priesthood, that once
again priests might marry publicly, that so they might live honestly and
without shame, and not pollute themselves so filthily. This is the judgment of
their own popish Polidore, who being an Italian knew best the Romish fashion.
He confesses plainly as you see, that priests were married in old time, wishing
for great causes that it were so again. Their great Cardinal Panormitanus
gives so worthy a testimony of this controversy, as which being well marked,
will confou^d al papists in the world: these be his words; Continentia no^ est
in clericis secularibus de substantia ordinis, nec de iure diuino, Panormita^.
de clerie. co^^ugati^. cap. cum Olim.
quia alias Graeci peccarent, nec excusaret eos consuetudo. Sequitur: and non
solum credo potestateminesse ecclesiae hoc condendi sed credo pro bono and
salute esset animarum* quod esset salubre statutum, vt volentes possint
contrahere, quia experie^tia docente, contrarius prorsus effectus sequitur ex
illa lege continentiae, cum hodie non viuant spiritualiter, nec sint mundi, sed
maculantur illicito coitu cum eorum grauiss* peccato, vbi cum propria vxore
esset castitas: Continency in secular priests, is not of the substance of
their orders, nor of the law divine, because otherwise the Greeks should sin,
and their custom could not excuse them: and I do not only believe that the
church can make such a law, but also that such a law were for the good, and for
the salvation of souls, that such as would might marry; because experience
teaches, that a contrary effect follows of that law of continency, since
this day they live not spiritually, neither are clean, but are polluted in
unlawful copulation with their sin most grievous, though they might live
chastely with their own wives. Out of which words of Panormitan,

CHAP. V. Of popish pardons, and the original thereof.
I Have spoken so copiously of popish pardons, in my book of Motives; as much
more shall not be needful, in this place. There I proved by the testimony of
Roffensis, Syluester, and other popish doctors, that popish pardons are not
grounded in or upon the word of god; as also that they crept into the church,
long after Christ's ascension into heaven.

Anno. Dom. 1300
Bonifacius the eight of that name, (who began his popedom as a fox,
continued in it, as a wolf, and ended it as a dog, their own writers Platina
and Carranza so affirming) was the first bishop of Rome, that ever took upon
him to pardon sin by public bulls. He appointed a Iubilee, and granted
full remission of al sins, Platina in Bonifac. 8, in med.
to such as would come in pilgrimage to Rome. Their own Platina has these
express words: Iubilaeum idem retulit anno millesimo trecentesimo, quo plenam
delictorum omnium remissionem his praestabat, qui limina apostolorum
visitassent, ad exemplum veteris testamenti. (Pope Boniface) brought again the
Iubilee, after 1300. years, and gave full pardon of all sins to those that
did visit S. Peter's Church (in Vaticano at Rome,) after the example of the
old law. Out of these words I note first, that the old iubilee was never
heard of in Christ's church til the Bonifacius our Jewish pope. I prove it by
the word ( retulit) he brought again (from the Jews.) I note secondly, that
the church was free from popish pardons, the space of 1300 300. years old,
albeit silly people do so magnify the same. I note thirdly, that this pope
pardoned not only the pain, but even the sin it self, yea Maliface brought
again the Jewish ceremonial law. I note fifthly, that the remission of Leu. 25.
verse. 10. and ^
and yet forsooth he would be thought to bring the Iubilee again.

Two hundredth years after this, that is, 1500. years after Christ, pope
Alexander the sixth appointed his Iubilee, An, Dom. 1500
and like pardons, not only for coming to Rome, but to all persons in all
places wheresoever. So writes their own Polydore, and Platina accords
thereunto: for the rest see my Motives in this point.

The first objection.
The church of God used to give pardons, Polidor. lib. ^. cap. 1.
above a thousand and two hundred years sithence, as appears by the great
council of Nice, and by other ancient synods. Yea S. Gregory gave pardon, to
al those that did visit the churches at Rome

The answer.
I say first, that Emperors, kings, absolute princes, and common

De his qui praeter necessitatem praeuaricati sunt, Conc. 1. Nicen. ^an. 11.
aut propter ablationem facultatum, aut propter periculum, aut aliquid
huiusmodi, quod factum est sub tyrannide Licini^; placuit sanctae synodo licet
sint indigni misericordia, tame^ aliquid circa e^s humanitatis ostendi.
Concerning those that have voluntarily transgressed, or for fear to lose their
worldely goods, or for danger, or any such like occasion, as chanced in time
of Licinius his persecution; to such although they be unworthy of mercy, yet
is it the holy councels mind, to grant them some pardon or relaxation in that
behalf.

In the council of Arles, and in the council of Ancyra, the like pardon is
granted to penitent offenders: Conc. 2. Arelat can. 10. conc. Ancyr. can. 2.
of which kind of pardons, the ancient fathers Irenaeus, Tertullianus,
Eusebius, Sozomenus, and others, do often make relation. Yea, of this sort were
the pardons that Saint Gregory gave: but of late popish pardons, that is, of
applying to whom they list, and when they list, as well to the living as to the
dead, the merits of Christ and of his saints, as condign satisfaction for
their sins: for of such pardons no council, no father, no ancient approved
Historiographer, makes any mention at all. Which thing I have plainly proved,
in the third conclusion of the second chapter of my Motives.

The second objection.
The keys of heaven were given to Saint Peter, and consequently to his
successors the bishops of Rome, Mat. 16.19.
and withal promise was made unto him, that whatsoever he should bind on
earth, the same should be bound in heaven, and whatsoever he should loose on
earth, should be loosed in heaven: now to loose sins is nothing else, but to
give a pardon or indulgence for the same.

The answer.
I say first, that upon the gross interpretation of these words, many popish
priests have arrogantly and presumptuously taken upon them like the proud
pharisees, to condemn the innocents and to loose the guilty persons; whereas
before God, not the sentence of the priests, but the life of the persons
charged is enquired of. Thus writes S. Hierome, adding that priests can bind
and loose sinners no otherwise now in the new testament, then they did bind
and loose the Leapers in the old law: D. Hierom. (...) cap 16. Matt.
that is, not to forgive sins perfitly and indeed, but to declare by Gods
word, the sins of penitent persons to be forgiven in Gods sight; even as the
priests in Moses law did not purge the Leapers, Luc. 5. Mat. 8. Mat. 1.44.
Leuit* 13. per totum.
but only declared those whom God had purged already, to be clean and free
from the leprosy: for as the gospel witnesses, none but God can forgive sin.

I say secondly, Luc. 5.21.
that all the rest of the Apostles had the self same power granted to them
all, which is here promised to S. Mut. 18. v. 18. Joan. 20. verse. 22.23.
yet might al other bishops do the same even as well as he. So S. Austen, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Hylary, Origin, Theophilacte, and others do
confess.

I say thirdly, that S. Peter and the other Apostles have not power granted by
the scripture to forgive sin, but only to declare and pronounce according to
the scripture, that God has forgiven to truly penitent persons all their
sins. For they can Hierome. The learned popish Cardinal Hugo, (to the
everlasting confusion of all impenitent and obstinate papists) confirms S.
Hieromes opinion in these express words: Vinculo culpae and poenae debitae non
potest^um sacerdos ligare vel soluere, Hugo in. 16. Mat
sed tantum ligatu^ vel absolutu^ oste^dere; sicut sacerdos Leuiticus non
faciebat vel mundabat leprosum, sed tantum infectum vel mundu^ ostendebat. The
priest cannot bind him with the bond of sin and due punishment, either loose
him from the same, but only declare him to be bound or absolved (in Gods sight)
even as the Leuitical priest did not make or cleanse him that had the leprosy,
but only showed him to be infected or cleansed.

Their own school doctor Durandus sings the same song, in these express
words; Claues nihil operantur ad dimissionem culpae vel maculae, Durand. in. 4.
s. d. 18. q. 2.
quia deordinatio actus tollitur per eius ordinationem, dum been displicet,
quod male placuit. The keys work nothing to the remission of the fault or
blemish, because the deordination of the act is taken away by well ordering the
same, while that displeases well, which pleased evil.

Thus we see by popish grant and doctrine, that the metaphorical keys (whereof
the papists boast so much) can never put away sin, neither can any priest
absolve any person from sin, or from the pain due for sin, save only by
declaring his sins to be forgiven, as is said.

The reply.
(...) 9. verse. 2.8
It is evident in the holy gospel, that not only God can forgive sin by his own
power, but men also by authority and commission received from him: for when
Christ had forgiven the sick man his sins the people maruailed, and
glorified God, which had given such power unto men.

The answer.
I answer, that our savior Christ in forgiving the sick man's sins, Let this
point be well marked.
showed himself to be true God: which manner of proof had bin none indeed, if
any but god could have done the same, which point I wish the gentle reader to
observe attentively. For the Pharisees charged him with blasphemy, as who not
being god, yet took upon him the office of God, in forgiving sins. Whose
opinion for all that, Christ himself approved, and for ratification thereof,
showed by an evident external miracle, that he was god indeed, so as they could
no longer be in suspense of ye matter, Mat 9. verse. ^.
but that ye may know (says Christ) that the son of man has power to forgive
sins (then said he to the sick of the palsy) arise, take up thy bed, and go
into thy house; as if he had said, I confess that I am God, and that ye may
know the same evidently, I make the sick man whole with mine only word,
which if I were not God indeed, I could never do. This case S. Chrysostom
makes so plain, as none that once read or hear his words, can stand any
longer in doubt thereof. Thus does he write in express terms. Videamus quid
ipse ait, vtrum opinionem eorum improbauerit, Chrysostom. in ca. 9. Mat. hom 30.
tom. 2. p. 275.
an potius comprobauerit: nisi enim aequalis esset patri, dixisset; quid mihi
tribuitis non competentem opinionem? procul ego absum a tanta potestate. Nunc
vero nihil horum dixit, sed contra, tam verbo quam signo affirmauit. Ita
quoniam solet esse audientibus molestum, vt aliquis de seipso apertius dicat,
aliorum verbis and signo deum se patrique aequalem esse ostendit; and quod
mirabilius est, non per amicos solum, verum etiam per inimicos hoc peragit, vt
and virtutis and sapientiae suae pelagus pateat. Let us see what he says,
whether he reproved their opinion, or rather approved the same. For if he
had not been equal with his father, he would have said; why do ye ascribe to
me that incompetent opinion? I am far off from that so great power: yet now
he says no such thing, but contrariwise affirms it both by word and
miracle. So because it is wont to be grievous to the hearers, that any man
should speak openly of himself; he shows both by the testimony of others
and by miracle, that he is God, and equal with his father; and which is more
wonderful, this he does not only by his friends, but even by his enemies,
that so as well his power as his wisdom may be known abundantly.

Out of which words I note first, yt Christ approved the opinion of the
Pharisees, who held that only God could forgive sin.

I note secondly, that if Christ had not been equal with God The pope is worse
then the devil.
that the pope who will give a general pardon of al sins, must by S.
Chrysostomes judgment, be either as good as God, or worse then the devil. I
note thirdly, that it was needful for Christ to show himself to be God;
because

S. Ambrose and S. Hilary both are of the very same judgment, S. Ambrose
writes in this manner. Cognosce interioris homines sanitatem; Ambros. lib. 5.
in ^ucam. cap. 5. in (...).
cui peccata donantur: quae cum Iudaei asserunt a solo Deo posse concedi, Deum
vtique confitentur suoque iudicio perfidiam suam produnt; qui vt opus astruant,
personam negant. Sequitur; magna itaque infidae plebis amentia, vt cum confessa
fuerit solius dei esse donare peccata, no^ credat deo pecca ta donanti.
Acknowledge the curing of the inward man, whose sins are forgiven: which when
the Jews confess that only God can forgive, they doubtless confess him to
be God, and by their own judgment bewray their false faith, who to establish
the work, deny the person. Great therefore is the incredulity of faithles
people, who confessing that only God can forgive sins, does not for all that
believe in God that forgiueth sins.

S. Hilary has these words; Mouet Scribas remissum ab homine peccatam; ^il^^
can ^. in (...).
hominem enim tantum in Jesus Christo contuebantur, and remissum ab eo, quod lex
laxare non poterat: fides enim sola iustificat. Deinde murmurationem eorum
dominus introspicit, dicitque facile esse filio hominis in terra peccata
dimittere: verum enim nemo potest dimittere peccata, nisi solus Deus; ergo qui
remittit, Deus est, quia nemo remittit nisi Deus. It stirs the Scribes that
a man should forgive sin, because they beheld in Jesus Christ only a man, (not
God) and that to be forgiven by him, which the law could not release: For faith
only justifies. Afterward the Lord looks into their murmuring, and says
that it is easy for the son of man to forgive sins on earth, for it is true,
that no man can forgive sins, but only God, therefore he that remitteth
sins, is God, because no man remitteth sins but God. By these testimonies
it is evident, that God, and only God can forgive sins, and that our savior
Christ did effectually, prove himself to be God, in that he could forgive sin.
Which kind of reasoning had been of no force at all, if others beside god, as
monks and Jesuits could have remitted sin.

The reply.
The text says, that the faithful people did glorify God, for that he gave
such power to men, as to remit sins and to do miracles; knowing that so to do
by commission from God, was not against his glory.

The answer.
I answer, that although sundry of the people were reverently affected toward
Christ, by reason of his miracles; yet did they not behold or confess God
manifested in the flesh, but still thought Christ to be a pure man, though a
great and holy prophet. And the reason hereof is evident, because they did not
acknowledge Christ to be God, but to have received that power from God, as an
holy man: for as the text says, the multitudes seeing it, were afraid and
glorified God, that gave such power unto men. Out of which words I note first,
that they believed not Christ to be God, because they were afraid. For as Saint
John says, he that confesses Jesus to be the son of God, 1. John. 4.15.
(...)*
will love him and be without fear. I note secondly, that they gave glory to
god, but not to the Savior of the world: for albeit that no man but Christ
wrought the miracles, yet did they glorify God for giving such power to men,
whereby it is clear, that they esteemed of him, as of a pure man; and that god
had given that power to others as well as to him, otherwise they would have
spoken in the singular number, and not in the plural; of only Christ whom
they saw, and not of more, whom they neither saw, nor could see, working in
that divine manner. I note thirdly, that it is a bluntish kind of disputation,
when the conceit of the vulgar sort, is alleged to refute Christ's divine
reasoning.

The third objection.
S. Paul himself gave pardon to the incestuous Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. verse. 1^
2. Cor. 2. verse. 10
who had committed fornication with his fathers wife.

The answer
I say first, that if popish pardons should be grounded upon this place, it
would follow by a necessary consecution, that the 2. Cor. 2. ve. 10.


I say secondly, that popish confession must of necessity go before popish
pardoning, in all such as sin mortally; and therefore perforce, that he neither
speaks of popish pardoning.

I say thirdly, that the pardoning whereof S. Paul speakketh, is nothing else,
but that he who was excommunicate for his public trespass, may, after signs
of true remorce, be restored to the church again; and after their sharp
censure of correction, 2. Cor. 2. verse. 6, 7, 8.
find pardon and mercy at their hands. This much I prove out of saint Paul's
own words, which are these; It is sufficient to the same man, that he was
rebuked of many; so now contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort
him, lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. Wherefore I pray
you, that ye would confirm your love toward him. After this grave and godly
exhortation, he adioyneth these words; To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive
also: as if he had said; if ye be content to receive him into the church
again, I am therewith well pleased. For he yields two reasons why the church
of Corinth ought to pardon the excommunicate person: the one is, for that he
seemed to have given sufficient signs of his unfeigned repentance: the other
is, lest too much rigor of correction should bring him to desperation. For
which cause S. Paul requesteth them to declare the consent of the whole
congregation, that he was taken again for a brother and pardoned for his
offense. So then S. Paul and the church of Corinth did pardon no otherwise
indeed, but even as we our selves are taught to pardon in the Lords prayer,
saying; and pardon us our trespasses, as we pardon or forgive

I say fourthly, that the renowned popish Thomist Syluester Prierias, sometime
master of their so termed sacred palace, confesses plainly according to
right and reason, that popish pardons were neither known to us by this place
of S. Paul, neither yet by any other place of the whole scripture: these are
his express words: Syluest. de indulgent.. 1.


Indulgentia nobis per scripturam minime innotuit* licet inducatur illud, 2.
Corin. 2. si quid donaui vobis; sed nec per dicta antiquorum doctorum, sed
modernorum. Dicitur enim Gregorius indulgentiam septennem in stationibus Romae
posuisse, and quia ecclesia hoc facit and seruat, credendum est ita esse, quia
regitur spiritu sancto.

The popes pardons (says friar Syluester their surnamed absolutus theologus)
were never known to us by the Scriptures, although some allege S. Paul to the
Corinthians for that purpose; neither were they known by the ancient fathers,
but only by late writers. For Gregory is said to have appointed seven years
of indulgence, in his stations at Rome. And because the church (of Rome) this
does, and thus observes, we must believe it to be so, for the church is
governed by ye holy ghost. Out of these words I note first, that this friar
Syluester was a man of great fame among the papists, and for his singular

I note secondly, that Antoninus a learned papist, who was the archbishop of
Florence even in the altitude of popedom, Syluester.

I note thirdly, that popish pardons can neither be proved by the scriptures,
nor by the ancient fathers; and consequently, Syluester seems here to ascribe
the original of some kind of pardoning to Gregory yet does he only tell that
by hearsay; and besides that, Gregory either gave no pardons in deed,
(which is very probable) or at the most, he pardoned after saint Paul's manner,
some part of severity enjoined by the church.

I note fourthly, that the chiefest ground upon which Popish de facto; I have
proved abundantly in my Book of Motives, where the gentle Reader shall find
the opinions of other popish doctors, most fit for this end and purpose.
Shameless and impudent therefore are the papists, when they blush not to
father their Romish pardons upon saint Paul.

The reply.
In the council of Laterane (which was almost an hundred years before pope
Bonifacius) mention is made of pardons with good liking of the same, yea S.
Gregory appointed stations and granted pardons for frequenting them.

The answer.
I say first, that in process of time when sin increased, and Burchardus
writes, about the year of Christ 1020.

I say secondly, that by little, and little after such redemptions

Penance satisfaction and canonical discipline is al one to the old writers.
not to satisfy Gods judgment, but to bridle ill life, and to keep comely
order in the church) was by little and little changed into superstitious popish
satisfaction, yet had not that execrable doctrine gotten place in the church in
the time of the Lateran council. Concill. 1. later. can. 62.
I prove it, because that council makes mention only, de poenitentiis
iniunctis, of penance enjoined, which was holden Anno Dom. 2215.



The fourth objection.
The blessed virgin Marie, holy Job and many others, have suffered much more
then was needful for their own sins. And saint Paul says of himself,
Coloss. 1.24.
that he supplied the wants of Christ's passion for his church: which super
abundant satisfactions of S. Paul and others, because they were not determined
by themselves to this or that particular person; it pertains to the supreme
pastor the popes holiness, to make application thereof as he sees cause. Which
application is termed pardoning, for that when the pope applies twenty
degrees of the satisfaction of Christ, or of S. Paul, or some other saint, to
one of his nuns, monks, or jesuits; then so many degrees of satisfaction
are pardoned to such a nun, monk, or jesuit, which the said nun, monk,
or jesuit should otherwise have done, either in this life or else in
purgatory.

The answer.
I say first that no saint did or can suffer so much as is sufficient Gerson,
Durand, Baius, Roffensis, and Almayn (who al were renowned papists) but even
the common schools of late days do hold the same opinion.

I say secondly, that God has already rewarded every saint Romans ^.1^*
are not worthy of the glory to come. Which saying I have answered at large in
my Motives, there answering all replies that can be made against Io. de Combis
libr. 5. Tholog. ver. cap. 11.
M. John de Combis; Hoc patet, qui^ deus semper remunerat supra meritum, sicut
punit citra condignum: This is evident (says our holy friar John) because God
evermore rewards us above our deserts, and punishes us less then we be
worthy. So then the popes holiness may apply to himself, all the
superaboundant merits of his holy nuns, moonkes, and Jesuits, and flee to
heaven as a bird without feathers. I say thirdly, that the want whereof the

Apocalip. 6. v. 10 11.
until their fellow servants and their brethren who should be killed as
they were, were fulfilled. Thus says holy writ.

Out of these words of the holy scripture, I note first, that God in his
secret counsel has decreed, as well the number as

I note secondly, that the afflictions of Gods children shall



These annotations well observed, this illation will manifestly result out of
the same; to wit, 1. Cor. 5. v. 7. 1. Joan. 2. Heb. 10. v. 14. Osee, 13.4.
Esai. 43.25.53.5. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5.
that the afflictions whereof S. Paul speaks to the Colossians, were not
satisfactions for the sins of the church: (for so to suffer was the peculiar
office of Christ our only savior,) but they were testimonies of ye zeal and
patience which ought to be in the church, and of that conformity which is
required between the members of the mystical body and the head. Which sense
may easily be gathered out of Anselmus his golden gloss, upon the apostles
words in this place. Thus does he write;

Adimpleo inquit, ea quae desunt. Cui desunt? in carne mea. Nam in carne
Christi quam virgo peperit nihil passionum deest, Anselm. in 2. cap. Colost.
sed omnes in illa passiones sunt impletae; sed adhuc restat pars passionum
eius in mea carne, quas quotidie tolero pro universally corpore eius quod est
ecclesia. Si enim ab eruditione fidelium cessarem, has passiones ab infidelibus
non sustinerem. Sed quia semper ecclesiae studeo prodesse, semper aduersa cogor
tolerare.

I fulfill says he, those things that want. To whom do they want? in my
flesh. For in Christ's flesh which the virgin bore, no passion at all wanted,
but all passions were fulfilled in it; nevertheless some part of his passions
yet remains in my flesh, which I daily suffer for his universal body which
is the church. For if I should leave off from instructing the faithful, I might
be free from these persecutions of Infidels. But because I ever desire to
profit the church, I am always enforced to abide persecution.

Out of this grave, virtuous, and learned commentary, I

I note secondly, that some passions of Christ yet remained, Act. 9. v. ^.
I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, it is hard for thee to kick against the
prick.

I note thirdly, that the afflictions which S. Paul sustained, were for the
good of the whole church: yet not by the way of satisfaction, but by the
ordinary means of christian instruction. For as Anselmus truly says;
afflictions came to the apostle, because he preached the gospel. From preaching
whereof if he would have ceased, Anselm. vbi sup. S. Ambrose expounds this
text in the self same manner.
he might have been free from his passions here mentioned. Where we must
diligently observe, that God appointed when, where, and how long S. Paul should
preach the gospel, for the good of the whole church. In regard whereof S. Paul
pronounced woe unto himself, if he should not preach the gospel. 1. Cor 9.
v. 17. Heb 10. v. 12.14 1. Pet. 3. ve. 18. 2. Tim. 3. v. 11.12 Romans 8. v.
17.18. 1. Pet. 2. v. 21.
To which preaching of the gospel these passions were annexed, as the
complement of Christ's passions: not of his passions in himself, but in the
church his mystical body. For as he suffered once for all in himself, for
the redemption of the world, so does he still suffer daily in his members. For
he has appointed his elect to suffer much tribulation, before they shall
possess eternal rest. Notwithstanding that the glory which we expect does a
thousand fold surmount the misery of our afflictions. First therefore, since
the afflictions

The first reply.
Our blessed lady the virgin Mary, was not only borne and conceived without
sin, but lived all her life without sin, as Saint Austen and the church
believes. Therefore she at least, had good store of merits and satisfactions
for others; for though she suffered intolerable anguish and grief, yet had
she being free from sin, no need at all to suffer for her self. Luc. 2. v.
3^.


The answer.
I say first, that what the late church of Rome believes, is not much
material; because it is become the whore of Babylon,

I say secondly, that though the blessed virgin had great grace and
sanctification bestowed on her, as who was not only the Romans 5. v. 12.
the fault came on all men to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, verse
18.
the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. And in
another place, there is none righteous, no not one.Again, in another place;
Romans 3. v. 1^. Gal. 3. v. 22.
the scripture has concluded al under sin, yt the promise by the faith of
Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe. And the holy Psalmographe
says* Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm 143. v. 2.
for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. All which textes and
such like are generally spoken of all, no one nor other is exempt.

S. Ambrose has a long discourse, in which he proves that none but only
Jesus Christ is void of sin. Ambro. in Psalm. 118. circa med.
These among others are his words. Omnes intra retia erant, imo adhuc intra
retia sumus; quia nemo sine peccato nisi solus Jesus, quem non cognoscentem
peccatum peccatum pro nobis fecit pater. Infra; venit ad laqueos Jesus, vt Adam
solueret; venit liberare quod perierat Omnes retibus tenebamur; nullus alium
eruere poterat, cum seipsum non possit eruere.

All were in the nets, yea we are yet in the nets; because none is without
sin but only Jesus, whom when he knew no sin, the father made him a
sacrifice for sin, in our behalf. Jesus came to the snare, that he might
loose Adam; he came to deliver, that which was lost. We were al taken in the
net, we could not deliver one another, when no man could deliver himself.

S. Augustine teaches the same verity in many places of his works, but I will
content my self with one or two. Thus therefore does he write upon the 34.
Psalm; sic ergo peccatum domini quod factum est de peccato, quia inde carnem
assumpsit, de massa ipsa quae mortem meruerat ex peccato. Aug. in Psalm. 34.
conc. 2. tom. 8.
Etenim vt celerius dicam, Maria ex Adam mortua propter peccatum Adae, Adam
mortuus est propter peccatum, and caro domini ex Maria mortua est propter
delenda peccata.

Even so therefore (is it called) the sin of the Lord, which is made of
sin; because he took flesh from thence, of that mass which had deserved
death by reason of sin. For to speak more briefly; Mary descending of Adam,
is dead by reason of Adams sin; Adam is dead for his own sin; and our Lords
flesh of Mary, is dead to put away sin.

Aug. de Genes. ad literam, libr. 10. c. ^8. tom. 3.
S. Augustine in another place has these words; Proinde corpus Christi quamuis
ex carne foeminae assumptum est, quae de illa carnis peccati propagine concepta
fuerat; tamen quia non sic in ea conceptum est, quomodo erat illa concepta, nec
ipsa erat caro peccati, sed similitudo carnis peccati.

Therefore Christ's body, although it were assumpted of the flesh of a woman,
which was conceived of the stock of the flesh of sin, yet because it was not
so conceived in it, as it was conceived: therefore was it not the flesh of
sin, but (only) the similitude of the flesh of sin.

The same S. Augustine in another place, writes in this manner; Aug. cont. Iul.
Pelag. libr. 5. c. 9. tom. 7.
Sine dubio caro Christi non est caro peccati, sed similis carni peccati; quid
restat vt intelligamus, nisi ea excepta omnem reliquam humanam carnem esse
peccati? and hinc apparet illam concupiscentiam per quam Christus concipi
noluit, fecisse in genere humano propagine^ mali; quia Mariae corpus quamuis
inde venerit, tamen eam non traiecit in corpus, quod non inde concepit.

Doubtless Christ's flesh is not the flesh of sin, but only like to the
flesh of sin; what therefore must we understand, but that all other men's
flesh besides it, is the flesh of sin? And heereuppon it is clear, that that
concupiscence by which Christ would not be conceived, dispersed sin throughout
mankind, because the body of Marie though it came from thence, yet could it not
convey that into the body, which was not conceived thereupon, (but of the holy
ghost.) These words of S. Austen and Saint Ambrose are so plain and easy, as
they need no declaration,

Thomas Aquinas, albeit he constantly defends, that the blessed virgin was
neither borne in sin, nor yet sinned actually after her birth more or less,
grants for all that, that she was conceived in original sin: and he
proves it by two evident reasons, whereof this is one. Aquina p. 3 q. 27 ar.
2. in. corpore
Sanctificatio de qua loquimur, non est nisi emundatio a peccato originali,
culpa autem non potest emundari nisi per gratiam, cuius subiectum est sola
creatura rationalis, and ideo ante infusionem animae rationalis B. virgo
sanctificata non fuit.

Sanctification whereof we now speak (says the cheifest popish doctor,) is
nothing else but a clensing from original sin, but sin cannot be purged
without grace, whose subject can be nothing but a reasonable creature, and
therefore the blessed virgin could not be sanctified from sin, before a
reasonable soul was infused into her body. This argument of Aquinas is so
invincible in popish manner of proceeding, as no Jesuit in the world (though
they all hold the contrary) can invent a sufficient solution for the same.

Devout and holy Bernarde (whose authority is great with all Papists) holds
the same opinion with Aquinas. Bernard. epist. 174. ad Canon. Ludg.
For albeit he sharply reprove the practice of the cathedral church of Lions
for keeping the festiuitie of the conception of the blessed virgin, calling
that practice the novelty of presumption, the mother of temeritie, sister of
superstition, and the daughter of leuitie: yet does he hold that she was borne
without sin, and (...) continued all her life.

All learned men that ever wrote before our seditious lately hatched Jesuits,
confess the conception of the blessed virgin, to have been polluted with
sin: and I prove it by an irrefragable demonstration. First, because the
blessed virgin, if she had ever been free from sin, Mat. 1.21. 1. Tim. 4.10.
should have needed no Savior, nor had any Savior, and so Christ should not
have bin her Jesus: which to say, is both against the scripture, and against
the honor of that holy virgin. Bernardus and Aquinas saw the force of this
reason, and gravely urged the same. Yea, the holy virgin renounceth flatly
their heretical and hypocritical doctrine, in her humble thanks to God for
her salvation. Luc. 1.46.
My soul (says she) does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
savior. For this cause Bernard cries out in these words; Bernard. vbi sup.
Non est hoc virginem honorare, sed honori detrahere. The virgin is not this
way honored, but greatly dishonored. Secondly, because as Bernard says, Where
lust is, there must needs be sin: and therefore since the virgin was
conceived with lust, or else (as they dare not say) by the holy ghost; it
follows, that she was conceived in sin. Other reasons the same Bernard
has, but these may suffice.

The second reply.
But saint Austen says that he will always except the holy virgin Mary, when
he disputes or reasons of sinners or sin.

The answer.
I say first, that saint Austen confesses flatly (as you have all actual
sin, but seems rather to hold the contrary. For he adds these words, Vnde
enim scimus, quod ei plus gratiae colla tum fuerit ad vincendum omni ex part
peccatum, Aug. de Not. and Great. c. 36. tom* ^
quae concipere ac parere meruit, quem constat nullum habuisse peccatum. For
how know we that she had more grace given her to overcome all sin, who did
conceive and bear him, that certainly was free from al sin? In which words S.
Austen shows plainly, that he can not tell, whether the blessed virgin was
void of all actual sin or no: yet is he unwilling to call her into
question, for the honor of our Lord Jesus, whose mother she was according to
the flesh. Yea, Saint Austen in his questions upon the new testament, (if it be
his work,) confesses freely, that she sinned for want of faith. These are his
express words; Hoc vtique significauit, Aug. in q. nou. test. q. 73. tom. 4.
quia etiam Maria per quam gestum est mysterium incarnationis saluatoris, in
morte domini dubitaret, ita tamen vt in resurrectione firmaretur. This verily
is signified, that Marie by whom was accomplished the mystery of the
incarnation of our Savior, doubted in the death of our Lord, yet so as she was
confirmed in his resurrection. Thus he writes, and yet knows every child,
that to doubt in matters of faith is no little sin.

S. Basil dissenteth nothing from Saint Augustine, Basil. apud Aqu. p. 3. q.
27. ar. 4. ad 2.
when he tells us, that the blessed virgin standing by the cross, wauered
and was doubtful in her mind, while she beheld on one side, what misery
he suffered, on the other side, what wonders he had done.

Saint Chrysostom affirms so expressly that the blessed virgin sinned,
Aquin. 3. p. q. 27* ar. 4. ad 3.
that their angelical doctor Aquinas is enforced to use this silly shift,
for a colorable answer to his words; to wit, that he was excessive in his
words. But who will not rather think, that he was presumptuous in his answer.
These are S. Chrysostomes express words, Quae estmater mea, and fratres mei
aiebat; Chrysostom. hom^. 20. in Joan. 10.
siquidem no^ adhuc debitam de ipso opinionem habebant, sed more matrum Maria
iure omnia filio se praecepturam censebat, cum tanquam dominum colere and
reuereri licebat; ideo in hunc modum respondit: who is my mother, and my
brethren said Christ, for they had not yet a right opinion of him; but Mary
after the manner of mothers, thought she might command her son to do all
things, albeit she might well have honored him as her Lord; therefore did he
answer in this manner. Again he says thus: ^aulo superius
Optabat enim vt tam hominum gratiam conciliaret, and ipsa clarior filij gratia
efficeretur, and fortasse aliquo humano afficiebatur affectu For she wished,
that now he would win the favor of men, and that she might be more famous for
his sake; and perhaps she was touched with some humane affection. Again, in
another place he says thus: Ambitione quadam ac ostentatione commoti, foris
eum in praesentia omnium euocarunt, vt viderentur facile ac magna cum potestate
Christo imperare. Chrysostom. hom. 45. in mat* to, 2.
Infra; vnde patet inani quadam gloria illos commotos fuisse, nihil adhuc magni
de ipso cogitantes, quod apertius Ioannes significauit, dicens; quia neque
fratres eius credebant in eum. They being tickled with ambition and vain
glory, called him out in the presence of all, that they might seem to command
Christ at their pleasure, and with authority. Whereupon it is clear that they
were tickled with vain glory, having no great opinion on him as yet, which
John signified evidently, when he said; For neither did his brethren believe
in him.

Saint Hierome shall conclude this point, (which I have handled more at large,
because many stumble at it, and few seem to understand it well) these are his
express words; Conclusit Deus omnes sub peccato, vt omnium misereatur, absque
eo solo; Hier. ad Algas. q. 8. tom. 4. in fine
qui peccatum non fecit, nec inuentus est dolus in ore eius. God has shut up
all under sin, that he may show mercy unto all, him only excepting that
sinned not, neither was there guile found in his mouth.

The third reply.
She was Christ's mother, and therefore was more blessed then al other women.

The answer.
I confess willingly, that she was blessed above all women, and yet that she
was a sinner, and had Christ not only for her son, but even for her Lord
and Savior; neither was it so great a grace simply and barely to bear Christ
as the Papists feign it to be: but the holy fathers S. Austen and S.
Chrysostom shall tell us what they think thereof. S. Austen has these express
words. Hoc in ea magnificauit dominus, quia fecit voluntatem patris, August.
tract. 10 in Joan tom. 9.
non quia caro genuit carne^. Propterea cum dominus in turba admirabilis
videretur faciens signa and prodigia, and ostendens quid lateret in carne,
admiratae quaedam animae dixerunt, foelix venture qui te portauit: and ille, imo
foelices qui audiunt verbum Dei and custodiu^t illud; hoc est dicere, and matter
mea quam appellatis foelicem, inde foelix quia verbum Dei custodit, non quia in
illa verbum caro factum est, and habitauit in nobis; sed quia custodit ipsum
verbum Dei per quod facta est, and quod in illa caro factum est.

Our Lord magnified this in her, for that she did the will of his father, not
because her flesh bare his flesh. Therefore when our Lord seemed admirable to
the people, working signs and miracles, and showing what was hid in the
flesh, the people maruelling said, happy is the belly that bare thee, and
he answered; yea happy are they that hear the word of God and keep it, that
is to say, my mother whom ye call happy, is therefore happy because she
keeps the word of God, not because the word was made flesh in her and dwelt
in us, but because she keeps Gods word by which she was made, and which was
made flesh in her. Again, in another place he writes thus; Beatior ergo Maria
percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi. Nam and dicenti
cuidam, beatus venture qui te portauit, ipse respondit: August. de sanc, virgin.
cap. 3 tom. 6.
imo beati quiaudiunt verbum Dei, and custodiunt: denique fratribus eius, id
est, secundum carne^ cognatis, qui non in eum credideru^t, quid profuit illa
cognatio? Sic and materna propinquitas nihil Mariae pofuisset, nisi foelicius
Christum cord quam carne gestasset. Therefore Marie was more blessed in
receiving the faith of Christ, then in conceiving ye flesh of Christ: for he
answered to one that said, blessed is the womb that bare thee: yea, blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Finally his brethren, that
is, his kinsmen in ye flesh, that believed not in him, what good had they by
that kindred? And even so motherly kindred had done Marie no good, unless she
had borne Christ more blessedly in her heart, then she bare him in her flesh.

S. Chrysostom has these express words. Ea sententia dictum existima,
Chrysos. hom. 20 ^ Joan. tom. 3.
non quod matrem negligeret, sed quod nihil vtilitatis ei matris nome^
allaturu^ oste^deret* nisi bonitate and fide praestaret. Infra, Nam si id
profuturum erat per se Mariae, profuisset etiam Iudaeis, quorum consanguineus
erat Christus secundum carnem, profuisset ciuitati in qua natus est, profuisset
fra^ribus. Atqui dum fratres verum suarum curam habuerunt, nihil eis
propinquitatis nomen profuit, sed cum reliquo mundo damnati erant. Think that
Christ spoke that, not because he had no care of his mother, but because he
would show the name of a mother to profit her nothing, unless she were better
in piety and faith. For if that could have done Marie good of it self, it
would also have profited the Jews, it would have profited the city in which
he was borne, it would have profited his brethren: but while our Lords brethren
set their hearts upon their own worldly matters, the name of kindred did them
no good at all, they were damned with others in the world.

The fifth objection.
Nathan the Prophet brought word to David, that God had forgiven him his sin,
and that he should not die, nevertheless because David caused Gods enemies to
blaspheme by reason of that his sin, God punished him by the death of his
child. So David being penitent for his sin in numbering the people, 2 Reg. 12.
v 13. ^. Reg. 4. v. 10.11, 12, 1^.
obtained remission of the fault, and yet suffered three days pestilence in
his people. So God forgave the Israelites their rebellious murmurings against
him, Numer. 14. v. 20.23.
and yet for that fault none of them could enter into the land of promise: so
in baptism also our sins are freely forgiven us, and yet do we still suffer
temporal pains for the same, all the days of our life. Which texts of holy
scripture, and others of like sort do plainly insinuate, Romans 8. verse. 1.
that after God has forgiven us our sins, and remitted both the fault and the
eternal pain, there still remains some temporal satisfaction to be done
for the same, either in this world or in purgatory, which satisfaction is
accomplished in the popes pardons, while he makes application of the
superaboundant passions of holy men and women, locked up in the treasure of the
church of Rome.

The answer.
I say first, that when God forgiueth us any sin, he freeth us as well from the
pain as from the fault: which I prove by many reasons. Dei perfecta sunt opera,
Gods works are perfect: which in the original and Hebrew is uttered more
significantly, Deuteronomy. ^2.4.
where God is called (...) a stone or rock, noting unto us that his works are
done with power and might, and therefore with all exact perfection. And
doubtless, if his act in forgiving sin be perfect, as it is most perfect, then
after God has remitted the fault, there can remain no satisfaction for the
same. Secondly if man's act should be a partial satisfaction for sin, then
could not Christ be a perfect and absolute redeemer; but as it were a joint
redeemer, together with man. Thirdly, the fault is never truly and perfectly
forgiven, where payment is still required for the same. Fourthly, God (who is
faithful in all his promises) has promised to forget all our iniquities, when
soever we truly become penitent for the same; and yet can be not possibly
forget that, for which he requires our satisfaction. Fifthly, Ezech. 18. v. 22^
God absolueth in baptism A culpa and paena* say the papists all the papists grant with uniform consent generally, that in baptism and
martyrdom god remits sins wholly and perfectly, as well in respect of the pain
as of the fault, and yet can they never yield any sufficient disparitie,
between the forgiveness of our sins, before and after baptism, whereupon they
may build their fondly forged satisfaction. This is a mighty reason, as which
troubled me all the while I was a papist, and because I could never read or
invent any sufficient solution to the same (though at that time I would most
willingly have done it,) it was one motive to excite me against their
superstitious and idololatricall doctrine: in regard hereof, gravely,
learnedly, and christianly says S. Augustine, August. sermon. 14.1^ de tempore
to. 10.
Christus communicando nobiscum sine culpa poenam, and culpam soluit and
poenam: Christ while he took part with us of our pain without sin, purged us
both from the sin and from the pain due for sin. I say secondly, that the
punishment others from sin to come; as also to ingraffe in our hearts, how
odious a thing sin is in Gods sight. This to be so, Chrysostom rightly
surnamed Os aureum, ^hrysost sermon. (...) poeni^ and con^^ss. to.* 5. p. 907.
golden mouth, utters very perspicuously in these golden words; Nam ne
peccantes and inulti manentes nos efficeremur deteriores non remisit nobis
supplicium, sed vidit hoc manifest, quod peccatis ipsis non m^nus damnosum sit
non puniri; propter hoc imponit poenam, non exigens supplicium de peccatis, sed
ad futura nos corrigens. For lest we our selves should be made worse, if we
should not be punished when we offend; God forgave us not the punishment, for
that he saw evidently, that it was no less hurtful to sin it self, if it
should not be punished. For which cause he imposes pain upon us, not
requiring satisfaction for the sins, but correcting us for that which is to
come. Out of these words I note first, that if we should escape unpunished
when we sin, we would be more prone to sin again. I note secondly, that the
punishment which God la^eth on us, is not any part of satisfaction for our
sin committed, but a fatherly correction to keep us from sinning so again.
I note thirdly, that saint Chrysostom was not acquainted with popish pardons,
wherewith the world is this day so pestered. I note fourthly, that whosoever
disliketh this my answer, must reprove saint Chrysostom for the same, as from
whom I received it. And yet indeed, he says nothing which holy writ has not
taught us long before. For as wise Solomon says, Prou. 13.24.
He that spares the rod, hates the child; but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betime. I bless thee (says Tobie) O Lord God of Israel; Tob.
11. v. 14.
because thou have scourged me: Ierem. 31.18.
Thou have corrected me (says Ephraim) and I was chastised as an untamed
heiffer. Whom the Lord loves (says saint Paul) him he chasteneth; Hebr. 12.
verse. 6.
and he scourges every son that he receives. As many as I love (says God)
I rebuke and chasten, Apoc. 3. verse. 19.
be zealous therefore and amend. Mark these words well, gentle Reader. God
corrects us not in way of satisfaction, which we are never able to perform
(as I have proved more at large in my book of Motives;) but that we may
repent, turn to him, and amend our sinful lives. For this cause says the
Psalmograph; Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest (O Lord) and teach him
in thy law; Psalm. 9 4. v. 12.
that thou may give him rest from the days of evil, while the pit is
dug for the wicked. For as saint Paul says, If we would judge our selves
(by true faith and repentance) we should not be judged. But when we are
judged, 1. Cor. 11.31.
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world:
which Christ himself confirmed, when he willed the adultresse to go and to
sin no more. Ioh. 8.11.


The sixth objection.
S. Paul exhorted the Corinthians, who abounded in goods, 2. Cor. 8.13, 14
but wanted merits, to bestow money largely on the saints at Jerusalem, that
so they might be partakers of their merits. Therefore it is very lawful to
procure pardon with our money, by the application of godly men's merits unto us.

The answer.
S. Paul means nothing less, then that the Hierosolymitains should sell
spiritual things for money. For when Simon the sorcerer even after his
baptism, Act. 8.19, 20.
would have bought the distribution of holy things with money: then said saint
Peter to him, Thy money perish with thee; because thou think, that the gift
of God may be gotten with money. But the apostle exhorts the richer sort at
Corinth, to minister competently to the faithful at Jerusalem, for their
necessary relief and sustentation: and this to do the rather, for that
heretofore they received the gospel from thence, so that there may be an
analogicall or proportionable equality between them. For liberality ought to
be mutual among christians: and as the apostle says in another place, 1. Cor.
9.11.
It is no great thing for them that have sown to us spiritual things, to
reap part of our carnal things. Thus seems Chrysostom to understand this
place, whose words are these; Chrysostom. sup. hunc loc. hom. 17. in fine.
Haec autem dicebat etiam diuitum superbiam deprimens, ostendens quod post hanc
vitam in maiori dignitate spirituales futuri sint: He spoke these things to
abate the pride of rich men, showing that after this life the godly shall be in
greater dignity: as if he had said, esteem not better of your selves,
because ye have more worldly wealth; but distribute such things liberally, and
seek to abound in spiritual things, that so there may be an equality.

The seventh objection.
The article of our creed (I believe the communion of saints) does plainly
show, that ones satisfaction may be applied to an other, which is that
application that the pope makes, when he gives pardons.

The answer.
I answer, that the duties of charity, are and ought to be common among the
faithful, in that they are the mystical members of one mystical body; 1.
Cor. 12.25, 26 27.
which saint Paul proves to be so, by the example of the members in man's body.
And this is that communion of saints, whereof mention is made in the Creed
apostolic. But of popish pardons and merits of supererrogation, this article
makes no relation at all. Yea, as the apostle says, Romans 3.24. c. 5.1.
al righteousness, remission of sins, and eternal life, is ministered to the
members of the church by Christ the head. Of whose fulness we have all received,
Ioh. 1.10.
even grace for grace.

CHAP. VI. Of Popish purgatory.
OF popish purgatory I have spoken sufficiently, in the seventh chapter of the
second book of my Motives. It will therefore here be sufficient to declare the
original thereof, and to solue the objections against the same.

The superstitious and fond fantasies of purgatory came from the old heathen
Romans; for as saint Austen records, they had a purgatory sacrifice: Aug.
de ciuit. ^bi. 7. cap. 7.
these are his words; Ideo terminalia eodem mense Februario celebrari dicunt,
cum fit sacrum purgatorium quod vocant Februm, vnde mensis nomen accepit.
Therefore men say, that the ends of things are celebrated in the same month of
February, when the purgatory sacrifice is made which they call Februs,
whereupon the month took the name. Afterward Origin being too much addicted to
his allegorical speculation, Paganism the original of purgatory.
fained many odd things touching purgatory, as the ethnicke Plato (whom he
much imitateth) had done before him. After Origin others began to call the
matter into question, others rashly to believe it, others to add many things
to Origens conceit. Thus by little and little it increased, Anno. Dom. 250
till the late bishops of Rome made it an article of popish faith. But of what
credit Origin ought to be in this point, his own opinion will declare
sufficiently, as who held that the devils should all be purged at the latter
day. For of Origin thus writes S. Austen; Aug. de ciuit. Dei libr. 21. cap. 17.
Qua in re misericordior profecto fuit Origenes qui and ipsum diabolum atque
angelos eius post grauiora pro meritis and diuturniora supplicia, ex illis
cruciatibus eruendos atque sociandos sanctis angelis credidit. Wherein Origin
doubtless was more compassionable, who believed that the devil himself and his
angels, after great and long punishment for their demerites, should be
delivered from their torments, and placed with the holy angels. Lodouic. in
comment. de ciuit. Origens purgatory.
And Lodouicus Viues upon the same place of S. Austen has these words; Et
istos quoque supplicijs liberabat Origenes, sicut ex sanctis angelis
praecedente tempore diabolos faciebat, quae illius erant vicissitudines. These
also did Origin deliver from punishment, as in process of time he made of
angels diuelles, such was his changeable course of dealing.

Roffensis our late popish bishop of Rochester confesses a truth in this
matter; to wit, Popish purgatory has no constant ground.
that the Greeks did never believe there was a purgatory. Again, that
purgatory was not received in all places at once, neither yet generally for
many hundred years. His words I have alleged in the first book of my
Motives, in the seventh preamble.

The first objection.
I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, Zachar. cap. 9.11
wherein there is no water: Ergo, (says our Jesuit Bellarmine) there is a
purgatory, for out of hell none can be loosed.

The answer.
I answer, Hier. in 9. cap. Zach.
that the prophet means nothing else but that God will deliver his church out of
all dangers, how great soever they seem. Again, this text may fitly be
expounded of hell, as Saint Hierome takes it. His words are these; In
sanguine passionis tuae eos qui vincti in carcere tenebantur inferni, in quo
non est vlla misericordia, tua clementia liberasti. Thou have delivered in the
blood of thy testament of thy free mercy, those that were bound in the prison
of hell, where there is no mercy. And indeed the merit of Christ's blood
preserved us from hell, which otherwise was prepared for us. This text may also
be understood of the captivity of Babylon, from whence the church was
delivered.

The second objection.
We went through fire and water, and thou have brought us to a place of comfort
or refreshing. By this place it is clear, that there is a purgatory. Psalm.
65. v. 12.


The answer.
I say first, that before hell had no water in it, but now there is found both
fire and water, such is the constancy of popish divinity.

I say secondly, that by fire and water the prophet here understands, the
victories which martyrs have had in their manifold passions. That is to say,
martyrs after all their crosses, miseries, and afflictions, are brought to
Christ their head and true comfort. Thus does S. Hierome expound this place,
whose express words are these; Hier. in psalm. 65. ver. 12.
Martyrum hic ostendit victorias, quas in diuersis passionibus meruerunt; and
ad vnum eos dicit refrigerium, id est, Christum Dominum, per laqueos, per
cruces, per verbera, per ignes aestusq, and alia diuersa supplicia (per quae
and holocaustum acceptum effecti sunt) peruenisse. He shows the victories of
martyrs, which they were worthy of in their manifold passions; and he says
they came to a place of refreshing, that is, Aug. in Psalm. 65 Prope finem.
to Christ our Lord, through snares, through crosses, through beatinges,
through fire and heat, and diverse other tortures, (through which they became
an acceptable sacrifice.) S. Austen expounds it, in the self same manner.

The third objection.
Psalm. 106. v. 13.14
They cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from their
distress. He brought them out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death,
and brake their bands asunder: Ergo there is a purgatory.

The answer.
I answer, that the whole Psalm contains in effect nothing else, but thanks
giving to the Lord for his great mercy, in that he has delivered them not
only from hell justly deserved for their sins, Aug. hic*
but also from the manifold dangers of this life. So writes S. Austen upon
this Psalm, Hier. in Psalm 106.
and S. Hierome is of the same opinion. For these are his express words;
Vinctum enim erat genus humanum catenis criminum, and carceri diaboli
mancipatum. For mankind was bound with the chains of sin, and kept in
prison as a slave by the devil.

The 4. objection.
He shall fine the sons of Leui, Malac. 3. v. 3.
and purify them as gold and silver, that they may bring offeringes unto the
Lord in righteousness. Which fining say our papists, cannot be understood but
of purgatory.

The answer.
I answer, that the prophet Malachie speaks flatly, of the first aduent of
our Savior Jesus Christ; who by his bitter and sacred passion, will purge his
church from all her sins, Hier. in. 3. cap. Malach.
and then shall the faithful offer up the sacrifice of land and thanksgiving.
Thus does S. Hierome expound this text, neither can any other gloss be
consonant to the discourse of the prophet.

The 5. objection.
S. Matthew says, Math. 12. v. ^2.
that the sin of the holy ghost shall be forgiven, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come. By which words he gives us to understand, that
some sins are forgiven in the world to come; Ergo there is a purgatory.

The answer.
I answer, that Gods spirit knows best how to interpret the scripture, and
consequently that S. Matthew means nothing else by these words, (neither in
this world, neither in the world to come) but that the sin against the holy
ghost, shall never be forgiven. For so does S. Mark, another Evangelist,
interpret this self same text. These are the words; he that blasphemeth
against the holy ghost, Mat. 3. v. 29.
shall never have forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation. Yea,
which is a confusion to the papists. S. Matthew himself so expounds himself,
Math. 12. v. 31. Chrysostom. hom. 42. in Mat.
in the next verse aforegoing. And so does S. Chrysostom expound this place.

The 6. objection.
Mat. 5. v. 26.
Thou shall not depart thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing.
Ergo, after satisfaction made, or the popes pardon granted, thou may come
out of purgatory.

The answer.
I answer with S. Augustine, that the prison whereof S. Matthew speaks is
hell, Aug. de q. Dulcitil. q. 1 in fine. tom. 4.
from whence there is no departure in deed. For he that is once committed
thither for non payment; must tarry there world without end, because he can
never answer this infinite debt.

The reply.
When he says (until thou have paid) he gives us to understand, that after
a certain time, we shall come out. I answer, that the word (until) does not
connotate the end of imprisonment, but the continuation thereof: because so is
the usual acception of that term, in the holy scriptures. For when S. Matthew
says, (he knew her not until she had brought forth her first borne son:) it
follows not, that he afterward knew the blessed virgin. Mat. 1. v. 25.
So when it is said, (that Michol had no child to the day of her death) it
follows not, yt she had children after her death. 2. Kin. 6. v. 23.
Thirdly, when our Savior promised to be with his disciples till the worlds
end, it does not import that he will after forsake them. Fourthly, when the
prophet says, (as the eyes of a maiden look unto ye hands of her mistres,
Mat. 2^. v. 20.
so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us) he
means not that our eyes shall not afterward wait upon the Lord. Psalm. 122. v. 2
No, God forbid. Fifthly, when God says (sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool) he means not, Psalm. 109. v. 1.
that Christ shall sit no longer on his right hand. No, no, God auert.

The 7. objection.
If any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber,
hay, or stubble; 1. Cor. 3. v. 12.
every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what
sort it is. This fire the holy fathers do understand of purgatory. Ergo it
ought not to be denied.

The answer.
I say first, that all the fathers as well old as latter writers, confess that
S. Paul's discourse is altogether metaphorical; and

I say secondly, that the old writers dissent one from another, in the
exposition of his text. For S. Chrysostom understands Vide istos patres in
hunc locum.
S. Hierome of Gods examination in the day of general judgment; S. Gregory of
the fire of tribulation in this life; S. Ambrose and S. Theodoret, of the fire
of Gods judgment, and others otherwise. Gregorius Magnus has these express
words; Gregor. li^. 4 dialog. cap. 39.
Quamuis hoc de igne tribulationis in hac vita nobis adhibito possit intelligi;
albeit this place may be understood, of the fire of tribulation which we suffer
in this life. Out of which words I note, that although this Gregory thought
there was a purgatory of small sins after this life, yet did he confess, yt
this place could prove no such thing. Hereunto I add, that if either this
text, or any other had been a sufficient warrantize for purgatory; as well the
Greeks as the ancient fathers, would have received it; both which their own
Roffensis denies, Roff. contra Luther. ar. 18.
as is already proved. I say thirdly, that it cannot possibly be understood of
purgatory: and I prove it effectually. First, because al martyrs Jeremy, Job.
Ioh. Baptist, the blessed virgin, This third illation is proved in my Motives,
and sundry others (in whose passions of supererogation, they build the
treasure of the church and popish pardons) could never come in purgatory; and
yet does the text say, that all as well good as bad, must be tried by that fire,
whereof the apostle speaks in this place.

I say fourthly, yt the apostle here speaks of ye fire of probation, but not
of purgation, as ye papists would have him to do. 1. Cor. 3. v. 13.
These are ye words; vniuscuiusque opus quale sit, ignis probabit. the fire
shall try every ones work, of what sort it is. Which S. Austen well observed,
when he wrote in this manner; Ignis de quo locutus est eo loco apostolus Paulus,
talis debet intelligi, vt ambo per eum transeant; Aug. in Euchirid. cap. 68.
tom. 3.
id est and qui aedificat supra hoc fundamentum, aurum, argentum, lapides
pretiosos; and qui aedificat ligna, foenum, stipulam. The fire whereof the
apostle Paul speaks in that place, must be understood to be such an one, that
both sorts may pass through it; that is, as well he that builds upon this
foundation, gold, silver, or precious stones, as he that builds wood, hay, or
stubble.

I say fifthly, that all things spoken of in this text, are taken Popish
purgatory is built upon rotten foundations.
and makes false doctrine known. This exposition is gathered out of the
circumstances of the text it self, out of S. Ambrose, and S. Austen, and out
of late popish writers. For their own Hofmeisterus (if my memory fail me not)
and their Gagnaeius also, have this interpretation in flat and express terms.
It is long since I read them, and I have not now their books at hand;
otherwise, I would have alleged their words.

I say sixthly, that al such as would ground popish purgatory Bellarmine may
suffice. Respondeo, nos cogi ab ipso textu ad aequiuocationem non vnam, sed
duas admittendas. Bellar. in lib. 1. de purg. c. 4. p, 1387
I answer, that the very text does compel us, to admit more then one
equivocation.

The 8. objection.
What shall they do, which are baptized for dead? if the dead rise not at all.
Why are they then baptized for the dead? out of this place, (as our Jesuit
Bellarmine supposes) nay as he braggingly boasts, 1. Cor. 15* 29
is popish purgatory proved undoubtedly.

The answer.
I say first, that great is the impudency of our Jesuit, who glories so much
in his late Romish exposition, which neither Epiphanius, Theodoretus,
Chrysostomus, Tertullianus, Ambrose, Sedulius, Anselmus, Oecumenius, Haymo and
Theophilactus, do expound it flatly against our Romish Jesuit; and so do also
his own dear fellows Aquinas and Caietanus. I say secondly, that S. Paul
Epiphanius co^t. Cerinth. haer. 28. p. 37
and this says S. Epiphanius, is the true meaning of the Apostle: and that he
says truly, I appeal to the true judgment of the indifferent reader. These
are the words of Epiphanius; Alii recte hoc dictum interpretantes dicunt, quod
morti vicini si fuerint in pietatis doctrina instructi, ob hanc spem ante
obitum lavacro digni fiunt; ostendentes quod qui mortuus est etiam resurget,
and ob id indiget remissione peccatoru^ per lauacru^. Others interpret this
saying of the apostle truly, and say, that such as are at the point of death,
if they be instructed christia^ly, are for this hope worthy of baptising
before they die: thereby signifying, that he which is dead shall rise again;
and for that end, has need of remission of his sins by baptism. This then is
the true meaning of S. Paul in this place, The Jesuit prefers his own
judgment before al writers without al ti^^ and reason.
what shall they do which are baptized for dead? that is, which are rather
reputed for dead then for living. Wherefore are they baptized, if the dead rise
not again? for since they cannot be baptized for any commodity of this life,
(which presently they must forsake, being so extremely sick) their baptism
proves the resurrection of the dead. And where our Jesuit lists to wrangle
upon the words ( pro illis, for them,) it shall suffice to tell him, that their
latin so magnified edition is false, and that in the original and Greek
copies, it is thus, (...) for the dead, and so his cavil is not worth a fig.

The ninth objection.
S. Paul says, that in the name of Jesus every knee voweth, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, Philip. 2.10.
and things under the, earth; but the damned in hell blaspheme Christ, ergo
there be some under the earth, that is, in purgatory, which worship and adore
Christ.

The answer.
I answer, that the bowing of the knee (whereof the apostle speaks) does not
signify worship or adoration, but that subjection which shall be showed openly
in the last judgment, when and where the deuilles as well as men and the good
angels, shall yield homage and dominion unto Christ. For so S. Paul expounds
S. Paul, in his epistle to the Romans: and S. Luke records, Romans 14. verse
10, 11.
that the devil falls prostrate before Christ, and acknowledges his power
over him: Luke. 8.28.
which is that bowing of the knee, whereof S. Paul speaks. Other expositions
whatsoever, are repugnant to the text.

The reply.
S. John says, that he heard all the creatures which are in heaven, and on
earth, and under the earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, Apoc. 5.
verse. 13.
saying in this manner, praise, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Therefore they
be under the earth, which truly worship Christ, and consequently, since the
devils (as ye grant) do rather blaspheme then worship Christ; they that
worship Christ under the earth, must needs be the souls in purgatory.

The answer.
I answer, that S. John means nothing else, then that which S. Paul has
uttered: he uses the figure Prosopopeia, and after the usual course of the
scriptures, causes things senseless, and void of reason, to sound out the
praise of God: so says the Psalmograph David; All thy works praise thee, O
Lord, Psalm. 144. v. 10.
and thy saints bless thee* and in another place thus; The heavens declare the
glory of God, Psalm. 18. ver. 1.
and the firmament shows the work of his hands: yea, as the prophet says,
and as the three holy Hebrews sang, Psalm. 148.
fire, heat, winter, summer, frost, snow, light, darkness, the stars, the
sun, the moon, and creatures bless the Lord. Dan. 3 secund. ^at.


The tenth objection.
Ap^cal, 21. v. 27.
S. John says, that no unclean thing shall enter into heaven, but many depart
out of this life, which are not pure, ergo such must be purged in purgatory,
before they come in heaven.

The answer.
I say first, that faith in Christ Jesus can as well purge a man in this life,
as the Popes pardons: and yet as your selves

I say secondly, that it is a needelesse thing to establish popish purgatory,
because popish pardons supply the want thereof.

I say thirdly, that the faithful and elect children of God, have their
cleanenesse before him in Christ his son, with Apoc ^.14.
was yet made the sacrifice for sin, 2. Cor. 5.21.
that we might be the righteousness of God in him. And as S. Peter says, their
hearts are purified by faith: yea, as Christ himself says, Act. 15. verse. ^
his sacred word has made them clean. In fine, holy Writ pronounces them
blessed that die in the Lord, and that they rest from their labors. Which being
so, they neither have any impurity, Joan. 15. verse. 3. Apoc. 14, 13.
nor suffer any purgatory pain.

The reply.
You all confess, that your inherent justice is imperfect and impure, and so
your uncleanness must be taken away after this life, be fore ye come into
heaven; ergo there is a purgatory.

The answer.
I answer, that original concupiscence is an inseparable accide^t during this
life, as well in you as in us, but as it is proper to this state, so is it taken
away in that very instant, in which our state is altered.

The 11. objection.
S. Peter says, that God raised up Christ after he had loosed the sorrows of
hell. This place says our Jesuit, Act. 2.24.
must needs be understood of purgatory: for first, it cannot be meant of the
damned, because their pains shall never end. Secondly, it cannot be meant of
the sorrows of Christ, because they were finished on the cross. Thirdly, it
cannot be meant of the fathers in Limbo, Bellarm, de purg. lib. 1. c. 4. col.
1396.
because they had no pain at all: it therefore remains, that it be meant of
the sorrows which souls abide in purgatory.

The answer
I say first, that if their Latin text were sound, this objection would solue
it self: for the original and Greek text is this; (...), having loosed the
sorrows of death. Out of which words, nothing can be gathered, that favors
purgatory

I say thirdly, that the fathers who^ the papists hold to have Limbo at that
time, did according to their own doctrine suffer poenam damni, Bellarminus, de
^entit. sanct. lib. 1 cap. 20.
because they were not as yet partakers of the clear vision beatificall: which
Bellarmine grants in another place, and so is repugnant to himself. But let
that be deemed a small fault in a Jesuit, which is thought a great crime in
another man. Add hereunto, that poena damni is a greater pain then poena
sensus, by their best popish divinity. I Romans 4.25. Act. 2.24.
do confirm this exposition: for there it is thus written; whom God raised
up and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should
be holden of it: as if S. Peter had said; although the passion of Christ was so
bitter and exceeding great, as implying the curse and malediction due for our
sins (insomuch that the remembrance thereof caused him to sweat out drops of
blood) yet could not death possibly prevail against him, but that he should
rise again, and conquer both hell and it.

The reply.
Although the greek word in the 24. verse signifies death, yet in the 27 verse
it signifies hell, and so the sense is against you.

The answer.
I answer, that the hebrew word in the psalm, from whence this sentence is
taken, Ps. l. 10. verse. 10.
is (...), and signifies, a sepulcher or grave, and so does your own great
linguiste Arias Montanus interpret it: as if the Prophet had said, thou will
not leave my soul or life, in the grave. For the course of holy scripture,
does comprehend our life under the name of the Soul: so says the Prophet
Jonas, therefore now O Lord take I beseech thee; my soul from me, Jonas. 4.^.
for it is better for me to die, then to live. So is it in the Hebrew and
original, and yet by the word (soul) must we understand life: for so the words
following, do require of necessity: so says Paul, Act. 20.10.
trouble not your selves, anima enim ipsius in ipso est, for his soul (that
is, his life) is in him: And a little after, he says thus; Act. 20.24.
neither is my soul dear to me, so I may fulfill my course; Mat. 2.20.
where by ye word (soul) life must needs be understood. So Joseph was bidden
to take the babe and his mother, Joan. 10.11.
and to go into the land of Israel; because they were dead, that sought the
babes soul, that is, his life: so Christ says, that a good shepherd gives
his soul for the sheep, that is, his life. These and other like places do
prove evidently that our soul in the scriptures, is taken for our life; so
that when the scripture says, God will not suffer Christ's soul to tarry in
the grave, it means Christ's life; as if it should say, Christ shall not be
long dead, death shall not swallow him up, or prevail against him.

The 12. objection.
Saint Austen and other of the fathers, have taught flatly that there is a
purgatory; and therefore whosoever denies purgatory opposes himself against
the fathers.

The answer.
I say first, that I have said sufficiently for the authority of Bellar. when
he dislikes them. This is proved in my book of Motives. I say thirdly, that
though sundry of the S. Austin may suffice for the rest. Aug. in euch^. c. 69.
tom. 3.
In one place he writes in this manner; Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam
fieri incredibile non est, and vtrum ita sit quaeri potest. It is not
incredible, but that some such thing may be after this life, and it is a
question, whether there be any such thing or no. Again in another place, after
he has discoursed largely of purgatory, in ye end he concludes doubtfully
thus, Aug. de ciuit. lib. ^^. ^. 26.
Non redarguo, quia forsitan verum est, I do not reprove it, because perhaps
it is true. Again in another place, he has these express words; Sieve ergo in
hac vita tantum homines ista patiuntur, Aug de fide and operibus cap. 16. tom.
4.
sieve etiam post hanc vitam talia quaedam iudicia subsequu^tur, non abhorret
quantum arbitror a ratione veritatis iste intellectus huius sententiae. Whether
therefore men suffer these things only in this life, or also after this life
some such judgments follow; this interpretation as I think is not repugnant
to reason. Thus we see clearly, how unconstant and how cold S. Austens
doctrine is, concerning popish purgatory.

The 13. objection.
The ancient fathers both prayed and offered up sacrifice for the dead; which
they would never have done, if there had not been a purgatory.

The answer.
I say first, that sundry of the fathers prayed for the dead, who

Cyprian. lib. 4. Epis 5. Ambros de obitu Valent. ^
in which memories were publicly named al such persons, as died constantly for
the christian faith. Not by that means to procure any merit, remission, or
satisfaction to those blessed martyrs, (for as ye papists grant, martyrs need
no such thing, August. in ser. 17. de verbis apos. c. 1
) but so to excite the living after their godly example, boldly to confess the
name of Christ, and therein to be ready to yield up their lives; when time and
place should so require. I say thirdly, that they prayed for ye dead, to
insinuate Ambros. de obitu Valent. and Theod.
But never did any of the approved antiquity, pray in such sort for the
dead, as the old fathers used, ministered great occasion to that superstition,
which is now an high point of Romish religion. For the ignorant posterity,
wrested every thing to serve their turn.

I say fifthly, that as the fathers were excited to pray for the Aug. lib. 9.
conl. c. 13. tom. 1.
shall appear evidently by S. Austens testimony. First, therefore S. Austen
prayed for his mother, and that she might have remission of her sins, (for I
will conceal nothing yt seems to make for the papists:) and yet did S.
Austen thus pray, only to show his loving and ardent affection toward his
mother, and not to procure any remittall for her sins; as whose sins he
constantly believed, were already pardoned. For these are his express words.
Et credo iam feceris, quod te rogo, sed voluntaria oris mei approba Domine. And
I verily believe, yt thou have already done as I desire; yet Lord accept my
inward affection, uttered by my lips. Out of which words I note, that Austen
believed his mothers sins to be forgiven, before he prayed for her: and that
the end and intent of his prayer was only this; to show that he was naturally
and dutifully affected to his mother. Upon which kind of indiscreet zeal,
great superstition and flat idolatry followed in his posterity, as I said
before. Secondly, S. Austen having distinguished three sorts of dead; to wit,
very good, very evil, August. in e^chi^. c. 110.
and neither very good nor very evil, affirms yt prayers made for the very
bad and damned souls, do make their damnation more tolerable. These are his
express words; Pro valde malis etsi nulla sunt adiumenta mortuoru^,
qualescunque viuoru^ consolationes sunt. Quibus autem prosunt, aut ad hoc
prosunt, vt sit plena remissio, aut certe vt tolerabilior fiat ipsa damnatio.
For the very bad although they be no helps to the dead, yet are they some
solace to the living. And whom they profit, they profit for this, that either
they may have full remission, or that their damnation be more tolerable. Out of
which words I note, that Saint Austen holds in this point of praying for the
dead, that which neither is sound, neither yet allowed by the Papists
themselves; and consequently, that the papists ought not to make account of his
judgment herein. For, you do see that he grants the punishment of the
damned, Mark this point (...).
to be mitigated in hell for the prayers of the living; which thing no papist
will or dare avouch. And the like is to be said of other of the Fathers, when
they follow opinions not grounded upon the word of God. Saint Austen therefore
must be rejected by his own rule (as I have proved in my Motives) when he
dissenteth from Gods word, the true touchstone and trial of all truth. And
saint Austens inconstancy is plainly uttered in an other place, Aug. de
ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 24.
where he has these words: Quod quidem non ideo confirmo, quoniam non
resis^o. Which verily I do not therefore approve, because I do not impugn it.
Out of which words I note, that though saint Austen could not approve the
opinion of the vulgar sort (as which he knew to have no ground, but a mere
natural affection) yet would he not condemn it, but leave it as in suspense.

The foureteenth objection.
Prayer for the dead is proved by the scripture, even in yt new testament: 1.
Ioh. 5.16.
for when S. John forbids to pray for them that die without repentance, he
doubtless exhorts to pray for them that die penitent.

The answer.
Aug. de verb. apostol. sermon. 17. cap. ^.
he may tell that tale to wise men, and repute himself a fool for his pains.
For first, as S. Austen (upon whose authority he only builds) affirms that
the apostle speaks of him that dies impenitent; so does the same S. Austen
avouch, that he does injury to a martyr, that prays for a martyr, which is a
received axiom with the papists: and consequently, when he infers out of S.
Austen, that we must pray for them that die penitent; he concludes against S.
Austen, that we must pray for most constant martyrs, and so commit a manifest
injury. So then albeit S. John dehorteth from praying for such as die without
repentance, yet does he not exhort us to pray for those that die penitent: for
otherwise doubtless we must pray not for the dead. I prove it, because these
are saint John's words; (If any shall see his brother sinning a sin not to death)
but he that sins, is in this life; for we can not see a man sinning in the
next life, where no sin is committed, and therefore S. John speaks of prayer
only in this life. I say thirdly, Caiet. in ie^tac. octauo. quaest. quinta.
to their utter confusion.

CHAP. VII. Of praying to Saints departed.
COncerning the invocation of Saints, great abuses and intolerable
superstition have crept into the church, and dazeled the eyes of the vulgar
sort: wherein I desire diligent attention, and indifferent judgment, until
the end of my discourse.

The first Conclusion.
Albeit a christian man never pray to the saints departed, yet does he not
sin therein. I prove it, because every sin is a transgression of Gods law
or commandment; but God has made no law, nor given any commandment to pray
to saints: Ergo not to pray to them is no sin at all. The proposition is a
received maxim in the Romish church, grounded on these words of saint Austen;
Peccatum est factum, vel dictum, Aug. cont. Faust. libr. 22. cap. 27 tom. 6.
vel concupitum aliquid contra legem aeternam: Sin is any deed, word, or
thought against the eternal law, which is the will of God. Saint Ambrose
confirms Saint Augustines description in these words: Quid est peccatum,
Ambr. de parad. cap. 8.
nisi praeuaricatio legis diuinae, and caelestium inobedientia praeceptorum?
What is sin but the transgression of Gods law, and the disobedience of his
holy precepts? The assumption is secure, until the papists can allege some
precept out of the old or new testament for the invocation of saints, which
they will do ad Calendas Graecas. But the Papists think they have a mighty
objection against this Conclusion, taken out of Genesis in these words: Et
innocetur super eos nomen meum, nomina quaeque patrum meorum, Abraham and
Isaac. And let my name be called upon them, Genes. 48.16*
and the names of my fathers, Abraham, and Isaac.

To which I answer thus; First, this vocation or nomination was not any
precept from God, but the mere fact of Jacob or Israel: who as he was holy,
so was he a man, and might have erred herein as man. Secondly, the hebrew text
is thus; Let my name be named in them, that is, let them be called my children
by adoption, or let them be surnamed after me. The grandfather Jacob made
Joseph's children his by adoption.
For it was the custom both of the Hebrews and of the Greeks, to express
the surname of every one by the name of the father; as Aristoteles the son of
Nicomachus, Zenophon the son of Gryllus, Cambyses the son of Cyrus.
Thirdly, the whole course of holy scripture, does yield this interpretation of
Jacobs words. In the old testament it was a great reproach for a woman to
bear no children, (though now with the Papists they be reputed holy, that
will rashly vow never to marry;) for which respect, the small remnant of men
left after the execution of Gods justice in the destruction of Jerusalem,
enforced women contrary to womanly shamefastness, to seek unto men, and to
offer themselves to very base conditions, to the end they would be their
husbands and so take away their reproach. Which thing the prophet Jeremy
utters in these words; In that day seven women shall take hold of one man,
saying; We will eat our own bread, and wear our own garments, Esa. 4.1.
only let us be called by thy name, and take away our reproach. Thus writes
Gods holy prophet, whose discourse with the due circumstances thereof, if the
christian Reader will exactly ponder, he shall behold as clearly as the
glittering beams of the sun, the most impudent and sophistical dealing of
the papists. For though the words as well in the latin as in the Hebrew be all
one and the very same, yet are the papists ashamed (I am well assured) to
infer or prove invocation of Saints, by this latter place. That which I say
is evident, because these women desired nothing else of the man, but that he
would be their husband, and that they might be called his wives, and so put
away their reproach. This interpretation is plainly touched in the express
words of the text; when the women desired the man to take their reproach away,
by letting his name be called upon them: for which end they promised not only
to eat their own bread, but also to wear their own clothes, that so they be
no way burdenous to him. And yet as our Jesuit Bellarmine and other papists
would have it understood in Genesis, the text must yield this sense: We will
eat our own bread, and wear our own garments, and desire only that we may
invoke thy name, and make our prayers to thee when thou art dead. Which sense
is most absurd, as every child may perceive: for first if this had been the
meaning of the women, in vain had they made mention of eating their own
bread, and wearing their own garments, as which could neither profit nor
disprofite the man.

Secondly, these women knew not whether the man should be a saved soul in
heaven, or a damned spirit in hell, and therefore would they never make such a
request to him. Thirdly praying to him being dead, could not take away their
reproach on earth. Fourthly, the man might survive and live after them all, and
so their desire was in vain, Fifthly, Hier. in 4. cap. Esaiae.
Saint Hierome expounds this text, even as I have said: For these are his
words; Tantum ne absque marito esse videantur, and sub^acere illi maledicto
quod scriptum est; maledicta sterilis, quae non facit semen in Israel: Only
least they seem to be without an husband, and to be subject unto the curse
which is written; Accursed be the barren, which brings not forth seed in
Israel.

In sundry places of the Scripture the self same phrase is found, which can
not possibly yield any other sense: and therefore most impudent are the
papists, who blush not to father their praying to Saints, upon this fact of
Jacob. Peruse the ninth chapter of Daniel, the eighteen and nineteen verses,
where it is thus written; Behold the city whereupon thy name is called: For
thy name is called upon thy city, and upon thy people. That is to say, it is
named thy city, and they are called thy people. Ponder well these words of
Saint James the second chapter 7. verse; Do not they blaspheme the good name,
that is inuocated upon you? that is, you that of Christ are called Christians.
The like phrases are in Jeremy the seventh, Iere. 7.14. Esaiae, 44. v. 5
in Esaias the 44. chapter, in the book of kings, and in other places. But our
Jesuit thinks the words aforegoing in Genesis, to prove his purpose
effectually. Genesis 48. v. 16.
For Joseph prayed to the angel, to bless the sons of Joseph. But I answer,
that that angel whereof Jacob spoke, is Christ himself. And I prove it by
other places of the same book, where Jacob calls God an angel. The angel of
God says Jacob, Genesis 31. v. 1^.1^
said to me in a dream. Yet in ye verse following, the angel calls himself
the God of Bethel. Which God was the angel that delivered Jacob from all evil.
Which God was that Christ, Genesis 28. v. 14.18
in whom Jacob and his seed are blessed. And so by conferring place with place,
it is evident that Jacob prayed to God, not to the angel.

Job. 5. v. 1.
Our Jesuits urge yet another Scripture, to prove invocation Elyphas the
Themanite one of Iobes frindes, and therefore Job to consider, if any of the
godly rage against God as he did. I say thirdly, that our Jesuit confesses
elsewhere as I have proved, that before Christ's ascension, praying to saints
was not used.

The second conclusion.
To pray to Saints departed, is a thing at the least vain and needles. Job.
42.2. Genesis 17.1. Number. 16.31. Deuteronomy. 4.^4. Iac. 1.17.
I prove it, because God is most able and most willing to help us. Most able,
for that he is omnipotent, the fountain of all grace, and the giver of every
good gift. Most willing, in that he has not only mercifully invited us to
call upon him, but withal faithfully promised to hear and grant our
petitions. If any man lack wisdom says S. James, let him ask of God, I^^.
1. verse 5. 1. Joan. 2. v. 1. Psalm. 49. v. 15
which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given
him. If any man sin says S. John, we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the just, and he is the reconciliation for our sins, even for the
sins of the whole world. Call upon me in the day of trouble says God by his
prophet, and I will deliver thee. The scripture tells us in many places that
whosoever asks any thing of God, shall receive, and whosoever seeks shall
find, Luc. 11. v. ^. Math. 7. v. 7. Mar. 11. v. 24. Joan. 16. v. 23. 1. Joan.
5. v. 14.
and to every one that knocks, the door shall be opened. And that whatsoever
we shall ask in Christ's name, we shall attain the same undoubtedly.

The 1. objection.
God will often accept the prayers of others for us, when he will not hear
our selves. Job. 42. v. 78.
For when his wrath was kindled against Eliphaz the Themanite and his two
friends, he would not hear them, but yet accepted Jobs prayers for them.

The answer.
I answer, that God meant not utterly to reject Eliphaz and his friends; for
if he had so determined, he would never have accepted Jobs prayers for them.
But because they had contemned Job, and preferred their own righteousness;
God to give a testimony of Jobs innocence, true faith, and patience, and to
confound the proud conceits of Eliphas and his fellows, sent them to Job,
Job. 42. v. 7.
and said that he would accept his prayers for them. Which my exposition is
grounded on these words; my wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two
friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my
servant Job. As if God had said; ye have offended much more then my servant
Job, in that ye condemned him by his outward afflictions, and did not comfort
and solace him with my mercies. And therefore do I send you unto him, that you
may know that he has greater favor in my sight. Gene. 18.32. Psalm. 10^. v.
23. Acts 27. v. 34.
Thus God showed the faith of Abraham, praying for the Sodomites, of Moses for
the Israelites, and of Paul for the 276. persons in the ship with him.

The reply.
If it were true, that because God is most willing and most able to help us:
1. Tim. 2. v. 1. Iac. 5. v. ^6.
therefore it is needles and vain to invoke or call upon saints departed,
by the same reason it is needless to invoke and call upon the saints
living, which yet the scripture commands us to do.

The answer.
I say first, that in proper kind of speech, invocation is a special

The reply.
Like as nobles and magistrates bring us to the presence of an earthly king,
even so do saints by their holy prayers, bring us to the presence and favor
of God the king of heaven.

The answer.
Ambr. in cap. ad Romans p. 177.
Saint Ambrose shall answer, as who precisely and fully resolves this
question. These are his words; Ideo ad regem pertribunos aut comites itur,
quia homo vtique est rex, and nescit quibus debeat remp credere: ad dominu^
autem (quem vtique nihil latet, omnium enim merita nouit) promerendum
suffragatore non opus est, sed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim talis locutus
fuerit ei, respondebit illi. We are therefore brought to the presence of kings
by Lords and officers, because the king is a man, and knows not to whom he
may commit his realm. But to win Gods favor, (from who^ nothing is hid, for
he knows what every man is meet to have) we need no spokesman, but a devout
mind. For wheresoever such a one speaks to God, God will answer him. And
this answer of S. Ambrose, is consonant to the holy scripture. Mat. 11. v. 28.
For Christ himself says; Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I
will ease you. Again, we must not judge what is the will of God, by the
similitudes of earthly things departed through sin, but by his sacred word
revealed from heaven.

The 2. objection.
^ere. 15. v. 1.
God says by his prophet, that though Moses and Samuel stood before him, and
prayed for the people, yet would not he hear them. Whereupon we may gather,
that saints use to pray for us, and that God hears their prayers; though
neither at all times, nor for all persons.

The answer.
I say first, that conditional propositions prove nothing, but

I say secondly, that by popish doctrine Moses and Samuel Moses and Samuel not
then in heaven by popish doctrine.
and consequently they did not then pray for the people. For (as the papists
hold) they were in Limbo until Christ's ascension.

I say thirdly, that the meaning of the text is no other then Ezech. 14. v. 14
and Job were among them, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness. As if he had said thus; though most godly men Noah, Job, and
Daniel, were now living together, and should pray for this wicked people, yet
would not I hear them. By which words it is manifest, that God both before
in Jeremy and now in Ezechiel, speaks of the prayers of the living for
Daniel was now with Ezechiel alive in captivity, and yet does the scripture
speak of them all indifferently.

The third conclusion.
To pray to be helped for the merits of Saints departed, Joan. 1. v. ^^. 1.
Joan. 2. v. 1. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5
is very superstitious and plain diabolical. I prove it, because Christ is
the lamb, that takes away the sins of the world; because Christ is our
advocate, and the reconciliation for our sins; because Christ and only Christ,
Heb. 5. v. 9 10 Heb. 10. v. 12 14 Act 4. v. 12. Joan. 16. v. 23 Romans 5. v 1 2.
Cor. 5. v. ^1.
is the mediator between God and us: Because Christ is our high priest, and
the author of our salvation; because Christ has offered himself a sacrifice
for our sins, and has therewith sanctified us for ever: because Christ and
only Christ is he, in whose name we must be saved: Because Christ is he, in
whose name we shall receive whatsoever we ask: Because Christ is he, through
whose merits we have peace in God: Because Christ is he that suffered for us,
that we might be the righteousness of God in him: Finally, because the spirit
of God enforces the papists themselves, to conclude their public prayers in
this manner; per dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, through the merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The objection.
The fathers of the old testament, did often allege and oppose against Gods
wrath, Genesis 32. v. 9.11. Deuteronomy. 9. v. 27. Psalm. 132. ver. 10.4. Reg. 19. v. 34.
the names and merits of the holy patriarchs. Remember thy servants
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For thy servant David's sake, refuse not the face of
thine anointed. Why may not we therefore stand upon the merits of Christ's
dear mother, and of others his holy saints?

The answer.
I answer, that these and like inuocations very frequent in the scriptures, do
not depend upon the merits of Gods saints, but upon his covenant and promise
made to them and their posterity. Exodus 32. v. 13. Deuteronomy. 26. v. 3.
So says holy Moses; Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob thy servants, to whom
thou swarest by thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your
seed: in which words he opposes not their merits, but Gods oath and promise.
So says Solomon; O Lord God of Israel, thou have kept with thy servant David
my father, 3. Reg 8. ver. 23.^4.
that thou have promised to him: for thou spakest with thy mouth, and have
fulfilled it with thine hand. In which words holy Solomon urges Gods promise,
not the merits of his father David. So says God himself to Isaac; dwell in
this land, and I will be with thee, Genesis 26. v. 3.
and will bless thee; and I will perform the oath, which I swear to Abraham
thy father. Lo, he remembers and respects his own oath, but not Abraham's
merits. No, no, for as I have proved already copiously; the most holy
saints in heaven, are rewarded far above their deserts and merits. It is I
say, not for the merits of the godly, but for Gods holy covenant made with
them, that God deals mercifully with their posterity. For thus is it written
in Gods own book; howbeit the Lord will not destroy the house of David,
because of the covenant that he made with David, ^. P^r. ^1. v. 5^
and because he had promised to give a light to him, and to his sons for ever.

The fourth conclusion.
The honor due to saints in heaven, and which they require, is not religious
invocation or adoration, but holy imitation here on earth. I prove it, because
God will not give his honor to any other. I am the Lord says he, this is my
name, and my glory will I not give to another. Esai^. 42. v. ^.
And that invocation is the peculiar worship and honor due to God, S. Paul
declares evidently in these words, Romans 10. v. 1^*
for whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: but how
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Austen proves this
conclusion effectually in sundry places of his works; Non sit nobis religio
inquit, cultus hominum mortuorum: Infra; honorandi sunt propter imitationem,
non adorandi propter religionem. August. de ver^ religione, cap. 55. tom. 1.
Let not says S. Austen, the worship of dead men be our religion: they are to
be worshipped for imitation, but not to be adored for religion. Again in
another place, Nos autem martyribus nostris non templa sicut Diis sed memorias
sicut hominibus mortuis, quoru^ apud deum viuunt spiritus, fabricamus, August.
de c^uit. lib. 22. cap. 106 tum. 50
nec ibi erigimus altaria, in quibus sacrificemus martyribus, sed vni Deo, and
martyrum and nostro sacrificium immolamus, ad quod sacrificium sicut homines
Dei, qui mundum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine nominantur;
non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat, inuocantur. We build not churches to our
Martirs as to gods, but we make memories as to dead men, whose souls live with
God, neither do we rear up altars there, in which we may offer sacrifice (of
laud) to the martyrs, but we offer sacrifice (of thanksgiving) to one God, the
God of martyrs and ours, at which sacrifice they are named in their place and
order, as the men of God that have overcome the world in their confession,
nevertheless they are not inuocated or prayed unto, by the priest that
offers the sacrifice. Eusebius hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Of honor and reverence due to Saints, Eusebius Caesariensis makes sufficient
relation in these words, Neque Christu^ aliquando possumus derelinquere, qui
mortem pro totius mundi salute sustinuit neque alium quenquam colere, quoniam
verum Deum, and qui solus colendus sit nouerimus, martyrs vero tanquam
discipulos domini d^ligamus and veneremur, quasi integre fidem magistro
servants and domino, quorum nos quoque in fide and perseuerantia charitatis
optamus esse participes. We can neither forsake Christ at any time, who suffered
death for ye salvation of the whole world, neither can we worship any other but
him, because we know him to be the true God, and him that only is to be
worshipped; yet let us love and honor martires, as the disciples of our Lord,
as those that keep their faith undefiled to their master and lord, with whom
also our selves desire to be partakers in faith and perseverance of charity.
What need more? Christ himself says; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
Mat. 4.10. Apoc. 22.8, 9.
and him only shall thou serve. And saint John was forbidden to worship the
angel.

The first objection.
God honors his saints, and reputeth them for his dear friends: Mat. 19.28.
Ioh. 15.14, 15.
Ergo, it is our duty also to honor them.

The answer.
We honor them with that honor which God has appointed: we acknowledge their
faith, their humility, their patience, their constancy, and all their
gracious gifts, and we desire to imitate the same: and this is all the honor
that saint Austen will afford them, as you have heard.

The second objection.
The saints in heaven pray for us, and therefore it is meet that we invoke
and call upon them. For the angel said; O Lord of hosts, ^^char. 1.12.
how long will thou be unmerciful to Jerusalem, and to the cities of Judah,
with whom thou have bin displeased now these threescore and ten years? Baruc.
3.4.
Baruch witnesses that the dead pray for us, when he says; O Lord almighty,
hear now the prayer of the dead Israelites, and of their children, which have
sinned before thee. Judas Machabeus had a vision, 2. Match. 15.12.
in which he saw Onias holding up his hands toward heaven, and praying for the
whole people of the Jews. And saint John saw 24. Elders fall down before the
lamb, Apoc. 5.8.
having every one of them harpes and golden vialles full of odours which are
the prayers of saints.

The answer.
I say first, that although we grant both angels and saints in Apoc. 5.9, 10.
Apoc. 8.4. Iren. libr. 4. ca. 33
For among other thanks to God, one is this, that he has made the elders to
reign on earth. S. Irenaeus agrees hereunto, neither is any ancient approved
writer of the contrary opinion.

The third objection.
Ye bewray your ignorance not knowing the difference between Latria and Dulia,
and so wrest the scriptures against the lawful worshipping of saints; Mat. 4.
verse 10. Apoc. 19.10.
for the worship prohibited in the gospel and in the Revelation, is (...), that
worship which is proper to God alone.

The answer.
I say first, that though Saint Augustine made difference between Latria and
Dulia in ecclesiastical signification; August. de ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 1.
(which was the cause of great superstition afterward in the Romish church)
yet did he ascribe and give all religious worship to God alone, and no other
then civil worship to any creature whatsoever. Which thing I have proved out of
Saint Austen already, and shall more at large hereafter.

Latria is always or almost always taken in the scripture for divine worship;
Ludou. in com. de ciuit.
yet does Lodouicus Viues a learned papist oppose himself against saint
Austen therein, alleging sundry texts of the old testament for his probation.
Yet the same Viues adds, that he is content with the distinctio^s invented by
the popish school men, so they will likewise allow him and others to use
words in their proper and native significations. (...) vbi sup.
But here I can not omit the taunt which he by the way gives to his
scholasticall masters: these are his words; Obiter tamen admonebo eos duliam
and latriam penultimam habere longam, ne breuem faciant, sed has leges ipsi
conte^nere se dicunt, quia nesciunt. Yet must I (says he) admonish them by the
way, that Latria and Dulia have the last syllable save one long, lest they make
it short. But they say they care not for these rules, because they know not
what they mean. Which check doubtless were a bloody Valla, Suidas, and
Zenophon, all three very skillful in the greek tongue, affirm Latria and
Dulia to have one and the self same signification, and that Latria is taken
for that common service which one creature does to another. Thus writes
Zenophon; (...) Lud. Viu. ^bi sup.
(...), But I (O Cyrus) would redeem even with my life, that she should not
serve. Suidas also affirms, (...): that Latria is service for hire. I say
fourthly, that if this distinction Matthew. 4.10.
it might also have served the devil against Christ, and so Christ's reason had
bin of no force: for the devil might have said to Christ; albeit it be true as
thou say, that Latria is only to be given to God; yet may thou give me
Dulia, Apoc. 19.10.
was not Latria, but (...), for these are the words of the angel; (...), adore
thou God: as if he had said; religious worship can be given to none, but to the
everliving God alone. I say sixthly, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
I say seauenthly, that as Latria is given to creatures; so is Dulia applied to
God, and that is very frequent, not only Luke. 16. verse. 1^ Romans 16. verse. 8.
where the greek word is, (...). S. Paul writing to the Romans says, for they
that are such serve not ye Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. In which
place, the Greek word is, (...), and the same apostle writing to the
Thessalonians says; how they turned to God from idols, to serve the living
and true God; 1. These. 1. verse. ^
in which place the greek is thus, (...): and Paul, though in many places he
call himself the servant of God, yet uses he ever the greek word (...). Now
then, since Latria and Dulia be in greek as ensis and gladius in latin, and
since as well ye one as the other, is applied indifferently to God and his
creatures, the gentle reader may clearly behold, how vain and ridiculous is
popish dealing in this behalf.

The first reply
Ye protestants abuse the angels prohibition, when he had S. John to adore
God: for the angel never meant to deny religious worship to be due to angels;
but to signify that Saint John did mistake him, and that he was not God; and
consequently, that he was not worthy of that divine honor, which John
thinking him to be God, did then give unto him.

The answer.
I say first, that if any religious worship had bin due to any 17 chap.
Secondly, he willed S. John immediately before to write thus; Apoc. 17. v. 1
Blessed are they that are called to the supper of the Lamb: who^ S. John knew
right well to be Christ by the vision which himself reported in the fifth chap.
Thirdly, this was not him that said in the 1. chapter, Apoc. 5.
I am alpha and omega; for it was Christ himself, Apoc. 1. verse. ^.
that then appeared to S. John. I say thirdly, that this angel professed
himself in express terms, not to be God, but the messenger of God; for he
said unto S. John, these words of God are true, and not these words of mine are
true, and yet S. John forthwith adored him, and the angel forthwith controled
him for the same.

The second reply.
S. John being an holy and worthy apostle, endued largely with the spirit of
god, could not be ignorant what worship was unlawful and to be reprehended, and
so he erred materially in knowledge of the person, not formally in the kind of
adoration.

The answer.
I answer, that if any religious worship could have bin given to any creature,
the angel should have induced S. John into an error, bidding him worship God,
and yielding the reason why he should not worship him; to wit, because he was
a servant, not the Lord; a creature, not God: as if he had taught, that all
religious worship ought to be given to God alone. S. John therefore stricken
into an ecstasy of mind through the majesty of the angel that told these
things, fell suddenly down before his feet to adore him, ^poc. 19. verse. 10
which yet he did not of ignorance for the resons aleaged, ^poc. 22. ver. 8.9.
but of forgetfulness, as the iteration of the worship declared. For though he
was forbidden before to adore any beside god, yet did he ye second time adore
the angel, forgetting himself suddenly, and what the angel had said unto him.
Austen makes so plain a recital of this adoration, ^ugust. de vera ^^ligione
cap. vit. ^^m. 1.
as more needs not to a reasonable mind. These are his words; Quare honoramus
eos charitate, non seruitute, nec eis te^pla construimus, nolu^^ enim se sic
honorari a nobis, quia nosipsos cum boni sumus, templa summi Dei esse nouerunt:
recte itaque scribitur hominem ab angelo prohibitum ne se adoraret, sed vnum
Deum, sub quo ei esset and ille co^seruus; qui autem nos inuitant vt sibi
seruiamus, and tanquam deos colamus, similes sunt superbis hominibus* quibus si
liceat, similiter coli volunt Sed istos homines perpeti minus, illos vero
colere magis periculosu^ est. Infra, religet ergo nos religio vni omnipotenti
Deo, quia inter mentem nostra^ qua illu^ intelligimus patrem, and veritatem, id
est, lucem in^eriorem, per quam illum intelligimus nulla interposita creatura
est. We honor angels with charity, not with service, neither do we build
temples unto them; for they will not be so honored of us, because they know
that we our selves, when we are good, are the temples of the higest God:
rightly therefore is it written, that a man was forbidden by the angel, that
he should not worship him, but one God only, under whom he was a fellow
servant with him. But they that inuit us to serve them, and to worship them as
gods, are like to proud men, who if they might, would be likewise worshipped:
but to suffer these me^ is less perilous, and to worship the angel is more
dangerous. Let religion therefore bind us to one God almighty, because
between our mind by which we understand him to be the father and the truth,
that is, the inward light, through which we understand him, no creature is
interposed.

The reply.
The angel prophesied, that the Jews should fall down before the bishop of
Philadelphia, and adore him. Apoc. 3.9. Heb. 11.21. Genesis 18.2. Number. 22.31.
Iosue. 5.14. Dan. 2.46.
Jacob adored the top of his rod. Abraham adored the angels that appeared to
him: Balaam adored the angel that stood before him with a drawn sword: Iosue
adored the angel falling flat down before his feet, and calling him Lord, and
the angel refused not that worship, but required yet more of him:
Nabuchodonosor adored Daniel, and did great offices of religion, which the
prophet r^sed not. Achior the Ammonite fell at Iudeths feet, Judith. 14.7.
and reverenced her: the Sunamite whose child Elizeus raised to life, fell down
before his feet and adored him, and he reproved her not: 4. Reg. 4.37.
the prophets at Jericho, 4 Reg. 2. verse. 1
perceiving the double grace of Elias to be in Elizeus, fell down before him and
adored him, which he rejected not.

The answer.
I answer to al these in general, that for the greater part they speak of
civil worship, which I grant may be done to angels, prophets, magistrates and
holy men. To ye several obiectio^s, thus in particular. I say first, that ye
Jews gave such civil reverence Apoc. 3. verse. ^*
but yielded no religious worship unto him. I say secondly, that your popish
vulgar latin translation, is false and idolatricall, albeit your late disholy
Heb. 11. verse. 2
which if Jacob had done indeed, as your guilefull edition says, he should have
committed flat idolatry, because as I have proved out of your own Pope
Gregory, Gregor epist. lib. 9. cap. 9.
it is not lawful to worship images, much less a naked piece of wood
religiously. But the text indeed is thus, as your own dear doctor Arias
Montanus grants; (...). He adored on the top of his rod or staff: which is
nothing else, but staying himself upon his staff adored God. So does Saint
Augustine expound it, ^^gust. q. 162. ^p. genes. tom. 4.
whose express words are these; Nam facile intelligeretur senem, qui virgam
fereba^ eo more quo illa aetas baculum solet, vt se inclinauit ad Deum
adorandum, id vtique fecerit super cacumen virgae suae, quam sic ferebat, vt
super eam caput inclinando adoraret Deum. For we might easi^y understand that
the old man, ^opish paltrie ^doration is fond (...) imagined.
who carried a rod in such manner as that age used to bear a staff, as he
bowed himself to worship God, he did it on the end of his staff, which he
carrie^ so, as he might adore God by bowing his head upon it. In which words S.
Austen shows plainly, that Jacob when he worshipped god, leaned on his
staff by reason of his age and weakness. Behold here gentle reader, how our
late papists do wrest the holy scriptures, to build thereupon their
superstitious and idololatricall adoration of stocks and stones. I say thirdly,
that it ^ofue. 5. verse. 14. ^ap. 6. verse. 2.
I say fourthly, that albeit the worship which Nabuchadonosor yielded ^an. 2.46.
because he joined Gods honor with the Prophets. And if Daniel did not admonish
him of his fault, (as it is very probable he did) he sinned grievously. That
which Abraham, Achior, the Sunamite, and the rest did, was mere civil
adoration.

The reply.
^sal. 89. verse. 5.
It is lawful to adore holy things, as the temple, the arc, the bread of
proposition, and the like: for the Psalmograph says, adore ye his footestoole,
because it is holy.

The answer.
enforce us to do. Neither do I barely say this of mine own head, but with the
uniform consent of the holy fathers. Thus writes S. Epiphanius, Sed neque
Helias adorandus est, Epiphan. haer. 79. cont. Collyti.
etiamsi in viuis sit, neque Ioannes adorandus, quanquam per proprias preces
suas dormitionem suam admirandam effecerit, imo potius ex deo gratiam
acceperit: sed neque Thecla, neque quisqua^ sanctus adoratur. Non enim
dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, and adoremus ^a quae
ab ipso facta sunt. Infra, sit in honor Maria^pater, and filius, and spiritus
sanctus adoretur. Mariam nemo adoret, non dico mulierem, imo neque virum. Deo
debetur hoc mysterium, neque angeli capiunt tale^ glorificationem: deleantur
quae male scripta sunt in cord deceptoru^: tollatur ex oculis cupiditasligni:
conuertatur rursus figmentum ad dominum: reuereatur Eua cum Adam, vt deum colat
solum, ne ducatur serpentis voce, sed permaneat in dei praecepto; ne comedes de
ligno: and erat lignum non error, sed per ipsum lignum facta est inobedientia
erroris: ne comedat quis de errore, qui est propter S. Mariam: nam etsi
pulchrum est lignum, sed tamen non ad cibu^: and si pulcherrima est Maria, and
sancta, and honorata, at no^ ad adorationem. Neither is Elias to be adored,
though he be among the living: neither S. John must be adored, though by his
prayers his death was wonderful; ^opish adoration confuted and confounded.
yea he rather received grace from God: but neither Thecla, neither any saint
is to be adored. For the old error may not ouerrule us, that we forsake the
living god and adore the works of his hands. Let Mary be in honor; let the
father, and the son, and the holy ghost be adored; let no man adore Marie, I do
not say the woman, but neither the man. This mystery is due to god, neither are
the angels capable of such glory: let such errors be blotted out, as are
wickedly engraven in the hearts of deceived souls; let the concupiscence of the
wood be taken out of our sight; let the work return again to the workman; let
Eve have reverence with Adam; let her worship only God; let her not be seduced
with the voice of the serpent, but let her abide in Gods commandment; thou
shall not eat of the wood: and it was wood indeed, not error, but by the
wood came disobedience of error: let none eat of that error, which is for
holy Mary. For though the wood be fair, yet is it not for meat: although
Marie be most beautiful and holy, and honored, yet not for adoration. Out of
these golden words I note first, Anno. Dom. 370.
that in the time of S. Epiphanius, (who lived more then 370. years after
Christ,) it was reputed great superstition and flat paganism to adore any
Saint or angel in Epiphanius. I note fourthly, that by the judgment of this
holy, learned, and ancient

S. Ambrose is consonant to Epiphanius, as who has these express words;
Ambr. in cap. 1. ad Romans prope finem tom. 5.
Age, numquid tam demens est aliquis, aut salutis suae immemor, vt
honorificentiam regis vindicet comiti, cum de hac re si qui etiam tractare
fuerint inuenti, iure vt rei damnentur maiestatis? and isti se non putant reos,
qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt creaturae, and relicto domino conseruos
adorant, quasi sit aliquid plus quod reseruetur Deo. Go to, is any man so mad,
or so careless of his life, that he will give to a Lord, the honor of the
king or sovereign? when such as are known to deal in such a matter, are
justly condemned of treason? and yet these men do not think themselves
guilty, who give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and leaving God adore
their felow-seruants, as though there were any thing else reserved for God. Out
of these words I note first, that S. Ambrose, Augustine agrees iumpe with S.
Epiphanius and S. Ambrose, August. de vera religione. cap. 55. ^om. 1.
and utters his mind plainly in these words; Non sit nobis religio cultus
hominum mortuorum; quia si pie vixerunt, non sic habentur vt tales quaerant
honores, sed illum a nobis coli volunt, quo illuminante laetantur meriti sui
nos esse consortes. Let not the worship of dead men be our religion: for if
they lived well, they are not of that account that they seek such honor, but
they would have us to worship him, by whose inlightning they rejoice that we be
their fellow-seruants in well doing. Hest. 3.5. cap. 13.15.
The good Jew Mardocheus would not adore Haman the kings lieutenant, and that
not of pride, malice, or presumption; but lest he should give that to man which
was due to God alone. I say secondly, that there is

I say thirdly, that the place truly translated is thus; Psalm. 99. verse. 5.
he is holy: so that the sense is not to adore the temple, (which is meant by
the word Footestoole) but to adore and worship God in his temple at
Jerusalem, the place which God had appointed for his worship: and therefore it
is not said, It is holy, but, He is holy. Yea, so is it also in the greek,
(...), because he is holy. I say fourthly, that Saint Augustine and Hierome do
expound this text of Christ's sacred humanity, which is as the footestoole of
his divinity. These are Saint Hieromes express words* August. and Hier. in
hunc locum.
Multae sunt de scabello opiniones, sed hic propheta corpus dominicum dicit, in
quo maiestas diuinitatis tanquam super scabellum stat. There are many opinions
of the footestoole, but the prophet here understands Christ's body or
humanity, in which his divinity stands as upon a stool. Yea, S. Austen was
so far from the opinion of our late Papists and Jesuits, that he was troubled
how to understand this text; and that for this respect only, because it
seemed to command him to adore some creature, which he durst not do: these are
his own words; August. vbi supr. in Psalm. 98.
Terra scabellum pedum meorum; anceps factus sum, timeo adorareterram, ne
damnet me qui fecit coelum and terram^rursum timeo non adorare scabellum pedum
Domini mei, quia Psalmus mihi dicit, adorate scabellum pedum eius. The earth is
my footestoole. I am doubtful what to do, I fear to adore the earth, least
he condemn me that made both heaven and earth. On the other side, I fear not
to adore his footestoole, Esai* cap. 66. v. 1
because the Psalm says, adore ye his footstool. Lo, S. Austen found in
the prophet Esaias, that the earth was Gods footstool, and he knew well that it
was not lawful to adore creatures, and consequently neither the earth, (least
he should be damned in so doing, as himself here says;) and therefore was he
sore troubled, what to understand by the word (footstool) in the Psalm. But
if he had been a Romish Jesuit, he would never have stumbled at any such
thing. Whether therefore we interpret the word (footestoole) by the literal
Hebrew phrase, or with S. Austen and S. Hierome; it will not follow thereupon,
that any pure creature may be adored. I say (any pure creature) because
Christ's body or humanity is a creature, but not a pure creature. For the
unspeakable hypostaticall union, makes it to subsist in the person of God; by
which Christ is as well God as man.

The fifth conclusion.
The invocation this day common in the Romish Church, is the self same which
the Gentiles in old time did use, The Romish manner of invocation
when they did invoke their false Gods. I prove it, because they have
peculiar saints for their several necessities; to wit, S. Loy, for their
horses. S. Anthony for their pigges, S. Roch for the pestilence, S. Stephen
for the night, S. John for the day, S. Nicholas for their studies, S. George
for their wars, S. Cosma and Damiais for their sores, S. Apolonia for their
teeth, S. Agnes for their virginity, and others innumerable for the like end.
They erect churches to their saints, they frame images to them, they carry
their images about in procession, they consecrate altars to them, they dedicate
holy days to them, they make vows in their honor, The multitude of Romish
patrons.
they offer presents to their altars and images, they bestow more yt way in
one hour, then on poor folks in a whole year; they place lamps, tapers,
torches, and lights before their images, and think them the most happy, that
so bestow the most. They kneel down before their images, they touch them,
they embrace them, they kiss them, they speak unto them, they entreat them
as if they were yet living. Yea, they seem to pass the folly and impiety of
the Gentiles: They ascribe their salvation to their saints, and to such
saints, as of whose sainthood we may well stand in doubt. They invoke
Campion, Sherwin, Ballard, Heart, Nelson, and the rest of that seditious
faction. Alphonsus the Jesuit, and late rector of the English College in
Rome, caused the organes to be sounded, and all the Students to come to the
Chapel, and himself having on his back the white Surplesse and the stole
about his neck; sang a collect of martyrs; so after his manner, canonising a
rebellious subject for a saint. Such is the seditious impudency, of newly
hatched Romish Jesuits. And least any other Jesuit or papist shall deny,
that they ascribe their salvation to saints (for they use to say, The saints
are made mediators of redemption and salvation.
that they make them but mediators of intercession, and not of salvation and
redemption,) I will prove it flatly out of their own books, and church
service, which I wish the reader to mark attentively.

In the prayer which the church of Rome reads publicly, upon Thomas Beckets
day, sometime the Bishop of Canturburie, I find these words; Deus, pro cuius
ecclesia gloriosus po^tifex Thomas gladiis impiorum occubuit, praesia
quaesumus, In Romans breni^^. in festo Tho. B^cket.
vt omnes qui eius implorant auxilium, petitionis suae salutarem consequantur
effectum. O God, for whose church the glorious bishop Thomas was put to death,
by the swords of the wicked; grant we beseech thee, that all which desire
his help, may attain the effect of their petition to salvation. Out of these
words, I note first, that Thomas Becket is pronounced a glorious martyr,
albeit the disobedience of his lawful prince,

I note secondly, that the Romish church seeks for salvation,

I note thirdly, that the papists make him a Savior, yea such a Savior as is
equal with Christ; and consequently, that yet does the Romish church teach,
(as ye see) that Thomas Becket shed his blood for the church of God. Since
therefore the proper and only badge of Christ's mediatorship, is given to
Thomas Becket; what remains for him to be, if not another Christ? And least
we should not fully understand how our redemption is wrought in the blood of
Thomas, they deliver this mystery more clearly in another place, in these
words; Tuper Tho. sanguine^ que^ pro te impendit* In hymno Tho. Cant.
fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit. Thou O Christ cause us to come
thither where Thomas is, even by the blood which he shed for thy sake. Lo
Thomas Becket died for us, and shed his blood to bring us to heaven, as the
papists teach us; therefore by their doctrine he is our redeemer, and
mediator, not only of intercession, but also of redemption.

In their prayer books, delivered to the vulgar people (which God wot they
understood not, Oration ad angel. prop^ium.
) they teach the people thus to invoke their proper Angels; Angele Dei
quicustos es mei pietate superna, me tibi commissum salua, defend, guberna. O
Angel of God, who art my keeper by supernall piety, defend me, govern me,
and save my soul.

Oration ad S. Paul* doct. gent.
To S. Paul they teach us to pray in this manner, O beat Paul apostole, te
deprecor vt ab angelo Sathanae me eripias, and a ventura ira liberes, and in
coelum introducas. O blessed Apostle Paul, I pray thee that thou will take me
from the angel of Satan, and deliver me from wrath to come, and bring me into
heaven.

Oration ad S. I^c.
To Saint James in this manner; O foelix Apostole magne martyr Iacobe, te
colentes adiuua, peregrinos vndique tuos clemens protege, ducens ad coelestia.
O happy Apostle and mighty martyr James, help thy worshippers, defend
courteously thy pilgrims on every side, and bring them to heavenly joys.

In translat. S. Mart.
To Saint Martin thus; Caecis das viam, mutisque loquelam; tu nos adiuua,
mundans immunda; qui fugas daem^nia, nos hic libera. O Martin, thou causest the
blind to see, and the dumb to speak; Help us and purge the unclean; thou
that castest out devils, deliver us here. But for breuitis sake, I will
wittingly and willingly superseade many particular prayers made to meaner
saints, and come to the blessed Virgin.

The Papists teach us to invoke the holy virgin Mary thus; O Maria
gloriosa, in delitiis delitiosa, In antiph. B. Virg.
praepara nobis gloriam. O Mary glorious, in dainties delicious, prepare thou
glory for us.

Again in another place thus; In natiu B. Virg.
Maria matter Domini aeterni patris filij, fer opem nobis omnibus ad
teconfugientibus. O Mary, the mother of our Lord the son of the eternal God,
help us all that fly for help unto thee.

Again, in another place thus; Maria matter gratiae, In concept. B. Virg.
matter misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. O Mary
the mother of grace, the mother of mercy, defend thou us from our (ghostly)
enemy, and receive us at the hour of death.

Again, in another place thus; Solue vincla reis, In annuntiar, B. Virg.
profer lumen caecis, mala nostra pelle, bona cunctae posce. Monstra te esse
matrem, sumat per te preces qui pro nobis natus tulit esse tuus. Loose the
bands of the guilty, bring light to the blind, drive away our evils, require
all good things for us: show thy self to be a mother, let him receive thy
prayers that was borne for us and suffered to be thine.

Again in another place thus; Veni regina gentium, In visitat. B. Virg.
dele flammas reatuum, dele quod cunque deuium, da vitam innocentium. Come O
Queen of the Gentiles, extinguishe the fiery heat of our sins, blot out
whatsoever is amiss, and cause us to lead an innocent life.

Again, in their old Latin primers, Deuotissim^ oration ad B. Vir Mariam.
fol. 118.
the people are thus taught to pray; In extremis diebus meis esto mihi
auxiliatrix and saluatrix, and animam meam, and animam patris mei, and matris
meae, fratrum, sororum, parentum, amicorum, benefactorum meorum, and omnium
fidelium defunctorum ac viuorum ab aeterna mortis caligine libera; ipso
auxiliante quem portasti Domino nostro Jesus Christo filio tuo. O glorious
Virgin Mary, be thou my helper and Savior in my last days, and deliver from
the mist of eternal death, both mine own soul and my fathers soul, and the
souls of my mother, brethren, sisters, parents, friends, benefactors, and of
all the faithful living and dead; by his help whom thou did bear, our Lord
Jesus Christ thy son.

Again, after two or three leaves in this manner; Vt in tuo sancto tremendo ac
terribili iudicio in conspectu, vnigeniti filii tui, Ibid. fol. 111.
cui pater dedit omne iudicium, me liberes and protegas a paenis inferni, and
participem me facias coelestium gaudiorum. I beseech thee most merciful and
chaste virgin Mary, that in thine holy, fearful, and terrible judgment in
the sight of thine only son, thou will deliver and defend me from the pains
of hell, and make me partaker of heavenly joys.

These prayers if they be well marked, will prove my conclusion effectually;
as which contain every jot, of power, right, majesty, glory, and
sovereignty whatsoever, is, or ought to be yielded unto our Lord Jesus Christ.
Yea, these two last prayers make the virgin Mary, not only equal with
Christ, ipso auxiliante, etc. By the help of our Lord Jesus Christ.) For by
these words and the rest before going, the virgin Mary does save us, and
Christ is but the instrument that helps her, in the work of our salvation:
which how intolerable blasphemy it is, let the reader judge; I have said.

The sixth conclusion.
To invoke Saints as the papists do, and to believe that they hear their
prayers, is to make a plurality of Gods. I say (as the papists do) because
to invoke saints at certain times, in certain places, and for certain
respects, does not make them gods. I prove this conclusion, because to hear
all prayers at all times in all places, for all things; is a thing so proper to
God, as it can not possibly agree to any, Note well what is here said*
but to God alone. For his knowledge is infinite, and so not communicable to
any creature; mark well gentle reader, what I say; for this reason is such, as
few seem to have conceived ye same. But certs, no learned papist can indeed
deny it to be true. For which cause their great learned D. Aquinas tells us
two truths, the one, Aqu. p. 1. q. 45. ^. 5.
that God can not communicate the power of creation, to any creature living,
either on earth or in heaven: and he proves it out of Saint Augustine, who
says that neither the good nor the bad angels can be the creators of any
thing. And why so? because that kind of work requires power infinite, whereof
no creature is or can be capable. The other, Aq. p. 1. q. 7. (...)
that none but God is or can be infinite; and his reason is evident, because to
be infinite, is against the nature of that which is made.

The first objection.
The Saints in heaven may hear and understand our prayers on earth, and yet
have limited and not infinite knowledge, ergo the proof of your conclusion is
not good.

The answer.
I say first, that God has revealed to his servants on earth, 3. Reg. 14.5.
For he revealed to Ahias that Ieroboams wife would come disguised to him, and
told him what he should say unto her. He revealed to Elizeus all the secret
dealing of Giezi, which he had with Naaman the Syrian: 4. Reg. 5.26.
he disclosed to Peter the falshoode of Ananias and Saphyra his wife: and so
may he at his holy pleasure reveal to his saints in heaven, Act. 5.3, 9.
the prayers that on earth are made in some places at sometimes unto them.
Every thing is proportionable, no contradiction is implied therein.

I say secondly, that there be sundry things which God cannot

I say thirdly, that Gods apostles and prophets knew but some special things,
which seemed good in Gods wisdom to be so revealed. Neither did they know
such things by any inherent quality, but by signification from above, and that
only at such time, as the necessity of the church did require. Which I prove
by these words of Elyzeus to Gihezi, Reg. 4.27.
Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it
from me, and has not told it me: as if the prophet had said, God reuealeth not
al things, to his dear and faithful servants at all times: but some things at
some times, as seems best in his

The first reply.
As the saints cannot have infinite knowledge, because it is not communicable
to any creature; so neither can any living of limited power, make any infinite
request unto them.

The answer.
in potentia, and yet must every saint severally for himself, have the distinct
notice of al them that pray, and of all things that are prayed for: for
otherwise, many shall pray at many times, and not be heard, which is the thing
that I contend to prove. For example, al papists in all countries pray to the
virgin Mary at al times for all things, and so her knowledge must extend to al
persons al places, and al desires at al times, and so be infinite; or certes
she must be sometime deceived, not knowing Act. 1.24.
Therefore is it said in the Acts, thou Lord, which know the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two thou have chosen. Act. 15.8.
God says S. Peter which knows the hearts, bear them witness. Solomon says,
thou only know the hearts of the children of men. ^. Par. 6. ver. 30. Rom*
8.27.
He (says S. Paul) that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of
the spirit. Thou O Lord of hosts (says Jeremy) iudgest righteously, Ier. 21.^0.
and triest the reins and the heart. And yet must the saints know our hearts
and thoughts, if they hear and know our prayers: for doubtless the sound of
our words, can not reach up to heaven.

The second reply.
Both Angels and saints are present here on earth and know our affairs, and
therefore it is a vain cavil, to say that the sound of our words cannot be
heard to heaven.

The answer.
I say first, that neither angels nor saints can be in many places at once, but
are definitiuely in one only place at one time. Aquinas, Aqu. p. 1. q. 52. ar.
2. Corp.
does witness with me in these words; Nam corpus est in loco circumscriptiue,
quia commensuratur loco: angelus autem non circumscriptiue, cum non
commensuretur loco, sed definitive, quia ita est in vno loco* quod no^ alio
Deus autem neque circumscriptiue, neque definitive, quia est vbique: for a body
is in a place circumscriptiuely, because it is measured with the place; but an
angel is not in place by circumscription, for that he is not measured with the
place, but definitiuely, because he is so in one place, that he is not in
another: yet god is neither circumscriptiuely nor definitiuely in place,
because he is every where. Damasc. l. 2. cap. ^
And Damascenus agrees with Aquinas, affirming that angels while they are in
heaven, are not on earth. I say secondly, that the angels (as S. Hebr. 1.14.
And the angels (as Moses says) went up and down by Jacobs ladder, which
reached from earth to heaven; Genesis 28.12.
and that the angels (as Daniel writes) are defe^ders of ye church under
Christ; Da. 10.13, 20, 2^
and for that purpose are sent unto us. But nevertheless, they are but in one
only place at once; and while they see what is done in one place, they are
ignorant what befalls to another; for they pass to and fro, from affairs to
affairs, from place to place, from person to person, from heaven to earth, and
from earth to heaven again, according to their appointed service; so that no
one angel does or can know, the hundredth part of our petitions, much less the
saints in heaven, who have no such appointed ministry.

The third reply.
Luc. 2^.36.
The saints are equal to the angels; and are the sons of god, since they are
the children of the resurrection: therefore they are present and see our
affairs, even as do the angels.

The answer.
I answer, that the time by Christ named is after ye resurrection; neither is
the equality he speaks of, general, but particular; to wit, in that ye saints
shall have no more need or use of marriage, then ye angels. But that the saints
shall be sent as the angels, for ye service of the church and the ministry of
the faithful, it is nether recorded here, nor in any other place of ye
scripture. For Christ here only answered to the captious Saduces, who denying
the resurrection asked whose wife she should be in ye resurrection, that had
bin married to 7. brethren, al dying without issue.

The 4. reply.
Luc. 15.10.
The angels in heaven rejoice, when sinners repent here on earth; which they
could never do, if they did not understand our affairs, our prayers and our
penitent hearts.

The answer.
Esai. 63.16.
and Jacob knew them not. I say secondly,

The fifth reply.
To do miracles is as proper to God, as to know the secrets of our hearts,
therefore since God has communicated the one to his servants, so may he
without contradiction do the other.

The answer.
I say first, that God himself did ever work the miracles, de facto revealed
the secrets of men's hearts, even to his holy prophets, yet he never did that
generally, but in measure, at certain times to special persons, for the good
of his church.

The sixth reply.
Although God cannot give any inherent qualities to the saints in heaven, by
which they may know all the desires and prayers of the living here on earth,
because no creature is capable thereof; yet may God from time to time, reveal
all such prayers to his Saints.

The answer.
I say first, that it is not impossible for God so to do, though God should be
so driven without need to work innumerable

The 7. reply.
Ye cannot deny but that the living may pray one for another, and also desire
one an others prayer; Romans 15. Colos. 4. Iac. 5. 1. Tim. 2. Job. 42. Genesis 20.
verse. 7.
therefore since the faithful departed love us as much as before, and are as
mindful of us as before, and are as dear in Gods sight as before; we do no
more injury or dishonor to God in praying now to them, then when they were
living here among us.

The answer.
I say first, that we have commandment, promise, and examples to pray one for
another while we are yet living on earth, but we have no such thing in the holy
scriptures, neither in the old nor in the new testament, concerning the
invocation of saints departed. I say secondly, that if the saints departed
could hear Passio D.N.I. Christi, merita B.V. Mariae, and omnium sanctorum and
quicquid bonifeceris vel mali sustinueris, Polanchus de modo and. confess.
sit tibi in remissionem peccatoru^ tuorum in augmentum gratiae, and praemium
vitae aeternae. The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the blessed
virgin Mary, and of al saints, and all the good thou shall do and punishment
thou shall suffer, be to thee for the remission of thy sins, for increase of
grace, and for the reward of eternal life. I say fourthly, that to invoke
saints departed, believing Esa. 42.8.
and will not give his glory to another.

The second objection.
The soul of the rich man in hell, knew where Abraham was, as also the state of
Lazarus, Luc. 16.25.
and of his brethren then living: therefore much more do the saints in heaven,
know our state on earth.

The answer.
Irenaeus records) Christ meant nothing else, but to declare the cogitations,
torments, and state of the wicked after this life. Iren. lib. 4. cap. ^ Just.
q. 60. ad orthodox.
Justinius is of the same opinion, and hereupon flatly denies purgatory* I say
secondly, that if this were granted to be a true history, and Austen gravely
writes, though the dead know not what is done here on earth, while we do
it; yet may they afterward know what is done, either by the dead that go from
hence, August. de cura pro mort. cap. 14 15. tom. 4.
or by the angels that are present when the things are done: and this knowledge
had Abraham by the relation of the dead, and no otherwise, as witnesses the
same S. Austen in the same book.

The third objection.
S. Austen, Ambrose, Gregory, Cyprian, and the ancient fathers generally, used
to invoke and to pray unto the saints, and therefore it is neither any new
thing, nor any unlawful act.

The answer.
Better answer cannot be given to the fathers then that which is truly
gathered out of the works of the same fathers. I therefore say first with
Cyprian, that we must hear and attend what Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 3. Epist. 63.
apud Pa.
but what Christ who was before al, would have to be done: for we must not follow
the custom of man, but the truth of god, so says holy Cyprian. To which I may
add with S. Jerome, Hier. in 9. c^. Ier. Aug. de unit. eccles. cap. 3.
that ye multitude of them that err, bring no patronage to the error it self:
and with Augustine, that neither what I say, nor what thou say, Tertull.
adu. pra^. in initio.
but what Christ says, ought to be regarded: and with Tertullian that that is
true, whatsoever was first; and that cou^terfeit, whatsoever came after. I say
secondly, that though the papists glory greatly of

The first Canon.
The visible Church (as writes Egesippus) remained a virgin, free from all
heresies, and corruptions, Egesippus apud Eusebius. hist. lib. 3 cap. 32.
during the life of the Apostles, that is, about one hundred years after
Christ, to which time S. John the evangelist was living. But after the death of
the apostles, errors by little and little crept into the church, as into a void
and desert house. Which assertion is doleful enough, but yet profitable against
the papists; as who are not ashamed impudently to avouch that after so many
hundred years from Christ's ascension, there has been no error at all in their
whorish Babylon. And a great cause of these errors is this, for that many
without due examination, received the doctrine of him that went before them. So
writes Eusebius, that Papias a man of no sound judgment, ^usebius hist. lib.
3. cap. vlt.
was the Author of the Chiliastes; as who first grossly invented, that there
should be 1000. years after the resurrection. To which error though most
palpable, Irenaeus and others, otherwise well learned, gave place, only for
antiquity sake. This imitation without time or reason, was, is and will be,
the cause of many errors, which sundry of the learned papists, have profoundly
considered. For this cause did Canus oppose himself against all the Thomists
and Scotists, Can. de locis lib. ^. c. 5.
the old and latter papists: for this cause did Caietanus Caieta. in Genesis 5. ^
br. Mos.
for this cause said their learned Victoria, that he reputed nothing certain,
albeit al writers agreed thereunto, Victor. de Sacramen.
unless he could find it in the holy scriptures: for this cause their sound
canonist Navarre, did roundly reject the common opinion, Nau. in enchir.
when it seemed not grounded upon right reason: for this cause gravely said
Saint Austen, that he reputed no man's writings free from errors, but only the
writers of the holy scriptures: August. epist. ad Hier. 19.
for this cause said their own Roffensis, that it is lawful to appeal from
Austen, Cyprian, Roffen. Ac. 32. aduers. Luth August. cont. Crensc* lib. 2.
cap. 32.
Hierome, and all the rest; because they are men, and do not want their
imperfections. I (says S. Austen) do not repute S. Cyprians writings as
canonical, but judge them by the canonical; and whatsoever does not agree with
the scriptures, that by his leave do I refuse.

The second Canon.
Many of the ancient fathers have not only many ways erred, but withal
committed to the view of the world in printed books, that which this day is
reputed and generally confessed of al, as well papists as good christians, to be
a notorious heresy. The heresy is this, to wit, Just. q. 60. Iren. lib. 5*
cap. vlt. Orig. hom. in Le^uit. Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. hom. 39. etc.
that the souls of the faithful departed out of this life, do not see God
clearly till the day of doom. This opinion held Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus,
Origenes, Chrysostom. Theodoritus, Hilarious, Ambrosius, Augustinus, Lactantius:
yea, these latter writers were of the selfsame resolution, Theophilactus,
Oecumenius, Euthymius, Arethas, The margent can^not contain the quotations of
al^
and others. And to the great comfort of our Jesuits and other papists, their
own sweet S. Barnard sings the same song, these are his words; Bernard. in
sermon. 3. de omnibus sanctis
Aduertistis ni fallor tres esse sanctarum status animarum, primum videlicet in
corpore corruptibili, secundum sine corpore, tertium in beatitudine consummata;
primu^ in tabernaculis, secundu^ inatriis tertium in domo dei. Infra* in illam
beatissimam domum, nec sine nobis intrabunt, nec sine corporibus; id est, nec
sancti fine plebe, nec spiritus sine carne; Ye understand I ween, that there
be three states of holy souls; to wit, the first in the corruptible body; the
second, without the body; the third, in perfect bliss: the first in
tabernacles, the second in courts, the third in the house of God. Into that
most blessed house, they shall neither enter without us, nor yet without their
bodies: that is, neither the saints without the common multitude, nor the
souls without the flesh. Sermon. 4. vbi sup^
Again in another place the same Bernard has these words Interim sub Christi
humanitate foeliciter sancti quiescunt, in quam nimirum desiderant etiam sancti
angeli prospicere, donec veniat tempus quando, iam non sub altar collocentur,
sed exaltentur super altar. In the mean season, the saints rest happily under
Christ's humanity, which doubtless the holy angels desire to behold, until the
time come, The old fathers show themselves to be men (...) not Gods.
when they shall be no longer hid under the altar, but exalted above the altar.
So then, not only the ancient fathers, but holy and devout Bernard with others
of late years, were and continued in this gross error, to wit, that ye souls
of the faithful dying in the Lord, shall not be admitted to the vision and
fruition of God, to the sight of his divine essence, clearly to behold his
deity, until the general resurrection of our bodies. Further the^ this (which
is a scourge to the papists,) Pope John the 22. of that name, professed this
heretical doctrine, The heresy of Pope John.
and commanded all the divines in Paris, to teach the same. His words with all
the due circumstances thereof, are cited at large in my book of Motives These
two Canons well marked, will serve for many good purposes; and especially at
this time, to prove that the opinion of the fathers, are of no more force for
the invocation of saints, the^ for these other important matters already in
these Canons named. For as we ouerrule them in these points by Gods sacred
word; so must we still ouerrule them by the same word; if at any time they
swerve from it, either for the invocation of saints, Every truth must be tried
by the scripture.
or for praying for the dead, or for marriage of priests, or for whatsoever
else. And so to ouerrule them, is consonant to their own doctrine, as is
already proved.

The third Canon.
The primitive church for the space of two hundredth and thirty years after
Christ, 230. years after Christ.
lived utterly destitute and unacquainted with the merits, suffrages,
intercession, and invocation of the saints in heaven; after which time this
cacozeale by degrees proceeded, till it became perfect and consummate idolatry,
as this day is seen in the church of Rome. For before this time, the papists
cannot allege any one authentical writer, for the invocation of saints in
heaven.

The first objection.
Irenaeus, who lived within one hundredth and nintie years after Christ,
Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 1
affirms expressly, that the virgin Mary was the advocate of the virgin Eve.

The answer.
I answer, that S. Irenaeus had a far other meaning, then such popish
frivolous collection would enforce upon him: which I prove first indirectly,
Irenae. lib. 5. c. 1. in fine.
because the virgin Mary was not born or conceived; much less a saint in
heaven, for the space almost of four thousand years, after the virginity of
Eve; and so doubtless, Eve neither did nor possibly could, invoke the holy
virgin Mary. Neither will it help to say, that though Eve could not then
invoke the holy virgin Mary, yet did the holy virgin pray for her, and so
became her advocate. For besides that the virgin Marie is there said, to be
Eues advocate when she was a virgin, at which time Marie the virgin was not
born; the same Eve was either a Saint in heaven as soon as the virgin Mary, or
a damned soul in hell. Again, I prove it directly, because Irenaeus
compares the virgin Mary with the virgin Eve, to insinuate unto us, that we
receive no less good by the virgin Mary, in that she bare Christ; then evil
by the virgin Eve, in that she transgressed Gods holy laws. For thus does
Irenaeus interpret himself, in another place in these words, Sicut Eua
inobaudiens facta, et sibi and vniuerso generi humano causa facta est mortis;
Irenae. lib. 3. c. 33
sic and Maria habens praedestinatum virum, tame^ virgo obaudiens; and sibi and
vniuerso generi humano causa facta est salutis. As Eve being disobedient, was
the cause of deathed her self and to all mankind, so Mary having a
predestinate husband, and withal an obedient virgin, was the cause of salvation
both to her self and to all mankind, (in that she bare Christ, the true and
only savior of the world.)

The second objection.
S. James in his Mass (which the sixth general council holden at Constantinople
admits) teaches us to invoke the virgin Mary and all Saints, Council.
Constantinop. 6. Can 32
and to hope for mercy by their prayers and intercessions.

The answer.
I say first, that that council of Constantinople says indeed,

I say secondly, that pope Gregory (who lived well near Carranza in annot. 6.
conc. Constant.
) that the Apostles did celebrate the holy communion, only with the Lords
prayer: and their own dear friar Carranza witnesses the same, while he
confesses that there is no such tradition extant, as that whereof the council
speaks. Whereby it well appears with what intolerable burdens and
counterfaite books, the papists do this day oppress and seduce the simple
people. For this disholy Mass is current every where, and my self have one of
the books.

The fourth Canon.
In the days of Origin, (who lived about the year of our Lord 233.) the first
seed of the invocation of Saints began to be sown. Anno Dom. 233
Which seed so sown by Origin, was but a step or degree to popish invocation.
For besides that Origin only taught this, that saints in heaven do pray for
us, and not that we on earth should pray to them; this his doctrine was not
definitive and resolute, but doubtful, opinatiue, and disputable. This Canon
Origin himself has delivered to us, Orig hom. 16. in cap. 13. Iosue.
whose express words are these. Sed requiris qui sunt isti qui pugnant, and
quae est illa pugna quam illi gerunt. Ego sic arbitror, quod omnes illi qui
dormierunt ante nos patres, pugnent nobiscum, and adiuuent nos orationibus
suis. Ita namque etiam quendam de senioribus magistris audiui dicentem. But
thou requirest who they are that fight, and what that battle is, which they
fight. I am of this opinion, that all the fathers which are before us and are
dead, do fight with us, and do help us with their prayers; for so I heard
one of our old masters say. Again, in another place thus; Idem ^n cantic.
hom. 3. circa med.
Sed and omnes sancti qui de hac vita decesserunt, habentes adhuc charitatem
erga eos qui in hoc mundo sunt, si dicantur cura^ gerere salutis eorum and
iuuare eos precibus suis, atque interuentu suo apud deum, non erit
inconueniens. But also all saints which are departed hence, and have still
charity toward them which are in this world, if we say they have care of
their salvation, and help them with their prayers and intercession before God,
it shall not be a thing inconvenient. Out of which sayings Origin I note first,
that he speaks only of the prayers which saints in heaven make for us, and
not one word of our praying to them. I note secondly, that to hold that the
Origens doctrine; but only an opinion and disputable question. I prove it,
because he says ( arbitror, I think.) Again, because he says; non erit
inconueniens, it shall not be inco^uenient. Thirdly, because he says ( audiu^
ita dicentem; I heard one say so.)

The first objection.
Origin in his book de paenitentia says, yt he will fall prostrate on his
knees, and invoke all the saints in heaven, that they will help him,
because he dare not pray to God for himself.

The answer.
I say first, that this assertion fathered upon Origin, will confute it self:
for how could Origin or any faithful christian, Mat. 11. v. 28. Psalm. 49. v.
15. Joan. 14. v. 13.14 Hebr. 7.25.
who wills all to come to him that are in distress; who promises to hear
all those that in their trouble call upon him. Who grants to us whatsoever
we ask in his sons name, who has appointed his son, to make intercession
for us. I say secondly, Origens, but a plain counterfeit. And I prove it
effectually, Gelasiu^ did. 15. cap. sanct. To.
because their own pope Gelasius has so resolved.

The 2. objection.
Origin says, Origin. hom. 3. in diue^sos.
that the fathers of the church appointed the feast day of the holy
Innocents, and that by the will of God, that so their intercession might
profit their parents.

The answer.
I say first, that if all this were granted, it could but at the most prove,
that the saints pray for us, which in a good sense The manner of praying of
saints for us.
and yt in the end we may be partakers with the^ of eternal glory. I say
secondly, that sundry learned men do think these homilies (from whence this
objection is taken) not to be any Origens works. I say thirdly, that if Origin
do make that a constant doctrine in one place, which he grants to be
Ruffinus records, Ruffin in apolog. pro Orig. in fine.
) will admit nothing in Origin, which disliketh them; but reject all such
stuff, as infarsed into his works by the heretics. Let them therefore give
us leave also to reject in Origin, if in any place he seem to approve
invocation of saints, as that which is infarsed by the heretics: specially
because in other places, he teaches the contrary doctrine.

The fifth Canon. Anno Dom. 250

About 20. years after that Origin had doubtfully disputed the praying of
saints for us; S. Cyprian and S. Cornelius set down that point resolutely, as
standing no longer in doubt thereof; to wit, that the saints in heaven do pray
for the living here on earth. For they made this couenaut, that whether of them
soever should die the first, should pray for his brethren and sisters yet
living. Cypr. Epist. 57. lib. 1. ep. 1.
These are S. Cyprians own words; Et si quis istinc nostrum prior diuinae
dignationis celeritate praecesserit, perseueret apud dominum nostra dilectio,
pro fratribus and sororib apud misericordiam patris noncesset oration. And if
either of us shall through Gods mercy die before the other, let our love
continue still in Gods sight; let us not cease to desire the favor of God for
our brethren and sisters yet living. Thus says S. Cyprian. Out of whose
words, I note first, that to Cyprians time, neither once called into question.
I note thirdly,

The sixth Canon.
Anno Dom. 350
About an hundredth years after S. Cyprian, (which was about 350. years after
Christ) some of the fathers by rhetorical apostrophees, did apply their
orations to the dead, as if they had been living. Of which sort were S. Basil
and saint Gregory Nazianzene, Na^ianz. orat. 1. ^n Julian, in initio, tom. 2.
who though they did but invoke the saints figuratively, and of a certain
excessive zeal, yet did such their inuocations minister occasion to the
papists, of all their superstition in that behalf. These are the words of S.
Gregory Nazianzene; Audite populi, tribus linguae, homines omnes cu^usuis
generis and aetaetis, quicunque and nunc estis, and existetis Infra, audiat
quoque Constantini magni anima, si quis mortuis sensus est, omnesque eorum qui
ante eum imperium tenuerunt, piae Christique amantes animae. Hear O people,
kinreds, tongues, Nazianz. orat. 2. in Pascha, in ipso ^^ne.
nations, ages, whosoever are now living, or shall be borne hereafter. Let also
the soul of Constantine the Great hear, and all the christian godly souls of
the Emperors before him, if the dead perceive any thing at all. And again in
another place, he thus writes; At o pascha, magnum inquam and sacro sanctum
pascha, totiusque mundi piaculum! te enim quasi vita praeditum alloquor. But O
Passover, the great I say, and sacred Passover, and the purgation of the
whole world. For I call upon thee, as if thou had life. Thus writes
Nazianzene, by whose words we may measure both the rest of his sayings, and of
the other fathers. First therefore I note, that he does

The 7. Canon.
Catholic doctrine is that, (as Vincentius Lyrinensis, Vincent. Lyrin.
aduers. haeres.
who lived above a thousand years ago, defines it;) which has been received
constantly, of all the faithful, at al times, and in all places. Which
Vincentius is, and ever was of great reputation, with and amongst al learned
papists; and consequently, since popish invocation of Saints, neither was
constantly received of all the faithful, neither in all places, neither at al
times, The Romish religion not catholic.
(as which was not heard of for many hundredth years after Christ) it cannot
be, deemed catholic doctrine, no not by popish proceeding. This Canon ought
to be well remembered, as which of it self overthrows al Romish religion.

An objection.
S Chrysostomes Mass, which was generally used in the Greek church, makes
express mention of the invocation of Saints, and the same doctrine is taught
in sundry places of his works.

The answer.
I say first, Anno. Dom. 400.
that in S. Chrysostomes time (which was more then 400. years after Christ,)
this superstitious invocation had gotten deep root in the hearts of the
vulgar sort. For which cause S. Chrysostom did zealously in many sermons,
induce them wholly and solie to invoke the living God. One or two places I
will allege, for the better satisfaction of the Reader. thus therefore does
he write; Dic mihi mulier quemadinodum ausa es cum sis peccatrix and iniqua,
Chrysostom. hom. 16 ex var. in Mat. locis, tom. 2. col. 1181.
accedere ad eum? ego, inquit, noui quid agam Vide prudentiam mulieris; non
rogat Iacobum, non obsecrat Ioannem, neque pergit ad Petrum, nec intendit
Apostolorum chorum, non quaesiuit mediatorem; sed pro omnibus illis
paenitentiam accepit comitem, quae aduocati locum impleuit, and sic ad summum
fontem perrexit. Propterea, inquit, descendit, propterea carnem assumpsit, and
homo factus est, vt and ego ei aude^m loqui. Tell me O woman, how thou being
a great sinner dare come unto God? I, says she, know what I have to do.
Behold the wisdom of the woman: she desires not James, she prays not John,
she goes not to Peter: she neither respected the company of the Apostles,
nor sought for a mediator; but in steed of them all she took true repentance
for her fellow, which supplied the place of an advocate, and so she came to
the chief fountain. For this end (says she) did Christ descend; for this
end did he take our nature upon him, and was made man, that I may boldly speak
unto him. Chrysostom. hom. 5. in cap. 1. Mat. tom. 2. col. 56.
Again in another place, the same S. Chrysostom says thus; Sin vero sobrie
agemus, etiam per nosmetipsos istud valeamus efficere and multo magis per nos
quam per alios. Nam and Deus gratiam non tam aliis rogantibus pro nobis* quam
nobis vult donare; quo and fruamur liberate Deum compellandi, and emendemur,
dum ipsi studemus deum reconciliare sic Chananaeam illam aliquando miseratus
est, sic etiam meretrici donauit salutem, sic latronem nullo patrono, nullo
mediatore intercedente. But if we will deal soberly, we may dispatche that by
our own selves, and a great deal better by our selves, then by others. For
God will give us his grace, not so much for the prayers of others, as for our
own sake; that so we may have liberty to call upon God, and to amend our
lives, while we seek to be reconciled to him. So had he mercy on the woman
of Chanaan, so gave he remission of sins to the adulteress, so did he save
the thief without any patron, without any mediator. Thus says Saint
Chrysostom. Out of whose note secondly, that he greatly reprooueth all such,
as are

I say secondly, that the mass which goes abroad under the name of S.
Chrysostom, is a mere counterfeit: for first there Chrysostom had written
any such mass, he should be contrary to himself in sundry places James, S.
Basil, and S. Chrysostom, should every one of them have made a mass, I have
these three masse^ i^ print.
as popish printed books tell us, it must needs follow, (which the papists
will not well like of,) that the bishop of Rome had in those days small
authority. For now a days nothing may be done without the popes consent, but
then bishops made masses at their pleasure, and the pope made none at all.
Fourthly, because in this supposed S. Chrysostom. mass, there is often repeated
Chrysostomes death; the one 500. years: the other 800. years.

I say thirdly, that the other places of S. Chrysostom are even

CHAP. VIII. Of Popish Pilgrimage.
GOds people of late years have been wonderfully seduced, and that by the
sinister and false persuasion of the papists; who taught them to merit their
salvation by gadding on pilgrimage, to visit stocks, stones, and dead men's
bones. The whole sum whereof for perspicuitie sake, I shall reduce to
certain brief conclusions.

The first conclusion.
Anno Dom. 420
The common people about the year of our Lord, 420. were so addicted to sundry
kinds of superstition, partly by the instinct of Satan, partly by the
negligence of some Bishops, and partly by the indiscreet doctrine of othersome,
that S. Austen was at his wits end, not knowing which way to turn him, or what
to do, because he utterly condemned many things in his heart, which he durst
not freely reprove and speak against. This conclusion will seem strange to
many a one, August. epist. 119 ad Ianu^^. in fine tom, 2.
but S. Austen does himself deliver it to us, whose express words are these:
Quod autem instituitur praeter consuetudinem, vt quasi obseruatto sacramenti
sit, approbare non possum, etiamsi multa huiusmodi propter nonnullarum vel
sanctarum vel turbulentarum personarum scandala vitanda, liberius improbare non
audeo. Sed hoc nimis doleo, quod multa quae in diuinis libris saluberrima
praecepta sunt, minus curantur, and tam multis praesumptionibus sic plena sunt
omnia, vt grauius corripiatur qui per octauas suas terram nudo pede tetigerit,
quam qui mentem vinolentia sepelierit. Omnia itaque talia, quae neque sanctarum
scripturarum authoritatibus contine^tur, nec in concilijs episcoporum statuta
inueniuntur, nec consuetudine vniuersae ecclesiae roborata sunt, sed diuersorum
locorum diuersis moribus innumerabiliter variantur, ita vt vix aut omnino
nunquam inueniri possint causae, quas in eis instituendis homines secuti sunt;
vbi facultas tribuitur, sine vlla dubitatione resecanda existimo. Quamuis enim
neque hoc inueniri possit, quomodo contra fidem fint, ipsam tamen religionem
quam paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationum sacramentis misericordia dei
esse liberam voluit, seruilibus oneribus premunt, vt tolerabilior sit conditio
Iudaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus libertatis non agnouerint, legalibus tamen
sarcinis, non humanis praesumptionibus subijciuntur.

I can not approve that, which beside custom is ordained to be observed as an
holy thing, albeit to avoid the scandal of some persons that are either holy
or troublous, I dare not freely reprehe^d many such things. But I am very sorry
for this, that many wholesome precepts in Gods books are little regarded,
Saint Austen for fear dissembled many things
and that all things are so full of presumptions, that he is more sharply
reproved, which touches the ground in his octaues with his bare foot, then
he that shall lie drunken in the street. All things therefore which neither
are contained in the holy scriptures, neither in the decrees of bishops,
neither established by the custom of the universal church, but are infinitely
varied by the diversity of manners in diverse places, so that seldom or never
the causes can be known, which men respected in the ordinance thereof, This is
a grave saying worthy to be written in golden letters*
I think they are to be taken away without any stop, where power and authority
is at hand. For although it cannot be found, how they make against the
catholic faith, yet do they clog the religion with servile bondage, which our
merciful God would have freely celebrated with very few and manifest
sacraments, so that now the condition of the Jews is more tolerable, who
though they have not acknowledged the time of liberty, yet are they subject to
legal burdens, not to human presumptions. Thus says holy and learned Austen.
Out of whose words I note first, that S. Austen for fear of scandal and other
human respects, durst not speak all he thought, nor freely reprove every
abuse as he wished in his heart. I note secondly, that all the bishops and
learned

I note thirdly, that Gods word was little regarded even Austens time, and that
superstition in steed thereof reigned every where; and therefore no marvel
if so much Romish trumperie, did after Saint Austens time abound in their
visible church.

I note fourthly, that even in Saint Austens days odd

I note fifthly, that many superstitious errors, have crept into the church,
the causes wereof neither are nor can be Austens judgment all such trumperie
ought to be cut off by the authority of the Magistrate.

I note sixthly, that the church was brought into servile bondagt, as in S.
Austens time the state of the Jews was more tolerable, then the condition of
faithful christians. I note seauenthly,

The second conclusion.
The bodies, bones, and relics of Gods Saints and martyrs, are not to be
conte^ned, rejected, or disdainfully cast away, but to be buried honorably and
esteemed reverently, as well to give a sign of our hope in the resurrection of
our bodies and theirs, as to signify their true faith in the everliving God.
This conclusion may evidently be proved, by many texts of holy writ; Psalm.
115.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord (says David) is the death of his saints.
Again in another place; Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all; Psalm. 33.19.
he keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken. Again in another place;
Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord: and in another place the
Psalmograph yields the reason why the bodies and relics of ye dead be
honorable, Apoc. 14.13.
to wit, for the hope of the resurrection, and that they shall once be
glorified: for my flesh (says he) shall rest in hope; Psalm. 15.9.
and in the Hebrew more significantly (shall dwell in hope,) to express the
full assurance of the resurrection. Genesis 50.2, 7, 8.
In this hope did S. Joseph cause his fathers body be enbalmed, and being
accompanied with all the servants of R. Pharao both the elders of his house, and
all the elders of the land of Egypt, and with his brethren, and others of his
fathers house, he went up into the land of Canaa^, there to bury his father
with great honor and solemnity. Epiphan. in vitis prophetarum.
The prophet Daniel when he died, was buried with great honor; so was Micheas,
Joel, and many others, the prophets, apostles, and servants of the living god.
Ecclesiast. cap. ^6. verse. 12.
In regard whereof prudently said Syrach; Let their bones flourish out of their
place, and their names by succession remain to them that are most famous of
their children. All which Saint Austen comprised briefly in these golden words;
August. de ciuit. libr. 1. cap. 13.
Nec tamen contemnenda and abiicienda sunt corpora defunctorum, maximeque
iustorum atque fidelium, quibus tanquam organis and vasis ad omnia bona opera
sanctus vsus est spiritus. Si enim paterna vestis, and annulus, ac si quid
huiusmodi tanto charius est posteris, quanto erga parents mayor extitit
affectus, nullo modo ipsa spernenda sunt corpora, quae vtique multo familiarius
atque coniunctius, quam quaelibet indumenta gestamus. Haec enim non ad
orname^tum vel adiutorium quod adhibetur extrinsecus, sed ad ipsam naturam
hominis pertinent. Neither are the bodies of the dead to be despised and cast
away, specially the bodies of the just and of the faithful, whom the holy
ghost has used as instruments and vessels to all good works. For if the
fathers garment, and ring, and the like, be so much the dearer to the
posterity, by how much our affection was greater to our parents; then
doubtless their bodies are no way to be contemned, which are more familiar and
nearer to us, the^ any garment; for they pertain not to the ornament or help
which we use externally, but even to the nature of man it self.

The third conclusion.
To go from place to place, on pilgrimage, to learn experience, civil manners,
customs and laws of other countries, or christianly to profit others thereby,
is a godly act and highly to be commended. The painful and godly peregrinatio^s
of Christ him self, and of his chosen vessels, The pilgrimage of Christ Jesus.
Mat. 2.1, 13, 23 Mat. 3.13. Mat. 4.1, 5.
will make this conclusion evident. For Christ was conceived in Nazareth, borne
in Bethlehem, the eight day presented in Jerusalem. He fled into Egypt, he
returned and dwelt in Nazareth. Being twelve years of age he disputed in the
temple at Jerusalem, from whence he returned with his parents, and came to
Nazareth. Being thirty years old, he was baptized in Jorden, tempted of the
Devil in the wilderness, placed on a Pinnacle of the temple, Joan. 2.2, 9.
(...) 4. verse. 13. Luc. 4.31. Joan. 6.1, 2.
and after that carried into an exceeding high mountain. In Cana of Galilee he
was present at a marriage, where he changed water into wine. He abode a while
at Capernaum, with his mother and his friends. He went throughout Galilee
teaching in the synagogues. Besides the sea of Galilee, he calls Simon,
Andrew, James and John. From thence he came to the region of the Gerasenes
where the swine were drowned in the sea by the devils. Mar. 5.1, 13, 14, 17.
He came to Jerusalem at the feast of Easter, Joan. 5.1. Mat. 13. verse. 2.
Mat. 10.5. Luc. 10.1.
he entered into a ship to avoid the prease of the people; and sent his apostles
two by two to preach the gospel. He went into the mountain when the people
would have made him king: he sailed into Magedan and Dalmanutha, he returned to
Bethsaida, Mat. 15. verse 39. Mat 16. verse 13 Mar. 9. verse 3. ^. Pet. 1.18.
Luc. 17.12. Mar. 6.7. Joan. 12.2. Joan. 10.22, 23. Joan. 11.43, 44. Lu.
19.29.30.45 Matthew 26.6, 18. Joan. 18. verse 1. Mat. 26.36. Luc. 22. ver. 44,
47, 48, 54. Mat. 26.57. Mar, 15. v. 18, 15 Joan. 19. verse. 1, 6 16, 30.
and came into the coasts of Cesaria Philippi. He was transfigured in the mount
Thabor, he returned to Capernaum, and passed through the mids of Samaria: he
sent his twelve disciples to Jerusalem to the feast of Tabernacles, and
secretly followed after them. He sent his messengers to Samaria, the
Samaritaines would not receive them; he came to Jerusalem and taught openly in
the temple. He sent 72. disciples two by two into every place, whither he
would come. In Bethania Martha did intertaine him. In the feast of the
dedication he walked in the temple in Salomons porch, even in the winter
season. He passed into the coasts of Iewrie beyond Jorden, where John did
first baptize: in Bethania he raised up Lazarus from death to life: thence he
went to Ephraim beside the desert where he fasted: he came to Bethphage
beside the mount Oliuet, he entered into Jerusalem riding on an asse-colt,
whereon never man sat before: he went up into the temple, and did cast out
them that bought and sold therein; he returned to Bethania, and went again
to Jerusalem, where he ate the Paschal lamb. After supper he went forth with
his disciples over the brook Cedron, into the Garden of Geth-semani, where he
prayed while drops of blood trickled down his cheeks: after his prayer he
returned to his disciples, was apprehended by Judas and his accomplices, was led
away to Annas first, then to Caiphas, then to Pilate, then to Herod, then to
Pilate again; after whipped, and scourged, crowned with a crown of thorn,
condemned and crucified. And all this long, tedious, paineful, and bitter
pilgrimage, Christ Jesus the son of God, suffered for the sins and love of
man.

Saint Paul likewise the chosen vessel of God, had a long and painful
pilgrimage for the Gospel sake. For being miraculously converted, from a raging
Wolf to be a meek sheep, from a mortal foe to be a dear friend, from a
cruel persecutour to become an holy Apostle; he forthwith preached the
gospel at Damascus. From thence he went to Arabia, Act. 9. ver. 1, 2, 20, 22.
Galat. 1.17, 18
from Arabia he turned again to Damascus, and after three years came to
Jerusalem. Before which time the Jews at Damascus took counsel to kill S.
Paul, Act. 9. ver. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Act. 21. ve. 15, 27 Act. 23. verse. 24.
and for that end they watched the gates day and night. But the disciples took
him by night, put him through the wall, and let him down by a rope in a basket.
The Jews laid hands on him, while he was in the temple at Jerusalem. They lay
in wait to kill him, but the chief captain commanded to bind him with two
chains, and to lead him into the castle: he caused him also to be scourged and
examined, and sent him away to Felix the governor: he came to Antiochia by
the means of Barnabas, where they twain taught the people a whole year, Act.
11. verse. 26. Act. 11. verse. 28, 29, 30 Act. 13. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7.
insomuch that the disciples were first called christians in that place. From
Antioche he went with Barnabas to carry their charitable alms, which the
Antiochians sent to the faithful in Judea: he passed from Antioche to
Seleucus, and from thence he sailed to Cyprus, from Cyprus to Salamis, and
thence to Paphus where he found a Jew named Bariesus, who was with the deputy
Sergius Paulus: from Paphus he went to Perga, from Perga to Antioche not in
Syria but in Pisidia, Act. 13. ve. 13.14 Act. 14. verse 5, 6
and afterward to Iconium. But being stoned at Iconium he fled to Lystra and
Derbe the cities of Lycania, and to the regions round about. He returned to
visit the brethren in every city where he had preached, stablishing the
churches of Syria and Cilicia. And when he had gone throughout Phrygia, Act.
15.36, 41. Act. 16. v. 6, 5, 11 1^
and the region of Galatia, he was forbidden of the holy ghost to preach in
Asia. And being admonished in a vision to go into Macedonia, he went to Troas,
from Troas to Samothracia, from Samothracia to Neapolis, from Neapolis to
Philippi, the chife City in the parts of Macedonia. After this he returned to
Jerusalem, Act. 24. verse. 24. Act. 25. verse. 9, 1^ Act 26. verse. 1. Act. 28. v.
16, 19
and being cast in prison, he pleaded his cause before Felix and Drusilla his
wife; before Agrippa, Festus and Bernice, and appealing to Caesar he was sent
to Rome, where afterward he was beheaded, as approved histories make relation.

So Lycurgus (as authentical histories record) profited much by his pilgrimage
into foreign countries. So did also the Decemuiri of ye Romans, while by their
pilgrimage into Greece, they learned their prudent politic laws, and trained
up their own people accordingly. More commendable then all these, was the
pilgrimage of ye three wise men that came from far, to adore the sweet babe
that was newly borne, Christ the Savior of the world. Mat 2.1, 2. ^. Reg. 10.1,
2. ^. Par. 9.1, 2, 3. Mat. 12. verse. 42. ^uc. 11.31.
Neither for all that was the pilgrimage of the queen of Saba to be reproved,
when she came so many hundred miles to hear and try King Salomons wisdom.

The fourth conclusion.
Popish invocation, adoration, visitation, translation, elevation, asportation,
and reservation, is superstitious, blasphemous, and idololatrical. This
conclusion is evidently proved, by that which is already said of the invocation
and adoration of saints. For if no religious worship nor adoration can be given
to the living saints, as is already proved; much less may that which is
contained in this conclusion, be yielded to the dead bodies and relics of the
same. And doubtless the faithless Gentiles have not committed more gross and
palpable idolatry in adoring their idols, then our late Papists in adoring
their relikes. For first, when the relic which they term ( Vultus sanctus)
misericordi, misericordi, mercy, mercy, for our sins. Which, as every
child repute such holiness in external rites, and corruptible relics; that
the bone of a dead dog, In all superstitious adoration, one imitateth an
other without time or reason.
(if it be said by any to be a relic of a saint) will draw them with
facility to touch it, to kiss it, and to adore it, as if it were God
almighty. For which cause saint Austen says truly, that many bodies are
adored upon earth, whose souls are damned in hell. Yea, the dead corpse of
Hermannus was adored for a saint twenty years at Ferrara; who yet was an
heretic, Platina in 8. Bonifac.
as writes their own Platina.

The first objection.
They are undoubtedly the true relikes of true saints, which the church
appoints to be adored every where. And saint Austen speaks only against
private abuses of certain private persons, not against the general practice
of ye universal church. For the use of the church is, first to canonize the
saint, and after to propose his relikes to be adored. Which church being
therein directed by the holy ghost, cannot err as you imagine.

The answer.
I say first, that how your church both may err and has erred de facto* is
already proved. I say secondly, that your abuses Ludouicus Viues grants,
Ludou. in comm. de ciuit.
that many christians do sin no less in adoring their images and relikes,
then do the Gentiles in adoring their false gods. I say thirdly, that your
worshipping of relics is flatly reproved by S. Coloss. 2.23.
The apostle of Christ yields this reason, because it is (...) voluntary
worship^, not contained in Gods word. I say fourthly, that if Christ's cross
must therefore be adored, because it touched Canus de locis, lib. 5. ca. 5. p
17^*
as your own Doctor Melchior Canus tells you, neither can Aquinas indeed
deny the same. And certes, as the pope may err in canonizing your saints, so
may he much more err in determining such and such relics, to be the bodies,
bones, or ashes of such and such saints; and consequently, so may all papists
adoring them commit idolatry, yea though it were granted that true relics
might be adored; because as S. Austen gravely said, their relics are adored
on earth, whose souls are broyling in hell fire.



The second objection.
Gen* 50 v. 25. Exodus 13. v. 19.
If it were not a godly act to adore holy relics, and to translate them from
place to place, as the church has a long time used; holy Moses who had Gods
spirit largely, would never have so reverenced the dead body of S. Joseph, nor
yet have carried it so many miles.

The answer.
I say first, that the flesh of Joseph's body was wholly consumed, said; and for
the better confirmation thereof, Heb. 11. v. 22.
I appoint my bones to be taken with you thither: and for this end does the
Apostle ascribe this charge given to Iosephes brethren, to the great
commendation of his faith.

The third objection.
The scripture tells us that Helcana and Anna his wife, went thrice in the
year on pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 1. Sam. 1. v. 3. Joan. 12. v. 20. Act. 8.
verse. 27. Act 20. v. 16.
Sundry of the Greeks left their own country, and came to adore in
Jerusalem. The Eunuch came from far, to adore in the same place. S. Paul
himself made haste in his journey, that he might keep Pentecost at
Jerusalem. Christ likewise with his mother Mary, and S. Joseph her husband,
came on pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

The answer.
I say first, that God appointed his temple at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 16. v. 1.10.13.
to be the peculiar place of his external worship; and that al his people
should repair thither, at three several times in the year. Pilgrimage
appointed by God, is to be approved.
So that S. Joseph, S. Marie, S. Anna, and Helcana went to Jerusalem at that
day; even as we do now to the Church, to hear divine service and sermons.
And therefore their pilgrimage was honorable, and highly to be commended.

I say secondly, that Christ himself went not of any necessity, Matthew. 5.17.
and to give us an example of obedience and humility. For he came to fulfill
the law, not to dissolve the same. I say thirdly, that saint Paul hasted
thither for the gospel Josephus writes, sundry of the converted gentiles,

The fourth objection.
Going on pilgrimage is a very ancient custom, and that for religion sake:
for S. Alexander a most holy martyr, (who lived above a thousand and two
hundredth years ago, Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap 9.
) went for that end to Jerusalem, as writes Eusebius in his history.

The answer.
Pilgrimage is no satisfaction for sin.
yet did he neither think his prayers more acceptable in ye place then in an
other: nor yet thought his journey to be any part of satisfaction for his
sins. For he knew right well, Joan. 4. v 23.
that whosoever will worship God truly, must worship him neither in the
mountains, neither in Jerusalem, but Bernard. Epist. 5. ad Adam monach. tom.
2.
and tolerable in other some; so is it necessary to salvation in none, and very
unfit for many. Which thing their own S. Bernard can tell them, whose judgment

The fifth objection.
Ambr. sermon, 91. Aug. de ciuit. De^ lib. 22. c. 8.
S. Ambrose tells great miracles done by the bodies of S. Geruasius and
Protasius, while they were touched lying on the coffin. S Austen recites like
miracles, which were wrought by the relics of S. Steven. S. Chrysostom,
Eusebius, Palladius, and diverse others, make mention of the like miracles: Yea,
the holy scripture it self tells us, that miracles were done even by
touching the relics of Elizaeus. Why therefore may not the people this day
resort to such places, 4. Reg. 13. v. 20.
where such wonderful miracles have been done? for to get help either of
corporal diseases, or spiritual, is the cause of their going thither. And for
corporal helps, your selves this day go to S. Anne of Buxton, and to other
like places.

The answer.
I say first, that the scripture tells us of the death of Saint Steven, of S.
Joseph, of Moses, and others, as also of their Elizaeus, by the miracle wrought
at the contact 4. Reg. 18. v. 4.
because he pulled down the brazen serpent set up by Gods appointment, so
soon as the people committed idolatry by adoring the same; worthily are those
christian princes commended, who prohibit their people from gadding on
pilgrimage, in popish idolatricall manner; albeit ye original thereof was
tolerable, and a long time free from popish godles superstition. I say
seventhly, that waters have natural curatiue qualities in sundry places, as
have also certain herbs,

The sixth objection.
S. Iustine, (who lived shortly after the apostles,) tells of great honor
done unto relics; Justin. q. 2^*
as that the bodies of martyrs defended men from the devils, and cured many
incurable diseases.

The answer.
I say first, that Justinius lived more then one hundredth and S. Iustins indeed.
I prove 82. and in the 86. questions, I find mention made of Origin, who was
borne long after the death of S. Justinius. So likewise in the 127. question,
mention is made of the Manichees, who yet followed long after S. Iustines death.

CHAP. IX. Of Christian righteousness or justification.
THe Papists do not only dishonor God, while they seek to establish their
own righteousness; but withal they slander good and true christians,
auouching them to be contemners of good works: but how blasphemous they be on
the one side, and how malicious on the other, shall sufficiently appear, by
these brief conclusions.

The first conclusion.
Man albeit he was so created as he might sin and die, (which thing the
event it self declared;) yet was he so adorned and beautified, with
supernatural gifts and graces, as well external as internal, that he might have
lived eternally, and have eschewed all sin world without end. This conclusion
I thus prove. That man might have lived ever if he had not sinned, is evident
by Gods own words, when he says; Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the
garden, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of
it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2. v. 17.
thou shall die the death. And again in another place, after that he had
pronounced the earth cursed for Adams sin, he uttered these words; For out of
it wast thou taken, because thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return. By
which words it appears, Genesis 3. v. 19.
that if he had not transgressed, he should not have died. August. de ciuit.
dei, lib. 13. cap. 3.
S. Austen confirms the same in these words; Quapropter fatendum est primos
homines ita fuisse institutos, vt si non peccassent, nullum mortis experirentur
genus. Wherefore we must confess that our first parents were so created,
that unless they had sinned, Bernard sermon. ad milit. cap. 11. de caena domini
ser. 10. Chrysos. hom. 16. in Genesis
they should have felt no kind of death, (neither of soul nor of body.)
Death (says S. Bernard) should never have followed, if sin had not gone
before. S. Chrysostom gathers this conclusion, out of the express text of
Genesis. These are his words; Factus enim est mortalis propter
praeuaricationem, vt ex hoc mandato and his quae sequuta sunt, claret.
Sequitur, itaque ante praeuaricationem immortales erant, alioqui post cibum non
hoc sup^licij loco imposuisset. For he became mortal, by reason of
transgression, as is evident by this commandment, and that which follows
after. Therefore they were immortal before the transgression; otherwise after
the eating thereof, this punishment should not have been imposed upon them. He
confirms the same in another place, where he writes thus; Cum Adam
peccasset, corpus illius confestim mortale ac passibile factum est, plurimosque
recepit naturales defectus. So soon as Adam had sinned, Chryso. hom. 12. ad
Romans
his body forthwith became mortal and passible, and received many natural
defects. That Adam might have lived without al kind of sin, is likewise
manifest by ye scripture, Ecclesiast. 7. v. 31
which says that God made man righteous, or right. His rectitude consisted in
this, that his reason was subject to God, his inferior powers to his
superior, his body to his soul. There was no rebellion to be found, in any
part of the whole man. For otherwise it would follow hereupon, yt God were
unjust; which yet to avouch, were ye greatest blasphemy in the world. The
reason is evident, Aug. de lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. 1.
because if it had not been in Adams power to have avoided al sin* God should
have charged him with an impossibility, and withal have condemned him for not
performing the same. 2. Tim. 4. v. ^.
But our Lord is a just judge, as witnesses his apostle.

This whole process* August. de ciuit. libr* 13. cap. 13.
S. Austen shows both pithily and briefly, in these right golden words;
Posteaquam praecepti facta est transgressio, confestim gratia deserente diuina,
de corporum suorum nuditate confusi sunt. Senserunt enim nouum mot^m
inobedientis carnis suae, tanquam reciprocam poenam inobedientiae suae; and
quia superiorem Dominum suo arbitrio deseruerat, inferiorem famulum ad suum
arbitrium non tenebat: non omnino habebat subditam carnem sicut semper habere
potuisset* si Deo subdita ipsa mansisset. After that Gods law was
transgressed, Gods grace did incontinently forsake them, and they beholding
their own nakedness were confounded. For they felt a new motion in their
disobedient flesh, a punishment correspondent to their disobedient hearts. And
because he voluntarily disobeied his superior Lord, he could not have his
inferior servant, subject to his word. Neither was his flesh in subjection,
as he might have had it for ever, if it had remained obedient to Gods laws.

The condition of man's free will, from the creation of the protoplaste Adam,
until our regeneration; Christ himself seems to set down most lively, Luc.
10. v. 30.
in that parable which he propounded to the lawyer. A certain man (says
Christ) went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, who
robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half
dead. Which is to say allegorically (as ye fathers write,) that mankind went
out from the paradise of peace, to the mutabilitie of misery, and fell among
the powers of darkness, who robbed him of his supernatural gifts of innocence
and immortality, wounded him in his natural gifts, of will and reason, and
departed leaving him half dead; that is, dead in respect of Gods favor,
though living to the eyes of the world. Semiuiuus (inquit Augustinus) habet
vitalem motum, id est, liberum arbitrium vulneratu^, Aug. ap. Ludolp.
quod ad aeternam quam perdiderat vitam non sufficiebat. Et ideo iacebat, quia
vires ei propriae ad surgendum non sufficiebant, vt ad sanandum medicum.i. deum
requireret. In that he was half alive, (says S. Austen) he had vital motion;
that is, free will so wounded, as it could not return to eternal life, which
it had lost. And therefore did he lie; because he wanted proper strength to
seek God, the physician that could cure his malady. Ludolphus alluding to
man's creation, Ludolph. de vita Christi.
sets down this matter very finely in these words; Fecerat Deus hominem
ad imaginem suam secundum rationem, ad similitudinem secundum dilectione^, vt
per vtrumque Deo adhaereret, and in haerendo beatus esset. Sed diabolus humanae
beatitudini inuidens, contra duo bona praedicta duo homini in originali intulit
praecipua mala. In eo namque quod factus erat ad imaginem Dei secundum
rationem, vulnerauit eum per ignorantiam boni; in eo vero quod factus est ad
similitudinem Dei secundum dilectionem, vulnerauit eum per concupiscentiam
mali. God made man after his own image according to reason, after his own
similitude according to love; that by them both he might adhere to God, and by
adhering to him attain eternal beatitude. But the devil envying man's
felicity, The double evil of ignorance an^ concupiscence.
bestowed on him in steed of these two blessings, the double mischief of
original sin. For in that man was made after Gods image in reason, he
wounded him with the ignorance of good* and in that he was made after his
similitude in love, he wounded him with the concupiscence of evil.

All this is lively comprehended in the essence, nature and definition of free
will, which after Saint Austen is this, Aug. apud Lu^^^
Liberum arbitrium est facultas rationis and voluntatis, qua bonum eligitur
gratia assistente; malum ea desistente: Free will is the faculty of reason and
will, by which good is chosen, when grace is present; and evil, when grace is
wanting. 2. Cor. 3.5.
For this cause says the apostle, that we are not able to think any good
thought of our selves, as of our selves; 1. Cor. 12.^.
neither yet to say that Jesus is the Lord, but in the holy ghost. Philip. 2.13.
For it is God (says he) that works in us, both to do well, and to will well.
This verity was defined above a thousand and one hundred years ago, by the
ancient, holy, and learned council of Aransica, in these words, Haeretico
fallitur spiritu non intelligens vocem Dei, Con^ Ara^. can. 7.
dicentis in Euangelio; Sine me nihil potestis facere; whosoever (says the
holy synod) thinks he can do any act which pleases god, or pertains to
eternal life* by force of his free will, that man is deceived with an heretical
spirit, not understanding the voice of god when he says in his gospel, Joan.
155.
Without me ye can do nothing (that is good.) Out of this discourse, two things
are clear and evident; the one, that our first parent Adam before his fall,
might by force of his free will helped with supernatural grace, make free
election as well of good as of evil, and withal put that his free choice in
execution: the other, that ye posterity of Adam has free will to nothing save to
sin only, until the time of regeneration.

The first objection.
There is no consultation, as says the Philosopher, Ethi^. 3. cap. 5.
but of things which are in our own power; and yet does every one use
consultations, in those things which he goes about. Again, there must be some
immediate cause of every act, and that can not be God, because God is not the
cause of any evil. Neither can the cause thereof be ascribed either to nature,
or to destiny, or to fortune, because humane actions are variable, and with
the intention of the doer. Therefore the best course that can be taken with him
that denies man's freewill after the fall of Adam, is this; to wit, to beat
him like a stockfish, until he confess those that beat him to have free
will, either still to beat him, or to cease from beating. For if one should
deny the fire to be hot, the best reason against him, were to cast him into an
hot oven or burning furnace. ^eg^e^. de vo^ ^^^tate human^, cap. 3. ^. 1. (...)
^.
Thus reasons Veguerius.

The answer.
I say first, that I willingly grant, both Papists and other

The second objection.
If free will after the fall of Adam, can not make election as well of good as
of evil, then does free will utterly lose it own nature: for where sin
must needs be chosen of necessity, there can be no true liberty.

The answer.
I answer, that there be three kinds of liberty, as S. Bernard proves
learnedly, in a peculiar treatise of free will; the first is called, Bernard.
de (...) lib. (...).
Libertas a coactione, vi, vel necessitate; Liberty from coaction, violence,
or necessity; for all these three are one and the same with him, as every one
that reads him seriously will perceive. The second is called, Libertas a
peccato; liberty from sin. The third is called, Libertas a miseria; liberty
from misery. The two latter liberties, from sin and misery, can not be had in
this life: the first was from the creation, is at this present, and shall be in all Adams posterity world without end. For such is the essence, nature, and
formal reason of will, that it cannot be coacted, or enforced. The reason is
evident, The formaliti^ of free will.
because it implies contradictio^, that Will do any thing, which it is coacted,
or enforced to do. For when we do any thing violently, we do it against our
will, and not with our will. If this were not so, the angels in heaven should
have no free will, contrary to the uniform consent of all learned men. For they
have no more freedom in heaven to sin, then the unregenerate have freedom on
earth to do well. Further then this, it would follow hereupon, that the angels
in heaven should not be happy. For what happiness can it be to will and do by
coaction, that which they will and do? and yet it is certain, yt they have
freedom only to do well: if any will hold the contrary, he must likewise hold
that angels in heaven may sin; and consequently, that they may be damned into
hell fire.

The third objection.
If there be no free will to do good before regeneration, then must all the
moral good deeds of infidels be sin; which to hold is most absurd. For, to
serve our sovereign, to die in the defense of our country, to honor our
parents, to feed the hungry, to cloathe the naked, and such like, which the
infidels do, cannot but be good acts.

The answer.
I answer, that albeit these and like moral deeds be indifferent in their own
nature, glorious in the eyes of the world, and right profitable to others; yet
are they mere sins in the doers, and displeasant in Gods sight. And I prove
it, Heb. 11.^ Romans 1^.2.
because that without faith God cannot be pleased, as the apostle witnesses.
Again, the same apostle says, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and so
every act of the infidel must needs be sin, because it is not of faith. Neither
will it help to say, that if the said acts of infidels be not good, yet are they
not evil. For as their great popish canonist Navarre, and their Romish cardinal
Caietan avouch; Na^arr. i^ (...) Caietan ib^^
every act in indiuiduo, must perforce be good or evil: and the reason thereof
is evident. For every act must either be referred to some end, or to no end at
al: if to no end, then it is an idle act, and we must render an account for
the same: if it be referred to any other end then to God, it is flat sin;
because as the apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.^^. Colo^. 3.
whatsoever we do, we ought to do it for Gods glory.

S. Austen in his f^urth book against Iulianus the Pelagian handles this
question so learnedly, and in so ample and perspicuous manner, as none that shall
read the book with judgment, can stand any longer in doubt thereof. I will
cite one only periode, for brevity sake. Thus does he write; Si gentilis,
inquis, August. contr. Iu^ian. lib. 4. cap. 3. ^om. 7. p. 705.
nudum operuerit, numquid, quod non est ex fide, peccatum est? prorsus in
quantum non est ex fide, peccatum est; non quod per se ipsum factum quod est
nudum operire, peccatum est, sed de tali opere non in domino gloriari, solus
impius negat esse peccatu^. If an infidel, say thou, shall clothe the naked,
is such an act sin, because it is not of faith? it is doubtless sin, in
that it is not of faith; not for that the work it self is sin of it own
nature, (for to clothe the naked of it own self is not sin,) but to clothe
the naked for any other end then for Gods glory, is sin indeed. And it is
so manifest a sin, as none but the wicked can deny it to be sin. Thus did
Saint Austen answer the Pelagians then, and thus do I answer the papists now,
telling them that they are become Semipelagians herein.

The reply.
If this be so indeed, then may an infidel as well rebel against his prince, as
truly serve his prince, as well betray his country, as die in defense thereof, as
well rob his neighbor, as relieve him, and so in the rest.

The answer.
I answer, that it is far otherwise, because although they sin in so doing
for want of faith in Christ Jesus, yet shall their punishment be so much more
tolerable, by how much their sins are the less. Neither is this answer
invented of mine own brain, but long sithence framed by S. Augustine, whose
words are these; August. contr. (...). 4. cap. (...) p^ope (...)
Sed ad hoc eos in die iudicij cogitationes suae, defendent, vt tolerabilius
puniantur; quia naturaliter qua legis sunt vtcunque fecerunt, scriptum habentes
in cordibus opus legis hactenus, vt alijs non facerent quod perpeti nollent.
Hoc tamen peccantes, quod homines sine fide non ad eum finem ista opera
retulerunt, ad quem refer debuerunt. Minus enim Fabritius quam Catilina
punietur; non quia iste bonus, sed quia ille magis malus; and minus impius quam
Catilina Fabritius, non veras virtutes habendo, sed a veris virtutibus non
plurimum deuiando. But in this their cogitations shall defend them in the day
of judgment, that their punishment may be more tolerable, because they have
done naturally in some sort, those things that pertained to the law; All in
hell have not the same to ments.
having the work of the law so deeply written in their hearts, that they did
so to others, as they wished to be done unto themselves. Yet they committed
this sin, that they being men without faith, did not refer these works to
that end, to which they should have done. For Fabritius shall be more gently
punished then Catiline; not because he is good, but for that he is not so bad
as Catiline; neither because he has true virtues, but for that he is not so
far from true virtues as Catiline.

The fourth objection.
It is clear by the testimony of Moses, that Cain had free will as well to
good as to evil; Genes. 4.7.
and that both after the fall of Adam, and before his regeneration: for there
is it expressly said, that he shall rule over his sin. Therefore though
freewil were wounded by ye fall of Adam, yet did it abide still in his posterity.

The answer.
I say first, that the text in the original speaks of that rule, Arias
translateth it, ( in eum, not in illud; over him, not over it) because the
variety of the gender in the Hebrew would not bear it. I say thirdly, that S.
Chrysostom interprets this portion of scripture, not of freewil, but of that
dominion which Nam hoc de fratris subiectione accipiendum est. Infra; Mihi enim
videtur de fratre esse dictum. Chrysostom. in 4. cap. Ge. hom. 1
For this must be understood of the subjection of his brother: for I judge it
to be spoken of his brother. I say fourthly, that howsoever this place of
scripture be understood, it will no way make for the papists. For first, the
wicked have free will from coaction. Secondly, they have free will in moral and
civil acts. Thirdly, among many sins, they may make free choice of one; only
this freedom wants, that they can never make election of good, until they
be regenerate by Gods holy spirit.

The fifth objection.
If we have not free will to do well, then do we sin of necessity; and
consequently God is unjust, who punishes us for that which we cannot avoid.

The answer.
I say first, that God is not unjust, though he punish us for Austen, that
every sin (which is not poena peccati) is so voluntary,

The reply.
If this be so, our will may rather be called bond-will then free will; because
all the freedom we have, is to go to the devil.

The answer.


The second conclusion.
There is nothing in man by which he may be justified, or which can any way
further his justification. The ancient council of Aransica proves this
conclusion effectually. These are the words; Conc. (...) 19.
Natura humana, etiamsi in illa integritate in qua est condita permaneret,
nullo modo seipsam creatore suo non adiuuante seruaret. Vnde, cum sine gratia
Dei salutem non possit custod^re quam accepit, quomodo sine Dei gratia poterit
reparare quod perdidit? Man, although he had continued in that integrity in
which he was created, yet could he not have attained salvation, without the
help of his creator. Wherefore since man without grace, could not retain that
felicity which he had once received; how can he without grace, repair that
which he has lost? In these words we see clearly, that this holy council
condemns moral preparatiues, and merits de congruo, to which ye papists
trust so much. The whole scope of the council is nothing else, but only and
soly to persuade man, that he cannot so much as to think one good thought,
much less do any good act, which may any way further his justification. Can.
7. vbi sup.
And in the 7. canon, it does precisely condemn that active concurrence of
freewil, which our papists in the late council of Trent, require of necessity
to man's justification.

S. Austen as in all other things, so in this matter uses a large and learned
discourse in his epistle against Vitalis: Aug. epist. 1^^.
in which among many other excellent sentences, I find these finely contrived
words; Quapropter vt in Deu^ credamus, and pie viuamus, no^ vole^tis neque
currentis* sed miserentis est Dei; non quia velle non debemus and currere, sed
quia ipse in nobis and velle operatur and currere Vnde and ipse D. Jesus
credentes a non credentibus.i. ab irae vasis vasa misericordiae discerne^s,
nemo inquit, venit ad me, nisi ei datum fuerit a patre meo. Wherefore that we
believe in him and live godly, it is neither in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in god that shows mercy; not because we are not bound to
will and run, but because he works in us both to will and to run. Whereupon
our Lord Jesus seuering believers from infidels, that is, the vessels of mercy
from ye vessels of wrath, says that none can come to him, Luc. 17.10.
but he to whom it is given of his father. Christ himself tells us, that we
are unprofitable servants, even when we have done the best we can. And yet
doubtless we should be right profitable, if we could yield any help at all to
our justification. And holy Moses says, Genesis 6.^.
that the imaginations of our hearts are evil continually: But sin and
corruption can be no mean to work man's justification. Wisely therefore says
the Apostle, that it is God which works in us, both the will and the deed,
^^ilip. 2.13.
even of his good pleasure (not for any merit or disposition which he finds
in our selves.) Again in another place; Cor. 3.5.
not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. Again; the natural man perceives not ye things
of ye spirit of God, Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishnes unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. ^om. 8.7.
Again; the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And Christ himself says; No man can
come to me, except my father draw him. Again in an other place; Without me can
ye do nothing. ^an. 6.44.
By which testimonies it is clear, ^an. 15.5.
yt man before he be regenerate, has not power, force, efficacy, or faculty to
do good, or once to consent to any spiritual act.

The third conclusion.
The meritorious cause as well of salvation as of justification, is Christ Jesus
and none else. This conclusion will be manifest, if we seriously reuolue in our
minds the wonderful mystery of man's redemption. In which kind of holy
meditation, whosoever shall devoutly exercise himself; that man doubtless will
epsy with facility, these four most excellent attributes of our most sweet
redeemer; to wit, his justice, his mercy, his wisdom, his love. For first,
as the worthiness of the person increases, so does also the offense against the
said person committed. The attribute of Gods justice.
it is great^r; when against our sovereign, the greatest of all: and
consequently, when we offend God, whose person is of infinite worthienes, our
offense must needs be infinite, howsoever our late papists flatter themselves
in their venials; and so man incapable of every infinite action, cannot
possibly yield any condign compensation: and yet god of his justice cannot
pardon sin, without condign compensatio^ for the same. Behold here Gods
justice. The attribute of Gods mercy.
neither is the party offended bound to accept the satisfaction of any other:
and conseqently God was not bound to accept his sons satisfaction for our
sins, though it were most sufficient, and of infinite dignity. In this Gods
mercy showed it self. Thirdly, on the one The attribute of Gods wisdom.
though he were of infinite dignity, because pure God is impassible; on the
other side, pure man was not able, because every his action was insufficient,
as of which no one amongst al could be infinite; God therefore appointed his
only son to be incarnate, to join humanity with divinity in hypostatical
union, and so to make atonement for our sins. For as man he was passible,
and as God he was able to give infinite dignity to his passion. Wherein we may
behold Gods divine wisdom. Fourthly, God seeing The attribute of Gods love.
and thraldom of the devil through sin, and having tender compassion of him
in such his distress, sent his own dear son to set him at liberty again;
and this he did of mere love, without all merits and deserts of man. Joan.
3.16.
For (as Christ himself says) God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting.

All (says the apostle) have sinned, Rom 3.23, 24.
and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Again in another place, Romans
5.18, 19.
As by the offense of one, the fault came on al men to condemnation, so by the
justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of
life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, many shall be made righteous. This is the stone (says Saint
Peter) which the builders refused, Act. 4.11.
which is become the head of the corner; neither is there salvation in any
other: for among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we
must be saved. We have an advocate with the father (says Saint John) even
Jesus Christ the just, 1. Io. 2.1, 2.
and he is the reconciliation for our sins. Christ redeemed us (says Saint
Paul,) from the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13.
while he was made a curse for us. Again in another place, In whom we have
redemption through his blood, that is, Col. 1.14.
the forgiveness of our sins. Again, Who did by himself purge our sins,
Heb. 1.2, 3.
and sits on the right hand of majesty on high. Again, For he has made
him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.21
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Apoc. 7.14.
These (says S. John) are they which came from great tribulation, and washed
their stoales, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Again in another
place; The blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all sin. ^. Io. 1.8.
I, even I am he (says God by his Prophet) that blotteth out thine
infirmities (not for thy deserts, ^sa. 43.55. ^sa. 53.5.
but) for mine own sake. Again in another place; He was wounded for our
iniquities, he was torn in pieces for our offenses. S. Austen shall conclude
this point, who writes in this manner. Dominus noster Jesus Christus mori
venit, August. sermon. 141 de temp. tom. 10.
peccare non venit, communicando nobiscum sine culpa poenam, and culpam soluit
and poenam. Our Lord came to die, he came not to sin; communicating pain with
us without sin, he loosed both sin, and the pain of sin.

The fourth conclusion.
The mercy of God is the efficient cause of man's justification, and Gods
glory the final cause of the same. Of the former speaks S. Paul when he
says; (...) 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy has he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of
the holy ghost. Again in another place, the same Apostle says; Romans 2.23, 24.
that al have sinned, and are freely justified by his grace. Again he says;
Which believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Romans 4.24.
Joan. 3.16.
And S. John says, that God of his mere mercy and love gave his only son for
the redemption of the world. Ephesians. 1.^, ^. Cor. 10.31.
Of the latter speaks the apostle when he says, that God has made us
accepted in his beloved, to the praise of his glory. Again in another place;
whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God; As if he had said, ye must refer al your thoughts, words, and works, to
Gods glory, because ye were created to that end. The prophet also says; Esa.
43.25. Esa. 48.11.
I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. Again in an other place; Surely I will not give my glory
to any other. But doubtless if God should justify man for any other end then
for his own glory, it would follow thereupon that his glory were given to
another. Prou. 16.^.
Yet as Solomon says, God has made al things for his own sake, yea even ye
wicked for ye day of evil.

The formal cause of man's justification, is not man's own inherent justice,
but the justice and righteousness of Christ Jesus. This conclusion contains
the maine point of a mighty controversy between the papists and us: for which
respect, I wish the reader to mark attentively my discourse. The late council
holden at Trent, sets down the opinion of the papists, in these words;
Demu^ vnica formalis causa est iustiti^ dei, no^ qua ipse iustus est, sed qua
nos iustos facit. To conclude, Conc. Trid. se^^. 6. can. 7.
the only formal cause is the justice of God, not that with which himself is
just, but with which he makes us just. This decree is quite contrary to my
conclusion, and they learned it of Aquinas their angelical doctor, whose
direction they follow in all theological questions. Thus does Aquinas write;
Aquinas 12. q. 111. ar. 1. ad primum.
Gratia non dicitur facere gratum effectiue, sed formaliter; quia per hanc homo
iustificatur, and dignus efficitur vocari Deo gratus secundum illud Colos. 1.
verse. 12. dignos nos fecit in partem sortis fanctorum in lumine. Grace does not
make one acceptable effectiuely, but formally, because man is justified by
grace, and is made worthy to be accepted of god, according to that which the
ap^stle says, He has made us worthy of the fellowship of saints in light.
Thus writes Aquinas; whose opinion being once confuted, al other papists
shall be confuted in him. I therefore say first, that Aquinas was deceived with
the popish vulgar latin translation called vulgata editio, which for all that,
Vulgata editio.
the late disholy vulgata editio has (worthy) there the greek and original
has (meet or fit) these are the very words of the original; Coloss. 1.12.
(...): Giving thanks to god even the father, who has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.

I say secondly, that since his foundation was a false translation, Aquinas
did, (who has made us worthy, Their own linguist is against them.
but) who has made us meet or fit for the fellowshippe of Saints;) and so
their own linquist Arias Montanus does interpret it, to their confusion. And
because the very life of this question stands wholly in this, if there be
any form or quality inherent in man, by which he is worthy of glory and
eternal life; I will prove pithily and succinctly, that man neither has in
him, nor can have any such quality at all; but that the formal cause of man's
justification is in Christ Jesus, not in himself.

The first argument.
The 1. argument.
No infinite accident can be in any finite subject; but the grace of
justification is infinite, Ergo it cannot be in man a finite subject. The
argument is in form, the proposition is granted of all, as well Philosophers
as Divines; and the assumtion is manifest, because the transgression was
infinite, as is proved in the third conclusion.

The second argument.
The 2. argument.
Being justified freely by his grace (says the Apostle;) thorough redemption
which is in Christ Jesus. Where we must Romans 3. v. 24.
yt when the apostle says (freely,) he does exclude

The 3. argument.
The 3. argument.
Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 5. v. 1.
through whom we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand. In
which

The 4. argument.
Not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, The 4. argument Phil. 3. v. 9.
even the righteousness which is of God through faith. In which words the
Apostle teaches us two things; First, that the formal cause

The fifth argument.
He that knew no sin, suffered the pain due for sin for our sakes, that
we might be made the justice of God in him. The 5 argument.
In which words the apostle teaches us two things; First, 2. Cor. 5. v. 21.
that Christ died for our justification. Secondly, that this justification is
the application of the justice of God in Christ. But doubtless the justice of
God, cannot be our inherent justice.

The 6. argument.
For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, The 6. argument.
and going about to stablishe their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. Romans 10. v. 3.4.
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, unto every one that
believes. In these words of the apostle, we are taught two things; First,
that to ascribe any righteousness to our selves,

The 5. conclusion.
Man is justified by sole and only faith; that is to say, faith only is the
instrument, by which man applies to himself, the righteousness of God in
Christ Jesus. The true meaning of this sentence, sole faith does justify.
This conclusion contains three things; First, that Gods righteousness is
that ^om. 4. v. ^.^.
he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. For what says the Scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. Thus says
the Apostle. (...). 4. v. 3.
his faith is counted for righteousness. Lo, not the worker, but the believer
is justified, and that by imputation.

The same apostle after a long discourse, to prove that a man is justified by
faith only, Romans 3. v. 28.
in another place adds these words; We therefore think yt a man is justified
by faith, without the works of the law. Lo, the holy apostle, after a long
disputation, which is implied in the word (therefore,) concludes, that we are
justified by faith without works. As if he had said; sole faith, only faith, or
faith without works does justify, albeit the papists cannot, or will not it
see. This whole process is confirmed, by the uniform testimonies of the
ancient fathers, who all ascribe our justification to sole faith.

S. Ambrose has these words, Iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes,
neque vicena reddentes, sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei. Ambros. in 3. cap.
ad Romans paulo ante finem. cap. 4. cap. 9. ad Rom, ^
They are justified freely, because they neither doing any work, nor making
any compensation, are justified by sole faith through the grace of God. The
like sayings he has in sundry other places. S. Chrysostom has these
words; Vnum hoc tantummodo donum Deo obtulimus, Chrysostom. hom. 1^ ad Romans
(...) med.
quod futura nobis promittenti credimus, atque hac solum via seruati sumus.
This one only gift do we present to God, that we believe him when he promises
us future gifts, and by this only way are we saved. Again in another place he
writes thus; Aut fidem dicit, decretum illam vocans. Ex sola quippe fide nos
saluauit. Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad Ephesians,
Or he means faith, calling it the decree. For by only faith has he saved
us.

S. Hilarie has these words; Mouet scribas remissum ab homine peccatum;
Hilarious in Ma^^* Can. 8.
hominem enim tantum in Jesus Christo contuebantur, and remissum ab eo quod lex
laxare non poterat. Fides enim sola iustificat. It vexes the Scribes, that man
forgiueth sins, for they only considered Christ Jesus to be man, and that he
forgave that which the law could not do. For sole faith does justify.

S. Basil has these words; Basiliu^ de hu^^ tom. 1.
Nam ea demum perfecta and omnimodae gloriatio est in Deo, quando neque propter
suam ipsius quis extollitur iustitiam, sed agnoscit se quidem verae destitui
iustitia, verum sola in Christum fide iustificatum esse.

For that is the perfect joy and al manner of comfort we have in God, when no
man is puffed up by reason of his own righteousness, but acknowledges
himself to be destitute of true justice in deed, and seeks to be justified
by sole faith in Christ.

Origin writes in this manner; Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem,
ita vt credens quis tantummodo iustificetur, Orig. ad Romans cap. 3. non proc. a
fine.
etiamsi nihil ab eo operis fuerit expletum.

He says, that the justification of sole faith is sufficient, so as a man may
be justified, if he only believe, although he do no works at all. And the
same Origin proves in the same place, by a long and learned discourse; that
we are justified by sole faith, and not by works.

S. Austen is plain in this point, who writes in this manner, Opus autem fidei
ipsa dilectio est: And charity it self is the work of faith. What plainer
testimony can be had? what papist can invent any solution for the same? who
but mad men will not yield thereunto? August. in Epist. Ioann. tract. 10. in
initio.

The 6. conclusion.
The good works of ye regenerate, do neither merit grace in this life, nor
glory in the world to come. This conclusion is against a graund and mighty
article in popish doctrine, but I will prove it by strong and irrefragable
reasons.

S. Paul writes to the Romans, in these words; the afflictions of this
present time are not worthy of the glory, The first reason. Romans 8.18.
which shall be showed unto us. The works of the regenerate (says S. Paul, as
ye see) are not worthy of heaven. They cannot therefore (say I) merit heaven,
because (as the papists themselves do grant) to merit heaven, and to be
worthy of heaven, is all one; the difference is only in words, not in sense.

The papists perceiving the force of this argument, use this seely evasion: A
frivolous distinction of the Papists.
although (say they) the actions of man be not worthy of heaven, neither
merit grace, as they proceed from man's free will; yet are they worthy of
heaven and meritorious, as they proceed from the holy ghost. But this is a
frivolous, childish, and miserable shift, only invented by the suggestion
Ergo, neither that which God does, can be deemed man's. The assumption, wherein
rests the difficulty if there be any at all, is manifest by man's sinful
actions. For the most cruel act that can be imagined, is not done without the
concourse of the holy ghost, as all learned papists do, and must confess.
Nevertheless man's sinful acts are so far from being Gods acts, as the
deformities and irregularities thereof be only man's, and never Gods; and yet
does God concur more effectually to those wicked acts, in that he is the
principal agent of the real and positive entities thereof, then man does or
can concur to any act of Gods, that is, to any good act himself does. Note
well, for God is the creator of the devil, as he is an angel, but not as he
is such an angel: and even so is God the author of man's acts, as they be
acts, but not as such acts. This place of the Apostle is handled more at large,
in my book of Motives.

I my self (says the Apostle) in my mind serve the law of god, The second
reso^ Romans 7.25.
but in my flesh the law of sin. Out of which words I note first, that Saint
Paul speaks of the regenerate throughout this whole chapter, because he
names himself, who was Gods chosen and elect vessel. For which respect and
the like expressed in this seventh chapter to the Romans, S. Austen changed
his opinion, Aug. li. 1. retract. cap. 22. p. 23.
and granted the apostle to speak here of the regenerate. I note secondly,
that the elect and regenerate do serve the law of sin. I note thirdly, that
the best livers are so far from meriting grace of glory; that they deserve (in
rigor of justice) eternal death, because death is the reward of sin. Which
for that Saint Augustine could not well digest at the first, Romans 6. v. 23.
he thought that S. Paul's words in this chapter, were to be understood of the
reprobate, and not of the elect and godly sort; but after he had pondered the
text deeply, he altered his opinion. This is confirmed in these words of the
self same chapter, Romans 7.23. The first conf^^^mation.
but I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind,
leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. By these words
of Paul it is evident, that albeit he were the child of God, yet could he not
merit any thing in Gods sight, but rather in rigor of justice provoke his
heavy displeasure against him. For where or what could be his merit, who was
prisoner to the law of sin?

Again it is confirmed in these words; Romans 7.19. The second confirmation.
Romans 6.23.
For I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not,
that do I. Thus says saint Paul, and doubtless since he did the evil which
he would not, he sinned though he were regenerate; and because he sinned he was
worthy of condemnation, for that death is the stipend of sin.

Again it is confirmed in these words; For the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal sold under sin. Romans 7.14. The third confirmation.
Thus says S. Paul of himself, and yet is it true, that one under sin can
merit nothing, save hell fire and eternal pain.

Again it is confirmed in these words; Now if I do that I would not, it is no
more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. Romans 7.^0.
Thus says Saint Paul of himself, and yet because sin abode in him, and did
that that was offensive in gods sight, he could neither merit grace nor
eternal life, as is already proved. The fourth confirmation.
Further then this, no man lives without sin, (as the papists grant) and yet
is every sin mortal, as I have proved elsewhere.

The first objection.
Saint Paul speaks of original concupiscence, which remains even in the
regenerate after baptism, but is no sin at all. For he only calls it
sin, because it provoke a man to sin, as a man's writing is called his hand,
for that it is written with his hand: which exposition S. Austen approves in
sundry places of his works.

The answer.
Austen does undoubtedly judge it to be sin; neither shall any papist in the
world, ever be able to prove the contrary, howsoever they bare the world in
hand. I will only allege a few places out of S. Austen, and make effectual
application of the same; to which when any either Rhemist or Romist shall
answer sufficiently, I promise to become his bondsman.

The first place of Austen.
Concupiscentia carnis aduersus quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, Aug. contr.
Iuli^n. lib. 5. cap. 3. tom. 7.
and peccatum est* quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis; and
poena peccati est, quia reddita est meritis inobedientis; and causa peccata
est, defectione consentientis, vel contagione nascentis. The concupiscence of
the flesh, against which the good spirit strives, is sin, because it is
disobedient against the dominion of the mind; and it is the punishment of sin,
because it is inflicted for the deserts of disobedient (Adam;) and it is the
cause of sin either by the default of him that consents, or by the
contagion of the child that is borne. Thus says S. Austen. In which words he
expresses three things precisely; first, that concupiscence in the regenerate
is the pain or punishment Austen only calls it sin, because it is the cause
of sin.

The second place of Saint Austen
Neque enim nulla est iniquitas, Aug. con^. Julian. lib. 6. ca. 8. tom. 7
cum in vno homine vel superiora inferioribus tur piter seruiunt; vel inferiora
superioribus contumaciter reluctantur, etiamsi vincere non sinantur. For it is
some iniquity, when in one man either the superior parts shamefully serve the
inferior; or the inferior parts stubbornly strive against the superior,
although they be not suffered to prevail. Thus says S. Austen: whose words
are so plain, as the papists can not possibly invent any evasion at all. For
he says in express terms, that the rebellion, which is between the flesh
and the spirit is sin, even when it is resisted and cannot prevail: at which
time and in which respect, the papists will have it to be merit and no sin at
all.

The third place of Saint Austen.
Virtus est charitas, qua id quod diligendum est diligitur; August. epist. 29.
ad Hier. tom. 2.
haec in alijs mayor, in alijs minor, in alijs nulla est, plenissima vero quae
iam non possit augeri, quamdiu hic homo viuit, est in nemine; quamdiu autem
augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est. Ex quo
vitio non est iustus in terra qui faciat bonum, and non peccet. 3. Reg. 8.
Psalm. 142. 1. Joan. 1. Matthew. 6,
Ex quo vitio non iustificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis viuens. Propter quod
vitium* si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, nosmetipsos seducimus, and
veretas in nobis non est. Propter quodetiam quantumlibet profecerimus,
necessarium est nobis dicere; dimitte nobis debita nostra, cum iam omnia in
baptismo dicta, facta, cogitata, dimissa sint. Charity is a virtue, with which
we love that that ought to be loved. This in some is more, in other less, in
others none at all; but the perfect charity which can not be increased while
a man here lives, is found in none; so long as it can be increased, that
doubtless which is less then it should be, proceeds of sin, by reason
of which sin, there is not one just upon earth, that does good and sins not;
by reason of which vice, none living can be justified in Gods sight; by reason
of which vice, if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us; Concupiscence is sin in the regenerate.
by reason of which sin, how much soever we profit, yet must we say of
necessity, Forgive us our trespasses, even after that al our thoughts, words
and works, are forgiven in baptism. Thus says saint Austen. Out of whose most
golden words, I note sundry things, to the everlasting Austen says, that no
man can have charity in that perfect degree, which the law requires. Secondly,
that the want thereof proceeds

The fourth place of Saint Austen.
August. de nupt. and concupisc. lib. 1 cap. 25. tom. 7.
Si in parente baptizato potest and esse, and peccatum non esse, cur eadem ipsa
in prole peccatum est? Adhaec respondetur, dimitti concupisce^tiam carnis in
baptismo non vt non sit, sed vt in peccatum non imputetur. If it be demanded,
how concupiscence can be without sin in the parent that is baptized, and yet
be sin in the child; I answer that concupiscence is forgiven in baptism,
yet not so that it remains not still, but that it be not imputed for sin.
Thus says Saint Austen, in which words he shows plainly, that concupiscence
remains as well in the baptized parent, as in the unbaptized child; yet with
this difference, that it is sin in the parent, though not for sin imputed;
but in the child it is both sin, and so reputed.

The fifth place of Saint Austen.
August. de nupt. (...) concupisc. lib. 1 cap. 29. tom 7.
Ideo apostolus non ait facere bonu^ sibi non adiacere sed perficere. Multum^n,
boni facit, qui facit quod scriptu^ est, postconcupiscentias tuas non eas; sed
non perficit, quia non implet quod scriptum est, non concupisces. The Apostle
therefore says not, that he has not power to do good, but that he can not
perfect that which is good. For he does great good, Ecclesiast. cap. 18 30.
Exodus 20.17.
who does that which is written, follow not thy lusts; but he does not perfect
his well doing, because he fulfilleth not that which is written, Thou shall not
lust. Thus says S. Austen. Out of whose words I note first, that S. Austen
speaks these words of the Mark well this illation: for it strikes the
papists dead.
thou shall not lust) prohibiteth not only actual lust done with consent, but
also original lust without consent; and consequently, that concupiscence
remaining in the regenerate, is sin properly and formally. I prove it,
because S. Paul could not perform this precept, as S. Austen truly and
learnedly observed: and yet concerning actual consent, S. Paul was free and
innocent, as who fought mightily against his concupiscence, and would in no
wise yield unto the same. He was therefore guilty by reason of original
concupiscence, which abode in him against his will. Romans 7.18, ^^, 20.
To will is present with me (says S. Paul) but I find no means to perform
that which is good, for I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil
which I would not, that do I. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I
that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. Lo, the holy Apostle confesses
plainly, that he sins against his will, and that by reason of original
concupiscence, which remained in him after Baptism. S. Austen sings the same
song, and yet our Papists will not have it sin: and why? because forsooth, it
overthrows their holy iustifications, their inherent purities, their condign
merits, their mutual satisfactions, and their pharisaicall supererogations.
And yet Petrus Lombardus their worthy master of Sentences (whose book to
this day is publicly read in their schools of Divinity) utterly condemns
their heretical doctrine in this point: Lombard. lib. 3. ^nt. did. 19.
these are his express words.

Secundum animas vero iam redempti sumus ex part, non ex toto, aculpa, non a
poena; nec omnino a culpa: non enim ab ea sic redempti sumus vt non sit, sed vt
no^ dominetur. But touching our souls we are redeemed in part, not wholly, from
the fault, not from the pain, Now ye papists, either recant your doctrine, or
else cry fire and ^agot for your master.
neither wholly from the (sin or) fault. For we are not so redeemed from it,
that it be not (in us,) but that it rule not (over us.) Thus writes the
venerable popish master, our reverend father Lombarde: out of whose words we
may gather with facility, so much as will serve our turn against al papists. For
first, he says yt we are redeemed in part, but not in all. Peruse the 8.
conclusion in the answer to the last reply of the fifth objection.
Secondly, that we are not wholly redeemed from sin. Thirdly, he tells us how
and in what manner we be redeemed from sin; to wit, that albeit sin still remain
in us, yet has it not such dominion over us, as it can enforce us to consent
thereunto.

The second objection.
Romans 8.1.
If concupiscence were sin in the regenerate, it would make them guilty of
eternal death, and yet are they free from all condemnation, as witnesses the
Apostle.

The answer.
I answer that concupiscence as well as other sins, is apt of it own nature
to condemn us, but God of his mercy does neither impute it nor other sins
of humane frailty unto the faithful, for the merits of Christ Jesus.

The first reply.
Forma dat esse ^^i.
Every thing (as the Philosophers truly say) has the denomination of the
formalitie thereof; but doubtless the formalitie of original sin is taken
away in baptism; other else in vain were infants baptized, and so there only
remains the materialitie, as the schools term it, that is, a certain
rebellion and inclination to sinne-ward.

The answer.
I answer, that the formalitie of original sin is of two sorts, or double;
Ratio formalis originalis peccati
to wit, the guilte and the deordination. The former by which the party that
sins is bound to pain temporal and eternal, is remitted by grace and
baptism in this life. The latter, which is a certain disorder and (...) in
the mind, will, and actions of man* continues still, even to the last hour.

The second reply.
Natural things neither make us worthy of praise nor of dispraise, as the
Philosophers all grant; but certes concupiscence in man is natural, and so can
it not be sin.

The answer.
I answer that concupiscence as it is natural indeed, and given to man as
man in the state of innocence, is ordinate, agreeable to reason, and
altogether without sin: but concupiscence as it is connatural to corrupt man,
is inordinate, rebellious, against the spirit, and altogether sinful in Gods
sight.

The third reply.
S. Austen in one place says plainly, August. de (...) lib. 1. cap. 25.
that original concupiscence is no sin, unless we consent unto it. These
are the words, Quanto magis absque culpa est in corpore non consentientis, si
absque culpa est in corpore dormientis? How much more is it without sin, in
the body of him that consents not; if it be without sin, in his body that
is a sleep?

The answer.
I answer, that S. Austen means nothing less, then to deny concupiscence to
be sin, for otherwise he should be contrary to himself, who affirms it to
be sin in many places of his works, as is already proved; but he only
labors to persuade the reader, that it is never imputed to the faithful,
that stoutly strive against it. And that this is the true meaning of S. Austen,
I prove it by the judgment of S. Ambrose, Amb. libr. 10. epist. 84. tom. 3.
concerning the self same matter. Thus does he write.

Caro contra spiritum, and contra carnem spiritus concupiscit: ^ec inuenitur in
vllo hominum tanta concordia, 1. Joan. 1.
vt legi mentis lex quae membris est insita non repugnet. Propter quod ex
omnium sanctorum persona accipitur quod Ioannes apostolus ait; si dixerimus
quoniam peccatum non habemus, nosipsos seducimus, and veritas in nobis non est:
cum tamen idem ipse dicat; qui natus est ex Deo, peccatum non facit, qoniam
semen ipsius in eo manet, and non potest peccare, quonia^ ex Deo natus est.
Vtrumque ergo verum est, quia and nemo sine peccato est, in eo quod nemo est
fine lege peccati; and qui natus est ex Deo, peccatum non facit, quia per legem
mentis, id est, per charitatem quae Dei semen est, peccatum non facit. Charitas
enim operit multitudine^ peccatoru^. the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh; neither is there found in any man such concord,
but that the law (of concupiscence) which is ingrafted in the members,
fights against the law of the mind. And for that cause Saint John's words are
taken, Note here against the papists, that the faithful ^oth are sinners and
just at once.
as spoken in the person of all saints, If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us, when for all that; the same apostle says,
He that is borne of God, sins not, because his seed abides in him, and he
cannot sin because he is of God. Therefore both are true, because no man is
without sin, for that no man is without the law of sin, (that is,
concupiscence) and he that is borne of God sins not, because he sins not
by the law of his mind, that is, by charity, which is Gods seed; for charity
covers Austen means as S. Ambrose does, that they are without sin, to whom
sin is not imputed. Yea, Aquinas himself grants, (which is to be admired)
that the inordinate motion of sensuality, even which goes before the
deliberation of reason, is sin though in a low degree. These are his
express words:

Dicendum, quod illud quod homo facit sine deliberatione rationis, ^q. 12. q.
74. ar. ^. contr. and ad 3.
non perfect ipse facit, quia nihil operatur ibi id quod est principale in
homine; vnde non est perfect actus humanus, and per consequens non potestesse
perfect actus virtutis vel peccati, sed aliquid imperfectum in genere horum.
Vnde talis motus sensualitatis rationem praeueniens est peccatum veniale, quod
est quiddam imperfectum in genere peccati.

I answer, that that which man does without the deliberation of reason, he
does it not perfectly, because that which is the chief in man works nothing
there; wherefore it is not perfectly man's act, and consequently it cannot be
perfectly the act of virtue or of sin, but some imperfect thing in this
kind. Whereupon such a motion of sensuality preventing reason is a venial
sin, which is a certain imperfect thing in the nature of sin.

The fourth reply.
Concupiscence at the most is but a little venial sin, as S. Thomas Aquinas
truly says; therefore it cannot bring a man to hell, neither debar him of
heaven.

The answer.
I answer, that every sin is mortal undoubtedly, as which is flatly against
Gods holy commandments. For that the transgression of Gods commandments, is
a grievous mortal sin, no man ever did or will deny; Galat. 3.10.
Cursed is every one (says the apostle) that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them. Again in another place,
Romans 6.23.
The reward or wage of sin is death. And S. James says, Whosoever shall
keep the whole law, Iac. 2.10.
and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. Now that every sin
as well great as small is against Gods holy law, I prove sundry ways. First
because the Apostle says, that al our thoughts, words, 1. Cor. 10.31.
for most certain it is, that no sin at al is referred to Gods glory. For
no sin, no, not the least of al is referrible to god; Romans 3.8. 2. Cor. 5.21.
but is of it own nature, repugnant to his glory. Secondly, because we must
Mat. 1^.36.
as Christ himself tells us; and yet (as every child can perceive) God most
merciful and most just, will never lay that to our charge, which is not against
his holy law. Thirdly, because the apostle says Romans 6.23.
Fourthly, because sin in general is defined by the fathers, to be Amb. de
Par. ca. ^ Aug. contr. ^aust. 22. cap. 27.
which definition could not be true, if any little sin could stand with his
commandment. Fifthly, because famous popish writers, as Ioannes Gerson,
Michael Baius, Almayn, and our own Bishop of Rochester, In the seventh
chapter* and fif^ conclusion of purgatory.
in my book of Motives. Sixthly, because Durandus and Josephus Angles, Vide
Joseph. Angles in 2. s. d. 37. diffic. 6.
(to whom the Schools of the papists this day accord,) do sharply impugn
Aquinas his doctrine; in that he teaches Venials, not to be against Gods law.

The 7. conclusion.
Although good works do not justify, yet are they precious in Gods sight, Mat.
10. v* 42.
and never want their reward. Christ himself proves this conclusion, when he
promises that not so much as a cup of cold water given in his name, shall
pass without reward. Mat. 19. v. 29. Luc. 18. v. 29.
And in another place he says, That whosoever shall leave house, parents,
brethren, wife, or children for his sake, shall receive much more in this world,
and in the world to come, life everlasting. And in another place Christ tells
us, that when the son of man comes in his glory, and al his holy angels
with him, Mat. 25. v. 34.35 Romans 2.6.
then will he pronounce them blessed, that have done the works of charity to
their poor neighbors. God (says S. Paul,) will reward every man according to
his works. The Lord rewarded me (says holy David) according to my
righteousness; Psalm. 17. v. 20.
and according to the pureness of mine hands, he recompensed me. Yea, it is a
thing so certain with God, to reward ye good deeds of his faithful servants,
that the best livers give great respect thereunto. Hebr. 11. v. 26.
Moses (says S. Paul) esteemed the rebuke of Christ, greater riches then ye
treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of the reward. Which
reward nevertheless proceeds of Gods mere mercy and bountiful benignity,
without all deserts of man. Which the great papist friar John de Combis well
observed, Joan. de Combis in comp. theol. veritatis.
when in his theological Su^me, he wrote in this manner; Deus nos punit citra
condignu^, remunerat vltra condignum. God punishes us less then we be worthy,
and rewards us far above our deserts.

The first objection.
2. Joan. 3. v. 7.
S. John says, Qui facit iustitiam iustus est. He that does justice, he is
just. Therefore a man becomes just, even by doing of good works.

The answer.
a bulwark, for their justification by good works. For when he says, he that
does justice, is just, it is all one as if he had said, when one does good
works, it is a sign that he is just, because none can do good works, unless
he be just. For as a tree cannot bring forth good fruit, unless it first be
good; even so cannot any man do good works unless he first be the child of god.
The reason is evident, because the effect must follow, and not go before the
cause. For as saint Austen gravely says; August. de fid. and open. ca. 14. tom.
4
Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. Works follow him
that is already justified, but they go not before him that is to be
justified. I say secondly, that he that does justice, is just by

The second objection.
Saint James says, that a man is justified by good works, Iac. 2.21, 24.
and not by faith only; and he proves it because Abraham was justified by
offering up his son Isaac.

The answer.
I say first, that Abraham was justified indeed, before he did any good work;
and I prove it by Saint Paul, Romans 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
whose words

I say secondly, that Abraham offered his son Isaac, not to of his faith, and
that he was already the child of God. For as S. Paul says, that ob^ation was
for the trial of Abraham's faith. These are the words: (...) By faith Abraham
offered up Isaac when he was tried, Heb. 1^* ^. 17.
or proved (for so the Greek word does significantly express. Genesis 22. v. 1.
) And Moses makes the matter more plain, in these words; And after these
things, God did prove or try Abraham: (where the Hebrew word (...) signifies
to make trial.) And ye proof follows in these words; Genesis 22. v. 2.
Take now thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee to the land
of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering, upon one of the
mountains, which I will show thee. Out of which words, with the circumstances
before and after recorded in the scripture; I gather that Abraham was perfitly
justified, before he offered his son Isaac. Genesis 17. v. 19.
as it is written; Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son in deed, and thou
shall call his name Isaac, and I will establishe my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, Genesis 22. v. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7* 8, 9, 10.
otherwise he could never have yielded thereunto, in such manner and with such
alacrity of mind as he did.

I say thirdly, that S. James speaks of justification before offering up of
Abraham's son, was to try Abraham's faith, and obedience, as I said before;
which I gather out of these words, (for now I know that thou fear God.) I
note secondly, yt it was also to make known unto the world, that great faith,
fear, and love, which Abraham had toward God. As if God had said; I knew
before, thy faith and love toward me; but now I have made the same known unto
the world.

The third objection.
S. James says plainly, Iac. 1. v. 25.
that a man may keep the law perfitly, and be justified for so doing. These
are the words; Whos^ looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, he not being a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, shall be
blessed in his deed.

The answer.
I say first, that no man can keep the law perfitly in this life, as I have
already proved copiously. I say secondly, yt though Romans 7. v. 20.
but the sin that dwells in us. Whereupon S. Austen says very finely; Ecce
quemadmodum qui ambulant in vijs, domini, August. in Psalm. 118. conc* 2. in
fine.
non operantur peccatum* and tamen non sunt sine peccato quia iam non ipsi
operantur iniquitatem, sed quod habitat in eis peccatum. Behold how they that
walk in the ways of the Lord do not sin, and yet are they not without
sin; because now not they work iniquity, but the sin that dwells in
them. I say thirdly, Iac. 1. v. 12.
Blessed is the man, that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

The 4. objection.
S. Luke says, that Zacharias and Elizabeth were just before God, Luc. 1. v. 5.
not only before men; and that they walked in all the commandments of the
Lord, without reproof.

The answer.
Romans 4. v. 25. Math. 19. v. 17. Luc. 10. v. ^9.
then Christ needed not to have died for them, or to have risen again for their
justification. For the perfect fulling of the law, gives life to the doer
thereof. I say secondly, Joan. 1. verse 8. Romans 3. v. 10.12.
we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. And of whom S. Paul
says; There is none righteous, Psalm. 143. v. 2.
no not one, they have all gone out of the way, there is none that does good,
no not one. And of whom the Psalm^graphe says; for in thy sight shall none
that lives be justified. And of whom S. Austen says; August. lib. 9. confess.
cap. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. Woe
even to the best livers on earth, if thou extend not thy mercy toward them.

I say thirdly, that they were just before God, as were David, 2. Reg. 12. v.
7. Mat. 26. v. 74. Act. 9. v. 1.2.
but because God reputed them so perfitly just, as if they had never sinned;
and of his great mercy thorough the merits of Christ Jesus, did not impute
the breach of his law unto them; according to this saying of the scripture.
Blessed are they, Romans 4 v. 7^.
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man,
to whom the Lord imputes no sin.

The fifth objection.
Genesis 6. v. 9. 4. Reg. 20. v. 3.
The regenerate live without sin, and so may they justly merit heaven. For we
read that Noah was just, and perfect, and upright, and walked with God.
Remember (says David) how I have walked before thee in truth, 1. Cor. 2. v.
6.
and with a perfect heart, 2. Par. 15. v. 17. Psalm. 118.
and have done that which is good in thy sight. We speak wisdom (says the
apostle,) among them that are perfect: and it is written of king Asa, yt his
heart was perfect all his days. In another place ye prophet says, that he
has not swarued from Gods law. In another place, he requires God to judge
him according to his righteousness. Psalm. 7.8*


The answer.
I say first, that as the Prophet David in one place, required Psalm. 7. v. 8.
Psalm. 142. v. 2. Psalm. 118. v. 120.
so did he desire God in another place not to enter into judgment with him,
because none living could be justified in his ^^ght. So then his meaning is
not, to oppose his own righteousness to the just judgment of God, (at which
he ever trembled and never durst abide it, as he says in another place,
Dionysius, Carthus. in Psalm. 7.
) but only to show his own innocent dealing, in respect of the malicious and
wicked practices of his enemies: although the papists to establish their
pharisaical justice, would have it to be understood of David's own merits. I
say secondly, that the perfitnesse which the scripture Philip. 3. v. 12.
To which purpose holy Bernard writes excelle^tly, in these words; Bernard. de
ve^b^ Esaiae, sermon. 5.
Nostra enim (si qua est) humilis iustitia, recta for^itan* sed non pura. Nisi
forte meliores nos esse credimus quam patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter
quam humiliter aiebant; omnes iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae
mulieris. For our base justice (if we have any) is perchance right, 1. Cor.
1.30. Coloss. 2.10.
but not pure or perfit^ unless perhaps we believe, that we are better then
our fathers were, who spoke as truly as humbly; All our righteousness is as
filthy clouts. But Christ (as the apostle says) is our justice, in him we are
perfect and consummate.

I say thirdly, that the regenerate are said to live perfectly and without sin,
in that they strive against sin, and do not suffer Bernard well observed and
uttered in this manner; Quomodo enim pura iustitia, vbi adhuc non potest culpa
d^esse? recta proinde interim videri potest iustitiae hominum, Bern. vbi sup^.
^.
si tamen peccato non consentiant, vt non regnet in eorum mortali corpore: For
how can their justice be pure, who cannot be without sin? yet may the justice
of men be right, if they consent not to sin, nor suffer it to reign in their
mortal bodies. In which respect S. John says, 1. Joan. 3. v. 9.
that the faithful sin not, because they suffer not sin to reign in them.

The reply.
If the regenerate cannot fulfill and keep the law exactly, then is it given
in vain, and without cause are we charged with the obedience thereof.

The answer.
1. Cor. 1. v. 30. Colos. 2. v. 10.
sins, and misery, and are thereby excited to seek for remission of our
sins, and to be clad with the righteousness of Christ Jesus.

The reply.
The apostle says in one place, that the just are not under the law, Romans 6.
v. 14. 1. Tim. 1. v. 9.
but under grace. And in another place he says, yt there is no law for the
just man: but where there is no law, there can be no transgression, and
consequently no sin at all.

The answer.
Romans 1.8.1. Romans 8.13. Joan. 14.15. 1. Joan. 2. v. 3, 4.5 Romans 6.12.
I answer, that the just are free from the coaction, curse, and condemnation of
the law, as the apostle witnesses in another place; but yet are they under the
obedience of the law, and bound to frame their lives according to the prescript
rule thereof, as other scripture makes mention.

The reply.
How can any man frame his life after the prescription of the law, if none
living can keep the law as you defend?

The answer.
I answer, that if ye were well studied in your own doctors, and should
mark well what they write, ye could not be ignorant of this point. Harken
therefore what your own Bernard says, and after you have heard him, remember
well his words and never forget his holy instruction. Thus writes he in one
place; Cupiebat dissolui, Bernard. de aduent. Dom. sermon* 6. tom. 1.
and cum Christo esse sciens quod peccatum separans inter nos and deum penitus
auferri non poterit, donec liberemur a corpore. Sequitur; itaque dico vobis
genus illud peccati quod toties conturbat nos (concupiscentias loquor and
desideria mala) reprimi quidem debet and potest per gratiam dei, vt non regnet
in nobis, nec demus membra nostra arma iniquitatis peccato, and sic nulla
damnatio esthis qui sunt in Christo Jesus; sed non eiicitur nisi in morte,
quando sic discerpimur, vt anima sepaietur a corpore. The Apostle did covet to
be dissolved and to be with Christ, knowing that sin which makes a division
between God and us, Lo, concupiscence in the regenerate is properly sin*
cannot wholly be taken away while we remain in this body. I therefore say
unto you, this kind of sin, which so often troubles us, (I speak of
concupiscence and evil desires) ought and may be repressed by the grace of
God, so as it reign not in us, nor we give our members to be weapons of
iniquity unto sin, and so there is no damnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus; but it is not cast out save only in death, when we are so torn, that
the soul is divided from the body. Thus he says in another place, Sit ergo in
cord iustitia, and iustitia quae ex fide est. Bernard. in vig^. not* dom.
sermon. 1.
Haec enim sola habet gloriam apud deum. Sit etiam in ore confessio ad salutem,
and securus iam suscipe eum qui in Bethlehem Iudae nascitur, Iesum Christum
filium Dei. Let righteousness therefore be in thine heart, even that justice
which is of faith; for only that righteousness or justice has glory with
God, (howsoever righteousness be esteemed among men.) Have also confession in
thy mouth unto salvation and then receive him with security, that is borne in
Bethlehem of Judah, Jesus Christ the son of God. Thus he says in the third
place; Omne quod natum est ex Deo, non peccat; Bernard. de great. and lib. arbi.
page 1189.
sed hoc dictum est de praedestinatis ad vitam: non quod omnino non peccent,
sed quod peccatum ipsis non imputetur. All that is borne of god sins not,
but this is spoken of the predestinate to life, not because they sin not at al,
but for that sin is not imputed to them.

Thus does he say in the fourth place, Vtique quod factum est, Bernard. sermon.
1. in annu^^ia^.
non potest non fieri; ipso tamen non imputante, erit quasi non fuerit. Quod
propheta quoque considerans ait; Beatus vir cui non imputabit Dominus peccatum.
The sin doubtless that is done, can not be undone; yet for that God does not
impute sin unto us, we shall be as if we had not sinned: which the prophet
considering says; Blessed is the man to whom God shall not impute sin.

Out of these four places containing most comfortable and Bernard, gives a
deadly wound to the papists. For he says, that that concupiscence which
remains to death, does separate us from God. Which effect, nothing but that
which is properly sin, can possibly work in man. I note Bernard to the
testimony of saint Austen, Popery is stricken dead.
cited in the answer to the first objection, in the seventh conclusion: and
that done, a mighty article of popish doctrine, will be utterly overthrown.

The sixth objection.
^. Pet. 1. ver^* 10.
Wherefore (says S. Peter,) labor the more, that by good works you may make
sure your vocation and election? Therefore good works are a mean for us to
attain to the effect of Gods predestination; that is, to life everlasting: as
whose certainetie (if the apostle say truly) is procured by man's freewil and
good works.

The answer.
regard of our works. For (as the apostle says,) he chose us in Christ, before
ye foundation of the world: (not because we were holy, but) that we should be
holy. I say secondly, that the words vulgata editio. For which and like
respects your late Tridentine council has so magnified the same. I say
thirdly, that good works are the proper effects of predestination Aquinas and
their double glossa interlinialis and ordinaria do give the same exposition
with me; to wit, Good worke^ yield moral certitude of our justification.
that the apostle wills us, to make known our eleccion by doing of good
works, as which yield to man a moral certitude thereof.

The seventh objection.
Saint Paul wills the Philippians to work their salvation, with fear and
trembling: but doubtless, Phil. 2. verse. 12.
he that can work his salvation, may by his works merit heaven.

The answer.
I say first, with the selfsame apostle in the next verse following, Philip.
2.13. Ephesians. 2* 8.
even of his good pleasure. Yea, as he says in another place; we are saved by
grace through faith, and that neither of our selves, nor yet of works, lest any
man should boast himself. And therefore the apostle means nothing less, then
that we should purchase and merit heaven by our good works. I say secondly
with devout Bernard, that the ready way to attain salvation, Necesse est primo
omnium credere, Bernard. sermon. 1. in annuntiat* (...) Mariae*
quod remissionem peccatorum habere non possis, nisi per indulgentiam Dei:
deinde, quod nihil prorsus habere queas operis boni, nisi and hoc dederit ipse;
postremo, quod aeternam vitam nullis potes operibus promereri, nisi gratis
detur and illa. First of all, thou must believe of necessity, that thou can
not have remission of thy sins unless God will give thee a pardon for the
same. Again thou must believe, that thou can not have any good works at all,
unless thou receive it at Gods hand; Last of all, thou must believe that thou
can not merit eternal life by any ^phes. 4.24.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained, that we should walk in them.

The eight objection.
Redeem thy sins with righteousness (says the prophet,) and thine iniquities
with mercy toward the poor. (...). 4.24.
Therefore with good works we may satisfy for our sins, and procure Gods
favor toward us.

The answer.
Bernards gloss unto the same, Romans 8.18. Bernard. sermon. 1. in annu^. B.M.V.
who writes thus; Iam vero de aeterna vita scimus, quia non sunt condignae
passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam, nec si vnus omnes sustineat. Neque
enim talia sunt hominum merita, vt propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex iure,
aut Deus iniuriam aliquam faceret nisi eam donaret. Nam vt tacea^ quod merita
omnia Dei dona sunt* and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est, quam Deus
homini; quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam? denique quis melior est
propheta* cui dominus ipse tam insigne testimonium perhibet, dicens, virum
inueni secundum cor meum? veruntamen and ipse necesse habuit dicere deo, non
intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo Domine. Now touching eternal life, we know
that the sufferings of this time are not worthy of ye glory to come, no not if
one man abide al. For the merits of men are not such, that for them eternal
life is due by right, or that god should do some injury, if he gave it not. For
to let pass that all merits are the gifts of God, The papists are c^^^ounded
in their L. Abbot.
and so man is rather debtor to God for them, then God to man; what are al
merits to so great glory? In fine, who is better then the prophet, to whom our
Lord gives so worthy testimony, saying; I have found a man according to my
heart? for all that, he had need to say to god; Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, O Lord. In which words the papists are utterly condemned, by their
own approved doctor. For first, S. Bernard says,

I say secondly, that the Hebrew word ((...)) does properly Theodor. orat. ^ in
Danielem.
and thy tyranny into mercy and conpassion toward the poor. Thus does
Theodoretus expound this text.

I say thirdly, that albeit we cannot redeem our sins in Gods Bernard; yet may
we redeem them before men, while we reconcile our selves to those whom we
have offended, and make restitution where we have done wrong. And of this kind
of redemption, may the Prophet not unfitly be understood.

The reply.
Not only S. Bernard in the words by you alleged, but the other fathers
usually and* generally do acknowledge the merit of good works, which you and
your solifidians cannot abide.

The answer.
Bernard already cited, to which for better confirmation, I add these his
words in another place; ^^^nard. in Cant. ^.67.
Deest gratiae quicquid meritis deputas. Nolo meritu^ quod gratia^ excludat:
horre^ quicquid de me^ est vt ^im meus, nisi quod illud magis forsitan meum
est, quod me meum facit. Gratia reddit me mihi iustificatu^ gratis, and sic
liberatum a seruitute peccati. It derogateth from grace whatsoever thou
ascribest to merit. I will no merit, that excludes grace. I abhor
whatsoever is of mine own, that I may be mine own, unless perchance that is
more mine own, which makes me mine own. Grace justifies me to my self
freely, and so delivers me from the bondage of sin.

(...) well, how (...) Fathers (...) be merit to (...) works.
but for Gods acceptance and promise sake. That is to say, they term good
works meritorious, because God has promised to accept the works of the
faithful as worthy, for the worthiness of his son; and for his merits to
reward them with heaven, as if they had merited the same. For which respect
either ever or almost ever, they join merit and grace together. This verity
will be manifest, if we ponder deeply, what famous popish doctors have
written herein. Bernard has these express words; Sic non est quod iam
quaeras quibus meritis speremus bona, ^^rnard. super (...). sermon. 68.
praesertim cum audias apud prophetam; non propter vos, sed propter me ego
faciam, dicit dominus: sufficit ad meritum, scire quod non sufficiant merita.
So there is no cause, that thou should now ask by what merits we hope for
glory, especially since thou hear the prophet say; I will do it says the
Lord, not for your sake, but for mine own. It is sufficient to merit, to
know that our merits are not sufficient. Thus says devout Bernard, who though
he lived in the greatest mist of popery, and so was carried away with some
errors of his time; yet did he teach most christian doctrine, almost in all
his works: and because he was reputed a great papist with the papists, his
testimony is ever most forcible against them and their proceedings.

Aquinas has these express words: Manifestum est autem, Aquin. 1^. q. ar. 1.
in co^p.
quod inter Deum and hominem est maxima inaequalitas, (in infinitum enim
distant) totum quod est hominis bonum, est a Deo: Vnde non potest hominis a Deo
esse iustitia secundum absolutam aequalitatem* sed secundum proportionem
quandam, in quantum scilicet vterque operatur secundum modum suum. Modus autem
and mensura humanae virtutis homini est a Deo, and ideo meritum hominis apud
Deum esse non potest, nisi secundum praesuppositionem diuinae ordinationis; ita
scilicet, vt id homo consequatur a Deo per suam operationem, quasi mercedem, ad
quod Deus ei virtutem operandi destinauit. And it is manifest, that between
God and man there is exceeding great inequality (for they differ in infinite;)
all the good that man has, is of God. Wherefore man's justice received of God,
cannot be according to absolute equality, but after a certain proportion, to
wit, in as much as either works according to his condition. Now man has the
measure and condition of his virtue from God, and therefore man's merit cannot
be with God, save only according to the supposal of Gods holy ordinance: so to
wit, that man may attain that at Gods hand by his working, as reward, to which
God has appointed his power of working. Thus writes the master papist
Aquinas; who utterly overthrows all popish merit, as it is this day defended
in the church of Rome. Note well (...) doctrine.
For first, (mark well gentle Reader, for this is a weighty point,) Aquinas
tells us, that where there is not perfert equality, there can be no merit
properly. Secondly, he grants

Durandus their own schooleman denies every man's works how just or holy
soever he be, ^eritum largo ^^do.
to be simply and properly meritorious; but only to merit in an improper and
large kind of speech; Meritum (inquit) proprie de condigno est, cui
simpliciter debetur aequale virtute operis: ^urand. in 2. (...). d. 28. apud
(...). de just. and (...).
nullum autem opus nostrum aequale potest esse vitae aeternae, neque illam
largitur nobis Deus ex iustitia, sed ex quadam liberalitate sane quia gratis
acceptat nostra opera. Merit (says Durand) is properly of the worthy, to
which that is simply due which is equal by the virtue of the work: but no
work of ours can be equal to eternal life, neither does God give it us of
justice, but of mere liberality, in that he freely accepts our works.

Gregorius Ariminensis, Marsilius, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus Burgensis, ^pud
Ios. Angl. ^ 2. s. d. 27. ar. 2. ^^ffic. 5.
and Io. Eckius, all being zealous papists, do for all that deny man's works
to be meritorious of eternal life, how holy soever the man be.

And (gentle Reader) that thou may fully know, how the papists have of
late years bewitched the world, and under pretense of holy zeal seduced
simple souls; call to mind that they use to wrest the scriptures (as I have
already proved out of their own doctors) and to come new no distinctions to
make their false doctrine good. Which for thy better satisfaction, I will
prove concerning this present controversy of the merit of works, out of
Josephus Angles a gray friar and learned popish bishop, who even in that book
which he dedicated to the pope himself (so mighty is the truth) writes in
these express words:

^osephus Angles ^ 2. s. did. 27. ^. 2. diffic 4.
Diuus Chrysostomus ait; Etsi millies moriamur, etsi omnes virtutes animae
expleamus, nihil dignum ger^mus ad ea, quae ipsi a Deo percipimus. Eodem etiam
modo co^siderantes omnes alij doctores sancti naturalem solummodo bonorum
operum valorem, and illum a valor and iusta vitae aeternae aestimatione
longissime distare perpendentes, prudenter dixerunt, opera nostra non esse
meritoria aut digna vita aterna. Ex lege tamen sieve conuentione, sieve
promissione facta nobiscum, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio gratiae Dei fiunt
aeternae vitae digna, and illi aequalia; quae seclusa illa dei promissione quae
passim in sacris literis repetitur, fuissent tanto praemio prorsus indigna.

Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in lib. 2. de compunct. cord^^, tom. 5*
though we dye a thousand times, and accomplish all virtue of the mind, yet
do we nothing worthy of those things which we receive of God. And all other
holy doctors, considering after the same manner the natural valor only of
good words, and perceiving that it is exceeding far distant from the valor
and just estimation of eternal life, said wisely, that our works are not
meritorious nor worthy of eternal life. Yet for the covenant and promise made
with us, the good works of man with the help of Gods grace, are worthy of
eternal life, and equal with it; which for all that, that promise of God
which is frequent in the scriptures set aside, were altogether unworthy of so
great reward.

Thus says our Popish Bishop and holy Friar, who though he bestirre himself
more then a little, to establish the condign merit of works, yet does he in
his own kind of reasoning, utterly confute and confound himself. For first,
he S. Chrysostom, but all the rest of the holy Fathers with him, affirm good
works neither to be meritorious, nor worthy of eternal life. Again, he
grants The Bishops reasons confuted*
that that gloss and exposition is only invented by him and his fellows, to
salve their beggarly doctrine if it would be. For besides yt no father says so;
they repute al works before grace mere sin, as I have proved out of Austen.
And our Bishop unwittingly confuteth himself (of such force is the truth,)
when he grants that good works done in grace are unworthy of heaven, if Gods
promise be set apart. For if they merit ex condigno, as he avouches; then
doubtless promise, covenant, and mercy, is altogether needless. Secondly,
where the bishop flees to distributive justice, so to establishe the merit of
works; I answer, that both the fathers and his fellows are against him,
Aquinas 12. q. 114. ar. 1.
yea even Aquinas himself. For they understand justice commutatiue, and
require arithmetical equality. And if Geometrical proportion were to be
admitted; yet should greater equality be required, then can be found between
our works and eternal life.

The 9 objection.
Ye brag that the merit of good works, cannot be found in all the Scripture:
Ecclesiast. cap. 1^ v* 15.
But therein you belie both us and the holy scripture. For in the book of
Ecclesiasticus, I find these express words; Omnis misericordia faciet locum
vnicuique secundum meritum operum suorum. All mercy shall make place to every
one, according to the merit of his works. Lo, here is made express mention,
of the merit of his good works.

The answer.
Ecclesiasticus is not canonical Scripture, as which was not found written in
the holy tongue. vulgata editio. For such stuff as this, it does afford you
in time of need. I say thirdly, that in the original and Greek text, your
word (merit) may long seek for lodging, before it find any. For these are
the express words; (...). Make place to all alms, for every one shall find
according to his works.

The 10. objection.
One Scripture says, that if we give alms, all things are pure unto us.
Another scripture says, that charity covers the multitude of sins. Luc.
1^* v 41. 1. Pet. 4. v. 8.
And it is frequent with the holy fathers, that good works deliver us from
hell.

The answer.
I say first, that S. Luke reprooueth ye extortions of the Pharisees, and
exhorts them to works of charity. As if he had said;

I say secondly, that almesdeedes* and other good works proceeding

The reply.
If good works can neither justify nor merit, then is it but a vain thing
to exercise our selves therein.

The answer.
I say first, that thus to say and think is a probable sign of Mat. 5. v 1^.
Luke 1.75. Joan. 14. v. 15.
because it is the end for which we were created. Therefore says the apostle;
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. Fourthly, Ephesians. 2. v. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 7. 1. Pet. ^. v. 24. Romans 8. v. 1. Rom 6. v. 4. 1. Joan. 2. v. 6*
because they are necessary effects of our predestination, and consequently
yield and evident moral certitude both to our selves and to our neighbors,
that we are ye children of God. Therefore says the apostle; There is no
condemnation to the^, yt are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after ye flesh but
after the spirit: as if he had said, Who soever are the children of God,
cannot but live after Gods holy laws. Which is the self same doctrine, that
Christ himself taught us, saying; If ye shall keep my commandments, Joan.
15. v. 10.
ye shall abide in my love; as I have kept my fathers commandment, and abide
in his love. 1. Joan. 5. v. 2.3.
And S. John confirms the same in these words: In this we know that we love
the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandementes. For this is
the love of God, that we keep his commandementes. So then if we keep Gods
commandementes, it is an evident sign, that we love God, and that by faith we
are of his free mercy made his children, for the merits and righteousness of
Christ Jesus. See more hereof in the eleventh preamble, in my first book of
Motives.

The 8 conclusion.
Although good works do neither merit grace in this life, nor glory in the
life to come, as which are imperfect, polluted with sin, and in rigor of
justice worthy of condemnation, as is already proved; yet because God has
decreed in his eternal counsel to bring us to heaven by them, as by ordinary
means and right fruits of a sound christian faith; they may in a godly sense
be termed, The secundary isntrumental cause of eternal life; but in no sense
the cause of man's justification. Explico: I say (of man's justification,)
because the latter can never be the cause of the former; and consequently good
works following our justification as the immediate fruits thereof, can by no
means possible be the cause of the same. In regard whereof S. Austen as in
many other things, August. de fide and operib. cap. 14. tom. 4.
so in this point said very learnedly; Quod opera non praecedunt
iustificandum, sed sequu^tur iustificatum. That works do not go before
justification, but follow him that is justified; I say (of eternal life)
because when there be many gradual effects of one and the same cause, then the
former may fitly be termed the material cause of the latter; that is, as the
schools term it, Causa sine qua non, The cause without which the latter shall
not have effect. For as vocation, Romans 8. v. 30. Romans 10. v. 17.
justification, regeneration, and glorification are the effects of
predestination; even so by Gods holy ordinance, being predestinate, we are
called by the hearing of his word unto ^aith, Romans 5. v. 1. 1. Cor. 1. v. 30.
2. Cor. 4.16. Gal. 6. v. 15. Mat. 7. v. 17.
which faith is the cause of our justification by apprehending the
righteousness of Christ Jesus; after we be justified of our justification
proceeds regeneration, as who having remission of our sins, and being
ingraffed in Christ by faith, are endued with more abundant grace of his holy
spirit, thorough which we are daily more and more regenerate, and made new
creatures; after we be regenerate, out of our regeneration spring good works
as well internal, as external; as who being made good trees, begin to bring
forth good fruits; and so continuing are brought at the length of Gods free
mercy, to the possession of eternal life. For as ye apostle says, Ephesians. 2.
v. 10.
we are created unto good works, which God has ordained that we should
walk in them: and continuing in them, we shall at the dreadful day of doom
hear this joyful sentence, pronounced to our unspeakable comfort; Come ye
blessed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom, prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, Math. 25. v. 34.
and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger,
and ye took me in unto you; I was naked and ye clothed me, I I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came to me. And with this, it is true
yet yt the apostle says; Tit. 3. v. 5.6, 7, 8.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and by renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our savior, that
we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope
of eternal life. This is a true saying, and these things I will thou
should affirm, that they which have believed God, might be careful to show
forth good works. These things are good and profitable unto men. Thus says S.
Paul, and therefore I think this a profitable conclusion. By it rightly
understood, many places of holy Scripture may easily be answered, which seem
to ascribe justification or glorification to good works.

The 10. conclusion.
This popish assertion, Anno Dom. 1080.
that works do justify and merit eternal life de condigno, was for the
space of a thousand and eighty years unknown to the church of God. About
which time Petrus Lombardus and his fellows began their scholasticall
theology, Anno Dom. 1545.
and disputed such matters doubtfully. About the year of our Lord 1545. the
late council of Trent defined the same for an article of christian belief,
solemnly accursing al such as hold the contrary opinion. This is the original
and antiquity of this impudently defended heresy. It is sufficiently confuted
throughout the whole chapter.

CHAP. X. Of the popish idololatricall mass.
The 1. conclusion.
TO withhold from the vulgar and laycall sort of people, the Math. 26. v. 27.
Mar* 1^* v. 23.
and Christ's holy institution. For Christ himself instituted and ministered
the Sacrament in both kinds, saying; drink ye all of it, as Saint Matthew
records: and they all drank of it, as witnesses Saint Mark. Saint Paul
also taught all the Corinthians to communicate in both kinds, protesting that
he delivered the form and manner of the holy communion, even as he had in
spirit received it from the Lord.

1. Cor. 11. v. ^3.25.
Secondly, because the ancient fathers show evidently, that in their time it
was the general practice of the church, to deliver the holy communion to the
lay people under both kinds. Neither was the cup taken from the vulgar sort by
any settled law, Anno. dom. 1414
until the late council of Constance, which was in the year of our Lord God,
1414.

Origin. hom. 16. in numer. prope finem.
Origin has these words; Quis est iste populus, qui in vsu habet sanguinem
bibere? haec erant quae in euangelio audientes ij qui ex Iudaeis dominum
sequebantur, scandalizati sunt, and dixerunt; Quis potest manducare carnem, and
sanguinem bibere? sed populus Christianus, populus fidelis audit haec, and
amplectitur, and sequitur eum qui dicit: nisi manducaueritis carnem meam, and
biberitis sanguinem meum, non habebitis vitam in vobis ipsis, quia caro mea
vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere potus est.

Who is that people, that has in custom to drink blood? these were the
things which the Jews that followed Christ heard in the gospel, and were
scandalized, and said; Who can eat flesh and drink blood? but the christian
people, the faithful people, hear these things, and embrace them, and follow
him that says; unless ye shall eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye shall
have no life in your selves, because my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood
drink indeed?

S. Hierome has these words; Sacerdotes quoque qui eucharistiae seruiunt, and
sanguinem domini populis eius diuidunt, Hieron. in 3. cap. Sophon.
impie agunt in legem Christi.

The Priests also that administer the eucharist, and divide the Lords blood
to his people, transgress the law of Christ heynously.

Saint Cyprian with forty learned bishops, in their joint Epistle to
Cornelius, write in this express manner; Cypr. lib. 1. epis. 2.
Quo modo docemus aut prouocamus eos in confessione nominis sanguinem suum
fundere, si eis militaturis Christi sanguinem denegamus? aut quo modo ad
martyrij poculum ido^^os facimus, si non eis prius ad bibendum in ecclesia
poculum domini iure communicationis admittimus? How do we teach (...) them
to shed their blood for the name of Christ, if we deny them the blood of
Christ, when they go to war? or how do we make them fit for the cup of
martyrdom, if we do not first admit them to drink the Lords cup in the
Church, and that by the right of communion? The Romish Church takes from us
our christ^^n right.
where I wish the reader to note well that the lay people have right to both
kinds; and consequently, that the Romish church is become the whore of
Babylon, in that she robs us of our christian right, which we have de iure
diuino.

Saint Chrysostom has these words: Chrysostom. in ^. Corinth. hom. 1^ in mor.
Est vbi nihil differt sacerdos a subdito, vt quando fruendum est honorandis
mysteriis. Similiter enim omnes vt illa percipiamus digni habemur. Non sicut in
veteri lege, partem quidem sacerdos comedebat, partem autem populus; and non
licebat populo participem esse eorum quorum particeps erat sacerdos. Sed nunc
non sic: verum omnibus vnum corpus proponitur and poculum vnum.

There is a place, where there is no difference between the priest and the lay
person, as when we are to communicate in the holy mysteries; for we are all in
like worthy, for that communion; not as it was in the old law, where the
priest ate one part and the people another; neither could the people be
permitted to take part of that that the priest ate. For now it is not so, but
to all is proposed one body and one cup. Out of Chrysostomes time, when the
people received under both kinds. Ignat. in epist ad Philadelp. prope (...).
I note fourthly, that the pope has brought us into greater bondage then ever
were the Jews. S. Ignatius has these words; Vna est caro domini Jesus* and
vnus eius sanguis qui pro nobis effusus est, vnus etiam panis pro omnibus
confractus, and vnus calix totius ecclesiae. There is one flesh of our Lord
Jesus, and one blood which was shed for us, one bread also broken for all, and
one cup of the whole church.

^ustinus mar^yr apolog. 2. pa. 76.
Saint Iustine has these words; Praesidens vero, postquam gratiarum actionem
perfecit, and populus vniuersus apprecatione laeta eum comprobauit, qui apud
nos vocantur diaconi atquo ministri, distribuunt vnicuique praesentium, vt
participet eum in quo gratiae actae sunt panem, vinum, and aquam. After the
chief pastor has finished the giving of thanks, and all the people have
with joyful prayer approved the same, they that we call Deacons and Ministers,
do distribute to every one that is present, the sanctified bread, wine, and
water, to be partaker thereof.

Yea the said Justinius a little after adds these important words; Nam
apostoli in commentarijs a se scriptis quae euangelia vocantur, ita tradiderunt
praecepisse sibi Iesum. For the apostles in their commentaries, that is, in the
gospelles, have taught us, that Jesus so commanded them (to minister the holy
communion.) Where note by the way, that Christ did not only ordain both
kinds, but he also gave commandment to retain the same in the church. For
which cause saint Paul teaching the Corinthians to communicate under both
kinds, said that he received that form and manner from the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.23*
25.
S. Austen has these words: Cum Dom. dicat, August. q. 57. (...) Leuit. tom. 4*
nisi manducaueritis carnem meam and biberitis meum sanguinem, non habebitis
vitam in vobis: quid sibi vult, quod a sanguine sacrificiorum quae pro peccatis
offerebantur, tantopere populus prohibetur, si illis sacrificijs vnum hoc
sacrificium significabatur, in quo vera sit remissio peccatorum? a cuius tamen
sacrificij sanguine in alimentum sumendo no^ solum nemo prohibetur, sed ad
bibendum potius omnes exhorta^tur qui volunt habere vitam. When our Lord says,
unless ye shall eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye shall have no life in you:
what means it that the people is so greatly forbidden the blood of sacrifices
which was offered for sins, if in those sacrifices this only sacrifice was
signified, in which there is true remission of sins? From ye blood of which
sacrifice for all that to be taken for nourishment, not only none is prohibited,
but al rather are exhorted to drink it, that desire to have life. S. Ambrose,
at such time as the emperor Theodosius after his great slaughter of men at
Thessalonica desired to enter into the church at Millan, and there to be
partaker of the holy eucharist, spoke these words unto him; Qui quaeso, Ambr.
apud Th^odor. lib. 5. hist^^. cap. 17.
manus iniusta caede and sanguine respersas extendere audes, and eisdem
sacrosanctum corpus domini accipere? aut quomodo venerandum eius sanguinem ori
admouebis, qui furore irae iubente tantum sanguinis tam inique effudisti? How I
pray thee dare thou stretch out thy hands sprinkled with unjust slaughter
and blood, and to take the holy body of our Lord in the same? Or how will thou touch thy mouth with his venerable blood, who to satisfy thy fury, have
shed so much blood so unworthily?

Gregorius magnus their own bishop of Rome, confirms this verity in these
words: Eius quippe ibi corpus sumitur, Gregor. lib. 4. dialogor. cap. 5^.
eius caro in populi salutem partitur, eius sanguis non iam in manus
infidelium, sed in ora fidelium funditur. For his body is there received, his
flesh is divided for the salvation of the people, his blood is now powered, not
into the hands of infidels, but into the mouths of the faithful. What need
many words? Their own Gelasius in their own canon law, condemns their fact
as flat sacrilege. These be his words: De consecr. did. 2. cap. compe^.
Aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arcea^tur: quia diuisio
vnius eiusde^que mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire Either
let them participate the whole sacraments, or else let them abstain from the
whole; because the division of one and the same sacrament, cannot be done
without great sacrilege.

The first objection.
Matthew. 26. Mar. 14.
The commandment to receive in both kinds, was only given to the twelve
apostles, and in them to all priests: for they only were present, when Christ
sp^ke these words; Drink ye all of this.

The answer.
Joseph. Angles in 4. s. q. de clau.
For the apostles were vnpriested until after his resurrection, when he said;
Receive ye the holy ghost. I say Bernard that the participation of both kinds
was commanded by Christ, Bernard. sermon. 3. in ramis palmar.
in the first institution thereof: for thus does he write: Nam de sacramento
quidem corporis and sanguinis sui, nemo est qui nesciat hanc quoque tantam and
tam singularem alimoniam ea primum die exhibitam, ea die commendatam and
mandatam deinceps frequentari. For concerning the sacrament of his body and
blood, every one knows that this such and so singular nourishment was
exhibited that day the first, that day commended, and commanded afterward to
be frequented. This commandment S. Cyprian and saint Iustine urge for both
kinds; their words already are set down.

The reply.
S. Paul only recited Christ's institution, (says our Jesuit Bellarmine) but
gave no commandment for both kinds, but left it as he found it, indifferent,
and in the free choice of the Corinthians, to communicate in both or in one
only kind.

The answer.
I say first, that howsoever sundry of you admire your Jesuits ipse dixit, as
if they were become disciples of Pythagoras. I say secondly, that S. Paul's own
words Haymo (so reputed) expound S. Paul: for these are his words; Ego* n^
accepi a domino, Haymo in 1. Co^ cap. 11.
quod et tradidi vobis.i. myster^u^ corporis and sanguinis Dom. quomodo
debeatis sumere. Sicut mihi reuelauit, ita tradidi vobis. For I have received
of the Lord, that which I delivered to you, that is, the mystery of our Lords
body and blood, in what manner ye ought to receive it. Even as he revealed it
to me, so have I delivered it to you.

The reply.
S. Mark makes it plain, Mar. 14.2^.
that it was only spoken to the apostles; Drink ye all of it. For he adds;
And they all drank of it. For it is clear, that al they drank thereof, who
were commanded to drink.

The answer.
I say first, that it was spoken to all the faithful, as well as to epistle,
that commandment of receiving the holy Eucharist in both kinds concerned all
the faithful in the world, as well to come, as the^ living. For these words
(Ye shall show the Lords death till he come, 1. Cor. 11.26.
) do evidently prove, that the form prescribed by the apostle must continue
after the death of the Corinthians, De consecr. did. 2 cap. peracta.
For which cause their own canon law commands all to be put out of the
church, that will not communicate when the consecration is ended. Yea, their
own Pope Julius does condemn their gross illation, as who understood
Christ's words of all the faithful. Thus does he write; De consecr. did. 2
cap. cum omne.
Illud vero quod pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt eucharistiam
populis, nec hoc prolatum ex euangelio testimonium receperunt, vbi apostolis
corpus suum commendauit and sanguinem: seorsum enim panis, and seorsum calicit
co^mendatio memoratur. Nam intinctum panem alijs Christu^ praebuisse non
legimus, excepto illo discipulo tantu^ que^ intincta buccella magistri
proditorem ostenderet. Lo, to receive the one only kind is against the
gospel.
But where they give ye dipped eucharist to the people for the complement of
the communion, they found not this witnessed in the gospel, where Christ
commended his body and blood to his disciples. For the bread is commended
apart, and the cup also apart. For we read not that Christ gave dipped bread
to any others, save only to the disciple, whom the dipped morsel declared to
be the betrayer of his master.

The reply.
The council of Constance commanded no new thing, but only made a law for
the continual performance of that, which the church had practiced long before.

The answer.
I say first, that though it were so practiced before in some places: Thomas
Aquinas Aquinas, as himself has delivered them: thus does he write: Aquin. p.
3. q. 80 ar. 12. in corpor^
Ex part quidem ipsius sacramenti conuenit, quod vtrumque sumatur, scilicet
and corpus and sanguis, quia in vtroque consistit perfectio sacramenti. Et ideo
quia ad sacerdotem pertinet hoc sacramentum consecrare and perficere, nullo
modo debet corpus Christi sumere sine sanguine: ex part autem sumentium
requiritur summa reuerentia and cautela, ne aliquid accidat quod vergat ad
iniuriam tanti mysterij: quod praecipue posset accidere in sanguinis sumptione,
qui quidem si incaute sumeretur, de facili posset effundi. Et quia creuit
multitudo populi christiani, in qua continentur senes* and iuuenes, and
paruuli, quorum quid^m non sunt tantae discretionis, vt cautelam debitam circa
vsum huius sacramenti adhibeant; ideo provide in quibusdam ecclesiis
obseruatur, vt populo sanguis sumendus non detur, sed solum a sacerdote
sumatur. In the behalf of the sacrament it is meet that both be received; to
wit, both the body and the blood, because in both consists the perfection of
the sacrament: and therefore, because it belongs to the priest to consecrate
and to perfect this sacrament, he may in no case receive the body of Christ
without the blood. In the behalf of the receivers great reverence and
circumspection is required, left any thing chance that may tend to the injury
of so worthy a mystery: which might chance especially in the receiving of the
blood; which if it were unwarily received, might easily be shed. And because
the multitude of christian people is increased wherein are contained old men,
and young men, and little ones, whereof some are not of so great discretion, to
use due warines about the use of this sacrament: therefore there is a good
prouiso made in some churches, that the lay people shall not receive the blood,
but only the priest. Out of these words Aquinas I note first, that he lived a
thousand two hundred seventy, Anno. Dom. 1275
and five years after Christ. I note secondly, that the perfection of the
sacrament consists in both kinds; and consequently, Aquinas his time, and
that the contrary was practiced only in some few odd churches Aquinas and
their late synod of Constance.

The second objection.
(...). ^4.36.
Christ ministered the holy Eucharist in one only kind, to his two disciples in
Emaus: for saint Luke makes mention of bread only, and not of wine.

The answer.
Iansenius grants that this place is not meant of the eucharist, ^^nel.
Iansen. comment. (...) loci.
but was only a figure thereof: and he proves his opinion out of saint
Austen, S. Bid and Theophilacte. (...). 26.27.
yet will it not confirm the popish practice by any means. For a singular act
of Christ, who was above his law and not bound thereunto; Cor. 11.24.25.
cannot discharge us from his holy institution, which he commanded us to
observe.

The third objection.
^
S. Luke says, that the faithful continued in the apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers: Act. 20. verse. ^.
where by the breaking of bread must needs be understood the blessed
eucharist; and yet is there no mention made of wine.

The answer.
I say first, that as it is true, that these Textes are to be Synecdoche,
which is frequent in the holy scripture, when a part is named for the whole.
Whosoever reiects this gloss, must charge the apostle with flat sacrilege.
Yea, it is common with the fathers to understand both the kinds, whenever
they speak of the holy eucharist, although they make but express mention of
the one. Therefore Saint Iustine, after he had made express mention of both
the kinds, adds these words; Alimentum hoc apud nos appellatur eucharistia.
Justinius martyr apolog. 2. in fi^
This food or nourishment we call the eucharist. S. Irenaeus has these words:
Quando mixtus calix and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, Irenaeus libr. 5.
prope initium.
fit eucharistia corporis and sanguinis Christi. When the cup mingled and the
bread broken receives the word of God, it is made the eucharist of the body
and blood of Christ. So S. Cyprian naming the cup only, calls it the
eucharist. Cypr. in tract. de lapsis.
Which cup being given to an infant, proves evidently, that in the primitive
church both kinds were thought most necessary.

The fourth objection.
It was the use in the primitive church to bear the eucharist in one kind to
the sick, Eusebius. hist. lib. ^ cap. 34.
because there was great danger in carrying the consecrated wine. A sufficient
testimony hereof is the story of Serapion.

The answer.
I say first, that most ancient approved antiquity bears witness Iustine the
martyr has these words: Diaconi distribuunt vnicuique praesentium, vt
participet eum in quo gratiae actae sunt panem, ^ustinus apolog. 2* ^ag. 76.
vinum, and aquam, and ad absentes perferunt. The deacons distribute to every
one that is present a portion of the consecrated bread, wine, and water, and
they also carry thereof to those that be absent. Again he writes thus;
Distributio communicatioque fit eorum in quibus gratiae actae sunt, ^dem ibid.
pa. 77.
cuique praesenti, absentibus autem per diaconos mittitur. A distribution and
communication is made of those things that are blessed, to every one that is
present: and the same is carried by the deacons, to those that be absent* Saint
Hierome greatly commends saint Exuperius, for his singular zeal in this
behalf: (...). ad Rustic. ^^onach. tom. 1. (...). 23.
these are his words; Sanctus Exuperius Tolosae episcopus viduae Sarep^ensis
imitator, esuriens pascit alios: and ore pallente ^eiunijs, fame torquetur
aliena omnemque substantia^ Christi visceribus erogauit. Nihil illo ditius* qui
corpus domini canistro vimin^o, sanguinem portat in vitro* Saint Exuperius the
bishop of Tolose imitating the widow of Sarepta, feeds others even when
himself is hungry: his own mouth is pale with fasting, and yet it grieueth
him to behold others famine: al his substance he bestows on Christ's members.
None more rich then he; he carries our Lords body in a wicker basket,
^eephorus con^esseth that he ^eceiued the eu^harist. lib. 9. ca. 6
though in some thing different from Christ's institution. For the bread was
first infused into the consecrated wine, and so received: which manner of
receiving was a little corruption, though far different from the popish
practice, which altogether abandoneth the perfection of the holy sacrament.
This their own Durand tells them: and if they will not hear me, yet must I
request them to hearken to his words. Durand. lib. 4. ca. ^4. in ration.
^iuinorum.
Thus does he write; Etsi in hostia consecrata Christi sanguis sit, non tamen
est ibi sacramentaliter eo quod panis corpus* non sanguinem; and vinum,
sanguinem significat and non corpus* Quia ergo, sub altera ta^tum specie non
est completum sacramentum, qu^ ad sacramentum vel signum* debet hoc sacramentum
compleri prius, quam presbiter eo vtatur. Although in the consecrate host there
be the blood of Christ, yet is it not there sacramentally: ^ee Durands ^ordes
in the conclusion (...).
because the bread does signify the body not the blood; and the wine does
signify the blood, not the body. Therefore because the sacrament is not
complete under one only kind in respect of the sacrament or sign; this
sacrament must be first complete, before the priest use it. Thus says our
popish Durand. Out of whose words I note to the great comfort of good
christians, The Laical communion imperfect.
that the adversaries unwittingly are beaten with their own swords. For though
their doctor Durand, only intend to make good the priests receiving; yet is
his reason general, forcible, christian, insoluble, and utterly overthrows
al communicating under one kind. Which he proves unwittingly and unwillingly,
(such is the force of truth) by three reasons: first, because the blood is not
in the consecrate host sacramentally:

Now that to use dipped bread in stead of the blessed wine, is a corruption; I
have already proved by pope Julius, De consecr. did. 2 cap. cum omne.
who tells us that none received dipped bread, but only Judas the traitor.

The fifth objection.
In the primitive church, the faithful used to carry the bread home with them,
that they might receive it when they thought good, which is an evident sign,
that then they received it in one kind at home.

The answer.
I say first that the custom the objection speaks of, was as Nazianz. orat.
in Gorg^. post med.
For S. Gregory Nazianzene writes of his sister Gorgonia, that she reserved
for devotion sake, some part of the signs of the body and blood of our Lord,
which she brought home from the church. Tertull. lib. 2. ad vxorem.
Tertullian writing to his wife of this use, makes mention of the wine as well
as the bread. And Saint Exuperius (as ye have heard already) carried both the
kinds about with him to relieve the sick and absent; which he would never have
done, if the lay people had not received in both kinds.

I say secondly, that this custom was not general, but only Conc. Tolet. ^.
can. 14. Conc. Caesaraug. can. 2.
These are the express words of these holy councels; Si quis acceptam a
sacerdote eucharistiam no^ consumpserit, velut sacrilegus propellatur, anathema
sit. If any shall not eat up all the eucharist which he receives of the
priest; let him be excommunicated, let him be accursed. Out of which words I
gather that the lay people received both kinds in the church; but of a certain
zeal reserved some part thereof, which they carried home, to eat in time
convenient, as they thought. Which use these grave synodes utterly disliking,
condemned as sacrilegious.

The sixth objection.
Many councels make mention of the laicall communion, by which the lay people
were distinguished from the clerks. Which distinction could never have been,
if both had received under both kinds.

The answer.
I answer briefly, that both sorts received the holy eucharist in both kinds:
but the difference was this: the priest receued before the altar, the clerks in
the chauncell, the lay people without; so that the meaning of the councels is
this and no other, to (...), that when the laicall communion was enjoined to
the clergy for penance, then they were to receive in both kinds as before, but
after the other clergy, and in a lower place with the vulgar and lay people.
This my solution is grounded in these words of the Toletain council: Conc.
Tolet. ^. can. 17.
Sacerdotes and Leuitae ante altar communicent, in choro clericus, extra
chorum populus. Let the priests and the deacons communicate before the altar,
the clerks in the chancell, the people without the chancell. In which words is
insinuated the distinction of communions by the local distinction where the
communion was received.

The second conclusion.
The private communicating in the popish mass, where the priest deuoureth up
all alone, is wicked, profane and execrable, as which is repugnant to Christ's
sacred institution, controlled Matt. 26.27. Luc 22.19. Man. 14.23.
I prove it briefly: First, because Christ instituted both kinds, and
commanded al to receive both kinds, and withal, because all present
accomplished his precept. For as Saint Mark says, they all drank thereof.

Secondly, because S. Paul delivered to all the Corinthians as well the lay sort
as the clergy, not only the form of bread, 1. Cor. 11.24, 25.
and consequently that they ought in like manner to frequent that holy
sacrament. And that all without exception used thus to do, is most evident by
the course of holy scripture. For Luke writes; Act. 2.4^. Act. 20.7.
The faithful continued in the apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking
of bread, and prayers: yea, it is so evident in the very canons of the apostles
(so highly magnified of the papists) that private mass was reputed an execrable
thing in their time, as none living perusing their canons seriously, ca^
without the note of impudency deny the same. These are the express words of
the tenth canon: Can. 10. Apostol.
Omnes fideles qui conueniunt in solennibus sacris ad ecclesiam, scripturas
apostolorum and euangelium audiant. Qui aute^ non perseuerauerint in oratione
vsque dum missa peragitur, nec sanctam communionem percipiu^t velut
inquietudines ecclesiae moue^tes, conuenit communione priuari. Let all the
faithful that come to the church in time of the holy mysteries, hear the
scriptures of the apostles and the gospel. And if any shall not continue in
prayer til ye mass be done, or shall not receive the holy communion; Popish
private mass condemned even by the apostles.
let them be excommunicate, as those that disquiet the congregation. Thus did
the apostles decree. In whose constitution we see plainly, that the apostles
are so far from approving the private mass of the papists; as they would not
permit any to be in the church, but such as did communicate with the priest. De
consecr. did. ^ cap. omnes.
This is confirmed even by the popes canon law.

Thirdly, because all the fathers of approved antiquity, do teach us the same
doctrine. S. Chrysostom has these words: Ista videlicet and nunc ad omnes nos
dicit, Chrysostom. hom. 3* ad Ephesians.
qui impudenter hic and improbe adstamus. Quisquis enim mysteriorum consors non
est, impudens and impr^bus adstat. These things verily he now says to us all,
which stand by impudently and wickedly. For whosoever stands by and does not
communicate, he is impudent and wicked. Oh what would this holy father say, if
he were this day in Rome* and should see many hundreds standing by gazing, and
the priest only devouring al? he would doubtless term them, most impudent
and ungracious people.

Clemens in Epistol 2.
Saint Clement, whose Epistles the papists have in great reverence, writes in
these words: Certe tanta in altario holocausta offerantur, quanta populo
sufficere debeant. Quodsi remanserint, in crastinum non reseruentur. Let so
many breades be offered at the altar, as may suffice the people, (not only the
ministers.) And if any thing shall remain, let it not be reserved till the
morrow.

Ambr. in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
S. Ambrose is consonant, and confirms Saint Clements assertion in these
words: Munus enim oblatum totius populi fit, quia in vno pane omnes
significantur. Per id enim quod vnum sumus, de vno pane omnes sumere oportet.
For the oblation offered belongs to the whole people, because all are
signified in one bread. For in that we are all one, we must al receive of one
bread.

Durand. in ration. lib. 4. cap. 53.
Durand, though he favor the papists all that he may, yet could he find no
place for private mass. Thus does he write; In primitiua ecclesia omnes qui
celebrationi missarum interera^t, singulis diebus communicare solebant, eo quod
apostoli omnes de calice biberunt, Dom* dicente, bibite ex hoc omnes. In the
primitive church all that were present at the mass did every day receive the
communion, because all the apostles drank of the cup, according to our Lords
commandment. Out of whose words

Aquinas p. 3. q. ^0. ar. 10. ad ^uintum.
Their angelical doctor Aquinas has these express words: Nam in primitiua
ecclesia quando magna vigebat deuotio fidei Christianae, statutum fuit, vt
quotidie fideles communicarent. Vnde Anacletus papa dicit peracta consecratione
omnes co^municent, qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus: sic enim and
apostoli statuerunt, and sancta Romans tenet ecclesia. In the primitive church
when the faithful were fervent in devotion, it was decreed that the people
should receive the communion daily. Whereupon the pope Anacletus says: when the
consecration is ended, let all communicate, that will not be driven out of the
church doors: for so both the apostles ordained, and the holy Roman Church
observes. Out of these words I note first, that all were driven out of the
church that would not receive. Aquinas says

The 3. conclusion.
The popish oblation of Christ's natural body in their mass, by which they
ascribe remission of sins to the quick and the dead, is blasphemous and
injurious to Christ's holy passion. I prove it first, because the apostle
says, that we are sanctified by the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once.
For if it Heb. 10. v. 10.
it must needs be false that the papists say, that it is offered in their
masses, ten thousand times in one hour.

I prove it secondly, because the apostle says, that Christ has Heb. 10. v.
14*
nor often iteration of the same. Therefore the popish oblation of Christ to
his father in their mass is blasphemous against Christ, as which makes his
oblation upon the cross imperfect, and insuffcicient for our sins. I prove
it thirdly, because the apostle proves Heb. 10. v. 10.11, 12, 13.
for that Christ did take away sins by one only oblation, which the priests
of the law could not do with many. But doubtless this reason of S. Paul is
frivolous and to no purpose, if Christ must still be offered in the mass to put
away sin.

I prove it fourthly, because the apostle says, that as it is appointed to
men, that they shall once die, Heb. 9. v. ^^.2^.
and after that comes Heb. 9. v. 25.26*
as the high priest entered suffered since the foundation of the world; as if he
had said, he can but suffer once, and therefore he is but once only offered*
Note this reason well, for doubtless it does convince.

Note well this reason.
then was man's redemption twice accomplished, then was Christ sacrificed before
he died, then was man's redemption really done before it really began, then was
he dead before his passion, then was his body in one place and his blood in
another, then was he both living and dead at once, then was his death in
vain: for all these absurdities do follow perforce, upon the forged
propitiatory sacrifice in the popish mass.

Joan. 19.30.
that it was the consummation of every thing needful for man's salvation. But
doubtless where one oblation once made, makes man's salvation perfect and
consummate, there not only more oblations, but also the iteration of the same
oblation, is mere frustrate and needelesse.

Hebr. 10.18.
There is not henceforth any oblatio^ for sin. For if Saint Paul say truly,
that there is no oblation for sin after Christ's death on the cross; then
doubtless the papists must needs say falsely, that they have a daily
propitiatory sacrifice in their mass.

I prove it ninthly, because if the sacrifice of the mass, were Hebr. 10.14.
Valor sacrificii missae finitus est. The valor of the sacrifice of the mass
is finite.

Now I prove the consequution of my proposition, which is the third thing
remaining; wherein rests all the difficulty, if there be any at all. First
therefore the sacrifice supposed to be in the mass, is the natural body and
blood of the son of God* For otherwise it could not be the same, that was
offered upon the cross. Again, he that is supposed to offer the sacrifice
daily in the mass, is Christ himself the son of God. Who (as the papists
teach blasphemously) held in his hands at his last supper, that self same body
that was borne of the virgin Mary, and suffered the next day after. And yet if
the valor of the sacrifice of the m^sse be finite, then doubtless that
sacrifice can not be the son of God: for he is of infinite power, of infinite
glory, of infinite majesty, of infinite valor. Yea, whosoever denies
Christ's body and blood, subsisting in the person of God by hypostaticall
union, to be of infinite valor; he is become a flat Arrian, believing Christ
to be pure man, and not God. And consequently, howsoever the papists think
or speak of their mass, yet in making it a sacrifice they are blasphemous:
and that must needs follow, though it were freely granted them, that
Christ's body were present really in the Sacrament.

I prove it tenthly, because our Jesuit cannot deny, but that Bellarmine de
missa lib. 1. c. 2^*
in every true and real sacrifice. Wherefore, since Christ dies not in the
popish mass, it cannot be that he is truly sacrificed in the same. For as
Bellarmine truly says, Abraham did not truly sacrifice his son Isaac,
because he was not really slain. Now that this discourse may be made more
manifest, I will propound the strongest obiec^ions for the adverse part, and
add brief solutions to the same.

The first objection.
S. Paul says, that Christ is a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech; and Melchisedech offered bread and wine, Heb. 6. v. 20. Gen
14.18. Heb. 10.^.
as he was Gods priest, says holy Moses. To which we must add that the thing
figured is more excellent then the figure, and that Christ truly offered
sacrifice in bread and wine: otherwise, he should not have exactly fulfilled ye
figure of Melchisedech. For all the fathers grant, that he was a true figure of
Christ, even as he was a priest.

The answer.
I say first, that Melchisedech did not sacrifice bread and wine, but as the
Hebrew text says, brought forth bread and wine; that is, sufficient victuals
for the refection of Abraham and his soldiers, after their return from the
slaughter of Chedor-laomer, and the other kings. For the whole course of ye
scripture tells us, that bread by Synecdoche signifies, meat. So Moses
says, that the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, Genesis 43. v.
32.
that is, ^sa^. 4. v. 1.
meat. In Esaias 7. women say; we will eat our own bread* ^. Reg. 9.7.
that is, our own meat. King David promised Mephibosheth, that he should eat
bread always at his own table: which had been a very small reward of a king,
if by bread were not signified all kind of meat. Ier 52.31. and deinceps.
King Iehoiachim ate bread at the table of Euil-merodach the king of Babel:
that is, al delicate fare. So it is called bread, Job* 42.11.
that Jobs friends ate in his house, when it is certain that they had right
sumptuous cheer. The like examples are in S. Matthew, and sundry other places
of scripture. This I note against the papists, who fondly use to answer, that
bread was a slender refection for all Abraham's company.

I say secondly, that Christ's priesthood is after the order of Melchisedech,
not in any sacrifice of bread and wine, which Melchisedech can never be proved
to have offered; but in yt as man he was without father wonderfully conceived;
as God, without beginning and without ending, and without mother woonderfully
begotten: ^s. 53. v. 8.
for which cause the prophet demands, who shall declare his generation? in
these points Christ's priesthood differs not from Melchisedech, Heb. 7.3
who as S. Paul says, was without father, without mother, without kindred,
without beginning of his days, without end of his life, likened to the son of
God, and a priest for ever. Yet in the oblation of bread and wine, Exodus 29. v.
23.
the priesthood of Melchisedech was not perfitly distinguished from the
priesthood of Aaron, Number. 28. v. 2.9* 12.
as the scripture witnesses. S. Paul therefore describes the priesthood of
Melchisedech without the mention of bread and wine, in such sort as it is
perfitly distinguished from the priesthood of Aaron. So Eusebius Caesariensis
comparing the priesthood of Christ with the priesthood of Melchisedech, does
not say that it consists in the sacrifice of bread and wine; but in the
unction, the divine similitude, the eternity, and want of succession. These
are his express words: Eusebius. apud Ruff. hist. libr. 1. cap 1.
Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Hic aute^
Melchisedech in diuinis voluminib. sacerdos fuisse Dei summi refertur, sed qui
non oleo communi perunctus sit, neque qui ex successione generis suscepit
sacerdotium, sicut apud Hebraeos fieri mos erat: and ideo secundum ordinem
ipsius sacerdos futurus dicitur Christus, qui non olei liquore, sed virtute
coelestis spiritus consecretur. Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. And this Melchisedech is called in the holy scriptures, the
priest of God most high: but one which was not anointed with common oil,
neither yet received his priesthood by the succession of kindred, as the manner
was among the Hebrews; and therefore Christ is called a priest after his order,
who is consecrate, not with the liquor of oil, but with the virtue of the holy
ghost. I say thirdly, that Melchisedech Observe this well.
was Hebr. 7.11
because our Lord Jesus was of the tribe of Judah; of which tribe Moses spoke
nothing at al touching the priesthood. Thirdly, Ibid. verse 14.
because the sacrifice of the cross was the most perfect sacrifice of all
other, Hebr. 10.14.
as which did co^summate them that are sanctified for ever. I prove the latter
part; first, because it must be after some order, but not after the order of
Aaron as is proved: ergo after the order of Melchisedech. Secondly because the
apostle does in express terms call Christ a priest, even after the order of
Melchisedech. These are his words; Hebr. 5.9, 10.
And being consummate, was made the cause of eternal life to all them that
obey him, and is called of God an high priest, after the order of Melchisedech.
Lo, Saint Paul joins the order of Melchisedech, with the sacrifice of the
cross offered for man's redemption: as if he had said; Christ is therefore
called a priest after the order of Melchisedech, because he has offered a most
perfect sacrifice on the cross. And indeed, as all priests were types of
Christ the eternal priest, in whom they were accomplished; so al sacrifices
were figures of the sacrifice of the cross, and exactly accomplished in the
same; and consequently, wherein soever the sacrifice of Melchisedech did
consist, it was accomplished in the sacrifice on the cross.

The first reply.
Genesis 14.1^.
Moses after he had said, that Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine,
added forthwith these words; Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi, for he was the
priest of God most high. In which words he yields the reason of his
sacrifice, because as Saint Paul says, every Priest must offer sacrifice.
Wherefore he that denies Melchisedech to have offered bread and wine, Heb. 5.1.
must tell us of some other oblation that he made; for in the scriptures we
find none else.

The answer.
vulgata editio does afford you some pleasure now and then, as by means whereof
ye make some show of truth; but the fountain, the original, and Hebrew text is
otherwise, (...) and he was the priest. And the reason aleaged in your latin
translation, Argumentum ad hominem.
is void of al reason; for if Melchisedech must therefore offer bread and wine,
because he is a priest; then must it follow perforce, that every priest shall do
the same; which yet no scripture does avouch. Neither can any papist prove the
same of Abraham, Cain, Esau, and others, who al were priests Every truth is
not expressed in ^he scripture.
For though the scripture contain every thing necessary to our salvation, yet
concealeth it many truths, as Melchisedech offered bread and wine; yet will it
not follow, Mark well, O papist, and thou not but be satisfied.
that Christ must do the same. For if Christ should offer bread and wine
indeed, we should still continue in figures, and remain without the verity. But
because the thing figured is more excellent then the figure, as the papists in
this present controversy truly do object; Christ who was to accomplish al
tipes, al figures, al prophesies concerning his most sacred aduent, presented
to God his father omnipotent, a most pure, holy, sufficient, independent, and
absolute sacrifice upon the cross, and then truly said consummatum est: Joan.
19. verse 30.
I have fulfilled every thing that was written of me in the law and the
prophets: and this he did after the order of Melchisedech, while he did ye
night before sacramentally signify the same, at his last supper in bread and
wine. This my solutio^ (if it be well marked) is doubtless firmly grounded in
these words of S. Cyprian: Cyprian. ad Caecilium epist. 63.
Nam quis magis sacerdos dei summi quam D^noster Jesus Christus? qui
sacrificium deo patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc ide^ quod Melchisedech obtulerat
i panem and vinu^, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem. For who is more the
priest of god most high, then our Lord Jesus Christ? who offered sacrifice to
God the father, and offered the self same thing that Melchisedech had offered,
that is, bread and wine, to wit, his body and blood. Thus says the ancient,
holy, and learned father S. Cypria^, whose words the papists ever allege for
their purpose: and yet do I think to confound the papists even by the self
same words. I therefore beseech thee (gentle reader) to mark attentively what I
say. I note first out of S. Cyprians words, The Papists are confounded by their
own allegation.
y^ as Melchisedech was the priest of god most hie, so was Christ also. I note
secondly, that Christ offered sacrifice to god the father. I note thirdly, The
first corollarie.
and evident reason enforces them,) was really and substantially bread and
wine. I infer secondly, that that which Christ offered was his real body and
blood sacrificed really on the cross, The second corollarie.
and in the eucharist sacramentally the selfsame that Melchisedech offered.
For the natural bread and wine in the eucharist, is a mystery and sacrament of
Christ's body and blood offered on the cross. Thus is every thing consonant
that S. Cyprian writes, and no otherwise can all that he says be verified.
And in this sense do other Fathers speak of this theme; who affirm bread and
wine in the eucharist, to be the mystery of Christ's body and blood offered on
the cross, but not to be the real and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and the dead.

Arnobius in Psalm. 109.
Arnobius has these words; hic qui per mysterium panis ac vini sacerdos factus
est in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech qui panem and vinum solus obtulit
in sacerdotibus dum Abraham victor reuerteretur de p^aelio. He that by the
mystery of bread and wine, was made a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, who only among priests offered bread and wine, while Abraham
returned from the battle with v^ctorie.

Theodoret in Psalm. 109.
Theodoretus has these words, offert vero ecclesia corporis eius and sanguinis
symbola, omne ferme^tum per primitias sanctificans But the Church offers the
signs of his body and blood, Lo, this holy and ancient Father, tells the
case plainly.
sanctifying all leaven by the first fruits. Mark this testimony O Papist,
and yield unto the truth.

Eusebius. Caesar. de demonstr. euangel. lib. 5 cap. 3.
Eusebius Caesa^iensis has these words: quemadmodum ille qui sacerdos gentium
erat, nusquam videtur sacrificijs corporalibus functus, sed vino solo and pane,
dum ipsi Abraham benedicit: ita sane primus ipse saluator ac dominus noster,
deinde qui ab ipso profecti sunt sacerdotes, in omnibus gentibus spirituale
secu^dum ecclesiasticas sanctiones sacerdotij munus obeuntes, vino ac pane and
corporis illius, and salutaris sanguinis mysteria repraesentant. Quae sane
mysteria Melchisedech tanto ante spiritu diuino cognouerat, and rerum futurarum
imaginibus vsus fuerat. As he yt was the priest of the Gentiles, seems no
where to have used corporal sacrifices, but only wine and bread while he
blessed Abraham: even so our Lord and Savior Christ, then the priests that came
from him, executing the spiritual function of priesthood among all nations,
according to the decrees of the Church, do represent the mysteries of his body
and blood in bread and wine: which mysteries truly Melchisedech knew long
before by Gods inspiratio^, and used ye figures of things to come.

Thus we see by the testimonies of these ancient Fathers, that the oblation of
Melchisedech was accomplished in the sacrifice of the cross, which Christ
before did signify sacramentally, by bread and wine in his last supper.

The second reply.
The Fathers by you alleged, do prove constantly, that Melchisedech offered
bread and wine to God most high; and not only brought it forth to refresh
Abraham and his company, as you defend.

The answer.
I say first, that out of the text can no more be provided, but Joseph. antiq.
Iu^ lib. ^. cap. 10.
For Josephus writes in this manner: hic Melchisedechus milites Abrahami
hospitaliter habuit* nihil eis ad victum deesse passus; simulque ipsum
adhibitu^ mensae meritis laudibus extulit, and deo, cuius fauore victoria
co^tigerat, debitos hymnos, vt sua pietate dignum erat, cecinit. Abrahamus
contra de manubijs decimas ei dono dedit. This Melchisedech entertained
Abraham's soldiers, suffering them to want no competent food; he also placed
Abraham himself at his own table, giving him his condign gratulation, and
praised God religiously, as became his piety, by whose favor the victory was
had. Abraham on the other side gave him tithes of all that was gotten in the
spoil. S. Austen is of the same mind, Aug. in q* ex vtroque t^st. q. 109.
and has these words: obuiauit Melchisedech sacerdos dei summi Abrahae
reuertenti a caede regum, and protulit panes and vinum, and obtulit ei, and
benedixit eum. Melchisedech the priest of God most high, met Abraham returning
from the slaughter of the Kings, and brought forth bread and wine, and offered
them to him, and blessed him. In these words of S. Austen, I note two things:
the one, that the oblation of Melchisedech was not made to God, as the Papists
affirm, but to Abraham himself in ye way of refection. The other, that S.
Austen names breads in the plural number: as if he had said; Melchisedech
brought good store of meat for Abraham and his soldiers. Tertull. aduersu^
Iudaeos prope initium.
Tertullianus has these words: denique, sequentes patriarchae incircumcisi
fuerunt, vt Melchisedech, qui ipsi Abrahae iam circumciso reuertenti de
praelio, panem and vinum obtulit incircumcisus. In fine, the partiarks that
followed were uncircumcised, as Melchisedech, who being uncircumcised offered
bread and wine to Abraham, that was now circumcised, when he returned from the
battle. Saint Ambrose teaches the same doctrine, by the tradition of the
Hebrews. These are his words: nec esse nouum, Ambr. in 7. cap. ^d Hebr.
si Melchisedech victori Abraham obuiam processerit, and in refectionem tam
ipsius quam pugnatorum eius panem vinumque p^otulerit, and benedixerit ei.
Neither ought it to seem strange, if Melchisedech went to meet Abraham the
conqueror, and brought forth bread and wine for the refection of him and his
soldiers, and blessed him. Canus de Ioel^ lib. 12. cap. 12. p. 415.
Yea, your own bishop Canus grants all this. I say thirdly, that the fathers
do indeed confess Melchisedech to have offered bread and wine; The Papists
labor ^o establish their mass, in the oblation of Melchisedech.
to all that is or can be said in this intricate matter, whereon you seek to
ground your popish mass.

The second objection.
Hebr. 5.1.
Every priest (says S. Paul) is ordained for men in things pertaining to God,
to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin: therefore doubtless we must have
some sacrifice in the new testament, and priests to execute the same; for
without priests, gifts, oblations, and sacrifices to God for the sins of the
people, no person, no people, no common wealth can appertain to God, neither
can such sovereign duties be done by any in the world, but by a priest chosen
for ye purpose. For diverse princes (as the scripture records,) were punished
by God; Ieroboams hand dried up, ^. Reg. ^3.1, 4. ^. Para. 26.16, 20 ^. Reg.
1.3.9, 13.
Ozias smitten with the leprosy, and king Saul deposed from his kingdom,
specially for attempting such things.

The answer.
I say first, that S. Paul speaks not generally of all the ministers of Gods
holy word and sacraments, but of the priesthood of the old law; yea, he
speaks especially and expressly of the hie priests only, who was a type and
figure of Christ Jesus, the true, perfect, and eternal priest of God most high.
I say secondly, that the people of the new testament, want neither Psalm 109.4.
for Christ's eternal priesthood fulfilled and abolished the legal priesthood
together with the law; Heb. 7.25. Act. 4.12. Ioh. 19. verse. 3^*
and all legal sacrifices which were but figures of Christ's sacrifice upon the
cross, were exactly accomplished in the same; so that Christ being our
eternal priest, and his sacrifice once offered being so perfect, as the virtue
thereof endures for ever; Hebr. 5.9. cap. 6.20. cap. 7.11, 26, 27. cap. 9.26.
cap* 10.14.
we people of the new testament have neither need of legal priests, nor yet of
popish massing priests, who can never put away their own sins, much less the
sins of others. For if we expect any other priest, or appease to any other
sacrifice in the new testament; we deceive our selves, make frustrate Christ's
only sacrifice, and do great villainy to his eternal priesthood. I say
thirdly, that though in the reformed christian churches, there be no external
propitiatory sacrifice acknowledged, save only the sacrifice of Christ upon
the cross; Hebr. 5.4.
which no man takes on him to execute, but he that is lawfully called
thereunto. I say fourthly, that albeit in the preaching of ye word and the
administration of the sacraments, the chosen minister The prince does neither
preach the word, nor minister the sacraments, but commands the execution of
them both.
Gods anointed prince has the supreme charge and authority, to command the
execution thereof, as also to puni^h the minister for neglecting his duty in
that behalf. Of which point I have spoken sufficiently, in my book of
Motives. I say fifthly, that Ozias, Jeroboam, and Saul, were not punished for
correcting the abuses or negligence of the priests, 3. Reg. 13. 2. Paral. 26.
1. Reg. 13.
and insolently executed priestly function, which God did flatly porhibite in
his sacred word.

The third objection.
S. Austen, S. Chrysostom. S. Ambrose, and all the fathers generally, do usually
term the mass or eucharist (the sacrifice of the mediator, the sacrament of
the altar, the unbloody sacrifice, and the price of our redemption) whosoever
denies this must either be condemned of malice, as speaking against his own
knowledge, or of mere ignorance, as not knowing what the fathers write.

The answer.
I say first, that it were a vain contention to strive for the name, so we
could agree in the thing. For as it is not material if we call the ministers of
the new testament (priests,) so we understand rightly the thing it self; so
is it not of importance, if we term the sacrament of Christ's body and blood,
(either the Lords supper* or the Eucharist, or the communion, or the liturgy,
or the blessed sacrament, or the mass) if we understand rightly, the thing
signified by the same. For all these words (I know) are rightly used, by the
ancient, holy and learned fathers. Where I note this by the way, that whether
the word Mass be latin or hebrew, or what it does properly signify, the
papists cannot yet agree among themselves. I say secondly, that the fathers
indeed do often call the Eucharist (Christ's body and blood, the sacrifice of
the mediator; the unbloody sacrifice, and whatsoever else is due to the
sacrifice of the cross,) nevertheless, they have always a godly sense and
meaning in such kind of appollations; that is to say, they ascribe such names
to the Eucharist, not because it is properly the self same thing that the word
imports; but for that it is ye sacrament, the sign, and the memorial
thereof; or else because it is spiritually the sacrifice of laud and
thanksgiving; for the proof hereof, it were enough to call to mind, that
sacraments in the scripture have the names of those things, whereof they ^e the
sacraments. For Moses says of the paschal lamb, Exodus 12.11.
(...) it is the Lords passover, and yet most certain it is by the very text
it self, that the lamb was not the passover it self, but only the sign and
signification thereof; like as al sacraments be signs of the things which they
do represent, but not the things which are signified by the same. And this I
hope to make so plain, even by the express testimonies of the holy fathers,
(wherein the papists use to glory beyond al mesure,) as no papist in yt the
christian world shall ever be able to answer me therein.

S, Austen has these express words; Sacrificium ergo visibile inuisibilis
sacrificij sacramentum, i sacrum signum est. Therefore the visible sacrifice is
the sacrament of the invisible sacrifice, that is, an holy sign. And a little
after, he adds these words: Illud quod ab hominibus appellatur sacrificium,
Aug. de ciuit. (...) lib. 10. cap. 5.
signum est very sacrificij: that which men call a sacrifice, is the sign of ye
true sacrifice. In another place he has these words, with many other to the
like effect; Ibidem cap. 20.
Cuius rei sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificium. Whereof he
would have the sacrifice of the church to be a daily sacrament. In another
place he has these words; Contr. Faust. libr. 20. cap. 21. tom. ^
huius sacrificij caro et sanguis ante aduentu^ Christi, per victimas
similitudinu^ prrmittebatur: in passione Christi, per ipsam veritatem
reddebatur: post ascensum Christi, per sacramentum memoriae celebratur. Before
the coming of Christ, the flesh and blood of this sacrifice was promised by
the sacrifices of similitudes; in the passion of Christ, it was restored by the
verity: after the ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by the sacrament of
memory. In all these places S. Austen says expressly, that though the
Eucharist be called a sacrifice, yet is it not a sacrifice properly and
indeed, but only a sacrament, sign, and representation of Christ's sacrifice
upon the cross. For first he says it is a sign of the true sacrifice: as if
he had said, it is not the true sacrifice, but a representation thereof.
Secondly; he says it is a daily sacrament of the true sacrifice: as if he had
said, it is not ye thing, but a sign of the thing. Thirdly, he says it is the
sacrament of memory; as if he had said, it is but a commemoration of the true
sacrifice indeed. Fourthly, he says that that which men call a sacrifice, is
nothing else but a sign of the true sacrifice; as if he had said, though many
use to term the Eucharist a sacrifice, yet is it but the sign of the true
sacrifice indeed.

Greg. Nazianz. who was Hieromes schoolmaister, and for his singular knowledge
in ye holy scriptures surnamed Theologus, expresses this matter very lively,
Nazianz. orat. 21 tom. 2. p. 413.
in these brief and pithy words Quo tande^ modo externu^ illud sacrificiu^,
illud magnoru^ mysteri oru^ exe^plar praefidenti animo ipsi offerrem? How should
I offer to him with a confident mind that external sacrifice, which is the
example (or sign) of the great mystery? Lo, so soon as he has termed it a
sacrifice; by and by he interprets himself, and calls it the sign and
representation of the sacrifice; as if he had said: we use to term it by the
name of sacrifice, because it is the image, sign, sacrament, and
representation of the true and only sacrifice.

Areopagia. de eccles. hierarch. c. 5.
S. Dionysius Areopagita S. Paul's disciple, in his ecclesiastical Hierarchy
(which work the Papists will needs have to be his) has these words: Ad
eorundem sacrificium quod signis continetur, venit, atque id quod a deo
proditum sit, facit The B. comes to the sacrifice of those things, which is
contained in signs, and does that which God has appointed to be done. Lo, he
calls the eucharist a sacrifice, as the other fathers do: and yet for a
plain testimony of his right meaning, he adds, that it only consists in
signs. As if he had said: it is nothing else, but a significatiue or
commemoratiue sacrifice.

Chrysostom. hom. 27. ad Hebr.
Saint Chrysostom has these words: Offerimus quidem* sed ad recordationem
facientes mortis eius. Sequitur: hoc autem quod facimus, in commemorationem
quidem fit eius quod factum est. Hoc enim facite inquit, in meam
commemorationem. No^ aliud sacrificiu^, sicut pontifex; sed idipsum semper
facimus: magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur. We offer I grant, but
we do it for the remembrance of Christ's death. And that which we do, we do
it for the commemoration of that which is already done. For he says, Do ye
this in the remembrance of me. There is not another sacrifice, as there is an
other Bishop; but we do always the same thing: yea rather we work the
remembrance of the sacrifice. Out of these Observe this carefully.
though the priest or bishop be changed. I note thirdly, that where Basil. in
missa p. 39


S. Basil has these express words: Fac nos idoneos, vt tibi offeramus
sacrificium laudis, tu es enim operans omnia in omnibus. Make us meet to offer
to thee the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, thou that workest all in all.
To these and the like testimonies the Papists can not possibly frame any true
answer.

The reply.
True it is, that the sacrifice of the holy mass, is a sign and commemoration
of the sacrifice of the cross: but withal, we tell you, that as it is the
sign, so is it the thing signified also. Neither is that with us any
absurdity, Hebr. 1.3.
as ye grossly and fondly imagine. For Christ is the figure of his fathers
substance, as the apostle witnesses: and yet if ye deny him to be the same
substance with his father, ye prove your self an Arrian: so a loaf of bread
in the bakers window, is both a sign of bread to be sold, and also the bread
it self. But your dull heads, cannot conceive these scholasticall
distinctions.

The answer.
I say first, that how dull soever our wits be, yet do we

I say secondly, which is a received maxim in the schools, nullum simile est
idem; no similitude is the self same thing whereof it is a similitude. For to
be a relative and the correlatiue of the same, at the same time, and in the
same respect, is flat contradiction.

I say thirdly, that though Christ be the same substance with his father, as he
is God: yet is he termed the figure of Coloss. ^.^.
So says the apostle in another place; For in him dwells the fullness of
the godhead corporally. And the same answer serves to your loaf. For it is
neither idem numero with the other loaves, Idem n^me^^ sacrifici^^*
as you imagine and affirm of your putatiue sacrifice; neither does the loaf
of it self so signify: but the people by the modification of the loaf, are
brought into the notice of the sale of bread.

I say fourthly, (and this confounds you all, and your sottish imagination)
that ye verity is more excellent then ye figure; the body, then the shadow:
the thing signified, then the sign. For your own selves labor by this means,
De eucharist. lib. 1 ^. 3. col. 474.
to prove the sacrifice of your idolatrous mass. These are the words of your
Jesuit Bellarmine: Figurae necessario inferiores esse debent rebus figuratis.
Figures of necessity must be of less value, then the things that are figured
by the same.

The 4. conclusion.
The Eucharist or holy communion (which the papists term the sacrament of the
altar) is a commemoration, representation, sign, or sacrament of Christ's body
and blood, offered and shed upon the cross for man's redemption; but not the
real, substantial, and natural body of Christ Jesus, which was crucified
for our sins. This conclusion, that it may be exactly understood of the
vulgar sort, and every popish conceit therein plainly discovered, and
effectually confuted, shall be proved by way of certain brief paragraffes.

The first paragraffe, of the form of consecration.
The papists defending the bread to be made Christ's natural body, by virtue
of consecration; are at variance among themselves, and cannot tell in the
world, which are the precise words of that their putatiue consecratien. Opinio
communis papistar. ex Aquin. p. 3. q. 78. Innocent. de offic. missae. p. 3. c. 6
For the common opion among the papists, (to which their practice agrees)
holds the consecration to consist in these words: This is my body. But their
learned pope Innocentius, tells them another tale; to wit, that Christ
consecrated by the power of excellency, which is not tied to the Sacraments:
and consequently, that he first consecrated it, and afterward pronounced the
words, which the other papists will have to be essential to the consecration.
^os. Angl. de es^^nt. Euch. c. 4.
Josephus Angles tells us very gravely, that this opinion of Innocentius is
not heretical, although it cannot be defended without great temeritie. But by
our friars good favor, if the words of the consecration be as they defend;
Math. ^6. v. 26.
then must the bread perforce be broken, before it be Christ's body; then did
Christ break bread, and not his body; then did Christ deliver bread, and not
his body. For Christ first blessed the bread, then brake it, then gave it to
his apostles, and after said, This is my body. So that against their wills
they grant unwittingly; that that which Christ gave to his disciples, was
substantially bread and not his body. This point is handled more at large, in
the 12. preamble in the book of my Motives.

The 2. Paragraffe. Of the validity of consecration.
The papists teach, that these words, (this is my body) do change and
transelementate the substance of bread, Conc. Trid. sess. 13. cap. 1.
into the substance of Christ's real, substantial, and natural body: and that
the bare forms of bread and wine, do after consecration existe without any
subject. But this doctrine does confute it self. For first, if the words of
supposed consecration, do work transubstantiation; then must every word have
his due

Secondly, if the fourth word ( meum) concur essentially to Aquinas and all
learned papists deny: or the whole effect proceeds totally of the fourth
word, without the actiuitie of the other three. The sequel is evident, Aquinas
p. 3. ^* 75. ar. 7.
because the prolation of the words is with succession, and not in an instant.

Thirdly, if the words of consecration, be of such force as the papists
teach; then must both Christ's body and bread be under Mark this reason well.
and consequently, since two instantes cannot be immediate, they must both
either be together in the same instant, or both absent for the time mediate.

Fourthly, the popish supposed transubstantiation, is very ridiculous and
absurd. I prove it, because when the priest says, (this my bo) he then
either holds in his hands substantially bread, or corporally Christ's body:
if substantially bread, then are their words of consecration not of force: if
corporally Christ's body, these three absurdities do ensue. First, Christ's
body is made by succession: Secondly, the syllable (bo) which by it self
signifies nothing, is made significant. Thirdly, the last syllable (die) which
is commonly deemed to accomplish their consecration, is become officiperda,
redundant, and superfluous.

Fifthly, if the words of consecration be operative as the papists hold, then
if the priest chance to die in the midst of the prolation, Christ's body
shall be left mangled and imperfect: for otherwise, half of the consecratory
words shall stand for ciphers, and have no effect at all.

The 3. Paragraph. Of the impossibility of transubstantiation.
The first reason.
When two unequal dimensiue quantities are placed together, it is impossible
for the contained to be bigger then the conteiner; but Christ's body in the
eucharist reteineth still the natural dimensiue quantity, Ergo it is
impossible, that it be contained under the form of a little round cake.
Bellarm. de eucharist. lib. 3. c. 6.
For the manifestation of this argument, I note first, that all learned men
as well papists as others, agree in this: that God by his absolute power cannot
do those things, which implie contradiction in the doing: the reason whereof I
have yielded in my book of Motives, Aristot. lib. 3. Metaph. Text. 9.
in the 12. preamble. I note secondly, that it is essential to quantity, to
have one part without another, as the great philosopher Aristotle does avouch.
See the 2. part, book 2. chap 6. and note it well. I note thirdly, that the
whole demensiue quantity of Christ's natural body, which he had here visibly
on earth, and still retains in heaven, is together with his body in the
eucharist, Aquinas p. 3. q. 76. ar. 4.
as all learned papists grant. And so by popish docrine, a body being four
cubits long and two cubits broad, remaining still so long and broad, must
perforce be contained under another body, which is neither two cubits long,
nor one cubite broad: but it is impossible, as implying flat contradiction. The
2. reason.
When occupatio^ of place is taken away from a body, it then cease to be, and
is no body at all. But Christ's body occupies no place in the Eucharist, as
learned papists grant: Ergo, Christ's body is not corporally there. Aquinas
p. 3. q. 76. ar. 5.
And least any man distrust the proposition, Saint Augustine has these
express words: Cum ergo sit corpus aliqua substantia, August. epist. 57 ad
Dardan.
quantitas eius est in magnitudine molis eius; sanitas vero eius non quantitas
sed qualitas eius est. Non ergo potuit obtinere quantitas corporis, quod potuit
qualitas. Nam ita distantibus partibus quae simul esse non possunt, quoniam sua
quaeque spatia locorum tenent, minores, minora, and maiores maiora, non potuit
esse in singulis quibusque partibus tota vel tanta; sed amplior est quantitas
in amplioribus partibus, breuior in breuioribus, and in nulla part tanta
quanta per totum. Infra: Nam spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt,
and quia nusquam erunt* nec erunt.

When therefore any substance is a body, the quantity thereof is in the
magnitude of the bigness, but the health is not the quantity, but the
quality thereof. Therefore the quantity of the body could not attain that,
which the quality could. For ye parts being so distant, which could not be
together, because al severally keep their spaces of places, the less lesser
places; and the greater greater, there could not be in all the places severally
the whole or so much; See the 3. Paragraph in the end of the first reason, and
note it well.
but there is a larger quantity in the larger parts, a shorter in shorter
parts, and in no part so much as in the whole. For if spaces of places be
taken from bodies, they shall be in no place; and because they shall be in no
place, neither shall they have any being at all.

Out of these words I note first, that every quantitatiue

I note secondly, that the same parts occupy distinct places.

I note fourthly, that a greater quantity must have a greater

I note fifthly, that no one part can contain so much as the

I note sixthly, that when bodies are without places, they

Guilielmus Okamus in 4. s. q. 4. ad 4.
I therefore conclude, that it is impossible for Christ's natural body to be
contained in a little round cake, and his whole body in every little part
thereof: all which the papists impudently and blasphemously do avouch. Guiliel.
Ocham and Durandus, two popish doctors, do both subscribe to S. Austens
reason. If it were possible for Christ's body to be in diverse places at once;
The third reason.
the angel of God should have made a foolish reason to the women, that came to
see Christ in the sepulcher: for the angel proved Christ not to be there,
because he was risen. These are the words: Matt. 28.9.
(He is not here, for he is risen as he said.) But if Christ's body could be
in many places at once, as the papists would have us believe; then doubtless
did the angel reason childishly. For the women might have said: though he be
risen, yet may he be here also. Yet the angel (who was not to be instructed of
the papists, but from heaven,) affirmed that he could not be there, because he
was risen. For he said not, Christ is risen, and is not here: but, he is not
here, because he is risen. Lo, his rising, is the cause, that he could not be
there. Mark this reason well, for it does convince. Peruse the twelfth
preamble, in my first book of Motives, and the first reply of the seventh
objection in the first paragraph.

The fourth Paragraph. Of the original of transubstantiation.
Transubstantiation is not only repugnant to all philosophy; but so absurd
also in all christian speculation, as it was unknown to the church of God, and
to all approved writers the space of one thousand and two hundred years, after
Christ's sacred incarnation. For it was first hatched by pope Innocentius the
third of that name, in the council of Lateran, which was holden 1215. years
after Christ. Anno. Dom. 1215
Yea, the determination of this synod was reputed of so little force, that the
zealous papist and famous schoole-doctour Durandus boldly published the
contrary doctrine, even after the flat resolution of the same council. Whose
doctrine does so gall the papists, that the Jesuit Bellarmine, unwilling on
the one side to oppose himself against Durand rigorously: and on the other
side, not knowing what to say in defense of the Romish synod, makes as it
were this mitigation between them; Bellarm. de Euchar. libr. 3. cap. 13.
Itaque sententia Durandi haeretica est, licet ipse non sit dicendus
haereticus, cum paratus fuerit ecclesiae iudicio acquiescere. Therefore the
opinion of Durand is heretical, though himself may not be called an
heretic, because he was ready to give place to the decree of the Church:
thus writes our Jesuit. Out of whose words I note first, that a man may
steal an ox, proclaim the same to the Durand held an heretical opinion,
published the same in print constantly, and yet (as the Jesuit tells us) was
no heretic for so doing. I note secondly, that Durand lived more Lateran.

I note thirdly, that he never retracted his opinion, notwithstanding Durand
was willing to obey the decree of their Church: for if he were willing to obey
their church herein, how came it to pass, that he living so long after he
knew their Churches mind, did commit that to print wittingly and willingly,
which is altogether against the same? for no man doubtless impugneth that by
writing, which he does approve at least so far forth, as man's judgment can
have place.

The fyft Paragraph. That the holy Eucharist is a figure and sign of Christ's
body and blood, not the thing it self (that is thereby signified) corporally,
but in a divine and spiritual sort.
FOr the perspicuous explication of this Paragraph, I will use certain
effectual and distinct proofs; and that done, I will succinctly answer to
such objections, as may be made against the same.

My first proof is grounded in the analogy of our christian faith: for first,
Christ took our nature upon him, The first proof.
and that so really and truly, as it was like unto ours in every thing, sin
words: Philip. ^. v. 6.7.
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God;
but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. The latter part S.
Peter proves in these words: 1. Pet. 2. v. 21.22.
for Christ suffered for you, leaving you an ensample that ye should follow his
steps, who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. And S.
Paul says: 2. Cor. 5. v. 21.
for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him. Now our bodies are such, as they can not
with one act be made to be in two places at one time, ergo the priests words
can not make Christ's body in a thousand places at once: for if he could so do,
Christ's body should be of an other nature then ours, contrary to the holy
scripture.

Joan. 4. v. 22.24.
God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth. Thus does our faith tell us, but the Papists say, that we must worship
God in a round cake: that we must worship for God, that which neither we nor
they know to be God: for if the priest either want intention to consecrate,
(which often chances by reason of wandering imaginations) or of purpose
means not to consecrate, The Papists worship they know not what.
or of negligence omitteth any one word of consecration; then by popish
religion the thing adored is but pure bread, and yet do they worship it for the
everliving God. It is therefore truly said to them, that they worship they
know not what.

Thirdly, Christ must so be eaten of us, as he abides in us, I^an. 6. v. 56.
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him:
the latter part S. Paul proves in these words, Ephesians. 3. v. 17.
that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.

Act. 3. v. 21.
therefore we must feed on him in heaven by faith, and not on earth with our
teeth. For which cause, the ancient Church exhorted ye people before the
communion, to lift up their hearts unto the Lord, as if it had been said, 1.
Cor. 10. v. 16.17.
ye must not affixe your minds to these visible creatures, but meditate on
heavenly things, which are promised by ye reverent and faithful use thereof.

Fifthly, S. Paul says plainly, that the faithful in the old testament did all
eat and drink Christ's body and blood, 1. Cor. 10. v. 3.4.
which they S. Austen, vt quid paras ventrem and dentem? creed and manducasti.
De consec. did. 2. Cap. vt quid.
Credere enim in eum, hoc est panem and vinum manducare, qui credit in eum,
manducat eum. Wherefore preparest thou a belly and a tooth? believe, and thou
have eaten; for to believe in him, is to eat bread and wine: he that believes
in him, eats him. Thus says S Austen, even as their own Gratian has
alleged him.

Sixthly, S. Paul says, that so often as we eat and drink 1. Cor. 10. v. 26.
but doubtless if he be corporally present under the accidents of bread and
wine, then is he already come: nay, more truly is it said, that he was never
gone. For as S. Austen says, De consecr. did. 2 cap. prima.
donec seculum finiatur, sursum est dominus, sed tamen etiam hic nobiscu^ est
veritas domini; corpus enim in quo resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet:
veritas autem eius vbique diff^sa est. Our Lord is above until the worlds end,
but yet his truth is with us here, for the body of our Lord* wherein he rose
again, must needs be in one place: but his truth is diffused every where.
Again, the same S. Austen writing against Faustus the Manichee, has these
express words, August. contr. Faust. libr. ^0. cap. 11. tom. 6.
Secundum praesentiam quippe spiritualem nullo modo illa pati posset* secundum
praesentiam vero corporalem simul and in sole, and in luna, and in cruce esse
non posset, For his flesh could no way suffer according to his spiritual
presence; and according to his corporal presence, it was not possible for him
to be both in the sun, and in the moon, and on the cross, at one and the
same time. Again, he says in another place after this manner, Videte
ascendentem, August. in Psalm. 46. circamed.
credit in absentem, sperate venientem, sed tamen per misericordiam occultam
etiam sentite praesentem. Ille enim qui ascendit in coelum vt tolleretur ab
oculis vestris, promisit vobis dicens, ecce ego vovestris, promisit vobis
dicens; ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque in consummationem seculi. Behold Christ
ascending, believe in him absent, trust in him that is coming; and for all
that feel him also present, by his secret mercy. Thus ye see the flat opinion
of this grave writer, of this ancient father, of this holy learned doctor; his
resolution is so evident, and so free from all obscurity, as none can pretend
ignorance that once read his Lo, Christ's body cannot be cor^orally in two
^laces at once: and so it cannot ^oth be in heaven and on earth.
and withal to feel his virtue, as he is spiritually present. How can he tell
us more plainly, that Christ's body is spiritually in the Eucharist, but not
corporally? It is not possible for any man, to yield a more sensible
declaration: which if the gentle reader will observe attentively, it will
minister to him a great light, for the perfect understanding of the whole
mystery.

The second proof.
My second proof is grounded in the figures of the old testament; for first,
circumcision was called Gods covenant, and Genes. 17, 10.
it is clear in these words, (This is my covenant, which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Let every man child among you
be circumcised.) And nevertheless that it was not the covenant, but the sign
of the covenant, ^bidem 1^.
it is evident by these words: (Ye shall circumcise the foreskinne of your
flesh, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and you. ^^idem 7*
) The covenant indeed was this. To be Abraham's God, and the God of his seed
after him; so says the text.

Secondly, the Lamb was called the Lords passover, and Exodus 1^.1^.
it is clear by these words of Moses: (For it is the Lords passover.) And
also by these words of the Evangelist: Matthew. 26.17.
(Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover;) that is, the
Lamb, which was the sign of the passover. Again in these words; Ibid. 18.
Ibid. 19.
(I will keep ye passover at thine house.) Again in these words, (And they made
ready the passover.) In all which places the scripture speaks only of the
sign, that is, of the lamb, and ^
gives it the name of the thing, that is, of the passing over. Now that it was
not the passover indeed, Exodus 12.1^.
but the sign or figure thereof, it is evident by these words of holy Writ:
(And the blood shall be a token for you upon the houses where ye are: so when
I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to
destruction, when I smite the land of Egypt.) Lo, the lamb was but a token and
sign of ye angels passing over them. And this lamb was a figure of our
passover Jesus Christ, as he was really sacrificed upon the cross, so says
the holy apostle: 1* Cor. 5.7.
(For Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.) This S. John confirmed, when
he willed the Pharisees to behold the Lamb of God, Joan. 1.29.
that takes away the sins of the world. And in the Revelation, Apoc. 13.8.
this lamb is said to be slain from the beginning of the world. Since
therefore the scripture tells us so plainly, that the paschall Lamb was the
type and figure of the true Messiah, who was sacrificed to his father for the
sins of the world: it shall not be unprofitable to the Reader, to consider the
allegory of the rites which God appointed to be observed therein.

The Type, Exodus 12 The thing signified. 1 The lamb was a memorial of the
deliverance out of Egypt. That is to say: 1 Christ delivered us from hell, sin,
death, and satan, Gal. 3.13 2 The lamb was a sacrifice distinguishing the
Israelites from other nations. 2 Christ is the eternal sacrifice, who being
eaten spiritually by faith, distingu^sheth gods faith full people from
infidels, Ioh. 6.56. 3 The lamb was a true lamb of the flock. 3 Christ was a
true man, borne of the blessed virgin, Ioh. 1.14 4 The lamb was truly slain.
4 Christ was truly crucified, 1. Corinthians. 5.7. John 19.30. 5 The lamb was not
boiled in water, but roasted dry. 5 Christ's body was enclosed in a new tomb,
that had no water in it, Matthew. 27.60. 6 The lamb was killed at even. 6 Christ
was killed in the end of the world, Hebr. 1.2. 7 The Angel beholding the
doors sprinkled with the lambs blood, passed over the Israelites. 7 God
beholding our souls sprinckeled with the blood of Christ, does not impute our
sins to us, Romans 3.34. 8 The lambs blood saved the Israelites from common
death. 8 The blood of Christ delivered us from eternal death, He. 2.9 9 All the
Israelites did eat of the lamb. 9 All the faithful shall eat of Christ
spiritually, John 6. 10 Every part of the lamb was eaten. 10 Every mystery of
Christ's incarnation must be believed, 2. Timoth. 3. 11 The lamb was eaten
without leaven. 11 Christ is eaten by faith with out hypocrisy, 1. Corint.
5.8. 12 The lamb was eaten with sour herbs. 12 We must eat Christ in
bearing his cross, Matthew. 10.38. 13 The lamb was appointed to be eaten with
speed. 13 We must embrace Christ's Gospel, with all expedition, Matthew. 6.33.
14 The lamb was eaten of the circumcised only. 14 Christ is only eaten by
faith of the regenerat, 1. Cor. 11.29 15 The lamb was without blemish. 15
Christ was free from sin, 1. Pet. 2.22.

THis passover of the old law with other sacrifices and figures, which were
but shadows of ye Messiah to come; are al wholly abolished by Christ's sacred
aduent. For Christ now ready to die, Hebr. 10.14.
and to offer up himself as the true passover and verity of all figures:
made an end of the old passover with a solemn banquet, and instituting the
Eucharist in stead thereof, Luc. 22.15.
commanded the faithful to observe the same for a memory of his death and
passion, until his second aduent, 1. Cor. 11.26.
which shall be in majesty and glory.

My third proof is grounded, The third proof^ Luc. 22.18. 1. Cor. 11.
in the phrases of the new testament. For Christ himself said, that he would
not henceforth drink of the fruit of the vine, until he rose again. S. Paul
in like manner calls it bread very often, even after the consecration. But
if it had been Christ's natural blood, and his natural body, neither would he
have called it the fruit of the vine, nor Saint Paul have termed it bread.
Which Saint Paul makes plain in another place, 1. Cor. 10.16, 17
where he has these words: The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ? for we that are many, are one bread and one body,
because we all are partakers of one bread. Out of which words I note first,
Mark (...)*
that Saint Paul terms it bread after

I note secondly, that he calls it not Christ's body, but the

I note thirdly, that the bread he speaks of is broken.

I note fourthly, that we are all one bread and one body; Canus grants, and
as very reason teaches. I infer secondly, that we are no otherwise
partakers of Christ's body: then we are all one body and one bread. Ergo we
are no otherwise partakers of Christ's body then mystically and sacramentally:
that is to say, while we eat the sacrament of Christ's body, we are united
spiritually to Christ by faith, and mystically one to another.

The fourth proof.
My fourth proof is grounded in the uniform consent of the ancient doctors of
the church. For first, S. Clemens Alexandrinus has these words: Nam ipse
quoque homo, and vinum benedixit, cum dixit: accipite, bibite, hoc est sanguis
meus, sanguis vitis: verbum quod pro multis effunditur in remissionem
peccatorum, sanctum laetitiae fluentum allegorice significat. Sequitur: quod
autem vinum esset quod benedictum est, ostendit rursus dicens discipulis: non
bibam ex fructu vitis huius, donec bibero ipsum vobiscum in regno patris mei.
For our Lord being also man blessed wine, when he said: Take, drink, this is
my blood, the blood of the vine: the word, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins, does signify allegorically the holy river of gladness.
And that it was wine which is blessed, he shows again when he says thus to
his disciples: I will not drink of the fruit of this vine, until I drink it
with you in the kingdom of my father. Out of these words of this holy and
ancient father (who lived above one thousand, three sanguis vitis, such blood
as the vine does afford.



I note thirdly, that these words of Christ (I will not drink Christ's blood
sa^ramentally, but ^ot naturally.
allegorically, which I wish the reader ever to observe, as a general rule.

Secondly, S. Hilarie writes thus: Secundo princ^paliter.
Nos vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc vnu^ erimus,
quia pater Hilar. de Trinit. libr. 8. p. 140.
We truly receive the flesh of Christ's body in a mystery, and by it we shall
be one, because the Father is in him, and he in us. Out of these words I note
Hilarie truly says. And this answer will solue a thousand captious cauilles,
which the Papists use to make. I note secondly, that such as is our union by
eating this bread, such is the eating

Thirdly, S. Irenaeus has these words: Qui est e terra panis Iren. lib. 4.
cap. 3^
sed eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti. The bread
which is of the earth, after it has received gods blessing, is no longer
common bread, but the eucharist. And it consists of two things; the one
earthly, the other heavenly. Out of which words I note first, that our
communion bread is still 1. Corinthians. 1^.
yet withal, 1. Cor. 15.
it still reteineth all essential properties of a true body, even as our
bodies shall do after the resurrection. It is still circumscriptible, sensible,
visible, tangible, quantitatiue, dimensiue, local; none of which can possibly
be found, in popish carnal real presence.

Chrysostom has these words: Nam quando dicunt, Chrysostom. hom. 83 in Matthew.
tom. 2. Vide Hilar. can. 30. in Matt.
vnde patet immolatum Christum fuisse, and alia multa mysteria: haec afferentes
ora ipsorum consuimus. Si enim mortuus Jesus non est, cuius symbolum ac signum
hoc sacrificium est? Infra: ita per sacratissimam istam mensam and saluat and
docet: hoc enim caput bonorum omnium est: quare hoc Paulus voluit ac repetit:
sed tradito iam mysterio, non bibam ait, de hoc genimine vitis vsque in illam
diem, cum illud bibam nouum vobiscum in regno patris mei. Sequitur: ex genimine
autem ait vitis, quae certe vinum non aquam producit.

For when they say, how do we know that Christ suffered, and many other
mysteries; we bringing these things ^owe up their mouths. For if Jesus were
not dead, of whom is this sacrifice a mark and sign? So he both saves and
teaches by this most sacred table; for this is the head of al good things:
wherefore Saint Paul meant this, and he repeateth it. But after he had
delivered the mystery, I will not drink says he, of this fruit of the
vine, until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in the kingdom of
my father. And he says, of the fruit of the vine, which doubtless brings
Crysostome and other fathers do deny.

Cyprian has these words; Dico vobis, non bibam amodo ex ista creatura vitis,
vsque in diem illum, quo vobiscum bibam nouum vinum in regno patris mei.
Cyprian lib^. 2. epist. 3. circ. med*
Qua in part inuenimus calicem mixtum fuisse quem Dominus obtulit* and vinum
fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit. I say to you, I will not drink henceforth of
this creature of the vine, until that day, in which I will drink new wine with
you, in the kingdom of my father. Wherein we find that the cup was mingled
with our Lord offered, and that it was wine which he called his body. Out of
these words I note first, that Saint Luke spoke of the Clement and S.
Chrysostom. I note secondly, that the consecrate cup contained natural wine,
Cyprian were this day living, and knew the blasphemous doctrine of the papists,
A general rule to expound all the Fathers.
yet could he not decide more plainly, the controversy between them and
us. Yea, this testimony of saint Cyprian may be a general rule for us, as
well to expound himself in other places, as also the rest of the holy
fathers. For when they term the holy communion or Eucharist, Christ's body
and blood, the blood that issued out of his side, the body that was nailed on
the cross, the flesh that was borne of the virgin, the price of our
redemption; all this is truly said in their godly meaning: that is to say,
all this is truly verified sacramentally, mystically, spiritually, but not
corporally as the Papists teach. For all the Fathers admit this doctrine of
Saint Cyprian; that even after consecration, remains still the true nature of
bread and wine.

Sixthly, Tertullian being consonant to the other fathers, Tertull. aduers.
Marcionem lib. 4 p. 306.
Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est
corpus meum dicendo, id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi
veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res quod est phantasma, figuram capere
non potest. He made that bread which he took and gave to his disciples to
be his body, saying this is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body,
and there should not have been a figure, unless there had been a true body
indeed: for a vain thing which is but a fal^^ imagination, cannot receive a
figure. Out of these words I

Seventhly, S. Theodoret has these words: Neque enim signa Theodor. dialog. 2.
p. 128.
Manent enim in priore substantia, and figura, and forma, and videri, and tangi
possunt sicut and prius. The mystical signs after the sanctification depart
not from their nature: but they abide in their former substance, and figure,
and form, and may be seen and touched, even as before. Out of these most
golden words of this ancient Theodoret confuteth the heretics, even by
their own reason. For the mystical signs (says he) remain still in their
former substance and nature, even after the sanctification thereof. As if he had
said: ye lay not a good foundation, your supposall is false, ye take that as
granted, which is flatly denied. For although the creatures of bread and wine
be sanctified by Gods word, and accidentally changed into the mystical signs
of his body and blood; yet do they still retain their former nature and
substance, yet do they still remain, truly bread and truly wine. I note
thirdly, that though the bread and wine All the papists in Europe cannot
answer this reason. For Theodoret proves against the heretics, that as
bread and wine are as truly bread and truly wine after consecration, as they
were before consecration; even so is Christ's body as truly a body now after
his ascension, Whom will not this reason persuade?
as it was before here on earth. So as the papists cannot now say, that the
bread and wine have lost their true natures in ye eucharist; unless they will
also say, yt Christ has lost ye nature of a true body now in heaven.

Eighthly, S. Austen a worthy pillar of Christ's Church, (as the papists
themselves do grant;) has these words: Nisi Aug. de doctrine. Christiana,
lib. 3. cap. 16.
Facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. Figura est ergo praecipiens passioni
domini esse communicandum, and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria,
quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. Unless says Christ, ye
shall eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have no
life in you. He seems by these words to command to do an heinous offense.
It is therefore a figure commanding us to be partakers of Christ's passion, and
sweetly and profitably to lay up in our minds, that his flesh was crucified
and wounded for our sakes. In another place he has these words: Cum videritis
filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius, certe vel tunc videbitis, August in
euang* Joan. tract. 27. tom. 9.
quia non eo modo quo putatis erogat corpus suum; certe vel tunc intelligetis,
quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. When ye shall see the son of man
ascending thither, where he was before; then doubtless shall ye see, that he
gives not his body in such sort as ye imagine: then shall ye truly
understand, that his grace is not consumed with the bit of the mouth.

Again thus: In principio cauendum est, ne figuratam locutionem ad literam
accipias. Et ad hoc enim pertinet quod ait apostolus: litera occidit, spiritus
autem viuificat. August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. ca. 5.
Cum enim figurate dictum sic accipitur, tanquam proprie dictum sit, carnaliter
sapitur. Sequitur: ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus, signa pro rebus
accipere: and supra creaturam corpoream oculum mentis ad hauriendum aeternum
lumen leuare non posse. Before all things thou must take heed, least thou
understand that literally, which is spoken by a figure. For to this end is that
which the apostle says: The letter kills, but the spirit quickens. For
our wisdom is then carnal, when we understand that properly, which is spoken
figuratively. To conclude, that is a miserable bondage of the soul, to take
signs for the things signified: and not to lift up the eye of our mind above
the corporal creature, so to behold eternal light. Again thus: Possum etiam
interpretari praeceptum illud in signo esse positum. August. cont. Adimant.
cap. 12. tom 6.
Non enim dominus dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum cum signum daret
corporis sui. I may also interpret this precept to be figurative. For our Lord
doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign or figure of his
body. Again thus, Cum adhibuit ad conuiuium, in quo corporis and sanguinis sui
figuram discipulis co^mendauit and tradidit. August. in Psalm. 3. in initio*
When he admitted (Judas) to the banquet, in which he commended and delivered
to his disciples, the figure of his body and his blood. Again thus, Illi
manducabant panem dominum, ille panem domini contra dominum. They ate the bread
that was our Lord, August. in Joan. Tract. 59.
he ate (not our Lord, but) the bread of our Lord against the Lord. Again
thus: Quomodo in coelum manum mittam vt ibi sedentem ten^am? fidem mitte and
tenuisti: parents tui tenuerunt carne, tu tene cord, quoniam Christus abs^ns
etiam praesens est: nisi praesens esset a nobis teneri non posset: sed quonia^
veru^ est quod ait, Ibid. tract. 50.
(Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad consummationem seculi: Math. 28. v. vlt.
) and abijt and hic est, and redijt, and nos non deseruit. Corpus enim suum
intulit coelo, maiestatem non abstulit mundo. How shall I reach up my hand to
heaven, that I may take hold on him sitting there? Reach thither thy faith,
and thou have hold on him. Thy fathers held him in the flesh, hold thou him in
thine heart, because Christ being absent is also present: for if he were not
present he could not be holden of us; but because it is true that he says:
(Behold I am with you till the end of the world,) both he is gone and he is
here, he is returned and has not forsaken us. For he carried his body up into
heaven, August. in Joan. tract. 50. in fine.
yet he took not his majesty out of the world. Again, in another place
thus: Secundum praesentiam maiestatis semper habemus Christum, secundum
praesentia^ carnis recte dictum est discipulis, me autem non semper habebitis:
Habuit enim illum ecclesia secundum praesentiam carnis paucis diebus, modo fide
tenet, oculis non videt. According to the presence of his majesty we have
Christ always, but according to the presence of the flesh it was rightly said
to his Disciples; but ye shall not have me always. For the Church had him in
the flesh a few days, but now she holds him by faith, she does not see him
with her eyes. Again thus: August. epist. 23.
Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christ^ corpus Christi
est: sacramentum sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei
fides est: As therefore in a certain sort the Sacrament of Christ's body, is
Christ's body; and the sacrament of Christ's blood is the blood of Christ: even
so the sacrament of faith is faith. In these manifold testimonies Saint Austen
proves abundantly, that the popish carnal imagined presence in the
Eucharist, is blasphemous and most execrable.

Secondly, he tells us that Christ is ascended, and that

Thirdly, he says that the soul is never in greater bondage, then when she
grossly and carnally takes the figures and

Fourthly, he tells us, that since the signs of things be

Fifthly, he says that the bread which the other Disciples The papists are
confounded*
Then perforce Judas should also have received, Panem Dominum: Then Judas
could not by any possibility, have barely received panem Domini: which yet S.
Augustine affirms most constantly. For first, if it were true, that after
consecration the substance of bread were transubstantiated into Christ's
natural body, as it consists of flesh, blood, and bone: and again if it
were also true, that the self same body remained under the form of bread
until it were corrupted: then let all the papists in England or else where in
Europe, tell me how Judas could receive ( panem Domini,) but not ( panem
Dominum) as S. Austen says: that is, how Judas could receive the form of
bread, with the flesh, blood, and bones of Christ's organicall and natural
body h^dden under the same, and for all that not receive Christ himself, and
panem Dominum, as the other apostles did. Let them I I say, tell me this, and I
promise to subscribe. If they will not this do, because they cannot, (for if
they can do it, all the world must think they will do it;) then if the
fear of God be before their eyes, they will acknowledge the truth that I now
defend; which God grant they may do, Amen.

Sixthly, he tells us, that albeit we cannot reach with our Joan. 6. v. 63.
according to this doctrine of our master Christ. The words that I spoke unto
you, are spirit and life.

Seventhly, he tells us, that as Christ is on earth still, according Austen,)
touching the presence of his flesh, he was but a few days on earth. Yea,
(say the papists,) S. Austen lies; and when he thus wrote, he was a sleep,
and so were the rest of the fathers, that hold as he does. We affirm without
scriptures, fathers, rhyme, and reason, that he is carnally present at the
priests appointment, in ten thousand pixes at once. More absurdly then this we
say, that a mouse can catch Christ's carnal body, carry it away into an hole,
and there devour it with her teeth. Of which blasphemous doctrine, the great
papist Petrus Lombard* surnamed their master of sentences, knows not what to
say or think; but being at his wits end what answer to make, thus answers
the question without answer: for his answer is answerelesse, in these words:
Lombard. in 4. s. did. 13.^^.
Quid ergo sumit mus, vel quid manducat? Deus nouit hoc. What therefore does a
mouse take, when she catches the reserved host, or what does she eat? God
knows this. Lo, is not this a grave answer, of the grauest father amongst
our popish doctors? He is termed the master of sentences, and his books are
publicly read in their schools of divinity, and so of the next authority to
the holy scriptures. And for all this, so doubtful and uncertain is their
faith; that when a mouse catches their accidents without subjects, he knows
not in the world, what is become of their carnal real presence.

Eeightly, he tells us, that the sacrament of Christ's body

Ninthly, Nono principaliter.
Saint Ambrose (whom ^he papists think to make wholly for their side,) has
these express words: Si tanta vis Ambr. libr. 4. de sacram. cap. 4.
quanto magis operatorius est, vt sint quae erant* and in aliud commutentur? If
there be so great power in the word of our Lord Jesus, that things began to
be which were not: how much more is it workefull, that things be which were,
and be changed into another thing? In these words, Saint Ambrose declares the
creatures of bread and wine, to remain still in their proper nature and
substance; and withal to be changed into another thing, that is to say, De
euchar. libr. 2* cap. 14.
into the sacraments of Christ's true body and blood. To this our Jesuit
Bellarmine answers in these words: Non dixit vt sint id quod erant, tunc enim
panis manner deberet; sed vt sint quae erant, id est, n^n annihilentur, sed
maneant, quamuis mutata. He said not, that they may be that which they were,
for then the bread ought to remain indeed; but that they may still be which
were before, that is, that they be not annihilated, but abide still, Ambrose
means no other thing, then did Saint Aust^n, when he called baptism the
sacrament of faith. For the omnipotency of Christ's word, is required of them
both in both sacraments. And as the water is changed into another thing, that
is, to be a sacrament and ^ea^e of Gods favor, which before was but common
water: even so bread is changed into another thing, that is, to be the
sacrament of Christ's body, Argumentum ad hominem.
and yet keeps still the nature of a man: and as a Bishop by orders is
altered into another thing, and yet keeps still his former substance: even so
the bread in the Eucharist is changed mystically, and still remains true
bread. This is a good argument against the papists, who defend matrimony
aliud) must needs signify an essential change, (as master Harding our
Jesuit, and the rest will have it to do,) then either married men have gotten
nothing by their matrimonial contractes, nor Bishops by their consecrations:
or at least all married men and Bishops have lost the natures of men, and are
changed into another substance. But as the Logicians tell us, these three
transcendents, ens, res, aliquid, may be affirmed of whatsoever is: and for
the order of Bishops, the papists tell us, that it imprinteth an indeleble
character: Matthew. 19 6.
touching matrimony, Christ himself tells us, that it is an indissoluble
band. Touching the persons themselves, experience tells us, that they are
still as tru^ly men as they were before; and consequently, the word ( aliud)
may as well signify an accidental alteration, as an essential transmutation.
Bellarmine would gladly gloss Saint Ambrose; then doubtless may we truly
say, that they are gone which were before, not that they still remain; unless
perhaps the papists will say, that the horse remains, when nothing is left
but his skin: and that a man lives after he be dead. For in both more
remains, then of their wine and bread.

I say fifthly, that by Bellarmines answer, if himself were changed into the
essential nature of an ass, and kept still the external figure of a man; yet
should he still be as truly Bellarmine, as he was before; A rare prerogative
of Jesuits.
and so Jesuits may be both Asses and men at once: a privilege granted to all
others of their crew.

The first objection
S. Austen alluding to the facts and words of David, August. in Psa. 3^* conc.
1.
by which Christ was prefigured, writes in this manner: Manibus aliorum potest
portar^ homo, manibus suis nemo portatur: quomodo intelligatur in ipso David
secundum literam non inuenimus, in Christo autem inuenimus. Ferebatur enim
Christus in manib^su^s, quando co^mendans ipsum corpus suum ait. Hoc est corpus
meum Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis; ipsa est humilitas Dom. nostri
Jesus Christi. A man may be carried in the hands of others; but no man is
carried in his own hands. How this may be understood in David literally we do
not find, but in Christ we do it find. For Christ was borne in his own
hands, when he commended his own body, and said: This is my body. For he
held that body in his hands; such is the humility of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thus says Saint Austen. By whose words it is evident, that that which Christ
at his last supper gave to his disciples, was his true, real, and natural
body, even that which was borne of the virgin Mary. For first, he tells us
that Christ did that which David could therein. But Christ did so bear himself
in his own hands (says saint Austen,) as no man can do the like. This reason
is invincible, all protestants in the world cannot answer the same.

The answer.


S. Austen should so mean, as you gather of these words; he should contradict
himself in many other places, as is already proved; and consequently, his
authority should be of no force in this behalf.

I say thirdly, that Saint Austen does a little after expound Et ferebatur in
manibus suis. August. in psalm 33 conc. 2.
Quomodo ferebatur in manibus suis? quia cum commendaret ipsum corpus suum and
sanguinem suum* accepit in manus suas quod (...) fideles, and ipse se portabat
quodammodo cum diceret, hoc est corpus meu^ And he was borne in his hands. How
was he borne in his hands? because when he commended his own body and his
blood, he took into his hands that the faithful know, Note well the word
Quodammodo.
and he bare himself after a sort when he said, This is my body. Where I wish
the Reader to mark well the word ( quadammodo, after a sort:) for Christ had
his true, real, and natural body, in his hands after a sort, that is,
sacramentally; when he said, This is my body. He had his (...) body in his
hands, but it was after a sort, not simply: but sacramentally, not naturally:
but mystically, not carnally.

Aquinas, Victoria, Antoninus, Couarruuias, Bellarminus, and all learned
papists grant,) no mortal man can institute any sacrament, Note well what (...)
said.
and so no mortal man being pure man, could sacramentally bear himself in his
own hands.

this discourse S. Austen confirms in another place, where he has these
words: Aug. in psalm. 98. and habetur de consecr. did. ^* lib. prim.
Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem
quem effusuri sunt qui me ^rucifigent Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui,
spiritualiter intellectum viuificat vos. Ye shall not eat this body that ye
see, and drink that blood which they shall shed, that will crucify me. I have
commended a sacrament to you, which being understood spiritually does quicken
you.

The second obiect^on.
S. Cyprian does prove this verity, in most plain and manifest terms. Thus
does he write: Panis iste quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat non effigy, sed
natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. The bread which our Lord
did reach to his disciples, being changed not in shape but in nature, became
flesh by the omnipotency of the word. Lo, bread was changed not in shape or
figure, which our sense tells us to be so: but in nature or substance, as the
catholic church teaches us. And how is it changed? even into flesh; and yet
will not you have Christ to be present, in flesh, blood, and bone. But if it
were otherwise, the omnipotent power of Gods word should be needelesse: which
yet Saint Cyprian says, Cypr. de (...) Domini.
is it that works this mighty change. If ye yield not to this testimony,
ye show your self to be obstinate.

The answer
I say first, that the gross and carnal sense of these words, did

I say secondly, that if Saint Cyprian meant as you would

I say thirdly, that S. Cyprian can never be more truly all his words may be
consonant one to another, we must join antecedent to consequent, former to
latter, and one place to another. This done, we shall find with facility,
that he speaks only of sacramental alteration: and that by the word
(nature) he means natural properties. Yea even so do the papists interpret
the same word in their Gelasius, concerning this question now in hand. Thus
does Saint Cyprian say immediately after the other words: Cypr. de coena
Domini.
Et sicut in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, and latebat diuinitas; ita
sacramento visibili ineffabiliter diuina se infudit essentia. Infra: Nostra
vero and ipsius coniunctio nec miscet personas, nec unit substantias; sed
affectus consociat, and confoederat voluntates. Iterum: and sicut panis
communis quem quotidie edimus, vita est corporis: ita panis iste
supersubstantialis vita est animae, and sanitas mentis. Panem Angelorum sub
sacramento manducamus in t^rris; eundem sine sacramento manifestius edemus in
coelis, non ministerio corporali. And as the humanity was seen in the person
of Christ, and the divinity hidden; even so has the divine essence powered out
it self unspeakably, in the visible sacrament. For both ours and his
conjunction neither mingleth persons, nor yet unites substances; but procures
fellowship in affection, and agreement in wills. And as the common bread which
we eat daily, is the life of the body: so is this supersubstantiall bread the
life of the soul, and the health of the mind. We eat here on earth
Angel-foode under the sacrament; but we shall eat the same more clearly
without the sacrament in heaven, and that without help of the body.



Cyprian says a (...); Recipitur non includitur, He is received, but not shut
up in the sacrament*

I note thirdly, that this bread is spiritual, not corporal; the

I note fourthly, that we eat Angell-foode here on earth, in the sacrament,
and that we shall eat the very same in heaven Cyprian, shows his catholic
christian meaning so plainly, as all Papists may be ashamed henceforth to
allege him, for their late invented carnal presence. In heaven there is
neither accident without subject, nor sacrament administered, nor yet any
corporal eating and drinking there used. Angels food is spiritual, not
carnal; celestial, not terrestrial; eternal, not corporal: Angels neither
eat by dint of tooth, nor by morsels in the mouth. Their nature is not capable
of any such actions. Since therefore our sacramental meat, is the same that
Angels now eat, and the same that our selves shall eat in heaven, where all
corporal, carnal and fleshy eating cease: it follows of necessity, that
it is mere spiritual; not corporal, fleshy or carnal.

The reply.
He says, that the bread is made flesh by the omnipotency of Gods word, to
show the unspeakable transmutation. Therefore so soon as Gods word is spoken
by the priest, it is no more bread, but flesh indeed.

The answer.
I say first, as I said not long before; that it passes the force

I say secondly, that the alteration is unspeakable, when

I say thirdly, that whosoever will peruse the whole treatise of Saint Cyprian
De coena Domini, and do it seriously with Ideo ex consueto rerum effectu fidei
nostrae adiuta infirmitas, sensibili argumento edocta est visibilibus
sacramentis inesse vitae aternae effectum, and non tam corporali quam
spirituali transitione Christo nos vniri. Therefore the infirmity of our faith
being helped by the accustomed effect of things, is caught by a sensible
argument, that the effect of eternal life is in the visible sacraments, and
that we are united to Christ, not so by corporal as by spiritual transmutation.
And in the very end of the tract he concludes in this manner: Haec quoties
agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus sed fide sincera panem sanctum
frangimus and partimur dum quod diuinum and quod humanum est, distinguimus and
separamus, itemque simul separata iungentes, vnum deum and hominem fatemur. Sed
and nos ipsi corpus eius effecti, sacramento and re sacramenti capiti nostro
connectimur, and vnimur singuli alter alterius membra, ministerium dilectionis
pro inuicem exhibentes, communicamus charitate, participamus sollicitudine,
eundem cibum manducantes, and eundem potum bibentes, qui depetra spiritali
profluit and emanat, qui cibus and potus est dominus noster Jesus Christus. So
often as we do these things, we do not whet our teeth to eat, but we break
and divide the sanctified bread with a sincere faith, while we distinguish and
separate what is divine and what humane; and also joining the same things
separated together, confess one God and man. Our selves also being made his
body, are knit to our head by the sacrament and virtue thereof, and are united
particularly one an others members, exhibiting the ministry of love one for
another; we communicate in charity, we participate in solicitude, we eat the
same meat and drink the same drink, which flows and runs out of the
spiritual rock, which meat and drink is our Lord Jesus Christ.





and is broken and divided: none of which can agree indeed with Christ's
corporal presence.

I note fourthly, that we eat not Christ with mouth and

I note fifthly, that the true and sincere faith, by which we

I note sixthly, that as we eat Christ in the Sacrament, so

I note seventhly, that our sacramental meat and drink is qualis causa talis
effectus, the effect is of like condition with the cause: neither can a
corporal cause bring forth a spiritual effect, nor a spiritual cause a
corporal effect: whereupon arises a great question among the Schoolmen, how
hell fire can be material, since a body can have no action into a spirit.

The 3. objection.
Saint Chrysostom has these words; Quod est in calice, Chrysostom. in cap. 10.
cor. 1. hom. 24. in initio.
id est, quod a latere fluxit, and illius sumus participes. That which is in
the cup, is the same that flowed out of his side, and we are partakers
thereof. But doubtless no christian can or will deny, that to be Christ's true
blood indeed, which issued out of his side upon the cross: therefore the
same must be granted, to be under the form of wine in the mass.

The answer.
I say first, that I grant Christ's true body and his true Chrysostom, S.
Cyprian, saint Austen, or any other ancient father, speak one word of your
carnal real presence, or once name your accidents without subjects. No, they
teach no other doctrine, then that which I willingly embrace.

Now that Saint Chrysostom speaks of a mystical presence, his own words
following within a few lines, shall witness the same with me. Chrysostom. vbi
sup.
Thus he says: Et propter te frangi sustinet, vt omnes satiet; And he
suffers to be broken for thee, that he may satiate all. Thus says this holy
father. By whose words it is clear, that he means Christ to be no otherwise
present, then he affirms him to be broken. And if any papist will say, that
Christ's bones are otherwise broken then in a mystery; then must the same
papist tell me, how Christ's body can be glorious and not mortal: Romans 6 9. 1.
Cor. 15. verse 53, 42.
then must be tell me, how it chauceth, that I can not feel and see Christ's
bones and flesh. For so Christ proved the verity of his body to his
disciples; Handle me (says Christ) and see: Luc. 24.39.
for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Then must he tell
me, to what end he sent the comforter in his steed, Joan. 16.7.
if himself be still on earth among us. For himself says: If I go not away,
the comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him to you.
Matt. 26.11.
Then must he tell me, how Christ is not always with us, since as they say,
their round cakes do never want him. For himself says: Ye have the poor
always with you, but me shall ye not have always. Then must he tell me,
how accidents can be without a subject, August. ad Da^d. epist. 57.
since S. Austen says, that if qualities be taken from the bodies, they loose
their being. Then must he tell me what scripture says, that Christ's body which
was visible before his ascension, Act. 1.9, 11. Act. 3.21.
visible in his ascension, and shall continue visible in heaven till his second
aduent; is for all that daily and hourly in infinite popish cakes; and after
an invisible and insensible manner: then must he tell me, how Christ's body being
like to ours in all things, Hebr. 2.1^. Hebr. 4.15. 1. Pet. 2.
sin excepted, can nevertheless be in many places at once: then must he
tell me, how Christ's body is not a fantastical body, as Marcion and the
Manichees held: for Saint Austen says, that Christ's true body can be but in
some one place of heaven; August. epist. ad Dardan. in fine.
Vbi (inquit) totum praesentem esse non dubites tanquam deum, and in eodem
templo Dei esse tanquam inhabitantem Deum, and in loco aliquo coeli propter
very corporis modum. Thou must not doubt (says saint Austen) that Christ is
wholly present every where as God, and in the same temple of God as God
inhabiting it, and in some one place of heaven for the manner of a true body.
Lo, this grave father tells us, that Christ as god is every where; but in
respect of his true body, he is only in heaven, and in some certain place of
heaven: Only in heaven, Act. 3.21. A true body cannot be in many places at once.
because the scripture says, that he shall be there till the worlds end: in
some certain place of heaven, to declare the nature and verity of a true
body. So then, if he were present as the papists would have him, his body should
loose the nature and verity, of a true body indeed.

I say secondly, that Saint Chrysostom expounds his own Chrysostom. vbi sup.
when he says that Christ in his last supper, gave the fruit of the vine to
his disciples. His words are before alleged, and are flat contrary to these
other here objected, unless they be glossed as I say.

The reply.
Saint Chrysostom in an other place confuteth your sophistical answers, and
delivers his meaning in so plain terms, as no denial can be made thereof.
These are his words; Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Mat.
Non enim sufficit ipsi hominem fieri flagellis interim caedi; sed nos secum in
vnam (vt ita dicam) massam reducit, neque id fide solum, sed reipsa nos corpus
suum efficit. For it is not enough for him to become man, and in the mean time
to be whipped and scourged: Note well the answer to this objection.
but he does as it were moulde us into the same lump with himself; neither
is this done by faith only, but he makes us his own body indeed. Lo, there
is a further kind of eating, then by faith only; we are made his body really,
and not only by faith. And Saint Hilary says the very same in effect. These
are his words: Hilar. in 8. libr. de Trinit. p. 141.
De veritate carnis and sanguinis non relictus est ambigendi locus: nunc enim
and ipsius domini professione, and fide nostra vere caro est, and vere sanguis
est. Concerning the verity of his flesh and blood, there is no place left to
stand in doubt: for now as well by Gods attestation, as by our own faith, he
is flesh indeed and blood indeed.

The answer.
I say first, that I do not deny Christ's true and real flesh and blood to be
in the Eucharist; but I deny it to be there in a fleshy, corporal, carnal,
and sensible manner. In the latter of which twain, I only dissent from you,
and your late council of Trent. Council. Trident. Sect. 13. cap. 1.


Hilary, nor yet S. Chrysostom affirms, Christ's flesh to be present
otherwise then I grant. Touching S. Hilary, he has these words a little
before; Nos vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc vnum
erimus. We truly receive the flesh of his body, (yet not really or
corporally, but) in a mystery, and by this we shall be one. Lo, though we
receive Christ's flesh truly, as I grant; yet is it in a mystery, not
carnally or corporally, as the papists hold. Again, S. Hilary says, we are
made one by it; and yet is it clear, that our unity is no other then
mystical: the papists agree thereunto, it cannot be denied.

I say thirdly, that to eat a thing really, is not to keep it a Ioh. 6.56.
as I never heard of any, that kept them in his mouth till supper. Christ
says, that he will dwell with him that eats his flesh; but that guest cannot
truly be said to dwell with one, that is gone before dinner.

I say fourthly, that it is true which S. Chrysostom says; to wit, that we
are indeed made Christ's body, yet that is not done really or corporally, but
in a spiritual and divine sort. And because none can expound S. Chrysostom
better then himself: let us seriously examine his own interpretation. These
are his words a little before, from whence this objection is taken: Chrysostom.
hom 83 in Mat.
Quontam ergo ille dixit, hoc est corpus meum, nullae teneamur ambiguitate, sed
credamus and oculis intellectus id perspiciamus. Nihil enim, ensibile traditum
nobis a Christo, sed rebus sensibilibus: omnia vero quae tradidit insensibilia
sunt Sic and in baptismo, per aquam, quae re, sensib^lis est donum illud
conceditur; quod autem in ea conficitur, regeneratio scilicet ac renouatio,
intelligibile quiddam est Nam si tu incorporeus esses nude ipse dona incorporea
tradidisset tibi: quontam vero corpori coniuncta est anima tua in sensibilibus
intelligenda tibi traduntur* o quot modo dicunt, veblem formam and speciem
eius, vellem vestimenta ipsa vell^m calciamenta videre. Ipsum igitur vides,
ipsum tangis ipsum comedis. Vestimenta eius desideras videre; ipse vero seipsam
tibi tradidit non vt videas solum, verum etiam vt tangas, and in te habeas.
Because therefore he said; this is my body, let us not stand in doubt, but let
us believe and behold it with the eyes of our understanding. Behold, how finely
and evidently. S. Chrysostom does expound himself.
For Christ gave us no sensible thing, but (spiritual things) with sensible
things; and all things that he gave us, are insensible. So in baptism, by
the water, which is a sensible thing, that gift is given; but that that is done
in the water, to wit, regeneration and renouation, is a certain intelligible
or spiritual thing. For if thou were incorporall, he would have given thee
incorporall gifts barely, (and not hidden;) but because thy soul is coupled
with thy body, intelligible things are given thee in things sensible. Oh how
many now a days say? I would see his form and shape, I would see his
garments, I would see his shoes. Thou therefore see him, thou touchest
him, thou eatest him. Thou desire to see his garments, but he has given
himself to thee; not that thou may see him only, but also that thou
may touch him, and have him within thee. These are the words of this
ancient father and learned writer: which I have cited at large (though they be
somewhat tedious,) because they are able to confound the papists, even in this
argument which they deem insoluble, when due application shall be made thereof.

I therefore note first, that all gifts given us by Christ in his

I note secondly, that though the things given us be insensible,

I note thirdly, that as the gift in baptism is incorporall, and

I note fourthly, yt Christ is so present, as he is seen, touched,

S. Chrysostom therefore speaking of that kind of presence, by which Christ
is seen and touched; must needs understand that spiritual kind of presence,
which we defend according to the Scriptures.

S. Chrysostom will yet tell us his meaning more plainly, if it possibly can
be done. Chrysostom. in 2. ad Tim hom. 2. in fine.
Thus does he write in another place; Quemadmodum enim verba quae locutus est
Christus, eadem sunt que sacerdotes nunc quoque pronuntiant; ita and oblatio
eadem est, eademque baptismi ratio est adeo omnia in fide consistunt. For as
the words which Christ spoke, are the same which priests now pronounce, even
so is it the same oblation, and there is the same reason of baptism, all
things do so depend of faith. Again in another place thus; Haec omnia carnalia
quae mystice and spiritualiter intelligenda sunt. Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Joan.
Infra: quid est carniliter intelligere? simpliciter vt res dicuntur, neque
aliud quippiam excogitare. Non enim ita iudicanda sunt quae videntur, sed
mysteria omnia interioribus oculis consideranda, hoc est spirituali^er. Al
these things are carnal, which must be understood mystically and spiritually.
What is it to understand carnally? simply, as the things are spoken, neither to
think any other thing. For they must not so be judged which are seen, but all
mysteries must be considered with the interior eyes, that is spiritually.

S. Bernard though he were a monk and lived in the altitude of popery, yet is
he sincere as in many other things, so in this point of doctrine. Bernard. in
sermon. de sancto Mar^ino.
These are his words: Adest enim nobis etiam nunc carnis ipsius vera
substantia, haud dubium sane quin in sacramento. Adsunt reuelationes, sed and
spiritu and virtute. Infra sed quomodo eum etiam nunc habet ecclesia, in fide
and sacramentis. For ye true substance of his flesh is even now present with
us: there is no doubt, but it is in ye sacrament. We have revelations present,
but in spirit and verity. But as the church has him even now in faith and
sacraments. Lo, we have and receive the true flesh of Christ, but in spirit
and verity, but in faith and sacraments. This assertion of their own beloved
Bernard, is doubtless our constant doctrine.

The popish approved gloss, teaches us the same doctrine. De consecr. did.
2 cap. vt quid. in glossa.
For these are the express words thereof; Coelesie sacramentum quod est in
altari improprie dicitur corpus Christi, sicut baptismus improprie dicitur
fides Infra; coeleste Sacramentum quod vere repraesentat Christi carnem,
dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie; vnde dicitur suo modo sed non rei
veritate sed significati mysterio, vt sit sensus: vocatur Christi corpus, id
est, significatur. The heavenly sacrament which is on the altar, is called
improperly the body of Christ, as baptism is improperly called faith. The
heavenly sacrament which truly represents Christ's flesh, is called the
body of Christ, but improperly. Whereupon he says ( suo modo, after it own
manner,) but not in the truth of the thing, but in the mystery of that which
is signified; that this be the sense: it is called Christ's body; that is to
say, it is the sign of Christ's body.

The 4. objection.
Christ says plainly, this is my body; and not, this is a sign, or this does
signify my body. He meant nothing less, then to use tropes and figures, in
the institution of this holy sacrament.

The answer.
I say first, that the case is so plain, as no papist in Europe Luc. 22. v. 20.
This cup is the new testament in my blood. In which words the trope or
figure called Metonymia, does twice occur. For first, the cup does
figuratively signify, the liquour in the cup. Again, the cup is called the
testament; and yet it is but the figure or sign of the testament.

I say secondly, that ye figure ( Metonymie,) is very frequent. in the holy
scripture, as well in the old as in the new testament. In the old testament we
have these examples; this is the passover. Exodus 12.11.
That is, this does signify the passover. Again, this is my covenant; that
is to say, this does signify my covenant; or, this is a sign of my covenant.
Genesis 17.10.
Again, the 7. good kine are 7. years, and the seven good ears are seven
years. Again, the the seven thin and evil favored kine, Genesis 41. v. 26,
27.
are seven years. Again, the seven empty ears, blasted with the East Wind,
are seven years of famine. In all which places, the figure ( Metonymia) is
used. For neither the kine nor the ears were the seeuen years, as every
child knows: but they did signify the years to come, they were a sign and
figure thereof.

In the new testament, we have these examples. I am the vine. Joan. 15. v. 1.
Joan. 10. v. 9. Luc. 8.11. 1. Cor. 10. v. 17.10.
Again, I am a door. Again, My father is an husbandman. Again, The seed is
the word of God. Again, We that are many, are one bread. Again, The rock
was Christ. Again, Apoc. 5.5.
The lion which is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has obtained to
open the book. In which places, Christ neither was the vine, nor the rock,
nor the lion: neither was the seed the word of God, neither was God the father
an husbandman, neither are the fathfull one bread: but al these things are
figuratively spoken, by the usual custom of the holy Scripture.



I say fourthly, that the very words of institution are figurative: Luc. 22.
v. 20.
For thus says S. Luke: This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is
shed for you. Where, I am well assured, every papist small and great, will
confess with me, that the cup by the figure ( metonymia,) is taken for the
liquour in the cup. And so against their will, they are enforced to acknowledge
a figure, even there where they so obstinately deny a figure.

The fifth objection.
Malac. 1. v. 11.
The Prophet Malachie has such a plain testimony for the real presence and
sacrifice of the altar, as it can never be answered till the worlds end.
These are the words: In every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a
pure offering. These words of the Prophet being effectually applied, will
confound the respondent whatsoever he shall answer. For first, the prophet
speaks of the oblatio^ of the new testament, ^sai. 64.6.
Al our righteousness is as filthy clouts: and so no oblation that is ours, can
be pure. Therefore he speaks of Christ's body offered in the mass, which is a
pure oblation indeed.

The answer.
I answer to this insoluble so supposed argument, that the prophet speaks of
the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving. And I prove it by the flat
testimonies of the holy Fathers.

Saint Irenaeus has these words; Iren. li. 4. cap. ^^
In omni loco incensum offertur nomini meo, and sacrificium purum. Incensa
autem Ioannes in Apocalypsi, orationes esse ait sanctorum. Incense is offered
to my name in every place, and a pure sacrifice: and Saint John in the
Revelation says, that this incense is the prayers of the Saints.

Saint Theodoretus does expound this place after the same manner, in his
Commentaries upon the same text. Theod. in 1. cap. Malach.


Saint Hierome has these words; Sed thymiama, hoc est, Hier. in hu^^ locum.
sanctorum orationes Domino offerendas: and non in vna orbis prouincia Iudaea,
nec in vna Iudaeae vrbe Jerusalem, sed in omni loco offerri oblationem. But
incense, that is, the prayers of saints must be offered to the Lord: and that
not in Judea one only province of the world, neither in Jerusalem one only
city thereof, but in every place must an oblation be made.

Now where it is said, that al our actions be impure and polluted: I answer,
that that is true indeed, when our actions be examined in rigor of justice.
But not so, when we are clad with the righteousness of Christ Jesus, and have
washed our sins in his blood, for whose sake God does not impute our
pollutitions, and filth unto us. Not so, when God deals with us according to
mercy. Not so, when God accepts our sinful and imperfect acts, as pure,
just, and innocent. For our own vnworthienesse, Psalm. 142.2.
the Prophet desired God not to enter into judgment with his servants: Romans
8.1.
but for Christ's righteousness the Apostle pronounces us free from
condemnation. For though our sins be red as scarlet, Apoc. 21. Apoc. 7.14.
yet so soon as they be washed in the blood of the immaculate Lamb, they
become (by acceptance) as white as snow. Isa. 1.18.


This whole discourse Saint Augustine handles finely, in these golden words;
August. confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. Woe
even to the laudable life of men, if thou examine it thy mercy set a part. And
in this sense, the objection takes place. Nevertheless, god of his great
mercy, does accept our works as just and pure, through faith in Christ Jesus
our sweet redeemer, Romans 8.1. Romans 5.12. Cap. 4 verse 7. Tit. 1.5.
for whose sake he does not impute our sins to us. So says the Apostle; not by
the works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
has he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. So says S. John; These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their long robes, Apoc. 7.14.
and have made them white in the blood of the lamb, through the merits of which
lamb our prayers and works are reputed pure. Therefore says Saint Paul, I
will therefore that the men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without
wrath or doubting. ^. Timoth. 2.8.


The 6. objection.
If the words of consecration be trophicall and figurative, so as there is but
a bare sign of Christ's body and blood: then shall our sacraments of the new
Testament, be no better then the sacraments of the old. Matthew. ^.17. Hebr.
20.1. Joan. 19.30.
The reason is evident, because they did signify Christ's death and passion,
even as ours do, and yet is it clear by the scriptures, that we have the
verity, whereof they had but the figure only.

The answer.
I say first, that our sacraments excel the old sundry ways: How our
sacraments do excel the old.
which by the old were but prefigured to be done. Thirdly, because they are
more manifest, and so do excite our faith the more. Fourthly, because they
pertain to all nations, whereas the other belonged to the people of the Jews
only.

I say secondly, that the Papists falsely accuse us, when they Romans 8.11.
Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith, which effect can never be had by
popish doctrine; because by it, their accidents void of subjects, are no sooner
devoured, but Christ's body forthwith departs out of their mouths. And if thou
ask, whither: they answer, they cannot tell.

The seventh objection.
He that eats Christ's body unworthily (says S. Paul) is made guilty of
Christ's body: 1. Cor. 11.37.
which punishment doubtless should never be imposed, for eating a piece of
bakers bread.

The answer.
I say first, that it far surmounteth bakers bread, as is more Genesis 3.6.
Adam was guilty of disobeying Gods divine majesty, and that by reason of
eating: Nevertheless he ate not Gods majesty, Romans 13.13. Gal. 5.21.
but an apple. Secondly, every glutton is guilty of irreuerence against God,
and that by reason of his eating: and for all that he eats not Gods
substance, but his creatures. The like may be said (...)
of every drunkard, and many other malefactors. I say thirdly, that the wicked
eat Christ's body sacramentally, which is as sufficient a cause of
condemnation, as the eating of an apple.

The reply.
(...). 2.17.
Adam was condemned not simply for eating, but for eating with disobedience.
Ergo the case is not like.

The answer.
I answer, that even so are not the wicked condemned for eating the sacrament
simply, 1. Cor. 11.28.
but for eating it with disobedience. For the apostle commands every one to
examine him self before he eat; 1. Cor. 10.31.
and in another place he commands us to refer all our acts to Gods glory.

The seventh objection.
It is not impossible for two bodies to be in one place at once, Ergo neither
is it impossible for Christ's body to be in many places at once. I prove it,
because there is the same difficulty in both.

The answer.
I grant, that one body may as well be in many places at once, as diverse
bodies in the same place at once. But withal, I affirm them both to be
impossible.

The first reply.
The holy Scripture tells us, that all things are possible to God: it also
has discovered the possibility of this particular case, by many fold
examples. For first, Christ's own glorified body, Joan. 20.19. Matthew. 28.2.
Matthew. 19.24, 25 26 August. epist. 3.
was at once in the same place with the doors. Secondly, Christ's body and the
stone of the sepulcher, were both in the same place at one time. Thirdly, God
can bring a camel through a needles eye, even continuing in his natural figure
and quantity still. For as Christ himself says, God can do both this and al
other things. Fourthly, Christ came out of his mothers womb, the clausure
being whole and not stirred; for so says Saint Austen.

The answer.
wisdom, and power divine. I say secondly, that it is one thing Things
vndo^ble by power divine
so are there many things which he cannot do, or rather which he will not do,
because they cannot indeed be done. And these things are of 2. sorts: the one
sort contains imperfection, the other implies co^tradiction. In respect of
ye former, he cannot do these things. First, he cannot make another God:
secondly, he cannot make Tertio principaliter.
which

I say fourthly, that the stone gave place to Christ's body, and that done
returned again to the former place; Act. 12 7. Exodus 14.32. Act. 12.10.
like as Peter's

I say fifthly, that touching the passage of the Camel, many things may be said:
First, Vide Theoph. in hunc locum*
that by the word (Camel) is understood

I say sixthly, that Christ's body came not out of his mothers Luc. 2.23. exodus
13.2. number. 8.10
Christ was presented to the Lord according to the law, as the holy gospel
does record: yet the law required such presentation only of them, which opened
their mothers womb. Secondly, Tertull. testifies this opening of the blessed
virgins womb. These are his words: Terull. libr. de carn. Christ in sin.
Haec vulua est, propter quam and de alijs scriptum est: Omne masculinum
adaperiens vuluam sanctu^ vocabitur domino. Quis vere sanctus, quam Dei filius?
Quis proprie vuluam adaperuit quam quiclausam patefecit: Caeteru^ omnibus
nuptiae patefaciunt. Itaque magis patefacta est quia magis erat clausa.
Sequitur: cum apostolus non ex virgin sed ex muliere editum filium Dei
pronuntiauit, agnouit adapertae vuluae nuptialem passionem. Thi^ is the womb,
for which it is written of others: every manchild that opens the womb, shall
be called holy to the Lord. Who is truly holy, but the Son of God? who
properly opened the womb, but he that opened it when it was shut? but
marriages open it to all: therefore it was more opened, because it was more
shut. When the Apostle says, Gal. 4.4.
not that Christ was borne of a virgin, but of a woman; he acknowledged the
nuptial passion of an opened womb. Hieron. libr. 2. adu. Pelag. prope initium.
Thirdly, Saint Hierome has these words: Solu^ enim Christus clausas portas
vuluae virginalis aperuit quae tamen clausae iugiter permanserunt. Haec est
porta orientalis clausa, per quam solus pontifex ingreditur and egreditur, and
nihilominus semper clausa est. For Christ only opened the gates of the virgins
womb, Vide Ezech. cap. 44.2.3.
that were shut, which for all that were shut continually. This is the east
gate which is shut up, through which the Bishop goes in and out, and for all
that it is ever shut. Origin. hom. 14. in Luc. prop. sin.
Fourthly, Origin has these words: Quemcunque enim de vtero effusum marem
dixeris, non sic aperit vuluam matris suae, vt Dominus Jesus: quia omnium
mulierum non partus infantis, sed v^ri coitus vuluam reserat: matris vero
dominico tempore vulua reserata est, quo and partus editus. For what man child
soever thou shall name, that is borne of a womb; he does not so open the
matrice of his mother, as does our Lord Jesus. For in all women, not the
birth of the child, but the copulation of the man opens the womb. Yet the
womb of the mother of our Lord was opened even then when the child was borne.
Fifthly, S. Ambrose has these express and plain words: Non enim virilis
coitus vuluae virginalis secreta reserauit, Ambros. li. 2. cap. 2. in Lucam.
sed immaculatum semen inuiolabili vtero spiritus sanctus infudit. Sequitur:
Hic ergo solus aperuit sibi vuluam. Nec mirum; hic enim dixerat ad prophetam:
priusquam te formarem in vtero, noui te, and in vulua matris sanctificaui te:
qui ergo vuluam sanctificauit alienam, vt nasceretur propheta, hic est qui
aperuit matris suae vuluam, vt immaculatus exiret. For the copulation of man
opened not the secrets of the virgins womb, but the holy ghost poured the
immaculate seed into the inviolable womb. He therefore opened the womb to
himself alone. And it is no marvel; for he said to the prophet: before I
formed thee in the womb, Ierem. 1.^.
I knew thee, and in thy mothers womb I sanctified thee. He therefore that
sanctified the womb of another for the birth of his prophet, is the very same
that opened the womb of his mother, that he might come forth immaculate.

The second reply.
Holy Writ tells us, that Christ was borne of a virgin, Luc. 1.27.31. Matt.
1.23. Esai. 7.14.
to which all the ^ncient fathers accord: yet should she have been corrupted
and no virgin, if her womb had been opened in the birth of Christ. Pernel. de
part. corp. libr. 1. cap. 7
For as the learned Physician Fernelius writes, the loss of virginal
integrity, consists in the sole dilatation of the coniunct parts.

The answer.
I say first, that not only the holy scriptures, but the ancient

I say secondly, that Fernelius makes nothing for the papists,

I say thirdly, that though Christ's holy mother were a virgin Aquinas says,
Aqu. 22. q. 152. ar. 1. ad 3.
whose doctrine sundry Popes one after another have confirmed: virginity is
not lost by fraction of the signacle, but by corruption of the mind and purpose
of the will. August. libr. 1. de ciuit. Dei cap. 18.
Saint Austen has a learned and large discourse concerning this only point of
doctrine, wherein he shows gravely, that the apertion of the matrice may be
done sundry ways: to wit, either by art in the way of medicine, or by
violence of the corrupter, or by other accidental means: and that virginity
this notwithstanding, may be free from all corruption. Much more might Christ's
own mothers womb, be opened by his divine power: and nevertheless her most
holy womb, still remain inviolable.

The fifth conclusion.
The popish idololatricall mass, is like unto a clowted beggars cloak. This
conclusion will be manifest, so soon as I shall prove sundry Popes to have
joined piece unto piece, as if it were clowt upon clowt.

The first Section. Of consecration with the Lords prayer.
IN the primitive and apostolical church, the mass or holy communion, was
administered with the Lords prayer only, al superstitious ceremonies set
apart. This to be so does witness Gregory surnamed the Great, sometime bishop
of Rome himself: whose testimony no papist in the world can or will reject.
Gregor. epist. ^^b. 7. cap. 63.
These are his words; Orationem autem dominicam idcirco mox post precem
dicimus, quia mos apostolorum fuit, vt ad ipsam solu^modo orationem oblationis
hostiam consecrarent. And after other prayers we add the Lords prayer, for
this end and purpose: because the manner of the apostles was this, to consecrate
the oblation with that only prayer.

The second Section. Of the Mass said in the vulgar tongue.
IN the ancient church after the apostles time, the holy communion was
celebrated in the vulgar tongue, which was known to all the people. Justin.
apolog. ^. prope ^^nem.
Justinius Martyr has these words: Die solis omnium qui vel in oppidis vel ruri
degunt, in eundem locum conuentus fit, and commentaria apostolorum, aut scripta
prophetarum, quoad tempus fert, leguntur. Deinde lectore quiescente, praesidens
orationem qua populum instruit, and ad imitationem tam pulchrarum rerum
cohortatur, habet. Sub haec consurgimus communiter omnes, and precationes
profundimus, and sicuti retulimus, precibus peractis, panis offertur, and vinum
and aqua^: and praepositus itide^ quantu^ pro virili sua potest, preces and
gr^tiarum actiones fundit and populus fauste acclamat* dicens, Amen. On the
Sunday, all that live either in town or country, meet together in one place,
and then the epistles of the Apostles, or writings of the Prophets are read,
according as the time requires. Afterward the reader cease, and the chief
minister makes an oration, in which he instructs the people, and exhorts
them to imitate that which is read unto them. These things being done, we all
arise together and make our prayers; and after our prayers, the bread is
offered, with wine and water, and the pastor as he is able, prays and gives
thanks, and the people with joyful acclamation say, Amen. Lo, in the old time
the priest or minister said the communion together with the people, and
consequently they understood one another, as also what was said; whereas this
day in the popish church, the people neither answer the minister, nor yet
understand what is said.

Saint Ambrose has these words: Ambros. libr. 3. hexamer. cap. 5. tom. 4.
In oratione totius plebis tanquam vndis refluentibus stridet, tum responsoriis
psalmorum, cantu virorum, mulierum, virginum paruulorum, consonus vndarum
fragor resultat. When all the people pray together, there is a noise, as if the
waves of the sea should beat one against another: then with the answering of
Psalms, with the s^^ging together of men, women, maids, and little children,
the consonant sound reboundeth as it were an echo with the surges of the sea.
By this testimony we see evidently, that the practice of the ancient church
agrees with ours, and utterly confounds the antichristian popish mumbling.

Pope Gregory himself confirms this doctrine, Gregor. epist. libr. 7. cap.
63.
in these words; Sed and dominica oration apud Graecos ab omni populo dicitur,
apud nos autem a solo sacerdote. Furthermore, among the Greeks all the people
say the Lords prayer: but with us the priest alone says it. Behold, Anno. Dom.
590
this Gregory lived 590. years after Christ's sacred incarnation, and yet in his
days y^ people of Rome used to pray with the minister, eue^ in time of the
mass.

Philo a very ancient and learned writer, Apud Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. v^^.
shows this old practice of our christian church in these words; Et vt vnus
ex omnibus consurgens in medio psalmum honestis modulis concinat, vtque
praecinenti ei vnum versiculum, omnis multitudo respondeat. And that one among
all shall rise up in the midst, and sing a Psalm with tuneable voice, and
that so soon as he has sung one verse, all the people answer him.

Sozomen. hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 36 Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 24. Niceph. lib
^. cap. 24.
Sozomenus shows plainly in his history, that in his time, which was more
then 400. years after Christ, the people and the ministers did sing psalms in
the church together. These are the words, as Cassiodorus in his Tripartite
history reports them: Apud Antiochiam non concordabant in professione sua
clerus and populus, sed per choros, vt est consuetudo, ad hymnos dicendos Deo,
in fine psalmorum monstrabant propriam voluntatem. At Antioch there was
variance in a certain point of religion, between the people and the clergy:
but singing spalmes to God in companies, as the manner was, they declared their
minds in the end of the Psalms.

S. Chrysostom speaks so plainly of the peoples praying together with the
priest, and that even in the time of mass; as none that hear his words, can
stand any longer in doubt thereof. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom. 18. in mor.
These are his express words; In ijsdem iterum horrendis mysterijs been
precatur sacerdos populo, and been precatur populus sacerdoti, Nam (cum spiritu
tuo,) nihil aliud est quam hoc. Ea quae sunt eucharistiae, id est, gratiarum
actionis, co^munia sunt omnia: neque enim ille solus gratias agit, sed etiam
omnis populus. Prius enim accepta illorum voce, deinde congregatis illis vt
digne and just hoc faciat, incipit Eucharistiam. Et quid miraris si populus
cum sacerdote loquitur? Again, in these reverend mysteries, the priest wishes
grace to the people, and the people desire grace for the priest. For these
words (with thy spirit) have no other meaning. The things that pertain to the
Eucharist, that is, to the giving of thanks, are common to them all; for he
only gives not thanks, but all the people also with him. For he first
receives their voice; after that, they being gathered together that he may do
this reverently and well, he begins the communion. And what marvel is it to
thee, if thou see the people speaking with the priest?

Hier. in praefat. libr. 2. in epist. ad Galat.
S. Hierome gives a constant testimony, of the practice of the church of Rome
in his time, affirming that the people were heard sounding out (Amen) with an
Echo, as if it had been with an heavenly thunder. Basil. epist. ad cler.
^^^c^sar.
And Saint Basil says, that in his time, all the people sang psalms together
in the church. Yea, he adds that it was the custom of all churches so to
do.

Saint Cyprian witnesses the same thing, Cypr. in orat. dominica page 316.
to have been the practice of the church in his time, alleging the very words
that the common people answered to the priest. Thus does he write; Ideo and
sacerdos ante orationem praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes dicendo,
sursum corda, vt dum respondet plebs, habemus ad Dom* admoneatur nihil aliud se
quam dominu^ cogitare debere. What can be more plainly said?
Therefore the priest after ye preface before the prayer, prepares the minds of
the brethren saying, Lift up your hearts, that while the common people
answer, we lift them up unto the Lord, they may be instructed to think upon no
other thing but the Lord.

S. Augustine confirms that which the other fathers have said, in these
golden words: Quid hoc sit intelligere debemus, August. in psalm. 18 expos. 2.
See S. Austen in psalm 44 prope finem.
vt humana ratione, non quasi autum voce cantemus Nam and meruli, and psittaci,
and corui, and picae, and huiusmodi volucres, s^pe ab hominibus docentur
sonare, quod nesc^unt. Scienter autem cantare non aui sed homini diuina
voluntate concessum est. Infra: Nos autem qui in ecclesia diuina eloquia
cantare didicimus, simul etiam instare debemus esse quod scriptum est: beatus
populus qui intelligit iubilationem. Proinde charissimi, quod consona voce
cantauimus, sereno etiam cord nosse ac videre debemus.

We must understand what this is, that we may sing with reason as men, and
not chirpe in voice like birds. For Owsels, The Papists are like to owsels,
pa^ets, erowes and pies.
and Parrets, and crows, and Pies, and other birds, are often taught by men,
to sound they know not what: but to sing with knowledge God has granted to
man, not to birds. We therefore that have learned to sing in the church gods
heavenly words, must also endeavor to be that, that is written: Blessed are the
people, that understand what they sing. Therefore my dearest, we ought to know
and see with a pure heart, that which we have sung with tuneable voice.

In fine, S. Paul does bitterly exclaim against this detestable practice in
celebrating the holy mysteries in a strange and unknown tongue. He
commands straitely, that every thing in the church be done to edification:
^ Cor. 14. v. 16.
and consequently, that the communion be not ministered in an unknown tongue,
because no man can be edified thereby. These things being so, it may be
demanded, what moved our disholy father the pope, to command the
church-seruice of late years, to be done in the Latin tongue? To which
question the ancient and learned writer Lactantius, seems to answer pithily
in these words: Lactantius, lib. 5 cap. 20.
Hinc fida silentia sacris instituta sunt ab hominibus callidis, vt nesciat
populus quid colat. Hereupon trusty silence was appointed to the mysteries,
by subtle and crafty men: that the people (still remaining in ignorance,) should
never know what they worshipped.

The 3. Section, Of the canon of the Mass.
THe papists of late days, ascribe such sanctimonie to the canon of their
Mass, as far surpasses all sense and reason. So soon as they come to the
beginning thereof, they spread abroad both the arms, they look up to heaven,
they join their hands in solemn manner, they kiss the altar, they multiply
the signs of the cross, Man's invention esteemed as a thing divine.
they quake, they tremble, as if heaven and hell should go together, they
mumble to themselves, no by stander knows what but by conjecture, although
(as they prate) even the^ be in hand the chiefest mystery of their redemption.
And yet for all these solemn magical dispositions, this their canon was
invented by one Scholasticus of latter days.

Pope Gregory, a man of sufficient credit, does witness the same, to the
confusion of all the Papists. These are his express words: Gregor. epist.
lib. 7. cap. 63.
Et valde mihi inconueniens visum est, vt precem quam Scholasticus composuerat,
seu per oblationem diceremus, and ipsam traditionem quam redemptor noster
composuit, super eius corpus and sanguinem non diceremus. And it seemed to me
very unfit, that we should say that prayer over the oblation, which
Scholasticus composed; and let that tradition pass, which our Lord himself
delivered.

To the novelty may fitly be annexed, the manifold variety of their mangled
irreligious canon. For they have one of Basilius, another of Chrysostomus,
another of Ambrose, Great alteration in popish service.
another of Gelasius, another of Scholasticus, another of Isidorus: and as they
bear the world in hand, another of S. Peter, and another of S. James. To which
I add the late reformation of their Missals, and of their Breuiaries, in which
was found so much beggarly stuff infarsed, as their late council of Trent
could not for shame bear any longer therewith.

The 4. Section, Of other pieces of the popish Mass.
PLatina their own dear friend and Abbreuiator apostolicus, Platina, in vita
Sixti.
has these express words: Nuda haec primo erant, and omnia simplicer
tractabantur. Petrus enim vbi consecrauerat, oratione, Pater noster, vsus est.
Auxit haec mysteria Iacobus episcopus Hierosolymitanus, auxit and Basilius,
auxere and alij. Nam Caelestinus missae introitum dedit, Gregorius Kyrie
eleyson* gloria in excelsis deo Telesphorus, collationes Gelasius primus,
epistolam and euangelium Hieronymus: hallelu-ia vero sumptum est ex ecclesia
Hierosolymitana, symbolum in concilio Niceno, mortuorum autem commemorationem
Pelagius inuenit: Thus Leo tertius, osculum pacis Innocentius primus: vt
caneretur agnus Dei, Sergius pontifex instituit. These things were bare in the
beginning, and were all handled simply. For where Peter did consecrate, he used
the Lords prayer. James the bishop of Jerusalem increased these mysteries,
Basil augmented them, other also aded thereunto. For pope Celestine made the
introite, pope Gregory added Kyrie eleyson* Behold here the rags of the
mass.
Telesphorus added gloria in excelsis, pope Gelasius made the collects, Hierome
added the Epistle and the Gospel. Hallelu-ia was set from Jerusalem, the
Creed was made in the council of Nice, Pope Pelagius invented the memory of
the dead, pope Leo incense, and Innocentius the pax. But pope Sergius caused
agnus Dei to be sung. And as Sigebertus says, pope Gregory added these
words: Sigebert. in ^hro*
Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas.

Here only I will admonish the reader, that among popish ceremonies which are
so mystical, one solemn mystery is this: to wit, that the pax may not be
given, in Masses for the dead. Now if we ask, why they deprive the dead of
their peace, more then the living: Durandus answers gravely for them, in
these express words: In missa pro defunctis pax non datur, quia fideles
animae iam non sunt, Duran. in ration. ^iu. lib. 4. cap. 53.
nec vlterius erunt in turbatione huius mundi, sed quiescunt iam in domino.
Vnde non est eis necessarium pacis osculum, quod est pacis and concordiae
signum. In the mass for the dead the pax is not given, because the faithful
souls are not now, nor shall be any longer in the troubles of this world, but
rest henceforth in the Lord. Wherefore the kiss of peace is not needful for
them, which is the sign of peace and concord. Thus gentle Reader, thou
beholdest their ceremonies, Mark this well.
and thus thou hear their doctrine for the same: mark therewith, this my
brief application: This their ceremony, of witholding the pax in the masses
for dead, does utterly confound their massing sacrifice for the same. For if
the withholding of the paxe, does signify their rest in the Lord: then is the
mass it self idololatricall, which is offered for their purgation. On the
other side, if the souls be in purgatory, and therefore stand in need of the
mass: then is their ceremony false and fantastical, Note the Dilemma.
which signifies them to be in heavenly rest.

Durandus vbi sup^r.
To these I must add as a merriment, that our popish monks do never receive
the paxe, because forsooth they are dead to the world. So says Durand. Hinc
est, quod etiam inter monachos pax non datur, quoniam mundo mortui reputantur.
Hereupon it comes that among the monks, the paxe is not given, because they
are thought dead unto the world. How they be dead unto the world, let the
world judge. They have goodly houses, pleasant gardens, fine celles; they are
seated in the most wholesome air, planted upon the most fertile soil,
environed with most desired prospects. Their diet is readily provided, their
table is ever well furnished, they want no dainty fare. This only may be the
proof. S. Thomas Bedle the monk, was imprisoned in York sundry years, he is
now dead, I will report no untruth of the man. This only will I say, for
instruction sake. He used ordinarily to send every day for one quart or one
pint of wine, which was very chargeable to him, being but a prisoner. His
friends sometime wished him to abstain, adding sundry reasons why it seemed
convenient. But he answered, Our monks kill themselves with sparing di^t.
that in their abbay he had been so long used to drink wine at his pleasure,
that he could not now live without it. O mortified monks? Nay, O
hypocritical deceivers of the world? for that more fitly is your name.

The 5. Section, Of the mystical kissing in the popish mass.
The mysteries in the popish mass are so fit for edification, (which is the
end pretended by the same,) as if one Priest among ten hundred can expound
them, let me have the shame. For if you ask this priest or that priest, what
is meant by such a ceremony, he must either observe monkish silence, or
answer with the colier. That is, he that invented them, can tell what they
mean. But because I will deal sincerely, and in such manner as no papist
shall be able to charge me: I will now as ever, set down their own words for
their better confutation. Thus therefore does their own Durandus write: Duran.
in ration. diuinor. cap. 53.
Sacerdos ter osculatur altar, ad designandum triplicem pacem scilicet
temporalum, spiritualem, and aeternam Sequitur: rursum, ad notandam duorum
testamentorum concordiam, Episcopus duabus vicibus codicem osculatur. Infra:
illud quoque vacare non creditur mysterio, quod summus pontifex septem modis
accipit osculum: videlicet ad os, ad pectus, ad humerum, ad manus, ad brachia,
ad genu, and ad pedes. O most wonderful edification*
The Priest kisseth the altar thrice, to signify (I know not to whom) the
triple peace; that is to say, peace temporal, peace spiritual, and peace
eternal. Again, the Bishop kisseth the book twice, to signify the concord
between the old and the new testament. Furthermore, we believe this to be a
great mystery, that the popes holiness receives a kiss seven maner-wise: to
wit, to his mouth, to his breast, to his shoulder, to his hands, to his arms,
to his knee, and to his feet. Thus gentle reader, thou may behold their
irreligious ceremonies, with their fond interpretation of the same. For they
had need to put many of their Priests to the School all their life, before
they will perfectly understand such obscure and unsavory significations. Yet
such is the blindness of the seely people, that they were brought into the
admiration of the mass, by these and other like beggarly ceremonies. For the
less they understood, the more magnificence and majesty they ascribed to the
thing.

^^rand. vbi supr.
I must needs add hereunto, the kissing of the patine. Ad notandum (inquit
Durandus) charitatem, sacerdos osculatur patinam, quae designat cor patens in
latitudine charitatis. The priest says Durandus, kisseth the Patine, to give a
sign of charity, which signifies an open heart in the latitude of charity.
I ween this is a sufficient Sermon, for ye whole auditorie. But alas, could
the people no way be taught what charity was, unless the priest kissed the
Patine? doubtless they were so far from learning any thing thereby, as
neither they nor the priest himself commonly, knew what was meant by the same.

The 6. Section. Of the triple breaking of the Sacrament.
THe papists break their supposed Christ's body into three parts, thereby to
express this high mystery. Christ's body risen again, walking on earth, and
lying in the grave. So says pope Sergius in their own canon law. These are ye
words: Triforme est corpus Domini. De consecr. did. 2 cap. triforme.
Pars oblata in calicem missa, corpus Christi quod iam resurrexit, monstrat.
Pars comesta, ambulantem adhuc super terram. Pars in altari vsque ad missae
finem remanens, corpus in sepulchro, quia vsque ad finem seculi corpora
sanctorum in sepulchris erunt. The body of our Lord is threefold. The part
that is put into the chalice, signifies Christ's body risen again. The part
eaten, signifies Christ yet walking on earth. ^alse and ^ond mysteries.
The part remaining to the end of the mass, signifies Christ's body in the
grave, because the bodies of Saints shall be in the graves till the worlds end.
We see here their doctrine, we behold their practice; Let us now duly examine
their mysteries. First therefore the piece dipped into the drowning of the
body, is most like to ye crucifying of the same. Secondly, the part that is
eaten, may more fitly represent Christ's dying, then walking: for as I ween, a
devoured thing The ceremoni^^ in the popish mass are mutable.
is now

Here it shall not be amiss, to set down the manner of the Popes receiving;
because although the act be done very seldom, yet is it not then without a
mystery: and lest credit be not given to my words, their own Durand shall
tell the story for them. Thus does he write: Romanus pontifex ideo non
communicate vbi frangit, quoniam ad altar frangit, Durand. in^^tion* lib. 4.
cap. 54.
and ad sedem communicate: quia Christus in Emaus coram duobus discipulis
fregit, and in Jerusalem coram discipulis duodecim manducauit. In Emaus enim
fregisse legitur, sed non comedisse legitur. Ascendens igitur sedem ibi
communicate: siquidem secundum apostolum Christus caput est ecclesiae; caput
autem in corpore sublimius and excellentius ob sui perfectionem caeteris
membris collocatur.

The Pope does not receive the sacrament where he breaks it, because he
breaks it at the altar, but he receives it in his chair. Behold the pop^^
humility, who must needs be fellow with Christ Jesus. Coloss. 1.18.
For Christ brake it in Emaus before his two Disciples, and he ate it in
Jerusalem before his twelve apostles. For we read that he brake it in Emaus,
but not that he ate it. He therefore ascends up to his seat and receives it
there. For as the apostle says: Christ is the head of the church, and the head
must be set in an higher and more excellent place, then the other members in
the body, for the perfection thereof. In these words I note first, the fond
resons of popish mysteries. I note dearest, if it be not to show himself
Antichrist indeed.

The seventh Section. Of the Popish Miter.
WHen Moses that holy servant of God, came down from the mount Synai having
the 2. tables of the law in his hands, Exodus 34.29. Exodus 24.12.
his face shi^ed bright, and was as if it had had two horns, as their vulgar
latin text says. For the resemblance whereof si dijs placet, the Pope and his
bishops must have miters on at mass: hearken to their own gloss, and then
give your censure for the mystery thereof. Thus writes Durand. Mitra scientiam
vtriusque testamenti designat. Duran. in ration. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Duo namque illius cornua, duo sunt testamenta: anterius, nouum: posterius,
vetus: quae duo episcopus memoriter debet scire, and illis tanquam duplici
cornu fidei inimicosferire. Videri debet quide^ subaitis episcop cornutus,
sicut and Moses de monte Synai descendens. The myter signifies the knowledge
of both testaments; for his two horns are the two testaments: that before, is
the new testament; and that behind, All popish ceremonies are fond lying signs.
is the old: which two the bishop must have by heart and without the book, and
must smite the enemies of the faith with them, as with a double horn. The
Bishop must be horned to his subjects even as Moses was, when he came down
from the mount Synai. By this every child may see, how fond the popish
mysteries and ceremonies be. This one thing I will add, that if the Romish
bishops shall never wear myters, until they can the old and new testament,
as is here mentioned; the most of them doubtless, if not al, shall be without
miters all the days of their life. In these and like false signs and sottish
ceremonies, with which they have a long time bewitched Gods people, does wholly
consist their antichristian religion.

CHAP. XI. Of the original of certain odd Popish superstitions.
The first division. Of changing the Popes name.
POpe Sergius the second being somewhat ashamed of his ancient name, because it
sounded not pleasantly in men's ears (for he was called Os Porci Swine-mouth)
changed his old name and termed himself Sergius. This Sergius lived more then
840. years after Christ; Ann. Dom. 840
from which time the manner of Popes has been, to change their names so soon
as they aspired to the popedom. So writes their own dear friends Platina
and Carranza. These are Carranzaes words; Platina in Sergio secundo. Carranz.
page 33^
Sergius, 2. sub Lothario primo Germano Caesare, 3. primus mutauit suum nome^.
Nam antea Os Porci fuit appellatus. Sergius the second in the reign of
Lotharius the first, the third emperor of the Germans, changed his name. For
before that time he was called swine-mouth; a name very unfit for his holiness,
and therefore with great reason did he change it: and with the like spirit of
pride, (I would say of humility) other Popes since do imitate the same manner.

The second division. Of kissing the Popes feet.
IVstinianus the Emperor, Justin. 2. imper. Constant. PP.
after he had sent for the Pope Constantinus to come to him at Nicomedia,
received him very honorably, and sent him back again: but first of a
certain fondly conceived humility, he fell down and kissed the Popes feet.
Ann. Dom. 708
This Iustinianus reigned more then 700. years after Christ; and here began
the kissing of the Popes feet, which as it was done then by the emperor upon
a fond zeal, Ar. Pontac. ^urdeg.
so is it this day continued with intolerable superstition.

The third division. Of praying upon Beads.
AFter that the people of God had lived above a thousand years, using
altogether godly books of prayer, one Peter an eremite a Frenchman borne,
Ann. Dom. 1089
perceiving the nature of men to be desirous of novelties, was the first that
invented praying upon beads. Thus writes Polydorus Virgilius, a Papist by
profession. From hence sprang Rosaries, Polydor. lib. ^* cap. 9.
Corones, Lady psalters; and a thousand superstitious kinds of prayers. Whereof
to rehearse the original, is a sufficient confutation.

The 4. division. Of wearing a Cardinals hat.
Anno. dom. 1243
INnocentius the fourth of that name, who lived more then one thousand, two
hundred and forty years after Christ, first ordained that Cardinals should
ride on horses in the streets, and have a red hat carried before them: by
which hat they ought to remember that they should be ready to sheade their
blood for the gospel sake; Plati. in Inno^. 4.
so says their own Platina.

The 5. division. Of the paschall Torch.
Sigebert. in chro. Polydor. libr. 6. cap. 7.
THe papists use upon Easter eeue (which they term sabbathum sanctum,) to
hallow a torch or taper of wax, which they call caerea paschalis, in which
they instill crossewise five hallowed greines. To this taper they ascribe great
holiness, and reserve it till the ascension, or Pentecost. Nevertheless it
was first invented by Pope Sozimus, Anno. Dom. 417
four hundred years after Christ. This Sozimus falsified the decrees of the
Nicene council, as I have proved before, so to maintain the usurped primacie
of the church of Rome.

The 6. division. Of the number of Popish prayers at their mass.
Intolerable superstition.
The superstition used in popery, is to too gross and ridiculous. For either
they must have but one prayer, one secret, and one post-communion, (which three
are always in number equal;) or else the same must be, three, five, or seven;
but in no case two. And why I pray you? Because forsooth God is not pleased
with an even number. So writes their great Master of ceremonies in these
express words: Durand. libr. 4. cap. 1^.
Quia vero numero Deus gaudet impari, quidam obseruant vt impares dicant in
missa orationes, videlicet, vel vnamitantum, vel tres, vel quinque, vel septem*
Vnam ad designandum fidei vnitatem. Tres, ad significandum mysterium
trinitatis, and quia Christus ter in passione orauit dicens: Pater, si fieri
potest, transeat a me calix iste. Quinque, ad designandum quinque plagas
Christi: septem, ad designandum spiritum gratiae septi formis, seu septem dona
spiritus sancti. Deus enim diuisionem and discordiam detestatur. Vnde cum
caeterorum dierum operibus benediceret* operibus tamen secundae diei
benedixisse non legitur: Eo quod binarius numerus primo ab vnitate reeedebat,
and ab eo caeteri diuisibiles numeri originem sortiuntur, and impar numerus est
mundus Because god takes pleasure in an odd number, some observe always to say
od prayers at mass: to wit, either one only, or else three, or else five, or
seven. One, to signify the unity of faith: three, to signify ye mystery of
the Trinity, and that Christ prayed thrice in his passion, saying: Father, if
it be possible, Fond superstitious observations
let this cup pass from me. Five, to signify the five wounds of Christ.
Seven, to signify ye spirit of seuenfold grace, or the seven gifts of the holy
ghost; for God detesteth division and discord. Wherefore when he blessed the
works of the other days, we do not read that he blessed the works of the
second day: and that because the number of two departs first from unity; and
the other diuisible numbers take their original of it; and the odd number is
pure and clean.

Out of these words I note first, that where our master Durand Rubrica Trid.
conc.
we must not think that he would except any: for their Tridentine rubricke
appoints all in general to observe that order.

I note secondly, that as their Pighius affirmed the scripture to be like a
nose of wax; so do they all at their pleasures appite

I note thirdly, that God is delighted with od numbers, but not with even; for
so says master Durand, 33. q. 2. c. nupti^^.
and he proves it out 12. articles of our 12. apostles, and perhaps therefore
Judas betrayed him to make the number odd. Yet, to say so cannot serve the
turn because the apostles Act. ^.26.
Fourthly, that the words omitted in the works of the second day, do not argue
either liking in the odd number, or disliking in the even. For the same words
are added, both in the fourth and in the sixth day; and in the end of al, the
works of every day are jointly commended for very good.

The seventh division. Of mystical whispering in the Mass.
THe Papists think the cannon of their mass as it were profaned, if the lay
people should but hear one word thereof: for which respect and other
mystical consideration, the priest is commanded to whisper al to himself. Of
this secrecy, thus writes their Durandus: Durand. libr. 4. ^^p. 27.
Instante memoria dominicae passionis silentium obseruat, vsquedum alta voce
dicit, per omnia secula seculorum: illud insinuans, quod Jesus post
suscitationem Lazari non palam ambulabat apud Iudaeos. When the memory of the
passion draws near, he keeps silence, until he speak a loud, per omnia
secula seculorum, giving us to understand thereby, that Jesus after he had
raised up Lazarus, walked not openly among the Jews. Behold this learned
sermon, consider the edification. Joan. 11.54.


The eight division. Of the colors of the habits used in the Mass.
THe papists use four special colors in their mass, and this they do to
signify to the people four special mysteries, as if it were by the way of
Sermons. For their chiefest preaching consists in odd mystical dreaming.
The first color is white: the second, red: the third, black: the fourth,
green. They use white colors, Durandus lib. 3. cap. 18.
to signify innocence: red colors, to signify martyrdom: black colors,
to signify sorrow and mourning: green, to signify whatsoever else. The red
they use in the festiuities of the apostles, Red colors.
evangelists, and martyrs; so to declare to ye world, that they shed their
blood for Christ's sake; also in the feast of the cross, and of the innocents
stain by K. Herod. Black colors.
The black they use upon good Friday, in ye Rogations and upon al fasting
days: at which time their bellies mourn for lack of meat, at the least
among the simple sort. The green they use upon workie days, Green colors.
and at other times not proper to the rest. The white they use in the feasts of
al co^fessors, White colors.
and virgins which were not martyrs, in all the feasts of the blessed virgin,
in the feast of al saints, in the chair of S. Peter, in the conversion of
Saint Paul, in the feasts of our Lord throughout the Octaues, and in the
nativity of saint John the baptist. And why? forsooth to signify, A point of
importance.
that the persons in whose memories such feasts are celebrated, were free from
al, actual and original sin. This is the point of importance, mark it well.
That this is their doctrine, Durand affirms it for them. These are his words:
In natiuitate Saluatoris and etiam Praecursoris, quoniam vterque natus est
mundus, id est, Durand. vbi sup. lib. 3. cap. 18.
carens originali peccato. In the nativity of our savior and also of his
precursor, because either of them was borne pure, that is, free from original
sin. This is the mystery of Popish colors; in which they are not content
vainly to flourish like Robinhood in green, but they must also blaspheme god,
making the creature equal with the creator. For only the son of God was
free from sin, as is proved in the chapter of man's justification.

The 9. division. Of Candelmas-day.
THe old Pagan-Romanes, in the Calends of February honored Februa the mother
of Mars, whom they supposed to be the God of battle. The honor that they did
exhibit was this: they went up and down the streets, with candels and torches
burning in their hands. In regard hereof, Durand. li. 7. ca. 7
Pope Sergius invented another like ethnicall superstition: to wit, that the
christian Romans should go in procession with burning candels in their hands,
and that in the day of the purification of the blessed virgin, the second of
February. By which feast and burning candels, the Pope gives us to
understand, that the virgin Mary was pure from sin, and stood no need of
purgation. Of which point I have spoken sufficiently, in the chapter of man's
justification.

The 10. division. Of the Popish Agnus Dei.
THe Popes of late time have used every seventh year, and the first year
that every one is made Pope, to consecrate solemnly with prayers, chrisme,
and manifold ceremonimonies, In libello insti^^^. sodalit. Jesus.
certain round pieces of wax having the print of a Lamb, and for that cause
so termed. With this kind of paltery stuff this world is so bewitched, that
infinite numbers do ascribe a great part of their salvation thereunto. He that
has an Agnus Dei about him, believes that he shall be delivered by sea and
land, from all tempests, thunder, earthquakes, fire, hail, thunderbolts,
sudden death, and from all evil. If any man will not believe me, let him
read a little book printed at Colonia, containing the order sodalitatis B.
Mariae virginis; which is every where to be sold; in which book he shall
find, much more then I have said.

The 11. division. Of the Popes Bulls.
POpe Adrian the first of that name, caused his pardons, privileges, and
grants to be sealed with lead, which they called the popes bulls. These bulls
were unknown to Christ's church, Anno Dom. 772.
for the space of 772. years after Christ: and if it had been still so till
these our days, no detriment should we have sustained thereby. Polydore will
have them to be called bulls of the Greek word (...) by corruption of speech.

The 12. division. Of the Popish carni-uale, or Shrouetide.
THe devout Romans, who whip themselves in Lent for their sins, till they
seem as pure as Christ all, use a long time before Lent, to gadde up and down
in the streets and from house to house in visards; neither can men be
discerned from women, nor women from men, they are al so disguised: by means
whereof all iniquity is committed, as their own dear friend Polydore has
witnessed. ^^lyd^r. l^. 5. c. 2
But what skilleth it? a little whipping in Lent, will make condign
satisfaction for the fault. Yea, if the rich do hire the poor to be scourged
for them, the satisfaction is deemed sufficient. Polydore says, that in his
time they used this irreligious madding, for the space of two months; but of
late years the Pope has abbridged the time. Nevertheless the practice is
even this day, most execrable, heathenish, and intolerable.

CHAP. 12. Of Popish auricular confession.
COncerning auricular confession, I have spoken sufficiently in my book of
Motives. It shall now be enough to answer to such objections, as the papists do
or may frame against the same.

The first objection.
Christ commanded to confess our sins, Matthew. 18.18.
when he gave his priests authority to loose them: for they cannot loose any
man, unless they first know him to be bound.

The answer.
I say first, that Christ speaks in that place, not of confession, 1 Cor.
5.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
Which sense may be gathered out of Saint Paul's discourse, as well to the
Corinthians, as to the Thessalonians.

I say secondly, that Gods ministers bind and loose sins, by preaching his
sacred word; of which kind of binding and loosing, Christ speaks in Saint
Matthew and in Saint John. Matthew. 16* 18. Joan. 20.23. Romans 10.10, 1^
Romans 1.16.
who says that the gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation, to
every one that believes it: then are Christ's ministers (as the Apostle says,
2. Cor. 2.1^*
) become in them, the savor of life unto life. On the contrary side, when the
people will not hear and believe Gods word sincerely preached, but contemn
it, and the ministers thereof: then doubtless are their sins bound on earth,
and then is that binding also approved in heaven. Then are the apostles words
verified, who says that vengeance is ready against all disobedience. Then are
Christ's ministers (as ye apostle says,) made unto them, 2. Cor. 10. v. 6.
the savor of death unto death. What can be a more joyful loosing? what can
be a more terrible binding? See the answer to the third objection following,
Vid Hier. in Esaia. cap. 14.
and there mark S. Hieromes words.

I say thirdly, that our people confess their sins generally before 2. Esdr.
8. and 9.
Yea, in the reformed churches abroad, the people use to confess to the
ministers, such special sins as most grieve and clog their consciences, and
for which they need grave advise and godly council. Which christian liberty
is granted also, in our churches of England. For such as list may confess
their sins to the minister privately, and have both his godly advise and
absolution, if he deem them penitent for their sins.

The reply.
Your confessions are nothing else, but a mere mockery: for ye confess your
selves generally to be sinners, but ye name no sins at all. Again, as in
Germany they confess some sins, so do they leave unconfessed what pleases
them. And this is the scornful liberty, which ye grant to your churches of
England.

The answer.
Nehem. 8. and 9. Luc. 18. v. 13. Leuit. 16.
before Ezra and the Levites. As the humble publican confessed his sins, when
he said: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. As the prophet David confessed his
sins, when he said: I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight:
that thou may be just when thou speak, Psalm. 50.3.4.
and pure when thou iudgest. As the prodigal son confessed his sins, Luc. 15.
when he said: Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy son. And as your selves confess your sins, in the
beginning of every mass. I say secondly, that your selves grant, that Venials
Nauar. in Enchir. cap. 21. n. 34.
the least sin of al deserves eternal death. For thus does your own famous
Canonist write: Quibus consequens est, posse quem, si velit, confesso vno
peccato veniali alterum tacere. Upon which it follows, that one may if he
list, confess one venial sin and conceal another. Mayor and other
Schoole-doctors, are of the same opinion.

I say thirdly, that by the scriptures upon which ye would gladly ground your
confession, we are no less bound to confess The text speaks of all
indifferently.
For your triuolous distinction of mortal and venial sins, can be found in
no text of holy scripture. And consequently, since the scripture it self by
your grant, freeth us from confessing Venials: it follows directly, that we
are bound to confess none at all.

I say fourthly, that your confession is ridiculous indeed, as Nauar. cap.
1.^4. Joan. Lud. viuald. de veritat. contrit. fol. 141. p. ^.
to afflict our selves for popish absolution. This that I say, is witnessed by
Martinus Nauarrus, by your learned friar Joan. Lud. Viualdus, and diverse
others. I say fifthly, that your confessions are never able to bring peace to
any troubled conscience, but to drive them headlong Psalm. ^8. Prou. 20. Caiet.
in summu. page vlt.
which thing is so clear by the Scriptures, that your Cardinal Caietane
cannot deny it. Secondly, thousands are so turmoiled therewith, that daily
they come to confess the sins which they had forgotten, condemning my life,
that ye have ten thousand priests in Europe, yea perhaps in Italy, that
cannot perceive the aforesaid difference; and much less can the lay people
perform it. See more hereof, in my book of Motives.

The 2. objection.
Mat. 3. v. 6.
S. John the baptist induced the people to the confession of their sins: which
doubtless was not to confess themselves in general to be sinners, but to
utter every man his sins. So is it said in the acts of the apostles, that
many of them which believed, Acts. 19. v. 18.
came confessing and declaring their deeds. And therefore says S. Hierome, that
priests bind and loose, Audita peccatorum varietate, Hier. in 16. Mat.
having heard the variety of sins.

The answer.
I say first, that S. John the baptist cannot mean of your Mat. 14. Luke 9. v.
7.22.
But you make small account to wrest the holy scripture, if by any means it
could so serve your turn. For as your graund doctor Pighius resembled it to a
nose of wax, even so in good sooth ye seem to use it. The truth is this: S.
John exhorting the people to repentance, and to amendment of their former lives
evil spent, found so good success in his preaching, that Jerusalem, Math. 3
v. 1.2, 3. Jordan was two floudes joined in one. Eucherius.
and all Jury, and all the country about Jordan, were desirous to be
baptized; and in sign of their true repentance, they publicly acknowledged
their sins. But that they this did in general terms, and not in popish
manner, Secundo principaliter.
the general confessions of so many multitudes* specially, in so short a
time.

Hysteron proteron proper to the papists.
And yet does S. John speak, as is evident by the text, only of those sins
that were done before baptism. This is your Hysteron proteron, to whom an
horse-mil and a mil-horse, is all one.

I say thirdly, Act. 19. v. 1^.
that the confession which these Ephesians made, whereof S. Luke speaks; is
an evident external sign of true inward remorse, and of sincere faith in
Christ Jesus: but doubtless it does nothing at all resemble, the blasphemous
popish auricular confession. For first, they confessed their sins Vide Iosue
cap. 7 v. 20.
this confession was done in the face of the congregation, but popish
confession is made in Mat. 10. v 3. 1. Tim. 1. v. 13.
but neither of them confessed any other sin. So the faithful at Ephesus of
zeal confessed their notorious deeds, but not all their particular sins,
Nay, they only confessed how Satan had seduced them, and for that end they
burnt their books. Which public attestation done to the glory of God, can
never establish secret popish whispering in the priests ear.

I say fourthly, Quarto principaliter.
that S. Hierome makes altogether against popish confession; as who affirms
the priest or bishop to have The priests do only declare sins to be bound or
loosed.
then the priest of the old testament had in making clean or unclean: That is
to say, as the priests of the old testament, did declare who were clean, or
unclean: so the ministers of the Church knowing some sinners to be penitent,
and other some to be unpenitent, pronounce according to Gods word, that the
sins of the one sort are bound, and of the other sort loosed. And here note
by the way, that the word ( peccatorum) in S. Hierome, does as aptly signify
sinners as sins: and therefore these words ( Audita peccatorum varietate,) I
thus translate: having heard the variety of the sinners. This I say, because
the papists seek to make advantage of the indifferency of the word. And yet
howsoever they take it, it cannot serve their turn.

The 2. objection.
Christ commanded him that was cleansed from his leprosy, Math. 8. v. 4.
to go unto the priest. And he likewise commanded his apostles to loose Lazarus
that was bound, thereby signifying that they should loose our sins. Joan. 11.
v. 44.


The answer.
The leaper is cleansed, before he be sent to the priest.
or make the sinner clean; but only pronounce and declare him to be clean,
whom God has already cleansed. For otherwise, God would have sent him to the
priest that had the leprie, before he was cleansed from the same; that so he
might have found remedy, at the Priests hands.

Leuit. 14. v. 22.
and therefore Christ would not have them contemned or omitted. Now the law
was as we read in Leuiticus, that whosoever was cleansed from the leprosy,
should present himself before the priest, and offer up the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. This is the mystery, wherein the papists would stablish their
popish absolution. The end of the law was, that Gods goodness should be
publicly approved, and that the party cleansed should give a sign of
gratitude. Therefore does it follow in the text: Go and show thy self to the
priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a witness to them. Mat.
8. v. 4.
For he could not be received into the congregation, but by the judgment of
the priest.

Math. 8. v. 42.43 44, 4^.
but all the Jews also, and the very women that were present. And
consequently, not priests only but even lay men, and women also may give
absolution. Which thing I ween, the wiser sort of papists will never grant.
Yet the end of this loosing was not to establishe popish absolution, but to
make the miracle manifest to the incredulous Jews. I prove it by these words
next before going: I know that thou hear me always, but because of the
people that stand by, I said it; that they may believe, that thou have sent me.
Yea, it cannot be proved by the text, that the disciples were appointed to
loose Lazarus, save only in general terms, as also were the women that stood
by. And indeed Christ seems to have committed that office principally to the
Jews, that so all occasion of incredulity might be taken from them.

The 3. objection.
S. James says: confess your sins one to another, Iam. 5. v. 16. Joan. 20.
v. 22.23
and pray one for another, that he may be healed. And Christ himself says:
receive ye the holy Ghost. Whose sins so ever ye remit, they are remitted to
them: and whose sins so ever ye retain, they are retained. And a little
before he says thus: As my father sent me, so do I send you. Now it is
certain that Christ was sent with all power, even to bind and loose men's
sins: and therefore his apostles being sent in the same manner, must needs
have power to forgive sins as he had. Yea, the church has ever thus
understood these Scriptures.

The answer.
I say first, that in these words Christ gave authority to preach the gospel;
which whosoever believe, have their sins See the answer to the first
objection.
are subject to damnation. Other binding and loosing we find none in the
scriptures; neither yet that Christ heard any confessions. This sense of
binding and loosing by preaching the word of God, S. Hierom, whom the papists
boast to be their patron herein, makes so evident, as more to a reasonable
man cannot be wished. Hier. in Esaia^* c 14.
These are his words: Funibus peccatorum suorum vnusquisque constringitur: quos
funes atque vincula soluere possu^t and apostoli, imitantes magistrum suu^ qui
eis dixerat: quaecunque solueritis super terra^, erunt soluta and in coelo.
Mat. 18. v. 18.
Soluunt autem eos apostoli sermon Dei, and testimonijs scripturarum, and
exhortatione virtutum. Every one is bound with the cords of his sins: which
cords and bands the Apostles can loose, while they imitate their master,
that said (these words) unto them: The preaching of the word, binds and
loses our sins.
what things soever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. And
the apostles loose them by ye word of God, and by the testimonies of the
scriptures, and by the exhortation of virtues. Behold here these golden words.
The papists bitterly exclaim against us, when we teach that Gods ministers do
bind and loose men's sins, by the true preaching of his sacred word: and yet
the holy and most learned father S. Hierome, In breu^ar. Triden. in ips. fest.
whom the papists in their church-seruice, term ( doctorem maximum) the
greatest doctor of all the rest; teaches the self same doctrine, in most
plain, flat, and express terms. To which exposition of S. Hierome, when any
papist shall answer sufficiently, I promise to become his bondsman. For S.
Hierome alleges the very same scripture, upon which the papists would
ground their new no absolution, and affirms that the apostles imitate and
fulfill Christ's commandment, when they preach his word, declare the
scriptures, and exhort to godly life. Oh sweet Jesus, who but papists can
deny such plain testimonies? Nay, nay, who but senseless men, who but
arrogant men, who but impudent men, who but men careless of their salvation;
will desperately impugn so manifest and comfortable doctrine, so exactly and so
sweetly agreeing with the holy scriptures? God grant that they may once epsy
their gross errors, and with humility acknowledge the same.



Mat. 22. v. 39.
to love him in the same degree. For we may lawfully have more care of our own
soul, then of our neighbors: and also prefer our own necessity before our
neighbors.

Mat. 28.19. Luc. 10.3. Joan. 16.2.3. Mat. 10.19.
yet not to forgive sins in popish sense, but for the effectual preaching
of Gods word. For otherwise, they being of themselves poor and simple men,
and sent to all nations as lambs among wolves, could never have accomplished
their commission, with authority, fruit and effect.

mutual confession. Neither are his words restrained either to priests or to
lay men, but uttered indifferently to all: yea, Torquet hoc papistas.
if the apostle should mean as the Papists would have him, it would follow of
necessity that the priests should as well confess in the ears of the lay men,
as the lay men in the ears of the priest. I prove it, because the apostle
says indifferently (confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another.) And if any will be so absurd, as to interpret praying, for
absolution; then do I answer that the lay man must as well absolve the priest,
as be absolved of him. This case is so plain, that their own Scotus (whom
for his sharp wit and subtle distinctions, they surnamed Doctor Subtilis)
freely grants that their auricular confession is neither grounded in this
place, nor in any other text of holy scripture: these are his own words:
Scotus in 4. fen^. did. 17. q. 1.
Sed nec per hoc videtur mihi quod Jacob, praeceptum hoc dedit, nec praeceptum
a Christo promulgauit. Primum non: vnde enim fuit sibi authoritas obligandi
totam ecclesia^ cum esset tantu^ episcopus ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae? nisi
dicas illam ecclesiam in principio fuisse principalem and per conseque^s eius
episcopum principale^ fuisse Patriarcham, quod non concedent Romani; nec quod
illa authoritas proprie pro tempore illo erat sibi subtracta. N^c secundum
videtur; quia apostoli publicantes praceptum Domini in scripturis suis,
vtebantur modo loquendi per quem potuit innotescere quod erant praecones
Christi Sequitur dicendo enim confitemini alterutrum, non magis dicit
confessionem facienda^ esse sacerdoti quam alij. Subdit enim statim: and orate
pro inulcem vt saluemint: vbi nullus diceret ipsum instituisse, nec promulgasse
praeceptum diuinum, sed intellectus eius est sicut in illo verbo: confitemin^
alterutrum persuasio ad humilitate^; vt scilicet generaliter nos co^fiteamur
apud proximos peccatores iuxta illud: si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus,
nosmetipsos seducimus and vertias in nobis non est. Ita per secundum persuadet
ad charitatem fraternam vt scilicet per charitatem fraternam subueniamus nobis
inuicem. Neither does this persuade me, that James gave this commandment;
neither that he published it as commanded by Christ: the first seems not:
for from whence could he have authority to bind the whole church, being but
only the B. of Jerusalem? unless thou will say, that that church in the
beginning was the principal, and consequently, that the B. thereof was the
principal patriarch, which the Romans will not grant: neither, that that
authority was properly for that time taken from them. Neither is the second
probable, because the apostles, when they published the Lords commandment in
their writings, used that manner of phrase. By which it may appear, that they
were the publishers of Christ's institution. For in saying (these words) confess
one to another, he commands no more to make confession to a priest, then to
a lay man: for he adds forthwith; and pray one for an other, that ye may be
saved. Where none will say that he ordained, neither that he published gods
commandment, but the understanding is as in the other place, a persuasion to
humility, to wit, that we generally confess our selves sinners to our
neighbors. Even so does he by the second persuade to brotherly love: to wit,
that of charity we will help one another.

Thus writes their subtle schoole-doctour Scotus, who not able to stablish
auricular confession in the scriptures, flees to their last refuge, to wit, to
unwritten traditions: for in the end of al he adds these words: Scotus vbi
supr.
Apparet ergo istud non esse de iure diuino promulgato per scripturam
apostolicam Vel ergo tenendum est primum membrum, scilicet quod sit de iure
diuino promulgato per euangelium: vel si illud non sufficiat, dicendum est
tertium; scilicet quod est de iure diuino positiuo promulgato a Christi
apostolis sed ecclesiae promulgato per apostolos absque omni scriptura.

Vide Joseph. Angles in 4. l. page prim.
Of this opinion is Beatus Rhenanus, Richardus, Durandus, Bonauentura Hugo,
Panormitanus, and the popish Canonists generally. Of Beatus Rhenanus his
opinion more shall be said shortly: of Richardus, Durandus, Bonauentura, and
Hugo, Josephus Angles may satisfy the Reader: and what popish canonists hold,
^a^ar. and Couar.
Navarre and Couarruuias do not conceal: of whom with others read in my book
of Motives.

Caietane, Caiet. ea. 20. in Ioann.
secret confession is against Christ's institution, as also the precept that
urges us to the same.

Anno Dom. 1215
which council was celebrated under pope Innocentius the third of that name,
more then 1200. years after Christ. So says friar Joseph in his narration to
the pope: yea, Joseph. Angl. in 4. sent. de con^^^*
which is more to be admired, the necessity of auricular confession was not
established by popish decree, before the said Innocent* was pope of Rome: so
writes their own historiographer Platina. Platina in vit^ Zeph^ri^^*


The fourth objection.
Tertullian and Cyprian who lived above 1300. years ago, do both make mention
of secret confession made closely to the priests: yea, of such sins as the
people never did, Cypr. de lapsi^.
save only that they thought of the^ in their hearts. Which words can never be
rackt to public confession, Tertull. de poenit,
but must perforce be understood of that auricular confession, which is this
day used in the church of Rome.

The answer.
I say first, that Cyprian and Tertullian speak of public Confession was
voluntary for 1215. years after Christ.
neither did they recite all their sins, but such only as seemed good unto
them. This answer is sufficiently proved already; yet for better satisfaction
of the Reader, I will confute papists by papists in express terms. Beatus
Rhenanus a popish divine, Primo principal
and a man of great learning, though carried away with the errors of his time,
has testified this verity so sincerely and so copiously, as more need not be
said herein. First therefore he has these words: De publica confessione sieve
(...) facit mentione^, Beatus Rhenanus in annot. ad libr. Tertull. de poenitent.
(cuius etiam Leo papa meminit de poenitentia, did. 1.) qua maiores nostros
apparet aliquandiu vsos fuisse priusqua^ ista secreta nasceretur, qua hodie
co^scientia^ nostram sacerdoti detegimus, vsque ad circumstantiaru^ omnium
minutias; qua^ tamen saluberrimam esse nemo potest inficiari. Sane sunt etiam
inter iuris pontificij interpretes, qui institutam ab ecclesia tradant
confessione^: igitur quantum conijcere datur, illa sumpsit originem ex veteri
instrumento: haec aute^ hinc nata videtur, quod constitutis quibusdam
poenitentiae legibus, quib and tempus and modus singulis peccatis expiandis
praestituebatur, (Canones poenitentiales vocant*) opus* fuit sacerdotem in
consilium adhiberi, praesertim a laicis.

He makes mention (he speaks of Tertullian,) of public confession, whereof
Leo also makes mention; which it is clear that our ancestors used some space
of time, before this secret confession was hatched, with which we this day
disclose our conscience to the priest, til we have told the least circumstance
of al, which nevertheless no man can deny to be very good. Yea, there be even
among them that interpret the popes law, who acknowledge confession to be
ordained by the church. Therefore as I can conjecture, This testimony is
worthy of consideration.
the public confession began of the old Testament; this auricular came up
thus, because so soon as certain laws were made, in which the time and the
manner were appointed for the punishment of every sin (which they term the
penitential canons;) it was needful to have a priest for counsel,
especially to the lay people.

Tertullian, Cyprian, Leo, and all the ancient writers, do always understand
public, when they speak of confession; although some of them, as Leo were
bishops of Rome themselves.



Beatus Rhenanus is a great papist, as who acknowledges this confession
auricular to be good; and consequently, that his answer is most forcible
against ye papists



Rhenanus says that it began of the old testament; Leuit. 16.21. ^. Esdr. 9.2.
in which it is clear, that all sins were not particularly confessed. Let this
be well marked.

of time, is brought to a further matter.

Secondly, Rhenanus has these express words: Secundo principaliter.
Vides igitur necessarium fuisse sacerdotis vti consilio, quatenus institutis
poenitentiae legibus fieret satis: quae laicis non perinde cognitae erant.
Sequitur: caeterum soli Deo confitendum esse, diuus Chrysostomus author est.
Thou see therefore that it was necessary to use the counsel of a priest,
Rhenanus vbi supr.
that so the penitential canons might be observed, which the lay people
understood not. But for all that, that we must confess our selves only to God,
S. Chrysostom. is our author. Out of these words I note first, that Rhenanus
(though a Papist) grants constantly, Behold the confusion of popery, for
better proof cannot be had.
being thereto enforced by the authority of the scripture, of S. Chrysostom,
S. Cyprian, S. Basil, S. Bid, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, Tertullian, Hesychius,
Theodulphus, Theodorus, Bertramus, Rabanus, and Nectarius; all which he
alleges for his opinion. Who can wish further proof?

Thirdly, Rhenanus writes thus: Tertio. principal.
Non aliam ob causam complurium hic testimonijs vsi sumus, quam ne quis
admiretur Tertullianum de clancularia illa admissorum confessione nihil
locutum, quae qua^tum conijcimus, penitus id temporis ignorabatur. For no other
cause have I used here the testimonies of so many writers, but lest any should
marvel, The pure primitive church knew not auricular confession.
that Tertullian spoke nothing of that secret confession, which (as I think)
was altogether unknown at that time. Lo, Tertullian spoke not one word of
auricular confession, as which was not heard of in his time. So then, the holy
fathers are wholly against the papists, even by the judgment of a famous
papist. Fourthly, Rhenanus says thus; Thomas Aquinas and Scotus, homines
nimium But Th. Aquinas and Scotus, men too much delighted with subtilties, have
brought confession this day to such a pass, Popish confession is impossible,
even by the grant of the Papists.
that Ioannes Geilerius a grave and reverend divine, and a preacher a long time
at Argentoratum, said many a time unto his friends, that it was impossible for
a man to make his confession, according to their traditions. Mark well for
Christ's sake.
Out of these words I note first, that the vain curious distinctio^s of the
school doctors, have brought much mischief into the church of god: which if a
papist had not spoken it, would Who will not defy popery that deeply
considers these things?
Mark well my words, gentle reader. The papists teach us to hold for an article
of our belief, that we are bound to make our confessions as the popish law
prescribes; that is, as Aquinas and Scotus have set town the same. And for all
that, Ge^lerius a papist himself and a great divine, complained often to his
friends, that no man could possibly perform the same. Fi^ on popery, and
God of his mercy convert al papists to the truth.
Now then, since on the one side, the popish confession must be made under
pain of damnation, and since on the other side, none possibly can make the
same as is required; it follows of necessity by popish doctrine, that all
papists must be damned eternally. O miserable popery, confounded by thy self!
Thine own doctors O popery, (such force has the truth) have bewrayed thy
treachery to the world. It is to us his great mercy, for the merits of Christ
Jesus, and to you papists his just judgment, for the punishment of your
sins. If you will in time repent and embrace his holy gospel, his mercy is
open toward you: if you will still continue in your wilful obstinacy, God
doubtless will revenge the blood of his innocents at your hands. For with your
beggarly unwritten traditions, you devour the souls of many thousands. Many
among the papists dare not utter their minds
This is evident by the secret complaint of this learned man Geilerius, who
told that to his trusty friends, which he durst not disclose to others.

Tertio principaliter.
I say thirdly, that in S Cyprians time, some were so zealous and so esteemed
the sacred ministry, that although they did not deny the faith publicly in
time of persecution: yet because they had some doubts therein, and were
troubled in their minds, they voluntarily disclosed their secret griefs to
Gods ministers humbly desired their godly advise, and submitted themselves to
do what they thought expedient: by reason whereof, they sometime had public
penance enjoined them, and confessed that in the face of the congregation,
which they before disclosed secretly to the ministers: which thing was
appointed for edification sake by the ministers, and of devotion voluntarily
performed by the penitents. This my answer is fully contained, as well in the
words of Origin, as of Saint Cyprian.

Saint Cyprian has these words; Cypr. de lapsis, page 284.
Quanto and fide maiores and timore meliores sunt, qui quamuis nullo sacrificij
aut libelli facinore constricti, quoniam tamen de hoc vel cogitauerunt, hoc
ipsum apud sacerdotes dei dolenter and simpliciter confitentes exomologesin
conscientiae faciunt, animi sui pondus exponunt, salutarem medelam paruis licet
and modicis vulneribus exquirunt. How much sounder in faith and better in holy
fear are they, who neither having offended by sacrificing to the Idols, nor by
exhibiting libels to the magistrates, yet because they sometime thought of
these matters, do simply and penitently confess the same to Gods ministers,
do lay open their conscience, and do disclose the grief of their minds, and
seek for wholesome medicine, though their wounds be small and easy to be
cured. Out of these words I note first, that all generally Cyprians words, and
more plainly out of Origens words following.

Origin has these express words, Tantumodo circumspice diligentius, cui
debeas confiteri peccatum tuum. Proba prius medicum* cui debeas causam
languoris exponere; qui sciat infirmari cum infirmante, flerecum flente* qui
condolendi and compatiendi nouerit disciplina^, vt ita demum si quid ille
dixerit, qui se prius and eruditum medicum ostenderit and misericordem; si quid
consilii dederit facias and sequaris: si intellexerit and praeuiderit talem
esse languorem tuum, qui in conuentu totius ecclesiae exponi debeat, and
curari, ex quo fortassis and caeteri aedificari poterunt and tu ipse facile
sanari, multa hoc deliberatione, and satis perito medici illius consilio procur
andum est. Only look about thee diligently, to whom thou may confess thy
sin. Try first the Physician to whom thou must disclose the cause of thy
disease; such a one as knows to be infirm with him that is imfirme, to weep
with him that weepeth, and has learned to sorrow and take compassion; that so
at the length, if he shall say any thing, who before has showed himself to
be a skillful and merciful Physician; if he shall give thee any counsel, thou
may do and follow the same. If he shall perceive and foresee thy disease to
be such, that it must be disclosed in the assembly of the whole congregation,
and so be cured, whereby perhaps both others may be edified, and thy self made
whole; then this must be done with great deliberation, and by the skilful
counsel of the said physician.

any one sin of auricular confession, or once urge the penitent to do the
same. For so much the self same popish law teaches, no learned papist can
deny.

The reply.
That confession which Nectarius did abrogate at Constantinople, was private
and not public, as Rhenanus thinks. For Sozomenus, Cassiodorus, and
Nicephorus, do all three affirm jointly, that that priest was designed over
the penitents in every church, who was known to be a discreet person, and a
keeper of secrecy. But doubtless in vain was a keeper of secrecy chosen, where
every thing was to be published.

The answer.
The true intelligence of this story, will bring great light to the whole
matter of confession. For which respect, I will proceed so methodically in
answering this objection, as possibly I can. I therefore say first, Primo
principal.
that Nectarius the B. of Constantinople, utterly abolished the law made for
confession, and that to avoid the great vices, which ensued thereupon. Which
being so, it must follow of necessity; that confession was not commanded by the
law of God. For otherwise it should be in man's power (which no wise man will
grant, The story of Nectarius must be well marked.
) to disanull the law of God. Again, neither the holy B. Nectarius, would ever
have attempted so to abolish gods ordinance; neither would so many famous
bishops, have imitated his fact. And yet is it certain, that all the bishops
of the east church did follow his opinion; yea, even S. Chrysostom, Nicep. li.
12. c. 2^
who succeeded Nectarius at Constantinople, that goodly patriarchall seat of
the world. So says Nicephorus.

Now for the proof of the principal point, to wit, that Nectarius abandoned
confession simply and wholly, The first probation.
(which is the point that the papists do and must deny, or else forsake their
popery:) I prove the same first, by Thomas Waldensis a papist highly renowned
among them; who affirms the story so absolutely, as our Jesuit Bellarmine
cannot deny the same; and his reasons to the contrary, are ridiculous and
childish. For first, Bellarm. de poenitent. lib. 3. c. 15
he says, that pope Nicholas calls Nectarius ye mighty adversary of
heretics, and the defender of the church. Secondly he says, that saint
Chrysostom and many other bishops approved Nectarius his opinion. Ergo, says
our Jesuit, he could never take away auricular confession. S. Chrysostom and
all the bishops of the East, practiced the same that Nectarius appointed, and
Thomas Waldensis a zealous papist understands it of confession generally; and
yet Nectarius because he was a godly man, could not abolish popish confession,
says our Jesuit. But I ween, I may better conclude; that because Nectarius
was an holy man, Our Jesuit is driven to use petitio principii.
and saw great knauerie used by reason of confession; to wit, whoredom between
the deacon and the confessionist; therefore he justly abolished that law,
which was only made by the power of man. For our Jesuit takes that as
granted, that is in controversy; which is a great fault in the Schools,
called Petitio principij. For I am so far from granting his auricular
confession to be of God, that I have copiously Chrysostom, The second
probation.
who was the next successor to this holy Nectarius. In one place he has these
words; Peccata tua dicito, Chrysostom. hom. 2. ^n Psalm. 50. tom. 1.
vt deleas illa. Si confunderis alicui dicere, quia peccasti; dicito quotidie
in anima tua. Non dico vt confitearis conseruo tuo, vt exprobret. Dicito Deo,
qui curat ea. Tell thy sins, that thou may blot them out. If thou be ashamed
to confess them to any man, because thou have sinned; confess the^ daily in
thy mind. I say not this, to cause thee to confess them to thy fellow
servant; that he may vpbraid thee. Confess them to God, Chrysostom. de Lazar. ^ac
Din. hom. 4. ^om. 2. page 1359.
that cures them.

Again, in another place he says thus: Condemnasti peccatu^ tuum? deposuisti
sarcinam. Quis haec dicit? ipse iudex tuus. Dic tu peccata tua prior, vt
iustificeris; cur igitur te quaeso pudescis and erubescis dicere peccata tua?
cave enim homini dixeris, ne tibi opprobret. Neque enim conseruo confiteris, vt
in publicum proferat, sed ei qui Dominus est, ei qui tui curam gerit, ei qui
humanus est, ei qui medicus est ostendis vulnera. Neque enim ignorant, etiamsi
tu non dixeris; qui sciebat etiam antequa^ perpetrares. Quidigitur causae est,
quo m^nus dicas: non enim ex accusatione fit grauius peccatum, imo mitius magis
ac leuius: and ob hoc ipsu^, Deus vult te dicere, non vt puniaris, sed vt
relaxeris: non vt ipse sciat peccatum, cur enim id postulet, quum iam sciat?
sed vt tuscias, quantum tibi debitum remittatur. Ideo vero vult te scire
beneficii magnitudinem, vt perpetuo gratias agas, vt segnior fias ad peccandum,
vt ad virtutem promptior. Nisi dixeris debiti magnitudinem non agnosces
donationis eminentiam. Non inquit, cogote in medium prodire theatrum, ac multos
adhibere testes: Mihi soli dic peccatum priuatim, vt sanem vlcus, teque dolor
liberabo. Have thou condemned thy sin? What can more plainly be said, against
Romish confession?
then have thou discharged thy self of thy load. Who says so? even thine own
judge. Tell thou thy sins first, that thou may be justified. Why therefore I
pray thee art thou bashful, and ashamed to tell thy sins? beware to tell them
to man, least he vpbraid thee. For thou do not confess them to thy fellow
servant, that he may tell them abroad; but to him that is thy Lord, to him
that has care of thee, to him that is gentle, to him that is the physician
do thou show thy wounds. For neither is he ignorant of them, although thou
tell them not, who knew them before thou did them. What then is the cause,
that thou may not tell them? For the sin is not made greater for confessing
it, but rather more light and easy. And for this cause will God have thee to
tell it: not for to punish thee, but for to acquit thee: not that he may know
thy sin; for why should he require it, since he knows it already? but that
thou may know how much debt is forgiven thee, and therefore will he have
thee to know the greatness of the benefit, that thou may always give
thanks, and be more slow to sin, and more propense to virtue. Unless thou
tell the greatness of the debt, thou shall not know the excellency of the
gift. I do not (says he) compel thee to come forth into the midst of the
theater, and to bring many witnesses. Tell thy sin to me alone privately,
that I may heal thy disease, and I will deliver thee from thy grief.

Again, in another place, he writes thus; Non tibi dico vt te prodas in
publicum neque apud alios te accuses: Chrysostom in epis. ad Hebr. hom. 3^. tom.
4.
sed obedire te volo prophetae dicenti, reuela Domino viam tuam. Ante Deum ergo
tua confitere peccata, apud verum iudicem cum oratione delicta tua pronuntia,
non lingua sed conscientiae tuae memoria, and tunc demum spera te misericordiam
posse consequi. I do not bid thee come forth in public, No confession made
to the priests.
neither to accuse thy self before others: but I would have thee to obey the
prophet when he says; reveal thy way to God. Before God therefore confess thy
sins, before the true Judge in prayer pronounce thine offenses; not with thy
tongue, but with the memory of thy conscience, and then hope to have mercy.

Again in another place, he has these words: Vos oro, fratres charissimi,
Chrysostom. de incompreh. dei not. contra Anomaeos hom. 5. tom. 5.
crebrius deo immortali confiteamini, and enumeratis vestris delictis veniam
petatis and numen propitiu^. Non te in theatrum conseruorum tuorum duco, non
hominibus peccata tua detegere cogo: repete coram deo conscientiam tuam, and
explica: ostende Deo medico praestantissimo tua vulnera, and pete ab eo
medicamentum: oste^de ei qui nihil opprobret, sed humanissime curet. Cur taces
quae optime ille nouit? dicatque enumera, vt fructum maximum consequaris. I
desire you my dear brethren, Confession to God, but not to man.
to confess your sins often to God almighty: and when you have reckoned up
your sins, then to crave his pardon and mercy. I do not lead thee into the
theater of thy fellow servants, I do not compel thee to disclose thy sins
to men. Repeat before God thy conscience, and unfold it; show to God thy
wounds, and ask him a medicine for the same: show them to him yt never
vpbraideth, but cures with all humanity. Why do thou conceal those
things, which he knows right well? tell and number them, that thou may
reap the great fruit thereof.

Again in another place, he writes in this manner; Confunderis and erubescis
peccata tua effari; Chrysostom. de p^^nit. and confess. tom. 5. p. 905.
atqui oportebat maxim apud homines eadicere and inuulgare. Confusio enim est
peccare, no^ est confusio confiteri peccata. Nunc autem neque necessarium
praesentibus testibus confiteri: cogitatione fiat delictorum exquisitio, absque
test sit hoc iudicium. Solus te Deus confitente^ videat. Thou art confounded
and ashamed to utter thy sins, but sometime it behooued to tell and publish
them, especially before men. For it is confusion to sin, but it is no confusion
to confess our sins. And this day it is not necessary to have witnesses
present, Confession was once made to man, but after that taken away.
when we confess our sins. Let us examine our sins in thought and cogitation,
let this judgment be without any witness, let God only see thee when thou
confessest. Thus says S. Chrysostom, whom I have alleged at large, the
rather to confute the Jesuit Bellarmine. Whom whether I have confuted, or no,
let the indifferent reader give his censure, when he has heard my discourse to
the end. Our Jesuit will needs save the life of his popish auricular
confession, though himself spend the best blood in his body, in defense of the
cause. In regard hereof, he imagines that in the time of Nectarius, not only
public confession; but also private Romish enumeration was in use. This
grave Jesuitical consideration premised; he tells us sagely, if we will
believe him, that S. Nectarius abandoned only public confession, permitting
Romish auricular confession, still to remain in force. This is the whole
scope of the Jesuit, it cannot be denied. The scope of the Jesuit must be
marked.
And because S. Chrysostom was the next bishop in Constantinople after this
holy Nectarius, and consequently must needs best know his practice; the Jesuit
perforce will have S. Chrysostom only to speak against public confession, and
not at al to disprove their private Romish mumbling.

I therefore note first, out of S. Chrysostomes words; that he

I note thirdly, that albeit he speak an hundredth times of confession to God,
yet does he not once will us to confess our selves Chrysostom utterly
disswadeth from confessing our sins to men. For first, he wills us not to
All confession is abandoned, none at all is excepted
as only God hears us. By all which ways and reasons, he opposes that
confession which is made to God; against that auricular confession, which our
Jesuit would have to be made to man. I note fifthly, that he says, we are
freed from confessing our sins to Nectarius had not abandoned the law of
confession. And consequently, that if we were still bound to popish auricular
confession, he would have made some mention thereof; A man made free, is still
in bondage with our Jesuit.
and not have said generally and without al exception, yt we are made free from
confessing to man. For no man doubtless is free from confession, that still
remains bound Nectarius had abandoned but one kind of confession, and not
another; S. Chrysostom being so wise and so learned, and speaking so often and
so much of the one, would have spoken at the least some one word of the other;
which yet he edid not, because there was no such thing Nectarius did not only
displace, The third probation.
and put out of office the penitentiarie-priest; but withal left it to the
free judgment of every one to come to the holy communion without confession,
as every man's conscience moved him. Which could no way be true; if the
penitentes had bin still bound to popish auricular confession. For (as I said
before, Histor. trip. lib. 9. cap. 35.
) the late Romish confession at that time, was not heard of in the world. This
determination of Nectarius is witnessed, not only by Socrates and Sozomenus,
Socrat. lib. 5. c. 19 Sozo. lib. 7. c. 16. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 28.
but also by Cassiodorus and Nicephorus. I will only allege Nicephorus for all,
whose words are these: Nectarius statuit suadentibus illis, vt cuique
permitteretur, pro conscientia and fiducia sua communicare, and de immaculatis
mysterijs participare. Nectarius determined by their advise, (he means
Eudaemon of Alexandria and his accomplices, as writes Socrates,) that every one
might communicate and be partaker of the holy mysteries, as his own conscience
and faith directed him. Ergo neither public nor yet private confession
Sozomenus and Cassiodorus after him do say; The fourth probation.
that sins did more abound, by reason that confession was taken away. For the
confession of al sins, must needs bridle sin more then the confession of a
few sins; specially of such sins as were known before. These are Sozomenus his
own words: Siquidem antea vt ego existimo, minora erant peccata, tum ob
verecundiam eorum qui sua ipsorum delicta ipsi enuntiabant, Sozo. lib. 7. c.
16. Can. lib. 9. ca. 35.
tum ob seueritate^ eoru^ qui iudices eius rei constituti erant. For before, as
I deem, less sin was done, as well for their bashfulnesse that confessed their
sins, as for their severity that were the judges thereof. Lo, the bashfulnes of
confession was taken away by the determination of Nectarius, Ergo auricular
confession, that of necessity discloseth al sin, could by no means remain.
For small bashfulnesse, or rather none at all, proceeds of confessing sins
already known: but confession of secret sins though to one only priest,
brings great bashfulnes with it; yea, No place left to auricular confession.
such intolerable bashfulnesse and fear also, as many have concealed many
sins for many years together. This is so manifest to every popish
confessary; as if any deny it, his own conscience will confound him. To this
it is consectary: that many have done the same, all the days of their life. And
yet is it certain by Bellarmines own grant, that secret sins were never
confessed publicly.

I say secondly, that in the ancient church before the heresy of Nouatus, as
I have proved out of Tertullian, Origin, Secundo principaliter.
and Cyprian; the penitentes both made election of their confessary, and of the
sins which they did confess. The Canons only urged them to this, to confess
public faults publicly. This was the practice of the primitive church, for
the space of 250. years after Christ's ascension.

I say thirdly, that after the heresy of Nouatus, which began Decius, Tertio
principaliter.
about the year of our Lord two hundredth and threescore: the godly bishops for
discipline sake, made an addition to the ecclesiastical Canon, Ann. Dom. 260
as Socrates terms it. That is to say, that in every church there should be
one special priest designed, to whom the penitents should secretly confess
their public and grievous sins; and after only to confess openly such
faults, as that wise priest should think convenient, and fit for edificatio^.
For as Sozomenus says, it seemed an odious thing to confess sins publicly:
Sozom. and Orig. vbi supra.
and as Origin writes, the Ethincks did often deride such confessio^s:
therefore the church appointed, yt not al public sins should be confessed
publicly, but such only as seemed good to the penitentiary priest. I say
fourthly, y^ Nectarius did abrogate this additament (whatsoever it was) wholly,
eue^ by Bellarmines own Quarto principaliter.
For as Socrates records, this appendix or addition contained all those sins,
which the penitents did or were bound to confess: and consequently, Socr^.
lib. 5. c. 19.
it will follow of necessity, yt Nectarius did abolish al confessions made to
man, and the confessions of al sins totally. I prove it, A deadly blow to the
Jesuit.
because both Socrates and our Jesuit do say; that whatsoever the penitents
did confess, the same was done to the penitentiarie priest.

Socrates speaks, Qu^nto principal^ter.
which contained all the sins great and small yt the penitents did confess, was
abrogated by Nectarius S. Chrysostomes predecessor, about the year of our
Lord three hundredth ninety four, Anno Dom. 394
throughout the East Church. Nevertheless, the former constitution made in the
time of Decius against the Nouatians, was still of force in the Roman church.
Which by degrees received superstitious augmentations, Nicephorus. Socrates,
Sozomenus.
until it got ye Romish new no perfection, which this day is in use.

The 1. objection.
A man of great secrecy was chosen to be the penitentiarie priest; which
proves, that other faults then public were confessed to him. For such sins
as were publicly to be revealed, needed no secrecy at all.

The answer.
I answer, that the penitentes were not debarred from confessing any sin;
although the canons of the church did not urge them to confess any faults,
save the public only. And because the zealous people in the primitive times
used to confess many other sins, for to have grave and godly advise therein;
the superintendentes and overseers of the church (then and now commonly called
Bishops,) appointed every where such a confessary over the penitentes, as was
very discreet, and a keeper of secrecy. Which they did for this end and
purpose, least such secret faults as the penitentes voluntarily confessed for
counsel sake, should be disclosed and known abroad.

The reply.
Socrates, Sozomenus, Nicephorus, vbi supra.
Socrates, Sozomenus, and Nicephorus, do all three avouch, that the penitentes
confessed all their sins done after baptism. Which was a flat platform and
pattern of auricular confession, this day used in the church of Rome. Yea,
Socrates adds, that they confessed their sins particularly.

The answer.
I say first, that they all say indeed, that ye penitentes confessed after
baptism; the general sign (all) cannot be found annexed thereunto. I say
secondly, that true it is, that they confessed Note this against the papists*
that confess their sins distinctly, although they conceal many a one: but
they only confess totally, that confess all, both great and small without
exceptition. And therefore said Socrates significantly, that they confessed
sins done after baptism, (...) in part, but he said not, (...) wholly, or in
all.

The second objection.
Socrates, Sozomenus, Vbi supra.
and Nicephorus do al infer this upon the fact of Nectarius: to wit, that we
cannot henceforth reprove one an others sins; which illation can connotate no
other thing, but public confession only. Therefore secret confession,
remained still in force.

The answer.
I say first, that as the fact argues al public confession to Nicephorus,
that still they did confess their sins that would, Nicephorus vbi supra.
although neither Socrates calls the confession Socra. lib. 5. ca. ^^
These are his words: Ab illo tempore quo Nouatiani se ab ecclesia seiunxerant,
recusauerantque cum his qui tempore persecutionis regnante Decio concitatae
lapsi erant, communicare, ecclesiarum episcopi canoni adiunxerunt, vt in
singulis ecclesiis presbyter quida^ poenitentiae praesset: quo, qui post
baptismu^ lapsi fuissent coram presbytero ad eam rem designato peccata sua
confitere^tur. From that time in which the Nouatians severed themselves from
the church, Ann. Dom. 254
and refused to communicate with them that were fallen, during the persecution
of the Emperor Decius, the bishops of the churches added to the cano^, that in
every church a priest shoud be over the penitents, to the end, that whosoever
were fallen after baptism, might confess their sins before the priest designed
for that purpose. Thus writes Socrates, by whose words it is clear, that to
confess our sins committed after baptism, was the appendice to the canons:
and yet cannot the Jesuit Bellarmine deny, that Nectarius abolished that
appendice or addition; and consequently, will he, nill he, he must likewise
grant, that Nectarius disanulled the law for confessing sins after baptism.
These are the express words of our Jesuit. Bellarm. de poenitent. lib. 3. ca.
14. col. 1667.
Non sustulit Nectarius, nisi appendicem ad veteres canones, quae accesserat
initio haeresis Nouatianae. Nectarius took away nothing, save only that
appendice which was added to the old canons, which was made in the beginning
of the Nouatian heresy. And thus (me think) the stornie of Nectarius though
somewhat intricate, is discussed sufficiently.

CHAP. XIII. Of the authority of summoning councels.
OF the force and validity of late popish councils, I have spoken sufficiently
in my book of Motives, Now, where the papists challenge to their Pope, a great
prerogative above the Emperor; because (as they say) he ever commanded
general councels to be holden every where; this doctrine in this place, I
purpose briefly to disprove.

The first conclusion.
Vide Epiphan. contr. Andianos, libr. 3. tom 1. pa. ^67. haer. 70.
The first general council of Nice, (in which Arrius denying the
consubstantialitie of the son of God, was condemned,) was not celebrated by the
Popes appointment, (who in those days was reputed but as other bishops;) but
by the flat and express commandment of the Emperor Constantinus surnamed the
Great, in the year 327. This I do not barely say, but I will prove the same
after my wonted manner, by the express testimonies of approved
Historiographers. Ann. Dom. 327


Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 6
All the fathers assembled in the sacred council of Nice, wrote to the church of
Alexandria, and to the inhabitants of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, in this
express manner: Quoniam dei gratia and mandato sanctissimi Imperatoris
Constantini, qui nos ex varijs ciuitatibus and prouincijs in vnum congregauit,
magnum and sanctum concilium Nicaenum coactum est necessariu^ videtur, etc.
Because through the grace of God, and by the commandment of the most holy
Emperor Constantine, who has gathered us together out of diverse cities, and
provinces, the great and holy council of Nice is assembled: it seems
necessary, that the whole council send letters to you; by which ye may
understand, as well those things that were called into question, as the things
that are decided and decreed in the same. Thus writes Socrates. Out of these
words I note first; that this testimony Nicephorus, Niceph. li. 8. c. 1^.
who were the most virtuous and learned priests in the christian world. I note
secondly, The Emperor commands councels to be holden.
) for if the emperor did not call councils together by his own authority, but by
the popes, as the papists prate; then could not this holy council truly say,
as all the fathers thereof constantly do say, to wit, that they came thither by
the Emperors commandment. I note fourthly, that none in the world

Theodoret* has these words: Verum vbi spes eum fefellerat, Theodoret. lib. ^*
cap. 7.
celebre illud Nicaenum concilium cogit, and publicos asinos, mulas, and mulos,
quinetiam equos episcopis and comitibus suis ad iter faciendum vtendos dat.

Sozom. has these words: Veru^ vbi contra quam expectabat, Sozom. li. 1. c. 1^
res succederet, and contentio reconciliationem concordiae, etc. But after the
matter succeeded otherwise then he expected, and reconciliation was hindered
with contention; and Hosius also sent to make peace, returned leaving ye thing
undone; ye emperor appoints a council at Nice a city in Bythinia, and writes
to the presidents of al churches to be present at a day appointed.

Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 14.
Niceph. has these words: Infectis reb. ad imperatore^ rediit, qui ad pacem
componendam missus fuerat, Hosius. Itaque imperator, etc. Hosius that was sent
to make peace, returned to the Emperor, not having accomplished the matter.
Therefore the Emperor perceiving the mischife to grow to a head, does proclaim
the famous council of Nice in Bythinia, and by his letters calls al bishops
thither at the day appointed. Thus we see evidently by the uniform testimony
of four grave Historiographers, whereof three lived more then a 1100. years
ago: that the bishop of Rome had no more to do in general councels, then other
bishops had. First, they tell us, that the Emperor sent Hosius the bishop of
Corduba, The Bishop of Rome reputed as a common man.
to bring the contentious to unity. Secondly, when that would not take place,
that he proclaimed a council to be holden at Nice in Bythinia. Thirdly, that
he commanded al bishops to come thither at a certain day appointed. But of the
B. of Rome, never a word at al.

The second Conclusion.
The second general council of Constantinople, holden against Macedonius and
his accomplices, for denying the divinity of the holy ghost, was called by the
commandment of the emperor Theodosius the first, Ann. Dom. 389
about the year of our Lord 389.

Socrates has these words, Imperator nulla mora interposita; concilium
episcoporum ipsius fidem amplectentium conuocat; Socrat. li. 5. cap. 8
quo tum fides concilii Nicaeni corroboraretur, etc (The emperor Theodosius)
with all expedition calls a council of bishops embracing the right faith, that
as well the faith of the Nicene council might be confirmed, as that a bishop
might be appointed at Constantinople, and because he was in hope to make the
Macedonians, to agree with the bishops that held the right faith, he sent
forth bishops that were of the Macedonian sect.

Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Sozomenus has these words; Breui deinde concilium episcoporum sibi
consententium co^uocauit partim vt Nicaeni concilii decreta confirmarentur,
patrim vt ordinaretur aliquis qui Constantinopolitanae sedis episcopatum
administraret. Then shortly after (Theodosius) called a council of Bishops
that agreed with him, partly that the decrees of the Nicene council might be
confirmed, and partly that one might be appointed B. at Constantinople.

Sigebertus writes in this manner; Sigeb. in chron. anno 386.
Secunda synodus vniuersalis 150. patrum congregatur Constantinopoli, iubente
Theosio and annuente Damaso papa, quae Macedonium negantem spiritum sanctum
Deum esse condemnans, consubstantialem patri and filio spiritum sanctum esse
docuit. The second general synod of an hundred and fifty bishops is assembled
at Constannople, by the commandment of Theodosius, Damasus agreeing thereunto;
in which council Macedonius, who denied that the holy ghost was God, was
condemned, and the consubstantialitie of the holy ghost with the father and the
son was confirmed in the same.

Nicephorus, Theodoretus and Prosper, Vide Niceph. lib. 12. ca. 10. Tripart.
hist. lib. 9. c. 12.
teach the same doctrine, whose words for brevity sake I here omit.

The third conclusion.
The third general council, being the first Ephesine; of two hundred bishops,
was proclaimed by the commandment of the Emperor Theodosius the younger,
against Nestorius denying the virgin Mary to be (...), Ann. Dom. 433
and affirming Christ to have two persons, proving that two natures did subsist
in one only person of Christ Jesus, in the year of our Lord 433.

Euagrius has these words; Euagrius li. 1. c. 3.
Haec nefaria Nestorij dogmata cum Cyrillus episcopus Alexandria vir, etc. When
Cyrillus the bishop of Alexander, a man of great renowned, had distinctly
confuted the wicked opinions of Nestorius, and Nestorius for all that gave no
place to his writings, neither obeyed Cyrillus nor the council of Caelestinus
the bishop of old Rome, but licentiously powered out his poison against the
church: Lo, the grave bishop Cyrillus made suit to the emperor, not to the
pope, to have a Council called in his name.
then Cyrillus made suit to Theodosius the younger, who at that time was
Emperor in the East, that by his will and authortie a council might be called
at Ephesus. The Emperor upon this sent his letters to Cyrillus, and to the
other presidents of the churches, appointing the assembly to be upon
Whitsunday, at what time the holy Ghost came down unto us.

Nicephorus has these words; Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 34.
Theodosius imperialibus literis suis in metropoli Ephesi locoru^ omnium
episcopos conuenire iussit, sacram* etc. Theodosius commanded by his imperial
letters that all bishops should meet in the metropolitaine church of
Ephesus, at the day of Pentecost (which we call Whitsunday;) for on that day,
the holy ghost came upon the Apostles. He added this to his letters, that no
man should excuse himself either before God or the world; but that every
one should be there present at the day appointed.

Cassiodor. in tripart. hist. lib. 12. cap. 5.
Cassiodorus has these words; Non multo post tempore, iussio principis
episcopos vndique Ephesum conuenire praecepit. No long time after the
commandment of the Emperor (Theodosius) charged the bishops to come from every
place to Ephesus.

Sigebert. in anno 4^3.
Sigebertus has these words, Tertia synodus vniuersalis Ephesina prima,
ducentorum episcoporum, iussu Theodosii iunioris Augusti aedita est, quae.
Nestorium, etc. The third general council the first Ephesine of 200. bishops,
was celebrated by the commandment of the emperor Theodosius the younger, which
council justly condemned Nestorius affirming Christ to have two persons,
showing that two natures in Christ did subsist in one person.

The fourth conclusion.
Euagr. lib. 1. ca. 9.
The fourth general council of Chalcedon against Eutiches, who affirmed Christ
to have but one only nature after the hypostaticall union, although he
granted him to have had two before the conjunction thereof; was called by the
commandment of the emperor Martian, in the year of our Lord, 454.

Socrates has these words, Passimque in historia imperatorum mentionem
propterea fecimus, Ann. Dom. 454
quod ex illo tempore quo Christiani esse coeperunt, ecclesiae negotia ex
illorum nutu pendere visa sunt, atque adeo maxima concilia de eorundem
sententia and conuocata fuerunt and adhuc co^uocantur. I have therefore made
mention of the emperors in every place of my hystory, because since that time
in which they became Christians, the affairs of the church depended upon
their good will and pleasures: in regard whereof, most famous councels were then
called by their appointment, and are so caled eue^ to this day. Out of these
words I note first, that Socrates was a famous greek Historiographer. I note
secondly, that he lived above 400. years after Christ's sacred incarnation. I
note thirdly, that the end for which he made mention of the Emperors, was to
declare that the chiefest matters of the church did depend on their good
pleasures. I note fourthly, that councels were evermore appointed by authority
of the Emperors, even to the days of Socrates, which was 400. years after
Christ. These observations well marked, this Corollarie follows of
necessity, that the usual practice of the ancient Christian Apostolic and
Catholic church, does flatly overthrow all Popery, and late Romish
abomination.

Nicephorus has these words: Earum rerum gratia, Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 2.
imperatorum literis, locorum omnium episcopis conuocatis, synodus Chalcedone
est coacta. In regard of these matters, a council was called at Chalcedon, and
all bishops sent for thither, by force of the Emperors letters.

Sigebertus has these words; Sigebert. in anno 452.
Instantia Leonis papae iubent imperatore Martiano, congregata and habita est
quarta vniuersalis synodus sexcentorum and triginta episcoporum apud
Chalcedonem. The fourth general council of six hundredth and thirty bishops,
The pope requested, but the emperor commanded the thing to be done.
was holden in Chalcedon by the commandment of the Emperor Martian, at the
request of Pope Leo. Lo, the Pope could but request; to command was in the
Emperors power. Euagrius in the second book and second chapter of his
history, teaches the self same verity.

The 5. conclusion.
The Emperor evermore had the chiefest place in councels, which thing is an
evident confirmation of the former conclusions.

Sozomenus has these words; Vbi autem venit praestituta dies, Sozom. lib. 1.
^^. 18.
in qua, etc. And when the day appointed came, that they should decide the
controversies, the bishops come together into the palace, as the emperor had
decreed, Lo, the emper^^ had the highest place, and the bishops sat no^ down
till ha^ commanded them.
that he might consult with them of the matters. And when he came to the place
where the priests were, he passed by to the highest room of ye assembly, and
sat down in a chair prepared for him, and commanded all that were present in
the council to sit down.

Out of these words I note first, that all the bishops came at the emperors
appointment, to attend his majesty at the time and the Emperor commanded them
so to do.

The famous popish archbishop and Cardinal Panormitanus, has these golden
words, to the great comfort of all true Christians, Panormit. de elect. cap.
significasti, prope fin.
and the confusion of al papists: Ipse autem Imperator repraesentat totum
populu^ christianum, cu^ in eum translata sit iurisdictio and potestas vniuersi
orbis: loco ipsoru^ hoc ergo populorum* etc. But the emperor represents al
christian people, because the jurisdiction and power of all the world is
imposed upon him. Therefore in steed of the people, the Emperor calls
councels; and for this purpose is it, that the calling of councels was ever
done by the emperor, as is already said; but afterward it was reserved to the
Pope.

Panormitaine must needs be forcible against the papists, because he was their
own popish Abbot, their Canonist, their

The verity and infallibility of this conclusion is so manifest and
irrefragable, that the Jesuit Bellarmine cannot deny the same. And therefore
he is enforced to excuse the Popes absence from councels, because he could not
sit above the Emperor: his words are alleged in my book of Motives. By this
testimony, the Popes humility does sufficiently appear; and for affinity
sake, I will adioyne the testimony of an other Monk, for his tyranny.

Sigebertus a Monk, and therefore must be of good credit with monkish Jesuits
and other papists, after he has discoursed largely of the popes tyranny, and
namely of the monk Odo alias Otto, who aspiring to the Popedom named himself
Vrbanus the second, Sigebert. in anno 1088.
adds these words: Vt pace omnium bonorum dixerim, haec sola nouitas, non
dicam haeresis, nondum in mundo emerscrat, vt sacerdotes illius qui regnare
facit hypocritam propter peccata populi, doceant populum quod malis regibus
nullam debeant subiectionem, and licet ei sacramentum fidelitatis fecerint,
nullam tamen debeant fidelitatem, nec periuri dicantur qui contra regem
senserint: imo qui regi paruerit, pro excommunicato habeatur, qui contra regem
fecerit noxa iniustitiae and periurij absoluatur. To speak by the favor of al
good men, this sole novelty, I will not say heresy, was not yet known in ye
world; that his priests, who causes an hypocrite to reign for the sins of
the people, should teach the people, that they owe no subjection to wicked
kings, and that although they have taken the oath of fidelity, yet do they
owe them no allegiance, neither are they perjured that think any thing against
the king: Yea, he that obeys the king is reputed an excommunicate person,
and he that takes part against the king, is absolved from injustice and
perjury. Thus we see popery to be heresy, and the Popes to be heretics and
wicked men, as their own Monk Sigebertus teaches us.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Bishops of Rome, after Pho^as had made it the head of all
churches.
THe bishops of Rome having obtained the supremacy, Ann. Dom. 607
by the imperial grant of Phocas that parricide and cruel tyrant; heaped
mischief upon mischief, and never made an end thereof. And that which I do
here report of them, shall be truly and sincerely collected out of their own
dear friends, Sigebertus Gemblacensis, Marianus Scotus, Bartholomaeus
Carranza, and Martinus Polonus. Whereof the first 3. were popish monks, and
the fourth a famous popish archbishop; so that whatsoever they say of the
Popes, must needs be of credit with the papists. For doubtless they did not
write any thing of any Pope, which the very truth did not enforce them unto:
as who were most unwilling, to discover the trupitude of their disholy fathers.
And Platina their renowned Abbreuiator Apostolicus may be the fifth witness,
and Polydorus the sixth, if need shall so require. This general preface I make
once for all, lest I be tedious to the reader, in the often repetition of my
witnesses.

Pope Bonifacius the third with much ado obtained of Phocas (after he had
cruelly murdered the emperor Mauritius with his wife and children) that Rome
should be ye head of al churches: because before that time, the church of
Constantinople had the chief prerogative of al patriarchall seats. Ann. Dom.
607
So that popish primacie (as we see) ensued upon most bloody tyranny: Anno. 607.

Constanrinus.
Pope Constantinus of a lay man was made a priest, and by tyrannical ambition
invaded the Popedom, to the great scandal of Christ's church. But shortly after
through the zeal of the faithful, Ann. Dom. 765
he was deprived of his pontifical magnificence, and both his eyes plucked
out, Anno. 765.

Pope John the eight of yt name, be lying her sex; and clad in man's attire,
Pope John.
with great admiration of her sharp wit and singular learning, was chosen to
be the pope of Rome. Shortly after by the familiar help of her beloved
companion, she brought forth ye homely fruits of her popedom, An 855. This
history of Pope John is handled at large in the chapter of succession, Ann.
Dom. 855
or rather of popish primacie: and if it be not true, then doubtless small
credit can be given to any popish traditions: for approved popish writers,
affirm it to be as I have said.

Adrianus.
Pope Adrian the third, made a law, that the Emperor should not deal with ye
election of ye pope. Where we may behold the ambitious minds, and the
tyrannical proceedinges of the late bishops of Rome. This was done Anno 886.
About this time, Italy revolted from the emperor. Ann. Dom. 886


Formosus.
Pope Formosus was a perjured person. For pope John degraded him bringing him to
laicall state again, after he had bin the B. of Portua. He further took him
sworn, yt he neither should be bishop, nor ever return to ye city of Rome. Yet
pope Martin absolved him from his oath; and after a few years he did not only
come to the city, Ann. Dom. 892
but also was Pope, Anno. 892.

Stephanus.
Pope Stephanus the sixth, persecuteth pope Formosus after his death. He calls
a council, and disanulleth all the degrees of pope Formosus his predecessor. He
causes his body to be brought forth into his consistory; ye papal induments
to be taken away; a laicall habit to be put on the dead corpse; two fingers of
his right hand to be cut off; and that done, his body to be put into the grave.
And what was the cause I pray you, of this great stomach against Formosus?
Verily because this Stephanus sought to have bin pope before him; and where his
ambitious intent was prevented by Formosus, Ann. Dom. 898
he avenged him as a right Roman, upon his dead corpse: in the year 898.

Pope John the ninth called a council of 74. bishops, Pope John.
and disanulled the decrees of that Synod which pope Stephanus held against
Formosus. Behold ye sweet christian unity, Ann. Dom. 900
amongst the holy popes of Rome. This was done, in the year 900.

Pope Sergius the 3. caused Formosus, Sergius.
(who now had bin dead almost ten years,) to be taken out of his tomb, and to
be set in a chair with pontifical attire upon his back: that done, he
commanded his head to be cut off, and to be cast into Tyber. And what offense
trow ye, had this Formosus done? doubtless, because Formosus had kept him from
the Popedom. Ann. Dom. 907
This was done in the year of our Lord, 907.

John the 10. the son of Sergius the third, Ioannes.
sometime bishop of Rauennas, came to the popedom by violent means, and for
that respect, the people shortly after deposed him, Ann. 917. Ann. Dom. 917


Pope John the 12. was made pope by violent means for his father Albericus
being a man of great power and might, Ioannes.
enforced the nobles to take an oath; that after the death of pope Agapitus,
they would promote his son Octauianus to the popedom. Which oath was
accomplished, and he was named John. He was a great hunter, and a man of
licentious life. He kept women openly, to the notorious scandal of the church.
Insomuch, that some of the cardinals wrote to Otto king of the Saxons, to come
and besiege Rome. Which the pope perceiving, commanded that Cardinals nose to
be cut off that gave the counsel, and his hand that wrote the letters. This
pope being often admonished by the Emperor and clergy, and never giving any
sign of amendment; was deposed in the presence of the Emperor, and pope Leo
chosen in his stead; in the year of our Lord, 968. The Romans chose another
pope in the time of this Leo, Ann. Dom. 968
who named himself Benedictus the fifth; for which cause when the Emperor Otto
besieged Rome, Benedictus was delivered to him, whom he banished and restored
Leo to the popedom. This Benedictus died in Saxony the place of his exile, and
was buried in Hamburge. But Pope John delighted still with adultery, died
without repentance suddenly. Ioann^^.


Pope John the 13. was apprehended by Peter the Prefect of the city, and
imprisoned in Pont-Angelo, and after that driven into exile into Campania: Ann.
Dom. 970
10. months and eighteen days being expired, he returned to Rome by the
assistance of the emperor, and avenged himself of his persecuters: whereof he
slew some, hanged other some, and banished the rest into the confines of
Saxony, in the year of our Lord, 970.

Benedictus.
Pope Benedictus the sixth, after he had been pope one year and 6. months was
strangled with wormwood in Pont-angelo, in the year of our Lord, 978.
978.

Pope Bonifacius the 7. was made pope by the Romans, after they had thratled
Benedictus the sixth. Bonifacius.
Who afterward not able to tarry in the city, robbed S. Peter's church of all the treasure in it, and fled to Constantinople. At length he returned to Rome
with a great sum of money, and when he could not prevail, he plucked out a
Cardinal-deacons eyes, in the year of our Lord, Anno Dom. 980.
980. And here note by the way, that some Cardinals are deacons, some priests,
some bishops: nevertheless, he that is but a deacon, is of greater authority,
then any bishop or archbishop whosoever in the popish sect.

Pope Syluester the second was first a monk, a Frenchman borne, Syluester.
Gilbertus by name. He promised homage to the devil, so long as he did
accomplish his desires. Who being very ambitious, did so often express his
desire to the devil, as he made homage unto him. He was first made archbishop
of Rhemes, then at Rauennas, at the last pope of Rome. For the devil knowing
his ambitious mind, brought him to honor by degrees. Being made pope, he
must needs know of the devil, how long he should live in his pontifical
glory. The devil answered him, The pope in pontificalib. forgets the names
of his churches.
so long as he did not say mass in Jerusalem. The pope receiving that
answer, was very joyful within himself: hoping to be so far from dying, as
he was far in mind from going to say mass in Jerusalem beyond the sea. It
chanced that in Lent the pope said mass, in the church Sanctae crucis, which
they call, in Jerusalem, my self know the place. It seems that the pope
infatuated with pride and honor, had quite forgot the name. While he was at
mass (O holy sacrifice!) he heard a great noise of devils, and so both
remembered the place, and his death to be at hand. Wherefore he wept (although
before most wicked,) disclosing his offense to all the company, and nothing
doubting of Gods mercy. Withal, he commanded to cut away from his body, all
the members with which he had done sacrifice to the devil. He was buried in
Lateran church, Anno. Dom 1007.
in the year of our Lord, 1007.

Pope Benedictus the 8. was seen after his death as it were corporally riding
upon a black horse. The bishop that saw him spoke thus unto him. Art not thou
pope Benedict, whom we know to be lately dead? I am says he, that
unfortunate Benedict. But how is it with thee father, says the bishop? I am
now in great torment says the pope, and therefore would I have some money to
be given to the poor, because all that I gave the poor aforetime, was gotten
by robbery and extortion. Ann. Dom. 1032.
This was done, in the year of our Lord, 1032.

Pope Benedictus the 9. was deprived of his popedom, Benedictus.
and one Syluester placed in his room. This Syluester was deposed, and
Benedictus recovered the popedom again. Yet this Benedict was cast out again,
and another put in his place. Which other was so ignorant, that he could not
say mass, but as one did instruct him. For which cause he was put out, Ann.
Dom. 1042.
and another placed in his room, in the year of our Lord, 1042.

Pope Clemens the second, Clemens.
came to his popedom by violent means, in the year of our Lord, 1058. 1058.


Pope Damasus the second invaded the popedom, Damasus.
and had a sudden death, in the year of our Lord 1060. 1060.


About the year of our Lord 1072. one Mathildis a most mighty and rich
countess, gave all her lands, Ann. Dom. 1072.
goods and possessions to S. Peter, which is by interpretation, to the pope;
and it is this day called S. Peter's patrimony. Such oblations as these, made
the pope so mighty as he is.

Pope Anastasius the 4. made a new palace in Sancta Maria rotunda, Anastasius.
and gave to the Lateran church a chalice of curious works, abbut the weight of
twenty marks, Ann. Dom. 1162.
in the year 1162. Thus popes wickedness, mischief, and tyranny, I find
every where, but that any one pope since Bonifacius claimed the primacie,
(which is more then 900. years since,) made any one sermon in all his life, I
cannot read. I might here speak of the vanity of Romish cardinals, as that
one cardinal bestows yearly 4000. crowns for the keeping and vpbolding of
his most curious garden at Tyuola. It is fourteen English miles from Rome, my
self have seen the same. Free access is granted to all sorts of people,
such is his glory to have it seen.

Bonifacius 8.
Pope Bonifacius the 8. made a constitution, in which he called himself Lord
spiritual and temporal of the whole world. Whereupon he required Philip the
French king, to acknowledge that he held his kingdom of him: which when the
king refused to do, he gave his kingdom to another. This was done Anno.
1302. Anno. Dom. 1302.
This pope entered as a fox, reigned as a Wolf, and died as a dog: so do they
write of him.

CHAP. XV. Of certain popish sects, which they term the orders of religious
men.
Whatsoever I shall set down of these sects or religious orders, as the papists
must needs have them termed; shall be truly and sincerely collected out of
these popish historiographers: to wit, Martinus Polonus, Philippus
Bergomensis, Polyd. Virgilius, Palmerius, Platina, and Ar. Pontacus
Burdegalensis. Which I here for once admonish, least the often repetition
thereof should be tedious.

Benedictus an Italian, the father of all monks, erected an Abbay in the mount
Cassinum, The first Sect.
and instituted the sect of the Benedictines; Ann. Dom. 527.
about the year 527. These monks in a short time began to be dissolute, and
were divided into many new sects; whereof same were called Cluniacenses, some
Camalduenses, some Vallisumbrenses, some Montoliuotenses, some Grandimonte^ses,
some Cistertienses, some Syluestrenses. Al which being most variable in life,
The pope must needs be S. Peter's successor.
manners, and observations, will for all that be right Benedictines. Eue^ forsooth
as our late popes must needs be S. Peter's successors, though they be as like as
York and foul Sutto^.

This sect of the Benedictines far altered from the first institution, Ann.
Dom. 1335.
was reformed in ye year 1335. For as Polydore gravely reports, monks do not
long observe their monastical institution.

The sect of the Carthusians, was ordained by one Bruno, in ye year 1084. The
second Sect.
How this sect had the first original, it is worthy of due attention. 1084.
This is the story. While Bruno was the reader of philosophy at Paris in
France, it chanced that a friend of his being a man of good external life,
died; who lying dead upon the coffin in the church, sounds out these words in
the ears of the said Bruno, I am damned by the just judgment of God. By which
miracle Bruno was so terrified, yt he knew no way how to be saved, but by
inuenting the sect of the Carthusians. Behold here the subtletie of the devil,
who wants no means how to set up superstition and idolatry. For if the story
be true, as I think it was in deed, then doubtless the voice came from the
devil, as which brought forth ye spirit of pride and not of humility. I prove
it, because this Bruno could not be content to be a monk amongst the
Benedictines, but he must be Lord Abbot of a new sect. For since the order of
the Benedictines, was the ready way to heaven, as popery taught him: either he
condemned his own religion, and consequently his own institution, or my
consecution must be admitted. Let what papist as list reply* my reason can not
be co^uinced. And here I note by the way, The ab^omination of sects in popery.
the formal deformity of all the sects or orders in popery; to wit, that the
papists ascribe merit and salvation to the same. Let therefore this story of
our holy father Bruno never be forgotten.

The order called ^raemonstratensis, The third Sect.
began the year 1119. The first author thereof was one Norbertus by name.
Ann. Dom. 1119.
Who doubtless either con^emned the former orders, at the least of imperfection;
or else was puffed up with the spirit of pride, as were his predecessors his
fraterculi before him.

The sect of the Carmelites began in y^ year 1170. and was instituted by one
Almericus ye bishop of Antioch. This sect, The fourth Sect.
1170.
though it had the original in the time mentioned; yet was it not in full
perfection, for the space of 40. years to come.

The sect of Dominicans (whereof Tho. Aquinas, surnamed Angelicus was one,)
began in the year 1198. The fifth Sect.
The author of this sect was one Dominicus Calaguritanus, a Spaniard borne.
1198.
The sect it self was termed, Ordo fratrum praedicatorum.

The sect of the Franciscans began in ye year 1206. The sixth Sect.
Of which sect was Io. Scotus, 1206.
surnamed D. Subtilis The author of this sect was one Franciscuss Asisiates, an
Italian born. The sect it self was termed, Ordo fratrum minorum. Thus we see yt
these Romish sects were multiplied, as if it were swarms of Bees.

The sect of the Iesuates, The seventh sect.
began in the year of our Lord 1371. the author of this sect was one Ioannes
Columbinus Senensis; the sect it self was termed, ordo Iesuatorum. 1371.


The sect of the Jesuits, The eight Sect.
began in the year of our Lord 1540. The author thereof was one Ignatius
Loyola, 1540.
a soldier and a Spaniard borne. The sect of our Romish Jesuits, is not yet
three-B^^ore years old.
The moonkes of this sect, as they were hatched after al others, so do they in
pontifical pride exceed all the rest. This sect is termed, ordo societatis
Jesus; the very name expressing their proud and hauty minds. For no name of so
many sects before them, nor any other appellation could content them; unless
they be termed fellows, and companions with Jesus Christ. They are indeed so
proud and stately, that where every other Romish sect has some cardinal to be
their protector; they only (to die for it) will have none at al. And why?
because forsooth they will depend upon none, neither submit themselves to any,
save to the pope alone: to whom I ween they will be subject, because they can
no other do. They are not only proud, but very factious people. They are hated
generally of all sorts of men: they cherish themselves, and seek to ouerrule
all others. They employ some of their sect to no other end, but only to look
into matters of state: that so by parasiticall informations made to the pope,
they may lead all the world in a string.

The Perioch.
First therefore, since popish primacie began in the year 607. de condigno, was
disputable about the year 1081. Eighthly, since the communion under both kinds

A Table containing the texts of holy scripture which are handled in this
Volume: Necessary at the least for the simple Reader; as by which he may
readily find such places soundly answered, as the Papists use to wrest against
the truth.
The Texts of the Old Testament.
GEnesis chapter 3. verse 22. And now le^t he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat and live for ever. Page 1 Ge. 4.7. And thou shall
have power over thy sin 361 Ge. 14.18 Melchisedech offered bread and wine. 419
Ge. 48.16 And let my name be named upon them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac. 311 2. Sam. 12.14. Howbeit because by this deed thou have
caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is borne to thee,
shall surely die. 292 Job 42.8. And my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will
accept him, lest I should put you to shame. 315 Psalm 99.5. Adore ye his
footstool, for it is holy* 326 Psalm. 110.4. Thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. 419 Psalm. 66.12. We went into fire and water and
thou have brought us into a place of comfort. 298 Psalm. 107.13, 14 He b^ake
their bonds asunder. ib Ierem. 35.6 Ionadab the son of Rech^b our father
commanded us, saying: Ye^ shall d^i^ke no wine, neither you nor your sons for
ever. 59 Dan. 4.24. ^edeeme thy sins with righteousness 392 Dan. 9.24. Seventy
weeks are determined upon thy people. 99 Dan. 8.14. Unto the evening and the
morning, two thousand and three hundred: then shall the sanctuary be^^^ansed.
98 Zach. 9.11. I have loosed thy prisoners, etc. 297 Mal. 1.11. And a pure
oblation shall be offered every where. 468 Mal. 3.3. He shall fine the sons of
Leui. 299
Texts of the New Testament.
Matthew. chap. 5 verse ^6. Thou shall not depart thence until thou have paid
the utmost farthing 300 Mat 12.32 He that sins against the holy ghost shall
neither be forgiven in this world, neither in the world to come. 299 Matt. 16
19. And whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. 272 Matthew. 28.20. And
behold I am with you till the worlds end. 208 Luke 18.25. It is easier for a
camel to go through a needles eye, then etc. 472 Luke 22.36. The sa^nts are
equal to the angels in heaven. 338 Luke 22.31. I have prayed for thee that thy
faith never fail. 212 John 16.13. He will lead you into all truth. 210 Ioh.
21.16. Feed my sheep. 215 Ioh. 21.26. Then came Jesus when the doors were
shut and stood in the mids. 270 Acts 2.24. Whom God has ^a^^ed up, and
loosed the sorrows of hell. 305 1. Cor. 3.12, 13. And the fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is. 301 1. Cor. 15, 29. What shall they do that are
baptized for the dead? 302 2. Cor. 2.10. To whom ye pardon any thing, I also
pardon. 277 2. Cor. 8.13, 14. That also their abundance may be for your lack,
that there may be equality. 295 Ephesians. 4.11. He has put pastors and doctors
in his church until the worlds end. 193 Philip. 2.10. That at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow 301 1. Corinthians. 9 5. Have we not power to lead about a
sister a wife? 220 Coloss. 1.24. And fulfill the rest of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the church. 281 1. Timo 3.2.
A bishop must be the husband of one wife. 217 1. Timot. 3.15. The church is the
ground of truth. 207 1. Timot. 4.3. Forbidding to marry, and to abstai^e from
meats. 226 1. Timot. 5.11, 12. Having damnation, because they have broken
their first faith. 241 Hebr. 13 4. Marriage is honorable in all 225 1. Joan.
5.16. If any man see his brother sin a sin not to death 310 Apoc. 5 13. And
all the creatures which are in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and
in the sea* etc. 304 Apoc. 19.10. See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-seruant.
321
A Table Alphabeticall.
A
Abels death folio 46 Abra^^m^ birth and acts 49 Popish Abstinence 59 Adam
created on friday 46 Adam, though he were mortal, might have lived forever 1
Adams age, death, and burial 46 Ages of the world 2 Agnus Dei and the
superstition thereof 492 Agrippa king of the Jews 137 Allegiance taken away by
the Pope 528 Alexandra the wife of Alexander 137 Angels if they hear our
prayers 337 Antichrist. See Supremacy and Priests marriage Antichristian
tyranny 200 Antiochus his lineage 147 The Apostles, when and where they preached
172 Aristobulus king Herod's son 139 Arrius and his heresy 178 Arrius thought
to deceive Constantine 179 Augustus the name of every emperor 151 Auricular
confession 493
B
The tower of Babel 48 Babylon the place of the captivity 26 Praying upon
beads 487 Bernard condemns merit of works 389 Bernard affirms
concupiscence to be sin ibid. Bernard affirms the virgin M. to be a sinner
287 The Books of the scripture burnt, and restored by Esdras 133 The Book of
Jeremy burnt by Ioachim, and written again 34 The Books of the Prophets 36,
etc. Bread remains in the eucharist 335 Popish Bulls 492 The building of the
Temple 28 All Bishops err by popish grant 204
C
A Camel may pass through a needles eye 472 Candlemas day 491 The Captivity
of the ten tribes 29 The Captivity of the two tribes 2^ The Cardinals hat
488 The popish Carni-uale 492 Ceremonies of the Romish Church intolerable 486
Christ's resurrection 168 Christ's ascension and being in heaven 171 Christ's body
cannot be in two places at once 436 and 169
Christ's body not carnally in the eucharist 466 Christ's body truly eaten in
the eucharist 464 Christ's body not eaten by the wicked 452 Christ's passion, and
the hour thereof 167 Christ's resurrection 168 The Church cannot err, and how
it is to be understood 207 The Church invisible, and how 206 The Church
visible, and how ibid. The visible Church among the Papists, and how ibi.
Church-seruice ought to be in the vulgar tongue 476 Circumcision a sign only
of the covenant 52 Concupiscence sin in the regenerate 389 Confession in
popish manner when it began 509, etc Confession first instituted 515 Confession
in popish manner impossible by grant of learned Papists 5^6 Confession not
known in Tertullians time 505 Confession abolished by Nectarius 509.510 The
Communion of infants 186 Communion under one kind 402 Communion of priests
alone 415 Consecration in the popish mass, and the form thereof 432 The sign
of the Cross 157 Councelles summoned by the Emperor 518
D
Days 2300. expounded 140 Days of popish abstinence 59 Daniel preached in
Babylon 36 Daniel expounds the seventy weeks 101 Darius king of the Medes
93 David and other kings of the Hebrews 24 The general Deluge 27 The
Departure of Israel out of Egypt 56 The Disciples of Christ 172 The Duration of
the world. 2
E
Eli the priest Judge of Israel 12 Elias at what time he lived 23 Elias the
Cabalist his prophecy 2 Elias knew not the 7000. faithful reserved in Samaria
206 The elect cannot err, neither all generally, nor one finally 207 Emperors
of Rome 86 Error may be in the church 206 Errors how they come 342 The
Eucharist given to infants 186 The Eucharist expounded by Chrysostom 461 The
Eucharist is not Christ's body 467 The Eucharist under one kind^ 402 The
Eucharist broken 484 Eutiches and his heresy 181
F
Abraham's Faith did justify him 383 Sole Faith justifies 370 Faith can not be
without good works 399 The first Faith broken, how understood 241 A true
Fast 72 Fasting and choice of meats 60 The Fathers do err very often 342
Festival days 116 Fidelity and allegiance condemned by the pope 528
Free Will how it remains 358
G
Grace that justifies is not inherent 370 The Grace of the Maniche^s 176 Saint
Paul justified by Grace: yet a sinner still 374 Grace infused may stand with
sin 350 The virgin Mary abounded with Grace, yet not fre^ from sin 28^ The
Greeks and their supputation 8^ Gryphus at strife with his uncle 123 The
Government of the Jews 135
H
The Heresy of Arrius 178 Of Nestorius 180 Of Macedonius 181 Of Eutiches
ibidem Of Mahomet 182
The History of Nectarius 509 Of Spiridion 64 Jerusalem besieged 153
Destroyed 25 Holy days and Sabbaths 116
I
Jesuits are humble 144 Dissemblers 145 Images 139 Indulgences 270 Invocation
of Saints 319 Joseph and his acts 57 Iosue 58 Of the Israelites but seventy
persons went into Egypt 53 Israelites 400. years in Egypt 54 Justice inherent
383 Justice of the regenerate imperfect 351 Justification by faith 370
Justification formal in Christ ibid. Justification by works 383 and 384
Iulianus Apostata 175
K
Kings of the Assyrians 74 Of Egypt 128 Of the Jews 135 Of Israel 20 24 Of
Judah 24 Of Macedonia 116 Of the Medes 76 Of the Persians 94 Of the Romans 83
Of Syria 123
Kings are supreme governors in causes ecclesiastical 34 and 426 Kings that
afflicted the Jews 147 Kissing the altar 483 The pax 482 The patine 483 The
Popes feet 487

L
The Law impossible after Adam 350, etc. The Law fulfilled by faith 370 Every
transgression of the Law a mortal sin. 381 What time the Law was given 56 The
Lie in the midwiues 55 The Library of king Ptolomie 132
M
Macedonius ^81 The Maniches 176 Marriage of Priests prohibited only by man's
law 216 Gratian allows priests marriage 231 The Nicene council allows
priests marriage 233 The Mass how it is called a sacrifice 428 The canon of
the popish Mass 480 Mass in one kind contrary to Christ's institution and
antiquity 402 Popish Mass injurious to Christ's passion 417 Popish Mass is
not a propitiatory sacrifice 432.433, etc. Popish Mass a clowted beggars
cloak 476 Private Mass is diabolical 414, etc. Mass ought to be said in the
vulgar tongue 476 Melchisedech what he offered 422, etc. No Merit in man's work
372, etc. The Merit which the fathers ascribe to good works 394, etc. The
Meritorious cause of justification 345 The popish Miter 486 A Monarchy
contained not all power in it 129 The Monarchy of the Assyrians 74 Of the
Greeks 121 Of the Persians 92 Of the Romans 149
Moses and his acts 55
N
The several Names of the ten tribes 43 Nectarius abolished confession 510
Nestorius 180 Nero and his wicked acts 150 Noah his flood 27 Nouatus the cause
and beginning of popish confession 512 Nuns may lawfully marry, even after
vows 235
O
Olympias 116 The Olympiads 81 The Original of confession 509, etc. Of kissing
the Popes feet 487 Of pardons 270 Of pilgrimage 341, etc. Of popish mass 480
Of changing Popes names 486 The Original of praying for the dead 296 Of
praying to Saints 311 Of praying on beads 487 Of popish primacie 187 Of
purgatory 296 Of single life 224 Of transubstantiation 436

P
Pardons 270 Pax used in popery 481 Phocas author of primacie 188 Pilgrimage
341, etc. Popes and their wicked dealing 529 Of kissing the Popes feet 487
Changing the Popes name 486 Praying to Saints 311 For the dead 296 In the
vulgar tongue 476 Upon beads 487
Prima^^^ 187 Private mass 414 Purgatory 296 Ptolomaeus his library 232
R
Relics of Saints not to be adored 349 Remus how slain 82 The Romish church
has erred 203, etc. The church of Rome holds many things whereof it can
yield no reason 186 The church of Rome uses to wrest the scripture ib. Rome,
how it had the name 82 Rome, when builded ibidem
S
The alteration of the Sabbath 108, etc. The Sacrifice of the mass 428 The
Saracens 182 A Scribe what it signifies 133 The Scripture must try every
truth 342 The Sects of Romish religion, and when they began 530 The
Septuagints and their celles 131 Succession of kings. See Kings. Succession in
the Romish church 194, etc. Supremacy of the Romish church 187
T
The Temple, when it was built 2^ Transubstantiation, when it began 436 The
destruction of Troy 81 All Truth to be tried by the scripture 342
V
No sin Venial of it own nature 381 Vestments and their color 490 The
Virgin Mary a sinner 287 Virgins may marry after their vows 235 The Visible
church clogged with superstitions. See Church Vows cannot dissolve lawful
marriage 253, etc. Vows unlawful 265
W
The Wearing of a Cardinals hat 488 The seventy Weeks in Daniel are
declared 101 The scripture must Witness truth 342 A Woman pope of Rome 191 A
Woman clad in man's apparel 74 Good Works cannot justify before God 383, etc
Good Works do not merit 392 Widows damned for breaking their first faith. 241
FINIS.
Among other faults escaped in the Printing, these especially are thus to be
corrected:
Page 2. for Cabatist read Cabalist Page 13. for 432 443 Page 19 for 428 443
Ibidem for 4082 4097 Page 21. The first two lines as part of the sentence
afore-going. Page 37. for Achab Achaz Ibidem for eight seventh Page 74. for
hadle handle Pa. 75. for Tantanes Tautanes Ibid. for Tantens Tantens Page 1^^
deest made, with other literal faults, which the ingenious Reader may easily
epsy and amend.


