A Path way to Penitence.

With sundry devout prayers, fruiteful aduertisementes, and wholesome
counsels of godly Fathers toward the amendment of life, and some
withdrawing of the bridle of overmuch liberty taken.

Luke 1^. (...) by the narrow gate (...) shall seek to enter (...).

LONDON* Printed by John Wolf. 1591.

The end and purpose of this Book.
LAy down thy lofty looks,
Thy rich and rufling rags,
Since God nor godly brooks,
That beggars make such bragges.
This wretched state you know,
Shall soon be laid full low.
Death pulls thee by the sleeue,
And calls thee to account:
Thou wo^st a month to live,
To what it does amount.
But least it be a week.
Prepare: be not to seek.
Examine by this squire,
And see if all be square,
To escape that lasting fire,
Fly pains, nor cost, nor care.
To help thy life to look,
It Is purpose of this Book.
Of Penitence, and the parts thereof.
PEnitence, is the grief and sorrowing of the heart for the sins and offenses
committed, together with an earnest purpose and desire to forsake them, and to
be cleansed of them, that grace may be restored, by such means as GOD has
left whereby to obtain it. To say thou art sorry for thy sins committed
against the divine majesty, and yet have a liking thereof, or some remnant of a
will or purpose in thy heart to renew them again, it is but wicked
dissumulation and deriding of the holy action of Penitence, without which no
sinner can well hope to attain to salvation. Let such take this for admonition,
both dreadful and often verified, they are most likely to be prevented and
overtaken with ye wrath of God, whose merciful favor in giving the^ sufficient
space and means to repent, they have neglected and ouerpassed, and so shall be
disappointed both of time, and the necessary means to their forgiveness.

Therefore it will be most safety, readily to embrace Gods mercy when it is
offered* with some devotion, fear and dread of his justice. Like as it is a
thing most dreadful to despair of forgiveness, or upon presuming of his mercy
and forgiveness, and persevere in a delight and liking of the former sins and
offenses

Penitence is thought to consist of three things: viz. Contrition, which is
the inward grief and hearty sorrowing for our sins committed, to the
impairing of that dignity, and polluting of that purity, whereunto we attained
by our calling in Baptism, but especially to the provocation of GODS wrath
thereby. Which contrition and inward motion of grace, moves and counsaileth
to proceed to the acknowledging of our manifold sins, and accusing of our
selves in the court of conscience, by confession, there to judge our selves
least we be judged of the Lord.

And since the account of our life and offenses committed, is the waightiest
cause that any mortal man can pass through and deal with in his life, it is
to be attempted and taken in hand, rather with all care, fear and diligence
possible, then slightly and superficially, without due regard which we utterly
disalow of, in the meanest of our worldly causes.

Then rests the third part, which is restitution, and amends making, which
some do call satisfaction, which is not to be taken as though we are able by any
works or merits to deserve the forgiveness of our sins, or to yield any
meet recompense to God, for offending and displeasing his divine Majesty, for
in that respect, Christ in his most precious bloudshedding, has wrought a
satisfaction for us, if we withal perform our duties, thereby to be
partakers in that benefit, as by his holy word and the counsel of the holy
Ghost, in his Church, he has willed us. But the satisfaction belonging of our
parts, is the humbling of our hearts, the brideling of our fleshly appetites,
the bringing forth of penitent fruits in expres actions to the world: as in
alms, prayer, fasting, abating of our pride and pomp in our apparel, ye
charitable bestowing of our superfluity to the comfort and relief of the
needy, or otherwise to the honor of God or good example in the Commonwealth.
Also by forgiving others offenses against us, and by restoring unto all me^
whatsoever we withold or took away wrongfully: and that is that little which
we are able to do toward satisfaction, wherewith GOD may be pleased, and his
wrath the better appeased.

Reasons persuading to Penitence, and the speedy performance thereof.
The needfulnes thereof.

The profit thereby.

The sundry examples of men in time past.

Ezechiel 18. If the wicked shall be converted from his wickedness, and
become righteous, all his iniquities which he has done shall be forgotten.

Chris. de Penit. O penitentia quid de te nunc referam etc. O Penitence what
shall I now say of thee, thou set free the soul that is bound, and
preseruest that which is unbound. By thee the thief obtained Paradise, the
prodigal son a chain of worship, the city of Niniuie pardon, and Peter
forgiveness when as he had denied Christ.

Philosophy says, that every thing is undone by the same causes it grew.

The rule of law says, the thing is not forgiven except the thing wrongfully
taken be restored.

God grant that the Penitence which is to be performed for our sins and
offenses, be not required to the last farthing.

If thou ask when Penitence is to be done, forsooth presently, it is but
presumption to defer it.

Eccles. That which thou may do, do it forthwith.

Gal. 6. Whiles we have time, let us do things that be good.

Aristot. Of all our time, non habemus nisi nunc, we have but this time which
we call Now.

Godly cogitations inducing to Penitence and amendment of life.
Think on the goodness of God, on his divine might and virtue.

Think how good he has been to thee, to create thee of so noble a shape as
in his own likeness.

Think what grace he has done to thee in the Sacrament of Baptism cleansing
thy soul from sin.

Think how often and manifoldly thou have offended him, since the vow and
profession in Baptism.

Think how weekly, monthly, or yearly he has tarried for, and expected
thy returning from sin.

Think from how many dangers he has preserved thee in body and soul.

Think how ill thou have bestowed the time that has been given thee to
perform true Penitence, and yet perhaps thou have not done it.

Think how many times he has forgiven thee in christ, and how many times
thou have fallen to sin again.

Think what pain and torment thou had been in now, and evermore, if god
had taken thee out of this world when thou wast in deadly sin.

Think how dearly he bought thee from the danger of the devil, suffering
continual pains in this world about the space of 32. years, going barefoote
in cold and in heat, suffering hunger and thirst: and many reproachful
injuries: at length sheading his precious blood and yielding his body to the
Cross.

Cassiodorus. Think all that time to be lost, in which thou have not thought
on god.

Let us begin to love good cogitations, and forthwith God will vouchsafe to
deliver us from those that be evil.

Questions and aduertisements about sin and repentance or Penitence.
What is sin?
There are two latin words for it, peccatum, and delictum: peccatum is the
sin when we do offend by disobeying the commandments of god, delictum is
the sin when we leave a good work undone, which we ought to do: but these
words are almost grown out of difference.

An other definition of sin.
Fol. 19. Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 2. cap. 22. Sin is a free will to retain
and obtain that which Law and Justice has forbidden. From the will therefore
flows the beginning of sin, and from thence the beginning of evil: namely,
the transgressio^ of the just commandments of God, or the punishment according
to the just judgments thereof.

How many sorts of sins are there?
Three. Sins of infirmity, of ignorance, and of malice: sins of infirmity are
contrary to power, and by attribution to the father. Sins of ignorance, to
wisdom, and contrary to the Son. Sins of malice, to love, and by
attribution are contrary to the holy Ghost.

De ver. and falls. penit. There is no sin so small that grows not over
strong by negligence. De conf. lib. 1. cap. 7. Who shall put me in remembrance
of the sins of my childehoode, for none are clean from sin in thy sight, no
not so much as the child of one day old? And a little after: The weakness
of infantes members is innocent before GOD, but not their souls. Fear
therefore to commit sin, for he that loves sin shall fall into a death, where
he could not fall into it if he did not delight in sin. Which be the sins
crying before God for vengeance and punishment.
Manslaughter, sin against nature, Oppression of the poor, fatherles, and
widows, with holding of laborers wages, and debtes due to poor men.

Which be the sins that bring forth other sins?
Provocation, counsailing, commending, permission, assisting, participation,
consenting.

Which be the circumstances augmenting sin?
Time, knowledge, order, age, state, number, perseuering, dignity, place,
manner, small resisting.

How is sin avoided?
By eschewing the occasion thereof, which oftentimes is found to be through
company, meats, drinks, apparel, beholding, etc.

What remedy to put away sin committed?
Repentance, which is an inward contrition of heart for sin committed, with
amendment of life intended.

What effects be there of repentance?
It makes Angels glad, it justifies wicked persons: it does call again the
goodness lost, and draws mankind to everlasting life.

Which be the parts pertaining to repentance?
Hope of forgiveness, inward sorrowing, or contrition of heart, acknowledging
of the fault, and a purpose to forsake sin.

How should a man begin Repentance?
First in thy chamber or other secret place, be busily thinking with thy
self, how manifoldly and how wickedly thou have sinned: whether in deed,
speech, consent, or will, and then what good deeds thou have left undone,
which to thee pertained to do. Thy sins particularly called to remembrance,
with ye greatness, enormity, and filthiness of them, it behooves to ask God
forgiveness with all humility, and hope to be forgiven, wholly trusting in the
merits of our only Savior and Redeemer: the great benefit and virtue of whose
merits are applied unto the sickness and wounds of our souls by his ghostly
physic of Penitence, and the godly actions and perfourmance thereof, which is
like to prove the more fruitful and effectual, if it be joined with these
things following:

First faith, which is a firm believing that God will undoubtedly perform that
that he promises or threatens.

Secondly, hope of obtaining forgiveness.

Thirdly, confidence and trust had in Christ's merits, of his bloudsheadding and
passion, whereof our penite^ce for sin makes us partakers.

Fourthly, submission and accusing of our selves.

Fifthly, the love of God, for which, all sin is to be abhorred, and all
obedient service of our part to be performed Means to kindle and stir up
that love, are these.

First the knowing of our selves, by considering our basens, vileness and
infirmity.

The consideration of the mightiness and greatness of God, against whom we
dared to offend.

The regard and dread of displeasure, and terror of the last judgment, when al
shall be rewarded according unto their works or deserts.

The reuoluing, reckoning and remembering of our sins, and wicked or filthy
desires.

The calling to mind of Gods undeserved benefits bestowed on us his
unprofitable and unworthy servants.

To help us the better to call our sins to mind, these few circumstances may
serve.
The calling to mind how long time has passed since we performed the works
and parts of penitence, last before this, in such sort as we ought to do.

The estate of our degree and calling, by reason whereof our sin may be the
more grievous, or we the more touched or punished for the transgressions of
others.

The vocations which we have bestowed our time in.

The places where we have lived, accompanied, or been conversant.

The persons whose fellowship or dealinges we have meddled with.

Why is confession of sins so needful as prayer?
Because confession prepares and makes us more meet to pray, and more likely
to be heard. The holy man David had ever recourse to confession and penitence.
Psa. Dixi confitebor, etc. I have said I will confess mine iniquities to the
accusing of my self.

Prou. 28. He that hides his offenses shall not prosper but he that shall
confess them, and forsake them, shall obtain mercy.

Who is like never to be forgiven?
He that forgiueth not others. And he that will not to his power restore again
such goods or things as he has taken or gotten into his hand wrongfully from
others, by stealth, robbery, fraud, subtilty, or otherwise injuriously.

How prove you that?
The testimony of the Pater noster, or Lords prayer, may be brought for the
first, viz.. Good Lord forgive us, even as we forgive others.

And for the other S. Augustines words may stand for witness to confirm it,
where he says: Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum. The sin is
not forgiven, unless the thing taken away be restored.

How a man ought to examine his own conscience, and to confess his sins
privately to God.
First, look into your self, your behauior and usage, and see by how many
ways and means you have offended God in the sin of pride: whether it be of a
hie, presumptuous, vainglorious, or arrogant mind, or else in your apparel,
beauty, eloquence, riches, great liuelyhood, fair building, office, or other
temporal or natural gifts. And according to that which you shall find your
self an offender in, to be heartily contrite, and inwardly sorrowful,
confessing, acknowledging, and accusing your self thereof. Most humbly craving
pardon and forgiveness with an unfeigned purpose to amend, and become humble as a
denier of your self.

Also how much and how diuersely you have sinned in envy against others,
because they be better esteemed or commended then you, or live in more wealth,
credit, and prosperity. And according unto your guiltiness herein, to cry God
mercy, in purpose to amend and become more charitable toward your neighbor.

Also how much and how often ye have sinned in wrath against your neighbor,
kept covertly, or breaking forth into rigorous or malicious words, with
appetite to revenge.

Acknowledge and accuse your self, imploring mercy and forgiveness, with
grace to become patient.

Also call unto mind how slothful you have been to al goodness: especially
for the health of your own soul, in omitting to serve God devoutly by prayer,
coming to the Church, or in due pondering on your repentance, delighting
rather in idle thoughts and imaginations of the world and the flesh.

Acknowledge your manifold faults here: ask God heartely mercy, esteem
less of your ease, by dreading or thinking on the torments due to all sin.

Moreover, peruse your self and see how diversely and often you have fallen into
the sin of Covetousness, by unlawful desires of worldely goods, in mispending
of them or in unmeet keeping of them when they might be well spent. And
specialy in desiring of other men's goods wrongfully, or in ambitius desire of
worship, or riches, above that is meet and sufficient against your necessity.

Acknowledge your desires and dealings herein: even to to him that knows
whether you say true, or do cloak and make light of them.

Item, how often you have sinned in gluttony of meat or drink, in taking more
then sufficient: or in eating at such times, or in such manner, as you ought to
forbear, preferring the regard of your belly, before the conscience of order,
obedience and example, aggravating the sundry offenses herein, by making your
self worse disposed to serve God, and the more prepared and stirred up to
sin, wrath, and wretchedness. Ask God mercy with tears, and due sorrowing,
remembering the penury of the poor distressed and the voluntary abstine^ce of
Christ and his servants.

Lastly, how often and diuersely you have offended in the sin of lechery and
fleshly liking, either by unclean desires or voluntary pollutions, and by
actual performance. Acknowledge your manifold offenses herein, be thoroughly
penitent, and ever think that to be a sorrowful pleasure, which so much
displeases GOD, for the which he says: Thou shall not in that state of mind
and purpose, inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Furthermore, you are to examine your self by the rule of the commandments.

Whether you have loved God above all things, or thy wife, child, gold, fair
house, or concubine more then him.

How much you have used to take his name in vain, by needelesse swearing.

How negligent you have been in observing the Sabbath, and other festiual
days, appointed for prayer and Gods service.

How obedient or disobedient you have been unto your own parents, carnal or
spiritual, in not following their well advised counsails, and commandments,
or in not doing unto them due reverence.

How slanderously you have used your tongue to the defaming of any person.

How injurious you have been toward your neighbors, in taking away their
goods or things without their good wills and consent.

How much you have sinned with your neighbors wife, or other women, by
unlawful act, or fleshly desire

How wicked and malicious you have bin in bearing false witness against any
person, especially the innocent, and he that stands in that which is right
and true.

How viciously inclined you have been, in not forbearing to seek, and practice
how to get and obtain the unlawful love and liking of other men's wives,
daughters or servants.

Or by what means you may get into your hands, or possession, the goods,
house, land, office, or living of your neighbor, al which offenses are
committed against the express commandment of almighty God, and therefore you
can not be too scrupulous or diligent in looking well to these points, nor
think this superfluous or superstitious.

Likewise, how much you have sinned in misusing or in mispending of your five
senses, called the five wits, that is, in unchaste seeing, in gluttonous
tasting, in vain or ungodly hearing, in pomppous or ruffianly smelling in
wa^ton touching with hands, feet or other places.

Lastly, how much and how wilfully you have sinned in not fulfilling the
Temporal works of christian pity: in not clothing the naked: in not giving
drink to the thirsty: in not feeding the hungry: in not visiting prisoners,
and the sick: in not giving unto the poor: in not harboring the
harbourlesse: in not burying the dead.

Spiritual works of pity.
In not giving counsel to them that needed: in not teaching the ignorant: in
not correcting or rebuking offenders: in not comforttng the sorrowful: in not
forgiving them that have missaide or misdeemd of you: in not patiently
suffering the^ that have reproved you: in not praying for your ill neighbors
amendment.

Sins of the heart.
Error, heresy, sinful study, not believing all the articles of the faith,
evil delight, imagining mischief, or vengeance: hatred, wrath, envy, joy of
other men's evil: sorrow at other men's welfare: no pitying of them that be in
pain or poverty: disdain at poor or sinful men: hipocrisy or dissimulation:
flattery: dreading more to displease man then God: sinful coveting of dignity,
benefice, office, or riches: vainglory of goods, lands, gay houses, or
kindred: loathing of poor kindred: pride of kindred rich or noble: sorrow for
not doing more evil, or that he did not the sin he might have done:
inconstant in good purpose: loath to forsake sin: not liking or not desiring to
hear the word of God: not attentive to the calling of the holy Ghost. Loath to
serve God, or to do a good deed: disobedient to the commandments of GOD, or
of the holy Church: disdaining of good counsel: singularity: obstination in
evil purpose: despair. Of these speaks the Lord in the Gospel. De cord
exeunt cogitationes malae, homicidia, adulteria, fornicationes, furta, etc. Out
of the heart proceed evil thoughts, manslaughter, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, etc.

Sins of the mouth.
Excess in tasting, eating or drinking: idle words or wa^ton talk: taking
Gods holy name in vain: lying: false bearing in hand: swearing, or
forswearing: slaundring, scorning, cursing, blaspheming, scolding, railing,
obraiding, disclosing of counsel, false-witnesse bearing: evil counsel
giving: flattering words: praising of evil deeds: perverting of good deeds:
perverting of Gods word to a wrong meaning: despising, vain arguing, foolish
laughing, proud or presumptuous speaking. Of these our Lord speaks by the
Prophet: Prohibe linguam tuam a malo, and labia tua ne loquantur dolum: sic
elige quid loquare, quia mors and vita in manibus linguae. Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak not deceipte: weighe what thou speak,
for both life, and death, is in the keeping of the tongue. And this of Solomon:
Qui custodit os suum and linguam suam, custodit ab angustiis animam suam. He
that keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from sorrow.

Sins of deed.
Idolatry, Necromancye, treachery, sorcery, tyranny, treason, manslaughter,
sacrilege, simony, apostasy, gluttony, lechery, drunkenness, false inditing
of any man, wrong imprisoning, striking, hurting or hindering any in his body,
good fame, or in his cattle: theft, robbery, extortion, usury, deceit, using
of false weights or measures: letting of Gods service, or of any good doing:
mispe^ding of holy days: wasting of time: haunting of vain plays or jests:
example of evil living: bringing up of new fashions maintaining of sin, or
any false quarrel: receiving in the state of mortal sin: employing viciously
any bodily or ghostly gift of God: not refraining the custom of sin, nor the
circumstances, as time, place or persons.

Sins of omission. that is. The leaving of good deeds which we ought to do.
Not loving, praying, and tha^king God often for his gifts and benefits: not
giving attention to our prayers: not conforming our works and our will to Gods
will: not doing al our good deeds to a good intent, which is, to please God,
and so come to blis: not disposing us to receive grace, and if we receue it,
not using it as we should do: not forgiving others for charity and Gods sake:
not resisting strongly against temptation: not appeasing them that are at
debate: not teaching and instructing the ignorant: not correcting the^ that do
amiss: not being faithful unto God, and our Christian brother to our power: not
yielding a good deed for an other if we may: not comforting them that be in
sorrow, sickness, or poverty: not amending our sins speedily, but lying or
dwelling in them presu^ptuously in trust of mercy. Against which presuming, we
read in Eccl. 5. Non adijcias peccatum super peccatum, and dicas, misericordia
Dei magna est. Add not one sin on heap upon an other, and say, the mercy of
God is great. S. Greg. has this saying: Cum miser homo etc. When the wretched
man falls into any grievous sin the Devil persuades with him, that he
should not repent, nor confess his sins, affirming it was but a light and
small sin, or but purposed in his heart, he preaches unto him of mercy, and
promises him long life, and bids him go forwards a while longer in his
sin, and all is to the end that we may bring him to care but little for God: and
so at length to perish, through impenitence or desperation.

Ready and approved remedies against capital sins.
AGainst the swelling and enflaming of pride apply unto your self the practice
of humility, which chiefly consists in knowing of our self, in obaying our
superiors spiritual and temporal, in not making our self better than our
equals. Neither ought we to despise or disdain our inferiors. And therefore to
beat down stoutnesse and haughtiness of mind and will, let us look upon
examples of Jesus Christ, his humbling to the death of the cross, and the
lowly patience of his saints and martired servants. Thus comparing our
imperfections with their perfections, let us cast down our selves, and
acknowledge our self vile, and void of any thing to be honored or praised for.

Against the heat and distemperaunce of wrath, and desire of reuengement: the
very same remedy serves, that cures pride.

Against the wicked repining of envy had against the prosperity of others, or
other wise reioising at their harm, have recourse unto charity, which enuieth
not at all, and to stablish that virtue in you, be fervent in prayer, and
understand well the meaning of that ordinary petition, Adueniat regnum tuum,
which kingdom in us is the use and possessing of charity, whereby all our
wills and minds are subjected and referred to Gods will, which ought to rule
and reign in us: whereby our faith and suffering of adversities, troubles, and
annoyances are made effectual and fruitful to us, and without no good work is
any thing available.

Against the heat of lechery, and greedines of gluttony whereby they are both
counted vile and beastly, allay the one and moderate the other, with the
temperate plaster of Christian fasting, which subdues the flesh to the spirit
and with releeuing and assisting of the poor oppressed soul, it works also
health to the body and benefit to the common wealth.

Against the hated iniuriousnesse of Avarice, whereby a man offends God as
well in keeping as in coveting, set justice against wrong doing, the virtue of
liberality against sparing in good purposes, and mercy against a cruel and
vnpittifull mind.

Against sloth or slownes in well doing, which is the vice of them that be
coldly affected toward God, lukewarm in religion, negligent in their souls
health, and such as be in despair, or delay and defer that which they ought to
do for the love of God or their soul, encounter and resist this sin, armed
with the virtue of hope, which makes a man to attempt things that be hard,
and above his means, so they pertain to God, and the fulfilling of his holy
will. Hope is our ankar the which holds us fast to a good purpose, as the
ship is stayed by the material ankar.

A prayer devout and thankful for daily help and preservation.
O My sovereign Lord Jesus, the very Son of Almighty God, and the most
clean and glorious virgin Mary, that sufferedst bitter death for my sake and
al ma^kinde, on the Good Friday, and rose again the third day. I beseech thee
lord have mercy upon me, that am a wretched sinner, but yet thy creature. And
for thy precious passion save me, and keep me from all perilles bodily and
ghostly, and specially from al things that might turn unto thy displeasure.

And with all the powers of heart, I thank thee most merciful Lord for the
great mercies which thou have showed me in the great dangers that I have been
in, as well in my soul as in body. And also for that thy grace and endless mercy
has ever kept me, spared me, and saved me from the hour of my birth, until
this time. I beseech thee Lord, that thy mercy may keep me for thee always. And
I cry thee mercy with all my whole heart, for my great offenses, for my great
unkindness, and for my wretched and sinful life: and in that I have showed my
self so unable to lead my life as thy servant, I cry thee mercy, and beseech
thee to forgive me. I thank thee also most entirely, my most gracious Lord,
for the benefits and grace which thou have given me so largely in this world,
before many other who have better deserved then I. But most gracious Lord, I
confess and acknowledge utterly that all the same comes of thee: for the
which all worship, praising and thanks be to thee now and ever.

Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam.

A prayer to be said when thou preparest to make confession of thy sins to
God.
CReator of heaven and of earth, King of kings, and Lord of Lords, who have
made me of nothing to thy Image and likeness, and have redeemed me with thy
own blood, who^ I a sinner am not worthy to name or call upon: most humbly I
pray and beseech thee, that thou would mercifully look upon me thy naughty
servant, and have mercy upon me that had mercy on the woman of Canaan, and
on Mary Magdalene, that sparedst the Publicane, and forgauest the thief
hanging upon the cross. To thee (O most holy father) I confess my sins,
which if I would hide from thee (O Lord) I can not. Spare me (O Christ) whom
I have much offended, in thinking, speaking, and doing, and in every manner
wherein (I frail man and sinful) might sin by my fault, by my own fault
through my great default. Therefore (O Lord) I beseech thy mercy that cammest
down from heaven for my salvation, that liftedst up David from his fall of
sin, spare me (O Lord (spare me (O Christ) that sparedst Peter when he
denied thee. Thou art my Creator and my Redeemer, my Lord and my savior, my
king and my God. Thou art my hope and my trust, my guide and my help, my
comfort and my strength, my defense and deliverer, my life, my health and my
resurrection, my light and my desire, my assistance and my refuge. I pray and
beseech thee, help me, and I shall be safe, govern me and defend me,
strengthen me and comfort me, confirm and make me glad, lighten me and
vifite me, raise me being dead, because I am of thy making and workmanship. O
Lord despise me not, being one of thy household servants, although lewd,
unworthy, and a sinner: but whatsoever I am good or bad, I am alwais thine. To
whom shall I fly except I go to thee? If thou do cast me off, who shall
receive me? If thou do despise me, who shall look upon me? Uouchsafe
therefore to know me one unworthy flying unto thee: though I be vile and
unclean, seeing if I be unclean, thou can purge me: if I be blind, thou
can make me to see: if I be sick, thou can make me whole: if I be dead
and buried, thou can raise me again. For thy mercy is greater then my
iniquity, thy godliness is greater then my ungodliness, thou can forgive more
then I can commit, and release more then I can offend. Despise me not therefore
(O lord) neither look on the multitude of my iniquities, but according to the
multitude of thy mercies have mercy on me, and be favorable unto me a great
sinner. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation: who did say, I will not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he may be converted and live. Turn me (O
Lord) and be not angry against me, I pray and beseech thee, O most merciful
father, that for thy mercies sake thou will bring me to a good end, and to the
happiness of true repentance by due contrition and pure confession of all my
sins. Amen.

A prayer before confession to God.
MOst holy and merciful Lord Jesus Christ, the only hope of my souls health,
receive this the confession of my sins, which I will make unto thee: and give
me I beseech thee due sorrowing of heart, and grace to bewail them with the
tears of mine eyes, and that hereafter both day and night I may mourn for my
negligences and offenses with an humble and pure heart. Let my prayer approach in
thy sight (O Lord) if thou shall be displeased with me, whom shall I seek to
help me? who shall pity mine iniquities? Be mindful of me O lord, who
calledst the Cananean and the Publican to repentance, and receiuedst Peter when
he wept. O lord my God receive my prayers the Savior of the world, good Jesus
that gave thy self to the death of the cross, to save sinners, respect me
miserable sinner, that am calling upon thy name, neither respect thou so much
my euilnes, yt thou forget thy own goodness* And if I have committed that whereby
thou may condemn me, thou have not lost that whereby thou may save me.
Spare me therefore thou that art my Savior, and have mercy on my sinful soul,
unloose her bonds and beale her wounds, Lord Jesus I desire and beseech thee
show me thy countenance, and I shall be safe: send forth thy light and thy
truth into my soul, that I may see in this gross body the number, quality,
and greatness of my offenses which I ought now to confess to thee with
answerable sorrowing and bitterness of heart. Grant thou that live and rainest
god for ever and ever.

A prayer to be said after the confession of our sins to God.
O Lord I beseech thee, let this my confession be accepted with thee, which I
have now made before thee, by calling to mind, and rehearsing of my sins,
and whatsouer there is wanting in me, either of due contritio^ and sorowing, or
of pure and dutiful confession, let thy godliness and mercy supply it: and
according thereunto vouchsafe that I may be received, full and perfectly
absolved in heaven, who live and raignest world without end. Amen.

A prayer before the holy Communion.
TO come to the Table of thy most sweet banquet (O holy Lord Jesus Christ) I
do fear and tremble, that am a sinner, nothing presuming of my own merits,
but trusting in thy mercy and goodness, for I have a heart and body spotted
with many crimes, together with a mind and tongue not warily kept. Therefore O
holy Deity and dreaded Majesty, I poor wretch attached with many causes of
sorrow and grief of mind, have recourse to thee the fountain of mercy: unto
thee I hasten to be cured: I fly under thy protection. And whom I am not able
to bear as a judge, I hope to find a Savior: to thee, O Lord, I show my
wounds: before thee I wipe away my shamefastnes: I wot my sins be many and
great, for which I am afraid, but I hope of thy mercies which are infinite.
Look unto me with the eyes of thy mercy, Lord Jesus Christ, King eternal, God
and man, crucified for man, hear me hoping in thee, have mercy on me that am
full of sins and wretchedness, thou which never wilt cease to let run the
fountain of thy compassion. Remember O Lord, thy creature which thou redeemest
with thy own blood. It repents me that I have sinned, and I am in desire to
amend the works of my life.

Therefore most merciful father take from me all my iniquities and sins,
that I being purified in mind and body, I may worthily taste of that which is
most holy, and grant that the same that I unworthy intend to receive, may be
the remisson of my sins, the perfect purging of my offenses, the expelling of
filthy cogitations, the renewing of good and godly intentions, and a most firm
defense of my soul and body against the snares and deceits of my enemies. Amen.

A prayer to be said after the holy Communion.
I Give thee thanks holy Lord, almighty Father, god eternal, that have
vouchsafed to feed me a sinner, thy unworthy servant, for no merits of mine,
but of the vouchsafing of thy mercy. And I beseech thee that this holy
Communion be not unto me a guiltiness unto punishment, but rather a wholesome
intercession to forgiveness. Let it be to me the armor of faith, and shield
of good will. Let it be a cleansing of my vices, and destruction of
concupiscence and lust: the increase of charity, patience, humility, and
obedience, a sure defense against the assaults of al enemies, both visible and
invisible, a perfect quieting of my motions, both carnal and spiritual, a
sure staying on thee one true god, and a happy consummating of my life and end.

And further I beseech thee that thou will vouchsafe to bring me a sinner to
that vnspeable banquet, where thou with thy son, and the holy Ghost art to all
thy Saints, the true light, and the full sac^ety* the everlasting joy and most
perfect mirth and felicicity through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A devout prayer of the seven last words of our Savior.
O Lord Jesus Christ, who art noted to utter specially seven words or sentences
whiles thou did ha^g on the cross, whereby we understand it was thy will we
should always be mindful of the same most holy speeches. I beseech thee by the
virtue of the same, yt thou have mercy on me, in whatsoever I have sinned and
offended against thee in the like number of mortal sins, or their branches.
Lord even as thou said, Father forgive my crucifiers, so give me grace that
I may forgive all them that work me any evil Lord as thou said to the Thief,
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, by thy grace let me so live, that
at the hour of my death thou may say, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Lord, as thou did say to thy mother, Woman behold thy son, and
then unto the Disciple, Behold thy mother, even so let thy love and charity
bring me to be conversant with thy blessed mother, Lord, as thou did say,
O my God my God, why have thou left me? Give me grace to say, whenever I am
in trouble or vexation. Father, have mercy on me a sinner: help me my King and
my God, who have redeemed me with thy own blood. Lord, even as thou saiedst, I
do thirste after the death of souls, so let me ever thirst after thee, love
thee the welspring of living water* the fountain of eternal light. Let me
run to love thee with all the desire of my heart. Lord, as thou said, father
into thy hands I commend my spirit, give me grace to live so perfectly, that
at my death I may say to thee: Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
receive me that am coming unto thee, for now is the time thou did
appoint. Lord, as thou said, It is finished, meaning that the sorrows and
labors suffered for us miserable sinners, were now at an end: let me by thy help
deserve to hear ye sweet speech of thine: Come my beloved, for I have now
determined to accomplish thy petitions, Come with me that thou may sit with
my Angels and Saints, feasting in my Kingdom, and rejoicing world without
end. Amen.

A prayer for the daily bread.
ALmighty God, we thy wretched children do cry unto thee from earth, as to our
father in heaven: vouchsafe through thy infinite mercy to give us that which
pertains to the needful sustentation of the body* and grant thy grace and
blessing unto all our labors and honest exercises. For unless thou buildest the
house, they that build it labor in vain. Help us that we may cast out the
net of our vocation in thy name to good luck in taking, and therwithal give us
thy grace that every one in buying and selling may deal with a good conscience,
without fraud and deceit. Keep us from ill servants, and from an unfaithful
family to deal with. Give us that live in poverty, patience, that we murmr
not against thy divine will, nor of malice transgres thy commandments: grant
to them that be rich that they be not proud thereof, but rather that they may
enrich themselves with good works, and so lay up a good foundation for the
world to come. O Lord God two things I do ask of thee, keep me from Idolatry,
in preferring any thing before the love of thee, be it wife, children,
friends, house, riches, or any private opinion, and give me neither beggary, nor
riches, but rather ye which is needful for my sustentation, least being over
full, I be moved to deny thee, and say who is the lord* or otherwise be
compelled by need to rage and to forswear the name of my God. From these
things preserve me I beseech thee, through Jesus Christ thy beloved son. Amen.

Against the devils temptation.
O Mighty and good God, the heavenly Father, we find by thy holy word, that
the devil the old serpent our adversary lies in wait by a thousand or
infinite endeavors to keep our souls from salvation, and to bring us into the
filthiness of sin, confusion and desperation. He inticeth us with riches: he
would catch us with poverty: voluptuousness: the coveting of worldly honor,
and desire of power and authority: or else by other worldly carfulness. He
lays snares for us by words, by deeds, by night, by day which way soever we
turn us, he assaulteth us with his temptations, whether we watch or sleep, he
is at our backs, and opens his jaws to devour us. O lord, who shall escape
him? Behold he wacheth without ceasing, and never is at rest, but we of the
sluggishnesse of our flesh, watch not carefully to resist him by thy help.
Open therefore our eyes, that we may know how puissant and subtle an enemy we
have: for our wrestling is not only against flesh and blood, but against
Satan the Prince of this world. Have mercy on us O GOD, and make us strong and
comfortable in the virtue of thy power: put on us that armor that we may
resist his assaults, girde our loins with the truth^ put on us the
breast plate of righteousness: and shoes of Evangelical peace. But above all
things strengthen our hearts with the target of faith, where with we may break
off the fiery darts of the wicked feende: put on us the helmet of salvation,
and give us the sword of the spirit, which is thy holy word in true sense and
understanding: so shall we manfully resist and overcome our said adversary. If
thou be our helper, we shall not fear him, though the whole earth be in
broile, and the mountains cast into the Sea, thou art our force and refuge,
which live and raignest world without end.

For Benefactors.
O Most merciful God, since it is so, that all ingratitude displeases thee,
give me grace (I beseech thee) to be mindful and thankeful for all thy
benefits, and that I be not found unthankful toward them that have done me any
good, least I fall into thy judgment for it. O most sweet god, give to them that
good both of body and soul, which they stand in need of. And give me grace to
be beneficial unto others, as I have found others to me, after my power. Let me
not for the ingratitude of others, fail or wax fainte herein, specially
toward the faithful, for as much as thou our heavenly father art good, and
suffer thy Sun to rise both on the good and evil, and rainest on the just
and unjust: I beseech thee let us follow this thy liberal example yt we may
show our selves to be thy true sons, that thy name be not dishonored, or thy
honor vioalated, who live and raignest true and almighty God now and for
ever. Amen.

For the unity of the Church.
Merciful God, who have called us by one and the same hope of our calling,
eue^ as there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of us
al, or more rather, as thou the Father art one God with Christ thy beloved
Son in the holy Ghost, so ought we to be one in thee. I therefore do beseech
thee, that all that bear the name of Christian men, may be of one mind in the
true and catholic faith: and that we may be careful to maintain the unity of
the Church in the bond of peace, and to unite our hearts in charity. Take
from us all carnal affection, enmity, hatred, and swelling of mind, and
curiosity of foolish and unprofitable questions, that beget nothing but
strife. Break the power of the devil with the malice and deceit of men, who
endeavor to disseuer that band of unity Assist us, O merciful God, that as
many as have departed from the sound understanding of the scriptures (according
to the interpretation of the holy Ghost, whom our Savior left to be the
comforter and directer of his church) and of a reprobat mind have brought in
errors, heresies, and strifes, they may through thy grace return to the
acknowleding of thy truth. Likewise defend us from the tumultuous spirits of
errors and schism, that the church be not troubled, and the hearts of the
ignorant seduced by sugered words. So shall we of one agreement, and with one
mouth, honor thee the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the preservation of the Church.
O Father of all mercy, conserve, I beseech, thee, thy universal Church, the
congregation of all true faithful people, against the gates of hell, against
all the deceiptful snares of the Devil, and against all malice and rebellious
madness of the world, save thy Arc and al christians therein, that it perish
not in the raging sea, and tossing waves, I beseech thee. Suffer thy Church
that it may remain unshaken upon that foundation and firm corner stone, whereon
it was by thee erected. O lord God of might and virtues, turn toward us,
look down from heaven and visit this thy vineyard. Make that perfect which
thy right hand has planted, and which thou have chosen unto thy self, that
the boughs and branches thereof may spread and increase: fence it with thy
shield* receive us thy sheep in to thy protection, that we be not by any
adversary of the same, taken out of thy hand. Mercifully protect us from al
such as seek the overthrow of sound doctrine, and the stablishing of Idolatrous
heresy. Remember not Lord our offenses, who in time past did remit thy
peoples iniquity. Convert us Lord our Savior, and turn away thy wrath from us.
Perform this for the love of thy name, least the holiness thereof be
violated and dishonored. Grant this I beseech thee, for the love of thy most
beloved Son our only hope and Savior. Amen.

Another prayer for conservation of the church.
Almighty God, who gave victory to Gideon, with a handful of men to
overcome his enemies. And thou O Christ our Savior, as thou sauedst Peter from
drowning when he walked on the Sea, and Paul the Apostle from the bottom of
the Sea, having escaped danger of shipwreck three times so preserve us in this
storm and tempest of our enemies, here ready to swalow us up, and strengthen
us with thy right hand, that in our victory thy name may be to all men most
holy and glorious.

A prayer at the travail of childe-birth.
OUr most merciful and gracious father in Christ Jesus our Lord, who have
promised to our forefathers the children of Israel, that if they would hearken
to thy voice (in obeying thy will and commandments) there should none
mis-carry with their fruit, or otherwise be barren: we thy unworthy
servants, and their sinful offspring, acknowledging the wickedness of life, and
the calamity of our age to be such that we may justly say with Ezechias, This
is a troublesome time, children are at the point to be borne, and the mothers
want strength to deliver them: good Lord we most humbly and devoutly beseech
thee with thy clemency and merciful help to respect this thy handmaides
wretched estate, which for disobeying thy holy will, thou have inflicted upon
the daughters gf our first parent Eve, that this our sister may obtain at thy
merciful hand, the favor of safe and speedy deliverance: and her fruit to
come unto the new birth of baptism and regeneration, that she ouercomming by
thy merciful goodness, the pains and travel which thy pleasure is she should
suffer, she may live, and laud thy holy name, and say with thy beloved servants
helped in this case: Thus has the Lord dealt with me at such time as he
looked upon me: thou (O Lord) vouchsafing to wipe her tears, and to make her
a glad mother. Grant this mercy unto her, we beseech thee, who have promised
to be their assured help and comforter that put their trust in thee.

A prayer for making a good end.
O GOD most holy, thou have appointed to man a term of his life, which he
can not pass, for he has his prefixed time: the number of his months is in
thy hand, thou have remembered every day of our life, which passes away so
swift, as if our selus did fly away: all our years are but as smoke and
shadow: all flesh is grass, which soon withers: it is as the flower of the
field that soon perishes. Teach me therefore that I may now at length know
and think upon my end, which is so near at hand. My dais be but as a hand
breadth. Teach me, O Lord, to be mindful of death, and to learn to die,
since in this pilgrimage we have no long dwelling place. O Lord let my end be
foreknowen unto me, that in this world I may live and end my life unto thee,
and accept the day of my return, and of our revealing of our lord Jesus Christ
thy beloved son, by my readiness in holy conversation and godliness. Suffer me
to make my end with perfect use, reason, and in true confession of my sins
with contrition. Let me not speak like one that is mad, nor utter any
blasphemous words against thee my good Lord, or contrary to my salvation.
Uouchsafe to protect me also from sudden death, and from eternal damnation,
that I be not overtaken by death, before I am fully prepared in performing of
true repentance. And when the same hour shall come, make me strong and without
fear to bear the Temporal death, which is nothing else but the door to
eternal life. Let me thy servant then depart in peace, because mine eyes have
seen my salvation* which thou have prepared before the face of all people as a
revealing light to the Gentiles, to the renown of Israel thy people. Give me
grace that at the last instant I may speak, at the least this word which thy
beloved Son uttered upon the Cross, saying: Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit.. And when I* shall not be able to speak, yet vouchsafe, I beeseech
thee, to hear my last groans through Jesus christ. Amen.

Against desperation.
O Most just and merciful GOD, seeing through my own fault and will, I have
often transgressed thy commandments, and contemned thee my Lord God, to my
grievous burden of offenses, whereby my conscience is sore vexed and wounded,
that thereby trembling and weakness of mind grows upon me, I beseech thee
most holy father, suffer me not to distrust thy grace and mercy at any time,
least I fall into desperation, which is the most grievous of all sins. Comfort
me that even in the midst of death I may fix all my hope in thee, which art
my life, without distrust of thy mercy and help. Behold me with the eyes of
thy mercy, as thou did Peter, after he had denied thee, least dispairing like
Judas the traitor, I might sin against the holy Ghost. O God the holy Ghost,
help me in my extreme necessity* when Satan shall grievously accuse me
before thee, laying open the Book of my conscience, and the sight of Hell
terrify me, when I shall be compassed about with the sorrows and fearful
temptations of death, when all the world shall forsake me, and take part against
me: then I beseech thee to comfort me, that my hope fall not from me. Comfort
my heart with thy testimony and seal, that I may firmly believe the remission
of sins, and that I may be mindful of thy most holy covenant in Baptism,
and of the annexed promise: He that beeleeueth and is baptized, shall be saved.

The prayer of a Magistrate or one in authority.
O Almighty God, Lord of heaven and earth, who have brought and set me in the
place of a ruler, and given me power over others, I beseech thee to give me a
wife and prudent heart, that I may govern thy people according to my office,
and understand good from evil, to the performing of justice without any fear
or respect of persons. Give me counsel and strength that I may do that which
is acceptable unto thee, profitable for the^ that be under me, and available
to public peace and quietness. Let me not forget that I have not my
authority of my self, but from the high God, and that I am to execute the
judgment or rule not of man, but of God in heaven* and thou assisting me in
the same, beholdest all my doings, who at length wilt inquire and take account
of my words, works, and ordinances that am sure to live but a short time in
mine office. And because the punishment shall be sore and grievous on them that
rule not well, when the mighty shall be mightily tormented: (For God is the
ruler of all, who will not spare the person of any, nor fear his greatness,
who has made both great and small, having an equal care for all.) Assist me
therefore O merciful and eternal god, that I may by thy grace and help, bear
my self well in my office: offering violence nor injury to any, nor suffer it
to be done of others: or to bear with any injustice, since I am thy servant,
and the son of thy handmayde, a weak man and of short life, unable for to
understand thy judgment and laws. Send therefore wisdom to be assistant unto
me in the place which I do occupy, that it may be with me, and labor with
me, that I may know what is acceptable to thee? which also may guide me in all
my affairs, and keep me in her power, that my doings may be to thy liking in
christ Jesus our redeemer and savior.

The prayer of a son or daughter.
MOst merciful God, the celestial father, who have commanded that I should
honor my parents, of whom I took this life, who also acceptedst in good part,
that duty and obedience for Christ thy beloved Son, and promisest to reward
the same with long life, together with sundry temporal benefits and the
heavenly blessing, I beseech thee even from the bottom of my heart, that thou
vouchsafe to give unto my most kind and loving parents, long life and
prosperous years, and also to defend them from al mischaunces, hurt and
damage. Give me also a heart apt to love and obey them, and that I may honor
them in deeds, speech, and all patience: that the same blessing of god may
come upon me, and that I may succeed my father, as well in old age, as in
worldly benefits. And likewise that I offend not or grieve my sweet mother
that bare me in her womb with much grief, and brought me up with much car^
and business, whom I ought not to forsake or discomfort, least her curse come
upon me. And if before this I have showed my self disobedient to my parents or
unquiet, vouchsafe mercifully to forgive me the sins of my youth, and my
secret offenses, O Lord remember not: but let me acknowledge my own
foolishnes, and perform due repentance therefore, carefully setting before me
the wholesome example of Jesus Christ, who in his childhood was an admonition
to his parents, and an example to all children by his obedience. So let me by
thy help be endewed always with Christian obedience. Keep me from the
company of naughty persons: and if they entice me, let me not go with them, but
with-holde my feet from their paths. Let me increase and profit in wisdom age,
and favor with GOD and men, through the same thy beloved son our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The prayer of a servant.
O Merciful God, who by the precious passion and death of thy Son Jesus
Christ, have made me an ouercommer of hell and death, being delivered from
perpetual servitude, from the power of sin from the kingdom of darkness, and
from the horrible tyranny of the devil: I beseech thee vouchsafe unto me by thy
grace, that I fall not into any wearines or disliking of that state and
seruantly condition whereunto thou have caled me, according to thy good will and
pleasure, nor through impatience neither murmr against this thy ordinance, or
envy the dignity and better calling of others. But that I may perform this thy
will with all ready willingness, as if I served the Lord of al, and not men.
Help me most pitiful Lord, that I may with all fear and patience obey my
carnal masters, be they good or evil, in those things that be not contrary
to thy will: not serving to the eye, as there with to please men, but from my
heart for thy commandments sake. Give me grace that I may be sound
faithful in all things committed to thy charge: that I leese nothing, or
suffer it to perish by my sloth and negligence. O Lord keep me in health,
and comfort my strength give me understanding wit to go forward with the work
of my Master or Mistres, and by thy gracious help for to increase their
substance, that by my diligence they may be replenished with thy blessing. And
further that whatsoever I shall do at any time, the same may turn to the glory
of thy most holy name, and to the wholesome exercise of my faith, through Jesus
Christ thy beloved son, which lives with thee, and reigns in the unity of
the holy Ghost world without end. Amen.

The prayer of one in a troubled conscience.
Lord reprove me not in thy fury, thy arrows are fixed in me, and thou have
laid thy hand upon me. There is no health in my flesh because of thy wrath:
there is no quiet in my bones, because of my sins. My heart is sore
troubled, my strength and valor has failed me, the light of mine eyes is not
with me, sorrows have compassed me without number, my iniquities are gone over
my own head, and they are multiplied as the hairs of my head, greeuing and
oppressing me as a sore burden. The sorrows of death have compassed me, and
the troubles of hell are come upon me. My conscience and my heart are both
against me. O Lord deliver me, hasten to help me, and bring my soul from
the terrors of hell: forgive me my sins, which my enemy the devil heapeth
upon me like a mountain, so as the same standing before my eyes, I may not
behold the brightness of thy grace. Let thy mercy therefore appear unto me I
beseech thee, and let me not be destitute of thy favor. Comfort me O God that
I may have the inioying of a quiet conscience: for all this is inferior to thy
greatness and mercy if thou will. Why art thou sorrowful my soul? trust in
God the health of my countenance, and he shall take thee out of temptation, and
bring thee at liberty, through the innocent death of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is the holy and unspotted sacrifice for our sins. Amen.

The prayer of a sick person.
ALmighty God and heavenly Father, forasmuch as thou have commanded us saying:
Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will hear thee, and thou shall honor
me, therefore I do call upon thee in this my great distres through Jesus
Christ thy beloved Son, forsake me not a wretched sinner. And if this my
infirmity extend not unto death, help me that by thy mercy I may recover my
health, and glorify thy power and virtue which thou have showed upon me. But if
it be thy good pleasure more expedient and meet for me to die, then to remain
in this sorrowful vale and troublesome life: let thy godly will be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven. And give me grace (I beseech thee) that I may commit
my self to thy will which always is best. Keep me firm in the Catholic
faith, to the end that I be not severed from thee and thy unity: but receive my
soul into thy kingdom, through the same thy beloved son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Another prayer of the sick.
O Mighty and omnipotent God, which art merciful and full of pity, and long
suffering, forgive me my sins, and put away my iniquity. Uouchsafe (beseech
thee) to comfort my soul against whatsoever temptation and afflictions: help
me that my faith do not faint or waver in thee, nor my hope have any distrust,
nor my charity wax cold, nor that my frailty be overcome with the fear of
death. And when the extreme hour of my life shall come, then send me forth in
peace, I beseech thee, because mine eyes have seen thy health, which thou have
made ready before the face of all people, as a light to lighten the Gentiles,
and as a renown for all thy people of Israel. In this my Savior I believe, and
in him do I trust. I beseech thee O Lord let me not be confounded, since thou
art my help and my strength behold me with the eyes of thy pity, and turn
thy fatherly favor toward me, through Jesus Christ thy son, who by his
most sacred passion and death, obtained for us eternal redemption. Amen.

A prayer of such as be present at the extreme sickness or death-pangs of any.
O Most holy and omnipotent God, that preseruest our life eue^ at the point of
death, we do beseech thee vouchsafe to cast the eyes of thy mercy upon this
sick person, to relieve him both in body and soul, and to forgive him al his
sins: accept we beseech thee the oblation of the most innocent death of Jesus
Christ thy beloved Son, in place of satisfaction for all his iniquities. For in
the confession of his name he was baptized, deliver him now therefore from the
pains and griefs of his body: shorten his grief and affliction: conserve him
against the accusation of his own conscience, and against whatsoever temtations
of the enemy: that he may strive manfully by the faith of the holy Church, and
overcome him. Send unto him thy holy Angels, that they may bring him to the
fellowship of al Angels, and of the elect in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

A prayer in time of plague or common mortality.
ALmighty God, we do grant and acknowledge that we have often and greeously
offended thee by our diverse and manifold sins: forasmuch as we have all
swarued from thee, and therewith are become unprofitable, neither we nor our
fathers keeping thy commandments. With a right sorrowful spirit, we
beseech thy infinite mercy for Jesus Christ thy beloved Sons sake, that thou will not deal with us according to our sins, but have mercy upon us
according to thy great goodness and favor. Be merciful to us of thy fatherly
good will, take from us this fearful cogitation of pestilence and infectiue
sickness: and suffer us not thus to perish by thy dreadful disease. Rebuke us
not Lord in thy fury, nor consume us with the wicked and ungodly. Lord I
beseech thee, let thy displeasure cease and leave us: show unto us thy mercy,
and deliver us: be mindful of thy goonesse and pity for thy names sake. Thou
O Lord art good, and thy judgments be right: but we have sinned and stirred up
thy displesure against us: forgive I beseech thee, the iniquity of my people,
and take from us this pestilent infection for the bitter passion of thy sweet
Son. Protect us from thy wrath, from evil and sudden death, and from eternal
damnation. But if thy good pleasure be such, that thou will needs visit our
iniquities with this temporal punishment, so favor us, I beseech thee, that
bearing thy fatherly hand, laid upon us, we despair not in thy
chastisement. For when we are judged, we are so corrected by our Lord, that we
be not condemned with this world. And more profitable it is to suffer here
temporal punishment, then eternal in the life to come: and better it is to
fall into the hands of the Lord, then of men, for that thy mercy is infinite. O
most holy father, grant us to end our lives in the true and Catholic faith
of thy Son Jesus Christ, who is the everlasting reconciliation and perfect
oblation for our sins.

Amen.
A Daily exercise for a Christian.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1591.

EXercitium christiani quotidianum. In nomine patris, and filii, and spiritus
sancti. Benedicta sit sancta and indiuidua Trinitas nunc and semper and per
infinita secula seculorum. A Daily exercise for every Christian.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

When thou have made thee ready, kneeling down, and holding up thy hands, say:

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and ever, and world without
end.

PAter noster qui es in coelis, sanctificetur nomen tuum, adueniat regnum tuum,
fiat voluntas tua, sicut in coelo and in terra, panem nostrum quotidianum da
nobis hodie, and dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus
debitoribus nostris, and ne nos inducas in tentationem, sed libera nos a malo.
Amen.

CRedo in Deum patrem omnipotentem, creatorem coeli and terrae, and in Iesum
Christum filium eius vnicum Dominum nostrum, qui conceptus est de spiritu
sancto, natus ex virgin Maria, passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus and
mortuus, descendit ad inferna, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis, and ascendit ad
coelos, sedetque ad dextram Dei patris omnipotentis, vnde venturus est iudicare
viuos and mortuos. Credo in Spiritum sanctum, sanctam ecclesiam catholicam,
communionem sanctorum, remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam. Amen.

Misereatur nostri omnipotens Deus, and demissis omnibus peccatis nostris,
perducat nos ad vitam aeternam. Amen.

Indulgentiam, absolutionem, and remissionem omnium peccatorum nostrorum
tribuat nobis omnipotens and misericors Dominus.

Dignare Domine die isto sine peccato nos custodire.

Miserere nostri Domine, miserere nostri.

Fiat misericordia tua domine super nos, quemadmodum sperauimus in te.

Domine exaudi orationem meam, and clamor meus ad te veniat.

Domine Deus omnipotens, qui ad principium huius diei nos peruenire fecisti,
tua nos hodie salua virtute, vt in hac die ad nullum declinemus peccatum, sed
semper ad tuam iustitiam faciendam, nostra procedant eloquia, dirigantur
cogitationes and opera, per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

DIrigere and sanctificare regere and gubernare dignare Domine Deus, rex coeli
and terrae hodie cord^ and corpora nostra, sensus, sermones and actus nostros
lege tua, and in operibus mandatorum tuorum, vt hic in aeternum te auxiliante
saluemur, and liberemur ab omni malo per te, saluator mundi qui viuis and
regnas, in secula seculorum. Amen.

Veni Domine Jesus preliat^r fortissime, princeps exercitus Domini qui diabolum
vicisti and seculum, apprehende arma and scutum and exurge in adiutorium mihi.

Domine Deus, intend orationi meae, and misericordia tua exaudiat desiderium
meum. Conforta me Domine, vt ^mnia possim quae iussisti, d^fende me ab omni
malo, nunc dirigens oculos meos ad te: euelle precor de laqueo pedes meos, and
protege me sub velamento alarm tuarum.

Illumina oculos meos, ne vnquam obdormiam in morte, ne quando dicat inimicus
meus, preualui aduersus eum.

Reminiscere miserationum tuarum Domine and misericordiarum tuarum quae a
seculo sunt.

Delicta iuuentutis meae and ignorantias ne memineris.

Secundum misericordiam memento mei propter bonitatem tuam Domine.

In manus tuas commendo spiritum meum, redemisti me Domine Deus veritatis.

Loquutus sum in lingua mea, notum fac mihi Domine finem meum.

Et numerum dierum qui est, vt sciam quid desit mihi.

Fac mecum signum in bonum, vt videant qui oderunt me, and confundantur quoniam
tu Domine adiuuisti me and consolatus es me.

O Domine quia ego seruus tuus and filius ancillae tuae.

Diripuisti Domine vincula mea, tibi sacrisicabo hostiam laudis, and nomen
Domini inuocabo.

Perijt fuga a me, and non est qui requirat animam meam.

Clamaui ad te Domine, dixi, tu es spes mea and portio mea in terra viuentium.

Gloria patri, and filio, etc.

OUr Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. So be it.

I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of

heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was
conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary, he suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into hell, the
third day he arose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven, and sits
at the right hand of God the father almighty from whence he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic
Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins the resurrection of the
body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

The Almighty God have mercy upon us, and upon forgiveness of our sins,
bring us to everlasting life. Amen.

The Almighty and merciful Lord grant us pardon, absolution, and remission of
all our sins. Amen.

Uouchsafe O Lord, this day to keep us without sin.

Have mercy on us O Lord have mercy on us.

Let thy mercy, O Lord, be showed upon us, even as we have put our trust in
thee. Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry unto thee.

Lord God almighty, who have brought us to the beginning of this day, save us
by thy power, that this day we fall not into any sin, but that always we may
speak that which is true and right, and that our thoughts and works may be
directed unto the same end, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd God, king of heaven and earth, vouchsafe to direct and sanctify, rule and
govern this day our hearts and bodies, our senses, speech and doings in thy
law, and in the works of thy commandments, that here and for ever, by thy
help, we may be preserved from all dangers both bodilye and ghostly, etc.

Come Lord Jesus, strong in battle, and prince of Gods army, thou that have
overcome the devil and the world, take thy armor and shield, and rise to
help me.

Give ear O Lord unto my prayer, and let thy mercy hearken to my desire,
strengthen me to perform that which thy law commands and teaches me to do.
Keep and defend me from all evil, and lifting up my eyes, and addressing my
prayers unto thee: Draw my feet out of the snare, and hide me under the
covert of thy wings.

A prayer out of the Psalm called Saint Barnards verses.
Lighten mine eyes, least at any time I sleep in death, that mine enemy never
say, I have prevailed against him.

Be mindful of thy mercies O Lord, and of thy commiserations which have been
since the world began.

Remember not the follies and offenses committed in my youth.

Be mindful of me according to mercy, and for thy goodness, O Lord.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.

I have said, and spoken it openly, O Lord make my end known unto me.

And what the number of my days is, yt I may know what is wanting unto me.

Give me a good sign that such as hate me, may see thy favor, and thereat may
be confounded: forasmuch as thou, O Lord, have helped and comforted me.

O Lord let it be so, seeing I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid.

Thou have rid me of my thraldom, I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of
praise, and shall call upon the name of the Lord.

They perished who fled from me, and there is none to seek after my soul.

I cried to the Lord saying, thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the
living.

Glory be to the Father. etc.

Another prayer by such as be present at the peril of childbirth.
MOst mighty Creator, and merciful God, we thy seely wretched creatures
descended of Eve her offspring, most suppliantly beseech thee of thy infinite
goodness, mercifully to look on the wretched state and misery, which of thy
dreadful justice, in mixing always sorrows with joys, thou have inflicted
upon womankind for our said first parent her disobedience, and namely the state
and sorrowful being of this our sister thy servant here languishing and
oppressed with the pains of woman's travail and wretchedness, O good Lord
thy omnipotent wisdom foreseeing that some would sin much, did bridle them
with infirmity of body, to the end that it may be found more profitable for
them to be low brought with suffering grievous pains, then to remain in health
to their more hasard of sin and damnation. But seeing in all sickness there
be three things that be grievous and specially to us thy creatures, of more
weakness and infirmity by nature, that is to say, the fear of death, the
grief of the body, and the loss or leuing of these worldly pleasures:
therefore thy merciful goodness has so disposed our state and condition in
this life, that no woman or man can be in great pain and long continue
therein, so as by thy just and merciful providence, either he shall be able to
bear our pains, or else that the same shall be but short: therefore it may
please thee of thy great mercies, yt as the air is cleansed and made clear
after vehement storms, so after this sharp and long shower of tears and
woeful panges, there may follow a calm of ease of affliction to this our
sister, and fair wether both of thy gracious favor, and of our minds
quietness, that are pensive and careful for her. For by the testimony of thy
holy word, thou delightest not in destruction, and with thy own mouth by the
holy Ghost thou have said, that thou will convert the sorowing of thy servants
into rejoicing. Be then our good Lord and our comforter in the day of our
tribulation. Suffer not (we beseech thee) this our sister to be tempted or
oppressed with pains and calamity above her strength and patience to bear it,
but mercifully and speedily help and deliver her both from pains and peril.
So shall we evermore pronounce and say* Blessed is God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all consolation, who comfort
us in all our trouble. Amen.

The Lords prayer briefly expounded.
Our Father.
By benefit of Creation through thy omnipotency.

By privilege of condition, through thy providence.

By piety of adoption thorough thy charity.

By reparation of bliss through thy only begotten.

Which art in heaven.
By omnipotent power governing.

By grace lightening.

By mercy directing.

By glory appearing.

Hallowed be thy name.
Of us by honest conversation.

In us by a clean conscience.

Forth out of us by a good name and fame.

Above us by Angelical presentation.

Thy kingdom come.
That is,

Heaven by revelation.

Holy Church by assumption.

The faithful soul by justification.

The holy scripture by instruction.

Thy will be done.
In simplicity of heart by humility.

In charity of body by abstinence.

In holiness of prayer by frequentation.

In verity of work by discretion.

Give us this day our daily bread.
Of humane necessity.

Of spiritual doctrine.

Of the blessed sacrament.

Of eternal felicity.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we, etc.
Not retaining malice in heart.

Not vpbraiding in word.

Not doing evil for evil.

Not refusing to do good.

And let us not be lead into temptation.
Sudden which dismaieth.

Importune which wearieth*

Deceitful which beguileth.

Uiolent which oppresses.

But deliver us from evil.
Of worldly adversity which disquieteth.

Of man's cruelty which vexes.

Of the Devils subtletie, which prevails.

Of everlasting calamity, which tormenteth.

Amen (that is) all thus be done.
By attention of heart.

By sincerity of word.

By diligent practice.

By continual desire.

Read and understand. Remember and practice.
As things are proved to be living, by moving, by sense of sight or feeling,
and by lively working: so is it known whether the soul of any man lives in
Christ by these three tokens
IF the soul be moved with the spirit of Christ, that is, to the holy desire
of heavenly things, and to the contemning of the delectable things of the world.

(...) the soul have a feeling of those things which pertain unto Christ,
and as it were a suffering with Christ that suffered.

If the soul works virtuous works in following of Christ. They that be lead
by the spirit of God, be the sons of God.

Fides sine operibus mortua est.
These be six signs of a Christian.
Innocence and cleanness.

Penitence, and the true performing thereof..

Lowliness and humility of spirit.

Obedience, and the fear of God.

Pity and brotherly love.

Fervent charity.

The 12. abuses of the world which are thought to be the sins which deserve
with the justice of God, that Antichrist the most wicked of all men should
prevail and trouble the whole world to the peril of innumerable souls.
Old men, and grave persons, without the wisdom of true and mature patience.

Young men of less knowledge and authority, without reverence and obedience.

Rich men without alms, and merciful works.

The poor given to proud apparel, and without humility.

The Pastors or Teachers without good deeds: where Christ himself wroght
first, and then taught, he says, Qui fecerit and sic docuerit, ille
saluabitur.

The people hearing the word of God preached, and yet wax never the better: of
an hundred hearers, scarce one is converted to true Penitence, when at one
sermon of Peter's or of some other Apostle, five thousands were converted.

Men bearing the name of Christ, yet void of Christian life and sanctimonie.

The vulgar sort given to fraud in their workmanship and deceitfulnes in their
dealings, specially servants.

Governors without justice and virtue.

Churchmen without holiness and devotion.

Religious men without observing the rules of their profession, and statutes of
their order.

Married persons without honest and continent life.

Scriptures and fruitful sayings of the Doctors, to edefie in these points
following.
Prayer.
I would have men to pray lifting up pure hands, without wrath and contention.

I have said I will confess mine iniquities.

When ye do pray, if ye have any thing against others, forgive it.

The sound or voices of prayer come not unto Gods ears except it be made with
great affection of mind.

Prayer if it be true, if it be chaste, it pierces heaven, and returns not
empty.

For the daily and light sins, without which this life is not led, the daily
prayer of the faithful recompenceth.

By fasting the passions of the body: by prayer, infections of the mind are
to be cured.

The more we have to do with carnal things, the more earnestly ought we to be
given to prayer.

The kingdom of heaven is not gotten by taking our rest, nor eternal
blessedness promised unto the negligent.

Charity.
He that loves, abides in the light.

In this al men shall know that ye be my disciples: if ye love one another.

In Charity a poor man is rich, and without charity every rich man is but
poor.

Charity feeds the hungry: pride also feeds, but charity does it to the
praise and honor of God, and pride for the praise of her self: Charity
cloatheth the naked, pride clotheth also: charity fasteth, so does pride.

Charity is the strength of faith, and faith is the fortitude of charity,
where they be not both together, there both be wanting.

A man may have in him the help and benefits of the Sacraments, and yet be
an evil man, but he cannot have charity* and be evil.

Fasting.
This kind of Devils may not be cast out but by prayer and fasting.

My legs are weakened with fasting: and my flesh is altered for want of
wonted sustenance.

Fasting purges the mind, releeueth the senses, subdueth the flesh to the
spirit, makes the heart contrite, and humble, disperseth the clouds of
concupiscence, quenches the burning of lusts, and kindles the light of
chastity.

He that will well and truly fast, let him abstain from sin and vice, for
what avails it to empty the body of meat, and to ouerlode the soul with
sin? What can it profit any man to be pale with fasting, and to consume with
hatred and envy? What good is it to abstain from wine, and to be drunk with
the lees and poison of anger and malice? What gain is it to abstain from
flesh, made for man's use to be eaten, and to tear asunder the members of our
neighbor with backbiting, and slander? It is no profit or a thing
praise-worthie, to abstain from that which sometimes is lawful, and to do
that which never is permitted, but always forbidden

Let thy fasting chasten thee, but glad an other, and so thy sorrows shall be
fruitful, if they bring joy to others. Fast so, that thou may be as glad
as if thou have dined, in having seen the needy to eat. God loves a
cheereful giver, and when the poor are fed by thy relief, think then that
Christ has dined with thy goods, crying that he hungereth himself in his
poor.

God likes that fast, when thou give to an other that which thou do
withdraw from thy self, that thy needy neighbors body may be relieved by
that means whereby thine is afflicted.

Then thy fasting shall please the Lord God, when thy soul abhors sin,
for it is to no effect to withdraw meat from the body, and to pamper and
flatter it by sin. Fast therefore chiefly from sin, and then thy fast shall
please God. For as fasting is to the humbling of the soul, it will avail thee
nothing in humbling it by abstinence of meat, and to puff it up by sin.

Alms.
He that does the work of mercy offers a sacrifice.

Acts. 14. It is a more blessed thing to give tha^ to take.

Aug. Alms cleanses sins, entreats for us to Christ* for whatsoever we
give unto the poor, we shall be sure to possess it.

Aug. If thou will be a good merchant and a great gainer give that which thou
can not keep, that thou may receive that which thou can not leese: give
of thy temporal substance, that thou may receive eternal inheritance.

To deny that which sustaineth life, is to kill a man, take heed, lest amongst
your chests or store, ye lock up the saving of poor folks lives, and, as it
were, in toombes burying them.

It is a part of sacrilege, to bestow the goods of the poor, otherwise then
upon the poor.

Give your alms of that which is rightfully gotten, give not of that which is
ill gotten, to the faithful, unto whom Christ's body is given in the sacrament.

The renown of the Bishop is to provide for the welfare of the poor, it is
a shame to all Priests to make themselves rich.

The alms of the proud rich man can do him no good, if he have robbed the
poor, for that will not suffer his alms to ascend and come before the eyes of
God.

Penitence.
Luke. 13. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Eccl. My son, if thou have sinned, add not other sins to the former, but
pray rather that thy former may be forgotten.

Prou. 5. Every man is bound with the cords of his sins.

Aug. de Penit. Paenitere est paenam tenere, vt semper puniat in se quod
commisit peccando.

Aug. Better is a little bitterness in thy mouth, than eternal torment in
thine intrailes.

Au. He that wipes away his sins by penitence, is become in fellowship with
Angels.

David sinned as Princes do, but he did penance with bewailing of his life, ye
which princes or great men are not wont to do.

Not to be sorry for thy sins makes God more angry, then the sin which
thou did commit.

Contrition.
Be sorrowful for your sins in your chamber.

Whom shall I regard (says the Lord) but the poor and contrite in spirit?

Contrition is a sorowing of the mind with tears, rising of the remembrance
of sin, and of the fear of judgment.

Let him know himself to be hard hearted, and too blame that does bewail the
corporal death of his friend, and weepeth not for the death of his own soul.

Confession.
Esaias. 14. I will reckon unto thee O Lord, in the bitterness of my soul, how I
have spent all my years.

Prou. 28. He that hides his offenses, shall not be directed: but he that
confesses and forsakes them shall obtain mercy.

Barnard. The camel has but one burden, the rich man has two: the one is of
his wealth or possessions, the other of his sins: the first he lays down at
his death, the other, will he, or nill he, he must bear when he is dead,
unless he be unburdened before his death.

Aug. Confession is the health of souls, the disperser of vices, the
vanquisher of devils: what more? It shuts the mouth of hell, and opens the
gates of paradise.

He that accuses himself, though he be a sinner, he begins to be
righteous, because he does not spare him self* but confesses the justice of
God.

Close wounds are worse then the open wounds, where the corruption is cast
forth, much ease and amendment follows.

Without confession the good man is judged unthankful, and the sinner reputed
as dead: confession, therefore, is the life of the sinner, and the renown of
the righteous.

Confess thy sins the rather, the more thou do despair in thy self,
because of thy iniquities: for the greater is the praise of the forgeuer,
Quanto mayor est exaggeratio peccata confite^tis, says S. Augustine, the more
that he that confesses his sins, does exaggerat the^.

August. From the heart comes true confession, for if thou have one thing in
thy heart, and another upon thy tongue, thou speak, but do not confess.

Aug. Tell men what thou art, but to God who thou art for fear if thou do it
not, he condemn in thee that he shall see and find in thee. Will thou escape
gods judgment? Judge and condemn thy self. Will thou that he do pardon thee?
Confess and acknowledge thy misdeeds, that thou may truly say unto him: O
Lord turn away thy face from my iniquities: prevent God always with an
humble confession, and then thou shall not fall into eternal damnation.

Aug. As long as thou hidest and do not confess thy sins, so long do thou
strive with God: confess boldly thy infirmity, that thou may come to
eternity. Confess and acknowledge the benefits of thy Shepherd and pastor,
and so thou shall be sure not to follow the wolf of error and destruction.

Of poverty.
He only is poor in spirit that is humble, fears God, confesses his
sins, boasts not of his own works or justice, but when he does* some good,
praises God for it, and when he commits some evil, accuses, and blames
himself.

Five kinds of poverty.
Poverty may be said to be in five manner of ways. First, by adversity.
Secondly, by cupiditie. Thirdly, by abundance. Fourthly, by counterfetting.
Fifthly, by will. The first is a beggerie: the second a covetousness: the third a
prodigality: the fourth a painted Sepulcher: the fifth Christianity. The first
is a scourge: the second a poison: the third a windy fan: the fourth a
shadow: the fifth a castle. The first is a misery, because it greeueth: the
second venomous, because it kills: the third windy, because it puffs up:
the fourth deceitful, because it dissembleth: the fifth glorious, because it
crowns.

Justice.
Apoc. 18. Quantum quis glorificauit se, and in delitijs vixit, tantum illi
dabitur de tormento and luctu.

Luke 12. To whom much is given, much shall be required of him.

Cyp. The justice of the King, is the peace of the people, the defense of the
country, the saluing of sores, the temperature of the air: it makes fair
weather by sea, and plenty at land: it puts away the murmuring of the
poor, and unto himself is the hope of future blessedness.

That which thou do to one, look to find it of another. If thou be
obedient and loving, thou shall have peace with men, and war with vice.

Truth.
Great is the truth, and it prevails.

O ye fond Galathians, who has bewitched you to disobey the truth?

The mouth that speaks lies, kills his soul.

He erreth that bears in hand he knows the truth, and yet lives
naughtelie.

Chrysostom. Such is the condition of falsehood or error, although no man withstand
it yet it will wax old and decay: and contrarily, such is the state of truth,
though many withstand and seek to oppress it, yet it will rise and increase.

Chry. He is not only a betraier of the truth, who speaks a lie for the
truth, but he also that pronounces not the truth freely, which he ought to
pronounce, or defends not the truth freely, the which he ought to defend.

Ibid. If it be ungodly, not to speak the truth for fear of death, how can it
be less ungodly to hide the truth for living or vain glories sake.

Sen. Rich or noble men, though they have all things, yet one thing they lack,
and that is, some one to tell them the truth: for he that will accompany with
such people, must either lay truth aside, or let friendship go.

Restitution.
Let not the wrong doing of the just please thee.

A kingdom is translated from one nation to another for injustice, wrong
doing, deceifulnes, and scorning or railing.

If another man's goods be not restored when it may be restored: thou art not
penitent, but do feign it: for if penitence be not truly done, the sin
shall not be forgiven, except things taken away be restored.

If he be cast into fire that has not given of his own goods, where shall he
be cast yt takes away other men's? If he burns with the devil that clothed
not the naked, where shall he burn that spoiled them?

Full. If unfruitfulness be cast into the fire, what does robbery deserve? Or
what shall he receive, that takes away other men's, if he shall burn that has
not given of his own? If judgment without mercy shall be to him that did not
the work of mercy, what judgment shall be to him that robbed the poor?

Death.
Job. 30. I wot thou will deliver me unto death, where there is a house
appointed for every one that is alive.

Luke 12. Make your selves ready, for ye know not what hour the Son of man
will come.

August. de ciu. Dei. The first death drives the soul willingly out of the
body: the second death does hold the soul against her will in the body.

Aug. de cura pro mor. The rich man had a care of his friends that were alive,
although he wist not how they did: so we have a care of the dead, though we wot
as little what they do.

What is death, but the leaving of the body, and a laying down of an heavy
burden? In case the man have no other burden wherewith he may be thrown
headlong into hell.

Well ought every man to dread his ending day, for look, in what state he
shall be then at his departing out of the world, such shall he be judged at the
day of judgment.

Naked we are borne, and naked we die, no difference in dead bodies, save that
the bodies of the rich do stink vilely with much pampering.

Make death to be of thy famylyar acquaintance, by continual thinking upon
him, that when God appoints it, thou may be ready to meet with him.

Sen. He that dies in his youth, has no more cause to complain, than he that
has a quick dispatch of a voyage.

Ibid. The eternal law ordained nothing better than in giving us one way to
come into the world, and many ways to go out of it.

Resurrection.
2. Mac. 7. Unless we hoped that they who were slain should rise again, it
should seem superfluous and vain to entreat for the deceased.

Greg. in mortal. Our redeemer took upon him death that we might not fear to
die, he showed us his resurrection, that we might assuredly trust to rise
again.

Let us consider the little seed of every tree that is cast into the earth,
how a tree thereof may be brought forth, and let us comprehend, if we can, where
so great a tree might be hidden in so small a bulk of that seed: where the
wood, where the rind, where the green leaves, and where the plentifulnesse of
that fruit, why should we the^ marvel how God can turn that little dust that
comes of our body into a man? when of a little seed there rises so huge a
thing as is a great tree.

If there be no resurrection, neither is there any God nor any providence,
then all things are wroght and conducted by Fortune. We see many righteous men
to live in penury, and to suffer wrong, and contrarily, sinners and
unrighteous persons to flow in all kind of wealth and voluptuousnes: what man
of right mind will think this to be the work of just judgment or wise
providence: therefore there shall be a resurrection, for God is just, and
rewards them that put their trust in him.

Judgment.
Job. 9. I feared my works knowing thou would not spare an offender.

Romans God will reward every man according unto his works.

Aug. de ciu. Dei. Then shall he come openly among the just, to judge justly,
that came privily to be judged of the unjust unjustly.

Aug. de Symb. That Judge is not to be prevented by favor, nor to be bowed
with pity, nor to be corrupted with money, nor to be appeased with
satisfaction or penance. Let the soul deal as well as she can for her self,
while there is place for mercy, for there shall be the place of justice.

When our Lord shall judge the woeful world, the most puissant kings shall
come forth naked: that foolish wise man Plato shall be brought forth with his
scholars, the witty arguments of Aristotle shall not help him, when the
son of the poor maid shall come for to judge the furthest parts of the
earth.

Greg. When I call to mind Job on the dunghill, John famishing in the
wilderness, Peter tormented on the cross, I think how God will punish the
reprobate in time to come, since he entreats so sharply them whom he loves.

Hier. super Mat. So often as I consider that day, my whole body does tremble
for fear, for whether I eat or drink, or do any other thing always me
thinks that fearful blast of the trumpet sounds in mine ears, rise ye
dead and come to judgment.

Heaven.
Esdr. 8. The most highest has made this world for many, but the world to
come for a few.

1. Cor. 2. The eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it ascended
unto the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that love him.

Aug. de poenit. Hasten thither where thou may live ever, if thou so much
love this wretched and flitting life, where thou live with so much a do,
running, wrestling, swearing and sighing, and can scarce provide thy bodily
necessaries how much rather ought thou to love the life eternal, where is
no labor nor any care to be taken, but rather great felicity, happy liberty,
happy blessedness, where shall be fulfilled that which our Lord says in the
Gospel: Men shall be like Angels, the righteous shall shine, etc.

Aug. super. Psa. The poor Widdowe bought as much for two mites, as Peter did
by forsaking his nets, or Zacheus by giving the halte of his living.

Aug. in Epist. If riches be loved, let them be laid up where they cannot
perish: if honor be desired, let it be sought where none has it but the
worthy: if life be liked, let it be gotten where no death shall end it.

Barn. in ser. O Lord there be many that would reign with thee, but they
will not suffer with thee, they would find thee, but they will not seek
thee: they would come where thou art, but they will not follow thee.

Chrysostom. super Math. Great is the violence, if a man born in earth catch heaven
for his portion: if he obtain by virtue that which he cannot by nature. The
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, for that the glory of the Lord of
Israel which was due to the fathers, foretold by the Prophets, and offered by
Christ, is surprised and occupied by the faith of the Gentiles, whiles they by
the penance which John preached, do revive to the heavenly Country, as it
were returning to a strange place.

Greg. in mor. Only to the righteous are the rewards of the heavenly country
due, so as the humble, the chaste, the meek and the merciful, are they which
attain to the joys eternal.

Hell.
Math. 8. The children of this world shall be cast into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Apoc. Look how much a man has glorified himself, and been in pleasures, so
much give him of sorrow and torment.

Greg. in Dialog. There is but one fire of hell, but the same tormenteth not
all sinners after one manner: for every one shall find there so much pain as
his sins require.

Ibid. Like as when many men stand in the sun, all feel not a like heat,
for that some be more hot than other: even so in that one fire, there is not
one manner of burning, for as much as the diversity of sins causes that
there, which the diversity of bodies works here.

Greg. super Math. They shall be cast into darkness, that they may there gnash
their teeth, who delighted here in eating. For crying out is caused of heat,
and gnashing of teeth is caused of cold. There hell is showed to be of two
sorts, to wit of extreme cold, and of intolerable heat.

Ibid. In hell shall be intolerable cold, unquenchable heat, a worm that
never dies, a stink intolerable, extreme darkness, the scourge of torments,
the horible sight of devils, the confused heap of sins, and despair of all
good things: for unto those wretches there shall be a death without dying,
because there death always begins, and cannot end.

Hugo de S. Vict. Hell is a lake without measure, deep without bottom, full
of incomparable burning, full of intolerable stinkes, full of innumerable
sorrow: there is misery, there is darkness and everlasting horror, where there
is no hope of any good thing.

Isodor. de summo bono. The fire of hell shall give light to those wretches, to
the increase of their own woe by seeing it: and not to any comfort, least
they might see whereof to rejoice.

A note touching the profession of great knowledge in the scriptures.
CUnning is not to be blamed, if it be well ordered, for it is good and comes
of God: but a clean conscience and a virtuous life is much better, and more to
be desired. O if ye could be as busy to avoid sin, and to plant virtue in
our souls, as we be to move questions. At the day of judgment it shall not
be asked of us, what we have read, but what we have don: not how well we have
said, but how religiously we have lived. Tell me now where be all the great
Clerks and famous Doctors, who flourished while they lived? Now other men
occupy their promotions and dignities, who think full little of them. He is
great that has great charity, and he that is little in his own sight, and that
sets at naught great things. And he is well taught that forsakes his own
will, and follows the will of God. Behold the perfection of the life, and
religion of the ancient fathers, and you shall see how little it is that we do
in comparison of them. They served our Lord in hunger and thirst, in heat and
cold, in nakedness, in labor, in vigils and fasting, in prayers and holy
meditations, in persecutions, and many reproaches: they refused honors and
bodily pleasures, that they might have the everlasting life: how straight and
abject a life lead they in wilderness? How grievous temptations suffered
they? What rigorous abstinence used they? How great zeal and fervor had they
to spiritual profit? How strong battles held they against sin? On the day
they labored, on the night they prayed. And for the great sweetness that they
had in heavenly contemplation, they forgot often times their bodily refection:
all riches, honor and dignities they renounced for ye love of God. Now a days
he is counted virtuous that is no offender, and that may with patience keep
some little spark of that virtue and favor which he had first.

Another note concerning the pain ordained for sin.
IT is better now to purge sin, and to put away vice, than reserve it to be
purged hereafter: what shall the fire or torment devour but thy sin? Truly
nothing. Therefore ye more thou sparest thy self now, and the more thou
followest thy fleshly liking, the more grievously shall thou wail hereafter.
In such things as a man most has offended, shall he be most punished. The
slouthful persons shall be there pricked with burning pricks of iron, and
gluttons shall be tormented with great hunger and thirst, the lecherous and
lovers of voluptuous pleasures shall be filled with burning pitch, and the
envious shall wail and houle as do mad dogs, there shall no sin be
without his proper torment: the proud man shall be filled full with all shame
and confusion: the covetous shall be pined with all penury and need, one
hour there in pain shall be more grievous, than here an hundred years in the
sharpest penance: then shall he stand as a judge, that here submitted himself
meekly unto the judgment of man: then shall the meek poor man have great
confidence and trust in God, and the obstinate proud man shall quake and
dread: the^ every devout person shall be joyful and glad, and then
irreligious persons shall wail and dread: then shall the vile habit shine
clear in the sight of God, and the precious garments shall wax foul and
loathsome to behold: then the despising of worldly goods shall be more of value
than all worldly riches and treasure: then shall thou have more comfort for thy
devout praying, than for all thy delicate feeding: then shall it please more a
strait life and hard penance here, than all worldly delectation and pleasure.
Learn therefore now to suffer the small tribulations in this world, that thou
may then be delivered from the greater ordained for sin. First prove here
what thou may suffer hereafter, and if thou may not now suffer so little
pain, how shall thou the^ suffer the everlasting torments? thou may not have
two heavens that is to say, to have joy and delectation here, and after with
Christ. Moreover, if thou had lived always in honor or in temporal
felicity, what should it profit thee dying now? He that loves God dreadeth
neither torment nor death: a perfect love makes a sure passage to God. But if
a man yet delight in sin, it is no merualle if he dread death and hell.

A third fruitful note concerning curious searching in matters of faith, and
specially about the holy Eucharist.
THou must beware of a curious and an vnprofifitable searching of this most
profound sacrament: if thou will not be drowned in the great depth of
doubtfulnes: for he that is the searcher of Gods majesty, shall be thrust out of
glory. God is of power to work much more than man may understand: nevertheless
a meek and humble searching of the truth, ready always to be taught, and to
walk after ye teachings of holy fathers is sufrable. Blessed is ye simplicity
that does leave the way of hard questions, and goes in the plain and
steadfast way of the commandments of God, many have lost their devotion,
because they would search higher things than pertain to them. Faith and a good
life is asked of thee, and not the highness of understanding, nor the deepnes of
the mysteries of God. If thou may not understand nor take such things as be
within thee how may thou then comprehend those things that be above thee.
Submit thy self therefore meekly to God, and submit also thy reason unto faith,
and the light of knowledge, and true understanding shall be given thee, as shall
be most profitable and necessary: for there be some that be griuously tempted
of the Faith and of this Sacrament: but that is not to be imputed to them, but
rather to the enemy. Therefore care not for him, nor dispute not with
thoughts, nor answer to the doubts, which thine enemy shall lay to thee: but
believe the words of God, and believe the Saints and Prophets, and the wicked
enemy shall anon fly away from thee. And it is often times much profitable
that the servants of God should feel and sustain such doubts for their more
proof, and commonly the enemy tempts not unfaithful people and sinners, whom
he has sure possession of, but he tempts and vexes in diverse manners the
faithful and devout persons. Go therefore with a pure and undoubted faith, and
with an humble reverence proceed to this sacrament: and whatsoever thou can
not understand, commit it faithfully to God, for God will not deceive thee, but
he shall be deceived that trusts overmuch to himself. God walks with the
simple persons, he opens himself, and shows him to meek persons: he
gives understanding unto them which are poor in spirit, he opens his will
unto pure and clean minds, and hides his grace from them that be curious
and proud. Man's reason is feeble and weak, and soon he may be deceived: but
faith is stable and true, and cannot be deceived. Therefore all reason and all
natural working must follow* Faith without further reasonings: For faith and
love in his holy and most excellent sacrament, surmou^t and work high in
secret manner above al reason. O the eternal God and Lord of infinite power
does great things in Heaven and in Earth that may not be searched. For if the
works of God were such that they might be lightly understood by man's reason,
they were not so marvelous and so inestimable as they be.

A tripled reason shortly and particularly yielded of some decay of Christian
duty, observed in xii. sundry states or degrees of persons.
First, why be there many children not truly obedient to their parents?
One cause may be, for that the parents themselves be not only not given to
obey the will of God, and the counsel of the holy Ghost in his Church, who is
the spiritual Parent and Nurse of the faithful, but are rather inclined to
follow their own fancy and fleshly delight, which are the nurs and wel-spring
of the greatest diobedience.

Secondly, because they be negligent in giving sound and godly instruction
with needful example of kindly love.

Thirdly, because it is the just judgment of God, that men many times be
annoied or punished in the same manner that themselves offended.

Why be there so few parents that tender the souls health of their children
before worldly wealth?
First, neglecting the bond of nature, which ought to be of more force than
the law of friendship, they fall too short of the duty of common christian
charity, so as that which they should seek and vouchsafe to any christian
brother* be he never so much a stranger, they omit even to their own children
at home.

An other cause is, for that they who have so much delighted in fleshly and
earthly things, have so little taste and sauouring of ghostly and spirirituall
things, that they are more ready for to seek any worldly commodity, then to
procure them purged and stripped of vice, much less to be clad and enriched
with virtue and goods of grace.

Thirdly, for that they consider not the dignity of the soul, and but
superficially, or negligently regard the justice of God, in rewarding of virtue
and punishing of vice. And this through want of faith.

Then how happens it that there are so few Christians found faithful in the
truth, since the faith of Jesus Christ is most holy and true.
This may come of presumption and blindness of mind, wrought by the spirit of
error, as when some presume over much that because god has created us to
salvation, therefore we can not be damned: and because he has redeemed us with
his precious blood, therefore we can not but be saved. Likewise some do presume
of their good works, and others of only faith.

An other cause is, for that they do not duly regard the wholesome precepts
and counsels of our Savior in his word. Also want of devotion in the
sacraments which our Savior left unto his people for their Spiritual health,
comfort, and remedy, when they delight in base and vile things, refusing that
which is excellent and eternal.

Why be there so few converted to godly life by true penance or repentance?
The greatness and overmuch heaping of their sins is the cause that they do
not feel the weight and greeuousnesse of them, no more then he that is
oppressed with sickness, wotteth where he has most need to be cured.

Moreover, an evil custom will hardly be left: vile and filthy delectatio^s
which have been so long sweet, will not yet become sower without cross and
affliction.

Obstinacy of mind, and a purpose to persevere in the former delighted sins,
will not be expressed or removed by threatninges, preaching, nor good counsel.

Why does there follow so little fruit of preaching?
Because of some imperfections in Preachers, some preaching for vainglory, to
show their eloquence and get praise of men, some to spread their singular
conceit and opinion: and few that preach simply, for the honor of God, and true
health of souls, sealing their words with example of their own good works.

Secondarily, through default of the hearers, who either are indurate by light
regard and lack of grace, or else distracted by diversity or contrariety of
doctrine.

Thirdly, for the electes sake, that hereby they may know themselves advanced
unto the height of grace and glory, when they see others cast off by their
fault or neggligence.

Why be there so few counted good and virtuous men among them that be
learned?
First, because of a corrupt and false intent, which they have in their study,
which is, not to the end of virtue, but for living and worldly worships sake.

Also because of pride and swelling of mind, or otherwise because of a
naughty affection which many have in earthly and fleshly things: whereby they
are not given to devout prayer and service of God, bt rather become unmindful
of the end of learning and true wisdom.

Wherefore in time past were not the greatest part of Cleargye-men counted
good and virtuous seeing they were hired unto virtue as others be to their
labor?
For that perhaps they took not their order of a pure intention, and with due
preparation to receive the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Secondly because some attended more to the cares and affairs of the world, and
following the appetites of the flesh, then to the charge and dignity of their
sacred vocation.

Thirdly, for that percase there did want in them the true love of GOD and
their neighbor, and over that an earnest purpose to fast and pray, and to save
souls of their own charge, which Christ has redeemed to be saved.

How comes it that there were so few wealthy and great men found to be
virtuous or of worthy valor?
One cause was, for that they thought themselves enobled and made worthy of
honor or great worship by the virtue and valor of their old anccestors.

Also for that it was not duly considered, that Nobility was ordained chiefly
for the honor of God, and common vtility of his people, whom they ought not
to grieve or oppress with hard rents and fines, or other cruel and ungentle
dealing.

Also because of taking overmuch pleasure in voluptuousnes, and other vices
and wanton vanities, wherein their great riches was most bestowed, which many
times they might have better employed for the health of their souls, the
benefit of their common wealth, and releeuing of their needy neighbor.

Why be there so few true laborers, crafts-men, and servants?
One cause is, for that they seek not the kingdom of heaven, but rather which
way they may make to themselves best wages at the week or years end.

Also, for that they consider not the dignity of the soul, nor dread the
justice of God. Thirdly, because they see and perceive in a manner all other
degrees faulty in their calling, so as they being of the most inferior degree,
can derive little good example from their better and superiors to draw and
encourage them unto the just performing of their duty.

Or else because of a certain liberty taken of conscience, when all accounts be
so long deferred, which makes almost, that all Masters, Mistresses and
Magistrates, do at this hour find their own feathers in their own wounds.

Why be there so few good men of Marchaunts?
Because in their trade and traffic they fear not to offend God by lying,
deceitfulnes, and breaking the holiness of the Sabbath.

Also, if good conscience be once wrecked or laid aside, sin is made but a
light and ordinary matter.

Lastly, for that their mind and love is not upon God, nor care they for these
spiritual things, but rather to be satisfied in carnality, sensuality and
covetousness of gain.

Why be there so few widows that be chaste and virtuous women?
For that whiles they were married they lived carnally, without any devout mind
or ghostly care.

Secondarily, because they loved, served, and obeyed the will and liking of
their husbands better then God.

Thirdly, for that they give not themselves to the observing and performing of
widows duty, in fasting, prayer, alms, and sole or sober conversation, little
remembering or considering their sorrows past in the wretchedness and misery
of Eve.

Why be there so few maids that seek and desire to continue in their
virginity?
One cause is, for that they little know, nor are of capacity to consider the
dignity of that state.

Then for that they do not give themselves to resist carnal desires, nor do
help or fortify their weakness with fasting, prayer, and invocation.

Also, for that they do not mark by what causes they may be comforted and
encouraged therein, since they are honored by nature, and by the worthiest
amongst men, they are honored in scripture and preferred in grace and glory.
Wherefore in sundry parts of Christendom, the maid of known, honest and
virtuous life when she dies she has for her a hearse of black, placed in
the Quire with a guilt coronet set thereupon, as an honor unto the state,
encouragement to the followers, and a sign of the hundred-folde fruit worthy
of a Crown.

The Conclusion.
TO conclude, that thou have perhaps these many years neglected the due
account and sorrowing for thy sins, here have found proof of thy great fault
and testimony of thy folly. The obstinate sinner perseuering in his custom,
may read here the description and calender of his conscience, he that by his
office or vocation has pleadged ye price of his own blood for the safety and
conduct of others, may perceive hereby (if he be not too much blinded with
worldly respect) how busy a toil pertayneth to the discharge and clearing of
himself. O subtlety unsound that deceueth in thy self thine own soul. O
folly most filthy, that fights against thy proper health and happiness. No
dallying with holy or ghostly things. God will not be mocked. If heaven might
be had with continual following the desires of the flesh, then the wisdom and
careful regard of the holy fathers was mere folly, their straightnes of life,
vain and like lost labor. Sero sapiunt Phryges, but let us remember our selves
in time, proclayming and practicing with the converted Ninevites.

Sackcloth, dust and ashes.
FINIS.
I. N.
LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1591.


