THE Trial of the New RELIGION.

Containing a plain Demonstration, that the late Faith and Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, is indeed the New Religion.

By Thomas Bell.

PRVDENTIA
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by William Iaggard dwelling in Barbican. 1608.

The Contents of the Chapters following.
CHapter 1. Of the name (Pope.) Chap. 2. Of the Popes superoyall power. Chap.
3. Of the marriage of Priests. Chap. 4. Of Popish pardons. Chap. 5. Of Popish
Purgatory. Chap. 6. Of Popish auricular confession. Chap. 7. Of Popish venial
sins. Chap. 8. Of Popish faith. Chap. 9. Of the condign merrite of works.
Chap. 10. Of transubstantiation in popish Mass. Chap. 11. Of Popish invention
of Saints. Chap. 12. Of the Communion under one kind. Chap. 13. Of private
Mass. Chap. 14. Of Pope (...) ^^^pensation. Chap. 15. Of worshipping of
Images. Chap. 16. Of Church service in the vulgar tongue. Chap. 17. Of the
antiquity of Popish Mass and the parts thereof. Chap. 18. Of the mysteries of
popish Mass. Chap. 19. Of kissing the Popes foot. Chap. 20. Of praying upon
Beads. Chap. 21. Of changing the Priests name. Chap. 22. Of the Paschall
Torch. Chap. 23. Of the Popish Paxe. Chap. 24. Of the Popes Bulls. Chap. 25. Of
the popish Agum Dei. Chap. 26. Of C^^^^lmasday Chap. ^^. Of the (...) made to
the Pope. Chap. ^^. Of (...)p^pish L^nt-fast. Chap. ^^. Of (...)ing of
Wedlock. Chap. ^^. Of (...) power of a General Council.
To the Right Worshipful and my approved good friends, Sir Charles Hayles,
and Sir Cuthbert Pepper, Knights, and worthy pillars of his Majesty's honorable
Counsel, established in the North-parts of England. (*)
THE visible Church, (as writes Egesippus) remained a Virgin, Egegesip: apud
Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32.
free from all heresies and corruptions, during the life of the Apostles: that
is to say, about one hundred years after Christ, to which time S. John the
Evangelist was living. But after the death of the Apostles (says he,) Errors
by little and little crept into the Church, as into a void and desert house.
This Assertion is doleful enough, and yet very profitable against all Popish
Recusants of our time: as who are not ashamed, impudently to avouch, that after
so many hundred years from Christ's Ascension, there has been no Error at all
in their Romish Babylon.

If any demand the cause hereof, the answer is at hand; viz. That many
without due examination, receiving negligently and carelessly the Doctrine of
them that went before them, have unawares brought Errors into the Church.
Eusebius: (...) lib. 3. cap: vlt.
So writes Eusebius of Errors in his time, that Papius, a man of no sound
judgment, was the Author of the Chiliasts; who fondly and grossly first
invented, that there should be a thousand years after the Resurrection. To
which Error, (though most palpable) Iraeneus, and sundry others, (otherwise
well learned,) gave place only for antiquity sake. This sottish imitatien,
without all rhyme and reason, was, is, and will be, the cause of many Errors:
which many not of the meanest sort of Papists, have both gravely and prudently
considered.

For this cause did that great Shoolemaister Melchior Canus, (...)
oppose himself against all the Chanists and Scotists, both the old and latter
Papists. For this cause did Cardinal C^^eranus, (...)
(a man of high esteem in the Church of Rome,) (...)
both in his litterall exposition of Genesis, an in his other books, roundly
reject the multitude of fo^mer Commentaries. For this cause said their learned
(...) and Schoole-Doctor Victoria, that he reputed nothing certain, (...)
albeit all Writers agreed thereunto, unless he could find it in the holy
Scriptures. For this cause did their famous Canonist Nauarrus, (...)
peremptorily condemn the common opinion, when it was not grounded upon right
reason. For this cause gravely wrote S. Augustine, (...) 19.
that he reputed no man's writings wholly free from Errors, save only the
Writers of the holy Scriptures. For this cause wrote their own Roffensis, (...)
that it is lawful to appeal from Austen, Cyprian, Hierom, and all the rest,
because they are men, and do not want their imperfections.

I (says S. Augustine) do not repute S. Cyprians wrytings as Canonical,
(...) cap. 32.
but judge them by the Canonical and whatsoever does not agree with the
Scriptures, that by his leave do I refuse. And for this cause is it, that so
many silly, follish, rude, and ignorant Papists, do at this day, term late
vpstart Popery* the Old Religion. They only respect the external face of the
Church, as it was in the late days of their forefathers, And for want of
skill, and reading of ancient Counsels, Fathers, and histories of the Church,
they deem that to be very old, which is indeed very new. Hence comes it,
that nothing more moves the rude vulgar people to embrace Popery, then this
their fond persuasion, that it is the old Religion.

In regard hereof (right Worshipful) I have taken upon me, for the glory of
GOD, the peace of his Church, and the common good of my native Country, to set
before the eyes of all indifferent Readers, as clearly as in a glass of
Crystal, the original and daily excrements of Popery, and that it is not the
Old but the New Religion: I have proved succinctly and evidently, first, that
Phocas the Emperor of Rome. 3. That the Priests and Bishops Origin (too much
adicted to his allegorical Speculation) ^eyned many odd things touching
Purgatory. After Origin, others began to call the matter into question: others
rashly to believe it: others to add many thing to Origens conceit: and so by
little and little it incre^s^d, till the late Bishops of Rome presumed to Pius
the fifth of that name, that is to say, Constance, about 1414. years after
Martin set it abroach, Agnus Deis were not heard of, for the space of one
thousand two hundred years after Christ. Candelmasday, were invented 843.
years Lent-fast in Popish manner, was never heard of for the space of 427.
years. All which, and many other important points of Popish faith, are so
lively discovered to the first hatching thereof, in this short and plain
Discourse, as every child may with all facility, boldly pronounce, and
constantly affirm, that the late Romish Faith and Doctrine, is not the Old,
but the New Religion. Which if the silly Papists would once duly consider, they
would no longer obey the Pope, or like of his Religion. The Work, such as it
is, I have dedicated to your Worships, as a sign of a thankful heart, for your
manifold kindnesses toward me at all times. And so I humbly commend your
Worships to the protection of the Almighty.

From my study, the first of Iulie. 1607. Yours in Christ Jesus Tho: Bell.

CHAP. 1.
Of this name and word (Pope.)
IT is a wonder to consider, how the late Bishops of Rome have aspyred to their
super-lordly Primacie, and chiefest so supposed Sovereignty in the Christian
world. Popery with our Jesuits, and Iesuited-Papists, must needs be the Old
Religion, and that self same Doctrine, which S. Peter and S. Paul delivered
to the Church of Rome. This is their invincible Bulwark, which (as they boast)
all the Canons of the faithful and good Christians can never batter down. And
this they never cease to inculcate into the ears, and to instill it into the
hearts, of the silly vulgar people; telling them forsooth, that Popery is the
Old Religion, and the faith of their forefathers in all ages. I therefore to
take this stumbling block out of the way, do purpose in God (the fountain of
all goodness, and the chief workman of every good act) to set before the
Readers eyes, in a very summary and succinct narration, that Popery is a new
Religion, by little and little crept into the Church, and patched together as
clout upon clout in a Beggars cloak.

Now, for this name ( Pope,) which the silly people admire (God-wote) as a most
sacred thing; and for all that know no more what it means, the^ how far it
is to Heaven; it is a Greek word ( Pappas,) which signifies ( Father.) It was
given of old indifferently, as well to other Bishops, as to the Bishops of
Rome. I prove it first, because the Clergy of Rome writing to the Clergy of
Carthage, Apud Cyprian page 11.
call S. Cyprian, (the blessed Pope, or holy Father.) Secondly, because the
Priests, Moses and Maximus, and the Deacons, Apud Cyprian page 46, pa^ 66 page
61.
Nicostratus and Ruffinus, and sundry other Co^fessors, did all with one
assent, call the same Cyprian, Beatissimum Papam, the most blessed Pope.
Thirdly, because S. Hierom called S. Austen, Apud Augu. ^pist. 11. 13 14, 17,
18. 25. 30.
Beatissimum Papam, most holy Father or Pope; and this he did many times, and
in many Epistles. But after that the Emperor Iustinianus, had in his Legal
constitutions named the Bishop of Rome ( Pope,) the arrogant Bishops of Rome
began to challenge the Name, as if it were proper unto them alone: And so in
process of time, the Bishops of Rome were only and solely called Popes; and
of late years, Our holy Father, and His Holiness, An: Dom: 528.
is his usual Name. But this Emp^rour lived after Christ his birth, about 528.
years; Ergo this point of Popery, is a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Popes superoyall power.
BOnifacius Bishop of Rome, An: Dom: 607.
and the third of that Name, above six hundred years after Christ, obtained
of Phocas then Emperor of Rome, that Rome should be the head of all Churches.
Before which time, no authentical Writer can be named, who ever ascribed the
Headship, and Universal government of all Churches, to the Church of
Policarpus would not yield to Anicetus Bishop of Rome, in the controversy
about Easter, which for all that he would and must have done, if the Bishop of
Rome had had any true prerogative over him. Secondly, S. Iraeneus, and other
holy Fra^nce joining with him, reproved Victor, then Bishop of Rome, very
sharply and roundly, as one that had not due respect to the peace and unity of
the Church: Which doubtless those holy and learned Bishops would not have
done, if the Bishop of Rome had had in those days the supreme Sovereignty
over them.

Thirdly, S. Polycrates, and many Bishops of Asia, Victor, the^ the Bishop of
Rome, in his presumpteous proceedings touching Easter. Fourthly, S. Cyprian
roundly opposed himself Stephanus then Bishop of Rome, contemning his Decree,
and deriding his reasons. Fifthly, Acts. 4. 17.
sent Peter and John, to confirm the faithful in Samaria. And consequently,
if the Pope be not above Peter, but his supposed Successor, he may be sent of
the Bishops his Brethren, as Saint Peter was. But who is that Bishop, and where
dwells he, that at this day dares do to the now Pope, such supposed
villainy?

Sixthly, the Fathers of the famous Affrican Counsel, Austen, that holy Father,
and most stout Champion of Christ's Church was present, to the great honor and
credit thereof,) would in no wise yield to Celestine then Bishop of Rome, in
the controversy of Appeals concerning Appiarius. And when Pope Celestine
alleged for himself, and his supposed Sovereignty, that the ancient and
famous Council of Nice, gave liberty to appeal to Rome, the Fathers of the
Council answered roundly, that the true copies of the Decree were otherwise.
Where I wish the Reader to observe with me, these two points seriously; First,
A worthy note, not to be forgotten.
that the Pope could not, (and therefore did not) allege any better reason for
Nice. Secondly, that the Pope Celestine falsified the canon and Decree of the
Council, so to gain credit and authority to himself, if it might be.

Chalcedon, gave the Bishop of Constantinople equal authority with the Bishop
of Rome, in all Ecclesiastical affairs. Nice prescribed limits, as well
Chalcedon, acknowledged the authority of the Bishop of Constantinople, to be
equal with the Bishop of Rome; Secondly, Celestine the Bishop of Rome, could
allege neither Scripture, council, Father, or reason for his pretended
Primacie, but one only false allegation out of the council of Nice; Thirdly,
seeing Affrican council, contradicted and reproved the Pope, for his forgery
of the Nicene council, Appiarius; Fourthly, seeing S. Polycarpus, S.
Policrates, S. Iraeneus, and S. Cyprian, with many Bishops of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, contemned the Bishop of Rome, his Decrees, and his supposed
Supremacy; I cannot but conclude, with this inevitable illation: Ergo, the
late pretended Sovereignty of the Pope, is but a rotten ragge of the new
Religion; as which was never heard of in Christ his church, for the space of
six hundred years and odd. Al^ this is proved at large, in my Survey of
Popery.

CHAP. 3.
Of the marriage of Priests, and Ministers of the Church.
MArriage was lawful for all Priests in the old Testament. Ierem, 1, 1.
For the Prophet Jeremy was the son of Helkiah, who was one of the Priests
at Anathoth: Hophni and Phinehas, I, S^m, 1. 3
were the sons of Eli the Priest: Sephora was the daughter of Iethro, Exodus,
18, 1, Luke, 1, ver: 8, 9, 13.
who was the Priest of Midian. Saint John the Baptist, (that holy precurser of
our Lord Jesus,) was a priests son, even the son of Zacharias. Yea, the
marriage of Priests was then so dear in Gods sight, that the High Priest was
forbidden to marry; not simply and absolutely, Leuit. 21. ver: 13. 14.
but to marry a Widow, a divorced, or polluted woman: and he was charged to
take a Maid of his own people. In the New Testament, no prohibition can be
found, as which is consonant to the Old; pronouncing Marriage honorable in all,
Heb. 13, v. 4
and a bed undefiled.

Marriage (as the Apostle teaches us, 1, Cor, 7.
) was ordained for a remedy against fornication, to be used of all such, as
find themselves grieved with that disease; and consequently, seeing that
disease is as well incident to persons Ecclesiastical, as to persons secular,
and oftentimes more, the Medicine is as necessary and as lawful for the one
sort, as it is for the other. For this respect did holy Paphnutius stand up in
the Council of Nice, An: Dom: 327.
(at such time as the Fathers then and there assembled, thought to have severed
married Priests, and Bishops, from their wives,) and told them according to
Gods word, that to forbid marriage to priests, was too severe a Law. He yielded
this reason, because marriage is so honorable in all sorts of men. Thus
writes Cassiodorus, thus writes Socrates, thus writes Sozomenus. For this
respect was it, that the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of the East-Church,
would never admit or receive the Canons of the West and Romish Church. For this
respect was it that Priests were ever married in the East Churches, until
these our days; and in the West Church generally, for the space of three
hundred, 385.
eighty, and five years: at which time Pope Siritius excited by satan,
prohibited Priests marriage as an unlawful thing.

Yea, An: Do: 1074.
Priests continued still married in Germany, for the space of 1074. years,
until the days of the ungracious Pope Hildebrand; who termed himself
Gregory the seventh, so soon as he had crept into the Popedom by naughty
means. For this respect was it, that the famous Popish Cardinal Panormitanus,
committed to print to the view of the whole World, that Priests marriage, was
neither of the substance of their Order, nor forbidden by Gods Law, and that
therefore it were for the salvation of souls, that all such as would might
marry. He adds the reason; Because experience (says he) teaches us, that
the Priests debarred from marriage, live not spiritually, but are polluted in
unlawful copulation, though they might live chastely with their own wives.

For this respect was it, that the great Papist Polydorus, could not contain
himself, but pitifully exclaim against the wicked prohibition of Priests
marriage; affirming stoutly and resolutely, that the compelled chastity of
unmarried Priests, was so far from excelling chastity in wedlock, as no
crime whatsoever has brought greater shame to Priesthood, more harm to
Religion, or more grief to all good men, then the unchaste life of Priests. For
this respect was it, that Pope Pius the second of that name, (who before his
Popedom was named Aeneus Syluius, a very learned man, and famous Writer, after
he had reproved many vices in the Romish Church, concluded very gravely; that
though there had been great reason to debar Priests from marriage, yet was
there greater reason to restore marriage again unto them. For this respect was
it, that many holy and learned Bishops were married men, in the ancient time,
and flourishing state of the Church; viz. S. Gregory, Saint Clement, S.
Spiridian, S. Chereman, S. Philogonius, S. Eupsichus, and others.

First therefore, seeing Priests marriage is approved Nice, and that the holy
Bishop Paphnutius, (a man full of miracles in his life time, An: Dom. 327.
) did pronounce openly in the same Council, that the conjugal acts of married
Priests was true chastity; Mark this point well.
whose sentence was approved of the whole Council, and therevppon the matter
was left as indifferent, for every Priest either to marry, or not to marry, at
his own choice. Fourthly, seeing priests marriage was ever holden lawful and
Christian, for the space of three hundred eighty five years, even until the
time of the untimely birth of Siritius, 385.
then the Bishop or Pope of Rome; and in the great country of Germany, for the
space of 1074. years, even until the days of wicked Pope Hildebrand, 1074.
whom at that day, the whole Clergy of Germany, accused of flat heresy; for
that his most damnable Decree or Constitution, against the honest and lawful
marriage Panormitanus, (for he was all the three,) and seeing withal, that the
great learned Papist Polydore Virgill, did bitterly and pitifully exclaim
against the ungodly, and unchristian prohibition of Priests marriage, crying
out, that it was the destruction of many souls: and seeing also, that Pope
Pius the second, confessed freely, that it was time to restore marriage to
their Popish priests again, and to suffer the^ to live as they had done in old
time, all which and much more, (for the lawful and honest defense of the
marriage of all Bishops, Priests, and Ministers of the Church,) the indifferent
Reader shall find pithily and copiously proved in my Survey of Popery, ^age
3. chap. 3. 4.
I cannot, but perforce I must conclude with this inevitable illation; Ergo,
the prohibition of the marriage of Priests, is a rotten ragge of the New
Religion.

CHAP. 4.
Of the Popish execrable Pardons.
THE famous Popish Writer Syluester, for his great learning surnamed by the
Papists, ( Absolutus Theologus,) knew right well, that Popish Pardons are but a
toy for Children to play withal, Syluest. de Indulgent.
these are his words; The Popes Pardons (says he) were never known to us by
the Scriptures, although some allege S. Paul for that purpose, neither were
they known by the ancient Fathers, but only by lare Writers. Saint
Antoninus, their popish Saint, Page 1. tit. 10 Capit. 3.
and famous Archbishop, had the self same opinion. And Petrus Lombardus,
their famous Master of Sentences, (who collected with great diligence into one
Volume, all the worthy Sentences of the ancient Fathers,) could never find
the Popes Pardons, or any mention thereof, in any of all their writings. For as
Syluester truly said; The old Writers were not acquainted with any such thing.
Yea, their famous Martyr and Bishop, Master Fisher, in his answer to Master
Luthers Articles, was enforced to admit the newnes of the Popes pardons:
Contra. Artic. Lutheri.
and withal forsooth to yield this reason for the same, viz. That Purgatory
was not then so well known to the Church, as it is now adays. Peruse and note
well the next Chapter, which is of Purgatory so supposed pains.

First therefore, seeing the great popish Syluester Antoninus Fumus, and many
other learned Papists grant freely, that Syluester says the truth herein;
Fisher, was enforced to grant the young age and noneage of popish-pardons,
when he could not answer Ma. Luthers Ergo, the Popes pardon, is a rotten
ragge of the new Religion, An: Dom: 1300.
brought into the Church after 1300. years, by Pope Bonifacius the eight.

CHAP. 5.
Of Popish Purgatory.
COncerning the original of Popish-purgatorie, it shall be enough to set down
the words of John Fisher, the late Bishop of Rochester, and the popes canonized
Martyr: these are his express words; The Greeks to this day do not believe
that there is a Purgatory. Cont. assert. Luth. art. 18
Read who will the Commentaries of the ancient Graecians, and he shall find
either very sildome mention of Purgatory, or none at all. For neither did the
Latin Church conceive the verity of this matter at one time, but by leisure.
Neither was it without the great dispensation of the holy Ghost, that after so
many years, Catholics both believed purgatory, and received the use of
pardons generally. So long as there was no care of Purgatory, no man sought
for pardons. For of it depends all the estimation of pardons. If thou take
away purgatory, to what end shall we need pardons? for if there be no
Purgatory, we shall need no pardons. Considering therefore, how long Purgatory
was unknown, then that it was believed of some by little and little, partly by
revelations, and partly by the Scriptures; and so at the last believed
generally of the whole Church, we do easily understand the cause of pardons.
Since therefore purgatory was so lately known and received of the whole Church,
who can admire pardons, that there was no use of the^ in the primative Church.
Pardons therefore began, after the people stood in some fear of purgatory.
Thus writes the popish Bishop Fisher. Whose words I heartily wish, that the
indifferent Reader may ponder seriously with me. For if he so do, he cannot
choose but abhor late popery, and know it to be the new Religion.

This Bishop was a learned man, a great papist, and said for popery what
possibly he could, yet he gra^teth many things, (of such force is the truth,)
which quite overthrow popery, and turn it vpside down. First An: Dom: 1517.
and so it was unknown to the^ 1517 years. Secondly, that the church of Rome
believed it

Of which, (as the popish Bishop tells us,) the silly people do stand in
fear. See the fourth Chapter
Thus therefore I must conclude; Ergo, Popish purgatory, is a rotten ragge of
the New Religion.

CHAP. 6.
Of Popish Auriculer Confession.
SCotus, (who for his great and subtle learning, was of the Papists termed
Doctor subtilis,) affirms resolutely, that popish Auricular-confession, is
not grounded on the holy Scripture, but only instituted and commanded by the
Church of Rome. The popish Gloss (of great credit with the Papists) tells
them roundly, that Auricular-confession can no way be defended, but by
tradition of the Church.

Panormitanus, Rhenanus, Richardus, Durandus, Bonauentura, An: Dom. 1215.
Hugo, and all the popish Canonists generally, approve and follow the same
Gloss. To this I add, that Auricular-confession, was not an Article of faith
in the Romish Church, for the space of 1215. years. All which I have proved
at large, in my Survey of Popery, Part, 3. cha. 12
and in my Motives.



CHAP. 7.
Of Popish venial sins.
THE newnes and young age of Popish-Religion, may be sufficiently known, by
the coining and inuenting of Venial sins; if nothingels could be said
therein, the Thomists will have some sins not against the Law, but besides
the law: and those sins they call their Venial sins. But Durundus, a
famous popish Schoole-Doctor, and many other learned Papists, affirm every
sin to be against Gods Law. And this opinion does now prevail in the popish
Schoole^, as I^sephus Angles in his Book dedicated to the Popes Holiness
(...) us His words are these; Io: Angle^i^ 2. Sen. pa. 275
Et hae (...) in schol^ (...) co^m^nior; and this opinion seems now adays,
to be more common in the Schools.

Where I wish the Reader to (...) by the way, this word ( mod^, now adays,)
because it does most ^^^ely and sufficiently, set before our eyes, the
mutability of the late Romish Religion. For in that he says ( niod^, now
adays) he gives us to understand, that their Doctrine is now otherwise,
their it was of old time, and in former ages. Behold here the new Religion,
and that popish doctrine is uncertain.

Again, Ma. Fisher, late Bishop of Rochester, grants to Ma. Luther, (when he
was overcome with the force of his Reasons,) that every sin is mortal of it
own nature. Iaeobus Almaynus, Durandus, Io: Gorsonus, Michaell Baius, and
other famous papists, not able to answer the reasons against Venial sins,
confess the truth with the Bishop, That every sin is mortal. Page 281.
Yea the Jesuit. S. R. with the advice of his best learned friends, in his
Answer to The downfall of Popery, confesses plainly, and blusheth not
thereat, that the Church of Rome had not defined some sins to be Venial, An:
Dom: 1566.
until the days of Pius the fifth, and Gregory the thirteen, which was not
fifty years ago. These are the Jesuits own words; True it is, that Bishop
Fisher and Gerson, were in that Error, but that was before it was condemned in
the Church, as it was since, by Pius Quintus, and Gregorius 13. Lo the Jesuit
cannot deny, that great learned Papists, held every sin to be mortal; and
therefore he had no other shift to defend Popery vvithall, save this only,
which is a very silly one; That the Church of Rome had not yet defined the
matter.

O sweet Jesus, what a world is this, that silly foolish papists should be so
bewitched, as to think Popery the Old Religion. We see it plainly confessed
by our Adversaries, that for the space of one thousand, five hundred, and
threescore years, all sins were deemed mortal. But, because some sins to
be Venial, made greatly for the life of popery, as without which it could
hardly live, and continue, pope Pius, and after him Gregorius, decreed it for
an Article of popish faith, That some sins are mortal, and some Venial: for
which Venialls, God cannot justly condemn any one to hell, if we will
believe the Pope and his doctrine.

now adays changed, and not as they were in old time; Thirdly, seeing all
sins were believed and Pius, and pope Gregory, could change sins mortal
into Venial; Fifthly, seeing the Pope, si^ting in his Ergo, the Popish
distinction, without all rhyme or reason, of mortal and venial sins, is
nothing in deed, but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 8.
Of the Popes Faith.
Wisdoms, with the whole troop of Virtues, were needful for him, that should
dispute of the holy Fathers faith or power, I therefore ( post deosculationem
pedum) humbly pray to be heard in defense of Truth, wherein I will desire no
more of his Holiness, but only that he will grant so much to be true, as I
shall prove to be true by the testimony of the best Popish Writers. In the
Anatomy, book 3. adu^so 6.
The popish Seminary Priests, write of this subject in this manner. As the
p^udent Greek appealed from Alexander furious, unto Alexander sober; and
Bishop Crostrate, from pope Adrian private, to pope Adrian public; and as
Summus Pontifex in Cathedra Petri: so may the Seculars, notwithstanding any
decree set down by his Holiness to the contrary, by wrong information given,
appeal even from the Pope as Clemens, unto his Holiness, as Peter. Thus (...)
William Watson, in the name of all the rest.

By this Doctrine thus plainly delivered, (which is a constant position in the
Romish Church,) the Seculars give us to understand, that execrable, and never
enough detested fallacy, wherewith the Pope and his popelings, have a long
time sedueed, the greater part of the Christian World. viz. That the Pope may
Err as a private man, but not as a public person. This is a great
wonderment, observe well the Peter, that blessed Apostle of our Lord Jesus.

Thus much is necessarily gathered out of this popish doctrine. Which being
well marked, Popery will be the New Religion, and turn it self vpside
down. For first it is a constant Maxine in all popish doctrine, that the Pope,
and none but the Pope, must judge in all Controuersi^s of faith and doctrine.
This notwithstanding, we see by this popish doctrine, (so contrary is popery to
it self,) that if the Pope judge of any matter, as he is furious, and not
sober; as he is a private man, and not a public person; as he is Clemens,
Sixtus, Adrianus, or some other like Pope, and not S. Peter himself; then he
may Err and so both he deceived, and deceive others.

O my s^rable Papists, how are ye led headlong into pernicious Faith and
Doctrine* and either do not, or will not see the same? Your Pope (say you,)
may Err as a private m^n, but not as pope or public person. This distinction
may fitly be termed a trick of fast and loose. For if the Pope define a truth,
they may say, he defined it as a public person: but if he define an error,
then say they, he defined it as a private man. Behold here (gentle Reader,)
upon what rotten stuff, In the hunting of the Fox.
the Papists would have us to ground our Faith: when we prove (as I have done
elsewhere,) that pope Anastasius, pope Honorius, pope John, pope Celestine, and
others, have both holden and taught false Doctrine; they tell us, they did that
as private men, not as popes of Rome.

That their pope cannot err in faith iudiciallie, it is this day with papists
an Article of their faith. The famous papist Dominicus Scoto, shall be the
spokesman for the rest. Scoto in 4. sent. D. 22. Qu. 2. Art. 1.
Albeit (says he) the Pope as Pope cannot Err, that is to say, cannot set
down any Error as an Article of our Faith, because the holy Ghost will not
that permit: nevertheless, as he is a private person, so may he Err even in
faith, as he may do other sins.

But how old is this Romish Doctrine? Of what age is this strange Faith? Of
this s^biect I have written at large, in my Golden Balance of Trial. This
only will I now say; that this popish Article, ( The Pope cannot Err in
faith. An: Dom. 1500.
) was never heard of in Christ's Church, for the space of 1500. years. Many
famous papists I might allege, but one Alphonsus will suffice. Libr. 1. de
haer. Capit. 4.
We doubt not (says he) whether one man may be a Pope and an heretic both
together. For I believe there is none so shameless a flatterer of the Pope,
(ever except our Jesuits, and Iesuited Papists,) that will ascribe this unto
him; that he can neither Err, nor be deceived in the exposition of the
Scriptures.

De facto; And thirdly, seeing this strange faith was not hatched or heard of
in the World, for the space of one thousand and five hundred years, no not in
Alphonsus his days, as we have heard already: I cannot but perforce I must
conclude, that it is a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 9.
Of the condign, so supposed merrite of works.
TRue it is, I freely grant, that the holy Fathers do often use the word
Merit, and do often merritorious: yet this they do not for any worthiness of
the works, but for Gods acceptance and promise sake, who has promised, and
will perform, not to suffer so much as one cup of cold water given in his
Name, Math, 10. 42. Mark, 1, 12.
to pass without reward. That is to say, the Fathers term good works
merritorious, because God has promised to accept the works of the Faithful
as worthy, for the worthiness of his Son: and for his merits, to reward
them with heaven, as if they had merited the same. For which respect, either
ever, or almost ever, they join Merrite and Grace together. Part. 3. chap. 9.
Of this subject I have written at large in my Survey of Popery. I will now
only say with their dear Abbot Bernard, Super cant: Sermon. 18.
It is sufficient to merrite, to know that our merrites are not sufficient.

True it is likewise, that not only the Fathers generally, See the Survey, vb^
sup.
Durandus, Aquinas, Gregorius, Ariminensis, Dominicus Scoto, Marsilius,
Waldensis, Burgensis, and sundry others, do uniformly and constantly affirm,
that no man's works, (how holy soever they be,) either are, or can be
meritorious properly; but only merritorious in an improper and large kind of
speech, as is already said. This is proved at large in my other books.

True it is thirdly, that the religious Friar and popish In 2. Sect: Did. 27.
Concl. 2. diffic. 4.
Josephus Angles, tells the Pope roundly, that it is the constant and
uniform faith of all the holy Doctors; that the best, and holiest man's works
upon earth, neither are, nor possibly can be merritorious, or worthy of
eternal life, if Gods holy and free promise be set aside: Without the which,
(says Angles in the name of all the rest,) the best works of all, are
altogether unworthy of so great reward. His express words are these; (
prorsus digna, wholly unworthy.) Where I with the Reader to observe seriously
with me, this word ( prorsus, which signifies wholly;) for if out best works
be wholly unworthy of the reward or glory, (as Iosep: Angles in the name of all
the holy Fathers and Doctors, tells the Pope both gravely and constantly,)
then doubtless the best works of all, can no way be meritorious. The case is
clear; for, to be meritorious, (as every child knows,) is to be worthy: And
consequently, seeing to be worthy, and to be meritorious, is all one, our
works which are no way worthy, but every way ( prorsus, unworthy) can no way
be meritorious. When any Papist in the world can truly disprooue this Illation,
let me be his bondslaue for his reward. Again, for the simple Readers help
and capacity, this is the state of the Controversy. The Papists hold, that
man's works do condignely, or woorth^ly (which is all one) merit eternal
reward. I, (in the name of all Catholics, and good Christians,) do hold, and
constantly defend the contrary. Now to merrite, is to be worthy, (^s is both
already proved, and of it seife evident) but the best works are no way
worthy, (as is alieadie proved, Ergo, the best works do no way merit. If
this argument be well marked, all papists are co^sounded everlastingly.

True it is fourthly, that the Jesuit S. R. Robert Parsons, (indeed I
challenge the man,) in his supposed and pretended Answer to The downfall of
Popery, has set down these Co^clusions against both the Pope and himself.
The first Conclusion; There is merit of eternal life, Concl. 1. ^age 218.
221. 223.
and our supernatural works done by Gods grace, are meritorious of eternal
life and glory. The second Conclusion Good works done in Gods grace, are
condignly merritorious of eternal life. The thi^d Conclusion; This condign
merrite is not absolute, but supposes the condition of Gods promise made to
reward it. These are the Jesuits Conclusions, set down by the best advise of
his best learned friends, among whom, the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine must
needs be one. Which Co^ciusions for all that, do evidently prove, as much as
I desire.

True it is fifthly, that the late popish Council of Trent, has accused all
such, as (...) or not believe the condign merit of man's works. And
co^sequentlie, it has made that an Article of Popish faith, (o wonderment of
the World,) which was no point of faith in the true Catholic Church, for the
space of 1540. years. An: Dom. 1540.
viz. The condign merit of man's work, amonster lately borne at Rome.

Now, to take away all wrangling, true it is (I will it not deny,) that the
Council of Trent has not the word ( condign,) but it has another word
equivalent to the same, viz. True merrite. And therefore, to answer (as the
Jesuit does,) that the Council has only the word ( true,) The Jesuit
consuteth himself.
not the word ( condign,) is mere foolery. For to merrite truly and
condignly, is all one. Otherwise, let our Jesuit tell us, how one can merrite
that thing truly, which he does not worthily and condignelyd serve?

Yea, to the Jesuits everlasting shame, and to the utter confusion of all his
lesuited brethern, S. R. him self; does most plainly against himself,
testify the same to all the world. These are his express words; That good
works are a condign, Page 224.
or w^orthy merrite of Heaven, Mark this point well.
follows of that they are a true merit thereof: because as I think, only
condign merrite, is true merrite. Thus writes our Jesuit. I allege his
words truly, as I will auoswere before God. And consequently, seeing true
merrite and condign merrite is all one, even by the Adversary his free grant;
it follows of necessity, that the Council decreed the condign merrite to be
a matter of says.

condign merrite of works I mean,) is yet scarce three-scote years of age;
I cannot but perforce conclude, with this incuitable illation, Ergo, it is but
a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 10.
Of Transubstantiation in Popish Mass.
THE popish Transubstantiation in their Mass, is to themselves so vnceritaine,
that they cannot toll in the world, what to say or think thereof. Rupertus, a
famous popish Abb^r, holds; that the Bread is united hypostatically to the
Son of God, Caietmus Henricus, and Capreolus, are of an other opinion.
Ioha^^es Parisiensis, held also that the Bread was assumpted, but in a
different manner from the opinion of Rupertus. Another opinion a firmeth the
annihilation of the Bread. Durandus for all that tells us, that only the
form of Bread is changed, and ohat the matter of Bread remains still in the
Eucharist. But Bellarmine, the Pope, and all his lesuites, hold with the
Council of Trents definition; that the Bread is transubstantiated into the
body of Christ Behold this sive^ harmonic and good agreement, in this
important point of popish faith.

Of this subject I have written elsewhere (...), I will here only touch the
birth and age thereof Transubstantion, is not only repugnant to all
Philosophy, but also so absurd in all Christian speculation, that it was
unknown to the Church of God, and to all approved Counsels, Fathers, and
Histories for the space of one thousand and two (...) years. It was first
hatched by Pope Innocentiue the (...) of that Name, in the late Council of
Lateran, which was holden 1215. years after Christ. An: Dom: 1215.
Yea, this council, and the determination thereof, was of so small reputation
at that time, that Durandus they own famous popish Doctor, who lived abode
threescore years after it, boldy published the contrary doctrine. Which thing
does ^ogall the Papists, that they cannot tell what to say to it. But seeing
this monster of popish says, was hid and unknown for 1206. years together, I
must needs conclude with this inevitable illation; Ergo, it is but a rotte^rag
of the new religion.

CHAP. 11.
Of Popish invocation of Saints.
OF this subject I have disputed at large in my Survey. Part. 3. cap. 7.
The Papists in their fond popish invocation, ascribe that to Saints, which is
only and soly proper to Christ himself. I prove it, because they make the
Saints departed, (I will not say, Traitors buried in hell) not only Mediators
of intercession, (which is their usual refuge, and fond so imagined evasion,)
but also of redemption and salvation. This one example may suffice for many.

Thomas (...), sometimes Bishop of Canterbury, (what a subject let others
Judge,) is invocated of the Pope, and all his popish crew; not barely and
absolutely as an holy man, (if perhaps he so were, which is more then I know,)
but as the Son of the living GOD, and the only Savior of the World. This
Affection to the godly, may seem wonderful; but it is such a known truth, as
no Papist whatsoever he be, (...) without blushing deny the same. These are
the express words of their Hymn, which they both say and sing upon that day
which they keep holy for his praise and honor: Tuper Thomae (...), que^ pro
te (...) Christ scandere, In Hymno Tho. Cant.
qua Thomas ascendit. By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend,
bring us shether, O Christ, whether Thomas did ascend.

Lo, Thomas (...) died for us, and shed his blood to bring us to heaven, as
the Pope tells us, and would enforce us to believe. If this Poperly be not
flat blasphemy, my wits are not at home. Let the indifferent Reader judge, and
be careful of his soul. This blasphemy is confirmed, by the usual practice
of the Papists, especially of the Jesuits. For their brother Jesuit Polanthus,
in his Treatise of Consesson, testifies as a truth unto the world, Polanch. de
modo audiendi confess.
that they ever add in the end of their Absolutions, these express words, The
Passion of our Lord lesus Christ, the merrits of the blessed Virgm Mary, and of
all Saints, and all the good thou shall do, and the punishment thou shall
suffer, be to thee for the remission of thy sins, for increase of grace, and
for the reward of eternal life. Lo, the merits of Saints, are joint
purchasers of our salvation with Christ's blood; and our own works, (God
have metcy upon us miserable sinners,) procure us remission of our sins,
increase of Grace, and etternall glory.

O intolerable Popery, who can endure to hear thy blasphemy! No Scripture,
no Council, no Father, no approved history, was ever acquainted with this
newly invented heresy, never known to the church of Christ, for the space of
one thousand years and odd. An: Dom: 1407.
I must therefore perforce conclude with this inevitable illation, Ergo,
popish invocation of Saints, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 12.
Of the Communion under (...) kind.
CHrist only, by the uniform consent of all learned Papists, has lawful
power to institute a Sacrament. Yet notwithstanding, our Papists have presumed
to alter this holy Order. For Christ commanded the holy Eucharist or
Communion, to be celebrated in two distinct kinds, Math, 26. 27. Math, 14, 23.
viz. in Bread and wine. He commanded all to drink, and they all drank of
it, says the holy Evangelist. And the Apostle Paul urging Christ's
institution to the Corinthians, tells them plainly and religiously, Cor. 11.
27
That they must receive the holy Eucharist under both kinds.

This was the practice of the ancient Church, for the space of 1230. years
after Christ. An: Dom. 1230.
About which time, they began in some odd Churches to lean off the Cup, and
to minister the Sacrament in Bread only. P. 3. q. 80. art. 12. in corp.
But that was done (as Aquinas confesses,) in some few places only.
Afterward, the Council of Constance, An: Dom: 1414.
(about the year of our Lord, 1414.) decreed it as an Article of Popish faith,
that the Eucharist might be lawfully received under one kind. I therefore must
perforce conclude with this inevitable illation; Ergo, to receive the holy
Eucharist under one kind only, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 13.
Of private Mass.
THe private communicating in the Popish Mass, where the Priest deuoureth up
all alone, is wicked, profane, and excerable, because it is repugnant to
Christ's institution, Math, 26. Mark, 14.
who commanded all to drink thereof; and to the Evangelist, who affirms all
to have drunk thereof; as also to the Apostle, who charge the vnpriested
Corinthians and laicall people, 1, Cor: 11. ver: 26, 27.
to make a remembrance of the Lords death until his second coming, so often
as they receive the holy Eucharist: and this to do, as well by drinking the
Cup, as by eating the Bread. This was the use and practice of the Church
every where, An: Dom: 1000.
for more then a thousand years together. But afterward, when the peoples
devotion began to be remiss, the priests then devoured up all alone.

I therefore cannot but conclude, with this inevitable illation; Ergo, late
popish private Mass, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 14.
Of Pope Martins dispensation, for the Brother to marry his natural Sister.
POpe Martin, says Antiminus, the popish Archbishop and canonized saint, Anto:
pa. 3. tit: 1. cap: 11. prepe sin.
took upon him to dispense with one, that he might mary his own natural
sister. Siluester Prierus, a famous religious Friar, sometime Master of the
Popes sacred palace, Syluest: in verbo Pap^.
has these words; Howbeit, pope Martin the fifth, dispensed with him, who had
contracted and consumated matrimony with his own natural sister: having first
co^sulted with his skillful Divines, so to avoid scandale, which otherwise was
likely to ensue thereupon.

Bartholmaeus Fumus, Fumut in verbo dispens.
a religious Dominican friar has these words; Nevertheless, when the deed
was done, Martin the fifth dispensed with one, who had consummated marriage with
his own^ natural Sister.

Angelus de Clau^sio, a religious Franciscan friar, and Vicar general of the
Cismontim Minor Angel: in verbo pap^.
has these words; Whereupon, my L. Archbishop of Florence affirms, that he
heard men of good credit say, that Pope Martin the fifth, after he had
consulted with many learned Divines and Canonists, dispensed with one who had
married his own natural sisters.

Card: (...) (faith Barthol Fumus,) affirms roundly, Fumus verbi supra.
that the Pope can dispense in all the degrees of consanguinitie and affinity,
save only with the Father and his daughter, and with the mother and her son.

Martinus Nauarrus, In Euchirid Page 115.
a famous popish writer, desendeth the opinion of Caietan greatly. Yea,
Caietane himself, (...) capit. 18.
in his Commentary upon Leuiticus, which he dedicated to Pope Clement, with the
Popes good liking and grateful acceptance, sings the self lame song. This
doctrine was never heard of, for the space of 1418. An: Do: 1418.
years. At which time, the Pope brought it from hell. Ergo, such popish
dispensation, is nothing else, but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 15.
Of worshipping of Images.
THe worshipping of Images, is this day high^^e esteemed in the Romish church,
insomuch that the Priests themselves, on Good Friday, are enjoined to salute
the Cross three several times, and that both kneeling, and with their shoes
put off.

Yea, adoration, and worshipping of Images and Relics, is this day grown to
such excessive superstition, as it is almost incredible to be told. Yet Gregory
the great, An: Dom: 590.
in his time, sharply reproved the worship done to Images, albeit he disliked
Serenus, the good Bishop of Mas^l^ae, for breaking the same in the Church.
Bieto in can: missae, lect. 40
Yea, Gabriell Bieto, a religious popish Friar, and a very learned
Schoole-Doctor, who lived long after Gregory and Serenus, even one thousand,
four hundred, An: Dom. 1484.
eighty and four years after Christ, does sharply inveigh and reprove the
worship done to Images. Ergo, the worshipping of Images, is but a rotten ragge
of the New Religion.

CHAP. 16.
Of Church-seruice in the vulgar tongue.
SAint Iustine, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyprian, S.
Hierom, S. Gregory, Sozomenus, Pa. 3. cha. 10.
Lyra, and many others, (as I have proved in my Survey at large,) do aftirme
constantly and uniformly, that the people in their days, were not as owls,
parrets, crows, pyes, and other birds, which were taught to sound they knew
not what, but as godly Christians, who both knew what the Minister said, and
made answer to the same. Whosoever reads my Survey of popery, cannot stand in
doubt hereof. lib 4. cap. 36.
Sozomenus shows plainly in his Ecclesiastical H^story, that in his time,
(which was 400. years after Christ,) An: Dom: 400.
the people and the Ministers of the Church, sang psalms together in the
church. I therefore cannot but conclude, that to celebrate Divine service in an
unknown tongue, is a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 17.
Of the antiquity of popish Mass, and the parts thereof.
THe Canon of the Mass, (which the late Papists have in great esteem and rare
admiration) is both uncertain, variable, and of young years. S. Gregory
tells us, Greg. Epi. lib. 7. capit. 68.
that one Scolasticus composed it. Platina a famous Papist, and Abbreuiator
Apostolical, shows plainly and co^pendiously, both at what time, and by
whom, every piece of popish Mass began. Platinainv. Sixt^.
Peter (says Platina) used only the Lords prayer, when he celebrated the holy
Mystery. James the Bishop of Jerusalem, increased the holy Mystery. Basilius
likewise added to them, and so did others. For Celestine the Bishop of Rome,
added the Introite; Gregory, the Kyrie Eleyson; Telesphorus, glortain excelsis
Deo; Gelasius the Collectes; Hieronimus, the Epistle and Gospel. Hallelu-ia
was borrowed of the Church of Jerusalem; the Creed was received of the Nicene
Counsel. Pelagius invented the commemoration of the dead; Leo the the third,
Incense: Inuocentius the first, the Pax, and Pope Sergius the Agnus dei. This
being so, I cannot but conclude, that every patch and p^ece of the Romish
Mass, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 18.
Of the profound Mysteries of Popish Mass.
POpe Sergius is the Author of Christ's threefold body, Peconecr. did 2 Cap tr.
form.
the body of our Lord (says Sergius) is threefolde, the part that is put into
the Chalice, signifies Christ's body risen again; the part eaten, Christ yet
walking on earth, the part remaining to the end of the Mass, Christ's body in
the grave: And that the Reader may the better know, the mutability of Popish
Mass, I give him to understand, that this practice of reserving one part to
the end of the mass, is at this day wholly changed, for the Priest eats up
aleuen in the church of Rome. O wonderful Novelties, in the disholy popish
Mass, which for all that, are as old, as Pope Sergius his nose: Ergo popish
foolish Mysteries, are but rotten rags of the New Religion.

CHAP. 19.
Of kissing the Popes feet.
IVstinianus the Emperor, after he had sent for the Pope Constantinus to come
to him at Nicomedia, Ar. Po. Burdeg^ An: Dom: 708.
received him very honorably, and sent him back. But first of a certain fondly
conceived humility, he fell down and kissed the Popes feet. This Emperor
reigned about 700. years after Christ; and here first began the kissing of
the Popes feet, which kissing as it was then done by the Emperor upon a fond
zeal, so is it this day continued with intolerable superstition, Ergo it is
but a rotten rag of the new religion.

CHAP. 20.
Of praying upon Beads.
AFter that the people of God had lived above a thousand years, An: Dom: 1089.
Polid, li, 5, ca, 9
using altogether godly books of prayer, one Peter, an Eremit a Frenchman
borne, perceiving the Nature of men to be so desirous of Novelties, was the
first that invented praying upon Beads. From hence sprang their Rosaries, their
Corones, their Lady Psalters, and a thousand superstitious kinds of Prayers,
whereof the rehearsal of the Original, is a sufficient confutation. Ergo, to
pray on Beads, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 21.
Of changing the Popes Name.
POpe Sergius the second, being somewhat ashamed of his ancient name, because
it sounded not pleasantly in men's ears, (for he was called Os Porei, Swines
mouth, or Hogs-snoute, If ye will), he changed his old name, and termed
himself Sergius. He lived above 840. An: Dom: 843. Plat ^n serg. 2. Ca^. l^.
336
years after Christ, from which time, it has been the manner of Popes or
Bishops or Rome to change their names, so soon as they aspired to the
Popedom. What a pride is this? For the Popish Bishops of Rome to change their
names, which they had given in their Baptism. No marvel, if they be ashamed
of Christ's religion? Well, I must per^orce conclude; Ergo the changing of the
Popes name, is but arotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 22
Of the Paschall Torch.
THe Papists use upon East^r-Eue, (...) in Chron.
to hallow a Torch or Taper of Wax, (...) lib, 6, cap. 7
(which they call Caerea, Pasch. lis,) into which they instill and sasten
Crosle-wise five of their hallowed greines. To this Taper they ascipe great
holiness, and reserve it til the Ascensio^ or Pentecost: An: Dom. 417.
Howbeit, it was first invented by Pope Sozimus 400. years after Christ. This
Sozimus ^alsified the Decrees of the Nicene Counsel, so to establish the
v^utped primacy of the Church o. Rome: And so I must conclude; Ergo, it is a
rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 23
Of the Popish Pax, and the mysteries thereof.
INnocentius the first invented the Pax; the Mysteries whereof (as Durandus
their famous Schoole-Doctor tells us) are so woe derfull, An: Dom. 404. Durand
lib, 4 cap, 55
that they had need to put many of their Priests to the School all their
life, before they will perfectly understand their obscure and unsavory
significations. The Paxe may not be given in Mass for the dead, because the
faithful souls (as Durand tells us) are not now in the troubles of the
world, but rest henceforth in the Lord, so that the kiss of peace or Pax, is
not needful for them, which is the sign of peace and concord. This is the
Mystery of the Popish Pax, An: Do: 404.
invented 400 yers and more after Christ, but here, I must tell them another
M^sterie; ( Viz) that if the withholding of the Pax do signify their rest in
the Lord, then doubtless is the Mass it self Idolacriticall, which is
offered for their Pargation.

Again, if the souls be in Purgatory, and so stand in need of the Mass;
then is their Ceremony false and fantastical, which signifies them to be in
rest. To this I most needs add, as a merriment, that our Popish Monks do
never receive the Pax, because forsooth they are dead to the World, but how
they are dead to the world, let the world judge. They have goodly houses,
pleasant Gardens, fine Celles; they are seated in the most wholesome air,
planted upon the most fertile soil, ennir oned with most defired prospects,
their diet is finely provided, their table ever well furnished; they want
neither wine, nor any dainty. This one sure thing may be the proof, sir Tho.
Bedle the Monk, Bedle the Monk.
was imprisoned in York many years, at what time my self for Popery was a
prisoner with him in the Kidcoat on Owse-bridge. He is dead, I will repeat no
vnttuth of the man, this only will I say, for instruction sake. He used vsualy
to send every day for a quart or a pint of wine, which was very chargeable to
him, being but a prisoner, his friends sometime wished him to abstain, adding
sundry reasons for the same, but he answered; that in their Abbey he had bin so
long used to drink Wine at his pleasure, that he could not now live without
it. O mortified Monks? O poor Friars? Nay, O Hypocrirall deceivers of the
world? For that more fitly is your name. Now I must conclude, Ergo the
invention of the popish Pax is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 24.
Of the Popes Bulls.
POpe Adrian the first of that Name, Polid. li, 6 ca, 7
caused his pardons, Priueledges, and Grants, to be sealed with Lead, which
they called the Popes Bulls. These Bulls were unknown to the Church, for the
space of 772. An: Dom: 772
years after Christ. Ergo, the Popes Bulls are a rotten ragge of the New
Religion.

CHAP. 25
Of the Popish Agnus Dei.
THe Church of God was above 1200. years, without the use or knowledge of this
Agnus Dei, Who was the first Author thereof, I do not read, An: Dom: 1247. In
libel, inst. sodal. lesu.
but cerraine it is, that it began of late years; for the Popes of late time
have used every seventh year, and the first year that every one is made Pope,
to consecrare solemnly with prayers, Chrismes, and manifold Ceremonies, certain
round pieces of wax, having the Print of a Lamb, and for that cause so termed;
With this kind of paltery stuff, the world is so bewitched, that infinite
numbers do ascribe a great part of their salvation thereunto.

He that has an Agnus des about him, must believe (as he is taught by our
Jesuits) libel, sod. lesu
that he shall be delivered by Sea and by Land, from all Tempests, Thunder,
Earthquakes; from Hayle, Thunderbolts, sudden death, and from all il evil.
If any man will not believe me, let him read a little Book printed at
Colonia, containing therein, the order sodalitatis B. Maria Virginis, which is
every where to be fold. In which Book he shall find much more then I have
said. Ergo the Popish Agnus dei, is nothing else bur a rotten ragge of the New
Religion.

CHAP. 26.
Of Candlemas-day
THe old Pagan Romans in the Calends of February, used to honor Februa, the
Mother of Mars, whom they supposed to be the God of battle, the honor they
did exhibit unto him was this, they went up and down the streets with
Candels and Torches burning in their hands, in regard hereof, that the
Christian Romans should not be inferior to the Pagan Romans, (...) 7. cap. 6
in Heathenish superstition; Pope Sergius decreed, that upon the day of the
purification of the blessed Virgin, An: Dom: 843. Par. 3. cap. 5
being the second of February, they should go in procession with burning
Candels in their hands, thereby signifying the blessed virgin to be pure and
free from sin. Of which point I have at large disputed in my Survey. Now I must
conclude, Ergo, to go up and cowne with burning Candles like Pagans, is but a
rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 27
Of the doleful Oath which Popish Bishops make to the Pope.
IN the ancient church for the space of 1227. years, all Bishops had free
access to Counsels, and free liberty when he came thither to speak the truth
out of the holy Scriptures: An: Dom. 1229.
but Pope Gregory the 9. took another course with them, that none should
have voices in Counsels, but such as s^vare obedience to the Pope, Decret, lib.
2. (...) 24, cap. 4
and promised with an Oath to defend his common Law. The express words of the
oath, the Reader may find in the downfall of Popery. I must here of force
Conclude; Ergo, this execrable Popish Oath, is but a rotten ragge of the New
Religion.

CHAP. 28.
Of the Popish fast of forty days, commonly called Lent.
OF the Popish manner of fasting, Sur^ey. part 1. book 1. Chap 16.
I have written elsewhere at large. Lent-fast (as Papists use of late years)
is ridiculous and hurtful both to souls and bodies. Ridiculous; first because
they prohibit Primo principaliter.
Cheese, and Butter, and yet do they permit all manner of strong Wines, all
^iads of most delicate Fishes, and other dainties whatsoever, flesh only
excepted. Albeit, sundry men do like as well of Fish as of flesh, if not
better. Again, because

Thirdly, because in all their sasts, the richer forte Ra^^ous, M^rmela^e,
Conserues of Cheries, (...) Fifthly, because they vs^to Cheese, Butter, milk,
the only food they have to live upon. Seauenthly, because all the day long,
they commonly will drink wine, eat bread funnels, manchets, and fruits, and
fed thereon at night, as if it were an ordinary settled dinner. And if they
defer their dinner till night, as sundry do for better liking Iundry times,
and as Englishmen have done of latter days, generally on Christmas-Eeue, then
do they practice the former privilege, in eating and drinking l^octally at
noone. Where I wish the Reader to observe this with me; that the popish
Lent-fast cannot be broken with drinking, though one be drunken twenty times a
day, no learned papist can this deny. For, albeit he sin by their law so
often as he is drunken, yet does he not thereby break their holy fast. O
wondo^ of all wonders in the Christian world!

( Hurtful to the soul.) (...)
because by means hereof, many have believed false doctrine to be the word of
God; and not only so, but they have also-ludged and rondemned themselves, for
transgressing men's traditions, Rom, 10, 3.
as the very laws of God. Wherein, while they sought to establish their own
tighteousnes, they fell from the righteousness of God. Math, 15, 9.
For to put religion in man's traditions; is flarly to abandon the worship of
the living God. Yea, by reason of these fasts, their souls were after in
damnable stare. I prove it, because they persuade themselves, that they were
as well bound to keep the Popes laws therein, as the flat commandments of
God; and consequently, so often as they brake them, (which was norare thing,)
so often did they commit damnable sin, because their acts were not of faith.
Romans 14, 23,


( Hurtf^ll to the body,) First, Tertio principaliter.
because many have shortened their days, by forbearing necessary food; The Art
of Physic condemns popish fasts in Lent.
Native heat is the proper workman of digestion, as grants every, skillful
Physician; and consequently, because our bodies are most hot in vvinter, (as
says Hippocrates,) at that time they stand in need of most meat. And because
our bodies be then cold and moist, hot and dry meats be convenient. In
Summer, because native heat is dispersed by exhalations, concoction is
weakened, and so less meat required. And because our bodies then be hot and
dry, cold and moist meats are proportional. In Autumn, because the
extrinsecall heat is more remiss then in Summer, and the natural heat
thereby more united, meat ought more largely to be used. The Springtime
keeps a mean between Winter and Summer, and takes part of them both: and
therefore out diet then, must neither be altogether of hot and dry mea^es; as
in Winter (...) either yet altogether of cold and moist meats, as in Summer.
And consequently popish institution of Lent, was not only superstitious and
ungodly, but also altogether preuidieiall to the health of the body. I prove
it, because as Hypocrates w^iteth, all sudden murations are dangerous, and^
so after abundant eating of flesh all the Winter season, suddenly to abstain
wholly from the same, cannot but be evil.

This is confirmed unto us sundry ways: first, Antiperistasis, as by reason of
long sleep. And therefore since much meat is necessary at that time, our
popish Lent-fast prescribing little meat, must needs be prejudicial.

Although there were in the ancient Church, a free kind of yearly fast,
whereof the Papists pretend an Apish imitation; yet is their usual Popish
Lent-fast, not only superstitious, but altogether different from the same.
Superstitious, because they intend thereby to satisfy for their sins, and to
merrite heaven. Lent, was not uniformly practiced in the (...) Church, but
lest indifferent to the discretion of thery one.

The old Romans fasted three weeks before Easter; intermitting their fast
weekly upon their Saturdayes and Sondai^e. The Slauonians, Alexandrians, Hist:
trig. lib. 9. cap. ^. 38.
and Greecians, fasted (...) weeks. Others continued their fast senueil
weeks, but they fasted only fine days in every week.

Thirdly, because the fast of the aunclent Church Trip. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38.
Soz^m: lib. 7. capit: 19. Eusebius: lib. 5. cap. 24.
some only becade; othersome nothing at all; other-some, at night are all kind
of meats. All which, Cassiodorus both summarily and pithily compriseth in
these golden words; Because there is no Law made for fasting, I think (says
he,) the Apostles left this matter to our own consideration, that every one
should do without fear or necessity, what seemed most convenient for
himself.

Fifthly, because S. Spiredion, (a man so holy that he Soz^m: (...). cap: ^. 11.
to eat as he did. And when the Stranger refused to eat flesh with him,
alleging for his refusal, that he was a Christian, and so prohibited to eat
flesh at that time, N^cep. li. 8 capit. 42 Histo: trip. lib. 1. capit. 1^.
S. Spiridion replied and said; that he ought the rather to eat, because he
was a christian. For (says S. Spiridion,) All things are pure to the pure.
This example is able our self, to satisfy any indifferent Reader. Spiridion
(that holy man of God,) did eat Spiridion, proves evidently, that to make
choice of meats for religion sake, was deemed superstitious and ungodly, not
only in the Apostles time, but also many hundred yetes after their departure
hence. To which I add, that this freedom of eating all Kind of meats in Lent,
was usual in the Church for the space of 400. An: Dom. 427.
years after Christ. And so I must conclude with this incuitable illation;
Ergo, late popish Lent-fast, is but a rotten ragge of the New Religion.

CHAP. 29
of the annulling of Popish wedlock.
Whatsoever the Bishop of Rome holds and defines, that must every Papist
believe, hold, and maintain, Math, 19. 17
as an Article of his faith. Matrimony pronounced by God to be indisloluble,
An: Dom. 1540.
the Church for the space of 1500. years durst never dissolve: but the late
Pope of Rome, ( Pius, Paulus, and Julius,) have taken in hand roundly to
dissolve the same. This truth is proved at large, in the Downfall of Popery.
But the Papists tell us, that the facts and Decrees or their Popes, must be
defended, how false and absurd soever they seem,* Cauarravias a famous and
learned popish Bishop, has these words, Nec me latet, etc. I know (says he)
that (...) holds the contrary opinion, but nevertheless, we must defend the
first opinion, least those things which every where are practiced, be utterly
overthrown. Thus says the great Canonist, and learned popish Bishop
Cauarruvias, whose words are setre down at large in my M^tyues. This is the
same doctrine in effect, which the popish cano^^ted Saint Antonius, and their
famous S^mmrst, Syl^^iter Prierus tells us, viz. Anton: part 1. tib. 10. cap.
3. Sylu^deindulg.
That whatsoever the Pope does, whether we can prove the same by the holy
Scripture, or no, yet we must belseeue it to be so. Lo, the Popes doings
must perforce be (...) otherwise, Popery cannot stand I (...) therefore but
conclude, Ergo, Popery is the new Religion.

CHAP. 30.
Of the Popes pretended (...) over and above a general Council.
THe late Popes, or Bishops of Rome, (which is all one,) with their Ies^^es and
Iesuited Papists, do obstinately and peremptorily affirm, as an undoubted
truth, that the Pope is above a General Council; and they seem to prove it,
because the Pope sitting in his Chair at home, (as one that cannot Err,)
confirms or condemns the Council at his good pleasure. And therefore do
the Rhemists, (that lesuited brood) tell us plainly, (if we will believe
the^,) that there is no necessity of a General or Provincial Counbell, save
only for the better contentation of the people. But this is a lote vpshirt
faith and doctrine, never known to the church of God, An: Dom: 1415.
for the space of 1415. years after Christ, that is to say, until the
General Council of Constance. Which Council defined by a firm and resolute
Decree, as a matter of faith; than a General Council was above the Pope: and
therefore did the said Council depose three Popes, ( John 23. Gregory 12. and
Benedict 13.) and cho^ Ma^tin 5. and made him Pope. And so likewise the
General Council of Basil, An: Dom. 1431.
about fifteen years after that, cited Pope Eugenius to appear, and for his
contu^acie d^posed him, and chose Amadaeus. (who was named Faelix 5) in his
room. Yea, Cardinal Camer acensis, Abbas panor^nitanus, (...) C^sanus, (...)
Papa, Cardinalis Florentinus, Johannes Cersanus, ^s^obus Almaynus, Abulensis,
and other learned Papists generally, (the Jesuits and their Iesuited crew
excepted) do all constantly defend as an undoubted truth that a General
Council is above the Pope. I therefore cannot but conclude with this
incuitable illation, Ergo popish, says and doctrine, by which we must believe
the Pope to be above a General Council, is but a rotten r^gge of the New
Religion. ()

Laus Deo vni et trino. Amen.

