THE SPECVLATION of Usury.

Psalm. 15. 1, 5. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? He that gives not
his money unto usury, nor takes reward against the innocent. Basilius in
Psalm. 14. Animalia pariendo desinunt, cum foetus ipsorum parere incipiunt;
argentum vero foeneratoris tam antiquum quam nouum parit. LONDON Printed by
Valentine Symmes. 1596

To the right Worshipful sir Thomas Egerton knight, the worthy master of the
Rolls.
TRuly wrote the elect vessel of our Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 10. v. 11.
that upon us are come the ends of the world. For as Christ told us, we see,
Matthew. 24. v. 12.
that in this last age Charity waxes cold, that iniquity has gotten the
upper hand. Now piety is deemed folly; now scurrilitie is reputed bravery;
now fidelity is judged vanity; now perjury is thought skillful policy; now
charity is termed hypocrisy; now deceitful dealing is highly commended, and
treason practiced every where; 2. Sam. 17. v. 1^
now crafty Achitophels are much esteemed, and faithful Chusaies little or
nothing at all regarded. Psalm. 12. v. 1.
Now have we need to exclame with Gods anointed Prophet, Help Lord, for good
and godly men do perish and decay; now faith and truth from worldly men is
parted clean away. Now, now, is nothing more frequent with the rich men of
this world, than to writhe about the necks of their poor neighbors, and to
impouerish them with the filthy lucre of Usury. Which Usury is this day
amiably embraced of innumerable; and so magnified of many, that they blush not
wiih brazen faces to defend it, and to term it a lawful contract. Yea, some
are so ravished with this kind of impiety, that they have sold their
inheritance, and thereby provided a stock of money; which they lend out
continually for this filthy lucre, to the utter undoing of their honest needy
neighbors. In regard hereof, that all Usurers may behold the turpitude of
their dishonest lucre, and once have true internal remorce for the same (if it
will please our merciful God to bestow it on them) I have according to the
measure of my small talent, employed seriously my earnest study, care, and
industry, in compiling this succinct and plain Treatise. Your Worships zeal
in Gods true religion; your painful service in her Majesty's affairs; your
cheerful countenance toward all loyal subjects; your sincere proceeding in
all manner of justice, as well in the behalf of the poorest as of the rich; your
rare great affection to all painful laborers in Christ's vineyard; and
especially your wonderful kindness, your unspeakable courtesies, and other
your manifold benefits toward my seely self the meanest of many thousands;
have worthily deserved far better things, both of others and at my hands.
Your worship I know, delights not to hear these commendations, though in
deed (absit verbo adulatio) they be far inferior to your condign deserts.
For as it is truly said, they are best worthy of true praise, that least
desire the same. I therefore, though not able to render condign compensation
for your manifold goodness to me wards; do humbly present unto your Worship,
that which I may, and as I can; that is, this my unpolished Speculation, as an
infallible argument of my ready grateful mind, if power were correspondent
unto will. Accept the gift I pray you heartily in good part, as if it were a
better thing: so commending your Worship, and all your actions, words, and
thoughts to the grace of our good God, I humbly take my leave. From my study
this 18. of March 1595.

Your Worships ever to command, THOMAS BELL.

Of the essence, nature, and definition of Usury.
The first Chapter.
BEfore I come to the precise description or definition of Vssurie, I must
require thee (gentle reader) to observe two things with me. First, that it is
one thing to A distinction very necessary to be observed.
to wit, co^modatum, locatum, and mutuum, which are confounded in our English
tongue, and taken only for loan or the thing that is lent. When therefore and
so often as I shall speak of loan or the thing lent, my meaning ever is to
speak of that loan, or of that thing lent, which is called in latin mutuum.
which I here admonish once for all; to avoid confusion and tedious repetition,
in this my discourse following.

The sin of usury, The definition of usury.
is the exacting, intending, or receiving of the usury, or of that gain which
is given for the loan. Usurie it self is that gain, which is exacted or
principally intended for the loan of our money, or of other things estimable
with money.

I say first, (exacted,) because a thing given voluntarily A deformed adiunct.
is not usury; neither does it make the receiver to be an usurer, if it have
not a deformed adiunct.

I say secondly, (principally intended) because gain intended

I say thirdly, (of money, or things estimable with money) the constitutions
made in councels of best approved antiquity. Which thing shall be proved
copiously, in the next Chapter following.

Of the deformity and great sin of Usury. Chap. 2.
WHen I consider Gods holy will revealed in his sacred word, the manifold
testimonies of the ancient fathers, and the decrees of approved Synods; I
cannot but admire the condition of many in these our days; who are so far
from condemning usury, that they do not only practice it, but without
blushing defend the same, as an honest and lawful thing. I will therefore by
Gods holy assistance, so discover the curpitude of filthy usury by three
several testimonies; as every child may with facility, behold how grievous a
sin it is.

The first distinction, of the testimony of the holy Scriptures.
THe first place of my first proof, is taken out of the book of Exodus in
these words: Exodus 22. v. 25.
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not be an usurer to him: ye shall not oppress him with usury.

The second place is contained in Leuiticus, in these express words: Leuit.
25. v. 35. 36.
If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, thou shall
relieve him: thou shall take no usury of him, nor vantage, but thou shall
fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee.

The third place is taken out of the Psalms, Psalm. 15. v. 1. 5.
and these are the words: Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, who shall
rest in thine holy mountain? he that gives not his money unto usury, nor
takes reward against the innocent.

The fourth place is in the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 18. v. 13.
who writes in this manner (He that) has given forth upon usury, or has
taken increase, shall he live? he shall not live; seeing he has done al these
abominations, he shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon him.

The fifth and last place, Luke ^. v. 35.
is taken out of the holy Gospel, in these express words: Wherefore love ye
your enemies, and do good, and lend, not hoping for any gain, and your reward
shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the most High.

Out of these texts I note first, that usury is a very great sin,

I note secondly, that no usurer loves or fears God, but

I note thirdly, that it is not only unlawful to take or require

I note fourthly, that usurers cannot dwell in Gods house,

The second distinction, of the testimony of ancient Councils.
THe ancient council Elebe^tine of some called Granado, decreed against
usury, above one thousand, two hundred, and sixty years sithence, in the
year of our Lord God 325. the words are these; Conc. Eleber. can. 20.
Si quis clericorum detectus fuerit vsuras accipere placuit degradari and
abstinere. Si quis etiam laicus accepisse probatur vsuras, and promiserit
correptus, se iam cessaturum nec vlterius exacturum, placetei veniam tribui, si
vero in ea iniquitate durauerit, ab ecclesia sciat se esse proijciendum If any
of the clergy shall be convinced to take usury, then we decree that he shall
not only surcease, but withal he degraded (for his wicked fact.) Yea if a lay
man who is known to take usury, shall after admonition give it over, and deal
no longer therewith, the council is content to pardon him. But if that lay man
shall continue in that iniquity, let him know that the church will
excommunicate him, (and deliver him up to satan, as the apostle terms it.) By
these words of this holy and ancient council^ we may see evidently, Joe, usury
is flat iniquity in all sorts of people.
that usury is a grievous sin in all sorts of people; and that lay persons,
who would not surcease from taking usury, were punished with excommunication,
the most terrible and fearful punishment that can in this life happen unto man.

The famous council of Nice, which was holden in the year of our Lord God 327.
utterly condemns usury, as a thing prohibited by the express word of God.
These are the words; Quoniam multi clerici auaririae causa t^rpia lucra
sectantes, Conc. Nicen. can. 18.
obliti sunt diuini praecepti (quo dictum est: qui pecuntam suam non dedit ad
vsuram) foenerantes centesimas exigunt, statuit hoc sanctum concilium, vt si
quis innentus fuerit, post hanc definitionem vsuras accipere, vel ex quolibet
tali negotio turpia lucra sectari, veletiam species frumentorum ad septuplum
dare: omnis qui tale aliquid conatus fuerit ad quaestum, deijciatur a clero,
and alienus ab ecclesiasticohabeatur gradu. Because many of the clergy,
Behold, usury is directly against Gods commandment.
while they are covetous and follow after filthy gain, do forget Gods holy
precept (which pronounces him blessed that has not given his money unto
usury,) and giving forth upon usury, require the hundred part; this holy
council decrees, that if any be found after this constitution, to take usury,
or to follow dishonest gain of any such merchandise, or else to give to the
seventh part their kinds of corn; let every one that shall attempt any such
thing for gain, be cast out from the clergy, and be removed from
ecclesiastical function.

Elebertine.







The ancient council of Arles the first, Conc. 1.
celebrated about the same time, Arelat.
with the former Synods, taught the self same doctrine in these words; can.
12.
de ministris qui foenerantur, placuit, eos iuxta formam diuinitus datam, a
communione abstinere. concerning the ministers which are usurers, we decree
that they shall abstain from the holy Communion, even as it is appointed by
God. Lo, God himself does so loathe and detest usury, that he will have no
usurers to receive his holy Communion.

The third council of Carthage, Conc. 3.
which was holden in the year of our Lord, 400. Carthag.
condemns usury as the other councels did before it. can. 16.


The third distinction, of the testimony of the ancient fathers.
Usury is so condemned by all approved writers of antiquity; as no one
ancient father can be named, who ever wrote one word in defense of it:
nevertheless, very many of the holy fathers, have in large manner discovered
that filthy lucre; of which number, I will now content my self with a few.

Lactantius Firmianus of this matter writes in this manner; Lactantius lib. 6.
diuinar. intit. cap. 18.
Pecuniae, si quam crediderit, non accipiet vsuram; vt and beneficium sit
incolume quod succurrit necessitati, and abstineat se prorsus alieno. in hoc
enim genere officij debet suo esse contentus, quem oportet ne proprio quidem
parcere, vt bonum faciat; plus autem accipere quam dederit, iniustum est quod
qui facit, insidiatur quodammodo, vt ex alterius necessitate praedetur: If a
man lend any money, he must not take usury for the same; as well to make the
benefit safe and sound which relieueth necessity, as to keep himself free
from another man's goods. for in this kind of service, he must be content with
his own; who is bound not to spare his own, that so he may do good; but to
take more then he gave, Usuris is flat theft and ^^to^^ion.
is a thing unjust. which who so does, works by deceit, that so he may make a
pray of another man's necessity. Out of these golden words of this ancient
writer, who lived above 1200. years ago, I note first, that whosoever

I note secondly, that to receive more then was given, is usury

I note thirdly, that all usurers deal deceitfully, and make a

Saint Basil, Basilius in Psalm. 14. ser. ^, tom. 1.
reputed so excellent a divine that he was surnamed (magnus) the great, does
so lively paint out usurers in their deserved colors; as all hearts that are
not of flint or iron will be mollified with one only recital of the same: these
therefore are his words; Nam Ezechiel in maximis ponit malis foenus, and plus
quam sortem accipere, and lex illud luculenter prohibet. Sequitur auarus autem
videns inopem necessitate coactum ad genua sua supplicem procumbentem, ecquid
non abiectum facientem? quid non loquentem? non miseretur illius, vtut praeter
decorum se supplicem exhibeat, communem non cogitat naturam, humilibus
supplicationibus nihil cedit, sed immobilis implacabilisque consistens, and nec
precibus vincitur nec lachrymis mollitur, sed negando perseuerat: jurat insuper
atque protestatur sese omnino carere pecunia, and quaerere si quem ipse
faeneratorem inueniat, ac mendacio fidem per iur amentum faciens, iniquae and
inhumanae mercaturae impudens periurium addit; postquam vero conspicit miserum
illum meminisse faenor i^ poeturamque sortis vltro offerentem, supercilium
remittere ac subridere incipit; tunc demum amicitiae paternae recordatur, and
familiarem and amicum appellat. videamus inquit, si quid nobis restat depositi
argenti: est n. amic^ hominis depositum quoddam apud nos, vnde quaestum ille
facit, graueque foenus nobis imposuit. nos vero ex hoc detrahemus, longeque
minore tibi dabimus. For (the Prophet Ezechiel) places usury and all that is
more then the principal, amongst the greatest sins; and the Law does
expressly forbid the same. But the covetous man seeing the poor man enforced
with necessity, fallen prostrate at his feet, making humble suit unto him,
abacing himself in all kind of seruilitie, does not for all that extend any
compassion toward him, howesoeuer he submit him self more then seemly order
would require; he remembers not the nature common to them both, Behold the
express practice of usurers. this day in England.
he gives no place to humble request, he remains immovable and implacable,
he is neither overcome with prayers, nor mollified with tears* but still
continues in denial. Besides this he swears and protests that he has no
money at all, but that himself seeks, where to find an usurer; and so
swearing falsehood to be truth, he adds impudent perjury to naughty and
cruel merchandise: yet so soon as the silly poor man makes mention of
usury, and willingly offers the overplus above the principal, he abateth
his sour councenance, and begins to smile; then at the length he
remembers paternall amity, and calls him neighbor and friend. let us see
says he, if there remain any money, O wicked greedines joined with falsehood
and hypocrisy.
of that which was left in our hands. For a friend of mine left a piece of
money with me, whereof he uses to make a gain, and has imposed a great
interest upon us; yet we will subtract a piece of it, and let you have it
far better cheap.

Out of these words of this holy, learned, and ancient father, I note first,
that usury is proved out of holy writ, to be S. Basil, so says the holy
Prophet Ezechiel.

I note secondly, that usurers are unmerciful and very cruel

I note thirdly, that usurers be liars and perjured persons;

I note fourthly, that howsoever usurers protest and swear

Saint Ambrose does no less exclaim against usury, then you have heard
already out of Saint Basil. Yea, he handles no other matter throughout many
Chapters of a large book; some few words only I will allege, by which the
Reader may have an indifferent conjecture of the rest: these are the words;
Ambrosius libr. dd Tobis, caa. 3. tom. 4.
Numeratur pecunia, addicitur libertas, absoluitur miser minore debito, minore
ligatur. Talia sunt vestra diuites beneficia: minus datis, and plus exigitis.
Talis humanitas, vt spolietis etia^ dum subuenitis: foecundus vobis etia^
pauper est ad qu^stum Vsurarius est egenus cogentibus vobis habet quod reddaet,
quod impendat, non habet. Misericordes plane viri quem alij absoluitis, vobis
addicitis. vsuras soluit, qui victu indiget; an quicquam grauius? ille
medicamentum quaerit, vos offertis venenum. Panem implorat, gladium porrigitis:
libertatem obsecrat, seruitutem irrogatis. absolutionem praecatur, informis
laquie nodum stringitis. Money is told, liberty is sold, the silly poor man
is quit of the less debt, and fast bound to the greater. Such (O rich men) are
your benefits, you give less, O intolerable iniquity.
and exact more; such is your humanity, that while you seem to help a man,
you spoil him utterly. Your profit is wrought, even by the poor man unto your
gain. the usurer is needy. by your exaction he has something to restore,
but plain nothing to bestow. You are doubtless merciful men. whom you make
free to others, those you make bondmen to your selves. he pays usury, that
has not whereon to live. can any thing be a more grievous sin? he seeks
for a medicine, you give him poison. he asks bread, you give him a sword. he
prays to have liberty, you bring him into seruilitie. he desires to be
loosed, you tie a knot on the cord.

Saint Chrysostom reputeth the usurer, Chrysostom. in cap. 21. Mat. hom. 38.
tom. 2. p. 999.
for the most cruel and abject caitife in the world, thus does he write; Qui
autem comparat rem, vt illam ipsam integram and immutatam dando lucaretur; ille
est mereator, qui de templo Dei eijcitur. vnde, super omnes mercatores plus
maledictus est vsurarius. si. n. qui rem comparatam vendit, mercator est and
maledictus; quanto magis maledictus erit, qui non comparatam pecuniam. sed a
Deo donatam sibi, dat ad vsuram? secundo, quia mercator dat rem, vt iam illam
non repetat; iste autem postquam foenerauerit, and sua iterum repetit, and
alienae tollit cum suis. He that provides a thing to gain, by giving it
entire and unchanged, is that merchant that is cast out of the temple of God.
A fine epithiton for the usurer.
Wherefore more accursed is the usurer then all merchants in the world. for if
he that sells the thing he has, be a merchant, and accursed; how much more
shall he be accursed, that gives to usury not the money he has gotten, but
that which God gave him. again, because the merchant gives the thing never
henceforth to receive it again; but the usurer after he has lent his money,
both takes his own again, and other men's with his own.

S. Augustine is in this point as in all other things, August. in psa. 36.
conc. 3.
brief, pithy, and sweet: these are his words; Nolo sitis foeneratores, and
ideo nolo, quia Deus non vult: nam si ego nolo, and Deus vult, agite. si autem
Deus non vult, etiamsi ego vellem, malo suo ageret qui ageret. Vnde apparet
Deum hoc nolle. Dictum est alio loco, qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad vsuram. Et
quam detestabile sit, and quam odiosum, quam execrandum, puto quia and ipsi
foeneratores nouerunt. I will not have you to be usurers, and therefore will
not I, because God will not. for though I will not, yet if God will, ye may do
it. but if God will not then although I would, yet should he do it to his own
harm, that would do it. But how do we know, that God will it not: because it is
said in another place; He that has not given his money to usury. Now how
detestable, how odious and execrable a thing it is, I think the usurers
themselves do know.

S. Hierome the most excellent and skillful clarke, is in this point consonant
to the rest, Hieron. libr. 6. in 18. cap. Ezee.
these are his express words; Respondeat nobis breuiter foenerator misericors,
vtrum habenti dederit, an non habenti Si habenti, vtique dare non debuerat, sed
dedit quasi non habenti. Ergo quare plus exigit quasi ab habente? alij pro
pecuniae foenerata, solent munuscula accipere diuersi generis; and non
intelligunt vsuram appellari, and superabundantiam, quicquid illud est, si ab
eo quod dederint plus acceperint* Let the merciful usurer (...) answer me,
whether he lent to him that had, or to him that wanted: If to him that had, he
doubtless should not have done it; but he gave it as to one that had not,
therefore why does he exact more, as of one that has? Others for lent money
use to take gifts of another kind; and they understand not that usury is
termed that surplusage or overplus whatsoever it be that they take more than
they gave. To these Fathers, the testimony of S. Bernard Guerricus shall be
added for a complement; Bernard. Gue^^. in epist. (...). in fine oper. Bernas.
Clareuall.
these are his words: melius est grauem pati famen, quam patrimonii
venditionem: sed melius est partem vendere, quam se vsuris subiicere. Quid est
vsura? venenum patrimonii. Quid est vsura legis? latropraecedens quod intendit:
it is better to suffer great famine, then to sell thy patrimony, yet is it
better for thee to sell a piece of it, then to live in the bondage of usury.
What is usury? The poison of our patrimony. What is the usury of the law? A
thief going before that that he intends to do. S. Bernard Clareuallensis
compares usurers with thieves and hypocrites, and says, that they be unworthy
the name of Christians; Bernat. epist. 322
these are the words: Sicubi desunt Iudaei peius iudaizare dolemus christianos
foeneratores, si tamen christianos and non magis baptizatos Iudaeos conuenit
appellari: if the Jews be wanting in any place, christians that be usurers (a
pitiful case) are found to surpass them in Iudaisme; if it be that we may
term them Christians, and not rather baptized Jews.

Of the difference between Viurie and other lawful contracts of lending. Chap.
3.
FOr the exact understanding of this chapter we must observe commodatum
differs from locatum: commodatum is, when we lend a thing to a certain day,
not requiring any price or consideration for the loan.

locatum is, when we lend a thing to a certain day, requiring a certain price
or consideration for the same.

commodatum, locatum, and mutuum, are confounded in our vulgar tongue, and that
mutuum is even as locatum, The difference between mutuum and locatum.
when we lend a thing to a certain day, requiring a certain price or
consideration for the same. But the difference is this, because in locato, we
keep still the dominion and propriety of the thing which we lend; but in
mutuo, the dominion and propriety of the thing lent, (...) translated from us
to him that borrows the same. This observation ought never to be forgotten.

Things consumptible and things inconsumptible.
as our horses, our oxen, our kine, our sheep, and such like; we may take
competently for the loan, use, or increase of the same; because after the
loan of such things, the dominion and propriety of the same, still remains in
our selves. Contrariwise it falls out, in things consumptible with the use;
because the dominion and propriety of such things which before was in our
selves, passes from us to the borrowers, ipso facto with the loan thereof.
Such things are money, wine, a^e, beer, bread, oil, corn, and the like. For
in these things it is impossible to separate the use from the dominion of the
thing it self: and consequently, whenever ye lend me any such thing, ipso
facto ye change the property of the thing, and make me the owner and lord of
the same.

We must observe fifthly, that money is a thing which of it

We must observe sixthly, that we may speak of money two Formally and materially.
as the rule and measure of things to be sold. And when money thus taken is
lent, the dominion and propriety is ever altered with the loan. It is taken
materially: when it is lent to be given for a pledge, for ostentation, and
other like intents, so as the selfsame numero must be restored. The use and
commodity of these observations and distinctions, will appear throughout the
chapters following.

Of the object of usury, that is, of the matter and things in which usury is
committed. Chap. 4.
MAny think that usury consists in the loan of money only; but they are
grosely deceived, in that their imagination. For it chances so often as any
thing is taken for the loan in what kind of things soever. This I will prove
manifestly, as well by the scriptures, as by the holy fathers.

Touching the Scripture, Ezech. 18. v. 17.
the first place is in Ezechiel, in these words; Neither has received usury
nor increase: where the word (increase) may be supplied as well to other things
as to money.

The second place makes this matter a little plainer, Leuit. 25. v. 37.
these are the words; Thou shall not give him thy money to usury, nor lend him
thy vitailes for increase. Lo, not only the increase of money, but of
vittailes also is prohibited.

The third place is in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 23. v. 19.
so plain and so evident, as no man be he never so subtle, can by any color
avoid the same: these are the words; Thou shall not give to usury to thy
brother; as usury of money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to
usury.

Concerning the fathers, Hier. in 18. cap. Ezech. libr. 6.
S. Hierom writes in this manner, Putant quidam vsuram tantum esse in pecunia:
quod praeuidens scriptura diuina, omni rei aufert super abundantiam: vt plus
non recipias, quam dedisti. Solent in agris frumenti, and milij, vini, and olei
caeter arumque specierum vsurae exigi, sieve vt appellat sermo diuinus
abundantiae. Some men think that usury is only in money; which the holy
scripture foreseeing, takes away the superabendance of every thing; that thou
receive no more then that which thou gave. They are wont to exact usury, or
as holy Writ terms it, overplus, of corn, millet, wine, Usury is only in
things consumptible with the use.
oil, and other things. Behold here, how usury is in all such things, as are
consumptible with the use. For in other things usury can have no place. Let
the Reader mark well my words, and understand and perfectly what I say.

S. Austen has these words, August in psalm. 36. conc. 3.
Non pecuniam solam sed aliquid plus quam dedisli, sieve illud triticum sit,
sieve vinum, sieve oleum, sieve quodlibet aliud, si plus quam dedisti expectas
accipere, foeneratores. If thou expect to receive more then thou gave, not
only money, but any thing more then thou did give, whether it be wheat, or
wine, or oil, or whatsoever else, thou art an usurer. Thus writes this holy
and learned father, whose words are so plain, as no gloss is needful for the
same.

S. Ambrose writes in this manner; Ambros. libr. de Tob. cap. 14.
Et esca vsura est, and vestis vsura est, and quodeunque sorti accedit. vsura
est. Quod velis ei nomen imponas. vsura est. Si licitum est, cur vocabulum
refugis? cur velamen obtexis? si illsicitum est, cur incrementum requiris? quod
peius est, hoc vitium plurimorium est, and maxim diuitum quibus hoc nomine
instruuntur cellaria. Both meat is usury, and thy garment is usury, and it is
usury, whatsoever is more than the principalll. Give it what name thou will,
it is usury. If it be lawful, why do thou refuse the name? why do thou
hide it with a veil: if it be unlawful, why do thou require more then thou
gaues? And which is worse, many have this fault, specially rich men, whose
storehouses are furnished with the name. Lo, not only money, but meat, come,
garments, and what things else soever, is flat usury; if any thing above the
principal be exacted for the loan.

Of the several kinds of Usury, and their proper adjuncts. Chap. 5.
THere be two kinds of usury, Usury mental and real
to wit, mental usury, and usury real.

Mental usury is, when one wishes or expects overplus for the loan, but
does not exact the same by any external word or covenant. This kind is not
subject to restitution.

Real usury is of two sorts, to wit, manifest, and palliate: manifest usury
real is, when surplussage is exacted for the loan, by express words of
covenant: and this kind is not only a damnable sin, but also binds to
restitution.

Palliate usury real is, when more then the principal is exacted for the
loan, yet not by express and plain terms, but in a secret and bid kind of
bargaining. This palliate usury is a very detestable sin, and binds the
receiver to restitution, although it be this day frequent (alas for pity) in
all kind of bargaining. Note this point well.
For, how often soever the seller sells better cheap, because he receives
the money before hand; or dearer, because he forbeareth his money till a day;
so often doubtless is this palliate usury committed, and the overplus indeed
exacted for the loan of the money. Provided ever, unless the day be to his
hinderance.

The example of the former, to wit, when things are sold better cheap for
having the money before hand.

An honest poor neighbor being in great distress, comes to a rich covetous
miser, and desires to borrow some money for a time. The crafty dealing of the
usurer.
Well (says the covetous man) you want money, but you have that which I would
buy, and if not, you may provide it to serve my turn. What shall I give you
for so many bushelles of corn, to be delivered at such a day, and you shall
have present money to serve your need? and because the poor man must needs
have money in hand, such is his necessity, the rich man, (though he will not
in precise terms exact more money and manifest usury, because he would not be
reputed an usurer) yet does he enforce his poor neighbor, on whom he ought
by Gods laws to have compassion, to sell his goods at under value, and that he
does indeed for the very lone of his money. For first the poor man might as
well

2 Secondly, the poor manwould not have been bound

3 Thirdly the overplus of the corn indeed, Note that this corn is vsualy
bought of them, that have none to deliver, which is too too abominable.
was only eracted for the loan of the money (fle upon al crafty usury.)
For otherwise, he should and would have granted the lone of the money freely,
until the day in which he should receive the corn. And withal he ought to have
taken the corn by the current price of the market, and not as his covetous
mind did design. Some covetous wretches deal more subtle it, but no less
wickedlie. For example, a poor man came not long sithence, to a rich man, whom
my self know, and his usual manner of dealing, (the man shall here be nameles,
though neither before God nor the world blameles) and desiredt a borrow, 33. s
4. d. You have a mare quoth th^e rich man, I will give ye so much for her: alas,
says the poor man, I may not forgo her, for she is the best part of my poor
living. Well, the rich man concluded, What heart will not lament such dealing?
he would buy the mare for five nobls, and sell her again to the poor man for
seven nobles, with a year day for the payment, in which bargain the poor man
gave no usury, save only two nobles for the loan of five: for which increase
of money, the poor man kept still his own mare in his own hand: 1. Joan. 3.
v. 17.
but alas, how did this rich man love his poor ^eighbor as himself? I will say
no more herein, but that which Christ's Apostle said before me: he that sees
his brother need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? this usurer departed out of this life, even
while I wrote these things, whose sudden death with the circumstances thereof,
may be a warning to all numerciful usurers: the example of the latter, to wit,
when thngs are sold dearer, for want of present payment.

A poor man comes to his rich neighbor, God help the poor, and comfort
them in their misery.
to buy such things as he has present need to use, here the richer sort,
specially the merchants, take great pleasure in oppressing the poor, in their
most pitiful need. Will ye buy of me, says the rich man, for present money,
or to a certain day? and when the poor man answers, that he must needs have
it til a day: then the rich man valueth his wares at such an high price, as he
extorteth most grievous usury for the loan: for the forhearance of the money,
is the sole cause of the surplussage in the price.

The first objection.
IF two rich men have this year diverse opinions, concerning the price of
corn, and he that thinks it will be dearer the next year, shall give to him
that thinks it will be cheaper xx. pounds presently for (...) much corn to
be delivered then, as he ran now buy for (...), that kind of dealing is no
usury at all, albeit the corn* nay then perhaps be sold for xxx. pounds:
therefore it seems lawful to sell corn at a lesser price, for the payment of
money before hand.

The answer.
1 I say first, that usury is never committed, (as is already proved) save
then only, when overplus is exacted for the loan.

2 I say secondly, that in the case proper ^^ded in the objection, there is no
loan of money at (...), neither expressed, nor yet palliate: the reason is
this, because as well the buyer as the seller, exposes himself to a mere
^^^uall event: for whether corn will then be cheaper or dearer, neither of the^
twain can tell.

3 I say thirdly, that if he who receives the money, were in present
necessity, and yielded to sell the corn only or principally for the use of
the money, the buyer (...) the same at his hands, then were that kind of
dealing usury indeed, A great disparitie, of a far different contract.
howsheuer the event should afterward fall out: but when neither the seller
respects the use of the money, nor the buier extorteth any thing for the loan
of the same, as in this casual bargain, but both the parties stand upon their
providence ^niectures, and politic diuinacions, then doubtless, the formal
reason of usury cease, and the buying with the sale becomes a lawful
contract.

The second objection.
It is good reason, it cannot be denied that if my neighbor can gain five
pounds by the use of my twenty pounds, then that he shall give me three pounds
for the loan thereof, for the delay and non-payment of my money, is the only
and sole cause of his gain.

The answer.
I say first, that howsoever the gain fall out, yet may nothing be exacted for
the loan, because god himself has so appointed.

2 I say secondly, that the greater part of people are so far from gaining
thereby, as they are utterly impouerished by the same.

3* I say thirdly, that by the loan of money the property thereof is altered,
and the dominion translated to the borrower, and consequently, that when the
le^der extorteth any thing for the use thereof, Melancth. in definit. theolog.
ipso facto. he robs the borrower and despoyleth him of his lawful goods:
this among the latter writers has Melancthon well observed to his immortal
fame.

4* I say fourthly, that money is a thing so barren and unfruitful of it own
nature, as is cannot yield any commodity without the industry of man: Money
is not fruitful at it self.
and consequently, since the whole fruit thereof preceedeth from man's
laborious travel, to exact anything for the use thereof, must needs be flat
extortion.

The third objection.
MAny (...) able (...) are often greatly damni^ie^ by lending their money, and
therefore it is good reason, that they should have some consideration for the
same.

The answer.
I answer that no consideration can justly be exacted, No consideration for
the loan.
for or in respect of the loan. Nevertheless, in certain cases ^^^^plus may
very lawfully, both be given and required, which cases shall be made manifest,
in the next chapter following.

Of the gain ceasing, and loss ensuing, by the loan of money. Chap. 6.
THere be two things, to wit, the gain that cease and the damage or loss
that insueth to the londer, by reason of either of which ^^aine, surplussage
may be required, and that without any usury at al ithe reason hereof is
evident, because gain ceasing and loss ensuing for the loan of money, are
things essentialy and really distinguished, from the loan of the same: the
example of the former, Lucrum cessans.
I have in ready money an hundred pounds which I purpose presently to bestow in
corn for honest and lawful gain. Now it so falls out, that my neighbor is
very urgent to borrow this hundred pounds of me, to whom I condescend to lend
it with mine own hinderance, yet upon this condition, that he give me so much
overplus, as would be the just gain, that cease by reason of the loan:
this kind of overplus is no usury, because it is not exacted for the loan,
but for the gain that cease thereupon: yet in this case two things must be
required; first that I intend in true meaning, to Mark w^ll my words, and
judge th^^ of accordingly
to be my surceasing gain, the value of which gain ought to be esteemed by
indifferent men, which are expert in that kind of trade: for if I either exact
more then the gain ceasing, or in truth intend not to expose my money for
lawful gain, in way of honest bargaining, then is the exacting of such
surplussage, become palliate usury indeed. By reason of this surceasing
gain, ^ grave advise to the seller of any thing.
merchant men and other honest bargainers, may sundry times exact a greater
price, when they sell their merchandise or goods to a certain day: but here I
must require al merchants and other, especially the richer sort to mark well
what I say: for although the seller may ever exact overplus for his truly
surceasing gain, yet may he not ever extort overplus, when he selles to a day:
the reason hereof is evident, because to sell to a day, does not ever prejudice
or hinder his lawful gain, and so the formal reason of exacting overplus in
this case lies dead: for if the buier bring the money so soon, as the seller
can and means to bestow the same for honest gain; then to exact any higher
price for the day, is palliate usury indeed. The example of the latter: I have
a sum of money which* I am to bestow in the necessary reparation of my house,
and that now in the summer season: for if I shall let my house stay til the
winter season, Damnum emergens.
it will not only be hurtful, but also (...) chargeable to me ^ in the mean
time my distressed neighbor comes to me, and in pitiful manner desires to
borrow my money, whose need* I cannot relieve but with mine own loss, The
judgment of men indifferent.
as is already said: in this case, to exact so much as amounts to my loss,
is no usury at all, for the overplus is not extorted, by reason of the loan;
yet more may not be exacted then is or would be deemed the just loss, by the
judgment of indifferent men.

The difficulty.
THe debtors do often disappoint their creditors, and will not bring their money
at the day assigned, in respect of which danger, it seems that a man may
exact some reasonable overplus, and so value his saleable things at an higher
price.

The answer.
I answer, To redeem a man's vexation.
that the seller may value his things at an higher price, when in true meaning
he doubts of the payment, because so to deal is but a prudent prouiso, to
redeem his just vexation: yet here is to be observed, that the creditors must
always give the overplus back again, when the debtors pay the money in due
time.

That usury is flat theft, prohibited by the eight commandment, and also that
it binds to restitution. Chap. 7.
ALl as w^l^lde as late Writers agree in this, The true meaning of the 8.
commandment.
that ^y the eight commandment is not only prohibited theft, but robbery also
extortion, deceit, and al manner of dealings, by which we unjustly take or
possess another man's goods, this case is so plain, as no ancient father or
approved latter writer, can be alleged to the contrary: for the definition of
theft makes the case evident, which by uniform consent of al writers is this:
Furtu^ est acceptio vel occupatio rei a lienae, iruito domino, theft is the
taking or using an other man's goods agaisnt his will. So then since the
surplussage in usury is another man's goods, and unjustly extorted as is
already proved, it follows of necessity, that usury is flat theft and
manifest (...). Now that al usurers are bound to restitution, it is a thing so
consectarie upon the ground already laid, as none either learning or reason
can deny the same: for the virtue of justice (as the very ethnike
Philo^ophers tell us) est reddere cuiquam quod suum est, (...) 19. v. l.
is to give to every man that which is his own: therefore said good Zaccheus,
that if he had done wrong to any man, he would restore it four fold: Job, 2,
v, 13.
therefore willed holy Tobias to restore the kid, that he heard bleating in his
house: therefore commanded the law of Moses, that if any man did hurt field or
vineyard, or put in his beast to feed in another man's field, the same should
make recompense of his own field, Exodus 22. v. ^.
and of the best of his own vineyard: therefore did the same law command,
that when any man's corn or other goods was destroyed by fire: he that kindled
the fire should make full restitution: therefore said S. Augustine wisely and
gravely, Exodus 22. v. 6.
Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: the sin is never
forgiven, until that which is wrongfully taken away, be restored again, and the
reason hereof is evident, which S. Augustine well observed: Aug. Ma^^^. epist.
54.
to wit, that when a man will not restore things wrongfully taken from his
neighbor, when he is able so to do, that man cannot be truly penitent, and
so neither can he attain remission at Gods hands. I say (when he is able)
because if an usurer, thief, extortioner, or other deceitful dealer, be so
far wasted and become so beggarly, that he has not wherewith to make
restitution in part or in all, then it is enough for such a one to ask God
mercy, and to have a willing mind to make restitution, when he comes ad
pinquiorem fortuna, and is able so to do.

Hereupon I infer first, The first corollarie.
that all usurers, as also the children or heirs of usurers, who possess any
lands, tenements, or goods, gotten or bought with the gain of usury, are
bound to make restitution for the same: which if it were duly and truly put
in execution, many that now a days are reputed rich, would be as poor as
their need^e neighbors: but how rich soever such seem in their own
conceits, or howsoever they be esteemed by the eyes of the world, yet are they
most beggarly indeed, and will one day be so found, before the tribunal seat
of our Lord Jesus.

I infer secondly, The second corollarie.
that all judges and lawyers, who for bribes, friendship, or other worldly
respects, do wittingly and willingly further evil causes, and by their pleading
or sentence do debar poor men, from their lawful title to lands or goods, are
bound to make restitution for the same.

I infer thirdly, The third corollarie.
that al justices of the peace, baylifes, constables, and other officers, who
by reason of bribes or any other sinister respects, do favor the rich and
mighty men against justice, and thereupon do oppress the poor and needy
sort, are strictly bound to make restitution, for all injuries and injustice
done in that behalf.

I infer fourthlie, The ^ourth corollarie.
that al merchants, artificers, and others that use to buy and sell, who in
their merchandise, occupations, or in buying and selling, use any fraud or
deceit, are bound to make restitution, for all their deceitfully gotten goods.

I infer fiftlie, The fifth corollarie.
that whosoever get their neighbors goods fraudulently, by carding, dicing,
shooting, or other disporte whatsoever, are bound to make restitution for the
same.

I infer sixthly, The sixth corollarie.
that whosoever will not make restitution of goods unjustly gotten, and for
injuries done to his poor neighbors, can not be the child of God.

Of the objections made in defense of usury. Chap. 8.
The first objection of the etymology of the word.
Usury in the original, and sacred hebrewe tongue, does signify nipping or
biting: which etymology does flatly insinuate unto us, that so often as our
neighbor does gain by taking our money to usury, so often is usury lawful and
no sin at al: yea, when our neighbor gains by giving usury, he cannot
doubtless be oppressed by the same: and yet is oppression the sole and only
cause, why usury is prohibited by Gods law.

The answer.
They must (...) wares, that know not how to use them.
that the greatest usurers indeed, would be thought no usurers at all. For
when one comes to borrow money on them, they say they have none, but yet they
will let them have wares, and procure a friend to buy the same, again for
ready money: which palliat usury, has made some that I know, to sell their
whole inheritance. I heard of another poor man, who came to a rich cormorant
to borrow money, but received this answer, I have no money to lend (quoth the
rich man) but thou have a good mare, for which I will give thee five nobles,
and so thou shall have money to do thy needs: alas quoth the poor man I am
not able to spare my mare, because she is the greatest part of my poor
living, well says the rich man, thou shall presently have her again til a day,
if thou will enter into bond, to give me seven nobles for her: to which
lamentable extortion, the poor man was enforced to yield. The fact is
notorious, my self knew both the parties right well, as I said before, this
usurer to the ensample of al others has lately made a miserable end.

I say secondly, that in Hebrew it is called Neshech of the Nashach, Leui. 25.
^. 36, 37
which does signify to bite, and that very fitly, because it biteth poor men
pitifully, and as it were gnaweth al their silly substance from them.

I say thirdly, that the gain of the borrower, cannot make usury This ob^^^ct
must be remembered.
and yet for all that, the poor tenant should gain by giving the 40.
shillings: ad hereunto that money of it own nature is fruitles, and would
yield no gain at all without the industry of man, that imployeth it to use.

The second objection.
God himself allowed usury in the Jews, Deuteronomy. 23. ^0,
when they took ^surie of strangers only, but not one of an other. Usury
therefore is not simply evil, for God never approves sin.

The answer.
Our father which art in heaven.

Amalechites and Ammorites, Gods enemies and theirs, because they had justly
deserved to be dispossessed, D^^ine dispensation.
not only of their goods, but of their lives also: for God the eternal law
maker is not so tied to his law, but that he may at his good will and pleasure
dispense with the same: and therefore said Christ himself, to the Pharisees,
when they charged his disciples with the breach of the sabbath, Matt. 12. v. 8.
that the son of man is Lord, even of the saboth, and according to the common
received axiom, priuilegium paucorum non facit legem communem, a privilege
granted to some few, cannot establish a common law: Ambr. in libr. de Tobia ca.
14.
yea, S. Ambrose shows in a large discourse, that the taking usury of the
Amalechites and Ammorites, cannot make usury lawful amongst us christians;
who so lists may read his words in his learned book de Tobia.

The third objection.
IT is lawful for to take increase of money for the delivery of money at such
a time in such a place: for example, I may take overplus in gold at Paris, to
deliver gold at Lions, Genua, Millan, or Rome: for this is daily practiced and
never reproved by any learned writer. I may therefore in like manner, for the
delivery of present money in January, receive increase of money in december,
and not thereby sin at all.

The answer.
I answer, that in these two cases great disparitie may be found. For in your
delivery of present money, increase is exacted only and solely for the loan.
But in the other delivery, increase is required for assecuration sake: that is
to say, the party that delivers money or gold at Paris, is in fear to fall
among thieves, and so to be dispoiled of all he has: in regard whereof he
comes to a banker, who partly of charity, and partly to get an honest
living, keeps servants at Milan, Lions, and Genua, with a stock of money in
every place. To this banker the traveler gives a competent consideration,
that he may have his ticket to receive so much money, when he comes to such a
place, or to his iourneis end. Which increase this banker takes not for the
loan of his money (for he may rather be said to borrow then to lend) but for
the safe delivery of my money at such a place, and for the charges he is at, by
keeping servants to that only end. Which thing is so far from being usury,
that it is a very commendable and charitable act. Yea in those countries where
these banks be allowed, al usury is utterly condemned. And such as die known
usurers without satisfaction to the parties damnified, cannot be buried among
other christians.

The fourth objection.
IF a man give an hundred crowns in hand, he may have for the same out of the
banks at Rome, at Genua, and at other places, twelve crowns yearly for the
term of his life; or ten crowns yearly to him and his assigns for ever.
Which increase is given for paying the money before hand: and yet no learned
man did ever reprove this kind of dealing, but rather has highly commended
the same.

The answer.
I answer, that in these kinds of banks, there is no usury at all committed,
the reason hereof is this; because these bankers have lands in fee simple, out
of which they grant for so much in hand, either a yearly rent of so many
crowns for ever, or at least for term of life. Which to do is a lawful
contract, as which is nothing else but to sell for an hundred crowns in hand,
the yearly rent of ten crowns for ever. And the same thing may be
proportionably verified, in all other like banks and contracts.

Of certain doubts or difficult questions, tending to the perspicuous
explication of Usury. Cha. 9.
The first question.
THere is in sundry countries, a bank called mons pietatis, the mountain of
piety. This mount or bank was founded by certain devout persons, so then and
this day esteemed, for the honest help of poor and needy folk. And this mons
pietatis is virtually practiced, (...) no usury.
in many famous universities. The case thus stands; certain men having a
charitable care how to provide for the poorer sort, that they might borrow
money in their need, and not be oppressed with usury, gave great sums of
money to be kept in a bank, and appointed certain chosen servants, for the
giving out, and the taking in of the said money. Which servants have in charge,
to lend to poor folks such sums of money as they need, ^ provident cautele
and prouiso.
unto a very reasonable day. Yet, lest the mount should in time be spent and
consumed, they have prouidently made this double prouiso,

The answer.
I answer, that here I behold great charity, but usury I can find none. For
nothing at all is taken for the loan of the money, but for the necessary
maintenance of the servants, who attend continually for the convenient help of
the borrowers. To which consideration, if the borrowers should not yield,
neither could the bank ^^dure, neither the pledges be kept in safety and good
order. For the pledges or guages are of sundry sorts, and oftentimes can not
be kept, without both cost and care. Mary if they take above measure, I grant
that it is hard dealing, and contrary to the true meaning of the founders.

The second question.
You said before, that it is not usury, when one takes consideration for his
gain ceasing: which if it be so, then may all usurers be excused, for when the
usurer lends out his money, that gain doubtless cease, which he might make
thereupon.

The answer.
I say first, that rich men, who have great store of money, are bound by Gods
laws, not only to lend their money without gain, but also to give it freely,
for the necessary relief of their honest poor neighbors: 1. Joan. 3. v. 1^.
for as S. John says, he that has the wealth of this world, and knows his
brothers need, and shuts up his bowelles from him, in that man dwells not
the love of God. When thou come to the Church to pray says S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. hom. 9 in Matthew.
bring thy reward in thy hand: give to them that want, and ask of him that
has, that thy prayer may be commended with good works: the hand of the poor
faith Rauennus is the treasure of Christ, Ra^en*
and what the poor receives, that Christ accepts, which saying our Savior
Christ confirms in the gospel, telling us, Matthew. 10. v. 4^.
that if one give but a cup of cold water to the poor for his sake, it shall
not be unrewarded: why says S. Basil, Basilius.
is one made rich and another poor, but that God will reward the fidelity of
the one, and the patience of the other* It is the bread of the hungry which
thou have, the coat of the naked, which thou lockest up, the shoe of the
barefooted, which thou hold, the money of the needy, which thou possessest,
wherefore thou killest so many as thou can relieve and wilt not. Amb^.
This says S. Ambrose, is to kill a man, to deny to help him in his need:
beware le^^ thou shut up in thy bags, the life of the poor: will thou be a
fine merchant and rich usurer, August.
says S. Austen? the^ give that thou can not keep, to receive that thou
can not lose, give a little to receive much: give temporal possession, to
attain eternal salvation. I never read of any man says S. Hierome, Hier.
that made an ill end, who in his life time, cherefully exercised the works of
charity. And Christ's holy Apostle confirms all this, Iac. 1. v. 27.
when he pronounces it to be the pure and undefiled religion before God, to
rel^eue the fatherless and widows in their necessity, (...) cruel usurers,
then, are of a new no religion, and god will one day vomit them out of his
mouth: Note well this point.
for the which cause such usurers as will not make restitution before their
death, of al goods gotten (...) usury, cannot be (...) in many christian
countries to be buried in christian man's burial, for such sharp punishment
seems detested usury to deserve.







The third question.
What say you to those merchant men, that sell their wares continually for more
when they give a day, and take less when they receive money in hand: for this
is a thing most common nowadayes, not only with merchants and mercers, but
even amongst al other bargainers.

The answer.


end, and in that respect, he may take (...), for his lawful (...) game: but
when his money is so paid, and in such time, as the seller is no way damnified
thereby, the^ and in such a case, he can take nothing for the day, without the
crime of usury.

The fourth question
What say you to those merchants and others, who are so rich, that they have
always good store of gold and money locked up in their coffers, and yet sell
dearer to the day, and to those who though they be not so rich, yet need they
not the money, before the day, and yet for all that sell their wares and goods
dearer for the day.

The answer.
I say first to the former sort, that they are not only usurers,

I say secondly to the latter sort, that they are tangled with

The first question.
Is it usury to lend our kine or sheep after a competent rate, and to receive
the stock again.

The answer.
I say first, that kine and sheep ve things fruitful of their

I say secondly, that when kine, shrepe or other cattle, are He that has no
horse can lose Horse.
it cannot be denied: the reason hereof is evident, because over and besides
the overplus taken for the fertalitie of the rattel, the lender requires
security for the principal, and thatby reason of the loan, and consequently
the dominion of the principal is translated, which is the formal reason of
usury: for when anything perishes it perishes to the owner, and not to him
that has no title thereunto.

I say thirdly, that he, who lends or sets over to his poor neighbors,
kine, sheep, or other cattle, after a reasonable and competente rate, without
covenant or bond to deliver the principal again, in as good case, state, and
order as it was received, both a very charitable art, but commits no usury
at al.

The reply.
Mary li^, if this he so, then must I be at great charges, and sustein no final
losses at his hands, who hired my horses, sheep or kine, and so for doing good
to my neighbor, be utterly impouerished my self, but I will none of that, I
thank you.

The answer.
I answer, that the case is far otherwise: for if your goods be hurt or
miscarried any way, by the negligence or default of him that borrows or hireth
them, then both in conscience and by the course of the common law, he is bound
to make satisfaction for the same: and thus much you may draw into covenant if
you lift, without (...) suspicion of usury at all: but if (...) your horse,
kine, or sheep; and do to them that which an honest man ought to do, then if
they die, or otherwise miscarrie, your self must stand to the loss, and not
I, for the goods are yours, and not mine, they must perish to you the owner,
and not to me the hirer: if you defend the contrary, you fall into the flat
case of usury.

The sixth question.
A friend of mine gave me an hundred and twenty pounds freely, so as I must
never pay the principal again, but yet with this prowish, that I must give to
him during his natural life, twenty pounds by year. Now would I know if this
be usury.

The answer.
I answer that it is no usury indeed, The cont^nes called in latin, (...).
but a very lawful contract or bargain, termed of the Latins, do vt des:
the reason is evident, because here is nothing taken for the loan: over and
besides this, it is a mere (...) contract, putting the receiver in far
better state, then he was before: for the giver may die the next day, and so
the receiver have the principal for nothing at all. Again, if the giver should
live as long as the common sort of men do, yet could the receiver be at no
loss, unless his own negligence were in default.

The reply.
Then it is no usury if I lend my neighbor twenty pounds, upon this condition,
that he shall give me thirty pounds, if I be living at the end of the half
year, and if I die before, he shall be bound only to pay the twenty pounds
again: indeed many good men use this kind of dealing, and I am glad to hear
you say, it is no usury.

The answer.
I say first, that you seem to interpret my instruction according

I say secondly, that there is great disparitie, in these two proposed

I say thirdly, that the dealing is plain diabolical, howsoever Ambr. in
libr. de Tobia.
for as S. Ambrose has well concluded out of the holy writ, if they be blessed
that give not their money to usury, as the holy Prophet of God avouches
plainly then doubtless are they accursed, Psalm. 15.
that practice usury and rejoice therein.

The seventh question.
It was ever thought lawful, to set over the portions of infants for gain,
neither to this day has any learned man reproved the same: what therefore must
be think thereof?

The answer.
I say first that many things have been often by learned men

I say secondly, that the least sin may not be committed, to Paul, Romans 3. v.
^.
non sunt facienda mala, vt inde eue^iant bona: evil may not be done, that
good may come thereupon. We may not steal from a rich man, for the relief of
the poor: the causes and cases of infants and poor folks, are to be favored
indeed, but yet ever with justice, and never with sin: The portions of
infants.
and therefore we must judge of lending or setting over the overplus of
infants, even as we do of other things, that is to say, if the portions be in
money, then to take any thing for the loan, as the maintenance of the infants,
or some consideration to that end, is flat usury indeed: if the portions be
in lands, or other goods that be fruitful of their own nature; the^ competent
consideration may be had, for the increase of the same. Always provided, that
if the goods miscarrie without the negligence or other default of the borrower,
that then as is already said, they perish or miscarrie to the lender, who
only and solely has the dominion thereof.

The reply.
If the poor infants may have nothing, in consideration of the use of their
portions, then will their portions often be consumed, or at left much wasted,
even during their nonage and minority.

The answer.
Neither law, By the way of gratitude, but not of compulsion.
conscience, nor reason, does or can make a man in worse condition for
bestowing a benefit, then he was before the gift thereof: and therefore, as he
might before accept of a free donation, so may be much more after his good
deseres, receive that which is freely given him, in the way of gratitude. My
answer now is, that since, as the common proverb says, (one good turn
deserves another) and since ingratitude as well by the law of nature, as by the
law divine, is reproved for a grievous sin, it follows consequently, that
whosoever reapeth commodity by taking an infant, with his portion, and will
not to his power make thankful conspensation for the same, may justly be
condemned of ingratitude: yet as he is to be condemned of ingratitude, if he
render not thankfully of his own accord, so if he be compelled by bond of
covenant thereunto, then by and by is committed the sin of usury: yet in
things fruitful some consideration may be had, according to the true sense
already touched.

The eight question.
If usury be so grievous a sin, what shall we say to the laws of this Realm,
that this day approve and allow the same:

The answer.
I say first, that they who seek thus to defend their abominable

I say secondly, that the laws of this realm do not approve Good laws are
sometimes slowly put in execution.
pass unpunished after information given, (of which kind of dealing and the
like, the poor people make pitiful complaints God wot) that truly must be
imputed to the iniquity of the inferior Magistrates, who now and then are
corrupted with flattery, friendship, or gifts, and not to the just and godly
laws of this Realm.

The reply.
Sundry learned men do hold, that the civil Magistrate is appointed by God to
punish male factours, and therefore may not tolerate or leave any sin
unpunished.

The answer.
I answer, that albeit some otherwise learned indeed, do hold the contrary
opinion, yet do I repute it for an undoubted truth, that Kings, Queens,
absolute Princes, and independent Magistrates, may in certain cases upon godly
considerations, either tolerate sin unpunished, or pardon malefactors: for
otherwise we must not only condenme her excellent majesty, Note the practice
of al christendom.
that now happily reigns over us, but also all her most noble progenitors,
yea and al other kings at al times in all ages, throughout all the christian
world: for when was the King, and where is the kingdom, in which kings upon
good causes, have not pardoned malefactors and the time cannot be named, the
kingdom is unknown. Now for the exact handling of this point, (because it is
not only perti^ent to my present theme, but necessary also for many other
respects) I think it to the purpose, to lay down some strong foundations in
that behalf. The first foundation.
First, this is a constant maxim, approved by uniform consent of all learned
divines; cessante fine legis cessat lex ipsa; when the final cause or end for
which the law was made, cease, then does the law even of necessity also
cease. This foundation is grounded upon the holy Scripture in the 15. of the
Acts. Whereby the flat decree and settled law of the Apostles, Act. 15. v. 28.
19.
we are bound to abstain from blood and strangled meats. This
notwithstanding, no man has this day any scruple of conscience to eat the
same: and yet hereof no other sound reason can be yielded, save only that the
end for which that law was made, did long sithence cease. For even at that time
there was no precise necessity to abstain from blood and strangled meats. Let
this point be welmarked
But this law was only made in respect of the state of that time, that the
Gentiles and the Jews might live more peaceably together, and thereby avoid
al occasion of quarrelling. And therefore as soon as that end ceased, this law
also ceased with it; and so we this day are freed from the same. Yea this
maxim is evident lumine naturali, even by natural reason. For every law is
made for some end; which end how often soever it may be accomplished without the
law, so often the execution of the law is needelesse.

Secondly, The second foundation.
we must hold this for a constant foundation, that albeit the civil magistrate
be commanded to punish malefactors; yet is neither the kind of the
punishment, nor the quantity thereof taxed by the law of God; but it still
abides indifferent, to be determined by the supreme civil magistrate. For
although there were special punishment prescribed in the indiciall law of
Moses, The usual punishment of malefactors may be changed.
for transgressors of the sabbath, for adulterers, for murderers and such like;
yet neither by the law moral, neither by the law of the new testament, to
which laws only we christians are this day bound, is any such punishment
determined. And therefore the civil magistrate (if it so seem good unto him)
may change the usual punishment of thieves, (which with us is to be hanged) and
cause them to be cast into the bottom of the sea, with milstones about their
necks. And the same may be said, of the punishment for other malefactors.

Thirdly, The third foundation.
we must repute this for an undoubted foundation, that the end for which Gods
law appoints malefactors to be punished, is the public peace and good of
the whole commonweal. For this is so evident by the course of the whole
scripture, as it can neither with learning nor reason be denied.

Out of these three foundations thus firmly stablished, The first corollarie.
these two corollaries may evidently be inferred. First, that whenever any
member of the commonweal commits any capital crime, for which he ought to
die by the law, whose life notwithstanding is more profitable to the weal
public, than his death, in such a case the prince may pardon such a
malefactor, (...) thereby sin at all. Which thing christian princes seem to
respect, when in the time of wars they set such felons at liberty as are
able to do service in defense of the realm. The second corollarie.
Secondly, that when any malefactor is so mighty or so strongly seated, that
the prince cannot without probable danger of his royal persm, or great damage
to the commonweal punish the said malefactor; in such a case the prince may
tolerate such a malefactor unpunished, and not thereby sin at all. These
foundations and these illations once well understood and marked, this
important controversy can not but be manifest: nevertheless I will adioyne
certain sound reasons hereunto for the better confirmation of the same.

The first reason.
It is a common atiome received of all as well Ciuilians as Divines; The first
reason.
quod lex ron obligat vitra intentionem legislatoris, that the law does not
bind a man beyond the intention of the lawmakers. Whereupon I infer first,
that the civil magistrate

The second reason.
Prodigality is a great sin, The second reason.
condemned as well in philoso^^ (...), it neither will nor can be denied. It is
the (...) extreme, of the virtue liberality. This notwithstanding, al christian
kings, as far as I can learn, have ever tolerated ye same unpunished at least
in some degree; neither were they for such tolerations reproved at any time,
by any ancient approved writer or learned father whosoever. Which doubtless is
and ought to be so deputed, an argumental no small importance. For although
emperors, kings, (...) do sin as well as others of meaner calling yet neither
have they, neither ever can they live unreproved, if at any (...) they (...)
either by stablishing (...) laws publicly; or by suffering their (...) to
(...) of Gods laws dissolutely: Matthew. 3. v. 9.
For God (...) of stones to Abraham, and neither is he, nor ever (...) he be
destitute of faithful courageous servants, who will constantly and without all
leare, Esai. 2. v. 6.
reprove al such as (...) his holy law^. He has watch men on the walls of his
Jerusalem, who will reprove sin (...) He is not without his Elias, 1. Reg. 18.
v. 18.
that will stoutly reprove at wicked Achabs. He has in store a Danie (...) al
naughty judges, Dan. 13. v. 61.
and to acquit his faithful Susannes. He will find a prophe^^^ (...) out
against ^ool any, and to teach every Ierobo^n his duly. He can and will
provide another John Baptist, Matt. 14. v. 4.
to speak boldly to all bloody Herod's. And yet in so many hundred years, such
tollerations have not been reproved to my knowledge, by any learned writer.

The third reason.
It is a general axiom, The third reason.
received not only indiuinitie, but in philosophy also, ex (...) mali^ mique
eligend^m, of (...) the lesser is to be chosen. And to spea^^^ more plaindey,
that which is often sin, Mark well this point.
if it be absolutely considered; the same done respectfully, will be no sin at
al. For example sake, murder is against the law divine, and yet to kill one
neighbor in our own defense, both is and ever was reputed lawful. S^t for a
man to cut off his arm or leg, lest the whole body put^^efie or perish is a
very lawful thing. Which thing all (...), kings seem to respect, when they in
sundry cases, tolerate (...) unpunished: for they think that (...) their
realms by punishing, than by (...) in such cases. Yea, if kings should at all
times punish all malefactors, the church of God should often thereby want many
most excellent and profitable members. For which respect our Savor himself
tells us, that when the ^ares can not be sever (...) the good corn, unless
both be pulled up together, then may they tolerate the tares or weeds with the
good corn even (...) the harvest: Matthew. 13. v. 30.
as if he had said; when the wicked can not be punished, but with great damage
to the good; then may the magistr^t tolerate such malefactors unpunished, and
not thereby sin at all.

The fourth reason which is insoluble and irrefringible.
The blessed man Moses so highly renowned in holy writ, The fourth reason.
and so great in the favor of God, pardoned great malefactors, in the heinous
crime of divorce. And this he did to avoid a greater evil, that is, lest
they upon every light cause should poison those wives, whom they did not
love. For that such light diuorcement was only permitted, but neither by God
nor Moses approoues, I will demonstrate by these important reasons. First,
because these are Christ's own words; Moses Matthew. 19. v. 8.
suffered you to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so.
Secondly, Romans 7. v. 1, 2, 3.
For thus writes S. Paul, know ye not brethren (for I speak to them that know
the law) that the law has dominion over the man, as long as he lives? for y^
woman which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the man, while he
lives; but if the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man. So
then, if while the man lives she take another man, she shall be called an
adultresse. Out of these words I note first, that marriage cannot be dissolved,
Moses law, because S. Paul says he speasath to them that know the law, I note
thirdly, that to be ma^^d the scriptures, but also confirmed by the best
approved fathers, and eke by the late writers of this our age.

The fifth reason.
We have many examples in the holy scriptures, The fifth reason.
of blessed kings who have often pardoned malefactors, and to this day were
never reproved for the same: King David a man full of the holy ghost, pardoned
wicked Nabal at the petition of his virtuous wife Abigail. 1. Reg. 25. 35.
The same king David pardned Abner, who rebelled against him for the house of
Saul: the same king David tolerated Ioab in his naughty dealings, 2. Reg. 3.
6, 22.
albeit be was more then a little offended with his manners: the same king
David tolerated cursed Shemei, ^. Reg. 3.
though he commanded his son Solomon do executian on them both, 3. Reg. 2. v,
8, 9.
after that himself was dead.

The sixth reason out of Saint Austen.
Saint Austen says plainly, The sixth reason.
that the church does tolerate many evils, Aug. epist. 119.
which she does not approve: and the same saine Austen in his epistle to
Macedonius, proves by the ensample of Christ, that not only secular
magistrate may give pardon to offenders, but also that clergy men may require
the same at their hands: Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedon. Joan. 8. v. 11.
our Lord says he, made suit that the woman taken in adultery, should not be
stoned, and by that fact commended to us the office of intercession: yea, Saint
Austen was greatly offended with the Magistrates of Africa, if at any time
they denied his request therein: the difference is only in this, that we must
do that by prayer, which he did by terrourr for he was the Lord, and we are his
servants: this and many other reasons S. Austen uses, which whosoever lists may
read at large, in that learned epistle which he wrote to Macedonius. Hereunto
agrees S. Paul's intercession unto Philemon, Paulus ad Philemonem.
for Onesimus his servant.

The seventh reason out of S. Joseph his holy fact.
The blessed virgin Marie, The seventh reason.
was found to be with child b^t the holy ghost, before Joseph and she came
together: wherefore Joseph because he was a just man and would not put her to
open shame, Matthew. 1. v. 19.
was minded to put her away privily: thus records (...) Joseph that he knew
himself not to be the father of the child. I note thirdly, that Joseph knew
no other, but that Mary his wife Joseph was even then just, when he sought

The first objection.
No inferior, has power to alter the law of his superior, and therefore man
can not pardon or tolerate malefactors, whom God appoints to be punished.

The answer.
I say first, that precepts delivered to us in holy writ, are Precepta sunt
duplicis generis.
yet do they not actually kind us, save then only, when the due
circumstances of time, place, and persons do occur: hereupon it comes, that
it is never lawful to steal, never lawful to commit adultery, neither
lawful to bear false witness, neither at any time nor in any place: the
reason hereof is this, because these be precepts negative. This
notwithstanding, it is sometime lawful to omit the precepts affirmative: for
example sake, Matthew. 5. v. 39. 40, 41, 42.
that whose shall smite thee on the right cheek, to him thou turn the other
also. Again, it is Gods commandment to give him thy cloak, that will sue thee
at the Luc. 6. v. 30.
that we may sundry times not only ask our goods again, which are unjustly
taken from us, but Romans 10. v. 10.
and yet we are not bound to confess our faith openly and vocally, at al times
and in every place, but where and when the glory of God, or the utility of
our neighbor, shall so require: for example sake, then we are bound to confess
our faith vocally, The like may be said of praying always.
when by our silence and taciturnity they that demand us of our faith, would
either believe that we had no faith, Luc. 18. 1.
or that our faith were not the true faith, or otherr would thereby be altered
from the faith, and so forsake the everliving God. Al which and other the like,
have this only ground and foundation, to wit, that they be precepts
affirmative, which neither bind us at all times nor in all places. For
precepts affirmative to use school terms: Modus loquendi scholarum.
obligant semper, sed non ad semper.

Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 2, 3.
yet was the punishment to be determined, even at his own discretion. Again,
when the wicked was worthy to be beaten, the judge might design him to have
many or few stripes, according to the quality or quantity of his trespass:
Leuit. 25. 53.
thirdly, he that sold himself to another man, might justly be afflicted, but
yet how and in what measure that should be done, was to be determined by the
civil magistrate.



The second objection.
Achab was punished with death, ^. Reg 20.
because he granted pardon to Benhadad king of Ara^^. 1. Sam. 28.
King Saul was deposed from his kingdom, 1. Sam. 15.
because he spotted Agag king of the Amalekites.

The answer.
Achab was precisely designed, to do executi^^^ (...) vpm Benhadad, Vbi supra.
and so was also Saul appointed in precise terms, to put to death king Agag.
Secondly, that in the new In epist. ad Philemonem.
I see not how S. Paul can be excused, who made earnest suit to Philemon, not
to punish his servant Onesimus, who unjustly had departed from him: and the
like may be said of S. Austen, who so often made intercession to the princes of
Africa, to pardon the Donatists, and Circumcellions, who did not only
disturb religion, but also spoiled the christians of their lawful goods: yea,
it was y^ usual custom of the Jews, as the Gospel bears record, to set some
one prisoner at liberty every Easter; which custom I find not reproved, in
any place of holy Writ: yea, the sin is usually practiced, in every
Christian Parliament. I say fourthly, that it is so clear Paul, that
malefactors may sometime be pardoned, as it is without al crime and reason, to
deny the same: for what can be (...) offense, then such fornication as is not
once named among the Gentiles, to wit; that one should have his fathers wife. 1
Cor. 5. v. 1.
And yet when the party that did this horrible fact, seemed to give signs of
true remorse, then S. Paul himself both pardoned him, 2. Cor. 2. 8, 9, 10.
and willed the Corinthians to do the same. So did the fathers of the
Elebertine council, Conc. Eleb. can. 20.
pardon the usurers of the Last al sort, who promised to surcease from usury,
and to deal no longer therewith, which counsel was holden above 1200. years
ago.

The reply.
Saint Paul did not pardon the crime of fornication, but did speedely
excommunicate the incestuous person for the same, whose pardon was nothing
else, but a relaxation of that severe correction, which he had imposed upon
him, for his deformed fact.

The answer.
I say first, that the civil magistrates among the Corinthins, we grant
indeed, that Princes may sometime pardon malefactors.

Paul who knew gods mind better then any this day living upon the face of the
earth, would never have requested the Corinthians so to do, but would have
charged them to cut off, and to have taken such a fellow out of the way.

S. Paul first excommunicated the person afterward he received to mercy, even
so do Princes first punish malefactors by imprisonment, attaignment, etc. whom
aftherward they pardon.

Peter smot Aananias and Saphira, his wife with sudden death, for their
hypocrisy and deceitful dealing, and yet did S. Paul pardon the incestuous
Corinthian, Whereby we have to understand, that Princes may pardon malefactors,
when it seems expedient for the common weal I therefore now conclude, that
(in my judgment) they want due consideration, who deny that Princes may
pardon malefactors, and I heartily wish and earnestly pray, that al such as do
not or will not condescend thereunto, A very reasonable request.
would take the pains soundly and directly to solue such reasons and
authorities, as I have made in that behalf. Which, (if any such can be
yielded) I shall no sooner understand, then I will willingly with hearty
thanks, subscribe unto the same.

The ninth question.
Some politic persons will lend their money as they say grati^ and without any
gain for the loan, yet the borrowers must this do, or else they can have no
money at all: that is forsayth, they must make a lease of a piece of ground,
worth 20. or 30. pounds by the year, which lease must be to the use of the
creditour, for paying twelve pence or two shillings or such a trifle yearly,
so long as the lent money is in their hands. Now would I know, if this be
usury or no: it seems usury (...) seem, and to othersome it is thought
otherwise, because the ground indeed, is set over for a yearly rent.

The answer.
prove it, because the just rent of the ground is cut off, for the sole and
only loan of the money.

I say secondly, that if the borrowers would make earnest

I say thirdly, that the like deceitful dealing, is this day Symonie is the
ruin of Christ's church
and brings the greatest ruin that can be to the church of God: for blind
bussards and idle lubbards possess the fat livings, and worthy learned men in
the Universities can get no preferment at al. Now the patrons either prefer
such as will give them money, or else the unworthy persons whom they prefer to
the livings, must make them a lease of a great part of the tithes, for a
yearly rent of no value: but I hope our good Byshopes, (who of late days God
be thanked, are far better then they have been) will shortly look more
warily to this matter. My self know sundry in the North parts, who are
parsons of fat livings, and yet so utterly unlearned as they can scarsely
read the English bible. Others I know to be so poor, by coming to their
benefices by symonie, as they have not wherewith to buy them books for their
studies: by means hereof the people live in ignorance, popery is fostered
still, the weak are scandalized, and the free passage of Christ's gospel is
more then a little hindered.

The tenth question.
A certain man lately deceased, gave to the chamber of a City in this land,
one hundred pounds in money, which sum he gave with this limitation and
condition, to wit, that the said city should, in consideration thereof, give
eight pounds yearly to a preacher for ever. Now would I know, if this be the
sin of usury: for to find a preacher is a work of charity.

The answer.
I answer, that this City, if it have lands in fee simple (as I said before of
banks) out of which it grants a perpetual rent of eight pounds by the year,
for the hundred pounds paid in hand, Mark these words well.
then it makes a lawful contract and committes no usury at all: but if the same
city have no yearly revenues, out of which it paieth the said sum, then is
it flat usury given only for the lean: note what was said before of the
portions of infants during their nonage and minority: for evil deeds are not
therefore good, because good follows thereupon.

The eleventh question
Some devout persons give at their death, certain sums of money to
towneships, out of which they appoint something to be given yearly, partly for
the relief of poor folks, and partly for the maintenance of the common
highwayes, which gifts have ever been reputed the works of piety, and never
once deemed to smell of usury. I would therefore know, what is to be said
therein.

The answer.
Romans 10. v. 10.
but not grounded upon knowledge, a good work indeed is done, but not by a
lawful mean.





The twelfth question.
What must the heirs, and such as possess the lands and goods of usurers do?
and what are they bound unto?

The answer.
solidum and totally, to make restitution for the usury, so far forth as the
lands and goods will extend.

Matthew. 25. v. 40.
for in such cases the poor succeed in Christ's room, Psalm. 14. v. 1.
the (...)

The thirteen (...)
If an (...) buy an horse (...) usury, and give or sell the same horse to
another man, what is that man bound to do, who has the horse by free donation,
or by way of sale?

The answer.
I say first, that if the usurer left not goods sufficient for restitution,
gratis, bound to restore him to the oppressed party.

I say secondly, that he that bought the horse bona fide, and

I say thirdly, that the man who bought the horse mala fide, is

The reply.
By this it seems, that they who eat of stolen mutt^^^ are bound to
restitution, although they know nothing, of the unlawful taking thereof.

The answer.
I say first, that they only are not bound to restitution, who

I say secondly, that they who eat thereof and are privy to

I say thirdly, that they who eat thereof, bona fide, are indeed

The fourteenth question.
What if a party damnified, will freely remit the ^estitution of the
surplussage unjustly taken?

The answer
I answer, that so soon as the party grieved grants relaxation, the usurer
is by and by freed from all restitution, although he be not free from sin, by
reason of his impenitent heart that will not give to every man his own.

(...)

THus (...) and painful (...) paint out fitly in her (...) colors, the
deformed

(...).

