HIMATIAPOLEOS. THE TRIVMPHS OF old Draperie, or the rich Clothing of
ENGLAND. Performed in affection, and at the charges of the right Worthy and
first honored Company of Drapers: at the enstalment of Sr. Thomas Hayes
Knight, in the high office of Lord Mayor of London, on Satturday, being the 29.
day of October. 1614. Devised and written by A. M. Citizen and Draper of London.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Allde. 1614.

Himatia-Poleos. Or, The Old Draperie and Clothing of ENGLAND.
IN every well-gouerned Kingdom and Commonwealth, the chiefest City and
Citizens therein, have evermore held the prime place and prioritie; as well in
matter of honor, as due right of Antiquity. And as the Lacedaemonians, the first
instructers of the old Romans, and so (from them) we, and all other Nations
derived our form of rule; As they (I say) made a distinguishing of their most
memorable Societies, from other of much less note and merit: Even so this
famous City of London, whose continual teeming womb (from time to time)
brought forth many several Mysteries or Professions, has referred them all in
eminency of place, to twelve only. Amongst which twelve gradations of honor
and dignity, the first original began in the first Company of all other in
this City the ancient fellowship or Society of Drapers.

To approve the society of Drapers of the first, when (as yet) there was none
other: it is avouched by He lived and wrote in the time of king Stephen.
William Fitzstephen, John Bale, Roger Houeden, and others, that the
Wooll-winder, (who was the old Draper or Clothier, as borrowed from the word
Drappier) did card and spinne his wool, then weaue it into cloth, full, row,
sheare, dress, and dye it, and sell in afterward in his shop, performing all
these several offices thereto, by himself and servants: which (since then)
has branched it self into diverse other Companies, and of one entire Trade or
Mystery, is become many.

Out of this list or band of Drapers, issued Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine knight,
descended from that Alwine, Uncle to king Edgar, who made him Alderman of all
England, when as (till then) the name of Alderman, or Eldermen, was never
known. This Henry Fitz-Alwine had the first honor to be styled In the old
Saxon tongue from whence it was derived, it signifies Dominus or Lord.
Maire, or Mayor of London, by favor of King Richard the first, surnamed Cuer
de Lion, and was himself (as is credibly avouched) a Brother of the same
Society, in honor of the man by him so advanced, before his journey to the
Holy Land. For, until his time, the troublesome combustions of the City
being not fully settled: the government thereof remained first in Portgreues,
next in martial Provosts, thirdly in Bayliffes, and lastly in Lord Majors, as
in meet place is more at large declared.

Here before I pass any further, it may appear as a blemish on mine own
browe, because in my Book in the worthy Company of Goldsmiths, I did set
down Henry Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane to be a Goldsmith, and the first Lord
Mayor of London, alleging my authority for the same in the margent of the
same book, out of The ancient Chronicler of the City.
John Stowe, which now I may seem to deny, and affirm the same man to be a
Draper, to the disgrace of the forenamed Company, and mine own deep
discredit. What then I did, was by warrant of my fore-alleaged Author, who
finding Henry Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, to be Master or Guardian of the
kings Mint, did therefore set him down to be a Goldsmith; which was no error
in me to do the like, being thereto secured by him, and knowing (as then) no
other proof to the contrary. But having per^sed more assured authority in the
Drapers Hall, that one, not named Henry Fitz-Alwine Fitz-Leofstane, but Henry
Fitz-Alwine, a brother of the old Drapers, was Lord Mayor of London, four and
twenty years and a half (by yearly election) and longer had been if he had
longer lived, who had also given his dwelling house by London stone, to his
own free brethren of the Drapers, with an annuity yearly to be paid to the
king, out of such land as is held of his by them; and that he lies in the
parish Church of S. Marie Bothawe buried, the Parish wherein he lived and
died; whereas John Stowe affirms him to be buried in the Priorie of the holy
Trinity, called Christ's Church, on the right hand within Aldegate, which is
now called the Dukes place. Nay more, Master Clarentius Cambden, with the advice of diverse other good Antiquaries beside, has (under his hand and Seal
of Office) confirmed him to be none other then a Draper. What more free
confession can any man make, then of his blind misleading by a blinder guide?
In whose behalf I dare yet boldly maintain, that no such error escaped from
him wilfully or willingly, his care and endeavor was so great, but
misinformation, or incapacitie of reading, may (as it has done to many) wrong
better men then any that are concerned in this case, yet without any prejudice
or dishonest taxation.

What offense then may the Company of Mercers take, who make challenge
likewise to the very same man, by mistaking Peter Fitz-Alwine (a Mercer indeed)
for Henry Fitz-Alwine the old Draper? Or that of the Fishmongers, who deem
their worthy Wallworth, the first Knighted Mayor in the field, to be the same
man also, and that no man before him was Mayor of London? I answer freely for
my self, and appeal to an especial Gentleman in the imagined injured
Company of Goldsmiths (who took no mean pains to be resolved in this case)
that no certain assurance could be had therein, but that it remained doubtful
between both the Societies. And therefore we personated old Faringdon, not
Fitz-Alwine, as the book yet may be seen, to cut off all such contentious
questions. Seeing then that reverend antiquity, eminency of honor, and due
right of merit; bestowed so high a dignity upon the Drapers: I might well be
justly condemned, if I should seek after any other argument of credit for them
(when so maine a business does necessarily require it) then their own due
deserving, so long time sleeping in oblivion, yet now revived, to their
endless honor.

The walls of any City, were termed by the Grocians, according as we title
our instant discourse, Himatia Poleos, The Clothing or garments of the City.
Intimating thereby, that as garments and clothing do ingirt the body,
defending it continually from the extremities of cold and heat: so walls,
being the best garments of any City, do preserve it from all dangerous
annoynances. Here on we lay the foundation of our devise, in the honor of
Draperie the rich Clothing of England* which (long before the knowledge of
fantastic habites) clothed both Prince and people all a like, to the (...)
mean renown of the Kingdom, and admiration of foreign nations, to whom
our Draperie (abounding in her own plenty) by means of navigations and
commerce, affoorded the rich Liuerie of this land; better embraced by them, and
much more highly esteemed, then all other trafficque whatsoever. As well
appeared by that famous Knight and trauayler, Sir Frances Drake, who having
rou^ded the whole world, and noated the riches and best endowments of every
naon found none to equal the Draperie and clothing of England. In regard
whereof, he chose to be a loving Brother of the Drapers Society, before all
other Companies of the City. Wherefore our first land devise is a Ship, very
artificially and workemanly framed, called the Barke-Hayes, fitted with
Captain, Master, Mate. etc. and supposedly laden with woollen clothes, to
make exchange for other Countries best commodities, and thought meet to usher
the way to the residue of the shows, which are directed to follow in this
manner.

A beautiful Chariot, drawn by two golden pell^tted Lions, and two golden
Woolues Erminnois, after the manner of the triumphall Chariots of the Roman
Emperors, is graced with the supposed shape of King Richard the first, with
the several figures of so many Cities in England about him, as conueniencie
of place and carriage granted liberty unto. Those Cities are disciphered by
their Eschuchions of Arms, and that their best advantage ever ensued by making
of woollen Clothes, for the continual maintenance of Englands Draperie. But
London sitting nearest unto himself, as chief Mother and matrone of them all:
he honors the head of his chiefest Chamber, with a triple imperial Crown of
gold, under battelled or branched with Clouds, and beams of the Sun, being
the Arms of the Drapers Society, and declaring his love and favor bestowed
on her, by his advancement of Sir Henry Fitz-Alwine to the Maioraltie, in
whom began the old Drapers dignity.

After this Chariot, follows a Pageant or goodly Monument, figuring the whole
estate of Londons old Draperie. In the supreme and most eminent seat,
sits Himatia, of Clothing, as Mother, Lady and commaundresse of all the
rest, who by their distinct emblemes and properties, (apted for the easiest
apprehension) do express their duty and attendance on so gracious a person,
in their several places and offices to them belonging; As in Carding,
Spinning, Weauing, Rowing, Fulling, Shearing Dressing, Dying, Tentering and
performing all other services to woollen Clothes, which at first was done
only by the Draper, or Clothier. Peace, Plenty, Liberality, Council and
Discreet Zeal, do supporte the flourishing condition of Himatiaes
Commonwealth, and strive to prevent all occasions which may seem sinister or
hurtful thereto.

Our devise which we spoke last of, and yet is appointed the first in service,
serves both for the water and land. Till the year 1453. the L. Majors of
London used to ride on horseback to Westminster, at such time as each one went
to take his oath. But S. John Norman Draper, being then Mayor, at his own cost
and charge, and for the relief of poor Watermen, who were much distressed in
those days: made a very goodly Barge for himself and his Brethren, to be
rowed therein by water to Westminster, and so to continue for a yearly
custom. It was a costly Barge, and the Oars are said to be covered with
silver: in memory whereof, and the honest benefit yearly found thereby: the
Watermen made a pleasant song called, Row thy Boat Norman, etc. This honor
beginning likewise in the Draper, and falling out so fitly to help our
invention: in a goodly fair Barge, made meet for the purpose, attends the
supposed shadow of Sir John Norman, with the seven liberal Sciences (all
attired like graceful Ladies) sitting about him, until such time as the Lord
Mayor comes to take water, and then he saluteth him with this speech.

S. John Normans speech on the Water.
VVElcome to the water, worthy Brother Draper. Imagine me to be the true
resemblance of old S. John Norman, sometime Lord Mayor of this famous City,
and the first that devised this water honor, making my Barge at mine own
proper cost, and rowed with silver Oars to Westminster, when (as you now) I
then went to take mine oath. In regard whereof, I was the first Mayor, that was
presented to the Barons, of the Exchecquer. The imaginary shapes of the seven
liberal Sciences, each one distinguished by their true charracter, are placed
as my companions in my Barge: in memory of the love I ever bare to learning,
and no mean bounties by me extended for the maintenance thereof. I joy, that
invention would make use of my remembrance in this manner, to do any service
to so desertfull a Brother, and to the Company of Drapers which I dearly
affected. On then my hearts, and as in those elder days you declared your love
to old John Norman: so express somewhat now to delight my honored Brother,
singing cheerfully, Row thy Boat Norman.

Which being no sooner ended, but diverse sweet singing youths, belonging to
the master that enstructeth the young Quiristers of Paul's, being all attired in
fair wrought wastcoates, and caps belonging also to them, each having a silver
Oar in his hand; do sing a most sweet dittie of Row thy Boat Norman, and so
seem to row up along to Westminster, in honor of the Lord Majors attendance.

For the several peales of Ordinance, which make better report in the air,
then they can be expressed by pen: For the Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, and other
musical Instruments, whereof each Company makes their choice, to grace this
honorable service out and home again, in the true affection of loving
Citizens, not suffering their chief Magistrate to want any part of their kind
respect and furtherance: they can much better speak for themselves then I, and
serve but as a breathing time to me, until my Lords return and landing. When
all our devises being martialled in order, according as we have formerly
related, except a goodly Ram or Golden Fleece, with a Shepherd sitting by
it; as occation serves, delivers his intention in this ensuing speech.

The Shepherd.
Why gaze ye so upon me! am I not a man flesh, blood, and bone, as you are?
Or in these silken satin Towns, are poor plain meaning Sheepheards woondred
at, like Comets or blazing Stars* Or is it this goodly beast by me, that
fills your eyes with admiration? If it be so, let me then resolve ye, that it
is an article of duty which we Shepherds of Cotswold owe to the old Drapers
of London, for keeping their flocks on the Cotswold hills, that when any worthy
Brother of their Society comes to be L. Mayor of this City, the very fairest
Ram in all their flocks is sent unto them as a solemn offering, as being the
Crest of their Companies Arms, and the chief maintainer of Wool for
clothing. In which respect, my Father about some six and twenty years since,
when S. Martin Calthrope (a Brother of the same Society) was Lord Mayor,
brought then the like goodly. Ram as his oblation; and I hearing, that his
man S. Thomas Hayes, and another Martin, Master Martin Lumley (by the blessing
of heaven and their own virtuous endeauours) were the next chosen Brethren of
the same Band, the one to succeed in the self same dignity of the Maioraltie,
and the other of the Shriuealty; have brought this as my hearts free offering,
in honor of them that so dearly affect them, and in my duty to them both,
with all my utmost service beside. For thus say we in Catswolde.

From the Ram
we have the Lamb
From both our finest
woolles are shorn.
Wool had thus from
the Ram and Lamb,
Makes the best Cloth,
that can be worn.
Thank then the Draper
that began:
To make such Clothing,
meet for man.
For, if we have no Ram, we are sure to have no Lamb: no Lamb, no Wool:
no wool, no Cloth: no Cloth, no Draper.

Heaven grant that we may never see these noes,
For we shall then feel twice as many woes:
But that of Ram, Lamb, Wool, Cloth, still we may have store:
So shall the Drapers then thrive more and more.
As mean additions, to give some small Iuster to the Show, because over many
were thought inconvenient; we make use of a golden pelletted Lion, a supporter
to the Companies Arms, with a Champion mounted on his back, and a golden
woolfe Erminnois, the Ensign or Imprese belonging to the Lord Majors Creast.
And with these few slender devises, we usher his Honors way toward
Guilde-Haule; until he come to S. Laurence-Lane, where the figure of S. Henry
Fitz-Alwine, thus favorably stays him.

IN times of old Antiquity,
When men lived long and healthfully,
Detesting sloth and idleness,
Which breeds but surfeit and excess.
When yea and nay was greatest Oath,
And men's best wear, good woollen Cloth,
Yeleped Englands Draperie,
More worth then gaudie bravery,
Of Silken twine, Silver and Gold,
Nere known in those blessed days of old:
Then lived that grave and worthy man,
That Londons honor first began,
By title of the Maioralty,
A high and famous dignity:
Henry Fitz-Alwine was his name,
Noble by birth, and of much fame.
Whose substance though his grave has kept,
Four hundred years, where he has slept:
Yet is his shadow raisde in me,
To grace this days solemnity.
For he being first that held the sway
Of Mayor in London, justly may
Challenge (by right) prioritie,
In honoring his own Company,
With all that sacred Poesy can
Devise, to grace so good a man,
As first with hearts, hands, and free voice,
Was thought meet in the peoples choice
To rank in that rich roll of fame:
That honored first the Drapers name.
And worthy Brother here suruay
Those several kinds of Londons sway
Till royal Richard first in me,
Altered the rule to Maioraltie.
Portgreues held first by strict command,
Next Prouosts with a sterner hand,
Such from the Conquest was the case
Of Londons awe, till milder grace
Made choice of Bayliffes, men thought fit
In the Kings judgment Courts to sit,
And right all causes of contention:
By upright censure, or prevention.
Yet all this could not please the king,
In two men's rule grew varying,
By leaning to what part each listed,
So might by might was still resisted.
Wrongs vnredrest, offenses flowing,
Garboyles and grudges each where growing.
Therefore as God had given him place,
Solely to rule, and judge each case,
So would he plant a deputy,
To figure his authority,
In the true form of Monarchy,
Then which, no better sovereignty.
Which office being imposde on me,
By such a gracious Majesty:
I held it four and twenty years,
(Yearly elected, as appears.)
Until my very dying day.
Since when (my Lord) I can well say,
The Science of old Draperie,
(Our loving kind Society)
Has yielded many a Magistrate, The number of 45. Lord Majors,

In the selfsame degree of State.
And Time reserueth in his store,
For the like honor, many more.
On then before, for we must tend,
Till this days triumph have full end.
The solemnity of so pompous a feast being finished, and his Honor (according
to yearly custom) returning toward Paul's, with all the former conceits
gracefully borne before him: he is mildly solicited for a minutes stay by old
Sir John Norman, who (in this manner) gives him a reason for it.

The Speech at the little Conduit in the afternoon, at my Lords going to
Paul's.
HOnorable Lord and Brother, it is imposed on old John Norman, briefly to
discribe these two beautiful devises to ye. In the first, which manifests
the Honor of Draperie, your well judging eye may easily conceive, each person
by their apt distinguishment. The Mother, Old Draperie, with her Daughters and
attendants placed about her, do deliver the Drapers true antiquity, and that
which he and his only performed, is since become the benifit of diverse trades
or occupations. Carding, Spinning, Weauing, Fulling, Rowing, Shearing,
Dressing, Dying, Tentering, and what else appertained to woollen cloth, was the
ancient Drapers sole profession, and the chief honor of this famous
Kingdom: flourishing thereby in so many happy blessings, and so fortefied by
Peace, Plenty, Bounty, Council and Discreet Zeal, that all other nations
sat and admired thereat. You have a taste of this felicity in that other
Devise, beautified with the chief Clothing Cities of this Land, for
maintenance of ancient Draperie, whereof London sits the highest advanced,
as being his choice Chamber that first made a Draper the only Governor
thereof. I am loath to hold ye long, and well I wot, more ample relation has
been made unto ye; and therefore to God and your good devotions I heartily
commend ye.

Night folding up bright day in dim mantles of darkness, and those divine
ceremonies ended, which wait as Henchmen on that days duty, the Stars
seem to leave their places in their fixed Spheres, and become as so many
bright flaming Torches to grace our worthy Magistrate home, even to his house,
(as it were) in the malice of blacke-fac'd night, and to further the finishing
of so solemn a Triumph, which ends with this humble farewell given to his
Honor.

The Speech delivered to the Lord Mayor at parting.
THe longest days have end at last,
And pleasures pomp is but a blast,
You see my Lord that sullen night,
Sworn enemy to days delight,
(For all the pride these Tapers make,)
Whispers, that we must farewell take.
To doubt of your ensuing care,
Or to advise ye, to prepare
For enuies storms, or soothing smiles,
That wait on such high place some whiles:
Longs not to me. For in your eye
Such true Charracters I epsy
Of virtue, zeal, and upright heed,
That you will prove the man indeed,
Meet such a charge to undergo:
Whereto heavens hand has raisde you so*
And that you will equal any yet
That in the selfsame place has set.
Such is the hope of all that love ye,
Among whom, I cannot choose but move ye
With their remembrance, that this day
Have done as much as men well may
In honoring this Solemnity,
The Drapers worthy Company.
Their love and bounty has expressed,
How with their favors you are blessed:
For, as their kindness has not scanted:
So has no needful service wanted.
For this days honor and delight:
And so my worthy Lord good night.
Thus the worthy and first honored Company of Drapers, having (in loving and
bountiful manner) declared their kind affection to as affable a Magistrate: I
may not omit one thing more, wherein the duteous respect of themselves, and
love to the City very manifestly approved their worth: for, when many solemn
meetings have been made in the Guild Hall, for election of a Sheriff by
common consent, and as many refusalls still happening day by day, to the great
disquiet of the Companies, and mighty delay of time; yet when no one would
undergo the Office and charge, a Draper has done it, worthily and willingly,
though no Aldermans place as then was void, witness Master Benedict Barneham,
a learned and judicious Gentleman, who chearefully undertook the Shrieualty in
Anno 1591. Next, Master Henry Iaye, but a year since, and Master Martin
Lumley now Sheriff of London, all of them loving Brethren of the Drapers
Society.

To conclude, as the several Inventions (with all their weaknesses and
imperfections) were mine own: so the worth and credit of their performance (if
any may wait on so mean a business) belongs to the exact and skillful
Painter Master Rowland Bucket, whose care, diligence, and faithful dealing I
must needs commend, and should wrong him overmuch if I did not give him due
praise to his merit. (*)

FINIS.

