CHRIST'S Suite to his Church.

A SERMON Preached at Paules-Crosse the third of October 1613.

By THOMAS MYRIELL, Minister of Gods word at BARNET.

Revel. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. August. in Ioh. Tract. 13. Christus sitientibus sons est, caeco lux
est; aperiantur oculi vt videant luce^; aperiantur fauces cordis, vt bibant
fontem. LONDON: Printed for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold at the sign
of the pide-Bull near Saint Austines gate. 1613.

TO THE Right Honorable, SIR John Swinnarton, KNIGHT, Lord Mayor of the
honorable City of LONDON.
MY LORD: It is a divine speech of a wel-spoken DIVINE, Chrysostom. in Math. hom.
1.
That it might have been wished that men had not needed the help of Learning
from others, but to have had so pure a life in all things, that in stead of
Letters Gods grace might have served us; and as Paper with Incke, so our hearts
with the Spirit, might have been imprinted with the knowledge of our duty. But
seeing the happyest man that is, is not happy enough this way, our second
riches is, to get learning as Vlysseshis Moly, at the hand of God, but with
great travail and much labor. Both which, how little the best Scholars have
spared to get so rich a prize, may appear, by that which some report of them
selves Me autem, quid pudeat qui tot annos ita viuo, vt ab illis (Studijs)
nullo me vnquam tempore, aut commodum aut ociu^ meum abstraxerit, aut voluptas
auocarit, aut denique somnus retardarit? Cic. pro Archia Poet.
that they were so wedded to their studies, as from the same no profit could
entice them; no pleasure allure them, no, nor sleep hinder them. Haec studia
adolescentiam alunt, senectute^ oblectant, secundas res ornant, aduersis
perfugium acsolatium praebent, delectant domi, non impediunt foris, pernoctant
nobiscu^, peregrinantur, rusticantur. Cic. ibid.
Accounting Learning, to youth, a nourishment; to age, a recreation; in
prosperity an ornament; in adversity a refuge; a delight at home; no trouble
abroad; but a sweet companion at all times, in all places, to all persons. And
by that which others report of Valor. Maxim. lib. 8.
Pythagoras his going to Memphis; of Plato Diog. Laert. in vita Platon.
his voyage to, and his journey over Egypt, and Italy; of Philostrat. vti
Hieron. ad Paul.
Apollonius his trauails to the Persians; Scythians, Massagets, and other
people of India, that he might speak with the Brachmans: and of many other
whom St. Jerome names; as also by the famous Aul. Gell. Noct. Attict. lib. 6.
ca. 10.
Euclides of Megaris, who, (as Taurus had wont to tell his scholars) when the
Athenians had made it treason for any Megarian Citizen to set his foot in
Athens, yet adventured in his long gown to go by night from his own house to
Athens, being twenty miles at least, to hear and to learn of the most noble
Socrates, the wisest man living at that time. And lastly, by the painful
travails of many other, which might be named, whose souls at their return
home (as Nazi. Oratin laud. Caesarij.
Nazianzen tells of his brother Caesarius) came like laden ships, fraught
with all manner precious jewels of wholesome learning.

But because every man cannot go to CORINTH, as the Proverb says, God has
not given every man a body patient of labor, nor a mind capable of conceit
for the purchase of learning, it follows, that where it is, men should not
only admire it, as a singular gift of God; but respect it, countenance it, and
reward it, as the most precious jewel among men: so by thankfulness to God
honor the giver, and by kindness to the possessors of it, show their love to
the gift.

Wherein, how much your Lordship excels; (I mean, in loving learning in men,
and encouraging men in learning) most men cannot but take notice, and best men
cannot but take comfort. And may it please you through Gods grace thus to go
on; it is the ready way to make your greatness good, and your goodness great.

Amongst others whom it has pleased your Lordship to take notice of, my self
am one, on whom the splendor of your kind favor has shined. Not that there
is any such desert in me, (I am too privy, alas, to my own wants) or that I am
worthy to be named the same day with learned men, (my soul knows it, and
protests it:) but because your large goodness is pleased to reach down so
low, and the bright rays of your kind aspect stretch so far, being therein
indeed, like the royal beams of the Sun in the Firmament, that shines as
bright in the poor man cottage as in the Kings palace.

All which thankful acknowledgement of your love, I trust your Lordship takes
as spoken without flattery. For, besides that he has no need of false
praises, that abounds with true; so I confess my disposition is as contrary to
that vice, as that vice is to virtue it self. Only my desire is, not to
deserve to be accounted unthankful, to so worthy a Mecoenas, but to give
evident and open testimony of my thankful heart, for so many favors, for the
time past; least I should justly ever after be held unworthy of any favor, for
the time to come.

And because it pleased your Lordship so much to commend and approve of this
simple SERMON, I am bold to present it to your person, and to publish it under
your Name, hoping, that (as the King did by the poore-mans roots, so) your
Lordship will take this simple present in good worth, and judge by it how well
I mean toward you in thankfulness; as the world may conceive by this, how
much you have done to me in kindness. In which hope resting, I crave leave
for writing, and take leave of writing: praying God to bless you still in this
life; and to crown you with blessedness it self in the life to come. Barnet,
9. October. 1613.

Your Lordships in love and duty Thomas Myriell.

CHRIST'S SVITE TO HIS CHVRCH.
CANT. 5.2. Open unto me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled.
THose three things which Lyran. in praef ad Prou. Solom.
Empedocles affirmed to be the chief commendation of Philosophy Mobilis
affluentiae contemptus futurae faelicitatis appetitus, et me^tis illustratio.
Lyr. ibid.
the contempt of this transitory world, the desire of future happiness, and
the illumination of the mind; may more justly be said to commend the holy
Scriptures, and word of GOD, which is the true Philosophy or Sophie rather, 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
able to make a man blessedly wise for ever. For this, first, inlightning the
mind with the brightness of the knowledge of God, directly teaches us to
contemn the world present, and earnestly exhorts us to desire happiness to
come. The which, as it excellently intends in general; so, it most divinely
performs by Solomon (the great Philosopher, 1 King. 4.33.
that spoke of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and creeping things, as also of trees,
from the Cedar in Libanus, to the Hyssope on the wall) in these three books of
his, (truly therefore called Lyr. and alij.
Sapientiall) I mean, the books of the Proverbs, of the Preacher, and of the
Canticles. In the first, he labors to inlighten the mind, and therefore he
begins with Proverbs, To know wisdom, and instruction, to understand the
words of knowledge. Prou. 1.2.
Pro. 1.2. In the second he exhorts to contemn the world present, and
therefore he says, Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Eccle. 1.1.
Eccle. 1.1. In the third he moves the soul to desire future happiness, and
for that cause to cry out to CHRIST, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, Cant. 1.1.
Cant. 1.1. Whereupon the framing of these three books is much after the
building of the Temple. There Solomon made, first, the outter Court for the
people, then the body of the Temple for the Priests, and lastly the holy of
holyes for the high Priest. Here he sets down first, Proverbs, for the
mostignorant: To give unto the simple sharpness of wit, and to the Child
knowledge and discretion. Prouer. 1.3.
Prouer. 1.3. The Ecclesiastes, or the PREACHER, as it were for the Priest, the
man of learning to be busied in; and lastly, this Song of Songs, into which, as
the holy of holyes, no man must presume to enter, but he which is of a most
sanctified Spirit, fit in some sort, as an high Priest, to come into the
presence of God himself.

For here Solomon, upon occasion of his marriage with the King of Egipts
daughter, most divinely describes the happy conjunction of Christ and his
Church, with which he seems to be so ravished, that the description of his
own marriage serves him but as a shell to lap up the sweet kernel of the
other in, as the Poet fitly,

Monc. in Sol. hist. delib. Vti habet Ioh. Pin. dereb. Solom. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Nil Solomonis in hoc nudum nisi nomen and vmbra
Carmine, nil Phariae nisi nomen et vmbra puellae.
In this whole Song, is but the bare name and shadow of Solomon and the King of
Egipts Daughter, the body and substance is of Christ and the Church:

Id. ibid.
Vox hominem sonat ipsa, meros sonat omnis amores
Affectusque hominum, contexius, Atalmus in illis,
Nucleus, et coeleste latet sub cortice germen.
The speech indeed is of man and woman, and the bare letter sounds humane love
and affection; but this is but the shell, the sweet kernel is within in the
sense, where you shall find more sung of then the love of man to woman, even
the love of God himself to man.

Hence therefore all profane eyes and ears; and come not near. Profane
eyes, view not the sport of the letter, Bern. sup. cant. sermon. 61.
Nihil enim serium babet literae series, says Bernard, the series of the
letter is nothing serious. Profane ears hear not the loue-phrases of the
speakers, but, Origin in Cant. hom. 2.
vt spiritualis audi spiritualiter amatoria verbae cantari, says Origin, as a
spiritual man conceive of these amorous words, and when thou hear these
lovers: Bern. sup. cant. sermon. 61.
Non virum et foeminam, sed verbum et animam sentias. Think not on a man and a
woman, but of GOD and the soul of man and woman both. To conclude, view not so
much the outside of the phrase, as the inside of the sense. The letter is but
the chafe, the corn is in the understanding; and Gregor. proaem. in Cant.
fumentorum est paleis, hominum frumentis vesci, says Gregory: They are but
beasts that feed on chafe, and men which eat the corn. The letter is but the
bone, the marrow is the meaning, therefore Petrus Bles. ser. 3.
Frange os literae et innenies medullam intelligentiae. Break with me the
bone of the letter, and you shall find the marrow of sense and understanding.
Which as you must do in the rest, so in these words that I have read: Open
unto me, Division.
my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled.

Where you see, one, commending, and commanding, praising, and praying.
Commending and praising, when he says, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
Undefiled. Commanding, or praying (whether you will) when he says Open unto
me.

The question yet is, who it is that speaks, and to whom? This is to be
remembered, that the speakers in this book are in all but three, Iun. et.
Tremel. in annot. et alij.
the Bridegroom which is Christ, figured as is said, by Solomon the King of
Israel. The Bride, which is the Church, figured by the King of Egypts
daughter, and lastly, the friends of them both, now and then casting in a word,
as third persons between the Bridegroom and his Bride. Now the words read,
are spoken by the Bridegroom to his Bride, but recounted over again by the
Bride her self; partly in joy, as commending the Bridegroom for the sweet
words he bestowed on her; Lamentatio Ecclesiae, seipsam incusantis, de officio
non salis praestito. Iun. in annot. ad loc. Thomp. ad loc. and alij.
partly in sorrow, as condemning her self for not listening to the request
which he made unto her.

The words which he gives unto her, are words befitting a Bridegroom, words
full of love. My Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. He calls her first, his
Sister, which shows how near she is to him in affinity: Secondly, his Love,
which declares how dear she is to him in affection. Bern. sup. Cant. sermon. 8.
Soror, quia ab vno patre, Sponsa, quia in vno spiritu, says Bernard; His
Sister, as coming from the same father; his Love, as living by the same
spirit. Thirdly, his Dove, which shows that she is spightlesse. Fourthly, his
undefiled, which declares that she is spotless. Isidor. Hisp. comment. ad loc.
Columba, quia spiritus sui done illustrata, says Isidore, Immaculata, quia
sola aspectu sui digna. His Dove, as only graced with his spirit on earth; his
undefiled, as only glorified with his presence in heaven.

Again, the request he makes unto her is reasonable. [Open unto me.] Open,
what more easy in the attempt? unto me, what more worthy in the intent? Open
unto me: for I have both done good to thee, and suffered evil for thee: done
good to thee, whilst I have married thee, and made thee a Queen: Suffered
evil for thee, Nullum malu^ aut incommodum defugi, quin susceperim propter te.
Iun. annot. ad loc.
by waiting abroad so long till My head is wet with the dew, and my locks
with the drops of the night. Justly therefore may she complain, that she was
either so drowsy, as not to be moved at so kind entreaty, or so hardhearted,
as not to yield to so just a demand. To begin with the first.

My Sister.
THE Church in Scripture is usually compared to a woman, and their analogy is
apparent many ways.

First, in the manner of their birth. The first woman Genesis 2.22.
Eve was built out of Adams side whilst he lay asleep. This woman, the Church,
had her Ecclesia enim coniux domini, facta est de latere, quomodo Eua illa
facta est de latere. August. in Psalm. 126.
birth and building too out of Christ's side, which is the second Adam, in his
sleep of death upon the Cross. The Soldier with a Spear pierced Christ's
side, and John 19.34.
immediately there came out blood and water, Ioh. 19.34. Chrysostom. in Johan.
hom. 84.
Non casu, and simpliciter hi fontes scaturierunt, says Chrysostom. Sed quoniam
ex ambobus Ecclesia constituta est: This came not to pass by a simple chance,
but because by these fountains the Church lives, drinking water in Baptism,
and blood in the Lords Supper. So that as Numb. 20.11
Moses struck the Rock, and presently there flowed out water that cheared the
Israelites in the desert, Number. 20.11. even so Longinus struck the rock Christ
Jesus, and immediately there flowed out the two Sacramental streams that
Psalm. 46.6.
make glad the City of God, and preserues life in it for evermore.

Secondly, in the account of their husbands. Adam ioyed in his Eve, rested in
her love, and prized her more then the whole world that GOD had given him
before. So has Christ done by his Church; he has ioyed in her more then in
all things beside, yea, more then in himself. She is that Genesis 24.67.
Rebeccah, which he like Isaac has brought into his own Tabernacle, and sets
his mind on her so much, as for her love he has forgotten the death of his
Mother, the Synagogue, and sports himself alone with her, Genesis 24.67. She
that Genesis 24.20.
Rachel so much prized above bleare-eyed Leah populus vester est and Synagoga,
Rachel vero nostra Ecclesia. Just. Mart. colloq. cum Tryph.
Leah her Sister, for whom, like Jacob, he has served not seven years, but
almost five times seven, and they seemed short unto him because he loved her,
Genesis 29.20. She, that Esther 2.17.
Esther, to whom Christ, our Assuerus, has held out the Scepter of peace, and
has made of a Captive a Queen, in the room of rebellious Vashti, the
stiff-necked Synagogue. Esth. 2.17.

Thirdly, in the end of their creations. The woman at first was made to be an
help to man, her Lord, and such an help, as should be Septnag. Genesis 2.18.
(...), evermore at his elbow, ministering and serving, to expel sorrow from
him, and to bring content to him: so is the Church made to Psalm. 45.11.
serve her Lord, Christ; Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord God, and worship thou
him: For, as before the woman's creation, though all creatures served Adam, and
were ready attendants on him, yet none was found worthy to join with him in
friendship (a thing naturally desired of man, who is Arist. eth. lib. 8. cap. 1.
(...), a creature desirous of Friendship) or if in friendship, yet by no
means in wed-locke, which he notwithstanding, (being Arist. ib. lib. 8. cap.
12.
(...), more naturally inclined to love a wife in a house, then a friend in a
city) desires above all other things. Even so, although Infidels and
reprobates, like beasts as they are, cannot but serve Christ in the setting
forth of his Justice: yet no service is worthy of his love, nor pleasing to his
mind, but only the service of his Church, with whom he dwells, by his grace,
on earth, and who is to dwell with him in his glory, in heaven.

Fourthly, in the several estates and conditions that are incident to a woman.
For, there is no state happening to a woman in nature, but the same is suiting
to the Church in resemblance. Thus the Church is an handmaid, a mistress, a
mother, a daughter, a wife, a widow, a virgin, a Spouse, and to conclude, a
sister.

She is an handmaid, waiting and attending on Gods Service. Therefore those
words, Psalm. 123.2.
Psalm. 123.2. Behold, as the eyes of Servants look to the hands of their
Masters, and the eyes of an handmaid unto the hands of her Mistress, etc.
August. in Psalm. 122.
Augustine says, are spoken of the Church, which is Seruus, quia populus,
ancilla quia Ecclesia: Gods Servant, because his people, Gods Handmaid because
his Church: And we which are of his family, must love him and his Church, but
after a different manner, Aug. in Ps. 88.
Illum sicut Dominum, hanc sicut Ancillam, him as our Lord, her, as his
handmaid.

And yet she is also a Mistress. A Mistress to rule and guide her folk, yea and
to correct them too, if they do offend. Therefore the same Aug. epis. 48.
Nonne contumacem ancillam Sara potius affligebat? etc.
S Saint Augustine compares her to Sarah, who when her handmayd contemned her,
thrust her out of doors, Genesis 21.14.
Genes. 21.14. So the CHVRCH for as mittit puts out of doors, by Ecclesiastical
discipline, such as be rebellious and contumatious against her. True it is,
some men cannot endure to hear of this, that the Church should be their
mistress. Hence it is, that they neglect her commands, and contemn her
censures. And by their example it is come to pass that every wicked liver
thinks of excommunication as brutum fulmen, or a bullet of Cork, and forgets
the power of binding and loosing that is committed to the Church. So that
ecclesiastical discipline, which Disciplina custos spei, retinaculum fidei,
dux itineris salutaris, fomes ac nutrimentum bonae indolis, etc. Cyp. de disc.
and hab. Virg.
Cyprian calls, the preserver of hope, the retainer of faith, the guide to
salvation, the cherisher of good towardlines, the mistress of virtue etc. is
almost fallen to the ground, and has lost his due reputation amongst wicked
men. The Church they think should not constrain, but entreat, not compel,
but counsel.

But this donatisticall opinion is confuted: first, by reason, because, Aug. ad
Vinc. Epist. 48.
Non omnis qui parcit est amicus, nec omnis qui verberat inimicus, says
Aug^stine, Not every one that spares is a friend, nor every one that
punishes, an enemy. There is as well a punishing mercy, as a sparing cruelty.
For when mildness will do no good, we must use severity. Hier. ad. Helio.
Debet amor laesus irasci, says Jerome, love too much provoked must grow
angry, Hieron. ibid.
Qui rogantem contempserat, audiat obiurgantem: He which contemned one
praying, let him hear him chiding. Secondly, by example, and that even of God
himself, 1 Samuel 2.6.
who casts down that he may lift up, kills that he may make alive, turns
down to hell that he may exalt to heaven. As also of all good men; for Aug.
ad Vinc. epist. 48.
Semper, et mali persecuti sunt bonos, et boni malos, says Augustine. It has
ever been seen, that evil men have persecuted the good, and the good have
persecuted evil men. Id. ibid.
Illi nocendo per iniustitiam, hi consulendo per disciplinam. The one by
injustice hurting, the other by discipline amending. Thus the Apostles being
delivered Mat. 10.17. Aug. vt supra.
potestati humanae, to the power of men, delivered their deliuerers 1 Cor. 5.5.
potestati Satanae, to the power of Satan.

The Church is a Mother. Gal. 4.26.
Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.
She it is that brings forth in faith, and brings up in love. Cypryan. de
vnitat. Eccles. 5.
Illius foetu nascimur, illius lacte nutrimur, spiritu cius animamur, says
Cyprian. By her travail are we borne, nourished by her milk, and quickened by
her spirit. Hence that resolute speech of so many August. Hierom. Cyprian, etc.
Fathers: he can never have God for his father in heaven, that does not
acknowledge the Church his mother on earth. Her care is great for her sons,
which if they prove rebellious, either in opinion, as Heretics, or in manners,
as reprobates, she complains with God, Isa. 1.2.
Isa. 1.2. I have nourished up children, but they have rebelled against me. Or
with the Synagogue, 2 Esdr. 2.3. I brought you up with joy and gladness, 2
Esdr. 2.3.
but with sorrow and heaviness have I loft you.

She is also a daughter. Sion was called so: Zach. 9.9.
Tell ye the daughters of Sion. And the Church of the Gentiles, Psalm. 45.11.
Hearken O daughter, and consider. For if each faithful soul be Gods
daughter, as being borne of him, from above; then much more the Church, which
is, Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 61.
Multarum vnitas, vel potius vnanimitas animarum; the unity or rather
unanimity of many souls together. And she is a daughter to God, Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 44.
Quia ipse ipsam regenerauit, and ipse quoque eam despondit, says Chrysostom,
because he has begotten her after his own image, and because he has
betroathed her to his own son.

Again, the Church is a Wife; and that by a perfect Matrymonie between Christ
and her. For whether you take matrimony from Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 44. a. 2.
Matris munium, a Mothers Office; or from Id. ibid.
Matrem muniens, a Mothers defense; or from Id. ibid.
Matre^ monens, from admonishing a Mother; or lastly, from Id. ibid. supra.
materia and monos; unity of matter: it agrees to Christ and the Church
excellently well. She having an office under Christ to instruct her children
well, and an admonition from Christ, to demean her self well; and a defense
in Christ against the gates of hell; and an interest in Christ to the joys of
Heaven. Under him by deputation to govern his servants, with him by imputation
to partake of his inheritance.

She is also a Widow: a Widow says Gregory, Greg. Moral. lib. 16. cap. 22.
Quae occisi viri sui, interim visione priuata est. Whose Husband Christ being
dead, she marries no more to the delights of the World, but mourns for want
of his vision in Heaven. Therefore she does, says August. in 50. Homil. Hom.
18.
Augustine, like the Widow of Sareptah, eats her meal with resolution to
die, that being once dead she may live for ever. To this end she is gathering
two sticks, August. ibid.
Quia duo ligna Crucem faciunt, because two sticks make a Cross, which is her
only stay, whereon to rest her self in this vale of misery. All her meat is
the meal of Christ's flesh, and the oil of his blood, which being blessed unto
her by the Prophets of God, feeds her, and her sons, and the Prophets to.

This Church is also a Virgin: For though, says August. de verbis Dom ser.
32. Tota Ecclesia quae constat ex pueris, and virginibus, and maritatis
faeminis, and vxoratis viris, vno nomine virgo est appellata.
Augustine, She consists of diverse conditions, of men, women, children and
maids, yet is she commonly called by the one name of a Virgin. And the
resemblance stands many ways: First, In regard of purity, August. in Psalm.
147.
Virginitas carnis, corpus intactum, virginitas mentis fides incorrupta. The
virginity of the body is purity of flesh, the virginity of the Church, is
integrity of Faith. Secondly, In respect of innocence: for virginity is a
harmless estate; it is Cyprian. de bono pudicit.
Perseuerans infantia, says Cyprian; A perpetual infancy. And the Church is
a company of newborn 1 Pet. 2.2.
Babes, feeding upon the sincere Milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2. Thirdly, In
respect of beauty; we all know that beauty is in virgins, as in her proper
subject. Therefore virginity is compared to a flower: Cyp. de discip. and
habit. virg.
Flos est ille Ecclesiastici germinis, decus atque ornamentum gratiae
spiritualis. Chaste virginity is the flower of all Ecclesiastical branches,
and the comely ornament of spiritual grace. So is the Church her self, even
by Christ's own verdict, Cant. 4.7. Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair my love, thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee.
Fourthly, In respect of chastity. Therefore Digna viginitas quae apibus
comparetur. Ambr. de virg. lib. 1.
Ambrose compared a virgin to a Be, which creature is in the Pierius lib. 26.
hieroglyphicke of chastity. So the Church is a chaste virgin, presented by
the Ministers unto Christ without spot or wrinckle; yet in the midst of her
chastity she is far from barrenness: Cyp. de bono pudic.
Non habet faecunditatem, sed non habet orbitatem, says Cyprian; She has no
fruitfulness, and yet is void of barrenness. She has no children of the
flesh, but she has the offspring of the Spirit. Ambr. de virgin. lib. 1.
Partus virginis faetus labiorum, says Ambrose, The virgins Issue is the
calves of the lips. Therefore Anselme compares the Ansel. Comment. in 2 Cor. 11.
Virgin Church our mother, to the Virgin Mary Christ's mother. For as she though
a Virgin, brought forth the fairest Child that ever was, so the Church a
Virgin, daily brings forth to God the most acceptable issue that can be.

This Virgin the Church is also Sponsa, that is, a Virgin affianced. A Spouse
promised and set apart to the marriage of Christ. Reu. 21.2. The new Jerusalem
comes down from heaven (for her birth is from above) like a Bride trimmed for
her husband. Reu. 21.2.
Trimmed I say, but at the Bridegromes cost, who has adorned her with graces,
Isa. 61.10.
tanquam monilibus, as with precious Jewels, Isa. 61.10. She it is that is so
arrayed with all manner of flowers, that she is staid up with flowers, amongst
which yet there is not a fairer flower then is her self. It is well observed
by Bernard. super Cant. ser. 47.
Bernard, that Solomon in this Book, makes mention of three sorts of flowers.

1 Flos campi: The flower of the field, and that is Christ, Bernard. ibid.
nec sulcatus vomere, nec defossus sarculo, etc. whose flesh was not eared with
the share of any humane information, nor mind tilled with the cultor of any
masters instruction, and yet yields forth the smell of all most fragrant
virtues. 2 Flos horti: The flower of the garden, and that is the Church, which
is dug by the knowledge of the Law, planted by the work of the Ministry,
watered by the preaching of the Gospel, and fenced by the wall of the
Sacraments. 3 Flos thalami: The flower of the bedchamber, and that is
Conscientia bonis refarta operibus. Ber. super. Cant. ser. 15.
the soul, filled with good works, which are the flowers that the Bride decks
her self with, and deckes her self with them every day. For she is every day
a Bride, and every day puts on fresh flowers of good works. Bern. ibid.
Otherwise Cito iacet and marcet flos boni operis (says Bernard) atque in
breui omnis ex eo exterminatur and nitor and vigor: soon dies and withers the
flower of a good work, and fayles both in savor and favor, if it be not
eftsoons renewed afresh. But of all flowers, this Bride the Church is most of
all adorned with Lillies and Roses, Confessors and Martyrs, the one whereof has
the white flower of an innocent life, the other the red flower of a bloody
death. Cypr. ad martyrs. epist. 9.
O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, says Saint Cyprian; O blessed Church that we
have: Floribus eius nec Lillia nec Rosae desunt; her flowers want neither
Lillies nor Roses. All men strive now to wreathe themselves garlands, either
Aut de opere candidas, aut de passione purpureas. Cyp. vt sup.
white by action, or purple by passion. And sure the Church was then in her
flowers indeed, the sweet smell whereof has reached to our days, and shall
continue to the end of the world.
Lastly, the Church is Christ's Sister: not a Sister by similitude or imitation
only, but Isid. Hisp. orig. lib. 9. cap. 6.
germana, that is, ex eadem genitrice manaens (says Isidore) borne as it were
both in a belly. For, there is a greater consanguinitie between Christ and
man, then between the Angels and Christ: for, the Job. 1.6.
Angels indeed are Gods progeny, and so Christ is their brother by the
Fathers side: but to man he is allied nearer; for man is of Gods lineage, Act.
17.17.
Ipsius genus sumus, Acts 17.17. We are his generation: and Christ again is
of man's lineage, Romans 1.3.
Borne of the Seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. So that, as God
made our soul of him, so has he made his body of us. And the affinity is
continued both ways: for, as GOD gave his daughter, that is, his image to man,
so has he taken man's siister, that is, his nature, in marriage to his Son.
Justly therefore does he call the Church, and in the Church each faithful
soul, his Sister, as tied to him in a most firm bond of alliance and
consanguinitie.

And by this further you may see two other points. First, the chastnesse of his
love unto her. He calls her his Sister, says Hieron. aduers. Iouinian. lib. 1.
Jerome, vt tolleretur suspicio foedi amoris, to take away the suspicion of
unchaste love. For the name of Sister implies a detestation of fleshly
impuritie, which made him to say, Plautus.
Tam a me pudica est, quam mea si soror sis: She is as chaste for me, as if
she were my Sister. Secondly, the greatness of his love unto her, as being
tied together in a double band; of Consanguinitie, which makes them one blood;
and Matrimony, which makes them one flesh. This Abraham is a brother and
husband to his Sarah. How can she doubt to receive anything from God, whom
she has so surely and nearely tied to her. Bern. super Cant. ser. 20.
Puto me iam spernere non poterit, os ex ossibus meis, and caro de carne mea:
Now verily, I think he can never despise me, which is flesh of my flesh, and
bone of my bone. For, if he neglect me as a brother, yet will he love me as a
husband. And thus much of the first.

My Love.
AS of all Societies none is so near as that of man and wife; so, neither
amongst any is love so fervent as between them. Therefore Christ being by
spiritual marriage made one with his Church, and loving her more tenderly then
the kindest husband the kindest wife, calls her, as some translate it, Proximam;
his nearest: but as the Paguin. Vatablus. Montan. Tremellius. etc.
most and the best, Amicam, his dearest: as if he were by love gone out of
himself, and turned wholly into her: according to that of Anima verius est vhi
amat, qua^ vbi animat.
Augustine, The Soul is rather where it loves then where it lives. And so
indeed it is with God, says Bernard, Bern. sup. cant. sermon. 59.
Quia amorem non tam habet quam hoc ipse est, because he cannot be said so
much to have love, as to be even love it self. Hence it is, that he has put
off his roabes of Majesty, and clothed himself with our flesh, and so is
become the same with his Church on earth, that his Church might become the same
with him in heaven. Never lover so changed like him, and therefore never love
so unchangeable as his.

Here then have we just occasion ministered, to consider of the greatness of his
love to the Church, who calls the Church his Love. A theme, I confess,
admirably discussed by incomparable Divines; after whom yet, give me leave to
throw my mite, and to say something of that, of which we can never say enough.

It is commonly seen, that love is manifested four ways: First, by word of
mouth, verbo tenus, in tongue and in word, though not in deed and verity.
There is therefore a second degree, Greg. in Euang. hom. 30.
Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis, (says Gregory) The commendation of
true love, is the performance of some good turn. But because gifts are
sometimes bestowed as much for selfeloue, as for love of a friend (when a man
by giving somewhat, hopes to receive much more) therefore there is a third
degree greater then the other, there is one degree further, and that is by
suffering death for the party beloved. And here love and all has his end so
that he which has this can desire no more.

Now all these ways has God loved his Church: for, first, how amiably does
he use her in words for her own good? words of sweet Epithets, Can. 5.2.
My Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. Of kind entreaty; 2 Cor. 5.20.
We pray you in Gods stead, even as if God did beseech you through us, that ye
be reconciled unto God. Of wholesome admonition; Ezekiel. 18.31.
Cast away from you all your ungodliness, why will ye dye O ye house of
Israel, seeing I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner? Of sound advise;
Revel. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me, gold tried by the fire, that thou may be made
rich. And lastly, of alluring provocation; Mat. 11.29.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

For the second: How has he spent his gifts upon us? In the Creation he gave
us our selves, and all things necessary for our selves. He divided his
substance to man, his youngest son; and when he like a prodigal had spent
all, how did he receive him again? Sense. de ira, lib. 2. cap. 27.
Nimis nos suspicimus, says Seneca, si digni nobis videmur, etc. we are too
much in love with our selves, if ever we imagine that we are worthy that the
heavens should move for us, Sun and Moon shine to us, rain and dew fall on
us, earth and sea feed and comfort us. How much more then unworthy are we,
that after all this, God should bestow his son on us; his only son on us
his fugitive servants? In the creation he gave us the best things that he had,
when as yet we had nothing of our own; but in the restoration he makes an
exchange with us, In primis de suis meliora contulit in secundis de nostris
inferiora suscepit. Aug. de Tempor. ser. 9.
he takes the worst things that we have, and he gives us the best things
that he has. He takes our nature, and gives us his grace: he takes our
flesh, and gives us his spirit: he takes our misery, and gives us his mercy:
he takes our poverty, and gives us his riches: he takes our shame, and gives
us his glory: finally, he takes our cross, and gives us his crown: our
death, and gives us his life. For in giving us his Son, he gives us all
things that can be desired. And never before did God give a gift like himself,
infinite: then he did. Now verily a most worthy gift, as he is of most worth
that is the giver.

Thirdly, he has not been pleased alone to bestow benefits on us, but in his
own person has come and served for us, yea has served us. Math. 20.28.
The son of man came not to be ministered unto but to minister, Math. 20.28.
Even he which is Lord of all, made himself servant unto all. Bernard sup.
cant ser. 64.
Quae est ista quaeso vis, tam violenta ad victoriam, tam victa ad violentiam?
says Bernard: What force is that, which moved him who of himself is so
violent in all victory, for man yet, to be so vanquished with all violence. Id.
ibid.
Amor est. It is nothing else but the force of love. This made him to Phil. 2.7.
take on him the form of a servant. Philip. 2.7. Yea, Bernard ter. quart. Heb.
poenos.
non solum serui vt subesset, sed quasi mali serui vt vapularet, says Bernard
not the form of a servant only to be in subjection, but of a bad servant to
bear correction. And which is more yet, to be made a companion of beasts,
borne in a Stable; and which is most of all, to be made as it were prouender
for beasts, laid in a manger. Bernard sup. cant. sermon.
Cibus hominis mutauit se in pabulum pecoris, homine mutato in pecus. When man
was become a beast, Christ would become as it were prouender to feed him.

But all this Christ thought not enough for us, unless he dyed for us. So
great a degree of love, as there could be no greater, which makes his love so
much more sweet, as the loosing of life it self is accounted bitter. For it is
a truth, even which comes from the author of untruth; Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. Skin
for skin, that is, the skin or life of a man's children or cattle for his
own skin, Lyran. annot. in Job 2.
as Lyra expounds it. Or skin for skin, that is, the more hard skin for
the more tender skin; as when a man catches a blow on his hand to save his
eye, as Strab. in gloss. ordin.
Strabus interprets it. For there is nothing that a man had not rather endure
then loss of life. Every creature, as August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 11. cap. 27.
Augustine observes, has such a love to have a being, that it had rather be,
though in misery, then not be at all. Wonderful therefore and unspeakable is
the love of Christ Jesus to his Church, who so willingly, and so joyfully
suffered even the most shameful and bitter death for her sake. Men may coldly
and slightly think of it, but principalities and powers stand amazed at it.

That you may yet take a further view of it, compare his love with the love of
other persons, and you shall see how far he goes before them all. Love is
most fervent among four sorts of couples. 1. Between friend and friend, which
are as one heart in two bodies. 2. Between the parent and the child, which
are as two bodies from one stock. 3. Between the husband and the wife, which
are as two persons in one flesh. 4. Between the body and the soul, which are
as two substances in one person. Now the love of Christ to his Church exceedes
the love of all these each to other.

First, it exceedes the love that is between friend and friend. For what man
is there which loves another so as he could be contented to dye for him? yes,
Romans 5.7.
peradventure, says Paul, for a good man one would dye. It may be Damon would
have done it for Pythias, Pylades for Orestes. And this is as much as ever any
man did, or can do: For, Ioh. 15.15.
greater love then this has no man, that one should give his life for his
friend. But CHIRST, says Paul, sets forth his love unto us, that Romans 5.8.
cum inimici essemus, when we were his enemies he was content to dye for us.
Romans 5.8. He loved us Bern. sup. cant. sermon. 20.
non existentes, imo and resistentes, says Bernard, when we were nothing, and
when we were worse then nothing; when we were his very foes, and mortal
enemies. If it be said they are all Christ's friends for whom he dyed, we must
answer with a father, he dyed indeed Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat?
Pio iam amicis, nondum quidem amantibus, sed tamen iam amatis, for his friends
indeed, as being heartily loved of CHRIST, though like unkind friends they
loved him not again. Tho. Aqui. in Iohannem, vti Barrad. to. 4 lib. 4. cap. 15.
Non amici quasi amantes, says Thomas, tantum amici vt amati. Not his friends
as loving him any thing, only his friends as loved by him alone.

Again it exceedes the love that is between the parent and the child. For
what father in the world having but one only son, would be content to put him
to death, he not deserving it, to pleasure others? Esa. 49.14.
Can a woman forget her child, and not think upon the fruit of her womb? You
will say, Abraham would have done it for love to God. Indeed he is singular in
this case, and such an example, as the world never afforded the like. Origin
in Genes. hom. 8.
Origin sets it our thus. Genes. 22.2.
Take, says God thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, etc. Gense. 22.2.
Esto domine, says he, quia de filio commemor as paetrem. Be it so Lord that
thou put the father in mind of his son. Fulmen non minus terribile
Abrahamo, quam si iubetur cor sibi cruere, imo se cum vniuerso mundo in
infernum praecipitare. Pareus in Genesis 22.
This is one torture, to think, that the father must now become his childs
butcher. Origin vt supra.
Sed addis charissimum, etc. Thou addest thy dearest, or only son, and not
content with that, but say also Id. ibid.
quem diligis, whom thou love. It is likely that Abraham having been so long
without a son, was well affected toward him now he had him, but was this a
fit time to put him in mind of his love? Id. ibid.
Sint et in hoc parenti triplicata supplicia. Let us observe here three
tortures to the fathers mind, as so many daggers at his heart. But what need
was there after all this, to name Isaac? did not the father know that this his
son, his dear son, whom he loved, was called Isaac? yes, and he remembered
the promise to, Genesis 17.21.
in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Genesis 17.21. yet God forbeares not to name
him, that so Origin in Genes. ho. 8.
Commemoratio nominis, might be desperatio promissionis: the remembrance of his
name, might be desperation of the promise, by which he should not loose his
child only, but his own soul also, and not that alone, but the souls of
all men in the world beside: such a trial never lay on any man before, nor
never shall again; and yet Abraham would have done it.

But if you mark it, there is no comparison between the love of Abraham to
God, and the love of GOD to man. For what equality between Isaac a young lad,
and Christ the eternal son of God? Again Isaac must have dyed once, for he
ought God a death, Omnia quae de Christo legeris non necessitate, sed sponte
facta reperies. Origin in Genesis hom. 8.
Christ had no such necessity, being debtor to no man. Isaac sitting, bare a
little wood on his neck; Christ walking carried an heavy cross on his
shoulders, and bare that which bare him, fainting under it, and dying upon it.
Isaac had a Ram sacrificed for him, held by the horns in a bush; Christ was
the Ram himself, held by the horns, Quid est enim haerere cornibus, nisi
crucifigi? Aug. in Psalm. 30.
whilst he was nailed to the Cross, and his head in the bush, whilst the
bushes were on his head, whilst he was crowned with thorns. Lastly, Isaac
should have suffered in a mountain, where none should have seen him; it stood
Genesis 22.4.
three days journey off. Christ suffered afterward in the Hieronimus presbyter
scripsit ab antiquis et senioribus Iudae is, se certissime cognouisse, quod ibi
immolatus sit Isaac, vbi postea Christus crucifixus sit. Aug. de temper. ser.
71.
same mountain, as some think, or not far from it, as is most certain, and
was held in his sufferings three days and three nights together.

Thirdly, the love of God to his Church exceedes the love that is between the
husband and the wife. For Quis enim potest sic ducere, vt moriatur pro ea quam
vult ducere? Si enim mori pro ea qua^ vult ducere, volucrit, non crit qui
ducat. Securus autem ille pro sponsa mortuus est. quam resurgens erat ducturus.
Aug. in Ps. 122.
what man being to marry, would choose a deformed, black, and adulterous wife?
Or having chosen such a one in marriage, would love her so much as to dye for
her? Yet Christ has done so for his Church his Church so adulterous, so
deformed. Therefore he is said, when she was Ezekiel. 16.16.
polluted in her blood* to Ib. verse. 9.
wash her with water, and anoint her with oil. When she was naked and bare,
to Ezekiel. 16.13.
deck her with broyded work of gold, silver, and fine linen. When she was
Ezekiel. 16.8.
cast out, to take her up, and to enter into a covenant with her, and make her
his own. Ezekiel. 16.8. Therefore, this his marriage with his Church, says Per
nuptias Moysi nuptiae verbi ostendebantur, et per Aethyopissam coniugem
Ecclesiam. Irenae. lib. 4. cap 37.
Irenaeus, was like the marriage of Moses with the Ethiopian blackmore. The
one bride was as defective in grace, as the other deformed in nature. But
Christ did more for his spouse, then ever Moses could do for his Bride, as
Bernard notes, Bernard dom. 1. post, Octa. Epiph. sermon. 2.
Moses Aethyopissam quandam duxit vxorem sed eius non potuit mutare colorem,
etc. Moses married a certain black Ethyopian, but was not able to change her
skin from black to white; But Christ took to him a Spouse that was far
more ignoble and filthy, and by washing her with his own blood, has made her
a chaste Virgin to himself, without spot or wrinckle.

Lastly, it exceedes the love that is between the body and the soul; betwixt
which yet, there is so great love, that the one grieves to part with the other:
yea, even in the most sanctified men, there is a kind of reluctation against
death, the soul shrinkes at the bodies dissolution. For that which Jerome
tells of holy Hierm. in vita Hilarion,
Hilarion, saying to his soul thus, Egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea
quid dubitas? Go out my soul, go out, what fear thou? what doubtest thou?
that declares a kind of unwillingness which nature has to come to
dissolution; and that death is, Bern. super Cant. ser. 26.
as Bernard calls it, Horrendum diuortium; a most woeful separation, not only
of the dead from the living, but of the dead from himself. Yet Christ most
willingly suffered this most grievous partition and separation of his body and
soul asunder, that he might join us to God, that were separate from him, and
our selves to.

Finally, what shall I say? so much was Christ transported beyond himself, or
(to speak more properly) so much brought short of himself by love, that he
Exinaniuit seipsum. Phil. 2.7.
emptied himself of all respect, and made himself as nothing at all. Even he
which at first made all things of nothing, did afterward make nothing of
himself. Nazianzen calls love Nazian orat. 28. in Maxim.
dulcem tyrannum, a sweet tyrant. And Bern. super Cant. ser. 64.
Bernard says, Triumphat de Deo amor, Love triumphed over the vanquished. O
strange triumph! Quis triumphantis currus? What chariot had this Conqueror
thus to triumph in? Sane Crux, no other chariot but the Cross. Here Love
displayed his Banner, and hung up his Scutcheon, a bleeding heart for our
misery, unfolded arms for our embracing, a bended head to incline to us,
goared hands, head, feet, and side, to heal us. So that if you ask what
hard-heart bound Christ with fetters, scourged him with whips, crowned him with
thorns, pierced him with spear, and fastened him with nails, himself will
answer: Love.

Borbon apud Ludouic. Granat. post. ill. To. 2.
Huc me sydereo descendere fecit olympo,
Hic me crudeli vnluere fixit Amor.
Hither has the tyrant Love brought me down to live a contemptible and a
poor life: here has the tyrant Love fastened me to die an ignominious and a
shameful death. D. Walls. ser. life and death of Christ.
O the love it self of none, but of such a one as is Love it self!

Will thou now be partaker of this great love of GOD? Love him and thou have
it. For this is the rule of love, Isidor. Pelus. lib. 2. epist. 148.
(...). He which desires much love, must himself show much love. Nazian.
Apolo. 1.
Neque enim quicquam ad amorem ita firmum est, vt beneuolentia mutuo repensa,
says Nazianzen; There is not any thing so strong to draw affection of others,
as when a man sends forth good affections in himself. Love is the Lodestone
of Love. And therefore how can we choose, unless we be more hard then iron,
but we must return GOD some love, that has bestowed so much on us first?
Jerome says Hieron. ad Celunt.
Nihil imperiosius charitate, Nothing is more imperious and commanding then
love; it will force a man in whom it is, to make some testimony of his good
heart to GOD. 2 Cor. 5.14.
Charitas Dei vrget nos, says Paul, The very love of GOD constrains us, 2
Cor. 5.14.

O how should we abound in that virtue which Paul calls, Romans 13.8.
The fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8. James, James 2.17.
The life of Faith, Iam. 2.17. Chrysostom and Jerome, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom.
Hieron aduers. Johan. Hierosoly. ad Theop.
The mother of all virtues. Fulgentius, Necest alia quae sit vera sapientia,
etc. Fulgent de praedest. lib 1.
The whole wisdom of the reasonable creature. And Augustine, August ad
Caelestin. epist. 62.
A common debt, that can never be cleared, but that a man must be paying of it
still. Ibid.
Semper debeo Charitatem (says he) quae sola etiam reddita, semper detinet
debitorem. I am ever in debt with charity (and therefore we are commanded to
Romans 13.8.
owe it) which though I pay never so often* yet I am commanded to owe it still.
But here is the comfort of it, the more a man pays it to others, the more he
keeps it to himself. For, as Tully could tell us Cic. pro Cn. Plane. vti
habet A. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Dissimilis est pecuniae debitio and gratiae: There is no likeness between
paying money and paying love. For, a man cannot pay money unless he have it;
and when he has paid it, he has it not: but a man cannot have love unless
he pay it, and the more he pays it the more he has it. Therefore, let us not
be such misers and hucksters of our love, as the men of the world be of their
money, but let it flow forth amain from us unto God.

And as part of our love, let us spend some time in considering what CHRIST
has suffered for us. Mark how the Church speaks to each faithful soul,
Cant. 3.11. Cant. 3.11
Come forth ye daughters of Zion, behold your King Solomon, with the Crown
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, in the day of the
gladness of his heart. That is, O ye faithful souls, daughters of your Mother
the Church, Come forth, Bern. in Epipha. ser. 2.
Egredimini de sensu carnis ad intellectum mentis: Come forth out of the sense
of the flesh, to the understanding of the mind: Come I say, a little out of
your selves, and by holy meditation, Behold your King Solomon, your true Ephesians.
2.14.
peacemaker, and your King to, Christ Jesus: who, Licet enim regnum eius non
sit de hoc mundo, tamen rex est in hoc mundo. Bern. vt supra.
though his kingdom be not of this world, yet is a King even in this world,
With the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him, that is, with the crown of
thorns upon his head, wherewith his mother the Synagogue, Bern. paru. ser.
ser. 6.
Quae ei se non matrem exhibuit, sed nouercam, which proved not her self to
him a kind mother, but a cruel stepdame: Crowned him, that is, Tertul. de
coron. milit.
faedauit, and lancinauit, says Tertullian, gashed him, and goared him, In the
day of his marriage, that is, in the day of his passion upon the Cross, when
he was married to his Church built out of his side, as Adam to his Eve created
of his rib. In the day of the gladness of his heart, that is, in the very
season of his suffering, which was as joyful to him, as a geniall and nupriall
day to a Bridegroom. Come forth I say, see him, consider of him, meditate on
him, Bernard. in festo omn. Sanct. ser. 5.
Pudeat sub spinato capite membrum fieri delicatum; and let it shame you under
an head so crowned with thorns, to be as members of wanton and delicate
niceness.

The same thing which the Church desires of her members, himself desires of
his Church, Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a seal on thine heart, and as a signet on thine arm, Cant. 8.6.
words by some attributed to the Church, but by the Ambrose. Gregory. Aponius.
Cassiodor. Beda. Bernard. Vide etiam Tuccium. Sotto maio. Ghisterium, and alios
ad loc.
Fathers applied to CHRIST, wherein he desires her continually to remember
him. As if he had said: My dearest, though I am now going from thee for a
time, yet forget me not, but as a loving wife, frames the Image of her dear
husband in her heart; and as a Tucci. Lucens. annot. Cincin. page 378.
longing woman imprints the form of the thing which she longs for on the
child in her womb; so set me as a seal on thy soul, think on me, delight
in me, And as that famous Id. ib.
Artemisia so much affected her dead husband Mausolus, that she took the dead
ashes of his vrne, and mingled them with her drink, and so intombed his dead
carke is within her living body; so do thou my Spouse, have me ever within
thee, eat me and drink me in the Sacrament, let me be in thine heart, and on
thine arm, in thy intention, in thy operation, within thee, without thee,
every where, and at all times, let me be loved and thought on, on earth, as I
am careful of thee in heaven. Let us then, o let us fulfill his desire now,
that he may accomplish all our desires hereafter. And so much of this.

My Dove.
THAT the Dove signifies the Church, beside the judgment of wise Esdras
saying, 2 Esdr. 5.26.
Of all the fowls that are created thou have named thee one Dove, 2 Esdr.
5.26. and besides the testimony of Christ himself, calling her his Dove,
Cant. 2.10. and Cant. 2.14. and Cant. 5.2. and Cant. 6.8.
four times at least in this book: the due resemblance which that creature
has with Christ's Spouse, does most sufficiently declare. Due resemblance two
manner of ways, in her several members of body, and her natural practice of
life.

For her members: in at least six of them she sweetly resembles the Church.
Begin we with her Bill, which is all the weapon that she has; Bern. super
Cant. sermon. 59.
Rostro non loedit, says Bernard, she hurts no body with it. With other Birds
the Bill is guilty of two horrible crimes, capine and cruelty: for with the
Kyte, Alciat. embl. 128.
rostru^ is rastru^, her beak a rake to scratch all store of provision
together: whereupon she is made the Pierius lib. 17.
hieroglyphicke of a ravenous Extortioner. With Crows and Ravens, the beak is
a bodkin, to pick out the eyes of young Lambs and other harmless Creatures.
But with the Dove it is quite contrary; her weapon harms not, Cypr. de vnita.
Eccles.
Non morsibus saeuum (says Cyprian) it bites not to hurt: but which is more,
it is the member of true concord, and the instrument of chaste love: for, Doves
woo by the Bill; whence comes the phrase in Seneca, Senes. epist. 114.
columbari labris, to give mutual kisses each to other. Thus fares it with
the Church; hurt she does none, even in her greatest strength. Isay 11.9.
None hurts nor destroys in all mine holy Mountain, says God, Isay 11.9.
Hurts not, but which is more, with her weapons do good, Isay. 2.4.
Turns Swords into Mattockes, and Spears into Sythes, making weapons of
cruelty to be instruments of Charity.

Pass we forth from her Bill to her voice, because her voice passes forth
from her Bill. It is different from the voice of all Birds. For all other Birds
are said Canere, to sing, she Nec gemere atreacessabit turtur ab vlmo. Virg. Et
cosius turtur atque columba gemunt. Ovid.
gemere, to mourn: therefore the voice of mourning is called the voice of
Doves, Nah. 2.7.
Nahum 2.7. Huzzah shall be led away captive, and her maids shall lead her as
with the voice of Doves. Such is the voice of the Church, even a voice of
mourning and sad lamenting. Hence Christ, Cant. 2.12.
Vox Turturis audita est in terra nostra, Can. 2.12. The voice of the Turtle is
heard in our Land; which is, when Romans 8.23.
we, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, do mourn in our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, even the redemption of our body, Romans 8.23. Thus Isa.
38.14.
Hezekiah of himself; I did mourn as a Dove, Isa. 38.14. Thus Isa. 59.11.
Isay of himself and others, We all mourn like doves, Isa. 59.11.

And as God commanded in the Law, to offer Luc. 2.24.
Par turturum, a pair of Turtles, Ibid.
and duos pullos columbinos, two young Pigions: so in the Gospel, the righteous
do Bonau. in Luc. 2.14.
geminare gemitum, mourn doubly. First, for their own sins. Psalm. 6.6.
Psalm. 6.6.
I faint in my mourning, every night wash I my bed and water my couch with my
tears. And this must be done, because it is not enough, says Anselm. lib. de
simil. cap. 102.
Anselme, Vt se cognoscat quis peccatorem, nisi inde habeat and dolorem; for a
man to know himself a sinner, unless also he show himself to be a sorrower.
But if he grieve for his sin, then his sin shall never grieve him. Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom. 6.
Sicut euim post vehementes imbres, etc. (says Chrysostom) Even as after most
vehement storms the Sun shines most fair; Ita etiam lachrymarum plunias
serenitas mentis sequitur; Even so after bitter tears there follows a
pleasant calm, and an heavenly Sunshine in the conscience.

Secondly, for the sins of other men, Psalm. 119.136. Psalm. 119.136
Mine eyes gush out with water, because men keep not thy Law. To which purpose
sweetly August. ad Sebast. epist. 145.
Augustine, Pia est ista tristitia, and si dici potest, beata miseria, vitijs
aliorum tribulari, non implicari, moerere, non harere, etc. That is a godly
sorrow, and if I may so say, a blessed misery, for a man to be partaker of
sorrow for another man's sin, not to partake of the sin it self; to join
in mourning for it, not in committing of it. And this is not one of the least
persecutions which a good man finds in this world; Because, Aug. vt supra.
Coram pio, viuens impie, etsi non obligat consentientem, cruciat sentientem:
Whilst the wicked man lives ill before the good man's face, though the good
man's hand touches not the sin, yet the sin touches the good man's heart; and
another committing of it goes near to him that is far from committing of it
himself. Therefore Cypr. ad lapsos. 3.
Cyprian writes thus to them that fell in time of persecution; Doleo fratres,
doleo, nec mihi ad leniendos dolores integritas propria, and sanitas priuata
blanditur: O my brethren, weep I must with you, and for you: for to stay my
grief is neither able the sincerity of my soul, nor soundness of my body.
And Bernard. de consid lib.
Bernard to Eugenius; si doles condoleo, si non doles doleo: If thou be sorry I
am sorry with thee, if thou be not sorry I am sorry for thee.

See we now her Eyes: and these are both attentive against evil, and intentive
toward good. Attentive against evil; Orig. in Leuit. hom. 3. Idem and Greg. in
Cant. 5.
Ferunt Columbas cum ad aquas venerint, etc. says Origin, The report is that
the Dove coming to the water, espies there the shadow of her enemy the Hawke,
and so, Oculorum perspicacia, by the quick sight of her eye auoids the danger.
So, the Church coming to the Scripture, which is, the Cant. 4.15.
Fountain of the gardens, the Well of living waters, and the Springs of
Lebanon, Cant. 4.15. finds there the trains of her arch-enemie the Devil,
and accordingly escapes them. Happy man that is ever sitting on the banckes of
these waters, ever having his eyes fixed in this clear fountain, which may
serve him as a glass to see his faults and his false, both the sin of his
soul, and the punishment of his sin, and so eschew the peril. The Lauer
that was set up by Moses in the Tabernacle, was made of the peoples Glasses,
Exodus 38.8.
Exodus 38.8. so as that which at first showed them their blemishes, did
afterward afford them water to wash them off. Such a Lauer is the Scripture,
that when it has once made the blemish appear, yields also matter to purge us
from it. Here then let us continually fix our eyes, that it may be said of
each Christian, as the Church says of Christ. Cant. 5.12. Cant. 5.12.
His eyes are like the Doves upon the rivers of waters.

Again, the Doves eyes are intentive to her good. For ordinarily they are cast
upward, and fixed toward heaven: there being this difference between the Dove
and the Swine, he cloaseth his eyes with the upper lid, and so is blind
toward heaven; she with the nether lid, and so is blind toward earth. And
when she drinks at the brook, she casts up a look to heaven in token of
thankfulness for the same. Such eyes has the Church. Cant. 1.14.
Oculi tui columbarum, says Christ, thine eyes are like the Doves. Cant. 1.14.
Like the Doves, Bernard sup. cant. sermon. 45.
id est, spirituales* says Bernard, spiritual eyes. Not deceived with the
fair shows of temporal vanities, but delighted with the glorious beauty of
celestial verities, says Theod. ad loc.
Theodoret. These eyes Bern. in sent.
Bernard says are two, Rerum labentium consideratio, etc. Coelestis patriae
digna aestimatio. One, a due consideration of the fickleness of our earthly
tabernacle; The other, a worthy valuation of the permanency of our heavenly
country. With this latter eye, she has wounded Christ's heart. Can. 4.9. Cant.
4.9.
Thou have wounded mine heart with one of thine eyes, and a chain of thy neck.

Let us then, O let us give our selves to meditation, and often study of
heavenly things. For, so much as we see by divine meditation, so much we see
indeed. Periand. in Ausonio.
(...), says Periander. Meditation is all in all August. in speculo peccatoris.
Meditatio, mentis ditatio, says Augustine, Meditation is the enriching of the
mind. Bernard de consider. lib. 1.
Haec mentem purificat, regit affectus, dirigit actus, etc. This, says
Bernard, purifies the mind, rules the affections, gouernes the actions, frames
the manners, orders the life. And he which spends not some part of his life
this quiet way, casts his whole Tam pio, tamque vtili considerationis otio,
nulla^ in vita dare operam nonne vitam perdere est? Bern. vtsup.
life quite away. No marvel then, if there be so many poor souls in the
world, seeing they regard not to enrich themselves with contemplation. No
marvel, if so many loose their lives in business, and toils of things
earthly* seeing they regard not to spend their lives in meditation, and study
of things heavenly.

Next follows her Neck: commendable two ways: For strength, for beauty. For
strength, for if there be any force in her bill, either for defense, or
offense, it comes from her neck. For beauty, because, that, of all parts of
her body casts out the most radiant hew, according to Nero his verse in Seneca.

Senec. not. quest. lib. 1. Columbae dictae eo quod eorum colla ad singulas
conuersiones colorem mutent. Isid. orig. lib. 12. cap. 7.
Colla Cytheriacae splendent agita^a columbae. The neck of Venus doves shines
bright when it moves. Thus the Churches neck is most strong, most comely.
Whereupon he says i Thy neck is like a tower of Iuory. Cant. 7.4. Lyra ad
loc. Cant. 7.4.
Firmum, or, rectum ad modum turris, album ad modum eboris, says Lyra. Strong,
or straight after the manner of a tower, white or beauteous after the manner of
iuory.

Now the neck of the Church, through which the voice passes out, and the
meat passes in, and by whom the body and head are coupled together, are the
Per collum Spousae praedicatores Sanctae Ecclesiae designantur. Greg. in Cant.
1. Aponius. in Cant. 7. Serab. in gloss. ordinar. ad Cant. 7. etalij.
Ministers and Preachers of Gods word. They are the voice both of head and
body. Of the head Christ, when they preach his word to the Church Of the body
the Church, when they put up her prayers to Christ. They are the throat,
Cassiod. in Cant. 4.
quia acceptos verbi dei cibos nutriendo corpori transmittunt, says
Cassiodore, because they receive the meat of instruction first of all
themselves, and then convey it into the bowels of others. These are beautiful,
because they adorn others with wholesome doctrine; and strong, Strab. ad loc.
quia exemplo, vitae, alios muniunt, because they confirm and strengthen
others by good example.

The very same thing is signified by her Wings: which are not ordinary, but
rare, like the wings of a Phoenix. This Dove, says David, Psalm. 68.13.
is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. Psalm. 68.13. Where
by the way, noate, that in Palestina, Sebast. Barrad concord. Eu. to. 2. lib.
1. cap. 15.
as I read, were fair large white doves, whose feathers toward their back
looked yealowish, and so as white, had the color of silver, and as yealowish,
the color of gold. For which goodlinesse, in part, they of Assyria worshipped
the dove, as the Poet insinuates:

Tibull. eleg. 7. lib. 1.
Alba Palaestino sancto columba Syro. Now, Strab. in gloss. ord. ad Psalm. 67.
alae columbae, doctores ecclesiae says one. The doves siluered feathers, are
the Churches silver headed fathers. For as the wings of a dove bear up the
whole bulk of her body, from the earth into the air; so the Pastors and
Teachers of the Church bear up the whole body thereof, from earthly conceits
to heavenly meditations: truly there fore called Psalm. 68.13.
Pennae argentatae, Pens and that of silver. Pens, Psalm. 45.2.
because they declare the mind of the holy Ghost. Psalm. 45.2. My tongue is the
pen of a ready writer. Silver pens, August. in Psalm. 67.
Quia diuinis eloquijs eruditi, says Augustine, because they shine with the
brightness of Gods word, which is Psalm 12.7.
as silver tried seven times in the fire. Psalm. 12.6. With the help of these
wings the dove of Christ's Church flies the net of the fowler, and mounts up to
her neast in heaven. Therefore when the Dragon, the Devil, would have devoured
the woman, the Church, Reu. 12.14.
wings were given her, Pastors bestowed on her, to carry her into a place of
rest and security. Reu. 12.14.

Wherefore, let these silver wings of the dove, be like the golden wings of the
Seraphins: 2 Chro. 3.11.
as these were continually extended out in the top of the Temple: so let the
other be always stretched out in the midst of the Church. And as the
seraphins wings were so ordered that one touched another, so let the pastors of
the Church be so animated that one second another. To conclude, let each wing
of the Church be as the Ezekiel. 1.34.
wings of Ezekiels beasts, which sent out from them the voice of speech, like
the voice of the Almighty. Ezekiel. 1.24. Let them preach diligently. For a dumb
Minister is as a clipped wing, which lets the body fall, when he should make it
fly. Such were the false Prophets among the Jews* Ierem. 2.34. Ierem. 2.34.
In thy wings is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents. And such
is every lasie Pastor, who being Gods messenger, yet says nothing for him, but
lives as it were possessed with a dumb Devil. Of every such, a man may say,
as Blesensis said of Richard of Canterbury the Popes Legate, Blesens. ad
Richar. Cant. Epi. 5.
He is ligatus, potius quam legatus. Not an eloquent ambassador, but a
tonguetyed mumbler.

Lastly, the Dove has no gall. Such is the common judgment of all men: upon
the truth of it I will not stand, but take it as I find it; yet all ancient
writers, says Pierius, Pierius hieroglyp. lib. 22.
are of opinion that she has none; or if any, in vropygio esse tradunt, they
think it to be in the lower part of her chine: but Divines, I am sure are
wholly this way, that she wants it. Hieron. in Psalm. 54.
Sine fell, and a malitia fellis alienum, says Jerome: without gall, or any
bitterness of malice. Cyprian. de vnitat. Eccles. Item Chrysostom. in Mat. hom.
12. et in Genes. hom. 26. et Bed. commen. in Mar. 1.
Non fell amarum, non morsibus saenum, says Cyprian, Not bitter in gall nor
violent in biting.

Which made the Graecians, Pierius hierog. lib. 22.
when they went about to express the image of meekness, to name (...), the
quiet and still dove, and to say of a most patient man, Columbae mansuetior.
(...), in the same sense. And this, some think was the reason, why David
being much disquieted in mind about the falsehood of some of his friends in
Saul's court, cried out, Psalm. 55.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest.
Nazianz. orat. in Sanct. baptis. et Nicet. Scholi. ibidem.
Not wishing for Eagles vvings which are more lofty, nor for Hawks wings
which are more lively, because, these indeed would carry a man away, but not
bring him to rest, quietness being purchased, not so much by departing from
our enemy that is about us, as by fleeing from the enimitie that is within us.

Such a Dove is the Church. As the one has not the bitterness of gall, no
more has the other the gall of bitterness. Cyprian de vnitat. Eccl.
In domo dei, in Ecclesia Christi, vnanimes habitant, says Cyprian, concordes
et simplices perseuerant. In Gods house, which is Christ's Church, men are of
one mind, holding out in simplicity and concord. Their guide is the spirit of
God, Wisd. 8.16.
whose company has no bitterness, nor fellowship tediousness. ap. 8.16. As
for the viperous brood of malignant miscreants, that breath out nothing but
treacherous conclusions, and subuerting stratagems, they are of the sinagogue
of Satan, and of the faction of Antichrist. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the vines of Gomorrhah, their
grapes are grapes of gall; their clusters be bitter. Their wine is of the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes, Deuteronomy. 32.32, Such savor not
of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus, of whom it is said, that he was fallen,
Act. 8.23.
(...). Act. 8.23. Into the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Wherefore let us follow Christ's Dove in simplicity, not Satan's Serpent in
subtlety. In our Baptism GOD sends his Dove, that is, his spirit to us; as
the Dove came down at the baptism of CHRIST. Now then, says Chryso. in Mat.
hom. 12.
Chrysostom, Quam veuiam sperare poterimus, si ad serpentem currimus post
Columbam? What pardon can we hope for, if leaving the innocence of Doves, we
run to borrow poison of the serpent? And thus you see, how the Dove resembles
the Church in the several parts of her body. See it now in the practice of her
life.

The practice of her life is suitable to the properties of her nature; and her
properties of nature resemble the Church diverse ways. First, in respect of
matrimonial fidelity. Wherein of all Doves the Turtle is most excellent.
Bern. super Cant. sermon. 59.
Compare vno contenta est, says Bernard, quo amisso, alterum iam non admittit.
She contents her self with one mate, who being lost, she rests continually a
widow. And for more credence herein, Bern. vt sup.
you may see her, sanctae viduitatis opus strenue, and infatigabiliter
exequentem, every where executing and performing the office of holy widdowhood
stoutly and resolutly: Every where alone, every where mourning, at no time
sitting on green boughs, but on the withered tops of trees, or on the house,
Id. ibid.
Virentia vt virulenta fugit. Such pleasant mansions she hates as poison. Such
a faithful dove is the Church, who being in this life a professor of holy
widowhood sets her heart wholly on Christ her dead husband, mournes after him,
aspires to him, and takes delight in nothing beside.

Cant. 214. Cant. 2.14.
Columba mea in foraminibus petrae, My dove that art in the holes of the rock,
etc. Now the general opinion of the Fathers, is, that Vide Michael. Ghislerium
ad locum. Cant. 2.14.
vulnera Christi are foramina petrae, the wounds of Christ the holes of the
rock. In them the Church builds her defense, they are meritorious, with them
she feathers her neast, they are plentious. She neither builds with the sticks
of man's free will, nor daubes with the dirt of man's good deserts, nor couers
with the moss of his imagined Supererogations: but goes into the rock as she
finds it open, and there receives rest and security against all fears.
Bernard sup. Cant-serm. 61.
Quid non boni in petra? (says Bernard) what good can I not hope for in the
rock? In petra exaltatus, in petra securus, in petra firmiter sto: In the
rock I am exalted and lifted toward heaven, in the rock secured and freed
from earth, in the rock I stand firmly; securus ab host, fortis a casu;
without fright of foe, or fear of falling.

Thirdly, in respect of faecunditie or fruitfulness: Arist. hist. anim. lib.
5. cap. 13.
Aristotle says, Plin. not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 58.
Plinies acount, she breeds thirteen or fourteen times in the year. For in
Summer time, within two months she brings forth three pair, in so much as in
the same neast, you may see diverse sorts of young ones, alios prouolantes,
alios erumpentes, some ready to fly, some but breaking the shell. Hence, as
some think, she is call, Scalig. Pierius and alij.
Columba, quia colit lumbos saepe parturiendo: for her often breeding. Such a
careful breeder is the Church, who brings forth children in abundance, Greg.
Moral. lib. 19.24.
Et crescentes filios (says Gregory) quasi plumescentes pullos, charitatis
gremio fonet, etc. and keeps her newborn babes in Christ, like young Pigeons
in the bosom of Charity, as it were in a safe nest till by Faith they be able
to fly up to God in heaven. Thus was it prophesied to this Bride; Psalm. 45.17.
Psalm. 45.17. In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have children, whom thou may
make Princes in all lands. And therefore the Prophet in admiration says; Isa.
49.18.
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold all these gather themselves
together, and come to thee. As I live says the Lord, thou shall put them all
upon thee as a garment, and gird thy self with them as a Bride. Behold, I will
lift up mine hands to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people, and
they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried
upon their shoulders, Isa. 49.18. etc. And thus much for the third Epithet, My
Dove: Come we to the fourth.

My Undefiled.
THE word signifies Immaculata.
without spot, and by consequence pitre. This purity of the Church is
twofolde: Of imputation, of action: that, purity before God; this, before men.
All her purity is imputed, whereof some she has to justify, and some to
sanctify. Psalm. 45.13.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her soul is precious through
imputed righteousness; and yet, her clothing is of wrought gold: her life is
conspicuous with outward holiness.

All her pureness before God is given unto her of God. He it is that has made
her, Ephesians. 5.27.
a chaste virgin, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27.
And this he has done, by hiding her evil with the garment of his goodness.
For, as in himself he covered the divine virtue with the veil of our flesh;
so in us he couers the humane infirmity with the grace of his spirit.
Whereupon she sings. Isa. 61.10.
He has clothed me with the garment of salvation, and covered me with the
roabe of righteousness. Isa. 61.10. If any man say, Christ's garment is his
own, Bern. super. Cant. ser. 61.
Bernard tells us, Non est breue pallium, quod non possit operire duos, It is
not so short a cloak, but it may cover him and the Church to.

And after Christ has clothed her with his righteousness, she defiles
herself no more with any old pollutions, but shines forth in the midst of the
darkness of impiety, with the heavenly works of true Christianity. Cant.
2.2.
Like the Lilly among the Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters, Cant.
2.2. And hence it is, that CHRIST himself acknowledges of her, Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair, my Love, thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee,
Cant. 4.7.

But here take heed of an opinion of too much perfection, and too much
purity: the one hatched by the Friars of Rome, the other by the Brethren of
Amsterdam. For, they arrogate to the Church the greatest height of perfection;
these reject from the Church the least blemish of infirmity. The first, an
error of presumptuous pride; the second a conceit of preposterous zeal.

That they of Rome hold, that Aquin. 22. quae. 184. a. 2.
perfection may be attained in this life, it is evident by their writings: and
that not only, Bellar. de monac. lib. 2. cap. 2. Item Aquin. p. 22. quae.
184.2.6.
Monks be in a state of perfection adipiscendae, to be attained unto; Bishops
and Prelates in a state of perfection, adeptae, attained already; and by
consequence, that their Church cannot err: but that also all other men, which
are regenerate, are perfect, we have their Council. Trid. Sess. 5.. 5.
Council auerring the point, In renatis nihil odit Deus, God hates nothing in
the regenerate. Now if God hate nothing in them, then have they no sin, and
to have no sin is the greatest perfection that can be.

Again, they of Amsterdam dream of too much purity of a Church, and
therefore they separate themselves from the true spouse of Christ, because of
some pretended blemishes, and frame to themselves a Donatisticall conuenticle;
choosing for the love of an imagined purity, to become obstinate and
vainglorious Puritanes. But alas what comes of it? whilst they would be the
only Church, they become indeed no Church. Petrus Bles^ns. epist. 12.
Quidam insipientiam simulando sapiunt: (says one) quidam nimis sapiendo
desipiunt: Some men by the show of folly are wise; and others again by showing
their wisdom become fools. And what else do these men by all their
endeavors, but bewray their own folly, whilst they make of a remedy to us, a
disease to themselves? For our part, we know the difference between the
Church militant, and the Church triumphant, August. ad Glor. epist. 162.
Illa in terris non amittit nisi malos, haec in coelum non admittit nisi bonos:
The one loses none but bad men from her on earth, the other receives none but
good men to her in heaven. The Church militant may have her imperfections, but
must not therefore be forsaken. It is her own request, Cant. 1.6.
Nolite considerare me quod fusca sim, Cant. 1.6. Esteem me not so much for
my brownnesse, as for my soundness. And therefore for our part, we had rather
be of the brown Church, then of Brownes Church; rather defiled in something as
we stand, then filed away to nothing as they be; their reformation being like
childrens pilling of an Onion, pilling always till all be pilled away.

Leaving therefore both these, let us go the middle way, and that we may have
an undefiled Congregation, let us strive to have an undefiled conversation. For
our Church is not stained with the lies of her foes, but with the lives of her
friends, Bern. super Cant. ser. 33.
Omnes amici, inimici, and, necessarij, aduersarij; They are her friends that
most fight against her, and her mothers sons that are most Cant. 1.5.
angry at her, Cant. 1.5. She may say with David Psalm. 51.2.
Peccatum meu^ contra me semper. It is my sin, my sin that hurts me. Bern.
Dom. adu. ser. 6.
Peccatum, morbus animae, and corruption mentis. Sin it is, that is the souls
sore, and the minds misery. And therefore God complains of his Church, Isa.
1.6.
From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no soundness,
but wounds of swelling, and sores of corruption. Bern.
Nulla sanitas, quia nulla sanctitas, No vvholenesse, because no holiness.

Covetousness is like a thirsty dropsy. For even as men sick of an
hydropicall disease, Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 64.
non solum non extingunt ardorem potu, verum etiam incendunt, says
Chrysostom, by drinking are so far from alaying their heat, that the more
they drink, the more they may. Even so, such as are sick of Covetousness, the
more they get, the more they thirst for, and never leave swallowing, till Leo
de iciun. dec. men's. Sermon. 6.
Foenus pecuniae proves funus animae, as Leo speaks, the birth of money proves
the death of man.

Envy is a ranckling stripe in the soul. And therefore it is called Lyra in
Isa. 1.
Liuor, because the envious man does continually beat himself black and blew
with spite, as Cyprian truly, Cypr. de zelo and liuore.
Dum ab inuidis liuor nunquaem exponitur, die bus ac noctibus pectus obsessum
sine intermissione laniatur. Whilst envious men continually pine at other men's
happiness, they do day and night but gash and wound their own heart.

Pride is a swelling tumor: for, as a noxious and noisome humor, being met
together in the flesh, makes the body swell: so pride, seated in the soul,
makes the heart to swell. Hence comes high thoughts in the mind, big looks in
the face, great words in the mouth, as so many outward Symptoms of that inward
disease. Hence exoticke fashions in the apparel, fantastic gestures in the
body, and disguized looks in the countenance, as so many vlcerous scabs of
such a ranckling sore. We men are ashamed of our own fashions, and women of
their own faces, therefore the one seeks to be new shaped, and the other to
be new dyed. But o, that men would choose Tertullians stuff, Tertul.
'Vestite vos serico sanctitatis, byssino probitatis, purpura pudicitiae,
Clothe you with the Satin of sanctity, the Silk of sincerity, and the
Purple of purity. And women, Gorgonias complexion: of whom her brother
Nazianzen reports, Nazian. orat. in laud Gorg.
Vnus isli placebat rubor quem gignit pudor, vnus candor quem parit
abstinentia. The only red that pleased her was the maiden blush, the only
white the palenesse of fasting.

Oppression is a devouring gangrene. For as that corrupts and putrifies so
far, as that it leaves the member without any thing to keep life in it: so
oppression deuoures and wastes so long that it leaves a man nothing to maintain
his life vvithall.

But howsoever all iniquity does inquinare, all sin does soil, yet of all,
adultery is commonly, and properly to, called the sin 2 Cor. 12.21. Col. 3.5.
2 Pet. 2.10.
of uncleanness, and is said, Pro. 6.33.
turpitudinem congregare, to gather filth upon him that commits it. Hence it
is, that Lexicon Theo. D. Boys. Fr. Holyoke.
peccare is pellicare, all sin is named of adultery. For as adultery is the
leaving of a man's own wife, and going to a Pro. 2.16.
strange woman (whereupon Iac. de vorag.
adulter, quasi ad alter) so sin is a falling away from God, to whom our
soul is joined in marriage, and a coupling with Satan, with whom we ought to
have nothing to do. Now, if each sin be a kind of adultery, then adultery has
kindred with each sin: and kindred with sin, is like kindred with sinners; the
nearer the worser, Deuteronomy. 7.3.7. 2 King. 8.26.
as Scripture shows both in express words and evident examples.

This sin is one of the principal which defiles the Church of GOD. For it is
lamentable to see, how men stain and spot themselves with the lusts of the
flesh, whilst as Bears for a bone, so they for the flesh, do even rend and
tear one another in pieces. Hence so many loathsome diseases in the body;
hence so many duels and combats in the field; hence so many frantic
butcherings, and stabbings in the house. O that ever valor should come to be
prostituted in so vain a cause! But we are like Vide Iunij adag. Sybar.
Sybarites, and have changed manhood into womanishnesse, that if Diogenes
were passing his journey from them to us, he would say as once of his journey
from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians, Diog. laer. de vit. philo.
Eo a viris ad foeminas. I am going from men to very women. So as a man may say
to our Gallants, as Eras. Apoph. lib. 6.
Alexis to Calimedon, Many have died (...), but thou (...), many, for the love
of a Commonwealth, but thou for the love of a common vvench.

For remedy hereof, remember Paul's words, 1 These. 4.3.
1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that every one
of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not
in the lust of concupiscence. Where mark, how he bids you keep your bodies,
viz. possess them. For harlots, and harlot-mongers do not possess their
bodies themselves, but set them out to hire, and give possession of them to
others.

Again, mark what he calls the body; a vessel: even, 2 Timothy 2.20.
Vas in honorem, a vessel of honor in Gods house: but by lust a man makes it
Ierem. 1.13.
ollam succensam, a seething pot in the Devils Kitchen, that boyles in the
mind. Now, if thy body be in this case, Ierem. 6.7.
Frigidam fac malitiam, (there is such a phrase in Jeremy) cool thy
naughtiness, even as Cooks do their pots; and that, either by infusion of
water, or by substraction of vvood, or by removing it from the fire.

First, I say, if the vessel of thy body boil over with lust, run to the
waters; but not to the waters which the harlot speaks of, Prou. 9.17.
Stolen waters are sweet, Prou. 9.17. but to the waters which Solomon directed
to, Prou. 5.15.
Drink the water of thine own Cisterne, and let them be thine, and not the
strangers with thee. I am not ignorant that lust is sometime compared to water,
but that is not a cooling but a kindling water. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 21.
cap. 5.
Saint Augustine makes mention of a Well in Epirus, that, when firebrands were
put into it, it would quench them: but (which is strange) when they were
quenched, would set them on fire again. Such a water is an harlot which
quenches lust for a time, and sets the body on fire ever after. Have therefore
a Well of thine own, for Pro. 23.27.
an harlot is as a deep ditch, and a strange woman as a narrow pit.

Secondly, if thy concupiscence be not allayed this way, take away the wood.
For Eccles. 28.10.
Secundu^ syluae ligna exardescit ignis, Eccles. 28.10. As is the vvood of the
fire so is the fire it self. Now the fuel of lust is gluttony and
drunkenness. August. de temp. Ser. 69.
Semper iuncta est saturitati lasciuia, says Augustine. Saturity is the
breeder of impuritie, and foulness the child of fullness. See it in Noah,
Incert. author.
Noam, qui euasit aquam, euicit vinum. Noah that escaped the water, could not
escape the Wine, for wine did make him sink, whom water made to swim. See it
in Lot, Origin. in Genesis hom. 8.
Ebrietas decipit quem Sodoma non decipit. Drunkenness deceived him whom
Sodom deceived not. Vritur ille flammis mulierum, quem sulphurea flamma non
essit, and he is scorched with the flames of lust, that could not be touched
with the flames of vengeance. No marvel then, if uncleanness be so hardly
avoided, when drunkenness and gluttony be so much affected.

Thirdly, to quench lust utterly, remove thy body quite from the fire: avoid
the company of unchaste women. For this by the wisest men has been judged
the wisest course. Genesis 39.10.
Joseph, when he would not have his Mistres desire his company, would not so
much as offer to be seen in her company. Genesis 39.10. Isid. Pelus. lib. 2.
Epist. 62.
Lectione didici says Isidore of Pelusium, I have learned by reading, of a
certain King (it was Antiochus the third, as I have learned) who at Ephesus
beholding the priest of Diana, (a woman of incomparable beauty) went presently
out of the City, Id. ib.
ne praeter voluntatem nefarij aliquid admittere cogeretur. Least, more then
he was willing to, he should be tempted to commit uncleanness with her. And
he adds, that Cyrus the great Monarch of Persia, when he had heard of the
great Beauty of Panthea, the wife of Abradalus King of Susa, he would not
yield so much as to see her. Isid. Pelus. vt sup.
(...).

Eras. annot. in Hieron. Epist. ad Innocent.
Erasmus somewhat tartly, calls adultery Magnatum ludus, the sport of Nobles.
For my part I had rather speak of Magnatum lauds, then Magnatum ludos, rather
of their praise, then of their plays; only I wish that greatness would not be
a patron to gracelesnes, nor riches a cover for base actions. Excellent is
that, which is reported of Dionysius the tyrant, Tacitus.
who reproving his son for deflowring a woman, asked him, if ever he had
heard, that himself, his father, had done any such thing. No, says the young
man, and no marvel, for you had not a King to your father. True, says he,
neither will thou have a King to thy son, if thou ceasest not quickly to
follow such courses as these.

Therefore, great cause have we to bless God, who has given unto us so
gracious a King, who, as in other virtues he excels other Kings, so in
chastity, he excels himself; No doubt, but his royal son, our Noble Prince
Charles, as he was borne of the mirror of chastity, so also, (which yet let
us not cease to pray for) he will continue a mirror thereof, to the glory of
himself, and the admiration of the whole Christian world. And let this suffice
for the first part of my Text. Now to the second.

Open unto me.
We have heard in this speech of Christ's to his Church, the sweet words he
gave unto her; now are we to hear the request which he desires of her: which
is to Open unto him. Wherein you must imagine Christ as a lover, standing, or
sitting at the chamber door of his love, desiring to be let in; Together also
with an insinuation of some dislike in his mind, that he is made to wait so
long, before he can be received in to her.

As if he had said, What my dear Spouse, do thou sleep all night, and I
thy lover, yea, they Savior, here shiuer in the cold? having my head wet with
dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. Nay, my dearest, use me not
so. Arise, Open unto me.

Temporanoctis eunt, Ovid.
excute post sera^. Romans 15.12.
The night is past and the day is come, Up, let me in; put me on. Cast away the
works of darkness, and clothe thee with the armor of light. Bernard sup.
Cant. sermon. 61.
Hic literalis lusus. This, says Bernard, is the sport of the letter. The
sense we must further inquire for. Wherefore, I beseech you, yet a while to Open
your cares in attention, whilst I lay Open unto you the meaning of this word
Open.

A word it is of liberty, and of liberal signification: yet all that in this
place it imports may be reduced to two actions. Something, that she is to do
to her children; Something that her children are to do to themselves.

That which the Church is to do to her Children, is to Preach Christ unto
them, Isa. 1.1.
which is an opening of the prison door, and setting the prisoner at liberty,
Isa. 61. 1. Thus Augustine understands the place, August. in Johan. tract. 57.
Aperi mihi, id est, praedica me. Open unto me, that is, Open me; Preach and
declare me. Id. ibid.
Ad cos quippe quiclauserunt contra me, quomo do intrabo sine aperiente? For
unto such as have shut me out, how shall I enter without an opener? How shall
they hear without a Romans 10.14.
Preacher? This thing Christ elsewhere desires of his Church, Cant. 2.10.
Cant. 2.10.
Arise my love, my fair one, and come thy way. Arise out of thy bed of
contemplation, Come away, look about, and Ioh. 4.35.
behold the regions white unto harvest, Ioh. 4.35. Make have and be quick in
preaching. A business indeed of important celerity; in respect whereof we
must pass by men Luc. 10.4.
unsaluted, Luc. 10 4. And leave even our father Math. 8.12.
unburied. Mat. 8.22 And it may be, Christ therefore a little before his death
washed his disciples John. 13.15.
feet, that they might be nimble, and expedite in preaching, that others
seeing them, might cry out in admiration Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of peace, and
glad tidings of good things! Romans 10.15. Undoubtedly a most worthy work of the
Church, as can be. Lord Jesus, let me ever preach and declare thy name among
men, that thou may purge and clear my name before thy father in heaven.

Seeing then this business of preaching is committed to the Church, it is her
duty to choose men that can, and men that will, undertake so weighty a
business as preaching is: Men that can. For every block is not apt for a
Mercury, nor every honest man to be a teacher. It is Nazi. Apol. page 6.
ars artium et scientiarum regere hominem, says Nazianzen, an Art of all
Arts and sciences to be a teacher and ruler of men. Therefore Paul says, he
must nor be a 1 Timothy 3.6.
Neophyte, a young Scholar. 1 Timothy 3.6. Cyprian exhortat. ad marty.
Neque enim idoneus potest esse miles, qui non exercitatus prius in campo
fuerit, says Cyprian. He can never be a fit Soldiour in Christ's camp, that
was never exercised in the field before. Which made Nazianzen so pitifully to
complain, that some in his time did Figulinam in dolio discere. Gilber. Cog.
paraem. 2.7.
(...), as the proverb says, that is, as he expounds it, learn knowledge of
CHRIST by the destruction of souls, like unto bad Physicians, who learn skill
by hurting their patients. For my part, says he, I have ever preferred it as
a point of wisdom, Nazian. apol.
candidam potius aurem submittere, quam stolidam linguam mouere. Rather to use
an ingenuous ear in hearing, then to move a blockish tongue in speaking.

Again, it is the Churches duty to choose men that will Preach. For as good be
silent with ignorance, as with idleness. And it is no less impiety, not to
be willing to Preach when we can, then not to be able to Preach when we should.
Exodus 28.34.
Moses commanded Aaron the high Priest, to make him a coat, at the skirts
whereof were to be pomegranates of blew silk, and bells of Gold, that his sound
might be heard, when he went into the holy place, and when he went out, that
he might not dye. Exodus 28.34. Hereupon Greg. Past. lib. 2. cap. 14. et Epist.
lib. 1. ep. 24.
Gregory. Moysi praecipitur, etc. Moses is commanded, that the Priest going
into the Tabernacle should be compassed with bells, that is, vt voces
praedicationis habeat, that he should have the voice of preaching, and so not
dye. Idem vt sup.
Sacerdos quippe ingrediens vel egrediens moritur, si de eo sonitus non
audiatur. For the Priest going in and coming out dies, if there be no sound
of preaching, nor no sound preaching come from his mouth. Wherefore let us be
continually following our business. Let us, says Origin g imitate Moses and
Aron. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 6.
What is said of them? That they departed not out of the Tabernacle day nor
night. What did they there? Aut a Deo aliquid discere, aut populum aocere.
Either learn something of God. or teach something to the people. And, Haec duo
sunt pontificis opera, These two things are the whole business of a
Churchman, either by reading the Scriptures to learn something to himself;
or by expounding the Scripture to teach something to the people. And thus much
of this.

The other action I take it, is chiefly intended here, which each faithful
soul, that is a member of the Church, is to do for it self, viz. to Open to
Christ.

A speech indeed metaphorical: And that you may the better conceive the
Metaphor, we must call to mind, that man before his fall, being made after
the Image of God, had God remaining and abiding in him, as another soul to his
soul, quickening him with another life, which Paul calls Ephesians. 4.18.
(...). Ephesians. 4.18. the life of God. And so for that time, the state of man in
paradise was like the happy condition that shall be to Gods children in heaven,
when 1 Cor. 15.28.
GOD shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. But when by the subtlety of the
Devil, it was man's unhappy case to fall from God, then did he banish and
expel that sweet guest out of his soul, and was himself expelled and
banished out of Paradise. And look how God in Justice then, shut the gate of
Paradise against man, that he should not any more come thither: so has man by
sin, ever since, shut the door of his heart against God, that he cannot
lodge there. Hence it is, that God who does never cease to seek and to save,
does beg and crave of us, as in this place, Open unto me, desiring that we
again would entertain him, that by receiving him into our souls again on
earth, we may come to be received by him into his celestial Paradise in heaven.

Now the doors by which he is to enter in to us, are the doors of our senses,
and the doors of our understanding. By the one we hear and see him; by the
other we love and believe in him. And because there is nothing in the
understanding which is not first in the sense, therefore (as I take it) we must
first Open the door of our senses, hear him in the Word, see him in the
Sacrament, and then, the doors of our understanding, apprehend him by Faith,
and retain him by Love.

First then, Open unto him, that is, Open thine ears to hear him preached: a
most necessary work for a Christian; for, Romans 10.17.
Faith come by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. Yea, even
such as have seen Christ, and seen him crucified, yet have not believed in
him by seeing, but by hearing. The Centurion that watched him at his death,
Mark. 15.36.
hearing him with a cry give up the Ghost, said, Truly this was the Son of
God. Bern. super. Cant. ser. 28.
Auditus inuenit quod non visus: (says Bernard) Oculum species fefellit,
veritas auri se infudit: His hearing found out that which his seeing could not
pry into: and Truth showed her self to his care, that could not be perceived
with his eye. Therefore, God says to his Church, Psalm. 45.11.
n Audi filia and vide, Hear o Daughter and see, Psalm. 45.11. Bern. vbi sup.
Quid intendis oculum, aurem para; Why do thou bend thine eye, rather prepare
thine care, that thou may say with them in the Psalm, Psalm. 48.8.
Sieut audiuimus sic vidimus, etc. As we have heard, so have we seen in the
City of the Lord of Hoasts, in the City of our God, Psalm. 48 8.

Then, Open unto him, that is, open thine eyes to see him crucified. Look on
him in the Sacraments: in Baptism, washing and purging thee: in the Lords
Supper, feeding and nourishing thee. For, these are the signs which he
desires to be showed by, and which will make us, with Moses, Heb. 11.26.
to see him that is invisible. But rest not in the sign, that is but earth,
aspire to that which is signified, which is in heaven.

To conclude, as Dan. 6.10.
Daniel set his windows open to Jerusalem, so set thou thine eyes open to
heaven, Hieron. ad Eustoch.
vnde lumen introeat (says Jerome) vnde vide as ciuitatem Domini: from whence
thou may see the light of grace, and behold the City of God. It is said of
God, that Psalm. 34.15.
his eyes are over the righteous, and his ears open to their prayers: Let
thine eyes be toward God, as his are toward thee. Say with David, Psalm. 123.2.
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Master, and as
the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of their Mistress, so wait our eyes upon
thee O Lord.

When thou have thus heard him, thus seen him, let him pass from thy sense to
thine understanding. There open thine heart to believe in him, and thy
affections to love him. Thine heart to believe in him: for, Romans 10.10
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10. And Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ does dwell in the heart by Faith. Ephesians. 3.17. Ianua nostrafides est
(says Ambr. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 12.
Ambrose) quae totam domum sifuerit robusta communit. Faith is the door which
lets Christ into the soul, which if it be strong, all the house is the
stronger. And strong it is, if any virtue be strong. Bernard. sup. Cant. sermon.
76.
Attingit inaccessa, deprehendit ignota, comprehendit immensa, apprehendit
nouissima: It touches things inaccessible, finds out things inconceivable,
apprehends things invisible, comprehends things unmeasurable. Yea, it closes
within the sphere thereof, even eternity it self; for that most blessed and
glorious Trinity, which we cannot conceive in our heart by knowledge, we do
receive into our souls by faith. Per istam ianuam Christus ingreditur, Amb. in
Psalm. 118. ser. 12.
says Ambrose. By this gate Christ enters into the soul, and there rests as
in his holy temple. Finally, faith is, Lud. Viu. com. in Aug. de ciu. dei lib.
1. cap. 1.
huius vitae viaticum. Our whole provision for this life, without which a man
can neither Heb. 11.6.
please God, nor Nam qui non placeat deo, non potest illi placere deus, Bern.
in Cant. ser. 24.
God him.

When thou have thus got him by faith, hold him by Love: For else he will
soon be gone from thee again. The two Rib. de templ. lib. 1. cap. 21.
doors which lead into the Sanctum Sanctorum, had sides round, or folding, and
were 1 King. 6.24.
se inuicem tenentia, holding or clasping each other: to teach us, that the two
doors of Faith and love, by which Christ Jesus goes into the soul, as into his
holy Temple, must never be separate nor divided, but must se inuicem tenere,
claspe hands together: because, Leo de collect. and eleemos. ser. 5.
Sicut in fide est operum ratio, sic in operibus fidei fortitudo, says Leo:
Even as in Faith is the order of our works, so in works is the life of Faith.

And thus have we heard how we must open to him; that we may the better do
it, let us see how he knockes for entrance, and why. For the first, understand
that God knockes at the gate of our heart, for lodging there, diverse ways.
First, 2 Cor. 5.20.
by the open voice of the ministry, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you even as if God
did beseech you through us, that ye be reconciled unto God. Secondly, by
wholesome inspiration, Reu. 3.20. Reu. 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man will hear my voice, and
open unto me, I will come in to him, and sup with him. Domine, (says Aug.
confess. lib. 10. cap. 6.
Augustine) amo te, percussisticor meu^, and amaui te: Lord, I love thee, thou
have knocked at my heart, and I have set my mind on thee. And Acts 17.27.
doubtless he is not far from every one of us. Not far, no, Senec. epist.
41
Prope est a te Deus, tecum est, intus est, says divine Seneca. God is near
thee, with thee, within thee. Ita dico, Lucili, sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet.
Yea, it is, as I say, there is an holy spirit resting in us, or rather, not
resting, but stirring and moning us to holy actions. Idi. bid.
Bonus vir sine deo nemo est, so impossible is it for any man to be good
without God.

Thirdly, by the Creatures: the world is a Book, Heaven and earth opened
leaves, each creature a letter, to teach us to know and to love God: Aug.
confess. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Domine (says Augustine) and coelum and terra, and omnia quae in eis sunt,
ecce vndique mihi dicunt vt te amem, nec cessant dicere omnibus, vt sint
inexcusabiles. Heaven and earth, and all things therein, lo, (o Lord) they all
speak to me to love thee, and so they do to all other men, to make them
without excuse. Lastly, by afflictions. And then God knockes us somewhat hard
indeed. For, as Job says, Job 33.15.16
God speaks once or twice, and one sees it not, in dreams and visions of the
night: Then he opens their ears, even by their corrections which he has
sealed. So that God Opens men's ears to hear his call, and then men Open their
hearts to let him in.

But why (Lord) why do thou beg thus of us to let thee in? Art not thou able
to make entrance thy self? Is our heart harder then that Act. 12.10.
Iron gate of the City, which opened unto Peter of its own accord? And art not
thou our Sampson, able to break up, and break down the Judge. 16.3.
gates of our Azzah, and to carry them with thee into thy holy mountain?
Lastly, have not thou the Key of David, which Revel. 3.7.
openest, and no man shuts, which shuttest and no man opens? Why do thou
then beg so much to have us Open to thee, thou being so well able to Open to
thy self?

Yes my dear brethren, God desires of us to let him in, because his presence
is not pleasing to himself, if it be not pleasing unto us. Therefore he would
have us Open to him, receive him willingly, entertain him joyfully, that so
he may joy to remain with us. For, it is his Prou. 8.31.
delight to be with the sons of men, especially if they again delight to be
with him. And hence it is, that we have so many sweet exhortations, Ephesians. 4.30.
not to grieve his spirit, 1 These. 5.19
not to quench the spirit: but to Psalm. 31.23.
love the Lord, and to Psalm. 37.4.
delight in him. And all for this end, that he might please himself in the
kind entertainment that comes from us. For he tarryes with no man against his
will, nor remains in any place where he is not welcome.

Therefore, he is not more ready to demand entertainment of us, then he is
forward to give ability of the thing unto us. For, John 15.5.
without him can we do nothing. As no man but Christ could Reu. 5.5.
Open the clasped Book, that Gods counsels might be delivered to us; so none
but Christ can Open our closed heart, that Gods counsels might be received of
us. Even he which bids us Open to him, must Open for himself: Our heart, as
he did the Acts 16.14.
heart of Lydia, Acts 16.14. Our Luke 24.31.
wits, as the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, Luke 24.31. Our eyes, as the
Mar. 10.47.
eyes of blind Bartimaus, Mark 10.47. Our ears, as the ears Mar. 7.34.
of the deaf and dumb man, Mark 7.34. Domine (says Aug. confess. lib. 10.
cap. 27.
Augustine, vocasti, and clamasti, and rupisti sur ditat^m meam: Lord, thou
have called, thou have cried, and beat through my deafness. Id. ibid.
Coruscasti and splenduisti, and fugasti cacitatem meam: Thou have glittered,
thou have shined, and driven away my blindness. Then Lord, give what thou
command, and command what thou will.

Wherefore, to draw to a conclusion, and to shut up this word Open, remember
what Christ says unto you here, Open unto me. Remember what you must say to
Christ hereafter, Open unto us: that which you shall desire of him then, that
do, whilst he requests it of you now.

Governors and Rulers, hear what is said of Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 29.3 1 Chronicles.
29.3
He opened the doors of the house of the Lord (which 2 Chr. 28.24
Ahaz had shut) in the first year of his reign, and the first month of the
year. He began to settle his own kingdom with the setting up Gods Kingdom,
and so fulfilled the request of each faithful soul, that had cried out with
David, Psalm. 118.19.
Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may go in, and praise the Lord.

Ye Reverend Fathers, and Pastors of the Church, remember what is said of
Christ, Mat. 5.2.
He opened his mouth and taught, Mat. 5.2. which signifies, either that he
spoke of Apertio oris profunditatem significat sacramenti. Strab. in Gloss. ad
loc.
high matters, according to that of Mat. 13.35. Mat. 13.35.
I will open my mouth in Parables, I will declare hard sentences of old: or
else, that he spoke boldly and confidently, accordng to that of Ezeck. 29.21.
In that day I Ezekiel. 29.21.
will give thee an open mouth in the midst of them. And this being remembered,
will untie the strings of their tongues, whose mouths seem to be coped up
like Ferrets, and can say nothing at all: or whose practice is Origin. in Genesis
hom. 10.
Linire parietem lapsantem, as Origin speaks, to daube a tottering wall, and
color over their sins, with silent ouer-passing, which they should rub out
with sharp reproving.

Ye worshipful Magistrates and Judges. Hear what Bethsheba says to her
son. Prou. 31.8. Prou. 31.8.
Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all the children of destruction.
Remember that ye be living laws, to teach men by your actions, as well as by
your counsels. And one day we shall all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ. Bern. Epist.
Vbi plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, and conscientia bona, quam
marsupia plena. When a pure heart shall do more then a subtle tongue, and a
good conscience prevail above a full purse.

Ye rich men, Remember what God says to his people, Deuteronomy. 15.8. Deuteronomy. 15.8.
Thou shall not shut thy hand from thy brother, but thou shall Open thy hand
unto him. And to conclude all, you that are tradesmen, as you Open you shops to
men for gain, so Open your hearts to Christ for godliness, Heb. 9.8.
Christ has Opened to us a way into the holy of holies. Heb. 9.8. Shall Christ
Open a way for us in heaven, and shall not we Open a way for him on earth? Yes:
As Genesis 8.9.
Noah Opened the window of his arc and took in the Dove, that came flying to
him with an Olive leaf in her mouth: so let us Open the door of our heart, and
receive Gods Dove, his blessed spirit, that brings the Olive of peace with him.

Finally, let me say to each man's heart, which is the gate of his soul, as
David does to the gates of the Temple. Psalm. 24.9. Psalm. 24.9.
Lift your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the
King of Glory shall go in. Let the King of glory come into our souls now,
that we may come into his kingdom of glory hereafter. To which King of glory,
One eternal, and everliving God, and three persons, the father, son, and
holy Ghost, be all glory, might, Majesty, power and dominion for ever and ever
Amen.

FINIS.

