PAX
INFESTA malis.

A PLAIN Discovery of the whole Revelation of Saint JOHN: set down in two
treatises: The one searching and proving the true interpretation thereof: The
other applying the same paraphrastically and Historically to the text.

AMOR
PACIS alumnus

SET FORTH BY JOHN NAPEIR L. of Marchistoun younger.

WHEREUNTO ARE annexed certain Oracles of SIBYLLA, agreeing with the
Revelation and other places of Scripture.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, printer to the Kings Majesty. 1593.

Cum Priuilegio Regali.

blazon or coat of arms IN MY DEFENC GOD ME DEFEND

IN VAIN ARE AL EARTHLY CONIVNCTIONS, UNLESS WE BE HEIRS TOGETHER, AND OF
ONE BODY, AND FELLOVV PARTAKERS OF THE PROMISES OF GOD IN CHRIST, BY THE
EVANGELL.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT, HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES THE SIXTH, KING OF
SCOTTS, GRACE AND PEACE, etc.
For So Much (right high and mighty Prince) as both this our divine Prophet S.
JOHN, entreating here most specially of the destruction of the Antichristian
seat, city and kingdom, does direct the execution of that great work of
Gods Justice and just judgment to the Kings of the earth: as also the whole
Prophets of al ages, have for the most part, directed al their admonitions
generally to Kings, princes and governors, to the effect that they (as
Heads-men) being by holy admonitions forewarned, might (according thereto)
hold all the whole body of their commoun wealth in good order: for certain it
is, that the head being well affected, will of necessity ministrat health and
wholesome humors to the whole body. Therefore, it is likewise the duty of Gods
servants in this age, interpreters of Prophecies, as well (according to the
example of the Prophets) to encourage and inanimate Princes, to be ready
against that great day of the Lords revenge, as also to exhort them generally,
to remove all such impediments in their cuntries and common wealths, as may
hinder that work, and procure Gods plagues. For the which causes, we also all
your M. Subjects, that any ways (how little soever) have addicted our studies
unto these prophetical mysteries, does not only crave your highness to abide
constant and courageous against that day of the destruction of that Apostatik
seat and city, in case (God willing) it fall in your time: but also in the
mean time, until the reformation of that Idolatrous seat, to be preparing
and purging your M. own seat and kingdom, from all the enemies of that cause:
yea, and from all others any ways enemies or abusers of Justice: for verily
and in truth, such is the injury of this our present time, against both the
Church of God, and your M. true Lieges, that Religion is despised, and Justice
utterly neglected: for what by Atheists, Papists, and Cold professors, the
religion of God is mocked in all estates: Again, for partiality, prolixitie,
dearth, and deceitfulnes of laws, the poor perish, the proud triumph, and
Justice is nowhere to be found. Praying your M. to attend your self unto these
enormities, and (without casting over the credit thereof to wrong wresters of
Justice) your M. self, to wit certainly, that justice be done to these your
true and godly Lieges, against the enemies of Gods Church, and their most
cruel oppressors: Assuring your M. be concordance of al scriptures, that if
your M. ministrate Justice to them, God the supreme Judge shall ministrate
Justice to you against al your enemies: and contrarily, if otherwise.
Therefore, Sir, let it be your M. continual study (as called and charged
thereunto by God) to reform the universal enormities of your country, and
first (taking example of the princely Prophet David) to begin at your M. own
house, family and court, and purge the same of all suspicion of Papists, and
Atheists or Newtrals, whereof this Revelation foretells, that the number shall
greatly increase in these latter days. For shall any Prince be able to be one
of the destroiers of that great seat, and a purger of the world from
Antichristianisme, who purges not his own country? shall he purge his whole
country, who purges not his own house? or shall he purge his house, who is
not purged himself by private meditations with his God? I say therefore, as
God has mercifully begun the first degree of that great work in your inward
mind, by purging the same from all apparent spot of Antichristianisme, as that
fruitful meditation upon the 7.8.9. and 10. verses of the 20. Chapter of the
Revelation, which your highness has both godly and learnedly set forth, does
bear plain testimony, to your M. high praise and honor: So also we beseech
your M. (having consideration of the treasonable practices in these present
days, attempted both against Gods truth, your authority, and the common
wealth of this country,) to proceed to the other degrees of that reformation,
even orderly from your M. own person till your highness family, and from your
family to your court. Til at last, your M. whole country stand reformed in the
fear of God, ready waiting for that great day, in the which it shall please
God to call your M. or yours after you, among other reformed Princes, to that
great and universal reformation, and destruction of that Antichristian seat
and city Rome, according to the words prophesied, Apoc. 17. saying: The ten
horns are ten Kings etc. These are they that shall hate that harlot, and shall
make her desolate and naked, and shall eat up her flesh and burn her self
with fire: Beside also a warrant and command generally given to all men. Apoc.
18. saying, Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double
according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her
the double. And now, because the spirit of God, both by all his Prophets
generally, and by S. John particularly, commends and directs the execution of
Justice to kings and rulers, I trust no man shall think, that this our
discovery (wherein is contained Gods Justice and severe judgment against the
Antichristian seat) can more justly be dedicate unto any man, than unto these
ten Christian Kings, sometimes maintainers of that seat, whom, or whose
successors now both the Prophet promises to be executers of that judgment, as
also in whose kingdoms reformation is already begun: But because of these
kingdoms, sometimes maintainers of that seat, and now desisting therefro,
this your M. Realm is undoubtedly one, as also this present treatise both
being written by your highness subject, and in your M. native language, were
improper to be directed to any of the other Princes. Therefore, of necessity I
am led (as by the ear) to direct and dedicate these primices and first fruits
of my study unto your highness, wherein, if perchance I should seem any ways
more presumpteous then acceptable, I doubt not, but your M. clemency will
pardone that presumption that comes of necessity: But contrarily, if I herein
shall be found acceptable, (as verily I look for, of your M. humanity) then
certainly, not only conioyne I unto the former necessity, a voluntary heart,
and so do offer these presents, both gladly and necessarily unto your highness,
but also it shall encourage both me and others your M. Lieges, to proceed
every man in his own calling, to all kind of godly works, and good exercises,
to the honor of God, aedification of his Church, your highness renown, and
welfare to your M. realm, when they shall find your clemency to become the
Patron and protector of all zealous students, and an allower and accepter of
their godly exercises: For let not your M. doubt, but that there are within
your Realm (als well as in other countries) godly and good ingynes, versed and
exercised in all manner of honest science, and godly discipline, who by your M.
instigation might yield forth works and fruits worthy of memory, which
otherwise (lacking some mighty Maecenas to encourage them) may perchance be
buried with aeternall silence. Hoping therefore, that your highness will be a
protector of us and our godly exercises: we pray and humbly beseech the
Almighty, to be also unto your highness self and most honorable bedfellowe,
the Queens M. a perpetual protector of your honorable estates and welfare of
your persons, both in body and soul, to the quieting of your M. lieges,
increase of the true church, and honor of God, to whom, in Trinity and
Unity be praise for ever. At Marchistoun the 29. day of Ianuar. 1593.

Your highness most humble and obedient Subject, JOHN NAPEIR, Fear of
Marchistoun.

To the Godly and Christian Reader.
ALthough the nature of the truth be of such force and efficacy, that after
it is heard by the spiritual man, it is immediately believed, credited and
embraced: yet the natural man is so infirm, and weak, that his belief must
be supplied by natural reasons, and evident arguments: Wherefore, many learned
and godly men of the primitive Church, have gathered out diverse pithie and
forcible, natural and philosophical arguments, to prove and confirm the
Christian faith thereby: As in the 1. Cor. 15.36. Paul the learned and godly
teacher of the Gentiles, persuading the^ to confess the resurrection of the
dead, induces a marvelous pithie and familiar argument by a natural
comparison of seed sown in the ground, that first must die and be corrupt in
the earth, and then does it quicken up and rise again after an other form,
than it was sown into: And likewise other learned Doctors of the primitive
Church, writing to the Ethnicks, who sturred at the Virgins conception, and at
Christ's divinity, resoneth with them on this manner: saying, Your gods (as ye
believe) has conuersed with many women among you, and has begotten many
children, who has wrought no miracles: and how can ye that so believe deny us,
that our great God has begotten one Son, in whom divinity and humanity
are conjoined, seeing your eyes and forefathers, have seen so many and divine
miracles wrought by him, and in his name? And so most wisely used they these
Gentiles, own opinions and arguments against themselves, which moved the
malicious Apostate Julian the Emperor, to discharge from Christians, the
Schools and learning of Philosophy, yielding the reason, because says he,
Propriis pennis ferimur, and as by that means, many of the most learned
Gentiles in these days, were either moved necessarily to confess the
Christian Religion to be true, pure and holy: or then at the least were made so
astonished, that they were not able to write or teach against it. So likewise,
now in this second arising of the Evangelical truth, from the horrible
Antichristian darkness: it is not enough that this divine Revelation which
discovers, the Antichrist be only, by simple assertion interpreted, or
historically applied to the confirming of their zeal, that already knows and
detests that man of sin and son of perdition: but also, to the effect the
favorers of his errors, may either be converted, or then their mouths bridled
from calumniating the truth, it is needful that such necessary reasons and
sure arguments, or at the least such notable tokens be induced, as may make
that interpretation undeniable. And therefore being of purpose (by the
assistance of the Almighty) to expound and open up the mysteries of this
Revelation by a two-folde discourse, the one Paraphrastical, the other
historical, both confronted together: I have thought good before that work, to
premit by way of introduction, a resoning for the inuestigatio^ of the true
sense and meaning of every notable mystery thereof, and to set the same in
form of Propositions, as near the analytick or demonstratiue manner, as the
phrase and nature of holy scriptures will permit: and that for the better
satisfaction of these Naturalists, of whom happily, God may either make true
spiritual professors, or at the least, hereby bridle their opprobrious mouths
from calumniating the undoubted truth, when they see the natural coherence of
Gods mysteries so maruelously revealing one another, that thereby the truth of
God, the history of his Church, and person of the Antichrist are detected, and
the very Antichristians induced necessarily, either to confess themselves to
be hereby discovered, or then must they deny the scripture it self. And
although I have but of late attempted, to write this so high a work, for
preventing the apparent danger of Papistrie arising within this Island, yet in
truth, it is no few years since first I began to precogitat the same: For
in my tender years, and barneage in Sanct-Androis at the Schools, having on
the one part contracted a loving familiarity with a certain Gentleman, etc.
a Papist: And on the other part, being attentive to the Sermons of that worthy
man of God, Master Christopher Goodman, teaching upon the Apocalypse, I was so
moved in admiration, against the blindness of Papists, that could not most
evidently see their seven hilled city Rome, painted out there so lively by
Saint John, as the mother of all spiritual whoredom, that not only bursted I
out in continual reasoning against my said familiar, but also from thenceforth,
I determined with my self (by the assistance of Gods spirit) to employ my
study and diligence to search out the remanent mysteries of that holy book: as
to this hour (praised be the Lord) I have bin doing at al such times, as
co^veniently I might have occasion: But (to confess the truth of the
infirmity of man to the glory of God) I found ever during all that long time,
more fruit in one hours sobriety, prayer, and humble meditation, nor in a
thousand days of curious or presumptuous inquisition: yea, the more subtily I
searched, the more darkness I found, in so much, as curious inquisition rather
discouraged me by finding out of doubts, then profits me by finding any
resolution thereof: And so, when after long time spent, with little knowledge, I
(justly dispairing of mine own ability) became truly sorrowful and humble
in heart, then it pleases God, (to whom be the only glory) to give me that
grace, to espy in short time, that wonderful ouerture which in long time
before I could not considder: So that then I began to take up matters by their
right beginning, and by most easy grounds, And to prosecute out the rest by
their coherence in order, as is here set down, to the full resolution of all
the former doubts. After the which, although (greatly rejoicing in the Lord) I
began to write thereof in Latin: yet, I purposed not to have set out the same
suddenly, and far less to have written the same also in English, til that of
late, this new insolency of Papists arising about the 1588. year of God, and
daily incresing within this Island does so pity our hearts, seeing them put
more trust in Jesuits and seminary Priests, then in the true scripturs of
God, and in the Pope and King of Spain, then in the King of Kings: that, to
prevent the same, I was constrained of compassion, leaving the Latin, to haste
out in English this present work, almost unripe, that hereby, the simple of
this Island may be instructed, the godly confirmed, and the proud and foolish
expectations of the wicked beaten down, purposing hereafter (God willing) to
publish shortly, the other latin editio^ hereof, to the public utility of the
whole church. Whatsoever therefore through have, is here rudely and in base
language set down, I doubt not to be pardoned thereof by all good men, who
considering the necessity of this time, will esteem it more meet, to make
have to prevent the rising again of Antichristian darkness within this Island,
then to prolong the time in painting of language: Especially also, seeing
herein purposely I press not to follow the particular ornate terms, of
neither Scotts nor Englishmen: but rather contrarily for both their
instructions, I use so much as I can these words and terms, that be more
common and sensible to them both, then proper or ornate to any one of them.
Here then (beloved Reader) thou have this work divided into two treatises, the
first is the said introduction and reasoning, for investigation of the true
sense of every chief Theological term and date contained in the Revelation,
whereby, not only is it opened, explained and interpreted, but also that same
explanation and interpretation is proved, confirmed and demonstrated, by
evident proof and coherence of scriptures, agreeable with the event of
histories. The second is, the principal treatise, in the which the whole
Apocalypse, Chapter by chapter, Verse by verse, and sentence by sentence, is
both Paraphrastically expounded and Historically applied. This second and
principal treatise, keeps this order, that first before every chapter, is
premitted the argument, not of the literal sense of the chapter, but of the
true meaning and interpretation of the same. Thereafter (seeing all the
chapters of the Apocalypse, does either describe the vision, or then express
the prophecy) if the present chapter be descriptiue, every page thereof is
divided in two columns: in the first whereof, is set the text by verses, in
the second column, is set the Paraphrasticall exposition, answering verse by
verse to the text of the first column: But if the present chapter be
prophetical, then is every page thereof divided in three colums, the first
contains the Text by verses, the second the Paraphrasticall exposition
thereof verse by verse, the third also agreeable therewith by verses,
contains the history or historical application, in the which, and by the
which, the same prophecy is, or shall be performed. And if any chapter is
partly descriptiue, partly prophetical, then where it is prophetical, there
are three columns, the first is the Text, the second, is the Paraphrasticall
exposition of the text: The third, is the historical application and
accomplishment thereof. But where in that same chapter any part is descriptiue,
then are there forenent that part only two columns, whereof the first is the
Text, the second is common to both the Paraphrastical column, and to the
historical column: and therefore it passes through, occupying the room of
both the second and third columns, so that when ye read the second column,
ye shall read it with the second column, and when again ye read the third
column, ye shall also read it with the third column: for it is such a
common thing, as agrees to be read with either of them. Furthermore, there is
two drawn lines betwixt the Paraphrastical column and the Historical, within
the which lines there is set down the dates of times, by seals trumpets,
viols, thunders, and years of God, answering to the precise time, in the which
every Prophecy thereof was or shall be performed. Moreover, in case any part
of the text may be thought to be wrong translated, any part of the Paraphrase
wrong expounded: or finally, any part of the history wrong applied, over
briefly handled, not sufficiently proved, or having need of annotations: I
have therefore forenent every doubtful and needful place of the Text,
Paraphrase, and History, set marks of the ordinary letters of a, b, c, etc. In
the Paraphrase, and after the end of the whole chapter has subjoyned Notes,
Reasons, and Amplifications, marked corresponde^tly with the like letters of a
b c, etc. by the which Notes and Amplifications, not only the brevity of the
Paraphrase and history is supplied, but also by reasons, proofs, and arguments
of scripture therein insert, the whole smaller doubts thereof are resolved. And
as toward the greter doubts, they are referred to the first treatise, wherein
they are at length and demonstratiuely proved. So the note here in the second
treatise, does only quote the proposition of the first treatise, that proves
that present assertion. And because this whole work of Revelation concerns
most the discovery of the Antichristian and Papisticall kingdom, I have
therefore (for removing of all suspicion) in all histories and profane matters,
taken my authorities and cited my places either out of Ethnic auctors, or then
papistical writers, whose testimonies by no reason can be refused against
themselves. But in matters of divinity, doctrine and interpretation of
mysteries (leaving all opinions of men) I take me only to the interpretation
and discovery thereof, by coherence of scripture, and godly reasons following
thereupon: which also not only no Papist, but even no Christian may justly
refuse. And forasmuch as our scripturs herein are of two sorts, the one our
ordinary text, the other extraordinary citations, In our ordinary text, I
follow not altogether the vulgar English translation, but the best learned in
the Greek tongue, so that (for satisfying the Papists) I differ nothing from
their vulgar text of S. Jerome, as they call it, except in such places, where I
prove by good reasons, that he differs from the Original Greek. In the
extraordinary texts of other scriptures cited by me, I follow ever Ieromes
latin translation, where any controversy stands betwixt us and the Papists,
and that moves me in diverse places to insert his very latin text, for their
cause, with the just English thereof, for supply of the unlearned. And hereof
it comes that our quotations are according to the sections and verses of
Ieromes translation, printed in Antwerpe by Plantine, agreeing also with the
great concordances of Robert Stephane. In other textes not controuerted, the
English text, it alone is sufficient in a Scottish or English tretise, and
therefore omit we the latin. Further as concerning my citations of ancient and
vnsuspect writers, I have chosen the same out of the most old and faithful
copies, cheiflie those that be found in old Popish libraries, and imprinted by
Popish Printers: But as for the new coppies and latter editions, there is a
malicious ordinance observed in these latter days, by the which, the Friars of
Louane, and other Papisticall correctors, eiketh, paireth, and peruerteth al
good and rare books, causing first one sort of them to be imprinted under
their testimonial, so that (as that same testimonial therein imprinted
bears) nothing is left therein that may be contrarious to the Roman Church,
although the Author by his true edition had never so much inveighed against
Rome. Thereafter all the remanent Popish Printers, do follow these new perverted
Coppies, in their latter editions, without any testimonial, as being warranted
by the said first testimonial: and this is most evident to be seen by their
book entitled Index Expurgatorius. Praying therefore al good men to beware of
these, We desire earnestly with our hearts sto to proceed hereinto, that
truth may come to light, and that such grounds may be laid, as thereby the
ignorant and simple Reader may be best instructed, the godly and learned
Christian most surely confirmed, and the arrogant and obstinate caluminator
ratherest confounded and put to silence. But for so much as this our good
intention and godly purpose, does always proceed of a very tender and frail
veshell, and that as all liquors (how precious soever) does take some taste of
their veshells: So this holy work may in some things (though not espied by my
self) taste of my imperfections. Therefore humbly I submit these imperfections
whatsoever, to the gentil correction of every wise and discreet person, who in
the motion of Gods spirit judges uprightly, without envy or partiality.
Praying all good men to have me apardoned of whatsoever is a miss: for
although I have not done herein perfectly as I would, yet zealouslie as I
could, knowing that the poor Widows mite was acceptable unto the Lord: for
every man has not gold, silver, silks and purple to offer to the work of the
Sanctuary: to me (as says Jerome) it shall be much, If I may purchase wool,
or flocks to offer to that holy work. And surely, this that I have, how small
soever it be, till God enlarge me with more I offer it gladly, unto the glory
of God and aedification of his true Church. To God therefore the disposer of
this, and all other godly works and meditations, who lives and reigns
eternally in Trinity and Unity; be glory praise, laud and thanks, for ever
and ever, Amen.

The book this bill sends to the Beast, Craving amendment now in heast.
GOD first to John in Pathmos me presents,
Who sent me syne the seven Kirkes until, Apo, 1.1.9 Apoc. 1.11

As forth I foore with the two Testaments,
Gods truth to teach, in witnessing his will: Apoc, 11.3.7

Thou bloody Beast, us cruelly did kill, Apoc 11.7,

In sack of schisms sieling up our sense, Apoc. 11, 3,

Our corpse unkind then stonished lay still, Apoc, 11, 8,

Til seventy years eighteen times passed hence: Apoc. 11.3, 9.

But now since comd is till our audience Apoc. 11.11. and 1^.^.7

Gods word from heaven the voice of verity, Apoc. 11.12

Quickening these corpse with true intelligence, Apoc. 11.11.

So long suppressed by thy subtilitie: Apo. 11.2, and 15.8

I plain proclaim and prove by prophecy, Apoc, 10, 11.

That thou, O Rome, raisd up on hills seven, Apoc. 17, 9

City supreme and seat of Sodomie: Ap. 17, 18, and 11, 8 note [m] thereof,

Under whose reign our Lord to death was driven,
And many Martyrs rudely rent and riuen: Ap, 17, 6, and 18, 24

Art Heir and Eroy to great Babylone, Apoc, 17.5, 18, and prop, 23,

Whereby her name here God has to thee given, Apoc, 17. and 18

Thou whore that sit the bloody beast vpone: Apoc. 17, 1.3, 6,

Thy days are done, thy glory now is gone. Apoc, 17, and 18 Apoc. 18, 2, 8, 9,

Burnt shall thou be, and made a den of Devils.
Fly from her then my flock, leave her alone, Apoc, 14. and, 17,

Lest that ye be partaker of her evils: Apoc. 14, 14, 15, Prop. 14,

For does at hand approach the latter day,
When Christ's Church shall reign with him for ay. Apoc. 11.15,

Faults escaped.
Page, 1. q. l. 5. r. 1. Match. 1.30. p. 2. l. 10 r. forty years. l. 30. r. 8.
9. and 11. p. 3. q. l. 3. r. 1. Cor. 25.51. p. 9. l. 22 r. an. 1541. p. 13. q.
3. r. Apoc. 14.6. p. 18. q. 4. r. Jude 6. p. 22. q. 3. r. Ap. 11, and 12. p.
26. l. 17. r. of this, p. 27. l. 36. r. in title there p. 38. l. 35. r. fall,
and the, p. 42. forenent the lines. 21. 22. 25. set 1. 2. 3. p. 45. q. l. 17.
r. 1. Cor. 10. p. 46. and 47. for the q. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. red. 16, 17.
18, 19, 20. 21. p. 55, l. 16. r. 16. 17. p, 66 q. l. 3. r. 4. 7, Page 80. l. 7.
r. day worn. p. 83. l. 16. par r. Nicolaitans, pa. 89. l. 9. r, 7. and 8. and
10. p. 96. l. 26. r. profitable usury. p, 98. l. 23. r. 7. 3, 4. 5. p. 99. l.
6. r. Chapter, before he, p. 100. l. 20. par. r. forthshewings. p. 109. hist.
l. 21. and 22. r. of Christ. within, p, 112. pa, l. 18, 9, 120. r [after christ
first opened his word] came. l. 31. par, r. gods [i] ministers, p. 113. h. l. 7.
r. before. God p. 126 par. l. 12. r. church [where* p. 127. l. 27. r. certain:
Also, p. 130. par. l, 36. r. tail, end and p. 134 l. 27, r. 26. 10. p, 139. l,
11. r, how [vnder p. 141, text l. 15, r. prophecy again among, l. 27. r. 6,
7] as is, p. 148, l, 28, r. there true p. 150, par l. 34, r. state. and
prostrating, p. 172. par, l, 38 r. for the. p. 174, l. 5. r, [Mat. 4, 9] p,
179, forenent the 20, l. betwixt the lines, r, 1639, p. 182 l: 15, r, Ioh. 6,
39. p, 201, l. 24, r, note that professed, p, 208. l. 22, r, of their
kingdoms, p 217, par. l. 12. r, so they now, p, 211, l, 17, r. real Babylon.
l, 34, r. both secular, p, 264, l. 35 r. note [gg] thereof, Item mend the
titles, page 31. p, 34, p, 35, p 37, p 44. p 191, p. 242.

A Table of the Conclusions introductiue to the Revelation, and proved in the
first Treatise.
The first Treatise, is an introduction to the knowledge of the Revelation,
expounding by proof and demonstration the meaning of Dates and chief
reckonings laid under terms. Vulgar and used, such as generally, a day for a
year a week for seven years, a month for 30. years, and a year for a year
of years. or three hundred and three score yea es, proved in the 1
proposition. particularly 12. months 1260. prophetical days: three great
days and an half, and a time, times, and half a time, proved to be all one
date, proposition 15. and every one of them to mean a thousand, two hundred
and threescore Julian years, proposition. 16.
New and strange, wherewith is dated the history of S. John his days, under
the terms of 7. seals, whereof the first begins, An. Chri 29. prop. 8. the
last An. Christi, 71. proposition 7. and every one of them indureth seven
years, as is proved by the ninth proposition. The prophecy to the worlds
end, whereof The progres is dated by 7. trumpets, or 7. vials which both ar
proved to be one proposition 2. and every one of them does endure 245.
years, gathered by the third and fourth propositions, and proved by the fifth
proposition: and the first begins, Anno. Christi. 71. proposition 6. and the
last begins, an. Christ. 1541. and ends Anno. 1786. at the farthest. prop.
10. The end and last days, are dated by 7. thunders. and 7. Angels of Gods
harvest, both proved to be one, prop. 11. and to begin Anno Christi, 1541.
prop. 12. and every one of the first three that goes before the day of
judgment, to endure 49 years, prop. 13. making the latter day to fall betwixt
the years of Christ 1688. and 1700. by prop. 14


Affairs and chief matters concerning Gods servants. whose true and holy
Church with her contents is termed Gods Temple in heaven, Pro. 20 and a woman
cled with the Sun, prop. 22. Religion is termed God his throne in heaven,
pro. 17. whereof the written word is testified by the two witnesses, proved
prop. 21. to be the two Testaments, whereof The twenty four books of the old
Testament, are called the twenty four Elders, proposition 18. The four
Evangels of the new Testament are called the four beasts, proposition 19.

Gods greatest enemies, as Satan who is bound a 1000. years, beginning An.
300. prop. 34. yet bond but only from raising of universal wars, prop. 35.
Wicked kingdoms which are set out under the terms of Two nations, Gog and
Magog prooved [by the thirty and two proposition] to be the Papists and
Mahometans, whose armies are all one with those of the sixth trumpette or vial,
as is proved in the thirty three proposit. Two Beasts A two horned beast,
signifying the Antichrist only, by the twenty five proposition, who is proved
to be the Pope, by the twenty six proposition, whose reign of a thousand,
two hundred sixty years, begins anno Christi 300. or 316. at the farthest,
proposition, 36. A ten horned beast, signifying, by the twenty four
proposition, the whole Latin or Roman Empire, with the Antichrist descending
of the same, of which Roman or Latin Empire, the seat and Metropolitan^
City, Rome, is meaned and represented by Babylon in the twenty three
proposition. To this ten horned beast and Roman or Latin Empire [as is proved
in the twenty seven proposition] appertains An Image, proved by the 28
proposition, to be these degenerate princes that only in name and show, are
Roman Emperors. A mark, proved by prop. 30. to be the league of servitude
professed to the Romans, by their subjects noted afterward by the Pope with
visible marks, which, by the 31. prop. are (...) and crosses of all kinds. A
name, proved by the twenty nine proposition. to be the name of the Latin or
Roman Empire, (...) A number of 666. assigned by the text.





These Propositio^s ar set in this table after their natural order, but in the
tretise follovving, they are placed demo^stratiuely, to the effect every
proposition may be proved by the former propositions.

THE FIRST AND INTRODVCTORY Treatise, containing a searching of the true
meaning of the Revelation, beginning the discovery thereof at the places most
easy, and most evidently known, and so proceeding from the known, to the
proouing of the unknown, until finally, the whole grounds thereof be
brought to light, after the manner of Propositions.
THE FIRST PROPOSITION. In prophetical dates of days, weeks, months, and
years, every common prophetical day is taken for a year.
THIS Proposition is proved by apperance, by a law, by practice, and by
necessity. By appearance, because the common week is called a week of days,
Gene. 29.27,
as in Genesis (according to Ieroms translation) Imple hebdomadam dierum. i.
Fulfill a week of days. And the common year is called a year of days, Iere.
28.3.11,
as adhuc duo anni dierum: Within two years of days: 1. Match, 1.30.
and Post duos annos dierum: After two years of days: inferring thereby that
there is another week of years, containing seven years, as the common week
contains seven days. And another year of years, containing 360. years, as
the common year (not intercalar) among the Hebrews and Grecians, contained
Josephus Scaliger de emend. Temp,
360. days. Secondly, by the Leuiticall law, (which is the figure of all
prophetical verity) it was instituted, that as in the common week, six days
were for labor, and the seventh for rest: so should there also be a week of
years, in the which the land should be six years labored, Exodus 23. Leuit,
25.
and rest the seventh: Making so the common week of days, to rese^ble the
figurative week of years, and so consequently, every day to resemble a year.
Thirdly, by the prophetical custom and practice, every day represented a
year: as in Numb. Iuxta numerum 40. dierum, Number. 14.34
quibus considerastis terram, annus pro die imputabitur, and 40. annis
recipietis, etc. After the number of forty days, in which ye searched out
the land, the year shall be counted for a day, and in forty years ye shall
receive etc. And in Ezech. Ego autem dedi tibi annos iniquitatis eorum numero
dierum, etc. And I have given thee the years of their iniquity by the number
of days. And afterward, Et Assumes iniquitatem domus Iudae 40. diebus,
Ezech. 4.5.6
diem pro anno, diem inquam, pro anno dedi tibi. And thou shall bear the
iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, a day for a year, even a day for
a year, I have given thee. Fourthlie upon necessity of salvation, al
christians must confess, in the seventie weeks of Daniel, a day to be taken
for a year, extending in the whole to 490. years; otherwise, that prophecy
of the Messiah coming would not fall upon the just time of Christ's coming, Dan.
9.24
as necessarily it ought to do. So then a prophetical day is a year, the
week seven years, the month thirty years (because the Hebrew and Grecian
month has thirty days) and consequently the prophetical year is 360. years.
Josephus Scaliger de emend. temp.
Beside this common prophetical day, there is another great and extraordinary
day, whereof hereafter shall be spoken.

2. PROPOSITION. The seven Trumpets of the 8. and 9. chapters, and the seven
Vials of the 16. Chapter, are all one.
THis is proved, in that both the seven Vials, and also the seven Trumpets are
the seven last plagues: The seven vials, in that by the text they are called,
The seven last plagues: these same being hereafter called, The seven golden
Vialles, Ap, 15.1. and 7
and the seven Vials of the wrath of God. As to the seven Trumpets, the last
contains the day of judgment, as testifies the Angels oath, swearing, Apoc.
16.^
Quod tempus non erit amplius, sed in diebus vocis septimi Angeli, cum coeperit
tuba canere, Apoc. 10.^
consummabitur mysterium magnum Dei, etc. That there shall be no more time, but
in the days of the seventh Angel, when he shall blow the trumpet, the great
mystery of God shall be finished. Which mystery, Paul to the Corinthians,
makes the latter day and resurrection; saying, Ecce mysterium dico vobis, etc.
Behold, I declare unto you a mystery. And again, In momento, in ictu oculi,
1 Cor. 15.5^
in novissima tuba (canet enim tuba) and mortui resurgent: In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet (for the trumpet shall blow) and the
dead shall arise. And seeing then the seven tru^pets follow one another in
order, in the eight ninth, tenth, and eleue^th chapters, and the last
contains the day of judgment, and general resurrection; Therefore, must the
seven trumpets be also the seven last plagues, and consequently, they and the
seven vials must be al one. Moreover, for confirmation hereof, they agree in
their principal terms; the second trumpet with the second Vial; the third
trumpet with the third Vial; the fourth trumpet with the fourth Vial; the
sixth trumpet with the sixth Vial; the seventh trumpet with the seventh Vial: So,
that thereby we may be sure, and conclude both those trumpets, with those
Vials, and also the rest of the trumpets with the rest of the vials, respective
in purpose, meaning, time, and in all other circumstances, to be one and the
self same thing.

3. PROPOSITION. The star and locusts of the fifth trumpet, are not the great
Antichrist and his Clergy, but the Dominator of the Turks and his army, who
began their dominion, in anno Christi 1051.
BY the former proposition, the fifth vial is al one with the fifth trumpet: But
in that vial (says the text) there arose such a plague against the seat of
that Antichristian beast, that his kingdom was darkened, and they did gnaw
their tongues for sorrow. So that this may no ways be himself that arose
against himself, but rather some other godless tyrant like him, whom we
shall prove to be the Apostate Mahomet, and his locustes the Turks: first, by
the name of their Cheiftanes: secondly, by the length of their reign: Thirdly,
and last of all, by all the tokens and circumstances contained in the text. As
to the first, they shall have (says the text) their King, whose name shall be
in Hebrew Abaddon, and in greek Apollyon, and in Latin (as S. Jerome
translateth it) Exterminans: Hier. de int. nominum,
and in English a destroier, or a waster. But so it is, that trying from
language to language the names of Princes, ye shall only find both their
temporal and spiritual kings names to signify the same that Abaddon in
hebrew, and Apollyon in greek does: for their temporal king is called Turca,
which is as much to say, as a Waster or destroyer, as testifies P. Melancton in
Carrion his Chron. lib. 1, fol. 8. and lib. 5 fol. 107.
Chronicles. And their spiritual kings name Mahomet Hier. de int. nominum.
, signifies delens, a destroyer or waster: and beside that, it signifies also
a Messenger or Angel, most agreeable with this text, where he is also called,
the Messenger or Angel of the depthes. Therefore, these locusts by the name of
their Chieftaine, agrees certainly to be the Turks. Secondly, as to the
space of their dominion, the Turkish Dominators reigned 150. years, and so
long lasted these Locustes, to wit, five months: which being prophetically
taken, (because this is a Prophecy) makes just 150. years, as is proved by
the first Proposition. And so long lasted the dominion of the Turks, before
they were subdued by the Tartarians: to wit, from the days of Zadok, their
first Dominator, an. Christ. 1051. to the time that Changius Chan of Tartarie
subdued them, An. Christ. 1201. So then, in length of dominion these Locusts
agree to be the Turks. Thirdly and last of all, the whole circumstances and
tokens of the text, agrees most conveniently with the Turk, as at length our
paraphrastical and historical discourse shall prove. Wherefore, the Star that
in the fifth trumpet fell down from heaven, and his Locusts that arose, must
needs be the Mahomet, who fell from his former Christian profession, and became
an Apostate, and out of the smoke of his heresy, stirred up the Turks to be
his army.

4 PROPOSISION. The kings of the East, or four Angels, specified in the sixth
trumpet, or sixth vial. Cap. 9. and 16. are the four nations, Mahometanes beyond
and about Euphrates, who began their empire by Ottoman, in the year of Christ,
1296. or thereabout.
FOr proof hereof, there needs no other argument, than the perfect concord of
the whole tokens of the texts, cap. 9. and cap. 16. agreeing so in every point
with that history, that no other history can be applied thereto. For first,
cap. 9. they are called Angels; that is to say, Messengers evil or good,
executers of Gods will: So were these Mahometanes messengers sent of God, to
scourge the Christians falling away. Secondly, cap. 16. they are called Kings
of the East: and so are these Mahometanes indeed Kings of the East. Thirdly,
they were in number four (says the text) so were there of these Mahometanes
four chief nations; to wit, Turks, Tartarians, Saracens, and Arabians: and
four imperial or royal families; to wit, Assimbeis, Candelors, Caramannes
and Ottomannes. Fourthlie, they were hitherto bound (says the text) about the
river Euphrates: and so have they their residence about Euphrates, where they
were so bound and tied by civil and intestine wars, that they came not by
west Euphrates to make conquest, till after this year of Christ 1296. which
time the whole Mahometicke Empire over the most part of the said four nations,
came from the other three families, in the only hand of Ottomannus their
first Emperor. Fiftlie, these were appointed (says the Text) at this time to
slay the third part of men. And so did they, what by corporal, and what by
spiritual death, slay, conquest, and poison with heresy, all Asia and much of
Europe, even the large third part of the world. Which property can be
attributed to none other hitherto, but to the said Mahometike Army, which
exceeded far, any Army hard of in Christian histories. And therefore, sixtlie,
ar they numbered to so great a multitude in the text, to wit, two hundred
thousand thousands horsemen. Seuenthlie, as out of the mouths of the Devil,
the Antichristian beast, and this false Mahomet, proceeded out three unclean
spirits, stirring up the world to battle, as the Text specifies: So, by the
history it is found, that out of their mouths proceeded such inspirations of
the Devil, and deuilish exhortations, that stirred up (in fiery wrath, in
smoking heresy, and in sulphurious and bitter avarice) the whole world to
battle: that is to say, these Mahometanes, Emperors of the whole Orient,
against the Antichristian beast, supreme head of the Occident, Hier. de int.
nominum
to fight in Armageddon: that is to say, to fight in the mountain of the
chosen fruit, and in the mountain of the Euangell: even in Asia minor, and
Europe, and in other lands of the Christians, and among Gods elect fruit, and
chosen professors of his Euangell, troubling them on both sides, which at
length and orderly shall be found in our paraphrasticall and historical
Discourse, together with all the rest of the smaller circumstances contained in
the text. So, then by these perfect properties we conclude, the sixth Trumpet
or Vial, to be spoken of the great Empire of these four nations Mahometanes,
which began in Anno Christi 1296. under their first Emperor Ottomannus.

5 PROPOSITION. The space of the fifth trumpet or vial contains 245. years,
and so much also, every one of the rest of the trumpets or vials do contain.
Seeing at the pouring out of the fifth vial, or sounding of the fifth trumpet,
the Turks began their dominion under Zadok, in Anno Christi 1051. by the
third proposition: and by the fourth proposition, at the sounding of the sixth
Trumpet, and pouring out of the sixth Vial, the whole four nations Mahometanes
began their great Empire in anno Christi 1296. Therefore, the fifth Trumpet or
Vial endured from the 1051. year, to the 1296. year, which is the space of
245. years. Now, that every one of the rest of the Trumpets or Vialles does
contain the same space, it is probable by these reasons. First, because in
every distribution, aequalitie is most apparent and probable, and so these
seven ages, termed by trumpets and vialles, appear to have no reason, why one
should be longer and another shorter, but rather all alike. Secondly, as in
those 245. years the effects of the fifth Trumpet and Vial were performed (as
now is proved) so by our paraphrasticall and historical Discourse you shall
find, that in the former 245. years, the effect of the fourth Trumpet and
Vial, and in the 245. years before these, the effect of the third Trumpet or
Vial was performed: and consequently, the effects of every one of the rest of
the trumpets or vials were performed in their own space of 245. years,
ingendering so in these intervals of 245. years a perfect harmony and
analogy betwixt the prophecy and history. Thirdly, because every one of
these ages are termed and distinguished by the sounds of trumpets here, as the
Iubelees were in Leuit. 25, 9
Leviticus. For there, at the end of every 49. year, and beginning of the 50.
year the tru^pets sounded, making betwixt every sounding thereof 49. years
precisely for a Iubelee interuall without any odds, as the name Iubileus
betokens, which signifies a Trumpet or Cornet: Therefore, must those ages also
contain certain whole Iubelee interualls, Hier. de int. nominum.
preciselie without any ods: otherwise, appara^tlie, they would not have been
limited here by the soundes of Trumpets, as the Iubelees are. Then, if every
one of these ages does contain four Iubelees, which is 196. years, or six
Iubelees, which is 294 years, the one shall be so few, and the other shall be
so many, that the history could not agree thereto: Therefore, five Iubelees,
which is 245. years (as the midst betwixt extremities) agrees exquisitlie.
Fourthlie, it is found in histories, that great mutations of Empires followed
245. years one after another: as, Jerusalem was destroyed An. 71. An. 316.
Constantine tra^sported the Imperial seat from Rome to Byzantium, and in Rome
Pope Syluester began the Papisticall kingdom. Anno 561. or thereabout, Totila
king of Goths burned Rome, and usurped the dominion thereof. Anno 806.
Charlemaign received the new Empire of Germans and Romans. Anno 1051. Zadok
began the first dominion of the Turks. Anno 1296. Ottoman began the first
Empire of the four nations Mahometanes. Last of all, about the year 1541.
arose our true professors against the kingdom of Antichrist. And every one of
these great mutations followed 245. years one after another. And this moves
Carrion, and other Historiographers, to affirm by diverse observations, that
five Carrion. lib. 4. de Henr. 4. Imp.
hundred years (as groslie they think, or rather exactlie, 490. years) is
fatalis periodus imperioru^: the fatal period of Empires, for that it is about
twice 245. years. Fiftlie, 245. years, is the just half of the great
Iubelee, or seventy weeks of Daniel, containing 490. years: And because the
world would not stand wholly seven of these great Iubelees; therefore S. John
by the Spirit of God deuideth seven halfs of the great Iubelee, among the
seven Trumpets, or vials. Sixtlie, there are books of the Jews, containing (as
they allege) doctrines proceeding from the mouths of the Patriarchs,
affirming every great Angel of seven to rule the world 490. years: which we
(wanting the warrant of Scripture) can neither affirm nor condemn. Always (if
it be so,) the half thereof, to wit, 245. years is taken in stead of the
whole, because (as is said) the time to come to the worlds end, would not
contain seven whole, and to contain fewer divisions than seven, that had been
repugnant to the prophetical manner, that deuides all by seven: as seven
seals, seven tru^pets, seven vials, seven thunders, etc. So then, for
conclusion, every trumpet or vial endures 245. years.

6 PROPOSITION. The first Trumpet or Vial began at the Iubelee, in anno
Christi 71.
Seeing by the third Proposition, the fifth trumpet or vial began in Anno 1051.
And that by the fifth proposition every trumpet or vial contains 245. years,
it must needs follow by just count, that the first trumpet or vial began in
Anno 71. The second in An. 316. The third in An. 561. The fourrh in An. 806.
The fifth (as is already proved) in An. 1051. The sixth also in An. 1296. The
seventh in An. 1541. And that this 71. year of Christ, and consequently, the
first year of every trumpet or vial was Iubelee, you may consider by the
Discourse of Josephus Scalig^^ de emendat. temporum.

7 PROPOSITION. The last of the seven Seals, and first of the seven Trumpets
or Vials, begin both at once, in An. 71.
THis appears evidently, for even by the text (cap. 8.) the seventh seal
being opened, that very hour the seven Angels received their trumpets to
blow; for having said in the first verse, and when he had opened the seventh
seal, there was silence in heaven about half an hour: he subjoyneth
immediately (ver. 2.) And I saw the seven Angels, etc. receive their seven
Trumpets. And further, after he has showed (ver. 5.) how Christ powered out the
fiery coals of his wrath, in revenge of the blood of his Saints (which
doubtless, was upon Jerusalem, which shead it) incontinent he subjoyneth (verse
6. and 7.) that then the seven Angels prepared themselves to blow. And the
first blewe his Trumpet, etc. So therefore, justly at this destruction of
Jerusalem, in Anno Christi 71. make we both the last seal, and first Trumpet
or Vial to begin. And this is also confirmed by the former calculations,
which come backwarde from the fifth Trumpet or Vial preciselie, to the year of
this destruction.

8. PROPOSITION The first Seal begins to be opened, in Anno Christi 29.
complete.
THis is proved by this reason. The opening of the first Seal (cap. 6.) and
outgoing of one riding upon a white horse, etc. is interpreted to be the word
of God, in the 19. chap. verse. 13. which passed out victoriously, conquering
and piercing our hearts with the arrows of feruencie and godly zeal. This
behooued only to begin at that time that Christ was baptized, and began to
preach and open up the sealed doctrine of our salvation, which was in the end of
the 29. year of the age of Christ: and about the beginning of his thirtieth
year (as Luke testifies) So, Luke. 3, v. 23
then consequently, the first seal begins to be opened about the end of
the said 29. year of the age of Christ.

9. PROPOSITION. Every Seal must contain the space of seven years.
THe first Seal beginning to be opened in Anno Christi 29. as by the former
proposition is proved, we say, that the second seal begins in An. Christi
36. The third begins in An. 43. The fourth in An. 50. The fifth in An. 57.
The sixth in An. 64. And finally, the seventh begins in An. 71. proceeding
ever aequally by seven years interual, for these reasons. First, because in all
distributions, aequalitie is most apparent and probable: and truth it is, that
the first seal could not begin at the term and year of Christ 29. proved by
the former proposition, and the seventh seal at the term of the year of Christ
71. proved by the seventh Proposition, and proceed aequallie: unless that
every seal contain seven years. Secondly, because in proceeding, and
giving seven years to every seal, ye shall find the effect of every seal
to be performed within the seven years of that seal: And so the harmony to
be perfect betwixt these seals and the just history, as in our
paraphrasticall and historical Discourse shall appear more at large.
Thirdly, because all comptes of years within a Iubelee, were reckoned among
the Leuits and Prophets by weeks of years, Exodus 23 Leuit. 25
every week containing seven years, as the Jews do observe yet unto this
day: and this space of seals opening, proceeding from the year of Christ 29.
to the Iubelee in An. 71. is less than a Iubelee interuall, for it is but 42.
od years: and therefore, the division ought of necessity to fall by weeks of
years, or by seven years. Fourthlie, the Angel in Daniel reckons 70.
weeks of years betwixt the commandment to build Jerusalem, Dan. 9.24
and the latter destruction of Jerusalem, including the Messiah coming. And
this Angel calls his words closed and sealed, Sermones clausi and signati:
words closed and sealed: Dan. 12.9
where by justly these 70. weeks may be called sealed weeks. Now, because
these 42. od years of the seals are certainly a part of the seven sealed
weeks of Daniel: Therefore, we may justly affirm these seals to be sealed
weeks, and so consequently every one of them to contain seven years.

10 PROPOSITION. The last Trumpet and Vial begins anno Christi 1541 and
should end in anno Christi 1786.
Seeing by the third Proposition, the fifth Trumpet or Vial began in Anno 1051.
And by the fifth proposition, every Trumpet or Vial contains 245. years: it
must needs follow, that the seventh Trumpet or Vial began in Anno Christi
1541. and consequently it should end 245. years after: which is in Anno 1786.
Not that I mean, that that age, or yet the world shall continue so long,
because it is said, Mat. 24, 22
that for the Elects sake, the time shall be shortened: but I mean, that if the
world were to endure, that seventh age should continue until the year of
Christ 1786.

11 PROPOSITION. The seven Thunders, whose voices are commanded to be sealed,
and not written (cap. 10.4.) are the seven Angels, specified cap. 14. verse.
6.8.9.14.15.17.18.
THis tenth chapter does agree with the twelth of Daniel almost in every
point: there does he likewise show, that those very self same mysteries are
sealed, yet but for a time, says the Angel, in these words, Dan 12, 4. and
9.13.
Tu autem Daniel, claude sermones, and signa librum vsque ad tempus statutum,
etc. But thou, O Daniel, close up the words, and seal the book, until the
appointed time. And again, he says, Vade Daniel, quia clausi sunt signatique
sermones, vsque ad praesinitum tempus. Go thy way, Daniell, for the words
are closed and sealed until the appointed time. This time that these mysteries
were closed, appears to be the time of darkness already past, under the
Antichristian errors, now hope we in God, that those mysteries ar able to be
found out, seeing that time is expired. The^ to our purpose, let us confer the
tokens of the seven Thunders, with the tokens of the seven Angels, specified
Chap. 14. And we shall find them to agree. For first, at the coming of the
seven thunders, Christ does offer the open book of his truth. So cap. 14. the
first of the seven Angels brings the everlasting Gospel, and openly precheth
out the same. Secondly, cap. 10. Christ by the mighty voice of his word, Apoc
10.2.8 9.10.11. Apoc. 14.9
as a roaring Lion in the mouths of his preachers, proclaimed the truth: then
came the seven thunders; so also (cap. 14.) the voice of Gods heavenly elect is
heard as the mighty sound of waters, and as thunder (verse. 2.) Then came
orderly the seven Angels (ver. 6.8.9.14.15.17. and 18.) Thirdly, (cap. 10.)
the seven thunders are sealed up as a mystery. So likewise (cap. 14) those
seven Angels are preparers and reapers of Gods great harvest, and what
mystery is more sealed than that, as testifies Mark Mark. 13.31.
saying, De die autem illo vel hora, nemo scit, neque Angeli in coelo, neque
Filius nisi Pater: But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son but the father: And Paul to the 1. Cor.
saying, Ecce, 1. Cor. 15.5^.
mysterium dico vobis, etc. Behold I show you a mystery, etc. Fourthlie,
(cap. 10.) the thunders are commanded to be sealed and not to be written
plainly. So (cap. 14.) they are so sealed, that they are neither named duly
with their former name of thunder; neither are they placed in their due place,
which should have been in the tenth chapter, but here are called Angels, and
placed in the 14. Chapter. Fiftlie (chap. 10.) they be called thunders and yet
are sealed: So (chap. 14.) though they be sealed with the name of Angels, Apoc.
14.2.
yet for a token that they be the seven thunders, he describes the sound of
great thunder going before them. Then for a conclusion, in respect of the
harmony betwixt the seven thunders, and seven Angels of Gods great harvest, we
conclude them both to be one.

12 PROPOSITION The first of the seven thunders, and the seventh and last
Trumpet or Vial, begin both at once in An. 1541.
IN the eleventh Chapter it is said, that at the blast of the seventh trumpet,
the kingdom of the world becomes Christ his kingdom: that is, the kingdom
of the Antichrist, and all other profane kingdoms shall fall, and Christ his
kingdom shall be spread and enlarged over all: And this can no other ways
come to pass, but by the preaching of the Euangell, which was of new opened
up, and preached at the coming of the first Angel, whom the Text says, to
have Apoc. 14.6
Euangelium aeternum, vt euangelizaret sedentibus superterram An everlasting
Evangell, to preach unto them which dwell upon the earth. Which Angel, by
the former proposition, is proved to be the first of the seven thunders:
Therefore, it follows consequently, that the new restoring of the Evangell,
the seventh Trumpet or vial, and the first Thunder or thundering Angel, come
all at once. And therefore, by the tenth Proposition they began in anno Christi
1541. For confirmation hereof, after the end of the sixth Trumpet, completed in
the end of the ninth chapter: in the beginning of the tenth Chapter, where the
seventh Trumpet appears to begin (the sixth being newly ended) ye shall
find there declared, how Christ proffereth the open book, and manifest
doctrine of the Evangel, and then immediately that very time, while as Christ
by his Ministers, preached and proclaimed out that manifest word, as with the
mighty voice of a Lion: incontinent (I say) that very time (verse 3.) the
seven thunders began to utter their voice: And so the beginning of the voice of
the seven thunders, or voice of the first thundering Angel comes at once
with the completing of the sixth trumpet, and beginning of the seventh; although
though the very latter blast of the seventh Trumpet be not then come.

13 PROPOSITION Every one of the first three thundering Angels contains a
Iubelee, and then the last four al at once compleateth the day of judgment.
THE first part of this proposition, is at the command of the Angel in Dan.
12.9 Apoc. 10.4
Daniel, and in the Revelation so sealed and closed, that be no part of those
textes may it be gathered, how long every thunder or Angel of the great
harvest does follow after other: yet after the custom, both of the Levites and
Prophets, who divide all great dates by Iubelees: and small dates by weeks
of years, we judge most apparently, this last age to be divided by Iubelees:
and so every thunder or Angel of these three, that are said in the text (cap.
14 ver. 6.8. and 9.) to preceede Gods great harvest, to contain 49. years,
beginning the first (by the former proposition) at the year of Christ, 1541.
who verse. 6. and 7.) preached his everlasting Euangell to the year of God,
1590. Which year, begins the second thundering Angel (verse 8.) and
continues proclaiming the final decay and fall of Babylon, to the year of
Christ 1639. Which year, the third thundering Angel begins, who (verse
9.) is styled the third Angel, and he continues exhorting and threatening
these of the last dregs of the Antichrist to repentance, to the year of
Christ, 1688 Where the fourth thundering Angel, even Christ himself (v. 14.
and 16) enters actually unto his great harvest, to gather up his elect, at the
warning of the fifth Angel, even Gods holy spirit (verse 15) Like as
contrarily, the sixth thundering Angel, executer of Gods fiery and fierce
wrath (mentioned v. 17. and 19) is admonished and warned (v. 18) by the seventh
angel co^mander thereof, to cut down and tread out the vines of the earth, in
the winepresse of Gods wrath: And so by these last four Angels or Thunders (to
wit, by Christ himself, and by his whole ministering Angels, under the figure
of these last Angels) all the whole great day of Gods harvest, and latter
judgment is accomplished.

14. PROPOSITION. The day of Gods judgment appears to fall betwixt the years
of Christ, 1688. and 1700.
Mar. 13, 32
ALthough it be said in Mark, that the day of judgment and hour thereof, none
does know: yea, not the Son, but the father only: yea let none be so base, of
judgment as to conclude thereby, that the year or age thereof, is also
unknown to Christ, or unable to be known any ways to his servants; by reason,
that first in that same part of Mark, Christ lets us not only see, that he
knew the age and years, near the which that day should fall, but also to the
effect, that we may likewise foreknow the same, he gives us diverse indices and
foretokens, which he could not, nor would not have forewarned, if he had bin
utterly ignorant of the time thereof, or yet had minded that we should never
have foreknowne the age, and appearant years thereof, although the precise day
and hour be only known to God. Secondly, although the Spirit of God has
hitherto concealed these mysteries from them whom the knowledge thereof might
have endammaged: yet that proves not, that the same shall be hid from us,
to whom the knowledge thereof might bring repentance and amendment: for as the
foreknowledg of death, to him that were to live long, might make the foreknower
negligent of his duty to God, and careful to provide inordinately for his
long life here: Wherethrough God has made the hour of death uncertain till it
approach: Even so, if the foreknowledg of the latter day had bin granted to men
any ways long before it come, that long assured continuance of the world,
foreknowne by them so long before, had made them to become more careful per
fas and nefas: for their families and posterities, that were long to stand,
than for that heavenly kingdom, that was long to be delayed. And therefore,
was that mystery justly by the providence of God closed from our
predecessors: but contrarily, so soon as that day begins to approach, God
by his Scriptures, shall make the age and years thereof to be manifested, as a
spur in his mercy, to move the elected sinners to repentance, and a
testimony in Gods justice, against the hard hearted misbeleeuers, continuing
in sin. Thirdly, and for confirmation of the former, Christ testifies, that
his coming shall be lik unto the flood of Noah, before the which, Mat. 24, 37.
the world being admonished, both by Noah's preching, and by the visible
building of the Arc, would not the more repent, nor amend their lives, till
unawares they were all destroyed: and is God now otherwise tha^ he has bin? 1.
Reg. 15 29
Is he (says the scripture) a man that he shall repent that now, which he did
then, and forbear the like? Nay, but contrarily, he shall make his own to be
forseene of this time, as well as of that time, seeing it is now as necessary,
that Gods Ministers exhort us to repe^ta^ce of that coldness of charity, and al
other vices that abound in this last age, and to terrify us with the certain
and assured approaching of the latter day, and destruction of the world by
fire, as well as the longsome building of the Ark, the deeds, gesture, and
apparent preaching of Noah, Genesis 6 3 1. pet, 3.19
was a forewarning 120. years to the old world, that for their unlawful lusts,
and other their horrible vices, they should be destroyed by water. Fourthlie,
that the years or age of the latter day is not unknown to Christ, nor ever
unsearchable to his servants, is certain by Daniell, to whom, although it is
said, Vade Daniel, Dan. 12.9
quia clausi sunt signatique sermones hi: Got thy way Daniel, for these
words are closed and sealed: As to the Apostles, Non est vestrum scire
tempora: It is not for you to know the times, Act, 1, 7
for that their time was far from the latter day: yet, says Daniel of the time
of revelation, Dan 12, 4.
Signa librum ad tempus statutum, multi pertransibunt, and multiplex erit
s^ientia, Seal the book till the appointed time, many shall go to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased: meaning, when as the due time begins to
approach, these dates shall be known, for knowledge shall then abound. And again
he says, Impie agent impii, Dan. 12.10
neque intelligent omnes impii, porro docti intelligent. The wicked shall do
wickedlie, and none of the wicked shall have understanding, but the wise shall
understand. Fiftlie, this age or apparent years of the latter day, are neither
unsearchable to Christ's servants, nor unknown to himself, seeing it is
evident, that the Devils have a certain foreknowledge thereof, in that they
said to Christ, Venisti huc, ante tempus torquere nos? Art thou come hither,
Mat. 8.29
to torment us before the time? meaning, that although they are continually
reserved in fear and dread, yet (as Peter and Jude testify) their chief
torment is not until the latter day, 2. pet. 2.4 Jude. 7
which they knew, was not to be at that time. Again, it is said in the
Revelation, Laetamini coeli, etc. Vae autem terrae and mari, Apoc. 12.12
quia descendit Diabolus ad vos, habens iram magnam, sciens quod modicu^ tempus
habet. Therefore, rejoice ye heavens, etc. and woe to the inhabitants of the
earth, and of the sea, for the devil is come down unto you, which has great
wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. So then, seeing the Devil has
great wrath in the latter days, and does know that his time is short, shall we
say, that Christ shall be ignorant of that, which the Devil does know.
Sixtlie, to what effect were the Prophecies of Daniel, and of the Revelation
given to the Church of God, and so many dates of years; and circumstances of
time, foreshewing the latter day, contained therintil, if God had appointed the
same to be never known or understood before that day come. Therefore, assuring
our selves, that all these Prophecies of the latter day shall be known and
manifested to Gods Church, before Christ come to judgment: let us confer al
these prophecies and prophetical figures thereof together, and we shall find
them come so near to one time, that verily the matter is wonderful. And
first (beginning at the Symbol of the the Sabbath) it is thought by the most
learned, that the six days of labor, weekly observed, does mean and bear the
symbol of 6000. years, that mankind shall endure the travels and cares of
this world: and that is confirmed by Peter, who speking of the day of judgment,
2. Pet. 3, 8
notes, that a thousand years shall be as one day in Gods sight: and a day as a
thousand years: And so consequently, the six days of work, to represent
six thousand years: after the which six thousand years of worldly travels
and cares, then shall come our aeternal Sabbath and rest, in the glory of
heaven, signified by the seventh days rest: For that truly, there is no
institution appointed by God to Moses, which (besides the civil commodity)
had not also a spiritual figure: And sure it is, that no figure appears more
consonant with these six days of work, and seventh day of rest, than the
present miseries of this world, and aeternall Sabbath hereafter. Secondly,
and agreeable with the former, there is a sentence of the house of Elias
reserved in all ages, bearing these words: The world shall stand six thousand
years, and then it shall be consumed by fire: two thousand years void or
without law, two thousand years under the law: and two thousand years shall
be the days of the Messiah: And for our offenses, which shall be many and
great, shall these years lack which shall lack. Thus far says Elias: Now,
the term of these 6000. years does expire, about the 2000. year of Christ,
which term, both by the said saying of Elias, and by Christ's own saying in
Mat, appears to be shortened. And therefore, thirdly, Mat. 24.22 Dan. 12
by Daniel we shall approach nerer that term: for he in his 12. cap. entreating
both of the first resurrection (which is the resurrection from the
Antichristian errors) and of the second resurrection, which is the general
resurrection from the dead: such an Angel, as afterward appears to John (Reu.
10) teaching him concerning the latter day, Ap. 10.5.6.7.
does here appear to Daniel, swearing solemnly a term of prophetical days, to
every one of those questions, doubted of by the Prophet: of which, the
greatest term is expressed to be 1335. prophetical days, which (by the 1.
proposition) means 1335. years, Dan. 12.11.
whose beginning are determined in these words, And from the time that the
daily sacrifice shall cease, and the abomination put to desolation (or made
desolat) shall be 1290. days: blessed is he that awaiteth and abides to the
1335 day. As if he would say, from that time that both the Jewish daily
Sacrifice shall utterly cease, and the abominable rites of the Gentiles be
abolished, to the co^pleating of the great resurrection from the Antichristian
errors, and utter decay of his kingdom, shall be 1290 years, and then blessed
shall he be that abides and remains constant in the small time, that shall be
betwixt that and the latter day, which shall fall in the 1335 year, from the
taking away of the said Jewish ceremonies, and Gentiles superstitions. But so
it is, that these were neither actually taken away by Christ's passion, neither
in the destruction of Jerusalem, neither other ways else, till miraculouslie in
the days of Julian the Apostate, Anno Christi 365. This Apostate having in
despite of Christ, ordained the Jews to build up and repair their Temple of
Jerusalem on the one part, and on the other part, having sent his Legates to
offer Sacrifice in the chief Ethnic Temple of the Gentiles in Delphos, and to
consult with that Oracle of Apollo there, God sent his thu^der from above,
Cation, Chron, lib. 3
and earthquake from beneath, and thereby overwhelmed both those chief Temples
about one time, so utterly, that to this day all the Jewish daily Sacrifice
of the one, and the abominable Ethnic superstitions of the other, have
ceased, and been put to utter confusion and desolation. But if (after the
opinion of some learned men) this text does mean in the original Hebrew, not
the Abomination to be put in Desolation, but contrarily, a desolating and
wasting Abomination to be set up; together also, with the taking away of the
former and foresaid daily Sacrifice: In this case appearinglie, the same date
is not the less established: for who was a more horrible and wasting
Abomination, than was the foresaid Julian, that blood-thirstie Apostate,
together, with his detestable, idolatrous and magical decrees, which publicly
he erected and set up, to bring Christianisme to utter desolation. So that
howsoever this Abomination be expounded, either passiuely, to be made
desolate; as the Gentiles chief abominable and idolatrous Oracle of Apollo at
that time was made desolate, or actiuelie, that the Abomination should make a
wasting or desolation, and that that wasting Abhominatio^ should be then
erected, as the abominable Tyrant and Apostate Julian was promoted Emperor,
and his cruel decrees of persecution at that time set out: Even always in
that very same 365. year, all the foresaid accidents occurred: for, in that
one year both first the foundations of the Jewish Temple of daily Sacrifice:
as secondly (in the passive sense) the said Temple of the Ethnickes
Abominations in Delphos, were by thunder and earthquake both destroyed: as
thirdly (in the active sense) that abominable Julian, and his decrees for
desolating and devouring Gods servants, were then set up. Therefore, from this
year of Christ 365. we are commanded to reckon 1335. years, which falls in
An. 1700. And then (says Daniel verse. 6) shall be the end of all wonders, even
the wondrous and great day of the Lord: But yet, as this Prophecy does
abridge the foresaid prophecy of Elias, so also Christ's foresaid saying in
Matthew, that came after this Prophecy, Mat, 24, 22,
does appara^tly abridge somewhat of this time: for the which, now we proceed to
the last Prophecy in the Reuelat. Fourthlie therefore, it is reasoned in the
former proposition, that every thundering Angel of three, contained 49.
years, and then comes the great day of the Lord: and by the 12. Proposition,
the first thundering Angel, began in An. 1541. to which ad thrice 49. years,
which is 147. years: and so by that account, the latter day will fall in An.
Christi 1688. Wherefore, appearinglie betwixt this 1688. year, according to the
Revelation, and the 1700 year, according to Daniel, the said latter day should
fall. And for further confirmation hereof, there is a number put in the end of
the 14. chap. of the Revelation, which appears to be a date of the latter day:
for that chapter altogether speaks of the Lords great harvest, and latter
judgment. There (says John) The blood came out of the Wine Press unto the
Horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred stades or courses:
as if appearinglie, he would mean metaphoricallie, as wine may be thought to
flow from the press, or the blood of slain men in a field, to ascend to the
horse bridles: so, aeternallie shall the torment of the wicked ascend, after
that a thousand and six hundred years be accomplished: For, these Stades
agree well to mean years, seeing a stade is that race or course, that one may
be thought to run with one breath, before he begin to renew his breath again:
as one year is that race or course, that the Sun makes in a circuit, before
he begin to renew his circuit again. Now, counting therefore, a thousand
and six hundredth years, from the time that this was written, which was about
the 97. year of Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicle says, or in the end of
the reign of Domitian, as Irenaeus says, which was in Anno Christi 99. The end
of the count shall fall about the year of Christ 1697. or the year 1699.
which is betwixt the said term 1688. and 1700. And so the difference of these
dates is but small, and if the time of histories were surely written and
observed, it may be thought, that the difference would be either less, or
utterly nothing at all.

15. PROPOSITION The 42. months, Dan. 7 25. Dan. 12 7 Ap. 11, 12 Apoc, 13.
a thousand two hundred and threescore prophetical days, three great days
and a half, and a time, times, and a half a time mentioned in Daniel, and in
the Revelation, are all one date.
Every month among the Graecians, contained thirty days preciselie, lib. de
emend. temp.
as witnesses Josephus Scaliger, and so consequently, forty two months
are aequall to a thousand two hundred and threescore days. Also, three great
days and an half, are aequal to them for these reasons. First, by reckoning,
because three days and an half, after the prophetical manner (proved in the
first proposition) is three years and an half: and then counting (after the
Grecian manner) twelve months in the year, and thirty days in every
month, these three years and a half (called in the text, three days and a
half) will be forty two months, or a thousand, two hundred and threescore
days just. Secondly, they must be all one, for that in purpose they agree:
for it is said, that the Antichristian beast, Apoc. 11.7.
at his rising, slew the two Witnesses of God (which hereafter are proved to
be the two Testame^ts) and their dead carcases (or naked letter) lay three
days and an half, and then were they revived, and at that time of their
reuiving, come a great decay on the Antichristian city: So that both by this
text, and other good reasons, it appears that these Witnesses of Gods truth,
lay dead and silent, and their testimony neither buried in our breasts, nor
ingraued in our hearts, during all the days of the Antichrist. And so the time
of their lying dead, and the time of the Antichrists reign to be all one
date. Now, the time that they lay dead, is called three days and an half, and
the time that the Antichrist reigned, and oppressed Gods Church, is called 42
months: wherefore, three great days and an half, Apoc. 11.2 Apoc. 13.5
are all one with 42. months, or 1260. days: It rests then, to prove a
time, times, and half a time, to be likewise aequall to them, which must needs
be for these reasons. First, because it is said, (Cap. 12.6.) that the Woman
(which hereafter is proved to signify the Church of Christ) fled into the
wilderness, where she was nourished 1260. days: And again (verse. 14) it is
said, that she fled away in the wilderness, where she was nourished for a
time, times, and half a time. So then, a time, times, and half a time, and
1260. days must be both one. Secondly, this time, times, and half a time,
or three times and an half, correspondent with the foresaid three great days
and an half, are aequall to 1260. days for this cause. A time taken simply
and without figure, means a year, as in Daniel, Nebucadnetzars seven times
that he remained a beast, Dan, 4.13 20.29
are taken for seven years: Then three times and an half, are three years
and an half, which being counted, will make 42. months or 1260 days: And so
finally, for conclusion, seeing the reign of the Antichrist, his blaspheming
of God, and oppression of Gods Saints, the treading of spiritual Jerusalem
under feet, the prophesying of Gods witness unto the true and visible Church
in humble manner, and their lying dead and silent, unto the outward, visible
pretended Church. And the flying of the Spouse and Church of Christ to the
wilderness, and becoming invisible, by matters concurrent and adjunct, such
as apparantlie must at one time begin together, continue together, and end
together. Therefore, most necessarily the dates that the text attributes to
their continuance, to wit, 42. months, 1260. prophetical days, three great
days and an half, and a time, times, and half a time, must be all one date.

16 PROPOSITION. The 42. months, 1260 prophetical days, three great days
and a half: And a time, times and half a time, signifies every one of them,
1260 Iuliane years.
Seeing these dates are proved by the former proposition, to be aequall,
therefore necessarily what one is, al is, then we com to these 1260 days,
which we say, must needs be either understood so many natural days, or else so
many prophetical days, which are proved to be years in the first
proposition: But natural or common days they can not be, for these causes.
First, when the prophets in number, or great dates mean of natural days, they
use to adjoin the definition thereof, by morning and evening, defined in Gene.
chap. 1. as Daniel does chap. 8. verse. 14. and 26. But that is not done here,
this being a prophecy: and therefore, these are not natural and common days,
but consequently, are prophetical days. Secondly, it is not apparent, that
so many Prophets would have written so much: for only a reign of 1260 of
common days, which is but three year and a half, seeing many cruel
tyrants and heretical Emperors, that did reign longer over Gods Church,
were not prophesied of in particular, as Nero, Domitian, and others. Thirdly,
if these were natural and common days, then should the Antichrist reign,
but 1260. common days, which is three year and an half: but contrarily, it
is certain, by the Revelation cap. 20.4.5. that the Antichristian beast had
authority, and did reign at the least a thousand years, martyring the
saints of God, and persecuting them that reverenced not him and his mark,
etc. but spirituallie reigned, and lived as true Christians these thousand
years, and that the rest of the people should lie dead and drunken in his
errors, until the end of these thousand years: and should not* while then,
begin to rise in the first resurrection, which is, to rise from their errors.
So then consequently, these days (which exceed 1000. years) cannot be 1260.
of common days, but 1260. prophetical days, which are proved by the first
proposition to be 1260. years: and so apparantlie, the Antichrist reigning
mightily 1000. years: the re^nant, 260. years ar attributed to the falling and
decreasing of his kingdom, making thereby his whole reign 1260 years, to the
which, seeing by the former proposition, three great days and an half, or
three times and an half is aequall, it must needs be, that every great day,
or every time, must not simply signify a common year, as Nebucadnetzars times
did, but must signify a prophetical time, or year, Dan, 4.13 20.29
proved by the first proposition to be a year of years, or 360. years
precisely. For confirmation, whereof, it is to be understood, that the first
makers of times, to wit the Chaldaeans, Graecians and Astrologes in their
directions do agree with this description of time: for they devide the
Equinoctial into 360. degrees, and attribute a year for every degree of their
directions, whereby the whole time of the great revolution or direction of the
whole Equinoctial, will be 360 years: and conseque^tlie, three of these great
times and a half, or three times and a half, revoluing of the whole
Equinoctial, will contain 1260. years. And so Daniel, writing in the Chaldee
tongue to the Chaldaeans, and S. John also writing in the greek tongue to the
Graecians, observed their manner of counting times, as being a vulgar count to
them. But now, although it is prooved, these dates to be 1260. years: yet,
forasmuch as 1260. of Grecian years, are but 1242. Julian years, and 8.
months, or there about: and 1260. Julian years, are 1277. and an half of
Grecian years, making thereby, near 18. years of difference. It rests
therefore, to prove what kind of years these be. These (we say) ar common
Julian years, for two causes: First, although the Grecian common year
contained but 12. months, and 30. days in every month, yet do they adjoin
certain intercalar days, which does make every year overhed to co^tain 12.
months, five days and a quarter, which is 365. days and a quarter; and so
consequently, ar ouerhead equal with our common Julian year. Secondly, among
the Hebrew Prophets, where a day is taken for a year, although the common year
contain but 12. months, yet almost every third year, they adjoined an
intercalar month, by dobling the month Adar, which made their Hebrew years
ouerhead aequall also with our Julian years, as testifies Ios. Scal. de emend.
temporum. Hitherto are the difficulties of dates resolved: now follows the
resolution of the principal terms and matter.

17. PROPOSITION. The description of the throne of God in the fourth chapter,
is not the description of the majesty of God in heaven, but of his true
religion, wherein he is authorized and sits in the throne among his holy elect
on earth.
BEcause it is said in the text, that this throne is set in heaven: therefore,
some thinks this to be a vision of Gods glory in heaven, but that can no ways
be for these reasons. First, because heaven, for the most part prophetically,
is taken for Gods heavenly Elect or true Church upon earth. Secondly, because
it were superfluous curiosity for us to know any farther of Gods heavenly
estate, and glory of his majesty, than the simple points of our salvation.
Thirdly, because the Scripture testifies, that no pen can describe, nor wit
comprehend, the glory of Gods majesty in heaven. Fourthly, because the four
Beasts and 24. Elders, who here are coherent members of his throne, confesses
them selves to Apoc, 5, 9, 10
reign upon earth, and that Christ has redeemed the^ with his blood. Fifthly,
because it is said, that among them, even among these four beasts, arose a
Apoc. 6. 6.
famine and dearth of Barley and Wheat. Therefore, this throne can not be Gods
throne in heaven, but must needs be his throne upon earth among his heavenly
elect here: and consequently, are either his Church or true religion: but his
Church is not properly his throne and seat, but rather are these over whom
he sits. Therefore, this throne must needs be his truth and true religion,
wherein he sits, abides, and making his residence, therein is authorized
and inthronized here upon earth, among his heavenly elect servants.

18 PROPOSITION. The 24. Elders, are the 24. books of the old Testament, and
(metonymice) all the true professors thereof.
THese 24. elders, being proved by the former proposition to be upon earth,
because that the glory of the whole throne (whereof they are one coherent part)
is upon earth, we say now farther, that they do represent the 24 books of the
old testament for these reasons. First, ab officio, because these ancients are
said in the Ap. 4, 10.11
text, to glorify God day and night, and what thing in earth is God more
glorified by, tha^ by his scriptures and holy writings? whereof these be the
first. Secondly, because in name they do agree, for these 24. ar called the
ancients, so are these 24. books called the old Testament. Thirdly in number
they do agree, for these ancients ar 24. so there be 24. authentik books of
the old Testament no minate by Jerome, in Prologo galeato. Fifthly, and
finally, what soever is spoken in the Revelation, in name and behalf of any of
the 24 Elders: The same shall ye find specially written in one of these 24.
books of the old Testament, as particularly shall be noted in their dew place
of our principal discourse. As to the second part of this proposition, that
under the name of these 24. books, both the true writers and true professors
thereof be metonymice included, it is certain, otherways they could not say,
that Christ has redeemed them, Ap. 5 9, 10
and that they reign upon earth.

19 PROPOSITION. The four beasts are the four Evangelles with all the true
writers and professors thereof.
THat these four beasts are on earth, is also proved by the 17. proposition, in
respect the glory of the whole throne (whereof they are one coherent part) is
upon earth. We say now farther, that they do represent the four Euangelles for
these reasons. First ab officio, for that these four beasts does here decore
the throne, and never Apoc, 4.8
ceased from praising God day and night. And what thing on earth does more
adorn Gods true throne and Christian religion, then does these four
Euangelles and their true professors, who never cease from praising God
continually? Secondly, they agree in number, for there be four beasts; so
are there four Evangelles. Thirdly, in their particular and distinct titles or
faces, they agree, having consideration of the custom of the ancients, that
used for to entitle the books according to the beginning thereof, as in
Hebrew, Genesis is called Bereschith, because it begins Bereschith bara
Elohim, etc. and such like other books: as we also entitle our book of laws,
Regiam Maiestatem, because it begins so. Then in comparison, the faces of
these Beasts, are compared to the titles or beginnings of these books:
because, as men or beasts are readiliest known and distinguished by their
faces: so are books by their titles, and beginninges. And to come in
particular; like as in the Revelation, the Beasts, and in Ezechiel, their faces
were, one like a man, another like a Lion, the third like a Bullock, the
fourth like an Eagle. So, of these four Evangelists, Matthew begins his first
face or leaf, at the Genealogy of Christ, as he is a man: and Mark begins his
first face or leaf at the voice, crying (like a roaring Lion) in the
wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, etc. And Luke begins his first
face or leaf, at Zacharias offering incense (as it were a Bullock) at the
alter. And John begins his first face, or leaf, at the high and divine essence
of Christ's God head, flying so high in his style, that he is compared to an
Eagle. Fourthlie, in their order of prioritie, according as they first wrote,
they agree with Ezechiels order, where the first was a Man's face, that is
Matthew, who first of all wrote, and that in Hebrew. The second was a Lions
face, and that is Mark, who was the second that wrote, and that in greek. The
third in Ezechiel, is a Bullockes face, and that was Luke, who was the third
that wrote, and that in Greek. The fourth was the Eagles face, who is John,
that wrote the fourth Euangell, and that in Greek. And so the order of their
first editions, agrees preciselie with Ezechiel his order. Fiftlie, their order
of translation or edition in Greek, does agree with the order that here
Saint John (who wrote both in Greek, and to the Greek Churches) sets them
into: to wit, The Lion, Mark wrote first of all in Greek. The Bullock, Luke
wrote second in greek: Than was the man's face, that is, Matthewes Evangel,
translated in greek, who now is the third, and before was the first:
Afterward, last of all, the Eagle, John (as before) wrote the fourth Euangel.
And so correspondentlie, as Ezechiel, the hebrew Prophet, writing to the
Hebrews, prefers Matthewes hebrew Euangell, for that it was first written.
So Saint John, a Grecian Prophet, writing to the Graecians, spoke of
Matthewes greek Euangel, and sets it in the third order, for that it came
after both Marks and Lukes. Sixtlie, the precise time of their first writing,
and occasion why they did write these four Euangelles, agrees with the
history and time of the four first Scales, where their first coming is
mentioned. For first, when the word of God passed out on the white horse in the
first seal, betwixt the year of Christ 29. and 36. then (says the text) one
of the four beasts said, come and see, etc. that is, Matthew the Apostle, who
came that time, and wrote his first Euangel in hebrew, exhibiting the same to
be seen of the Jews expressly, for converting the^, that Gods word of his new
covenant might victoriously go out among them, to conquer and overcome (as
says the text) Then, in the second seal, when S. Steven and S. James were
martyred, and great persecution rose against the Church of God, viz. betwixt
the 36. and 43. year of Christ, then (says the text) the second Beast says,
Come and see: that is, the second Euangel was at that time set forth by Mark,
to be seen and read, in comfort of the afflicted Church. Afterward, in the
third seal, when hunger and dearth arose, betwixt the 43. and 50. year of
Christ, the third Beast says, Come and see, and this is Luke, whose Euangell
came to light at that time, and was set forth to be seen, and also writes of
the same dearth, in his book of the Acts of the Apostles. Lastly, Act, 11.28
in the fourth seal, when deadly heresies arose against the Divinity of
Christ, betwixt the 50. and 57. year of Christ. Then (says the text) came the
fourth Beast: and so indeed at that time did John write the fourth Euangell,
beginning at the description of Christ's Divinity, expreslie against the said
Heretics. Seventhly, these four Beasts wings, eyes, and all their other tokens
and circumstances, contained both in Ezechiels Prophecy, and here in the
Revelation, does so properly agree with the four Evangelists, that they
cannot be so conveniently attributed to any other, as shall be showed at
length in the principal Treatise. Eightlie, it appears by Hierome and others
learned, that these indices and tokens, so aptly agreeing to these four
Evangelists, and to their faces, have confirmed the ancient Fathers of the
Church, both to receive these four Euangelles true and certain, as also to
repel many false Euangelles, written in the name of Thomas, Matthias,
Bartholomaeus, and other Apostles. Also the Evangels of Basilides, Luke 1.1
Apelles, and Nicodemus. For Luke testifies, that many pretended to write
Euangelles. Then certainly, seeing there could not, nor cannot redounde to the
Church of God so great a commodity, by interpreting these four Beasts any
other ways, we have great occasion, by all these aforesaid reasons, to repose
us also upon this interpretation. As to the second part of this proposition,
that under the name of these four Beasts or four Euangels, both the writers
and the professors thereof are metonymice included: it is certain, otherwise
(as in the discourse of the former proposition is declared) they could not say,
that Christ has redeemed them, or yet that there arose Apoc. 5.9. Apoc. 6 6
famine among them, for neither can that redemption, nor such famine properly
convene to any but to men.

20 PROPOSITION. Gods Temple, although in heaven, is also taken for his holy
Church among his heavenly Elect upon earth, and metonymice for the whole
contents thereof.
IN figurative speakings, heaven is taken for Gods holy Elect upon earth,
whom he has preordained to inherit heaven, as is already showed by the 17.
proposition, where, by the throne of God in heaven, is meaned his truth and
true religion in earth among his heavenly Elect here: So in this place also we
say, that Gods Temple in heaven, is more properly his Church among his
heavenly Elect upon earth, than among the glorified bodies in heaven: for that
glorified number, called the Apo. 21.22.
new Jerusalem, ar said properly, to have no distinct Temple among them, for
John says thereof, Et templum non vidi in ea, etc. I saw no temple therein,
etc. So, no Temple being there, this Temple properly must be among Gods
heavenly Elect upon earth, and consequently his holy and true Church. As to
the second part of this proposition, it agrees very well with Christ's
speaking, saying of the material Temple, Qui jurat in altari, Matthew. 23 20.21.
jurat in eo and in omnibus qui super illud sunt, and quicunque iur auerit in
templo, iur at in illo et in eo qui habitat in ipso: Whosoever swears by the
altar, swears by it and by all things upon it, and whosoever swears by the
Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells in it. Even so likewise, under
the name of this spiritual Temple, is not only meant Gods true Church among
his heavenly Elect upon earth, but also is meaned metonymice the whole
contents thereof, to wit, Gods truth and true religion; yea, (although
improperly) even the very Majesty of God himself, because he dwells in
his Church, and they in him: for proof whereof, though John says first, I saw
no temple therein, because there is no distinct Church properly, where all is
the Church, yet does ^e subjoyne immediately, Dominus enim Deus omnipotens
templum eorum est and Agnus: For the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb are the
temple of it: calling the Deity to be their Church that are glorified, or
rather to them in stead of a Church; although more properly the Deity is the
thing contemplate, not the Temple it self. From this Temple in this sense, Ap.
14.15.17.
that is from the majesty of God, ar said to go out the last Angels of Gods
great harvest and latter judgment, to gather in his Elect, and to destroy the
wicked. And so the Temple of God in heaven, is properly taken for his
heave^lie elect Church upon earth, and for their true doctrine, profession, and
religion: yea, and (although improperlie) even for the Deity it self.
Hereupon follows this corollar, agreeable with all the former senses: that
when this Temple is said to be open, then it means Gods true Church to be
visible, his truth and true religion preached and opened up; and finally, the
Majesty of God to be known, and revealed by that preaching of his truth. And
when again, that Temple is closed or filled with fume, it signifies Gods true
Church to lurk, and become invisible, his truth, and true religion, and
knowledge of the Deity and divine Majesty to be obscured, darkened, and
closed up. As in confirmation hereof, it is said, Apo, 15.5.8
That the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony was open in heaven, and
the seven Angels of the last plagues come out of the Temple, and afterward
no man was able to enter into the Temple again till these seven plagues were
fulfilled: which agrees preciselie with the event after all the former senses,
to wit, that the true Christian Churches, professors of Christ his true
testimony, were visible and patent, their true doctrine and Christian religion
opened up, and the majesty of God thereby made known, and manifested in the
days of the Apostles: and afterward, upon neglecting their testimony, and
upon the contempt of the manifestation and opening up thereof, there proceeded
all the whole plagues of the seven last ages, during the which, the fume of
Gods wrath was so great, that by the Antichrist he made his true Church lurk
and become invisible, and his truth and true religion, and knowledge of the
divinity to be obscured and darkened: so that none might visiblie enter or
have access to the knowledge thereof, til by the seventh and last plague, that
the Antichrists kingdom began to fall, and then after 1260. years darkness,
was that true Temple of God opened and made manifest, as is plainly said in
the Apoc. 11.19
seventh Trumpet or age. So then, this Temple, the opening closing, and opening
again thereof, agrees so well with the Ecclesiastical history in all points
after the former senses, that we must conclude, by this Temple of God in
heaven, to be meaned his holy Church among his heavenly elect upon earth,
with the whole contents and pertinents thereof, to wit, his truth, true
religion, and (after a manner) the very Deity it self.

21 PROPOSITION. The two witnesses mentioned (Reave. 11) are the two Testame^ts,
and (metonymice) the whole true professors thereof.
THis is proved by their number, name, and office, and by the whole
circumstances of the text. First, by their number, they are two witnesses: so
are they two Testaments. Secondly, by their name they are called Witnesses: so
in that language of Latin, wherein they have been used most, these 1200. years
and more, they are called Testamenta from the word Testis, which is to say a
Witness, as being witness of Gods will: all other doubtful testimonies of men
being refused, as testifies Christ, saying, Ioh, 5, 34, 39
I receive not the testimony of men, etc. But afterward he says, Search
the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me. Thirdly, concerning
their office, (as Olives) they anoint us Kings and Priests to God: And (as
Lanterns) they illuminate us with knowledge of the true way of salvation. So
that who (as the text says) that would pervert them, God shall consume him
with the aeternall fire of hell; therefore, it is said, Omnis sermo Dei-ignitus,
pro, 30, 5
and clypeus est sperantibus in se, ne addas quidquam verbis illius: Every
word of God is fiery, and he is a shield to those that trust in him, put
nothing unto his words. Lastly, the whole circumstances of the text (which
here for brevity are omitted, and at amplified in the principal Treatise) do
so harmonicallie agree with these two Testaments, that necessarily, they be
the two Witnesses here made mention of. As concerning the witnessing of men,
because it is said, Omnis homo mendax: Every man is a liar: psalm. 116, 11 Rom,
3, 4, Ioh, 5.34
And again, Non ab homine testimonium accipio: I receive not the record of
man: Therefore, no men are simply to be accepted in place of these Witnesses.
Yet notwithstanding, so far as men do profess these Testamentes, and do
purely preach the simple doctrine thereof, in that case these men, are
metonymice included under these Testamentes, for that their word is not their
own word, but the word of these two Testaments.

22 PROPOSITION. The Woman clad with the Sun (chap. 12.) is the true Church
of God.
THis is proved; first, by the Song of Solomon, where Solomon, bearing the
figure of Christ, who descended of him: his beloved Woman and Spouse,
throughout all that Canticle bears the figure of Christ's Church. Secondly,
spiritual Jerusalem, which is Christ's Church by diverse Scriptures, is also
called Christ's Spouse in the Revelation. Apo. 21. Ephesians. 5^ 23
Thirdly, bodily marriage, is by Sanct Paul called a Symbol, and a Sacrament
of the union of Christ and his Church: whereby the husband represents
Christ, and the Woman espoused represents the Church. Fourthlie, in the whole
Scriptures, idolatry being called spiritual whordome, necessarily the true
worshipping of God is represented by perfect Spousage, and the true Church that
worshippeth him, is his Spouse, and so the Church of God is figured by a Woman.
Last of all, the whole tokens of this Woman, contained in the text so viuelie
and perfectly agree with Christ's Church (as is declared in the principal
treatise) that necessarily we must conclude, this Woman to mean the true
Church of God.

23 PROPOSITION. The Whore, Apoc. 14, 16, 17.18 Cap. 19.
who in the Revelation is styled spiritual Babylon, is not reallie Babylon,
but the very present City of Rome.
IN the former proposition was described the holy Spouse of Christ, here is to
be described the filthy Whore of Satan, there that Lady, who is adorned
with the Sun, Stars, and heavenly virtues: here that Adultresse, who
glories in gold, silver, precious stones, and worldly pleasures: there she,
who is persecuted by the Dragon, here she unto whom the Dragon does give
authority: There she, who is chaced into the wilderness, and has no lodge to
hide her in; here she who impireth above all people, and is the Metropolitan
city of the world. And finally, seeing in all things this Whore, or whoorish
Babylon, is contrarious to Christ's holy Spouse, let us, and all Christians
try her out, as our detestable and deadly enemy, and see what Babylon she
is. We say then, that this Babylon, is not that real Babylon of Chaldee, but
Rome, for these reasons. First, for that this Babylon is called Apoc, 17, 5
mysterium Babylon, that is to say, mystical or figurative Babylon: Therefore,
it is not Babylon it self in Chaldee. Secondly, that old Babylon in Chaldee
was destroyed long before Sa^ct John wrote this, as was prophesied by Esaias, by
Ieremic, and by David, and never rose to authority: But this Babylon, even
when Sanct John wrote, reigned over the Esa, 1^, 17 Ier 51, 11 psalm 136 Apoc,
17, 18
Kings of the earth: Therefore, it is not old Babylon, but means Rome,
which at that time, and a thousand and four hundred years after that, had
Empire over the whole earth. Thirdly, this mystical Babylon, is said by the
text, to Rome, Apoc. 17.9.
which is called Septicollis, as Virgil testifies, saying, Septemque una sibi
muro circumdedit arces: Virgil, lib. 2 Geor, and lib. 6. aeneid.

Within the wales of that city, contained ar seven hills hie.


And Propertius says, Septem urbs alta iugis, toti quae praesidet orbi,
On hills seven that city stands, that has empire above al lands.


Again, Sanct part, 2, tra. 5, Epist, 59 and part, 3, tract, 8, Epist. 30
Jerome libro Epistolarum, in diverse places approoueth the same: and Eutropius
in his History, and Publius Victor de descriptione vrbis Romae, and diverse
other do name these seven hills, this way, as Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus
(otherwise called Capitolinus) Aventinus, Quirinalis, Viminalis, and
Esquilinus. Fourthlie, because the manner of Families, Kings, and Kingdoms,
is to entitle themselves by the name of the first Conquerours, or most notable
persons, as the whole Roman Emperors were called Caesares, according to the
name of the first Emperor Julius Caesar. So Rome having obtained the
Monarchy over the whole kingdoms of the earth, whereof the Babylonians were
the first Conquerours, therefore, justly is called Babylon, as succeding in
her place. Fiftlie, per Icona, scu for that in idolatry, pride, covetousness,
and exceeding cruelty against the Sanctes of God, Rome was nothing inferior
to Babylon. Sixtlie, because by use and custom of ancient Rome is very often
called Babylon, as by. Jerome, lib. Epistolar. part 2 trac^ 6. Epist, 80 ^
part. 2. tract 5. Epi. 9 8 part. 3. trac^ 8. Epist, 30
Also by Tertullian in his book against the Jews, and lib. 3. against
Marcion. And for final confirmation hereof, al they that would prove S. Peter
to have remained at Rome, say, that by Babylon in the end of the first Epistle
of Peter, is meant Rome, from whence he then wrote, as Jerome says, in his
Prologne upon Mark, in these words, Ec Petrus in Epistola prima sub nomine
Babylonis, figuraliter Romam significans: And Peter in: his first Epistle,
under the name of Babylon, figuratiuelie signifying Rome.

And so for assured certe^ty, this whorish and mystical Babylon. is verily
Rome. But some seeking sophistical subterfuges will say, that this Babylon
means old Rome, and not this present City of Rome, that now is, as though
both were not one, even builded both within one wall, and upon these self same
seven mountains: and finally, one self same town, both in name, seat, and
government, and in all things else, only that where one house was ruined,
destroyed, or burned by the Goths, and other enemies, another within the same
walls is builded up again. Of these then it is to be demanded, if old Rome
has been so destroyed, that it is not to be found, or that never inhabitant
has dwelt in it since that time, neither ever so much as a candle has shined
therein hitherto, as is prophesied of Babylon in the Revelation, chap. 18, But
the contrary being true: Therefore, it is not only this old Rome: but all
whollilie Rome that is called Babylon, and as yet, rests to be that way for
ever destroyed.

24 PROPOSITION. The great ten-horned beast, is the whole body of the Latin
Empire, whereof the Antichrist is a part.
FOr proof hereof, the most notable tokens assigned by the text to this
Beast, does only agree to the Latin or Roman Empire: Apoc. 17.18
For first (says the Text) the Woman that sat upon this Beast, is the great
City, that sits over the Kings of the earth: So the chief seat and city
of the Latin or Roman Empire, is that great city Rome, that had Empire over
all the kingdoms of the earth. Secondly, says Daniel, Dan. 7 17.
there shall four chief kingdoms arise upon earth, under the figure of four
beasts: Whereof (by plain interpretation he says) the fourth beast that had
these ten horns, Dan. 7.23
is the fourth kingdom of the earth: And so it is, that the first great
kingdom or Monarchy being of the Babylonians: The second, of the Medes and
Persians: The third, of the Graecians. The fourth and last, is certainly the
Monarchy of the Latins or Romans: and therefore, that fourth beast which
both there in Daniel, and here in John's Reuelatio, has ten horns, must
necessarily be the Roman or Latin Empire. Thirdly, this Beast, whereon the
said whoorish woman or Babylonical city sits, has seven heads, which the
text Apoc. 17 ^
interprets to be seven mountains: Even so Rome, the chief city or
Metropolitan seat of the Latin Empire, is set upon seven hills, nominated
and proved in the third reason of the former proposition. Fourthlie, there be
here seven kings (says the text) that is, seven sorts of royal gouernme^ts:
Apoc. 17.
for a King is often taken for a whole race of Governors of one sort, as in
Daniel cap. 7. So had Rome seven royal governments, to wit, Kings, Consulles,
Dictators, Trium vires, Tribuns, Emperors, and Popes: Of which (says the
text) five ar fallen, one is, and another is not yet come: Even so was it
indeed, that before S. John's days, those five governments, viz. the Kings,
Consulles, Dictators, Trium-uires, and Tribuns were past, and in his days
reigned the Emperors, and the Popes were not come to the government while
after his days. Fiftlie, (says the text) this Beast that Saint John did
see, was, and is not, and shall rise of low estate, and shall go into decay:
Was (says he) because the Roman Empire, and government of Emperors, was
before that time, that he wrote: Is not (says he) because the time wherein
he wrote, the Emperor Domitian was dead, and the Empire waked, for the next
Emperor Nerva Cocceius was not yet chosen, as appears by Irenaeus, who
says, that Saint John saw these visions, in the end of the reign of
Domitian. Then (says he) He shall rise of low estate: Even so arose there a
new Emperor, not of the noble ancient blood of Romans, but of base estate, to
wit, the said Nerva Cocceius, who was the first stranger, or Barbarian
Emperor: This (says he) shall go into decay: that is, shall go shortly
into decaie: for otherwise simply, all flesh must go at some time into
decay: And so was it indeed, that this Nerua goes shortly into decaie: For
he lived Emperor but one year, three months, and nine days, and then he
died. Again, the Beast (says that same text) Was, and is not, and yet is,
that is to say, there were Emperors before Saint John wrote, none when he
wrote, and yet when he wrote the Empire stood, and the government by Emperors
was vnabolished: for, incontinent vpstart Nerua, and many more Emperors after
him: so that the Empire might be said at that time, in a manner not to be, and
in a manner to be. Sixtlie (says the text) the Beast that was, and is nor, is
even the eight, and is one of the seven: and that means, that that royal
government of the Empire by Emperors, which was immediately before S. John
wrote, and vaked when he wrote, by the decease of Domitian, that same
government shall be the eight government, and was also one of the said seven
gouernmentes: and even so was it, that after the Roman Emperors (who was the
sixth government) were abolished, by the Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles, and
thereafter, Rome seventhly governed be the Popes, then eightlie, start up by
Charlemaign a new race again of Emperors, entitled of Germans and Romans.
So that evidently the Emperors were the eight estate that governed Rome, and
were also one of the former seven, even the sixth government thereof, as is
already said. Seuenthlie (says the text) one of these seven heads received a
deadly wound, and that deadly wound was healed: So the chief of the seven
governments of the Roman Empire, to wit the Estate of Emperors was cut off
and abolished by the Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles, and vaked from the days
of Augustulus, Anno Christi 475. until that Charlemaign came, in Anno 806. At
which time, the estate of Emperors was of new repaired, and wholly made up
again. Eightlie, this beast has ten crowned horns, that is, ten kings (says
the text) which when Saint John wrote, had not received their kingdoms, but
should receive their kingdom at an hour after the beast, and then (says he)
shall they give their power again to the Beast, and all at once shall make
war with the Lamb: but at length (says he) these shall hate and destroy that
harlot beast: Even so came it to pass of the Roman Empire, that long after S.
John's days, when that old Empire began to fall, the estate of Emperors to be
abolished, (as is said) immediately thereafter sprang thereof ten Christian
Kings, who again gave their power, assistance and fortification, to the next
Governors of the new Latin Empire, which was to the Pope, authorizing him, as
their supreme head, with whom they concurred, fighting against Christ, as
hereafter shall be showed: But at length shall these ten Christian Kings,
destroy that spiritual harlot and idolatrous Empire, as (praised be God)
England and Scotland, with some others have already begun. Ninthlie, that
beast is the Latin Empire, and the chief seat thereof is Rome: because in
the text, both the plain name of the Latin Empire is figuratively expressed,
and the figurative name of Rome is plainly expressed. As to the first, how
the plain name of the Latin Empire, which is (...), is figuratiuelie
expressed, read the 29. proposion following. Apoc. 17.5
As to the second, how the name of Babylon (which is plainly said to be the
figurative name, that was written in the Woman's forehead that sat on the
beast) is the perfect, certain and accustomed figurative name of that city
Rome, that sits over the Latin Empire, is most evident by the former
proposition. Finally, all the rest of the smaller circumstances of this
ten-horned beast, contained in the text, do so properly and fitly agree with
the Latin Empire (as in the principal treatise shall be found at length) that
we must necessarily conclude, that self same Beast to mean and signify the
whole Roman Empire.

Rests then the second part of this Proposition, to prove the Antichrists
Kingdom to be a part of the great Roman or Latin Empire. Seeing then it is
proved, that this whole ten-horned beast signifies the whole Roman Empire.
Necessarily, it that one part of this beast signifies, must also be a part of
the Roman Empire: But one part of this beast signifies the Antichrist:
Therefore, the Antichrist must needs be a part or member of the whole Roman
Empire. That one part of this beast, to wit, the little blasphemous horn
thereof in Daniel, and the blasphemous mouth thereof in the Revelation, does
signify the Antichrist: it is certain by the tokens set down in the text,
wherein it is said, that that blasphemous Apo. 3, 5 6
mouth and Dan. 7.25
horn, should speak proud blasphemy against God, and against his Sanctes,
and against them that be in heaven: And should change times, and laws, and
should make war against Gods Sanctes, and overcome them, and subdue them
under his tyranny, for the space of 1260 prophetical days, proved to be
years in the 1. and 16. proposition. So this must necessarily be the
Antichrist, that has so wicked and so long a reign: And consequently, the
Antichrist must rise of the Roman Empire, and be a member thereof. Secondly,
his reign must be of that Roman Empire, for that he must sit in spiritual
Babylon, which by the former proposition, is proved to be Rome. And so Rome
should become the den of all diuelishnesse and Antichristian errors, as in the
principal Treatise upon the 17. and 19. cap. shall be showed.

25 PROPOSITION. The two horned Beast, is the Antichrist and his kingdom, it
alone.
Paul describing the 2, The, 2
Antichrist and his kingdom, among certain special notes to know him by,
gives many of these same tokens of this two horned beast: to wit: here in
John, Apo, 13, 11
this Beast has two horns like the Lamb: that is, double power, spiritual
and temporal: so there in Paul, he shows himself to be like God, 2, The, 2,
4, 9
and has te^porall power, whereby he is adversary to Gods servants: and
spiritual power to work wonders, albeit lying wonders. Secondly (says John)
he shall speak like the Dragon: so says Paul, he shall come by the working
of Satan, etc. Thirdly, (says John,) he wrought great wonders and signs,
Ap. 13, 13, 14
and deceives men thereby: So in Paul, he came with power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and in all deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness. Whereby
(doubtless) that man of sin, and son of perdition, even the very
Antichriste, whom Paul there described, is this very same two-horned beast,
mentioned here by John. And for confirmation hereof, the properties of this
two-horned beast (cap. 13) are the self same properties of the false
Antichristian Prophet (cap. 19.) For this two-horned Beast is said to Ap,
13, 14, 15
work great miracles, before the first tenne-horned Beast, and to deceive
them that dwelt upon the earth, whom he caused to worship the image of that
first beast and to receive his mark. Even so, the false Prophet, which
must needs be the Antichrist, is said also Apoc. 19.20
to work miracles before that first beast, whereby he deceived them that
received that beasts mark, and worshipped his Image. Wherefore necessarily,
as of this two horned beast, and of that false Antichristian Prophet, all the
tokens be one: so must also consequently they them selves be both one.

26 PROPOSITION. The Pope is that only Antichrist, prophesied of, in particular.
AMongst the plurality of Antichrists, spoken of in the Scripture to be
generally in all ages: there is one particular Apostatik kingdom, who is the
chief and principal of al Antichrists, and is that great Antichrist, whom Paul
calls the man of sin, and son of perdition, adversary to God, and an
extoller of himself above all that is called God, with diverse other epithets
contained 2. The. 2. Leaving therefore al other smaller Antichrists, this great
Antichrist and chief head of all Antichrists, is he whom here we have to
try out, whom (for remoouing of all doubts) we say cannot be the Mahomet,
neither any Turk, Jew or Ethnic. First, because it is not apparent, that the
spirit of God, would travel so carefully, to point them out to us, by dark
mysteries, and secreet signs to be the Antichrist, who when they come, do with
most clear confession grant and aduouch themselves to be Antichristians, as
all Jews, Turks and Ethnicks do plainly confess: and therefore their own
confession is sufficient to know them by, and al farther secreet tokens, were
superfluous. Then must he needs be a latent and not a patent enemy, that the
spirit of God so carefully points out: and so no Turk, Jew, nor Pagan; yea,
no plain Wolf must he be: Mat, 7, 15 and Act, 20, 19
but a Wolf in a Lambs skin, even an Antichrist under the name of a Christian.
Secondly, he must sit, says Paul, in the Church of God: 2, These, 2,
Therefore an alleged Christian must he be: for no Turk, Jew nor Pagan has
other sitting, than in their own Temples: these be not Gods temples, only the
society of Christians is Gods temple, of their number therefore must the
Antichrist call himself: and among them must he, sit, as a pretended
Christian: and consequently must he be no Jew, Turk, nor Ethnic. Thirdly,
apart must his reign be of the Latin Empire, as is prooved ( Proposition 24.)
and one pretending friendship thereunto, yea, he must sit in that spiritual
Babylon proved to be Rome: Then must he not be the Mahomet, nor any Turk, or
other Ethnik, but a pretended Christian Prince. Finally, and in a word, this
Antichrist is no Turk, Jew, nor avouched Ethnik, because on the one part, all
the notes and tokens of the Antichrist, given us by the scriptures, are most
evident properties of the Pope, and does altogether agree to him. And on the
other part, the special points of doctrine and conversation, of Christ and his
Apostles, ar altogether co^troverted into his person: Him therefore shall we
prove, both by the synthesis or sympathy, that his properties has with the
Antichristiane tokens, as by the antithesis or antipathie, that he has with
Christ, to be the very self great. Antichrist prophesied of in particular.

2 Thessalonians, 2, lib. 5 sexti can. Foelicis ^n gloss. and ^ib. 3. sexti. ^it. 16.
can. periculoso.
Church of God must the Antichrist sit: over Christian Churches does the Pope
sit, professing himself their supreme head. The Antichristian kingdom must
be a part of the Latin Empire, and thereof must it proceed ( Proposition 24.)
so is the Popes kingdom, a part of the Latin or Roman empire, Rome does he
sit. The Antichrist (who is mere impiety and wickedness) was transported
figuratively, as in a close vessel, to the land of Shinar, which is Babylon,
where he should have his dwelling builded, Zachary 5. So in figurative Shinar
Babylon else proved to be Rome, does the Pope dwell and remain. Christ shows
that there shall arise false Antichristian Prophets, Matt, 24, 26
who shall say, there Christ is in the desert, or he is in the secreet places
etc. So the Pope and his Clergy says, that there Christ bodelie is that
host, which sometime they carry in procession in desert and barre^ fields, to
bles the fruits thereof; at other times they close it up again in their secreet
box beside their Altars. The Antichrist speaking lies 1, Tim, 4, 3
forbid al his to marry, and shall command abstinence from certain meats:
so does the Pope under hypocrisy, and lying pretext of chastity and
abstinence, forbid al his Clergy to marry, and to eat flesh in Le^t, or on
frydaies. The false Antichristian Prophets shall privily Peter) and shall sell
their souls, as says the Revelation: so has the Popes Clergy brought in
pardons and indulge^ces, 2. pet 2 Apoc, 18, 13
whereby they promise remission of sins and the kingdom of heaven, privily
and in effect thereby, denying Christ to be their only redeemer, and so have
they through covetousnes under fained pretext of religion, made marcha^dise of
poor Christians, selling by such deuillish wares, even their souls to the
Devil. The Antichrist the son of perdition shall 2. These, 2 Did, 96 can,
satis euidenter
so does the Pope style himself God, and causes Emperors and Kings to kiss
his feet. And Pope Alexander the third trod with his feet upon the neck of
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, his clergy singing, Super Aspidem and
Basiliscu^ ambulabis et Leonem and Draconem pedibus conculcabis: In Daniel that
blasphemous Dan, 7.25
and in the Revelation, that blasphemous mouth that was given to the Roman
beast, had the saints of God under his hand, Ap, 13, 5.
impyring over them and persecuting them 1260 prophetical days, prooved by
the first and 16. Propositions, to be 1260 years: so the Popes kingdom which
is of the Roman impyre, has had power and authority over al Christians, and
of these that were most true Christians, such as John Hus, Hieronymus
Pragensis, Hieronymus Sauonarola, and of many thousand mo, has he been a
persecuter these 1260. years, even from the time that Sylvester the first,
Did, 96
and first Pope vnmartyred received his three crowns and large patrimony of
the Emperor Constantin, as is alleged betwixt the year of Christ 300. and
316. to the year of God 1560. which time the notable decay of his kingdom
began. The Antichrists coming (says Paul) is by the working of Satan, ^.
These, 2
with all power, and signs, and lying woonders in all deceiuablenesse. So of
Popes, 22. known (says Platina and others) came to the Popedom, being
abominable Necromancers, and exercised their mighty imperial power over
whole Christianity, subdewing and ouerwhelming the most mighty Princes and
Emperors thereof: And whereas Paul says, that he shall work with signs
and lying wonders in all deceiuablenesse: So has the Pope advanced his
credit, deceiving the simple sort, by his fained fables, and alleged
miracles of the Legendary, and de vitis Patrum, and by such juglings, as the
holy blood of Wales, and the Maiden of Kent in England, and the fained
miracles of Lauret in Scotland; and latest of all, by such as the Spanish
Goddess, with her five bloody wounds, Prioresse of the Abbay of L'Annunciata,
in this last 1588. year of Christ, now prisoner there, as a deceitful witch.
And shortly all the whole indices and tokens of the Antichrist, contained in
the Revelation, (beside these before specified,) do most perfitelie agree to
the Pope, his seat, kingdom, and Clergy, as shall be particularly
discussed in our principal Discourse, being here for brevity omitted. It
rests then to show a certain of the notable contrarieties betwixt Christ
and his alleged Vicar, the Pope, whereby he shall be found not his Vicar, but
his adversary: yea, not a Christian, but the Antichrist.

Matthew) Christ came so soberlie, and so meekelie, Matt, 12 20
that he would not have broken a bruised reed. The Pope came proudly,
ouerwhelming the most mighty Empires: He changed the kingdom of France from
Chilperike the lawful king, to Pipin the Popes confederate: he extinguished
the king of the Longobards, and broks their kingdom to this day: he bereft the
Exarchat of Ravenna from the Emperor of the Orient, he trod with his feet
upon the neck of Frederike Barbarossa, Emperor of the Occident. Christ would not
worship the Devil for all the kingdoms of the world, as testifies Matthew:
Twenty two Popes bound themselves slaves to the Devil for ever, to be made
Popes, as testifies Platina and other Matt, 21, 12
casts out the merchandes out of the Temple, the Pope establishes his
marchands in the Temple to sell his Pardons, Masses, and Indulgences. Christ
washed his poor Disciples feet: The most rich and Emperors kiss the Popes
feet, John. 13, 5
and he does tred on their neck. Christ honored marriage in Cana of Galilee,
had John 2 Mat. 8 14 1 Cor. 7, 2
married Apostles, and commanded all to marry that culd not live chaste: The
Pope forbids his Clargie to marie, though they were never so filthy
whoremongers. Christ Deuteronomy 23 18
offered in his sanctuary. The Pope received of every whore in his brothels
weeklie, a Julian penny, which will amount some years, to 40000 Ducats Christ
paid tribute to the Emperor: the Pope bereft the Emperor of both lands and
tribute within Italy. Mat. 17, 27
Christ had not of property, so much money of his own, as to tribute penny.
Mat. 17.27,
The Popes property is said at this hour to be 18000. Ducats every day:
Palmerius
also Pope John of Avinion left in store 25. millions of gold. Christ grants
liberty of all nothing enters in the mouth that defiles the soul, and
commanding us to eat of al thing, that is Mat, 15.11 1. Cor. 2 10 verse 25
sold in the market. The Pope forbideth flesh in Lent, Friday, and other his
fasting times. God misliketh the observing of days, months, Galat. 4.10
The Pope commanded to observe his festiual and holy days, septuageses,
Lentes, and years of Jubilees, and indictions. Christ is the only Mediator
betwixt God and man. The 1 Timothy 2, 5
whom he calls Mediators betwixt God and us. Christ is both God and man: The
fowls of the air, In prologo Clementina rum in glosstore
have their nests and beasts have their dens (says Christ) but the Son of
man has not where to repose his head, the Pope has store of Towers, castles,
and princely palaces. Mat. 8.20
Christ threatens Peter for drawing his sword: the Pope usurps both the
te^porall Math, 26 52
for proof whereof, Pope Boniface the 8. show himself the one day in his
pontifical apparel of a Bishop, the next day cled in armor as an Emperor,
beating before him two swords, proclaiming these words, Ecce duo gladii hic,
Behold here the two swords. God forbids in his Exo. 20.4
second commandment, not only the worshipping of Images, but also to make any
so vile figures, to represent his so incomprehensible majesty. The Pope and
his Clergy, not only make they vile images to represent God and his saints,
but also, they command to reverence them, to come in pilgrimage barefooted and
bare-headed, kneeling before them, praying such prayers to them, as are
entitled in their books; A prayer to the Image of Christ, a prayer to the
cross Deuteronomy 11 18 19.20
and such others. God has commanded to engraue these ten commandments on the
posts of our houses, and on all patent parts: yea, and in our hearts. The Pope
and his Clergy leaves out the second commandment, and to make them seem ten,
they devide the last commandment into Mat. 6.7,
us not to make much babbling, nor often repetitions of prayers as the Heathen.
The Pope commands to repeat over your prayers, as to say five Pater nosters,
five Avees, and to say a Trental of Masses, which is 30. Masses, and so to
observe a number as the Witches do, and as Lib. Meta. morph.
Ovid says of the Witch Medea in these words.

Verbaque ter dixit placidos facientia somnos,
Quae Mare turbatum, quae flumina concita, sistant
Thrice from her lips did words redounde, which moves sleep and slummering
sound.
And staieth storms of roaring seas, and furious floods do set at ease.
And for better proof hereof, they must have beads to keep their count with.
And to speak briefly of their doctrine in one Ethnike, partly Jewish, which
Christ has utterly abolished. Finally, Pope contrarily honored with a
threfold imperial crown. As also, Christ shed his blood once, that we might
reign spirituallie. Luke 16.31
the Law nor the Prophets, neither finally the rising of the dead to teach
them, could any ways convert them. And yet, for the more superabundant
certainty of this matter, we will also remove certain doubts of Scripture,
which might move the simple sort (by adhearing to the literal sense,) to
believe that all the Antichrists that were to come, were already come, and past
in the days of the Apostles; or that might any ways seem to purge the Pope
from being the Antichrist.

And first, where it is said in saint John. These are the last days, and ye
have heard that the Antichrist shall come: Even now are there many
Antichrists, and again says he, 1. John. 2.18
but this is the spirit of the Antichrist, 1, Ioh 4 3
of whom ye have heard that he should come, and now he is in the world. It is
to be answered hereunto, that the meaning of the first text is not, that that
present time, but the whole age after Christ, is the last age and days of the
world, in the which, the great Antichrist should come. And even then, says he,
there were many Antichrists, not that he says that the great Antichrist was
any of the^, but rather, that he means, that there were so many small
Heretics and Antichrists risen up, that thereby the coming of the great
Antichrist was porte^ded: for Paul maks this placeplain, where he speaks in
expres words, 2, The, 2
that the mystery of the Antichrists iniquity was even then begun to work, but
himself should not come, while he who held should yet hold still a while, and
then be divided or removed out of the way: meaning that the mystery of his
iniquity, and spirit of his errors, was then begun to work in these small
Antichrists, forerunners of the great Antichrist, unto whose errors (says 2.
The. 2.12
he) because the world has attended, and has left the spirit of verity,
whereby they should have been saved: therefore, God shall send upon them the
efficacy of errors, that they may believe lies, 2, The, 2 11
that is to say, God shall send the great Antichrist to work his miracles of
lies, etc. As to the second text, it is not spoken of the person of the great
Antichrist, but plainly by the text is meant, of the spirit of his errors, or
(as Paul calls it) the mystery of his iniquity, which even then was in the
world and wroght in his forerunners, whom Saint John calls also
Antichrists: So be these texts, rightly conceived, it is gathered, that many
small Antichrists, (in whom wroght the spirit and mystery of the great
Antichrist) were come in the days of the Apostles, but yet not the great
Antichrist himself. Moreover, in case it be doubted how the Pope can be this
Antichrist, seeing saint John says, that the Antichrist denies the Father and
the Son, 1, John. 2 22
whereas apparently the Pope denies neither of them. To this it is answered,
there be two denialls, the one in mouth and profession plainly, and that way
the Pope seems a Christian, and not to deny Christ, otherwise he would not be
credited of Christians, neither could he be a meet Mediator betwixt the
Dragon and them, as the Antichrist must be. The other denial is in heart and
deed tacitly, and that way the Pope has denied altogether, both the Father
and the Son: for who so denies the Son, the same (says the same text
immediately after) denies also the Father, 1, John 2.23
and consequently them both: But so it is, that the Pope denies Christ, in that
he establishes other mediators of his canonized Saints, betwixt God and us,
and vindicates to himself power to remit sins, and so craftelie makes Christ
but a cipher, without either office of mediation, or of remission of sins.
Wherefore, in effect the Pope denies the Son, and consequently, both the Father
and the Son. And besides this former reason, is not this, certain, that the 22.
Necromantik Popes already spoken of, could not be Necroma^cers, unless they had
by private and tacit paction, renounced both the Father and the Son, and became
slaves to the Devil for ever? Also, has not diverse of them bin espied and
noted with Atheism, such as Pope Leo the tenth, who when Cardinal Bembus was
in commoning with him, of certain Evangelical histories, made this godles
answer. Quantum nobis and nostro coetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula satis
est saeculis omnibus notum. It is known evidently to al ages, how much this
fable of Christ, has been profitable to us and our Clergy. Of this godles
number, there were eight Popes nominated in true register, beside the foresaid
Necromantik Popes, and others unspied Atheists. Here then have we after four
diverse manners discovered the Antichrist: first, by proouing him to be neither
Jew, Turk nor other Ethnik, but a pretended Christian Prince. Secondly, by
applying of the special tokens of the Antichrist precisely to the Pope.
Thirdly, by declaring the notable contrarieties in doctrine and conversation,
betwixt Christ and the Pope. Fourthly and last of all, have we expounded and
removed certain doubts, which would seem to excuse the Pope, and purge him
from being the Antichrist: so that nothing needs more to be said, if it
pleases God to bestow his spirit vponthe auditour: otherwise, in vain does
the Sun clearly shine to the blind mould-warp. The Lord open the eyes of all
men, and inspyre the hearts of Princes (as in the Revelation is promised) to
destroy that idolatrous seat, Apoc, 17, 16
and bring the Antichristian kingdom thereof to an end.

27. PROPOSITION. The Image, mark, name, and number of the beast: are of the
first great Roman beast, and whole Latin impyre universally, and not of the
second beast, or Antichrist alone in particular.
SOme has mixed confusedly, the tokens of these two Beasts through other, and
so have thought to apply this Image, mark, name and number, to the Antichrist
in particular: but here say we, the same does appertain to the great ten
horned Beast, and whole Latin Empire in general, and not only to the
Antichrist in particular, and that we prove by these resons. First it is said,
Apoc, 16, 2
that in the time of the first Vial, which was betwixt the year of Christ 71.
and 316. there fell a great plague on them that had the mark of the beast,
and on them that worshipped his image. But at this time, the second Beast or
great Antichrist was skarsly come: as by the 9. synthesis of the former
proposition is showen, and shall be more at length in the 36. proposition.
Therefore the Image and mark, must be of the first great Roman Beast or Latin
empire, and not of the second Beast only. And where it is said Apoc. 13, 14
16.17.18
that the second Beast and Antichrist, caused to make the image of the first
great Roman Beast, and caused al men to receive his mark, and that none
might buy or sell, that had not the mark or the name of the Beast, or the number
of his name; it follows not thereby that there was no Image, mark, name, nor
number of the beast, before the Antichrist come; but rather, that the second
beast or Antichrist, causes to repair the^ after they were almost abolished;
and that he did confirm and approve them of new, as in the next proposition is
declared. Secondly, this mark, Image, name and number of the name, appertains
to the first great Roman beast, because it is plainly Apoc, 13, 14
said, that the image is of the great Roman beast which received the deadly
vvound: And thereafter it is said (or at the lest may be gathered by the text,)
that not only the image and the mark, Apoc, 9, 20 Apoc. 13.14 16.17.18
but also the name and number does appertain to one self same beast. And
therefore necessarily the image, mark, name and number of the name, must al
appertain to the great Roman beast and Latin Empire, and not to the second
Antichristian beast only

28 PROPOSITION. The Image of the Beast, is these degenerate Princes, that in
name only were called Roman Emperors, and were neither Romans of blood, nor
Emperors of Magnanimity.
SEeing that great ten-horned beast, is the Roman Empire (by the 24
proposition) and (by the former proposition) this Image, is the image of that
Empire, and (by the text) this image must have a spirit, and must speak as
the Antichrist inspires him. What else can this lively and speaking Image then
be, but a man? yea, even such a man, as does represent and bear the figure of
that Roman Empire: and therefore (as says the text) do all men woorship and
reverence him. This image then is of two sorts, the one were these unworthy
Emperors (not of the ancient blood of Romans) in whom the empire did decay.
Of these there were in the days of this first Vial, as is said in the
discourse of the former proposition; the last of these were extinguished by the
Hunnes, Gotthes, and Vandalles. The other sort were the new Emperors, called
the Emperors of Germans and Romans, of whom Charlemaigne was the first.
These also were but a figure of the first old empire, and were but only Roman
Emperors in name, and neither of their ancient blood, neither having such
authority as they. These did the Pope crown and inaugurat as Emperors, or
rather as images of the first empire. These inspyred he with the spirit of his
errors, and made them to speak as he willed them, and then confirmed he their
empire, and proclaimed them Emperors, and caused all men to reverence them, as
is said in the Apoc. 13.14.15.
text. So then for conclusion, all the properties of the beasts image, agree so
fitly with these degenerate Emperors, both of the first sort and last sort
(which neither Romans of blood, neither Emperors in effect) that we can call
none other, than the^ to be the Images of the ten horned Beast, or Roman and
Latin empire.

29 PROPOSITION. The name of the beast expressed by the number of 666. (cap.
13.) is the name (...) only.
MAny having mistaken this text, have judged this number to be the number of
the Antichrists name in particular, as if it were the number of the second
Beasts name, which we have proved by the 27. proposition to be of the first
beasts name. Here then say we, that name is (...), for these reasons. First,
because the name of the beast is proved (by the said 27 proposition) to be the
name of the ten-horned Roman beast or Latin empire in general, and not of the
Antichrist only, and so it must either be Romanus or Latinus, but of these
two, Latinus is the eldest style: for King Latinus (from whom that people were
called Latini, and their cuntrie called Latium) was long before King Romulus,
of whom the City was called Rome, and the people thereof Romans. Secondly,
Apoc. 13.17 18.
it must be the number of a man's name (says the text) so is Latinus the name
of a man, even the name of one of their first Kings. Thirdly, forasmuch as
the Graecians had a custom in their mysteries and Oracles, to observe the
number of names, as ye shall find in diverse parts of Sybilla: And as in that
country, the name of the flood (...); is celebrated as holy, because it
contains the number of the days of the year 365, as Carrion testifies, Chro.
lib. 4. where he describes the Cattes and Hesses. Therefore, Sanct John
(observing the custom of them to whom he writes) says Apoc. 13, 18
that the number of the Beast, or rather (as he termed it in the former 17.
verse.) the number of the Beasts name, is 666. And even so it is, that (...)
contained the number of 666. for l is 30. a is 1. t is 300. e is 5. l is 10. n
is 50. o is 70. and is 200. which altogether make six hundred three score and
six. Therefore, (...) is the very name of the Beast, meaned by the said
number. And for better confirmation of this form of interpretation, Irenaeus
Martyr (who was Disciple to Polycarpus, the Disciple of Sanct John) about the
end of the fifth book de haeresibus, approoueth this manner of interpretation,
saying, Et testimonium perhibentibus his; qui facie ad faciem viderunt
Iohannem, and ratione docentibus, quoniam numerus nominis Bestiae, secundum
Graecorum computationem, per literas, quae in eo sunt sexcentos habebit and
sexaginta sex, etc. And these bearing testimony, that face to face have seen
Sanct John, and by reason teaching, how that the number of the beasts name,
does contain six hundred three score and six after the Grecian reckoning,
by the letters that are therein. And thus far says he generally, concerning
the manner how this text shall be interpreted, as appearingly he had his
warrant, received mouth by mouth from Sanct John. But as to the particular
names, although he reckons out (...), with other of his own conceptio^, yet,
because he had not such particular warrant mouth by mouth thereof, he leaves off
to speak determinatly thereof: But by the eue^t now fallen out, we may more
co^sta^tly affirm this same. For conclusion, seeing by the 24 proposition, the
first great ten-horned beast is the Roman Empire, whereof (by the 27
proposition) the number of his name, is the number of 666, and that (by the
text) the same must be the number of a man's name: Therefore, this number of
666. cannot be years, as some do interpret it, nor (...), for (...), which is
to deny, nor (...), neither Dic Lux: because although these contain the number
of 666. yet these be neither the names of a man, neither the names of the
Latin or Roman Empire, as is proved, that the name of the said number oght to
be. Also this name is neither (...) nor (...), because although they both
answer the said number, as likewise are the names of a man or masculine, yet
are they not the names of the first beast, or Roman Empire. And therefore that
name necessarily must be (...), as being not only the name of a man, but
also the proper name of the first beast: as thirdly containing in it the
said number 666. conform to the three properties and tokens thereof,
warranted by the text.

30 PROPOSITION. Then mark of the Roman beast, is that invisible profession
of servitude and obedience, that his subjects has professed to his Empire,
since the first beginning thereof, noted afterward by the Pope, with diverse
visible marks.
IN the ninth cap. of Ezechiel, Ezech. 9.4
it is said, that the Angel marked Gods Elect within Jerusalem, with a mark on
their foreheads: the like is said in the Revelation: Apo. 7 3 4
yet in no history of these days, it is hard that any such visible mark was
set upon the faithful: wherethrowe that mark must of necessity mean nothing
else, but that profession of service and obedience toward God, which with
bold faces we aduouch as constantly and openly, as if we were visiblie marked
therewith. And semblably, on the contrary part, this mark of the Roman beast
or Latin Empire, is nothing else, but that professed servitude, obedience,
confederacy, or concurre^ce, which the subjects thereof have advouched to
observe thereunto. And for confirmation hereof, it is said in the Revel. Apoc,
16, 2
that in the days of the first Vial, there fell a great plague on them that
received the beasts mark, Apoc. 16.2
and worshipped his Image: but at that time, (which was betwixt the year of
God 71. and 316) there was no visible mark, that can be attributed unto them
of that empire, nor any difference betwixt them and the enemies of the empire,
but only their foresaid profession; which therefore doubtless must be called in
that text, the mark of the empire. But as to the second part of this
proposition, how soon the Antichrist, that two-horned Beast came, he caused
all men to receive a mark, which the text discribes so specially, with such
notes, as it must needs be a more notable and visible mark, nor the simple
profession only; for the former mark of simple profession, is but simply
called the mark of the beast (Revel. Apoc, 16, 2
16.) but the marks that fell in the time of the Antichrist, are not only said
to be marked in their foreheades or right hands: but also, the form and shape
of the mark is expressed by the text, Apo, 14.11, Apo. 15.2.
where the same mark is said to be, the mark of the Beasts name or number
thereof: as if he would say, there are marks taken out of the beasts name, or
rather number thereof, which all his subjectes shall bear or wear sometimes
on their foreheads, some times in their hands: which, what they be, follows
in the next proposition.

31 PROPOSITION. The visible marks of the Beast, are the abused characters, of
(...) and crosses of all kinds, taken out of the number of the first beasts
name.
THese visible marks, whatsoever they be, have five notes or tokens, assigned
by the text to know them by. First they are called the marks of the Beast,
Revel. 13.17. and 14.9. that is to say, marks of the first and great Roman
beast, as is proved by 27. Proposition. Secondly, and more especially, they are
called marks of that Beasts name. Reu. 14.11. Thirdly, and most especially of
all, they are called the marks of the number of that beasts name, in these
words, Revel. 15.2. And these who obtained victory of the beast, and of his
Image, and of his mark of the number of his name, word by word out of the
original greek: And so this victory is not spoken of his mark, (and) of the
number of his name, as some translats, but of his mark of the number of his
name; meaning so expreslie, that his mark, is a mark of the number of his
name: that is to say, is derived or composed of the number of his name, but the
greek number of his name is, (...), as expreslie says the text, Revel. 13.18.
Therefore, in these numeral letters (...), ar these marks contained, and this
we have very specially for the third token. Fourthly, these marks must be
devised, enjoined, and appointed: by the second Beast or Antichrist, as proves
the text, Revel. 13.16. Fifthly, these marks must be universal upon all men,
rich and poor, free and bound, and that no man might use his traffike of
marchandice or lawful affairs, who had not received these marks, as testifies
the text. Revel. 13. 16. and 17. Then, unto whatsoever marks all these five
tokens do agree, the same are the Antichristian marks: But unto the abused
characters of (...), and crosses of al kinds, does all these five tokens agree:
for first (...) is justly called the mark of the first Beast and Roman Empire,
for two causes; the one for that all these of that Empire, are entised under
color of the name of Christ, to reverence that character, being nevertheless,
as it is abused, nearer to the name of the Antichristian and Latin kingdom,
nor to the name of Christ, as hereafter shall be said. The other cause is, for
that these marks of (...) are gathered of these letters (...), which are the
number of the name of that Latin kingdom and Roman Beast (as hereafter more
specially shall be proved) Therefore, justly ar the marks of (...), called the
marks ofthe first Roman Beast, agreeing with the first token. Secondly, and
agreeable with the former, because (by the 29. proposition) that beasts name is
(...), whose numeral letters (...), represents and yields the marks of (...)
(as more specially immediately shall be said.) Therefore (...) agrees with the
second token, to be called the mark of that Beasts name. Thirdly, and
according to the third token, this mark (...) is contained under the numerall
letters of that beasts name (...), and is hereby perfitly represented, the two
extreme letters respectively agreeing in one, and the small disagreance of the
middlemost: to wit, betwixt x and r^ to be upon very necessity: for where as
S. John here speaks expreslie of numerall letters, he could have no one
numeral letter to represent both r and his crown, this way r^, more like it
nor x, whereof the upper part represents the Crown, the nether part the figure
of r. Moreover there is yet greter affinity betwixt ^ and r, for r or rather r
after this form fn the greek, and x in this Beasts language and common written
letter in Latin is r, which is al one in figure, and so the marks of (...)
agrees with the third toke^. Then fourthlie the mark (...) is devised, and
taken up by the second Beast the Pope and his Clergy, to represent as they
say, the name Christ thereby, but rather the contrary, as follows hereafter.
Fifthly, and according to the fifth token, the Pope and his Clergy ordains
universally all theirs, (whom only they call Christians) to reverence the
very naked figure of (...) and bare character thereof, as having a divine
virtue in it, transferring and distracting our zealous reverence from Jesus
Christ our Savior, who is God with us, to such bare characters, and to such
dead and naked words in an unknown language, as IHS Xp^s SOTER IMMANVEL: And
therefore appoint they all men to bear and wear this foresaid character (...),
with such like other bare names, in their rings, amulets, pe^daries,
breastplates, tablets, Principios and Agnus Deis: Abusing it in way of
sorcerie, as in a thousnd papisticall charms and conjurations, not only in the
Clergies privy books, but also in their public service, called Exorcismus,
is to be seen. So then, seeing these five tokens do agree with (...), it
follows necessarily, that that abused character is one of the Antichristian
marks. It remains then to prove the like concerning their crosses of al
kinds. And first, the cross is justly called the mark of the first great
Roman beast and Latin Emperors, for three causes, the one because that the
Emperor and all his subjects generally, ar some times marked therewith, and
bears the same, as shall be said. The other cause, because the Emperor
Constantine illuded by a cross shadow in the clouds, takes up at the deuis
and persuasion of Sylvester the first, and first Antichristian Pope, the mark
of the cross, and that the rather, because (as these fabulous histories
report) his mother Helena was said to have found Christ's cross, and so justly
may the cross be called the mark of the first Beast and Roman Emperor. The
last cause, why the cross is called the mark of the Roman Beast, or Latin
Emperor is, for that it is taken out of his name, even out of the three
numerall letters thereof, as presently you shall hear. So then the first token
of the Antichristian mark, agrees with the cross. Then agreeable to the second
token: for so much as by the 27. proposition (...) is that Beasts name, at the
least undoubtedly, the numeral letters of his name are (...), out of the which
are gathered crosses of al kinds (as immediately shall be said.) Therefore these
crosses, are justly called the marks of this Beasts name. Then thirdly,
according to the third token, in the said numerall letters (...), ar contained
crosses of diverse kinds, both in figure and in name: In such manner, as both
the Greek Churches and Latin Churches, are certified thereof: for among the
Grecians the form of ch is a cross, and among the Latins x which is X, is
also a cross, and these be crosses asidewaies called S. Andrews cross:
Therefore the third and last letter is a double letter of abbreuiation,
containing these two letters. t. whereof the last is called a headles cross,
likest to the cross, which they call our Lords cross: And so always and of
every letter hereof arises the figure of the cross. As to the names of the
cross, in latin crux, and in greek (...), it is not possible for them to be
expressed under so few letters more viuely, nor they are here, for here have
you their chief letters, even both their capital and their final: for by ch and
x, have you in Latin C. and X. making crux, or. C H. and X making barbarously
CHRVX, as I have seen and heard it so in print and pronounced. And again by
the last letter (...) have ye the greek name of the cross (...) likewise
expressed, by his capital and final letters. So then according unto the third
token in (...), which are the greek number or numeral letters of the beasts
name, are contained crosses of diverse kinds, both by figure and by name
evidently expressed, to both the oriental or greek Churches, and to the
occidentall or latin Churches, and what is more evident? Fourthly, and
agreeing to the fourth token, these crosses (I mean the abuses thereof) were
devised by the second Beast, the Pope and his Clergy, as magical marks of
sorcerie, gree by gree, to withdraw that godly meditation that we ought to have
of Christ's passion, and that reverence that we ought to have toward Christ,
for suffering death for our sakes, and to bestow the whole merit, honor and
virtue thereof, first, to the material cross, whereon he suffered, and then to
bare figures and marks thereof, and last of al, to other curious sophistical
figures and marks, such as ^ which they call the cross of Jerusalem, and such
as this cross ^ which is to be seen upon diverse old Church walls. Which
figures are so degenerat gree by gree from crosses to co^passes, crooks and
rammald, that altogether they have no rese^blance of Christ's passion. Finally,
and according to the fifth and last token: these crosss were so universally
used, that (beside their daily crossings with their right hand on their
foreheads, which they call saning) all manner of persons, behooued to bear
and wear, even visible marks thereof, at appointed times on their forheads,
or in their hands; such as to be crossed with ashes on their forheads on
Ashwednesday, and to bear Palm crosses in their hand on Palmsunday, otherwise
they were thought to be Heretics, and cursed from the communion of Christians:
And these excommunicates (as says the Bull of Pope Martin the fifth, Fol. 134)
shall not be permitted to keep houses or lodging, or to make any block or
bargain, or to occupy any traffike or trade of merchandise, or to have any
society with Christians. Then, seeing these crosses agree now with all these
five tokens of the Antichristian mark, as a little before (...), was proved to
do. Therefore, necessarily these marks of (...) and crosses of al kinds,
must be the beasts visible marks. Let no man grudg hereat nor grievously tak
it, objecting, that we have made these to be the marks of the Antichrist, which
men have hitherto devised (as they say) to represent the name of Christ, and
his passion. For certainly these same things, which not men, but God has
devised and appointed; how soon they are misused, they are called by the Spirit
of God, abominations. Appointed not God the brazen Serpent to be erected, as
healthful, but after that it was worshipped, it was destroyed by 4. Reg. 18.4.
Ezechias as damnable? Appointed not God the Sacrifices and incense offerings,
and yet says he in Osee, Osee. 6.7.
Misericordia^ volui and non sacrificium: I desired mercy and not Sacrifice:
And in Esaias, Ne afferat is vltra sacrificium frustra: incensum abhominatio est
mihi: Esa. 1.13.
Bring no more Sacrifice in vain: Incense is an abomination unto me? Seeing
the Lord then does reject those ordinances which himself has instituted, and
calls the^ Abomination, when they are abused, how much more ought we to
reject these sophistical marks of (...) and crosses of all kinds; such as
these which they call our Lords cross, and S. Georges cross, and X, S. Andrews
cross, and ^ the cross of Jerusalem, and ^ the Cross of Dedication, besides
the Popes Cross, and many Crosses more, and esteem the^ as abominable
Antichristian badges, whereas we see the^ not only devised by men, but also
abused by them in way of sorcerie and magic: imputing unto these naked
figures, a virtue and sanctitude in their charms and exorcisms, as though, the
whole virtue of Christ and his passion, were transferred over into the^. And
although they say, that they have devised (...), to represent the name of Christ
(...) thereby, and crosses of sundry kinds, to represent his passion therewith:
yet the Spirit of God lets us see evidently by this text, that he does reject
and cast over these their magical characters and sorceries to themselves
again, as liker to the numeral letters of their name, tha^ to his name, eue^
liker to (...); than to (...) and so let none doubt, but these foresaid
figures, as they are used, or rather abused, are the very marks and tokens of
the Beast, agreeing with the foresaid tokens of the text, in all points and
properties.

32 PROPOSITION. Gog is the Pope, and Magog is the Turks and Mahometanes.
THis is proved three ways, to wit, first by the signification of the names,
secondly, by comparison; and thirdly, by their lineage: As to the first, Gog
does signify Tectum; Chron. lib. 1 fol. 21
that is to say, Covered: and Magog (as Carrion does testify) signifies De
Gog, or Detectum, that is to say, Discovered, as many learned do affirm,
thought others esteem it rather to mean detecto, of a covering, nor detcctum,
discovered. So then, there being in these latter days only two great notable
and mighty enemies to God: the one the Pope, a covered enemy and a
dissembling Christian: the other the Turks and Mahumetans discovered and open
professed enemies: It must needs be, that that secreet enemy Gog, is the Pope,
and the open enemy Magog, is the Mahometans. As to the second like as by
comparison, Gog was an Israelite borne, the Israelites the^ being the Church of
God. 1, Chro. 5, 4 Genesis 10.2
And as Magog was a borne Ethnike: so is the Pope borne among Christians, which
now are Gods Church: And the Turks and Mahumetans are born Ethnikes. Genes,
49, 4
And again, as Gog was of the tribe of Reuben, who was accursed for incestuous
whoordome. So is the Pope chief of that Romish seat, which is called that
spiritual whore and accursed Idolatresse, Apoc, 17, 2
with who^, the Princes of the earth have committed Idolatry and spiritual
whoordome. As to the third concerning their lineage: Ezechiel defines Gog to be
the chief Prince of Tubal and Meshech: Ezech, 38 and 39
then read Jerome de interpretatione nominum etc. upon Italia and Tubal, and ye
shall find of Tubal to be descended, Iberi or Iberes, which he calls the
Spaniards or Italians in Europe, and likewise of Meshech to be descended the
Cappadocians in littell Asia: which all having embraced the Christian faith,
does accept the Pope as their supreme head or chief prince: And so Gog, the
chief prince of Tubal and Meshech, must be the Pope, seeing he is supreme head
of these Tubalists in Europe, and Meshechists in Asia. And as concerning Magog,
^en. 10, 2
he was the son of Iaphet. Of this Magog descended the whole Scythians which
now ar the Turks and Mahumetans, according to the opinion of all writers. Then
by these three reasons (by and besides the whole notes and tokens of the 20.
cap. contained in the principal treatise) it appears evidently that Gog is
the Pope, and Magog the Turk or Mahumetike Emperor,

33 PROPOSITION. The armies of Gog and Magog (cap. 20) are all one with the
armies of the sixth Trumpet and sixth Vial.
THis is sufficiently proved, by the harmony of the whole tokens assigned by
the Text of the Trumpets and Vialles, and by the text of Gog and Magog Apoc. 20.
. For these of the sixth Trumpet and Vial, dwelt beyond and about Euphrates, and
were kings of the East: so here does Magog, for that he is proved lately, to
mean the Mahometanes. They are there called in the sixth Trumpet four, as
indeed they are four families, and four nations Mahometanes: Here likewise,
are they termed the people of the four quarters or corners of their land.
There were these four nations bound at Euphrates till their due time, and then
loosed to make war-fare: Here is the Devil bound from stirring them up or
entising them, till their due time, and then is loosed to stir them up to
battle. There are these Mahometanes alone reckoned, to two hundred thousand
thousands of horsemen: Here are both the Armies, even both Gog and Magog,
compared to the sea sand in number. There, does three devilish inspirations
(called spirits of Devils) gather and stir up all those people to battle:
Here, the devil himself is loosed to stir them up to battle. There, do
they convene to fight in Armageddon, Hier. de int. nominum.
which is the mountain of the Euangell, and lands of the Elect and chosen
people: Here, do they compass the whole lands, company, and army of
Christians, and their elect cities. And finally, these four of that sixth
Trumpet or Vial, are proved by the fourth proposition, to be the four
nations Mahometanes. The same is this Magog, proved to be by the former
proposition. And consequently, the armies or Gog and Magog, whom Satan here
in this 20. cap. does stir up to warre-fare, are the self same armies of
Papists and Mahometanes, that made great wars in the days of the sixth
Trumpet or Vial.

34 PROPOSITION. The thousand years that Satan was bound (Revel. 20.) began
in Anno Christi 300. or thereabout.
FOr proof hereof, it is evident by histories, that after the continual and
successiue tyranny of Ethnic Emperors, and last of Diocletian, (who in one
month made seventeen thousand Martyrs) there arose about this 300. year of
Christ, Constantine the great, a Christian and baptized Emperor, who, and
whose successors (except a few of short reign) maintained Christianisme and
true religion, to the abolishing of Satan's public kingdom: and therefore,
say we, this year Satan is bound. Secondly, shortly after this time, was
the first public and general godly counsel, holden by the Christians at
Nice, in the which the Apostolical belief was published, the authentik
Scriptures authorized: and finally, the true Christian religion so received,
that all Satan's outward opposition was banished, and his public tyranny
and kingdom overcome: although yet, by his Lieutenaunt the Antichriste, even
then began his dissimulate and hypocritical kingdom. Thirdly, seeing by the
former proposition, Gog and Magog are the armies of the sixth trumpet and Vial:
and these (by the fourth proposition) were loosed about the year of God 1296.
to make wars. Therefore, about the year of God 1296. or rather (as histories
preciselie report) about the year of God 1300; were the armies of Gog and
Magog loosed, and so Satan was then loosed, to stir them up to battle: from
the which 1300. years deduce the thousand years, that Satan lay bound, and it
will consequently follow, that Satan was first bound in Anno Christi 300.
Fourthlie, and for confirmation of the former, the Apoc. 20.7.
text says, that how soon the Devil is loosed, he passes forth to stir
up and seduce, these Papistical and Mahometicke armies of Gog and Magog, to
strife and warre-fare. But in that 1300, year, began (by Satan's instigation)
that proud strife betwixt them for supremacy, both of them chalenging to
themselves the Empire of the whole earth: for Pope Boniface the eight,
instituted the first Iubelee, that year, and clothed himself the one day in
the Pontificals of a Bishop, and the other day in the robe-royall, of an
Emperor, and having borne before him two swords, proclaimed these words, Ecce
duo gladii hic: meaning thereby, that he was full Monarch, and more than
Monarch: For; thereby he usurped to himself universally both spiritual and
temporal power. Likewise, on the contrary part, that same year, the whole
nations Mahometans crowned Ottoman the great, their first Emperor: And so
betwixt these contrary Empires, ever from thenceforth followed out such
universal and terrible wars, that the Devil (doubtless) from that 1300. year
of God forth, ran loose among them, stirring up these wars, and
consequently, he lying bound 1000. years before, behooved to begin that
bondage, in Anno 300.

35 PROPOSITION. The Devils bondage a thousand years (cap. 20) is no ways
else, but from stirring up of universal wars among the nations.
SOme by this bondage of Satan, have sought out to find the visible Church of
God a thousand years pure and vncorrupt, or believed that the true Church
should enjoy 1000 years peace: But the plain contrary appears here by the
fourth and fifth verses, where it is meant expressly, that in the time of these
1000. years, should the Antichristian beast reign, and should slay and behead
those, that worshipped not him, nor reverenced his mark and image, but lived
and reigned with Christ Jesus, as true Christians, all these 1000. years: and
that all the rest of the people lay dead in his errors; and rose not
therefrom, til these thousand years were expired. And so, seeing both by this
text, these Antichristian Ethnicks reigned in this time, as also by the chap.
11.2. they possessed the outward visible Church: Therefore, could neither the
true invisible church enjoy peace under the Antichrist, neither yet could that
visible Church be pure and incorrupt, during these thousand years, but rather
after the said 1000. years, because it is meant (verse. 5,) that the rest, who
were dead in Antichristian errors should not revive, or rise therefrom, till
after these thousand years. And beside this, it is not said, that the Devil is
bound from troubling the Church of God (which ever he troubles) but from
seducing or deceiving the Gentiles or Nations; which for the most part, are
taken in the Scriptures in an evil part, for the idolatrous, wicked, and lewd
people of the world, to whom God here grants these thousand years peace;
because they ( Revel. 11.2) do possess the outward and visible Church, and
have the true invisible Church lurking under their feet, which by their
continual trouble might also be troubled. Then rests the affirmative part
of this proposition, to wit, this bondage of Satan to be from stirring up of
these Nations, to any universal warre-fare, while the end of these thousand
years. For proof whereof, when he was loosed, then (says the text) he passed
forth to stir up the whole nations, of the four quarters of the land of Gog
and Magog, to war-fare and universal bloodshed: whereas contrarily, by
histories it is found, that all the 1000 years praeceeding, there were no such
huge imperial armies nor terrible bloodshed as now, when the whole Papists
and pretended Christians on the one side, against the whole Mahometanes on the
other side, even the whole Occident against the whole Orient, under the names
of Gog and Magog, were conuened in number as the sand of the sea, as the text
says. So that in comparison hereof, all small civil wars, skirmishings and
incursions, that occurred during those thousand years, were thought nothing
but peace; and consequently, those terrible and universal wars, that fell
out from this time forth, were the only troubles and seditions, from entising
and raising whereof, the text means, that Satan was bound and restrained all the former 1000 years, and not from stirring up of errors, heresies, martyrdom,
and provincial warfare.

36. PROPOSITION. The 1260. years of the Antichrists universal reign over
Christians, begins about the year of Christ 300. or 316. at the farthest.
THis is proved, by reasons of Gods apparent mercy, and of the Devils
subtlety, and by diverse necessary reasons of Scripture confirmed by
histories. And first, seeing on the one part, it was meet for the iniquities
of the world, that sometime a general Antichrist should come: but on the other
part, whilst as Satan ran at liberty, and his kingdom, publicly
flourished by the tyranny of Ethnik Emperors, by whom Gods Church was
extreemely persecuted: It was unmeet at that time, that the Antichrist should
also rise: lest on both sides, Gods Church were utterly extinguished: and
therefore it is not apparent, that God in his mercy would suffer the
Antichristian kingdom to rise, until the empire of Ethnike Emperors were
first removed, and Christian Emperors established in their place; and so
Satan's public tyranny bound and restrained. But this came to pass, in Anno.
300. that the first race of Christian baptized Emperors, is begun in
Constantine the great; and Satan's publik and imperial tyranny suppressed:
Therefore, at this time it is most apparent, that God in the temperature of his
justice and mercy, would rathest set up the Antichrists kingdom; and herewith
agrees the saying of Paul, that he that holds, 2 Thessalonians ^
must hold still a while, till he be taken out of the way or removed, and then
must that man of sin or Antichrist come; meaning, the wicked Emperors that
held the empire, must hold still the same till they be removed, and then
should the Antichrist start up: and so the one enemy of God to give place to
the other, and not both to stand. Secondly, by the Devils craft and subtlety
(herein permitted by God) it is very apparent, that whil as his publik tyranny,
that he used by his Ethnik Emperors, was new lie extinguished, and himself in
a manner, to be bound and restrained for 1000. years; he would in this his
bondage from public tyranny, rather establish the Antichrist, as his
Lieftennant, to use dissimulate tyranny, rather tha^ at any other time: but
this his bondage and Christianisme of Emperors, began about this 300. year,
by the 34. proposition: Therefore, about this 300. year, it appears rathest that
the devil by his subtilty, has substituted the Antichrist and made him to
begin his kingdom. Thirdly, these 1260 years of the Antichrists reign, or
three great days and an half, that the witnesses or testaments of God lies
dead (which by the 15. proposition are al one date) being ended then (says
the text) Shall the tenth part of the Antichristian city fall, Ap. 11.13.
even the tenth part of all the Abbacies, Monasteries, Nunries, and Papistical
policies be destroyed. But so it came to pass, that near about the year of
God 1560 these papistical policies, were destroyed in England, Scotland, and
in some parts of Germany, France and other cuntries, even their large tenth
part, from the which 1560 year, deduce 1260 for the years of the Antichrists
universal reign, so rests 300. years to be the year of Christ, about the
which the Antichrist began his kingdom. 2 Thessalonians 2 7, 7
Fourthlie, Paul testifies, that those that hold, must hold still a while till
their seat be transported, divided, or removed out of the way, and then shall
the Antichrist reveal and open up his empire, for he shall sit in their seat,
over the Church of God, extolling himself as God. etc. And so it came to
pass, that the Roman Emperors sat that time, and held the empire of Rome,
till Constantine, Emperor thereof, transported the seat of the empire to
Bizanrium, which he called Constantinople, leaving the seat of Rome to Pope
Sylvester the first and his successors, who was the first Pope or Bishop
that reigned in Rome vnmartyred, and the first that ever possessed patrimony,
rent or dignity, from which time, their kingdom ever has increased until
our days; and therefore, justly about his time, which began in the year of
God 313. or thereby, establishe we the beginning of the Antichristian and
Papisticall reign. Fifthly, because it is said by Dan. 7.25.
Daniel and by the Apo. 13.5.
Revelation, that he must all the said space, have power and authority over
the Sanctes of God, and by Paul in the said text, that he must be extolled
against all that is called God. Therefore must we begin our count, at the time
of the Popes first power and authority, even his very first coronation and
this was about the year of God 316. or thereby: for then Constantine Emperor,
gave to the said Pope Sylvester the town of Rome, and great lands and
dominions thereabout, and gave unto him the triple Crown, to be crowned
therewith, in token that he made him supreme head over all the Churches in
Asia, Africa and Europ; as his gift, contained in the decrees, Distinct. 96, at
length proportes, the date whereof is, Data Romae. 3. Calend. April. a
Constantino Augusto quarto consule, and Gallicano quarto consule, which date
repugneth in it self, for we find by common writers that Constantin his fourth
co^sulship, and Licinius his fourth consulship, were together in anno Christi
315. or according to Haloander in anno 316. But we find never, where
Constantine and Gallicanus were consulles together, neither yet that Gallicanus
was four times Consul: Whereby, not only the date of this gift is uncertain,
what year of God it befell, but also, by this repugnance, and diverse other
reasons, some thinks this whole gift to be false and fained, yet always in this
purpose be it true or false, it is al one matter: for seeing they acclaime it
as true, and thereat makes their beginning: it pertains not to us to reason
here, whether their beginning was truly given, or falsely usurped, but to make
the beginning of our count, where they begin their kingdom: to wit, at the
said gift, falling betwixt the years of God 300. and 316. whereas the precise
year thereof, is (as is said) uncertain. Sixthly, by Platina the Popes
familiar, in vita Syluestri primi, and by diverse others of their own
histories, it is reported, that the time that this foresaid Sylvester the
first, received from Constantine (or otherwise usurped) this foresaid large
authority and rent, there was a voice heard from heaven crying, Now is poison
sown in the Church of God, which miraculous voice, apparantlie establishes
and makes plain to us, that at this time began the horrible and detestable
kingdom of the Antichrist, as a poysonable venom unto the Church of God.
Seventhly, at this time began the first Antichristian mark, proved be the 31.
proposition to be the abused mark of the cross, which now was induced among
Christians, by the fabulous allega^ce of two fained miracles: the one that
Queen Helen the Mother of Constantine, admonished by an heavenly vision past,
and did find that very real cross whereon our Lord suffered: the other that
Constantine her son, fighting against Maxentius, saw appear in the air the
figure of a cross with these words, In hoc signo vinces, by this mark thou
shall overcome, with which mark and inscription, the Portugal ducat and some
other coins of late are imprinted. And therefore here, where the first public
and visible Antichristian mark begins, esteem we justly the Antichristian
kingdom to begin. Eighthly, about this time, even anno Christi 312. the 24. of
September, at which time the said Emperor Constantine overcame Maxentius, and
was also the first year of Pope Syluester the first, and first Pope vnmartyred,
even that very day and year, begins the common account of the papisticall
kingdom, by Indictions in place of the old Olympiads; and therefore, Ottoman.
Iose. Scal. de emen. temporu^.
are called Indictio Constantinianae Pontificiae: Of these, the first year
falls betwixt the said year of Christ 312. the 24. of September, and the 24.
of September, In anno 313. and so proceeds for 15. years, and then begins
again the first year of a new Indiction; keeping thereby, the exact memory
of the current years of their kingdom, within every fiftene, and dating
therewith all their papisticall evidences, even like the Jews, who kept
count of the od and curre^t years of their Jubilees, from their conquest of
the land of Canaan: The number of whole Indictions, and of whole Jubilees, being
more easy to keep account off, nor their current years. Therefore, justly at
this first year of the first Indiction and account of their kingdom, even
betwixt the year of Christ 312. the 24. of September, and 313. the 24. of
September, which year also the said Sylvester began, ought we justly to begin
the Antichristian kingdom. So by these eight former reasons, we conclude, that
betwixt the year of Christ 300, and 316, has the Antichristian and
Papisticall reign begun, reigning universally and without any debatable
contradiction 1260. years; and so (as is said) about the year of God 1560.
began their first public decay, and the open repining against their kingdom to
their confusion, ever more and more; till first their rents: then their city
of Rome: last of all, by Christ's own coming, their latter dregs, be utterly
extinguished and exterminate, as in the principal treatise, upon the 17. and
18. Chapters shall be declared.

So ends this demonstratiue resolution of all difficulties of the Revelation,
first of all dates and times, and last of the principal terms and matters, as
to the meaner terms and smaller matters, they are interpreted in the notes of
the principal treatise.
CONCLUSION.
THen for conclusion, by these interpretatiue propositions, follows four
things marvelous and notable. First, that the interpretation of every part of
the Revelation, is accessorie or consectarie to other: that is to say, it is so
chained and linked together, that every mystery opens other to the discovery
of the whole. Secondly, that the first half of the book is orderly, that is to
say, it contains in order of time the most notable accidents that concerns
Gods Church, from the time of Christ's Baptism successively to the latter day.
Thirdly, that every history prophesied, is limited or dated with his own
number of years. Fourthly and last of all, that whatsoever history is more
orderly and summarlie, than plainly set down in the first orderly part of
the book, the same is repeated, interpreted, or amplified in the last part of
the book: which therefore we call the amplificatiue part of the book,
dividing the whole Revelation according to the table following, before we
proceed to the principal matter.

A TABLE DEFINITIVE AND Diuisiue of the whole Revelation.
THe Revelation, is a discovery of those notable matters that concern the
Christian Church, from her beginning to the latter day, set out by visions,
which Christ has showed to his Apostle John: And it contains

A particular admonition, which as an Epistle, is directed unto the seven
Churches of little Asia, and it contains The preface, which shows the
director, the receiver, and to whom the message is directed, set out
spiritually, cap. 1. The message directed particulary to the Churches of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, cap 2. And to Sardis, Philadelphia and
Laodicea cap, 3. And it contains The reproof of certain points of their
defection, threatening them to amendment. The commendation of certain of their
godly doings, exhorting them to perseverance.

A general discourse of all alterations, which generally do concern or
interest the Christian Church from her beginning to the latter day, and it
contains An orderly part, which deduceth successively, briefly, and in due
order of time all alterations concerning the Christian Church: and it
contains A history of those things which were accomplished before they were
written, expressed cap. 4.5.6.7. and beginning of the 8, under the terms of
seven seals. A prophecy, forewarning all notable accidents, alterations and
changes, that concern the christian Church, betwixt S. John his days and the
latter day: and it is Secular, which forewarmeth such mutationes of earthly
kingdoms, and commotions of Empires as any way concerns the Christian
Church; and this is done in the rest of the 8. cap. and in the whole 9.
chapter, under the terms of six of the seven Trumpets. Hereafter follows in
the tenth chapter, an introduction to the seven thunders, or seven thundering
Angels, which are mysteries of the seventh trumpet and latter day.
Ecclesiastical, which simply and altogether forewarneth the only progress of
Gods true church, and this is done Cap. 11.

And amplificatiue part, wherein are more largely set down and expounded those
greatest and most notable matters, which were over summarlie, briefly, or
obscurelie expressed in the orderly part, and this forewarneth the estate of
the Elect on earth by commotions Ecclesiastical, wherein are described, the
Antichristian beasts strife with Gods Church cap. 12. and that Beast his
tokens and qualities cap. 13. and the progres of his falling, and the rising of
the Evangell to the latter day, cap. 14. and the interpretation of the Beasts
tokens cap. 17. and the decay of his city and seat, Cap, 18, and the triumph
also of Gods Church, cap, 19. And finally is expounded briefly, cap, 20. how
Gods publik and private enemies, strive against other, and both against his
Church: but at length to their own wrack and confusion eternally. Amen.
Seculare, which are introduced by preface, cap 15 and dilated in order, cap.
16. under the terms of seven Vials.
in heaven, described cap. 21. and 22. under the term of new Jerusalem.


THE SECOND AND PRINCIPAL TREATIS, wherein (by the former grounds) the whole
Apocalypse or Revelation of S. JOHN, is paraphrasticallie expounded,
historicallie applied, and temporallie dated, with notes on every difficulty,
and arguments on each Chapter.
CHAP. I.
THE ARGUMENT
These three first Chapters, being in way of Epistle, particularly directed to
the seven Churches of ASIA minor: he declares in this first Chapter (in manner
of preface) who is the director of this message, who are the bearers thereof,
and thirdly, to whom the message is directed: confirming the verity of al by
an heavenly vision, whereof in the end of the Chapter he yields the
interpretation.

The Text.
1 THe revelation of Jesus Christ which GOD gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly be done which he sent, and and showed by his
Angel unto his servant John.

2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

3 Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand.

4 John, to the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and peace
from him, Which is, and Which was, and Which is to come, and from the seven
Spirits, which ar before his Throne,

5 And from Jesus Christ, which is a faith full witness, and the first begotten
of the dead, and Prince of the kings of the earth, unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his blood,

6 And made us kings and Priests unto God, eue^ his Father, to him be glory
and dominion for evermore, Ame^

7 Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him: yea, eue^ they
which perced him through: and all kindreds of the earth, shall wail before him,
even so, Amen.

8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, Which
is, and Which was, and Which is to come, even the Almighty.

9 I John, even your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom
and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle called Pathmos, for the word of
God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ.

10 And I was ravished in spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as it had bin of a trumpet,

11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and that which thou
see, write in a book, and send it to the seven Churches which are in Asia,
unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardi, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

12 The^ I turned back to see the voice, that spoke with me: and when I was
turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks,

13 And in the midds of the seven candlesticks, one lik unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the feet, and gird about the pappes with a
golden girdle.

14 His head and hairs were white as white wool, and as snow, and his eyes
were as a flame of fire.

15 And his feet like unto fine brass, burning as in a furnace, and his voice
as the sound of many waters.

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a
sharp two edged sword: and his face shone, as the Sun shines in his
strength.

17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead: then he laid his right
hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not: I am the first and the last,

18 And am alive, but I was dead: and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen:
and I have the keys of hell, and of death.

19 Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall come hereafter.

20 The mystery of the seven stars, which thou saw in my right hand, and
the seven golden candlestickes, is this, The seven stars ar the Angels of the
seven Churches: and the seven candlestickes which thou saw, are the seven
Churches.

The paraphrastical Exposition.
1 THis is a book a revealed by Jesus Christ, whereby God appointed him, to
show forth and open unto his servants, things that must shortly be performed
in the last days, the which Christ has sent his b Angels to show and
reveal to his beloved Apostle c John.

2 Who also is an Evangelist, and thereby bears the record of the word of God,
and of the history of our salvation in Jesus Christ, and of al things that he
has seen, both then, and at this time.

3 Blessed is he, that reading and hearing the words of this Prophecy, does
observe and keep truly the meaning and contents thereof: for shortly, and in
this last age of the world, must the same be performed.

4 I John, unto the seven Churches which are in little Asia, wish grace and peace
from God the Father, who is, and ever was, and who shall come and abide for
ever: and from that holy, andd one Spirit of God, whose seven fold virtues
and perfections appear, ever ministering before the throne of God.

5 And from Jesus Christ, God and Man, who in his own person, has born a
faithful testimony of the resurrection of the dead, and of all that ever died,
he is the e first born, and begotten before al eternity, and is the first
fruits of the resurrection, even the first among the dead that arose unto
heaven: and he is king and Lord over all the princes of the earth: Unto him
therefore, that so has loved us, that he has washed us from our sins, by
shedding his blood to the death for us,

6 And thereby has made us as Kings, to reign with God his Father, and as
Priests, to offer up our daily prayers and laudings; to him, even unto that
Lord Jesus (I say) be glory and dominion for evermore, So be it.

7 Behold, he shall come to judgment in the f clouds, and all men shall see
him with their eyes, yea, even they which wounded and crucified him, and the
wicked of all the kindreds of the earth, shall quake and mourn before him,
even verily, so shall it be.

8 I am the g first, I am the last, even the first without any beginning, and
the last without any ending, says the Lord God, who present lie is, hitherto
ever has been, and shall come and abide in all time hereafrer, even for ever
and ever, for I am the Almighty.

9 And I John, your brother in Apostleship, and a partaker of tribulation with
you for the kingdom of heaven, through patience in Jesus Christ, was fugitive
in one of the yles of the Sporades, called h Pathmos, for professing the word
of God, and for bearing the true testimony of Christ Jesus.

10 And there I was ravished in spirit, upon that day of the week that our
Lord rose from death, which is the i Sunday: then heard I behind me a mighty
voice, terrible and loud as a trumpet.

11 Saying, I am the beginning, and the ending, yea, the first before all
beginning, and the last after all endinge: All therefore, that I let thee
see, write in a book, and send the same to the seven Christian Churches,
which are in little Asia, to wit, to the Churches of Ephesus, of Smyrna, of
Pergamus, of Thyatira, of Sardis, of Philadelphia, and of Laodicea.

12 Then I turned back to see him, whose voice I had heard speaking to me: and
when I had turned, I saw seven shining Candlestickes, bearing the type and
figure of those seuenk Churches.

13 And in the midst of these seven, Christ himself in his Deity, under the
l likeness of his Humanity, arrayed as in m long garments, betokening
gravity and wisdom: and in sign of ndiligence and readiness, he was girded
with the golden and precious girdle of verity, justice, and power.

14 His head and white hairs, whiter tha^ wool or snow, imports his o
honorable and reverent antiquity and age from all beginning: his fiery eyes
do pearce the secrets of al hearts, and terrify his enemies.

15 His feet are firm and stable to stand, as brazen pillars in defense of his
Elect, and are swift and terrible as a consuming fire, against the wicked, and
his voice by his preachers is loud and open, as of a multitude of p people and
waters.

16 And he preserved and kept in his migh the hand of protection, the holy q
teachers and instructers of these seven Churches, who as stars of heaven,
yielded the light of Gods truth among them, and out of his mouth, by his
teachers, proceeded the sword of r true doctrine two edged, conquering in his
elect on the one side, and subdewing and destroying his enemies on the other
side, and in the beauty of his face shined (brighter than the Sun) the bright
light of aeternall life.

17 And when I saw his heavenly majesty, I (lacking strength) fell at his s
feet as dead: then extended he his merciful hand, and gentle protection over
me, comfortably saying unto me, be not affraied of me, I am thy Lord, without
beginning, and without ending.

18 I rose to life, and do live, though I t was slain to redeem you, yea, now
behold, I live for evermore, Amen: and I have power over death and hell, to
open and close the same at my will.

19 Write up therefore, these things which thou have seen by vision, both
concerning these things that u ar, and these things which shall come to pass
hereafter.

20 And be sure, the seven stars, which by vision thou did see in my right
hand, and the seven golden candlesticks, are mystically to be understood (as
before is said) even the seven stars do mean the x seven messengers or
ministers, which God has sent to instruct these seven Churches: and the seven
candlestickes, which appeared to thee, does mean those same seven Churches.

Notes, Reasons, and amplifications.
a As God hitherto never left his Church destitute of doctrine, to instruct
them, and of prophecies to forewarne them: So here has his Majesty provided,
all the former books hitherto of the new Testament, to contain the Christian
doctrine: and this book of Revelation, to contain the whole Christian
Prophecy to the worlds end. Apocalypse then is a Revelation, and therefore, is
this book so entitled; for, that by the will and ordinance of God, Christ has
reueiled the same, word by word, as it is written in the text, to his Disciple
John, and now does daily by his holy Spirit, reueile more and more the meaning
thereof, to us in this our age, for the which it has been chiefly instituted.

b Here is this book described to proceed from God, and come to the seven
Churches by four degrees: First, God gives the same to Christ: Secondly,
Christ sends his Angel, or Angels bearing commission: Thirdly, the Angel
instructs John: Fourthlie, John wrireth the same to the seven Churches. Not
meaning hereby, that the Angels only are appearers to John: but sometime
the Father, as chap. 4. sometime the Son, as in this chapter: sometime the
holy Spirit, as chap. 14. 15. and other places: at which times, for
confirmation of the smaller visions; the Trinity in these great visions,
shows his unspeakable glory, but in other smaller visions, concerning
things to come, the Angels (as says this text) are made reporters, shewers,
and expositers, as chap. 17. 1. 7. and diverse other parts, as plainly
appears chap. 22. 8. 16. For, he says not here, the Angels are sent to
show all the visions, or visions of Gods glory, for it was the Trinity it
self that showed it self, and appeared in his own visions, and not the
Angels, as hereafter [note l] shall be showed: But he speaks here, of
prophetical visions, which Christ says here, he sent his Angels to show.

c Some have unadvisedly impugned the authority of this book, by diverse
frivolous conjectures: and among the rest, because John has so often herein
named his name, thinking it not agreeable to the Apostolic gravity, to cast
up so often his own name: and therefore, esteem they rather this book to be
set out in his name by others than by himself, for that he does not the
like in his Euangell. But contrary to their opinion, in all the scriptures, the
writers of doctrine, do not so often express their names, as the writers of
prophecy do: for the doctrine receives the authority of the own present
verity, and of the Spirit of God, but the Prophecy receives the authority by
the author, who is known to be a Prophet, whereas otherwise, the book could not
be known to be true before the perfourming thereof. Consider hereupon, Daniels
prophecy, where ye shall find his name more than threescore times repeated:
yea, in the first person, ye shall find [ I Daniel] repeated about nine times,
in the 7.8.9. and 10. chapters: whereas John repeateth his name but five times
in all this book. Hereby then no man can gather, but that this book was
written by that self same John, who was both Christ's beloved Disciple, and an
Evangelist. And therefore, styles he himself here the servant of Christ, who
has borne witness of Christ Jesus, of these things which he saw, as being
one of the four Evangelists that wrote the history of Christ, which with his
eyes he saw.

d There is but one holy Spirit, whose chief functions and graces are
divided into seven: whereof read the note[e] of the fourth chapter. For the
better comfort therefore of the seven Churches, to supply their belief and
weak faith, he lets them understand, that there is such a complete
perfection in Gods Spirit, that it has as many functions and graces to
conserve them with, as are agreeable to their number of seven.

e For two causes is Christ called the first born of all that died: First,
because in the Leuitical Law, the first borne, and first fruits, or primices,
were consecrated and offered up unto the Lord, and because of al men that ever
took life and died, only Christ is that first fruit, that is offered up an
acceptable Sacrifice to God the Father, as Paul testifies, 1. Cor. 15.20.
Therefore, he is called the first borne, even in his humanity figuratiuelie,
although reallie many others were borne near four thousand years before
him. Secondly, in consideration of his Deity, even of that word, that is
God, and long after took flesh: even in consideration (I say) of the aeternitie
thereof, because it was before all beginning: Therefore, is Christ (who is that
word) called the first borne among the dead, Col. 1.15.17.18. Although not the
word or Deity that took flesh, but the flesh it self died: and so in this
sense, the being first begotten is imputed to Christ's Deity, and aeternall
word; and to die, is imputed to his fleshly humanity; and so to Christ, as
he is fully both God and man, both these properties of being the first born,
and of dying, are justly appropriate, according to the diverse respects
aforesaid.

f Even in the clouds he ascended from hence into heaven, Act. 1.9.10.11. and
that way shall he return to judgment: read hereupon cap. 14. note m thereof.

g Of the greek A, B, C, (in which language this book was written) Alpha is
the first letter, and Omega is the last: and so God stiling himself the first
letter and the last of that A, B, C, he both thereby means, as also
incontinently subjoyneth the meaning thereof, saying, I am the beginning and
the ending.

h Pathmos is one of the yles, that are called Sporades or Cyclades, lying in
Mare Aegeo, by East the coast of Asia minor: Herein hid S. John himself from
the great tyranny and persecution of Domitian, where he abode until Domitian
died, and that year Anno Christi, 97. or 99. he wrote this book in that isle:
as appears by Irenaeus and Eusebius.

i The day of rest and godly exercises, while Christ his death was celebrated
upon the Saturday, which of old was the Jewish Sabbath day, but in memory of
Christ's resurrection, and victory over death, the Apostolic Church
transported the exercises of that day to the Sunday, which was the day of the
week, that Christ arose upon, and therefore is called the Lords day: the which
day, the people (appearingly conuening to serve God) are desired by Paul 1.
Cor. 16.2. to give contributions to the poor, and there he calls it the
first day of the week: And so indeed, where the Saturday is the seventh and
last day of the week, the Sunday falls to be the first, and is used for our
Christian Sabbath and day of the Lord.

k That these seven Candlestickes do mean these seven Churches of little Asia,
is plain by the end of this same chapter. Further, how the old Leuiticall
Candlestick was also a figure hereof, is to be said in the fourth chapter, note
ethereof.

l Because the text calls this midmost not the Son of man, but like unto the
Son of man: Therefore, some may think this not to be Christ, but an Angel
bearing the type and figure of Christ, whom Christ had deputed verse. 1. to
signify and represent these things to John, and so this Angel, not to be the
Son of man, but like unto the Son of man: But (after mine opinion) God, who
in his second commandment, will have us to represent him by no form, will also
represent himself to us by none other, but by himself, lest we otherways
being abused, should give the honor of God to Angels. And certain it is, that
neither will God be the author, nor good Angels the instruments, so to illude
mankind: And for confirmation then, that this midmost is Christ, and no Angel,
nor other bearing the type of Christ: it is evident, that hereafter he calls
himself by the styles of Christ, the first and the last, who lives and was
dead: and finally (cap, 2.18) he calls himself the Son of God: And these
titles (I am sure) none in heaven will accept nor usurp, except Christ only,
to whom they appertain. But then may you demand, why does not Christ call
himself reallie the Son of man, but like unto the Son of man? The answer
hereof, making much against Transubstantiation, is therefore to be deduced at
length. I say then, that so long as Christ was in this world, appearing
corporally to man, he styled himself the Son of man, as having his flesh and
humane body conversant with us: but contrarily, both before his incarnation, as
also since his ascension, when ever in all the Scriptures he did visibly appear
to his Saints, his visible shape and appearance, is not called the Son of man,
but the liknes of the Son of man, quasi Filius hominis, or similis filio
hominis, as in Dan. 7.13. and Dan. 10. Reu. 14.14. and in this place, or
wheresoever else: and yet by the whole properties of these self same textes,
that same that appeared in vision, is known to be Christ, as this same, who
here is called the likeness of the Son of man, or like unto the Son of man, is
hereafter in express terms, called the Son of God: neither makes this any
repugnance or co^tradiction, to the essential nature of Christ, who is really
both the Son of God, and the Son of man, being spoken of Christ, either before
his incarnation, or since his asce^sion: for first, because his humanity could
not be really seen of Daniel, before it was conceived of the Virgin; therefore,
Daniel saw Christ's Godhead, even that Word that is God, saw he transfigured
(for his capacity) into the likeness of a man, or likeness of the Son of man, but
not in a man, nor in the Son of man, till he took flesh of the Virgin. The
like transfiguration is often read to be also of Angels in the likeness of men,
but not in men. Also, secondly, since Christ his ascension into heaven, his
humanity having residence only there, his Deity being both there, and also
every where: that Deity (I say) even after Christ's ascension, as before his
incarnation, is said here to appear, not in his humanity, as the Son of man,
but in the likeness of the Son of man, for that his humanity, whereby he is the
Son of man, is not here, but in heaven, and his Godhead which is here, takes
not the flesh of the Son of man, but the visible likeness of the flesh of
man, by such a notable difference, either in the vision, or in the Spirit of
the Prophet, that he knew it to be Christ in his Deity, and not in his
humanity, but bearing the figure and likeness of his humanity. Some
unadvisedly will think this, to mean a separation of Christ's Deity from
his humanity: But contrarily, we say, that Christ his Deity, conjunct in
heaven with his humanity, does both make his chief residence with the same,
and does also flow therefrom over all the whole world infinitlie; as in
comparison, the light beams and spiritual virtues of the Sun, are conjunct in
heaven with the corporal and visible body of the Sun, wherein they have their
chief residence, and do also flow from thence unto every place: Also, the
spiritual virtue and sight is in the body of the eye, as his chief seat, and
does likewise flow from thence toward all things visible: Can any man say, that
the beam subsisteth it self alone, and is separate from the Sun, or that the
sight subsists it self alone, and is separat from the eye, seeing the body of
the Sun is the very local seat of light, and the eye of the sight? No more
make we Christ's Deity alone to be separate from his humanity: the more that the
Deity is universal and every where, and the humanity locallie in heaven;
for, the Deity (being every where) is also in heaven with the humanity, though
it likewise from thence extends it self, and flows over every place. So
that, for conclusion, the Divinity of Christ, that here appeared to S. John,
brought not down his humanity from heaven, for then he had called that
humanity that appeared, the Son of man, as (cap. 2.18) he calls his Divinity
the Son of God: but that Divinity took only, in presence of the Prophet, and
for his instruction, a shape like a man, which therefore, he calls not the
Son of man, but the likeness of the Son of man. Hereof the^ follows, that
seeing christ comes no otherwise into the world since his ascensio^, tha^ he
came before his incarnation, that is to say, by his Deity, and that his Deity
shows not his humanity, here on earth to his Saints, but only the likeness
thereof (as says the text) and so brings not down his real and natural body
from heaven while the latter day; therefore, his real body can never be in the
Host, nor transubstantiate therein. Further hereof, read note s following,
and note d of the second chapter.

m Long garments or gowns were of old, and to this day ar worn of Doctors and
Senators, to represent gravity and wisdom, as may be seen, that even in
those days the Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law did use, or rather
abuse them: and therefore, are reproched of Christ, Mar. 12.38. But here by the
right use and wearing thereof, Christ does typicallie represent, his wisdom
and perfect gravity.

n Girding is a sign of readiness: read Luke. 12.35. and Luke. 17.8.
specially, readiness in execution of justice, Esa. 11.5. Iustitia cingulum
lumborum eius: Justice shall be the girdle of his loins, conjoined with power
and strength, as Psalm. 17.33.40. The girdle therefore, that represents these
excellent properties, is said to be of gold; that is to say, precious, and
honorable, as likewise is to be said, Revel. 15.6. note e.

o White hairs importe also gravity, wisdom, and age, worthy and due of
all reverence, as says the Poet, Magna fuit quondam capit is reuerentia cani:
In old times men much honored, The old and grave white-haired head.
And seeing these properties of gravity, wisdom, and honor, as also of
antiquity, belong to Christ, he therefore, for our capacity, is described
with white hairs.

p Waters here may either be literallie taken, or propheticallie, as Reuelat.
17.15. for people: always meaning here the voice of God to be loud, open and
public.

q These seven stars are in the end of the chapter, interpreted to be seven
Angels or messengers, which are the Ministers of the seven Churches.

r As the tongue and evil speaking of the wicked, is called the sword of their
mouth, Job. 5.15. Psalm. 56.5. and Psalm. 58.8. and Prou. 5.4. whereby the Godly
are trapped, deceived, and oftentimes destroyed: So also a contrariis, this two
edged sword of Christ, in his teachers mouths, is the doctrine of truth and
true discipline whereby the wicked are confounded, and the godly are
conquered, and brought in into Christ's kingdom, Apoc. 19.15. And for further
confirmation, that this two edged sword is the true doctrine of God, read
Paul to the Hebrews, 4.12. saying, The word of God is lively and mighty in
operation, and sharper than any two edgd sword and Psalm. 148.6. And a two edged
sword in the hands of the Saints.

s This vision is agreeable in this, and almost in all points with the vision
of the man that was seen by Daniel, cap. 10.5. and therefore, as this is
Christ, so is also he whom there Daniel saw: but where he calls him a man,
according to the shape he did bear, he again incontinently interprets him,
neither to be a man, neither the Son of man, but like to the similitude of
the Son of man. ver. 16. and like to the vision or figure of a man. ver. 18.
and this example of Daniel, confirms our former note l, where we proved
Christ, neither before his incarnation, nor after his ascension, to appear in
his humanity to his Saints, but ever in his Deity under a figure, like to his
humanity: his humane body since his ascension, abiding in heaven until the
latter day: read herupon l above written, and the note d chap. 2. following.

t Here may some, contrary to the foresaid notes l and s, induce a sophisme,
saying, he who was dead, and revived aeternally appeared to John: But Christ
in his humanity died, and revived again aeternallie: Therefore, Christ in his
humanity appeared unto John. For opening the deceit of this caption: the
subject of the assumption is Christ alone, his attributum is to die in his
humanity, and to revive again eternally, and therefore neither this
humanity, nor any part of this attributum ought to be repeated in the
conclusion, but only the subiectum Christ, with the attributum, propositions
after this form: He was dead and lives aeternallie appeared unto John: But
Christ died in his humanity, and revived again aeternallie: Therefore, Christ
appeared unto John. And to the effect that the vulgar capacities may understand
these frauds: This is (as one would say, in a familiar example) He who carried
this book to you, wrote the same: But on horseback I carried this book to you:
Therefore, on horsback I wrote this book: Whereas the right argument should be
this ways disposed: He who carried this book to you wrote the same: But I
carried this book to you on horseback; or rather only simply: But I carried this
book to you: therefore, I wrote this book. Praying therefore, the simple to
beware of these and the like sophismes, I thought good in this due place, to
yield this one by way of example.

u Hereby, and by the writing of the book within and without, mentioned cap.
5.1. appears plainly, that not only there are prophecies of things to come,
written in this Revelation, but also histories of such things past, as may be a
brief introduction to the prophecy, as ye shall find (chap. 6.) of the seven
seals, which were al performed, before they were written.

x Seeing in the greek, al messengers of God ar termed by Angels, therefore, must
these Angels of the seven Churches without al question, mean these ministers or
messengers, that God has sent to teach them, as is proved immediately by the
next chap. where S. John is commanded to write to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, of Smyrna, etc. This necessarily, is to the ministers of the
Churches, and not to the Angels that S. John should write.

CHAP. II.
THE ARGUMENT.
The general preface to the seven Churches, being premitted in the first chap.
now in this chap. follows out the particular messages, direct to four of the
said Churches, commending their well doing, and exhorting perseuera^ce, and
reproving their defectio^, and craving their ame^dment.

The Text.
Unto the Angel of the church of Ephesus: write, These things says he, that
holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlestickes.

2 I know thy works, and labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
forbear the^ which are evil, and have examined the which say they are Apostles,
and are not, and have found them liers.

3 And thou have suffered, and have patience, and for my names sake have
labored, and have not fainted.

4 Nevertheless I have somvvhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love.

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works: or else I will com against the shortly and will remove thy candlestick out
of his place except thou amend.

6 But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate.

7 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the churches, To
him that over comes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
mids of the paradise of God.

8 And unto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians write, These things faith
he that is first, and last, which was dead, and is alive.

9 I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I
know the blasphemy of them, which say they are Jews, and are not but are the
Synagogue of Satan.

10 Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer: behold, it shall come
to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto the
death, and I will give thee the crown of life.

11 Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the churches. He
that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.

12 And to the Angel of the Church which is at Pergamus, write, This says he,
which has the sharp sword with two edges.

13 I know thy works and where thou dwell, even where Satan's throne is, and
thou keep my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days when
Antipas my faithful martyr was slain among you, where Satan dwells.

14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there the^ that
maintain the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, that they should eat of things sacrificed unto
idols, and commit fornication.

15 Even so have thou them, that maintain the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,
which thing I hate.

16 Regent thy self, or else I will come unto thee shortly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.

17 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will
give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.

18 And unto the Angel of the Church which is at Thyatira write, These things
says the son of God, which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his
feet like fine brass.

19 I know thy works and thy love, and service, and faith, and thy patience,
and thy works, and that they are more at the last than at the first:

20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, that thou suffer the
woman Iezabell, who calls her self a Prophotesse to teach and to deceive my
servants, to make the^ commit fornication, and to eat meats sacrificed unto
idols.

21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.

22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with
her, into great affliction, except they repent them of their works.

23 And I will kill her children with death: and all the Churches shall know,
that I am he which search the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you according unto your works

24 And unto you I say, the rest of them of Thyatira, as many as have not this
lerning, neither have known the deepnes of Satan (as they speak) I will put
upon you none other burden.

25 But that which you have already, hold fast til I come.

26 For he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I
give power over nations,

27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iro^ and as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken: even as I have received that power of my father.

28 And I will give unto him the morning star.

29 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

The paraphrastical Exposition.
Unto the Pastor or Minister of the Church of Ephesus write thou, and show
that these things says the Lord Jesus, that holds the pastors of these
seven Churches under his merciful hand and protection, and is present himself
in the midst of these his seven holy Christian Churches.

2 I know thy a works, o Church of Ephesus, and the travel, and patience,
thou have for my sake, and how thou detestest, and reproouest all that do
evil, and how thou have tried out the false Apostles, and have found them
dissembling liers.

3 And thou have endurrd trouble patiently, and for my names sake, have still
continued in all godly exercises, without fainting or falling back.

4 Nevertheless, I have to reprove thee, that thou have made b defection from
that charitable love, that thou sometimes had.

5 Remember therefore, of that defection, repent and amend the same, by taking
up again thy former charitable doing, or else I will come shortly in my
justice, and remove my Church from among you, unless you speedily amend.

6 But in this I praise thee, that thou abhorrest the common harlotry and
confusion of the heretic c Nicolaius, which also ar abominable in my sight.

7 Let him that has judgment understand, what Christ, d spirituallie
appearing, speaks unto his Churches: To him, says he, that overcomes his
temptations, shall I give the food of everlasting life, which he shall enjoy in
the spiritual e paradise of heaven, with God the Father aeternallie.

8 And unto the Pastor or minister of the Church of the Smyrnians write: These
things says the Lord Jesus, who is without beginning, and without ending, who
suffered f death for man's sake, and now lives aeternallie.

9 I know thy works, thou Church of the Smyrnians, and the trouble that thou
endurest, and both thy poverty in spirit, and conte^ning of worldly riches;
but thou have g treasure abiding thee in heaven: I know also the blasphemous
intisement that certain dissembled Jews make unto you, but they are the very
devils disciples, and Synagogue of Satan.

10 Fear not therefore these persecutions, which you shall suffer: for behold, I
foreshewe you, it shall come to pass, that the devil shall stir up his
tyrants to persecute and imprison you, that ye thereby may be tempted, and
abide trial, and that persecution shall last ten h years: but be thou
faithful even to the death of the body, and thou shall be crowned with the
glory of aeternall life.

11 Let him that has judgment, understand what Christ,i spirituallie
appearing, speaks unto his Churches: he that abides constant, ouercomming
his temptations, shall be delivered from the k aeternall death and damnation of
the soul.

12 And to the Pastor of the Church of Pergamus, write: Thus says the Lord
Jesus, out of whose mouth proceeds the two-edged sword of true doctrine and
sharp threatninges.

13 I know thy works o Church of Pergamus, and what wicked company you dwell
among, even among those where Satan has set his throne, and yet you worship
my name and have not denied the true Christian faith in the days of the
greatest persecution, when your l Pastor Antipas, my faithful martyr was slain
by those tyrants among you, in whom Satan dwells.

14 But I have certain offenses to lay to thy charge, because thou
entertainest them, who teach to eat things sacrificed to idols, and commit
whoordome, as Balaa^ did m teach Balac to put out their beautiful whoores of
Moab, with their glistering sacrifices to idols, and allured the children of
Israel both to eat of their idolothytes, and also to commit fleshly whooredome.

15 Even so you entertain them among you, that maintain the like doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, who confusedly make wives, and all other things to be common,
whose doctrine is abominable in my sight.

16 Repent and amend thy self hereof shortly, or else I will suddenly come
against thee, and will overthrow them with the devouring sword of my
threatenings.

17 Let him that has judgment understand, what Christ, spirituallie appearing,
speaks unto his Churches: To him (says he) that overcomes his temptations,
will I give my self, as food to his soul, who am the true, spiritual and
invisible n bread of life, that came from heaven: And as the ancients gave a
owhite stone in token of victory and freedom: so shall I, who am the true
corner stone, give my self to dwell in him, and he in me, even that stone shall
he have, which is entitled by my new and saving name of Jesus, which none p
does rightly know, but he that receives salvation thereby.

18 And unto the Pastor of the Church of Thyatira write: These things says the
q Son of God, the fiery flame of whose eyes sees the secrets, and
terrifieth the thoughts of all hearts: and whose feet are firm and stable to
stand, as brazen pillars, in the defense of his Elect.

19 I know thy works, thy charitable love, thy true service, thy lively faith,
and thy great patience, and that thy good and holy works do increase, and grow
mo in the end, than they were in the beginning:

20 Notwithstanding, I have certain offenses to lay to thy charge, in that
thou suffer the devilish woman Iezabell (who calls her self a
Prophetess) to teach and seduce my servants entising them both to the filthy
whoordome of the body, and to r spiritual whoordome with idolles, in eating
of their ethnic sacrifices, and Idolothytes.

21 And I have forborne her for a season, giving her leisure and space to
repent, and amend her whoorish idolatry, but she repented not.

22 Behold, I shall cause her s busk and set out all her idolatrous
intisements, and those that go a whooring after her idolatries shall be cast
with her, into most extreme afliction unless they repent them of their wicked
works.

23 And her t idolatrous children shall I destroy to the death, and all the
Churches shall know that I the Lord am he, which searches out the desires of
the mind, and secrets of the heart, and I will reward every one of you,
according to your deseruings.

24 And unto you I say, even unto the rest of them that are at Thyatira, so
many of you as have not embraced this devilish doctrine, nor learned that
profounde knoweledge (as they term it) of Satan, I will lay upon you no
uburthen of other traditions,

25 But that which I have already teached you, that keep, and hold fast and
sure, till I come again, to judge the world.

26 For to them that do overcome their temptations, and persevere in good
works, keeping my precepts to the end, will I give power to reign and
triumph with me over all the wicked x nations.

27 And I in them, and they in me, shall subdewe these wicked under the
scepter of our servitude, and as pot-shardes so shall these be broken and
destroyed, even of me shall they have power, as I have received that power of
God my father.

28 And I shall give unto them the light of the Euangell, and shall adorn them
with the morning beams, of the Son of justice.

29 Let him that has judgment understand what Christ, spirituallie
appearing, speaks unto his Churches,

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Such is the mercy of God, that these good works that we acknowledge to be
done by his holy Spirit, working in us, he imputes them to be our works. But
contrarily, let the presumptuous man assure himself, that if he esteem these
good works to be of himself, God in his judgment shall let him find, to his
confusion, that only God is good (Mar. 10.18) and that no goodness is in man.
ibid. And that all flesh is subdewed to sin (Romans 3.9.10) Woe therefore, to him
who otherwise presumptuouslie judges.

b Hereby learn, that a great number of good works, are not sufficient, but
God requires at our hand, that we preasse by all means possible, to attain
to a perfection in every good work, as Christ testifies, (Matthew. 5.48.)
saying, Be ye also perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.

c The Nicolaitans were heretics, affirming wives, and al things to be common.
Hereof read more amply the note m following.

d This Spirit that speaks to John, and to the Churches, is neither an
Angel, neither the person of the holy Spirit, but Christ himself: for, this
same Spirit that speaks, calls himself immediately the First and the
Last, and he who died, and lived again, (ver. 8) and the Son of God (ver.
18.) Where note, that he therefore, being Christ, calls here himself a
Spirit, because he appeared not to John in his humanity, but spirituallie in
his Deity, under a shape, like to the Son of man (as says the text, cap.
1.13) and not in his perfect shape of the Son of man: Of this read the notes
l and s of the first chapter.

e Paradise literallie in the Scripture, is that part in the earth, wherein
Adam was first placed: But there is a spiritual taking of Paradise, called the
Paradise of God, taken for that joy in heaven, which the elect souls, and
glorified bodies do possess: Read thereupon Luke 23.43. and 2. Cor. 12.4.

f Christ, in the text of the former noted, calling himself a Spirit, because
he appeared not to John, by his humanity (as there is said) yet does Christ
here speak of his humanity, how it died, and rose again, although his
Deity under an humane shape, and not his humanity it self, did then appear
to John.

g How gladly worldly poverty is to be embraced for riches in heaven,
Christ teaches, Mat. 19.21. and Mat. 6.19.20.21.

h How among the Prophets, days do mean years, is prooved by our first
proposition, and so these ten days are ten years, even the last ten years of
Traianus reign, wherein was great persecution, beginning that year, that
Ignatius, teacher of Antiochia, and this S. John his Disciple was martyred,
Anno Christi, 109. and continuing unto the year of Christ 119. that Adrian the
Emperor began his reign.

i How this Spirit that speaks, is simply no Spirit, but Christ, who is both
flesh and Spirit, consider the notes f and d above written, and l and s chap.
1.

k Here, and Apoc. 20.6.14. and Apoc. 21.8. mention is made of the second
death, meaning two deaths, to be even the death of the body, which
oftentimes in the Scriptures is called a sleep: and the death of the soul,
which is eternal damnation. This same destinction upon the contrary part ye
shall find in the scripture of the soul, or life, taking it in the first
signification for the soul and life that lives here: and in the second
signification, for the soul and life, that lives eternally, as Mat. 10.38.
and 16.25. Also two resurrectio^s you shall find mentioned in the Scriptures,
the one in this world from sins and errors, the other at the latter day,
when the flesh shall rise again. Apoc. 20. Consider therefore, these three
distinctions of death, life, and resurrection, when in the Scripture they occur.

l Antipas (says Aretas) was the pastor: and minister of this same Church of
Pergamus, by whose example of martyrdom, Christ here exhorts the rest of
that Church to constancy.

m By, and besides the common Ecclesiastical histories, which do describe the
heresy of the Nicolaitans, to be, in that they esteem wives and all things
common: Here S, John does also set out their confused opinion and double
whoordome, by example and comparison to the wicked Prophet Balaam, who devised
a way to entise the children of Israel to perish by offending God, both in
corporal and spiritual whoordom. Number. 25.1. and Number. 31.16. So then doubtless,
the Nicolaitans has been a sect, that used their wives and women as common,
and spared not to eat the offerings made to idols, expreslie against Paul, 1.
Cor. 7.8. and 10.

n That this hid Manna is Christ Jesus, who is our spiritual food, all
Christians must confess. So then, the bread and the wine in the Sacrament,
being public and visible signs, patent to our eyes, cannot be that
invisible and hid Manna, which is Christ: and so consequently, by
transubstantiation, the bread and wine do not become Christ's body and blood:
but contrarily, that visible Manna and corporal food of bread and wine, that
is taken with our hands, and incorporate in our bodies, and nourishes our
bodies in this transitory life, betokens only, and represents in the
Sacrament, that the glorified and invisible Manna Christ Jesus, who is ascended
and hid in heaven, apprehended of us by faith, and adjoined to us spirituallie,
does nourish our souls to eternal life. And so, for conclusion, that patent
Manna, is not this hid Manna by transubstantiation, as the Papists do judge:
but contrarily, the visible Manna does represent the invisible, and assures
us of the full fruit and fruition thereof.

o Aretas reports, that the ancients were accustomed to give a certain white
stone to him, that did get the victory in their plays and games: and
therefore, justly here may be taken for a sign of victory, that Christ does
give us over our temptations. Moreover, among the ancients, they that cleansed
or absolved an accused person, did cast in a white stone: and they that filed
or convicted him, did cast in a black stone, as Ovid testifies, lib. 15.
Metamorph. in these words: Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis,
his damnare reos, ill^ absolvere culpa.
Sentence was given in ancient times, by stones black and white,
The black convicted men of crimes, the other did them quite.
So, in that sense, this white stone may well be taken for the absolution of
our sins, which Christ gives to all that victoriously persevere in his faith.
In the third sense, himself is called the corner stone, Mat. 21.42. And
therefore, says the text, There is written thereon a new name, or rather (as
cap. 3.12) my new name: even that corner stone represents Christ Jesus. For
as Iehova is the old name of the Father and Creator, in the old testament, so
is Christ Jesus the new name of our redeemer in the new Testament, Where note
in Prophecies, that it is no absurdity to take a prophetical figure in diverse
agreeable senses, as Apoc. 17.9. the seven heads are both taken for seven hills,
and for seven kings and governments: read that text it self.

p Whether by the former note, this white stone means Christ himself, or
that victory and absolution, that proceeds from him: sure it is, that by
Christ only obtain we Christ, and all his benefits: and the name of Christ
and Christians receive we thereby, dwelling so inseparably in him, and he in
us, that none do perfectly taste how joyful a thing it is to receive him, and
be participant of his salvation, except those that receive the same. This name
(Apoc. 19.12) none is said to know but himself: meaning none to know Christ,
but the whole body of Christ, who dwell in him, and he in them: for Christ
and his members are called Christ, 1. Cor. 12.12.

q How this Son of God, who also suffered fleshly death, verse. 8. is in the
verses 7.11.17. and 29. called a Spirit, without any repugnance: read thereupon
the notes d and f above written.

r By this text and the conference hereof with the former 14. and 15. verses,
it is evident, that this Iezabel was a false Nicolaitan Prophetess, teaching
the very doctrine of Balaam and Nicolaus.

s As the bed is the execution place of whoordom, so metaphoricallie, to lay
this false Prophetess in her bed, is no other thing than to set her
gloriously at her altar and sacrifices, among her idols, where is meaned, that
if any there, following her idolatries, do commit spiritual whoordom, and eat
of her idolothytes, they shall perish with her for ever: Where note, that in
the Scripture whoordome is often taken in a spiritual meaning for idolatry: as
Deuteronomy. 31.16. Judge. 2.17. and infinite other places.

t As the children of the true Church are those, who have been fostered upon
the word of life, and shall ever retain the same, so they that without
recovery, are poisoned with heretical doctrine, are here called the children
of these heretics that have teached them.

u Here does our Savior expreslie note how sweet a yoke his yoke is, as
Matthew. 11.30. and how to add unto the pure and naked word of God, is so
burthenous, that he himself will add no farther traditions thereunto, til his
latter coming. Seeing Christ the^ will add no more than his simple word, by
what authority does men, under pretext of Catholics and Christians, add to
the Christian religion infinite traditions and ceremonies of men's inuentitions,
against the which Christ speaks both here, and in Mark. 7. and Luke 11. and
in other places.

x Though to govern all Nations with a Scepter of iron etc. be a property
only assigned to Christ in all the Scriptures, yet in his mercy, he so is in
us, and we in him, that thereby we are made heirs and partakers with him in his
kingdom and glory; and so consequently also in this pre-eminence over the
wicked nations. Of this union and communion promised to us, read Ioh. 14.20.
and Ioh. 17, 21. and Mat. 19.28. and 25.34. Romans 8.17. and 1. Cor. 6.3. Apoc.
3.21. And therefore, in this text, to the same sentence immediately ar subjoyned
these words, Even as I received of my father: meaning, that he gives us power
to reign over the wicked, as he has received that power of his father, etc.
And so I allow not this lection: Even as I received of my Father, so will I give
him the morning star.

CHAP. III.
THE ARGUMENT.
The former four Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna. Pergamus, and Thyatira, being in
the former chapter admonished to persevere in their well doings, and amend their
evil doings, our Savior in this chapter, proceeds with the like admonition to
the last three Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.

The Text.
AND write unto the Angel of the Church, which is at Sardi, these things
says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars: I know thy
works for thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead.

2 Be awake, and stre^gthen the things which remain, that are ready to die:
for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3 Remember therefore, how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and
repent: If therefore thou will not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

4 Notvvithstanding, thou have a few names yet in Sardi, which have not
defiled their garments: and they shall walk with me in white: for they are
worthy.

5 He that overcomes, shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put his
name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and
before his Angels.

6 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

7 And write unto the Angel of the Church which is of Philadelphia, these
things says he that is holy and true, which has the key of David, which
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens,

8 I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door and no man can
shut it: for thou haste a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not
denied my name.

9 Behold, I will make the^ of the Synagogue of Satan, which call themselves
Jews and are not, but do lie: behold, I say, I will make them, that they shall
come and worship before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee.

10 Because thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore, I will deliver
thee from the hour of tentation, which will come upon all the world, to try
them that dwell upon the earth.

11 Behold, I come shortly: hold that which thou have, that no man tak thy
crown

12 Him that overcomes will I make a pillare in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name
of the city of my God, which is, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out
of heaven from by God, and I will write upon him my new name.

13 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These things
says Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of
God.

I Know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest
cold or hot.

16 Therefore, because thou art luke warm, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth.

17 For thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not how thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may be
made rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed and that thy filthy
nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes with eie-salue, that thou may
see.

19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and amend.

20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock. If any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will com in unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

21 To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as
I overcame, and sit with my Father in his throne.

22 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

The paraphrastical Exposition.
ANd unto the Pastor of the Church of Sardis write: These things says the
Lord Jesus, who has the seuenfolde graces of his holy Spirit united in
Godheade with him, and thereby holds the Pastors of your seven Churches under
his protection. I know thy works, o Sardis, thou bear the aname, that thou
live in me by lively faith: but contrarily, thou and thy faith are but
dead.

2 Awake from thy slothfulness, and by godly exercises strengthen and quicken
up again, the small spark of faith, which as yet is in thee, but is in danger
utterly to be extinguished: for I have no ways found thy works to be
perfect before God.

3 Remember therefore, the doctrine that you received, and heard, and cleave
fast thereunto, and repent thy sweruing therfrom: for if thou will not repent
and be wakened from sin, I shall come as a b thief unawares upon thee, and
shall spoil thee of all my benefits, and thou shall not know the hour nor
time when I come.

4 Nevertheless, I know ye have a certain in Sardis with you, known to me by
name, which yet have not defiled their bodies, and these shall walk with me in
the purity and regeneration of the body, for I have accepted them as worthy
thereof.

5 He that overcomes his temptations, shall be clothed with a pure and
glorified body, and I will not blot out his name from among the living, but I
will aduouch him by name, as mine own before c God and his holy Angels.

6 Let him that has judgment understand what Christ, spiritually appearing,
speaks unto his Churches.

7 And unto the Pastor of the Church of Philadelphia write: These things
says the Lord Jesus, who is holy and true in all his sayings, and has the
key of the spiritual d house of David, even his holy Temple and Church, to
open up the true doctrine thereof, which none thereafter shall be able to
obscure: and to close up the mysteries thereof, which none, but by him, shall
be able again to open up.

8 I know, o Church of Philadelphia, thy good works: Behold, I have made to
thee an open access to the knoweledge of mine Euangell, and none shall be able
to close up or hide the same from thee: for thou art strong e in a part, and
haste firmly kept mine holy word, and have never denied my name.

9 Behold, I will make these pretended Jews, who are indeed the f Synagogue
of Satan, and are no true Israelites, but do teach lies: Behold, (I say) I
shall make these, that now would seduce and troble thee, to com and fall down
penitent g at thy feet, yielding reverence unto thee and worship unto me, when
as they shall know that I have loved thee.

10 And because thou haste kept my precepts and holy word, with patience and
constancy, therefore, I will deliver thee in the time h of trial and
persecution, which shall come shortly upon the Christians throughout all the
world, whereby their constancy shall be tried, in all the quarters of the earth.

11 Behold, it shall not be long to my last coming, hold therefore, and stick
fast, to thati doctrine that thou have received, least thy glorious reward and
triumphant crown be given to another.

12 Him that here overcomes his temptations, will I promote hereafter to bear
special rule in that heavenly Temple and kingdom of God, and he shall no
more swerue from me, nor wander astray, for I will entitle him by the name kof
a godly man, and by the name and style of the citizens of Gods heavenly
kingdom and new Jerusalem, even of that glorious estate, that God from the
highest heaven, shall vouchsafe to pour down on his elect: and finally, I will
style and name him by mine own new name, a true Christian.

13 Let him that has judgment understand, what Christ, spirituallie
appearing, speaks to his Churches.

14 And unto the Pastor of the Church of the Laodiceans write thou, These
things says l Verity it self, even the Lord Jesus the most faithful and
true witness, the m original by whom all the creatures of God were created.

15 I know thy works o Church of Laodicea, that thou art neither simply
ignorant, nor zealous and fervent according to thy knowledge, I would thou
werest either cold by n ignorance, or fervent by knowledge:

16 But because thou art betwixt them luke warm, and neither a simple ignorant
nor a fervent Christian: it must therefore come to pass, that I cast thee out
from these whom I profess with my mouth to be mine.

17 For thou vauntest that thou art rich, and increased with worldly goods,
and supposest that thou have need of no other thing, but thou know not, how
in truth thou have but a wretched and miserable soul, an art poor and
indigent of al heavenly treasure, and art blinded with worldly affections,
and see not the filthy nakedness of thy sins.

18 I counsel thee therefore, by thy prayers and daily supplications, to buy
and purchase at my hand, the fine and o golden treasures of spiritual graces,
that you may be made rich in heaven, and that you purchase to be clad with the
p merit, and innocence of my passion, that being clothed therewith, the qfilth
of thy sins be never discovered: adjoin also to thy dull senses my r clear
doctrine, that you may see the way of life.

19 As many as I love, I do rebuke and chasten them, be ye therefore fervent
and zealous, and amend your former life.

20 Behold, I stand ever ready knocking at the door of your conscience: whosoever
yields unto mine admonitions, and opens his heart and mind, by penitence and
remorse, I will certainly dwell in him, and will communicate al things with
him, and he with me.

21 To him that overcomes his temptations, will I grant power to s sit with me
in my kingdom, partaker of my glory, even as I overcame sin and death, and do
sit with my father in his kingdom and glory.

22 Let him that has judgment understand what Christ, spiritually appearing,
speaks unto his Churches.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Hereby is to be noted, in what estate and danger of death stand all
hypocrites, and these that in name only are called Christians, whereas God
contrarily, craves of us, that so far as we may, we ever aspire to
perfection in effect, and not in name.

b Of this metaphore and comparison of Christ his sudden coming, and the
coming of a thief, read his own words Mat. 24.43. Luke 12.39. and 1 These.
5.2. and 2 Pet. 3.10. and Apoc. 16.15. thereby exhorting us to continual
watching and attentiuenes.

c This is a comfortable spur to move us publicly, boldly and with
constancy to the death, to profess and confess the name of so worthy a
Lord: seeing he before God and his Angels does not spare by name to confess
us, although we be most unworthy creatures. Where, note the inseperable
communion betwixt Christ and us, he does here confess our name: and verse. 12.
he writes on us his name: read k following.

d Hereby plainly does it appear, that the Prophecy of Esaias 22.20. of
Eliakim, has both a literal and spiritual meaning: A literal, whereby it is
prophesied, that Eliakim the son of Hilkia, should bear the charge over the
house of David, as was performed 4. Reg. 18.18. A spiritual meaning,
prophesied and meaned of Christ the true Eliakim, that is to say, the God of
the resurrection, or God that rose again (ex Hierom. de interpretatione
nominum) who descended of Eliakim, Luke 3.31. Whose father Hilkia is here in
Luke, called Melcha. Else were there two several Eliakims descended of David.
In this sense, Christ the true Eliakim is spirituallie prophesied of in Esaias,
and here expounded in this text, to bear the keys of the house of David, etc.
meaning, that he bears the spiritual government and censure of his Church,
to open and close, etc. as is before said in the paraphrase.

e This little strength or strongnesse in a part, being appearinglie no great
strength, that God had given them for their talent: is nevertheless greatly
commended of God, because they have gained therewith, and neither have lost it,
nor the profit and gain thereof, but have put it to profitable uses, according
to the parable, Matthew. 25. And therefore, most of all the seven Churches, this
Church is always commended of God, and in nothing reproved.

f These appearinglie were some counterfeit Christians, and alleged Jews,
mentioned before, cap. 2.2.9. who purposed with their heresies to have seduced
these Churches from the truth.

g This is a reverence to be done by them to the Church of Philadelphia, and an
adoration and worshipping made at their feet of Philadelphia, not to them by
way of idolatry, but to God: and therefore, is it subjoyned in the text, and
they shall know that I have loved thee: meaning, that they understanding that I
love thee, shall therefore reverence thee, and worship me at your feet, that I
may also love them: Otherwise it were idolatry, and not only would not be
caused by God, but also would be forbidden by him, and by his Angels, as is
done Revel. 19.10. and Revel. 22.8.9.

h This was (appearingly) that great and universal persecution, during the
last ten years of Traianus reign, mentioned before, Apo. 2.10. and note h
thereof.

i No rites, ceremonies, traditions of men, nor other burden, but my simple
word and sweet yoke, as before (cap. 2.24.25 and note u thereof) is said at
length.

k This is an vnremooueable mark, a perpetual title, and constant profession,
whereby even to the death we are marked, named, and styled by the name of God,
godly men, and by the name of his true Church, true professors: yea, and
finally, by that name that our Savior (who was before al aeternitie) had but
newly received, when he was called Jesus, or Savior, and the only Christ: we
are therefore (after his name) called Christians, and made participant of that
salvation signified by that new name, Jesus, in the new Testament of his blood.

l Amen most commo^lie is taken for confirmation of a true and certain thing,
but likewise it signifies truth and verity it self, and in that sense it is
here taken, and is put as an epithet and style of Christ, who is the fountain
of all truth, and truth it self, as he testifies, Ioh. 14.6. I am the way,
the trutth, and the life: and this style of Amen, or truth, is set before,
being purposed in the following text to show immediately of his faithful and
true testimony and witnessing.

m Hereof read Coloss. 1.15.16.17. where ye shall find, that God by Christ
created al things visible and invisible, and that Christ was before all things,
even before all aeternitie, and therefore, is here called the beginning and
original of all the creatures of God.

n Of men cold in true religion, or yet, exceeding hot and fervent in a wrong
religion before their calling, there are infinite examples, that God has made
the^ after their calling notable instruments in his Church, and zealous
professors: But how dangerous the estate of these luke warm people is, who,
after their calling, ar neither hot nor cold, but knowing the truth, do
notwithstanding live in a careless mediocrity and idle security, Christ
testifies, Luke 12.37. Matthew. 11.20. Also of the terrible danger of these,
read Heb. 10.26.

o Gods word, wisdom and doctrine, is compared and preferred to gold or silver,
fined in the furnace: read Prou. 8.10.11. and Psalm. 12.7. So, by this gold so
fined, is meant the spiritual riches and treasure of these and all other
godly benefits.

p These white garments, are not only our mortified flesh, and regenerate
bodies, but even under the terms of garments Synecdochice expressed, is
meaned that universal purity, both of body and soul, that we obtain, being
washed by the innocent blood of Christ Jesus, as is proved by these, who (Apoc.
7) had long white robes, who (ibid. verse. 13. and 14.) are said to have washed
their robes, and made the same white in the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus:
and we know by the Christian truth, that not particularly our robes, yea, not
our flesh only, but universally, both in body and soul, we are washed in
that blood, and obtain full remission of al our sins

q Nakedness of it self is no villainy, as before the fall, Adam had no shame, but
a sinful nakedness is indeed vile and shameful, which as God corporally hid to
Adam with garments of skins after his fall: (Genesis 3.21) So Christ spirituallie
hid the same, by his white garments of innocence in his death and passion,
whereby our offenses are remitted, hid, and washed clean away.

r This sight and eie-salue is spiritually taken (as in Christ's parable, Mat.
7.34.5. and many other places) for the judgment and foresight of the mind, and
helps thereof, such as study, diligence, and exercise, which leads us the
right way of salvation: and can therefore, no ways be literallie imputed to the
corporal sight.

s Here is a comparison, whereof we, vile creatures, are not worthy; to him
be glory, that glorifieth the unworthy. Then as I (says Christ) have
obtained victory over al temptations, and therefore, reign with my Father: so
shall ye also (if ye obtein victory over your temptations) reign with me
aeternallie. The cause hereof, is because we are united in him, and he in us,
as the Father is in him, and he in the Father: read chap. 2.26. and note x
thereof.

And here ends the first part of this book, concerning the particular
admonitions to the seven Churches: Now follows the general Discourse to the
Worlds end.
CHAP. IIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
This vision the Spirit of God does premit, and set before the whole
prophecy and history following, as a most necessary thing, to know the true
throne of God and his word here in this world, and these authentike books and
Scriptures, which teach the same, here set out in this chapter before, he
proceeds to declare the tyranny that the Antichrist, and his profane Princes
are to use against that holy word and constant professors thereof, to the end
of the world.

The Text
1 AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was open in heaven, and the first
voice which I hard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, saying, Come
up hither, and I will show thee things which must be done hereafter.

2 And immediately, I was ravished in the spirit, and behold, a throne was set
in heaven, and one sat upon the throne.

3 And he that sat, was to look upon, like unto a Jasper stone, and a
Sardine, and there was a rainbow round about the throne in sight like to an
Smaragds

4 And round about the throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the
seats, I saw four and twenty Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and
had on their heads crowns of gold.

5 And out of the throne proceeded lightenings, and thunderings, and voices, and
there were seven lamps of fire, burning before the throne, which are the seven
spirits of God.

6 And before the throne there was a sea of glass lik unto crystal and in the
mids of the throne, and round about the throne were four beasts full of eyes
before and behind.

7 And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf and
the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying
eagle.

8 And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they ceased not day nor night, saying, Holy, holy,
holy Lord God almighty, Which was, and Which is, and Which is to come.

9 And when those beasts gave glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the throne, which lives for ever and ever,

10 The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the throne,
and worshipped him, that lives for evermore, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying,

11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou
haste created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and have been
created.

The paraphrastical Exposition.
1 AFter this I beheld, and lo, the door of heavenly knowledge was opened unto
me, and a first, I was called, as by the mighty and fearful trumpet of Gods
Spirit, to arise from earthly cares, and affections, to high and heavenly
conte^plations, that I might see these things, that hereafter should come to
pass.

2 Then was I immediately ravished in spirit, and did behold and conte^plate
the heavenly bthrone and temple of God, set here among his faithful, and in
that throne, God by his word erected in honor, and set in authority.

3 And this majesty of God (though in him self he be pure, bright and
shining) yet in our dull apprehension it seems dark, and mixed with
mysteries, as the Jasper stone is mixed with veins and spots, which our eyes
can not pierce: nevertheless, that weak apprehension is ever increasing,
flourishing, and continuing green, as the Jasper, holding fresh, and recent
the memory ever of Christ's blood and passion, represented by the bloody and
fleshie hew of the Sardine, and this inferior throne of Gods majesty, is
circled so about with the covenant of his e protection, as a rainbowe, that
whosoever shall approach to his Majesty, are under the wings of his
protection, for this covenant of protection, proceeds from the throne and
majesty of God, as the Smaragdus has his beginning and growing from the
Jasper.

4 And round about, and on every side is this majesty of Gods truth and true
religion, compassed, adorned, and set out by the honorable thrones and
authorities of the d twenty four authentike books of the old Testament, as
wise Senators, sitting and consulting in Gods cause, clothed all in purity,
for that in them is found no lie, and crowned with victory, for conquering,
and enlarging Gods kingdom.

5 Forth of this throne and majesty of Gods truth, and against the contemners
thereof, proceeds foreshewinges of tempestuous troubles, theatnings of
wars, and finally, the thundering out of all manner of plagues, in Gods
justice: before this throne and majesty of God, brightlie shines the e seven
special graces of Gods only Spirit, communicated to all the faithful.

6 Before the eyes of his majesty, the raging seas and storms of this world,
ar made fixed and stable as glass, that his elect (though perhaps they slide)
yet they shall not be drowned therein: yea, these drumlie seas of worldly
tyrants are made clear as Crystal, and the secrets of their hearts
disclosed. This holy throne of Gods truth is adorned within and without, with
the perfect testimony of his f four Evangelists, repleat with the eyes of
discretion, espying before the^ the prophecies of the Messiah to be fulfilled
in Christ, and espying after them, that this our Messiah should reign for ever.

7 The first Evangelist Mark begins his first face or leaf, at the voice,
crying like a roaring Lion in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, etc.
The second Evangelist Luke, begins his first face or leaf, at Zachariah his
offering incense (as it were a bullock) at the altar, etc. The third
Evangelist Matthew has his first face or leaf, of the genealogy of Christ, as
he is man. The fourth Evangelist John, begins his first face or leaf, at the
high and divine essence of Christ's Godheade, flying so high in his style, that
he is compared to an Eagle.

8 These four, as with six wings, betokening threefold haste and expedition,
proceed swiftly in their function, opening the history of Christ, and making
the same patent to the eyes of the whole world: so that day nor night, these
never stay from uttering Gods praise, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come.

9 And as these Euangels and their professors do utter this glory: honor,
and thanks to God, that lives for ever, for that he redeemed us in Christ,

10 The four and twenty books of the old Testament, by the true professors
thereof, kneel down in Gods presence, and worship him that lives for ever and
ever, acknowledging him to be the author of their triu^pha^t victory, and
glorious crowns, saying,

11 Thou only, o Lord, art worthy to receive glory, honor and power of all thy
creatures, for that thou have created all things, and at thy pleasure and will
they subsiste, and to express thy glory, they have been created.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Before any access to heavenly knowledge, we must first leave off all
worldly affections.

b How and why this throne, that here is said to appear in heaven, is Gods
heavenly truth and true religion, whereby he sits enthronized and authorized
among his Saints upon earth, is proved at length in our 17. proposition.

c The Rain-bowe was showed to Noah, as a covenant of Gods protection, that the
world should no more be destroyed by water again, Genes. 9.15. and so
generally in mysteries, it is taken for the covenant of protection.

d Of these four and twenty Elders, and how they mean the four and twenty
authentike books of the old Testament, read the 18. proposition. These does
S. Hierome in prologo Galeato nominate this way, Genesis, 1. Exodus. 2.
Leuiticus. 3. Numeri. 4. Deuteronom. 5. Joshua. 6. Judges. 7. Ruth. 8. Samuel.
9. Kings. 10. Chron. 11, Ezra. 12. Hester. 13. Job, 14. Psalms. 15. Proverbs.
16. Ecclesiastes. 17. Song of Solomon. 18. Esaias. 19. Ieremies prophecy. 20.
Ieremies Lamentations. 21. Ezechiel. 22. Daniel. 23. the twelve small Prophets.
24.

e These seven Lamps, or seven Spirits, illuminating Gods throne, are the
seven special and princincipall gifts, graces, and functions of Gods only
Spirit, besides the innumerable smaller benefits thereof: of which read
Roman. 12. and 1. Corinthians. 12. And this septenarie partition hereof, to be
received of old, is evident by the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, where after it
is said, Tu septiformis munere, etc. In these seven Lamps, or seven
Candlestickes, chap. 1. or seven grained Candlestick, specified in Exodus,
chapt. 25. and chap. 37. is also a further symbol or figure contained, to wit,
both of the seven Churches of Asia to whom Saint John wrote, as also of the
seven Churches that Paul wrote unto. And of the one and twenty Epistles and
remanent books of the new Testament, figured by the one and twenty cups of
the grains, of that Leuiticall Candlestick, with the remanent bowls and
flowers thereof: Which Churches, books, and Epistles are planted and framed, by
the seuenfold grace of Gods only Spirit, and being the first lights and
lanternes of the primitive Church, are therefore here called seven lamps,
whereby the throne of Gods word on earth, is illustrated and adorned.

f That these four beasts be the four Euangelles, is proved by our 19.
proposition, including also metonymice* the true professors thereof: But how
Ezechiel agrees thereto, and also with this Text is to be declared. Ezechiel
therefore, cap. 1. sees these beasts after a more ample manner, different from
this Text in circumstance, but not in effect: For first, in Ezech. they have
four wings, meaning speed in their future coming: here have they every one
six wings, meaning much greater speed and diligence, in their present
function. Secondly, there every one of them, have all their four faces, and
the wings of every one joined with others: meaning that every Evangelist
agreeablie teaches of Christ, borne as a man, sacrificed and slain as a
bullock, victorious over sin and death as a Lion: and finally, rising up and
ascending to heaven as a flying Eagle. And both these four patent faces, and
chief heads of Christianisme, as also every smaller head and point of
doctrine, of any one Evangelist to be contained in the others, and so one to
be all, and all four to be as one, as true witnesses should be, and
therefore, are their wings joined, that where one flewe, all flewe, tending all
to one purpose and scope: But here in the Revelation, though their faces are
separate, there is no repugnance: for they are four distinct witnesses indeed,
but here also, are they agreeable with Ezechiel, in that by this text, they
tend all one way, saying al in one voice, Holy, holy, holy, etc. Thirdly,
there they have wheels with the^, etc. that is, the army and congregations of
Gods elect, going the ways they go, eschewing the ways they eschew, reposing
on the grounds, whereon they repose, eue^ on Christ the ground stone, for that
the Spirit is all one, that is in them, and in us Gods congregation, even that
Spirit of God that indicted those four beasts and Evangelles, instructs us
his Army and Chariots, to fight out valiantly our spiritual battles. So on
the other part, the Revelation agrees herewith, speaking (chap. 5.11.12.13) of
infinite number of Saints and creatures, that with these Evangelists praised
God. For conclusion, these and al other appearing varieties, and supposed
repugnance of scriptures in circumstance, are mere harmonies, and perfect
agreementes in effect.

CHAP. V.
THE ARGUMENT
As God never left his Church destitute of Prophets and prophecies, to comfort
and forewarne them against al troubles: So here is described how Christ his
Church, and throne of his truth and true religion, has this book of
prophecy adjoined: Wherein is set out, what great grief and dolor it were to
the Elect, if they lacked this foresight of the good success, and prosperous
end of their miseries: for the which cause, Christ here has revealed this
book of prophecy to his Elect Church: like as on the other part, his whole
Saints and elect congregation, does render him praise and thanks therefore
for ever.

The Text.
AND I saw in the right hand of him that sat up on the throne, a Book
written within, and on the backeside, sealed with seven seals,

2 And I saw a strong Angel, which preached with a loud voice, Who is worthy
to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof:

3 And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to
open the Book, neither to look thereon.

4 Then I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the
Book, neither to look thereon.

5 And one of the Elders said unto me, weep not: behold, the Lion which is of
the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has obtained to open the book, and to
loose the seven seals thereof.

6 Then I beheld, and lo, in the mids of the throne, and of the four beasts,
and in the mids of the Elders, stood a Lamb as though he had been killed, which
had seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent into
all the world.

7 And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him, that sat
upon the throne.

8 And when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and the four and twenty
Elders, fell down before the Lamb having every one harps and golden vials full
of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.

9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to
open the seals thereof, because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

10 And have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth.

11 Then I beheld, and I hard the voice of many Angels round about the throne,
and about the beasts, and the Elders, and there were thousand thousands.

12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb, that was killed to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise.

13 And all the creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Praise, and
honor, and glory, and power be unto him, that sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for evermore.

14 And the four beasts said: Amen, and the four and twenty Elders fell
down, and worshipped him that lives for evermore.

The Paraphrasticall exposition.
AND I considered, that only in the merciful hand of the Almighty, that
sits in the throne of his truth, stands the a revelation of al things
done hitherto, or that shall occur and come to pass hereafter, and that
these mysteries were hid and closed from the world, as if they b were seven
foldly sealed.

2 And I perceived, that although the most mighty Angels of heaven were
inquisitiue, and should openly proclaim, who were worthy to open these
sealed mysteries, and to make the same patent;

3 They should find no creature in heaven, earth, or under the earth, worthy
or able to open the same, or to foresee them:

4 For the which cause, I (for the whole elect) greatly mourned and lamented,
that none was found worthy to open these Euangelical mysteries of our
redemption, and Christian history following thereupon.

5 Till by one of the twenty four books of the old Testament, even c by
Genesis (chap. 49.8.9.10.) we received first this comfort, that out of the
tribe of Judah (which was the root and stock, whereof David and Christ sprang)
should arise a victorious Lion over all his enemies, who should be our true
Shiloh and Messiah, in whom al nations should be blessed, and should be the
ladder (Gen* 28.12.) by which we should attain to heaven, and all heavenly
mysteries: so that no secrets, although they were seuenfoldlie sealed, could
be latent or hid from him.

6 And behold, among these of Gods true Temple and holy religion, even his
four Evangelists, and true professors of the four and twenty books of the
old testament, this came to pass, and was performed in Jesus Christ our
Lamb, who was sacrificed for us, and seeming utterly dead, did rise again,
and lives aeternallie, in d seuenfolde power and providence of that only
spirit of God, which is dispersed severally amongst the elect throughout the
whole world.

7 For he is now come fleshly into this world, and has received at the
hands of his Father, perfect knowledge and revelation of the whole mysteries of
our redemption, and history following thereupon.

8 Which as that immaculate Lamb received, and began to open and preach: his
whole elect of the old and new Testaments, prostrate themselves before his
majesty, and rejoicing as with timbrels, do offer up their vials full of the
heavenly smell of their holy prayers.

9 Singing gladly the joyful e song of our new redemption in his blood,
confessing this their Lord, to be only worthy to receive the doctrine of our
redemption, and to open up the mysteries, and whole history following
thereupon, for that even he it is, that has died for us, and has f redeemed us
in his blood; and has reconciled us to God, and of all the tribes, tongues,
kindreds, and nations, he has gathered us together.

10 And made us Kings and Priests, to God, and even with him shall we reign,
while we are yet in this ff earth.

11 And I considered the joyful voice also, of infinite of Gods holy Angels,
that stand awaiting on the throne of Gods truth, and in defense of his holy
religion, and doctrine of the new and old Testamentes, even thousand thousands
beheld I,

12 Professing openly, that immaculate Lamb, that was crucified, to be
worthy to receive power, and riches, wisdom, and strength, with honor,
glory, and praise.

13 And all the creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and in the sea, even all that are in the^, understood I to yield, every
one in his own kind, the like praise, honor, glory, and power unto that
Almighty, that sits in the throne of his truth, and unto this his immaculate
Lamb for evermore.

14 And as the four Evangelistes yielded thereto their testimony, the 24.
books of the old Testament, even all the true professors thereof
(understanding their prophecies and expectation of the Messiah now complete)
do prostrate themselves, and do worship him therefore, that lives for ever
and ever.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That by a book is meaned Prophecies, Revelations, and admonitions, consider
by the tenth chapter hereof: and Ezech. 3.1 But in that it was written without
and within, it signifies, that it contained patent histories of things in S.
John's days, and secret prophecies of things to come after his days, among
the Christians, as evidently appears, Revel. 1.19. and note u thereof: the
like ye shall find in Ezech. 2.10.

b That each of these seals does contain seven years, is proved by our 9.
proposition: but why, and in what respects they are called seals, appears to
be these causes: First, because (as proposition 9. is said) they are a part of
Daniels weeks, which indeed, are mystical and sealed weeks, as says the
Angel (Dan. 12.9.) These words are closed and sealed. Therefore, justly may
both these weeks and these Seals be called sealed weeks, or weeklie seals.
Secondly, because in the time of these Seals, containing the space of 42.
years, the whole seals of our salvation were sufficiently opened by the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, preached in that time (as Paul testifies
Romans 10.18) throughout all the whole world: and in that space the Jews, and
other enemies were brought to confusion. Thirdly, this space of these 42.
years, is justly termed by seals, because that short space, in comparison of
the rest of the years until the latter day, which are contained in this book,
is as the time of the opening of the seals of letters, in respect of the longer
time in reading the same. Fourthly, as seals must first be opened, ere the
letter be read, so these accidents of these 42. first years, being first in
time, must first be performed before the rest follow.

e Although this be Genesis, in the which this comfortable promise of the
Messiah is first made to us, yet all the rest of the 24. Ancients do also
prophecy and forewarn the same, which moves John here not to say, only one
Elder, but, one of the Elders, as if he would say, the first of the^: and
afterward, he repeates the same, for all the rest of the Elders, in the 8. and
9. verses: where they say al in one voice, Thou art worthy to tak the book,
and open the seals thereof, etc. In which saying of this Elder ye shall not
stir, although ye find not these words mentioned word by word in Genesis, for
Christ and his Apostles cite not their testimonies of the old Testament always
word by word, as ye shall find more ample in the note g Apoc. 7.

d Among the prophets, commonly horns are taken for Kings, Kingdoms, and
powers, as in Daniel. 8. and Psalm. 74.4.5. And eyes are taken for wisdom,
providence, and foresight, as in Esaias. 35.5. and Mat. 7. meaning hereby the
princely powers and wise foresight, that is in Gods holy Spirit: but of their
number of seven, read e in the former chapter.

e That this song is the song of our new redemption, is proved by the words
following, to wit: And thou have redeemed us, etc.

f. ff That this, for this text and other causes, is a vision of Gods throne,
not in heaven but on earth, is proved by our 17. proposition.

CHAP. VI.
THE ARGUMENT.
In these two former chapters, being described how God adornes the throne of
his truth and true religion, both with the present doctrine of salvation, and
with the prophetical admonitons of al things needful to be foreknowne. The
first being taught by the 24. Elders, and four beasts, and other books and
lamps of the new Testament: This book of prophecies was adjoined in the second
place, whereof the first part historical, now in this chapter, begins at Christ's
baptism, An. Christi 29. and contineweth from thence 42. od years, even to the
destruction of Jerusalem, in the year of Iubilee in Anno Christi 71. under the
terms of seven Seals, whereof the history of six seals is orderly set
down in this chapter: The rest, to wit, how from the seventh seal, in the
year of Christ 71. continues the seven trumpets or vials, to the year of
Christ 1541. and how from thence to the latter day, continews the seven
thunders, in the chapters hereafter following shall be declared. Now first of
the seven Seals.

Historical application. 1 First Christ in his complete age of 29. years is
baptized, begins to open and preach the Gospel. In these seven years Matthew
writes his Hebrew Evangell, and publishes it.

Years of Christ. 29 Sabbath year The week of the first Seal.

Paraphrase. 1 Thereafter I saw when Christ opened the sealed doctrine of our
redemption, in this first sealed week. One a of the four Evangelists in the
mighty style of Gods thundering Spirit set out the same, willing us to approach
and consider it

The Text. 1 AFter, I beheld when the Lamb had opened one of the seals, and I
heard one of the four beasts say, as it were the noise of thunder, Come and
see.

Historical application. 2 Christ and his Disciples pass over all the world,
bearing the testimony of the gospel, and true word of God; which by Christ's
doctrine, miracles, death, and glorious victory over death, so touched and
moved the hearts of all the faithful, that suddenly it spread, increased, and
triumphantly it got victory over all the world.

Paraphrase. 2 And as we beheld and considered that Evangel, lo, the b pure
and holy teachers and Apostles, speedily went forth, over all the world,
bearing with them Gods word, shoting the arrows of zeal to pierce all godly
hearts: and this word of God was crowned with victory, for it passed over all
the world, ouerco^ming and conquering.

The Text. 2 Therefore, I beheld, and lo, there was a white horse, and he
that sat on him, had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he went
forth conquering that he might overcome.

Historical application. 3 Now after this first seed of the Evangell once
sown, begins persecution, about the six and thirtieth year of Christ's
age. Within these second seven years Mark writes the second Euangel; in
comfort of the afflicted Church.

Years of Christ. 36 A sabbath or year of rest The week of the second Seal.

Paraphrase. 3 And as Christ by his Apostles, opened the doctrine of our
redemption, in the second sealed week, the second Evangelist spak out his
gospel, that al me^ might come and see it.

The Text. 3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second
beast say, Come and see.

Historical application. 4 And Saint Steven suffered martyrdom for Christ's
sake, and James the brother of John, likewise was beheaded (Act. chap. 7. and
chap 12.) for even then, and from thence forth, the Roman magistrates, and
Synagogue of the Jews never stinted from persecuting and putting to death by
fire and sword, all true Christians.

Paraphrase. 4 And that time proceeded c tyrannous and bloody Magistrates;
sitting in the seat of tyranny, to who^ power was given to persecut Gods
Saints on earth, and to deprive them of peace, by causing all men to kill the^,
abusing so the sword of justice, that God had given them.

The Text. 4 And there went out another horse, that was red, and power was
given to him that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another, and there was given unto him a great sword.

Historical application. 5 Notwithstanding this persecution, the Euangel ever
more and more, is opened and increased, so that within these third seven years
beginning in the year of Christ, 43. Luke also wrote the third Eva^gel and
published it. At this time there fell a great famine universally,

Years of Christ. 43 A sabbath The week of the third Seal.

Paraphrase. 5 And while as the third sealed week (after Christ began to open
his doctrine,) came, the d third Eva^gelist wrote forth his Euangel, that all
men might come and see the same: the^ behold, there came a deadly plague of
famine, and therewith such skarsitie, that victuals were weighed by weight.

The Text. 5 And when he had opened the third seal, I hard the third beast
say, Come and see. Then I beheld, and lo, a black horse, and he that sat on
him, had balances in his hand.

Historical application. 6 Whereof Agabus prophesied, and foretold to the
Evangelists and Disciples, and whole Church (Act. 11) and they contributed among
them, and gave succor to their poor brethren: in this dearth, the bushel of
wheat was sold for five accustomed prices, and the bushel of barley for three:
Of this dearth shows Suetonius and Dion, and other: but of the skarsity of
other victualles we read not.

Paraphrase. 6 So that it was forespoken of, and came to pass among the midds
of the Evangelistes and Disciples of the primitive Church, that the mesure of
wheat was sold for no less than five ordinary prices, and the measure of
barley for three ordinary prices, but there was no skarsitie of wine nor oil.

The Text. 6 And I heard a voice in the mids of the four beasts say, A
measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and
oil, and wine hurt thou not.

Historical application. 7 Then, after the 50. year of Christ, in this fourth
seven years, S. John wrote the fourth Euangel, and published it, beginning at
the description of Christ's Divinity,

Years of Christ. 50 AsabbaothThe week of the fourth Seal

Paraphrase. 7 And when the fourth sealed week (after Christ first opened his
doctrine) came: the fourth Evangelist showed forth his Eva^gel, that al me^ might
come and see it.

The Text. 7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I hard the voice of the
fourth beast say, Come and see.

Historical application. 8 Expreslie against certain Heretics, for there arose
many in those days, as Cerinthus, Nicolaus, and Ebion, and (in the Acts
chapt. 13. and chap. 15.) Elymas the sorcerer, and certain Pharisaicall
heretics, and others, procuring GOD his plagues against Iudaea, and other
parts of Asia, where they resorted.

Paraphrase. 8 And behold, at that time came in e heresies among the people,
bringing therewith the death of the soul, and procuring hell and aeternal
damnation: and through that quarter of the earth, where these heresies reigned,
God gave the^ over to the sword, to famine, to death, and to the f tyrants of
the world.

The Text. 8 And I looked and behold, a pale horse, and his name that sat on
him was Death, and Hell followed after him, and power was given unto the^ over
the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the sword, and with hunger and
with death, and with the bests of the earth.

Historical application. 9 Then in the fifth seven years, even the year of
Christ 57 arose the tyrant Nero, on whom, and on whose bloody seat, and
successors, the blood of Saint Steuee and Saint James, martyred by his
predecessors, and other Saints martyred by himself,

Paraphrase. 9 And when the fifth sealed week (after Christ first opened his
word) came, then (some new tyra^t being risen) there appeared prostrate before
the ff justice seat of God, the souls of them that had bin martyred for the
word of God, and for the testimony of Christ Jesus, which they did bear.

The Text. 9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of them, that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintained.

Historical application. 10 Cried up to the heavens to God, to revenge their
blood, upon these tyrant Emperors of this bloody Empire, but as God is ever
holy and just,

Years of Christ. 57 A sabbath The week of the fifth Seal

Paraphrase. 10 Crying vehemently to God, holy and true, to judge and revenge
their blood, on these that had shead the same upon the earth.

The Text. 10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, Lord, holy
and true, do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth.

Historical application. 11 So within a short space after this, even when Peter
and Paul, and othere of gods servants had likewise suffered martytdom under
the same tyrant Nero, then poured out GOD his great vengeance on him, his
seat, family, and successors, as follows,

Paraphrase. 11 These has God clothed with his g innocence, and wills them
to abide a little while, until the number of their brethren and fellow servants
that must likewise shortly be martyred for the Eva^gel were also fulfilled.

The Text. 11 And long white robes were given unto every one, and it was said
unto them, that they should rest for a little seson, until their fellow
servants, and their brethren that should be killed, even as they were, were
fulfilled.

Historical application. 12 To wit, after the year of Christ, 64. even in the
sixth seven years, a great change and defection came in all estates of the Roman
Empire: for, now Nero raised great persecutions against the true spiritual
professors, to have utterly darkened and extinguished the light of the Gospel,
as also, he became a vile incestuous tyrant and paricide, a polluter of his
whole Empire, and estates thereof, with blood and tyranny,

Years of Christ. 64 A sabbath The week of the sixth Seal.

Paraphrase. 12 And when the sixth sealed week after Christ, first opened, his
word came, then is the great empire of the earth shaken, and the Spirituality
and bright light of the Gospel, darkened with persecution h and secular princes
and Magistrates now are become bloody butchers.

The Text. 12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was
a great earthquake, and the sun was as black as sackcloth of hair, and the
Moon was like blood.

Historical application. 13 Namely, of Gods Saints, Peter and Paul and other
martyrs, thrown down without mercy.

Paraphrase. 13 And Gods ministers are yet thrown down as shaken fruit.

The Text. 13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth as a fig-rree casts
her green figs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind.

Historical application. 14 So that the true Church of God is forced to lurk in
secret; for reve^ge whereof, and of the blood of other martyrs shead by other
Emperors before God: moves the kingdoms of France, Spain, and I Will Britain,
to revolt from this tyrant.

Paraphrase. 14 And God his Church lurketh, as a closed letter: where fore, even
now God stirred up great kingdoms of k maine lands, and Islands to revolt from
the the obedience of that Empire.

The Text. 14 And heaven departed away, as a scrolle, when it is rolled, and
every mountain and isle were moved out of their places.

Historical application. 15 And these kingdo^s with the Princes, Tribunes,
Co^suls, Senators and people of Rome, fled from his tyranny, and left him and
al his race of the Caesar's blood,

Paraphrase. 15 And the kings that were under that great Empire of the earth,
with the Princes, Tribunes, and members thereof, small and great, free and
bond, hid and absented themselves, among obscure people from their Emperors
presence, and fled under the protection of new heads-men, and barbarous
nations,

The Text. 15 And the kings of the earth and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every
freeman, hid themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the mountains.

Historical application. 16 And chosed Galba, a stranger, to be their Emperor,
against Nero, whereupon Nero (after he had burned his town of Rome, murdered
his Senators, mother, and chief kinsmen) horribly slays himself.

Paraphrase. 16 Craving these Barbares to reign over them, and to cover them
from the horrible tyranny of these Emperors, who represe^ted the face of Gods
wrath and of Christ Jesus.

The Text. 16 And said to the montains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb.

Historical application. 17 That same year the Emperors Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, cruelly murder each other with many thousand Romans, in sign
and token of Gods angry face and irresistable vengeance.

Paraphrase. 17 For the great day of their wrath, and time of reve^ge, is come,
and none is able to withstand the the same.

The Text. 17 For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That this beast is Matthew, the order of time proves, for that in that
time, he wrote the first Evangel in Hebrew: and therefore, is Matthew (under the
term of a man's face) first in order by Ezechiel (as is said in our 19.
proposition) and though he be third in John's former vision (Ap. 4) for that his
Greek Evangel was third in order, yet here must the account be made by his
first Ebrew Eva^gel, because it was that work that first passed out unto the
Jews, and Ebrew Church: and began that Christian victory, whereof the text
here speaks. The rest read in the said 19. proposition.

b That by this rider on the white horse, is meaned the word and testimony of
God, which his servantes do bear and profess, is evident by the 19 chapter
hereof.

c That this red hew means bloodshed, read Esaias 63.1. and how persecution
must follow Christ's doctrine, read Matthew. 10.34.

d This third beast agrees to be Luke two ways, both for that he wrote his
Evangel that time, as also, for that he writes that history in his book of the
Acts. chap. 11. ver. 28.29.30.

e This must needs be false doctrine and heresies, which (beside temporal
punishments) procured both death and hell.

f That these beasts be earthly kings and tyrants, read Ezech. 34. and Dan.
7. and Dan. 8.

ff It were improper here, and chap. 8.5. and chap. 9.13. and chap. 14.18. to
interpret this altar to be Christ, seeing Christ was the Sacrifice, that was
offered upon the altar of Gods justice, for full satisfaction of his wrath.
Therefore, as the Arc and couerture thereof, does represent Gods mercy seat,
Exodus 25. So must the altar represent his justice seat, for that the altar was
the place of fire and bloodshed.

g This is a metaphore taken from them, that by the rash fury and overthrow of
their enemies, have been ouertrode, and their garments pudled and defiled, and
afterward known guiltles, are restored to clean garments, betokening their
innocence: read thereupon, Apoc. 7.14.

h The Sun for the most part is taken for the spiritual estat, be it pure or
corrupt: as in Esa. 24.23. and Esa. 30.26. and here, and in diverse other
places: And sometimes also, it is taken for those things good or evil, that
are adjoined to the spiritual* estate, as (Apoc. 12.1.) for the light of the
Evangell, and (as in Mark. 4.6.17.) for persecution: whereof read the note i in
the seventh chapter following. As touching the Moon, she is sometime taken for
the changeable world, as Apoc. 12.1. but oftest for the seculare estate thereof,
as here, and in Esaias, in the verses aforesaid: and that both because of the
great mutabilitie, of that estate, as also, because al seculare laws and civil
ordinances, are borrowed from the spiritual Law of God, and ministered to the
people, as the Moon borrowed her light from the Sun, and reflexeth the same to
the earth.

i That Stars betoken Gods Ministers, read Dan. 12.3. and Apoc. 1. and notes
q and x thereof. And that heaven betokens Gods Church here on earth, consider
by Apoc. 19. conferred with the premises.

k Mountains to mean kingdoms and kings, is evident by Esaias, chap. 2. where
he expresses the kingdom of Christ, to become erected above al kingdoms, by
term of mountains. Farther, the kingdoms of the Chaldaeans and Idumeans ar
called mountains. Iere. 51.25. and Ezech. 35.3.

CHAP. VII.
THE ARGUMENT.
God having in the fifth seal above written, promised the revenge of his
Martyrs blood, and in the sixth seal begun the same upon the Roman Emperors,
consenters thereunto* and being of purpose to do the like against the Jews,
that were executers thereof: Here in this chapter he sets out how before
that destruction of the Jews, in this next plague, and also before the whole
plagues, that are to come both on Jew and Gentile, in the seven ages following,
he will first of his tender care, reserve and mark his own of every tribe of
Israel, so that these with infinite of the Christian Gentiles shall rejoice in
that delivery, and shall give praise therefore to God.

The Text.
1 ANd after that* I saw four Angels stand on the four corners of the earth,
holding the four Spirits of his wrath, from blowing forth as yet their
vengeance on maine lands, Islands, or people of the world.

2 And I perceived Easterlie b toward Jerusalem, that Christ the great
Angel, and day spring from on high, who has the c seals and badges of
salvation, did by the mighty voice of his word, command these Angels, who
had power over the said destroying Spirits of the earth, and Islands thereof.

3 Saying, Let ye them not hurt the lands, Islands, nor the people of the
world, till we have sealed and put the mark of Gods protection d patentlie,
upon all his true servants.

4 And I heard the number of those that out of e all the tribes of Israel,
Christ had sealed with the profession of his Evangell, and mark of his
protection, to be an f hundred forty four thousand.

5 To wit, of the Tribe of Judah were marked f twelve thousand Christians. Of
the Tribe of Reuben were marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Gad
were marked twelve thousand Christians.

6 Of the Tribe of Asher were marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the tribe
of Nepthalim were marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the Tribe of Manasses
were marked twelve thousand Christians.

7 Of the Tribe of Simeon were marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the tribe
of Levi were marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Ishachar were
marked twelve thousand Christians. Of the tribe of Zebulon were marked twelve
thousand Christians.

8 Of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand Christians: finally, of the tribe of
Benjamin were marked twelve thousand Christians.

9 Then of the Gentiles I considered the Congregation to be out of number, even
of all kinreds, people, nations and tongues, who standing constant before this
throne of Gods truth, and in presence of Christ Jesus, clad with the white
garments of innocence of heart, and having the joyful palms of
righteousness and upright doing in their hands.

10 Publikelie professed with their mouths, that al salvation comes from
God, that sits on the throne of his truth, and from his Son Christ Jesus.

11 Like as all the whole Angels and heavenly army of God, that awaites about
that throne of Gods truth, in defense thereof, and of the holy doctrine of
the twenty four books of the old Testament, and four Evangelistes, prostrated
themselves before Gods throne, and worshipping him confirmed the same.

12 Yielding praise and glory, wisdom and thanks, with honor, power, and
might unto our God for evermore, Sobeit.

13 And as g Esaias one of the 24. Elders, writing (cap. 63.1) Who is this that
comes from Edom in red garments, from Bozra, he is glorious in his apparel,
etc. I judged also by him, to know what they were that were arrayed in these
white robes.

14 So I found in him (verse. 9) that these be Gods holy Israel, who^ he has
brought out of trouble, and redeemed them, and (as chap. 1.18.) has made them
white as snow, and clean as wol, though they had been red as scarlet.

15 And that because (verse. 16) they ceas d to do evil, and learned to do
good, etc* and so served God continually, and have God dwelling among them.

16 These, says he (chap. 49.10.) shall no more have h hunger, nor thirste in
their souls, nor the burning Sun, or the i heat of persecution to wither them.

17 For Christ, which is in the midds of his throne and true professors, shall
guide them, and lead them to drink of the lively doctrine and fountains of
his spiritual waters, and (chap. 25.8) shall wipe away the tears of dolor
from their eyes, and give them spiritual comfort.

The Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AFterward I considered, that on all the four quarters of the earth, God had
his holy a Angels staying the winds of the earth, that the winds should not
blow on the earth, nether on the sea, neither on any tree.

2 And I saw another Angel come up from the East, which had the seal of the
living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to who^ power
was given to hurt the earth and the sea,

3 Saying, hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, til we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

4 And I heard the number of them, which were sealed, and there were sealed an
hundredth and four and forty thousand of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.

5 Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad, were sealed twelve thousand.

6 Of the tribe of Asher were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nepthali
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve
thousand.

7 Of the tribe of Simeo^ were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Leui were
seled twelf thousand. Of the tribe of Ishachar were seled twelve thousand Of the
tribe of Zabulon were sealed 12 thousand.

8 Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin
were sealed twelve thousand.

9 After these things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of al nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their
hands.

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes of our God,
that sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb.

11 And all the Angels stood round about the throne and about the Elders, and
the four beasts, and they fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped
God,

12 Saying, Amen. Praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks* and honor, and
power, and might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

13 And one of the Elders spoke, saying unto me, What are these which are
arrayed in long white robes? and whence came they?

14 And I said unto him Lord* thou know. And he said to me, These are they
which came out of great tr bulation, and have washed t eir long robes, and
have made their long robes, white in the blood of the Lamb.

15 Therefore, ar they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day
and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne will dwell among them.

16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any heat.

17 For the Lamb, which is in the mids of the throne, shall govern them and
shall lead the^ unto the lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Correspondent to the four quarters of the earth, the Prophet here by a
prophetical phrase and conformity of language, sets down four Angels, and
four executers of Gods wrath, whereas they are innumerable. The Jews also have
books of antiquity, deviding the government of the earth among four great
Angels, and under them to be many inferior Angels: But these assertio^s being
more curious tha^ certain, or pertinent to us to know, we leave this, and
returning to the exposition of the text, what these four Angels and winds be.
We say, the four Angels appear by the text, to be good angels, bearing command
over these winds, whom we esteem to be evil Angels, executers of Gods wrath,
at command of the other: for although these Angels (ver. 2) ar forbidden to hurt
the earth, yet that inferres not the^ to be evil Angels, more than where the
like is said to God, Lead us not into temptation; but contrarily, in so far
here as of themselves, they stay these winds and blasts of Satan's tyranny, to
hurt the earth, they must needs be good Angels, and the winds evil Angels.
And whereas these first four, are by the text, ready to hurt, or not to hurt
the earth, according as they be commanded of Christ that great Angel. Yet for
as much as that hurt seems to be executed not by them, but (ver. 1) by these
winds, whom they have power to loose or bind: Therefore, apparantlie, these
four Angels be the good Angels of God, and the four winds, the Spirits of
Satan, and executers of vengeance.

b This day spring or rising in the East, may two ways be understood, to wit,
either as an epithet of Christ's, as Zach. 3.8. and Luke 1.78. called by
Hieroms translation, Oriens ex alto, etc. Or then it may be understood, that
Christ arose up, and abode Easterlie above Jerusalem, to seal his
elect-Israelites there, with his protection: For Jerusalem lies Easterlie,
both from Pathmos, where Saint John wrote, as also, from the Churches of Asia
to whom he wrote.

c This mark is a comparison from shepherds, who as they mark their sheep, so
Christ our Shepherd, marketh us with the mark of his profession and
protection, alluding here to the Symbol of the Passover. Exodus 12.22. The
like hereof read in Ezech. 9.

d Christ marketh us with no secret mark, but pate^tlie in our foreheads,
meaning thereby, that vowablie and with bold faces, we must profess the mark
of Christians. Saying with Saint Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel, etc.
Romans 1.16. For who denies him here, he will deny them in heaven. Matthew.
10.33. and 2. Tim. 2.12.

e Among these Tribes Dan is left out, and in his stead is put in the Tribe of
Joseph, meaning Ephraim, Joseph's youngest son: For Manasses, Joseph's eldest
son, is put in for himself. Why Dan is so left out, the reason appears to
be, that that Tribe has been more accursed than the rest: for by the Spirit of
God, it is called (Genesis 49.17) a Serpent, or an Adder, and is called a Lions
whelp, Deuteronomy. 33.22. and for their golden Calves and great idolatry, appears
by Amos 8.14. that they fell, and never rose again, and so could not be
participant of this Christian mark.

f The Spirit of God here expresses the number of an hundred forty and four
thousand, to wit, twelve thousand of every Tribe, not that every Tribe was
aequall, or that the number was so in whole thousands without odds* as if
there were neither more, nor fewer, as though we would addict the Spirit of
God to resolve and satisfy our curiosities* but the meaning of the Spirit of
God hereinto, is to satisfy our comfort, and not our curious scrupulositie,
giving to us Gentiles and to the Christian Jews, that comfort, that whereas we
rashly fear that we be left alone to serve Christ, and that none mo than we
of Israel are chosen, as Elias judged (3. Reg. 19.18. and Romans 11.3.4.5.) God
will let us know, that he has sealed about twelve thousand of every Tribe:
where note for certainty, that in speaking to men, and in accompting of men,
the Spirit of God speaks after the phrase of men, in rejecting the ods, and in
specifying the perfect or whole number, that is nearest the truth, in steed of
the truth. And as to this number no marvel indeed it is, though in the long
time of these seven plagues following, there be about 144000 of the Israelites
elected Christians, of men, women, and children, seeing even beside women and
children, and impotent men, there were at once of Israelites, in the only days
of David, thirteen hundred thousand fighting men. For here is neither meaned,
that these were all at this one time, neither that they were altogether marked
at this time, but hereby he means, this to be a time of the beginning of
troubles, from the which, always he signifies hereby, that he will exeme his
own, not only by preserving the^ successively, as they are borne in the
world, but also by bringing their parents for their sakes through these
troubles, that of them they may be procreated. Of these read further. Apoc.
14.1. and note a thereof.

g Let none doubt that the 24. Elders do signify the 24. books of the old
Testament; although these words, here spoken by one of the 24. Elders, be not
found word by word, and altogether in any of the books of the old Testament;
for the Testimonies cited by Christ and his Apostles, are not all to be found
word by word in the old Testament: as the words cited in Math. 27.9. out of
Jeremy, are not to be found together in any one part of Jeremy, and in
Zach. 11.12. that sentence is found nearest, but not word by word. Also that
So^g, which in the Rev. 15.3. is called the Song of Moses, is not to be found
word by word in Moses Song, neither in any of the five books of his
Pentateuchon. The lik is to be seen in diverse other places of Scripture: For
God (as is said in the former note) travels to satisfy our comfort, but not
our curiosity. For, although not scrupulously in words, yet substantially in
sentences, al spoken here by this. Elder, is contained in Esaias. For, first, in
describing who is he that was clad in red garments, etc. (Esaias 63.) It
follows of necessity tacitly, that he shows what it is also to be clothed
in white, seeing in this case they are contraries: For whereas he interprets,
that to be clothed in red, means bloodshed, and slaughter: to be clothed in
white garments, must mean purity, innocence, cleannes and holiness: again,
yet more amply ( Esaias. 1.18.) is expressed what is meant by clean wool, white
as snow, and by red crimosin and skarlet, whereas he says, though thy sins
were as crimosin and red as skarlet, they shall be made white as snow, and
clean as wool. So then none can deny, but here Esaias interprets sufficiently,
that to be white as snow, or to be clothed in white garments, or in clean
wool, is to be purged, and made clean and holy from sin. And in like manner, as
toward the rest of the sentences spoken here by this Elder, they are all
expressly contained in Esaias, as they are quoted in the Paraphrase, which seeing
none of the other Elders or 24. books of the old Testament do contain,
Therefore without al doubt, Esaias is this Elder here meant of.

h This hunger and thirst cited by John here out of Esaias, means the hunger
and thirst of our souls for the word of God, as is plainly interpreted in Amos.
8.11.12.

i Though the Son for the most part, is taken for the light of the Gospel,
and for the spiritual estate it self: yet, when the burning heat thereof, is
set opposite against the seed of the Gospel, and lively springes of true
doctrine (as here) then does the Sun mean the heat of persecution, this is
plainly proved by the fourth chapter and 6. verse of Mark, and by the 17. ver.
thereof, that interprets the same. Read more hereof Apoc. 6. note. h. thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
God in the former chapter, having first marked his elect Israelits, now in
this proceeds to the destruction of Jerusalem, and reprobate Israelites, in
revenge of their tyranny used against Christ and his servants, at which
destruction of Jerusalem, ends the history bygone, of the sealed weeks, and
begins the prophecy then to come, of the seven trumpets, every trumpet
containing the space of 245. years, wherein, are orderly expressed, the
notable accidents and alterations, that were to come among the christian
kingdoms, in a manner to the worlds end. In this chapter, then is entreated of
the last of the seven seals, and first four of the seven trumpets, as
follows.

Historical application 1 IN the seventh seven years, beginning in the year
of Christ 71 came the Christian Emperors, Vespasian and Titus, under whom the
Church of God had peace a little while.

Anno Christ 71. a Iubile The opening of the seventh Seal, and progress of
the first age or trumpet

Paraphrast. exposition AND as the seave^th sealed week (after Christ opened
the Evangel) came, Gods Church had peace a little while.

The Text. 1 AND when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about half an hour.

Historical application 2 And here begins the seven ages to the worlds end,
this 71. year being Iubile,

Paraphrast. exposition 2 And behold, here the a Angels of the seven ages,
begin to receive the seven trumpettes of Gods wrath.

The Text. 2 And I saw the seve^ Angels, which stood before God, and to them
were given seven trumpets.

Historical application 3 And was that year in the which Christ Jesus procured
the revenge of his blud, and the blood of his holy martyrs upon the Synagogue
of the Jews (upon whom the said innocent blood had hitherto craved ve^ge^ce.)
So that now (by the intercession of Christ) God in his justice, stirs up
the said Roman Emperors, Vespasian and Titus against them.

Paraphrast exposition 3 And the b great Angel Christ Jesus, came and stood
as our high priest before the justice seat of God, having the office of
intercession and many sweet acceptable prayers were made to him of all Gods
martyrs and elect, that he by his c mediation mig^ offer up the same before
that justice seat of Gods throne.

The Text. 3 Then another Angel came and stood before the Altar, having a
golden censer, and much odours were given unto him, that he should offer with
the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which is before the throne.

Historical application4 And the continual prayers of poor martyrs, craving
the revenge of their blood now takes effect,

Paraphrast exposition 4 And the sweet request of these prayers were accepted,
and granted by God the Father, through the procurement and intercession of
Christ Jesus.

The Text. 4 And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints, went
up before God, out of the Angels hand.

Historical application 5 For the said Titus, accompanied with many thousand
Romans, in closes the whole Jews celebrating the Passover within Jerusalem,
where they are besieged and overcome, their city destroyed, innumerable slain,
and the rest are taken, and sold as bond-slaues, abiding without land,
liberty, or government to this day. At this time God thundered out against
them, all manner of plagues, of wars, both external and intestine, of famine
and of pestilence, and the great Roman Empire, Monarchy of the earth, is now
stirred and occupied in this destruction of the Jews:

Paraphrast exposition 5. So that Christ took the cup of gods vengeance, and
filled the same with the fiery wrath of his justice, and poured it out upon
the tyrants of the earth, murderers of the Saints of God: and there came great
thunderinges of Gods vengeance upon the^, with forthshewings and threatenings of
all manner of te^pestuous plagues, and the great Empire of the earth was then
aloft, and greatly commooved.

The Text. 5 And the Angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the
altar, and cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and thunderings, and
lighteninges, and earthquake.

Historical application6 At which destruction begins the account of the seven
ages to come to the worlds end.

Paraphrast exposition 6 At this instant, the Angels of the seven ages, having
the seven last plagues, make themselves ready to blow out the same.

The Text. 6 Then the seven Angels, which had the seven trumpets, prepared
themselves to blow the trumpets.

Historical application7 In the first of the which ages, to wit, from this 71
year of Christ, to the 316 year, the effeminate and soft Emperors, Macrinus,
Heliogabalus, Philippus, Gallus Volusianus, Licinius, and Gallienus, by their
great sloth and coldness: and the fiery and fierce Emperors. Domitian,
Commodus, Didius, and Maximinus, by their fury and rashness, mixed with the
tyranny of the 30. tyra^ts that then reigned, as under them began the first
decay of the Roman Empire. During this time the ministers of Gods word,
chiefly in Europe, are persecuted: for even of Rome 33 Bishops, successively
after other, were martyred, and the weak in faith were constrained to make
defection.

Paraphrast exposition 7 And the Angels of the first age blewe forth their
plagues, and there were certain effeminate Emperous, cold as hail, and other
furious and fierce as fire, and bloody tyrants among them, who al were cast
in the Empire of the earth. At this time the constant professors of Christ,
through the third part of the world, were persecuted, and the weak in faith
utterly decayed, withered, and fell away therefrom.

The Text. 7 So the first Angel blew the trumpet, and there was hail and*
fire mingled with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part
of the trees was burnt, and all green grass was burnt.

Historical application8 Hitherto the Empire of Rome decaying, and now in
this 316. year, the Emperor Constantine tra^sporting the seat thereof to
Constantinople, the whole Peninsul of Cethim which is interpret the gathering
or tossing of the seas, and now called Italy, is left a pray to the Hunnes,
Gottes, Vandals and other fierce nations

Anno Christ 316 A Iubilee. The second age

Paraphrast exposition 8 And the Angels of the second age threatened out Gods
judgment, and there came a multitude of people, fierce as fire, who entered
upon some d Peninsull of the sea, or lands named by the sea, and they consumed
with the edg of the sword the third part of that Peninsull and sea coast.

The Text. 8 And the second Angel blew the trumpet, and as it were a great
mountain, burning with fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of
the sea became blood.

Historical application9 Who destroyed Rome, and subdued all Italy, slaying
and spoiling of great and small even every third man.

Paraphrast exposition 9 And the third part of the people of that Peninsull,
who dwelt there, were slain, and destroyed, even from the poor e Mariner and
inhabitante to the great Pylotes, and governors.

The Text. 9 And the third part of the creatures, which were in the sea, and had
life, dyed, and the third part of ships were destroyed.

Historical application10 Then in the year of Christ 561. begins the third
age, in the which, anno 591 (as the Arabians compts per an nos Hegirae) there
arose the horrible Mahomet, who first professing Christ to be that most high
Prophet, thereafter made defection, and through pride and glory to reign, he
with the aid of Sergius a Monk, devised the damnable and bitter doctrine of the
Alkaron, and by the assistance of the Saracenes, he began his conquest anno
Christ. 623.

Anno Christ 561 a Iubile The third age.

Paraphrast exposition 10 And the Angels of the third age, blew out Gods
thretnings, and there fell from the true Church a notable and f great Apostate,
burning in pride, and wrath, and he entered and sowed his heresy in the third
part of the world, amongst the g lively fountains of the pure doctrine of the
Evangell

The Text. 10 Then the third Angel blew the trumpet, and there fell a great star
from heaven burning like a torch, and it fell into the third part of the
rivers, and into the fountains of waters.

Historical application11 And spread that bitter heresy through al Asia,
impoisoning thereby the souls of al these of Asia, that came under his dominion,
and received the same heresy.

Paraphrast exposition 11 And he may justlye be called h galle or wormwood to
the souls, for he made the doctrine of the third part of the world bitter as
wormwood, so that many souls thereby dyed, even all that spiritually drank of
that doctrine, because it was horrible and bitter heresy.

The Text. 11 And the name of the star is called wormwood: therefore the third
part of the waters became wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because
they were made bitter.

Historical application12 Thereafter in the fourth age beginning in the year
of Christ. 806. this erroneous doctrine of the Mahomet, so on the one part
increased, and on the other part such heresies and new traditions are crept in
and authorized by the Pope, that both Ecclesiastical doctors, secular
Magistrates, and simple professors, are polluted and darkened with the Mahometik
and papisticall errors, so that the third part of the light of gods truth
that shined sometime in the primitive Church, is now extinguished, the oriental
or Graecia^ Churches being seduced by the Mahomet; and the Occide^tal or Latin
churches, by the Pope of Rome.

Anno Christ 806 a Iubile The fourth age or trumpet.

Paraphrast exposition 12 And the Angels of the fourth age blew forth Gods
wrath, and the third part of the spiritual Preachers, civil Magistrates, and
Christian professors, were so plaged with these heresies, and were so blinded
with men's traditions, that they lost that light of God his truth that
sometime shined in them, and neither the Oriental i or Easterly Church (where
the day springs) nor the Occide^tal or Westerly (Church where the night
gloumes) have (by the third part) that brighte light of Christ's pure Eua^gel
that they were wont to have.

The Text. 12 And the fourth Angel blewe the trumpet, and the third part of
the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of
the stars, so that the third part of the^ was darkened, and the day was
smitten that the third part of it could not shine, and likewise the night

Historical application13 This must needs speedily procure Gods true Church to
lurk in patience, and abide invisible, til God in his justice and just
judgment, have brought most terrible plagues and venge^ce upon the world, for
these errors and universal defections, whereof the revenging plagues shall
immediately follow and fall out in these three next ages yet resting.

Paraphrast exposition 13 Whereupon I beheld, and foresaw Gods speedy warning,
as the k flight of an Eagle, going thorough the whole congregation of his
Elect, proclaiming in his terrible threatenings, threefold l woe and wrack, yet
to come therefore, upon the wicked worldlinges, by the executers of the plagues
of the three ages following.

The Text. 13 And I beheld, and heard one Angel flying through the mids of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth,
because of the soundes to come of the trumpet of the three Angels, which were
yet to blow the tru^pets.

Notes, Reasons and amplifications.
a That at this year of Christ. 71. begins both the last of the seven
seals, and the first of the seven trumpets, appears plainly by this text, and
is proved by our seventh proposition, and how thereafter, every trumpet
contains the space of 245. years, or five Iubiles, is also proved by our
fifth proposition.

b This other Angel must be Christ, for none stands before the Altar of Gods
justice, as high priest and mediator, making intercession for us, except
only Christ, as in 1. Tim. 2. ver. 5. and Hebrews 7.8.9. chapters. We must
not doubt hereof, though here he is simply called but an Angel, for the like
is found in diverse scriptures, as in Malach. 3. ver. 1. Christ is called the
Angel of the covenant, though he was more than an Angel, as contrarily, S.
John the Baptist, is there called the Angel that goes before him, in Sanct
Ieromes translation, although he be less than an Angel, as testifies Matthew.
11.11.

c These Orisons and prayers, though generally they mean all our prayers,
which indeed Christ offered up before God his father, yet in this place is
specially meant, the prayers made for revenge of the late martyrdomes
specified. cap. 6. in the fifth seal, which prayers, there are delayed, and here
taks effect, as by the text, paraphrase, and history thereof does evidently
appear.

d That the Sea is taken for sea coasts or peninsulls, read Esaias. 21.1. by the
burden of the desert Sea, meaning the burden of the desert land of Arabia
beside the sea: also Esaias 23. ver. 4. by the sea, and strength of the sea, is
meant the peninsull of Tyrus: and again in Esaias 66. ver. 19. Italy (called
there Tubal) is named among the sea cuntries. Finally, a^ent the signification
of Cethim, read Jerome de interpretatione nominum.

c That ships be taken for their mariners, it is certain also: whereas the
sea is taken for the sea coast (as by the former note) it is probable that the
ships betoken the inhabitants of that coast and governors thereof, as in
Ezechiel 27. ver. 25. by Ieromes translation, Naves maris principes tui, etc.
The ships of the sea are thy princes.

f That stars be taken for ministers or professors of God his truth, even
after their defection or apostasy, you may see both here by this Mahomet, and
the Monk Sergius his colleague, as by the Turks hereafter. Reve. 9. ver. 1. Of
stars generally taken for true teachers, read Dan. 12. ver. 3. and Revel. 1.
notes q. and xtherof. Revel. 6.13. and notei. thereof, and other places.

g What these floods and fountains be, consider by the hunger and thirst
spoken of before, Revel. 7. ver. 16. and 17. And note h thereof, and confer
there with Jeremy. 2.18, speking of the drinking of the bitter floods of the
Egyptians and Assyrians, also John 7.37.38. and Revel. 21.6.

h That this bitter wormwood means the doctrine of false Prophets, how sweet
soever it seems, read Jeremy 23.15. and how bitter and vile the Mahomets
doctrine is, they may consider by his Alkaron.

i In these Churches of the Oriental and Occidental empyres, where God
sometimes was truly honored (as David Psalm. 113.3 prophetically foretells)
at this time abounds Idolatry, heresies and many vain traditions: of which,
read the Ecclesiastical histories.

k There is so small difference in the greek, betwixt the orthographie of an
Angel and of an Eagle, that some old coppies has the one, and some has the
other, always to them both, agrees the interpretation of speedy warning or
hasty message.

l The whole visible face of the Oriental and Occidental Churches, having now
made defection: he notes by woe, woe, woe, as by an emphasis, how great and
terrible shall be the remanent three plagues that are to come upon them therefore.

CHAP. IX.
THE ARGUMENT.
Having described the estate of the empire, These four first ages: and lately
how both the Oriental and Occidental empyres, have lost a great part of that
spiritual light that first they had: Now he proceeds in this chapter to the
fifth and sixth ages, wherein is described, how horribly they are punished for
their defection, and how nevertheless they abide obstinate and impenitent, till
in the remanent chapters, the reformation of a great part, and ruin of the
remanent ensue

Historical application. 1 Now, in the fifth age, beginning in the year of
Christ 1051. proceeded yet one farther horrible plague; for eue^ the sore said
Mahomet, who before had fallen from God his true Church, to earthly pride and
ambition, received yet more power by his professors after him, to open up
again the infernal pit of his deuilish errors.

years of Christ 1051* a Iu. The fifth age* or Trumpet.

Paraphrast. exposition ANd the Angels of the fifth age, blewe forth Gods
threatninges and plagues, and I perceived, that former a Apostate, who before
had fallen from God his true Church, to earthly pride and ambition, received
yet more power by his professors after him, to open up again the infernal pit
of his deuilish errors.

The text 1 ANd the fifth Angel blew the trumpet, and I saw that star which had
fallen from heaven unto earth and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.

Historical application. 2 And he by his professors and doctrine, opened the
very way to the endless deep of hell, and out of that his deuilish furnace,
there arose such darkness of errors, that darkened greatly both the light of the
Evangell and temporal estates.

Paraphrast. exposition 2 And he by his professors and doctrine, opened the
very way to the endless deep of hell, and out of that his deuilish furnace,
there arose such darkness of errors, that darkened greatly both the light of the
Evangell and temporal estates.

The text 2 And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose the smoke of the
pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by
the smoke of the pit.

Historical application. 3 So that now are sprung up the Turks, and become
new Mahometists, and oppress all Christian lands, rising at last so high in
conquests, and so deep in heresy, that their sect is spread over in all places.

Paraphrast. exposition 3 So that now, newly again of this deuilish darkness and
heresy, is sprung up now b swarms of that sect, wasters of all lands, having
power in the end, with their c stings of heresy, to infect a great part of
the earth.

The text 3 And there came out of the smoke Locustes upon the earth, and unto
the^ was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

Historical application. 4 Yet compel they as then, no man to become
Mahometists, but setts more their intent to reaue and spoil: those that were
under the Roman and Papistical empire.

Paraphrast. exposition 4 Yet did God so bridle them, that as yet they were not
able to overcome the conscience of the very tenderest and most weak
Christians on earth, neither any that were as green plants, or as fruitful
trees in Christ's vineyard, but only to troble and anoy these, that making
defection from Christ, professed subjectio^ to the antichristian empire.

The text 4 And it was commanded the^, that they should not hurt the grass of
the earth, neither any ^reene thing, nether any tree: but only those me^ which
have not the seal of God in their for heads.

Historical application. 5 And not being of power to destroy them and conquer
Europe, they continued so, spoiling and reuing, from the days of Zadok their
first Dominatour, in anno Christi. 1051. unto the time that Changius, Chan of
Tartarie, subdued the^ in anno 1201, which was the space of an hundredth and
fifty years, beginning first to enter in Europe, as friends in supply of
Basilius Emperor against the Bulgarians, his rebels, afterward, they proceeded
wasting and spoiling over all parts:

Paraphrast. exposition 5 Yea, even toward these also were they so bridled,
that they should not d utterly destroy them, but only oppress them for the
space of e 150. years, but this their small oppression beginning first softly,
as the sting of a scorpion, proceeds at length to incurable wrack and
exterminion.

The text 5 And unto them was commanded, that they should not kill them, but
that they should be vexed five months, and that their pain should be as the
pain that comes of a scorpion when he has stung a man.

Historical application. 6 So that now their poor, oppressed and depauperate
captives would wish to die, yet do they reserve them alive for rowing in
their galleys, and other seruitudes.

Paraphrast. exposition 6 And in these days me^ whom they have thus vexed and
depauperat would wish to die but they shall be reserved a live in torment.

The text 6 Therefore in those days, shall men seek death, and shall not find
it, and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

Historical application. 7 And those oppressors were as barded horses,
proceeding to battle with strength, boldness, and agilitie, and so triumphed in
oppression, that they reigned as crowned Kings, enriched with their prays: In
the first face they seemed friendly as men should be.

Paraphrast. exposition 7 And those oppressors were as barded horses,
proceeding to battle with strength, boldness, and agilitie, and so triumphed in
oppression, that they reigned as crowned Kings, enriched with their prays: In
the first face they seemed friendly as men should be.

The text 7 And the form of the Locusts was lik unto horses prepared unto
battle, and on their heads were as it were crowns, like unto gold, and their
faces were like the faces of me^.

Historical application. 8 And smiled alluringly, as with women's attire, yet
they devoured and wasted all lands, as with the teeth of Lions.

Paraphrast. exposition 8 And smiled alluringly, as with women's attire, yet
they devoured and wasted all lands, as with the teeth of Lions.

The text 8 And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as
the teeth of Lions.

Historical application. 9 They were armed on the most strongest manner, and
their speedy haste made a noise as chariots of war.

Paraphrast. exposition 9 They were armed on the most strongest manner, and
their speedy haste made a noise as chariots of war.

The text 9 And they had habergions, like to habergions of iron, and the sound
of their wings was lik the sound of charets when many horses run unto battle.

Historical application. 10 But their tails end, and final intention was to
oppress and subdewe all men, and after that subjection, to impoyson the^ with
their stings of heresy, and they had power to torment and oppress men the
said 150 years.

Paraphrast. exposition 10 But their tails end, and final intention was to
oppress and subdewe all men, and after that subjection, to impoyson the^ with
their stings of heresy, and they had power to torment and oppress men the
said 150 years.

The text 10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in
their tails, and their power was to hurt men five months.

Historical application. 11 And they had spirituallie reigning over the^ the
said Mahomet, whose name signifies a messe^ger or destroyer, and over the^
temporally reigned the great Turk, which likewise signifies the same: for Turca
is interpreted a waster or destroyer.

Paraphrast. exposition 11 And they had over the^ their king, even a f
messenger of the Devil, whose name (trying from language to language) shall be
found to signify a ff destroyer or waster.

The text 11 And they have a King over them, which is the Angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew, is Abaddon, and in Greek he is named
Apolly on.

Historical application. 12 These at this time wrought great woe to the Roman
Empire, but afterward, these same with others wrought yet more woe,

Paraphrast. exposition 12 The first of the great woeful plagues is past, and
behold, the two last are to come shortly.

The text 12 One woe is past, and behold, yet two woes come after this.

Historical application. 13 For in the sixth age (begun in the year of Christ,
1296) it pleased God in his wrath to stir up

years of Christ 1296 A Iubilee. The sixth age, or trumpet.

Paraphrast. exposition 13 And the Angels of the sixth age blew forth God his
threatninges, and a warning came at all quarters from the throne of Gods justice

The text 13 Then the sixth Angel blew the trumpet, and I heard a voice from
the four horns of the golden altar, which is before God.

Historical application. 14 The four nations Mahometists, that dwelled beyond
and about Euphrates; to wit, the Saracens, Turks, Tartarians, and Arabians, who
al being confederate together in one law of the Mahomet, and under one great
Emperor Ottoman, began even the^ their first Empire.

Paraphrast. exposition 14 To these Angels of this sixth age, to loose the four
g great nations, which as Angels, and messengers of God his wrath, abode at the
flood Euphrates.

The text 14 Saying to the sixth Angel, which had the trumpet, Loose the four
Angels, which are bound in the great river Euphrates.

Historical application. 15 These with huge Armies came against both the
Empires of the Orient and Occicident, overthrowing, slaying and subduing all
Asia, and much of Europe, even about the third part of the world,

Paraphrast. exposition 15 And these four nations (which here dwelt in readiness
against this precise time and hour, to slay the third part of me^) now raised
their army:

The text 15 And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an hour,
at a day, at a month, and at a year, to slay the third part of men.

Historical application. 16 For their number was infinite:

Paraphrast. exposition 16 And the number of their horsemen were h two hundred
thousand thousands, and I heard that number to be certain.

The text 16 And the number of horsemen of war were twenty thousand times ten
thousand: for I heard the number of them.

Historical application. 17 And themselves and their horses armed most
strongly, like irefull proud oppressors, hasting to their pray; professing
with their mouths, these three special points of their law; to wit, their
unquenchable ire against al christian professors: the establishing of the
Mahometicke heresy and doctrine universally: and finally, their bitter
avarice, to reaue and conquer all the world to themselves, as appertaining to
the^ by right, for that they are the sons of Abraham.

Paraphrast. exposition 17 So I saw, in spirit, these horses, and their horsemen
armed, as me^, burning with fiery wrath, puffed up with glistering pride, and
tending for fearful destruction, riding fiercely forward to devour their
pray as Lions, professing plainly with their mouths, their fiery wrath,
their dark and smokie heresy, and their horrible and bitter avarice against
all Christians:

The text 17 And thus I saw the horses in a vision, and them that sat on them,
having fiery habbergio^s, and of Iacinth, and of brimstone, and the heads of
the horses were as the heads of lions: and out of their mouths went out fire,
and smoke, and brimstone.

Historical application. 18 And they being on these three respects puffed up,
overran, slew and oppressed all Asia, and much of Europe.

Paraphrast. exposition 18 And in their i ire heresy and avaritious
oppression, which they professed, they invaded, slew and destroyed the third
part of all the Empire.

The text 18 Of these three was the third part of men killed: that is, of the
fire, and of the smoke, and of the brimston, which came out of their mouths.

Historical application. 19 Co^quering mightily before them with their army,
and leaving behind the^ their priests and false preachers to seduce.

Paraphrast. exposition 19 For these horsemen had power before them, to conquer
and devour up all that come in their teeth and power, also behind them,
because the Devil, that old serpent, followed in their tails, by the mouths
of their false teachers, to sting and seduce all whom they had overcome.

The text 19 For their power is in their mouths, and in their tails: for their
tails were like unto serpe^ts and had heads wherewith they hurt.

Historical application. 20 Nevertheless, the rest of the Roman Empire
reformed not themselves, nor amended their works, neither left they their
ungodly and deuilish worshipping of alleged Saints, neither their filthy
idolatry, and worshipping of senseless images, made of every metal and
material:

Paraphrast. exposition 20 Nevertheless, the rest of the people of the Empire,
that were not overcome by these plagues, repented not of their k ungodly
works, nor abstained from l deuilish worshipping of m images of gold, of
silver, of brass, of stone and of timber, which neither can see, nor hear,
nor move.

The text 20 And the remna^t of men which were not killed by these plagues,
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils,
and idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood,
which neither can see, neither hear, nor go:

Historical application. 21 Neither left they off to murder al them that spak
against their errors: but continued in their charms and exorcismes and in
their vild Sodomie, and horrible whoredom, and repented not to deceive simple
men, in stealing from the^ both their goods and their souls, for soul-masses,
Diriges, Pardons, Indulgences, and such other trifles.

Paraphrast. exposition 21 Neither repented they of their n tyranny and
martyrdoms, nether of their o conjuring charms or witchcraft, nether of their
filthy and p unspeakable whordo^, neither yet of their q theeuish taking of
goods from simple men.

The text 21 Also they repented not of their murder, and of their sorcerie,
neither of their fornication, nor of their theft.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Now does the Spirit of God repeat here the fall of the Mahomet, not that he
now fell (for as is said, he fell in the time of the third trumpet) but meaning
that his old fall, his Alkaron and professors that he left behind him, have
made the way patent to the Turks, now at this time, to fall also from the
truth, and follow him. Confer here with our third proposition, and note
following, by the which, both these stars appear to be one, and to mean the
Mahomet, and his locusts to be the Turks, and for confirmation that this star,
is that same star that before had fallen, the Greek term of falling,
expressed in the text is (...) in the praeterit time, which had fallen, and not
(...) in the present time, which falls. Meaning thereby expreslie, that Saint
John saw, that in this fifth age, the Mahomet (who before had fallen from God in
the third age) now by his successors, and doctrine does open up the gates of
hell more manifestly, in stirring up these Turks by his heresy.

b That these Locustes be the Turks, it is plain: for that as Locusts do
destroy and waste every where, and are plagues appointed by God to that effect.
(Exodus 10.) So are the Turks both in name and effect, wasters and spoilers, as
shall be showed in the note f following.

c That these, who with pleasant flatteries profess good, and yet in effect
are rebels, and seducers from God, are compared to scorpions, read Ezech. 2.6.
and how evil women for their fair resemblance and wickedness in effect, are
called scorpions, read Ecclesiasticus 26.7. So these Turks are described here
with men's faces, and women's hair, and Scorpions tails, because they first
entered in Europe humainlie, and proceeded since with all despite and
oppression. Also, for that the stinges of scorpions seem first nothing, and
after become incurable, as the small company of Turks became almost a
Monarchy.

d In histories is more mention made of the Turks oppressions, and spoils done
against Christians in that age, than of any conquest or utter destruction of
Christians, as John Baptista Egnatius, speaking de origin Turcarum; says,
Vagid spalatique quove cuique sors affuit latrocinantes magis quam
bellig^rantes provincias vastarunt: These going in vaging and wandering
wheresoever their chance was, they waste countries, as thieves rather than
as Warriors. And as to their dominion, how from the first year of their first
Dominator Zadok, in the year of Christ, 1051. to the time that the Tartarians
subdewed them, in An. 1201. are just 150. years, diverse histories do declare.

e That these five prophetical months are an hundred and fifty years, read
the first proposition, with the second reason of our third proposition.

f. ff This flitting from Abaddon in Hebrew to Apollyon in Greek, signifies,
that his name is neither Abaddon nor Apollyon, but that we ought to descend
from language to language, until we find the name of a Governor, that
signifies the same that Abaddon and Apollyon do in Hebrew and Greek. And so
it is, that Abaddon and Apollyon do signify a Destroyer or Waster (Jerome de
interpretatione nominum) And again, on the other part Mahometes signifies (ex
eod.) Delens, a Destroyer, or Nuncius a Messenger, agreeable with both the
styles that this text gives him, to wit, both a destroyer, and also, the Angel
or messenger of the bottomless pit. Moreover, the like is to be said of their
temporal kings name Turca, which ( ex Carionis chronico, fol. 8. lib. 1. and
lib. 5. fol. 107.) signifies idem quod vastator, a Waster or destroyer.

g That all messengers and executers of Gods affairs, either of favor or
wrath be called Angels, it is common in all the Scriptures: for Angelus
signifies a Messenger: and for proof that these four of the sixth Trumpet be
no spiritual Angels, the same in the sixth Vial (Apoc. 16.12) are called the
kings of the East, for so are these Mahometanes indeed.

h Albeit this number of two hundred thousand thousand is not so expressed to
satisfy our curiosity, as if there were no odds (as I wrote, Apoc. 7. and
note f thereof) Yet certainly it has been near this number, for that he
subjoyneth for the more certainty again, And I heard the number of them, and
saw the horses in a vision, etc Agreeable hereto, it is reported that the great
Turk contemptuously sent to the Emperor of Romans, a Camel or a Dromedarie
laden with wheat, with this vow by message, that he should bring against him,
as many fighting men, as there were grains of wheat therein. This army
hereafter (Apoc. 20.8.) is compared to the sea sand in number.

i Of these three points of their profession, read their Alkaron, and confer
therewith the histories, for of their ire against the name of Christians, even
from Mahomets first beginning, read John Baptist. Egnatius upon Heraclius
Emperor, saying. Responderunt impii, (meaning Mahometists) non prius Romany
pacem se daturos, qua^ Christum abnegasset Imperator. These wicked made
answer, that they would give no peace to the Romans, till first their
Emperor renounced Christ. The second, concerning their diligence to spread
their heresy is certain. The third, concerning their auaritious claiming the
title of the whole world, that is contained expressly in their law, that they
being the sons of Abraham and of Sara (as they allege) the land as promised to
them by God, Genesis 13.16. and thereupon, Mahomet promises the kingdom of
heaven to al them, that fights valiantly in that quarrel. Yet these alleged
Saracens, are the children of Abraham and Hagar, that is to say, Hagarens or
Ismaelites, and not of Abraham and Sara. But as to the Turks we find no
certainty that any ways they are the sons of Abraham, yet claim they that
promise, as if they were the true sons of Abraham and Sara. And so in these
three points of their heresy and usurping of kingdoms, do they inuey against
Christians.

k These of the Roman Empire regarded not what evil and vicious works they
did, seeing they were persuaded, that for little cost they would get indulgence,
pardons, holy water, and light penance, which would relieve and purge their
sins.

l Of earthly hypocrites, who dissembled their evil life, as some histories
report, the Pope made his Saints: And though some of these be devils,
condemned for their hypocrisy, yet has the Pope and his Clergy ordained all
these, whom they canonized to be worshipped. Moreover, they are said hear to
woorship the Devil, in that they woorship not God, as he has commanded
them, but after their own imaginations.

m What crucifixes and other Idols of gold, silver, and other materials, were
both privately in their oratories, and publicly in Churches adored, the whole
world knows. If they will say, they worshipped them not, but used them as a
remembrance: O Ananiasses and Zaphirasses, liars against their own souls,
came they not barefooted, barelegged, bareheaded, grouflings and kneeling with
their hands holden up to these Images, and with their faces and eyes direct to
them, making such prayers and supplications as in their very books are
entitled, a prayer to the image of Christ, and a prayer to the cross of
Christ, and such others. How are they then able to deny, but that they prayed
even to these very images, yea and for the greater deceit to simple souls,
least it should be known, that Idolatry any ways was sin, their Clergy
took away the second commandment out of their treatises, and divided the last
commandment into two, to make out ten. And likewise, they held the whole Bible
in Latin untranslated, lest it should be known to the people, that God in it
forbad the worshipping of Images. Repyning thereby against their knowledge and
conscience, without any repentance as yet, as says the text.

n Amidst the great invasions that these Mahometans made at this time against
the Papists. The Pope nevertheless spared not, even then to murder the poor
sancts of God, such as John Husse, Jerome of Praga, Jerome Savonarola, and many
more that opponed against his indulgences, and others his wicked traditions.

o What charms every common curate had for the fellone, the farsie, the worm,
for bloodstemming, for lechery, and for other horrible purposes, all their
familiars, or that has seen their works and books, knows. Also in Platina,
and in other credible historiographers, ye shall find the legend of 22. Popes
or thereby, that were most horrible Necromancers, like as there is one part of
their service that is called Exorcismus, containing superstitious and magical
enchantments and conjurations of oil, of salt, of holy water, of belles, beads,
Principiosis, Agnus Deis, and other such like. And further, every high altar
is erected with joints, hair, clouts, cloths, threads and worseds of diverse
hewes, and diverse other relics of dead men, laid and builded behind the
said altars, as they do testify whose eyes has seen the same. And lest they
should doubt thereof who has not seen it, the collects of the Mass do bear
record of the same, granting these relics to be there, as in the Mass book
secundu^ usum Sarum, in servitio beatae Mariae, orationibus: Propitiare
quaesumus Domine and Praesta quesumus omnipotens: And again, in festo
reliquiarum oratione praesta quesumus omnipotens etc. and lectione prima, Hodie
dilectissimi etc. ye shall find these clauses contained Quorum reliquiae in
hac continentur Ecclesia, that is to say, whose relics are here contained in
this Church.

p What whordome and vile Sodomie is used both in Rome, and likewise every
where, among the Popes, Cardinals and whole Clergy, not only their innumerable
bastards testifies, but also their laws privily permitting Priests to have
concubines, but not wives, (Distinct. 34.) though some late glozers (excusing
the matter) define these concubines to be wives, contrary unto the text.
Further hereof read in Platina and others unsuspected historiographers, the
legend of licentious popes, whereof 13. were adulterers, 3. were common
brothellers, 4. were incestuous harlots. 11. were impoysoned with vile Sodomie,
7. were whooremongers and erecters of brothel houses, whereof every whore
pays weekly a Julian pe^ny to the Pope, which diverse years will extend to
40000 ducats by year. And all these, beside the she Pope called Ioane, who was
first called Gilberta an English woman borne in the town of Lyn, who being two
years and an half Pope, at last dies in delivery of a child openly upon the
high street of Rome, going in public processio^ by the way to the church of
saint John de Laterane, and so made her whordom and filthiness of her seat,
patent, In memory whereof, all Popes ever since going in procession, escheweth
and goes about that Laterane way, where their she predecessor dyed.

q It is more nor notorious what great abbacies and bishoprics from simple
princes, what lands and yearlie rentes from landed men, what money and goods
from men of al estates, has bin deceitfullie stolen for indulgences pardons,
remissions of sins, trigintalls, soul-masses, diriges, de-profundis, and
other superstitions, stealing thereby not only men's goods, but even their
souls, as hereafter Revel. 18.13. and note i. thereof, and 2. Pet. 2.3. These
be like the Scribes and Pharisees who devour up poor widows houses under
pretense of long prayers, as is said in Matthew. 23.14.

CHAP. X.
THE ARGUMENT.
Now orderly should follow the seventh age, which the spirit of God
begins not here to describe, after the style of the other six: but first
settes out a vision consonant and relative, with the vision wherewith he began
to describe the estate of the primitive church, and that because Christ Jesus,
that came then in the flesh, and spread the true light of his Euangell to the
primitive Church, is now (after long darkness and horrible defectio^) returned
by his Spirit to restore and open up again the same light and truth to us, in
this last age* And therefore he staieth here the imperial or secular history
of this seventh age, till the Ecclesiastical history be also far
proceeded. In this vision, first is described the spiritual returning of Jesus
Christ to us, with the open word of his truth. Secondly, that now the seven
thunders or Angels of Gods great harvest are coming, where Christ makes his
solemn vow that in this seventh age the world shall end. Last of all, (how
under the name of the Prophet) the whole Church at this time, should rightly
conceive in their heart the true understanding and meaning of this revelation,
and should preach and publish with their mouths the same, more plainly of new
again to the whole world.

The Text.
1 AND I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud,
and the rainbow upon his head, and his face was as the Sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire.

2 And he had in his hand a little book open, and he put his right foot upon
the sea, and his left on the earth,

3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a ly on roareth: and when he had cried,
seven thunders vttred their voices.

4 And when the seven thu^ders had vttred their voices, I was about to write:
but I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Seal up these things which
the seven thunders have spoken, and write them not.

5 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lift up his
hand to heaven,

6 And swear by him that lives for evermore, which created heaven, and the
things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and
the sea, and the things that therein are, that time should be no more:

7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, after he shall blow the
trumpet, eue^ the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets.

8 And the voice which I heard from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said,
Go, and take the little book, which is open in the hand of the Angel which
stands upon the sea, and upon the earth.

9 So I went unto the Angel, and said to him, Give me the little book. And he
said unto me, Take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter,
but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as honey.

10 Then I took the little book out of the Angels hand, and ate it up, and it
was in my mouth as sweet as honey: but when I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.

11 And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy among the people and nations, and
tongues, and to many kings.

The Paraphrasticall exposition.
ANd now I saw another, even the great Angel of the covenant a Christ Jesus by
his holy Spirit descending from heaven, who^ as now the world thought cloudie
and knew not: over his head stood the sign and memory of his protection, and
in the beauty of his face shined the bright light of eternal life, standing
constant as a pillar in defense of the elect, and going as fierce as fire to
confound the wicked.

2 And he offered now at hand, the open truth and revelation of these b
Euangelical and prophetical mysteries, and subdued at last under his feet al
empyres, both of sea and land.

3 And he cried and publikelie preached repentance by the mouths of his
Preachers, as the fearful voice of Lions: and as that doctrine was preached the
seven terrible thunders c (preparers and reapers of Gods great harvest) began
to forewarn their message.

4 And when they had shown forth and foretold the same, I thought to have
written it plainly, but (that being so great a mystery) I was commanded from
heaven to d seal and close up the same in dark language (as cap. 14. I have
done) and not to write it plainly here.

5 And Christ Jesus that great Angel, Dominatour now over sea and land,
solemnlie voweth, as one holding up his hands to e the heavens,

6 And swears by him that lives for ever and ever, who made the heavens, and
all that is therein, and the earth, and all that is therein, and the sea, and
all that is therein, that f time shall be no longer:

7 But in the days of this seventh age, even g after the Angels of this age,
blow forth the plague of Gods last wrath, the Antichrist shall be destroyed,
and Christ's kingdom only erected, and the great h mystery of Gods latter
judgment, ending the prophecies of all Prophets, shall be performed.

8 Then was I warned again, by that former voice of God, to go now and receive
this clear instruction of these mysteries, evangelicall and prophetical, at
the hands of Christ Jesus, Dominatour over sea and land.

9 And I past, and craved earnestly of him to reveal now to me (in the name
of the whole Church) this revelation and knowledge, and Christ granting this
our petition, commanded us al now in this age, to receive this patent
revelation and knowledge, and deeply to swallow it up, and settle it in our
hearts, and it shall engender within us the Spirit of his i zeal, and bitter
indignation, detesting horribly al impiety, but to preach it out with our
mouths, and disburthen our consciences thereof, it shall be most sweet and
comfortable for our souls.

10 Then (the true light being now come) we receive this perfect and clear
instruction at the hands of Christ Jesus, and settle the same deeply in our
breasts, and the preaching and constant profession thereof with our mouths,
becomes most pleasant and delectable to our souls: but when we do deeply
ponder the terrible plagues of God, prophesied therein, to come for our
impiety, it moves our bodies to quake, and our souls to be full of bitter
anguish.

11 And Christ Jesus by his Spirit reueiled unto me, that it behoofed me, that
is to say, the whole ministry in me, to k preach forth this present
revelation again in this last age, and plainly open the prophecy thereof to
all nations, people, tongues, kingdoms, and kings thereof.

Notes, Reasons and amplifications.
a This Angel, who here appears to John, is all one with him whom Daniel
saw in the similitude of a man (Dan. 10.5. continewing to Daniels 12. chap.
ver. 6.7) is evident by their common signs and tokens, and for the same cause,
he who appears in the mids of the seven Candlestickes (Apoc. 1.13) is also
all one with them: For by Dan. 10.16.18. he is styled, One like the similitude
of the Son of man or like appearance of a man. So Apoc. 1.13. he is styled.
One like unto the Son of man. In Daniel he is girded with a golden girdle:
So is he also in Apoc. 1. In both places his face did shine, as here also it
shines: In all these places his feet were as pillars of fire, and of fiery and
burnished brass, and his voice terrible, as of a multitude of people, or of
many waters, or of a roaring lion. Again, both there in Daniel and Apoc. 1.
his eyes burn as a flame of fire, or as burning lamps: Both Daniel and John
fall down at his feet through fear, and he again does comfort the^ both:
Further, both in Dan. 12.6.7. and here in this chapter, he, standing upon the
waters, holds up his hands, and swears the end of times. So that without all
doubt, that similitude of a man that there appeared to Daniel, and Apoc. 1.13.
appeared to John, and this Angel here mentioned, must all three be one. But
seeing he, who (Apoc. 1.13.) appeared to John, is proved there, note l
thereof, to be Christ, spirituallie appearing: Therefore, both he, who there in
Daniel appeared, and this Angel, who here appears, is also Christ. And for
confirmation hereof, none has this book in heaven or earth, or is worthy to
open the same, except Christ our Lamb, Apoc. 5.2.3.6. Therefore, he who here
has the same open in his hand, must be Christ.

b Of this book of Revelation (whereof Christ here bears the type in his
hand) only the historical part, to wit, the seven seals thereof, is opened
by Christ and his Apostles to the primitive Church, in that that part was
fulfilled in their days. But the text does never show, that the book within
is opened up, and offered patent to us, till now in this our seventh age,
wherein Christ here (verse. 2.) not only opens all the prophetical mysteries
thereof, but also (ver. 9.) offers the same to the Church, under the person
of the Prophet: as thirdly, ordains them to preach the same over again,
openly and patentlie to the whole world, wherethrow, without all question,
this is the time of knowledge even presently, of which says Daniel chap.
12.4. Claude sermones, and signa librum vsque in tempus statutum. Close up
these speeches, and seal the book, until the time appointed.

c How soon in the beginning of this seventh age, (about the year of Christ,
1541.) the light of the Evangell, and of these prophecies against the
Antichriste, begins to be reviued, and preached out by Jesus Christ, in the
mouths of Luther, Calvin, and other his ministers, even that very year begin
the seven thunders of the latter day, and reapers of Gods great harvest, to
express their prophecies, every one of the first four following other, by
the space of forty and nine years, as at length is showed in our 12. and 13.
propositions.

d At the command and voice of God, the prophecy of these thunders, is so
sealed and closed, that none could before the due time epsy, either what they
meaned, or where they were written: But the complete time of Revelation and
knowledge, spoken of by Daniel (chap. 12.4.9.13.) so seems by the dates
contained both there in Daniel, and here in the Revelation, to be come. And in
this open book, that Christ in this text proffereth to be so manifested, that
we may certainly conclude now, that this, nor no other mystery hereof is
unsearchable: what therefore, these thunders be, is declared in our 11.
proposition; to wit, that they be the seven reapers of God his great harvest,
mentioned Apoc. 14. No marvel then, though so great a mystery be commanded
to be closed, at the least during the days of the Antichristian tyranny, that
these that reign in iniquity, might continue still therein, till unawares,
they be ruined (Math. 13.13.14.15.) like as contrariwise at length, and
chiefly to the elect, the same is commanded to be opened, and not sealed,
Apoc. 22.10. And so, though even unto the wicked, I with many mo, now write
this patentlie, yet God has prepared a veil for their eyes, that seeing they
shall not see, till they go into destruction.

e This is a comparison and similitude, taken from the gesture of men, when
they make a solemn oath: and not meaning, that God swears: for, the smallest
word of his mouth is as sure as an oath, yea, so sure, that not one jot
thereof shall perish, (Mat. 5.18) The same oath you shall find in Dan. 12.7.
Also the like Genesis 22.16. The mention of this oath is but put here for the
greater Emphasis, to supply our weak credit and belief.

f Then let the Pope and all earthly Princes, look for no longer delay, but
that in this seventh age, already begun in the year of Christ 1541. the
corner stone Jesus Christ, shall become a mountain, and shall destroy all
temporal kingdoms, and reign for ever Esaias. 2.2.3. Dan. 2.44. Psalm. 2.9. and
before the 1786. year of Christ: yea, even sooner, to wit, when we see the
tokens and plagues of this age spent and past, then shall immediately come, the
day of Gods dreadful judgment, as more in special is declared in our 10. 13.
and 14. propositions, and in chap. 14. following. With this vow confer the
like, mentioned in Dan. 12.7.

gThe vulgar text says here, Quum coeperit tuba canere consummabitur mysterium
magnum, that is, When he begins to blow the trumpet, etc. But the original
Greek may rather import, After he shall blow the trumpet: for the word (...)
may more justly be taken for After rather than for immediately or
incontinently when, etc. as is to be seen in Mar. 4.32. where (...) is taken
for a long time after, and not instantly: for there it is not meaned, that the
seed which is sown, does instantly rise up, etc. and Ioh. 8.28. by the word
(...) he meaned not, that insta^tlie after the crucifying of Christ they should
know him truly, but rather after a certain progress of time from his passion.
We therefore, here justly disassent from the vulgar translation, which makes
the beginning of the seventh blast to be the end of the world; where
contrarily, Apoc. 11.19. and Apoc. 16.18.19.20.21. there is mention made of
some worldly co^motions, betwixt the beginning of the seventh blast or
outpouring of the seventh vial, and the latter day.

h What this mystery is, and how it is the mystery of the day of judgment and
general resurrection, read 1. Cor. 15. whole chap. specially, verse. 51. Behold,
I show unto you a mystery, etc.

i It is certain, that the knowledge of Gods mysteries, mortifieth in us al
worldly joy, and makes us to conceive horrible bitterness against worldly
impiety, such is the vehement zeal that the Spirit of God works in our
bowels, as ye shall find in Ezech. 3.14. This bitterness also may be taken for
the danger that it is to Preachers; to conceal and hide up Gods mysteries, and
due admonitions within their bowels, and not to disburthen their conscience
thereof, by preaching out the same, as may be seen of Jonah, chap. 1. and Paul
testifies the sam, 1. Cor. 9, 16. saying, Woe were unto me if I preached not
the Gospel. But contrariwise, upon the other part, what sweetness and comfort
comes by preaching forth the same, read Psa. 118.103. The like ye shall find
in Ezech. 3.3.

k This prophesying over again by the open book, means, that besides John's
first prophesying and writing of this Revelation, in closed and dark language,
it must be prophesied, preached, and opened over again by the whole Church in
the name of John, in these our days of the the seventh age, according to the
perfect sense, meaning, and interpretation thereof. The like is said of Daniel
chap. 12.13. That he must rise and stand up again after manies years.

CHAP. XI.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Spirit of God having hitherto orderly prophesied the imperial or secular
history, unto this seventh age or trumpet, and in the former chapter having
showed, that in this seventh age the world will end: Therefore now in this
chapter, before that end come, he begins again, and enters to the
Ecclesiastical history, of the progress of Gods word and true professors
thereof, proceeding briefly therein, until that history be as far proceeded
as the other: And then does he introduce the trumpet of the latter day, after
the very manner and style of the other six trumpets before expressed.

The Text.
The Text. 1 Then was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood by
saying, rise and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that
woorshippe therein.

Paraphrast. exposition. ANd there was power and knowledge given me straightly,
as with a metwand, to measure the estate of things to come: so Christ the great
Angel of the covenant assisting me, commanded me to arise from all earthly
affections, and to prophecy now the precise measure of times, that God has
carefully appointed over his true, inward and invisible Church, his holy
religion, and all the true professors thereof.

Historical application ANd there was power and knowledge given me straightly,
as with a metwand, to measure the estate of things to come: so Christ the great
Angel of the covenant assisting me, commanded me to arise from all earthly
affections, and to prophecy now the precise measure of times, that God has
carefully appointed over his true, inward and invisible Church, his holy
religion, and all the true professors thereof.

The Text. 2 But the court which is with out the temple cast out, and mete it
not, for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread
under foot two and forty months.

Paraphrast. exposition. 2 But as for the a outward and visible face of the
pretended Church, it must be rejected from God, and no care, mesure, nor
account had by him thereof, because it must be given over to Antichristian and
Idolatrous people; who shall subdue his holy b Church and spiritual
Ierusasalem, and tread it under foot c 1260. years.

Historical application 2 But as for the a outward and visible face of the
pretended Church, it must be rejected from God, and no care, mesure, nor
account had by him thereof, because it must be given over to Antichristian and
Idolatrous people; for after the year of God 300, the Emperor Constantine
subdued all Christian Churches to Pope Syluester; from which time, til these
our days, even 1260. year, the Pope and his Clergy, has possessed the
outward and visible Church of Christians, treading down and suppressing all
that truly opponed against their abuses.

Anno Christ. Anno Christ 300 The Ecclesiastical History and estate of Gods
word and Scriptures during the Antichrist his reign.

The Text. 3 But I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophecy a thousand, two hundredth, and three score days, clothed in sakcloth.

Paraphrast. exposition. 3 Yet in the mean time shall GOD give that grace, that
his two Witnesses, the d old and new Testamentes shall be authorized, and
shall preach and prophecy these e thousand two hundred and three score
years, though not in there due apparel, but disguised with the obscurity f of
men's traditions.

Historical application 3 Seeming to authorize the old and new Testamentes,
and to preach thereof these 1260. years, yet not rightly interpreting them,
but obscuring them with men's traditions and colored glosses.

The Text. 4 These are two olive trees, and two candlesticks, standing before
the God of the earth.

Paraphrast. exposition. 4 These Testamentes be as two g Olives, to anoint us
Kings and Priests to our God, and as two g Lanternes, to illuminate us with
the true light of his holy Spirit: These abide and stand before God with his
elect upon earth.

Historical application 4 These Testamentes be as two g Olives, to anoint us
Kings and Priests to our God, and as two g Lanternes, to illuminate us with
the true light of his holy Spirit: These abide and stand before God with his
elect upon earth.

The Text. 5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their
mouths, and deuoureth their enemies: for if any man would hurt the^, thus must
he be killed.

Paraphrast. exposition. 5 If any Heretic would pervert these, the h fire of
godly zeal, proceeding from the mouths of their professors, shall confound
these heretics. And if any Atheist would utterly subvert these Testaments,
they shall be destroyed and die eternally.

Historical application 5 If any Heretic would pervert these, the h fire of
godly zeal, proceeding from the mouths of their professors, shall confound
these heretics. And if any Atheist would utterly subvert these Testaments,
they shall be destroyed and die eternally.

The Text. 6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days
of their prophesying, and have power over waters, to turn them into blud, and
to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, as often as they will.

Paraphrast. exposition. 6 These have such authority, that the heaven shall be
closed and no rain shall descend from thence, and tyranny and bloodshed shall be
among the people of the earth, and the world scourged with all kind of
plagues, during all the days that these testaments and professors thereof do
so prophecy and threaten us for our iniquities: yea even so often, as they list
to pronounce Gods wrath against us for that cause.

Historical application 6 These have such authority, that the heaven shall be
closed and no rain shall descend from thence, and tyranny and bloodshed shall be
among the people of the earth, and the world scourged with all kind of
plagues, during all the days that these testaments and professors thereof do
so prophecy and threaten us for our iniquities: yea even so often, as they list
to pronounce Gods wrath against us for that cause.

The Text. 7 And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that
comes out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and kill them.

Paraphrast. exposition. 7 And when these two Testaments are compleitly written
out, and their testimony authorized, the i Antichristian Monarch, rising from
the devil, shall strive against them, and shall overcome the^, and shall deprive
the^ of their spiritual meaning and lively sense.

Historical application 7 Now after the primitive Church had received and
admitted these testaments, and confirmed the same in the counsel of Nice, anno
Christi. 322. even from thence forth the Roman and Papisticall empire has
trobled those scriptures of God, with humane traditions and superstitions, and
so has prevailed, that the true sense and meaning there of, was as dead out
of the world.

The Text. 8 And their corpse shall lie in the streets of the great city,
which spirituallie is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified.

Paraphrast. exposition. 8 And their dead letter shall ly as dead carkeises
patentlie, throughout all the kjurisdiction of that great Antichristian city,
which spirituallie is l as Sodom, in all stinking and unnatural lechery, and
as l Aegipt in tyranny and oppression over the sants of god, for eue^ there,
Christ our Lord, in many respects is continually mcrucified, and put to death.

Historical application 8 And this dead letter did lie obscured in Latin,
throughout all the Empire of Rome, that great city, that is more vile in all
stinking Sodomie than Sodom it self, and a more tyrannical Empire over Gods
Church than Aegipt was: for in it Christ is daily crucified in his members,
yea, eue^ in Rome was Christ himself crucified, in that he suffered death under
that Empire, and under Pontius Pilat, one of the magistrates thereof.

The Text. 9 And they of the people and kindreds, and tongues, and Gentiles,
shall see their corpse three days and a half, and shall not suffer their
carkeises to be put in graves.

Paraphrast. exposition. 9 And they of all tribes, people, to^gs, and nations,
shall see this dead letter, lying as dead carkeises, the said space of n 1260
years, and shall not suffer the same to be duly buried, settled, and ingraued
within their breasts.

Historical application 9 And all the Roman and Papistical empire, had of those
Latin and il glosed Bibles patent in their Churches and houses, during the
said 1260 years of their reign: all the which time their Legendarie, and other
fables were more ingraued in their hearts, tha^ these Testame^ts of Gods truth.

The Text. 10 And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over the^ and
be glad, and shall send gifts one to another, for these two Prophets vexed
them that dwelt on the earth.

Paraphrast. exposition. 10 For all that dwell in earthly plesures, shall be
merry to see Gods word so smothered, and shall rejoice together, and send gifts
and propines every one to another: For these two testame^ts would have preached
against sins, and prophesied their destruction, and have troubled the glad
estate of these that dwelt in earthly pleasures.

Historical application 10 Yea, they rejoiced when the fearful threatenings of
Gods word were hid, and the Popes plausible Pardons opened up, and offered to
them, and made merry in their Christmas and Easter feasts, sending for gladness
their propines and gifts at new-yeares-day and hansell Mo^day: Whereas if they
had known the fearful sentence of the Scriptures, they had not so rejoiced in
men's traditions and earthly plesures.

The Text. 11 But after three days and an half, the spirit of life coming
from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand up upon their feet, and
great fear shall come vp^ them which saw them.

Paraphrast. exposition. 11 But after the said 1260 years, the lively Spirit
or interpretation from God shall quicken them up, and they shall be authorized
and set up in aestimation, and the fear of God shall com upon the hearts of al
men that shall then rightly see and consider them.

Historical application 11 But now are these 1260 years expired in an.
Christi 1560 or therabout, and the Scriptures of God are lively and quickly
interpreted and restored to the true estimation and honor: and thousands
converted daily from their former Papistry to the true fear of God,

The Text. 12 And they shall hear a great voice from heaven saying unto the^,
Come up hither. And they shall ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their
enemies shall see them.

Paraphrast. exposition. 12 For by the voice and preaching of Gods heavenly and
true Church, they were chosen and called upon, to ascend up to them, and be
promoted above al humain traditions, and they arose up, and were promoted to
their due honor and authority, among the^ of that heavenly and true Church,
while as yet they were but cloudy, dark, and unknown to the world: then shall
their enemies the Antichristians, now begin to see and perceive their
authority.

Historical application 12 Hearing it openly preched by the most true
professors of God, that these his holy Testaments have authority and
authentikenes above al decrees, writs, and traditions of men, and therefore (how
dark and despised soever they seemed before) ar only to be brought in as
witnesses of Gods holy truth: and now this authority of these holy
Testamentes is become so c^ and evident, that the very Papists do see and
perceive the same, and must needs admit their Testimony.

The Text. 13 And the same hour shall there be a great earthquake, and the
tenth part of the city shall fall, and in the earthquake shall be slain in
number seven thousand: and the remnant shall be afraid, and give glory to the
God of heaven.

Paraphrast. exposition. 13 And the great Empire of the earth shall quake and
be commoned: and the o tenth part of the Antichristian Synagogues, and
buildinges shall be ruined, and in that commotion pseue^ thousand of those men
shall be deprived of their rents whereon they lived, and the rest of these shall
repent, and fear the Lord, and shall give glory to the God of heaven.

Historical application 13 At this time this Roman and Papisticall Empire, is
greatly shaken, for the tenth part thereof, even all their Temples, Abbaies
Frieries, Nunries, and other their cities and civil policies through all
England, Scotland, and diverse parts of Germany are pulled down and destroyed.
And of their Bishops, Abbots, Priors Channons, Monks, Friars, and Priests, a
great number deprived of their rents, and livings, and the rest repenting their
idolatrous Papistrie, become true professors of God.

The Text. 14 The second woe is past, and behold the third woe will come anon.

Paraphrast. exposition. 14 The second of the great woeful plagues, that that
Empire should suffer is past, and this is the third and last, that approaches at
hand.

Historical application 14 This Papisticall kingdom suffered great troble by
Turkish dominatours, and far greater by the Mahometane Emperors: and these
troubles are passed, but now thirdly, and greatest of all, these Ministers of
Gods truth, arising in this age, since the year of God, 1541. shall bring it
to utter wrack.

The Text. 15 And the seventh Angel blewe the trumpet, and there were great
voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his
Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore.

Paraphrast. exposition. 15 And the Angels of the seventh and last age, blew
out the plagues of God his wrath, and then were there great voices of gladness,
sole^nlie heard through out all the church of God, rejoicing, and saying, Now all
the kingdo^s of the earth qar thrown down, and that holy kingdom of God, and his
son Christ Jesus (who reigns for ever and ever) only set up.

Anno Christ. 1541 Here begins the seventh trumpet, in which the world
ends.

Historical application 15 For, that year began the seventh age, wherein, the
last days approaching, all the Empires and kingdoms of the world must be
trodden down, and Gods, and his Son Christ's aeternall kingdom, only
erected.

The Text. 16 Then the four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their
seats fell upon their faces, and worshipped God.

Paraphrast. exposition. 16 And the 24. books of the old Testament (dead, and
unmentioned since the days of the primitive church) now apears before God in
their due and acostomed place and estate prostrating the^ selves, yield by the
mouths of their professors, praise and worship to God, saying.

Historical application 16 And Gods holy Scriptures, which lay as dead the
time of the Antichristian reign, now being restored to their former
authority and honor, do stir up the hearts and mouths of all true
professors, to humble themselves, and to yield their due praise and honor to
God almighty, saying.

The Text. 17 Saying, we give thee thanks, Lord GOD almighty, Which art, and
Which wast, and Which art to come: for thou have received thy great might, and
have obtained thy kingdom.

Paraphrast. exposition. 17 O our Lord God almighty, who was, who is, and who
now shall return to judgment, we yield thee most hearty thanks, for that now
thou have taken upon thee thy great and mighty power and strength, and do
now only reign over al.

Historical application 17 O our Lord God almighty, who was, who is, and who
now shall return to judgment, we yield thee most hearty thanks, for that now
thou have taken upon thee thy great and mighty power and strength, and do
now only reign over al.

The Text. 18 And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time
of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward
unto thy servantes the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy
Name, to small and great, and should destroy the^, which destroy the earth.

Paraphrast. exposition. 18 And the wicked nations are angry thereat, but thy
wrath is come upon the^; and the time of the general judgment is com, that the
dead must rise, and thy holy servants, the Prophets, and Saints, and all men
both great and small, that have feared thy name, must receive the reward of
aeternall life: but co^trarilie, those must be rooted out, and cast into
aeternall damnation, who have seduced the world, and polluted the earth with
their abominations.

Historical application 18 And the wicked nations are angry thereat, but thy
wrath is come upon the^; and the time of the general judgment is com, that the
dead must rise, and thy holy servants, the Prophets, and Saints, and all men
both great and small, that have feared thy name, must receive the reward of
aeternall life: but co^trarilie, those must be rooted out, and cast into
aeternall damnation, who have seduced the world, and polluted the earth with
their abominations.

The Text. 19 Then the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen
in his Temple the Arc of his covenant: and there were lighteninges, and
voices, and thunderings, and earthquake, and much hail.

Paraphrast. exposition. 19 And until that day (now shortly approaching) the
true Temple and Church of God shall be made r patent, vouchable, visible, and
open to all his heavenly and true elect, and among these of that true Church
and heavenly elect, shall Christ, the true Ark of our covenant, and atonement
with God the Father be seen, known, and understood, preached out, and
constantly advouched. In that time shall there be great shewings forth of
tempestuous troubles, great noise, rumors and threatenings of wars, and great
trouble and commotions upon the Empire of the earth. And the cold and
tempestuous s hail of partiality, self-loue, and lack of charity, shall
extinguish and quench out that ardent zeal, that we owe toward God, and the
fervent love and charity, that we owe to our neighbor.

Historical application 19 And until that day (now shortly approaching) the
true Temple and Church of God shall be made r patent, vouchable, visible, and
open to all his heavenly and true elect, and among these of that true Church
and heavenly elect, shall Christ, the true Ark of our covenant, and atonement
with God the Father be seen, known, and understood, preached out, and
constantly advouched. In that time shall there be great shewings forth of
tempestuous troubles, great noise, rumors and threatenings of wars, and great
trouble and commotions upon the Empire of the earth. And the cold and
tempestuous s hail of partiality, self-loue, and lack of charity, shall
extinguish and quench out that ardent zeal, that we owe toward God, and the
fervent love and charity, that we owe to our neighbor.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The temple of Jerusalem contained three parts, to wit, the utter part,
where al men resorted, the inner place, called the holy place, and the
innermost part, called the holiest of al. These two holy and holiest parts that
are within, represents here the true latent and invisible Church, and the
uttermost and most patent part, represents the outward and visible pretended
Church, this utter court is without the temple, if ye call only the holy and
holiest places to be the temple: but if ye call the whole work to be the
temple, then is this utter court within the temple as a part of the whole: and
therefore some read, atrium quod est intra templum, and some read, atrium
quod est extra templum, etc. Always in this visible and outward face of the
Church, represented here by this outward court, Paul does mean, that the
Antichrist must sit. 2. These. 2.4. and therefore, it is commanded here to be
cast out, and no care, measure, nor account thereof to be taken of God.

b The holy city is not one only city, but is spiritual Jerusalem, even the
true Church and Spouse of Christ Jesus, generally through the whole world, as
Revel. 21. appears.

c That these 42. months, are 1260. years, is proved by our 1. 15. and 16.
Propositions, and that this account of 1260. years begins about the years of
Christ 300. or 316. is proved by our 36. proposition, and that this time, the
Antichrist must sit over the Church of God, read 2. These. 2. and that so does
the Pope professing himself the head of the Church, read lib. 5. Sexti,
Canone foelicis: in glossa, and lib. 3. Sexti Tit. 16. can periculoso, hereof
read also the 2. synthesis of our 26. proposition.

d That the old and new Testaments be these two witnesses that here testifies
of God, is proved by our 21. proposition.

e That 1260. days means here 1260. years, is proved by our 1. 15. and 16.
propositions: and that they begin anno Christi. 300. or 316. or thereby, is
declared in our 36. proposition.

f Call to mind, how in the days of Papistrie, none durst under the pain of
their lives have the Bible in vulgar language, but all the scriptures were
hidden up from the vulgar people in Latin language, and were hidden up from
simple scholars, by wrong glosses and false interpretations, as who would hide
up and disguise a prince in sackcloth. Of these wicked glosses and false
translations, wrested by the original Hebrew and Greek, there is diverse to be
seen in that age, such as even now, and latest of all the Rhemish Testament.

g There is mention made of these in Zach. 4. where the Prophet speking of
Zerubbabel, and of Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak, their repairing up of the
material Temple, introduces in that vision a figure of these two
Candlestickes, and of these two Olives or Testaments, that yield spiritual
oil, both to the Lamps of the seven primitive Churches, as also now to us, to
kindle our Lamps again anew, against our bridegroomes coming to judgment.
Matthew. 25.1.

h How the enemies of God and his word, are confounded with the fire of godly
zeal, is testified Psalm. 20.9.10. and Psalm. 78.5.6. Also, how many
blasphemous heretics have been confounded by the mouths of Gods ministers,
and afterward died most horrible deaths, in histories may be seen.

i That this beast is the Roman and Papisticall Empire, by the whole indices
and tokens thereof, is most clearlie declared Apoc. 12. and 13. and 17. and
evidently proved by our 24. proposition.

k This great city and streets thereof (though chiefly it means the
Antichristian city, which, God willing, both hereafter shall be, and is
heretofore, proposition 23. prooved to be Rome) means no one city, but all
the lands, cities, and places of the world, subject to the Antichristian
Empire: Even like as contrarily, spiritual Jerusalem, meaned al those through
the world, that were of the true Christian Empire, as is before said in the
note b hereof.

l This city being called here, not simply Sodom nor Egypt, but
spirituallie, like as hereafter (Apoc. 17.5) the same is called not simply
Babylon, but mystically Babylon: means thereby, that that city is not named
literallie Sodom, Egypt: or Babylon, but that because it is polluted with
their vices; and like to them it is: therefore, spirituallie compared to them.

m Christ is said to be crucified in this Antichristian city of Rome, for
four causes: First, for that as the Jews did put Christ to death, who is Gods
true incarnate Word, and deprived him of this earthly life: So the Antichrist
here, has slain Gods holy Word and Scriptures, by depriving the^ of their
true sense, which is their spiritual life, and the execution of this slaughter
proceeds from Rome. Secondly, wheresoever Christ is truly preached and
afterward despised (as in Rome) he is said there to be crucified Gal. 3.1.
Thirdly, wheresoever Christ's members ar crucified and afflicted, there Christ
esteems himself to be crucified and afflicted (Mat. 25.40.45) But in Rome
many martyrs have suffered death: Therefore, etc. Fourthlie, because (by the
note k preceding) the whole Antichristian and Roman Empire, is comprehended
under the name of this chief metropolitan city thereof, which is Rome; But under
the Roman Empire. and by Pontius Pilate, one of the magistrates thereof, was
Christ crucified: Therefore, in this city, (which specially means Rome) is
Christ figuratiuelie said to be crucified.

n That these three days and an half, are 1260 years, is prooved by our 15.
and 16. propositions: and that these years began betwixt the years of Christ
300. and 316. is declared in our 36. proposition.

o In consideration of the ten dominions that were under the Roman and
Papisticall Empire, it may well be esteemed, that the Abbeyes, Monasteries, and
Papistical places of England, and Scotland, with the addition of many in
Germany, and some in France, that were ruined and pulled down, about the time
of the year of Christ 1560. were no less than the tenth part of all the
Antichristian city or Papisticall policy.

p At this time, the tenth part of the Papistical Empire being reformed, and
the idolatrous policies destroyed, it is specified here that seven thousand were
slain, that is, they were degraded of their dignities and honors, and spoiled of
their rents, whereon they lived: for (as hereafter, Apoc. 13.15) to give life to
the image of the beast, is nothing else but to confirm, authorize, and
inaugurate it, whereby it may enjoy office, honor, and rent: So here, to slaie,
is as much as to degrade and deprive them of their offices, honors, and
rentes, whereon they did live. As to the precise number of seven thousand, the
like, and like number ye shall find 3. Reg. 19.18. and Roman. 11.4. which we
must not think to be so preciselie spoken, as if there were no odds: for
such reasons, as you shall read Apoc. 7. note f thereof, and Apoc. 9. note
hthereof.

q That in this age (which began in the year of Christ, a thousand, five
hundred, forty and one, and ends, at the farthest, in the year of Christ,
a thousand, seven hundred, four score and six,) the Roman and Papistical
Empire, and al tyrannical kingdoms shall be suppressed, and Christ's kingdom
only erected: and the last judgment, ending all prophecies shall come, is
manifested by the oath and vow, made Apoc. 10.6. of which, read the notes e
and f thereof.

r How this true temple of God, was patent in the days of the true primitive
Church, and then closed up again, to these days is said in the discourse of
the 20. proposition, and shall be confirmed hereafter, Revel. 15.8. and note h
thereof: Whereby they notably err, that think the Church of God ever to be
patent, publik, and visible, seeing by the former verses 2.3.7. and 8. it must
be trod down by the Antichrist. 1260. years, til at length here ver. 19. a
little before the latter day, it be made public, patent, and open to all men.

s This cold hail of partiality, iniquity, self-love, and lack of charity,
is not only here the last token, that preceeds the day of judgment, but also
it is the very cause why the day of judgment shall be hastened before the said
1786 year come, as Matthew. 24.12.22. testifies. Of this self-love and
partiality of the latter day testifies Paul 2. Tim. 3.2. The remanent and
perfect history of the latter day is here omitted, and remitted to the 14.
chapter, as shall be discussed there at length, and was already noted Revel. 10.
note d thereof, and in our progress upon the 11. proposition is mentioned.
And so ends the orderly part of this Revelation, beginning at Christ's
baptism, and continuing until the latter day.

Here follovveth the amplificatiue part of the Revelation of the Evangelist S.
John, containing a repetition, amplification, and exposition of such notable
things, as before are but summarlie entreated of in the former part.
CHAP. XII.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Spirit of God, for our full instruction, minding to repeat, amplify and
expound in this last part of the book, such matters as has been summarlie and
obscurelie treated of in the former part, of the which this last Ecclesiastical
history being the chief: He therefore begins in this twelfth chapter again,
to expound and repeat the same after the manner of a battle betwixt Christ's
Church, holy Spirit, Word, and true professors on the one part: and the
Devil, the Antichristian and Roman Empire on the other part: In which is
described the strife and malice that Satan, by his Antichrist, executed
against the visible, Apostolik and primitive Church, which first conceived,
embraced, and preched forth Gods word, and against that holy word, which they
preached forth. So that the true Church became latent and invisible, and God
kept and reserved his holy word in purity, in the hearts of that invisible
and true latent Church, by means of his holy Spirit working in them,
whereupon followed out a spiritual battle, the spirit of Satan striving in
the minds of the elect by false doctrine, and other entisements against the
Spirit of God. But Satan seeing that he prevailed not in that spiritual
battle, against the souls of the elect number, he raises, by his Antichrist,
persecution corporally, against the bodies of every particular professor.

Historical application.
Historical application. 1 IN the days of Saint John, the true Primitive
Church of Christ flourished, the Euangel increased shining as the Sun, so that
the professors thereof, despised the glory and dignities of this world,
casting down al their rents at the feet of the Apostles; to be distributed in
common to the whole Church (Act. 4.35) having no other crown of glory, tha^
the cross of christ, and doctrine of his Apostles. Gal. 6.14.

Paraphrast. exposition 1 AND there was showed to me the great and mervelous
vision of Christ his heaue^lie a spouse and true Church, ouershadowed every
where, with the bright light of his Evangel, shining as the Sun, and she
contemned and trod under her feet, all the glories of this world which are as
mutable as the Moon, and she was crowned with the triumphant doctrine of the
twelve Apostles.

The text. 1 AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven: A woman clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her he^de a crown of
twelve stars.

Historical application. 2 Altogether bent in their hearts, to coceiue and
contemplat Gods true word, and in their mouths and works to teach the same,
and express the fruits thereof;

Paraphrast. exposition 2 And within her bowels, she conceived and meditated b
Gods true word, and with her mouth preached and proclaimed out the same, and
was preased by the Spirit of God, to yield forth and teach the same, as a
woman is pressed to yield forth her birth.

The text. 2 And she was with child and cried, traueiling in birth, and was
pained ready to be delivered.

Historical application. 3 But suddenly after the primitive Church, the devil
stirred up his instruments, even the mighty empire of Rome that great city,
that is situate upon the seven notable hills Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus,
Auentinus, Quirinalis, Vminalis, and Esquilinus, and has these ten Christian
kingdoms, Spain, France, Lombardie, England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, The
kingdom of the Goths in Italy, and of the Hunnes in Pannonia or Hungary, and
the Exarchat of Rave^na; co^federat with it, and have their Empire governed by
seven estates, all ruling successively after other as kings, to wit, 1 Kings,
2 Consuls, 3 Dictators, 4 Triu^virs, 5 Tribuns, 6 Emperors, 7 Popes.

Paraphrast. exposition 3 Then on the contrary part, I beheld amongst Gods
heavenly and holy elect and lo, the devil c that horrible and bloody dragon
(in the person of that Empire, whose seat and city stands upon seven
hills, and has under it ten confederate kings, and has had seven
princely estats governing it)

The text. 3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: for behold, a great
red dragon, having seven heds and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads:

Historical application. 4 By means of the which Roman and Papistical
Empire, the devil has drawn after him, much of Europe and of Asia, even the
large third part of the world, causing their Pastors and Ministers to leave
their heaue^lie doctrine, and to teach Antichristian Apostasy, for love of
dignities, rents, and earthly benefices: for the devil was so ready, that how
sone the true word of God was sown by the primitive Church, incontinently he
raised up the Papistical antichrist to devour and confound the same with false
glosses, and sinister interpretations.

Paraphrast. exposition 4 With the poison of his tail, drew after him the
third part of Christians, from their heavenly contemplation, to earthly
affetions: and this dragon and his members awaited upon Gods Church and holy
Spouse, that preached and expressed out the fruit of Gods word, that how soon
she had preached out that word, he might choke the same, and devour the
fruit thereof.

The text. 4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the women, which was ready to
be delivered, to devour her child when she had brought it forth.

Historical application. 5 But contrary to their expectation, that pure
doctrine of the Euangel, preched by the primitive Church, was reserved by God
among the invisible Church, til at length, it should rule over all the kingdoms
of the earth, and so God preserved his word in purity.

Paraphrast. exposition 5 And she delivered and expressed forth her fruit, and
increase of the true dincarnat Word, Christ Jesus, who shall rule and govern
all nations under the scepter of his servitude: And God accepted this fruit of
his holy Word under his protection, and authorized it among his holy elect.

The text. 5 So she brought forth a man child, which should rule all
nations with a rod of iron: and her son was taken up to God, and to his
throne.

Historical application. 6 But his visible Church was bannished and made
invisible among a few godly persons, who successively after other entertained
the truth all the days of the Antichrist, from the days of Pope Syluester the
first, to these our days, even 1260 years.

Paraphrast. exposition 6 Whereof the visible number, even Gods true Church and
Spouse was chaced away, and e remained invisible and solitary among certain
private persons, predestined and elected of God: where she was nourished,
and fostered with their godly prayers and secret meditations, during the space
f of 1260 years.

The text. 6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand, two hundredth and
three score days.

Historical application. 7 For at the Pentecost after Christ's ascension was
the holy Spirit and third comforter sent, down to dwell in our minds, and
therein to fight and withstand all the private temptations and motions of the
devil, used against the christian Church. For the devil having first seduced
the outward, visible, and Antichristian Church, now strives against the
Spirit of God, in the inward minds of the invisible Church.

Paraphrast. exposition 7 Hereupon proceeded a great and heavenly strife, for
God the g holy Spirit and third comforter, by his ministering Angels and godly
inspirations, fought against the devil, that old dragon; who with his wicked
spirits and temptations fought, and withstood the spirit of God within us

The text. 7 And there was a battle in heaven. Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels.

Historical application. 8 But he by his temptations and intisements, is no
ways able to ouerco^ the mighty force of Gods Spirit, working in our Spirits,
far les to posses the souls of the faithful and heavenly elect.

Paraphrast. exposition 8 But Satan prevailed not, neither obtained any place
amongst Gods heaue^lie and faithful elect to overcome them.

The text. 8 But they prevailed not, nether was their place found any more in
heaven.

Historical application. 9 So that now in Christ his passion hat crafty
Seducer and accuser, and his members, having no power against these elect
souls does most cruelly extend his tyranny against their fleshly bodies
only.

Paraphrast. exposition 9 And so that wicked dragon and old serpent, who
justly is called an accuser and odious, who deceiues all the whole world, (now
restrained from overco^ming the faithful and heavenly elect souls) is cast
out, he, his members and instruments, having only permission to tempt, try,
and persecute their earthly bodies.

The text. 9 And the great dragon, that old Serpent, called the devil and
Satan, was cast out, which deceives all the world: he was even cast into
the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him:

Historical application. 10 Therefore, with us, and for our cause, all the
Angels of heaven do yield praise and thanks to God eternal, saying, Now is
there salvation in heaven prepared for Gods elect, and the strength and
kingdom of our God, and power of his Son Christ Jesus, is enlarged over all:
for the accuser of the elect souls (who are even as brethren unto us his
Angels) is cast down and displaced: for continually, since the fall of the
first Adam, he accused the^ therefore in Gods justice:

Paraphrast. exposition 10 For which delivery of our souls, there were voices of
thanksgiving and great joy among all the Angels of heaven, saying, Now is there
salvation in heaven prepared for Gods elect, and the strength and kingdom of
our God, and power of his Son Christ Jesus, is enlarged over all: for the
accuser of the elect souls (who are even as brethren unto us his Angels) is
cast down and displaced: for continually, since the fall of the first Adam,
he accused the^ therefore in Gods justice:

The text. 10 The^ I hard a loud voice saying, Now is salvation in heaven, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night.

Historical application. 11 But now they have overcome this their accuser, in
the blood of the second Adam, Christ Jesus, and in the constant testimony they
did bear of him, not regarding their lives, but being contented to suffer
martyrdom for his sake.

Paraphrast. exposition 11 But now they have overcome this their accuser, in
the blood of the second Adam, Christ Jesus, and in the constant testimony they
did bear of him, not regarding their lives, but being contented to suffer
martyrdom for his sake.

The text. 11 But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

Historical application. 12 Therefore, rejoice all ye godly and celestial
creatures: but woe be unto you, that do fix your foelicitie on earthly
glory and affections, and do plunge your selves in the muddie seas and
tumbling cares of this world, for the devil is sent down amongst you, raging
in great fury, knowing his time to be short, for that the world draws near
to an end.

Paraphrast. exposition 12 Therefore, rejoice all ye godly and celestial
creatures: but woe be unto you, that do fix your foelicitie on earthly
glory and affections, and do plunge your selves in the muddie seas and
tumbling cares of this world, for the devil is sent down amongst you, raging
in great fury, knowing his time to be short, for that the world draws near
to an end.

The text. 12 Therefore, rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in the^. Woe to
the inhabitants of the earth and of the sea, for the devil is come down unto
you, which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.

Historical application. 13 So then, Satan seeing himself secluded from any
farther power against the elect, but only a little power over the earthly
bodies of the true Church, stirs up the Bishops of Rome to vsurp temporal
dignity, and Antichristian supremacy, above all the visible Churches, whereby
these seven Churches of Asia, that S. John wrote to, and other Apostolical
Churches, were still persecuted by that Roman Church, til their whole visible
number were feign to embrace the Roman Apostasy, in sted of that true word,
that sometime was preached among them.

Paraphrast. exposition 13 Now Satan perceiving himself so overcome, that he
had no more power but over the earthlings (as being Prince of this world) he in
the person of the Antichriste persecuted the true and visible primitive
Church, and spouse of Christ, who had procreated and brought forth the noble
fruit and increas of Gods Word.

The text. 13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child.

Historical application. 14 So God from these days forth, viz. from the year
of Christ 316. has withdrawn his visible Church from open assemblies, to the
hearts of particular godly men, where successively it abode in purity,
invisiblie all the days of the Antichristian reign, even to these our days,
the space of 1260 years.

Paraphrast. exposition 14 But God armed her with the swift h wings of his
protection, whereby she became his invisible Church, and fled from the open
assembly, to the private hearts of particular godly men, as to her desert
place, where she (as is said before) was nourished with godly meditations, for
the space of i a thousand, two hundredth and three score years, free from the
poison of that dragons heresy.

The text. 14 But to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a time, and times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent.

Historical application. 15 Then this deuilish Antichrist, and Roman seat,
fearing least the small spark of Gods invisible Church should sometime reviue,
and extinguish their synagogue, preached and set out such plausible heresy, as
might trap and allure the invisible church such as merits, and works of
supererogatio^; deserving (as they say) more than heaven, with Indulgences, and
pardons for sins, although they should deserve worse than hell.

Paraphrast. exposition 15 Then spewed Satan out of his mouth, a floode of k
false doctrine and heresy, that he might seduce God his true Church therewith.

The text. 15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman like
a flood, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood

Historical application. 16 Which, with many more plausible heresies, their
visible Church has wholly embraced: yet ever some of the true invisible Church
have remained in their purity.

Paraphrast. exposition 16 And the earthly and visible Church of the
Antichrist, did so drink up and swallowe every drop of that doctrine, that
the true invisible Church, did abide pure, and did not get one drop of
that poison, that Satan had spewed out.

The text. 16 But the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed up the flood, which the dragon had cast out of his mouth.

Historical application. 17 Whereupon the devil, in that Romish Antichrist, is
so enraged, that wheresoever particularly these dispersed children of Gods true
invisible Church, their works and books are apprehended, they are al burned
together, and persecuted with fire and sword.

Paraphrast. exposition 17 And the devil raged in ire against that invisible
Church, and proceeded in persecuting the residue of her children, which from
thence-forth do observe the co^mandeme^ts of god and do bear truly and
constantly, the testimony of Jesus Christ.

The text. 17 The^ the dragon was wroth with the woman and went, and made war
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Historical application. 18 And these things did S. John foresee, and
further, as follows, standing on the seashor of Pathmos.

Paraphrast. exposition 18 And I stood on the sea l shore of Pathmos, beholding
the vision, which follows.

The text. 18 And I stood on the sea sand.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That this woman clad here with the Sun, etc. is the true Church of God, is
proved by the 22. proposition.

b How the true Church ever traueled to procreate more children to God, in
whom Christ is continually conceived, formed, and spiritually borne: ye shall
read the Galathians. 4.19. where Paul calls the Galathians his little
children, of whom he traveled again in birth, that Christ may be formed and
shapen in the^: where by it is evident, that the Church of God is this Woman,
and Christ's true word is the fruit and birth, that she forms and produces
into the hearts and bowels of the elect.

c That this Dragon is the Devil, it appears plainly by the 9. verse hereof
following: and that this shape and figure of his, of seven heads and ten
horns, and that the 1260. years of his reign are the proprieties and notes of
the Latin or Roman empire, is proved by the 24. proposition. Hereby then is
meant, that the devil, in this strife against Gods Church, used or clothed
himself with the person of the Roman or Latin empire.

d This man-child that ruled al nations with a rod of iron, is called (Psalm.
2.) Christ the son of God, and ( Revel. 19.13.) he is called the word of
God, which are both one, seeing that word took flesh, and was incarnate, John
1.14. Gods Church then, and true spouse, is said to produce this birth of this
man-child, when they preach forth the true word of God, and his son Christ
Jesus, read hereof Gal. 4.19. how Christ must be formed and shapen in us, etc.

e Seeing by the opinion of Methodius and Primasius, and diverse old writers,
these notes of this woman agree not with the Virgin Marie in particular, but
with the whole Church of Christ in general: Therefore, and by these words of
this text, and by our 16. proposition, it is certain, that the Church of
Christ must lurk and abide invisible. 1260. years, under the Antichrist,
where through they are deceived, that think the true Church to be ever visible,
patent, and public, or yet the publik and visible Church to be ever Gods true
Church.

f That 1260. days in prophecies, signify 1260. years is proved by our 1.
and 16. propositions, and that these years begin at Sylvester the first,
about the year of Christ, 316. is proved in the 36. proposition.

g That both in Daniel 10.13.21, and Daniel 12.1. and also in this place,
Michael is taken for one of the persons of the Trinity, even either for the
Son, or for the holy Spirit, it is certain, by the properties contained in
these textes, for there is Michael called one of the first Princes and our
Prince, and so, is both Christ and the holy Spirit, the first Prince before all
beginning, and the last after all ending, even a. and o. and is also prince
over us, yea, he is a Prince for us that are his elect, who (as says Daniel
there) stands for Daniels people, even for the true and spiritual Israelites,
and so stands both Christ in heaven as our Mediator with God, and the holy
Spirit on earth with us, as our defender and gouerner: Again, with the name
of Michael, which is to say, who is like God, or otherwise, Deus percutiens, a
beating or striking God, (ex Hieronymo de interpretatione nominum) does both
the person of Christ and the holy Spirit agree, for both with the father are
one God, and none is like to that God, whereof all the three persons beat and
strike down Satan's tyranny, and fight for us. The question therefore is,
which person of the Deity does Michael signify, in these forenamed textes:
though some think he mean Christ, for the properties above written, agreeing
to Christ: yet in respect (as is said) the same also does agree with the holy
Spirit, and in some points agrees not to Christ. Therefore, (in my judgment)
Michael means the holy Spirit, and not the person of Christ: for seeing the
man, or one like unto the Son of man that appeared to Daniel. (10.) is proved
Apoc. 1. note s thereof, and Apoc. 10. note a thereof, to be undoubtedly
Christ: How can it be, that Christ there (Dan. 10.13.21.) says that Michael
helped him, except that Michael be taken for the holy Spirit? For the Deity
distinguished in three persons (although essentiallie inseparable) every
person is said in the Scriptures, to help one another, as the Father by the
Son created the world (Col. 1.16. and John. 1.3.) The Son sent by the
Father, redeemed the world. (Luke 4.43.) The holy Spirit sent both from the
Father and the Son comforts, defends, and regenerateth his elect of the
world: And the Angels are not said to help, but to serve and minister to the
Deity. But contrarily, to divide one person of the Deity in two names, and
to make Christ named with the one name, to help christ named with the other
name, seems altogether improper: Where by, Michael that helped Christ,
appears evidently, not to be Christ, but the holy Spirit: and this I
speak of these forenamed Textes only, and not of Michael in the Epistle of
Jude, where he represents an Archangell, who durst not himself, but
referred it to God, to rebuke Satan, neither of other parts of Scripture where
Michael is the proper name of a man.

h These Eagles wings do mean Gods mighty protection, because (Deu. 32, 11)
As the Eagle flotereth over her young, and stretches out her vvings, and
carries them on her shoulders: so the Lord has also kept and preserved his
own. Furthermore, these two Eagles wings may be taken for the two
Testamentes, the old and the new, with the which Gods true invisible Church
clothes her self, and therewith flies from the Antichristian synagogue and
assembly, to her private meditations.

i That this time, times, and half a time means a thousand, two hundred and
three score years, is proved by our 16. proposition, beginning that date
about the year of Christ 316. by the 36. proposition.

k That these Waters and floods mean doctrine, consider by the not g of the 8.
chap. hereof.

l Some read this Text to be spoken of the Dragon, in these words, And it
stood upon the sea shore, and so it may be interpreted to mean, that Satan
stands ready betwixt sea and land (according to the 12. verse hereof) to
oppress them both: that is, to seduce all those, that fix and repose their
foelicitie on earthly pleasures and ease on the one part: and these on the
other part who as the waltering waves of muddie seas, play the tyrants, reving
to themselves the kingdoms of the world: But I rather assent to those other,
who read, And I stood on the seashore, as if S. John would signify to us, that
he stood on the shore or sea coast of the I Will of Pathmos, while as he saw the
vision following of the beast arising out of the sea. The like is said in Dan.
10.4. that he stood on the bank of the river Tigris, where he saw his vision.

CHAP. XIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
Having in the former chapter deduced the continual strife betwixt Christ's
Church and holy Spirit, on the one part, and the Devil and his instruments on
the other part: In this chapter he renewth a more special description of these
chief instruments, whose person the devil is to use in all times hereafter, to
persecute Gods Church withal: to wit of the whole Latin Empire in general,
and of the Antichrists kingdom in particular, set out respectiuelie under the
figure of two beasts the first ten horned, the last, two-horned, with all their
notes and tokens, agreeing most exactlie with the Roman, and Papistical
kingdoms as follows.

Historical application. 1 ANd among the ambitious tyra^ts and tumultuous
people of the world, arose the great Latin or Roman Empire, whose chief seat
and Metropolitan city Rome, is set up on their seven hills Palatinus, Coelius,
Ianiculus (otherwise called Capitolinus) Auentinus, Quirinalis, Viminalis and
Esquilinus, and has been governed by these seven princely governme^ts, Kings,
Consuls, Dictators, Triumvirs, Tribunes, Emperors, and Pops, Afterward it was
divided into ten chief kingdoms, to wit, Spain, France, Lo^bardie, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, the kingdom of the Goths in Italy, and of the
Hunnes in Pannonia or Hungary; and the Exarchat of Rauenna, and over thwart
these seven hills and notable parts of that Empire, were set up idolatrous
temples, Images, pillars, Piramydes, and monuments of great ostentation, and
blasphemous superscriptions and titles, such as Diis Manibus, Minervae,
Fortunae* Romae fortunatae, Romae victrici Romae aeternae, Plutoni, Veneri,
Priapo, and infinite others of old erected, beside also infinite Papistical Idols
of new.

Paraphrast. exposition 1 AND I foresaw, that out of the waltering a waves and
muddie seas of Tyrants, there should arise a great and mighty b Empire, whose
principal seat and chief City, is placed upon seven chilles, and should be
governed by seven princely gouernementes; and d ten several parts of the same
Empire ar to be divided, whereof there shall be ten crowned kings, and
every where upon these seven hills, shall be monuments of ostentation, with
proud and blasphemous superscriptions and titles, set up by these princely and
royal Governors.

The text. 1 AND I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads, and
ten horns, and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads the
name of blasphemy.

Historical application. 2 This Empire succeeding to the former three Empires
and monarchies, was So that at length, by their deuillish works of Idolatry,
auguries, sorceries, oracles of false gods, and by bloodshed, it pleased our
God, to suffer these Emperors to conquer and possess the whole world.

Paraphrast. exposition 2 And this Empire that I foresawe, was like the
Grecian Monarch, in that it swiftly, as with the speed of a e Leopard,
shortly over ran the whole world, and like the Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians, who mightily marched forward, as on Bears feet, treading down all
other kingdoms, and like the Monarchy of the Babylonians, who (as with the
mouths of Lions) devoured up innocent blood without measure: And the devil
gave him his power and his throne that is, he made him f Prince of the world
with full authority.

Historical application. 3 But afterward, the Hunnes, Gotthes and Vandalles,
subverted that Government of Emperors, and abolished them, wherthrough the
Empire vaked and lay dead more than three hundred years. Yet, afterward rose
new Emperors again, entitled of Germans and Romans, of the which
Charle-maigne was the first, and in them was the Roman Empire in a manner
reviued and restored again. The great foelicitie of this Empire astonished
all men, who therefore called it Imperium sacrum p^rpetuum and semper augustum,
and not only became subject to it,

Paraphrast. exposition 3 And I foresawe one of his chiefest g governments, as
it were utterly destroyed and abolished but that loss was mended again, and
that government wholly restored, and all men marueiled at the power and
prosperity of that Empire, and gave over themselves as slaves and servants
unto it.

The text. 3 And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death, but his
deadly wou^d was healed, and all the world wo^dred and followed the beast.

Historical application. 4 But also for love of it, they worshipped the
devil, in the idolles of Mars, Minerva, Lady Fortune, and others, and did
bear such reverence to that Empire, that by protection of false gods, they
thought the same without al compare, and for ever invincible.

Paraphrast. exposition 4 And they worshipped the h devil that gave such
pre-eminence to that Empire, and they honored that empire, esteeming none like
thereunto or able to make war against it.

The text. 4 And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast and
they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast who is able to
war with him?

Historical application. 5 In this Empire arises the Pope, who proudly
alleges himself to be God his Vicar, and that he can remitte sins, and
exeeme from hell, and such other blasphemies against God: and he began his
mighty power and kingdom, by Pope Sylvester the first, about the year of
Christ three hundredth and sixteen, and has reigned a thousand, two hundredth
and three score years.

Paraphrast. exposition 5 Then was there adjoined to that Empire, a i false
mouth, even an Antichristian prophet, that spoke forth proudly things of great
ostentation, and blasphemies against God, and he received a mighty power of
doing, for the space of k 1260. years.

The text. 5 And there was given unto him a mouth, that spak great things, and
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to do two and forty months.

Historical application. 6 Not only blaspheming God and his name, but also
boasting that he has heaven to sell for money, and can make Saints in heaven
of his own canonizing, to whom we must pray, as our mediators.

Paraphrast. exposition 6 During the which time, the Empire opened this his
Antichristian mouth, whereby he taught blasphemous doctrine against God, and
against his holy name and heavenly Tabernacle, and against all the Saints
that dwell in heaven.

The text. 6 And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his Name, and his Tabernacle, and the^ that dwell in heaven.

Historical application. 7 And whosoever would not embrace these and other
his errors, but meaned to serve God truly, of these did he persecute, and put
to death many a thousand, extending his tyrannical power, over al christian
kindreds and people.

Paraphrast. exposition 7 And God suffered him to make war aganst his elect
servants and to subdue the^ under his tyranny, so that his power extended over
every kindred, tongue, and nation.

The text. 7 And it was given unto him to make war with the saints and to
overcome them, and power was given him over every kindred, tongue, and nation.

Historical application. 8 Whereby worldly men, addicted to earthly
pleasures, reuere^ced him as God (Distinct. 96. Can. Satis euidenter) kissing
his feet, and adoring him, so that in him the name of Rome and whole Roman
Empire, is esteemed famous, and holden in great estimation and reverence of all

Paraphrast. exposition 8 Therefore, all worldly men, dwelling in earthly
pleasures, shall give such homage and reverence as appertains to God, unto
that Empire, even all these, whose names are not registered among the elect
number of Christ Jesus our Savior, who was ^redestinat to l suffer death for
us, before the foundations of the world were laid:

The text. 8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worhippe him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb which was slain from
the beginning of the world.

Historical application. 9 But who has understanding, let him consider Gods
just judgment.

Paraphrast. exposition 9 But who has understanding, let him consider Gods
just judgment.

The text. 9 If any man have an ear, let him hear,

Historical application. 10 Whereby these tyrants shall go at length into
captivity, because they have led others captive: and shall be killed with the
sword, because they have killed others with the sword, and this yields
occasion of comfort, patience, and perseverance in faith to Gods servants.

Paraphrast. exposition 10 Whereby these tyrants shall go at length into
captivity, because they have led others captive: and shall be killed with the
sword, because they have killed others with the sword, and this yields
occasion of comfort, patience, and perseverance in faith to Gods servants.

The text. 10 If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: if
any kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience, and
the faith of the Saints.

Historical application. 11 And to return again to the particulare
description of the Popes kingdom, it arose of the said great Empire, and
contained a two fold power, spiritual and temporal: signified by their two
horned Miter, and by the two swords, that Pope Boniface the eight caused to
be carried before him, saying, Ecce duo gladii hic, while as he was ^lad the
one day in the Po^tificall of a Bishop, the next day in armor like an Emperor,
usurping so double power, but teaching such deuillish doctrine, as before is
said.

Paraphrast. exposition 11 And I considered m by it self, and aparte, the
description of this Antichrist; even how his kingdom was in a manner, another
kingdom coming up out of the former great and stablished Empire of the earth,
and that he had double power, spiritual and temporal, even n Priesthood and
kingdom as Christ has, yet in his doctrine teaches he divelish errors.

The text. 11 And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, which had
two horns like the Lamb, but he spoke like the dragon.

Historical application. 12 And he wrought what he list (the Emperors yet
standing) with no less authority and power than the Emperor himself; yea,
he established and inaugurated again of new, that decayed estate of
Emperors, that now started up again by Charlemaigne.

Paraphrast. exposition 12 And he did all that he list, in presence of the
great Empire, with no less power than that first great Empire was wont to
do: and he compelled al men to do homage, reverence, and be subject to that
great Empire, whose government newly o was start up again, and his former
decaies and losses amended.

The text. 12 And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and he
caused the earth and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed.

Historical application. 13 And he wrought many wonders, partly falls as
these of the legendary, partly by sorcery, throwing fire out of his sleues, as
sent from heaven, partly by his ordinary ceremonies of cursing, used with the
setting up on hie of light torches and burning candles, and then throwing them
down headlong to the ground, extinguishing them before all the people,

Paraphrast. exposition 13 And this Antichrist, wroght many devilish and p
deceitful wonders, so that he made q sires of diverse kinds to be thrown
down from on high to the ground in presence of the whole people, as if the
fire of God his wrath were at his command, to be brought down from heaven.

The text. 13 And he did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from
heaven on the earth, in the sight of men.

Historical application. 14 Terrifying simple men to obey him, who thought
their souls were undone for ever, by these lying terrors and deceites, which
he used against both the people, and Princes of the Roman Empire: Also, it was
the Pope that caused Charlemaigne and his successors new Emperors, to be
confirmed and established, after that that estate of Emperors had vaked more
than three hundred years, by the wars of the Hunnes, Goths and Vandalles:
and ordained Princes Electours, who should choose the King of Romans.

Paraphrast. exposition 14 And he deceived, and terrified the^ that dwelled on
the earth, by these lying signs and terrors, which God suffered him to use,
in presence of all those of the great Empire: and he r caused all those that
dwell on the earth, to renew and make up again, a new form of Emperors or
rather images of the former great Empire, whose imperial government had bin
destroyed and abolished before by the sword, but now is repaired, and restored
again.

The text. 14 And deceived them which dwell on the earth, by the signs, which
were permitted to him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that
dwell on the earth, that they should make the image of the beast, which had
the wound of a sword, and did live.

Historical application. 15 Who yet was not Emperor, but as a dead figure,
Image, or show of the Empire, til he sole^nlie received the Popes injunctions,
and did swear to maintain his profession, and then did the Pope crown,
inaugurat and confirm him Emperor of Germans and Romans: And when the
Emperor is so sworn, and co^federat with the Pope, then whoeuer do not
reverence the^, and obey their common decrees will be pursued of the^ both, and
of all their co^federats, to death, by fire and sword, as rebels apostats, and
heretics.

Paraphrast. exposition 15 And God suffered this Antichrist to s inspire those
Emperors (or rather images and forms of the great Empire) with the spirit of
his errors, so that they should speak and profess his doctrine, and then
should he confirm, crown and inaugurate these counterfeit Emperors with such
power, that now al men must honor and reverence them, and yield them worship
and obedience, under pain of their lives.

The text. 15 And it was permitted unto him to give a spirit unto the image of
the beast, so that the image of the beast should speak, and should cause, that
as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.

Historical application. 16 Moreover, the Pope caused all his subjects of
Christendom, to receive, and bear in their hands and foreheads, marks and
tokens, representing the name of the Latin Empire; such as the marks of (...)
and crosses of sundry sorts.

Paraphrast. exposition 16 And he caused all men of all degrees and qualities,
to receive, and bear visible t marks or liveries of the Empire, sometimes in
their hands, sometimes on their foreheads.

The text. 16 And he made al, both sma and great, rich and poor, free and bond
to recei e a mark in their right ^ands, or in their foreheads,

Historical application. 17 Else were they not thought to be Christians but
excommunicate, and by the Bull of Pope Martin the fifth, these were not permitted
to use any traffic or trade of mercha^dize, that would not subject themselves
to the seat of Rome, by marking themselves thereto, in bearing crosses on
their foreheds on Ash Wednesday, and palm crosses in their hands on
Palm Sunday, or by professing their name, that is to say, to believe, as the
Latin church believes, or to reverence magicallie the crosses or naked figure
of (...),

Paraphrast. exposition 17 And he discharged all men of doing their lawful
affairs, or using their trade of merchandise, except those, that do bear and
profess the mark or name of the Empire, or the figure of the number of his
name.

The text. 17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he th t h^d the mark or
the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

Historical application. 18 Which who will wisely consider, shall find more
like to (...) (which is the number of the name (...),) than to the name of
christ; for this (...) is the name of that king, from whom that Empire is
called the Latin Empire, and the number of that name (...) is 666. expressed in
Greek by these numerall letters (...)

Paraphrast. exposition 18 This is a matter, which requires wisdom: let him
therefore, that has skill and knowledge reckon the literal number of the name
of this Empire, for same number is also the number of one of the chief u
headsmen, and first Princes thereof, and the letters of that name make the
number of six hundred, three score and six.

The text. 18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has wit, count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man, and l^^^ number is six hundred, three
score and six

Notes, Reasons and Amplifications.
a Seeing (Apoc. 17.15.) waters generally are interpreted to mean al people and
nations: the sea whereout this kingdom, and the four kingdoms in Dan. 7.
arises, must needs be the tumultuous people and tyrants of the world, amongst
the which, and of whom, the monarchies start up, conform to Esaias 57.20. the
wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, etc. and Ezech. 26.3. I will
bring up many nations against thee as the sea, etc.

b That beasts be interpreted Kings, kingdoms, empires, and monarchies, read
Daniel. 7.17. and Dan. 8.20.21. and that this beast is the Roman kingdom and
empire in particular, is proved by our 24. proposition.

c That these seven heads, are interpreted seven hills of the great city,
and seven sorts of Kings or governors thereof, read Apoc. 17.9.18. and how
Rome is that seven hilled city, governed by seven royal and princely
governments, is proved by the 23. proposition, and in our foresaid 24.
proposition.

d How this empire of Rome became divided into ten King^ or kingdoms, compared
to horns, read Apoc. 17.12. and the said 24. proposition.

c Daniel (cap. 7.) describing the four monarchies, compares the first (which
was of the Babylonians) to a Lion. The second (which was of the Medes and
Persians) to a Bear. The third (which was of the Grecians) to a Leopard: but
because to al these, fourthly succeeded the great Latin empire: Therefore
Sanct John composeth here the fourth beast, which represents the same of all
the former three, signifying thereby, that this empire lacked no instrument of
cruelty, that any of the former had.

f What throne and seat can this be else, that the Devil gives to the Romans,
but that which he promises to give to Christ ( Mat. 4.29) to wit, even the
Empire of the world, as being the Prince of this world ( Ioh 12.31. and Ephesians.
6.12. and Col. 2.15.) and so indeed it pleased God to permit the Romans by
their deuilish auguries, oracles, sorceries and bloodshed, to obtain the whole
monarchy of the earth, to the wrack of other godles people, and at length of
them selves.

g The heads (Apoc. 7.19.) being two ways interpreted; to wit, for seven
mountains, and for seven kings or royal gouernme^ts. The wounding of one of
these seven heads, must necessarily, rather mean the decay of one of the
seven princely gouernme^ts, tha^ any thing concerning any of the hills,
specially, seeing experience of the event has declared, that the most special
of these seven gouerme^ts, to wit, the Emperors, were abolished by the warfare
of the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandalles, and vaked from the days of Augustulus,
in the year of Christ 475. until the coming of Charlemaign in the 806. year,
in whose person and successors, that deadly would of the empire was healed, and
the estat of Emperors renewed.

h Who can deny but these Romans, adorers of these Idols, in whom the devil
actually spoke by oracle, in that doing, worshipped the Devil, seeing the most
simple sort of Idolatry, is nothing else, but the worshipping of devils, and
are adjunct. Apoc. 9.20.

i This mouth of the Empire, even the Pope, that Antichristian prophet, here
receives his beginning of the Latin empire, as a member thereof, but afterward
(ver. 11.) he becomes a several king, and is particularly described: hereof
read the 24. 25. and 26. Propositio^s.

k That 42. months be 1260 years, and begin about the 300. or 316. year of
God, read our 1.16. and 36. propositions.

l This slaying of the Lamb from the beginning, means the certainty of Gods
predestination, in that the decree of God, preordinate from the beginning, shall
as surely take effect, as if it had been already performed from the
beginning. Arethas, reads this wise, Whose names were not written from the
beginning of the world in the book of life of the Lamb, who was slain.
Agreeable with the like, contained Apoc. 17.8. Always, seeing both the saved
number, as also the form of redemption are from the beginning appointed and
preordinate by God, therefore both these readings may stand.

m After he has described the Pope as a member, even the mouth of the great
Roman Empire: now describes he him more particularly and apart, as having
obtained a particular kingdom of his own: Hereof read note l with the 24. 25
and 26. propositions.

n Horns, to signify, powers, and kingdoms, read the note d Apoc. 5

o This deadly wound, note g is declared to be the decay of the Imperial
estat, which now being start up again in Charlemaigne, the Pope proclames him
Emperor, and wills al men to reverence him.

p Of these miracles and wonders, wrought partly by sorcerie, partly by
juggling, and partly but falsely alleged, ye shall find diverse histories:
Hereof read the tenth synthesis of our 26. proposition.

q Of these fiery signs, we read two sorts, the one is by inchantme^t, such as
Pope Gregory the 7. did practice, who first was a Monk, and was called
Hilde-brand, which is to say, a helth-brand, or rather a hel-brand, and being
ashamed of that name, did change the same, but not the meaning thereof, for (as
Cardinal Benno writes in vita Hildebra^di) Cum vellet manicas suas discutiebat,
etc, that is, When he list, he did shake down his sleeves and fire did fly
out, in manner of sparks, and by these miracles, as by a sign of holiness he
deluded the eyes of the simple people: And because the devil might not
persecute Christ openly by Pagans, therefore by this false Monk under a Monks
habit, and show of religion, he fraudfully preassed to subvert Christ's name.
The other sort, is by ceremonies of terror, as when the Pope or his Clergy
do cast down fiery Torches, and Candels from on high, at the time of their
cursing, as though they would mean, that the fire of Gods wrath were likewise
ready at their command, to be shaken out of heaven (as out of Hildebrands
sleeue) against the^ whom they curse. And by these horrible signs and terrors,
they have so terrified Princes, that they made the^ to lose their kingdoms, and
due obedience of their subjects, till they behooved to stoup under their feet,
and crave pardon and absolution. What kingdoms thereby the Pope has cowped,
and what rents and dignities he has conquered, is to be seen in histories.

r The Pope politikelie for his ease, causes these new counterfeit Emperors to
be made by princes Electors; that these Emperors of his own making, may not
only augment his Ecclesiastial rents: but also, may be ready, as his slaves,
to fight his battelles, and revenge all his quarrels, as is to be seen in
many and diverse histories, else shall the the Pope deprive them, and create
other Emperors in their place: And so has he puissance indeed to do, for
that he has hitherto so pinched the empire, that he has the substance
thereof; and they little more than the bare name, image, or shadow thereof: and
therefore, are they called images of the beast, as being in a manner but
counterfeit Emperors: Read hereupon our 28. proposition.

s The king of Romans and apparent Emperor, chosen by the Princes Electors,
is never the more Emperor, unless, being sworn to maintain the Papisticall
seat, he be afterward inaugurate and crowned by the Pope: for manifestatio^ of
which supremacy, Pope Coelestine, crowning the Emperor Henry with his hand,
he afterward with his foot threw down the crown from his head, saying, he had
authority both to make Emperors, and to depose them at his pleasure.

t That these visible marks are the abused characters of chr^, and crosses of
all kinds, such as ^ ^ and such other, and how these be rather derived from
the beasts name, lateino, than from the name of Christ, read the 31.
proposition.

u That the name of the beast is chx, or Latin Empire, and how that name
resulteth of the number 666 or (...), read the 29 proposition, and how the
beasts visible marks are derived therefrom, read the 31 proposition.

CHAP. XIIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
Under the figure of 144000 Israelits, marked (Apoc 7) with the mark of Gods
protection, before the troubles of the seven ages, and now appearing in that
same full number after these troubles, rejoicing with Christ on mount Sion: The
Spirit of God expresses to us, the delivery of his Church from all the tyranny
of the Antichrist, and reviuing thereof again in full number, which being the
first resurrection, he proceeds from thence orderly to the second
resurrection, and Gods great harvest, deviding the whole time to that great
day, as also that days work, among seven Angels, whom extraordinarily here
the Prophet has insert, and not in the tenth chapter, where they should have
been, for the better conceiling the mystery thereof of these days, which
before these our days was not meet to be known, as may be gathered by Dan.
12.4.8.9.13 and Apoc. 10 4 and note (d) thereof, conferred with our 11.
proposition, and with the second and fourth general reasons in our 14.
proposition.

The Text.
The Text. 1 THen I looked, and lo, a Lamb stod on mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name, written in their
forheades.

Paraphrastical exposition 1 THen I beheld, and considered the Lamb of God,
Christ Jesus, to stand on the mount of his inheritance, even among his elect
Church, and with him, those a hundredth, forty and four thousands Israelits,
who before (Apoc. 7.) were marked patentlie, with the mark and name of God,
their protector.

Historical application. 1 THen I beheld, and considered the Lamb of God,
Christ Jesus, to stand on the mount of his inheritance, even among his elect
Church, and with him, those a hundredth, forty and four thousands Israelits,
who before (Apoc. 7.) were marked patentlie, with the mark and name of God,
their protector.

The Text. 2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters,
and as the sound of a great thu^der: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping
with their harpes.

Paraphrastical exposition 2 And I heard further, proceeding from Gods Church,
the voice and sound of many b people and nations, and the thundering and
threatening voice of Gods true Ministers, and I heard the joyful voice of
their rejoicing in God.

Historical application. 2 And I heard further, proceeding from Gods Church,
the voice and sound of many b people and nations, and the thundering and
threatening voice of Gods true Ministers, and I heard the joyful voice of
their rejoicing in God.

The Text. 3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before
the four beasts and the elders, and no man could learn that song, but the
hundred, forty and four thousand, which were bought from the earth.

Paraphrastical exposition 3 And these Israelits sang, not the old song that
their Fathers did, of the Messiah to come: but contrarily, in the presence of
God, and before his professors of the old and new Testamentes, they gladly
sang the songs and hymns of their new redemption in his blood, already shead:
and no cmo of Israel could learn to rejoice and triu^ph in that new redemption,
but only those hundred, forty four thousands, which thereby were redeemed
and selected from among the earthly Israelites.

Historical application. 3 And these Israelits sang, not the old song that
their Fathers did, of the Messiah to come: but contrarily, in the presence of
God, and before his professors of the old and new Testamentes, they gladly
sang the songs and hymns of their new redemption in his blood, already shead:
and no cmo of Israel could learn to rejoice and triu^ph in that new redemption,
but only those hundred, forty four thousands, which thereby were redeemed
and selected from among the earthly Israelites.

The Text. 4 These are they which are not defiled with women: for they are
virgins, these follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes these ar boght from men,
being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

Paraphrastical exposition 4 These are they, which are neither d whoremongers
corporally with women, not spiritually with Idols, for they are chaste and
clean from both: These follow Christ, wheresoever he directs the^: these are
redeemed and chosen out from worldly men; being that portion of the e fruit of
the world, that is dedicated to God, and to his Son Christ Jesus.

Historical application. 4 These are they, which are neither d whoremongers
corporally with women, not spiritually with Idols, for they are chaste and
clean from both: These follow Christ, wheresoever he directs the^: these are
redeemed and chosen out from worldly men; being that portion of the e fruit of
the world, that is dedicated to God, and to his Son Christ Jesus.

The Text. 5 And in their mouths was found no guile for they are without
spotte before the throne of God.

Paraphrastical exposition 5 And in their mouths is found no guile nor deceit,
for Christ has purged their sins, so that they appear without spot before
the Majesty of God.

Historical application. 5 And in their mouths is found no guile nor deceit,
for Christ has purged their sins, so that they appear without spot before
the Majesty of God.

The Text. 6 Then I saw another Angel fly in the mids of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel, to preach unto them, that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

Paraphrastical exposition 6 These Israelits with many Gentiles, being
hitherto hidlings, preserved by God in these six ages, under the Pops tyranny.
Now in the seventh age, about the 1541. year of christ, god stirred up openly,
his first ministers and servants, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, and others, to
prech out, during all this Jubilee, the perfect verity of the Gospel publikly,
which before was hid and obscured, under the Antichristian reign, so that now
the true Church lurketh no more, but Gods treuth to all the world is made
patent by these ministers.

An. Christi. The seventh age begins. 1541 The first thundering Angels Iubelie.

Historical application. 6 The^ after Christ his sprirituall presence, for the
defense of these hither to: Now came another mighty Messenger, even the f
first of the seven thundering Angels of the latter day, and he, in the mouths
of God his Ministers, did publishe the everlasting Evangell of Christ Jesus,
and preached forth the same openly, to all them which dwelt upon the earth,
of every Nation, Kindred, tongue, and people.

The Text. 7 Saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him: for
the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water.

Paraphrastical exposition 7 Teaching them all universally, by their public
and open preaching, to fear God only, and leaving all other supersticious
worshipping, to give glory only unto him, for the g hour draws now near,
in the which, all shall be judged, and therefore, to leave their Antichristian
Idolatry, and only to worship him, that made the heaven, earth, waters, and
all that in them is.

Historical application. 7 Teaching them all universally, by their public
and open preaching, to fear God only, and leaving all other supersticious
worshipping, to give glory only unto him, for the g hour draws now near,
in the which, all shall be judged, and therefore, to leave their Antichristian
Idolatry, and only to worship him, that made the heaven, earth, waters, and
all that in them is.

The Text. 8 And there followed another Angel, saying, It is fallen, it is
fallen, Babylon the great city: for she made all nations to drink of the wine
of the wrath of her fornication.

Paraphrastical exposition 8 About the end of which Iubelie, and beginning of
this next Iubelie, begun in An. 1590. God has showed mervelous indices, that
the Empire of Rome and Papistical kingdom, shall shortly fall: the Antichristian
and Spanish flote is destroyed: the late King of France, Duke of Guize, and his
brother, Papists, and co^mitters of the Parisian massacre, al murdered by
other: a Protestant now made king of France: So that before the end of this
Iubelie (God willing) Rome and the whole Papistical kingdom thereof, shall be
ruined.

An. Christi. Iubily 1590 The second thundering Angels Iubelie.

Historical application. 8 Then came the second of the seven thundering
Angels; declaring even presently, the horrible fall and decay to become of
that figurative h Babylon, and great Antichristian city, because she had entised
all nations, hitherto, to commit idolatrous whoredom with her: and so made
them to drink of the cup of God his eternal wrath and indignation.

The Text. 9 And the third Angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice, If
any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
foreheade, or on his hand,

Paraphrastical exposition 9 So that in the 3. Iubile beginning in An. 1639.
the Ministers and messengers of God, shall (God willing) have only the latter
dregs of that Romish seat to admonish, and threaten by open intimation,
that if any be, in whose hearts the reverence of that ruined Empire, and
counterfeit Emperors, defenders thereof, is superstitiouslie inveterate; or if
any now be marked with Chrisme, or cross on hand or head

An. Christi. 1639 The third thundering Angels Iubelie.

Historical application. 9 Afterward comes i the third order of thundering
or threatening Messengers, openly and loudly threatening, that if any be now,
that do worship or reverence that Antichristian Empire, or counterfeiters
thereof, or that receives the old superstitious marks thereof on their
foreheade, or in their hands,

The Text. 10 The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea, of
the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and and he shall be
tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.

Paraphrastical exposition 10 The same shall drink of the horrible vengeance of
Gods wrath, yea, of his vengeance and wrath, pure and unmixed with any point
of his mercy: and he shall be tormented eternally in the bitter sulphurious
fire of hell, in the presence of Christ and all his holy Angels.

Historical application. 10 The same shall drink of the horrible vengeance of
Gods wrath, yea, of his vengeance and wrath, pure and unmixed with any point
of his mercy: and he shall be tormented eternally in the bitter sulphurious
fire of hell, in the presence of Christ and all his holy Angels.

The Text. 11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, and they
shall have no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the print of his name.

Paraphrastical exposition 1. And the grief of their torment shall increase for
ever and ever: and their torment shall never end, that reverence that Roman
and Papisticall seat, or obey the Princes, maintainers thereof, be it Spain or
Germany, or who ever else, that maintaining that seat, does counterfeit the
Emperor, and whosoever receives in honor the supersticious marks of (...)
and crosses of al kinds, which are derived from (...); which is the number of
(...), the name of the Latin Empire.

Historical application. 1. And the grief of their torment shall increase for
ever and ever: and they shall have no slakning day nor night, who reverence
that Antichristian Empire or counterfeit Emperors thereof, or whosoever
receives the supersticious marks that are k derived and composed of the name
of that Empire.

The Text. 12 Here is the patience of the Saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

Paraphrastical exposition 12 And this eternal punishment of the wicked, does
minister occasion of patience to the Saints of God, and to those that observe
his commandementes, and are the faithful servants of Christ Jesus.

Historical application. 12 And this eternal punishment of the wicked, does
minister occasion of patience to the Saints of God, and to those that observe
his commandementes, and are the faithful servants of Christ Jesus.

The Text. 13 The^ I hard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed ar
the dead, which die in the Lord, for that in continent hereafter (says the
Spirit) shall they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Paraphrastical exposition 13 And now does the Prophet John at the
commandment of Gods Spirit, write and publish those now to be happy, that
have died in the Lord, for that l incontinent (says Gods Spirit) after this
Iubelie, shall they rest from their troubles, and the reward of their works
(deserved in Christ) shall now follow them.

Historical application. 13 And now does the Prophet John at the
commandment of Gods Spirit, write and publish those now to be happy, that
have died in the Lord, for that l incontinent (says Gods Spirit) after this
Iubelie, shall they rest from their troubles, and the reward of their works
(deserved in Christ) shall now follow them.

The Text. 14 And I looked and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud one
sitting like unto the Son of man having on his head a golden crown, and in
his hand a sharp sickle.

Paraphrastical exposition 14 And behold now, and lo (the fourth Iubelie being
begun in Anno. 1688.) bright clouds shall appear, and m thereupon Christ,
the Son of man coming unto judgment, as the fourth of the thundering
Angels, having on his head the glorious crown of eternal victory, and in his
hand the n sickle of sharp diligence, to gather in his elect with.

Historical application. 14 And behold now, and lo (the fourth Iubelie being
begun in Anno. 1688.) bright clouds shall appear, and m thereupon Christ,
the Son of man coming unto judgment, as the fourth of the thundering
Angels, having on his head the glorious crown of eternal victory, and in his
hand the n sickle of sharp diligence, to gather in his elect with.

The Text. 15 And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud. Thrust in thy sickle and reap: for the time
is com to reap: for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

Paraphrastical exposition 15 And for the fifth of the thundering Angels came
another, even the o third person of the Trinity, who proceeding out from the p
Majesty of the Father, proclaimed with a loud voice to Christ, that sat upon
the clouds, saying, Enter to now with diligence, and gather in thine elect:
for the hour of the great harvest is now come, and the elect people of the
world are ready and ripe, exspecting their reward.

Historical application. 15 And for the fifth of the thundering Angels came
another, even the o third person of the Trinity, who proceeding out from the p
Majesty of the Father, proclaimed with a loud voice to Christ, that sat upon
the clouds, saying, Enter to now with diligence, and gather in thine elect:
for the hour of the great harvest is now come, and the elect people of the
world are ready and ripe, exspecting their reward.

The Text. 16 And he that sat on the cloud, thruste in his sickle on the
earth, and the earth was reaped.

Paraphrastical exposition 16 And Christ, coming in the clouds, entered to as
a reaper, with the sharp sickle of diligence, to gather in wholly his elect,
from the earth, and they were then all gathered up from the earth.

Historical application. 16 And Christ, coming in the clouds, entered to as
a reaper, with the sharp sickle of diligence, to gather in wholly his elect,
from the earth, and they were then all gathered up from the earth.

The Text. 17 Then another Angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven,
having also a sharp sickle.

Paraphrastical exposition 17 And then came another (even the sixth thundering
Angel) executer of God his wrath, from the majesty of God, appointed also,
diligently (as with a sickle) to gather in the wicked.

Historical application. 17 And then came another (even the sixth thundering
Angel) executer of God his wrath, from the majesty of God, appointed also,
diligently (as with a sickle) to gather in the wicked.

The Text. 18 And another Angel came out from the altar, which had power over
fire and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and said,
Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the
earth: for her graps are ripe.

Paraphrastical exposition 18 And the seventh and last thundering Angel came
out from the justice seat of God, having power, concerning Gods fiery and
fierce wrath, and he proclaimed with a loud voice to the former Angel, that
was ready, as one with a sickle, to gather in the reprobate, saying: Enter to
work diligently, as a reaper with his sickle, and gather the heaps of the
wicked of this world, for their q iniquity is fully ripe.

Historical application. 18 And the seventh and last thundering Angel came
out from the justice seat of God, having power, concerning Gods fiery and
fierce wrath, and he proclaimed with a loud voice to the former Angel, that
was ready, as one with a sickle, to gather in the reprobate, saying: Enter to
work diligently, as a reaper with his sickle, and gather the heaps of the
wicked of this world, for their q iniquity is fully ripe.

The Text. 19 And the angel thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth, and cut
down the vines of the vinyard of the earth, and cast them into the great wine
press of the wrath of God

Paraphrastical exposition 19 And that sixth Angel entered upon those people of
the earth, as a reaper with his sickle, and cut down the wicked, growing in
all earthly wickedness, and cast them into hell, the great tormente place
of God his fierce wrath.

Historical application. 19 And that sixth Angel entered upon those people of
the earth, as a reaper with his sickle, and cut down the wicked, growing in
all earthly wickedness, and cast them into hell, the great tormente place
of God his fierce wrath.

The Text. 20 And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came
out of the wine press, unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and
six hundred furlongs.

Paraphrastical exposition 20 And there they were tormented, far from the
company of Gods true citizens, and as the blood of an infinite slaughter, may
be thought to flow up to the bridles of horse in a field r 1600 stades off:
even so shall their terrors, and eternal torment in hell, begin to
ouerflowe all measure, after the outrunning of a r thousand six hundred
years.

Historical application. 20 And there they were tormented, far from the
company of Gods true citizens, and as the blood of an infinite slaughter, may
be thought to flow up to the bridles of horse in a field r 1600 stades off:
even so shall their terrors, and eternal torment in hell, begin to
ouerflowe all measure, after the outrunning of a r thousand six hundred
years.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a Of these 144000 Israelites, which the Spirit of God signified to S. John,
in the beginning of the troubles of the seven ages, that he would preserve and
mark to himself, there lacks not one, but they are all exhibited now, after
these troubles, merry and rejoicing with Christ their redeemer, as Christ
says, Ioh. 6.30. and 17 12. Haec est enim voluntas eius qui misit me Patris,
vt omne quod dedit mihi non perdam ex eo, sed resuscitem illud in nouissimo
die. This is the Fathers vvil which has sent me, that of al which he has
given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day:
And Quos dedisti mihi, custodiui, and nemo ex iis periit, etc. Those that thou
gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost, etc.

b As in the seventh chapter he has expressed and forewarned the marking,
preserving and electing of these 144000. Israelites, and of the Gentiles of all
nations, an innumerable people. So here for the Israelits, he repeats that self
same number of 144000. and for the Gentiles he represents them under the sound
of many waters, and great thunders, for (Revel. 17.15.) waters are interpret,
people, nations, and tongues: and thunders are those preachers, of whatsoever
nations, that boldly threaten out Gods judgeme^ts against the wicked; for the
which, Christ called John and James the sons of thunders. Mark. 3.17. and the
seven Angels, that here threaten the destruction of this Babylon, and day of
judgment, are therefore (Revel. 10.3.4.) called the seven thunders.

c This doubtless, is literally spoken of Israel, of whom he would mean,
that, boast as they will, that they are the seed of Abraham, and chosen people
of God, yet shall no more of them tha^ these 144000. be saved, that becomes
Christians: whereas, of the Gentiles, the number that shall be saved (Revel.
7.9.) shall be infinite, and their sound shall be here (says he, ver. 2) as
the sound of many waters: But concerning the precisenes of this number, read
Apoc. 7. note f thereof.

d This is not so precisely meaned, but that both the whoremonger and idolater,
whom God afterward has indewed with repentance and amendment, having faith in
Christ Jesus, shall be restored to purity in his blood: for, how often so ever a
sinner does repent him of his iniquities, the Lord will put his iniquity out
of his mind, Yea, though thy sins (says God, Esaias. 1.18) were as skarlet,
yet shall I make thee white as snow, and clean as wool.

e As the first fruits in the Leuiticall Law were offered to God, and the rest
disponed upon by the people: So ar the Elect only dedicate and appointed for
God, and therefore, they only are called his first fruits: and the great
multitude reprobate, and reiecte.

f That this Angel (although he calls him another Angel, that is to say,
another than the Lamb) is no second, but is the first of these, which (Apoc.
10.3.4.) are called the seven thunders, appears hereafter by verse 9. and note
i following, and by the 11. and 12. propositions: and therefore, this Angels
time falls betwixt the 1541. and the 1590. year of Christ.

g That at this time the hour of Gods latter judgment draws near, even
within an hundred and ten years from the end of this first Angels time, is to
be seen by our 13. and 14. propositions.

h That under the name of figurative Babylon, is meaned Rome, read the 23.
proposition. And as Rome it self is here comparable to Babylon, in that she
succeeded to her Empire and impiety, so also here, and in the 18. chap.
hereafter, does the Prophet S. John, in describing the fall of this Babylonical
Rome, borrow the very words of Esaias and Jeremy, describing the fall of
Babylon it self. Hereof read the note b of the 18. chapter. Further, how
before the end of this Jubilee, ending in Anno 1639. Rome appearinglie is to
be destroyed, and the kingdom thereof to fall, the merueilous beginning of this
same Jubilee seems to portend: for nere to the beginning hereof in the 88. 89.
and 90. years of God, God has by the tempest of his winds, miraculouslie
destroyed the huge and monstrous Antichristian flote, that came from Spain,
against the professors of God in this poor Island: Again, God has stirred up
one of the chief murderers of the Saints of God in Paris, even the late king
of France, to murder the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinal his brother,
special deuisers of that cruel Massacre. Then farther, that mighty God has
stirred up a desperate Papisticall Friar to cose lives with that bloody king.
So that by the sword, and mutual bloodshed of Papists among themselves, the
right of the crown of France is now fallen into the hands of the king of Nauar,
a protestant Prince. And with these miraculous accidents has this Iubelie
begun, hoping in God before the end thereof, to hear that whole Papisticall
city and kingdom of Rome utterly ruined: For these premises were as unlikely
before those three years.

i Because this text calls this Angel the third Angel: therefore,
necessarily the Angel preceding him in the 8. verse, must be the second: And
again, the Angel preceding that second in the 6. verse, must be the first
Angel, although the text adioines to that first Angel, the name of other, as
being another than the Lamb, mentioned before, verse 1. For the Lamb is ever
spirituallie present, and assistant with his Church: But that other was the
first messenger, that comes in the last age: and this, contained in this 9.
verse, is the third, and Christ himself by his bodily coming to judgment,
shall be the fourth. Read more hereof in our 13. proposition.

k Whereas in other parts of this book, this mark is but simply called the
beasts mark, as doubtful what it is like, or from whence it is derived: here
says he plainly, it is the mark of the beasts name: as if thereby he would
plainly let us understand, that that mark is some ways derived from the name
of the beast (...), to wit, even from the three numerall letters thereof (...)
assigned by the text, as more evidently does appear by the next chapter,
verse 2. and note c thereof, where that mark is expreslie called, the mark of
the number of the beasts name: and therefore, these marks, are the marks of
(...) and crosses of all kinds, as is prooved by our 31. proposition.

l Some read here, Blessed are they that incontinent hereafter die in the
Lord, for that (says the Spirit) they shall rest from their labors: but
seeing certainly, they are always blessed that die in the Lord, be it
heretofore, or hereafter, I therefore assent rather to them that read: Blessed
are they that die in the Lord, for that incontinent hereafter (says the
spirit) they shall rest from their labors. and this variety comes by the
placing of the point before the adverb of time, or after the same in the Greek.

m This cloud is meant literally, for in a cloud Christ past out of his
disciples sight, and that same way (says the Angels Act. 1.9.10.11.) shall he
return to judgment: hereof, read Math. 24.30. and Mat. 26.64. the like is
spoken, Revel. 1.7. and note f thereof.

n This hook or sickle mentioned here, and in Joel. 3.13. and Mar. 4.29. can
mean no other thing, nor that earnest and sharp diligence, that Christ shall
use in gathering in his elect: by comparison, as shearers or reapers with their
hooks gather in their corn, and not that Christ shall use any material
instrument in this work of the latter day: yea, no other than that, that God
did use at the first creation of all things, which was, Dixit and factum est,
even the virtue and puissance of his word.

o The precise day and hour of Gods great judgment, being both unknown to
Christ, so far as he is man, and also to the Angels of heaven, as Christ
testifies in Mark. 13.32. Therefore, this Angel, that is the aduertiser of
Christ, must needs be the holy spirit, the great Messenger of God, and God
himself, by whom Christ is made foreseen, and privy to al mysteries, as being
coniunct and unite persons in one Godhead.

p This temple that is said here to be in heaven, is by the Revel. 21.22. and
by the 20. prop. nothing else, than the majesty of God: from whom the holy
spirit going out figuratiuelie, as it were, after the manner of men, bears
this message of the latter day to Christ, and so are expressed three several
functions, correspondent to the three persons of the Godhead. The Father
directs the message of his judgment, the holy spirit bears it unto the
son, the Son then executes it. And this orderly progress is set down, but
for supply of our weak understanding.

q This Vine is the wicked people of the world, which the Lord has planted to
bring forth good fruit, but they have brought forth evil and corrupt works,
of whom says Esaias 5.2. I vvaited that they should produce good vines, and
they brought forth sour grapes. That is to say, in the seventh verse thereof:
I waited that they should give judgment, and behold, they wrought iniquity: and
I looked for justice, and behold the complaint.

r Seeing by the spirit of God, there is nothing idly or in vain expressed.
These whole premises being spoken of the later day, it appears this date of
1600. to be the date of that great day, else apparently, this great precise
number of 1600. would not have bin put here more than any other number, and
this does cheiflie appear, because this number agrees so near with other
prophetical dates of the latter day, falling about the year of Christ. 1699
as at more length is showed in our 14. Proposition.

CHAP. XV.
THE ARGUMENT.
The spirit of God, intending to repeat the prophecy of the seven ages now
under the terms of Vialls, which before were expressed by seven trumpets, to
the effect, the one may be a commentary to discipher the other, first settes
down this chapter as a preface thereunto, containing in it cheiflie two godly
instructions. The one of Gods mercy, that these last plagues being imminent and
ready, do not the more fall out, till God have first established such in
security amidst the raging seas and consuming fire of worldly persecution, as
refusing the Antichristian errors, rejoice triumphantly in god. The second
instruction, is of Gods justice, that while as his temple is most patent, and
his treuth publikelie preched in the days of the primitive Church, forth of
the open predication of the Evangell, proceeds both Gods horrible plagues,
universally upon the conte^ners thereof: As also, it pleases Gods majesty to
give power and permission to the Antichrist, to obscure the true contemned
light of the Euangell, till the end of these plagues.

The Text
1 ANd I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous, seven Angels having the
seven last plagues: for by them, is fulfilled the wrath of God.

2 And I saw, as it were, a glassie sea, mingled with fire, and the^ that had
gotten victory of the beast, and of his Image, and of his mark of the number
of his name, stand at the glassie sea, having the harpes of God.

3. And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God almighty: just
and true ar thy ways, King of Saints.

4 Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art
holy, and all nations shall come and woorship before thee: for thy judgments
ar made manifest.

5 And after that I looked, and behold, the temple of the Tabernacle of
testimony was open in heaven.

6 And the seven Angels came out of the temple, which had the seven plagues,
clothed in pure and bright linen, and having their breasts girded with golden
girdles.

7 And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden
vialles, full of the wrath of God, which lives for evermore.

8 And the Temple was full of smoke from the glory of God, and from his power,
and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the
seven Angels were fulfilled.

The Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AND I beheld again, farther of these great and heavenly maruells, and
considered Gods messengers of the seven latter plagues reddy, whereby in them
the wrath of God might be fulfilled.

2. Then I perceived and saw, how first, God would make for his own, the
flowing a waves, and rageing tyranny of the world calm, and firm as glass,
though mixed with a little fire of persecution, and those that had victoriously
attained to the true b knowledge, which is the Antichristian empire, who are
the counterfeit emperors thereof, which is his mark, that comes c of the
number of his name, would he make firmly and constantly to stand in all these
raging storms, as stable and sure, with perfect gladness.

3 Singing and rejoicing with Moses and the prophets of God, in the old
Testament, and with christ and his disciples of the new testament

5 Thereafter I considered, and behold, the true Temple of God, even his holy
Church was visible and patent, and the gospel publicly preached, among his
heavenly elect of the primitive Church,

6 And upon the pate^cie of that true church and d opening up of the gospel
and true christian religion, there flowed out upon the disobedient contemners
thereof, the seven great plagues, powered out in the seven last ages, by the
Angels of God, who ar cled in e purity and innocence, and gloriously girded
with justice, power and readiness.

7 And Luke one of the f four eva^gelists (ending here his acts of the
Apostles) gives place from this forth, to these seven Angels, to prosecute out
their prophecy of these plagues, which they are to power forth of the
precious cups of the justice of God everlasting.

8 And during that time, shall the true church of God, and holy christian
religion be g obscured and darkened with Antichristian errors, which the
majesty and power of God has plesed to permit and suffer, for the contempt of
his word, so that thereby, there shall be no true visible church, nor sincere
doctrine publikly opened, that any may have access unto, till these h seven
plagues be powered out, by these Messengers and Angels of God, against the
wicked of the world.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This glassie sea, is the world, wherein, although the wicked be drowned
sometime, with the stormy waves and troubles; sometime again, with the
pleasures and voluptuousnes thereof: yet does God a little quiet the rage
thereof, and make it so firm and stable to his own, that though they sometime
slide thereon, and be grieved with the fire of persecution, yet shall neither
the raging storms thereof, on the one part, nor the alluring pleasures
thereof, upon the other part, ouerwhelm or drown them, hereof read the
Paraphrase of the Revel. 4.6.

b The text here speaks of victory, and ouercomming the beast, his image, and
mark of the number of his name. Though the ouercomming the beast, might import
a battle or strife: yet it were improper to say, they strove and overcame the
mark of the number of the beasts name. This victory then, appears to mean a
spiritual strife by knowledge, to discern the treuth and true meaning of
these, from the wrong meaning, and so to overcome the difficulty of these
mysteries, that knowing their true meaning, we may victoriously follow the
truth.

c Many having mistaken this text, have not followed the original greek, but
thinking to make the matter more sensible, have turned it to the wrong sense:
for some have here interponed the conjunctio^, and, saying, of his mark, [and]
of the number of his name: these, by interponing that conjunction and, would
mean the beasts mark to be a several thing, no ways pertinent to the number
of the beasts name. Others, not finding there that conjunction, and, which is
(...) in the greek, does apparently judge these words. [Of his mark of the
number of his name] to be put appositiue, as to say, John an Apostle, and so
does judge this mark and this number to mean both one thing, and therefore
leaves out the one; to wit, the mark, and this is done in the vulgar latin
translation in these words. Et eos qui vicerunt bestiam et imaginem eius et
numerum nominis eius etc. that is, and they who have gotten victory of the
beast, and of his image, and of the number of his name etc. but betwixt these
extremities, whereof the one adds, and the other paireth the text, we hold
the text it self as the true midst, which word by word according to the
greek original, and as both T. Beza in the Latin, and we here in the english
have expounded the same, does import not the victory of the beasts mark, and
of the number of his name, but of the beasts mark of the number of his name:
inferring expreslie thereby, that the beasts mark comes of the number of his
name: and therefore, have we cited this text in our 31. proposition, as a sure
ground and authority to try this mark by, read further hereof in the said
proposition.

d That this Temple means Gods holy Church and whole contents thereof, even his
very treuth and true religion amongst his holy and heavenly elect upon earth,
is showed in our 20. proposition. And here is to be noted, that ever the more
patently that this temple is opened, and the more openly that Gods truth is
published, the greater ever are the plagues that flows out from thence, if it
be not duly embraced, and reverently accepted, as experience both here, after
the days of the primitive Church, and also in all ages proves, and shall,
without al question, be also proved upon us in this present age, except more
speedy repentance come not, yet appears.

e That fine linen, is purity, innocence and justification, read the Revel.
19.8 and how this girding is a sign of readiness, read Luke 12.35. and Luke
17.8. and specially means readiness to justice, as in Esaias. 11.5. Iustitia
cingulum lumborum eius, Justice shall be the girdle of his loins, etc. and
that with great power, as Psa. 17.33 40. So that the girdle of these
proprieties, for their excellency, is said here to be of gold: that is to say,
precious and glorious as is said, Apoc. 1.13. note n thereof.

f Where it is said here, that this beast or Evangelist, gave the seven Vials
to these seven Angels, it is not literallie so to be taken, but after a
prophetical and figurative manner of speech: as if he would say, that that
Evangelist Luke remitted, and gave over the writing of the rest of his
Ecclesiastical history and entered to, these seven Angels to prophecy out,
where he left off: The like phrase is commonly used, in saying, Thou have
delivered him thy pen: that is, Thou have given place to him to write the
rest. Here then note, that if either the four beasts were wrong interpreted,
to be the four Evangelists, or yet the seven trumpets, or seven vials were
not both one, or at the least, began not about the year of God, 71. and so
our 2. 6. and 19. propositions were impugned, then would there some repugnance
appear here: but in that there is no repugnance here (for the Acts of the
Apostles end at the remaining of Paul captive two years in Rome, in free
ward, where shortly after he suffered death, in the end of Nero his reign,
which approaches within a year or two to the said 71. year of Christ)
Therefore, the said propositions are hereby confirmed and undoubtedly approved.

g Some do translate this to be the smoke and reeke of Gods majesty, and of
his power, that hinders us to enter into his Temple; which is not probable,
but rather, as Jerome and other learned translate it, a smoke, not of Gods
majesty, nor of his power, but from Gods majesty, and from his power, as
being the smoke of Antichristian errors, which nevertheless flows from the
permission and power of Gods majesty, for the punishment of the contemners of
his truth. The like is said in the Lords prayer, Lord, lead us not into
temptation. and Amos. 3.6. Is there any evil in the city, which the Lord
has not done: not that the Lord tempts us, or does any evil in the city
directly, but only, that that temptation and evil doing does flow from the
permission and sufferance of his majesty, and his almighty power, as
permitting, in his just wrath, his slaves, the devil, the world, and the flesh,
to stir up all evil in us: And so, this smoke that hinders us from
entering into Gods Temple, is not his smoke, but the smoke of Antichristian
errors, which nevertheless flows from the permission of Gods majesty and
power.

h This abiding of Gods Temple so long latent and obscure, is most certain:
For, during the most part of the first age, by diverse heretics, forerunners of
the great Antichrist: and during the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and
beginning of the seventh ages, by the Roman Antichrist himself; the true
Temple of God, and light of the Gospel was obscured, til by the seventh
plague, in this seventh and last age, his kingdom began to fall; so that
henceforth to the worlds end, shall Gods true Church and holy religion be
patent, open, and publikelie known. Hereof read the paraphrase of chap 11. 19.
and note r thereof, with the discourse of our 20. proposition.

CHAP. 16.
THE ARGUMENT.
Having praemitted the former chapter, as a preface to the prophecy of the
seven ages, now to be repeated under the terms of vials. In this chapter he
prosecutes out, in due order of time, the plagues of the whole seven vials,
correspondent and agreeable in purpose, sense, and almost in terms with the
seven trumpets, before expressed, whereby most surely, the one may be used as
a commentary to the other.

The Text. 1 ANd I hard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
Angels, Go your ways, and pour out the seven vialles of the wrath of God,
upon the earth.

Paraphrastical exposition 1 ANd I hard the mighty decre of God, directed from
the Temple of his treuth, to his ministering Spirits of the seven ages,
commanding them to pass, and pour out the cups of his wrath of these seven
ages, upon the a people of the earth.

Historical application. 1 AT the appointment of God, there are seven ages to
the worlds end, in every one of the which, there ar several plagues poured
forth, for the iniquities of the world.

The Text. 2 And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth, and
there fell a noisome and a grievous sore upon the men, which had the mark of
the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

Paraphrastical exposition 2 And his messengers of the first age passed, and
powered out the cups of God his wrath upon the great Empire of the earth, and
there came a cruel and horrible plague upon al people that professed obedience
to it, and upon them that reverenced that Empire and the degenerate Princes
thereof.

Anno Christi. 71 The first Vial, or age.

Historical application. 2 In the first age, from the year of God, 71. to the
316. year, the Empire of Rome and Roman Monarchy began to decay: For, the
subjects of that Empire, and all who obeyed the degenerate Princes thereof,
were sometime plagued and oppressed by their tyranny, and by the tyranny of the
thirty tyrants, that then reigned under the^: Others, sometime were ouerrun by
strangers, through the effeminate lenity of these Emperors,

The Text. 3 And the second Angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it
became as the blood of a ded man: and every living thing died in the sea.

Paraphrastical exposition 3 And the Messengers of the second age powered forth
their cups of God his wrath upon a certain b sea coast, peninsull or land,
named by the sea: and that land became full of bloodshed and murder: and all
the people, that sometime lived wealthilie in that Peninsull, were for the most
part slain and destroyed.

Anno Christi. 316 The second Vial.

Historical application. 3 Wherethrough, and because in the second and next
age, beginning about the year of God, 316. the Emperor Constantine
tra^sported the imperial seat to Constantinople, it came to pass, that the
town of Rome, and whole Peninsull of Cittim, which is (ex Hieronymo de
interpretat nominum) interpreted the gathering or tossing of the seas, and now
is called Italy, is left a pray to the Huns, Goths Vandales, and other
barbarous nations, who slew and destroyed of the inhabitants of that country
at their pleasure.

The Text. 4 And the third Angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters, and they became blood

Paraphrastical exposition 4 And the Messengers of the third age poured out
their cups of Gods wrath c upon the wholesome floudes and lively fountains of
pure doctrine, and the doctrine became corrupt, tending all to d bloodshed and
murder.

Anno Christi. 561 The third Vial.

Historical application. 4 Then begins in the year of God, 561. the third age,
in the which, the wicked Mahomet arose and taught the damnable doctrine of his
Alkaron, among the Christian Churches of the Orient, wherethrough these
Easterly countries became altogether corrupt with his bloody heresy.

The Text. 5 And I hard the Angel of the waters say Lord, thou art just, Which
art and Which wast, and Holy, because thou have judged these things.

Paraphrastical exposition 5 And I perceived the Messengers and Ministers of
the true doctrine, extolling Gods justice, saying, Thou Lord, who is, and ever
was holy, art just, and have judged righteously in this cause:

Historical application. 5 Herein does God his justice and most just judgment
appear: for that men had then contemned the true doctrine.

The Text. 6 For they shed the blud of the Saints, and Prophets, and therefore
have thou given the^ blood to drink: for they are worthy.

Paraphrastical exposition 6 For these people have shead the blood of thy holy
Saints and Ministers, and therefore haste thou suffered them spirituallie to
drink bloody doctrine, exhorting bloodshed, for they were no better worthy.

Historical application. 6 And shed the blood of Gods servants; therefore did
God send among them this Mahometicke doctrine, which cruelly exhorts men to
make war and bloodshed, and falsely promises the kingdom of heaven to al those,
that valia^tly fight in their quarrels.

The Text. 7 And I hard another out of the Sanctuary say, Even so, Lord, God
Almighty true and righteous are thy judgments.

Paraphrastical exposition 7 And I considered from the Sanctuary, even from
among them, that entered into the secret meditation of Gods mysteries, the same
also confessed and approved, saying, O Lord God almighty true and righteous are
thy judgments.

Historical application. 7 And this, all that contemplate the mysteries of Gods
justice, understand to be justly deserved at the hands of the almighty, who
is true and righteous in all his judgments.

The Text. 8 And the fourth Angel poured out his vial on the Sun, and it was
given unto him to tormente men with heat of fire.

Paraphrastical exposition 8 And Gods Messengers of the fourth age, powered out
the cup of Gods wrath, against the e spiritual Preachers: and God suffered
them to stir up arrogant opinions, and to vex and grieve men with their
sophismes, and furious fire of their hot contentions.

Anno Christi. 806 The fourth Vial.

Historical application. 8 Then begins in Anno 806. the fourth age, about
the which time, the Spirituality and Papisticall Clergy, induced many
contentious arguments, and sophistical reasonings, as the captious
distinctions of (...), excusing their idolatry, and new erection of Imagerie,
established lately before, in the seventh counsel of Nice, against certain
Godly Emperors of Greece, who had demolished Imagerie: Also, the curious
sophismes and contentious arguments of transubstantiation, to excuse their
(...) and adoration of the bread.

The Text. 9 And men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name of God,
which has power over these plagues, and they repented not to give him glory.

Paraphrastical exposition 9 And men were meruelouslie chafed and puffed up
with f contentious arguments, defending blasphemies against the name of God,
who only had power to reveal the truth, and to remove these plagues of
bitter contention, neither repented they thereof, that they might glorify God.

Historical application. 9 And with these, and such like fires of contentions,
they kendled up men in strife, smothering the truth, and blaspheming the name
of God, by calling it God, that was not god, and persevered in these errors,
without repenting, or glorifying of the name of the true and almighty God.

The Text. 10 And the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the throne of the
beast, and his kingdom waxed dark, and they gnewe their tongues for sorrow.

Paraphrastical exposition 10 And the Messengers of the fifth age, powered out
their cups of God his wrath, against the Antichristian and imperial throne,
and other more g puissant Conquerours, obscured and stained their monarchy, so
that they orped and gnashed their tongues for sorrow.

Anno Christi. 1051 The fifth Vial.

Historical application. 10 Then the fifth age being begun in An. 1051 That
year Zadok was made first Dominatour of the Turks, whose dominion arose daily
so great, and so diminished the Roman Empire, that they of the Empire ar
greatly astonished and grieved.

The Text. 11 And blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains and for their
sores, and repented not of their works.

Paraphrastical exposition 11 And yet insisted, blaspheming the God of heaven
even the more, because of these plagues and griefs, and repented not them
selves of their wicked works.

Historical application. 11 And yet continue they still in their former
impieties, idolatries and schisms, without repenting the same, or craving
pardon of God for their wicked works.

The Text. 12 And the sixth Angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water there of dried up, that the way of the kings of the
East should be prepared.

Paraphrastical exposition 12 And the messengers of the sixth age, powered out
their cups of Gods wrath, toward the people that remained about Euphrates that
these kings and princes of the East, may make ready way over Euphrates, and tak
journey against the people of the West.

Anno Christi. 1296 The sixth age or Vial.

Historical application. 12 Afterward, begins the sixth age, in An. 1296. About
this time, even in An. 1300. Ottoman being crowned the first Mohammedan
Emperor, it pleased God in his wrath, to stir up from that time forth the
four nations Mahotans, Turks, Tartarians, Saracens and Arabians, that dwell
beyond and about Euphrates, with the said Ottoman and his vnderkings of the
east cuntries, to com over Euphrates, and raise war against the^ of the whole
Roman empire.

The Text. 13 And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth
of the false prophets

Paraphrastical exposition 13 So I considered out of the deuilish h mouths of
the great Empire, and of the false Prophet to proceed three special
exhortatio^s and wicked entisements, as vile vermin or frogs, creeping from
their pool.

Historical application. 13 At this time, the devil stirs up false teachers on
both the sides, even the Legates of the Pope and Roman seat on the one side; and
the doctors of the Mahometick heresies, on the other side; to seduce and stir
up their subjects of the whole world, three ways: to wit, in most furious
wrath and cruelty, the one against the other. 2. To stand obstinately in their
heretical doctrine. 3. To be illuded with vain hope, to obtain auaritiously,
both the whole kingdoms of the world, and also the kingdom of heaven hereafter,
if they fight valia^tly in these their holy wars, as they call the^.

The Text. 14 For they are the Spirits of devils, working miracles, to go unto
the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world to gather the^ to the battle of
that great day of God almighty.

Paraphrastical exposition 14 These be i deuilish inspirations intising men by
lying wonders, and entered into the hearts of all the Princes of the world, to
entise and stir the^ up to make war together, in this time of the horrible
ve^gea^ce of almighty God.

Historical application. 14 And by these deuilish intisements, confirmed some
times with lying wonders, they stirred up all the princes of the world by East,
and about Euphrates, against those that are by west, in continual warfare all this sixth age

The Text. 15 (Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, least he walk naked, and men see his filthiness.)

Paraphrastical exposition 15 Behold (says the Lord) I come at unawares to
punish: blessed is he that abides praying, and watching from sin, and keeps
his clothings of righteousness, least he being stripped thereof, al his
horible iniquities appear discovered, to his eternal shame and confusion.

Historical application. 15 So has the Almighty brought this great and sudde^
vengeance upon the Papistical Christians for their defectio^. Blessed ar they
that abide constant, for God shall deliver them from shame and confusion.

The Text. 16 And they gathered themselves together into a place, called in
Hebrewe, Armageddon.

Paraphrastical exposition 16 And these people shall gather themselves together,
to fight in the k mountain of gods Euangel, eve^ in the land of his chose^
fruit, and christian elect people.

Historical application. 16 And this wicked multitude of the whole world, even
the Roman and Papistical princes from the west, and Mahometik Princes from the
east convened, and fought many battles in Christendo^ both in Asia where S.
John had planted those seven Christian Churches, and in such parts also of
Europe, where other Apostles had preached.

The Text. 17 And the seventh Angel powered out his vial into the air and
there came a loud voice out of the Temple of heaven from the throne, saying, It
is done.

Paraphrastical exposition 17 And the Angels of the seventh age, powered
forth their vials of Gods wrath against the volving air, even the changeable
estat of things: and there passed out a mighty decree and ordinance from Gods
throne, and Temple of his treuth among his faithful, saying, l all is done,
even al mortal things, in this age shall end.

Anno Christi. 1531 The seventh Vial, and last age.

Historical application. 17 Last of all, begins the seventh age, in Anno
Christi, 1541. in the which age the world shall end.

The Text. 18 And there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and there
was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, even
so mighty an earthquake.

Paraphrastical exposition 18 And until that end, there shall be great shows and
foretokens of tempestuous troubles, rumors of wars and Gods just judgme^ts
thundered out, and such a commotio^ shall come in the great Empire of the earth
(which seems more stable tha^ the earth) that there came m never so great a
commotion thereof, since first men were upon earth.

Historical application. 18 In the mean time there shall be great and
tempestuous troubles of all sorts, and specially, the great Roman Empire,
and Papisticall kingdom shall (God willing) quite be overthrown, and the
Monarchy thereof so utterly destroyed, as never Monarchy was, since the
beginning of the world.

The Text. 19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities
of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

Paraphrastical exposition 19 And the whole people that n dwelt in Christendom,
became of three sorts, of opinions, and all the Ethnic religions were abolished,
and then the great o Antichristian city, successor of Babel, came in
remembrance before the Almighty, to give her now to drink in his justice, the
cup of his wrath and bitter indignation.

Historical application. 19 At this time the whole people that remain in
Christendom, shall either profess Protestantrie, Papistrie, or a pretended
Christian Neutralitie: for as touching the public profession of any Ethnicke
religion, there shall be none within Christendom: then shall that Papisticall
seat and city of Rome, in Gods wrath and just judgment be destroyed.

The Text. 20 And every I Will fledd away, and the mountains were not found.

Paraphrastical exposition 20 And every Ila^d revolted from her, and her mighty
kingdoms of main la^d were dissolved

Historical application. 20 England, Scotland, and other Islands shall revolt
from her, and leave her Papistry: her mighty and confederat kingdoms of
Germany, France, Spain, and others: shall either be ruined and dissolved
themselves, or then shall dissolve their league with her.

The Text. 21 And there fell a great hail like talents out of heaven upon the
men, and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail: for the plague
thereof was exceeding great.

Paraphrastical exposition 21 That time the p cold and te^pestuous hail of
self-loue, and lack of zeal and charity, fell down, as from on high, and in
abundance among the people of the world; so that they despised and blasphemed
god through their coldness of charity and zeal, for that plague of cold zeal does
every where increase

Historical application. 21 In this time, zeal to God, and charity to our
neighbors shall grow cold, and self love shall abound among al people,
whereby the most part shall neglect and despise God, and follow their avarice,
self-loue, and partial affections, for undoubtedly, to the worlds end, these
vices shall ever increase.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The earth, in all the Revelation, is not only taken for the people of the
earth in general, but for the Antichristian and universal Empire of the earth,
even the Roman Monarchy in special, as appears here plainly by these
seven plagues, which here are said to be powered forth upon the earth, and
fell indeed against the Roman Empire; and chiefly, where he says, the first
Vial was powered forth upon the earth, he subjoyneth in continent, and there
fell a noisome and grievous plague on them that did bear the mark of that
Antichristian beast or Empire: as meaning, by the falling of that plague on the
earth, the falling thereof on the empire of the earth, and consequently, the
earth means the Empire of the earth, or Roman Monarchy: and therefore
earthquake does ever mean commotions of the Empire, both actiuelie and
passiuelie, as you shall find through all our Paraphrase, to agree with the
history.

b Why justly we interpret the sea to mean Italy, read the note d Apoc. 8.

c That fountains and floods mean doctrine, read the note g Apo. 8

d This doctrine is justly called bloody, seeing the Mahomet preached and
proclaimed war against all men, and promised the kingdom of heaven to them,
that fight valiantly in his causes.

e That the Sun, for the most part, means the spiritual estate, read Apoc.
6. note h thereof.

f This heat that the Clergy, at this time, both chafed themselves and others
with, agrees very well, by histories of that time, to be both the contentious
arguments, and opinions, contained in our historical application, whereby they
troubled and vexed Christians, as also the pride and ire of the Pope and his
Clergy, which at this time rose so hie, that they, by the hand of Charlemain,
bereft the Exarchat from the Emperor of the Orient, and the kingdom of
Lombardie from the Lombardes, and do brook both to this day, and then, and
ever since, have stirred up the world in strife.

g This plague, that here makes against the Roman seat, in this fifth Vial,
proves the plague of the fifth Trumpet, not to mean the Pope (as some
believe) but rather the Turk, as in our 3. proposition is proved more at
length.

h These three unclean Spirits, that here are said to proceed forth of the
mouths of the Devil, of the Antichristian beast, and of the false Prophet,
are called (Apoc. 9.17.18.) three plagues of fire, smoke, and brimstone, that
proceeded out of the mouths of the Mahometanes: wherethrowe of necessity,
they must mean such three common heads of doctrine, as both the Pope and the
Mahomet do seduce their subjectes with. Such as, first, their ire and tyranny:
for, the Pope proclaimed havoc of all Mahometicke blood. So do the
Mahometanes with Christians. Secondly, heresy: For the Pope presses by all
means possible, to spread his Papisticall heresy universally: so do the
Mahometans their wicked heresy of their Alkaron. Thirdly, bitter and
sulphurious avarice: For either of them aspired to be Monarch of the whole
world. The Pope charging the Empire, and his under kings to fight his holy
wars, (as he terms them) for the augmenting of S. Peter's patrimony. The
Mahomet charging his Saracens to take up the whole kingdoms of the world, as
promised to the^ by God (Genesis 13.16) as being the sons of Abraham, even
Agarenes indeed, and Saracens (as they think) by adoption, and therefore,
promising the kingdom of heaven to them that fight valiantly in that
quarrel: and so for conclusion, these deuilish plagues, and inspirations of
ire, heresy, and avarice, do seem to be the three plagues and deuilish
intisements, that here both moves Papisticall and Mahometicke kings to this
great bloodshed and warfare.

i As God is in the truth, and the truth in him, and he is the truth (Ioh.
14.6) So (a contrariis) the devil is in deceit, and deceit in him, and he is
deceit, and that so inseperablie, that where the one is, there also is the
other. Whereupon, these wicked and deceitful intisements, and three
inspirations of the devil, are justly called by the text, spirits of Devils,
because the devil goes with them, and they with him conjunctlie, in taking of
the which his personal presence with them, he confirms them oftentimes with
lying wonders, and deceitful miracles, as says the Text. Of these false
Papisticall miracles, and Mahometicall enthousiasmes, diverse ar to be read in
their histories.

k That Armageddon signifies the mountain of the Euangel, or of the Elect
fruit, read Hierome de interpretatione nominum. There is no reason here to read
Geddon arma, as some do, under pretense of the Hebrew manner of reading
backward: for if the Hebrew manner were here to be observed, not only would the
last word be first read, but even likewise the last letters first, and every
letter backward in his own order, making Noddegamra, and not geddon arma

l Of this consumation of all things, read the note q Apoc. 11.

m There came never so great a change among the wicked Monarchies of the
earth: for ever as one was destroyed, another as wicked arose, but now shall al
wicked kingdoms be dissolved, and shall give place unto the eternal kingdom
of Christ.

n This great city, having neither the epithet of Holy, nor contrarily, any
Antichristian epithet joined to it, and yet apparantlie by the text, including
no professed Gentilisme, must therefore, (as appears) mean Christendom,
which neither is altogether Gods holy city and spiritual Jerusalem, neither
yet altogether Antichristian, but partly of both: but having no public
Gentilisme professed in it: for there is no religion publikelie professed in
it, but Christian: yet by the craft of the devil, the same is rent in pieces,
even in three factions: one being Protestants, another Papists, the third,
ignorant Neutrals, alike to both: who all call themselves Christians: But of
these three, the Papistical seat being the author both of their own wilful
errors, as also of the ignorant peoples Neutralitie and doubtfulnes of faith,
shall therefore (in the next verse) go to ruin.

o That this Babylon, that here is mentioned, is Rome, is proved by our 23.
proposition: by destruction of the which Roman seat, here prophesied,
occasion of perseverance is ministered to the Protestants, penitence to the
Papists, and of perfect certainty to the doubtful and wavering Neutral: which
because these do not the more hereof acknowledge, and tha^kfullie accept, but
for the most part, become al cold as haill (as in the next verse is said)
therefore does the Lord shorten the latter days, for final end of al iniquity.

p Of this cold and tempestuous haill of self-loue, and lack of zeal and
charity, read the note s Apoc. 11. Here note the professed Christians, being
of three sorts, Protestants, Papists, and Neutrals: the Papists being the
Authors, both of their own wilful errors, and of the Neutrals ignorant
errors are therefore in the former verse, first punished: but because,
nevertheless, these ignorant Neutrals do increase and augment daily in
self-loue, and their zeal and charity ever freeseth colder and colder to the
worlds end, therefore, shall the Lord shorten the latter day, as appears by
the testimonies cited in the said note s Apoc. 11.

CHAP. XVII.
THE ARGUMENT.
The most special intention of the Spirit of God, in this holy work, being
covertly to discover the Antichrist (covertly I say, least before the time,
and to Antichristian persons it being known, had ministered occasion to their
tyranny, through care of their own standing, to have destroyed this whole
Revelation) now, under this co^uerture, and locking up of his secrets, God
has been so beneficial to his own, that he prouides the means, whereby this
most needful discovery of the Antichrist, shall be in dew time made patent to
them: among the which means, this chapter is the key and chief, for here, in
express terms, the Spirit of God has interpreted the great Antichristian and
Idolatrous whore, to be that city, that is set as mistress over the kingdoms
of the earth: and the seven heads of the beast, whereon she sits, to be her
seven mountains, whereby (beside many other tokens herein contained) that
imperial and seven hilled city of Rome is most lively expressed, and only
designed, and all true Christians thereby certified, that in it must the
Antichrist set his seat and dwelling.

Historical application. 1 NOw, the last of the seven ages being come, the
Spirit of God lets us evidently see the destruction approaching of the
great Antichristian city, and Idolatrous Empire of Rome, which hither to has
empired over all nations.

Paraphrasticall exposition 1 ANd there came and communed with me, the a last of
the Angels, which did bear the plagues of the seven latter ages, saying,
Approach, and I shall show unto thee, the destruction of the great Antichristian
city b and Idolatrous whore, who impires over many c nations.

The Text. 1 THen there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven
vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Com, I will show thee the damnation
of the great whore that sits upon many waters.

Historical application. 2 And with whom all the princes of the earth have
been entised to go spiritually a whoring both of old, after the Pagan Idols
of Mars, Minerua, lady Fortune, and others, as also of late, after the images
of our Lady, the Crucifixe, Saint Paul, S. Helen, S. Margaret, S. Syluester
Pope, and infinite more Papisticall Idolles, and have caused all people to dote
with these fond supersticious errors.

Paraphrasticall exposition 2 And with whom the kings of the earth have been
intised to commit Idolatry, and all that dwell under her earthly Empire, are
drunken with the d doctrine of her abominable errors.

The Text. 2 With who^ have committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and
the inahbitants of the earth ar drunken with the wine of her fornication.

Historical application. 3 And those, whose spirit God indueth with true
judgment, may perceive, how that city of Rome has broked a bloody Empire,
and has usurped proud, glorious, and blasphemous Antichristian titles,
calling her self of old, Roma aeterna, foelix, invicta, etc. and her Empire,
sacrosanctum and perpetuum: and of new, S. Peter's chair, the Apostolic seat,
and head city of the Church. She is builded upon seven hills, and has been
governed successively, by seven princely governments, and assisted by the ten
christian kings, her confederats, al hereafter nominated.

Paraphrasticall exposition 3 Then ravished he my spirit in e solitary
contemplations: and I perceived, under the figure of a f woman, a city, set
over a cruel and g blood-thirsty Monarchy, full of glorious and and blasphemous
h styles, which is situate upon seven i mountains, and ruled by seven
princely k governments, under the figure of seven heads, and afterward
divided into l te^ under kings, under the figure of ten horns.

The Text. 3 So he carried me away in to the wilderness in the Spirit, and I saw
a woman sit upon a skarlet collored beast, full of names of blasphemy, which
had seven heads and ten horns.

Historical application. 4 And this imperial city inioyeth all the pomp and
riches of the world: her pillars are of marble, her tapistries of silks, her
sielerings over gilt with gold, her Cardinals and rulers clothed in fine
skarlet, red, and purple: their temples and idols decored with gold, pearls,
and precious stones: for all the world paies tribute unto her, but she
communicated nothing to the^ again, but her poysonable doctrine, and vile
allurements of idolatry.

Paraphrasticall exposition 4 And this whorish city, was clad with all
princely m riches, of purple, skarlet, gold, precious stones, and pearl,
exhibiting and propining (as out of her hand) to the whole world the venomed
drinks of her poysonable doctrine, and idolatrous heresy.

The Text. 4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and skarlet, and gilded with
gold and precious stones, and pearls, and had a cup of gold, in her hand, full
of abominations, nations, and filthiness of her fornication.

Historical application. 5 And though her common name be Rome, yet is she often
styled gloriously, by her Clerks, after her grandmother Babylon, whose Empire
she brooketh, and so is as mother of all vice, and fountain of all filthiness.

Paraphrasticall exposition 5 And she bare the title and style of n mystical
Babylon, meaning literally her successor the mother of all spiritual whordome,
and abominable idolatry of the world.

The Text. 5 And in her forehead was a name written, A mystery, great Babylon
the mother of whordoms, and abhominatio^s of the earth.

Historical application. 6 And we may daily see, how that cruel city, has
supped the blood of many thousands of Gods martyrs: so that it is wonderful to
behold, how she does play the Antichrist in all her tokens and behavior.

Paraphrasticall exposition 6 And I saw this city, as drunke^ with the blood
of Gods servants, and martyrs of Jesus Christ, and I o wondered marueilously
with great admiration, when I considered her.

The Text. 6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the
blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wo^dered with a geat
marvel.

Historical application. 7 Which the Spirit of God, in these latter days,
lets us evidently understand, to agree in all points with the Antichristian
city, Empire, seven mountains, seven princely governments, and finally with
the ten under kings thereof.

Paraphrasticall exposition 7 Then said the Angel unto me, why wonderest
thou? for I shall make plain unto thee, and to the whole Church in thee, the
perfect interpretation, what is meaned by that woman, and by that imperial
beast or monarchy, which vpholdes her, who has the seven heads and ten horns.

The Text. 7 Then the Angel said unto me, Wherefore meruelest thou? I will
show thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her, which
has seven heads, and ten horns.

Historical application. 8 For stood not that Empire or monarchy of Rome,
being governed by Emperors, before S. John wrote (...) it not vake by the
decease of Domitian, when he wrote? Rose not the next Emperor Nerua Cocceius,
not of the ancient blood, or honorable stock of the Romans, but of base
lineage? even he was the first stranger or barbarian Emperor ( Galba not
counted; as scarce being Emperor) and then died he not shortly? to wit, after
he had reigned only an year, three months, and nine days: and finally,
does not the wicked world have in great reverence and admiration these
Emperors, whose estate (as is said) stood before Saint John wrote: and
though by decease of Domitian, it vaked when he wrote, yet in effect stood it
still vnabolished, Nerua and others still succeeding.

Paraphrasticall exposition 8 That imperial p beast that thou did see, was
that Monarchy, which hitherto reigned, and now vaketh through the deceas of the
Emperor thereof, and immediately shall the next Emperor thereof arise, of low
degree and base lineage to that monarchy and shortly thereafter he shall die,
and the people of the earth, eue^ they whose names are not from the beginning of
the world registered into the book of life, shall have in great q admiration,
reverence and estimation: this great monarchy, that hitherto stood, now vakes
in interraigne, and r yet does stand vnabolished, for that more Emperors
thereof do instantly succeed.

The Text. 8 The beast that thou have seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend
out of the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on
the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the book of life, from
the foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not,
and yet is:

Historical application. 9 And beside these infallible tokens, does not the
rest of the greater circumstances also more plainly agree: For is not Rome
situate upon the seven hills of Palatinus, Coelius, Ianiculus (otherwise
called Capitolmus) Aventinus Quirinalis Viminalis, and Esquilinus: and has not
that City and empire thereof, been governed by these seven princely
gouernementes, Kings, Consulles, Dictators, Triumvirs, Tribunes, Emperors,
and Popes.

Paraphrasticall exposition 9 And now follows the mind, and meaning of the
spirit of God, wherein consists the knoledge and interpretation hereof. These
seven heads which appeared to thee, are certainly to be interpreted seven
mountains, whereupon that whorish city is set, and they do also mean the
seven princely s governments thereof,

The Text. 9. Here is the mind, that has wisdom. The seven heds ar seven
mountains, whereon the woman sits: they are also seven king^

Historical application. 10 Whereof the gouernemet of these five, to wit,
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Triumvirs, and Tribunes were past before S. John's
days. The sixth, which is the state of Emperors governed in his days, and the
seventh state, which is of Popes; came not while after his days: and since
they came, they have governed 1260. years, a time but short in Gods sight, yea
short in respect of the contrary eternal kingdom of Gods Elect.

Paraphrasticall exposition 10 Whereof five are past, and the sixth thereof now
stands, and the seventh government is not yet come, and when it shall come, it
must rule a t certain space

The Text. 10 Five are fallen and one is, and another is not yet com: and when
he comes, he must continue a short space*

Historical application. 11 And so that imperial state, that reigned before S.
John wrote, to wit, the government by Emperors (after it had vaked from the
days of Augustulus in anno. 475. more then three hundredth years) was renewed
again in Charlemaign in Anno. eight hundredth and six, and became the eight
Roman government, like as it had been before the sixth, but now ar the Caesar's
and imperial estate, worn to les than a private kingdom

Paraphrasticall exposition 11 And so that state of monarchy, and imperial
government, which lately was, and now vaketh by interreign, that same
imperial government (being hereafter long suppressed) shall be again the
eight government, like as before it has been one of the seven, and at length
shall it go into final destruction

The Text. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, is even the eight and is one
of the seven, and shall go into destruction.

Historical application. 12 And there are arisen of their decayed empire, ten
chief Christian Kings: to wit, of Spain, France, Lombardie, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Swaden, of the Hunnes or Hungarians in Hungary, of the
Gotthes in Italy, and the Exarchat of Rauenna. Who were not in saint John's
days, nor begun to reign while the empire began to decline.

Paraphrasticall exposition 12 And as for the ten horns which appeared to
thee, these ar ten under kings, or confederate kings, who as yet have not
begun to reign, but shall start up as kings immediately u after that that
monarchy, or imperial state begins to fall.

The Text. 12 And the ten horns that thou saw, are ten Kings, which
yet have not receued a kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour
after the beast.

Historical application. 13 These wholly agrees in one Papisticall faith, and
Idolatrous profession: and therefore, with all their might, force and strength,
maintained the Pope, who had the seventh government of Rome.

Paraphrasticall exposition 13 These shall agree upon one faith and opinion,
and shall give over again their force, power, and assistance, to the next
governors of that monarchy.

The Text. 13 These have one mind, and shall give their power, and authority
unto the beast.

Historical application. 14 And concurring with him, they persecuted and
martyred all true Christian professors, who opponed against their papisticall
abuses, but doubtlessly, Christ Jesus king of kings, shall now shortly ouercom
them, either co^uerting or suppressing the^ (as he has already begun) and shall
erect above all his kingdom of his holy people.

Paraphrasticall exposition 14 These will assist that Antichristian monarchy,
fighting x against Christ Jesus, and his true servants, but in the end, Christ
shall overcome them, for they are but earthly kings, and he is Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings, and his servants are by him called and chosen, and found
faithful in all their doings.

The Text. 14 These shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
the^: for he is Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and they that are on his
side, are called, and chosen, and faithful.

Historical application. 15 And so, although Rome has borne hitherto the
empire and supremacy over all kinreds, people and nations.

Paraphrasticall exposition 15 And expounding yet farther unto me: these
waters (says he) that appeared to the, over the which, is that whorish city
set, ar to be interpreted people, kinreds, nations and tongues, over the which
she empyres.

The Text. 15 And he said unto me. The waters which thou saw, where the
whore sits, are people and multitudes, and nations, and tongs.

Historical application. 16 Yet now shall these ten Christian kings, her
confederats begin to hate her, and renounce her Papistical superstitions,
deprive her of her dignities and honors, appropriate and annex her rich
benefices and rentes, to their own patrimonies: and at length, some of them
shall spoil, that very city it self, of all her costly ornaments, and burn
up with fire her edifices, and destroy the same for ever.

Paraphrasticall exposition 16 And these ten under kings (which by horns
appeared to thee) shall afterward begin y to hate that Idolatros city and shall
y make her bare and naked of her honors and dignities, and shall y eat up her
patrimony and rentes, and at length y destroy her self with fire.

The Text. 16 And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, are they
that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

Historical application. 17 For although God made these princes, first to
assist and authorize her with one consent: yet now is the time come, in the
which God has decreed them to revolt from her and destroy her,

Paraphrasticall exposition 17 For God had put into their hearts to work at al
times his will: eue^ that first they should give over their whole power, might,
and supremacy of the kingdoms to her, til at last the time were come, in the
which God had predestinate the^ to revolt from her.

The Text. 17 For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do
with one consent, for to give their kingdom unto the beast until the words of
God be fulfilled.

Historical application. 18 Who hitherto has been the Metropolitan City,
that has empyred over all the whole kingdoms and countries of the world.

Paraphrasticall exposition 18 And be sure, that richly decked whore which
appeared to thee, means nothing else, but the metropolita^ and Idolatrous city,
which usurps the empire over the whole kingdoms of the earth.

The Text. 18 And the woman which thou saw, is the great city, which regneth
over the kings of the earth.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This one of these seven Angels, both mentioned here, and in the Apoc. 21.9.
agrees rathest to be the last, even the Angel of the last age, as being he in
whose time, both in this place that Antichristian whore was destroyed, and in
that place Gods holy Jerusalem and true Spouse and Church decored and d^cked:
and therefore, of all the seven, he seems meetest to describe these things
to John, which God had appointed him in effect to execute.

b f That an Idolatrous city is called in the Scriptures a whore, it is
common, For says Esaias 1.21. How is the holy City become a whore, etc. And
how, more particularly, this decked whore, and filthy woman, is interpreted
to be that city, that does impire over the Kings of the earth, read the
last verse of this chapter, and so it must needs mean Rome, the only chief
Metropolitan city of the Empire.

c Waters are plainly interpreted by the Angel, to be people and nations,
ver. 15.

d Of potable liquors, wine and water, the clear waters and welspringes, are
ever taken in the Scriptures in the best part, for the wholesome, pure, true,
and most simple doctrine of the Evangell, which our souls continually thirste
after: But contrarily, wine, for that it is more alluring, delectable, and
provoke drunkenness, therefore, in all the Scriptures, it is commonly taken
in an evil part, for idolatrous, licentious, and voluptuous doctrins,
provoking Gods ire and fierce wrath. Read Apoc. 14.8.10. The like is in diverse
other places.

e Except we be solitarilie, and as in a desert, distracted and withdrawn from
worldly society and partial affairs, it is hard to have our Spirit and
perfect judgment ripe and ready to discern the truth of spiritual matters.

f Hereof read the note b.

g As al red coullours, betoken bloudshead in the Scriptures (as is said Apoc.
6.4. note c) and skarlet is a more glorious red than simple red. So betokens
it, this Roman kingdom not only simply to be bloodthirstie, but even to
glory in their bloodshead and murders. And further, beside the spiritual
meaning of these colors, the Princes of that Empire both first and last, even
both Emperors and Popes, were corporally and really clothed in purple and
skarlet, in their Pontificals, as is to be read in the Decret. distinct. 96.
where Constantine the Emperor gives his imperial garments of purple and
skarlet, called therein, Chlamidem purpuream, and tunicam coccineam, to Pope
Syluester the first, and his successors, to be worn by them, as they do to
this day,

h These names of blasphemy, that here are said, that the beast is full of,
are said (Apoc. 13.1) to be upon the seven heads of the beast. The truth is
therefore, that these proud, glorious and presumptuous styles and
superscriptions, are not only set up in sundry monuments upon diverse places of
these seven hills, which are her seven heads, but also through all the whole
body of the beast, even in every part of that Empire, are there infinite of
these Temples, Idols, and other monuments erected, bearing such proud and
blasphemous superscriptions and titles dedicatories, as Diis manibus, Fortunae,
Plutoni, Veneri, Priapo, and even at Mussilburgh, among our selves in Scotland,
a foundation of a Roman monument lately found (now utterly demolished)
bearing this inscription dedicatorie, Apollini Granno Quintus Lucius Sabinianus
Proconsul Aug. Also there is to be seen in their coins the like universally,
even titles of the pride and vain-glorie of Rome, as in the days of
Constantius and Maximianus, a coin printed with this inscription, Romae
aeternae prat. In the days of Licinius Junior, a coin with this inscription,
Romae aeternae, with the figure of Rome, sitting as a glorious lady. In the
days of Priscus Attalus, a coin with this inscription. Invicta Roma aeterna
conob. Of which writes Adolphus Occo, libro Numismatum Romanoru^. Of this
their blasphemous style of eternity, read S. Jerome, lib. Epist. part. 2.
tract. 2. Epist. 18. question. 11. litera. Z. in these words, Vnde secundum
Apocalypsim Ioannis, in front purpuratae meretricis, scriptum est nomen
blasphemiae, id est Romae aeternae; that is to say, Whereby, acccording to the
Revelation of S. John, in the forehead of the skarlet whore, there is written
a name of blasphemy, which is Eternal Rome.

i These seven heads ar plainly interpreted by the Angel hereafter, v. 9. to be
seven mountains, and seven governme^ts, or princely estats.

k Read these heads, taken for kings, and kings for any princely governors in
verse. 9. following, and note s thereof.

l Now have we to try, what these ten horns do mean: first by Daniell 7.24.
and Revel. 17.12. these be ten kings. Secondly, their kingdoms must be part
of the Roman beast, and fourth Monarchy, as both appears, Dan. 7.7.23.24. Reu.
12.3. and 13.1 and 17.3.7. as also, because that whole ten horned beast, meaning
the whole Roman Empire, by our 24. prop. what else can the parts of that beast
signify, than parts of that Empire, and consequently the ten crowned horns of
the beast, ten kings and kingdoms out of the Empire? Thirdly, by ver. 12.
hereof, and note u following, appears that these ten kings arose when the Roman
government by Emperors decayed, and when the Pope began to claim temporal
dignities, which al occurred betwixt the 300. and 450. year of Christ, by our
36. prop. and approved histories. Fourthly, by the 13. and 14. verses, appears,
that these shall be of one religion, and shall therefore authorize, and give their
power and assistance to the beast, that next governed that Roman seat, even to
the Pope (the Emperors then being decayed) Fifthly, though (as is said) these
ten horns came at once with that Papistical beast, and little Antichristian horn,
yet they rose first to their kingdoms before this Papistical horn rose to his
Monarchy, and then he suppressed three of them, which testifies, Dan. 7.24.
saying, Another (even that Antichrist) shall rise up after them (to wit after
these ten kings) and he shall subdue three kings, and so the Antichrist that
comes at one time with them, rises not to an established Monarchy til after
their rising, yea, til three of the^ were fallen: for the term in the original
Hebrew or Chaldee does not mean there of his first coming or simple beginning
to rise, but of his establishing or confirming of his rising: for the same
term that here is put for this rising, is expressly put in Job. 22.28. and 2.
Chro. 7.18. and diverse other places, for establishing and confirming. So by
these notes and tokens, these ten appear to be the kings of Spain, France,
Lo^bardy, England, Scotland, Denmark, Swade^, of the Hunnes or Hungarians in
Pannonia, now called Hungary, of the Gotths in Italy, and the Exarchat of
Rauenna, al start up with the Pope, betwixt the 300. and 450. year of God. As
to the kingdoms of Arragon, Granad, Portugal, Castile, Legeon Tolet, Galice and
Navarre, they are only inferior kingdoms, partly subject to the Empire, partly
pendicles of Spain, and are not kingdoms of old. The other kingdom of Navarre is
also of late, and now is and shall be (God willing) all one with France* Sicil,
Beheme, and Naples, for the most part are of the Empire, and are neither old
nor free kingdoms: Burgundy is of France, and was only a small kingdom, or
rather dukedom. Norway is but of late a divided kingdom from Denmark, and is
now conjoined again with Denmark, Ireland is conjoined with England. Polland
is but of late erected in a kingdom. Cyprus is a kingdom both late, small, and
seldom in Christians hands. As to the Vandals and Visegoths, that people, as
appears, came from Swaden, and the Northren countries, and began their kingdom
in Spain. An. Christ. 382. by Modogislaus their king: and therefore justly, of
these Vandals and Goths whatsoever, we comprehend their goers out under Spain,
Italy, and Hungary, where they came, and their remainers at home, we comprehend
under Swaden, whose king now styles him self, king of Swaden, Goths and
Vandals, as in the circumscription of their coins is to be seen. And so
appara^tly, remain only the said ten kingdoms to be chiefly the beasts ten
horns, with which the Popes little horn and small kingdom coming at one time,
was afterward confirmed and established by Pipin, Charlemaign, and Lodouicus
Pius, and the^ arose it greatest of all: and by his craft, and means of his
confederates, suppressed the kingdoms of the Goths, Longobards and Exarchat,
and brooketh their lands within Italy to this day: But the other seven kings
yet extant, with the people also of these three kingdoms, shall (God willing)
one day repay that Antichristian seat, with fire, sword, and utter destruction,
as appears by the 16. verse hereof, and other places of this book.

m Of the great pomp and riches of this town, read Hierom, part. 2 tract. 5.
Epistola. 59. litera, G. where he concludes, Aurata sua tecta magis velint
aspicere quam coelum, that is, they had rather behold their gilded silerings
than the heavens: and what merueil is it that it be rich, seeing almost the
whole world have been tributaries to it, about 2000. years, including the time
of pardons, as being the most welthy tributes. And as in all things they are
glorious, so also in their tributes they appointed that the same should be
brought in earthe^ pots, and the pots broken in a certain place of Rome,
where, by the great quantity of broken pots, there is waxed a hill, called Monte
testaceo. And this have they done for their glorious name and ostentation,
which (confirming this text) bears record of the great riches that has been
brought to them from all the world.

n How and why Rome is styled Babylon mystically or figuratively, is showed at
length in our 23. proposition.

o Here says Saint John, he wondered at the beast, and hereafter (verse 8) he
says, that they, whose names were not written in the book of life wondered at
the beast, not making any repugnance, neither making himself to be of the
wicked number: for there is a distinction in wondering, according to the
quality of the wonderer: the godly seeing the pomp and glory of the world,
wonder at the vanity and impiety thereof, with great grief of mind,
detesting the same: and so S. John here wondered at the whorish city: But the
wicked contrarily, seeing herefter (ver. 8.) the great pomp, wealth, and
worldly felicity of the Roman Emperors, they wondered thereat, not
detesting the same, but rather are ravished in admiration, with reverence,
obedience and fear of them, as if they were gods; and therefore it is said
(Apoc. 13.3.4) that the whole world wondered at the beast, and worshipped the
beast, and the dragon that gave her power.

p It is so notable among the Prophets, that a beast, generally means a
king, kingdom, Empire, or Monarchy (as may be proved by Dan. 7. where he
calls his four beasts, the four kingdoms or Monarchies of the earth) That
here S. John superfluously interprets not, this beast to mean a Monarchy in
general, but enters to the particular description thereof, so plainly, that
he lets us evidently see it, to be not only in general a Monarchy, but even
in particular, that self same ten horned beast, which Daniel called the fourth
kingdom or monarchy: and so consequently, to be the Roman Empire, as is
proved in our 24. prop. at more length.

q What manner of wondering this is, read before in the note o.

r Some read here, The beast that was and is not, only: but I rather approve
those, that read, the beast that was, and is not, and yet is, for although this
seem a repugnance, yet it is none: for the Empire or imperial estate, at that
time that S. John wrote, might justly be said, not to be, seeing the Emperor
Domitian was dead, and the next Emperor Nerua Cocceius not yet received: and
yet in a manner, the Empire or imperial estate that time was, because the
government of Emperors stood as yet that time vnabolished. And so in diverse
manners, and in diverse respects, the imperial estate at that time, both was and
was not, without repugna^ce: whereof read the 5. reason of our 24. prop.

s A king, in the scripture, is a general name for any supreme governor, be he
king, Monarch, Emperor, or Pope, as in Daniel chap. 7. all the kings of one
Monarchy, ar called but one king: whereby the four Monarchies are called four
kings: And again, Moses being but a governor, is called a king. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
and seeing hereby, that not only a king, is taken for whatsoever supreme
governor, but also, seeing how many soever supreme governors there be of one
race or sort, they are al called but one king. Therefore, we justly esteem
these seven kings, here mentioned, to be the seven princely, royal, and
supreme governments of Rome, seeing in all the rest of their circumstances,
they agree so well with the text: Hereof is spoken in the fourth reason of our
24. proposition.

t It were improper, to measure the breuity and length of this time that the
seventh Papistical and Antichristian government does stand, according to our
fantasy, as to call it long, that men think long, for so indeed, should that
Antichristian reign be counted long; but more properly the Spirit of God (in
whose sight a thousand years ar but as one day) here, in comparison of the
aeternity of the Christian kingdom of Christ Jesus, accounts the contrary
kingdom, even the Antichristian kingdom, to be but short, for that truly
1260. years are nothing in respect of aeternitie. Of a longer time called but
short, read Apoc. 22.6.7.10.12.20.

u Here do we follow Ieromes vulgar translation, Post bestiam, that is,
After the beast, agreing sufficiently with the Greek, (...); for verily so
came it to pass, that after the Empire of Rome decayed, and the imperial
government was abolished by the Hunes, Gotthes Vandales, and such others: Then
immediately, and at once, (betwixt the years of God, 300. and 450) start up
these ten kings. The other translation of T. Beza and others, who translate,
vna hora cum bestia, At one hour with the beast, may also very well stand
with the word (...) which sometimes signifies after, sometimes with. And so
in that sense, although after the beast, even after the fall of the Emperors
(who in their time were that Roman beast and Latin Empire) the ten kings
came, and began to reign, yet also this coming of theirs, was at one hour
(that is to say, immediately) with the beast: to wit, they came and arose
immediately with the Pope, who (since the fall of Emperors, has ever bin that
Roman beast, and possessed the Empire thereof: and therefore says the text, in
the next verse: These (to wit, ten kings) have one counsel, and shall give
over their strength and power to the beast, meaning to the Pope, who since this
decay of Emperors, have broked for the most part, the style, rent, honors and
seat of this Latin Empire, and Roman beast.

x These be the wars (called the holy wars) which the Pope, his under
kings and confederats, did raise against those kingdoms, princes, and
particular professors, that following the truth, would any ways mean to repine
against his Antichristian authority: But the Spirit of God here, discovers
their hypocritical terms of holy wars, affirming steadfastly, them to fight
against Christ, and that at length to their aeternall confusion.

y Here does the Angel declare to us, by whom, and after what manner the
Antichristian and Idolatrous City of Rome shall be destroyed. The doers
thereof shall be (says he) the same ten Christian kings, who before had
maintained her. The manner of this destruction of Rome, seems to be
three-folde. First (says the text) they shall hate her, and leave her
desolate: taht is to say, (as appears by Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and Apoc.
14.6.) The truth of Gods word and holy Euangell shall be first publickely
preached, and by the Majesty of the coming thereof, and two edged sword of
that holy Word, many of these ten Christian Princes, their kindreds, and
people shall be converted from their Antichristian and Papisticall
superstitions, and shall hate the Roman seat, turn back from it, and leave it
destitute of their assistance; and this is her first wrack. Secondly (says
the text) They shall eat her flesh: that is, these ten Christian kings, who
before had enriched her, and made her fat with great benefices, rents and daily
casualities, now hating her, shall eat up these rentes and rich benefices, and
live thereon themselves: and both these two wrackes are already come, thought
not as yet altogether perfected. Rests yet the last, whereof, thirdly (says
the text) they shall burn her with fire: which appears not to be
figuratiuelie taken, but literallie, by the next chapter, verses
8.9.16.17.18.21. by which it appears, that at length, Princes shall make
war against the very city of Rome, take it captive, spoil it, and
finally, so burn it with fire, that it shall be waste for ever, as at more
length in that chapter we shall now deduce.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this chapter coherentlie with the former, is pronounced the sore sentence
and doom of destruction, against the seat and city of Rome, for her wicked
demerites, with an exhortation to all true Christians, to leave and renounce
her: and express commandment to all men to put hand to the execution of Gods
vengeance against her for her pride. And last of all, is set forth the great
horror and anguish of her familiars, for the sudden and terrible spoliation,
demolishing, burning, and destruction of her for ever, with the triumph of
Gods whole true servants therefore, after so plain a style, that the
Paraphrase and history (or rather Prophecy) thereof, may be consolidate in one
Prophetical Paraphrase.

The Text.
1 AND after these things, I saw another Angel come down from heaven, having
great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried out mightily, with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen it is
fallen, Babylon that great city, and is become the habitation of devils and the
hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchantes
of the earth ar waxed rich of the abundance of her pleasures.

4 And I hard another voice from heaven, say, Go out of her my people, that ye
be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For her sins are come up unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

6 Reward her, even as she has rewarded you, and give her double according
unto her works: and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her the
double.

7 In as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much
give ye to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart, I sit, being a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine,
and she shall be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God, which will
condemn her.

9 And the Kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her which have
committed fornication, and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the
smoke of her burning.

10 And shall stand far off for fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the
great city Babylon, the mighty city for in one hour is thy judgment come.

11 And the marcha^ts of the earth shall weep and wail over her, for no man
byeth their ware any more.

12. The ware of gold and silver, and of precious stone, and of pearls and of
fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of skarlet, and of al manner of
Thine wood, and of all vessels of yuorie, and of all vessels of most precious
wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of marble.

13 And of cynamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
charets and servants, and souls of men.

14. (And the apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and
al things that were fat and excellent, ar departed from thee, and thou shall
find them no more.)

15 And the marcha^ts of these things which were waxed rich, shall stand a
far of from her, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing.

16. And saying, Alas, alas, the great city, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stone, and pearls.

17 For in one hour so great riches are com to desolation. And every
shipmaster, and all the people that occupy ships, and shipmen, and whosoever
travel on the sea, shall stand a far off.

18 And cry when they see the smok of her burning, saying, What city was like
unto this great city.

19 And they shall cast dust on their heads, and cry weeping and wailing, and
say, Alas, alas, the great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships on
the sea, by her costlines: for in one hour she is made desolate.

20 O heaven rejoice of her, and ye holy Apo stles and Prophets: for God has
given your judgment on her.

21 Then a mighty An gel took up a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it
into the sea, saying, with such violence shall the great city Babylon be cast,
and shall be found no more.

22 And the voice of Harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and tru^peters shall
be heard no more in thee, and noe crafts man, of whatsoever craft he be, shall
be found any more in thee and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more in
thee.

23 And the light of a candle shall shine noe more in thee: and the voice of
the bridegrom and of the bride, shall be heard no more in thee: for thy
merchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine enchantments were
deceived all nations.

24 And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the saints and of
all that were slain upon the earth.

The Prophetical Paraphrase.
1 Afterward came the a second of the seven thundering Angels from heaven,
with great power and Majesty, lightening all the earth with the beams of his
glory:

2 And he pronounced with a loud voice the doom and sentence following,
saying, now shall fall, yea, even now shall fall that mighty imperial seat of b
Rome, successor of great Babylon, and she shall become a desert dwelling of c
deuilles and Fayries, and a solitary wilderness, for the repair of wild and
ravenous fowls.

3 Because she has poisoned all nations, with the venomous drinks of her
idolatrous doctrine: and all the kings and governors of the earth, have
followed her a whoring after idolles: and the Merchantes of the earth d both
spiritual and temporal, have been enriched through her voluptuous and
delicate traffic.

4 Then heard I again, a spiritual and heavenly voice, charging all God his
true, holy and elect Christians, to depart from that Roman seat, and leave
all her superstitions, least they being participant of her offenses were also
destroyed with her.

5 For her sins have craved vengeance from the heavens, and the Lord has
called to mind her iniquities.

6 Commanding therefore al men to e render unto her such wrack, as she has
deserved at their hand: yea, and to double the revenge upon her, that her works
have deserved, and as she has hitherto entised them to drink in the cup of
Gods wrath, so they are now to execute Gods wrath twofold against her.

7 And so much as she has vaunted and gloried in her self, and has lived
wealthilie in all sensualities and pleasures, so much the more to ad unto her
torment and dolor. For in the presumption of her heart, she has said, I sit f
Queen and Maistres over the whole world, and I shall be destitute of no
voluptuous pleasure, neither ever shall I see any sorrow.

8 Therefore, at once shall God power out on her the plagues of death and
mourning, for the g slaughter of her inhabitants, and she shall be enclosed and
effamished: finally, taken captive, and burnt with fire: for almighty is the
Lord, that has given that sore sentence against her.

9 The Kings, Cardinals, and rulers of the earth, who have followed her in
whoring spirituallie after Idols, and have led a careless life in all her
worldly pleasures, shall now mourn and bewail her, and shall become dolorous and
sorrowful for her sake, when they shall understand that she is consumed and
burnt up with fire, and destroyed for ever.

10 They dare not approach to assist her, for fear to be wracked with her, but
absenting them selves, shall mourn in their hearts, saying; Alas, alas, our
chief city Rome, that great and mighty successor and daughter of Babel, for
unawares is come thy destruction.

11 The Merchants of the earth, craftsmen and traffiquers with her wares, shall
lament and mourn for her destruction, for their delicate wares shall not
henceforth be so saleable.

12 Even their rich and costly Idols, chalices, Paxes, and crucifixes,
threefold crowns, myters, Bishops staves, and rings of gold, and silver set
with pearls, and all manner of precious stones, surplices of fine linen,
copes, masse-clothes, and other vestiments of purple, of silk, and of skarlet,
sielerings, tabernacles and other ornaments in Churches, and Church places of
al manner of h well carved, and long lasting wood, Host boxes, and relic
buses of Iuorie or fine wood, offering stocks and diverse vessels for Chrisme,
oil, salt; and holy water of fine timber, Snuffers, and incensours of brass,
copper, or iron, founts and holy water stones of Allablaster, Marble, or Jasper.

13 Yea, their confections of cannell and sugered spices, for their Christmas
and Easter feasts, their delicate perfumes, odours, and costly ointments: for
their Pontificalls, their incense, roset and frankinscence, to burn in
Churches, wine for their drink, and for daily masses, oil for their extreme
unction, fine flower for their Hosts and mass bread, wheat and plenty of all
manner of corns, with store of kyne and sheep, for their daily sustentation;
Horses, mules, and mulets, with costly decored chariots for their journeying;
Moors, Pages, Lackies and servants to serve them, and finally the pretended i
merchandise of the souls of men from hell and purgatory, by soul masses,
diriges, pardons, indulgences, remissions of sins, and such soul wares for
lucre.

14 And the delicate and wealthy pleasures that thy soul lusted after, are
departed from thee, and all thy profitable rentes, and glorious dignities are
taken from thee, and shall never hereafter be restored to thee.

15 These Merchants and sellers of these wares, which hitherto were made
wealthy thereby, dare not assist her, but absenting themselves lest they be
wracked with her, shall bewail and lament her,

16 Saying, Alas, alas, that mighty city which was decored with fine linen,
and with abullements, pales, hangers, and tapestries of silk, purple and
skarlet, and had her k sielerings ouer-gilt with gold, and was richely dect and
replenished with all manner of precious stones and pearl:

17 For at an instant is she deprived and spoiled of all these riches, and all
her Mariners, pylates, and governors of her great l ships and huge
Galliasses, and every shipmaister, that transporteth her wares, standing a far
off for fear to be wracked,

18 Understanding her to be burnt up with fire, and utterly destroyed, shall
lament, saying, what city on earth was so mighty as this great city?

19 And they shall be grieved and disfigured with sorrow and anguishe, and
shall cry out, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that mighty and great
city, by whom, al we her ship-masters and mariners were enriched, and made
wealthy through the costlines of her delicate wares, for in an instant is she
brought to desolation.

20 But contrarily, O elect Church of God, Apostles and holy Prophets rejoice
and triumph, yea, for the Almighty has judged and revenged your cause against
her.

21 Then a mighty Angel, showed me the comparison of a great millstone cast
into the sea, declaring, that with such suddentie and violence should thou, O
Rome, the mighty city, successor and daughter of great Babylon, be brought to
utter confusion, so that thou shall never m arise nor recover thereafter.

22 And the triumphant melody of thy Organes, and belles, hymns and
canticles, bummes, timbrels, and rigols, shall never be hereafter heard,
sounding in thy quiers, nor in thy houses or habitations, shall any manner of
crafts-men be found dwelling: yea, not so much as the sound of any mil or
quernes shall be heard grinding corn toward thee.

23 For there shall not dwell in thee, so much as one to light a torch or ca^dle
to shine in thee, and far less shall it be heard, any to marie, or to be
married in thee, or to procreat, or replenishe with people thy ruined walls,
for thy merchants (chief sellers of indulgences, and soul wares) become
Cardinals and Bishops, and great men upon earth, and with thy alluring
superstitions, all people and nations were blinded and deceived.

24 And that miserable city was found and convict of God, to be the author of
the bludshed and martyrdom of all the Christians, and true professors that
were slain throughout the whole earth.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a We interpret the Angel, that here pronounces this decay of this spiritual
Babylon, to be the second of the seven thundering Angels, because that same
Angel proclaimed that same decay to fall in his time. Apoc. 14.8. and so
consequently, we look (God willing) for the performance hereof, in this
present Iubile begun already in anno 1590. and ending in anno 1639. or thereby.

b This Babylon is not literally Babylon it self, for that Babylon was
destroyed by the Medes and Persians, according to the prophecies of Esaias 13.17.
and Jeremy 51.11. and Psalm. 137. and that, long be fore saint John wrote this,
and never rose in authority again, but this Babylon is figurative or mystical
Babylon, so called (Apoc. 17.5) for that this Babylon succedeth to the
monarchy of the former, as the eroy to her grandmother, and is certainly the
city of Rome as is proved by our 23. proposition, and by the whole tokens of
the 17. chapter hereof, read also hereupon, Apoc. 14. note h.

c The spirit of God, describing the horrible decay of royal Babylon. Esaias.
13.21. for the greater agrauating of Gods justice, and to move us to conceive
the greater horror, not only says simply it shall be a desert, or such a
desert or wilderness, as no tame beast or bird dare resort into, for ravenous
beasts and fowls of reif, that abide there: but even that it shall be a place
so utterly elraich (as we term it) that also no man dare make residence
there, for fear of devils, fayries and spirits of illusions: and, as the
Rabbis interpret that text, Ibi saltabu^t Fauni, Satyri, seu daemones pilosi,
etc. The like is said here of this mystical Babylon or Babylonicall Rome, that
it shall become a dwelling of devils, and a hold or residence of unclean
spirits, not that the devils are as yet annexed to any certain residence, or
that they like rather to go dwell in deserts, than to abide among men to seduce
them, but that the spirit of God would have us his faithful to detest that
city as abominable, wherein devils shall dwell and possess the same as their
due patrimony.

d These merchants appear hereafter plainly by their wares, to mean but
seculare merchants, sellers of all delicate wares to the Romans, as also their
ecclesiastical merchants, priests, pardonars, and Legates, that sell their
indulgences, pardones, and soul wares unto the whole world: consider this by
the 12. and 13. verses hereof.

e Now Princes, potentats, and mighty men on earth, go to, and execute Gods
wrath against this godles city, for here you have a special warrant and
earnest command to revenge that cause, that is, not only your own cause, but
also it is the cause of the Almighty, by the which ye are certified here, that
that work shall go well with you, and shall prosper in your hands. Where note,
that this doubling of revenge is spoken by a Prophetical Emphasis, as meaning
thereby, that we ought without pity, ruth, and mercy to proceed with all
possible extremity against that deuillish seat, to the utter extirpation
thereof, and not meaning that any punishment in this world that possibly may
be executed by men, can be so much as equivalent with the single, and far les
can be double to her wicked demerits: where through, in the end of the next
chapter, she and hers ar cast into hell fire eternally, as a full revenge.

f Here does the spirit of God describe and paint Rome no other wise, then she
in her old monuments and coynings does paint and set out her self: to wit,
after the form of a lusty Lady, clad in no mourning weed, nor widows
apparel, but gloriously and richly decked, and decored with all delectable and
costly ornaments, and therewithal, sitting inthroned in her throne, as Lady and
mistres over the whole world, with her glorious titles, and blasphemous
inscriptions Roma aeterna, foelix, invicta, and such others, where of read the
note h Apoc. 17.

g Here have we inserted certain clauses gathered out of other parts of this
book, opening the manner of the destruction of Rome, that the prophecy may be
the more plain. And first, where we interpret her mourning to be for the
slaughter of her inhabitants (beside also for the ruin of her kingdom) we do
not conjecture it without a warrant, that there shall be great slaughter upon her
inhabitants, for which they shall mourn, because the former plague (expressed
in this text) that should fall on them, is death. Again, by the Apoc. 13.10.
it is doubtless meant, that they shall be killed by the sword, because they
have killed others with the sword. Secondly, because the text specifies, that
they shall be effamished and burnt with fire, it betokens a siege and
enclosing of them, and that she shall be taken captive, and therefore have we
also inserted these clauses agreeing with the said warrant. Apoc. 13.10.
wherein it is likewise meant, that they shall be led captive, because they have
led others captive.

h This (...), is the wood Thyia which Theophrastus reports to be a long
lasting, and incorruptible timber: hereof mentions Plinius lib. 13. cap. 16.
And with this timber, Temples in old times were decored and replenished.

i After the spirit of God had reckoned out certain bodily wares which the
Roman seat accustomed most to buy, now concludes he with these soul wares,
which they and their merchants used chiefly to sell, whereby, they were so
enriched, that thereby they were made able to buy all the former costly wares.
These soulwares are pardons, indulgence, remissions of sins, trentalls, soul
masses, and diriges, with such godles jestes, whereby, they promise for money,
to deliver us from hell and purgatory, and to canonize us saints in heaven, and
make us intercessors for our brethren on earth, and consequently, Christ's
intercession to be needles. O blasphemy intolerable that makes rich men
(whom Christ says shall hardly come in the kingdom of heaven) to become
saints for money, and so tacitly to deprive our savior of his office of
intercession and only mediation: does not Peter speak truly of these his
false pretended successors. (2. Epist. cap. 2.) saying, they shall bring in
damnable errors, denying the Lord that redeemed them, and through fained words
shall they make merchandise of men, to wit, (as here is said) by selling both
their poor peoples souls, and their own souls to the devil for worldly
lucre. Herewith confer the note d preceding.

k Of these golden and gilded silerings and great riches of Rome, read the note
m in Apoc. 17. with diverse old writers, describers of the Pomp of Rome.

l These mighty mariners with their great Galliasses, Venetia^s, Spanishes,
and other of that Antichristian flote, who hitherto, and latest of all in this
1588. year of God, have been so ready at every nod of their Apostatik
stepmother, Rome, to have overwhelmed us poor and true christian professors.
Seeing now and perceauing by daily experience, that God fights for us, and
daily aduanceth our causes more and more to their destruction, shall now
shortly faint and fall back, from assisting that cause any more, only standing a
far and bewailing that irreparable destruction that God is sending upon that
godles city, and in their hearts lamenting the decay of their own
prosperity, without making any farther debate or encounter in defense of that
Romish seat.

m Let none believe, that this destruction, desolation, and burning of Rome, is
any of these destructions which are already performed by the Hunnes, Gotthes,
Vandales, or others in time past, for these destructions were soon repared,
but this destruction, (says the spirit of God before, verse 14. and here
verses 21.22.23.) shall be such, that never shall be repared again, that city
never found nor founded again, her dignities and rents never restored to her,
and finally, no inhabitant to dwell there, or so much as to light a candle in
that execrable and accursed city again.

CHAP. 19.
THE ARGUMENT.
Following out the exhortation and commandment of Gods spirit in the former
chapter, verse 20. here in this chapter, the whole church of God, understanding
that Antichristian enemy of theirs, the Roman seat to be shortly brought to
ruin, and themselves now to be steadfastly coupled with their Lord and
spouse, Christ Jesus, does therefore rejoice and magnify God. Thereafter
follows a brief description of the word of God, and how the same does now
obtain victory over all the enemies, that are conuened against it, and how all
false Prophets, and chief members of that Antichristian empire, are condemned
to the unquenchable fire of hell for ever, as the latter and just reward of
their demerits, beside that bodily vengeance that comes upon the carkases of
all their assisters.

The Text.
1 AND after these things, I heard a great voice of a great multitude in
heaven, saying, Hallelu-iah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power be to
the Lord our God.

2 For true and righteous ar his judgments: for he has condemned the great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has aue^ged the
blood of his servants shed by her hand.

3 And again they said, Hallelu-iah: and her smoke rose up for evermore.

4 And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts fell down, and
worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Hallelu-iah.

5 Then a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him both small and great.

6. And I heard like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of strong thu^drings, saying, Hallelu-iah: for our
Lord God al mighty has reigned.

7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give glory to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.

8 And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed with pure fine linen
and shining: for the fine linne^ is the righteousness of saints.

9 Then he said unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the
Lambs supper. And he said unto me, These words of God are true.

10 And I fell before his feet, to worship him, but he said unto me, See
thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have
the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For the testimony of Jesus, is the
Spirit of prophecy.

11 And I saw heaven open, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat one him
was called Faithful and true, and he judges and fights righteouslie.

12 And his eyes were as a flamme of fire, and on his head were many crowns,
and he had a name written, that no man does know but himself.

13 And he was clothed with a garmente dipped in blood, and his name is called,
THE WORD OF GOD.

14 And the warriers which were in heaven, followed him upon white horses,
clothed with fine linen, white and pure,

15 And out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
heathen: for he shall rule them with a rod of iron for he it is that treads
the winepresse of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16 And he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written, THE KING
OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

17 And I saw an Angel stand in the sun, who cried with a loud voice saying
to all the fowls that did fly by the midst of heaven, Come and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God

18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of high Captains, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the flesh of all free men and bondmen, and of small and great.

19 And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their warriors
gathered together, to make battle against him that sat on the horse, and
against his soldiers.

20 But the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet, that wroght
miracles before him, whereby he deceived the^ that received the beasts mark,
and them that worshipped his image. These both were alive cast into a lake of
fire, burning with brimstone.

21 And the remna^t were slain with the sword of him that sits upon the horse
which comes out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled full with their
flesh:

Paraphrasticall exposition.
HEreafter I considered, and behold, the voice of the whole multitude and
congregation of Gods true Church, saying, a let us praise the Lord, salvation,
and glory, honor and power, belongs to the Lord our God for ever.

2 For true and righteous are all his proceedings, and he has justly condemned
that Idolatrous city and spiritual whore, which poisoned and infected all
people on earth, with her Idolatrous doctrine, and God has righteouslie
avenged the bloodshed and cruel martyrdom of his Saints and servants,
committed by her tyranny.

3 And again, and again, incessantly continued they, saying, Let us praise
the Lord, and the grief of her torment shall resound to the heavens, and never
shall have an end.

4 And all the true professors of the old and new Testaments, prostrated
themselves and woorshipped God, who reigned in his throne among them, saying,
even so, O Lord, let us praise thee for ever.

5 Then did the voice of Gods Spirit, proceeding from the throne of his truth,
exhort all his elect servantes, both small and great, that fear him, to render
him praise for ever.

6 And with that was heard the great dinne and mighty voices of all the huge
multitude of God his b people, as the resounding noise of many waters, and of
his true Teachers and Prophets, thundering out Gods praises, saying, Let us
praise God, for our Lord God Almighty has prevailed, and shall reign
henceforth for ever more.

7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give to him the praise, that has now
vouchsafed to unite his Son, that immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus, in
spiritual c spousage with us, his holy Church, and now is our Church purged
from Antichristianisme, and ready decked for him, as his true Spouse.

8 And he has propined and presented her with gifts and shining garments of
purity and innocence, betokening that perfect purity and righteousness,
that God has granted to every one of her particular saints and professors.

9 Then said the Angel unto me, publish thou, and show forth unto all men,
how blessed they are, that are called of God to be participant of that holy d
Supper and marriage banquet, whereby we are united and espoused to Christ
Jesus, and he said moreover, all that I have said unto thee is of e God, and
shall surely come to pass.

10 And I fell down at his feet to have f worshipped him: but he rebuked me,
saying, Beware thou do it not, for I am but a servant of God, as thou art,
and as one of thy brethren, bearing the testimony of Christ Jesus: woorship
nothing except God only, for we that do testify of Christ Jesus, are not
God, but Spirits of his prophecy.

11 At this time the Church of GOD shall be patent and visible, and therein
shall be perfect and sincere Professors, and that profession that they do
bear on them shall be of g Christ Jesus, who is called the faithful and true
incarnate word of God, who does judge with justice, and fights righteouslie.

12 And with the fierce and fiery eyes of foresight does terrify his
enemies, and his head is crowned with many victories over them, and he has
a name, which none knows but himself, even none does know Christ Jesus,
the very true incarnate Word of God, but they who are his mystical body,
even they who are in him, and he in them.

13 His apparel was besprinkled with the blood that he did shead for our
redemption, h as also with the blood of his enemies, whom he has trodden
down: and he is named that Word of God, that was before all beginning, and
now has received flesh.

14 And all the whole Army and elect Congregation of his true Church, followed
his will and precepts, truly journeying and traueyling through this world
in their mortified and regenerate flesh, clothed with the garments of his
purity and righteousness.

15 And out of his mouth proceeded true doctrine, piercing and subdewing on
every side, the hearts of all Nations, and under the Scepter of his servitude
does he govern and subdew them: for he also it is, who does i press and
tread down these wicked and reprobate people, that drink up iniquity, and
provoke the vengeance of almighty God.

16 And he bears in his badge, the style and title of KING OF KINGS, AND
LORD OF LORDS.

17 Then I saw a mighty k Angel who did awaite upon the Ecclesiastical
estate, and affairs of the Gospel, proclayming openly and patentlie, to all
Warriors, Soldiers, and other ravenous people, that dwelled among them of
the true Church of God, forewarning them, that they should convene and gather
themselves together, against that time, which almighty God had appointed for
that great spoil, slaughter, and bloodshed, which they must eat up and devour.

18 And that then they should shead the blood, and eat up the rents, and
spoil the riches of Papisticall kings, and Cardinals, and of their riding
knights and Captains, subuerting them, horse and man: and finally should
devour up and destroy all, both free and bond man, both great and small, that
were of that sect.

19 And I foresaw that the great Roman Monarch, and his confederate kings and
their great Armies had ever conuened together, to fight and rebel against that
true words of God, that his professors did bear, and against all the true
Ministers thereof.

20 And therefore also were taken these Monarchs, and their l
Pseudopropheticall Popes, who had counterfeited miracles, and made lying
woonders before them of the Empire, to deceive all those who did profess
obedience unto that Empire, bearing the badges and marks thereof, and them
that reverenced the counterfeit Emperors thereof: and these two, even straight
after this m mortal life, were cast down to hell, there to be tormented for
ever, with the burning fire and sulphurious flammes thereof.

21 And the rest of their Army and partakers were altogether overcome,
vanquished and suppressed by that true and sincere doctrine, which did
proceed from out of the mouth of Christ Jesus, that incarnate and holy
Word, which all true professors do most constantly bear testimony of
and profess, and all greedy and ravenous people, reuers spoylers, and
auaritious men, were satisfied abundantly with the rich spoils, Church
rentes, and benefices of these Antichristian people,

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a That Hallelu-iah is interpreted, Praise the Lord, read Jerome de
interpretatione nominum. This word, as also Amen and Selah, and diverse other
Hebrew words, as being Vocabula artis, even notable Theological terms,
that in few sillables do contain great matter, are therefore in all
translations left vninterpreted, for that S. John himself writing in Greek,
does nevertheless retain them in Hebrew, yet in the Paraphrase we think meet
to leave nothing vnexponed.

b Waters to mean people, and Thunders to mean Preachers, read in the note b
Apoc. 14.

c Of this Spouse and spousage, read the note a Apoc. 12. and our 22.
proposition.

d The parable of this marriage banquet of Christ Jesus, is at length expressed
in Matthew. 22. Hereof the Supper of the Lord is the perfect type and symbol.

e Here is the certainty of these prophecies threefoldlie confirmed: first, in
that they are revealed by an Angel. Secondly, in that he testifies that
they are of God. And thirdly, for that in express terms he affirms them
to be true and certain.

f O miserable Papists, why go ye barefooted, and barelegged on pilgrimage,
and do fall kneeling and groueling before your Idolles, adoring either them,
or yet at the best, those Saints whom they represent, seeing a more glorified
Saint than any of your Saints (whom for the most part, your selves make and
canonize) even an holy Angel, who never was a sinful man, never fell nor
made defection at any time from God, as men Saints a thousand thousand times
have done, but ever abode perfect and holy, here does abhor and detest all
kneeling and worshipping before him, greatly rebuking Saint John, for meaning
and preasing thereunto, and in express terms, forbidding the same, and
yielding the godly reason, that none should be worshipped but God only.
Away, away with your captious distinctions of (...) and (...), and all such
visards as excuse idolatry, for here the pure, naked and simple word of God,
spoken by the mouth, and uttered by the example of this holy Angel of God,
and of Gods holy Prophet Saint John, does detect all your hypocritical
sophismes. The Lord open your eyes, for in this text among many more, does the
light clearelie shine. The same example for the more aggreging hereof, is
repeated over again in the Revel. 22.8.9.

g That this that rides on the white horse, is the true and incarnate word of
God even Christ Jesus, appears plainly by the 13. and 16. verses following,
and by the whole harmonicall tokens of this text, and of Apoc. 6.2. conferred
also with the note d of Apoc. 12.

h Seeing Christ the incarnate word of God, treads the winepresse of Gods
wrath, in the 15. verse, therefore does this blood wherewith his garments are
besprinkled, bear the type of the blood of his enemies, which he has shead in
the winepresse of Gods justice, as appears by Esaias 63.3. beside also the
figure of that blood, which he shed out of his body for our redemption.

i To tread the winepresse of Gods wrath, does here not only mean, to
execute God his latter judgment of aeternall damnation against the wicked, as
it does particularly mean in the end of the 14. chapter: but it does mean
generally the execution of all Gods judgments against offenders. And in that
general sense, how Christ our righteous judge and revenger does tread this
press, read Esaias. 63. and Lament. 1.15.

k This Angel certainly bears the type of all Gods Ministers in this age,
who standing in the Sun, that is, standing and awayting on the Gospel and
Ecclesiastical affairs, openly and patentlie proclaimed the destruction of
Babylon, whereby those Ravens and ravenous fowls, that fly by the midst of
heaven, that is the ravenous and greedy people that dwell among them of the
true Church, shall be courageously enanimated to put hand to work, and
spoil that wicked City, and eat up all their riches. So that their greedy
avarice in this case, shall advance the work of the Lord in a part, although
the applying thereof to the use of the true Church, were more the duty of these
temporal auarious persons.

l Here is to be seen, what it is to worldly Princes to maintain and assist
false teachers, for here is not only the Pope, that false illuder of those of
the Empire, thrown down headlong to hell, but also those Monarchs and
Emperors that assisted him, and such other false teachers in this world, in
the world to come shall participate with them in aeternall torment. And that
this false prophet here mentioned, is one with the two horned Antichristian
beast, and consequently is the Pope, is proved in our 25. and 26.
propositions.

m This lake burning with fire and brimstone, where these imperial beasts,
and Pseudoprophetical Popes ar placed, are torments enduring for evermore (as
says Saint John, Apoc. 20.10.) and are the second death, even the death of the
soul (Apoc. 20.14. and Apoc. 21.8.) and therefore is it neither a temporal
punishment, neither the fire of Purgatory, but the aeternal flaming fire of
Gehenna, ont of the which there is no redemption. And here note against
Purgatory, that the Pope himself and his imperial princes, deuisers and
maintainers thereof, have, by this text, no leisure given them to resort
thither, but straightway, while they are skarse dead, to hell must they go the
nearest way, and therefore says the text here, And these two were alive cast
into that lake, etc. as if he would say, skarse is their soul and life gone
forth of their bodies, but it is as soon in hell, without any intermission
or mediate place. So that they and their sect hereafter in experience shall
find no other Purgatory to them, but the aeternall flamming fire of hell, nor
to the elect, but the blood of Christ, although now they debate Purgatory by
fire and sword.

CHAP. 20.
THE ARGUMENT.
There being only two special kingdoms enemies to God, the one Papisticke,
a coulloured enemy, the other Mahometicke, a professed enemy, and having in
the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth trumpets or vials, exponed and prophesied
orderly, the estate and and increase of the Mahometike kingdom. And in many
of these chapters lately past, having described the Roman and Papisticall
kingdom, now in this chapter S. John shows, that after a thousand years of
peace, granted to the Roman and Papisticall Empire, in the end the Devil is
loosed to stir up most cruel wars betwixt these two mighty kingdoms,
Papisticall and Mahometicke, in the revenge of the blood of holy martyrs shead
in the mean time: and how afterward, men begin to revive and arise from the
blind errors and deadly sleep of Antichristianisme. And last, how by Gods
truth, these godless kingdoms, shall be extinguished, and Christ shall come
to judge all men according to their demerits.

Historical application. 1 Now it pleased the the mercy and providence of
God, by his holy Spirit, and heavenly Angels, to restrain the tyrannical
power and universal rage of Satan.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 1 ANd I saw an Angel desce^ding from heaven, who
had power of God, to open and close the mysteries of hell, and to restrain by
his hand, the power of the Devil, in the chains of Gods fear.

The Text. 1 ANd I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottemlesse pit, and a great chain in his hand.

Historical application. 2 So that after the continual and successiue tyran ny
of heathen Roman Emperors, and last of Diocletian, who in one month slew
17000. martyrs, arose at length the first public Christian Emperor,
Constantine the great, about the year of Christ, 300. from which time to the
days of Pope Boniface the 8. and of Ottoman the great, and first Emperor of
Mahometans, An. 1300. even the space of a thousand years, the Devil and his
raging tyrants of this world, were restrained from that high degree of
universal tyranny, that they both before and after used.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 2 And he foreshewed me, how God had appointed
to take that oldea dragon and venomous serpent, even the devil, that odious
Satan, and should restrain him in bondage b a thousand years.

The Text. 2 And he took the dragon, that old serpent, which is he devil
and Satan, and he bound him a thousand years.

Historical application. 3 For God so dantoned them, and abased the power of
Satan, that he might well stir up particular and provincial wars, but
universal wars among the people and whole nations of the world, that is to
say, between Monarch and Monarch there was none raised during all these 1000.
years, and after these thousand years, ending in An. 1300. it pleased God to
permit Satan, by his instruments, so raise up most terrible and universal
wars for a season.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 3 And should depose him from his c highest
tyra^nicall power, to his lowest estate; and in such wise should he be
restrained and enclosed, and the closure so confirmed of God, that he should d
no further stir up deceitfully the Heathen nations to universal e warfare, til
these thousand years were expired, and the^ should the devil be losed to stir
up great wars among the^ for a season.

The Text. 3 And cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and
sealed the door upon him, that he should deceive the people no more, till the
thousand years were fulfilled, for after that he must be loosed for a little
season.

Historical application. 4 Now in the beginning of these 1000. years, a new
kind of supreme government, and judicial authoristart up, to wit, the
Papisticall government, by Pope Sylvester the first, in An. 315. to whom, and
whose successors, Constantine gave both kingdom and judicial power ouerall
Christian Churches, this at length came to that tyranny, that they martyred al
those that truly professed Christ, and preached the word of God, and all that
reverenced not that Roman seat, nor these counterfeit Emperors, or images of
the Empire, whom they inaugurated, neither were marked with Chrisme, or crosses
on their foreheades or hands, for even then was there a latent and invisible
Church, that lived privily as true Christians, triumphing and reigning over
these Papisticall abuses, during all these thousand years.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 4 At this time he let me see, that there should be
f new seats, and supreme authorities erected, and these that were erected in
authority, should have judicial power given them, so I perceived many, who^
they had judged, martyred, and condemned to death, for bearing the testimony of
Jesus Christ, and for professing the true word of God, and which did not
reverence the Antichristian Empire, nor the cou^terfet Emperors thereof, neither
had professed his superstitious marks, or born the same on their forheads, or
in their hands, and these lived and reigned as true Christians, g during all
these 1000. years.

The Text. 4 And I saw seats: and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them, and I savv the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the beast, neither
his image, neither had taken his mark upon their foreheds or on their hands,
and they lived and reigned with christ a thousand years.

Historical application. 5 But the rest, I mean the whole outward visible church
lay wholly as dead, and corrupted with Papisticall errors, and began not to
be raised up nor quickened by the word of life, till after the year of God, a
thousand three hundred when that al these thousand years were outrun, and
then began mo and more to rise daily from their former Antichristian errors:
this rising from Antichristian errors, is the i first resurrection, that goes
before the resurrection of the dead.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 5 But the rest of the people, that lay h dead in
Antichristian errors, arose not therfro^, to embrace the word of life till
these thousand years were run out: this rising from Antichristian errors,
is the i first resurrection, that goes before the resurrection of the dead.

The Text. 5 But the rest of the ded men shall not live again, until the
thousand years be finished: this is the first resurrection.

Historical application. 6 Happy is he and blessed that rises truly from
these errors, and so is participant of that first resurrection, for upon them
the second death, which is the death of the soul, shall have no power, but
they shall become Priests and Sacrificers of their pure and holy prayers unto
God and his Son Christ Jesus and shall reign with him spiritually, the k
thousand years of the great Sabbath, which is to say, for ever and ever.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 6 Happy is he and blessed that rises truly from
these errors, and so is participant of that first resurrection, for upon them
the second death, which is the death of the soul, shall have no power, but
they shall become Priests and Sacrificers of their pure and holy prayers unto
God and his Son Christ Jesus and shall reign with him spiritually, the k
thousand years of the great Sabbath, which is to say, for ever and ever.

The Text. 6 Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection:
for on such the second death has no power: but they shall be the Priests of
God and of christ, and shall reign with him a thousand year.

Historical application. 7 But these former 1000. years being expired in An.
1300. even that very year Pope Boniface the 8. beginning the first Iubelie,
was clothed the one day in his Popelike pontifical, and the next day in an
Emperors Robe royal, and bearing before him two swords, saying, Ecce duo
gladii hic, thereby he vindicated to himself both the spiritual and temporal
impire over all the quarters of the earth: on the contrary part, was Ottoman
the great, who aspiring to be Monarch, was crowned that same year Emperor over
all the four nations Mahometa^s.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 7 And when the l former 1000. years shall be m
outrun, the devil shall be loosed of his foresaid bondage,

The Text. 7 And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison.

Historical application. 8 And so from this forth the devil stirred up betwixt
these two pretended Monarchs and their successors, most terrible wars, by
such universal multitudes and inumerable Armies, as has not been heard of
before.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 8 And shall pass out to deceive the people that
dwell in all the arthes, or four quarters of the countries of n Gog and of
Magog, even stirring up the one against the other to battle, and shall gather
them in number, as the o sea sand.

The Text. 8 And shall go out to deceive the peo- which are in the four
quarters of the earth even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle,
whose number ber is as the sand of the sea

Historical application. 9 And their chief skirmishes and battelles, were
fought besides the lands of Christians, in Europe and in Asia minor, and
thereabout, where God had first planted his holy Citizens, even these seven
Churches that Saint John writes unto: But (God willing) at length shall these
Papisticall and Mahometane kingdoms, both enemies to God, be destroyed by the
power and force of Gods word.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 9 And they shall gather together in the plain of
the earth, toward and about those cuntries, p cities and dwellings, where
Christians, and Christ's holy citizens had made their residence: but at length
by the fiery tongues of the Apostolic doctrine and fla^ming fire of Gods word
from heaven, shall both Gog and Magog be overcome.

The Text. 9 And they went up into the plain of the earth, which compassed the
tents of the Saints about, and the beloved city: but fire came down from
God out of heaven, and devoured the^.

Historical application. 10 And Satan, that great deceiuer of the world shall
be cast into hell fire eternally, where also all the godles Roman and
Mahometicke Emperors, and other wicked Princes, together with all false
Prophets Papisticals, Mahometickes, and others, shall terriblie be tormented
day and night for evermore,

Paraphrasticall exposition. 10 And the devil that shall deceue the^ and stir
the^ up to warfare shall be cast into the eternal flame of Gehenna, where also
the great Emperors of the earth, and the false Antichristian Prophets shall be
tormented day and night for ever more.

The Text. 10 And the devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire
and brimston, where the beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented even day
and night for evermore.

Historical application. 11 When Christ in his majesty shall come to judgment,
for then certainly shall heaven and earth be renewed.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 11 For I saw that at this time should the true and
sincer justice seat of God appear and Christ our just judge sitting thero^, at
whose presence this heaven and earth shall then utterly q melt away, and all
things be renewed

The Text. 11 And I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from
whose face fled away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more
found.

Historical application. 12 And we are sure that then the second and last
resurrection should be, wherein generally all men small and great, that ever
died, shall rise again, and appear before that justice seat of God, and the r
register books of all men's consciences be opened up, and laid abroad, and the
great r register of God his predestination, and book of life shall be opened
and made patent, and the dead shall be judged according to theit s works,
written and registered in their consciences.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 12 And we are sure that then the second and last
resurrection should be, wherein generally all men small and great, that ever
died, shall rise again, and appear before that justice seat of God, and the r
register books of all men's consciences be opened up, and laid abroad, and the
great r register of God his predestination, and book of life shall be opened
and made patent, and the dead shall be judged according to theit s works,
written and registered in their consciences.

The Text. 12 And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand before God, and
the books were opened, and an other book was opened, which is the book of life,
and the deid were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works.

Historical application. 13 And the waltering world, by his raging seas and
stormy tempests inveighing against our flesh, shall render again all that
have died by it, and the devil by his deadly and desperate greifes, and
infernal temptations of the mind, shall render again all that has dyed by
him, and every man shall be judged accorto his works.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 13 And the waltering world, by his raging seas and
stormy tempests inveighing against our flesh, shall render again all that
have died by it, and the devil by his deadly and desperate greifes, and
infernal temptations of the mind, shall render again all that has dyed by
him, and every man shall be judged accorto his works.

The Text. 13 And the sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death and
hell delivered up the dead, which were in them: and they were judged, every man
according unto their works.

Historical application. 14 And the t infernal spirits and damned Devils, who
are as death and hell it self, shall be cast in the burning flame and
unquenchable fire thereoff: this is the second and everlasting death.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 14 And the t infernal spirits and damned Devils,
who are as death and hell it self, shall be cast in the burning flame and
unquenchable fire thereoff: this is the second and everlasting death.

The Text. 14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the
second death.

Historical application. 15 And whosoever is not contained in the register of
Gods merciful predestination, and book of life, shall also be cast in with
them in that eternal and unquenchable fire.

Paraphrasticall exposition. 15 And whosoever is not contained in the register
of Gods merciful predestination, and book of life, shall also be cast in with
them in that eternal and unquenchable fire.

The Text. 15 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was
cast into the lake of fire.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a The former part of the history of this Dragon Satan, is to be found in the
twelfth chapter hereof: to the which, this chapter is to be subjoined.

b To wit, a thousand years of the 1260. years, that the church abode latent
and invisible, as at more length is opened in our 34. Proposition.

c This deep wherein Satan is now closed, is not as yet the deep pit, and
endless pain of Gehenna, for as yet, he is but retained in the chains of
darkness, till the latter day, when he shall be damned aeternally to the deep
of hell (2. Pet. 2.) But this hell or deep, called in Greek (...), and in
Latin abyssus is sometime taken for the depth of the earth, or of waters
locallie: as Psalm. 105. ^^ Sometime for low estate and base degree, as both
here, and ^^oc. 17.8. where the imperial beast rises out of this hell or deep,
^^d goes thereafter to decay, but out of hell there is none that rises,
specially, no Emperor or mankind: wherefore in this text ( abyssus meaning
but a low degree and base estate) the Devil is but thirled and restrained
from his uttermost tyranny, and not at this time bound in Gehenna: for as all
the scriptures testify, he has ever had and shall have to the worlds end that
freedom and liberty to go te^pting mankind, seeking as a rageing Lion whom
he may devour: read further hereupon in our 35. proposition.

d It is said in the Apoc. 12. (where the former part of this history is set
out) that the Church of God shall be persecuted and chased into the desert by
this Dragon, and made invisible 1260. years: and therefore now alluding to
that, he says here, that Satan is bound, that he shall not sedu e any
farther: to wit, any farther than is said already in that 12. chapter: and so
in this chapter he is not restrained simply from persecution, and from all
manner of seduction, such, as particular wars, and martyrdomes, and sowing of
heresies, but from stirring up of universal wars, as is proved in the said
35. proposition.

e Sense Christ's days to this day, the Church of God wanted never either
schisms or persecution: therefore, this bondage of Satan for a 1000. years,
is only (as is said) from stirring up of universal wars, as is proved in
the said 35. proposition.

f Because the judgment seat, and judicial throne of Christ follows
shortly, verse 11. and that with him his elect shall sit (Apoc. 2.26.27. and
note x thereof, and Apoc. 3. verse 21. and note f thereof.) Therefore this
throne and authority that here is erected, appears not to be of the elect
souls, but rather upon the contrary part to be the throne of the Antichristian
beast, who here does martyr these Saints of God, that reigned against
antichristianisme these thousand years professing Christ in this world, and
shall therefore eternally reign with Christ in his throne herafter ver. 11.

g Although during these 1000. years and more, the true Church lurked in the
wilderness (as Apoc. 12.6.14. is said) yet was not that Church so invisible,
but the Dragon in the Antichrists person in all ages, espied some of the
children of the true latent Church, and martyred them: as both here, and Apoc.
12.17. is mentioned. So this confirms our former assertion, where we say, the
Devil here is not simply bound, but in a manner, as we prove in our sa^^ 35.
proposition. Moreover hereof is gathered, that seeing (by this text) they that
worshipped not the Antichristian beast, his image, or mark was persecuted a
1000. years, therefore necessarily the Antichrist reigned a 1000. years at
the least: and consequently, these who supposes him to reign but three years
and an half, ar deceived, as is proved in our 16. Proposition.

h The former martyrs and professors being the inward and invisible Church
(Apoc. 11.1.) These whole remanent here spoken off, are the utter court and
visible pretended Church called in that chapter Gentiles, that is Idolatrous
Ethnickes, and John there ve. 2. is forbidden to account or regard them: for
here says he, they ly all dead and drunken in Antichristian errors, for the
space of a 1000. years: and so indeed from the days of Pope Syluester the
first, to the days of Pope Boniface the eight: that 1000. years the seat of
Rome having no match nor encounter, suffered never any to be seen vouchable or
visible of the true Church: but there about, and from thence forth such hot
wars fell betwixt the empire of Rome and the Mahumeticke empire, that
unawares, diverse true professors openly and vowably did arise and start up,
such as John de rupe scissa ann. 1240. Gulielmus de Sancto amore anno 1260.
Arnoldus de villa noua and Petrus Cassiodorus Italian anno 1302. Dantes
Aligherius and Gulielmus Occham anno 1321. Franciscus Petrarcha 1374. Ioannes
Wicklevus anno, 1390. Ioannes Husse and Hieronymus de Praga Bohemians and
martyrs anno 1415. And then did arise by their doctrine a visible reformed
Church in Bohemia, and thereafter be Luther in Germany, and so ever more and
more visible Churches and public teachers ar risen from Papisticall and
Antichristian errors, even to this day: and all these were sometime dead in
these former Antichristian errors, but (praised be God) are now revived by the
spirit of God in this first resurrection.

i That there be two resurrections, and two deaths, and what they be is plain
in the scriptures. The first resurrection, is the rising from errors, of which
says Solomon. Prou. 24.16. Seven times in a day falls the just man, and yet
rises again: and this first resurrection is chiefly meant, from antichristian
errors, as here, and in Daniel 12.2. wherein says he, many shall rise, etc.
whereas the second resurrection is the general resurrection of the dead where^^
^ot only many, but even all, shall arise again: as to the two deaths they
are also plain. The first, is the death of our fleshly bodies here, which the
scriptures call often a sleep: the second death, is the endless dying of body and
soul in hell fire eternally, read hereof, Apoc. 2. ver. 11. and note k
thereof.

k After our exemption (here spoken of) from the second death, and after our
aeternall kingdom and priesthood with Christ, this reign of 1000. years in
this place, cannot be temporal or definite: for by the grounds of Christian
religion, that reign is aeternall, how then here a thousand years is taken
for aeternitie, ye may consider by the comparison of the six days of labor,
and the Sabboths rest with the six thousand years, that we must labor in this
world, and thereafter have eternal rest, whereof we have spoken in our 14.
proposition, and ye shall find, that although every day of weeklie work
days means (according to 2. Pet. 3.8.) 1000. years definitely: yet the
Sabboths 1000. years represents aeternitie. And such like doubtless though the
other 1000. years of this chapter ar definitly to be taken for a 1000. common
years: yet these 1000. years of our reigning with Christ, after we are freed
from the second death, must infinitely be taken for aeternity and for the
eternal Sabbath. Where note, that by this text literally and definitely taken,
resulted the great error of Cerinthus, and his sect of Chiliasts or
Millenaries, who thought our reign with Christ to be on earth, and temporal for
a 1000. years, and we then again to die, and ly dead another 1000. years,
and so about by vicissitudes, as did of old the Platonicks, and of new in a
manner the Origenists. Further, some also by the mistaking of this text,
suspected the authority of this whole Revelation: but to the true Christian
conceiuer hereof, both is the authority of this book confirmed, and the
heresy of the Millenaries refelled.

l Though in the former verses by the last note 1000. years, is there proved
to mean aeternitie: yet these thousand years here spoken of, are the same
1000. years literally and definitely spoken of in the verses, 2.3.4. and 5.
for all these 1000. years are spoken of things temporal, while we are yet in
this world, and agrees historically with these same 1000. years that begins
about the year of Christ 300. and ends in the year of Christ 1300. as is
proved in our 34. proposition, but years, times, and numbers specified of the
world to come (as verse 6.) must mean aeternitie, seeing after the latter day,
there shall be no day, yea no year, time nor numerall distinction thereof, but
aeternitie without measure, Apoc. 10.6. And therefore be sure this present text
here, is the progress and large deduction of that loosing of Satan, which was
but summarly touched, and forewarned in the end of the third verse, and so this
loosing is all one with that loosing.

m This text does confirm our former assertion, whereby we affirm Satan's
bondage these thousand years, to be only from raising of universal tyranny
and wars: for proof now whereof when here he is loosed, he raised now
universal wars, by enanimating of Gods public enemy Magog, with his Princes
of the Orient, against Gods latent enemy, and Antichrist Gog, with his whole
Princes of the Occident: and so came it to pass that very last year of these
thousand, even the year of God, 1300. that Pope Boniface the 8. challenged to
himself in his triumphant Iubelie, the double Monarchy, both spiritual and
temporal, over the whole world. And contrarily, that same year, Ottoman the
great, was crowned the first Emperor of the Mahometans: and so from thence
forth betwixt these, and their successors, there followed out continual and
universal wars of the whole Orient, against the whole Occident, by armies of
innumerable people.

n That Gog is the Roman and Papistick Empire, and Magog the Mahometicke
Empire, read and consider the 32. Proposition.

o The Mahometick horsemen only of this army, being (Apoc. 9.16) reckoned to
two hundred thousand thousand horsemen, no marvel though here both the Armies,
Mahometicke and Papistick, yea, both horsemen and footmen thereof, be more
comparable to the sea sand, than to any definite number: further concerning
this matter, read Apoc. 9.16. and note h thereof.

p Consider the progress of Ottomans wars, and his successors Emperors of
Mahometanes, and ye shall find the greatest part of all their battles, both
intestine, and also against the Popes forces, to have been fought among
Christians, and Gods holy Citizens. For Ottoman fought, and did win Bithynia,
and much of the coaste side at Pontus Euxinus in the country of Asia minor,
where these seven Churches lay, that Saint John writes to. Then Ottomans son
Or^^^^s fought amongst the Graecians, and in diverse Christian parts (...)
Europe, and conquered Prusia. Then Amurathes their third Emperor, made great
conquest in Europe about Constantinople, and fought many battles thereabout:
and so forth, with their successors, who never rested, making all their
battles among the Christians in Asia minor, Bulgaria, Walachia, Seruia, Bosna,
Croatia, Illyria, Hungaria, Epirus, Peloponnesus, and at length, in Spain and
Italy, with marvelous success, in so much that Mahomet, their ninth Emperor
subverted the two Christian Empires of Constantinople and Trapezo^da, and wan
twelve Christian kingdoms, with two hundred Christian Cities, beside diverse
Islands, as ye shall find lib. 3. Romanorum Principum Joan. Baptistae
Egnatii, and in other histories.

q Of this dissolution of the heaven, the earth, and all the elements, read 2.
Pet. 3.10. and next chapter hereof: So that by the Scriptures, apparently
heaven and earth shall be one habitacle of Gods Saints and holy servants.

r The book of life and predestinate salvation, is effectually registered with
God in his mercy, whereof, although by faith the Spirit of God gives our
Spirit a feeling, yet the same is not effectually registered in our conscience,
I mean our conscience bears no testimony that we have any merit of life
in us. But the other books of Gods just judgment, are indeed effectually
registered in our conscience, which bears the fearful record of all our
iniquities, whereby the consciences of the wicked do testify their own
damnation. Wis. 17.10.11. while as contrarily, the register book of Gods mercy
exemeth the godly from their deserved damnation, and promoteth them free lie to
life everlasting.

s By works here are we judged and justified, and not by faith only, as also
James 2.24. testifies, meaning hereby that of lively faith, and of the good
works that follows thereupon man is justified, and not of that dead faith,
that is by it self alone, with out any good works: otherwise were the words
of Paul (Romans 3.28) express contrary to this text, and to James, for says
Paul, We are justified by faith, without the works of the Law, that is to say,
not without good works whatsoever, but meaning, that we are justified by
lively faith, with such small good works, as our weak nature will suffer
that faith to produce, although it be without the precise works that the Law
requires: and for confirmation of this interpretation, and union of these
textes, ye (...) find both James and Paul agree in diverse places; that faith
without works is a dead faith, and serves nothing to justification. And
again, they agree both, that all works (how good so ever they seem) that
proceed not from faith, are evil. And so it is all one to say with Saint
Paul, We are justified by fruitful faith, or faith that produces good
works, although not the works that the Law requires, or to say with James,
and here with Saint John, we are justified by faithful works, seeing a
working faith and faithful works are inseparable, and none can have the one
without the other. So for conclusion, these works, by the which here we are
judged, are to be esteemed good or evil, not in themselves, or in so far as
they satisfy the Law (for so were all works evil and imperfect) but in so
far forth, as they have or want faith adjoined with them, they are accounted
good or evil only.

t To cast death or hell, or such vnliuelie things into this aeternall fire,
cannot be meaned here: But for as much as death and hell by Satan's
procurement is brought upon mankind, and so Satan is author thereof:
Therefore metonymice death and hell are taken for the Devil and all damned
Spirits. The like is mentioned in diverse places of the Scriptur, as in Esaias.
28.15.18. where by their league and band made with death and hell, is
doubtleslie meant, the giving of themselves over unto the Devil and all
inquitie, and in Esaias. 38.18, where, in saying, that hell and death shall not
praise God; is meaned, that the Devil and damned Spirits shall not praise God:
and so in Osee. 13.14. O death, I will be thy death, and O hell, I will be
thy destruction, What else is this than the victory of Christ over death and
hell, by treading down the head of Satan, and casting him into the eternal
torment of death and hell, who has been the intiser and only author of
death and hell. So then here (verse 13.) the Devil and his instruments under
the terms of death and hell, does exhibit to judgment all those whom he
has destroyed by his temptations, as the world is said before (under the
terms of sea) to have exhibited all that have died by it, including betwixt
them all that ever died, for all men either die by corporal grief of body,
or spiritual grief of mind. So then here (verse 14.) this death and hell,
that (...) aeternallie cast into the lake of fire, can be no other than the
devil and damned Spirits, who intised man to death and hell, and therefore
are casten into that aeternall and unquenchable fire of Gehenna, agreeing with
verse 10. preceding.

CHAP. XXI.
THE ARGUMENT.
The divine Prophet Saint John, hitherto from the first to the last coming of
Christ, prophesying the mutabilities of this world, wherein the Christian
Church has never had earthly rest: now in this Chapter and beginning of the
next, concludes and ends all these their definite and temporal miseries, by
assuring them of infinite and aeternall joy and rest, in that new world and
heavenly habitation, which here he describes, not as it is, for that no eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart can consider the joys thereof. (1.
Cor. 2.9.) but after a certain metaphorical comparison most proper for our
senses and capacity, is that heavenly habitation described. So that under the
literal glory thereof, objected here to our capacity and worldly senses, is
not only meaned an infinite and endless glory, exceeding all humane
capacity and judgment, but also by the symmetries thereof, diverse mysteries of
the Godhead, and grounds of religion are typically expressed.

The Text.
1 ANd I saw a new heaven, and a new earth, for the first heaven, and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.

2 And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of
heau^^ prepared as a b trimmed for her husband.

3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of
God, is with men, and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be their God with them.

4 And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
for the first things are passed.

5 And he that sat up on the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new: and
he said unto me, Write, for these things are faithful and true.

6 And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha an Omega, the beginning and the
end, I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life
freely.

7 He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son.

8 But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and al liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

9 And there came un to me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials;
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me saying, Come: I will show
thee the bride, the Lambs wife.

10 And he carried me away in the spirit, to a great and hie mountain, and he
showed me the great city, holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven, from God.

11 Having the glory of God, and her shining was like unto a stone, most
precious, as a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal.

12 And had a great wall and hie, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve
Angels, and the names written, which are the twelve tribes of the children of
Israel.

13 On the East part there were three gates, and on the North side three
gates, on the South side three gates, and on the West side three gates.

14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of
the Lambs twelve Apostles.

15 And he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the city withal,
and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16 And the city lay four square, and the length is as large as the breadth of
it, and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs, and the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

17 And he measured the wall thereof, an hundredth forty and four cubits, by
the measure of man, that is, of the Angel.

18 And the building of the wall of it, was of Jasper, and the city was pure
gold, like unto clear glass.

19 And the foundatiouns of the wall of the city were garnished with all
manner of precious stons: the first foundation was Jasper, the second of
Saphir: the third of a Chalcedonie: the fourth of a Smaragde.

20 The fifth of a Sardonyx: the sixte of a Sardius: the seventh of a Chrysolit:
the eight of a Beryl: the ninth of a Topaze, the tenth of a Chrysoprasus, the
eleventh of a lacinct, the twelfth an Amethyst.

21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, and every gate is of one
pearl, and the street of the city is pure gold, as shining glass.

22 And I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the
Temple of it.

23 And the (...) has no ^^ede of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it, for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

24 And the people which are saved, shall walk in the light of it, and the
kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shall be no night
there.

26 And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it

27 And there shall enter into it, none unclean thing, neither whatsoever
works abomination or lies: but they which are written in the Lambs book of
life.

Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 THen I foresawe that the heavens and the earth should be a renewed to their
uttermost perfection: for this imperfect estate of the heavens and the earth
that now is, shall dissolve and melt away, and there shall be no sea, or b
raging inundations of worldly troubles.

2 And I John foresaw and beheld that c spiritual Jerusalem (even our eternal
felicity, and glory in Gods Majesty) vouchsafed and d sent down of God from
the highest heavens, prepared to decore and attire true Christians with, for
their e spouse Christ Jesus.

3 And I heard the mighty voice of God his aeternall decree from heaven
saying, Behold, from henceforth the Tabernacle and dwelling of God shall be
with men, and by f Christ shall he dwell in them, and they in him, and they shall
be his people, and God himself dwelling with them, shall be their God for ever.

4 And he shall put an g end now to all their miseries, and they shall be no
more subject to death, nor to sorrow, nor to mourning, nor to any manner of
pain, for all such carnal passions of this our former world shall be
abolished.

5 And h God, who sits in full authority among them, has promised saying,
Behold (says he) I shall now renew and make perfect all these imperfections,
and he i commanded me to write, and assure all men, that these words were
faithful and true.

6 And he said unto me, now ar al k things done and perfected: I am the first
and the last even the first before all beginning, and the last after all
ending: to him that has thirsted and zealled after truth and justice, will I
now freely of my mercy, give to drink and receive of my lively fountain,
everlasting life.

7 He that has ouercom his earthly temtations, shall in this heavenly world
possess and inherit all joyful things; and I will be his God and Father, and
he shall be l adopted one of my sons.

8 But contrarily, the fearful doubter, and the unbeliever, and the execrable
and abominable livers, cruel murderers, filthy whormongers, execrable
Sorcerers, abominable Idolaters, and all teachers and authorisers of lies,
shall have their part and portion in that endless deep of hell, which burns
eternal lie with unquenchable fire, and bitter torment, which is the
everlasting m death of the soul.

9 And there came unto me the n last of the seven Angels, which had power to
execute the seven last plagues, and he talked with me saying, Come, and I will
let thee see the spiritual estate of the glorified Church, who is the true
Spouse and Bride of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus.

10 And he ravished me away in the Spirit, to a great and high contemplation,
wherein he let me to understand that aeternall felicity in GOD, and o holy
habitation, which from the highest heavens, God had appointed to bestow and
send down unto his elect and holy Church.

11 And that happy habitacle was decored with the glory of God, and the
shining beauty thereof exceeded all precious stones, ever flourishing in all
felicity, and waxing green as Jasper, but pure and clear from all spots of
uncleanness, as shining Crystal.

12 And it was strongly environed about, with the true and invincible p
Apostolical doctrine, and forenent each of the twelve tribes, even forenent
every elect people and nation, there was set an open and patent gate and
ready access, whereat Gods Angels, q Apostles, and Ministers, called and
conducted severally by name, every r tribe, kindred, and nation of Christ his
spiritual Israelites to enter.

13 Toward the holy elect people of the Orient, was the s knowledge of the
Trinity set patent, as a threefold entry to this felicity. To the elect
people of the North was the same knoweledge of Gods Trinity a threefold entry
to felicity. The elect people of the South also entered in by the same
Trinity. And finally, the elect people of the West, and all the airthes of
the world had no other entry to felicity, but by the knowledge and profession
of this Trinity.

14 And that strong bulwark and t wall of Gods truth and true doctrine,
wherewith that holy habitation was defended and environed, was even that self
same doctrine, whereof the strong foundations were laid before in this world,
twelve fold by Christ Jesus his twelve Apostles, every one by name in their
several calling.

15 And the Angel who revealed these things to me, represented by the u
symbol of a golden metwand, that he was to mete and expone by measurs, the
figurative symmetrie of that holy habitation, of the entries thereof, and of
the walls enuironing the same.

16 And this our heavenly habitation and eternal felicity in God, was x
squared and fourefoldlie described by the four Evangelistes: and the
indwellers are to enjoy a like felicity in the Father, as in the Son, and
the Angel by the symbol of metting represented unto me the infinite room and
sufficient dwelling places that were therein, y even that there were twelve
thousand times twelve thousand stades, counted or multiplied 12000. times,
answering to the infinite number of Gentiles, and to the twelve thousand of
every tribe of Israel, mentioned Apoc. 7. al these shall participate z so much
felicity in the Father, as they do in the Son, and alike in Son, as they do
in the holy Spirit.

17 And the Angel by the figure of metting represented to me, that that strong
bulwark and wall of the Apostolik doctrine, raised up twelve courses high, by
these twelve Apostles, is now as it were raised up aa twelve times so high, even
144 courses up, speaking these things after the manner and comparison of men,
which are meaned in a spiritual and Angelical meaning.

18 And the building of this fortress, and wall of the Apostolic doctrine,
was firm, pure and bright, ever flourishing, and waxing green as the Jasper,
and the happy habitation of Saints within the same, was more glorious than
gold, and more glistering and pure than the clear glass.

19 And the foundations of that strong wall of this holy habitacle, was
decored with the Prophets, Martyrs, Professors, Preachers, interpreters, and
other precious people of the Primitive Church, which as bb precious stones,
God has gathred out of al countries, by his twelve Apostles, to found this
eternal Sanctuary with: for of these twelve Apostles some one from the Indies
gathered in all those green Iaspers, who abode ever green and vnwithered from
the true faith, to found with these the first foundation of this heavenly
habitacle: Another Apostle to make the second course of this foundation,
brought in those celestial Sapphyres, who, endued with heavenly hewes and
qualities, respected no earthly shows: The third Apostle for the third course
of this foundation, gathered in from among the Egyptians, the victorious and
fiery Chalcedonies, even the zealous Professors, and victorious Teachers of
truth: Some fourth Apostle, to build the fourth foundation, even from the
Scythians and Bactrians, brought in the green and glauncing Smaragdes, even
the flourishing, vnwithered, and sincere Christians of those Countries.

20 For the fifth course of this foundation, some Apostles gathered in from
among the Arabians, their meek lowly and chaste people, comparable to the
simple and chaste nature of the Sardonyx: The sixte Apostle gathered in these
mollified people, in whose soft hearts are engraven the seals of salvation,
even the continual memory of Christ's passion, represented by the blodie and
fleshly color of the Sardius. The seventh Apostle, for the seventh ground and
foundation, the wise and constant Chrysolites: The eight Apostle for his course
and foundation, gathered in all diligent Christians and peace makers, comparable
to the precious Beryll. The ninth Apostle to found his course with, gathered
in the patient people, and restrayners of their affections, represented by the
nature of the Topaze. The tenth Apostle, brought in to the tenth course of this
foundation, the golden green Chrysoprasus, even those Christians, that
renouncing avarice, glory in that golden treasure of heaven, that never
withers nor decays. The eleventh Apostle to found his eleventh course with,
gathered in the golden purple and princely Hyacinths, even those magnifice^t
and princely Professors, who being richly decored with spiritual benefits,
overcame all temptations: Finally, for the twelfth course, and to complete the
foundation of this holy work, the twelfth Apostle brought in, even from
Armenia, the pure and temperate Amethystes, to wit, those Christians, who
detesting gluttony and drunkenness, are endued with sobriety and temperance.

21 And these twelve Apostles, teachers of the way of life, stood as precious
pearls, decoring these entries, even every Apostle was in every entry of
that heavenly habitacle, as a precious pearl, and the cc patent passages or
streets of that glorious habitacle, are more glorious than the pure gold, and
more bright than the shining of glass.

22 And there was no distinct Temple in that heavenly habitacle, for
universally, and over it all, the dd Majesty of the Almighty God, and of
Christ Jesus is their Temple.

23 So that therefore, this holy habitation needs no light of ee spiritual
Teachers, nor seculare laws, for the glory of God shines in it, and Christ
Jesus is their lantern of light.

24 And the elect people and nations shall enjoy the full fruition of that
light, and all that were kings of the earth, shall above all worldly pomp ff
glorify that glory.

25 In all this eternal day time, shall never the elect be barred out from
this felicity, and there shall be no obscurity of gg night, or darkness of
errors there.

26 And the only glory and felicity of all the elect nations shall be
established in it.

27 Into this glorious habitation shall no wicked or filthy creature have
entresse, neither any abominable sinners, or deceitful liars, but only they
which are predestinate to salvation and registered in the book of life of our
Savior Christ Jesus.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This renewing of the heaven and earth, is without all doubt literally meant:
for seeing this is the time of eternal rest, all heavenly motions and earthly
vicissitudes must have an end: yea, seeing the motions of the Spheres,
Planets, and stars were made for distinction of times. Genes. 1.14. as also
forth from this day shall be no time Apo. 10.6. Therefore shall their estate
without all question be renewed: yea, and the estate of every creature, for
says Paul Romans. 8.21.22. The Creature also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: for we
know that every Creature groneth with us also, and traueleth in pain
together unto that present. Of this renovation read. 2. Pet. 3.10. and Esaias.
65.17. and Esaias 66.22. and Apoc. 20.11. and note q thereof.

b Because this destruction of the world shall be with fire, (as testifies 2.
Pet. 3.10.) It may be that the Sea shall be utterly dried up, and so the Sea
here to be literally taken: but always in the figurative sense, we are sure
that all tumultuous troubles, shall cease at that day forever, and that the sea
does signify tumults and tumultuous people, is said in our note a Apoc. 13.

c This Jerusalem called new Jerusalem, and the spouse of the Lamb, must
therefore be the renewed Church, even both the glorified Church, and the
felicity thereof: for that to both the glorified Church who are the
inhabitants, and to that felicity in which they dwell, does the whole
subsequent proprieties of this Jerusalem agreee: even as the name of a city is
not only taken for the town, but also metonymice, for the inhabitants thereof.

d For that God is the supreme height, all that proceeds from him is said to
descend, and so this descending of spiritual Jerusalem, is not meant locally,
but figuratiuelie, that both the godly their selves, and their eternal
felicity has their original, and flowing from the majesty of God, and so
descends from him.

e Seeing by the Apoc. 12.1. and note a thereof, and by our 22. proposition,
the Church militant is Christ's spouse, far rather is she now his spouse, when
she is become triumphant: yea, before was she in a part diuorceable for her
offenses, but now for her confirmed purity and established chastity, all
wholly indiuorceable.

f For this end has Christ taken on him our nature, and is become Emmanuel
(Esaias. 7.14.) that is to say, God with us, that we might now be with God, and
so by this text God shall be with man, and man shall be with God in this holy
habitation and aeternall felicity.

g This end of all miseries yields comfortable occasion to all Gods servants,
to endure patiently temporal and definite troubles, knowing hereby, that now
shall follow the reward of infinite and eternal felicity.

h Here says the text, he who sat in the throne spoke, to wit, that same
Deity and divine essence. But for as much as both the person of the Father, and
also of the Son, are meaned to sit in this throne, in the next chap. ver.
1.3. therefore it is to be reasoned whe^^^r this be the person of the Father or
of the Son, that here speaks to S. John. Concerning this we say, that
although it was the person of Christ, who sitting in this throne, lately, in
the end of the former chapter, judges the world, as both our belief, and Apoc.
14.14. do testify, yet here is there a translation made of persons, and it is
the Father that now speaks. For not only now has that judgment seat
(attributed in the Scriptures to Christ) taken full effect, but also Christ
hitherto having perfected his functions of incarnation, teaching, redemption,
mediation, and of damning and throwing down the wicked, does now deliver up
the kingdom unto God the Father, that he may be all in all, as testifies
Paul, 1. Cor. 15.24.25.28. And again on the other part, now are here
introduced the offices and functions of God the Father, and Creator, in new
creating and renewing the world. So that here the functions of the Son
ending, and the functions of the Father of new again beginning, this must
needs be the Father, that here shows, that he is to renew the world, seeing
that is his function and office. And to confound the persons, or yet their
offices, is contrary to the godly Symbol of Athanasius, saying, neque
confundentes Personas, neque Substantiam separantes, as who would say, the holy
Spirit had redeemed us, or that Christ either first created, or now at last
renews the world simply, and altogether in his own person: Indeed Christ is
meaned with the Father, and the Father by Christ (but not Christ simply) to
create the world. Heb. 1.2.9. conferred with Psalm. 102.26. and Col. 1.16. and
the first article of our belief: and so this must not be the person of
Christ, but of the Father, that speaks this: and for more proof that this is
the Father, he calls us afterward, verse. 7. his sons, whereas Christ
calls us not so, yea, not servantes, but friends, Ioh. 15.15. for both
Christ and we are called Sons to God the Father, he natural, and we adopted.

i It is said by Paul (2. Cor. 11.14.) that Satan may take the similitude of
an Angel of light, but that he may profess himself God, by taking his
similitude, we read not, neither possibly dare he, least so the most godly
Prophets (meaning nothing but godliness) should be abused, and worship Satan.
Then follows, that this being verily God, that here appears, and testifies
the words of this book to be true and faithful, there can therefore be no
doubt of the authority thereof. But if any will say, that though Satan dare
not feign the similitude of God, yet durst Cerinthus or other heretics,
Chiliasts, feign Gods visions. In contrary of that conceived suspicion, the
heavenly style, the precise performance, the harmony with other Scriptures,
the infallible notes, names, numbers, and dates of times confirm the verity of
this Book, and divine certainty thereof. The same verity hereof, that here is
approved by God, was before intimate by the Angel Apoc. 19.9. note e and is
hereafter repeated. Apoc. 22.6.

k This is the same thing that is meant, by the latter sound of the seventh
trumpet. Apoc. 11.15. and outpowring of the seventh Vial. Apoc. 16.17. and
these are the performances of the Angels oath and vow made in Daniell. 12.7.
and Revel. 10.6. of which, our 14. proposition reckons the dates.

l That this is God the Father that says this, is said at length, note h
preceding.

m The first death, being the bodily death; the second death, must be the
eternal death of soul and body, as is said, Apoc. 20. note i and Apoc. 2.
note k.

n This one of these seven Angels, both here, and Revel. 17.1. mentioned,
appears to be the last of these seven Angels, for such reasons as are contained
there, Revel. 17. note a thereof.

o What this Jerusalem and descending thereof means, read the former notes
hereof c and d.

p The Apostolical doctrine, being indeed a strong wall against all errors is
therefore justly here meant by this wall, which hereafter verse 27. debarreth
out all unclean and abominable creatures and liars: Further, that bold and
constant Preachers and their doctrine, is called a brazen wall: read Jeremy
1.18. And for the more evident token, that this wall can mean no other thing,
nor the Apostolic doctrine, the same has twelve foundations, which are
entitled by the names of the twelve Apostles: ver. 14. and 19. following: and
so it being a solid wall to debar out the wicked, has not the less
threefold ports in it, by the knowledge of the Trinity, to receive in the
elect at all quarters as follows. verse 12. and note f hereof, pointing out
so by number, names and circumstances, that it does mean the Apostolic
doctrine.

q Seeing ministers and Pastors even before their glorification, (...) called
angels, as is showed. Revel. 1. note x thereof: how much more then may the
twelve Apostles now after their glorification be meant by these Angels, the
number of twelve, and other circumstances following, so well agreeing.

r Under the number of twelve tribes of Israel, (because they sometime were
the only peculiar people of God,) are now figuratiuelie included the whole
elect tribes of all the people and nations of the world, who now also are
become Gods people. So that as testifies Paul, Gal. 3.7. all the faithful ar
the sons of Abraham, and consequently, all the faithful are accounted the
twelve tribes, in these figurative and prophetical speeches.

s This description of this spiritual Jerusalem and heavenly habitation, by
three ports in each of the four airthes, making in the whole twelve, has in
it a perfect harmony and representatio^ of our absolute and eternal
felicity, whereof the entries and ports is the knowledge of the Trinity,
written and testified by the four Evangelistes, and patently preached, made
open, and dispersed through all the world, by the twelve Apostles.

t What this wall is, read before in the note p preceding.

u Nothing is more common amongst the Prophets, and in prophetical visions,
nor to represent their figurative matters by an outward and external action,
as is to be seen in Ieremies jockes. chap. 27. and 28. and Ezechiels gesture*
cap. 4. and cap. 5. and in the Angels meeting, Ezech. 40.3. and diverse other
places. And this is done for our weak capacity, which imprinteth no verbal
document so deeply in mind, as we do an actual gesture: So here the Angel
by this external gesture of metting, wills us deeply to imprint in mind,
all the subsequent symmetrie of this holy habitacle, as containing in it an
holy harmony, with the chief grounds of Christian truth.

x Proceeding here further to the description of that eternal felicity, in
which we are to dwell for ever: for our capacity, the Spirit of God sets
down the same in such form and shape, as most lively points out the
doctrine of the Godhead, and teachers thereof in this world, by whom this
heavenly felicity has been squared and founded in us in this life, that
afterward we might be citizens in the joyful habitacle of everlasting life.
Now therefore says he here, this city is set in square or four cornered:
meaning, no doubt, hereby, that this our heavenly habitacle a^^ eternal
felicity, wherein now we are to dwell, and the whole doctrine pertinent
thereunto, was squared and fourfoldly described by the four Euangels of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John: for where before, note p the twelve Apostles by
their short and present doctrine, are made the first layers of the twelve
foundations of this work, does it not very harmonically agree, that the four
Evang. by their long lasting and written testimonies, have builded out the
squares and four corners of that work, to the final perfection thereof. If
this were not the cause, why this raised square, and Cubique figure, were
rathest here of al other figures chosen: then had either the Spirit of God
chosen the round figure, as of all solid bodies the most perfect figure: or
then had he chosen the Pyramid Triangulare, which is the most simple, firm,
and constant figure: but these, partly not agreeing with the convenient form
of a city, and partly, not bearing the symbol of the unite and aequall
Trinity, and of the four Evangelists, and other symmetries needful are
therefore here refused, and the raised square or Cubique figure chosen.

y The whole elect Israelites being reckoned to 144000. to wit, 12000. of
every Tribe, and the elect Gentiles to be innumerable, (Apoc. 7.4.9. note f
thereof. and Apoc. 14.1. notes a and b thereof.) here sets he down a city
almost of infinite room, to contain them into, according to Christ's saying,
Ioh. 14.2. In domo Patris mei mansiones sunt multae. In my Fathers house are
many dwelling places, for the length of this City being 12000. stadges, the
breadth 12000. stadges, and the height 12000, stadges, as here the text
means, the whole city must contain 12000. times 12000. stadges, multiplied
by 12000. which is, 1728000000000. Cubique stadges: whereas one cubique stadge,
(that is, a stadge in length, a stadge in breadth, and a stadge in height) were
sufficient to hold one whole region of people. Hereby then is meaned, that
this heavenly habitacle and eternal foelicity is infinite, and abundantly
capable of all the elect number. Of the precisenes of numbers in such like
accomptes, we have said enough Apoc. 7. note f and Apo. 14. notes a and b
thereof and other places. And as for this number in particular, it has his
original from 12. for the 12. Apostles, and then from 1000. answering to the
subdisciples of every Apostle: and then again, these ar multiplied cubiquelie
to represent the great increase of Gods servants to the worlds end, and
consequently, of the agreeable mansions, provided in heaven for them.

z Seeing the whole body of this city, represents most properly that whole
felicity, that we are eternally to enjoy in the whole unite Godhead, the
three several dimensions of longitude, and altitude of that city must
represent these several measures and portions of joy, which we have in the
Father, in the Son, and in the holy Spirit, and consequently, the being of
the longitude, of the latitude, and of the altitude of that holy habitation al
equal by this text, does represent that portion of joy, that we have in the
Father, that portion of joy that we have in the Son, and that felicity that
we enjoy in the holy Spirit, to be aequall and alike. So that although every
one of us enjoy not alike felicity with other, yet, as God in his three
persons is aequall, and alike in himself, so of al his three persons gives he
alike presence and fruition: The Father shall not be absented from us more than
the Son, nor the Son no more than the holy Ghost: we shall see all three
in one, we shall worship all three in one, and finally, of all the three
persons of that unite Godhead, shall we have full joy, comfort and fruition, and
that alike of the one as of the other, even as the persons are alike in
Godhead, and one in substance.

tuxyz Of all these textes and former notes thereof is gathered the marucilous
harmony and accord in all points, betwixt God and this his holy Jerusalem.
For God, who created man according to his own image, here also describes his
glorified Churches symmetrie, to his own similitude. God is one, so here by
one only spiritual Jerusalem, he represents his Church. There be three
equal persons of the Deity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, so be there here
of this Jerusalem three equal dimensions of longitude, latitude, and
altitude: None of the three persons of the Deity is separable from other, so
none of these three dimensions of a city, or of any solid body, can be
separable one from another, for then should it become a superfice, and no
solid body. The three persons of the Deity and their functions, cannot be
confounded: so are not these three dimensions confounded, for the length is not
the breadth, nor the breadth is not the height: Like as in Athanasius Creed,
the person of the Fat^^ is not the person of the Son. Neither is the person of
the So^^ the person of the holy Ghost, and yet the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, are one only God: as here the length, breadth, and height, makes one
only City. Further, the doctrine of the deity is witnessed and fourfoldly
set down by the four Evangelists: So here is this Jerusalem set down in
quadrat, or foursquare. Twelve Apostles dispersed in all airths, has founded
this doctrine, and thereby enter we to the knowledge of God: So on twelve
foundations stands this Jerusalem, and twelve entries there be thereunto in
several airthes. Finally, the Deity is universal, infinite, and infinitely
extended over all his works. So in this Jerusalem, is there infinite
foelicitie, and abundant room for stowing of all her inhabitants.

aa The Apostolic doctrine, amongst these of the Church militant, being by
worldly impediments holden low, is now amongst these of the triumphant Church,
raised to the full and perfect height, signified here by the full increase of
12. multiplied by 12. quadratly, making 144. courses of height.

bb Of all that hereafter follows, and is spoken of these precious stones,
wherewith are founded the 12. foundations of this strong wall of the Apostolical
doctrine, this one thing is the sum and summar meaning, that as a diligent
master of work, will send his quarriors, masons, and builders in all parts,
to search, dress, form and hew stones proper and meet for their building, and
glorious for the decorement thereof. So has our God in this world, sent his
holy Apostles through Inde, through Arabie, through Aegypte, through Armenie;
and throughout all the cuntries of the world, to gather in, teach, and instruct
these holy and precious people, some Prophets, some Martyrs, some teachers,
some interpreters, some having one gift and virtue, and some another, of whom
God had decreed to build up this holy and eternal habitacle, and first to lay
by them the twelve foundations, of the Apostolical and Militant Church in this
world, which thereafter in the world to come, even in this triumphant Church
and holy Jerusalem, should shine aeternally and utter all their glistering
virtues: as says Dan. 12.3. Qui autem doctifuerint, fulgebunt sicut splendour
firmamenti, and qui ad iustitiam erudiu^t multos, quafi stellae in perpetuas
aeternitates. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that (...) ^e many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars, for ever and ever. In the separate hewes, natures and qualities of
these stones, in the Paraphrase, I have followed the received opinion of
writers, leanning always more to this their summar effect and meaning.

cc By these streets and passages, is signified liberty (amongst other
felicities) so that we have no manner of thirlage, as tied or addicted to any
one place: yea, go where we will, we go always in God, and our ways and
streets are beautiful and glorious, and imports to us full felicity.

dd Of this temple, and how here and some other places, it means the majesty
of God, we have showed in the discourse of our 20. Proposition.

ee How the Sun is taken for the spiritualitie, and the Moon for the
temporalitie, read the note h Apoc. 6.

ff This is no worldly glory that they shall bring thither, for that heavenly
habitacle that has no need of the glorious light of the Sun, and Moon,
verse 23. has far less need of worldly glory. It is therefore hereby
meant, that these, who were godly Princes in this world, shall lift up all
their felicity, glory, and estimation from the pleasures of the world, and
fix the same wholly upon that felicity and glory, which there they shall
have in God.

gg This night that shall not be found, agrees there both literallie, and
figuratiuelie: for literally there shall be no night after the latter day,
seeing distinctions of time by night and day, and by Summer and winter shall
cease, as is lately said in the note a hereof, and Apoc. 10.6. Again,
figuratiuelie, there shall be no obscurity of errors there, for that no
unclean thing, no liar, nor abominable person abides there, as hereafter
verse 27. is testified, of no night to be here, read also Revel. 22. verse 5.

CHAP. XXII.
THE ARGUMENT.
The spirit of God in the former Chapter, having described the glory of the
glorified Church, under the comparison and form of a City, now prosecutes out
in this Chapter, to declare, how that City and heavenly Citizens thereof are
furnished of such spiritual lively drink, meat and medicaments, as shall
conserve aeternal^^ felicity and health, using here these earthly terms for
our capacity, in expressing of heavenly matters. Thereafter follows a
conclusion of the proprieties of that glory, and of this whole prophecy, with
a confirmation yet again of the verity hereof, ending finally with a
threatening against all the wicked, and a terrible protestation against all the
eakers and pairers of this book, and then contrarily commending the faithful
Churches to God.

The Text.
1 And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.

2 In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was the
tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month,
and the leaves of the tree served to heal the nations with.

3 And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the Lamb
shall be in at, and his servants shall serve him.

4 And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

5 And there shall be no ni^ht there, and they need no candle, neither light
of the sun, for the Lord God giueeth them light, and they shall reign for
evermore.

6 And he said unto me, These words are faithful and true: and the Lord God
of the holy Prophets, sent his Angel to show unto his servant, the things
which must shortly be fulfilled.

7 Behold, I com shortly, Blessed is he that keeps the words of the Prophecy
of this book

8 And I am John, which saw and heard these things: and when, I had heard and
seen, I fell down to woorship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me
these things.

9 But he said unto me, see thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant, and
of thy brethren the Prophet of them which k^ the words of this book, worship
God.

10 And he said to me, Seal not the words, of the Prophecy of this book: for
the time is at hand.

11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and
he that is holy, let him be holy still.

12 And behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be

13 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

14 Blessed are they, that do his commandments, that their right may be in
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.

15 For without shall be dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies.

16 I Jesus have sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things (...) ^e
Churches: I am (...) root and the generation of David, and the brighte morning
star.

17 And the spirit and the bride say, Come, And let him that hears, say
Come: and let him that is a thirste, come: and let whosoever will, take of the
water of life freely.

18 For I protest unto every man, that hears the words of the prophecy of
this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book.

19 And if any man shall diminishe of the words of the book of this
prophecy, god shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy city, and from those things which are written in this book.

20 He which testifies these things, faith, Surely, I come quickly. Amen,
even so, come Lord Jesus.

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.

Paraphrasticall exposition.
1 AND the Angel let me to understand how a God the holy Spirit (flowing as a
river to satisfy all that thirsted after his spiritual gifts) proceeds
from the persons of God the Father, and of God the Son, who sat there in
supreme authority.

2 And amidst the ways and passages of all that glorified congregation, and
with these flowing waters and graces of the holy Ghost, was also b Christ Jesus
conjunct, who is the author of our life and salvation: who continually and
ever recently yielded, and exhibited the fruit and fruition of all his heavenly
virtues, in number and measure sufficient to satisfy every man, of the c
twelve tribes of spiritual Israelites: to wit, such as had observed and
embraced the doctrine of the c twelve Apostles: and the smallest benefits, and
lightest virtues that flows from Christ served some way to the comfort, joy,
and continual health of every elect people and nation.

3 And there shall be no accursed thing in that holy habitacle, for the throne
and eternal seat of God the d Father, and of Christ Jesus his Son shall be
there, and all these his servants shall now most perfectly serve him.

4 And they shall have the full fruition and enjoying of his face and presence,
and with constant e courage and bold faces shall they profess his name.

5 And there shall be no darkness there, neither of f night, nor of errors,
and no need shall they have of temporal nor ecclesiastical teachings, for
GOD himself in Trinity and Unity shall lighten them, and with him shall they
reign, for evermore.

6 And the Angel again assured me, that these words were faithful and true:
for the Almighty God, Lord over all the holy Prophets, had sent him, who is
his holy Angel, to show and publishe unto his servant upon earth these
things, which must begin shortly, and be performed amongst them.

7 Behold, it shall not be g long (says Christ) till my coming, in respect
of my eternal abiding, happy shall he be, who observes and does according
unto the words written in this book of Prophecy.

8 And I the writer hereof, am John the Apostle and Evangelist, who
spirituallie saw and heard all these things, and when I had heard and seen
the same, h I fell down prostrate at the feet of the Angel, who showed me
these things to have woorshipped him.

9 But he rebuked me, saying, Beware thou do it not, for I am but a servant of
Gods as thou art, and as one of thy brethren which are Prophets, and am one of
them which observe the words of God, contained in this book, woorshippe none
but God only.

10 And he commanded me not to i conceal, or utterly to seal up the words
of the prophecy contained in this book, for that the time of the performance
thereof, comes daily on and approaches.

11 Now he that does wrong k proceed (if he list) to do wrong, and he who is a
filthy sinner proceed (if he lists) in his filthy sins and contrarily,
let the righteous man continue in his righteousness, and the holy man in his
holiness.

12 For behold (says God) I come shortly, and that not empty, but bearing
with me every man's reward, to recompense the^ therewith, according to their
faithful l works.

23 I am the first and the last; the beginning and the ending, even the first
before all beginning, and the last after all ending.

14 Blessed are they that m keep the commandments of this their God, that
they may obtain a joyful part and protion in Christ Jesus, the true Author
of life: and that they by the true knowledge of the Trinity, according to the
Apostolic doctrine, may enter to eternal felicity.

15 But forth of the same shall be debarred all Apostatik n revolters to their
filthiness, as dogs to their vomet, and all enchanters, whoremongers,
murderers, and Idolaters, and finally, all that teaches lies, or loved and
delighted therein.

16 I (says the Lord Jesus) assure all men that I have sent my holy Angel to
testify these things unto you all my holy Churches and congregations. I am
(in my Deity) that o root and foundation whereof David and all the faithful
has sprung, and (in my humanity) I am of that o posterity and offspring that
has sprung of David, and am that morning p star and Son of justice, whose
bright Evangell lightened the whole world.

17 And all godly q spirits, and Christ's holy Church and chaste spouse, wished
him to come, and ye that hears pray for his coming, and let every man that
zealeth and thirsts after spiritual graces, approach, and come unto him: For
what faithful man soever lists to come, shall freely and in his mercy
receive of him, and drink up as water the abundant graces of the holy Ghost
to life eternal.

18 Now therefore, I protest unto every man that hears the words of this
book of prophecy, that if any man shall pretend to add any thing farther
unto this book, God shall add his torment, and bring upon that man all the
plagues that are contained in this book.

19 And likewise, if any man shall mean to pare or diminish of the words of
this holy prophetical book, God shall utterly take away all his portion and
part, out of the register book of eternal life, and out of this holy habitacle
of eternal felicity, and from enjoying of these joys and r benefits herein
promised for the faithful.

20 The Lord Jesus, who testifies these things, has promised, that he
shall come most speedely. Even so must it be, O Lord Jesus, come therefore
speedily.

21 The s grace of this our lord Jesus Christ, be with all you his faithful for
ever. So be it.

Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications.
a This pure and christalline river of lively waters, is taken in the
scriptures for the spirit of God and graces thereof, which our souls ever
thirste and drink, as is plainly expounded in John 7.38.39. saying, Flumina de
ventre eius fluent aquae viua: hoc autem dicebat de spiritu quem accepturi
erant credentes in eum, etc. Out of his belly shall flower rivers of water of
life: This spoke he of the spirit, which they that believed in him should
receive. And for confirmation, that this reiuer is the holy spirit, he says
here, that it proceeds of the throne of God the Father, and of God the Son,
using the proper term of proceeding, for that the holy Spirit is said to
proceed from the person of the Father and of the Son, as says the godly
Athanasius in his Symbol: Spiritus sanctus a Patre and Filio, non factus, nec
creatus, nec genitus, sed procedens: The holy Ghost, not made, nor created, nor
begotten of the Father and of the son, but proceeding from them.

b This tree of life that grows in the midst of this glorified
congregation, and among these flowing waters of Gods spirit, and yields
continual fruit, where upon the godly feeds to life aeternall, must needs
be Christ Jesus the author of our life and salvation, of whom the tree of life
in earthly Paradise, did bear the type: and who has his residence among his
elect, and is conjoined with the holy spirit in Deity, and yields to these
his elect, continual benefits, and spiritual graces and virtues, whereon,
they spiritually do feed and aeternally live.

c Because the City by the number of ports, foundatio^s, rooms and symmetries
thereof, has been before accommodate to the number of twelve, correspondent to
the twelve tribes of spiritual Israelites, and twelve Apostles: Therefore
agreeable to that same number of twelve, he here also describes their
spiritual food, making thereby the city, and the inhabitants, and their
spiritual food, and furniture, all correspondent and conformablie agreeing
together in one, with the twelve Apostles, of whom they have received their
comparison, and of whom in truth, both is that heavenly habitacle and
proprieties thereof: to wit, our resurrection, justification, immortality, and
aeternall foelicitie described: as also, the number of all faithful, are by
them and their successors collected and gathered in: As thirdly, these
spiritual virtues flowing here ^^m Christ, are distributed to every faithful,
according as they are more or less of the number of the twelve tribes of
spiritual Israelits, or has embraced more or less the doctrine of the twelve
Apostles: and therefore, not only first the symmetrie of the city, and
secondly, the room and inhabitants thereof, but also thirdly, the furniture,
even these fruits, benefits and graces that here flows from Christ unto
them, are all reckoned after the number of twelve: and so their monthly
increases, means noe other thing, but first this allusion to the number of
the twelve Apostles, And secondly, that these fruits and benefits are ever
continual, fresh, and recent: for (as we have said note a of the former
chapter, and in other parts) there is no distinction of times by years,
months or days, neither in heaven, neither after the latter day any ways.

d Here he (as also verse 1.) speaks only of two persons of the Godhead: to
wit, the Father and the Son sitting in this throne, although inseperablie the
whole Deity in Trinity and Unity here sits: but these two persons, the
Father and the Son are only here mentioned, because the judicial matters of
this throne, and the present functions belonging thereto, at this time
concerned cheiflie the offices of God the Father, and of God the Son. Of God
the Son, in that here he sits, now lately judging the whole world generally,
which chiefly appertains to him, as says our Belief, inde venturus est
iudicare vivos and mortuos, from thence he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead. Of God the Father, in that he here sits reforming and renewing
the world, as he testifies in the text saying, ecce, noua facio omnia,
behold, I make all things new, which belongs to his office, as being Creator
of all, as testifies our belief, calling him, Creatorem coeli and terrae,
maker of heaven and earth, This approves the note h of the former chapter.

e This name of God was promised before (Apoc. 3.12.) to be written upon the
elect, where the first mention is made of this new Jerusalem: and now at this
time since they are come to that Jerusalem that promise here takes effect.
This (contrary all wayfaring and worldly professions) means so constant and
unchangeable a profession of the name of God, that it shall never be deleted
nor forgotten out of their hearts, minds, and continual thoughts, but ever
shall abide so rooted in them, that with cor^^ courage and bold faces, shall
they profess that name for ever, (...) therefore is that name of God said here
to be in their foreheads.

f Read of this night before, Apoc. 21.25. and note ff thereof.

g For three causes, are times which appear long to men, called short in the
scriptures. First, to move the elect to patience. Secondly, in respect of the
contrair purposes and matter, as here the definite time of Christ's, bodily
absence in this world, in respect of the infinite time of his eternal presence
in that everlasting world, is called but short. Thirdly, in respect of God who
speaks this, in whose sight a 1000. years are but as one day (2. Pet. 3.8.)
this definite time is but short: confer herewith Apoc. 17.10. and note t
thereof.

h Marvelous is the forcible temptations of Idolatry, and wrong worshipping.
Sundry times has saint John seen the persons of the Deity in these visions:
and although we read, that he has then fallen and been prostrated with that
glorious majesty of Gods presence (Apoc. 1.17.) yet find we not, that he
prostrated himself voluntarily to worship God, but contrarily, this is the
second time, that voluntarily he prostrates and bows down himself to commit
wrong worshipping: and that even although he was before forbidden of the
Angels self, according to the proverb, Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque
negata. Forbidden things of men are choosed, and most we sue that is refused.
The divine Prophet, Apostle and Evangelist John, makes notable here to us by
his own twofold example, the great infirmity in mankind on the one part,
and the terrible force of Idolatrous temptations on the other part. To the
effect we wretched sinners neither trust over much in our own strength,
neither yet be over slack and slothful against such temptations: Seeing this
holy and beloved servant of God so far overcome, read more hereof, Revel.
19.10. and note s thereof.

i In that here the Prophet is forbidden to seal and close up these
mysteries, it is not simply meant, that he should write all so plain, that no
part thereof were in any wise sealed or kept secret: for contrarily of the
seven thunders (Revel. 10.4.) it is commanded to seal them, and not to write
them plainly. The meaning therefore of this text, is not simply, but in
comparison of other ^^ophets: to wit, that saint John who was nearer to the
time of (...) performance, should not seal up these things so obscurely as
other Prophets did, who were further from that time of performance: and
therefore says this text here, ne signaueris, etc. tempus enim prope est,
Seal not these words, etc. for the time is at hand. And contrarily is said
in Dan. 8.26. Tu ergo visionem signa, quia post multos dies erit. Seal you up
the vision, for it shall be after many days. and Daniel 12.4.9. Claude sermones
and signa librum, vsque ad tempus statutum, Shut up the words and seal the
book till the end of the time. And so is John here indeed a great deal more
plain, ample, and orderly nor is Daniel: Daniel having sealed his book for a
long time, and John having only concealed this book from Antichristians,
during the Antichrists reign, which time he calls but short. Apoc. 17.10.
saying, Oportet cum breue tempus manner, He must continue a short space,
agreeable with these words here spoken, of the revealing of this book, which
are, tempus enim prope est, for the time is at hand, and so in the end of the
Antichrists reign (which ends in our days) should these mysteries be
thoroughly revealed. This text makes expreslie against them, that esteems
this book to be so closed, that it shall never be understood till Christ come,
and consequently, it should be superfluous.

k This is spoken Ironicallie in mockage of the wicked, and there after speaks
he exhortingly to the godly to confirm them. This Ironical speech is used often
in the scriptur, for the more eshaming of us from sin, as (besides many other
examples) the like is to be found in Eccles. 11.9. where the spirit of God by
Solomon mockes the licentious youth, in bidding them tauntinglie follow their
lusts and hearts desire, but know says he certainly, that of al these things
God shall crave account in judgment. The like is said even here in the next
verse, For behold (says he) I shall come shortly, and my reward with me, to
give to every man according to his works. So this threatening conclusion
inferres, that the former bidding of the wicked continue wicked, is altogether
Ironicall, and contrarily, that the bidding of the godly continue godly, is
altogether allowablie and exhortingly spoken to them.

l How these works are not simply meant of only works, but of works that
proceed of Faith, or lively Faith that produces good works, and so Faith to
be the ground of Justification, read Apoc. 20. note s thereof.

m The vulgar translation, contains here these words, Be qui lauant stolas
suas in sanguine Agni, Blessed are they that wash their garments in the blood
of the Lamb. The most allowable translation bearing Beati qui servant eius
mandata, Blessed are they that keep his commandments, as the literal
difference hereof is small in the original greek, so is the meaning of both
alike in substance, for these that do keep the commandments of Christ Jesus,
ar these self same, that figuratively are said, Apoc. 7.14. to wash their
garments in the blood of Christ, and therefore set we the plainest in the
paraphrase, as an interpretation to both.

n To dogs for filthiness in lust, insatiable gluttony, vomiting and
returning to their vomit, are compared al such filthy persons as how often
soever the spirit of God strives to purge the^ of their sins, yet will they
ever revolt and return to them again, till at length the spirit of
God-renounce them, and leave them in their own filth. Of these says Solomon,
Proverb. 26.11. Sicut canis qui reuertitur ad vomitum, sic imprudens qui iterat
stultitiam suam, As a dog who turns again to his vomit, so is the foolish
man who turns to his foolishnes, and in 2. Peter. 2.22. It is said of these
reuolters and backturners to their sins. Canis reversus ad vomitum suum, and
sus lota in volutabro luti. The dog is returned to his vomit, and the sow
that was washed to the vvallowing in the mire. This general doggish property
of backturning, and continual reuolting to sin, without amendment, is here
set foremost, and is to be understood, common to the enchanters, whoremongers,
murderers, Idolaters, and liars after specified, where through, here they are
debarred from God: otherwise, if they repented their sins, and returned not
ever thereunto, as dogs to their vomit, they might be received among the
faithful number, as Apoc. 14. note d is declared.

o In simple terms Christ here, and Apo. 5.5. sets out his two natures
very lively, I am (says he) the root and the generation of David. This
apparent contrariety making Christ the root whereof David is sprung, and
again Christ to be a branche, who is sprung of David, is doubtleslie to be
understood diversely. The first of Christ's deity, in respect whereof, he was
before David, as he testifies saying, (John 8.58.) antequam Abraham fieret,
ego sum, Before Abraham was I am: yea, seeing God by Christ created the whole
world, (Colos. 1.16. and John 1.3.) therefore, Christ in his Deity, is the
(...) root and original, whereof all things, cheiflie godly men, as Abraham
and David has their beginning and being. The second of Christ's humanity, in
respect whereof, Christ contrarily is sprung of Abraham and of David,
Matthew, 1.1. and so is Christ perfitely both David's root, and also his
branche.

p For many causes is Christ called the morning star: for as the morning star
ends the nights darkness, and begins the day light. So does Christ at his
coming put end to all errors. And does begin and yield to us that aeternall
light and day, which never decaieth: of which is said before, verse 5. et nox
vltra non erit illic, and non egebunt lumine lucernae, neque lumine Solis,
quoniam Dominus Deus illuminabit illos. and there shall be no night there, and
they need no candle, neither the light of the sun, for the Lord God gives
them light. For that same cause, is he likewise called, Sol Iustitiae, the
sun of justice, that rises to the world, Malach. 4.2. Also Christ is called
this morning star, to show thereby, that the star that should rise of Jacob
(Nomb, 24.17.) was performed in his person. Moreover, because Christ's nativity
and coming was represented by an extraordinary star, seen in the East
Oriental. And it is frequent in the scriptures, to call the thing signified,
after the name and the style of the sign it self: as where Christ is called
the Lamb, etc. Therefore is Christ, called here the beautiful, oriental,
rising, or morning star.

q This spirit that craves Christ's latter coming, is nether the damned
spirits, for that they thereby are to receive no gains, but p^^ne and eternal
torment. Neither yet is it simply and in it self the spirit of God, for that
holy spirit in himself, has no yearning, not other passions, but has the
present estate of all things agreeable to his will and ordinance, lacking
nothing longer nor he craves it or yearneth after the same. This therefore is
the spirit of the holy elect and chosen number, or the spirit of God in them,
that craves here Christ's coming and yearneth for the same. For seeing all
the good creatures of God long for that day, that they may have liberty,
freedom, and rest in God, as says Paul Romans 8.21.22. Therefore, far rathest
of all do these godly spirits that God has created and breathed in man,
yearne and desire Christ's coming, thar from henceforth they may be conjoined
with God their original, and have the full fruition of his presen^^ as says
also S. Paul, (Phil. 1.23.) of himself and his godly spirit, desiderium
habens dissolui, and esse cum Christo, by this desire that Paul's spirit had to
be with Christ before the latter day, and without the body, imports he a
far greater desire that our spirits have in yearning for the latter day,
that body and soul altogether may be with Christ our Lord and Savior.

r Although the greek word may here seem to mean alike. These men that are
written, or, These things that are written: and also that this book may
either mean indifferently here the book of life, or this present book of
Apocalypse: yet be reason of the like words contained in the former verses,
speaking directly of the plagues written in this book of Apocalypse, It must
needs be, that contrarily these spoken of here, are the benefits and good
things written also in this same book of Apocalypse.

s Here ends Saint John, this holy Prophecy of Apocalypse: imploring the
grace of Gods spirit through Jesus Christ, to abide with all the faithful. Here
end we also that interpretation thereof, which God by that self same grace has
made the faithful of these our latter days to understand, in discouerse of
Gods enemies and revealing of his truth, that his Church being purged from
Antichristianisme, may from henceforth abide pure, and holy, and ready decked
as a comely bride, waiting the sudden coming of her Lord and bridegroom
Christ Jesus: To this God in Trinity and Unity, who here gives these graces
to us, do we therefore render aeternal praise, honor, and glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

Romans cap. 15. verse. 4.5.6. 4 Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
scriptures might have hope.

5 Now the God of patience and consolation, give you that ye be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus.

6 That ye with one mind, and with one mouth may praise God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To God only wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

Romans 16.27.
To the misliking Reader whosoe^er.
SVch is the misery of these latter days, through self love, and coldness of
charity (as Christ foretells) that every man envying other, aspires by
reproching his neighbors godly works and good exercises, to get him self a
name, so that no man's works, how godly soever, lacks some one or other
detestable calumniator and envious reprocher: Neither look I more, than others
more learned to escape the same. To thee therefore whosoever, misliker hereof,
and opponer against this work, I have thought good to direct this gentle
admonition, craving thee earnestly, in the fear of God, Read over, ponder
well, print all in mind, confer places, leave off partiality. So trust in God
you shall find in the same nothing either greatly, worthy of blasphemous
reproach, or able justly to be-refelled: For first, as touching the opponing
against these presents, by blasphemous reproaches: because that raylings,
reproaches, and invectiues, exceedes the bounds of brotherly love and Christian
charity, I trust you, nor no Christian professor will borrowe these manifest
darts of the Devil, and armor of Satan to fight against any man, even not
against a reprocher, and far less against me, who reprocheth no man that ever
wrote hereof: but judging them al to have done faithfully as they could, does
therefore but simply, without injury to them, set out this my present work,
confirming the same by conference of scripture expreslie, (as the Lord
knows) to glorify God thereby, and to profit thee, O Reader, in repelling of
errors, and discovering the truth, without partial love to Protestant, or
hatred to Papist, as to this hour, never having received worldely injury of
Papist, nor fleshly commodity forbeing Protestant: yea, I spare not in this
work to blame, the negligence of such professed Protestants, as in these days
are waxed cold, careless, and without charity: as again, I spare not to
purge and excuse the Pope and Papists of some texts in this book, which
others applies against them: namely, in that (contrary the opinion of many
learned) I purge the Pope from being the Apostat of the fifth trumpet: And
wheresoever I accuse the Pope in this work, by admonishing of his errors, and
threatening the decay of his sect, seat and kingdom: I do nothing more
thereinto, nor the very evidence of the text, harmony of other scriptures, and
the truth of God enforces me unto. This doing then being offensive to no good
man: I am (...) no professed Christian, will by blasphemous reprochings,
raylings, publ^^ slanders, private backbitings, or such other darts of the
Devil oppone against this book. But if secondly, leaving these Ethnic
invectiues and detractions, thou think by pretended arguments, to refute
this work and form of interpretation therein contained: be sure, that can
thou not justly, nor by no good reasons perform, seeing the grounds and
substance hereof ar proved, both by sure testimonies and very probable
arguments: by sure testimonies (say) both of scriptures interpreting scripture:
whereof, our whole Paraphrasticall exposition, and diverse notes are composed
and made up: And also by the testimony of vnsuspect writers, even of Papists,
where they wrote of themselves, and of Ethnicks, where they wrote of
themselves, and of these vnsuspect histories (verily credible against
themselves) is the historical application of this work composed, and diverse
amplifications amongst the notes made up. Then rests our propositions and the
resones that are among the notes, and these I say we prove by very probable
arguments: yea, even by arguments as necessary, as true religion (which falls
not under the capacity of man, nor necessity of man's reason) will suffer and
permit: For these arguments are founded upon the most evident reasones,
clearest tokens, and plainest scriptures, and thereafter every argument
follows one another, from the plainer text, to the obscurer text, til the
whole be discovered. So then of our Propositions, Paraphrasticall exposition,
Historical application, Notes, Reasons, and Amplifications: and consequently,
of this our whole work, nothing is mine, or of my only assertion, to God be
the glory, true testimony and reason yields all: Think not therefore to
refute the verity, for strong and mighty is the protector thereof. And
whereas I have said, that our Paraphrasticall exposition, is not only
grounded upon the present text, but composed of the conference of many texts
and scripturs interpreting others: that have I purposely and by all means
possible pressed to do, expreslie, because many interpreting the present text
only by it self, and according to that sense that to them seemed most proper
in that place, they have greatly erred, for to others another sense does seem
more proper, and so infinite and repugnant interpretations do arise: for as in
the disciphering of cyphered letters, he who judged such a mark or Character
to signify such a letter, for that it so agrees and spells in some one place,
he may be deceived, and therefore he must take that Character for such a letter
as it spells and agrees with, not only in that one place, but in all places
where it is found throughout that whole Epistle. Even so in Prophecies, who by
an only text judged such a prophetical term or phrase to have such a
sense, for that it so appears there to agree, he may be deceived: and therefore
he must take that prophetical term in such a sense, as not only does agree
with that one present text, but with diverse other texts where the same term
is to be found, and so shall all interpreters agree, and no man vary from
other: for scriptures interpreting scriptures, furnishes one only verity,
and though sometimes diverse interpretations, yet not disagreeing nor
repugnant, but in a manner all one: and after this manner of interpretation do I
proceed, so far as God has given (...) judgment, memory, and sight of
scriptures, referring the rest to whomsoever God does bless with more talents
and greater benefits. If then thou O Christian Reader hereof, first laying
aside blasphemy, invectiues, and reproaches against me: secondly, casting of
all captious sophismes against the truth, does now think this form of
Paraphrasticall interpretation, by scriptures interpreting scriptures, after
the manner of disciphering of letters, and this form of historical application
be approved, and vnsuspect writers, and this form f gathering our gro^ndes by
most probable judices and arguments, to be the perfitest way to d^scouer the
mysteries of this holy Revelation (as in truth it is) and yet does think that I
have not so accuratly followed that order my self, as I have here prescribed t
to others: Then and in that case, I am not only contented, but earnestly I
crave and exhort the^, and all other su^p^cters hereof, whom God has endued
with greter benefits, to put hand to work, and follow this most perfect order,
more accuratelie then I may attain to: for verily, I do ack^owledge mine own
imperfection, even my tender memory and hard utterance: but sure I am, and
experience shall declare, that whosoever by this most perfect way and manner of
exposition shall proceed, he shall fall upon the same interpretation in
substance, that I have here set down, and though now thou disagreest, yet then
shall thou accord herewith in one verity without any substantial difference in
effect or matter. I grant indeed, and am sure, that in the style of words
and utterance of language we shall greatly differ: for therein I do judge my
self inferior to all men* So that scarcely in these high matters could I with
long deliberation, find words to express my mind: but this imperfection,
seeing God perchance sends it, to make the ^reater perfection in humility,
and to beat down vain glory, and that Moses and many great men have lack^d
the eloquence of tou^g: I trust charitable Christians shall not disdain me
therefore, but rather amend the same in their own editions. Finally, by this
my brotherly admonition, I hope you will not give place unto thy first conceived
wrath: so, that howsoever you at this first approaching disdained these
presents: yet now at thy more resolved revewing hereof, I hope, and also
protests, that in the fear of God you casting of all blasphemous reproaches
against me, and all captious sophismes against the truth, must either yield to
the assured verity of this work, or then thy self set out the better
exposition hereof, upon these or more surer grounds: And I beseech the
Almighty, the God of truth and unity, to bless that thy godly enterprise,
and to unite it with his truth: So shall we also please one an other, and
ab^de united in him, who in Trinity is United, and abides blessed for ever and
ever. So fare you well in the Lord, and grow in him, from rankour and reproach
to Christian charity, for ever. Amen.

Your loving Friend in the Lord. I. N.

HEREAFTER FOLLOWS CERTAIN NOTABLE PROPHECIES agreeable to our purpose,
extract out of the books of Sibylla, whose authorities neither being so
authentik, that hitherto we could cite any of them in matters of scriptures,
neither so profane that altogether we could omit them: We have therefore
thought very meet, severally and apart to insert the same here, after the end
of this work of holy scripture, because of the famous antiquity, approved
verity, and harmonicall consentment thereof with the scriptures of God, and
specially with the 18. Chapter of this holy Revelation.
OVT OF THE SECOND BOOK OF the Oracles of Sibylla, beginning at this part
according to Castalio his Latin translation. -- hominum tum denique saeclum.
Existet decimum, quando qui sydera fecit, etc. Faithfully englished this way.
THere shall of men the tenth age then arise,
When God who did the heavens high devise,
At whose presence, the earth does quake and move,
Of Apoc 17.9. and 23. Prop.
Imagerie extinguish shall the love:
And shall of Rome raised on her Apoc. 18.17.
hills seven,
The people shake. Then beis the strength down dreuen
Of her riches, whill Apoc. 17.16, and 18.8.9.
Vulcane in his ire
Often shall on her send furious flames of fire.
a Herby she notes the inseparable Idolatry of Rome in so much as Rome and
her Idolatry, shall stand together ^^d fall together.

a Of these seven hills of Rome, read Apoc. 17.9. and our 23. Proposition.

c Here, agreeable with the Revelation, does she forewarne the final
destruction of Rome, to be by fire, using here poeticallie the name of Vulcan^
expreslie, for mocking of them and their Idol Gods, for she in all her books
acknowledges only the true God.

OVT OF THE FIFTH BOOK AT THIS PART. De coelo veniet sydus magnum in mare
magnum, etc.
From heaven there fell a great (a) star in the (b) sie, Apo. 8.8.

And burnt it up although both great and hie:
So beis burnt up, Apo. 18. etc, propo. 23
and shall no longer stand,
Thou (c) Babylon of Italy the land:
Who murthereth Saints and many faithful Iow, Apo. 17.6 and 18.24. Apoc. 11.3.

Temples tread down that did the truth avow,
Yet thou O mischant suffer shall great pain,
As thou deseruest desert shall thou remain: Apoc. 17.16. and ^18. etc.

Remain shall thou desert for ever more,
Thy native soil henceforth thou shall abhore:
For thou in (d) poison has delighted thee,
Mother of whoredom and adultery: Apoc. 17.5.

And bougerie against nature nurishing, Apoc. 18.7.

A town of ease in filth most flurishing:
Wicked, unjust, unworthy to be named,
Ah town of Latins utterly defamed:
As (e) Widow wood, Isay. 47.7.8.9.
and Viper venomous,
Upon thy banks thou shall sit dolorous:
And (f) Tiber flood for thee his spouse shall mourn,
Thy mind is mad, Apoc. 17.6. and 18.24. Isa 47.7.8.6 etc. Apoc. 18.7
thy heart for blood does burn:
Thou do misknowe Gods mind and might, for why
Only I am (say thou) and who but I?
Eternal God, Isa. 47 etc. Apoc. 18. etc.
now wrack shall the and thine,
In all the earth shall not rest but ruin
A monument or yet a mark of thee,
Which thou had when God gave prosperity:
Thou mischant now fit soliter alone,
Hurld syne to hell with many grievous groan: Apoc. 19.20.

Where thou shall bide burning both bone and lyre,
Into that lake of furious flaming fire.
a This great star, Apoc. 8.8. is called a mountain of fire, and is there
proved to mean, the multitude of fierce and fiery people that began already the
first destruction of Rome.

b The sea is both proved, Apoc. 8.8. note d thereof, to mean Italy, as also
here subsequently does follow.

c How this Babylon is Rome, we have proved Prop. 23. and consequently, must
be of the land of Italy, as here both marvelously and plainly this
Prophetess affirms.

d How much the people of Rome, and all Italy, are inclined to poisoning and
privy murders, all men knows, in so much as vulgarly we call poison, an
Italian posset.

e Because as testifies both Esaias 47.7. and Revel. 18.7. that she is a Queen
and Lady, fornicating with many vowers, and thinks her self no widow,
therefore at once say they there, as Sibylla does here, she shall be made a
widow and desolate of all her vowers.

f This is the flood that goes through the town of Rome, bearing the name of
Tiber to this day.

OVT OF THE SAME FIFTH BOOK AT THIS PART Italia infoelix deserta infleta
manebis, etc.
O Cursed and unhappy Italy,
Vnmeind or mournd for, barren shall thou be:
To ground as green, as wilderness unwrought, Apoc. 18.2

To woods wild and bushes beis thou brought.
And thereafter sairh she Stay and restraineye (a) mother murderers,
Your hands and hearts, O filthy furtherers
(^) To bougrie, like beasts abusing boys,
Who women (e) chaste with villainy annoyes: Apoc, 17.5

And makes whores by your persuasion,
Ouercomd by subtle so^istation:
In thee the Son does with his mother mell,
The daughter wife does with her Father dwell,
And Kings their (d) mouths polluted has in thee,
In thee is found with beasts bougerie:
Sit dolorous down deplore thy pain with pity, Apoc. 18. etc.

Thou lecherous seat suppressed, and sinful city:


a Because that Nero, who was Emperor of Rome, murdered his mother, therefore
here Sibylla styles the whole Romans after him, Mother murderers.

b Who could more viuely describe by present history, the filthy vices of
Rome, than here Sibylla does by her marvelous prophecy, for proof whereof,
read their own histories.

c To wit, chaste Lucretia, whom Sextus T. Aruns son to Tarq. Sup. the king
of Rome, deforced filthily against her will.

d In moving of Kings and Emperors to make oaths of maintenance, service and
obedience to her, even against God and his truth.

OVT OF THE VII. BOOK AT THIS PART. Roma ferox animi, post fracta Macedonis
arma, etc.
ROme fierce in mind, when (a) Grecians are down driven,
Shall stellifie thy self up to the heaven.
But when thou think thee in thy highest hight,
God shall tread down thy sturdie strength and might: Apoc. 18.7.8

Then shall I say when thou art dongen down,
Sometime on hie resounded thy renown:
The (b) second time, O Rome again to thee,
Hereafter yet I will speak secondle.
a Alexander King of Macedonia, Monarche of (...) world being dead, and the
monarchy of the Grecian ^ing ended, then vpstart the Romans, and become
monarch of the whole earth, and thereafter by the Pope they usurped also the
power of heaven.

b For the greater emphasis she doubles the word (secondly) meaning thereby,
of a first and of a second destruction of Rome, according to the which, she
here pronounces a first, and hereafter a second prophecy.

OVT OF THE VIII. BOOK AT THIS VERSE. Par tibi de coelo sublimis vertice Roma,
etc.
O Rome vpraised now with thy toppis hie,
The like ruin from heaven shall fall on thee:
Plain beis thou made, down shall thy tops turn, Apoc. 18.21

And flaming fire all wholly shall thee burn: Apoc. 17.16. and 18 8.9.

Far shall thou slit into an uncouth land,
Thy riches shall be reft out of thine hand:
In thy wall steds shall Wolves and toddes convene, Apoc. 18.17. Apoc. 18.2.
Ier. 50 39.

Wast shall thou be, as thou had never been:
Where then shall be thy Oracles deuyne,
What golden gods shall keep or save thee syne: Isay 47.11.13.

What God I say of copper or of stone,
Where then shall be the consultation
Of thy Senate? What helps thy noble race,
Of Saturn, Jove or Rhea in this case:
Whose sensles souls and Idols thou before,
Religiously did worship and adore:
Of whose green graves, unhappy Crete avants,
Their figures dead up do thou set like Sants:
Then follows immediately of the Pope.

When rung in thee has (a) fifteen Emperors,
Of all the world that has been conquerours:
Then comes a King (b) a manifold crown to bear,
^^^ose name shall be to (c) PONTI very near.
(...) wicked (d) foot the world shall visitate,
Great gifts and goods then shall he impetrate:
Huge heaps of gold he shall have into treasure,
With silver hid, and money without measure:
(e) Discovered things he shall loose and remit,
of (f) Magic art, well shall he know and wit
The mysteries and secreet sorcerie,
The mighty God he makes (g) a babe to be:
Dan. 7.25. Apoc. ^ 11.2 2. These. 2.9.10.
And down he shall tread all true worshippin,
And at chief heads of errors first begin
His mysteries to al he shall expone,
Then comes the time of mourning and of moan:
For in a (h) roape his ending shall he make,
The potent people, and the town shall wrack:
Thus shall they say, we knew and hoped ay,
Sometime on us should come this bitter day:
The Fathers old, and babes shall mourn for thee,
Beholding then thy dolorous destinee:
On Tiber bank lamenting sore thy case,
Sad shall they sit, with many loud alase.
a Having before in the beginning of the fifth book, amongst other Emperors
described the fiftenth Emperor Adrianus, with many of the same tokens
wherewith here the Antichrist is described, Sibylla here shows, that this
wicked Antichrist shall come after fifteen Emperors, expressly thereby to put
difference betwixt him and Adrianus, and not meaning thereby, that immediately
after the fifteenth Emperor, came the wicked Antichrist.

b Adrianus Emperor was before described with a silver crown, and to be a good
man, but where here she describes this wicked man to wear a many fold crown
called in Greek (...), she thereby expresses and points out the Pope most
lively, who ever since Constantine the Emperors days, bears a threefold
crown, as the gift contained in the Decret. did. 96. proports.

c Where she describes Adrianus Emperor, she says not that his name is near
unto Pontus, which is to say, near to the Sea, but plainly says she, he
shall have the name of the Sea: for where Adrianus was borne, the sea there is
called the Adriatic or Adriane Sea, but here says she, this wicked man shall
have a name near to Ponti, meaning thereby plainly of the Pope, who is styled
Romanus Pontifex, or Summus Pontifex.

d With his wicked foot does he visit the world, both in treading down Kings
and Princes under his feet, as he did to Frederick Barbarossa and Henry the
Emperors: as also in setting up his foot to be visit, seen and kissed, as a
relic and public spectacle to the whole world.

e Even sins discovered by auricular confession shall he presume to loose and
remit.

f Hereof read Platina the Popes own secretary, together with other true
histories, who make mention of 22. Necromantick Popes, and of eight Atheists,
beside others of horrible natures.

g By representing God by stones, and carved stocks of bony Baby Jesus, and
such like Idols to the poor people to play them with, and many other
vanities, where by he mocketh God, and would make God to seem as an ignorant
barn.

h This is unperformed as yet, and seems to mean of the last Pope, who shall
make such a tragical end, his people, seat and town being utterly wracked.

And shortly after follows Lament shall you and mourn, laying aside,
Thy (a) purpleweede, imperial robes of pride:
And into sackcloth sitting sorrowful,
Repeat shall thou thy plaintes pitiful:
O royal Rome, thou bragging Prince but Peer,
Of Latin land the only daughter dear:
(...) ride but pomp ruyned shall remain: Apoc, 18.19

Thou (b) once trod down shall never rise again: Apoc. 18.14.^1

For gone shall be the glore of that army,
That bears the (c) Eagles in their enseignie:
To whence then shall thy forces foreward fair,
What land with arms shall help thee any mair:
Yea, none now bound is to thy servitude,
O mishant, etc.


a How both Popes and Emperors of Rome, have their robe royal of purple and
skarlet, read the Decret. did. 96. as is said in the note g Apoc. 17.

b She speaks not here of the wrackes that Rome sustained in times past, by
the Gotthes and Vandales, for all these wrackes were repared: but here she
speaks of that great wrack; that is yet to come, which never shall be repaired,
as is testified Apoc. 18.14.21.22.23.

c The Roman Emperors bears the double displaied Eagle in their badge.

And hereafter follows.

Then ends the world, then comes the latter light,
Then God shall come to judge his folk aright:
But first shall fall on Rome but resistance,
Apoc, 14.8.14.
Of Gods wrath the woeful vengeance
A woeful life a bloody time shall be,
Apoc. 17.6. and 18 24.
Oh, people rude, Oh land of cruelty:
Thou little lookst, nor does regard aright,
How poor and bare thou first came in the light:
That to the like again you should return,
And last before a dreidfull judge should murne
IN summar conclusion, if thou O Rome alleges thy self reformed, and to
believe true Christianisme, then believe Saint John the Disciple, whom Christ
loved, publicly here in this Revelation proclaiming thy wrack, but if thou
remain Ethnic in thy private thoughts, believing the old Oracles of the
Sibylls reverently kept sometime in thy Capitol: then does here this Sibyll
proclaim also thy wrack. Repent therefore always, in this thy latter breath,
as thou love thine aeternall salvation, Amen.

FINIS.

