PIDAX PETPEIA OR, The disc^^erie of S. Peter's Well, ^t Peter-head, in
SCOTLAND, being in latitude 57. d. 43. m. and in longitude 22. d. 40. m.

Showing the admirable virtues thereof, against many deplorable diseases.

BY A. M. Student in Medicine.

Visitavimus Interiora Terrae, Rectificando Invenimus Occultum Lapidem, Veram
Medicinam.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Heart, Anno Dom. 1636.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, AND Virtuous Lady, D. MARIE ERSKEINE, Countess of
Mareshall, etc.
MADAME,
THese my travels, upon the medicinal water of Peter-head, are yours, as the
Well is, and many miles about: neither ar^ my travels only, but my self am, and
many of my progenitors, parents, and kindred are, and were yours, as receaving
first breath under your L. most noble and famous house of Marshall. Wherefore I
have taken the bold (...) to publish them to the world under your L. name, that
whosoever shall be benefited hereby, may, next to God, bless your L. for that
blessed instrument of their health. What I have written, I have not written at
randon, but by infallible grounds of reason and experience. And if neither the
Well, nor the Writer were yours, yet the singular virtues and graces wherewith
your L. beautiful mind is richly adorned, should have furnished reason
sufficient for this dedication, and for much more then (...) spring of my years
could possibly produce. Receave herefore, Noble Lady, these first fruits of my
small ingine, as an earnest of a greater harvest of service: which, if it
please God, may be after reaped, for your L. and your most noble Family, and
hopeful progeny: whom God continue in felicity and honor, so long as the
Sun and Moon shall last.

Your L. devouted servant, AN. MURE.

To the Reader.
GOD by his wise, mighty, and wonderful providence, in such fashion governs
the world, that he does furnish every nation, with what he knows to be most
necessary and convenient for them. This our nation of North Britain, in all
former ages, was esteemed and known to be as wise and valiant in mind, so
health full in body; while now that by intemperancie, the gut, gravel, the
diseases of the spleen, the hypochondriak melancholy, with many other terrible
uncouth, cruel and monstrous maladies are come in ready to undermine and
destroy us, if God of his great mercy, had not revealed to this nation that
excellent spring, and water of health, which I thus discovered, being at
London, with that hopeful gentleman James Scot, son to my L. of Scots-tarvet,
who was he avily troubled with a disease, which the chiefest and greatest
Physicians in that place, called a Carnositie in the urinall passage, (though
it proved in end to be a very hard one, and turned in a stone) the which to
cure, they applied many good and laudable medicaments, without prevailing any
thing against his disease. At length despairing of health: he is sent to the
waters of Tunbridge, as t^^^s last refuge. With whom amongst others I went:
where, by the use of these waters, his pain was mitigate and abundance of
slimy humors voyded: from thence he went to Paris, where he was cured, and
ordained to go to the Well of Spaw in Germany, and from thence to Knesbrough in
England: by the use of all which waters, he is come to be expert, and to have
full knowledge, of the nature and virtues of such mineral waters.

In the mean time of these voyages, my study was of that kind of fountains:
remembering from my childhood, in some kind, the affinity of the taste of the
Well of Peter-head, with that which I did find in thole Wells, whereof now I
have spoken, I resolved to come and try the virtues and operation, of that
Well. Which first the inhabitants of that town of Peter-head manifested to me,
by their relation of its curing of sore eyes, loosing of the belly, if bound,
and stopping the immoderate course thereof, serving to them for a cup of
preparation before dinner, with many other such like experiences: as one, which
I think not amiss to insert in this place of an old, ancient, grave man of 76.
years experience, yet living, who diverse and often times has told me, that he
himself being usually troubled with sand and stones in the kidneys, used many
kinds of drogues, to free him from this fearful and consuming desease: at
last being vehemently vexed with pain, took some 5. or 6. draughts of this
water, after which, there burst out with his urine, great quantity of sand and
stones. Which water thus he did drink 8 days altogether, every morning, with
the like effects, and has never been troubled hithertils, with so vehement
pain.

Another in that same town, who voyded his stomach of a stone, bigger then a
tennis ball per anum, and I think it was, the great antipathie which this water
has against stones or sand, in all places of the body, that made him so
evacuate such a monstrous thing as this.

Yet not content to know the truth hereof, and that the virtues of this water
were great by some experiences: I intended to dive in the deepest of this
fountain, by the ordinary trials of such waters: as the drawing of the
tincture of a nutgall, which it will do in the twinkling of an eye, with many
other pretty little trials of that sort: as in all of them it proved excellent.

Neither yet confident of my own trials, I carried the water of this source, to
the source and fountain, from whence my first knowledge in medicine did slow:
and from whom, many in this nation have received the most part of their
knowledge, both divine and Philosophical, which water was keept half year,
then tried and found neither changed in taste nor smell, as yet it remains in
that same state after two years: and by his advise, information, and ordinance
I caused pur this clear, pure wholesome water in a vessel, which after a
little boiling, was coagulate in a red or brownish tincture. (like that of
Plin. chap. 2. lib. 3, Tungria, civitas Galliae, fontem habet insignem,
plurimis bullis stillantem, ferruginei saporis, quod ipsum non nisi in fine
potus intelligitur. Purgat hic corpora, tertianas febres discutit,
calculorumque vitia. Eadem aqua igni admota, turbida fit, ac postremo
rubescit.) In the bottom of which vessel, after evaporation remained a red
kind of matter, like unto colcothar, which was calcined, pulverised, and
dissolved with common water: the water being separate from the sediment by
inclination, and evaporate there remained in the bottom a perfect vitriol, of
a greenish color, and of taste sharp and sweet: the vitriol by concoction
within the earth, having turned its corrosive acrimonie, in a good sweet
aciditie, ideo aquae thermales omnes, qua solutam vitrioli materiam fixam,
eamque cocta^ and subdulcem, sine suo humido complectuntur, caeteris omnibus
praestant: quod materia illa fixa vitrioli, humido radicali fixo auri and
argenti respondeat, cui infinitas occultas virtutes inesse tota credidit
antiquitas. inquit Fabet. Cap. 17. Pallad. spag.

The sediment which remained after separation of the water by inclination,
being again tried in the fire, proved to be a confused mass of not perfectly
cancocted metals.

But none can speak more by experience, of the goodness and virtue of this
fountain, then the gentleman, I have named, and another gentleman of good
worth, M. Thomas Aikinhead, Commissar of Edinburgh, who in August last, An.
1635. did find in this Well, as much worth, as they found in any of the
forementioned exotic Wells, having tried both. And not only those, but many
other gentlemen of good respect can testify these things to be true, which in
this book, I have written, concerning the medicinal virtues of this
fountain: which, good reader, I hope you may patiently read, and thank God;
if, diseased, you reap any benefit from hence.

Neither had I intention to have published this treatise being conscious of my
own weakness, if I had not been animated and encouraged thereto by a letter,
which I received from my learned Master, whom I shall reverence, with a filial
respect so long as breath shall delay to expire.

Io: Adamsonus An. Moro S. D.
PErgratae fuerunt tuae ad me literae; pergratus libellus: utraque vel quod a
te: ex utrisque amorem, satis antea perspectum; sed ex hoc and industriam, qua
scrutinio quodam accurato nobis videris (...) thesaurum, a nemine hactenus ved
quaesitum, vel inventum, demonstrasse. O te felicem, cui coelitus obtigit tam
eximium thesaurum invenisse, in salutem humani generis prodidisse! Sed and ego
hujus felicitatis non vacuus abiero, cui contigit discipulum habuisse tam
industrium, tam doctum, and disertum; qui talis thesauri vires and usum tam
erudite and concinne patriae suae aperuerit. Tu perge, ut facis, virtuti
litare, and amantem me tui redamare.

Vale. Edinb. Call. Mart 1636.
De Font Petraeo, ejusque reclusore, ANDREA MORO.
Cum gelidus, fons est nitidis argenteus undis,
Vulcanum admoveas, aurea lympha siet.
Est auro argentoque simul praestantior omni,
Qua reparent vires languida membra suas.
Ergo, aegri, vivis libate e fontibus undas,
Et manibus puris sumite, sultis, aquas
Atque Deo coeli grates persolvite dignas,
Qui facit ut tantas petra refundat opes.
Et Mori ingenium voto laudate benigno,
Qui facit ut tantas penna recludat opes.
I. A.

Ad Andream Morum, Petraei fontis detectorem, (...)
PEtraei laticis gratas languentibus undas
Detegis, and tanti quae sit origo boni.
Si tanta utilitas insit vulgaribus undis,
Hasce sibi ut vulgus commoda prima putet;
Quanta o Petraeo debetur gloria fonti;
Omnigenis obstat quae Panacea malis!
Nymphae monstratis meruerunt Orgia lymphis:
Quanta erit inventi gloria; More; tui?
T. CRAFORDIUS.

S. PETER'S WELL, OR THE WELL OF Peter-head.
Medicinal waters differ much in savor and taste: some of them being
sulfureous, some vitriolate, some saltish: yet all of them communi nomine are
called acidi, from the taste: which acidity or sharpness comes partly from
vitrioll and partly from the salt of minerals: or they are called mineral
waters because passing through the concavities of the earth, they carry with
the^ the tinctures of what they renconter, and are impregnate with the
quintessence of those minerals by which they pass whether it be terra lemnia,
bol. armen. chalk: or congeled liquors an juyces, as allome, succin, sulphur,
nitre, vitriol etc. or metals, as gold, silver, iron, etc. or stones as
crystal, marble, lodestone etc: they are also called medicinal waters for
their rare and admirable virtues in curing diseases and preserving of health.
Many of these waters are found out by the diligent searching and industrious
labor of the learned, endeavoring to find out the secrets of nature most easy
for the help of mankind; as the well of Spaw in Germany, the wells of Burbon, of
Pouges, of Forges in France, of Porrecta in Italy, of Tunbridge, and
Knesbrough, in England with many others of infinite virtues, as Plinius
records in many passages of his books, especially in the 2. chap. of his 31.
book. And I would that any reader who doubts of the excellent virtues of
infinite diversity of waters should read that chapter: And now our waters of
Peter-head called be our forefathers Saint Peter's well thinking that it was S.
Peter that sent from Rome a faculty of curing diseases to these waters,
because he himself could not come, being employed about more necessary
affairs at Rome, for the time Pope. Wherefore to gratify this holy Apostle
they have built a temple, which to this day is called S. Peter's church. They
used to come to the well on S. Peter's day, assembling themselves in great
mulitudes; on which day as yet we have a great fair at this place. But this is
mere superstition, like that of the heathen, who as Plinius testifies lib. 31.
chap. 2. denominate their rare and medicinal waters from diverse of there gods.

S. Peter's well may be compared with Spaw waters, being nothing inferior to
them in medicinal virtues, and far excells any other as yet found out, in
Europe.

It is certain that this Petrean water (for so hereafter shall it be called)
passes through minerals: but with what proportion they are mixed in these
subterranean cells, it is impossible to know, or whether it be hot or cold,
moist or dry, some things from whence it flows being hot, some cold, some
temperate, seeming rather that it is temperate, well mixed, as its effects
shows: yet always this water while it is drunken humectates and refrigerates,
incontinent, being daunted through the heat of the stomach, heats and dryes.

For the virtues of our water: it cleanses and wastes viscide and Tartareous
humors, extenuats pituite, it voyds the liver, melt, mesaraicks, and other our
entrails, of whatsoever obstructions is troublesome to them: it strengthens the
stomach so, be its astriction, that none can complain of harm by its actual
coldness: It gives strength to the nerves, tempers the heat of the kidneys,
cleansing and expelling their gravel, sand and stones more forceably then any
other medicament, because it is diuretic, simple, natural, void of all art,
made by the hand of God alone, and most gracious to the taste it hinders the
concretion or coagulation of sand, resisting the generation of confirmed
stones; and if confirmed, diminishes them: it purges the bladder and mundifies
the stone of viscide pituit and mucositie wherewith it is environed, prepairing
it to be easily taken out by cutting, it is most profitable for the ulcer of
the reins and carnosities in the urinal passage, cast in be injection: it
certainly helps the venerean and Virulent Gonorhea and all other diseases of
that sort, applied with out for their ulcers, chancres, poulanes, pustules,
within by injection, and potion, it helps the concoction of the stomach,
quenches thirst, appeases dolours, throwing of the belly, with Colic and
Iliack passions: it purifies the blood, kills and expells all kind of worms,
chases away all fevers, cleanses the skin of pustles and skabs, be lotion and
bathing, it louses the belly, if bound, taking away the obstructions from the
gal, which sends forth its choler or bilis the only stimulus foecum in jejunum
intestinum, wherewith being sharpened, casts out the foeces therein contained,
it restraines the fluxes of the belly, by corroborating the retentive faculty,
drying the intestins, and makes them slow to expel the humors being drawn by
the force of the water to the reins and bladder, and so it works proportionably
according to the necessity of nature, as an excellent instrument appointed by
Gods providence for the health of mankind.

They also carry with them out of the body diverse ways, the cold and watery
blood with other excrementitious humors of choler, pituite, melancholy. Our
Hydropotae piss much their expulsive faculty being helped through the
diuretic quality of our water, their gross excrements are black or greenish:
because the salt of minerals be its precipitating virtue facit deseendere
terrestreitatem ad fundum: some vomites, voyding their stomach of superfluous
humors, some sweats sending forth their obstructions by the pores: for all
diuretic things are also diaphoretick, the urine and sweat being of natures
little different.

These clear pure waters gracious both to palate and eyes provoke so many and
diverse evacuations, which scarce any medicament, grievous to the smell,
horrible to the sight, and loathsome to the taste, could effectuate: they agree
with both sexes, all ages: restoring health lost: preserving in integrity the
present.

We have used all kind of trials for examination of the Petrean water; and
have found (as we are able to demonstrate) that these waters carry with them
the tincture of vitriol and of metals not perfect nor altogether solid; but
crude begun, growing to a solid metal if every day a part were not carried
away with the waters.

As for the virtues and qualities of vitriol, they are so renowned by many of
the ancients and all our modern writers, that purposely I omit them to a more
fit occasion then the brevity of this piece can permit. And if I shall but point
at the generation of vitriol, within the earth the understanding reader shall
quickly perceave its nature and operation, which is thus.

There arises a sulfureous exhalation be the action of the subterranean heat:
which mixed with water makes a sharp corrosive juice, proper to corrode and
drink up a part of copper and iron, and to collect and coagulate it self in
one; which we call Vitriol. So that the principles and elements of vitriol are
sulfur, water, the two metals of iron and copper, and some little portion of
the mineral clay adhering either to the metals, as seldom they remain in the
bowels of the earth without some slimy matter: or else in the water with which
was mixed the sulfureous salsuginous exhalation, which things we see in the
anatomy of vitriol be destillatio^ First the watery part being volatile, arises
in making of Colcothar, then that sulfureous salsuginous exhalation, which
being by cold condensed in the recipient, turns in oil: the hypostasis or
sediment being puluerised, washed dried and liquified with borax, secundum
artem, shall produce a metallic substance. Out of which considerations A.
Guntherus has defined it to be sulfureae salsuginis aeratae ferrataeque
coagulum.

And albeit evidently ad sensum we can see no more metals but copper and iron,
yet certainly it is coagulum omnium metallorum autcorum sal. Whence some have
taken occasion to make an allusion to the letters of Vitriolum, Visitando
interiora terrae rectificando invenies occultum lapidem veram medicinam.

As for the metals, the Chimique Philosophers say that their proxima materia
Mercury engendered of the first matter of minerals well mixed: to wit, that
viscous humiditie subtly incorporate to incombustible earth equally mixed
with the least parts in the mineral concavities of the earth. And seeing that
kind of matter can not produce self, nature has given it a proper agent
sulphur, a certain fatness of the earth, engendered in its own bowels by
temperate coction, for concocting, digesting and converting the forsaid
Mercury in form of metal, the sulphur having relation to the mercury, as
the male to the female, and as the proper agent to its proper matter: this is
proximae materia metallorum. As in the generation of man, the aliment is a
nearer matter then the elements, the blood then the food, the seed then the
blood, and in end after a long and continual digestion the matter receaves
humane form: so in the generation of metals there arises vapors of the
elements, these vapors being condensed turn in a viscous and ponderous liquor
mixed with subtle and sulfureous earth, which is called mercury, whereof as
of its proxima materia, be the mixtion and action of sulphur, is made gold,
silver, iron, or any other metal according as nature has digested it less
or more: for there is no difference betwixt gold and iron, but that gold has
happened to be better and longer concocted then the other.

Some striving to imitate nature in perfecting of metals, meaning to bring
them to their perfection, Gold, have used many artificial operations in making
their Philosophers stone so much searched.

First they calcine the matter without diminishing the body, they attenuate the
grosnesse and solidity of the calcined matter by solution, and reduce it to its
prima materia, which they call mineral water, whereof gold is the father,
silver the mother, and quicksilver the proxeneta, that makes the marriage and
union: this done they separate the four elements in two parts, one superior
and celestial, which is the spirit that quickens, another inferior and
terrestrial which must be enlived by the spirit making the combination with
the soul and body, for that first part is a soul inspired: they conjoyn the
water and air with the earth, and fire, they putrify the matter be a moist
heat, after putrefaction comes coagulation, cibation, sublimation,
fermentation, exaltation, augmentation, and lastly projection upon imperfect
metals, changing them into perfect gold and silver.

It is certain that the chief end of the ancient Philosophers, who traveiled
and labored about this stone, was to compose an universal balsamic medicine
to roborate and conserve the radical balsame and nectar of our life, in a good
and laudable temperament: which great and incomparable medicine they searched
in minerals: and knowing that gold, the perfection of minerals, could not have
action in our bodies: be reason of its compact and firm composition: they have
endeavored to break its hardest bonds, and to reduce it to its first matter,
that it may be dissolved in all liquors, and communicate to them that excellent
and balsamic perfection of our life and nature.

The transmutation of metals in the concavities of the earth appears
evidently; but be artificial projection many imaginations are not strong
enough to conceave, though some too strongly conceave them, and by thus
conceaving have deceaved many of the world and themselves: and it is thought be
many that gold is not so dissolved be any preparation as yet found out, that
it renders any tincture worthy of the least and smalest part of the praises it
receives. For in auro potabili, essentia auri, sale auri, there are other
excellent things of more worth nor the gold, lurking in another form reducible
to the metallic substance, neither perchance is it to be denied, but there is
in gold excellent virtues and specific remedies for all kind of diseases:
yea, more then in any other thing else, if the right and true preparation
thereof were known, as it may be future ages, more happy then we shall find,
and I pray GOD they that spend their spirit and expense herein, may better
themselves, and the world.

And it may be thought, if the ancients, or moderns had known that the
tinctures of minerals were carried from the concavities of the earth, with
water, as in our Petrean fountain, they had never so perplexed themselves to
have tried so many solutions, calcinations, coagulations, fixations,
sublimations, etc. As they have done, evaporating their spirits, and exhausting
the humiaum radicale of their substance.

Within the earth from whence our Petrean water flows, is a concavitie, a great
vessel, ampullare matratium capacissimum, wherein is contained materia proxima
metallorum: which sends forth its tincture with our water. In this natural
operation there is no need of calcination, solution, reduction to its prima
materia: and separation of the four elements, which are the most difficile
operations in the composition of the stone. And where many may err, for here
as yet the matter is not coagulate, neither is mercury united to its salt and
sulfur: but nature finding the salt, sulphur, and mercury of minerals, as yet
not united, conjoyns them by digestion and cohobation, sublimating and
subtilizing the earthly part, re^dring the mercurial fixed, going on naturally
with all the operations requisite to the perfection of the work, as
coagulation, cibation, sublimation, fermentation, exaltation, augmentation, as
certainly it would increase, grow, and fill up, the whole concavities where our
water is contained, if there were not a continual projection of this natural
elixir, this magisterium this quintessence of all metals, in our water
dissolving it self therein, the water being impregnate with this admirable yet
natural medicine, bursts out dancing, bringing with it the cure of all
diseases, crying and calling all those who are troubled and loadned with
infirmities, to come and buy without money what may restore them to their
health. And truly I may speak of this source what sweetly the prince of French
Poets did sing of the tree of life: neither let divins take exception that we
symbolize from one earthly thing to another, from the tree of life to the water
of life, for what is called the tree of life in the old testament is called the
water of life in the new: both pointing out the lively virtue of our life which
is hid in Christ: yet from the tree of life to the water of life let me
subsultim pass, as birds do from sprayes to brayes and from mountains to
fountains, saying of this water what he spoke of that tree, Du Bartas. page
174.

O holy, peerlesse, rich preservative!
Whether were thou the strange restorative
That suddenly did age with youth repair?
And made old A Eson younger then his heir?
Or holy Nectar that in heavenly bowrs
Eternally self-pouring Hebe pours?
Or blessed Ambrosia (gods immortal fare)
Or else the rich fruit of the garden rare?
Whereof three Ladies as assured guard
A fire armed dragon day and night did ward?
Or precious Moly which Jove's pursuivan
Wing footed Hermes brought to the Ithacan
Or else Nepenthe enemy to sadness
Repelling sorrows, and repealing gladness?
Or Mumie or elixir that excels
(Save men and angels) every creature else.
And it may be thought that a more ancient (I will not say a better) Poet, when
he said (...) comparing water with the rest of the elements, meant of this and
such other medicinal waters, and not of common rivers and fountains which have
no taste, not being impregnate with barley or beef or some such like good
commendable ingredients.

Nature has here prepared an universal medicine by many, diverse, long and
natural preparations, which for its perfect temperament and purity, is able
govern, conserve and increase the radical humor, and enliving nectar,
sympathizing be its spiritall nature with our spirits. He that uses this
water aright and in season, shall be restored, corroborate, and so armed with
strength, that he may afterward more easily and readily shake of diseases: of
whose comforting help nature being destitute may sooner succumbe. For if our
natural balsame, the shining torch and lamp of our life fail either through
defect of proper aliment, or be confined and retrenched by dregs and ashes
obstructing, or impeded be any other cause from exercing its livelie flame, for
the conservation of our life, then and in that case it must be restored,
fortified and enlarged with this balsamic medicine, the true and natural
tincture of such wholesome minerals, that it may afterward absolutely, exerce
its functions, which come from a friendly harmony which this balsamic
medicine has with our natural balsame: And from this sympathy and similitude
of nature this our water is endued with great activity, spiritual and
penetrative, for it attenuats, digests, dissolves and evacuats these feculent
oppilations which threaten danger to our health and life. If there be any
impuritie or corruption offending nature, by what better and more safe way can
it be extirped then be so excellent and pure a thing as this? If any ardent
fever invade us, with what sharp julep, with what more convenient and
efficacious syrup of limons shall you extinguish it, then with the balsamic
aciditie of our medicinal water? is their pain to quench, let this be your
Anodyn, this your only and safe Nepenthes, this your safest Triacle, your
wholesome Alexipharmacum and Antidote to abolish and extirpate poysonable,
pestilent and malign qualities; no Bezoar natural nor artificial, animal,
mineral or metallic: no Alkermes comparable to this for corroborating the
heart, that our bodies may by its comforting help continue in lively strength
and vigor: these and many more virtues are proper to this Panacea and
universal medicine, these are the virtues of our medicinal balsamic water,
working together with our natural balsame: which natural balsame is the only
governer and conserver of life, the only preserver of health, and expeller of
diseases: for if morbus be affect us contra naturam actiones laedens,
altogether contrary to our natural balsams, and nectar of life, which is
nothing but nature, or an assisting instrument so conjoyneds; that without its
help nature can perfect or do nothing: then if the functions be weakened,
corrupt or altogether abolished, it must necessarily follow that our natural
balsame in some part is hurt, since it it is certain that all the laudable
functions flow from it: This it that (...) of Hippocrates: this is that
dispensator making attractions, expulsions, mixtions, coctions of aliments.
This natural balsame is not subject to alterations in its own substance, since
it is of an ethereal and heavenly nature, and somewhat incorruptible, but its
action is retarded or hindered by impediments, lurking in our internal members
and entrails, breading trouble and labor to that balsame. Hence it the
occasion, the generation, the chief foundation of diseases:

Inextirping of diseases nature is to be restored to its entire and pristine
estate, to which end all our cogitations should tend, having first taken away
the impediments: which intentions are perfected by the only restoration of
our natural balsame, (from which all healthful Crises depends) by the help of
the medicinal balsame, which is in nothing else more powerful and operative
then in this our S. Peter's well, being pure separating, correcting, roborating,
expeling: exercing the rest of its functions, as the nature of the patient
requires, without violence or perturbation of the body. Which waterye may use
as the proper vehiculum of all medicines for all diseases: for its salt is
detersive, purgative, diuretic, an universal voyder and corrective of all
impurities and corruptions its sulphur a general and spiritual Anodyne, its
mercury an universal confortative and nutritive, which being all conjoined in
our water by the industrious working of nature, can furnish us means, not only
for defense, but also for expulsion and suppression of diseases.

Now since this water brings with it the salt, sulphur, and mercury of
minerals, it must also be able to cure all diseases, bred from a regression of
these three principles from their natural state in our bodies: as first the
diseases of resolved salt, which are Tumors, or excrescences, enlarging the
whole or a part of man's body more nor the natural constitution and competency
requires by the resolution of salt into liquor: unto which are referred the
leucophlegmatick kind of dropsies, anasarca, ascites, the vterinedropsy,
hydrocephalum, diabetes, cachexia, the dissolution of salt throughout the whole
body, ficus, psidracus, all soft phlegmatic tumors.

A disease of coagulate salt is Tartar, containing all kind of calculs or
stones, whatsomever part of the body they be bred into, as sand and stones in
the head, stomach, kidneys and bladder, the Tartar of the hypochondres,
begetting the hypochondriack melancholy, the Tophes and knots bred in the gut
and joints etc.

This Tartar is the nearest and immediate cause of the stone and gut, as the
acrimony or some other quality of the salt, noxious to the sensible parts of
the joints is the cause and action of less or greater pain, according to the
diversity of the Tartar or salt contained in the joyntures, since some salt is
more sharp and mordicant then another, some bitter, some sweetish, and some
insipide.

A disease of reverberate salt is a defiling of the skin: to which pertains the
venerean diseases, the french pox, leprosy, scurvie, etc.

A disease of inflamed sulphur is called (...) which is nothing but an
inflammatition or kindling of sulphur in the whole body or in some certain part
thereof, whence the heat of all the body is augmented, and is found and known
unnatural to the touch without, in the whole or in some part of the body. To
which are referred all kind of agues, burnings, and intermitting, putride and
not putride, hectic, ophthalmick, infla^mations, phlegmons, erysiples or Rose,
wildfire, or ignis persicus, the english peste, squinance, gangrene, etc.

A disease of resolved sulphur is a flux, and resolution of the sulphur in the
parts of our body, as dysenteries, diarrhes, lienteries, vomites and all
unnatural excretions.

A disease of coagulate sulphur is called coma, or sopor, containing under it
all kind of sleeping and drowsy diseases, as the thargie, giddiness of the
head, somnolentia, cataphora, caros, myopia etc.

Mercury makes regression from its natural state by a dry or humide
destillation.

The diseases of the first is an inflammation, when some part of the body
suffers pain by flatus included, or flowing thereto, as all kind of flatulent
phlegmatic tumors, scrofules or crowels, melliceria, myrmecia, flatuous
throwing of the colic, Tympanie, piercing pains etc.

The disease of an humide destillation of mercury, is a convulsion, when
mercury resolved into liquor molests the nervous parts: hence come apoplexies,
palsies, epilepsies, tetanus, emprostotonos, trembling of the heart, the night
mare, crampes, tenesmus, yexing, which is a convulsive motion of the stomach,
etc.

The disease of sublimed mercury comprehends under it all these diseases which
pearce the membranes with fervor, as madness, phrenesie, migraine, peste,
pleurisy, consumptions with exulcerations of the pulmons, apostemes,
charboncles, etc.

The disease of precipitate mercury is, arthritis, and all diseases which hurt
the extremities of bones and ligaments, as chiragra, podagra, scriatick, the
doggish appetite etc.

Which diseases, proceeding from a digression of salt, from its natural state
by sosolution, coagulation, reverberation: of sulphur, by its inflammation,
resolution, coagulation: of mercury by its dry and humide destillation,
sublimation, precipitation, unde actio partis necess;ario laeditur, are cured
by the salt, sulphur, and mercury of minerals, conveyed to us from the
innermost parts of the earth by our Petrean waters, to the glory of GOD, and
our particular comfort.

And thus have I spoken anent the medicinal virtues of this water in curing of
humane diseases, which are common to men and women: and now I must tell you
that its virtues are not confined within the compass of this generality, that
do not reach to the particular diseases of the infirmer sex, which as it is
more lovely and delicate then the other, so is it more opportune to the own
defects, and is obnoxious to some proper diseases, as far different from those
of men, as the sex is from the sex.

This water helps, as other common diseases, so barrenness in both: but in
the weaker sex the pale colors, theimmoderate evacuation or retention in
their desired sickness, insurrection, precipitation, suffocation and other
diseases of the mother: and in a word by removing al impediments of beauty (for
diseases impare the beauty with the health) makes them look clear, fair,
beautiful rather like angels then mortals: in such sort that I do not admire
that many of the ancient divins affirm that the sons of GOD, that is the
angels, loved the daughters of men, and begat with them giants. For at that
time before the flood, the custom was to drink waters, and I warrant you, the
choicest: which made women look so fair, that the angels were taken with their
love: and if Angels were, it is no uncouth thing to see men taken with the same
beauty.

When the Petrean waters are to be taken.
GEnerally all seasons, when the weather is good, and the air dry, and clear,
are convenient to drink of this water, abstaining when the air is full of
hanging clouds, threatening us with rain, or foggy mists. In winter there is
more strength in our water then any other time, because then the subterranean
heat is greater, per antiperistasin, sending forth in greater abundance, the
tinctures of what is there included. But because in May, June, July, August,
ordinarily their is fairest and hotest weather, and longest days, giving
opportunity to walk, and use exercise for helping the digestion of the waters,
these months are thought fittest for drinking: notwithstanding that all kind
of medicine in the canicular days with many be odious, founding on that
aphorism of Hippocrates, exoriente cane and ante canis exortum, perdifficiles
sunt purgationes: meaning that the great and burning heat of that time, is able
to cast us in fevers, after any kind of immoderate evacuation, by medicine.
Yet Hippocrates does not altogether forbid the use of medicine, about that
time, but tells us only that it is difficult. The medicaments used in his time,
were Hellebore, without any good preparation, or some such other violent
medicament, which we in this our age will use in no time of the year, without
great and exquisite preparation. For if he had known the use of Cassia, manna,
Rubarbe, syrup rosat, etc. he had never mentioned any danger in the canicular
days. You must also distingush the place, he lived in a hot country, we in a
cold. The most part of physicians affirm, that the spring and automne are the
most proper times for medicine, because then the air is most temperate,
without pearcing cold, or scorching heat: we in Scotland are troubled at no
time with heat, the summer distinguished chiefly from the winter, by the longer
sojourning of the sun in our horizon, wherefore it is most agreeable with reason
to take medicine in Scotland in our hottest season. When the air is too hot
remain in a cold chamber: if cold, cause it become warm with fire, and in so
doing you may safely purge, phlebotomise, sweat, bath and so forth any time or
season in the year.

How the Petrean waters are to be taken.
HE who is to drink of this water, either for curing disease, restoring health
lost: or to preserve it being present, avoiding future inconveniences: shall
come to this Well in a convenient time of the year, whereof now I have spoken,
resting the first day after arrival: the next day purge with fit and
convenient medicines, either powders, potions, pills, syrups, juleps etc. cum
regimine, by the advice of some Medicin, because diversity of diseases require
diverse medicaments, since some have their stomach and intestines oppressed
with tough and glewie phlegm: some their liver and gall obstructed: some their
melt hardened with melancholy juice: some their reins and bladder burdened with
sand, stones, pituite, viscide and tartareous humors, and so forth. Therefore
let the medicament be proper having respec to the humor which is peccant. The
day following purgation, let him come to the Well, (neither fear any
Hypercatharsis) early in the morning, yet after the sun rising, and drink so
much even the first day, while he find his stomach full, not loadned, walking
a little betwixt every two or three glasses, taking in the mean time, some
confected anise, coriander, cinamom, or some good tablets proper for the
disease: or tobacco to help the stomach to daunt and vanquish the actual
coldness of the water; which done walk, ride, or exercise your self with
goafing, bowling, or some such other exercise, (for the Petrean fields are as
the Elisian, for such exercises) whilst the most part of the waters be voyded,
which will be so soon as the urine does begin to be colored. Then dine with
meats of good digestion: let the better sort drink wine moderatly, others ale
or beer. Afternoon beguile the time, with reading, talking, walking, dancing,
singing, dicing, carding etc. Then sup lightly with a tosty of bread, some
raisins of the sun, or some such other thing, of good and easy digestion. Use
this kind of doing 20. 30. 40. 50. days or so long, as the disease requires,
or affairs can permit. Aday after you leave off the drinking of water, take
some other good purgative medicine, resting aday after, then take journey to go
whither you list.

Live temperatly a long time after the drinking of the water in a clear, pure,
wholesome air to breath on: eating meats of good digestion to suffice nature,
not greedy appetit: sleeping to refresh, not to dull your spirits: waking to
drive away stupiditie, dullness, and drowsineesse from your brains, not to
wast, consume, and dry your bodies: using exercise for recreation, not to
weary: taking rest for a remeed to your weariness, restoring strength, that
your bodies may be made more fit, to endure new travels and labors: avoyde
repletion of the belly, intestins and veins, by moderate evacuation of nature,
and if slow, make help by art: neither violent, to resolve your spirits, or to
evacuate with excrements your souls. Flee perturbations of the mind: and in so
doing, by the grace of God, you shall continue healthful, even to your lives
end. To which I pray GOD happily to bring us all, through JESUS CHRIST, Amen.

We have thought good to insert in this place, some approved receiptes, fitto
be taken before, after, and in the mean time, of drinking of our Petrean waters.
A potion.
R. of seen vnc. ss. Cinamom. drag. ss. of the marrow of Cassia fistula, vnc.
1. salt of tartar. drag. ss. which infuse in lib. ss. of the Petrean water,
cold, 12 hours, strain it, and dissolve therein of suggar rosat. vnc. 1.syrop
of pale roses vnc. ss. which give discretly to all kind of persons, young men
and maids, old men and babes. It is harmless, pleasant to the taste, and
purges well and strongly.

Another.
Take of manna, syrop of pale roses an. Vnc. 2. crystal tartar, drag. 1.
dissolve them in abroth.

A good electuary.
Take of electuar. lenit. vnc. 2. pull. sen, vnc. ss. christ. tartar. drag. vi.
mix them with the syrop of pale roses.

A potion.
Take of the cold infusion of cassia fistula in the Petrean water, vnc. vi.
mix with it of pull. sen. laxat. Ruland. drag. 1. ss.

Syrup. benedictus.
Take of the whole Cichory, of Celidone an. manip. iij of lig. vitae of sarsa
parill. ana. vnc. 2. of sasafras, of crystal tartar, pull. nostri emetici, and
benedict. an. vnc. 1. boil these things, in agood sufficient quantity of the
Petrean water, to the consumption of two parts: wherein put sufficient quantity
of suggar. Add thereto of Venice theriack. vnc. 1. confect. alkerm. drag. 2.

The effects of this blessed syrop, are mo^^ nor ordinary, in extirping the
roots of deplorable diseases: it purges up and down without violence and may
be given safely to all ages and sexes, with discretion.

For expelling the stone.
Take of the bark of the ash tree lib. 2. Juniper feed lib. 3. Venice
turpentine lib, 2. ss. mix them with three pints of the Petrean water, and
distill it after the manner of other oils. This oil being taken in the mean time
or before the drinking of our waters, breaks and expells the stone.

Another.
Take of tartar vitriolate vnc. ss. of Iulep rosat vnc. iij. cannel water vnc.
1 mix them and you shall find an efficacious and profitable detersive of the
reins.

For the jaundise.
Boil in the Petrean water, of Rad. and Flor. Chelid. Hyperic an. M. 1. ebor.
of (...). an. drag. 3. of safran drag. ss. of suggar-candi. vnc. 1. whereof
make 3. doses for 3 days together.

FINIS.

