ILLUSTR: PRINCEPS SULTAN MORAT MAG^^ TURCARUM IMPERATOR ET CETERA
The Pourtraicture of the most Mighty Prince Sultan Mora^ Emperor of the
Turks now reigning: and brother to Achmat the last deceaced Emperor


A Vaunting, Daring, and a Menacing Letter, Sent from Sultan Morat the great
Turk, from his Court at Constantinople, by his Ambassador Gobam, to
Vladisllaus King of Poland, etc.

Which Letter was sent to the Christian King, since the Truce concluded
between the Turk and the Persian in March last; as by many Copies whereof,
may appear, as it was sent out of Poland.

Wherein he declares himself a mortal Enemy to the said Christian King,
threatening to invade his Kingdoms and Territories, with all manner of
Hostility.

Whereunto is annexed a brief Relation of the Turkish present strength, both
of Horse and Foot: with all the Victories the Turks have prevailed against the
Christians these last three hundred years.

As also what glorious Victories the Christians have won against the Turks,
till this present year. 1638.

Published by Authority.

London Printed by I. Oaks, and are to be sold by I. Cowper at his Shop at the
East End of St. Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1638.

(...) stigations of Satan, there has none prevailed so much for the
enlarging and increase of his Infernal Kingdom, as the setting of Christian
Kings and Princes at variance one against the other, and the whilst they have
been by the ears (as it were) and infesting each other with deadly hatred and
bloody Wars, the Turk, their common Adversary, has taken advantage of their
unnatural dissentions, and by force taken from them (in little more than three
Hundred years past) more Kingdoms, Empires, Principalities, large Territories
and Signiories, from the Christians, than all the rest of Christendom besides.
His force and power I will partly relate in the latter end of this Treatise,
and also how the Christians have oftentimes had the better of him, when they
have been at Unity and peace amongst themselves: but first let the Reader
peruse the true Copy of an insulting proud Letter, lately sent from the Grand
Signior from his Court at Constantinople, to the King of Poland now Reigning;
the Contents of the Letter were as follows.

The true Copy of a Letter of Denial of Peace, sent from the Turkish Emperor
to the King of Poland, as by many Coppies here in England, may appear.
SUltan Morat, or Amurah, the fourth of that Name, by the Grace of the Great
God in Heaven, the only Monarch of the World, a great and mighty God on Earth,
an invincible Caesar, King of all Kings from the East unto the West, High and
Mighty Emperor of the Turks, do by these our Imperial Letters signify to
thee Uladislaus, King of Poland, how that our Highness, by our trusty and
wel-beloved Ambassador Goban, formerly made Articles, Agreements, and
Conditions of Peace, which now we utterly deny and renounce, by reason we have
received certain Intelligence and true Knowledge at our Imperial Court, that
thou have and do daily make private Contracts, not only with our revolting
and rebellious Subjects, but also with our mortal Enemy the perfidious
Moscovite: And furthermore thou have contemptuously slighted and scorned our
Great and Unconquerable forces, making no more account of them than trivial
things of small value, or little esteem; relieving and wholly depending upon
thy own strength and power, which is but weak and feeble in respect of our
Invincible Hosts, and huge Armies and Forces, which we daily do maintain,
being both Horse and Foot. We see that the Reflection of the Grace and Favor
which we have been pleased of our magnificent and abundant goodness to
reflect upon thee, and by the peace which we have suffered and vouchsafed thee
by our Clemency (undeserved) to enjoy, thou having formerly sworn and promised
to keep good correspondent League and Amity with us, with our Friends and
Confederates: which Promises of thine (out of thine own Pride and Insolence)
thou have not performed, but most falsely broken and violated; which we will no
longer suffer to go without Correction and Acknowledgment: For by the reason
of thy refractory falling off from we, there are other petty Kings and
Princes, (who by thy instigation) do combine together, and offer to take up
Arms, and stand in defiance against me and my power, trusting upon their
handfulls of men and weak Fortifications.

Moreover, thou art willing, and with readiness do watch all opportunities
to make more Contracts with other Kings, that they also would assist thee; and
desie us: But if thou do persist in thy ambitious intentions and designs;
then know, that for everlasting time; neither thy self or any of thy
Successors (the Polish Kings) shall never have Peace or Amity with us, or the
succeeding Othoman Empire: but thou art to expect nothing but utter ruin,
slaughter, and all the calamities of a just incensed conquering Adversary to
fall upon thee; we will enter thy Kingdom and thy other Signiories with our
forcible and innumerable Armies, and there shall be no mercy to be expected
from our hands. I would have thee know that since that long and bloody War is
ended, and that now there is Peace concluded for 21. years to come, between us
and the Persian Emperor, that not only thou but other of thy adherents shall
not be suffered in their insolent ways to persist, but that I will wholly bend
and set my innumerable Army upon thee and them.

Thou did promise according to our former agreements, to live quietly, and at
Peace, which now thou neglectest, and regardest not, but have let loose thy
licentious will; and thy cut-throate Cossacks and Heiducks, like Hell Hounds,
do fall in and make incursions into our confines and Territories, in diverse
parts of our Empire, plundering and spoiling my people in that Hostile manner
upon thy unlawful commands, and unadvised want of foresight, which we will
revenge in the highest and severest measure that we possibly can imagine or
execute. Also upon thy intemperate will and pleasure thou would have caused
our trusty and well-beloved Ambassador (Abbas, Bassa) to take some distaste
against our Imperial person and State, which was an injury insufferable, and
it was the occasion that his Loyalty to us, made him fall upon thee, in the
defense of mine honor, in my Name, and behalf, which thou at that time did
contemptuously seem to slight also.

And do thou now, (after all these uncivil Insolences) desire Peace? which
is because thou hear of a mighty great Army, which I have caused to be
levied and raised, which I purpose shall fall heavy upon thee and thy weak
Forces with all possible speed; yea, our invincible Ianizaries, whose often
tried valor and strength shall make thee and the whole World to tremble;
besides our Tartarian Horsemen, who shall meet thee in the wide Fields, and
toss thee and thy weak forces like dust or ashes in the Air, or motes in the
Sun; my invincible powers of Foot and Horse (whose numbers thou shall not be
able to count) like a huge Mountain shall overtop thee, like a raging Torrent
overturne thee, and like a violent Inundation overwhelme thee, with merciless
plundering, robbing, spoiling, wasting, and burning both thy Country and
people. Then shall thou know (with great fear and dread) my force and power,
nay, all thy Adherents and Confederates, (be they whom they will, in number
never so many) shall quake and tremble at my dreadful and just indignation: It
is not thy Kingdom of Poland, thy Principality of Lithuania, thy Russes,
Goths, and Vandails, nor any of thy Countries and Dominions, which thou patst
so much unstable security and confidence in, (with all their best defenses for
themselves, or opposition of us) that altogether shall be able for the space of
one Month to endure the force of my might and power: The swelling Seas shall
shrink under the burden and weight of our unparalleled Shipping, when our
Navy Royal and Tryumphant shall gloriously show it self upon the vast Ocean;
namely, our Gallyes, Gallyasses, Argosies, Friggots, and Brigandines, when they
show themselves on the Seas, the land shall admire, and the wild beasts of the
Forests shall shake, and fearfully run into obscure holes, dens, and
cavernes of the earth, when they do hear the terrible report of our thundering
Ordnance discharged.

And what will thou do then, thou petty King, with thy poor, and weak Bands
and Troops, or handfuls of men, when thou shall behold my great and powerful
Armies, which shall cover thy Countries: Thou make a ^a^nting show, and art
seemingly-confident in thy ever-weening opinion, that thou can consume and
destroy the great Waspe with a small Gnat: Know thou, that our strength and
terror does reach and extend further than our ample Dominions, for our
Imperial commanding name is dreadful, and famous through the whole World, or
Universal Globe of the Earth, from the rising of the Sun, to the setting of
the same.

We purpose (with the edges of our sharp and welltempered Semiters) to loppe
and mow down thy ambition, and to ruinate the ostentatious pride of thee, and
thy Country. And we assure thee, that it is mere folly for thee to expect any
Peace, Truce, or League with us, after we have once set footing in thy
Territories: for our holy Prophet Mahomet is highly offended at our so long
Clemency, in forbearing and suffering thee in thy ungodly and wilful actions.
Therefore we will come to Craconia, (thy Metropolis and chief City in Poland)
in the strength of which place thou put much confidence; and where (as we
are lately certified) thou have built a holy Sepulcher, in imitation of that
which we have in possession in the sacred City of Jerusalem, upon which thou
do likewise rely; but that neither can, nor shall help thee; for we will
raze and overthrow your Temples, Churches, and Chapels, and convert them into
Turkish Moskies, for the service of our holy Prophet; and those whom our force
and fury do not demolish and confound, we will turn into Stables, where our
Horses and Cammels shall live, and be housed with rack and manger: Thus we (the
great God of the World) determine to do; these fore-threatned mysteries thou
must expect; and it is not thy Crucified God (in whom thou put thy
confidence) that shall help thee; for we purpose, that when our sword is once
drawn, not to sheath it again, till we have made a final conquest of
Christendom, or utter extirped and chased them from, or near any parts of our
Dominions.

Sent by our trusty Servant and Ambassador in the Ides of the Month of March.
Anno 1637.
THus may the Reader perceive in what thundering manner, and ostentatious
boasting, this great and and sea Leviathan threatens to overthrow and devour
the Polonian King; but that manner of insulting and vainglorious writing from
the Turk, to Christian Princes, is no news in these days of ours: for if any
man will but look into the famous, and well written Turkish History, (now
newly printed by Master Adam Islip, in the 300 Page he may read how the Turk
Amurath, the sixth King of the Turks, writes to Scanderbeg, or George
Castriot, the son of John Castriot, King of Albania or Epirus. Also if you
look into the 1024 Page of the aforesaid book, you may read of a braving
Letter (far surpassing this here before mentioned) sent from Amurath, the
third Emperor of the Turks, to Rodolphus the second Emperor of Germany,
where in that place may be seen the most impious and blasphemous threatenings,
that ever Heathen, Infidel, or Atheistical Barbarian has belched or vomited
against either God or man. But for a proud Letter indeed, look in the 789
Page, and there you may read the Masterpiece of a vaunting title, which
Soliman, the Magnificent Emperor of the Turks, sent to Ferdinand the Emperor
of Germany, in the year 1561. there you may perceive that the Styles and
Titles which the Turk gives himself, would, of it self, fill half a
Pamphlet: (in proclamation Print) But Christian Princes who do acknowledge
that they do hold their Crowns and Scepters from, and under God, and his
son Christ Jesus, are more strongly fortified with heavenly Faith, and
Majestical courage, than to be seared or afrighted with Bugge-beare words, or
farre-fetch'd large embost, and embroydered Styles or Titles.

And for one instance of the just Titles of a Prince, who was indeed, in his
greatest Style but an Archduke of Austria, yet in real repetitions of the
Signiories, over which he was lawful Lord, and possessor: he was (in his time)
Equivalent, that was then reigning in the whole Christian World. He lived in
the year 1494, and his Titles were as follows.

The many, just, and ample Styles and Titles of Phillip Duke of Burgundy.
Philip, by the grace of God, Archduke of Austria; Duke of Burgundy, Lothier,
Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia, Lemburgh, Lupenburgh, and Guelders; Earl of
Hauspergh, Flanders, Arthoys, Burgoigne, Ferrets, and Kiburgh; Palatine of
Henault, Holland, Zealand, Namure, and Zutphen, Marquess of the Holy Empire,
and of Burgan; Lantsgrave of Elsaten; Lord of Windesmarke, Portevan, Salines,
and Macklin.

Although the repetition of this great Christian Princes Title may seem
somewhat impertinent, yet it may be taken as tolerable, because in a good
measure it shows that there has been, are, and will be Kings and Princes in
Christendom, that can vye Titles, and dare wage War with the Turk, and
first I will a little demonstrate the Turkish power, and after declare how he
has been often foiled and beaten.

Otheman, the first King of the Turks, won many Castles and Territories from
the Christians in Greece; as Cara Chisar, Chalce, Belezuge, Jarchisar, Nice,
Neapolis, Prusa, (or Burusa.) This Othoman overcame the valiant Grecian
Emperor Michael, in the Country of Thrace, in an unfortunate mortal Battle:
After that Othoman (in another Battle in Chersonesus) overcame the Christian
Emperor, and conquered and plundered almost all Thracia, with many other places
of strength, which he won from the Christians: Othoman Reigned in the year
of our Lord 1327, at which time Edward the third was King of England.

Orchanes, the second King of the Turks, won from the Christians Nicomedia,
and likewise the Kingdom of Cha^asia or Carafina, which contained Lydia, part
of Misia, part of Phrygia the less, with Troas and the City of Pergamus, a
most mighty Kingdom: After that he won the strong Castle of Maditus, and
the goodly City of the Callipolis. Orchanes got most of all these in one year
from the Christians.

Amurath, the first of that Name, and third King of the Turks, won from the
Christians many Countries and Cities, of which Cities Hadrianople in Europe was
the chief, where he after kept his Court, which was then made the Royal
Seat for the Turks in Europe. Amurath invaded and conquered Servia, slew
Lazarus the Prince or Despot of that large Country; won a great part of
Bulgaria; and many other places. He Reigned Anno 1377. when Richard the second
was King of England.

Bajazet, the first of that Name, and fourth King of the Turks, won
Philadelphia from the Christians; he spoiled the Country of Valachia, and made
it Tributary to him: He destroyed Thessalonica and all Thessaly; he overthrew
the Christian Army at the unfortunate battle of Nicopolis, Sigismund King of
Hungaria, having 130000. Thousand Horse and Foot almost all lost. Also Bajazet
won the most part of Capadocia: he Reigned Anno 1399. when Henry the fourth
was King of England. This Bajazet was at the last overcome, and taken prisoner
by Tomberlaine, and lost much of what his predecessors had won. All which and
more was recovered again by his Successor Mahomet, the first of that Name, and
first King of the Turks: Mahomet reigned Anno 1413, when Henry the fifth was
King of England.

Amurah, the second of that name, and sixth King of the Turks, with a mighty
and merciless Army spoiled and plundered the most part of Hungaria, he subdued
Servia, he wasted the Principality of Transylvania: he overcame and slew the
Hungarian and Pol^nian King Vladislaus, and conquered a great part of Hungaria;
he wasted the large Country of Peloponesus, (now called Morea) and after he
had filled a great many Christian Kingdoms and Lordships with blood-slaughter,
and all manner of cruelties, he having reigned 28. years, in the year of
Grace 1448, or thereabouts, when Henry the sixth was King of England.

Mahomet the second of that Name, the seventh King, and first Emperor of the
Turks, for his many victories and conquests called Mahomet the Great: He
won the famous City of Constantinople from the Christians, on the 29. of May,
1453. It had anciently been the Royal seat of the Eastern or Grecian
Emperors, where ever since the Othoman Family has placed their Imperial
Courts. He conquered the City and Empire of Trapezond, Anno 1461. In the time
of 31. years which he reigned, he got from the Christians one Empire, 12.
Kingdoms, and 200. Cities; he dyed when Edward the fourth was King of England.

Bajazet the second of that Name, the Eighth King, and second Emperor of the
Turks, he invaded Moldavia, he won the City of Tarsus in Cilicia, (where
St. Paul was borne) he made fierce inroads into Podolia and Russia, spoiled the
Country of Friulli, which was the Venetians; also he took from them the
great Cities of Lepanto, Modon or Methone, Corone, Pilus, Dirrachium; and after
he had for 30. years space of his Reign done all the mischief he could to
Christendom, he being very aged, was by the command of Selimus, his most
undutifull son, who corrupted a Jew, that was his Fathers Physician,
poisoned, Anno 1509. when Henry the eight was King of England.

Selimus, the first of that name, the ninth King of the Turks, and third
Emperor, he invaded some parts of Hungaria, and after eight years of a cruel
bloody reign, he dyed of a canker in his back, which yielded such a stench,
that long before his decease, no man durst come near him: He was so busied in
his wars with the Persians, Arabians. Armenians, and Egyptians, that he had
but little leisure to molest the Christians; he dyed in the year of our
Redemption 1520, Henry the eight then being King of England.

Soliman, surnamed the Magnificent, the tenth King, and fourth Emperor of the
Turks, he wan from the Knights of the order of Saint John of Jerusalem, the
famous Island of the Rhodes, on Christmas day, Anno 1522: he overthrew the
Hungarians, in a mortal battle, at a place called Mohatchaz, where amongst
thousands of common Soldiers, many of the nobility of that Country were
slain; and King Lewis (King of that Kingdom) seeking to save himself by
flight, was most miserably drowned in a Ditch; and he carried away more than
one hundred and fifty thousand poor Christians with him in that expedition out
of Hungaria to Constantinople 1526: After that, he entered Hungaria again, and
wan the strong City and Castle of Buda, and spoiled a great part of Austria:
And in the year 1532, he entered the second time into Austria, and most cruelly
burnt, spoiled, and wasted the Country, filling it full of blood and
slaughter, and carrying away many people into perpetual slavery. By his
admirable Barbarussa he did much spoil to the Venetians, and did much
mischief to the Italians: He also spoiled the rich and beautiful Country of
Apulia: he likewise invaded the Island of Corcira, and from certain other
Isles and places in Italy, carried away 16000 poor Christians into Captivity
to Constantinople, 1537. He conquered the rich Islands of Napos and Aegina;
after that he overthrew Ferdinand King of Bohemia, with a great slaughter; he
beat the Christian Fleet, or Navy, set forth at the charges of Charles the
fifth, Emperor of Germany, Paul the third, Pope or Bishop of Rome, and the
Venetians 1539. After that he wan the strong City of Buda in Hungaria, 1540. In
the year 1543, Soliman came with a huge army again into Hungaria, meaning to
over-runne the whole Kingdom; then he besieged, and won the most strong and
great Cities of Strigonium, and Alba Regalis, wherein he used all kind of
cruelties that could be imagined. He won the City of Tripolis in Barbary
from the Christians; and in the year 1566 he took the rich and fertile Island
of Chios. Thus Soliman, having bin a mighty Invador and spoyler of
Christendom, after 44. years reign dyed, in the eighth year of the Reign
of the unmatchable, famous, and virtuous Elizabeth Queen of England. 1566.

Selimus, the second of that name, the eleventh King, and first Emperor of the
Turks, conquered, and took the rich Island and Kingdom of Ciprus, from the
Venetians; he made great Havoc in the Country of Moldavia, and Vallachia, and
in other parts of Christendom, with the extremest barbarous cruelties, as
ever was inflicted, and after eight years of his bloody and tyrannical reign,
wasted in his flesh and spirits, and amply furnished with diseases, which are
easily purchased with drunkenness and leacherie, he dyed Anno 1574. The
famous Elizabeth then being Queen of England.

Amurath, the third of that name, the twelfth King, and sixth Emperor of the
Turks, he was almost wholly busied in the wars against the Princes of the
Eastern parts of the World, as the Persians, Arabians, Armenians, and others
of the Oriental Nations, so that he had very little leisure to make any wars
or inroads into Christendom, although he with threats and braving menacings,
made large promises to invade the Christians: but haved reigned nineteen
years, he dyed of the Stone, and the falling sickness, in the year of grace
1595, in the 37 year of the reign of Elizabeth, the admired Queen of England.

Mahomet, the third of that name, the thirteenth King, and seventh Emperor of
the Turks, had many bloody and cruel battles, and bickerings with the
Christians, in Hungaria, Transylvania Vallachia, Stiria, Moldavia, Austria, and
in diverse places of the Germane Empire: He won, and lost, and by his Bassaes,
Lievtenants, and Generals, did beat, and were beaten: he dyed, Anno 1604, in
the third year of the reign of King James of blessed memory.

Achmat, the foureteenth King, and eighth Emperor of the Turks; He, by his
Bassa, aided with the Tartars, spoiled the upper Hungaria, there they took and
ransacked the towns of Setchin, Tregla, Puganisa, Iarmeta, Samoschin,
Regimcat, Palanka, Dillena, Sacmaria, Rabenstine, Onoth, Vacia, Sevara,
Blavenstine, Tabra, Disgiora, Libetua, Calo, Sitna, Nagibana, Scharospotac,
Zatuar, Filek, Budnoc, with many other strong towns and places both in
Hungaria, and Transylvania, which were sacked and spoiled by the Turks,
through the contentions, rebellions, and treacheries of false Christians;
sometimes the Governors and Commanders were corrupted with gifts, given them
by the Turks; and many times the Christian Soldiers revolting, and in mutiny
for pay; and in the year 1605 the famous and strong City of Strigonium, in
Hungaria, was taken by the Turks: But in the year 1606, a peace was concluded
betwixt the great Sultan, and the German Emperor, since which time there has
no matters of great Hostility been used on either side. Achmat dyed when he
had reigned fifteen years, Anno, 1617. in the 15. year of the Reign of King
James.

Mustapha the Fourteenth King, and Ninth Emperor of the Turks, was the Brother
to Achmat deceased; he had no great time in his first Reign, either to make or
move Peace or War, for he was deposed, and put into a Cell at or near the
end of two Months after his Coronation.

Osman, the son of the aforementioned Achmat, the Fifteenth King of the Turks,
and Tenth Emperor, in the year 1620, the Turks with a great power made War
by Sea upon the Kingdom of Naples, where they won the City of Manfredonia,
and after they had most miserably sacked it, they carried away near 1500.
poor Christians into intolerable slavery. Osman gives occasions of distaste,
and grievances to the King of Poland, by conniving craftily, and suffering the
Tartars to make inroads into diverse parts of Polonia, for which indignity the
Polonian King did make the like incursions into the Turks Dominions, insomuch
that it grew to a War; so that the Turks entered Poland with a great Army,
whence he carried away 25000. Christians as slaves to Constantinople: After
which a Peace was concluded betwixt the Grand Signior and the Pole 1622, and in
the year 1623. Sultan Osman was treacherously and traitorously strangled and
murdered by the Great Vizier named Daut Bassa, after which the deposed Mustapha
was again crowned the second time, and in less than Nine Months after he
was made the mockery of Fortune, and deposed the second time from his Imperial
dignity; but what became of him afterward, I have neither read or heard of.

Morat or Amurath, the sixteenth King, and Eleventh Emperor of the Turks,
(now reigning) was on the last of August, 1623. crowned: he was the son of
Sultan Achmat, and has kept the peace for the most part with all Christian
Kings and Princes, but he has had his hands full with the Persian, and with
some others of his own Bassaes which have fallen into rebellion against him.

To show the Numbers of the Turkish Foot and Horse, which he has daily at
continual command in all places of his Dominions at all times, the Relation
would either beheld to be incredible, or the Turks power to be invincible,
both which opinions of people are scarce worth the refuting; for experience
knows they are both false.

Yet the strong City of Scodra in Dulmalia (bordering on Epirus and Albania)
was besieged in the year 1473. by the Turks Army in number 350000 men and
Horse; there was 12000. Camells laden with Brass in Mass or hunos, which they
cast into great Ordinance, so great indeed as never the like were heard or read
of; for it is truly reported, that one Gu^ne carried a Bullet of 300. pound
weight, and that two other Pieces carried Bullets of 400. weight, one carried a
shot of 650. weight, and one which they called the Princes Piece, carried a
Bullet of 1200. weight; and lastly, another carried a shot of 1300. weight. He
had also at that Siege as many Brasse-peeces for Battery, as made up the full
number of 178, and after six most sharp and terrible Assaults, and a whole
years siege it was through want enforced to yield upon Composition to the
Turks. Read the Turkish History, page 421.

The Great Sultan has Horsemen called Timariots, which are Gentlemen that
hold Lands of him during their lives, and they are for every 60. Ducats of
yearly value or Rent of those Lands to maintain one Horse and a man armed
with a Bow, Arrows, Semitar, Target, and Lance, as well in Peace as in War:
He, whose Land is worth but 60. Ducats, must find one; he that has 120.
Dukats, must maintain 2. Horsemen so armed; and so of the rest: these Timariots
are dispersed all over his Dominions, and are, as is truly related, in number
719000.

To speak of his potent Bassaes, his great Begler bags, his commanding
Sanzacks, his insolent Janissaries, his mutinous Spahi, his rusticke Acanzij
Horsemen, his innumerable unregarded Asapi, it is so well described by many
worthy. Authors, but especially in the forenamed History of the Turks, to
which I refer the Reader for ample satisfaction.

And although what has been in this brief Treatise related, has only
showed the conquests greatness, power, and strength of the Turks, how they
have beaten and overcome the Christians in sundry Battles, bloody
foughten-fields, Sieges, and Sallies: yet it is not amisie to show when, where,
and how he has been from time to time repulst, and beaten both by the
Christians and also by other Princes and Potentates of his own Mahomet an
Superstition.

In the year of our Lord 1397. Tamberlane overthrew threw Bajazet the first,
How, when, and by whom the Turks have been overthrown oftentimes.
and the fourth King of the Turks, in a mortal Battle, where Bajazet with
his son Musa were taken Prisoners, and the proud Turk was shut up in an Iron
Cage by Tamberlane, and in that Battle 300000. Turks were slain, in which
thraldom he endured two years, and then (in the pride of his heart and
greatness of spirit) ended his miserable life, and violently beat out his
own brains against the Cage, Anno 1399.

Amurath the second besieged Constantinople, and was most bravely repulst and
beaten thence Anno 1439, and in the same year he was (with a great slaughter,
and loss of many Thousands of his men and Horse, beaten from the Siege of
Belgrade in Hungaria: The valiant Christian Prince Huniades (Vaivod of
Transylvania) in two several Battles overthrew Isa Beg the Turks Cenerall in
Servia, and slew Mesites Bassa and his son, with more than 30000. Turks in
both battles, for which losses Amurath was so mad, that he was about to have
killed himself: but being persuaded to patience, he surrendered the whole
government of his Empire, and retired himself into a Cell, or House of
Religion: Afterward he reassumed his estate, and though he won the Battle
of Varna 1444, in which Vladislaus King of Hungaria, was slain, yet the
Christians sold their lives at so dear a rate, that 30000. of the Turks were
there slain. After that the valiant Scanderbeg, ( alias George Castriot) King
of Epirus and Albania, he recovered his Kingdoms from the Turk; he beat
Alis Basha, and slew 22000. of them, and took 760. prisoners. In another
Battle he vancuish'd Ferses Basha, and put him to flight with the loss of
3000. men, and many prisoners taken. He overthrew the Basha Mustapha in a
battle; and slew 5000. Turks, and took 300. prisoners, 1445. Also in the
year 1448. Huniades fought the great battle of Cossova, which lasted three
days together; and although the Turks wan, yet their loss was greatest; for
of them there fell 4000, and of the Christians 17000 In the year 1449.
Scanderbeg overthrew the Basha Mustapha the second time, in which fight 10000.
Turks were slain, and Mustapha was taken prisoners with others of their
Commanders: after that in a skirmish fought by Moses, ( Scanderbegs Lieutenant)
2000. Turks were slain, 1000. Horses taken, with the loss of 22. Christians.
In the same year likewise Amurath himself went in person with a huge Army of
300000. into Epirus, where Scanderbeg with his own hands in a fight slew the
General Feri Bassa, with 7000. Turks, so for that time Amurath went back
with his Army: but the next year 1450. he returned again with 160000 Horse
and Foot, and at one Assault of the City of Croya in Epirus, the Turks lost
8000. men. Amurath being dead, his Son ( Mahomet the great) sent an Army into
Epirus, under the leading of a valiant Turk named Amesa, whom Scanderbeg met,
fought withal, and took Prisoner, with many other brave Comanders, and in
that fight also 7000. Turks were slain, 1464.

Much about the same time, the famous Prince Huniades, beat the Turks Fleet
in Manubius, near to the City of Belgrade in Hungaria, where he took twenty
of their Ships and Gallyes; many were sunk and spoiled, and the rest ran a
ground, and sired themselves, because they would not fall into the hands of the
Huniades. Furthermore, in the same year 1464, Mahomet sent his General
Debreas, against Scanderbeg, betwixt whom was a^mell battle fought, for
Scanderbeg with his own hand did encounter with Debreas in the hottest of the
fight, and slew him, and took many Prisoners, besides 4120 of the Turks were
slain. After that, Scanderbeg besieged the Turks in Belgrade, and put them to
much distress: but Mahomet came to raise the Siege, wherein a battle was
fought, and Scanderbeg had the worst, but the Turks lost 3000 men.

In the same year also 1464, Scanderbeg met with the Traitor Moses, (who was
revolted lately from him to serve the Turk) and after a great and bloody
fight, Moses was beaten, and fled, with the loss of 11000 men, and many
Prisoners taken by Scanderbeg.

There never were so many noble victories won in one year against the Turk,
as were in this, 1464, and by such brave Commanders as were Scanderbeg and
Huniades, whose powers and force were so small and weak, in respect of the
numerous Armies of their Enemies, that the Turks did contemn them; besides
Moses (a valiant noble Commander) revolted from Scanderbeg, and served the
Turk against him; and after that Amesa ( Scanderbegs Nephew) likewise fled
from him, and likewise came, with Isaac the great Bassa, with 50000 men,
against him into Epirus, and there in the Plain of Pharsalia the Turks were
overthrown, the Bassa put to flight, the Traitor Amesa, with many of the
Turkish Nobility and Commanders taken Prisoners, and thirty thousand Turks
slain, and twenty of their bravest ensigns taken, the rich and stately
Pavilions, Tents, Treasure, and munition, were all left as a reward to the
valiant Scanderbeg and his soldiers, who lost but 60 men in that days
battle.

The Turkish Emperor thus often put to the worst, made a peace with Scanderbeg
for one year, which being expired, he sent Sinan Beg with 20000 men into
Epirus, who was wholly discomfitted and made flee, with the loss of 17000:
After that came Assam Beg, with 30000 horse and foot, who was also overcome,
and taken prisoner by Scanderbeg, and 21000 Turks slain: And after him came
Iussum Beg with 1800 men, who was also beaten, and fled with much loss: And in
short time after Caraza Beg, with a mighty power, of whom, in a sharp conflict
was slain 4000 Turks, and Caraza was enforced to retire to Constantinople with
disgrace.

Then was a peace concluded betwixt Mahomet and Scanderbeg, which lasted not
long, for the Turks began to injure the Epirots; which Scanderbeg so much
distasted, that he made inroads into their Territories, and having made a great
havoc amongst them, returned with rich spoils and prisoners.

In revenge whereof, Mahomet sent Seremet Bassa, with 14000 Horse and Foot,
who was likewise beaten, many rich Turkish Prisoners taken, and 1000 men
slain. After that, Mahomet sent Ballabanus, three several times, with three
several Armies, who were all overthrown by Scanderbeg, one after another,
with the loss of 12000 Turks.

For which overthrowes, Mahomet (being enraged) sent the said Ballabanus
again, and one Iacup, Arnauth, with two Armies, that they might by several
ways invade Epirus, and distress Scanderbeg with which two Armies Scanderbeg
fought, and put Ballabanus first to flight, and his army to rowt, after which,
he slew Iacup, the other General, with his own hand in fight, in these two
battles 24000 Turks were slain, and 6000 taken Prisoners.

And thus in the compass of one year, 1464, Scanderbeg with his small Armies
(for he was never above 20000, sometimes but 6000, and many times fewer) slew
116000 Turks, beside the numbers of Prisoners that he took.

In the year 1465, Mahomet himself went with an Army of 20000 against
Scanderbeg, and returned back again, not doing any thing worth the noting,
leaving behind him his General Ballabanus, with 80000 men and horse. After
that, Mahomet was so malignant against Scanderbeg, that he hired two Turks to
go into his Kingdom, and to be turned Christians, because under that fair
pretense they should work some means to poison him, which Turks were
baptized, their treachery disclosed, and Scanderbeg preserved, and the Traitors
executed.

The Turkish Tyrant perceiving that all his forces and policies prevailed not
against this most glorious, happy, and fortunate Prince; after which damnable
plot, and auspicious escape, Scanderbeg encountered with Iovima, a brother to
Ballabanus, and Hedar his son, and after a bloody bickering he took them,
and many more prisoners, and following his Victory, he slew Ballabanus, the
Turkish General: (his old Fugitive, and Renegado enemy) but for the number of
the slain it is not mentioned. And last of all, in the year 1466, Mahomet
with another huge army entered Epirus, with no better success than before he
had; so that after the expense of much Treasure, and many men lost, he was glad
to retire home again to Constantinople; and within short time after the most
illustrious Prince Scanderbeg dyed of a Fever, so that his miscreant enemies
could not boast that they overcame came him, or were the death of him; but God,
under whose Banner he had many times courageously fought, was so gracious unto
him, as to take him from this transitory life by a Natural death.

After the decease of Scanderbeg, Mathias King of Hungria, the son of that
famous Huniades, before named, was another Goad in the side of the proud Turk,
for he won from him the Kingdom of Bosna, and a great part of the
Principality of Servia, both which he joined to the Kingdom of Hungaria, he
was as fearful a bug-Beare to the Turks, as either Scanderbeg, or his father
Huniades were before him; he slew Isa, a great Commander under Mahomet, with
30000 common Soldiers, and others: the Turks were a 100000 strong, but the
Christians were not one quarter of that number; yet that Heroic Prince (by the
assistance of God) got that glorious victory, with the loss of 8000 of his
soldiers.

Selimus the first, had his hands so full with the Persians, Egyptians,
Arabians, and other of those Eastern and Mohammedan Nations, that (as is said
before) he troubled not the Christians, not they did not win or lose much by
him.

His son Soliman (the Magnisicent) besieged Gunza a weak Town, on the
borders of Austria and Steirmarke, with 500000 men, and 3000 Pieces of Brass
Ordnance: but after one Months siege, and thirteen fierce assaults, he was
feign to raise his Camp, with the loss of a great number of his men, and
leave Gunza untaken.

In the year 1529, Soliman, the Magnificent, came in person to besiege the
City of Vienna, in Austria: (which City may well be called the Bulwark of
Christendom) The Turks beleagured it with 300000 men, which City was so
valiantly defended, that after many assaults, breaches, minings, and most
furious batteries, Soliman was glad to leave the Siege with the loss of 80000.
of his Turks, and many Horses, with much Powder, Shot, and Ammunition spent,
and all to little or small purpose.

After that in the year 1565, he sent Mustapha Bassa with an Army of 30000.
Horse and Foot, and Piall Bassa with a Fleet containing 180. Ships and
Galleys, to mvade the Isle of Malta; the Turks being also aided by the King of
Algiers with 2200. men, 10. Galliots, and 7. Galleys, besides 13. Gallyes, and
10. Galliots with 1600. men under the command of Bragut, (a famous Pirat) and
after twelve most furious and bloody assaults (by the Turks) by Sea and Land,
the Island, Cities, and Castles of St. Elmo, St. Angelo, and St. Michael being
bravely defended by the Christians six Months, Mustapha was forced with shame
to leave^ Malta, he having lost in that expedition 24000. men. The whole Island
of Malta is but 20. Miles in length, and 12. in breadth where it is broadest:
and of the Knights of the Order, Gentlemen, Priests, Soldiers, Mariners, with
all other men Inhabitants, as Artificers, and the like, they were not all in
number above 12000 to repulse and withstand so great a power as the Turks
were: but Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?

In the year 1571, Selimus the second sent out a mighty Navy of Ships,
Galleys, Frigots, and Brigandines, with a purpose to iuvade and over-runne
Christendom: Against whom many Christian Princes joined in a noble
Confederacy; namely, the Pope, the King of Spain, the Viceroy of Naples, the
Dukes of Florence, Savoy; the Dukes of mantua, Vrbin, and Ferara; the Galleyes
of Malta and Sicilia, the Venetian Galleyes, and the Forces and personal
service of the valiant Alexander Ferveze Prince of Parma: These Christian
Worthies with their Fleet united, the chief and general Commander then being
Dow John of Austria, (the second son to Charles the fifth Emperor) a Prince
of but twenty four years of age, but of an Heroic and invincible courage:
and after a most fierce and bloody battle many hours continued, the Turks
were beaten, 161. of their alleyes taken, more than 40. sunk and fired, their
Admiral Hali Bassa slain, with 32000. of his Turks; many brave Commanders
taken prisoners, and 2956. of common men also taken; a great number of
Christians released from slavery, (who were freed being chained to row in the
Galleys. Also 404. Pieces of Brass Ordnance were taken. This glorious Battle
was fought near the Gulf of Lepanto, the 7. of October, in the year 1471, in
which famous Sea Fight there fell on the Christian side of Commanders and
others 7579. men. Lepanto was in ancient time a fair City of the Venetians, it
was called Naupactum, it stands in Morea, (or Peloponessus) it was won from
the Christians by Scander Bassa, General to Bajazet the second, Anno 1449.

Selimus the second (the son of Soliman) is spoken of before, and Amurath his
son that succeeded him, had so much to do with the Persian and other Asian
Princes, so that the Christians were not troubled with him to any purpose, but
only with menaces and threatenings.

In the year 1596. Mahomet the third was beaten by Mathias the Archduke,
near Agria in Hungaria, the Turks Emperor fled, with Ibrahim his great
Bassa, and in that fight 60000. Turks, and 20000. Christians.

Thus may any reasonable Reader perceive, that the Turk has received many
overthrows from the Christians, and with small numbers have repulsed and beaten
their multitudes in despite of their boasting and blasphemous threats and
Letters.

FINIS.

