AN APOLOGY OF ENGLISH ARMINIANISME OR A DIALOGVE, between Iacobus Arminius,
Professor in the University of Leyden in Holland; and Enthusiastus an English
Doctor of Divinity* and a great Precisian.

WHEREIN Are defended the Doctrines of Arminius touching Freewill,
Predestination, and Reprobation* The said doctrines being mantained and taught
by many of the most Learned Protestants of England, at this present time.

WRITTEN By O. N. heertofore of the University of Oxford.

Quoties volui congregare filios tuos, etc. and noluisti? Matthew. 23. Qui se
existimat stare, vide at ne cadat. 1. Cor. 10. Permissu Superiorum, 1634.

THE ARGUMENT of the Dialogue.
CERTAIN Gentlemen of Quality, being sent out of England, to negotiate with
the States of Holland, touching Public Affairs, one Enthusiastus is appointed
(as their Chaplayne) to accompany them. This Enthusiastus, being supposed a
Doctor of Divinity, made in one of our English Universities, is a Man (as his
name imports) much relying upon his own Illuminations from God, touching
matters of Faith, and interpretation of Scripture. He is a great Precisian, and
(though learned) much adverse to the Positions, and Theses, maintained by the
Arminians.

Now this English company lying at the Hage, and having conueniency of leisure,
Enthusiastus entreats some of the chiefest of them to accompany him to
Leyden, being some few hours journey from the Hage. He tells them, that his
meaning is, to dispute with Arminius (Professor in that Vnuiuersity) touching
three Questions believed by the Arminians of England. The Gentlemen accord to
his request. The questions do concern Freewill, Predestination, and
Reprobation.

At their coming to Leyden, they find Arminius, reading his Public Lecture in
the common Schools of the University. The Lecture ended, and salutations done,
Enthusiastus acquainteth Arminius with the occasion of himself and his
companies repair thither. Arminius willingly yields thereto. Thereupon they
begin a serious disputation touching the former Points of Doctrine, according
to their different Tenets of them, in the open Schools, and eye of the present
Auditory. What is the event of this disputation, the end of the Dialogue
relates.

Thus far concerning the fictio^ of this Dialogue. The Author whereof
supposes Arminius to be living at this present, and to have read all such
Books of Protestants, as have been written, touching the Questions here
disputed of. All which liberty the Nature of a Dialogue permits to any
Writer.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the Right Reverend Lords, the LL. Archbishops of
England: And to the right Worshipful, the Heads, and Masters of the Colleges
of both Universities.
MOST Reverend Lords, and you other Learned men of our Universities (whose due
Panegyricks, and Laudatiues deserve to proceed from a more skillfull Pen,
then mine:) you are not to think strange, that I make bold to dedicate this
my small Treatise to your selves. The reason is manifest, and it is this.

Common Report (and you know the vulgar saying, Vox populi, vox Dei) though it
often err in its own agitation, has nevertheless voyced it much throghout
this Realm, that diverse of You do entertain in your judgments, certain
Positions in doctrine, not long since revived by Iacobus Arminius, heertofore
the public Poofessour of Leyden in Holland: To wit; 1. Touching man's having
Free Will. 2. That no man is infallibly assu- of his Salvation. 3. That
justifying Faith may be lost. 4. And finally, that God does not reprobate any
man to damnation, without preuision, or reference to his bad and wicked
works. Yea some of you have in your public Sermons learnedly defended
certain of these Points. And of my own knowledge there are diverse in the
Universities, most strong in the said doctrines.

The truth of this then being so fully acknowledged, I (who do run one, and
the same line of doctrine with you heerin) have undertaken to vvarrant and
make good in these ensuing leaves, the most Ancient, and Orthodoxall Verity of
the said Points: and therefore in regard of this assumed Attempt, my Ambition
has embouldned this my Dedication.

I presume, that most of you, who are Patrones of these* Theorems, have
already fortifyed your Judgments (through your own* Reading) with most of the
Arguments, produced in this Treatise; and therefore in this respect, to You it
will prove less necessary, or profitable* Nevertheless, that* those, who
are Anomalous, and irregular Professors among you (as I may term them,) and
who through the crookednes of their own paths, do tread different steps from
You therein, may see, upon what grounds (both Divine and Humane) the former
Articles are seated, and* consequently how incompatible the contrary Tenets
are with the holy Scriptures; I have to that end undertaken this Province.

The matter is here delivered in the form of a Dialogue, as best comporting
with the fastidious humor of the present times The Interlocutours are,
Arminius himself (whom I suppose to be now living) and one Enthusiastus an
Imaginary English Doctor of Divinity; a man, sufficiently learned, but a great
Precisian, and a resolute Enemy to the former Positio^s of Arminius. What
otherwise this ae^ry Doctor is, You may casely conjecture; since to you who
are learned, his name (as coming from the Greek Verb (...)) is his
Character. Now touching the further fiction of this Dialogue, I refer you to
the Argument thereof prefixed before.

If this my labor may become serviceable to any* I shall hold my self
sufficiently recompensed: but howsoever, my comfort is, that the Highest ever
sets a poise more upon the intention of the Worker, then upon the work it
self: and well I am assured, that my* intention heerin is Azimous, and pure,
as leuelling only at the spiritual good of others.

That I partly become Anonymous, or rather (in outvvard show) Fatherless to
this my own Issue, conte^ting my self only (as it were) to Anagra^matize my
name under two letters, your Ingenuity and Ca^dour (I hope) will pardon. The
maine reason of thus masking my self, is this follovving: admitting once the
Author heerof to be certainley known, what sallies, and incursions (more
against my Person, then against my Treatise) vould the* maintainers of the
contrary doctrines make with their Pens? And how would they, and their
followers (being so infinite in number, and warranted with the stream and
current of the times) even shovvre down words (of Disgrace, and Co^tumely
upon me* So loath I am to stand within the breath of such men.

But now, Reverend men, I will exp^tiate no further; noither will I distune
your ears with any longer difcourse; as being more vvilling to spread my
self in Matter, then in Words* Therefore referring this small work (I could
vvish to your Patronage) I hope, to your perusal, I commit You to the
Protection of him, who is the Protector of Israel, and do rest,

Yours in all dutiful Obseruancy, O. N.

AN APOLOGY OF ENGLISH ARMINIANISME OR A DIALOGVE, Wherein is proved, 1. That
Man has freewill: 2. That no Man is certain of his own Salvation: 3. That no
man is reprobated, without preuision of his Works.
The Interlocutors are, Arminius, and Enthusiastus.
Enthusiastus. LEARNED Arminius; Now after your Lecture is ended, God save you.
We were loath to interrupt you in the middle thereof. We have been at your
lodging to enquire for you, and your Servants directed us to these publi^
Schools; assuring us, that we should find you reading at this hour. Glad I
am, that it has so fallen out, that my ears have been witness thereof.


Arminius. Gentlemen. You are all strangers to me, and therefore I know not how
to proportion my resalutatio^; but yet I will make bold to use toward you
those words of Holy Writ: Pet. 1.
Gratia vobis, and pax multiplicetur. Indeed you have found me performing my
Calendary and weekly task of Reading. I could wish that my Lecture had been
worthy your Audience. But I pray you Sir (if so I may make bold) what is the
occasion of your, and the rest of your Companies arrival at this place?


Enthusiastus. I will relate to you the Motive of our coming hither. Take
notice then, that whereas his Majesty of England (whom God long preserve in a
most happy government over us) has sent over certain Knights, and others of
Quality here present (and with them my self) to negotiate with the High Lords
States of Holla^d, touching matters of State: And having stayed some weeks at
the Hage without effecting any thing (so intricate, and delaying is this (...)
of State business) and my self unwilling to rauell out week after week in
doing nothing, have taken the advantage of the Vacancy of some few days, in
coming with these worthy Knights and Gentlemen, to visit this your Vuiuersity
of Leyden (being not past half a days journey off from us) and particularly
your Self.


Arminius. You are all as welcome, as my power and ability can affoard. I will
show you our University before your departure; though indeed it must needs
appear in your eyes, but drouping, and of mean esteem, in regard of your Two
of England, famous throughout all Christendom; in respect whereof our poor
Academy may stand, but for a foil. But Sir, if without offense, I would
entreat your Name in particular, seeing discoursing with men, whose names are
not known, is, as if men should walk together in darkness.


Enthusiastus. My name is Enthusiast^^; and I an^ a Doctor (though unworthy) of
Divinity, created in our own Universities. And know you further (Worthy
Arminius) that I have often heard of you in England; though I could wish, that
the report of you had taken its rise, and beginning from some other grounds
then it does. That you are learned, w^ all know, and by this your Lecture, now
read, we may rest no less assured. But part of your learning rests (I fear)
in maintaining unwarrantable Assertions, and such as are repugnant to the Word
of God.

For it is known, that (among other peculiar Doctrines, broach^d by you) you
teach, with a strong delivery of your self therein, That Man has Freewill;
that Justifying faith may be lost, and finally, Uncertainty of Salvation, and
Reprobation: Points, which (I much doubt) no good Professor of the Gospel
does maintain. And which is the worst, these your Doctrines by me r^hearsed
(upon all which you briefly touched eue^ now in this your Lecture) ^aue already
invaded (if Report do not vaynely and idly multiply it self) the Judgments of
diverse most remarkable men in England; and such, who both for learning and
places of dignity which they hold, are in our own Euangelic all Spherc, Stars
of the greatest Magnitude. Nay the Very stones of our Episcopal and Cathedral
Churches, as also the walls of the Colleges in our Universities (even in a
speaking silence) do Echo forth the great hurt by you perpetrated: Hinc illae
lachrymae.

Furthermore, which I relate with disconsolate sighs and lamentation; Such men
in our own Conntry, who have embraced these your doctrines, do among us in
this respect take their Denomniation even from your Name, they being in the
vulgar speech styled, for the better distinguishing them from other more pure
members of our Church, Arminians: A demonstration euicting, that your Doctrines
are Innouations; since in every innovation of doctrine the Professors commonly
take their Name from the first Coyner of the sa^^: So true is that saying of
Chrysostom: Prout Hom. 33. in Act. A post.
Haereliarcha noman, it^ Secta vocatur: Pardon, ^yr, this my playnesse, and
vnfyled words, I pray you.

Now then, seeing I do hold* yo^^ former doctrines, as incompatible with the
Scriptures; Therefore, I confess, my chief Allectiue of Visiting you, (
Arminius) is to enter into a Scholasticall Duellisme, or dispute in all
Christian fervor and sobriety: Pede pes, densusque viro vir, that so, in the
sight of these Gentlemen here present, I may either alter your judgment, or be
by you altered. But why do I intimate in the least ^orte this later, since my
own Profession does warrant my attempt, and the Illustrious radiancy of the
Truth on my side does infallibly promise me the better of the day?


Arminius. Enthusiastus (since it seems, you so are called) and you worthy Men
hither accompanying him, I must tell you all, that the Occasion of your Coming
to me is most strange, and unexpected. Yet seeing every good Christian is
obliged (when just reason thereof is presented) to give an account of his faith
and Religion; Cord Romans ^^
creditur ad iusti^ia^, ore fit Confessio ad salutem: I shall not, according to
my ability, be slow therein.

But before you begin, I must put you in mind, that where you confess, that
diverse of the Chiefest men in your Country (both for learning and Authority)
maintain my former Theses and Positions; this greatly turns to the honor of
my Cause. For why should such eminent and selected Deuines give their full
assent thereto (and this contrary to the present stream and sway of the times)
but that the doctrines (so intertayned by them) are warra^ted with an
inexpugnable Truth and Certainty?

Again, where you say, that such Worthy men (among you) take their
denomination from me; and consequently, and by implication you brand me with
the odious Name of an Arch-Heretike; my answer to you shall be in all candor
and sobriety (for I am unwilling by way of retaliation to conuitiate you, or to
bandy words of disgrace, especially in my own University, and you being but a
stranger, since this would be accounted but Corid^nisme and Rusticity) that I
am assured* you cannot justly throw upon me any such imputation. My reason is
this* They only from whom others take the appellation for matters of faith, are
to be reputed for Arch Heretics, who did first dogmatize, and teach Opinions
in faith never before heard, as believed by the Church of God: Such were Arius,
Eutiches, Pelagius, N^storius, and some others. Now if it can be made good (as
I am assured it can) that the former Tenets by you mentioned, and by me
believed, be concordant to the sacred Scriptures; and were with an unanimous
consent believed by the ancient Church of Christ; then I justify, that the
hateful name of Arch-Heretike, cannot in any sort be appropriated unto me.

But seeing you are determined to enter into a serious dispute (as you say)
touching the former Articles; I would willingly know, what Method you intend to
keep herein? That is, where yo^ will begin, and whether your self will first
oppose and object, or answer? the choice whereof, for the greater satisfaction
of these Gentlemen (your worthy Associates) I freely give to you. And lastly, I
would know, whether you would rather dispute privately or publicly. If
Privately, then if it please you and these Gentlemen to accompany me to my
house, you shall enjoy (if nothing else, yet) better priuacy of discourse.


Enthusiastus. O no. Our dispute shall be open and public, I mean in these your
own public Schools; This shall be the place of our Conflict, that so in the
Theater and view, not only of these English Ge^tlemen, coming with me, but
also of this Presence (your own daily Anditory) you may disauow that faith, to
the which you have hitherto been so pitifully enthralled. Here within these
Walls the Hurt has been committed, and within these walls, I trust by dint of
Argument, and by assistance of the Highest (who ever affoardeth his peculiar
Illuminations, to his Elect, of which number I am ascertayned, to be ^ne) to
force you to disclayme from your former Positions, and thereby partly to
repair the d^mage.

Yet before we come to dispute, you must give me leave (thereby to affoard ^
more full passage to my grief) to tell you, that I much fear, your defense of
these interwounding* Controversies, proceeds in you from a thirsty desire to be
much spoken of by the tongue of Fame; and so to become Vir The^tralis, as
placed upon the stage of the Worlds Eye. The which I am the rather induced to
think; since you are not content to confyne your said doctrines, within the
compass of these Walls, to your own Auditory; But withal, to diuulge them
in your discoursing Papers; the immateriall (wellings of your Pen.

I will not say, how for better, but I may well say, how less hurtful (in
respect of others) it is, to be a secret Adiaphorist, or Neutrall in Religion
(so keeping his poison to himself) then with a certain Magistrality and
assum^^ Authority to frame and mould such doctrines, which stand so adverse to
the Word of the Lord, as that I may iustly^ style the^ to be Hyper-hereticall*
(...) ce^ding the nature of ordinary (...)

Now then, Arminius, you being the Architect of such strange doctrines, the
belief whereof does threaten an interminable perdition to the belieuers; it is
evident that your Sin in Teaching is far more reprouable, then it is in
your followers in their Believing. The reason being, in that, whereas the
ignorant Sectary merely Priuatiuely belieueth not that, which is True* the
learned (such as you are) belieueth with a formed and positive Faith, (to
speak in a restrained sense) that, which is false.

I here pass over, with a gentle touch, how in defense of your former
doctrines (to the dishonor of your own Cause) you over nearly interleague
with the Papists, who (as it should seem by some of their Books) equally
maintain with you the said Paradoxes. But I will stay my self from launcing
further in my Reproualls, having paid in these my speeches some Tribute and
Duty to the Truth, and to my own fervor: Psalm ^^.
Zelus domus tu^ comedit me.


Arminius. This your long (I will not say, tedious Discourse, discovers,
(...) your Name well comports with your own comportment: but you may take
notice, that my Scene is not, fruitlesly to wast the time in vaunting Words*
the froath of speech.

Where you say, that the defense of my doctrines rises from a certain
Ve^tuosity, and windy desire of Praise* It seems, you taste every thing through
your own enuenomed spitle; but I do assure you (to speak in my own defense)
I do little prize this poor weak breath of Men's mouths. Where you charge me,
with inter-leaging (as you call it) with the Papists; I reply heerto. True it
is, that the Papists do hold the said Articles with us, but not with the same
Conditions (I take it) and in the same manner.

Again, admit there were no disparity between them and us, touching the
believing; yet what does this enforce? Can it be inferred, that because the
Papists believe them; Therefore we ought not to believe them? Most
inconsequently inferred; since by this form of arguing, we should not believe
that there are any Scriptures* that Christ dyed for man's Redemption; that there
are three. Persons, and but one God; seeing the Papists do believe these
Articles. But Sir, be not lavish of time, but without futher surpluzage of
unnecessary discourse (which does but obtund men's ears) hasten to dispute: And
what I shall be able to produce. either in defense of my own Positio^s, or in
assaulting of yours (though these two points be partly coincident, and
interueyre the one the other) the Event will prove. Therefore I entreat you to
begin. And Gentlemen if it please you, you may take your Seats.


Enthusiastus* Well then: we will proceed thereto. And seeing you leave it to my
Election, I will first dispute and object, and will produce most Unanswerable
Testimonies of sacred Writ, delivered (without the least doubt) by me in the
intended sense of the Holy Ghost; Spiritus, vbi Joan* 3.
vult, spirat. And I will begin with the Article of Freewill; in that the
Question of Freewill is a Cardinal, and supreme Point, being indeed the hynge,
whereupon the other Questions following by necessary inference, do rest, and
rely.


Arminius. I like well of your Method. And you say truly, in calling the
Question of Freewill a supreme Point at this present, since it being once
proved that man wants Freewill, it the follows, that there is a certainty
of our Reprobation, Election, or Predestination. As also on the contrary part,
if it can be demonstrated, that man has Freewill; then of necessity from
thence may be inferred, that there is no certainty of Predestination, or
Reprobation.

But now to come to the subject, of which in the first place you undertake to
dispute, I hold it expedient, that we first both agree of the definition of
Freewill, and of other cautions necessarily conducing to every act, flowing
from Freewill; the which being set down before, and circumstanced with due
restrictions, and so acknowledged by us both, my presaging thoughts foretell
me, that you will but idly diuerberate the air, in alleging the most of your
Scripturall Authorities; since the Answers to them you shall find to be
vertually inuolued in the said definition, cautions, and explications.

And first to begin with the definition. The Deuines Aug. in En^hirid. c. ^0^.
do defyne Freewill to be: A faculty of Reason and the Will, by the which Good
is chosen, through Gods grace assisting; or Evil, through the absence of the
same Grace. Now for the better explication of this Definition, we are first to
understand, that Freewill can choose evil of it self; but good, through the
assistance and cooperation of Gods grace. Secondly, that Freewill belongs
only to an Intelligent and Rational Nature; to wit, to God, Angels, and men.
Thirdly, that Freewill is exercised only about Means conducing to an End, and
not about the End it self. Fourthly, that Freewill consists in choosing one
thing before another; and consequently, where there is no diversity of things,
there the Freedom of the will cannot be exercised. Fifthly, that the freedom
of will requires a freedom, not only from Coaction and constraint, but also
from all Necessity; so as the will is with no necessity carried ^o choose this
rather the^ that, but (...) choose whether it self will.

Thus much for the greater illustration of the definition of Freewill* an^ what
Freewill is in its own Nature Now where you say, that you will begin with
producing in the first pla^ your Testimonies from the Holy Scriptures, (as
justly they deserve the first place, and all precedence) for the impugning of
Freewill; therefore as above I intimated, I will set down before, other
certain, true, and acknowledged Cautions, which I trust being truly balanced,
will obtund and blunt the edge and force of the said Authorities* as being
alleged through mere d^tortion, and misapplication of them.

Of these cautionary Annotations, the first is, that the liberty of the will
does not exclude the cooperation, and help of God; nor Gods working excludes
Freewill. Seeing, though the cooperation of God be ever presupposed* yet it is
in our power to choose this or that, and therefore that sentence is most true;
God works all our works, but yet not without us, that is, not without our
free Consent thereto.

Secondly, we are to conceive, that God in cooperating with us in our Actions,
works either ^fficienter (as the School-Deuines do speak) yet this by the
interueniency of some form, imprinted by God in our wills, to wit, by ^o wring
into us his Grace, by which ^e enclineth our will to good Actions; ^or else God
works in our wills Obiectiue, and efficaciter, yet so as this efficacy
proceeds not so much from the force of the persuasion of God in us, as from
the disposition of our will, the which disposition God foreseeth. This is
meant, when God propounds any thing through internal persuasion, and that he
sees the will is apt to consent thereto. And Gods working in our wills, by
either of these two former ways, is no hinderance to the Freedom of our will,
since (admitting either of these kinds of Gods working within us) the Will
still remaynes free to choose this, or that; or to choose, or not to choose at
all.

The last Animaduersion may be, that there is great difference between
Freedom of Election, and freedom of Execution. The first is ever necessary to
^ which one both (...) and ^ad^ ^ction to do^, and y^^ (...) freedom the Will
is in (...) f^^strated, or ^^ned thereby. Now these Cautions ^^ing promis^d,
you may ( (...) begin at your pleasu^^, to draw y^^ Authorities out of God^
holy (...) for the impugning of (...).


Enthusiastus. All these your Paraphr acti^ all obs^^uations I allow well of,
they b^^^ ^ounded partly in Divinity, and part in force of Nature:
notwithstanding hope to produce such ^^^are and ^^uing passages of Scripture,
as throu^^ their euidency, they cannot by (...) means be de^or^^d; and through
the force and strength they cannot be (...) wered.

And first I allege that text, (...) it is said: Joan. ^.
No man can come to me, (...) the Father, that sent me, draw him. And (...)
Apostle inc^lcateth the same thing (...): ^. Cor. 3
We are not sufficient of our (...) to think any thing, as of our selves;
(...) ^^at say you to these texts, before we ^^leadge any other?


Arminius. I reply, that all these places are il^^^^trate^ (as making nothing
against (...)) from one of the Cautions a^^ue expressed. For we teach, that the
^^^edome of the Will is not by Nature do any good work, but only by (...):
therefore in that one comes Christ, this is effected by the Will of (...),
cooperating with the Grace of (...), and not otherwise.

But ( Enthusiastus) in my judgment (...) been more convenient to have (...)
borne the alleging of this first (...), seeing Chrysoston^^ introduces (...)
Manichees, (who denied Freewill) ^^^eadging this text in defense of their
(...), and then himself answers (...) these words: Chry^ost. in Ioannem
Hom. 45^ versus (...)
No man comes (...), except my Father, who sent me, draw (...). Here the
Manichees rise up, conten^^g by testimony of this text, that we can ^^thing of
our selves; but this takes not away our freewill, but shows that it u^^deth
Gods help. Now I hold i^ a blemi^^ to you, to compart with th^se, ((...) were
condemned in the F^imit^^ Church) not only in their doctrin^^ but also in their
proofs of the said doctrines, since it implies, that the be^ weapons,
wherewith you impugn the truth, are borrowed from the confess^^ Enemies of the
Truth.

The second passage alleged, by r^tortion makes wholly against you, an^ in
behalf of me, for it admit ^^th, th^^ we have sufficiency: Only the A post^
teaches us, that our sufficiency (...) think any good thing, is not of
ou^selues, that is, by force of Nature; b^^ through the help and a yd of God,
(...) is, by force of Gods Grace assisti^^ man's will therein. And according
here to M. Perkins thus writ^th: In his reformed Catholic page ^7.
(...) God commands men to repent, at the sam^ time by his grace he enableth
them both (...) will, and to desire to repent, as also (...) to repent.

To the third text. The answer (...) to is* grounded upon the former Ca^^tion,
or Annotation: for God worked in us both to will, and to (...) plash (...) his
Grace, but he works not this without our own cooperation therein. Now Gods
working, and man's working are two different things: neither are they in
themselves incompatible, but may stand together. This is necessarily euicted
out of the words immediately aforegoing in the same place: With fear and
trembling work your salvation. And therefore the foresaid M. Perkins truly thus
writes: In his reformed Cath. page 14. vid. p^ 16.
Man's freewill concurres with Grace, as a Co-worker; and being moved by Grace,
it acts, and moves it self: A point so evident, that Austin himself
answers this very text in these words: Aug. tom. 7. de gratia and libero
arbitrio. c. ^^
Non quia dixit etc. Not because it is said, it is God that works in you both
to will and to accomplish, that therefore he may be thought to take away
freewill from man etc. Thus far of these places, which receive one and the same
answer.

By this now ( Enthusiastus) you may see, how rouingly they are alleged by
you, against the doctrine of Freewill. But to these you may also range (if you
will) these following texts of Scripture, produced by diverse for the impugning
of Freewill, they receiving their full satisfaction from the answer^ given to
these last. The Texts are these* Isa. 26.
Thou O Lord have wrought all our works in us. And again* Matt. 10.
One sparrow shall not fall upon the ground without your Father. And yet more:
Who works all things after the Counsel of his own^ will besides the like
Text in Romans c. 11, and 1. Cor. 12. And lastly, where it is said. 3. Reg. ^.
Let our hearts so incline to thee, that they may keep thy commandments.


Enthusiastus. Well ( Arminius) if this my first encounter has not been
forcible enough to batter down the walls of your innouations; yet I trust my
second charge shall prove more powerful, or rather irresistible: what then say
you to these following Comments of Texts (for so in regard of their
perspicuity, I may rather term them, then Texts themselves) as where it is
said: Ierem. 10.
I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk,
or direct his steps. And again: Prou. 20.
The steps of man are ruled by the Lord, how can a man then understand his own
way? And more: Prou. 16.
The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord directs his steps. Lastiy:
(to omit some others for breuity) Prou. 1^.
The preparations of the Heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is in
the Board. See you not ( Arminius) how these Texts (as so many murdering
Pieces) do play upon the weak fort of man's Freewill?


Arminius. Good Enthusiastus, I partly pity you, to see your judgment thus
sealed up rather with prejudice, then cleared with force of proof. For here
again I recurre (as to my Asylum, or Sanctuary) to the state of the question,
and the Gautions above expressed, and by us both acknowledged. For there we
learn, that there is great disparity between man's Freewill, and the execution
of that, of which the Freewill makes choice to will. The Execution of the
thing, which we will, is not ever in our power; and this only (though to our
purpose merely impertinent) these former sacred Scriptures do euict* but the
freedom of the will (which is only in question between us) they do not at all
touch, much less overthrow.

Yea which is more, some of these ^^ry Texts by you urged, do rather prove the
freedom of the will (so often time^) it happens, that a man finds a weapon, by
which another wounds him:) for where it is said; The preparations of the Heart
are in man; And again: The Heart of man purposes his way etc* what other
construction can these receive, then that man through the freedom of his own
will prepares his heart, and purposes his way; though the Execution and actual
performance of those points are not ever in his own power? Therefore we must
remember* that only to will, and not to will, (and no^ actually to perform the
thing willed, or not willed) is the true Object of Freewill.

Thus far ( Enthusiastus*) where you find your self deceived in producing
these former passages of Holy Writ, since they in no sort prove any thing
against the true Tenet of Freewill, neither immediately, and exp^essedly,
neither by any Inferentiall deduction^* so certain it is, that your murdering
pieces (of which you before ^au^ted) are charged but with certain Paper-bullets
of strayned and wrested Authorities. But if it please you, proceed further in
this your offensive war; I mean in your assault against Freewill, and I shall
use the best means of defense, I may.


Arminius. I do assure you, your answers are unexpected, and make my mind (I
will not say my judgment) a little to fall. and let down. But I will proceed
further: for admitting, that the former Texts do but idly diuerberate the air,
(as above you said) for want of true application, yet if there be but any One
Text of Scripture, which in the true construction thereof does clearly impugn
the doctrine of Freewill, then is your cause wholly become prostrate, and
leuelled with the ground.

These then other passages I urge. As first: 1. Reg. 10.
Part of the army went with him (viz. Saul) whose hearts God had touched. In
like sort: Prou. ^^
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he turns it whithersoeuer it
shall please him. To these places diverse others might be ranged, as where it is
said: Ezech. 36.
I will give unto you a new heart, and I will make; that you shall walk in my
precepts. And that other passage: Psalm. 1^8.
Incline my heart to thy testimonies. The li^^^ text whereto, is in the Book of
the ^. Reg. 8.
Kings. Now from all these it unavoidably is inferred, that it is God alone
without any concurrence of our selves, which works all good in us: so clear
are these sacred Testimonies for the taking away of all Freewill in man.


Arminius. Enthusiastus; It is the true application of Scripture, and not a
gallantry of vanting words, which must overcome me in this question: And
therefore as to the Texts above by you alleged, so also to these last the
answer is pote^tially included in the former sta^e of the question of
Fr^ewill, and in the annexed Annotations. For it is above expressed, that God
works in all our wills, either for the desiring of any thing, or for the
flying from any thing; but yet he so works, without any impeachment to the
liberty of our will: for though God does work in us, yea sometimes infallibly*
yet our Freewill is in no sort end angered thereby; the reason hereof being (as
is above intimated) in that the infallibility ryseth not from the vehemence of
Gods motion, but from the preuision, and foresight of the readiness of the will,
to concur with his inspiration. For God enclyneth not the heart of man by
forcing it but only by inuiting by his inspirations: yet so, as that it is in
the power of the Will to consent, or not consent to Gods inspirations. But
certain it is, that Gods preuision, and freewill are compatible, and the one
is no bar to the other. Now, apply this Annotation to these last texts of
Scripture, and you shall find how easily your supposed difficulty touching the
said Authorities, and man's Freewill, is loosed and dissolved.


Enthusiastus. Well ( Arminius) if I should grant, that for the present, I
could not reply to your answers given against all the former divine
Authorities, (which admitting, I am rather to ascribe it to my own defect,
then to any defect in the said Authorities, for prooffe of the point intended:)
Yet what answer can you shape to these several Texts of Scripture, by which
we are taught, the^ we are dead to sin, and consequently that man's will is
ever languide* an^ faint (through want of power an^ freedom) to raise it self
to any spiritual actions? as where it is said: Ephesians. 2
You* who were dead in trespasses and sins etc* And again we thus read:
Ibidem.
When we were dead by sin etc.


Arminius. The transparency of this objection even an ordinary eye can pierce;
for a^ the Text says: We are dead by sin; so also it adds in the places
alleged* that we are quickened in Christ. Which addition imports, that though
of our selves we are not able to perform any* spiritual actions; yet Christ
has so quickened us with his preventing Grace, as that thereby we are made able
to produce the said spiritual actions: and thus* this quickening in Christ,
implies only an infusion of Gods Grace, (which I willingly acknowledge) but
not a taking away of the freedom of man^ will: so wildly (as I may say) these
two^ passages of Scripture are shot by you* still glancing upon one* point or*
othe^^ impertinent to the controversy ventilated between us. But I pray you (
Enthusiastus) proceed further in your Scripturall proofs.


Enthusiastus. I must confess, that the most forcing authorities of sacred
Scripture, which either I, or my partners can allege for the impugning of
Freewill, are already drawn out by me. And though some other Texts might be
insisted upon, yet I foresee the answer to them in your judgment, might be
appropriated out of the former Animaduersions. But ( Arminius) grant, for the
time, that the Scripture does not expressly and articulately condemn the
doctrine of* Freewill for Heresy; does it therefore follow, that the doctrine
thereof is Orthodoxall? Most inconsequently inferred. The Turkish Religion, and
the many Heresies registered by Epiphanius, Austin, Jerome, and other Fathers of
those early times, are not punctually and literally condemned by Gods Holy Writ
(for hardly could they be condemned particulerly by the Scripture, they rising
many ages after the Scripture was written) an^ yet no man will from thence
conclude^ that those doctrines, or Religions (...) true.

The like we may say here touching the doctrine of Freewill. For* the truth of
the point hereis, that a doctrine o^ Article of faith is to receive its
warrant, not because the Scripture dot^ not in particular anathematize the said
doctrine; it by omission speaking nothing thereof at all: but the said doctrine
receaues its authority, in that (...) receaueth from the Scripture certain^
evident and affirmative proofs for the defense of the said doctrine in
particular. Therefore ( Arminius) except yo^ be able (as I presume you are not)
to^ fortify, and establish the Doctrine of Freewill with some clear, evident,
and unanswerable Texts of Scripture, your cause is nothing aduantaged, thoug^^
the former divine passages above produced, do not so unavoidably (as ^ first
perhaps expected they should) confute the doctrine of Freewill.


Arminius. This which you speak of the Scriptures passing over in silence any
doctrine, or confirming the contrary doctrine by evident proofs, is in part
true, I grant, though it be alleged by you at this present merely as a
subterfugious evasion, because you are not able* to produce so much as One
Text, to impugn our doctrine withal. Though at other times you, and yours do
cry out with great exaggeration in words, that the doctrine of Freewill is
most repugnant to the Holy Scripturs; the maintayners thereof being deadly
wounded with every splinter of the several passages thereof: so variable and
several is your comportment herein, at several times.

Now whereas you say, it is more peculiarly incumbent upon me, affirmatively to
fortify the doctrine of Freewill by evident Texts of Scripture, or ^ls the
doctrine thereof to be abando^ed, as false and erroneous: I do agree with you
herein, and am ready to fortify the said doctrine with choking and
Unanswerable places of those divine writings, if so your self has already
finished your Scene of obiecting.


Enthusiastus. I will presently surrender the fu^ction of Oppone^cy to you. For
I gran^ that there ought to be according to (...) method of Schools certain
vicissit^^ des and alternations of turns betwee^ the parties disputant.
Neither is it (...) reason justifiable, that the one (...) should be forced to
maintain only defensive, and never an offensive (...)

But before I end, I must tell you, th^^ the chief Doctor of Christ's Chur^^
since the Apostles (I mean Austin) (...) most strong in the denial of
Freewill For thus he writes: Lib. 6. de Genes. ad literam. cap. 15.
Conditoris (...) luntas, rerum necessitas est. The will and t^^ mind of the
Creator, is the Necessity (...) things. Again: Vbi supra. c. 17.
That is necessarily (...) come to pass, which God wills, and they are truly
hereafter to be, which God foreseeth. And lastly, omitting some other passages;
In Enchirid. c. 30.
Libero arbitrio male (...) homo, and se perdidit, and seipsum. Man (me^ning
our first parent) by using Freewill badly, did both loose thereby himself,
(...) Freewill.


Arminius. How easily is the cloud here dis^elled. For the meaning of the two
first ^laces is, that what God will have to ^ome to pass, is infallibly to
come to (...) yet speaking of man's actions, it ^^mmeth to pass with the
freedom of man's will: For God does not destroy Nature first created by him,
but will, that every thing should be effected in ^^ch manner, as best sorteth
to the Nature of the thing.

To the third place, I answer, That (...) first Father is said to have lost
Freewill; because by his fall the Freewill of man was made more feeble, and
faint. For that Austins meaning is not, that Freewill was absolutely lost by
Adam (as though it never after were to be in rerum natura) appears from those
other words: and se perdidit. For Adam did not loose himself, by any
extinguishment of himself, or not after being; but because Adam thereby was
^ade far more worse, his Freewill being nothing so vigorous, and active, as
^ore it was.


Enthusiastus. I will not much labor, in seeki^^ to eneruate these your
answers, (...) they shall pass, as matters hanging (...) suspense. But there
is one difficul^ drawn from force of reason, which eu^^ arresteth my judgment,
from giui^^ assent to your doctrine. And this is, (...) great repugnancy, which
is between Gods foreknowledge, and Freewill: For (...) God do foresee such a
thing will b^ then certainly it must be: and if ce^tainly it must be, where
then is man Freewill in doing, or not doing the sai^ thing?


Arminius. This doubt is partly above v^foulded: but to answer more
particulerly thereto. The prescience and foresight of God is most certain, and
(...) that it imports no necessity of things to come, is thus proved, even
from (...) authority of Austin, who thus disp^^teth. De libero arhitrio l. ^.
c. ^.
If the foreknowledge (...) God do impose a necessity to things f^ture, this
falls out, either as it is (...) sutely a foreknowledge, or else because it ^^
in particular the foreknowledge of God. Not the first, because it would upon
the same ground follow, that not only the ^oreknowledge of God, but the
foreknowledge of man should impose the ^ike necessity to things. But this
later point is most false: for example, if it were revealed by divine power to
a man, that the next day it would rain, yet this man's foreknowledge is not the
cause of the rain, and yet no doubt it would rain, but no less contingently,
then if the man had not foreknowne the same at all.

Neither the foreknowledge, or preuision of God, I mean, as it is particularly
of God, imposes any necessity to things. And the proof hereof is this: As
God foreknoweth, not only what man hereafter will do; so also, he foreknoweth
what himself hereafter will do. And yet Gods prescience does not force God to
do that, which he will do. Neither therefore upon the same reason, does his
foreknowledge force man in his actions. Again: God did foresee the fall of
Adam; and yet in the judgment of the chiefest Deuines, Adam had Freewill before
his fall.


Enthusiastus. But how comes it to pass, tha^ those things, which are
certainly for (...) known, have ever the event, when yet they are effected
contingently (as you say) and may in that respect not be a^ all?


Arminius. The reason heerof is: Because wh^ foreknoweth a thing hereafter to
b^ effected, does in his understanding precurre, or prevent the effecting of
the thing, and beholds it as done, before it be done: but that which is done
cannot be undone; although it be effected voluntarily, or contingently. But to
conclude this point; the concordancy of Gods prescience with Freewill is so
acknowledged, even by the Deuines, as that D. Willet thus plain^ly writes
heerof: D. Willet in Synops. p. 809.
God foreseeth, but wills not sin.


Enthusiastus. Indeed there is no such repugnancy after the true ballancing of
the difficulty, between Gods provision and Freewill, as at the first it
appears to be; whereby we may learn, that that sentence is true: Secu^d^^
cogitationis, prudentiores.
(...). But I do find a far greater labor to reconcile Gods Cooperation with
man's Freewill, so, as they may both stand together, and not exile and banish
one the other. For since God has decreed from all eternity, what shall be, or
what shall not be, I see not how any place can here be left for Freewill.


Arminius. O ( Enthusiastus) you must not measure the Mysteries of Christianity
by the false yard of Natural reason, or ma^s capacity: For though
demonstratiuely we were not able to reconcile Gods cooperation and Freewill,
yet neither of them are therefore to be denied, if so each of them receive their
particular warrant from the word of God.

Notwithstanding for your greater satisfaction ( Enthusiastus) I will set down
one way (among others) by which in the judgment of the greatest Deuines, Gods
cooperation and man's freedom of Will are reconciled. For thus they teach: To
wit, that the Divine Cooperation does bear it self, with reference only to
the Effect, and not to the cause: whereby is understood, that the concourse of
God does not determine our will, neither does it work upon the will; but
flows only into the Effect produces the Effect in the same moment, in the
which it is produced by our will: And yet the same Effect could not be
produced, if either Gods Cooperation, or Man's Will were wanting. They
illustrate this sentence from two, which bear a great stone, the which stone
the of one them could not carry: neither of those two men gives force to the
other, nor impelleth the other, and it is in the free choice of them both to
leave this burden. The like falls out in the Cooperation of God, and Ma^s-Wil
in the (...) thing.

And (...) this point: only before I end, I must tell you, that it seems
strange to me, to observe your humility (as I may term it) in descending to
the former* Arguments, drawn from humane Authorities and natural reason:
Seeing diverse of your judgment in the Question of Freewill, and the
inferentiall Conclusions resulting from thence, will in great venditation and
bravery of speech undertake to prove all such their assertions only from the
sacred word; scorning with a supercilious look all other kind of proofs
deduced, either from the Fathers, from Natural Reason, or from any other
humane authority whatsoever.


Enthusiastus. Well ( Arminius) I see here, what the judgment of the chiefest
Deuines are in this point. But now I will proceed no further in producing any
more kinds of proofs; It then rests upon you, to undergo the like labor,
by proving from the Scriptures and other Authorities, the Doctrine of Freewill:
Begin then at your pleasure.


Arminius. I embrace willingly that imposed labor; in the prosecuting whereof,
I will draw my first proofs from Reason; that done, I will next rise to human
Authorities; and lastly I will firmly entrench, or anchour my cause upon the
infallible authority of Gods sacred Writ; thus by ascending by degrees in
proofs, I will consequently ascend in the weight of the proofs, produced from
the said Authorities.

And to begin. My first argument Let us August. l. 14. de vera Religione.
take away by supposall Free will from man; then with all we take away all
punishment due for perpetrating of Sin; and rewards for the exercise of
Virtue. But this last point stands not with the practice, not only of Private
men, but of all good Common wealths, who ever retaliate Virtue with rewards,
and Vico with punishments.


Enthusiastus. This your first argument is in my judgment, but diaphorous, and
transparent. For So answers Calvin l. Instit. 2. c. 5.
it follows not, that man should not be punished, if he has not Freewill;
the reason hereof being, in that the punishment is due to the offense, which
offense is yet remaining in us, and indeed takes its whole em^nation from our
selves.


Arminius. Howsoever ( Enthusiastus) you all^uiate and sleighten the force of
this argument, yet is it insisted upon by Chrysostom, Jerome, and finally is
grounded upon force of Reason. Now more particulerly to answer here to, I say,
that in your Answer you offend in the Paralogisme, or Fallacy in Logic,
commonly called Petitio Principij, since you assume that as granted, which yet
is in controversy. For you in your dispute do presume, that the fault does
remain and flow from us, although we be forced through necessity to the
working thereof, and that it is not in our power to avoid Sin; so foully you
see you are mistaken in this your seeming answer. But I will proceed to a
second Argument.

Exyle Aug. l. de Vera relig. ^. 14.
and banish from man Freewill, ^.
exyle with all, all kinds of Counsels, and precepts among men, as
Exhortations, and persuasions to Virtue, all praise due to the workers thereof;
as also on the contrary side all de hortations and rebukes touching the
perpetrating of Vice and Impiety; since to what end tend these exhortations,
persuasions, reprehensions, prccepts etc. if so men can not do otherwise, then
they do?


Enthusiastus. I answer, So answers Calvin l. a. ^^ 5.
That dehortations and reproualls, or obiurgations are very profitable, though
man wants Freewill; since they are deservedly applied to the wicked, as a
scourge to their consciences in this life; and as a testimony in the next life,
whereby they rest ine^^cusable at the last day in the sight of God. In the like
sort, Exhortations, etc. are applied to the Elect, to the end, that as by the
inward spirit they are illuminated, that so externally they may be stirred up
to the hearing of the word: so by these out ward means they may be more
prepared for the receiving of the grace of God.


Arminius. Here a gain the second time ( Enthusiastus) you fall into the
former ditch (blush you not thereat?) I mean you commit the foresaid Elench of
Petitie principij. For you here again take as granted, that that is truly and
properly Sin, which is necessarily committed by man: but this is the main
controversy between you and us: for we eternally deny, that what of necessity
is committed, that can be properly Sin. Now out of this your Hypothesis and
supposall, you Ideate, and frame to your self those a^ry and imaginary Ends,
where unto are directed (as you say) exhortations, dehortations, praise,
disprayie, precepts, and the like, toward the Elect, and the wicked. For it is
most certain* that reprehensions, and correptions cannot be a scourge to the
conscience of those, who want Freewill.

Further more in confirmation of this Argument, I demand, why we use not to
Infants, and madmen ^ohortations to Virtue, and dissuasions from vice, but
only to men of ripe age, and such as be in perfect state in their wits? No
other reason can be given hereof, but that Infants and Madmen (after the
manner of beasts) are carried with a natural instinct, and innate impetuosity,
neither can they otherwise work; whereas men of ripe age, and enjoying their
wits, do choose through freedome^ of Will, what they will do, and is in their
power, if they will, not to choose at all. This Argument above is so forcible
and pressing, as that I find it used by L* de vera re^^g c. 14.
Austin. But I will proceed forward.

My third Argument. August. vbi supra.
Either Sin is necessary, or voluntary. If necessary, then it is no Sin,
and then by this* Sin should be no Sin, (which is impossible to be: If
Voluntary, then may Sin be avoided, and consequently man has Freewill; as
being a Creature, in whose power it is to sin, or not to sin.


Enthusiastus. I peremptorily deny the inference* that Sin if it be
necessary, is no Sin* For the So Calvin vbi supra.
Devil does ever necessarily* work evil, and yet he sins; as on^ the
contrary, side, the Angels and Saints* of Heaven do necessarily* work well^*
and yet their works are truly good.


Arminius. This your Answer is most languid and weak, for this enfuing
Reason: The Angels and the Devil, with reference to the last end, have not
freedom of Will* to wit, as it is free from Necessity; but only as it is free
from co^ction, and constraint. Nevertheless, with reference and respect to the
Means* their freedom of Will is free, eue^ from Necessity, seeing they do
Many things, which are in their power not to do; and for bear to do some
things, which they may (if they will) do. And in doing of these things the
Devils do truly sin, and Angels work a laudable work; yet can neither the
punishment due to the one, or essential reward due to the other increase
thereby, seeing both of their states are in termino, and therein al their works
do belong either to their damnation, or eternal felicity. But to leave this
point as sufficiently solued, (and the rather, seeing it was explaned above in
the definition of Freewill; to wit, that Freewill has reference to Media, and
not to finis; to wit, not to the end, but to means conducing to the End) I
will hasten to my last Reason, which I hold as a sealing argument; since the
force of it is even charactered in each man's Soul, by the finger of God himself.

We read, even in great and legible letters, written in the book of Sin,
when we through frailty do fall into Sin, in the time of temptation, we often
show great reluctation and restance to commit it, and by our happy resistance
we find a secret joy in our Souls: as on the other side, by giving our
unfortunate assent thereto, we are thereby touched with an inward remorse, and
provoked to a virtuous anger (as I may say) against our selves. Now, what do
this secret fretting and grudging, and this worm of remorse onforce, but that
it was wholly in our own power to resist our giving of assent to such wicked
temptations?

This is the Lecture, which every man living reads in the opened book of his
own actions. And therefore I confidently conclude, that it may be accounted
almost miraculous, that a man fynding this proceeding of the Soul in moral
Actions, I mean touching Vice or Virtue, (his own experience dictating the
same to him) should nevertheless be persuaded, that he has not freedom of
Will. And with this, I will pass toward other kinds of Proofs.


Enthusiastus. Well ( Arminius) I hold this your l^st Reason not to be
altogether neglected, since (as you say) our own experience is otherwise able
to chek our judgment therein. But I pray you rise up to other kinds of proofs.


Arminius. I will* And the next head, from whence I will draw my proofs, shall
be from the Confessions of the learned Protestants, diverse of which even
ouerborne with multitude of conuincing Authorities, have in the closure of all,
abandoned your doctrine herein, and entertained our Positive Article of man's
Freewill so as here ( Enthusiastus) I may say in the words of Holy Writ, Luc.
19.
De ore tuo te iudico: I convince you from the authority of such men, whom your
selves do (and most deservedly*) highly esteem.

And first may occur Castalio, who reprehendeth Beza himself for his corrupt
translating of the first Chapter of S. John. v. 12. To wit; As many as received
him, he gave power to be made the Sons of God; which Beza translated,
dignity. Castalio his words are these: (...) ^is c. 1. v. ^^. In defens.
Translat. page 183.
Pulcherrimum (...) que momenti locum deprauat etc. The fair and forcing place
of the first of (...) Beza depra^eth, thus converting it: As many as received
him, he gave them dignity (...) be made the Sons of God: (...) (...) est
potestas, nunquam dignitas etc. But the word (...) (here used) signifies
power but never dignity etc. Now seeing Be (...) would not, that Christians
should have the power from Christ, what other thing is the then to enui^ at the
benefits of Christ ^^stowed upon Christians? Thus far C^stalio.

To this former learned man I may adioyne the authority of M. Per^ins herein
(though at other times he may seem partly to fluctuare, and waver i^ hit
judgment touching this point.) H^ thus plainly writes (a sentence (...) where
by me alleged:) In his reformed Catholic. p. 26.
Because Go^ gives men commandment to repent and believe, therefore they have
power to repe^^ and believe; V by supr. p. ^^.
God with his comman^^ment giving grace, that the thing prescribed may be done.

Molinaus (the learned Protestant) is so full in the doctrine of Freewill, as
that Peter Martyr rebukes him therefore in these words. In his Epistles
annexed to his common Places, englished in his Epist. to Calvin, page 99.
Molinaus adiud^eth certain things amiss, touching Freewill.

In like sort Hemingius and Snecanus (Protestants of good Note) are charged by
D. Willet for their maintayning of Freewill, in this manner* In his Synops. p.
808 and 810.
They (he meaning the former two Protestants) ^re more erroneous concerning
Freewill, then are the Papists. Brieflly, this doctrine of Freewill is fully
taught by Cent. 16. page 814.
Osiander, and by certain Protestants recorded by A^^* Mon. page 1533. and
1605.
M. Fox: so strong and resolute (we see) are many learned Protestants in this
doctrine.


Enthusiastus. The Authority of these former Protestants do not much sway with
me, ^^oing, that (as your self cannot but know) there are many other more in
number, and of equa^l learning at least with the former, who wholly impugn the
Doctrine of Freewill; and to whose judgments therein I had rather stryke ^ayle,
and yield.


Arminius. Be it so ( Enthusiastus)* as you sa^ yet I urge the testimonies of
the Protestants to this end; to wit, that wherea^ you rely (perhaps overmuch)
upon the authority of other Protestants our Adversaries in this controversy,
that yo^ may see heerby, that other Protestan^ of eminency do with as strong a
ben^ of judgment defend the doctrine o^ Freewill, as yours do impugn it. An^
therefore though I seek not, that the Protestants by me alleged should oue^
balance other Adversary Protestants heerin, yet I see no reason why they
should not equally balla^ce with the said Protestants. And thus it follows*
that the matter in respect of this point is become eauen and indifferent; as
being neither much aduantaged, or much prejudiced by yours or my producing of
Protestants, either for the impugning, or defending of the doctrine of Freewill.

Yet here I must advertise you o^ one thing to be considered: It is this* That
seeing the former Protestants by me alleged, do compart almost with all other
Protestants in all Articles of ^^otestancy (this only of Freewill, and ^ther
points thereof depending, excep^ed) it can hardly be coniectured, that ^he said
Protestants would divide the^^elues in doctrine from all their other ^earned
Brethren; were it not, that the weight of divine and humane Authorities did
ouersway their judgments there^n; seeing otherwise they might hold it as no
small scarre to them, being fe^er in number, to dispart themselves (but upon
most weighty and forcing Reasons) in judgment from all other Protestants.

Again, we know, that Protestants and Papists are Adversaries one to another
in matters of Religion: now, the former alleged Protestants by me, do conspire
partly in doctrine touching Freewill with the Papists; so as the Authorities of
the said Protestants heerin are to be reputed as Confessions of the adversary.
Now how forcible this kind of Argument drawn from the Confession of an
Adversary is, appears from ^he judgment of the most learned D. Whitakers thus
writing of this point: D. Whit. contra Bell. l* de Eccles. controuer. 2. q. 5.
c. 14.
Efficaxest Aduersariorum ipsorum testimonium etc. The testimony drawn from
the Adversaries, is most efficacious: a^ I ingenuously confess, that Truth is
ab^ to extort testimony from its Enemies: the said Doctor borrowing his
sentenc^ heerin from Irenaus (to omit other Fathers) thus writing: L. 4. c. 14.
It is an unanswerable proof, which brings att^statiou from the Adversaries
themselves. But inoug^ of this point: and now leaving to ins^^ further in the
Protestants judgment herein, I will ascend up to those time of the Primitive
Church (she being then Christ's intemerate, and incontaminate Spouse,) and see
of what judgment the Doctors and Fathers of those purer days were, touching
Freewill.


Enthusiastus. I pray you ( Arminius) rise up to those times, for I freely
confess, that the authorities of those ancient Doctour^ (so long as they do not
impugn God^ Holy Word, and Scripture) ought (...) have no small sovereignty
over man^ judgment. And the rather, seeing w^ find it thus written by our own
me^ K^^pnitius in exam. Council. Trident. part. 1. page 74.
We doubt not, but that the Primiti^^ Church received from the Apostles, and
(...)* postolicall men, not only the text of the Scripture, but also the right
and native sense thereof. Therefore ( Arminius) you may proceed.


Arminius. Now to begin with those Sentinels of Christ's Church. Though all of
them (I mean both of the Latin and Greek Church) be most luxuriant and
ryotous (as I may say) in their testimonies for the proouing of Freewill; yet
because I will not cloy this presence with a fastidious abundance of such
their Authorities, some few (and those pertinent) shall serve. And first I
find, that Austin thus writes: Tom. 3. de Spir. and litera. c. 34.
It is in our power to consent to Gods calling, or to dissent from it. Again,
he further thus enlarges himself, even delivering our doctrine in these
express words: Austin. tom. ^* epist. 47. Valentino.
I have dealt with yours, and our Brethren, what I could, that they would
persevere in the sound Catholic faith, which neither denies Freewill, whether
to bad life, or to good; neither attributes so much unto it, as that without
grace it avails any thing.

And to omit other infinite like sayings, he thus plainly teaches: Aust. l. de
spirit* and li^. c. 34.
Consentire vocationi Dei, vel ab illo dissentire propriae voluntatis est. It
is peculiar to the will, either to give assent to the calling (...) God, or to
reject it. But to proceed to others: Jerome thus punctually writes Hi^roni^us
Dial contra Pelagianos.
Hoc est, quod tibi in principio dixer a^^ etc. This is that, which I spoke to
thee in the beginning: to wit, That it is in our power t^ sin, or not to
sin, that so we may keep^ the freedom of our will.

Epiphanius accords to the former Fathers in these words. Epiphan Haeres. 1^.
Man^ festum, euidens, and indubium est, vnicui^ liberum arbitrium concessum
esse a Deo etc. It is manifest, evident, and indubious, th^^ God has given
Freewill to every man: who has said by himself; si volueritis, and si
nolueritis; that so by these his words, it may be in man's power, either to
work well, or ^^ work badly.

But to contract this point. Some Protestants of the greatest Note and rank,
do most fully charge the Fathers in general with the doctrine of Freewil. For
thus D. Whitgift (that learned Protestant) confesses of this point: D. Whitg.
in his defense of the Answer to the Admonition page 472. and 473.
Almost all the Bishops of the Greek Church* and Latin also, for the most
part, were spotted with the doctrine of Freewill etc. And according to this
Doctors judgment, we find that our Centurists See Cent. ^. c. 10. col. 221. and
Cent. 3. c. 10. Col. 265. and 240. Cent* 4 Col. ^^^3. and 1^44. and 1183. Cent.
5. Col. 969. etc.
do particularly charge, and reprehend these Fathers following, for their
maintenance of Freewill; to wit, Justin, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Cyrill Alexandrinus, Prudentius, Ambrose, Hilary,
Epiphanius, Gregory Nissene, and Gregory Nazianzen. And that three of these
ancient Fathers, to wit, Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian defended the doctrine
of Freewill, appears most evidently from this one consideration.

It is granted by the most learned Adversaries, that Austin, Epiphanius, and
Jerome (in regard of their most clear sentences in that behalf) did jointly
teach Freewill: Well, Austin against Origin in haeres. 414 Against Tertull. in
haeres. 86. ^ Against Cypr. in tom 3. de Baptism. l. 2. c. 7. Ierom. l. contr.
louin. and Vigil. Epiph. in Haeresibus.
These Fathers did charge the former three Fathers with these three peculiar
Errors following, and no other: to wit; Cyprian, with Rebaptization,
Tertullian, with denying second Marriages, and Origin, with believing that the
Devils should in the end be saved.

But now it is more then certain, that if Cyprian, Origin, and T^rtullian had
believed, and taught otherwise touching the doctrine of Freewill then the said
later Fathers did, no doubt they had been written against for this the^^
disagreement from Austin, Jerome, an^ Epiphanius, touching Freewill, as the^
were charged by them for their for m^^ acknowledged Errors. But we do not
find, that the former three more ancient Fathers were contradicted by the three
later, touching the doctrine of Freewill: from which point it ineuitably
follows, that Cyprian, Origin, and Tertullian did unanimously agree in
defense of Freewill with Austin, Jerome* and Epiphanius.

And thus far touching the Authorities of the Fathers in this question of
Freewill; assuring you (Enthus.) and this worthy Presence, that I have not
discerped the twentieth part of those Testimonies, which their Writings and
Volumes do affoard of this Subject.


Enthusiastus. Learned Arminius (for so I find you to be,) I will not be of
that Aristarchian, and Censuring disposition, a^^ to recall the Authorities of
those Ancient Fathers to be tried by the touchstone of my own judgment: I
reverence their Authority, both for their learning, virtues, and their
proximity to our Saviors days. Only, I ever say, I reverence them with this
presumed caution; to wit, whiles they write concordantly to the Holy
Scriptures. And therefore (Arminius) if so you can be able to produce out of
Gods Holy Writ, as evident Testimonies, (which I yet think you cannot) for the
fortifying of the doctrine of Freewill, as your have already done out of the
Fathers writings, I confess, it may perhaps beget in me a certain hesitation
and doubtfulnes of judgment herein. But (Arminius) proceed in that kind of
Method, as shall best seem pleasing to your self; and God I trust (for
refractory I will not be) will second the event.


Arminius. I will, in fitting time arrive to my proofs borrowed from the
divine Scriptures, yet because I will not ascend thereto (in regard of my
prescribed Method) over steepily, or per saltum; therefore I will take in my
way the Ancient Jews into my consideration; and will see, whether they stand
aff^cted to the doctrine of believing of Freewill, or wholly disclaim from the
same* But this difficulty is* easily dissolved* For do we not find Rabby
Moses fi^lius Maymon, thus to instruct his Proselytes? Epist. aduersus
Astrologos.
Ac illud quidem intelligere debetis etc. But this chief and principal
foundation of our Law you ought to understand; that both I, and all
Philosophers do confess* That what actions are committed by men* the same to
be in their own power etc. So ^^ man serves God, if so man himself will etc.
And if he has a desire to join himself with the wicked etc. he also does the
same.

See further of this point Rabby H^darsan upon the fourth Chapter of Genesis.
And Rabby Selemo, alleged by In lib. de Arcanis Catholica veritatis. Printed
at Fr^nckfurd. 1602* l. 6. c. 6.
Petrus Galatinus. Philo (that learned Jew) thus initiatech his Reader in this
mystery: Philo. lib. quod Deus sit immutabius.
Man has Freewill: God created him free, that being left to his proper will,
he might do whatsoever he pleas^ etc. To which sentence is extant that Ora^^
in Deuteronomy: Behold I have placed before thee life and death, good and
(...) choose life. Thus Philo. To conclud^* That the Ancient Jews were
Patron^^ of Freewill (so evident and confessed is this point) diverse of our
learned Brethren do acknowledge. For D. Fulk thus fully speaks hereof: In his
defense of the English I ranslation. page 320.
The Jewish Rabbis, Patrones of Freewill, do err. The like is acknowledged by
Upon the words of Rabbi A^iba.
Paulus Fagius (the Protestant,) and by the Book entitled: Printed Hannouiae.
1604. page ^17.
Synagoga Iudaica.


Enthusiastus. The Judgments of the Jews by you alleged, I cannot very much
esteem, and this for two Reasons. First because you know, that upon the
coming of our Savior their Law and Religion was to be abrogated and
disanulled, as we see by the cessation of their Sacrifices, and diverse other
their Ceremonies then used. Secondly, some doubt, that that Galatinus, whom
above you mention (being but a late writer) forged in his alleged Book
certain sentences, sorting to his own Religion, and then with subtilty
obtruded them, or rather incorporated them in the former Jews. And therefore
granting this for true, D. Whitakers with more probability might answer his
Adversary producing the Testimonies of the Jews, out of this Galatinus in
these words: L* 9. contra Duraeum. p. 818.
Tuum in hac causa Petruin Galatinum mi^nime profecta desidero, nec Hebraeorum
T^stimonijs illis indigemus. But I pray yo^ leaving these Authorities hasten to
the Holy Scriptures.


Arminius. Before I ascend to Scripturall proofs, you must give me leave, to
eneruate and weaken this your Answer* And to the first part thereof I reply*
That those only points of faith ar^ now abrogated, which did prefigure our
Saviors coming; such were the Jewish Sacrifices and diverse of their
Ceremonies. But now the doctrine of Freewill bears no reference to our
Sauiour^ Incarnation; since once granting, that man has Freewill, certain it
is, that h^ has it from his first Creation.

Again, if the Jewish Law does nothing belong to us, now after the coming of
the M^ssias; then it would follow, that the Ten Commandments do no^ belong to
us Christians, and consequently that we Christians (as being disoblige^ from
them) may break the same (by worshipping many Gods, by committing* Adultery,
Theft) with all Impunity and without fear. And the^ withal it would follow,
that our Savior, who first became incarnated, (so humbling himself in our
base nature) and after suffered most opprobrious death for the expiating of
Man's Sin, should be a means through which we might with more freedom sin;
thus the Son should become to us a sufficient warrant for the breach of the
Fathers Comma^deme^ts; The gross absurdity of which most necessary Inference
to weigh, ( Enthusiastus) I refer to your self and this company.

Now to come to the second part of your reply touching Galatinus: I am partly
persuaded, (though stiff and peremptory therein I will not be) that the
Sentences by him produced for confirmation of Christian Religion from the
Ancient Jews, were not by him first forged, and after fathered upon the Jews.
My motive heerto is this: I find, that one Hieronymus de sanctafide, who was a
Jew, but after converted to Christianity, and was Physician to Pope Benedict
the thirteenth (which Benedict was a good time before the days of this
Galatinus) did compose a book* bearing the Title of Hebraeo - mastix* or,
vindex impietatis, ac persidiae Iudaicae; in which book he labors to prove
diverse points of Christian Religion from the there alleged Authorities and
Testimonies of the said Jews mentioned by Galatinus.

This Book of the foresaid* Hieronymus de Sancta fide, was but lately printed
at Franckford, anno 1602. But enough of this Galatinus, and of the former Jews
Authorities. And now in this last place I will arrive up to the Holy Scriptures.


Enthusiastus. Arminius, I would gladly entreat you thereto* And as touching
all your former proofs for the maintayning of Freewill, drawn (as you say)
from force of Reason and humane Authorities, I do freely grant, they partly
sway with me, and have made a deeper impression in my judgment, then at the
beginning of our dispute, I ever expected they would. But if the Divine
Authorities hereafter to be alleged by you, for the fortifying of the said*
dogmaticall point of Freewill, be as punctual (without* any detortion, or
wresting of the said Sacred passages) for the proof of Freewill, as the former
Authorities have been; God only (who searches the heart of man) knows of
what unexpected force this our disputation may be. Therefore delay no time, but
presently hasten thereto.


Arminius. I am prepared thereto, and now I begin. And that these divine
Testimonies may seize upon your judgment more strongly, and this with the
less reluctation or repugnancy; I will therefore marshall, and range most of
the said sacred Authorities under certain Classes or Heads; that so you may
perceive, how every branch of the said passages of Scripture prove (though by
different means and respects) the point here intended; I mean, the truth of
the Doctrine of Freewill.

1. And first, I will incampe together diverse such chief texts of Holy
Scriptures, which do plainly affirm, that it is in man's power, either to
practice Virtue, or vice: which point immediately proves Freewill. Of this kin^
may be alleged, Ier. 32.
Because they obeyed not thy voice, nor walked in thy Law, therefore thou have
caused this plague to come upon them. Again: Isa. 5.
Judge I pray you, between me and my vineyard; what could I have done to it,
that I have not done? Why have I looked, that it should bring forth grapes,
and it has brought forth thorns? And more: Math. 23.
How often would I have gathered thy children together etc. and thou would
not? Act. 7.
You have always resisted the Holy Ghost. Esa. ^5.
I spread out all the day my hands unto a people, that gainsaid me. And in
regard of Gods such proceeding, he is said Apoc. ^.
to stand and knock^ at the door of our Heart. These Texts affoard this
Inference: That touching man, who sins, either it is in his power not to
sin, ors else he cannot but sin: If it be in his power to forbear sinning,
then has he Freewill: If he cannot but of necessity must sin* then God does
in vain complain of man for sinning; seeing it is not in his power not to
sin.


Enthusiastus. To this it seems, it may be answered, That God So answers
calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 5.
does not undeservedly complain of man, although he cannot but work evil;
seeing men are become thus infirm through their own fault, and their
Hereditary malice. Again, a second Reason may be given, why God reprehendeth
and admonishes Sinners, to wit, that thereby they may have a greater auersion,
and abhorring of their Sin.


Arminius. These Answers rather fortisy our alleging of the former Texts,
then weaken it: (So the poor byrd by struggling to get out of the net, does
more thereby entangle herself therein.) For first I say, to your first point,
touching the Hereditary malice insisted upon by you; We justify this malice, to
be a punishment, but not a fault, contrary to the judgment of diverse of our
Adversaries in this Controversy. To the second part of your Answer I reply;
That your words include the Doctrine of Freewill. For if Sinners through
obiurgation and fynding fault with their Sins, can be brought to have a
detestation of them, and alter thereby their course of life; then follows it,
that Sinners have Freewill, which is the point, we undertake to prove at this
present. And if these divine Correptions cannot cause Sinners to forsake their
sinful course, to what end then does God use these speeches, as though it were
in our power to sin, or not to sin?

But speaking no further of this Class of Testimonies, which shall contain,
That man is comma^nded thereby to do something, or to forbear the doing of
something: Of this nature are the Ten Commandments of God; as, Thou shall not
have other Gods then me. Thou shall not take the name of thy God in vain.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Besides infinite other precepts commanded and
imposed upon us in Holy Scripture. Now I will draw from these passages this
Argument. These holy passages contain a command or rule of living well; but
God (who works nothing in vain) should idly and fruitlesly impose this rule
or command of living virtuously, if man wanted Freewill to obey or disobey such
his Commau^d.


Enthusiastus. These places I must confess, seem very pressing; yet I answer
thereto, That the So Calu. vbi supra.
Law is not given in vain, (and consequently that God works not here to no
end) though man wants Freewill, because the Law is given not only to be a
rule of living well, but that by means of the Law Sin may be known, as the
Romans 3.
Apostle writes to the Romans. Again, those former Texts do not imply, that
God ever secondeth man with his grace, (without which man cannot do any thing
well) and therefore they force not so fully (as you may suppose) the point here
controuerted.


Arminius. I will first take away the later part of your Answer; for I here
say, that we read, That 1. Cor. 10.
God sussereth not us to be tempted above that, which we are able; but makes
with the temptation a way to escape, that we may be able to sustain. And upon
this ground it is, that God himself protests our possibility of keeping his
Commandments in these words: Deuter. 30.
The Commandment, which I have given thee this day etc. is very ne^^ to thee,
even in thy mouth, and heart, th^^ thou may do it. Which words (as some of our
Adversaries pretend) cannot be understood of the knowledge of the Law, and not
of man's power to keep it; since th^^ exposition contradicts the words of the
Text, which speaks expressly of doing, even according to the judgment of
other more moderate Hiperius l. 2. Methods Thcolog. and p. 479. 480.
Protestants. Now what can be more clear for conuincing that man has
Freewill, and that God is not wanting to assist him with his Grace; then the
former words, being the Conclusion it self?

To the first part of your Answer I reply, that granting the Law may have
several ends; certain it is, that one end thereof (and that the principal)
is to be a rule to man, for practicing of Virtue and avoiding of Vice: but then
in respect of this end, it must unavoidably follow, that man has freedom of
will given him by God, either to violate the Law, or through Gods Grace
(seconding his endeavor) to keep it. Again admit, that besides the former
end, the Law be given, that thereby Sin may be known; then I say, this is
but concident with the first end: for to what other end should Sin be known but
that by knowing it, man may avoid it? and how can it be avoided, except man
has Freewill, either to sin, or not to sin?


Euthusiastus. I pray you Arminius, proceed to other kinds of Scripturall
Authorityes. And I like well your reducing them to certain Heads: since this
kind of Method does much facilitate our apprehending and better conceauing of
them.


Arminius. My next Head then shall contain some few passages of Gods Holy
word, ^.
by the which something is under condition promised unto us by God, if so our
selves will. Now, from these Authorities I thus dispute. Either it is in our
power to perform the Condition imposed, or it is not in our power: If it be in
our power, then have we Freewill: If it be not in our power, then is not that
any true Promise under the condition annexed, but only an evident deluding and
deriding of the party, to whom such an idle promise is made. Were it not
ridiculous to inuit a man under promise of a great reward to run such a number
of miles within a prescribed time; and yet during all the time prescribed, to
enchaine and shackle the legs of the party, who should run, as that he could
not move them? The like exorbitancy of proceeding is found in our former
supposall.

Now (among others) the Texts of this Nature are these following: Mat* 10.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Again: Amos 5.
Seek good, and not evil, and you shall live. And further: Isa. 1.
If you consent and obey, you shall eat the good things of the land; but if
you refuse or will not, you shall be devoured with the sword.


Enthusiastus. I have read some of Note, who have labored to avoid these
former places, by maintayning, that it is not absurd, So Calu. vbi supra.
That God should promise to man under an impossible Condition: To men (say
they) that are wicked, that by these kinds of Promises, it may appear to them,
how unworthy they are of Gods benignity and goodness; To the Virtuous and good
men, such promises may be made by God, that through the sweetness of the
Promises, the Virtuous may be more allured to walk in the precepts of God.


Arminius. This Answer (under your favor) is wholly impertinent; since the
question here is not, why God does proffer his promises to good men, or evil
men: but I aver, that from the former Text it is proved (which is the point
only controuerted) that nothing can be rightly promised under Condition, but to
that Creature, which has freedom of Will, since otherwise (let the reason of
the promise be what it will) the proffer of such a Condition would be expounded
rather an Ironicall scoffing, then any true and real Conditional promise.
Again, this Conditional Promise to the Good and Virtuous, cannot be
understood Ironically, but really and truly: And therefore it is in the power
of the Virtuous, either to perform, or not to perform the imposed Condition;
since that is peculiar to a true Condition, to wit, that it may depend upon the
Freedom of his will, to whom it is made.

But I will proceed to my next Head of Authorities, and these shall contain,
that God offers to man a Choice of several Deuter. 30.
I call Heaven and Earth to witness this day against you, that I have set
before you life, and death etc. Choose therefore life. And according to this
his proposed Choice of life, and death, God thus sweetly complayneth of Israel:
Ezech. 18.
Why will thou dye, O house of Israel? A second place may be that: Iosue 24.
Choice is given to you, whom you will serve. In which words Iosue implies,
that it was in the Peoples power, either to serve the true God, or the Idols.

Other passages of this Nature the Book of Ecclesiasticus does affoard, which
though it be not accepted by us for Canonical Scripture, yet M. Perkins thus
worthily speaks of it, to wit, That he prefers this Book In his reformed
Catholic page 134.
before any other Books of men. Thus then we read in that Book: Eccles. 15.
He has set water and fire before thee, stretch out thy hand to which thou will. And again: Ibid.
Before man is life and death, good and evil; what lyketh him, shall be given
him. And lastly: c. 31.
Who might offend, and has not offended, or do evil, and has not done it.
Then which what can be more evident for proof of Fre^will?

Thus far of the chief Authorities; which maybe reduced to certain general
Heads (this next Class following excepted.) From whence we are instructed;
First, that God plainly says, it is in man's power either to practice virtue or
vice. Secondly, that God commands to do something, or to forbear the doing
of something. Thirdly, that God promises to us something upon some condition,
if so we will our selves. Fourthly, that God gives election and choice to man
to choose one thing before another thing: All which four points potentially
include freedom of Will in man, as is above demonstrated.

To these former we may adioine this Workers, Builders, Planters, Coadiutors
with God in the work of their Salvation. The places are these: Math. 20.
Call the workmen, and give them etc. 1. Cor. ^.
I have planted, Apollo has watered, but God gave the increase. And again, in
the same place we read: Every one shall receive his wages according to his
labor, for we are the Coadiutors of God.

Now, if men do properly work nothing by their Freewill, but only are le^ and
moved by God in these kind of actions, as mere instruments; then they ought
not to be called Co-workers, (...) Coadiutors of God, no more then a pe^ can be
called a Co-wryter, or a knyfe ^ Co-cutter, or any other dead instrume^^ to be
so accordingly called, in respect of its use, to which it is appropriated.

But now leaving these former general Branches, I will close up your judgment
with one most choking Testimony, every word almost thereof a foarding an
argument in proof of Freewill: The place is this: Genes. 4.
The Lord said to Cain, why art thou angry? or why is thy Countenance cast
down? If thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? Si autem male, statim in
foribus peccatum aderit: sed sub te erit appetitus eius, and tu dominaberis
illius. If evil, Sin lies at the door: but under thee the desire of it
shall be, and thou shall have rule over it. Now let us (as it were) dissect
this one Testimony. And first: Why art thou angry, or why is thy Countenance
cast down? This Interrogation evidently shows, that it was in the power of
Cain (if so himself would) not to become angry, or to be sorrowful. For why
is it not said to a newborn Infant, why do thou cry, but because we do
know, it is not in the Infants power to cry, or not to cry? Or why say we not
to a Dog, why do thou bark; or to a Lion, why do thou roar; but because
it is manifest, that it is not in the power of these beasts to bark, and not
to bark, to roar and not to roar?

To come to the next words: If thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? If
evil, Sin lies at the door etc. Now this addition ( if well, if evil) do
euil^ dently imply Freewill. For why do we not say to man, If thou will make
the Sun to stand still (as we usually say to man, if thou will do well) thou
shall have this, or that thing given to thee for making the Sun to stand
still, but because we know, that it is not in man's power, to stay the course of
the Sun, but that it is in his power to do well, if he will, or evil, if he
will not?

Now to come to the last passage of this Text: If evil, Sin lies at the
door: but under thee, the desire of it shall be, and thou shall have rule over
it. These words most plumbe and perpendicularly (as I may say) fall upon the
proof of Freewill. For what other meaning of them can be, then that the desire
of Sin shall be in thy power, and thou shall have rule over it, that is, it is
in thy power (if thou will) to resist Sin? I well know, that some of our
Brethren, ( See the marginall notes of the English Bibles of the year 1576
upon this place.
who are adverse to us in the doctrine of Freewill, rather by way of declining,
then answering this difficulty, affirm, that Cain had rule, not over it, viz.
Sin, but over him, vz. Abel. And so accordingly they do translate this Text
in some of their Bibles.

How forced (and indeed how absurd) this Constructio^ is, I will prove
(because this Text is most co^uincing.) First from the contexture of the words
10
themselves: Secondly, from the exposition 20
of this place, given by the Ancient Fathers, whose exposition thereof is 30
coincident with this our exposition: Thirdly from the like construction of 40
the ancient Rabbis passed upon this passage: And lastly from the like
Construction given thereof by diverse of our own learned Brethren; upon the
Authority of which place, they greatly stay themselves for the proof of
Freewill.

And first to examine the words themselves, I maintain, that according to all
true Grammatical Construction, the two Relatiues (eius, and illius) must be
necessarily referred to the Antecedent next going before; but the next
precedent Antecedent is, Sin, and not Abel. Secondly, I affirm for the more
conuincing of this point, that Abel is not so much as once named in this
passage: how then can the Relatiues, eius, and illius, be referred to Abel, as
to their Antecedent?

Thirdly, this will prove more evident, if we do observe the coherency of the
sense given by us, with the words. For to say, Sin lies at the door and thou
shall have rule over it, the sens^ is here most plain, and expedite: but to
say, Sin lies at the door, vz. to torment thy conscience, and thou shall
have rule over him (vz. over Abel thy Brother) is most forced, harsh, and
constrained; and with an ordinary and regular reference to the words in the
Text most dissolute and inconsequent.

But to descend to the interpretation of the Fathers touching this place.
Gregory thus writes: Moral. l. 4. c. 2^.
Diuina voce Cain etc. It is said by the voice of God to Cain, being of a
wicked disposition; Sin lies at the door, but under thee shall the desire
of it be, and thou shall have rule over it. Jerome in alluding to the words of
the Text, thus writes: In quaestionib. Hebraicis.
quialiberi arbitrijes etc. Because thou have Freewill, therefore I counsel
thee (vt non tibi peccatum, sedtu peccato domineris) that Sin may not have
rule over thee, but that thou may rule over Sin. Finally to omit the like
Construction given by diverse other Prosper. l. de Vocat. Gentium, c. ^^*
Ambros. l. 2. de Cain. c. 7. Bada in hunc locum Genes. 4.
Fathers: Austin thus literally expounds the former words: Austin. l. 15. de
Ciuitat. De^ c. 7.
Tulominaberis illius, numquid fratris? absit. ^uius igitur, nisi peccati? thou
shall rule over it, what, over thy brother? not so: over what then but Sin?
So conspiringly this Father agrees with our Interpretation herein.

To come to the ancient Rabins. In his Hebrew Commentaries upon Genesis, c. 4.
Aben Ersa affirment it to be a mere forgery, to refer the Relative in the
former Text to any other thing, then to the word, Sin. Rabby Moses Hadarsan
says: In ca. 4. Genes.
quod scriptumest; Adte concupiscentia peccati, and tu dominaberis illius: Hoc
est, sivolueris, praeualebis aduersus illud. That is, where it is written; the
desire of Sin shall be to thee, and thou shall rule over it* The meaning
heerofis, that if thou will, thou shall prevail over it. Thus Rabby Hadarsan.
To be brief, the ancient Jews are so plain in expou^ding the former passage
in proof of Freewill, that D. Fulke takes notice thereof, and thus answers
them: In the English Translat. pa. 380.
The Jewish Rabbis err in this place.

To come lastly to our own Brethren: Their judgments are here made manifest,
partly by their wrytings, and partly by their like agreeable Transstion of this
very Text in their versio^^ of their Bibles. Touching their own Authorities
herein, I will (for greater expedition) only cite the places of such their
writings. See then In l. 2. Method. Theolog. p 478.
Hyperius, In Syntagm. ex veteri Testam. Colum. 489.
Wigandus (both no obscure Protestants and even Tom. ^. Wittenberg. ann. 1580*
fol. 62.
Luther himself. As concerning their Public Translations of the Bible,
answerable thereto, see the great English Bible of anno 1584* and see the
Annotations annexed thereto, all showing, that it is ( Sin) and not Abel,
over which Cain shall have rule. The same appareth from the Translation of the
Bible by Castalio, printed at Basil, anno 1573. which Translation is much
commended by Derat. Interpret. l. 1. p. 62. and 63.
D. Humfrey.

And thus far for the more full unfolding and explicating of this most
markable, clear, and illustrious passage of Genesis, for the confirmation of
our Doctrine of Freewill. And here now I make my pause, being in good hope,
that all the former Authorities both divine and humane, (produced by me since
the beginning of our dispute) will win some ground upon your Judgment (
Enthusiastus) for your giving assent to our most true, ancient, and
A^ostolicall doctrine herein.


Enthusiastus. I do freely grant, my judgment is ^ouerborne with the stream of
your most forcing Authorities; and the rather, since I must confess, I was
much mistaken in the alleging of my proofs for the impugning of Freewill:
seeing through your avoiding of them, now upon a second, and more retired view
I well discern, how they did rather but idly beat the wynd through my own
misapplyed detortio^ of them, then otherwise level at the intended mark; So
illustrious a truth (now I confess) is the doctrine of Freewill, as that the
greatest doubt, which thereof I shall hereafter perhaps make, is only, whether
I can have Freewill at any time hereafter, to deny the doctrine of Freewill?

But ( learned Arminius) though I do much incline to believe, that man has
Freewill; yet there are certain other dogmaticall points, in which I confess,
as yet, I do dissent from you. And among the rest, these two following: To wit,
the first, The doctrine of (...) probation, by which I believe, That Go^ has
decreed some men even from their mothers womb, without any preuision o^ their
works to eternal damnation. The second, The Infallible Certainty of a man^
own Election, or Predestination; in bot^ which points many learned Deuines o^
our own Country borrowing their doctrines from you, do (I grant) hold the
contrary. Now I would see ( Arminius) if you be as fully furnished with
sufficient Answers to what I shall object therein, as also with good proofe^
for the fortifying of your contrary Tenets herein, as you have discovered your
self to be, for the Doctrine of Freewill.


Arminius. Glad I am to hear ( Enthusiastus) the hopeful eue^t of this our
discourse, and in you I see that sentence verifyed: Math. ^^.
Iustificata est sapientia a filijs suis. And as touching the other points of
doctrine mentioned by you (wherein you and your party mainly differ from me)
you may take notice, that our belief of them is necessarily, and implicitly
included* (so the Cause includes in it self the Eflect) in the doctrine of
Freewil. For once granting the Doctrine of Freewill to be consonant to the
Scriptures, then ^t unavoidably and most consequently follows, that every man
may be saved through the force of his Freewill, cooperating with Gods Grace and
mercy: as also it follows, from the Doctrine of Freewill, that man enjoys
not an Infallibility of his Election; seeing as enjoying Freewill, it is in his
power, of Virtuous to become wicked, and consequently to loose the benefit of
Election. Nevertheless seeing the reducing the warrant of the said two doctrines
to the doctrine of Freewill, is over general and large; therefore begin at
your pleasure ( Enthusiastus) to impugn the said doctrines, and I shall shape
particular answers to your particular Arguments; and that done, then will I
undertake to make good the said doctrines both from divine and humane
Authorities.


Enthusiastus. I will most willingly (so desirous I am to receive satisfaction
heerin from your self.) (...) I will (...) the doctrine of the Cortainty of
(...) Election, or Predestination, in the prese^ting whereof, I will tread my
for^ tract of Method; to wit, in giving (...) first place to divine proofs;
and (...) after I will descend to humane proo^ being of an inferior weight.


Arminius. Well Sir, proceed in your (...) chosen Method at your own pleasu^^
but before you enter into dispute; (...) me leave (as in the doctrine of Free
(...) above I did) to set down the true (...) of this question, with its due
explic^^^on or restrictio^; seeing by this mean^^ we no doubt shall find (as in
the fo^mer Controversy we did) that souer^^ of your proofs from Scripture will
receive their full answer, by rec^ring to the true state of the Question*

Here then we are to observe, (...) whereas you, and your fellows (...)
maintain, that every one that i^ (...), is assured infallibly of his (...)
Election, by his own ordinary and sp^^^ faith, which (say you) is most
inf^^^ble: Now I, and others (...) (...) with me, do teach as follow^th. First
that so far forth, as concerns Gods promise touching our Election; we say his
promise is on his part most certain and infallible: But yet seeing Gods
promise therein is only condition^^^, implying ever some things to be performed
on our part; to wit, the Conditions of belief, of true repentance, and of
final perseverance; now the performance by Gods grace, or not performance of
these Conditions, being in our power, it consequently follows, that our
Election to us is uncertain. Since God thus pronounces: Ezech. 18.
If the just man do turn away from his righteousness etc. in his sin he shall
die.

Thus through our own frailty and indisposition, not answering at all times to
Gods holy inspirations and grace, our Election to us is ever uncertain
(though, as above said, in respect of Gods promise, we fulfilling the annexed
Conditions thereto, most certain) and consequently it follows, that we
cannot be assured of Salvation by faith, seeing faith is infallible; but only
by Hope, which (through our coop^rating with Gods grace, and assistance) is not
infallibly (...), ne^^^theles it is (...) with gr^^^ comfort and confidence.
Now here once for all you are to conceive, that diu^^^ sayings of God, either
touching Pre^^stinatio or Reprobation, though in word^ they seem absolute, yet
in sense are ^^ly Conditional; In proof of which my assertion I will allege
a place of Ez^chiel c. 33. which (as a Comment) well may seem to expound all
such se^ming absolute Texts of this nature. God Almighty words in Ezechiel
(...) these: When I shall say unto the righteo^^ that he shall surely live; if
yet he trust (...) unto his own righteousness, commit (...) etc. he shall dye.
Again. When I (...) say unto the wicked, thou s^^t dye the death* If yet he
return from his sins, and d^^ that which is right etc. he shall surely
(...)* So clearly does the Prophet instru^^ us, that all such seeming absolute
sayings in Scripture, have ever by imp^^cation some Conditions annexed (...)
to. Now this being the true state of the Question, and illustrated with the
^^plication of Ezechiel; begin to impu^^ it from Holy Writ, at your plasur^
which you shall never be able to (...)


Enthusiastus. Well then, the first passage of divine Scripture, which I will
allege, shall be that of the Apostle to the Corinthians: 2. Corinthians. c. 13.
Try your selves, if you be in the faith: prove you your selves: know you not
your selves* that Christ Jesus is in you, unless per^aps you be Reprobates?


Arminius. I answer heerto; first admitting, that this Text did prove, that
Christ was in the Corinthians, according to ^is grace of Justification; yet the
Text ^roueth that only for the time present; ^ut whether the Corinthians might
after ^oose that grace or not, or want final ^erseuerance (which is the point
here only questioned) this Text nothing touches; and therefore you may see,
that granting more touching the expo^ition of the Text, then I need to do; ^et
the Answer is inuolued in the state ^n the Question above set down. And
^ccordingly here to, this knowledge of ^s being in the faith (if the words
^ere to be interpreted in that sense) (...) to be restrained only to the time
present: but for our continuance in the faith, the Text speaks nothing.

Secondly, I reply, that this knowledge of the Corinthians, that Christ wa^ in
them, has reference only of Christ being in them, by way of 2. Cor. c. 12.
Signe^^ wonders, and mighty deeds, done among them: which if they did not
acknowledge, they were Reprobates. And tha^ this knowledge of Ch^st being in
the^* cannot be referred, according to his grace of Justification, is most
clear; in that S. Paul would never then have ^^buked and reprehended the
Corinthia^ in so full and grievous a manner, as (...) find, that in the same
Ibid. ^. 1^.
Epistle he di^* Thus much heerof.


Enthusiastus. I take this your answer for suffici^^ for I see the Text (if
the scope of the Epistle be precisely observed) precludet^ me of al reply: but
what say you to (...) other passage of Scripture, where (...) Apostle speaks
of himself in this (...) confident manner: Romans 8.
I know, Objected by M. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of England. pa. 78.
th^^ life nor death etc shall be able to re none (...) from that love, that
God bears to me (...) Christ* What greater assuredness co^l^ the Apostle
utter of his salvation (...) this?


Arminius. To this I shape a double answer. First, admitting that these words
should be mea^t of the certainty of knowledge, yet they do not prove the
particular knowledge, which our adversaries do pretend, that every one of the
Elect should have of himself only: My reason heerof is: because these words
are delivered by the Apostle, touching his knowledge as well of others, as
himself. For the words are not, shall be able to re^oue me, but, shallbe able
to remove us, the Apostle speaking thus in the person of ^he Elect, and not of
himself only But ^ouching the salvation of the Elect, there ^s no controversy
between us and our Adversaries.

Secondly, and more punctually I reply, and affirm, that in the Greek of ^he
former Text, it is only, Persuasus (...), and not Certus sum; for the Greek
lord used by S. Paul, is (...), which signifies in English: I am per^^aded.
And thus the certainty of ^nowledge, which this Text affords, (...) only of
Persuasion and Hope, but not of ^ayth, or infallible knowledge; which is the
point only here issuable. That the Text signifies only, I am persuaded, and
not, I am certain, is so evident, that the English Bibles printed anno Do^
1576. and 1590. do read with me in th^^ very place, I am persuaded. Yea* B^^
himself in his Translation of the Ne^ Testament, in this place translateth
Printed at London, anno 1587.
Mihi persuasum est: So little dot^ this Text prove for infallibility of
Salvation.

Lastly I may say, that granting (...) Paul here spoke of the certainty of
(...) own Salvation; yet it may be well answered, that this certainty (in
regard (...) his high favor with God) he had (...) revelation only, and not by
force of (...) ordinary faith, as our Adversaries (...) pretend to have.


Enthusiastus. I will proceed further: 1. John 5.
Th^^ things I write unto you, that you may kno^ that you have eternal life,
which believe (...) the name of the Son of God.


Arminius. To this I answer. First, that (...) Eternal life, may be here
vnderstoo^ knowledge of God, which the faithful have, according as we read in
S. John's Gospel: C. 17.
This is life everlasting, that they know thee. Secondly I say, That True
Belieuers have eternal life, not actually, (since they do not actually enjoy
Heaven) but only in Hope, according as it i^ else where said; Romans 8.
We are saved by hope. For that if we will attain eternal life actually and
indeed, our perseverance in faith is necessarily required, of which
perseuera^ce this passage of Scripture intimates no certainty; since
(according to the words of Ezech. 33.
Eze^hiel above cited) this Text (as many more) implies in it a Condition to be
performed; and consequently, it pro^eth no certainty or infallibility of man's
Election.


Enthusiastus. We thus read, that the Apostle says: Romans 8.
We have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry: Abba Pater. And the
spirit it self bears witness to our spirit, that we are the Sons of God;
and if ^is Sons, then also heirs, if so be that we suffer with him etc.


Arminius. You cloy me ( Enthusiastus) with (...) fastidious saciety of Texts
of this ^^ture: For this Text only proves, (...) the Just during the state of
their pres^^^ Justice, are the Sons of God, and consequently his Heirs: But
whether (...) Just shall persevere in that state till their death, (which is the
chief point (...) this Controversy) this Text proves not. Nay it proves,
that the Just may* fall from their Justice, and thereupon loose their Election,
as is fully insinuted by the Condition annexed in (...) very Text, vz. If so
that we suffer (...) him. Certainly the damned Spirits before their fall were
the Sons or Children of God, and yet afterward through their want of
perseverance in righteousness, they fell from their form^^ state: So little does
this Authority prevail in proof of the certainty of man^ Predestination or
Election; the certainty* that is proved from this passage, being only
coniecturall, and not infallible.


Enthusiastus. What reply you to that of the A^ostle: Romans 8.
Whom he called, them also he ^^stifyed; and whom he justified, them ^^so he
glorified. In show of words a most ^^rcing Authority, since from hence it (...)
it may be concluded, that whom (...) does justify, he is thereby one of (...)
Elect, and glorified, and so cannot finally fell.


Arminius. I reply. This your inference were ^^rong, if all, who are called,
were Elect. But contrary to this we read: Matthew. 22.
Many ^^^called, but few Elect; therefore this ^lace can take no more hold of
him that is justified, then of him that is called, since the words of the Text
have equal Reference to them both. Therefore the true meaning of this place is
understood not of every one, that is called or justified in general, but only
of the Elect, whom God in his foreknowledge (according as it is said in the
former alleged Chapter) foreknew to be called, according to purpose of
election. And of these it is granted, none does finally fall. But who these*
Elect be, (...) man knows: Romans 11.
For who has (...) the mind of the lord, or who has (...) Counselor?


Enthusiastus. S. Paul thus writes of himself (...) (r) ^. Tim. 4.
I am Objected by M. Willet in Synops. pa. ^57.
now ready to be crucified, (...) time of my resolution is at (...) etc* (...)
finished my Course etc. and there is laid (...) for me a Crown of Justice,
which the (...) will render to me at that day: So certain (...) is, that S.
Paul was assured of his Election.


Arminius. This place touches not the diff^culty: For S. Paul was assured of
his Salvation through extraordinary R^uelation. And our Adversaries M. Perkins
in his reformed Catholic. p. ^8.
do affirm with us, that a man may be assured of his Salvation by
extraordinary Revelation* as Abraham, and others were. But this is not the
point controuerted between them and us, seeing our Adversaries d^ teach, that
this knowledge is by Ordinary Faith, as Vbi supra. p. ^9.
M. Perkins maintain (...) Now that S. Paul had knowledge of his Salvation only
by extraordinary (...), appears from his like fore^nowledge of his own
death, mentio^^d in this very passage alleged in ^^ose words: The time of my
resolution (...) at hand. And according to his like re^elation he said to the
Ephesians: Acts. 20.
(...) ^old, I know, that you no more shall see ^y face.

Thus we see, by true weighing of ^his Text, that is affords, no greater
^roofe for our Adversaries presumed ^nfallibility of their Salvation, then it
does, for the certain knowledge of the ^yme of their death; since the Text
concerns both alike, and therefore either both these points, or neither are
proved from this passage of Scripture.


Enthusiastus. We are counseled by S. Peter to make our calling and election
sure by good works: His words are these: 1. Petr. 1.
Wherefore brethren, Objected by Kimmo^on^i^s no his Redempt* of mankind. p.
^^^.
give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure by good works;
for if you do these things, you shall never fall. Now from this it seems,
that the Faithful are assured of their Election.


Arminius. Here Enthusiastu, you have affo^ded me a weapon, where with to
(...) your own Cause, since the force of (...) your reason recoyleth upon your
self For this Text teaches us, that (...) Certainty of Gods promise touchi^^
our Salvation depends upon our goo^ works, and therefore i^ but Condit^^nall;
which Condition we find to be (...) down in these words: If so you do (...)
things. So clear is this divine Authority against our Adversaries pretend
(...) certainty by faith.


Enthusiastus. We read thus of the Ephesians; That they Objected by D. Fulke
against Purga^. p. 35.
were Ephesians. 1.
sign it with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our
inheritance. And again it is said to the^* Ephesians. 4.
Grieve not the spirit, whereby you are signed to the day of Redemption. Now
what other thing do these Texts import, then the Certainty of the Ephesians
salvation*


Arminius. This place only proves at the most, that by the signing, and
pledge, o^ ^arnest of our inheritance, is understood the conuention, or Promise
made upon Gods part to the Ephesians; the perfor^ance whereof we willingly
grant to (...) on his side certain; but the Text ^elleth us not, that the
Ephesians were ^ssured hereby to accomplish and perform the Conditions
required on their ^art* But they rather to the contrary near are premonished,
not to grieve the spirit, and so accordingly it is in other ^laces of Scripture
said: Act 7.
They resisted the holy Spirit. And again: Isa. ^^.
They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit.


Enthusiastus. Well to press a little further. We read that it is said: John.
13.
Whom Christ By M. Willet in Synops. p. 55^.
loves, he loves to the end. Again we read: John. 10.
That which my Father has given me, is greater then all; and no man can pluck
them out of my Fathers hand. Briefly (to accumulate and heap several Texts
together) the Apostle teaches us, that Romans 11.
the gifts and vocation of God are without repentance. Now from all these
places what other necessary inference can result, then that one being once in
state of Grace, shall persevere therein to the and; and consequently, that such
an one is certain of his Salvation?


Arminius. I answer, that this inference (...) not so much as probable* (so in
(...) it is) much less necessary. A (...) to answer in order to the Texts as
(...) are alleged. True it is, That God for (...) part, whom he loves, loves
to (...) end; and accordingly we read; that Marc. c. 10.
(...) loved the rich man, who went away (...) him; and yet from this love of
our (...) to the rich man, we cannot (...) that the Rich man was one of the
(...) Again it is most true, that God louet^ all men, as they are his
Creatures though he hates their Sin; For (...) wiseman instructs us, that
Sapie^^ c 11.
God (...) all things, that are, and hates none (...) them, whom he has made.

To the second place I answer (...) that another like place of our Sauiou^
words may well seem to explane (...) as where he said: John 17.
Those whom thou (...) me, I have kept; and none of them pe^^shed, but the
Son of perdition. Now (...) parallelling these two several T^xts ^^geather
it is evident, that the (...) of this place is not, that every on^ whom the
Father gives, perseueres to (...) end, for then the Son of perdition (...) wit
Judas) who (as the Text says) (...) given, should have perseuered to the
(...)* But rather, that the Devil by all (...) temptations, cannot perforce
pull a (...) from God, except he gives his (...) consent to yield to the devils
(...).

Secondly, suppose these words to understood of the Elect in general, ^^ose
final repentance is known to (...) (of whom we all acknowledge, at None do
perish) for God is not (...) in his foreknowledge: yet this forces nothing,
seeing both the Hier. in c. 26. Hier. says* Non ex eo. quod Deus scit futurum
aliquid, id^ir^^ futurum est: Sed quia futurum est, Deus nouit. See likewise
Austin tom. 7. de praedest. and gratia, c. 15.
^^thers, and our own learned Hiperius in Method. Theol. l. 1. pa. 319. says:
Neque quia praescit Deus hominem peccaturum, ideo homo peccat; sed quia
peccaturus erat, ideo Deus id praesciuit* The like saying has Amandus Pola^^s
in partit. Theolog. l. 1 p. ^.
Bre^^ren do teach, that things are not, because God does foresee them; but God
does ^^resee therein, because they are.

To the third Text, I answer: That ^od indeed does never repent him of (...)
gifts bestowed upon any man, yet ^^uertheles by reason, that many do a^use his
gifts, applying them other^ise then God intended, he is said in ^oly Scripture
(as speaking to our Ca^acity) Genesis ^. and 1. Samuel 15.
to repent him.


Enthusiastus. Well. I will clos^tlli^ point (...) more Scipturall Authorities
(...) I see, Arminius, you are very (...) in avoiding of them) with there (...)
lowing, which for greater (...) I will a mass together. We find (...) Apostle
thus to say: Christ shall (...) confirm you (speaking to the ^^^thians) unto
the end. I^ like (...) (m) 1. Cor. 1.
said Apostle else where thus says (...) (n) Ephesians. 1.
He has thosen us before the foundation the world. Again: Romans 8.
Who shall accuse against the Elect of God? Finally we (...) in the Gospel:
John. 10.
No man shall (...) sheep out of my hand. All which ^^^^^rities may seem well
to fortify the (...) fallibility of Predestination.


Arminius. These Texts, though many (...) number, yet are small in force, so
(...) they glance from the intended (...) And as for the two first (to which
(...) others of the same nature may (...) ranged, taking their answer, from
(...) Answer given to th^se two) the ^postle only means, That he hop^ (...)
well of the salvation of the Corinthians* and Ephesians; but that he should be
as^ured through a certainty of faith, that ^ll the Corinthians, and all the
Ephesi^ns (for the Apostle speaks indefi^itely to them all) should be saved,
is ^ost absurd to think. To the two (...) Authorities. They only teach, that
^he Elect cannot finally perish; but they ^oe not teach, that the Elect do know
(...) much of themselves in particular; or that they are of the number of the
Elect: which point remaynes yet unproven.


Enthusiastus. I will desist (as I said before) from ^rging more places of Gods
word: For (...) willingly grant, I have produced all ^uch Texts, as I thought
had been most ^reuayling for the proof of the doctri^e, for which they were
urged. Only before I leave the Scene of further op^osing, I will insist in an
Argument or ^wo, drawn from force of reason, which Arguments prevail strongly
with diverse men of judgment: my first ^^en shall be drawn from the efficacy ^f
(...) and Hope. And thus I dispute.

The holy Scripture ascribes to Faith a (...), or most full (...) in the tenth
Chapter to the Hebre^* In like sort in the eleauenth Chapter (...) the Hebrews,
it is called in regard* (...) its Infallibility, Coniunctio or Hyposta^^ a
firm ground of things to be hoped for* (...) an infallible evidence of things
we see* (...) Again in the Epistle of S. James, (...) 1. Hesitation and
wavering is opposed (...) Faith. In like sort in the sixth to the H^brews, a
steedy firmenes is attributed (...) Hope, or as the former greek word (...) a
(...) in which place Hope, (...) its stability and firmenes, is compar^^ to an
Anchor. Therefore in regard (...) Gods promising a remission of (...) Sins,
why should we rest doubtfu^^ thereof?

My second Argument shall be tak^^ from the seeming absurdity Urged bv Kemp^it.
in Exam. Council. Trid.
accompanying this your doctrine; since (...) doctrine seems to be absurd,
which ^^uer teaches a doubtful hesitation* (...) fluctuation of a man's faith,
touchi^^ his own salvation.


Arminius. In soluing the first Argument (...) must recurre partly to the state
of (...) Question above set down. True it is, (...) Faith is most certain:
neither (...) it be called Faith, by the which a (...) gives assent with any
doubtful^^^^ or fear to such things, the which ^^ought to believe. But our
Aduersa^^^^ Paralogisme, or Fallacy, rests in (...) that they assume, as
granted (which (...) can never prove) that remission Sins, or justification
do properly (...) ^oly belong to faith. Again I say ^^^ording to the state of
the question, (...) granting a man to have once true (...); yet follows it
not that there^^^e he shall finally dye in state of true (...), and then it
follows, that if he (...) not certain of his final perseue^^^ce in faith,
he therefore is not cer^^^ne of his Election, or Predestination. Touching Hope,
It is most certain, ^espect of God promising; but in (...) of man's
indisposition, and his ^^^kenes and frailty in performing the ^^nditions
imposed by God, Hope is (...) languid, and accompanied with ^^rtaine fear.

Touching your argument from (...) supposed absurdity, attending on (...)
doctrine herein, I reply, that the doctrine maintained by us, thou (...) takes
not away all fear, yet it (...) away all anxiety, hesitation, and (...)
doubtfulnes, if he may be called (...), who dare; not give assent to (...)
contrary part or opinion. And as (...) no good inference to argue thus: (...)
man is not doubtful nor anxious of the ^^^tainty of his Election, therefore he
is elect^^^* So neither are you thus to dispute* (...) man has no certainty of
his faith, or (...); therefore he is ever doubting (...) troubled with fears
touching the (...) There is therefore a mean to be ad^^ted between these two
extremes (...), a moral certainty in respect o^ (...) Understanding, and a
Hope, and trus^ (...) respect of the Will.


Enthusiastus. Arminius, I must confess, you (...) partly satisfied me in
displaying (...) unexpected weakness and transpa^^^cy of my Arguments, drawn^
(...) from the misapplication of Script^^^^ as also from Reason. But seeing
(...) accomplished my task of (...) we are to change parts, therefore (...)
may at your pleasure enter upon (...) (...) in seeking to warrant your con^^^ry
doctrine, with such proofs, as (...) shall be best armed therewith. And ^^deed
I confess, I partly begin to retire ^^d give back, so little preuayling I ^^d my
former Arguments to be, which till now I accounted as many ^^gines, able to
beat down, and level ^^th the ground all contrary doctrine that, for which
they were urged. But ^rminius) begin.


Arminius. I am prepared thereto. And for the ^ore exact discussing of this
point, I (...) first overthrow by proofs the ^^^posed certainty of every
particular (...) Justice. Now if a man be vncer^^^^e of his Justice, which is a
means (...) the obtaining of Heaven, then much (...) must he rest uncertain
of his ^^^^ation.

When I have discoursed fully of the (...) ^ertainty of a Justifying Faith,
then (...) I proceed to the impugning, by ^^^ofes, of the imaginary Certainty
of (...). Now touching the first point, (...) ^ill lay down (though it be in
part (...) showed) what is the true state thereof: To wit, it is in express
(...) thus: Whether a man ought or can (wit^ (...) special revelation) be
assured, through (...) of divine faith, that his sins are (...). In which
question ( Enthusiast^^^) you, and your party hold the Aff^^^^tiue, I the
Negative.

Now, in disprouing this a^ry ^^^tainty, I will keep in part my for^^ method
of profes, and will draw (...) Arguments first from Reason. My first A^gument
then shall be this. Nothing (...) be certain ( c^rtitudin^ fidei) throu^^
certainty of Faith, except it be con^^^ned either immediately in the (...) God,
or at least deduced out of (...) word, by evident consequence; (...) Faith
groundeth itself only upon (...) Authority of Gods word. But we (...) not find
either immediately, or by* ^^cessary inference in the word of (...) that this,
or that man is truly iustify^^^ except some few as Ma^y (...) the Paraliticall
Ma^^, to both who^^ was said by our Savior: Thy (...) remitted thee.

If the Adversary should reply* (...) to, thus ^yllogizing: The word (...)
teaches, that every one who has (...) ^^ntance of his sins, is justified;
but I (...) true repentance of my Sins; there^^re I am justified. I answer
heerto, that ^he Assumption, or second Proposition of ^his Argument is not only
false, but (...) impossible; except it be proved by ^iuine Revelation; Since we
read, Jeremy c. 17.
^he heart of man is ins^rutable, and who ^^oweth it?

Again, we observe, that many are ^ersuaded to have that, which indeed ^hey
have not. This is evident from the ^xample of S. Peter, who when he said: Luc.
22.
I am prepared to be imprisoned, and to ^^ffer death, was doubtlesly persuaded,
that he would suffer death for Christ; and yet the event showed, that he was
^ot truly prepared thereto. Add heer^o, that the Anabaptist and
Anti-trinita^^lan (both manifest Heretics) do as confidently vaunt of their
certainty of ^ustification, as any Protestant can do: and yet it is most
evident, that both ^f them remain in mortal Sin, as ^^ng as they continue
in such their Religion, and consequently that they ca^^ot be assured of their
Election, but rather assured (during such their state) of Reprobation.

My second Argument is this* (...) by special benefit of God, it is reueal^^
to some few, that their Sins are ^^mitted; so on the contrary side, (...)
Authentical Histories record, that diverse most blessed, and holy men at the
hour of their death, through their (...) certainty of justification, did
greatly feare^ According heerto S. Jerome relates how Hilarion a Holy man thus
said at the point of death: Go out my Soul out of this body, why art thou
afraid? Se^uenty years thou have served Christ; (...) do thou now fear? And
with this (...) here end, touching this kind of Argument.


Enthusiastus. I cannot deny, but that your Arguments drawn from reason, seem
to be very pressing; but I pray you asoe^^ to other proofs.


Arminius. My next Head of proofs shall, be take from the pens of diverse most
learne^ and Ancient Fathers. And I will satisf^^ my self with the sentences of
some few (though chief) among them* W^fynd* Austin thus to write L. de
perfect. Iustitia post* medium.
Quatalibet ^^titia etc. with what justice soever man is ^^du^d, he ought to
think, whether any ^^ing be in him, which is to be blamed, which himself
sees not. And again: Sermon. 23. de verb. Domini.
^^rtasse tu nihil etc. Perhaps thou fyndest nothing in thy conscience; inuenit
ill^, qui ^^elius videt; but he fyndeth in it, who sees ^etter, meaning God.
And finally the ^ayd Father* In Psalm. 4^.
Noui, quia iustitia Dei etc* I know, that the justice of God remai^eth; but
whether it remains mine, or not, I know not. The Apostles words fear me,
saying: who thinks himself to stand, let him take heed he does not fall.
Thus Austin.

Chrysostom: Homil. (...) ad (...).
Multis de causis etc. for many causes our* judgment is uncertain; of which
one is, because we know not what our works are.

Jerome. L^^. in ^erem exponens c. ^^.
Homo vide tin face, Deus in cord: Man sees only the face, but God sees the
Heart: and which seems to us sometimes clean, is found to be most sor^ide,
and foul in his eyes.

Finally (to omit many others) Ba^^ll thus writes of this point: In constit.
Mon* c. ^*
Mul^a peccantes etc. we sinning in many things, many of such our sins, we
do not appre^end or understand: wherefore the Apostle said: I am not guilty to
my self of any (...) but nevertheless I am not justified in th^^ as much as if
he should say; I sin in many things, but I do not observe such my sinn^^
Thus far of the Fathers judgment, touching the uncertainty of our Justification.


Enthusiastus. I should hardly have been persuaded* that the Fathers had been
so strong in this point, as now I must confess they are; but I pray you (
Arminius) rise to your proofs of Scripture, since they are most preuayling.


Arminius. Well then, to come to the Holy Scripture: I will restrain my self
only term it no less) taken from the ^xample of David.

And to begin with the first sort, we thus read* 1. Pet* 1.
Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. Again, Philip. 2.
Work your Salvation with fear and trembling. And finally: Prou. 2.
Blessed is that man, who is ever fearful. But if a man be infallibly assured
of his Justification, how can he be fearful thereof?

To come to the second branch of Texts, teaching, That a man performing sorrow,
and being penitent for his Sins, notwithstanding is not assured of the
remission of his Sins: Now according hereto we read, Acts 8.
Re pent of thy wickedness, and pray to God, si forte remittatur tibi; if chance
it may be forgiven thee. In like sort it is said: (...). 3.
Who can tell, if God will turn and pardon v.? etc. And the same words are in
^o^^, c. 2. And finally we further thus read* D^niel. 4.
Perhaps God will pardon thine offenses.

Now here ( Enthusiastus) I refer^e even to your judgment, and to the
judgment of all here present, whether this doubtfulnes of Romission of Sins,
and the former Admonition, that we should not rest over secure of our Justice
(both which points are proved from the two former Classes of Scripture) stand
not wholly incompatible with our Adversaries persumed infalliable certainty of
their own Justification.


Enthusiastus. I freely grant, that these Texts do seem to eneruate and weaken
the doctrine of the certainty of Justification; But I pray you proceed to that
example of the Prophet David, which above (for it is conuincing) you called a
Demonstration.


Arminius. Well I come to David, whose example is a sealing Argument, closing
up this point, and affords to us a certainty of Truth, touching the
uncertainty of man's Justification. Thus then I urge: If Charity can be lost,
then faith can be lost; if Faith can be lost, then Justification may be lost.
My first proposition is warranted by the doctrine of us all, D. Fulke against
the Rhem. Testament in 1. Cor. c. 3. says: Faith cannot be without Charity.
who teach, that Charity does as necessarily accompany a Justifying faith, as
heat does the fire.

That Charity may be lost, is proved from the example of David, who killed
Vrias: seeing a voluntary pretended murder (and such was* that of David's) is a
mere privation of Charity. For how can we love that man with true Charity,
whom we intend to murder, and deprive of his life? Now the Evangelist assures
us, that 1. John 3.
Who loves not his brother, is not of God, but abides in death. From hence
then the unavoidable resultancy is, that David in the murder of Vrias, and
during all the time before his repentance thereof was not of God, but for the
time abode in death, and consequently neither had Charity nor faith; for if he
had faith, he had not abyded in death, because it is written: 1. John* 3.
By faith the just man lives.


Enthusiastus. I have read some of our learned Brethren, laboring to avoid
this Argument by answering, that David's faith was not lost in his murder of
Vrias, but only for the time slept. And others do affirm, that David when he
committed murder and adultery, D. Fulke in the disputation in the Tower ann.
1581. the second daves Conference.
was, and remained the child of God; and did not fall from his faith. And
another great man among us affirms, that Beza in respons. ad Act. Colloq.
Montisbelgar. part. altera P. 73.
at one, and the sam^ time, David sinned, and sinned not.


Arminius. Tush ( Enthusiastus) all this is but ^ froath of words, serving only
to blear^ the eyes of the ignorant; but it is wholly dissolved with the least
touch of a judicious finger. And to the first and second part of your Answer:
Either David had faith at the time of his murdering of Vrias, or he had it not
(for no Medium can be given between these two Extremes:) If he had faith, how
then could his faith be said to sleep?

Again, the Nature of true faith requires, that ^^ should be ever Galat. 5.
Working with Charity, and that without works it is Jacob. ^.
dead. If David has not faith at that time, then is that grated, which I
demanded, to wit, that David in the murder of Vrias lost his faith, and
consequently was not assured of his Justification. Thus you see, that this
yours evasion is nothing else, then a poor begging of the point, as granted,
which is still in controversy, to wit, that David still kept his faith, at the
time h^^ killed Vrias.

Now, to that other last kind of Answer, (to wit, that at one, and the same
^yme David sinned, and sinned not) I ^uch wonder, that it did ever fall from ^
learned man's pen; so fantastical, ^explicable, and indeed absurd it is. But
to proceed, this Answer implies, that David sinned (let it be in what ^espect
soever the Author of this Answer will have:) If then David sinned, ^hen David
by such his Sin was the ^eruant of sin, and of the Devil; for we read
that, John. 8.
He that commits ^inne, is the servant of Sin. And again: He that
commits Sin, is of the 1. John. ^.
Devil. And thus far touching this Demonstration.


Enthusiastus. I grant indeed, that this your Argument drawn from the example
of David is most strong, and I now well ^erceaue, how slightly my Answer
^hereto was wouen, upon several ^reeds, but all to illaqueate and ensnare
weak judgment. But ( Arminius) you ^auing now finished (as I take it) all our
proofs for the disprouing of the certainty of man's Justification (...) Method
requires, that you (...) take the like labor touching the (...) proving the
certainty of (...): though I cannot but grant, (...) the impugning of this
later (...) vertually inuolued in the (...) of the firster. For let us once
grant, (...) man rests uncertain of his (...), it then ineuitably from
thence (...) be inferred (as your self above did i^timate) that he also
rests vncerta^^ of his Election and Predestination; (...) Justification is a
necessary Medi^^ Election and Predestination; for no (...) are elected or
predestined by God, (...) such as are finally justified. Yet n^^withstanding
this most necessary ^^terueniency of these two points, (...) would willingly
hear your particul^^ proofs, for the particular point of t^^ uncertainty of
Election o^ Predestinati^^*


Arminius. I will satisfy your desire. (...) first not to lose time, I will
keep^ (...) former Method in producing of (...) proofs. And therefore for the
(...) of Election, and Predestinati^^* (...) ^^gin with Arguments drawn from
Reason. Of which, my first Ar^ument is this: The knowledge by Faith of a man's
present Justice is more (...), then the knowledge by faith of eternal
Predestination; But it is above ^rooued, that no man can tell, whether ^e be
worthy of hate or love, in respect of his present Justice, or state in this
world; much less can he be certain, whether he be worthy of hate or love ^n
respect of Gods decree; which decree ^yeth in the Abismall depth of his own
^udgment.

My second Argument: We can have no certain knowledge of such things, as
depend of the will of God, ^ut only by manifest revelation of God himself: But
Predestination does depend of the will of God: Therefore Predestination is to
man uncertain. If you reply, that God has revealed by ^is spirit in the
Scripture, that all those, who rightly believe, and live well, shall have
eternal life and beatitude, I grant ^his is true; but I deny that God ever
^euealed in Scripture, that all those, who ^y, they believe, do rightly believe
and live (...) they ought. For if it were sufficient to say, I do believe, and
live* as I ^^ght to (...) then should all Heretics be ^aued, (...) every of
them will say, that he belieueth, and lives as he ought. Th^^ much for some
delibation, and taste (...) what Arguments (omitting diverse others) may be
drawn from, reason (...) proof of this verity.

But in this next place, I will come to the Testimonies of many Protestant^
accomplished (in the highest degree with learning, who through the weig^^ of
divine and humane Authority* ^^ged in proof of so warrantable (...) Truth,
have in the end upon their more retired and impartial Judgments pa^sed
thereupon, wholly comparted with us in the doctrine here maintained* And to
begin with those, who are commonly called Caluinists, we find* that Snecanus,
and Hemingius (two learn^^ Caluinists) are so full in this doctrine o^ the
uncertainty of Salvation, 'that D. W^^let (our Adversary herein ^ thus
re^^^hendeth them: In his ^^^ops. p. 8^1.
These Patrones of ^^niuersall Grace and conditional Election (...)
consequently hold, that men may loose (...) Election and Faith: Hemingius p.
30. (...) same is also maintained by ^necanus. ^. (...) ^hus far D. Willet. D.
Harsenet is so full (...) our doctrine, that he preached in proof thereof a
Sermo at Paul's Cross. (^): M. Perkins (though our Adversary (...) this
doctrine, yet) through rack of ^^uth is thus forced to confess of the (...)
M. Perkins in his four Treatises, necessarily to be considered of all
Christians. Treatise forth sect. 14.
This Testimony of being persuaded, that we are adopted and chosen in Christ
etc. is weak in most men, and can scarcely (...) persuaded. And of the
Reprobate, who ^ake themselves to be in the number of ^he Elect, he further
thus teaches: In the epist to the Rend^r in the beginning of therefore said
Book.
They may do outwardly all things, which (...) Christians do; They do willingly
subject themselves to the Ministry of the word, and are (...) forward as any,
and as joyful in frequen^ing sermons etc. They are also void of Hypocrisy, and
herein dissemble not that faith, ^^ich they have not, but rather show that
^ayth which they have. Thus a man being in this state, may dec^aue himself,
and the most godly in the world, which have the greatest gift of discerning,
how they and their brethren stand be fore the Lord. Thus M. Perkins.

And according to this his doctrine, ^he Anabaptists (who were burned in
^mithfyeld) even at their death vaunted ^f the certainty of their Salvation,
and yet were therein deceived, (...) judgment of Calu. cont. Anabaptist. p.
110. and 111.
Calvin. But to proce^^ to others. Musculus (the great Pro^^stant) does thus
teach of this point: In loc. Com. loc. de Peccato. sect. ^. 20.
If he, who has been made partaker of the Heavenly grace, do fall from that
Grace, (...) of a just and faithful man, do became, (...) just and vnf^ythfull
etc. this man's conscience (the purity of faith being lost) (...) made guilty
unto damnation. And M. Robert Rollock, once Rectour of the University of
Edinburgh (a man mu^^ esteemed by Beza) thus writes In his book of Lectures
upon the epist. of Paul to the Colossian^. Lect. 6. c. ^. p. ^4.
(...) tell thee, that notwithstanding thou art r^deemed, and by this blood of
Christ f^ee^ from Sin and death; yet if thou ta^est delight in Sin, the
greater shall be thy damnation.

Now to come to others, commonly styled Lutheranes. And to passover ^n
Theolog. Calu^nist. l. ^. ar^ 14. W^o there reproves Calvin, Zan^hius, and the
Divines of G^noua.
Conradus Schlussenburg, In lo^i^ Theolog. page 188. ^ 331.
Haff^nreffensis Professor in the University of Tubing, In disput 7 ex epist.
Pauli ad Cor. posteriori part Th^fi 5.
Rungius Professor in the University of Wittemberg, In epitom. Colloq.
Montisbelgar p. 47. and 6^.
Iaco^^ Andraeas, In disput 17. pro sanctissimo libro Concord. disput. 10. p.
650.
Gesnerus Professor in W^t^mberg, and diverse other learned followers of
Luther, all maintayning (...) uncertainty of Salvation; we (...) Mclancthon
thus expressly to (...) ^o Melanct^. in Council. Theolog. page 112.
Excidunt homines a gratia etc. Men do fall from Grace, and do loose their
justifying grace etc. In like sort In the harmony of Conf^ssions in English.
page ^24.
the Confession of Auspurg condemns the doctrine of Certainty of Salvation
for Anabaptisme. And accordingly In his Disputat. Theolog. p. 317. and 318.
Lo^echius (Doctor, and Professor in the University of Restocke) defends our
doctrine herein, and he alleges in proof thereof the Confession of
Augusta, and diverse Texts of Scripture, charging the defendours of the contrary
doctrine, with Anabapticticall Error.

In like sort, Kempnitius writes thus of this point: K^mpnit. in his Ex^m.
Council. Trident. printed a^no 1578. part. 2. p. 193. and vide part. ^ page 19^.
True lively justifying faith may be lost, and the party made guilty of
eternal damnation. Finally (not to charge your memory with a surplusage of the
learned Protestants judgment herein) the Protestant Divines of Saxony do in
their public Confession thus teach. In the Harmony o^ confessions in English.
p. 80. and p. ^33.
It is manifest, that who are regenerate etc. are again rejected by God, and
made subject to eternal punishment. And further: Harmony etc. p. 195.
Justification and regeneration may be shaken of, and we lose eternal ^^fe.
Thus much touching the most lear^ed Protestants in this matter of Vncer^^ty of
Election, and Predestination.


Enthusiastus. Indeed I rest half amazed at the pregnant Testimonies of so
many o^ our own learned Brethren in defenc^ of this your doctrine, and I
freely confess, I would never have believed, that so many of them, and of such
eminency, had with so strong an endeauo^^ maintained the same, but that I fy^^
you so punctual and precise in alleging their own clear words in (...)
half thereof. But I pray you ( Ar^^nius) proceed to other of your propfes.


Arminius. Before I proceed to other proofs, I must subnect to this former
discours^ one observation touching the judgments of our own learned and
Reverend Brethren, either in this point, (...) in the doctrine of Freewill
above disputed of, or of any other point hereafter to be discoursed of between
(...) this time. The observation is this: that whereas all these eminent
Protestants already produced by me* or hereafter (...) be produced, do with an
vnani^^^ consent teach, That no dogma^^^^* point is to be believed, as an
Article of ^ayth (they wholly rejecting all Tradi^ions) but what has its proof
out of the Scripture, either immediately in express words, or else by necessary
infe^ence deduced from the Scripture; that therefore we may truly infer, that
all these Learned men do ground themselves only upon Scripture, for their
maintayning of the said doctrines; and consequently that they conspire with me
in the expositions of the said passages of Scripture, already or hereafter to
be alleged by me.

And further, seeing the Scripture cannot teach contrary doctrines; it
follows, that our said learned Brethren by me produced, do interpret with us
(and contrary to your construction given of them) all such Countertexts of
Scripture heretofore urged, or hereafter to be urged by you ( Enthusiastus) for
the impugning of those our said doctrines. And now this Advertisement being
premised, I hasten in this next place to the Authority of the Ancient Fathers
and Doctors of Christ's Church.

And first, Gregory the Great thus writes: In primum Regum.
Quia (...) Dei imperscrutabile est etc. Because (...) judgment of God is
vnse^^he able, thereof (...) man knows not from whence be comes or whither
he goes: The Reason hereof being, in that it cannot be known, whether a man
shall persevere unto his end in th^^ Grace, which he receaueth.

Prosper: L. ^. de vocatione Gentium. cap. vltim.
De nullo ante ipsius (...) etc. We cannot pronounce before hand of (...) any
man, that he shall be in the glory of the Elect. And this profitable fear does
preserve in man a perseuering humility, that (...) who stands may take heed,
that he do (...) fall.

Austin is most full, thus writing: De Ciuit. Dei. l. 2. c. 12.
(...) Licet Sancti de suae perseuerantiae praemin (...) certisunt, de ipsa
tamen perseuerantia su^^ reperiuntur incerti etc. Although Holy men be assured
of the reward of their perseverance; yet of their perseverance it self* they
are found to be uncertain. For what man can know, that he shall persevere i^
practice and progress of Justice till his end, except it be made known to him
by some Revelation?

Again the same Father thus further amplifyeth upon this point: L. de Co^rept.
and gratia. c. 13.
Quis ex multitudine fidelium etc. Which of the multitude of the faithful, as
long as he (...) in this mortality can presume himself (...) in the number of
the predestinate? And further, speaking of Election, he thus says: L. de bono
perseuerantiae* c. 13.
Vtrum quis hoc munus etc. It is uncertain who has received this gift, as
long as he leads this life.

Jerome subscribes to the same censure, thus writing: L. 2. aduers. Pelagium.
Ne beatum dixeris ^uempiam antemortem etc. Thou shall not tell any man blessed
before his death: for as long as we live, so long we are in battle, or sight;
And as long as we are in battle, so long there is no certain Victory.

To contract this point touching the Fathers judgments herein, I will and with
Chrysostom; his words are these: Hom. 1^. in epist. ad ^ h^^p.
Si Paulus, qui tanta passus est etc. If S. Paul, who suffered so great matters,
was not yet secure of his Resurrection, what then shall we say? Thus far
concerning the Fathers in the point of Uncertainty of man^ Election, or
Predestination.


Enthusiastus. I can reply little to these so clear and evident places of the
Fathers; and indeed I cannot but confess, that the said Fathers did wholly
teach the doctrine, which now you a^ this (...) do defend. But I am de^^rous to
(...) what Texts you can produce out (...) Gods sacred Writ, to fortify this,
the Fathers, and your doctrine.


Arminius. Gods Holy word affoardeth plentiful store thereof; and those so
illustrious and evident, that both the Father^ and the former alleged Brothren
might securely rest themselves thereon, (...) teaching and believing of this
doctrine And to begin. I will reduce my Authorities for aduantaging your
memory unto certain Heads, as in my former proofs I have done. Now my first ^
Head shall contain such Texts, as teach that our Salvation does partly depend
upon the Condition of our works: but if it be uncertain, whether a man shall
continue in the exercise of good works; then must it follow, that our
Salvation (as partly resting upon our works) must be most uncertain. Of this
Nature (among others) are these (r) 2. Tim. 2.
few Texts following: No man shall crowned, but who shall lawfully fight.
Again: Math. 1^.
If thou will enter into life, (...) Commandments. And more. Romans 8.
If so (...) suffer with him, that we may be also ^^^ifyed with him. And
lastly: Math. ^.
Except. (...) Justice do abound more, then the (...) of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not ^^ter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Enthusiastus. To these Texts it may well perhaps be replied, that good works
are re^uired to Salvation, not as a Condition upon which eternal life
depends; but only because true faith cannot be without good works: since bad
and wicked works (we observe by experience) do exile, and banish away all true
faith.


Arminius. I do not here labor to search the reason, why good works are
necessary (since this to the present point is impertinent) only I rest
satisfied, if you grant, that good works are necessarily required, and that
without them, we cannot obtain eternal life: for once admitting this, then it
most consequently may be inferred, that no man without special Revelation can
assure himself to be of the number of the Elect: seeing no man (even in the
judgment of ou^ Adversaries in this doctrine) can re^^ assured, whether he
performs, and sha^^ to his lives end perform all such good works, as are
prescribed by Christ to him to exercise.

My second branch of Scripturall ^.
Testimonies shall respect those Scriptures which counsel us to Fear,
touching our spiritual state. Among others these here alleged shall serve:
Philip. 2.
Work your Salvation, with fear and trembling. Again: the Prophet exhorts,
thus saying: Psalm. 2.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling: Apprehend discipline, least
the Lord be angry, and you perish out of the just way. And more Apec. 3.
Hold fast that thou have, least another take thy crown. And further ^. Cor.
10.
who stands, let him take heed, he do not fall. And lastly (to omit many
other such like fearful admonitions:) John.
Look to, that you do not loose things, which you have wrought. Now to what
end are all these dreadful Sentences, if so a man be certain of his own
Predestination?


Enthusiastus. These sentences of the Holy Scripture (*) So answer Calum vbi
supra and Kempnit. in Exam. Council. Trident.
may be well delivered only to ex^ell that torpour, sluggishnes, and car^all
security, which otherwise makes Christians negligent in good works: ^et from
hence it follows not, that a^y danger should be, that the Just should.
finally fall from their Salvation.


Arminius. If this your Answer were solid and satisfactory, then would it
follow, (a thing not once to be dreamed) that the Holy Ghost should persuade
men to Infidelity, by persuading them to fear their own salvation. For does
not he persuade a man to Infidelity, who should persuade him to fear and rest
doubtful, whether Christ be the son of God, or ^o? Therefore when we are
commanded to fear, we ought not, nor cannot rest certain ( certitudine fidei)
that we are of the number of the predestined: though we may and ought to have
great hope thereof. But to proceed to a third Head

The sacred Scripture teaches, ^.
that diverse who for a time, have believed, yet after have m^de^ship wrack
their faith. And according hereto (...) read thus* ^. Tim. 4.
In the later days, there she depare certain from the faith. And ^gaine: V^i
supr. c. 6.
Erra^^^^nt a side, they (...) from the faith. Now the Scripture te^cheth us,
that ^t is uncertain, whe^^^ a man losing once grace and ^ayth sha^^ after be
restored to grace and fayt^* For (as I observed above) it is said. Io^l. 2.
Quis scit, si conuertatur, and Dominus i^noscat? Who knows, if he will
return that God may pardon him?

Now, if many believing truly* (...) after fall from their faith, and are (...)
by become Reprobates, and that they (...) not assured, that after they shall be
(...) stored to the Faith and Grace of God (as these Testimanies next above
(...) do prove*) what other (...) can be made, then that a man in not c^^taine
of his Iustification^, and cons^quently of his Predestination? seeing c^^tainty
of Predestination (as is abou^^ (...) cannot be had without certainty (...)
Perseverance in faith and Justice, (...) proper Medium of Predestination,
without which Predestination cannot be obtained.

To all these former sacred passages Scripture, alleged in proof of the ^n
certainty of man's Predestination, ^ay be addressed these passages fol^owing,
though not already ranged to any Class or Head: Hebr. 4
If we abide in his ^oodnes, otherwise we shall be cut off. A^ayne: ^. Tim. ^.
^*
Some do repel faith, and a good Conscience, Gal. ^*
and are fallen from Grace. And more Hebr. 6.
Some, who were once illumi^ated, have tasted also the heavenly gift, and ^ere
partakers of the Holy Ghost etc. are fallen, and so dangerously, that it is
impossible (meaning thereby, very hard) for them to be renewed again to
repentance. And yet further: Romans 11.
The boughs may be ^^oken of. Yea we read, that those, who are said Exodus 32.
and Psalm. 6^.
to be written in Gods book (to wit, in regard of their present Grace and
justice) are notwithstanding said upon their replase, or fall, See Moyse^ word^
hereof in Exodus 3^. and Gods Answer thereto.
to be razed, or ^lotted forth.

Now then in regard of the vncer^ainty of man's Justification, Election, and
Predestination (proved from these and many other Texts of Gods Holy word above
produced) the Apostle had reason to burst forth into this exclamation: Romans 11.
(...) how incomprehensible are his judgments?

^ Lord, or (...) Which ^oly Apostle out of hi^ (...) uncertainty of
Predestination, in (...) and careful manner (...) himself: Philip. 3.
If by any means, (...) come to the Resurrection, which is (...) dead; 1. Cor.
^ ^.
Least perhaps, when I have (...) to others, my self become a (...)

And thus far from the Holy (...) touching the uncertainty of our (...) and
Predestination; putting (...) in mind, Enthusiastus, as before I (...) done,
that all the former proofs (...) alleged out of Scripture either for (...)
fortifying of Freewill in man, or (...) impugning of the certainty of (...), do
implicitly and conseque^^ prove the uncertainty of Predes^^^^tion. For once
granting Freewill to in man, or that his present Justice is (...) certain;
then follows it, that by freedom of will, he may relinq^^^ his former
Justice, and thereupon (...) his Predestination.


Enthusiastus. Arminius I partly yield to you (...) this discourse, in regard
of the (...) (...) p^^tinent Authorities by you alleged: But yet before we
give the ^^st close to this our disputation, we are according to my intended
method, to discourse of the Question of Reprobation, ^^inersly holden by you
and me. Touching the which doctrine I must aforehand say: that in regard of
these our former disputes of Freewill, Justification and Predestination my
divining thoghts partly foretell me, that your Proofs will be perhaps as forcing
for that, as they seem to have been for these former doctrines.

Notwithstanding I would most willingly have this Question thoroughly discussed,
before we break of. And therefore what Authorities either out of the word of
God, or otherwise I shall allege in proof of the doctrine, I should therein;
I allege them, not so much with an absolute and resolved mind of
contradicting, as with a desire of receiving full Answer and satisfaction from
you, touching the said Authorities.


Arminius. I doubt little, but I shall be as able to vnty those knots of doub^^
(...) yet you have in the Question of (...), as already I have done in the
former. Therefore Enthusiastus you (...) proceed to instance in your
authorityes, which may seem (though but in an impartial eye) to fortify your
doctrine, yet embraced by you therein.


Enthusiastus. I will, and continuing in the (...) of the method by me above
obseru^^* I will first produce my testimonies (...) of the holy Scriptures. But
before (...) come to them, I hold it very pertin^^^ to show, what the chief
Patron^^ (...) Reprobation do hold therein. Thus (...) some chief men and
their fellowers (...) write: Beza in his Treatise englished, and entitled: A
display of Popish practices. p. ^7. and 31.
That God does create some (...) to perdition, appoints them to his (...) and
destruction: and again, that God (...) decree them to destruction. Further
maintayning (to use their own words* Beza in respons. ad Acta Colloq.
Montisbelg. page 2^5. and ^^1.
That God did not suffer death for the^ But some others, as remarkable as the
former, more fully enlarge themselu^^ thus endoctrinating their Scholars:
Calu. instit. l. 3. c. 23 sect. ^.
God does ordain by his Council and decr^^ that among men, some be borne
(...) (...) d^mnation from their mothers womb who by their destruction may
glorify God.


Arminius. This doctrine is of so horrid a nature, as that I can hardly be
induced to believe, that any good Christian will ever maintain it in so full a
manner, as it is by you literally delivered; but rather they teach it with some
qualification and mitigation; as perhaps their meaning is, that God does
ordain some to destruction, by reason of his foresight of their wicked lives;
And also that Christ did dye for the Reprobate, non efficaciter, but
sufficienter, not effectually; whereby the Reprobate should actually partake of
the benefit of his death (if so themselves will) but only sufficiently; that
is, that his death was of sufficient value in it self to save the Reprobate.


Enthusiastus. I would to God ( Arminius) I could thus charitably (and withal
truly) apologize for my own Brethren, as you (though their Adversary herein)
do now in their behalf. But the matter stands so, as that their own (...)
do wholly preclude them of all such ^^uourable Constructions. For first, to your
firster words, touching God* foresight of the wicked lives of the Reprobate;
one of them in express word^ thus writes: D. Willet in Synops. p. 554.
God has ordained (...) to be vessels of wrath, without any respect (...) to
their works, either good, or bad. And another as plainly teaches, thus
saying: Peter Martyr in his Common Places. part. 3. pa. 12.
Sins foreseen, are not the caus^ of Reprobation.

And as touching the distinction (by you delivered) of Christ suffering
suf^cienter, not efficaciter; some of our most learned Brethren (I relate it
wi^^ grief) call this distinction, Beza in Respons. ad Act. Colloq.
Mou^isbelg. part. altera. page 217. and 221.
A me^^^tergiuersation, and impertinent to the point in question: and therefore
the same lea^ned man restrains the death of Christ in these words, ad solos
Electos; to wi^^ that his death was only for the Ele^^* Yea they proceed so far
herein, as that they peremptorily maintain (pardon me in relating their own
words) that Beza in Respons. ad Act. Montisbelg part. altera. in Praefat. page
11. and 1^^.
many Infants (meaning of believing Parents) though baptized, are damned (...)
the secret decree of God.


Arminius. You have sufficiently enough laid open your own Brethrens blemishes
and scarres; So full hold (it seems) those words of Austin has taken of you:
Contr^ Donatist. post Col. ^. 24.
Truth is more forcible to wring out Confession, then any Rack or Torment.) But
now if it please you, you may come to your proofs of Scriptures, for this
their doctrine: Only I must tell you by the way, that the more direful and
execrable any doctrine is, the further off it is from receiving any fortifying
from the word of God, being delivered in its true and native sense, or
Construction.


Enthusiastus. I fully grant so much with you: Nevertheless for my own further
satisfying (since unresolved doubts secretly beat upon the understanding) I
will relate the chiefest Texts urged, by my Brethren in defense of this their
doctrine. First then they insist in those words: 1. Pet. ^.
Christ Objected by Beza in Annot. in Nou. Testam. in 1. Petr. c. ^.
is the chief Corner stone etc. unto you, which believe, precious; but unto
them that believe not etc. a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, to
them, which stumble at the word, being dis^bedient, unto which things they were
ord^^ned. From hence now they inferr^^ that God was the Author of their
d^^obedience, to the which disobedie^^^ they were by God ordained; and
cons^quently ordained to damnation, the fruit of their disobedience.


Arminius. The difficulty of this Text rest^^^ in those last words, Unto which
things (meaning in your brethrens sense, dis^bedience, and stumbling at the
Word) (...) were ordained. But here I justify, (...) Translation is not pure
and sinc^^^ since the words, viz, They were ordained have true reference unto
those form^ words, vz, Which believe; And so the true meaning of this place is,
that t^^ were ordained to believe. And thus y^^ see, this place being truly
urged, makes directly against your Brethren. Now I justify this my Answer
from the Greek Text; the words are th^^ (...). Nec credunt (...) quo and
positi sunt.

The sense thereof being, that (...) were ordained to believe, but did not.
(...) point is so evident, that diverse learned Protestants do give the same
construction thereof with me. For Snecanus reciting the Text in these words:
In Method. descript. page 701.
N^^ credunt* in quod positi fuerant, neither do they believe, unto which they
were ordained, thus answers: Refertur proprie a doctissimis etc. This last
clause is properly referred by most learned and Orthodoxall men, yea even by
Calvin himself, to the Jews, who were placed to believe. And the very same
Construction thereof is given by In defens. Translat. page 152. 153. 154.
Castalio: So little does this Text advantage your Brethren, but rather
disadvantage them: and yet your Brethrens integrity and candor was wanting in
their translating the Greek word, (...). were ordained; the word truly
signifying only Positi erant. But proceed to others.


Enthusiastus. The next shall be that passage: Proverb. ape^ 16.
The Lord Objected by D. Full^ against the Rhem. Testam. in Romans 9. fol. 2, 3.
made all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of Evil. From
whence my Brethren deduce, that God makes, or creates wicked men to Eternity
of damnation, which may be truly called, The day of Evil.


Arminius. Do your Brethren ^rge this (...) to prove, that God makes (...)
men to be wicked? If so, how th^^, (...) they free God, from being the (...) of
Sin? A Paradox, or rather a blasph^^ my ( As D. Fulk in his defense of the
English Translation. page 500. D. Whitak contra Duraeum. 1. 8. page 524
besides that diverse of themselves shame, at least in words, to be reputed
Patrones thereof) directly repugnant to other Texts of Scripture, (...) where it
is said: Psalm. 5.
Non Deus volens i^^quitatem^tues. Thou art a God, that wo^^dest not iniquity.
Is it not their intention to draw the foresaid Inf^rence (...) those words? To
what end then (...) they allege it, since it is then in (...) respect most
impertine^tly urged? Ho^ do they extricate themselves out of this Labyrinth?

Therefore for the better deprehending the true Construction of the foresaid
passage, we are to conceive, that Gods making, or creating of man in the former
words has reference to man's Materiality (if I may use that word) that (...) to
him, as he is man, abstracting him from his Morality; but it has no ref^rence
to his wickedness: so man (as he (...) man) is created by God, but as Man is
^icked, he cannot be said to be created ^f him; since in this later sense God
should be the cause and Author of his ^^ckednes, whereas his wickedness is ^^om
himself. And so if he be wicked, ^^en God ordayneth him to the day of Evil,
that is, to the day of punishment; and this he does, for himself, that is, for
(...) own glory. The like saying by Ana^^gy, may be used of Princes, who may
(...) a restrained sense) be said to or^aine Malefactors to punishments; (...)
yet the Princes are neither willing, ^or Authors of their Subjects offenses.
This our exposition of the former place (...) so natural and genuine, as that
it is acknowledged for true by In his Decads in English p. 404.
Builinger, In Method. Theolog. page 438.
Hiperius, and Philp ^n his disput Theolog. de Prouiden^ia (...). sect. 1^7.
Marbachius, all learned Protestants.


Enthusiastus. What Answer Arminius can be given to that (at least seeming)
pregna^t Text: Romans 9.
Has not the Potter M. Wille^ i^ Synops. 554.
power over the clay, even of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor,
and another unto dishonor? What if God wit^ing to show his wrath etc. suffered
with long patience the vessels of wrath, ordained to (...) Now this place
seems to ^^ict (...) God even without any provision (...) ordains some men
(being (...) the Mass, or Lump of mankind) (...) damnation.


Arminius. I will be partly silent herein, and A^stin, with some learned
Brethren of (...) own, and the Apostle himself shall (...) were thereto for
me. And first I (...) Austin to paraphrase this Text in (...) words: Epist.
10^. ad Paulinum. and epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Haec Massa etc. If this (...) (he meaning the Mass, or Lump^^ whereof the
Apostle speaks) were (...) indifferent, that as it deserved no good, (...) so
it deserved no Evil; not without cause i^ might be thought iniquity, that
thereof there should be made certain vessels to dishonor* But seeing, that by
the Freewill of the first man, the whole Mass did become guilty of
Condemnation, it is without doubt of Gods mercy, that thereof are made certain^
V^^sels to honor etc. and of his Iudg^^^^ (meaning his Justice) that other
(...) are made to dishonor. Thus far Austin According to whose judgment we
(...) that it is not Gods absolute (...) without respect to man's wickedness
^r^seene; but it is Sin, which is the ^^use, why some vessels are made to
^^^honour, or damnation.

Now Hyperius (a learned Prote^^ant) shall further answer for me, ^ho says,
That In Method. Theolog. l. 2. page 438.
the long patience (mentioned in the Text) wherewith God suffered the Vessels of
wrath, demonstrateth, that they were created good, and afterward (...) came
evil of their proper will; They being ^ade vessels of wrath, because
voluntarily they were to become Evil. Thus Hiperius: So certain it is, that
their Creation of being Vessels was of God; but being Vessels of wrath, was
from their sins foreseen.

I will conclude this point even with the Apostles explanation of this place,
who expressly says; That 2. Tim.
if a Vessel unto dishonor, shall cleanse it self, it shall become a Vessel
unto Honor: So far was the Apostle from judging, that God did absolutely
ordain any man to destruction and damnation, without respect and reference to
his Sins and Impiety. Thus far of this place, illustrated by the Apostle,
Austin, and the former learned Protestant. And for the closure of all, I will
a^l^yne to (...) Authorities, my own Obseru^ (...) touching our Aduersarius,
in this C^^trouersy, their tra^slating out of (...) for their own advantage,
these wor^ Ordained to destruction; whereas it (...) the Greek only, (...)
that is, Made apt to destruction. And according hereto, it is in the Latin T^^
Apta ad interitum.


Enthusiastus. I cannot, nor will not reply again the Apostles judgment
herein: But y^^ there remain behind diverse (...) passages of Scripture (as I
may tear^^ them) that a man can hardly fall vp^^ them without danger: As where
w^ read: Act. 1^.
As many as were ordained to ^ternall life, believed; implying hereby (...) the
restraint of the former words, that some were ordained to destruction.


Arminius. This Argument may be tak^^ away several ways. First, because (...)
speaks only of the Predestinate; (...) touching (at least in words) the
Rep^^^bate*

Secondly, that admitting, the ^ords of the Text were by sequel to ^oncerne
the Reprobate: yet they prove ^ot (which is only the issuable point in ^his
controversy to be proved) a real Reprobation, or ordaining to damnation
without respect of Sin foreseen, but only a not ordayning to Mercy, or a
dust dereliction of the wicked for their own Sins.

Thirdly and lastly I say, That whereas these former words are delivered by S.
Luke, and withal whereas our Adversaries Inference here is, That those, who
did not then believe, were ordained to damnation: now to dream, that the
opinion of our Adversaries should be the true meaning of S. Luke, is (I will
not say improbable, but) most absurd. My reason is this: The Text there
shows, that, Act. 13.
The whole City came together to hear, viz: that Sermon. By which words it
appears, that this assembly consisted of all sorts of persons, ^s young, old,
women, men etc. Now who is so stupid as to think, that of all that great
concourse, they only were saved, who at that time were conuer^ed by that
Sermon? For shall we think that all the rest of that assembly (...) Reprobates,
and could not after be (...) to the faith of Christ? So (...) you see (
Enthusiastus) in a ^^^trutination of the words, this (...) alleged. But
proceed further; For ^ assure myself, I shall not meet in all this discourse
with any one Text, which will force my understanding; much less necessarily
euict the point questioned.


Enthusiastus. I take your Answer as partly ^^tisfying; but because there are
some f^^ Texts behind, which by my near ^^tercourse among my Brethren, I (...)
heard them produced by them, with great confidence in proof of Rep^^bation;
Therefore I am loath to (...) them over in silence, without hearing from your
self, what Constructio^^ you and your party do give of them.

The next therefore shallbe (...) passage, which my Brethren have (...) vanting
words ever much prysed, (...) therefore I should be the more willing to receive
a sufficient and irrepli^^^^ answer thereto. The T^^^ i^ this: Romans ^.
(...) (...) shall serve the younger; I loved Jacob, (...) hated Esau. From
which words (...) infer, that God even from his ^^others womb hated Esau,
and there^^re without regard of his evil works ^^d reprobate him.


Arminius. Indeed this is the Maister-peece in all your shopps. But I hope (
Enthus.) shallbe able to give you full satisfa^tion herein; whereby you may
partly ^esemble this passage to lightning and thunder, which are fearful to
the eye, and do but seldom hurt. And first I ^ay, that if there were no other
Answer then this following, yet it were sufficient. We know, that S. Peter
admonishes us, that 2. Pet. 3.
in Paul's Epistles are things hard to be understood. Now, among other places of
this nature, this passage of Scripture touching Jacob and Esau, was ever
accounted the most difficult. Here then I demand, what equity or ^eason is it,
that this one place (being fraught with obscurity and spinosity) should seem
in any man's judgment, to frustrate and make void so many most ^leare, evident,
and illustrious Texts urged to the co^^r^^y? (...) said: 2. Pet. 3.
He would not, that any (...), but all to repent. Again; Ezech. ^8.
(...) not the death of him that d^^th; but Ezech. 33.
(...) he turn from his ways, and live; (...) many other like most express
(...) moneys, hereafter by (...) to be insis^^ upon.

Secondly, I say, that if we admi^ this hatred of God to Esau; yet this (...)
hatred is not to be taken Positiuely, (...) even as the Sea Christmannus in his
diagraphe Electionis. page 78. and S^ecanus in his Method. descript. page 517.
learned Protestants (...) explayne, Negatiu^ly, that is to say, (...) not to
love, or not to have mercy: And ^^cording to this my construction, (...) find
diverse examples in Scripture, (...) fering the like interpretation, as wh^^^ it
is said: Luc. 14.
If any man come to me, (...) hate not his Father and Mother etc. (...) again
(besides diverse such oth^^ (...) John. 12.
He that hates his life, shall keep^^ etc. in all which places, the word,
(...) hate, or Hatred, does only signify (...) Not lauing of life, and Parents,
accord^^^ to acertaine measure and respect, (...) not, a Positive hostile
hatred.

Thirdly I answer, that supp^^^ that in the foresaid sentence, I loved (...)
cob, and hated Esau, the word, (...) (...) to be taken, positiuely; yet this
Hatred cannot be understood of Esau, as he is Gods Creature; for we read,
that, Wisdom. 11.
of those things, which he made, (...) ^dted none: much less then man, who was
made Genesis 1.
according to his own image: but this Hatred is to be understood only of the
Sin of Esau, as even Beza in his display of Popish practices* page 17. thus
says: We both confess, that God condemns nothing in men but guiltines.
Beza acknowledges, which Sin God did foreknow, but did never make. Now that
Gods foresight and hatred of Esau his Sin (which point this Text only
proves) is not repugnant to Freewill in Esau, is made clear above, by my
former reconciling of Freewil with Gods foreknowledge, and preuision.

Lastly I reply, that even according to the judgments of Gesnerus in disput
acpro lib. Concord. p. 620 and 6^^. Christmannus in his Diagraphe Electionis.
c. 9. p. 72. 73^ 7^. Kimodon^n^s in his Redemption of mankind. p. ^94.
diverse learned Protestants: and as the contexture of the place shows, the
first part thereof is taken out of Genis. 25.
Genesis, the second part out of Malach. 1.
Malachy; and that there fore, as the context of Malachy and other words of
Genesis do further make evident, the whole sentence above alleged touching
Jacob and Esau, is to be understood only of the several posterities of Jacob
and Esau: to wit, of the felicity of the one, and the infelicity or calamity of
the other: under which two ^^sterities the different states of the (...) and
Gentiles are adu^brated and shadowe^. But because the displaying of this poi^^
is of it self not conducing to our Qu^stion in hand, and requires a far
longer discourse, then the shortness of th^^ time will affoard: therefore I
purposely forbear to enlarge my self further therein. And thus mu^ch now above
said, concerning your Gordians knot, which you, and other of your Brethren
thin^^ so hard to loose and dissolve.


Enthusiastus. Learned Arminins. I fear, that heertofore I did much undervalue
you: and I rest fully satisfied with your great variety of Answers to the
former Authority: and hereafter I shall never take it as a co^uincing Text for
the proof of Reprobation. But now after I have alleged all the chief Texts
(as I take (...)) which seem immediately and expre^^^ly to concern Reprobation
or damnation, without preuision of works* there remain some other behind,
which are urged by diverse, but this by way o^ inference and deduction only, for
(...) proof of the said point of Reprobation: which I will propose to you, to
receive your solutions of them. Of which number the first sort of Texts seems
to prove, that God hardens the heart of of man, so as he cannot exercise
virtue, or obtain his own Salvation. As where it is said: Exodus c. 11.
God hardened the heart of Phara^. In like manner, we read: John. 11.
Therefore they could not believe, because as Esaias said: He has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their heart. And more fully: Esaias. 63.
Why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts? And
lastly (besides many other like sayings:) Romans ^^
Ne delivered them up into a reprobate sense.


Arminius. To these I answer, that God is said to harden man's heart, not
positiuely (to use the School men's former Dialect) but only Negatiuely; that
is, as Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Austin teaches, not by giving malice, but by not affoarding him grace: Since
God in respect of man's former sins withdraws his Grace; and through that
forbearance of his Grace, man's heart is said to be hardened. Thus this Induratio^
is not properly God (...) but only by his permission* but it is (...) own Act.
This Construction is cons^nant to the Judgment of the Anci^^^ Fathers* For even
Calvin himself ((...) elsewhere is said) speaking of Induration, thus
confesses, of the Fathers Iustit. l. ^. c. 4. sect. 3.
All the Ancient Fathers were afraid (...) confess the truth of this matter:
And Austin truly was not free sometimes from thi^ superstition* as where he
says* that Induration and excecation pertayne not to (...) working of God, but
to his fore knowledge* Yea which is more, diverse Melancthon in loc. Com. de
c^us^ Poccati and Couting. Bulling^^ in his Decads in English page 49^. 49^.
(...) Polanus in Partition. Theolog. l. ^. page 75. 76 Besides diverse others.
learn^^ Protestants do expound with me (...) heardning of Pharao's heart, to
be (...) the Act of God, but only his permissio^^.

Now, that Gods Permission should be called his work, is frequent and obuious
in the Scripture; a^ where Esay^ says: Esaias 6.
Make the heart of this people (...) and shut their eyes. Which point in Esaias*
S. John delivers in like words, saying: John 12.
He has blinded their eyes. Yet our Math. 1^.
Savior, and Act. 28.
S. Paul alleging the same saying out of Esaias, instead of the former words,
say only* They (...) blinded their eyes; so referring this blindness, to the Act
of themselves, and (...) to the Act of God, but only by permis^^ion. In like
sort, God is said to have Job. 1. and 2.
^fflicted Job. And yet it is clear by peru^ing the History, that God only
permit^ed the Devil to afflict him. Yea which ^^ more, concerning* the very
Text above alleged touching the hardening of Pharaos heart; it is else where
explay^ed and expressly said: Exodus ^.
That, Pharao did harden his own heart.

Therefore to conclude this point, Induration is not properly the work of God,
but only his permission, and forsaking the party for precedent Sins. Which
reason of Induration is particu^erly alleged by the Prophet in these words*
Psalm. 81.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israd would none of me, so I gave them
up to the darkness of their Heart. And ^hus far in answer of all such Texts,
which do seem to imply, that God (...) Hurden the Heart of man, or deliver him
up to a Reprobate sense.


Enthusiastus. I take this your solution most sorting to the Analogy of Faith,
expressed in other passages of Scripture by you ^lleaged, as also concordant to
the judgment both of the Ancient Fathers, (...) diverse learned Protestant. But
to pr^ceed further: I have often heard all^^^ged in proof of Reprobation, that
in (...) betraying of Christ, Judas and the oth^^ wicked with him, did (as the
T^^^ says) Act. 4.
What the hand and Council of God decreed to be. And further it is said ^^
Act. ^.
Him etc. being delivered by the determinate Council of God, have you
crucified* These places make ouerture, that God even ordained Judas, and the
rest of those consorting Jews, by the prod^^tion of Christ, to damnation.


Arminius. In full Answer hereto, I must ^^^cur to certain principles in
divinity* acknowledged by all learned Bucanus in loc. Com. lib. 36. page 404.
Amandus Polanus in Partition. Theolog. l. 1. p. 73. and 70. D. Whit. contra
Duraum. l. 8. page ^27.
Protestants; to wit, that in every wick^^ Action, we are to consider (as (...)
where is showed) what is therein Pos^tiue or Material, and to distinguish ^^
separate it from the malice or deformity, which is in every said wicked Action*
That which is Material (as having in it self an Entity or Being, proceed^^^
from God, in whom it is said, Act. ^7.
W^ live and move. But the Malignity o^ ^^^^^rmity in every wicked Action, is
in it ^^lfe (as being a deuiation from the ^^ue use of Reason) a mere
privation, or ^fect, and has no Entity or being; and consequently does not
proceed from God; since as L. 1^. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 7.
Austin truly teaches: Priuations and defects have no Efficient, but a
deficient Cause* And therefore such priuations, or defects proceed only from
our selves.

Now to apply this doctrine to the Authority urged; certain it is, that the
death and Passion of our Savior was of God, for the Redemption of mankind; But
the prodition and particular Impiety of Judas and his Accomplices, in putting our
Savior to death, was of themselves, and not of God, nor his Council, will, or
causing, but of their own malice against Christ: Which malice of Judas and the
rest, God did foreknow, and suffer, but never willed or decreed it. Therefore
Sitzlinus (a learned Protestant) writes well of these former Texts, thus
saying: In disputat. Theolog. de prouidentia Dei etc. sect. ^44.
The words (Hand and Counsel) signify the good and healthyfull End, for which
God permitted that wicked fact of the Jews, which he did neither assist nor
allow. Thus you see, that from the former (...) we cannot (...), that God in
cited or caused Iuda^ (...) commit that wicked act, (...) it be^ing committed
through his own (...) impious mind and disposition, God (...) his Hand, and
Counsel, did turn it (...) man's good. And thus much touching the Hand and
Counsel of God in the (...) of Judas, and his Accomplices. But pro^ceed further.


Enthusiastus. What say you ( Arminius) to (...) often objected place: Math.
^ead us* Objected by D Fulke against the Rhem. Testam. in Math. c. o.
(...) into temptation? Now these words may^^ seem to import, (or otherwise
we should not pray for the preventing of it) that God sometimes leads man
into temptation of Sin, and conseque^tly^ prepares the way to his damnation*
and the rather seeing these form^^^ words make show to import, not only (...)
Permission, but even an Actual leading^ into temptation.


Arminius. The answer to this place is implicitly and potentially included in
th^^ Answer above given, touching In^^^^ration of Pharao above objected, and
^^erefore the true sense of these words (...)* Suffer us not to be led into
temptation ^f Sin, by withdrawing thy grace from us. Which exposition is most
sorting to other passages of Scripture, as where it is (...): 1. Cor. 10.
Not suffering us to be tempted a^oue our power; but with the temptation makes
way to escape, that we may be able to ^eare it. In like sort S. James says:
James* 1.
Let no man, when he is tempted, say, that he is tempted of God, for God is not
a tempter of evils; And he has tempted no man, but every one is tempted of
his own Concupis^ence etc. But go on ( Enthusiastus.)


Enthusiastus. I proceed further. I have read some of ours to urge these Texts
following: Esaias 45.
I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create Evil. Again,
it is thus written: Amo^ 7.
Shall there be any Evil in the City, which the Lord has not done? Where, by
creating darkness, may be understood, to create man to eternal darkness.


Arminius. In answer. To these Texts you may con^ea^^, that Decad. page 40^.
Bullinger, and In Method. Theolog. p. 438.
(...) perius (two eminent Protestants) (...) teach even out of Austin, that
they (...) to be understood, De malo porna, non (...) malo culpa; That is, Of
the evil of punis^ment, not of the evil of Sin: to whos^ judgment ^n
volum. 1. Thesium Theolog. p. 175. 176. and 20^.
Piscator also (no vulg^^^ Protestant) subscribeth. The exposition given by the
former Protestan^^ and me, of these said places is so allowed by the judgments
of other of our own Brethren, that even the same places are so commented in
the Marginall Annotations of the English Translation of the Bibles of the year
1576. So as there shall not be any need to answer more touching the same. But
yet let us hear of some more of your objected Texts.


Enthusiastus. I do assure you, I am wearyed (and I think also I have wearyed
you ^^ in these my allegations; and the rat^^r, ^^ seeing I find them all so
probably ((...) speak the least) if not fully, answered by you.

Therefore I will conclude this my Scene of obiecting with alleging these
following; As how it is said; (...) ^. Samuel 24.
God caused Objected by Calu. in Instit. l. 2. c. ^8.
David to number the people. That, ^. Samuel 16.
God commanded Semei ^^curse David; And ^. Regum. 22.
appointed Sa^in to be a false Spirit in the mouth of (...) Prophets: Besides
many other ^assages of like nature. Now these and the like Texts do seem in
diverse of our Brethrens Judgments to prove, that God would not cause these
actions in ^en, which are predestined to Salvation, but only in the Reprobate.


Arminius. Here again (as in some of the former I have done) I will interpose
the judgments of diverse learned Protestants (as a shield) between the former
Texts and me; yet before I come to their express Testimonies therein, I must
advertise you ( Enthusiastus) of two things: The first is, that many things,
which are done only by the permissio^ of God, himself (according to the phrase
and Dtalect of the Scripture) is said to do; as above I noted touching Pharaos
induration.

Secondly, you may be advertised, that when God suffers man to do any thing
to this or that particular (...) (by the like form of speech i^ Scr^^ture) is
said to cause or command (...) doing of it, as is ^as where noted. (...) to
apply these two observations to (...) former passages of Scripture: And (...)
touching God commanding David (...) number the People; it is explayned (...)
where in express words, that 1. Chro. ^^.
S^^tan provoked David to number them; So evident it is, that the numbering of
the People was the work of Satan persua^ding thereto, and not the work of
God, but only by his permission; and according to this my Answer, the
Marginall no^tes of the English Bibles of anno 157^* upon this place do thus
comment: The Lord permitted Satan etc. And to this ou^ exposition Austin
accords touching S^mei in these words: L. de gra. and libero arbitrio. c. ^0.
Quomodo dixer^^ Dominus Semci maledicere David etc. (...) the Lord spoke to
Semei to curse David etc* this is to be understood, non iubendo, not by
commanding Semei etc. For if Semei (...) obeyed the Lord commanding him, the^
there were reason, why he should be (...) praised, then punished.

In like sort, John Know speaking of the Tyranny of Pharao, an (...) ^^^^sing
of Semei, thus writes: Against the Aduessaries of Gods predestination. p. 374.
Neither to Pharao, neither to Semei, nor to any ^^ther reprobate does God give
either wicked ^^mmandement, or evil thoughts. The truth of which Answer God
himself making mention of the sinful actions of the People) may seem to
seal up in these his words* Hierom. ^^*
I commanded it not, ^or spoke it; neither came it into my mind. So much are
me^ deceived in dreaming, that God should either command, or cause sin.

But Enthusiastus, before I end this passage I would demand of you the reason,
(as above I did) why your party ^o alledg these last Texts, and some others
above objected by you; to wit, ^ouching Gods leading us into Temp^a^ion,
touching the Induration of Pharaos heart, touching Judas his prodi^ion of our
Savior etc? If they be alleged by your side, to prove that God i^ the cause
and procurer of those sinful Acts, tending to man's Reprobation, (as it seems
they are to that end alleged;) how then can you and yours exclude God (as
before I urged, touching some Texts above insisted by you) from ^^ing Author of
Sin, a confessed blaspheney, and (...) such (...) Contra Duraeum, l. 8, p.
524.
D. Whitakers, In his defense of the English Translation page 500.
D. Fulke, and (...) most learned Protestants? If the (...) said passages be
not produced to (...) former end, then they in no sort (...) the doctrine of
Reprobation.


Enthusiastus. I grant Arminius, I cannot su^^^ciently to my own satisfaction
reply thereto: and to speak more fully (...) confess the consideration of
this (...) so seeming necessary inference, has oftentimes strongly assaulted
my ^^^gement to give assent, that God is (...) Author of Sin. Yea which is
mo^^ I have often insisted in this co^sequen^^ to many learned men of my side:
(...) any of them would ever yield in ^^presse words, that God was the A^thour
of Sin: But when upon (...) their words I replied, how then (...) God be
said to obdurate Pharao's (...) to lead us into temptation; to cause ^^mei to
curse David* and to cause or p^^cure infallibly these and the like (...) wicked
Actions, specified in (...) the former Texts, commonly all (...) for proof of
Reprobation ^ and (...) notwithstanding all this, it should not ^^llow, that
God were the Author of ^inne? They (I well remember) would answer this my
propounded difficulty several ways, whose Answers I will at this present
relate to you, to know how far the said Answers in your level do carry: or
whether in your judgment, they are satisfactory to take away your former
dangerous illation.

Some prime men do first answer, That, Beza in his display of Popery. page 11^.
Whatsoever God does, is good: He does all things; all things therefore ^^re
good, as they be done of him: And the difference of good or evil has place
only in ^he instruments. And thus they teach, that such Actions, which are in
man wicked, are notwithstanding in God most just and good. Others again would
secondly salve the matter in this sort: Aretius in Loc. Com. page 130. and
Swingl. tom. 1. do prouidentia Dei. c. 6. fol. 365.
We answer, God having no Superior, can have no law prescribed to him; And
Sin has only place, where there is a ^aw: from whence it follows, that in
the Astions of God, there is no Sin. Others again shape a third solution,
(so irre^olute I did find them in their Answers) by distinguishing, that D.
Whitak. contr. Duraeum. vbi supra. l. 8. p. 527. Bucanu^ in loc. Com^. loc. 36*
page, 4^4.
in ^uery sinful Action, what is Positive and Material is ever (...) above is
touched) the (...), which is in every such action not of God, but of our selves.


Arminius. All this your diversity of Answres solue not the difficulty above
^^^pounded: but they are mere ter give (...) and subtle euasions of the (...)
handled. And to begin with (...) your last Answer: if your compar^^^ did
mean nothing else, but that (...) is material in a sinful action is of (...)
and the defect, privation, and impiety (...) such action does proceed (...)
man: then were the difficulty (...) and the controversy at an end* but (...) of
your friends are so full (...) in their sentences, of God being (...) sole
causer of our wicked actions as that the said sentences* are (...) capable of
this solution (...) (a) Swingl. ^om. 1. de provident. Dei. fol. 365.
find some of them thus to write* (...) When we commit adultery, or (...) the
work of God* being the (...), and inciter.

Here you see, that not only (...) is material in these actions, but also
(...) (...) and deformity in them, is ascri^^^^ to God; as the Author thereof.
And (...): Swingl. vbi supra.
The Thief, coactus est ad (...), is forced to sin: And another (...)* Beza
in his foresaid display. page 202.
God exciteth the wicked will of (...)* The^fe to kill another. Where you see
again, that the wickedness of the Will is ^^^ributed to God. And a third says
(to ^^mit diverse others) that, Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 2*
Our sins (...) not on^y by Gods permission, but by his decree and will: He
so attributing both what is Material, and the Deformity in every Sin, to the
decree and will of God, and consequently makes God the Author thereof.

Add hereto, That whereas diverse of our Adversaries do maintain, that (to
deliver it in their own words) Calu. l. 3. c. ^3. sect. 6. And by M. Perkins
in his Treatise of Gods free grace. page 148.
Whatsoever thing God does foresee, the same he does will, decree, and ordain
to be done, so confounding his foreknowledge and prescience with his
Predestination and Decree (a point above re^^^ted.) Now, I conclude from these
men's doctrine, that God is the Author as well of the Deformity, and Sin in
every wicked action, as of what is Material and Positive therein, seeing he
as well foreknoweth the one, as the other.

Now touching the other two ^^^ners of reconciling the former (...); if so we
but truly consider, what (...) the touch of the point herein, the (...) of
those Answers will instantly (lik^ a clowd before the Sun) vanis^* ^way:
Since those euasions show. That God is not Author of Sin, in himself (which
all men freely grant) but they prove not, that God is not the A^thour of Sin
in us (for this they touch not at all) which is the difficulty only here to be
salued, and in which th^^ Controversy consists.

But I will conclude this point, and to show, how inexplicable (or rather
contradictory) in it self it is, to maintain that God forces and causes
Sin in man, and yet is not the Author thereof, Calvin shall speak for me,
who is constrained thus to acknowledg^ hereof. De aeterna Dei praedest. contra
^ighium, page ^18.
How God is not to be drawn into the fellowship of fault, as being the Author
or allower of Transgression, let us not be ashamed to confess our ignorance,
seeing* it is plain, that it is a secret far above man^ understanding.

And now having spoken, what I hold convenient to be said, touching this foul
aspersion, of God being the ^uthour of Sin, how truly or untruly (...)
against some of our own Bre^hren the Protestants, I leave to other (...)
indifferency and impartiality to ^ensure; I would, Enthusiastus, know, whether
you have finished your discourse in your obiecting; or that you will draw other
Arguments either from the Authority of the Ancient Do^^ours of Christ his
Church, or from any other Head of proofs? For I am ^oath to encircle and
confine your liberty within a lesser compass, then ^our self would desire.


Enthusiastus. Indeed Arminius it may be, that I could produce some appearing
Arguments either from reason, or Authority of the Primitive Doctors, which
(...) an undiscerning eye might at the first perhaps seem of some force; but
seeing I cannot find any one Text in Gods Holy word, to fortify the doctrine of
Reprobation (if your former Answers to them be true and solid) therefore I must
needs conclude, that all such other Arguments, which might be produced, would
be (...) then those (...) drawn from (...) Writ* In respect whereof* I ^eer
(...) from f^r (...) obie^^ing the burden (...) which labour^s passed upon you.


Arminius. I accept of the pain ^ most will (...), and in (...) of (...) will
still perseue^d in my (...) tho^ of (...) by degr^^^ to the (...) Scripture.
Therefore my (...) Authorities is taken, (...) the Pr^^^stants themselves
((...) of great ^^^^nency for learning) (...) second and more serious reuiew,
(...) a great auersion of judgment do who^ly disau^^^ and reject th^^ Doctrine
(...) Reprobation, as most (...) to (...) Honor and Mercy.

The Protestants in so great (...), (...) full in this poy^t, (...) for orders
sake, I will alledg^ (...) (...), then the (...) (...) with us in this doctrine
(...) as ^^^^ching the Caluinists, I will begin (...) with the Caluinists of
Engla^^, you^ Country men. First I (...) M. (...) thus waiting. In Apocalypse.
page 473.
Seeing the (...) Redemption, which takes away the Sinn^s the world, is an
universal thing; it is de^anded, whether the grace of this Redem^^ion, ^^
appertain equally to all the poste^^ty of Adam, or be restrained to a certain
^umbers? I answer, that the incredulity of ^en, and ^^ default of the Lamb
makes ^^is restraint. Thus M. Fox.

D. Couell thus teaches: In his defense of M. Hooker. p. ^^. and 63.
Surely (...) has a general inclination to save all etc. And that with a
conditional Will, he ^illeth all men to be saved, who therefore ^^at they are
not saved, is not his decree, ^^t their own fault. M. Hooker is no ^^sse
strong in this doctrine, saying: In hi^ Ecclesiast. Policy. p. 104.
^ods general inclination is, that all men ^ight be saved. M. Gibbons
discourses ^ereof in this sort: M. Gibb. in his quest. and disputat. upon
Genes. quaest. 2. page 108.
Surely, there was no ^^use in God, either in his will, or in his knowledge or
decree, that man should fall.

That the doctrine of Universality ^f Grace, which imports, that God
af^^ardeth to every man sufficient Grace ^or his own Salvation) is entertained
^y diverse worthy men of your own ^^^lation ( Enthusiastus) is so evident, that
(...). Willet takes notice, and complains thereof in this manner: D. Willet
in his Synops. pa. 784.
Universality ^^ grace seems much to be approved by (...) Country men, and
has (...) gotten some ^airo^es in our Church.

But to come to the judgment (...) the learned Coluinicts of other Countries*
Hemingi^s (that learned Caluini^^^) dis^ours^th of Reprobation, maintayn^^ by
his Adversaries in this* full man (...) Heming. lib. de Universally gratis. page
^^^.
Pugnat cum verbo Deivocanti etc. Th^^ Doctrine fights with the Word of God,
calling and inuiting all men to repentan^^* It makes man partly sluggish,
partly secure, and partly desperate; For many are (...) to despair, whiles by
this opinion is ^uerthrowne the doctrine of Universal Grace, in which all are
commanded by faith to include themselves. For if we respect (...) Cause, which
is the Mercy of God in Christ^ Grace is, truly Universal: But if we respect
the event, which depends upon the fault of man, it is particular. Thus largly
he disputes hereof.

Bullinger as fully entreats of this point, saying: Upon the Reuelat.
englished cap 5. fol. 79.
The Lord dyed for (...) but that all men are not made partakers of this
Redemption, is through their own (...) for the Lord excludes no man. Yea
Bulinger is so absolute in this doctrine, (...) that he undertakes to explayne
(...) In his (...) in (...)* page* (...) ^^^.
Induration of Pharaos heart, and diu^^^lyke Texts of Scripture, produced
against this our doctrine. But to proceed further: Ama^dus Polanus thus
teaches: Amandus Polanus, in partition. Theolog. p. 11. 12.
God by his condi^^onall will would have all men saved. And further: Ibid. p. 8.
God does not cause, but permit men to fall into Sin. And yet more: Ibid. p.
7^.
God is not the cause of all things, that he foreseeth. To conclude, Piscator
is so great a Patron of our doctrine, as that he Volum. 1. These. Theolog. page
174. 175.
alleges diverse Scriptures for the fortifying of his own Opinion therein; as
also answers diverse Texts of Scripture, objected by our Adversaries.

Now touching the Lutheranes, We find, that In Enchirid. p. 158.
Kempnitius, In Respons. Bez. ad Colloq. Montis^elg. part^ alt^ra. page 25^.
Iacobus Andraeas, In Theolog. Calu. l 1. Art. ^^.
Conradus Schlussenburg, In disput. pr^ lib. Concord. page 60. 61. 6^.
Ges^erus, the Cent. ^. l. 2. c. 4.
Century Writers, The In the Harm. of the Confess. in English. page 268. 269.
Confession of Auspurg, In loc. Com. p. 140.
Manlius, In Syntagm. ^x Nou* Testam. Col. 109. ^10* and 111.
Wigandus, In disput. Theolog. disput. 1. p. 24. and disput. ^1. p. 507.
Lobechius, In loc* Com. com* 1. de pr^dest. fol. 29. 3^. ^2.
Sarcerius, In Margar^t. Theolog. page ^96.
Adamus Francisci, and (to omit many others) even the learned Melancthon, to
conspire with us herein. Which Melancthon, though for a time he was devoted to
the contrary doctrine, yet in his later days he wholly disauowed his said
doctrine, and agrees with the former Lutheranes therein: For thus he writes:
In Council. Theolog part. 2. p. ^^^.
Falsa and detestanda accusatio est etc. That accusation is false, and to be
(...) tested, which says: God sins not, tho^ (...) he helps the wicked to
perpeirate their ^^pietyes, because (say (...) men) God (...) above the Law, it
is lawful for him to (...) what he pleases. And then further: (...) tetram
vocem etc. O bad saying! For neither God wills at any time, nor causes (...)
works, contradicting and repugnant to his Law.

And again: Vbi supra. page ^^^.
Addunt and hoc, argumentum etc. The foresaid men do adioyne this argument: To
wit: All things are done, God seeing and determining the^^ etc. But let us
persevere ever in this sentence or opinion, that God neither wills nor
affects, nor approves Sin. Thus fa^ of the Protestants judgments in this
point; omitting for the avoiding of prolixity the like Authorities of many
other Protestants of Eminency: Of whom some do call this doctrine of our
Adversaries, Melancth. in loc. Com. de causa peccati.
Hurtful to manners, Others, Christmannus in Diagraphe Elect. page 94.
Wicked. Again, Others, (k) Blasphemous. And finally, Others (l) Horrendum
dogma, and horrendum auditu.


Enthusiastus. I had little thought, before this instant* that so great a
troo^pe of learned ^^otestants, had with such an vnani^^ous consent maintained,
this your ^^ctrine. But I see, your allegations of ^^em are so precise and
punctual, that ^f force I must give way thereto. But (...) me entreat you to
proceed to other proofs.


Arminius. (k) Rungius in disput. quindecim ex epist. Pauli ad Corinth.
posteriori disput. 14.
In this next place I come to the Fathers. Whose judgment herein is a^oue
discovered, touching their judgment in the doctrine of Freewill: seeing (as is
above often said) the doctrine of Reprobation, or Predestination is included,
(l) And^aeas. in epitom. Colloq. M^n^^sbelg page 54.
or rather impugned, in the doctrine of Freewill. But to take a little ^tast or
delibation of some Fathers particular sayings: Thus we find Austin to write:
Austin. ad Articul* sibi falso imposit. Art. 10.
Detestan la etc. It is a hateful and abominable opinion to believe, that God
is the author of any evil will, or action. Vincentius Lyrinensis thus fully
writes hereof: ^. aduers. Haeres. post medium.
Who before Nouatianus taught, that God would rather the death of him that
dies, then that he should return and live? Which Father also further says:
V^^. c^nt. Lyri^. vbi supra.
Who before Simon Magus etc. was bold to affirm, God the Creator, to be (...)
Author of our wicked deeds? Thus you see, these doctrines (to no small blemish
of them) take their beginning from Simon Magus, and the Heretic Nouatianus.

But this point of further producing particular Testimonies of the Fathers,
will be not much needful; seeing the learned Protestants (our Adversaries in
this doctrine) confess fully thereof: For Beza, in his display, etc. page 2^7.
one of the^ taxes and reprehendeth Chrysostom, Cyrill, Origin, and others
for their different doctrine to them touching Reprobation. And another thus in
express words confesses hereof: (an acknowledgment above alleged)
Calulustis. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 3.
Veteres omnes etc. All the Ancient Fathers were afraid to confess the truth
in this matter; And Austin truly was not free from this superstition; as where
he says, that Induration and Execation pertain not to the working of God, but
to his forknowledge. Thus much for greater breuity, touching the Ancient
Fathers herein.


Enthusiastus. You may then rise to your other proofs; for these your former
Authorities taken from the Protestants, and the Fathers thus far most
evidently carry; that is, that both the Protestants and the Fathers (next above
by you alleged) do agree with you in doctrine, touching Reprobation.


Arminius. Well before I arrive up to the Holy Scriptures, I will touch a little
upon the ancient Jews, who as before teaching the Freedom of man's will, must
therein (as is above often inculcated) necessarily teach our doctrine of
Universality of Grace, and the impugning of Reprobation; but how far the
Jewish Rabbis are engaged in this our doctrine, it will easily appear from
the acknowledgements of In Anno^. in Exodus ^ 7.
Munster and In Epist. ad Romanos. c. 9.
Peter Martyr; both which confess, that those Rabbis did ascribe the
iuduration and hardening of Pharaos heart only to Gods permission, and not as to
his proper act or work.

Now, in regard of these two eminent Protestants confessions in this point, it
will be less needful to insist in the particular Authorities of the said
Jews: but I will content my self with the alleging only (...) (that (...)
learned and grave Jew) his words. Th^^^ then Philo w^it^th: In lib. de
confusione linguarum.
Ipsi e^iim patints etc. It was not convenient or seemingm th^^ the powerful
God should prepare in the ^^^tionall Soul the way to vice etc. Therefore it
remains to be considered, that God is the cause only of good, but not of any
Evil. And again he thus further discourses: Lib. de Profugis.
Therefore let ^o wicked act, being perpetr^ted by affected diligence of man,
be rep^t^d or said to proceed from the sentence of God* but from our own
proper will. And thus briefly touching the judgment of the Jews in this
Controversy.


Enthusiastus. Well Arminius. You have riuetted the truth of your doctrine
herein by many humane Testimonies, the which I greatly presume are not capable
of any sufficient Reply, admitting the said Testimonies to be sortable to the
word of God* Therefore I much covet, that you hasten to your Scripturall
proofs, since they are to preponderate all other kinds of proofs whatsoever.


Arminius. Now I come to them; and as I said (...) of humane Authorities above
alleged, in confirmation of Freewill, that they did consequently impugn our
adversaries doctrine touching Reprobation: ^o with much more reason may I say,
that all the former divine passages heertofore produced, to maintain the
doctrine of Freewill: do by necessary inference and deduction overthrow the
adversaries said doctrine of Reprobation. Therefore passing over all such
former divine Authorities touching Freewill: I will near insist in such Texts
of Scripture, as do immediately and expressly impugn this your doctrine of
Reprobation.

And first, I will insist in those Texts, which teach, that God would have all*
men saved. That done I will desce^d to such passages, which show, that God was
incarnated and suffered death for the saving of All mankind. And to begin
with the first sort of proofs. The Prophet Ezechiel in most full manner, and
in several places contesteth the truth hereof, thus saying: Ezech. 18.
Have I any desire, that the wicked should die, (...) the Lord? Again. Ezech.
vbi supra.
Cast away from (...) all your Transgressions etc. for I desire (...) the death
of him, that dies* Yea (...) this Prophet deposes (as it were) (...)
intention herein, with a^ mo^^ veh^ment ingemination in these (...) Ezech. 3^.
As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked: but that
(...) wicked turn from his ways and live (...) you, turn you from your ^uill
ways (...) why will you die* O ye house of Israel?

Again (to leave this Proph^^) do we not find the Prophet I say to (...) in
the like Dialect ( Isa. 5.
Text above (...) god) saying in the person of God? (...) Judge I pray you
between my Vine and (...) what more could I have do^e for it* that I have not
done? Wherefore then has it given thorns* and I looked for grapes? In like
sort the Evangelist (to show (...) nothing is wanting on Gods side (...) man's
salvation) thus speaks of (...): Reuelat. 2.
He gave her a time, that she might repent, and she will not repent. And (...)
this end it is said (I mean, that m^^ by leaving their sins, might purcha^^
salvation) by the former Evangelist, that Reuelat. ^.
God stands at the door (vi^ (...) our hearts) and knocks; if any will open,
^^ will enter into him, and supp with him. And therefore in respect of Gods
pro^^eding herein, it is no wonder, that S. Peter speaks thus of all men in
general: 2. Petr. 3. and see 1. Thessal. c. 5.
God is not willing, that any perish, but that all return to repentance.

Now to come to the second kind of Texts, which show, that the end of Gods
Incarnation and Passion, was the salvation of All men, sorting here to we read:
That, John. 1.
God took away the sin^^^ of the World; John. 4.
That, He was a Sa^^our of the World; That, 1. Tim. 2.
He gave himself a Redemption for All; That Hebr. ^.
He ^^sted death for All. Finally, that ^. John. ^.
He (...) a reconciliation for our Sins; and not ^or ours only, but also for
the Sins of the ^hole world. Now whither tend all these ^ost forcing (and
indeed most comfor^^ble) passages of Scripture, but to ^^oue, that God for his
part creates ^ot any man to damnation, but would ^^ue all men saved; and that
for the ac^omplishing of the same end (if so sin^ers themselves would) he
became in^arnated, and suffered death?

And that no man shall think, that Christ died only for the Elect (and ^ ^
Christ's (...) for (...) ^ ^ (...) says* ^. Cor. ^ 8. and Romans ^4.
The (...) brother (...)* for whom Christ (...). And agayn^: 1. Tim. 4.
Christ is the (...) of All men, espetially (...) (m) 2. Pet. ^.
yet more, speaking of (...). They deny hi^ (...) bringing upon them speedy
(...) also: Esaias. ^^.
The Angel of (...) them, and in (...) etc. But they (...) Spirit; and
therefore he (...) (...) the (...) Heb. ^0.
Wh^ has trode^ (...) of God (...), and esteeme^ (...) bl^ud of (...) i^ (...)
done (...) to (...) of (...) Ye^ then the Wick^^ (...) in the (...) of the
(...) then the blood of the (...) was (...) for the Wicked.

Thus you see ( Enthusiastus) (...) these passages of Scripture do assure that
Christ's passion was (...) not only for the Elect, but also (...) Wicked; if so
the wicked will not through their continuance in their ^innes, deprive
themselves of the bene^^t thereof; and consequently, that God does not out of
his absolute decree Re^robate any man to damnation.


Enthusiastus. Worthy Arminius. I will not forbear to relate, what I have
heard answered (or rather objected) by some of our own learned Brethren to
most of these Texts, touching Gods will to have all men saved. They have shaped
a double Answer hereto. First, they demand, So urged by Kimmedon^ius in his
Redemption of Mankind. p. ^^^.
how comes it to pass, that ^f so God would have all men saved, why then are
not all men saved, since it ^s said of God: Psalm. ^^5.
He does, whatsoever he ^will?

Secondly, my Brethren do answer to the former Testimonies by distinguishing
of the will of God. For they teach, that God has a double Will, So teaches
Beza in his display of Popish and c. p. 18^. 190. 191. Danaeus in Isagoge
Christiana part. 4. l. 3. c. 38. And Kimedon^ius in his Redemption of Mankind
englished. page 170 ^ 162.
The one (say they) secret, fearful, and unsearchable; the other, the
revealed Will of God in his Word: They upon this distinction further teaching:
That, Kimedoncius vbi supra.
God wills not the death of a Sinner in his Will revealed in his Word, but
(...) his unsearchable Will. And in proof (...) this double kind of Will in
God, a l^^ned man on our side alleges (...) two seeming different sentences.
(...) (*) Esaias. 45.
Ego Deus, creans malum, And: Non D^volens iniquitatem Tu es, Thus fr^^ hence
inferring: M. Willee in his Synops page 75^.
How shall these pla^^ be reconciled to speak one truth, unless (...) make a
difference between the secret and ^^uealed Will of God?

Again, some others in (...) that God has both a revealed. Will (...) the
Word, and a secret Will also dif^^rent from the former, do object, (...) Gods
revealed Will by his word was, (...) Abraham should offer his Son (...) the
Mountain, where he had by his Secret Will disposed and determined otherwise. I
confess ( Arminius) that do not much rest upon these Answere^ of my own
Brethren, in regard of the perspicuity of so many places of Scripture already
alleged by you to the contrary: Notwithstanding I have pr^pounded them to you,
to know what replies best sort to frustrate, and ta^^ away these their said
Answers.


Arminius. Enthusiastus believe me, They are ^o Answers, but subtle
declynings ^f the former Texts. Therefore tou^hing these supposed Answers, I
will ^^tisfy you according to my best en^eauour. And first, as touching your
^emand, How chancheth it, that All-men (...) not saved, if so God would have
all men ^^^ed? To this I answer in the words of the learned Protestants
themselves, who thus write: A mandus ^olanus in partit. Theolog. l 1. page 10.
And Piscator in Volum. 1. These. Theolog. p 174. Musculus in loc. Com. Loc. de
voluntate Dei. p. 415. Hiperius in Method. Theolog. l. 1 p 1^6. Hemingius lib.
de Universally Gratia. page 16. All which Protesta^^s do teach, that according
to the former distinction, God wills (...) obsolutely, and other things but
Conditionally.
Voluntas Dei, est vel ^bsoluta, vel conditionalis etc. The Will of God is
either absolute, or conditional. Now what God wills absolutely, that ever
^ath its infallible event. But touching things willed by God Conditionally,
thus the said men do further teach: The Conditional Will of God is that, by
the which God wills some things, but with an annexed Condition etc. By this
his Conditional Will, God would have All men saved etc. Nimirum, si
promissionibus etc. But with this Condition, if so they believe and obey the
promises and preaching of the Gospel. And then after, the former Protestant
says of this Conditional Will of God: At nequaqua^est simulata etc. But this
Conditional Will is not (...) feyte in God, ^s if God commanded (...) things,
which indeed he would not. The far the former learned Protestant*

To these former Protestants D. ^^uel thus subscribes in these words: In his
defense of M. Hooker page 62* 63
(...) With a Conditional Will, God wills (...) men to he saved, therefore
that they are (...) is not his decree, but their fault* he ther^ meaning,
because the Wicked will (...) answer to Gods Inspirations, (...) keep his
Commandments, and (...) like. Thus you have your first* Answe^^ refuted from
the learned Protestan^ own pens: Whose doctrine herein (...) warranted from
many passages of Scripture, signifying Gods Condition^^ Will, as where it is
said: (as above (...) touched.) Revel 3
If any man will hear (...) voice, and open the gate, he will supp (...) him.
And in likesort: Ezech. ^^.
The wicked (...) live, if he will turn from his ways, besid^^ many other
such sentences in Holy Scripture: in which God does not compel or enforce our
Wills, but affoarde^^ to us Condition of Deuteronomy. 30.
Choice, and 1. Cor. 10.
(...) not suffer us to be tempted abouc that, whi^^ we are able to bear. Thus
though thi^^ges have not ever their event, according to Gods Conditional Will,
the cause ^^^reof is not God, but our selves not ^nswering to his Conditional
Will. Of which slackes in man, God himself ^omplayneth, saying: Ezech. 14.
I would have ^^ansed thee, and thou art not clean. And ^gayne; Isa. 65.
I called, but you would not ans^ere, but did chase the things, which I ^ould
not. And finally (to omit diverse others*) Math. 2^.
How often would I gather etc. (...) thou would not? Thus far in dis^^ouall
of your first Answer to my ^ormer Authorities.


Enthusiastus. I well see the weakness of that first ^^asion; therefore I pray
deliver your judgment touching the second Ans^ere, consisting of the Secret
Will of (...), and of his Revealed Will in the Word.


Arminius. Touching this distinction of Gods ^ill, I hold it to be a mere
Phantas^^e, or Platonicall Idaea, forged only in ^^spaire of better
satisfaction. There^^re I first answer, that if we do ad^^t God to have two
mere contrary wills, and this truly and really; by (...) One of which Wills
(to wit, his Reu^^led Will) he seriously wills, the Conversion of a Sinner;
by his other Secre^ Will, He would not have him to convert from Sin, that
thereby he may b^ damned; then it follows that God (...) one and the same time
wills mere contrary things; which to imagine God (...) do, is both
impossible and absurd. And if our Adversaries (to disintagle themselves out of
this net) do say, that Go^ by his Reu^ealed Will, wills not indeed* and
seriously the conversion of a Sinner; but only makes an outward show thereof,
by exhortation and promise set down in his word, whereas indeed (...) wills
and determines the contra^^ by his Secret Will; does it not from hence then
follow, that God is to (...) charged rather with a revealed dissim^lation, then
with a reu^ealed Will?

Secondly I answer, That this distinction of Gods revealed and concealed will,
fights mainly with this, (...) Principle of Protestancy; to wit, tha^ we are
to believe nothing, as matter of fait^ but what draws its proof from
Script^^^ How then can we believe, that (...) (...) a Secret will, different
from his ^^uealed will in Scripture? Or if they (...), that they pick his
Secret will out of ^^e Scripture, then how can they (...) it his Secret Will,
seeing it is expres^^d in Scripture? And thus the^ it would ^^llow, that God
should have Two ^eer contrary and repugnant Wills, ^^th being expressed in
Scripture: the which to ascribe to his divine Majesty, (...) most injurious and
dishonorable; (...) most absurd, and implying in it self (...) manifest
contradiction, and conse^uently thereby weakening the Autho^^ty of the said
divine Scripture.

But to proceed further, observe ^^thusiastus the exorbitancy of our
ad^ersaries proceeding heerin: for if God would not the death of a Sinner by
his ^^uealed will in the Scripture, why then do they urge from his said word,
that He wills the death of a Sinner, as of ^sau, Pharao etc. Now to come to
those ^ormer places of Scripture, which our ^duersaries make their Basis, upon
which they build this Intentionall and ^^ry distinction of Gods Secret will,
and (...) Revealed will: to wit: (e) Ego Deus ^^ans malum, and again: Non Deus
volens iniquitatem tues: I here (...) That this ^irster Text is wholly (...)
construed, and wrested from its (...) sense: seeing, by Evil, in that place,
(...) Esaias, is understood not Iniquity or the Evil of Sin, but only the
Evil of punishment, (as is above expressed) as namely War and Adversity; as
appears more evidently by the opposition of the word Peace, next precedent.
For the words in Esaias are: I make peace, and create evil; And therefore
Hyperius (the learned Protestant) thus commenteth upon this place: In method.
Theolog. lib. 2. p^g. ^^^.
Malum pro bello accipitur, vtpote quod paci sit oppositum: A point so evident,
that the English ^ibles themselves of the year 1576. (as above I declared) in
their Marginall notes of this place do thus paraphrase the foresaid place in
Esaias: I sendpeace and war, prosperity and adversity.

Now, touching the Example of Abraham; First I answer, That the Text it self
she weth, that Gods even Revealed Will to Abraham, signified by the Angel (and
not his Secret Will) wa^^ that Abraham should not offer (or, a^ the Text says)
Genes. 22.
Lay his hand upon the child. Again, God only commanded Abraham to offer his
son (as the Text says) to Genes. vbi supra.
prove Abraham. Therefore Gods Revealed will was not to have it done, but only
to have it commaded for the trial of Abraham.

Secondly, admitting that it had been Gods Revealed Will, that Abraham should
offer his Child, and that this his Will should not have been countermanded by
his said Revealed Will to Abraham; yet (according to the judgment of some
learned Amandus Polanus in Partition. Theolog. ^. 1. page ^^.
Protestants) it may be well interpreted, that when God willed by this act to
try Abraham, the true meaning and intent both of Gods Will and words were
truly to be performed in Abraham, by the only offering his son up in devotion
and faith. And accordingly the Apostle says. Heb. 11.
By faith Abraham offered Isaac, when he was tempted. Lastly I say, admit, that
God had a Revealed Will, and a Concealed Will, touching the offering up of
Isaac; Yet this is merely impertinent to convince, or prove, that God by his
Secret Will determines the Reprobation of any man, ordayning him even from his
Mothers womb to damnation. And thus much concerning this Subject of
Reprobation, defended with (...) a strong bent and vehemence, by diverse of our
Adversaries.

But now Enthusiastus, here I give a full stop to this our discourse: what my
small talent in defense of these my former doctrines, and in impugning of
yours, could affoard* I have not been (you see) sparing or nigard in making
use thereof, and this for the altering (and indeed bettering) of your
judgment, Now if I could discern, that they have wrought with you so
forcibly, as I do covet, O how bountifully were my labor recompensed, and how
larg a retaliation should I account it to be for any pains taken therein?

Your former words (and I hope, they do not stand Neutrall to your mind,
since such men were worthily rebuked, Romans ^.
Qui linguis suis dolos^ agebant) do partly encourage me, that my discourse
has not fallen upon the stones, or on the barren ground, but that it has
somewhat won upon your judgment. And for your greater strengthening in the
belief of these points, which I have proved in our former disputation for
most true, Here I do witness before the whole Court of Heaven, that if your
contrary doctrine^ be true, God does seem to cease to be God, and himself to
renounce Himself: Since he should then (by depriving man of Freewill, and
reprobating him to damnation, without any preuision of his works) seem partly
to relinquish and ab^ndon his own Essential and Incommunicable Attributes of
Good^^^* and Mercy.


Enthusiastus. Learned Arminius. This your serious and zealous Protestation is
not much needful (so strong a battery and assault your Arguments have already
madevpon my Judgment.) Therefore though I have above given sufficient ouer^ure,
how highly I prized your proofs, and how working they seemed with me to be:
Nevertheless to withdraw the veyle, which you (perhaps) may fear to be
betw^ene my former words, and my most retired and secret thoughts, Know you (
Arminius, and this learned Assembly) that at this present I do freely vnbreast
my self unto you all, and do confess in all candor and sincerity, that I am
convinced (...) this our Conflict. I grant, that I (...) lost the day
(notwithstanding my former windy, ventitation, and presumed confidence) and
that you come off, with honor. But what? Is this in a true judgment any
disreputation to me? Noe. Since in being overcome, I do overcome, and in my
Overthrow, I am Victorious, as now by this means triumphing over those
Errors, to which my Judgment was before enthralled. Let Truth ever prevail:
Veritas Psalm. 116.
Domini manet in (...).

Till the time of this our disputation, I grant, I ever was most strong (I will
not say pertinacious) in defense of my former doctrines, and even my Contrall
cogitations were ever that way fixed. But since my Cause lies thus wholly
prostrate by force of your former Authorities, I will for ever after repudiate
(to which I was before, as I may say, so much espoused) my former Errors,
strongly senting of Innovation. Never therefore more will I entertayne the least
thought of them. And no more Enthusiastus will I be called, as tasting of ae^ry
Illuminations, self-^^^^ Pl^^^ncy, and believing in a man's own Judgment,
Orthodoxus shall hereafter be my Name. I will decline (for the time to come)
the obliquity of the paths of such men, who tread aside to all ancient times,
and will be content to follow the Tract of Reverend and gray-hayred Antiquity,
especially seeing she does anchour herself so firmly and immoueably upon Gods
sacred Word. I have hitherto vnknowingly been sick (though John. 11.
My sickness has not been to death:) Now I am healed: Give me then leave to
congratulate my own recovery, and suffer me with patience to launch forth a
little in words.

My self am now cured by this learned Man's discourse, accounting it my honor
to become his Proselite, or Cannertite: and I thirst to cure others, laboring
with my former disease. O then, you Worthy men of my own Nation, who did
accompany me to this Man's presence, and I you out of England; I have (I speak
with grief) often in my public Sermons to you, and in my private discourses,
inuenomed your Judgments with these former dangerous Theories and Speculations:
now Charity 1. Cor. 13
quae adificat, omnia (...) omnia sperat; commands me to (...) (what I can) the
hurt already done^ Suf^er then for your own good, that these my words may be
an Antidote to your former poison, by me distilled I Think, what it is to
dismantle (as it were) and to disarme Man of Freewill: It is to resemble man (
made according to the (Genesis 1.
Image of the Highest) or rather to transform him unto a Beast: who works
nothing of himself, but only by the push of another (so the knife cutteth not
of itself, but as a dead instrument moved by the hand.) In like sort, those
other most pernicious Theorems, depending of the want of Freewill, (I mean the
Positions of Certainty of Salvation and Reprobation) what most dangerous
effects do they work in man's Soul? Do we not see by daily experience, that
they open the sluice to all turpitude of manners and Sensuality?

That man who is persuaded that he wants Freewill, and that he is already,
and vnalterably from all Eternity either Predestined or Reprobated, what
should stay him for ingulfyng himself in all enormous Crimes? May he not upon
the grounds of his own faith thus justly apologize for himself: I want
Freewill; The ten M. Fox Act. Mon. page 1^35 and D. Wills in Synops. Pap. page
564.
Commandments of God do not belong to me: I am already either Predestined to
Heaven, or Reprobated to Hell: A virtuous life, if I be of the number of the
Reprobate, cannot advantage me; nor the most facinorous course can prejudice
me, being Predestined: Why then should I be so unkind, as deny my self the
fruition of Pleasures, though never so much prohibited in Gods word? So thrall
and mancipated must such a man be to all Sin and flagitious Impiety.

This (no doubt) is the Dialect or language, in the which most men (believing
the former doctrines) do expostulate with themselves in the secret of their
own Souls: And daily experience does depose and swear the certainty hereof.

And you, the Learned Auditory here gathered together. Happy you are in
enjoying the daily Conference of this worthy man, who has indoctrinated you in
the Truth of these former dogmaticall Points. You see, how affluently, and
abundantly he has fortified these his doctrines from so many vnanswer^^ ^
word, and (besyd (...) o^ Reason, and of the most (...) Protestants) from all
(...) (...) grounded (...) from the (...) word; which (...) (...) hand o^ Time,
has (...) truth thereof to Posterity. Keep (...) this Depositum with an
unalterable ^^solution; and think that man to be (...) a mer^tricious and
frontlesse bold (...) who da^e oppose himself against (...) foresaid, both
divine and Humane ^^thorities.

And England (my most noble (...) dear Country) O that it were in (...) power,
to dis-inchant their iudgmen^ living in thee, of these pernicious ^^ctrines,
with which they stand yet ^^witched! Is it not a point deserving (...)
commiseration and pity, to obseru^ how many men in our own Country of most
elevated Wits, and furnish^^ with all variety of literature, do (...) their
full consent, for their believing (...) such exitiall and despe^t^ doctrin^^^
Desperate I call them, in regard of (...) most desperate attempts and (...)
which diverse of the Belieuers of (...) ^ (...) unnaturally perpetrated against
(...).

O how many, through persuasion (...) themselue^ are wholly Reprobated (...),
(...) that it is not in their own freedom of Will to concur with (...)
Grace, for the changing of their (...) lives, have become their own (...)? Thy
self, My dear Country ((...) it with unutterable grief) (...) become the
sable and mournful (...) Theater, upon which diverse (...) lamentable Tragedies
have been ^^^cted.

But (alas) why should man seek to con^ine Gods Mercy, which is like himself,
Infinite, Endless, and Interminable: (...) Psalm. 102.
ater^s and vsque in aternum, misericordia eius super ^^mentes se? And what can
discourage man from making his atonement with God, with whom, by truly and
penitently confessing our (...) be Sinners, we cease to be Sinners? Are any
Persons, here exempted? No. For we read, Whosoever Ezech. ^^.
shall depart from his wicked ways, and turn to (...) him. Is any time
limited or prefixed for receiving his Mercy? ^ grant and ^ndulgence of (...)
less: If (...) Esaias. ^^
(...) were (...), they shall be (...) S^ing (...) (...) nor (...) nor Sin is
excluded (...) of (...) large and (...); why (...) n^^ (...) (even (...) thing
(...) despayring doctrine of (...) much (...) the boundles Mercy of God) (...)
and (...) to him, (...) (...) (k) 2. Cor. ^.
(...) But I ^^^re, (...) your ^ares ( (...) (...) worthy* (...)) with a
tedious ^^^course; and therefore ^^ing the day (...) far (...), we must (...)
and (...) (...) (^^^eruing (...) for the (...) of your (...)) and (...) back to
the (...)*


Arminius. Good Enthusiastus, ^ much (...) that my speeches have (...) (...)* I
pray God that (...) company here, (...) yet (...) adverse in doctrine to (...)
the like benefit by this our discourse* That you are to depart so soon, I much
grieve; and rest much ^oubtfull, whether we shall ever see (...) another
again, during this time (...) p^reg^ination. But if so you be ^^lling thereto,
after your return into England, we will in part supply the want of corporal
familiarity by intercourse of mutual and friendly let^^rs by means whereof we
may enjoy ( as absently present) the one the other: Virg.
(...) absentem and video* and audio.


Enthusiastus. Most willingly I accord thereto: and with this, these Gentlemen
and I, take of you, and of this your Auditory, our last Farewell. ^ ^

Nay, (...) ^ ^ you, (...) (...) of Worthy* I will take my (...) you to your
(...)


Enthus^^stus. Once more the^* (...) Company and I give you (...) well.


FINIS*
God save the King

