THE CHRISTIANS COMFORT.

IN A SERMON APPOINted for the Cross, but Preached in S. PAVLS CHVRCH on
Candlemas day, 1623.

By Thomas Myriell, Rector of S. Steuens in Walbrooke LONDON.

1. Ioh. 4.4. Greater is he that is with us, then he that is in this world.

Nec plus ad deijciendum potest terrena poena, quam ad erigendum tutela diuina,

Cyprian. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John White, and are to be sold at his
Shop in little Britain, at the sign of the holy Lamb, near unto Aldersgate
street. 1623.

TO THE RIHGT HONORABLE PETER Proby, Lord Mayor of LONDON, Mr. John Hodges, and
Sir Humphrey Hanford, Knight, the two Sheriffs of the said City: And to the
rest of the right Worshipful Knights and Aldermen; the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of the right Worshipful Company of the Grocers, my singular good
Patrones, all health and happiness in this world, and that that is to come.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, etc.
IT was a solemn Law among the Persians, that whenever their King went
abroad, such as met him, must salute him with some gift, such as their state
and condition best supplied them withal. The equity of this Law, J suppose,
arose from hence, that seeing the King is the common Father and Protector of
the Country, every man should strive by the donation of some thing, to show
his thankfulness unto him, for that unspeakable benefit. It fell out on a
time, that Artaxerxes, surnamed Mnemon, a famous King of the Persians, being to
travel abroad, was in his way ready to meet one Sinaetas, a poor, but honest
subject, when he was far from home, and so unprovided of his gift; Which he
perceiving, and being loath to be found slacker then others in his duty, ran
immediately to the river Cyrus, and joining both his hands together, catched up
a quantity of water, which he brought and presented to the King. Which done,
the King very graciously accepted it, and highly praising the man's honesty for
it, commanded forthwith his Eunuchs to take the water out of his palms, and
put it in a golden Vial to keep. This Story somewhat fits my case: You are to
me next under God and his Majesty, the means of my temporal welfare and
maintenance; you gave me freely my Living where I feed spiritually, and am fed
temporally, besides many other courtesies from time to time received. For all
which favors, J have nothing to retribute back unto you, but with Sinaetas,
to bring you a little water, not from the river Cyrus, but from the Fountain
of Life, the Well of living waters, the holy Word of God. And in this kind I
have sundry times been officious toward you, but it was never put up in a
Vial till now, but as water in the hand, by drops shed and spilt again on the
ground. This I have presumed to put up my self, not without the request and
desire of many others, that there might remain hereafter some evidence of
thankful acknowledgement on my part, for your many favors. Accept it
therefore, I beseech you, and take it kindly, as coming from him, whose mind
is willing to express himself toward you in the most thankeful manner. And J
desire you to read it without prejudice and partiality, as it was uttered by
me in all plainness and syncerity. J doubt not, but such will find content in
it, who have learned to judge of a Preacher, not by stooping so low, as to
measure him by outward popularity, but by looking into him, and weighing him by
selfe-sufficiency. Jn which hope, I rest, and for this time humbly take leave,
praying the God of all mercy, to direct all your endeuorus to his glory, and
the flourishing welfare of the whole Company.

Feb. 24. 1622. Yours in all the services of love and duty, THOMAS MYRIELL.

THE CHRISTIANS COMFORT.
Text. 2. Chron. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye
seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.


IF it were lawful to assimilate heavenly verities to earthly fictions, I
would compare my Text to the three Graces. For the parts of it are naturally
three, as is their number Pausan. Baetic. lib. 9. Senec. de Benef. lib. 1. cap.
3.
and as they hold together hand in hand, so do these depend each on other: and
as their site and place is so ordered, that for one turning from you, you have
two looking toward you; just so it is here. And lastly, as they two first
look toward you, before the third turn from you; so here, two parts first
behold us kindly: The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek
him, he will be found of you. And the third turns from us indeed, but not till
we turn from it; If ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

A Text highly to be valued, for the Author who speaks it, Azariah a famous
Prophet; for the auditors who heard it, King Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin;
for the occasion that procured it, a great deliverance from an unspeakable
danger: and principally for the matter contained in it, being such as may
comfort the weak, terrify the wicked, stay the wavering, and stir up the
backward, to draw near unto God by repentance, and amendment of life.

It is divided to my hand: The parts three, but each admitting several
partitions, as we shall hear; the first in these words, The Lord is with you,
while ye be with him. Wherein consider 2. things. 1. The comfort. 2. The
condition. The comfort, Dominus vobiscum: The Lord is with you. The condition,
Si fueritis* cum eo: while ye are with him. For the first.

This sweet saying Dominus vobiscum, may be taken as a Prayer, or as a
promise. As a Prayer, and then it shows the Pastor his hearty desire for the
good of men; for a promise, and then it cheares up the people to the fervent
service of God. The first way it is ancient and general. Ancient, an ordinary
salutation in the Jewish Church, Ruth 2.4. Iud. 6.12. (...)
Such as among us, GOD save you, or GOD speed: not deserving to be termed,
Short cuts, or shreddings, as the great Cutter of our Church T. C. lib. 1. page
138.
has unmannerly termed them; but hearty and pithie expressions of our unfeigned
charity one toward another. General again it is: for it was used in the
Church, in Cyprian Vid. Boy^ par. 1.
, and Tertullians time, in the Liturgy of S. James and Chrysostom, etc. and
continued in the Church to this very day. Consisting of few words indeed, but
including abundant matter; Insomuch as Ioh. Trit. in Dam.
Petrus Damianus is reported to have written a whole book of it, entitled,
Dominus vobiscum.

Take it as a promise, and so we must in this place, if we take it aright, and
then it is the Prophets Alarm to encourage the hearts of the people against
their enemies, and may serve to cheer up all the faithful against the malice
of the whole world. For, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contranos? Romans 8. 31. If God
be with us, who can be against us? and as Cyprian, Cyp. de orat. Dom.
Quis ei de seculo metus est, cui Deus in seculo tutor est? What needs he
fear the malice of the world, who has God his protector in the midst of the
world?

To proceed aright, consider in this defense the author who, and the manner how
he defends. The Author, Dominus, The Lord. A name too great to be clasped in
the marrow palm of our apprehension. Est enim hoc Dei cognomen, says
Tertullian Tert. Apol. cap. 34.
For this name Sir, is Gods Surname. And if Dominus, quasi dans munus, Lord,
from Lordly liberality; who deserves the name but he, qui dat esse, and
escam, who gives life and living to man and beast? If possession make a Lord,
Heaven and earth, and all Kingdoms are his; If power, he can with a breath
make and unmake ten thousand worlds; If multitude of servants, this Lord of
Hoastes has his armies in heaven, earth and hell; If valiant soldiers, he
has millions of millions that have dyed for him; insomuch as if some are not
mistaken Pet. de Natal.
, there is never a day in the year but may challenge eight or nine thousand
Martyrs, who have died in their Masters quarrel. Finally, the enjoying of his
own will, Psalm. 135.6. working all things after his own counsel, Ephesians.
1.11. and all this without intermission, or intercision, Psalm. 10.16 proves him
sufficiently, not only a Lord, but the only Lord.

And this is the reason that many famous Emperors refused it, as too high a
name. Augustus Imperij formator, says Tertullian Tert-Apolo, cap. 34.
ne Dominum quidem dicise volebat. Augustus the founder of the Roman Empire
(for his father Caesar was but Metator, rather then Imperator Oros. lib. 7.
cap. 2.
the chalker of it out, then the setter of it up) This great man would not be
called Lord. And of the same mind was Alexander Seuerus Lamprid. in Alex.
, and others. And no Emperor affected it till Domitian came, who was so
likorish of transcendent highness, that he called himself God too. Dominus
and Deus noster Domitianus Suet. in Dominion.
etc. A true forerunner of his successor the Pope, who in the Extrauagants
Extra. Ioh. 22. cap. Cum inter. in glos.
, (and well it deserves to be put there) is styled Dominus Deus noster Papa;
Our Lord God the Pope.

Yet what these men unlawfully usurp, others lawfully receive from him, even
by his own gift. For he that said, Ego dixi, Dij estis, Psalm. 82.6. I have
said ye are Gods; deriuing his own title to the great Ones of the world, has
also said, Ego dixi Domini estis, I have allowed you dominion and Lordship in
my stead, And, Dicam plane Imperatorem Dominum, says Tertullian Tert. Apol.
cap. 34.
, sed more communi. I will call the Emperor Lord, but in the common phrase,
when I am not constrained thereby to prejudice the honor of my Lord God. And
therefore there is no such reason, that our Reformers should except against the
reverend Prelates of the Church, for accepting the name of Lord, bequeathed
unto them by religious devotion. For in two things they go before other men;
in dignity and gravity: and in two things they must be respected of us, in
honor and reverence. For which cause authority divine and humane has given
them two titles, Lord and Father; Lord, to show their dignity; Father, to
express their gravity. Art not thou my Lord Elias, says good Obadiah? 1.
King. 18.7. O my Father, my Father, says Elizeus of the same, 2. King. 2.12.

Neither need they fear St. Peter his (...), 1. Pet. 5.3. seeing they make a
spiritual Hierarchy, not a temporal Tyranny: or to use S. Aug. his phrase
Aug. de ciuit. lib. 19. cap. 14.
; seeing they Lord it, non dominandi superbia: sed officio consulendi, rather
by the rule of good counsel, then the love of sovereignty; and show themselves
Fathers, non principandi superbia: sed prouidendi misericordia Aug. ibid.
, not so much in a proud commanding, as in a provident mildness. And as Leo
Leo Epist. 84. cap. 1.
, Cum plus agat cohortatio, quam commotio, plus charitas, quam potestas: They
do more by exhortation of the mouth, then coercition of the hand: and
compassion, not compulsion, is their chiefest attendant.

But see how we are fallen from heaven to earth! Return we to our great Lord
again, and let us hear him speaking and pleading unto us, Malac. 1.6. Si
Dominus ego sum, vbi timor? If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Certainly a
Lord bears relation to a servant, and a servants badge is fear. He has bin
to us a Father and a Lord too: if we will not love him as Sons, yet at least
let us fear him as servants; Especially considering, his service procures both
dignity and commodity. Honor and profit, the two great baytes of humane
affections attend upon it. Honor it brings, Deo seruire, regnare est: to serve
God, is to reign as a King: and Philo Phil. lib. de regno.
, (...) To serve God, is better not only then liberty or freedom, but a
Kingdom or Sovereignty. And so commodity it brings too: for by serving this
Lord, we are saved from all enemies. Augustine Aug. de eiuit. Dei, lib. 19.
cap. 15.
well notes, Seruus comes a seruando, a servant, from being preserved; because,
Quiiure belli possent occidi, a victoribus seruabantur. Such as by right of
war might have been slain, by the mercy of their Conquerors were kept
alive. So it was a mutual pact Serua and seruia^, Preserve thou me, and I will
be thy servant. And is not this our case? or is it our case, and shall it not be
our duty? Let us hear Zachary, and he wiltel us, That we being delivered from
our enemies, Luke 1.74.
might serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life.

O then, why do we not humbly serve this great LORD, but proudly strive
against him? what intolerable impudence is it for men to use him as they do?
Some give him the lie, by unbelief; others the stab, by swearing and
blaspheming; many give him the Brauado, by an audacious contradicting his
settled truth; and some the flout, by laughing at the miseries of his Church.
Is this to make our selves his servants, to account him as a Lord?. who dares
use his Master so? Who will say to the King, Thou art wicked? and to Princes,
Ye are ungodly? Job 34.18. Oh how much less should they say it to him, who
accepts not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor! S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.18 bids servants obey their Masters, though they be
froward, much more if they be mild. How then should we be pliant to this great
Lord, considering he is ever merciful and kind, or as it is in my text,
Nobiscum; ever with us to help and succor us? And this is the second thing in
this Promise, the manner how he defends us, viz. by being with us.

Is with you.

It is true, that God is with all men, and that in all places, and at all
times: but he is especially with his Children and servants, and ever for some
good, for some singular comfort. For as in beauen our happiness is to be with
him; so on earth our welfare is, that he is with us.

And God is with us in two respects. 1. For our spiritual, 2. for our
temporal estates. For our spiritual estates, St. August. Aug. de verb. Apost.
sermon. 16.
observes, God is with (...) 4. ways; 1* he is with us, vt praedestineret nos,
for our predestination to life. 2 He is with us, vt vocaret nos, at and in our
vocation on to grace. 3. He is with us, vt iustificaret nos, at and for our
justification from sin 4. He is with us, vt glorificaret nos, for our
glorification in heaven* He predestined us before we were our selves; he
called us, when we were departed from our selves; he justified us when we were
sinful, and he glorified us, when we were mortal. More he could not add, to
raise us to royal happiness; less he could not do, to preserve us from real
misery. Upon this Paul shouts in a triumph; Romans 8.31. If God be with us, who
can ^e against us? or if against us, how can he overcome us? Man (he is an
inferior enemy) cannot bring us to death, for God has predestined us to
life. The world (that is an exterior enemy) cannot allure us from God, for God
has called us to himself. The flesh (that is an interior enemy) cannot drive
us to sin, for God has justified us by Christ. The Devil (he is a superior
enemy) cannot damn us in hell, for God has glorified us in heaven. Nemo nos
laedit, nisi qui Deum vincit, says Ansel. Ans. in Romans 8.31.
we are in good case, our souls are safe, no man can hurt us, but he which can
overcome even God himself.

Joseph in the prison, Genesis 39.21. or to advance us in time of prosperity, as
God was with David in Saul's Court; 1. Sam. 16.18.
or generally to prosper with happy success all our actions, and to incline
unto us all men's affections, as God was with John Baptist, Luke 1.66. Take it
how you will, every one of these ways God was with King Asa, as Azariah
heretels him. First, ^^d was with him to prosper his handy work, for he built
fenced Cities in Judah, and the land had rest and peace, 2 Chronicles. 14.6 Secondly,
he not only defended him against an invincible army, such as I think was
never heard of in the world before, an host of a thousand thousand men; but
advanced him and enriched him with their spoils, whilst he sacked, and
ransacked their glorious tents, and carried away innumerable spoils into his
own Country. Thus the Lord was with him, and be prospered accordingly.

Would any man be happy in his labor? Let him go to work (...) As Peter
labored all night and caught nothing, because Christ was not with him, Luke
5.5. so many sweat and toil, and strive in the sea of this world, and catch
nothing, because God is not with them. If God be with thee, every thing shall
go well with thee; yea, if God be with thee, it matters not what, nor where
thou be: were thou with Samson environed with an army of Philistines, if the
Lord be with thee, thou shall destroy the^ all. Were thou with the three
children in an hot fiery furnace, if the Lord be with thee, thou shall come
out vnsinged. Were thou with Jonas in the Whales belly, if the Lord be with
thee, thou shall be cast safe on the land again. Were thou with Daniel in the
Lions den, if the Lord be with thee, thou shall not be touched. Were thou with
Paul and Barnabas in chains in the dark dungeon, if the Lord be with thee,
thou shall be set at liberty. Were thou with John in the Caldron of scalding
oil, if God be with thee, thou shall come out unhurt. What will not Gods
presence do for us? To what will it not advance us? Esther was raised from a
captive to a Queen, for God was with her, Est. 5.2. David promoted a pedo ad
sceptrum, from the sheephooke to the Scepter, for God was with him, Psalm.
78.71. Joseph set up from a prisoner at the bar, to a Magistrate on the bench,
for God was with him, Genesis 41.43. Elizeus changed, ab ar atore, in orator om,
from a Plowman, to a Preacher, for God was with him, 1. King. 19.20. The
Apostles were made, ex piscatoribus, Episcopi, of fishermen, fishers of men,
for God was with them; Mat. 4.19. Finally, as Philosophy told Seneca Senec.
Epist. 41.
, Bonus vir fine Deo nemo est. No man can be good without God. So Christianity
tells us, Beatus vir sine Deo nemo est. No man can be prosperous without God.

And therefore let this Dominus nobiscum, be our Panchrestum, a medicine for
all maladies; when we come to preach, let Dominus nobiscum take up the text;
when you come to hear, let Dominus vobiscum prepare your attention; when you
go forth, let Dominus vobiscu^ be your vade meoum, and inseparable associate;
when you part with your friends and servants to sea, say Dominus vobiscum, for
a Pilot to waft them. To conclude, as St. Augustine Aug. ad Valor. Epist. 77.
said of his Deo gratius, Thanks be to God; so I of my Dominus vobiscum, The
Lord be with you. Hoc nec dici breuius, nec audiri laetius, nec intelligi
grandius, nec agi fructuosius potest. This thing is such, that nothing can be
said more briefly, nothing heard more gladly, nothing understood more largely,
nothing done more fruitfully.

O but, say some, how shall I gain him? how shall I be made partaker of this
rich treasure? My text tells you in the next words, Dominus vobiscum, si
fueritis cum eo: The Lord is with you, if you be with him; and that is the
second member of this first part.

If you be with him.

If we be with him. Why how can that be? God is in heaven, we on the earth,
Eceles. 5.2. How can earth fly up into heaven to be with God? True, therefore
God comes down from heaven to dwell with earth, Psalm. 113.6. though his dwelling
be in heaven, yet he humbles himself to behold the things in heaven and in
earth. What is meant by beholding, but dwelling? by heaven and earth, but a
righteous man? says Augustine August in Psalm. 112.
, who is Heaven propter spiritus libertatem, for the liberty of the spirit;
and earth, propter corporis seruitutem, for the servitude of the body. Now he
with whom God dwells, is certainly with God; and so we are with him, because
he is with us.

More plainly, two ways a man is said to be with God, in intellectu and
affectu, in the understanding and judgment; and with the will and affections.
In our understanding, when we know him; in our affectinos, when we love him.
But both these must go together, to be perfectly with God, Non enim potes
says S. Bernard Bernard.
aut amare quem non nouerit, aut habere que^ non amaueris, Thou can: not
either love him whom thou do not know, or enjoy him whom thou do not love.

First therefore, we are with him, if we know him; and from him, if we know him
not. Not that we can perfectly know him, and therefore cannot perfectly be
with him. That we cannot perfectly know him, the sharpest wits have confessed.
Trismegistus among other titles called him (...) that is, as Lactantius Lo^^ de
ira Dei, lib. 8. cap. 11.
expounds it, Tantus, vt ab bomine not possit aut verbis enarrari, aut sensibus
astimari, So great that he can neither be expressed in words, nor conceived in
thought. And as August. Aug. lib. de cog. ver. vit. and de verb. Dom. sermon. 38.
sweetly, The best part of our knowledge is, rather to know what he is not,
then what he is. For as a curious Statue or form is composed and brought into
perfection by hewing and cutting something still from it, not by adding any
thing unto it: so this great Lord is known of us, by denying him such and such
like things as are common to the creatures, and by ^^^ing away humane conceits
from him, where ^e go about to conceive what he is.

But though we know him not wholly as he is in himself, yet we may and must
know him holily as he is in his Word. For as the King is known what he is by
his Laws, so God is perceived who he is by his Will; neither is any man so
far from God, as he which knows not his Word and Commandment.

And thus two sorts of men are severed from God; the ignorant, and the
erroneous. The ignorant; for such are not with God, they are they know not
where; God dwells in light, but the ignorant man is in darkness, and therefore
he is said to grope, Act. 17.27. In this case were all we before Christ came,
and all Heathens thens now unto who^ Christ is not yet come. They are not in
this world with God, but they are with the god of this world. And the god of
this world is the Devil in the world to come, who shall punish them for not
knowing the true God that made them. Ignorance, whether there it be a sin, as in
such as might know, or a punishment of sin, as in such as could not know, it
is in both, not iusta excusatio, but (...). ad Sixth. Epist. 105.
iusta damnatio; no just excusall at the bar of Gods judgment, but a just
refusal from the joys of Heaven.

And as bad or worse is the erroneous man: For he wilfully goes out of the
way, when the hand points him to the true path. He is not with God, for God
is truth, and he is run madding with the many-headed monster, Error. How many
by a perverseness of judgment, think they are with Christ, when they be with
Antichrist? that suppose they be with the Church of God, when they are with
the Synagogue of Satan? that imagine they be with Jesus, when they are with
the Jesuits? that hope they are in the gates of heaven, when they be in the
mouth of hell? Sulpitius Seuerus in vit. S. Martin. lib. 1.
tells a story, That near the City where S. Martin sat, there was a religious
place much frequented, on it an Altar built, at it much devotion used, because
as was thought, certain Martyrs there had suffered for the name of Christ. S.
Martin being troubled that he knew not what Martyrs they were, after he had
abstained for a while from the place, at time convenient he repaired thither,
and fell a praying to God, that he would declare who and what Martyrs these
were, whose renown had so famoused that frequent place. At last, there starts
out a ghost of a ghastly and grisly aspect, and tells him his name and his
condition, Latronem se fuisse ob scelera percussum, That he was no Saint, but
a sinner, not of the company of Martyrs, but murderers; cum illos gloria, se
poena retineret, seeing they were in glory and happiness, he in pain and
torment. Thus this credulous people thought they were with God, or some Saint,
when they were with the Devil and a Thief.

May we not justly think our Romanish Samaritanes in the same danger, who
worship they know not what? That think by their devotion they do service to
heaven, when. it may be, their Saint to whom they be devoted, is in hell. And
then as their Canus Lib. 5. cap. 5. quae. 5. con. 3.
tells them, Nihil refert Diabolum colas, an hominem condemnatum, It is all one,
to worship the devil and a damned soul. I vvil not lay this to their charge,
though some of their own mistrust it, nor will I say they worship some
thief, though Antichrist be the greatest thief in the world, robbing God of
his honor, Christ of his office, the Church of the Scripture, Christ's Saints
of their lives: but thus much I say, they are not where they say they are, for
they are in error and blindness, when they boast they be in light and verity.

And this is so much more in excusable, by how much they shut their eyes
against the light, and like the Jews put from them the words of eternal
life, Act. 13.46. For the learned; though they cannot but see many of their
errors, yet as Pliny Plin. lib. 5. cap. 1.
said of some such like, Ignor antiae pudore mentiri non piget; being ashamed
to be found ignorant, they are not afraid to lie. And for the unlearned, the
Jesuitical blind obedience has made them bold to refuse all light of most
holy truth; insomuch as they will neither be with God that made the^, nor
their Country that bred them, nor the Church that begat them, nor their
friends that are near them, nor their Sovereign that protects them.

But for our selves: seeing God is with us by preaching, let us be with him by
practice; no place of the world, where God shines so bright as in England; no
place of England, like London; no place of London, like this; this is Bethel,
the House of God; here have you the choysest wits, the grauest heads, the
sharpest judgments, continually emptying themselves unto you, that whosoever
comes in among you, may truly fall down in admiration, and say, Now verily
God is in you indeed. 1. Corinthians. 14.25.

Secondly, men are with God in affection, and by no affection so much as by
love; the soul is rather where it loves, then where it lives. And so that
soul which loves God, is wholly with him in heaven, whilst the body is on
earth. It is true that Augustine Aug. de ciu. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 7.
notes, that Recta voluntas, is bonus amor, an upright will is a good love, and
love is the Master of the affections, yea the sum of them, for they are all
reduced to that; for love, when it longs for the thing loved, cupiditas est, is
then desire; and when it has the thing it loves, laetitia est, it is then joy;
On the contrary, when it flies from the thing it affects not, timor est, then
it is fear; and when it feels the thing it desires not, tristitia est, it is
sadness. Thus all the affections desire, joy, fear, and grief, are included
in love. So then, if we love God, we will desire to enjoy him, saying, Cupio
dissolui et esse cum Christo, Phil. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. And having enjoyed him, we will rejoice to keep him, saying,
Psalm. 4.6. Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me. This is more joy
to men, then wicked men have, when their corn and Wine and oil is increased.
And having so kept him we will fear to lose him, crying, Psalm. 27.9. Hide not
thy face from me: put not thy servant away in displeasure. And feeling him
leave us, we will grieve at his absence, with this lamentation, Psalm. 22.9. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Thus then by love we are with God: charity is a bond, yea the bond of
perfection, which linketh us to God, and God to us; we are with him, if we
love him; from him, if we love him not; and love him we cannot, if we love
any thing before him, any thing beside him, any thing beyond him. We love
something before him, when we prefer any thing to him; we love something
beside him, when we join any thing with him; we love something beyond him,
when we joy more in it, then in him. Therefore Augustine Aug. de doct.
Christ. lib. 1. cap. 22.
expounds the precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy strength, of supereminent and ouerflowing
love; Vt si quid aliud diligendum venerit in animum, illuc rapiatur, quo totius
dilectionis impetuss currit: That if any other thing offers it self to be
loved of us, it should be carried along, and made to run together with us to
the love of God. This is spiritually to be with him in soul in this world,
that soul and body may be eternally with him in the World to come.

O then, the misery of uncharitable sinners! who are so hard-hearted that they
care not for God, neither is God in all their thoughts, Psalm. 13. That say unto
God, Depart from us, for we regard not the knowledge of thy Laws, Job 22.17.
Among which is the ambitious man that dotes upon Courtlike preferment; the
proud man, that pursues glorious titles and vain applause; the luxurious man,
that sets the flesh before the Spirit; the inconstant man, that changes his
religion with the time; But principally the covetous man, who is only with his
money, and makes that his God, and whose heavy bags, and crammed chest presses
down his soul, even as low as hell it self. I read in the life of Saint
Anthony of Padua Alfonso Villegas in vita.
, a late Saint of the Popes coining, That he preaching at a rich man's funeral
on this text, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be, added in the
end, This text is fulfilled in this covetous man, who making his money his
treasure, had his heart stolen away from Almighty God. Certain persons
presently going to his Chest to open it, found there his heart, as fresh as if
it had been newly taken out of a man's breast. I press no man in this company to
believe this, but I presume, many men in this company will moralize this, having
hearts not mounting to God by the love of heaven; but glued to the earth by
love of money, who when they have done all, can get but Simon Magus his
portion; they and their money must perish together. Take heed then, Be with
God in your desires and affection, and he will be with you in his benediction
and blessing. Thus having finished the handling of this first part: Come we to
the second, yet not forgetting to pray Dominus nobiscum in this also; It must
not leave us even to the end.

And if ye seek him, he will be found of you, etc.

And this comes by way of answer to a secret question, which some might make.
You say, God is with us, if we be with him; and with him we be, if we know him
and love him: But how shall we come to know him, that we may come to love him,
and so be with him? The answer is, By seeking him: If ye seek him, he will be
found of you.

In this please you to consider 2. things. First, The work. 2. The wages. The
work, To seek God. The wages, The finding of him. The first intending to the
last, and the last inuiting to the first. For our promise of finding him,
inuiteth us to the work of seeking him.

For the first, to seek God: It is true, that in this world we are all at a
loss: for having all sinned, we are deprived of the glory of God, Romans 3.23.
It came to pass with Adam, as with a griping Usurer, who extorting more then
is due, loses principal and interest both: for Adam, by struing to know more
then was allowed him, lost that knowledge which before was granted him; and so
became ignorant of God, and ignorant of himself. For as a man that is in the
dark, cannat see any thing, no not himself: So Adams heirs being borne in
sin, which is the thickest darkness, are ignorant, and see not either God
their Creator, or themselves his creatures.

Hence it is, that there is continual seeking up and down in the world; so
that if a question were made, what all the men in the world do; it might be
answered in a word, Quaerunt, they are busy in seeking: somewhat we want,
somewhat we would have, though when we have it, we are not contented with it,
until we find that which is able to satisfy us, that is, God himself. A te
Domine sumus, et irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec reuertamur ad te, says S.
Augustine August. confess. lib.
, From thee (O Lord) we be, and our hearts are never at quiet, till we be
with thee again.

Now for the finding this blessed God, which will make an end of all our
seeking, sundry things are necessary to know, which if they be not understood,
may occasion us to lose all our labor. For, three ways, says Bernard,
Beruard in Cant. ser. 75.
men may be frustrated in seeking, Cum non in tempore quaerunt, aut nen sicut
oportet, vel non vbi oportet. Either if men seek not in due time, or secondly,
in a right manner, or thirdly, in a fit place.

For the first, We must seek him in due time, Isa. 55.6. Seek the Lord while
he may be found, call upon him while he is nigh. Signifiying, that Erit
proculdubio cum inueniri non poterit, Bernard, vt supra.
There will be a time, when he cannot be found, and that is, when this life
is ended. Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6.1.
Thou may put it off, if thou will, Et expectato salutem in medio Gehennae,
quae facta est in medio terrae, Bern. ibid.
and wait for salvation in the midst of hell, which was wrought for thee in
the midst of the earth. When this life has an end, then our seeking has an
end; and if we find not here, we shall be sure to miss hereafter. It is
neither Hell, nor Purgatory, nor the Grave that can put us in any hope of
finding God. Here if we miss, we miss for ever.

O poor seduced Romanists, why should you think to find God in Purgatory,
when yet the wisest men of the Church could never find that there is any
Purgatory? When Chrysostom Chrysostom. con. 2. de Lazar.
tells you, So long as we are here, we have excellent hope, but being once
gone; non est postea situm in nobis poenitere, neque commissa diluere; It is
not in our power afterward to gain repentance, or to wash away sin. No
Purgatory can then purge us: Cypryan. ad Deme^r.
When Cyprian tells you, Hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur, Here life and
happiness is either got or lost. When Epiphanius Epipha. cont. haeres. lib. 2.
To. 1. hares. 59.
tells you; After this life is ended, Impletum est tempus, certamen perfectum
euacua tum est stadium, et coronae datae sunt; The time is fulfilled, the
combat ended, the race is run, and the crowns given. When Augustine Aug. ad
Mac. Epist. 54.
tells you, Of amendment of manners, there is no place but in this life; For
this life being ended, Quisque id habebit, quod in hac sibi conquisiuit, Every
man shall have that, which he has gained in this life. Seek not, expect not,
hope not for God when thou art dead, if thou caredst not to find him when thou
were alive.

And as we must seek him only in this life, so must we seek him early in
this life, Isa. 21.12. The morning comes, and also the night; if you will
seek, seek. If ever you mean to be doing, begin betimes. Imitate the holy
women, Mar. 16.1. who sought Christ early, betimes in the morning. Be
stirring in the prime of thy youth; give God the may den head of thy life:
there is no reason Satan should have the flowr of our days, and God the bran;
that were to offer the halt and blind, and lame on his altar, if we begin not
to seek him, till we have given over seeking all things else; yea, it is just,
that he in his age should never find him, who in his youth would never seek
him. Thus then, learn first to seek him in due time.

Secondly, remember also to seek him in the right place. And where is that,
says Greg. Greg. Moral. lib. 18. cap. 15.
but In sinu matris Ecclesiae, in the bosom of our mother the Church. Mary
Magdalen sought him in his grave, but S. August. August. de temp. ser. 133.
reproues her, Quid quaeris in tumulo, qua^ adorare debes in coelo? why seek
thou him in the grave below, whom thou should adore in the heavens above?
Joseph and Mary sought him in the crowde, and among their kindred; but S.
Bernard demands, Quomodo, o bone Jesus, inter cognatos meos te inueniam, qui
inter tuos minime es inuentus? How, O sweet Jesus, shall I find thee among my
secular acquaintance, when thou were not found among thine own natural
kinsmen? The Papists seek him in their Images and Crucifixes; But the
Scripture teaches them, Christ which is the Author of verity, cannot be found
in an Image, which is a teacher of lies, Haba. 2.18. And who can think, the
work of man can contain therein the Maker of man; or that that which is not
quickened with life in it self, can hold Life it self that quickneth all
things? If any man say, Lo here is Christ, or lo he is there, believe him not.
Math, 24.23.

Come therefore to the Scriptures preached in the Church, there shall you find
him, and the Church too. For in a sweet and harmonious manner, we find the
Scriptures in the Church, and the Church in the Scriptures: we find the
Scriptures in the Church; for to her are committed the Oracles of God, Romans
3.2. And for this, she is the ground and pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. And in
the Scriptures we find the Church, and with the Church, Christ: Else would
not Augustine August. ad. Bonif. Epist. 50.
have said; In sanctis Libris, vbi manifestatur dominus Jesus, ibi et eius
Ecclesia declaratur, In the holy Books, where our Lord Christ is manifest,
there is also declared his holy Church.

Come then to the Church, if you desire to find Christ. When Joseph and Mary
had lost him, after three days labor, at last they found him in the Temple,
Luke 2.46. There is his Seat, and there he is still, in medio Dictorum, in the
midst of his Ministers, to aid them in preaching, yea, and in medio
Discipulorum, in the midst of his Disciples, to hear them in praying. It is
well noted by Rabanus, Amat medium Mediator Dei et hominum. The Mediator of
God and man, loves the middle part always. When he was borne, he was in medio
iumentorum, in the midst of the beasts; when he was twelve years old, he was
in medio Doctorum, in the midst of the Doctors; when he taught, he stood in
medio Discipulorum, in the midst of his Disciples; when he dyed, he was in
medio Latronum, in the midst of the Thieves: Now he is in heaven, he is in
medio Angelorum, in the midst of his Angels; and yet also in medio
Christianorum, in the midst of us Christians, according to that, Math. 18.20.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. To this house then let us come: For where should we sind one,
but in his own house?

And therefore Cant. 1.7. when the Church demanded of Christ, Vbi pascis, vbi
cubas in meridie? Where do thou feed, where do thou lie at noonday? she
received this answer, If thou know not, follow the footsteps of the flocks
to the tents of the Shepherds. That is, says Hugo Card. in Cant. 1.7.
Hugo Cardinalis, Attend opera et affectus Eclesiasticorum conuentuum; Look
upon the actions and affections or the Church assemblies; Or as Lyra ad loc.
Cant. 17.
Lyra, Abi post vestigia fidelium ad seeds Doctorum: Follow the footsteps of
the faithful, to the seats of the Doctors: As if he had said, Go to the
Preachers which teach, and the faithful that hear, there thou shall quickly
and easily find me.

Thirdly, as we must seek him in due time, and place fitting, so also in a
right manner. And this is all in all: For though one keep his Quando, and his
Vbi, and observe not his Sicut oportet, if he keep time and place, and not the
right manner, he is never the better. Now this Sicut, comprehends sundry other
aduerbs, that must be obscrued in seeking God.

First, Cast, purely and chastely. Seek God for himself, not for sinister
causes, and by-respects. Iesum propter Iesum, seek JESUS for salvation by
JESUS: Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 49.
Quisquis a Deo praeter Deum aliquid quaerit, non cast Deum quaerit: Whosoever
seeks any thing of God, but God himself, seeks him not chastely, nor purely.
If a woman love her husband because he is rich, her love is not chaste: for how
would she doc if he were made poor? If she cleave to him for his riches, Non
maritum amat, sed aurum mariti, August. vt supra
She loves not him, but his gold. So he which seeks God for promotion, for
profit, for any thing save only for himself, seeks him not right. This,
says Bernard, Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. ser.
is singular grace, singular perfection, Non modo nil sperare nisi ab eo, sed
nil quaerere nisi eum: Not only to expect nothing but from him, but also to
seek nothing but even him.

Secondly, Veraciter, truly, not fictitiously and hypocritically. It is his
promise, Deuteronomy. 4.29. Thou shall find the Lord, if thou seek him with thy
whole heart, and with all thy soul: otherwise, we have no assurance to find
him. When we seek but in show, we shall find but in show.

Thirdly, Feruenter, zealously and earnestly: not superficially and
perfunctoriously, as if we were indifferent whether we found him or not: but as
Salomons Scholars seeks for wisdom, Prou. 2.4. Seeking him as for silver,
and searching for him, as for hid treasure. Or as Samson sought drink, Judge.
15.18. If thou give me no water, I die for thirst. So Augustine cried August.
confess.
, Quicquid dare mihi vult Dominus meus, auferat totum, et se mihi det;
What-euer my Lord will be pleased to give me, let him take all again, and
give me himself.

Fourthly, Perseueranter, with perseverance and continuance, Psalm. 105. Seek
the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore. For when we have found him
for one thing, yet may we miss him for another thing. Therefore S. Augustine
August. in Psalm. 104.
says, Our seeking for God, signifies our loving of God. Now love must
continue and increase, et amore crescente, inquisitio crescatinuenti: And as
our love increases, so our seeking of him (though we have found him) must
increase too. And surely if our hearts be surely set on him, we shall have
little mind on any thing else. Plutarch Plut. Moral. T^. 2. page 116.
tells how Nicias a Painter, was so pleased with his own work, that he forgot
many times his meats, and would ask his servants whether he had dined that
day. So if our hearts be well fixed on God beauty, we shall mind nothing so much
as inquiry after him. And as Zacheus having found Christ, presently gave away
half his wealth at one dash, Luke 19.8.
as if now he had meant never to regard the world; so when we have found God,
we shall little regard any thing else, save only to keep and retain him in
our souls.

Fifthly, vnice, we must seek and inquire for him, and him alone; Non aliud
tanquam illum, non aliud praeter illum, non aliud post illum, says Bernard
Bern. ser. 2 de alt. and bass. cord.
, not any thing as him, not any thing beside him, not any thing after him. As
Jacob said when he heard of his son Joseph, I have enough, etc. So when we
have found Christ our spiritual Joseph, we should both think and say, I have
enough, I desire no more: For Auare, says Augustine Aug. de verb. Apost. sermon.
16.
Quid tibi sufficit, si non sufficit Deus? Covetous wrecth! what will serve thy
turn, if God be not enough for thee? Therefore a^ the East gate in Ezekiels
temple, was ever shut, and must never be opened, because God went once through
it, Ezekiel. 24.2. So the heart of a Christian should be shut to all other
objects whatsoever, and be left open only to Almighty God. And as they write
of the Clitorian Well Vitr. lib. 8 cap. 3. Ovid. Metam.
: Clitorio quicunque sitim de font lauarit,
Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius vndis.


Whosoever drank of that fountain, could never abide to drink wine after it:
so we having tasted of the blessed waters of life flowing from God himself, we
should never desire nor thirst after the wines of fleshly delights, but
cheerfully rejoice and say as the Church, Introduxit me Rex in cellaria sua
Cant. 1.4.
The King has brought me into his Wine-cellar; we will be glad and rejoice in
thee, we will remember thy love more then wine.

Thus he that seeks God, shall be sure to find. But one thing we must not
forget to remember, that we can never seek him, unless he first of al find
us; for of our selves we have no power, nor will to look after him, until he
has moved us, and rowzed us up to it. As all seeking is vain, unless we
seek him? so all seeking of him is in vain, unless he find us. Bernard
Bern. de dilig. Deo.
doubted not to say, Nemo, Domine, te quaerere valet, nisi qui prius inuenerit:
No man, O Lord, can seek thee, but he who has first found thee. Would thou
be found of us? The^ first do thou find us. Potes quaeri et inueniri, non
tamen prae ueniri: Thou may be sought and found of us, but not till thou have
sought and found out us thy self David Psalm. 88.13. said, He would prevent
God with his prayer; but God must first prevent David with his Spirit: he is
first to every man, no man first to him.

And surely hence it is, that there be so few that truly seek God; many that
seek the world and themselves: some that seek they know not what. Either men
hear not the voice of God speaking unto the^, but suffocate and choke up the
good motions of the Spirit, or else give ear to the voice of the world,
hearkening rather to the Merchants of Ianus, saying, Quaerenda pecunia primum
est: Seek money before virtue, rather then to the Ministers of JESUS,
speaking, Quaerite primum Regnum Dei, Math. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God. Never City, never Church had more exhortation to seek God then this;
and yet, O how few do practice it aright! Pliny Plin. lib. 14. in Prooem.
says, There are some trees which are called Arbores indociles, quae in
alienas non co^meant terras: indocible trees, that will be taught to grow no
where, but where they were first bred. Do not think me blind, if I tell you I
see many walking in the Garden of this City like trees, that are indocible to
any thing save to the course they have bin bred in, trading for money, and
seeking for gain. For the purchase of heaven, by expense of earthly pelf;
this Merchandise we cannot teach them, though we labor it never so much. This
they think is an unprofitable study, they desire not to be conversant in it.
The common search is, Quis ostendet no bis bona? Psalm. 4.6. Whither shall we
go for a good bargain? where shall we find a good purchase?

And it were infinite to reckon up other seekers, who greedily pursue every man
his proper delight. Only God among them left out, and either not sought for at
all, or else in the last place, when we are able to seek nothing else. And
yet if we should spend all our life in seeking out several delights,
peradventure all would prove but infructuosus labor, Aug. ad Lar. Epist. 82.
unprofitable pain: or if we should find them, all would be but fallax
suauitas, deceitful sweetness, like S. John's book, Reu. 10.9.
sweet as honey in the mouth, and bitter as gall in the belly. Only God is
worth the finding; only, God will not frustrate our seeking; so is his
promise: So our Text tells us, If ye seek him, he will be found of you. And
this is the second point, The wages. We have heard what is the work, to seek
God; now are we come to the wages, The finding of him.

He will be found of you.

There is nothing so acceptable to a man, as not to be frustrate in his hope
and expectation. Multos expertus sum, qui fallere volunt, says Augustine Aug.
conf. lib. 10. cap. 23.
qui autem falli neminem: I have had trial of many that would deceive, but
never of any that would be deceived. Nothing so welcome to a seeker, as to
find; but to find God, is to a Christian more pleasing, then when the Mariner
finds the shore, the Marchantrich wares, the labourer his hire, the Traveler
his iourneyes end. For God is the Center to which all hearts move, and when
they are come to him, they rest as being fully satisfied.

Now there is 2. degrees of finding God; One in this life, the other in the
life to come: In this world he is found per fidem, by faith; in the other
world, per speciem, by sight: In this world we find him by faith: for,
credere, inuenisse est, Bern. Bern. in Cant. ser. 76.
To believe, is to have found him; but this gives us not full content,
therefore we seek him still; I am quippe illum inuenit fides, sed adbuc illum
quaerit spes, says Aug. Aug. in Psalm. 104.
Faith has found him here, but hope looks to find him better hereafter: And
love does both these, Charitas et inuenit eum per sidem, et eum quaer it habere
per speciem: Charity has both found him here by faith, and yet further seeks
for him by sight. And though he dwells in an inaccessible light, whither no man
can enter, 1. Tim. 6.16. yet faith pryeth and presses in unto him, in his most
secret closet of glory: yea, Quid non inuenit fides? says Bernard. Bern. in
Cant. ser. 76.
What will not faith find out? Attingit inaccessa, deprehendit ignota, etc. It
reaches to things inaccessible, it finds out things unutterable, comprehends
things unmeasurable, apprehends things vnapproachable; yea, it incloseth within
the large bosom of it, even Eternity it self.

The benefits which faith gains by finding God in this life, are two. 1.
Remission of sins. 2. Imputation of righteousness. First, remission of sins,
for it translates a man from Moses to the Messiah; from the Law condemning, to
the Gospel absoluing. Zacharias was stricken dumb, when Christ was to be
borne, Luke 1.20. in token that the Law was to besilent when the Gospel should
be preached. And as the woman's accusers brought her to Christ, and afterward
dropped away and left none but them two alone, John 8.9. Remansit magna miseria
and magnamisericordia, says August. Aug. in Psalm.
There remained no body, but misery and mercy together: So when the Law has
schooled us with the rod of terror, it atlast brings us to Christ, the Prince
of Peace, and there we find our iniquities forgiven, and our consciences at
quiet.

So also it gains us imputation of righteousness: For Christ which dwells in our
hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. communicates his gifts and graces where he dwells.
So that what is his, is ours, that is, righteousness; as once what was ours,
was made his, that is, sin. And surely, says Bernard, Bern. Epist. 190.
This righteousness, is Tutior donata, quam innata: More safe when it is given
us, then saving when it is wrought by us: because, this may have glory, but not
before God. No, Ea Deum perfecta, and omnimoda gloriatio est in Deo, says S.
Basil, Basil. se^, de humilit.
That is perfect and sound glorying in the sight of God, when a man feels
himself destitute of true righteousness, and expects alone by faith to
receive righteousness from God. Thus we find him by faith in this world.

Secondly, hope finds him by sight in the world to come: and this is truly to
find him, because then we shall enjoy him; he shall be with us, and in us,
yea, all in all, 1. Cor. 15.28. What is all in all? says S. Aug. Aug. de verb.
Apost. sermon. 16.
Quic quid hic quaerebas, quic quid hic promagno habebas, ipse tibi erit:
Whatsoever here thou have sought after, whatsoever here thou have admired and
pursued, that shall God be there unto thee. What? was it meat and drink thou
hungredst after? Why, Erit tibi cibus and potus: God shall be meat and drink
unto thee: was it glory and preferment thou gapedst after? God shall be that
unto thee too. It may be thou were covetous, and could not be satisfied with
money? Auare* quid tibi sufficit, si Deus ipse non sufficit? O covetous wretch!
what will be enough for thee, if having found God, thou yet find thy self
empty? Here we are at the Center; here, at the Wellhead; here we may
drink, and fill all the empty corners of our heart, which could never be
satisfied in this world before.

If this will not encourage us to seek him, what will? Thus much is certain:
If we seek him not to find him, we forsake him and lose him. And that is the
thing which he threatens us, in the next words:

If ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

Hitherto we have been allured with sweet promises, now he comes to severe
menacing: And it is worth the noting; here are two alluring promises, for one
terrifying threat. Two for one, and those in the first place; which shows how
mild, how gracious our God is; and how unwilling to use justice, if mercy
would prevail.

In this third member, consider culpa and poena: the finne, and the penalty;
The sin, to forsake God; The penalty, to be forsaken of God.

If ye forsake him.

For the first, Forsaking of God: One would think, that man, the Prince of
understanding and reason, should never be so subject to blindness and error,
as to forsake God, which is the very soul of bliss, and bliss of the soul.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, says Christ, Ioh. 14.16. Whither
would thou go, says Aug? Aug. hom. 34. inter. 50.
Christ is the Truth, where would thou tarry? He is the Life, by what path
woldst thou trace? He is the Way. Does any man think to gain life by running
from it? Hugo Card. in Mat. 24.
says Hugo Card. Yet such is the madness of man since the Fall, that he has
no mind to draw near to God; but as Adam hid himself in the thickest of
Paradise from the knowledge of God: so his heirs desire to conceal themselves
in the mists and foggynes of carnal delights, from the God of knowledge. As
sore eyes desire not to behold the Sun: so a guilty conscience has no mind
to draw near to God, but rather Cain-like to depart from the presence of the
Lord, Genesis 4.16 into the Land of Nod, the land of banishment, to live in
perpetual exile from all grace and goodness.

And this would all men do, were there not appointed of God, Ministers to call
upon us, the Word whereby to call, and a Church whereinto to call us; that we
may find God for grace here, and glory hereafter. Although indeed, no sin be
comparable to this, that the creature should fall away and depart from the
Creator. Isa. 1.4.
Hear the Prophets, They have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy
one of Israel to anger, they have gone backward. And Ier. 2.19. It is an evil
thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that his
fear is not in thee. And S. Peter, 2. Pet. 2.21. It had been better not to
have known the Word of Truth, then having tasted of it, to fall away into
error. And therefore Aquinas s says, Aquin. 2. secun. quaest. 12. a. 1.
Though Apostasy be not infidelity properly, yet is it circumstantia
aggranans eam, a circumstance aggravating it, and making it worse. And it must
needs be so. For God is Summum Bonum, the nearer a man comes to God, the
nearer he is to goodness* and the further a man departs from him, the further
he is from goodness. Now as Ambr. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. ser. 15.
Non interuallo locorum Deus relinquitur, sed prauitate morum: God is not
forsaken by distance of place, but by lewdnes of manners. And he forsakes God
most, that is farthest from goodness.

And yet for all this, though by the Word and Sacraments, men are drawn to
God, many regard not to come at all, or else being once come, depart from him
again; cleaving to another object, as the Prodigal to the Hogheard, Luke
15.15. embracing vitreum, non verum Margaritum; a glistring vanity, in stead of
celestial verity.

Abulens^ad loc.
The ways whereby men more particularly fall from God, are Four.

First, as Tostatus well notes, de relinquendo legem Dei, by forsaking Gods
Law, that is, his service and worship established in the Church. By Religion we
are Deoreligati, bound and tied unto God. Whereupon it is, that such as forsake
Religion, says Lactan. Lact. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4.
are compared filijs abdicatis, aut seruis fugitiuis, either to forlorn sons,
or fugitive servants, whereof one seeks not to his father, nor the other to his
Master.

I trust there is no necessity that I should exhort you to constancy in
Religion; you cannot but see, how infinitely God has blessed this Land since
the Gospel flourished: your bodies have felt it in case and pleasure; your
souls tasted of it in grace and virtue; your estates grown fat by it, in
plenty and abundance; your hearts been ioyed with it, in peace and prosperity.
Should we now fear a defection? What though some few straggling frogs have
been catched in the net of a Popish Fisher? What is this to the Sea of our
Church? What marvel, though some few seem to fall to the Popish religion,
that were never of any before? Certainly, I presume of this place, this City,
this Kingdom, that you would desire rather to perish out of the world, then
that true Religion should perish out of the Church.

And for our comfort, we have his Majesty for our pattern; who as his
judgment and learning informs him against falsehood: so his affections and
desires confirm him to the truth: That should Rome, and all Romanists come to
him, and make it a request, to mingle their old dregs with our pure Water of
life; as once they came to Valentinian, Amb. orat. de obit. Valen.
to entreat for Templorumiura, sacerdotiorum prophana priuilegia: The old
ceremonies of Idolatrous Temples, profane privileges of their superstitious
Priesthood: He would undoubtedly answer them, as that famous Valentinian did;
Quod pius frater eripuit, quomodo a me putatis esse reddendum, quum in eo
Religio laedatur and frater? That which my Brother King Edward the Sixth, (let
meadde my Sister too, Queen Elizabeth of famous memory) did take away, how
would you have me to restore again, considering, that therein I should wrong
Religion, and them too? Certainly, we should be very disloyal to his
Majesty, if we should with a needless fear perplexe our selves with that,
wherein we ought to believe him most firm and constant.

What then, shall we be secure? No; but the more that Satan strives to supplant
us, the firmer footing let us take. If Priests and Jesuits swarm in houses,
let us so much more deuoutely flock together in Churches. If they seduce the
wavering, let us confirm the weak. As they plod for Antichrist, let us take
pains for Christ. Plut. Plut. lib. de vtilit. ab host. cap.
tells us, that it is a wisemans part to get commodity, even from an enemy. Let
us strive to gain thus much from them, to double our diligence in the
preaching and practicing of Religion: and then we need not fear forsaking of
God, by falling from Religion. Et reuera cum quaeque nouitas ebullit, statim
cernitur frumentoru^ grauitas, et leuitas palearum. Vincent. contra Haeriss.
It may be now is a time wherein God would discern between frumentorum
grauitas, and leuitas palearum, as Cyprian and Vincentius speak: the weight
and flowrinesse of good corn, which he reserues for his Garner; and the
lightness and unprofitableness of chafe, which he determines for hell fire.
He that is faithful unto the death, shall be sure to enjoy the Crown of
Life. Reu. 2.10.

The second way whereby men forsake God, is, by forsaking his Ministry, in
withdrawing their maintenance and Liuelode from them. The Ministry is
Seminarium Ecclesiae: The Churches seed-plot: destroy that, and farewell
Religion. And destroyed it will be, if not cherished and maintained by
sufficient means. O the damned sin of Sacrilege! how it strikes as the
root of Religion, and aims at the Majesty of God himself! Lact. Inst. lib.
2. cap. 4.
And therefore Lactantius notes, That God punished it among the Heathens,
because (though he cared not for any injury done to an Idol, yet) he would
make men afraid of withdrawing any thing from him, whom they in their blind
judgment took for the true God. And this was usual. Lucan.


-- Quis enim laesos impune putaret esse deos? Who ever saw the gods spoiled
and robbed, without condign punishment? And the maintenance of the Ministry is
Gods maintenance; because it serves for the upholding his immediate service and
worship.

It is true, Hugo Card. in Isa. 49.23.
I grant, that Hugo Cardinalis notes, that the reuenews of the Clergy is the
Churches food, and when the Church was young like a child, it ouer-ate it
self, and surfeited. But as surfeiting and diseases of oppletion must be cured
with purging: so has this course been taken, and our Church ouer-purged this
way, that she is now on the other side in danger of a Consumption through too
much euacuation. I know not how that same auri sacra fames; Virgil.
or auri sacri fames has grown into every man's stomach, that he thinks all
is well gotten, which is pilfered from the Church.

I know where I am, and to whom I speak. I suppose it is far from the mind
of this City to forsake God or Religion, by withdrawing the Ministerial
maintenance. I know, you give much, and freely, to painful and laborious men.
You love (I confess) our preaching, and will countenance it with your presence
and purses; but give me leave, I beseech you, to tell, that there be in this
City, who like not of us, because (though we preach, yet) we can work no
Miracles. How is that? Because (in plain English) we cannot live now as our
Predecessors did an hundred years ago, of twenty or thirty pounds a year;
which to do, in my judgment, were no less then a Miracle. And these men can
think it fit to raise the fee of every the meanest officer, and to tie the
Minister to his old stint, as if his calling were not worth the upholding.

Others there he, who are so far from giving any thing that is their own, that
they withhold what is the Ministers own. Lastly, some, who had rather give it
to any, then their own Pastor. I would there were more discretion on every
side: I would not have it spoken of this City, as it was spoken of Sylla, Plut.
in Sylla.
Multa eripiebat, donabat plura: He injuriously wrested many things from the
right owners, and gave away prodigally much unto others; insomuch as it was a
great question, Natura ne contemptor hominum, an adulator fuerit? Whether
naturally he were more a scorner or flatterer of me^. It would much impeach the
wisdom of this City, to be in this various humor, to offer injury to one,
and show courtesy to another. I speak not in mine own behalf; I thank God;
it is a part of my happiness, that my lot has fallen in such a place, as
hitherto has afforded me love and courtesy, not neglect and unkindness; and
I wish it had been so with others also.

But one thing I beseech you give me leave to inform you in: I am bound to
wish well to the Church in general, but specially in this City, where I am
like to live (for ought I know) and to spend my days; I would not conceal any
thing which might do good. Miser est Imperator apud quem vera reticentur: as
he said, That Prince, that State is in an evil case, from whom the truth is
concealed. Iul. Capit. Guard. 3.
You have here in this City, many that feed upon your bounty, who have
Livings, yea, charge of souls of their own abroad in the Country. Do you
think you do well, to give entertainment to these men? When you take the next
course to pull down Religion, and to make their people forsake God, as they
have forsaken their people? Will you maintain a man in the neglect of his own
charge? Can it be honesty for any man's wife, to love another woman's husband?
Shall that be accounted lawful among us, which Scriptures, Councels, Fathers,
Canons, Papists, Brownists, and all the world condemns?

O be advised in your charity! Spoil not so excellent a work in the manner
of doing. There are ynow will attend you, as sufficient as these. Think
hereon, I beseech you, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

The third way whereby men forsake God, is, By unthankfulness. For that vice
denies God, and withdrawes man's heart from the Lord: Peremptoriares est
ingratitudo, hostis gratiae, inimica salutis, says Bern. Bern. ser. 3. de
sept. pan.
d Ingratitude is a killing sin, an enemy to grace, a foe to salvation. Yea
it is a parching and a nipping wind, drying up the fountain of mercy and
compassion. It utterly separates God and man asunder: for by it we run from
him, as the Prodigal from his father, and he departs from us, as the life from
the dying limbs.

It were a shame that we should be charged with this sin, who of all people
should be farthest from it. And yet we must confess, we have ill requited the
Lord for his mercies. It is not long, since it pleased him to open the windows
of Heaven, and to send us abundance of Corn: which, when it should have moved
thankefulnes; it procured murmuring and complaining on all sides. Since, we
see, how the Lord has withdrawn his hand, chastened us with penury; as
appears (among many other sensible arguments) by the infinite number of Poor,
swarming in the streets; for whom, had not some good order been taken by the
Lord Mayor and the grave Senators of the City; men should not have quietly
passed one by another.

So we have long enjoyed a happy Peace, which is indeed, the greatest mercy
that Heaven can communicate to earth: And yet may we not hear some weary of
ease, and wishing for War? War, the firebrand of the world, the enemy of
content, and bane of hearts-ease. Whereby, Nobilitas cum plebe perit, Lucan.
lateque vagatur
Ensis, and anullo reuocatum est pectore ferrum.


Ruins and destructions come upon all states of men. Let me tell you a story;
It is of Henry, that famous, but unfortunate Emperor He, Oath. Friside gest.
Fred. lib. 1. cap.
in his young years coming into Saxony, observing the strength and largeness
of that Country; vauntingly and vainly said, He wondered, that in so large a
Continent as was his Empire, none could be found to rebel, against whom he
might exercise his prowess and valor. It was not long, before he had objects
inow to try his strength upon: for the Pope excommunicating him, his Subjects
fell away from him, and his son rose up in arms against him, and misery and
beggary was his end. Take heed, be not weary of Peace; Mala vota sunt, says
August. optare habere quem oderis, vt esse possit que^ vincas: Aug. de Ciu.
Dei, lib. 4. cap. 15.
It is bad wishing another to be thine adversary, in hope thereby to make thy
self a conqueror.

The fourth way, whereby men forsake God, is, by profaneness, when they fall
to embrace the world, and suck the fulsome sweet pleasures of it; a Greg. in
Euang. hom. 15.
As if it were possible, Et hic gaudere cum seculo, et illic regnare cum
Christo: Here, to revel it with the world, and hereafter to reign with
Christ. Such was Demas, who forsook Paul's company, and Christ's service, to
embrace this present world, 2. Tim. 4.10. These men are compared to Lots wife,
who being fetched out by the Angels from Sodom, looked back, and was turned
into a Pillar of Salt, Genesis 19.26. Saint Augustine says, Aug. de Ciu. lib. 16.
cap. 30.
She was turned into a Pillar of Salt, to season all others by her example,
that they look not back to the Sodom of this world, when they have been
called from thence by the Ministers, Gods Angels. But S. Peter compares
profane men to worse things, viz. to Dogs and Swine: For they verify the
Proverb, The Dog is returned to his vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to
her wallowing in the mire, 2. Peter 2.22. Men in Baptism are washed and made
clean, and in associating themselves to the congregation, nequitiam de qua
male saciati fuerant, confitendo proijciunt, faith S. Gregory: Greg. Past. cur.
par. 3. adm. 31.
they unload their stomachs of sin by hearty confession; but falling
afterward to profaneness, they resume their old filth and garbage, and
defile themselves in the dirt of iniquity. A very beastly course, and much to
be detested. Wherefore, let us take heed of this, it doubles our damnation;
and much better it had been for us not to have known the truth, then having
known it, to run into error. No comfort, but all misery gained this way; for
by forsaking God, he forsakes us. And that is the punishment.

He will forsake you.

No misery under heaven, nor under earth neither, should we go as low as hell,
to this, that God should forsake us. If wealth, preferme^t, honor, life, or
whatsoever else should forsake us, it were no great matter, God is more then al
these; and so long as he is with us, we cannot be but well. When the Heathens
judged the Christians unhappy foe suffering poverty, spoil, banishment, etc. S.
Augustine answers, Hoc sane miserrimum esset, Aug. de ciu. Dei, lib. 1. cap.
14.
si aliquo duci potuerunt, vbi Deum suum non inuenirent: Now surely their case
were miserable, if they could be carried any whither where they might not
find their God. But so long as God is with them, they cannot be unhappy.

O but when God is gone from a man, his case is most wretched; for then every
thing becomes his enemy, yea, his Master and conqueror. A hair in ones milk,
may be our bane, as it was with that Senator; a fly in the air may choke
us, as it was with Pope Adrian. Naucler vrspergens.
And what is less then these, if there be any thing, may do more then these,
if it were possible, when God has forsaken us, and withdrawn his saving
health from us. What shall I say? men and Angels cannot express the horror
and misery which they are open to, whom God has forsaken.

Sec here Gods justice, how he punishes in analogo! There is beauty and
comeliness in all his works; his very justice shines gloriously, in the
exercise of it. He forsakes such as forsake him: So he proportions his
punishment to the sin. See it in others: Pharaoh slew the Male children of
the Israelites; therefore his firstborne must dye, Exodus 12.29. He drowned them
in the green river: God destroys him in the red Sea. The Sodomites burn with
unnatural lust; Ergo, they must be burned with supernatural fire, Genesis 19.24.
Adonibezek cuts off the thumbes and toes of 70. Kings; Ergo, Judah must cut off
his for it in the end, Judge. 1.6. David kills Vriah with the edge of the sword;
Ergo, the sword must never depart from his house, 2. Sam. 12.10. Iezabel shed
Naboths blood by dogged men; Ergo, her blood in the same place, must be licked
up of dogs, 2. King. 9.36. Dives would not give Lazarus a crumme of bred; Ergo,
Lazarus must not give him a drop of water, Luke 16.25. Julian, and Foelix his
companion, speak disdainfully of Christ, and misuse his sacred Ornaments; One
said of the Church vessels, En, qualibus vasis ministratur Mariae Filio: See
what vessels Mary's Son is served in. He that vented this, presently vents all
his blood at his mouth, and dies. The other pisseth against the Communion
Table: he therefore could never piss more, but void his excrements at his
mouth. Theod. hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 12.13.
One in Cyprians time denied Christ, he is therefore presently stricken dumb:
Cipr. de laps.
Poena inde caepit, vnde caepit et crime^, says Cpyrian There began his
torment, where began his sin. And unworthy was that mouth ever after to open,
which had ever used it self to deny Christ. Infinite examples are extant for
this point: Let us fear God and honor him, and then we need fear nothing
else: every thing shall prosper with us.

Again note here, that if God forsake us, it is, Aug. ser. 22. de temp.
because we first forsake him. This Augustine firmly resolves on, and would
have every man believe, Quia Deus nunquam deserit hominem, nisi prius ab homine
deseratur: God never forsakes man, till man has first forsaken him. See his
longanimitie! Shall wed begin with him? Shall we provoke him to anger? Are we
stronger then he? As yet he has not forsaken us. Nay, he has declared
himself to be more with us, then with any nation beside. When war and
discord, famine and sword, plague and mortality has been round about us, yet
we have been in safety, far from the reach and contagion of any.

What remains, but that we remember every man to come nearer unto him: Ecce,
qui elongant, se a te peribunt. Psalm. 73.27. Behold, they which go far away
from thee, shall perish.

Let us draw near him in grace, so shall we draw near him in glory. Still
let us recount the Text, He is with us, if we be with him. He grant that we
may be with him in knowledge, in love; and then he will be with us in his
protection on earth, and in felicity in Heaven. Unto which he vouchsafe to
bring us in his appointed time, for Jesus Christ his sake; To whom with the
Father, etc.

FINIS.

