THE ENGLISH Romayne Life. Discovering: The lives of the Englishmen at Room:
the orders of the English Semiminarie: the dissension between the Englishmen
and the Welshman: the banishing of the Englishmen out of Room: the Popes
sending for them again: a report of many of the paltrie Relics in Room:
their Vautes under the ground: their holy Pilgrimages: and a number other
matters, worthy to be read and regarded of every one. There unto is added, the
cruel tyranny, used on an English man at Room, his Christian suffering, and
notable Martyrdom, for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in Anno. 1581. Written
by A.M. sometime the Popes Scholar in the Seminary among them.

Honos alit Arts.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by John Charlewoode, for Nicholas Ling: dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Maremaide. Anno. 1582.

To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Bromley, Knight, Lord Chaunceller of
England: William, Lord Burleigh and Lord Treasorer: Robert, Earl of
Leicester, with all the rest of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
A. M. wishes a happy race in continual honor, and the fullness of Gods
blessing in the day of joy.
THis Book (right Honorable) as I have been care full to note down nothing
in it, that might impeach me, either with error or untruth, malice or
affection to any, but even have ordered the same, according to certeintie and
knowledge: so when I had fully finished it, and done the uttermost of my
endeavor therein, I considered with my self, I was to present the same, to
such personages of Honor, wisdom, and gravity, as, did malice rule me, they
could quickly epsy it, or affecting my self to any, they would soon
discern it: then would Honor reprove me for the one, and their noble nature
reprehende me in the other.

To discharge my self of both these, and purchase the favor wherewith your
Honors are continually adorned: I directed my compass by truth, persuading my
self, that albeit in some, Veritas odium parit: yet in your Honors, Magna est
veritas et praeualet.

Few words suffiseth your wisdoms, and circumstau^ce without substance,
may incur disliking: according as when I presented your Honors with my
book, called the Discovery of Campion, I promised, so now in my English
Roman life, I have performed: thinking my self in as safe security, under
your Honorable favor, as Ulysses supposed himself under the buckler of Ajax.

Your Honors ever in duty, Anthony Monday.

To the courteous and friendly Reader.
THe thing long promised (gentle Reader) is now performed at last, and that
which my adversaries thought I would never set forth, to their disproofe and
thy profit, I have now published. Thou shall find a number of matters
comprehended within this small volume: some, that will irritate the mind of
any good subject, and therefore to be read with regard: others, importing the
whole course of our Englishmens lives in Room, with the od conceits, and
crafty iuglings of the Pope, (whereto our Englishmen are likewise conformable)
they are in such true and certain order set down, as if thou were there thy
self to behold them. I will not use many words, now thou have it, read
advisedly, condemn not rashly, and if thou think me worthy any thanks
for my pains, then friendly bestow it on me.

Thine in courtesy, Anthony Monday.

The English Roman life, Discoursing the lives of such English men, as by
secret escape, leave their own Country, to live in Room, under the servile
yoke of the Popes government. Also after what manner they spend their time
there, practicing, and daily looking for the overthrow and ruin of their
Princess and Country.
First, how the Author left his native Country of England, betaking himself
to travel, and what happened in his journey toward Room.
Chap. 1.
BEcause a number have been desirous, to understand the success of my journey
to Room, and a number beside are doubtful, whether I have been there or no,
albeit the proofs thereof, sufficiently are extant to be seen: as well to
content the one, as remove the doubt of the other, I will (God ayding me)
here set down such a certainty thereof, that if it happen not to please
both, yet, if they will, it may profit both.

When as desire to see strange Countreies, as also affection to learn the
languages, had persuaded me to leave my native Country, and not any other
intent or cause, God is my record: I committed the small wealth I had, into my
purse, a Trauelers weed on my back, the whole state and condition of my
journey to Gods appointment, and being accompanied with one Thomas Nowell,
crossed the Seas from England to Bulloine in France. From thence we traveled
to Amiens, in no small danger, The Camp broken up, the soldiers met with us,
and robbed us, and hardly did we escape with our lives.
standing to the mercy of dispoyling Soldiers, who went robbing and killing
through the Country, the Camp being by occasion broken up at that time.
Little they left us, and less would have done, by the value of our lives, had
not a better booty come then we were at that time: the Soldiers preparing
toward them, whom they saw better provided for their necessity: offered us
the l^ysure too escape which we refused not, being left bare enough both of
coin and clothes. But as then we stood not to accoumpt on our loss, it
suffised us that we had our lives: whereof being not a little glad, we set the
better leg before, least they should come back again; and rob us of them
too. This our misfortune urged us to remembrance, of our former quiet being
in England, carefully tendered by our Parents, and loouingly esteemed among
our ^^eends, all which we vndutifullie regarding, rewarded us with the rod of
our own negligence: being as then fearful of all company on the way, Many
men robbed and slain by the Soldiers, which made us travel in no small fear.
such cruel and heavy spectacles was still before our eyes, but yet this did
somewhat comfort us, we had nothing worth the taking from us, but our lives,
which we had good hope to save, either by their pity, or our own humble
persuasion.

When we were come to Amiens, we were given to understand, that there was an
old English Priest in the Town, whose name was Master Woodward: of whom we
persuaded our selves for Country sake, to find some courtesy, in hope
whereof, we enquired for his lodging, and at last found him. After such
salutations as pass between Countrymen at their meeting, I began to tell
him, how we had left our Country, for the earnest desire we had to see
foreign Dominions, The Priest of whom I have made mention in my Discovery of
Campion.
how we had been spoiled by the way, of all that we had, and that we hoped
for some freendship at his hands, which if God vouchsafed us safe return,
should not be cast out of remembrance.

Alas my friends (quoth he) I am your Countreyman I will not deny, but not
such a one as you take me for. I am a poor Priest, and here I live for my
conscience sake, whereas, were things according as they should be, it were
better for me to be at home in mine own Country. And yet trust me, I pity
to see any of my Countrymen lack, though I am not able any way to relieve
them: there be daily that comes this way, to whom, according to my
hability, I am liberal, but they be such, as you are not, they come not for
pleasure but for profit, they come not to see every idle toye, and to learn
a little language, but to learn how to save both their own and their
friends souls, and such I would you were, then I could say that to you, which
(as you be) I may not.

Trust me Sir (quoth I) I hope we have learned to save our souls already, or
else you might esteem us in a very bad case. If you have (quoth he) it is the
better for* you, but I fear me one day, they that teach you to save your
souls after that manner, will pay for it dearly, and you with them for
company.

With these words, he began to wexe somewhat melancholy; which I perceiving,
and remembering that our necessity, stood not in case to plead points of
controversy* rather sought to please him in hope of some lyberalitie, then to
contend with him (we being unable) and so fall into farther danger. Whereupon I
desired him, not to be offended at any thing we had said, for we would gladly
learn any thing that might benefit us, and beside, would follow his counsel
in any reasonable cause. Then he began to be somewhat more gently disposed,
saying, he could not greatly blame us, if we were obstinate in our opinion,
coming from such a young Hell as we did, but he had good hope, that ere long
it would be harrowed.

The Preeste used many circumstaunces, of the Popes lyberality to our
Countrymen: as also what Treasons was toward her Majesty and the Realm.
Then he willed us to walk with him, and he would bring us where we should
lodge that night, at his charges: all the way rehearsing unto us, how
beneficial the Pope was to our Countrymen, and how highly we might pleasure
our selves, our friends and Country, if we would follow his council.
Beside, such horrible and unnatural speeches, he used against her Majesty,
her honorable Council, and other persons that he named: as the very
remembrance makes me blushe, and my heart to bleed. To all which we gave him
the hearing, but God knows, on my part, with what anguishe of mind: for I
would have persuaded my self, that duty should have with-helde the Subject
from reuiling his Princess, and nature from slaundering his own Country: but
it suffiseth, where grace is absent, good qualities can never be present. When
we were come to our Lodging, he talked with our Hostess, what she should
provide for us, and afterward taking his leave, told us he would have more
talk with us in the morning: in the mean time, we should think on that,
which he had opened to us, and resolve our selves on a certain determination,
for he meant us more good then we were beware off. A little suffiseth hunger,
where necessity is mistress of the feast.
He being departed, we fell to such simple cheer as was prepared for us,
which was simple in deed, scant sufficient to the good stomachs we had to our
victualles: but because we had soon done, we went the sooner to bed, sparing
as much time as we could, in remembrance of the Priests words, till the
weariness of our journey, compelled us to take our rest.

In the morning, the Priest sent a poor fellow, whom he kept to make his bed,
and r^n about on his errandes, to our lodging, that we should come unto his
Master presently, because he had occasion to go into the Town, and his
return was uncertain, therefore he would speak with us before he went. Upon
these so hasty summons, we addressed our selves toward him, finding him in his
Chamber, reading upon his Poetesse, to him we gave thanks for his courtesy,
promising to requite it if he came where we might do it. In brief, among
great circumstaunce of talk, wherein he manifested the treason toward England:
he behaved him self in speeches to us, according as I have already declared in
my Discovery of Campion, There you may read his words, at large set down.
where you may perceive the Popes determination, and our Englishme^s unnatural
consent, to be Traitors to their own Princess, to shorten her life, and
overthrow their native Country, where they were borne.

When he had mightily besieged us with a multitude, as well threatninges as
persuasions, to conform our selves under that obedience: as well to avoid
peril that might otherwise happen, as also to gain somewhat toward our
relief, we promised him to do as he would have us, and to go whether he
would appoint us. Whereupon he presently wrote two Letters to Doctor Allen at
Rheimes, one of them co^cerned our preferment there, how we should be
entertained into the English Seminary, and take the orders of Preesthood,
because we might do good in our Country an other day. The other Letter was of
such news, as he heard out of England, how matters went forewarde to their
purpose, and beside, other things which I am not to speak of here, because
they are not to be read of every one.

These Letters finished* and sealed up with singing Cake, he delivered unto us,
saying: I thank God that I am ordained the man, both to save your Souls, and
a number of your friends here in England, whom I could wish: here present
with you, for that I pity their estate, as well that they are in, as that
which is wurse, and I fear me will fall on them shortly.

I put up the Letters, and gave him to understand, that we could hardly
travel from thence to Rheimes, having nothing wherwithall we might bear our
charges. Trust me (quoth he) and I have done as much for you as I am able, for
I have nothing here but to serve mine own necessity. When we offered to sell
our Clokes: he could find money to buie them.
Then we offered to sell our Cloakes, which the Soldiers against their wills
had left us. In deed (quoth he) to travel in your Cloakes will do nothing
but hinder you; I will send my man to a friend of mine (as much to say, as his
Chest) to see what money he can get for them.

The fellow took our Cloakes, after his Master had whispered him in the
ear^, and went down the stairs, returning quickly with two French Crowns,
which the Priest delivered to us, with fow^e or five French Souls out of his
own Purse, Great lyberalitie.
so, willing us to do^ his commendations to Doctor Allen, and to labor
earnestly in that we went about and Master (...) (...) we parted, he into the
Town, and we in our journey.

When we were about three or four miles from Amiens, we sat down on the side
of a hill, recounting what the Priest had said to us, as also the cause why he
sen^ us to Rheimes: the remembrance of the true and undoubted Religion, used
in our own Country, and wherein we were trained up, was of force sufficient
to persuade us from yielding to that, which we judged rather to be a mummerie,
and derision of the true. Doctrine, then otherwise: So that (notwithstanding
many matters my companion alleged unto me, what danger we might come unto,
if we went not to deliver the Letters, as also the hard penury we should
(...) in travel, being destitute of money, apparel, an^ (...) other
needful things) by the only appointment of God wha no doubt put it in my
mind at that time, This to be true, albeit he now be my utter enemy, I am
sure he will not deny.
I willed him to follow the, and come woe, want, miserio, or any other
calamity, I would n^^er leave him to the death. But if any exercise might get
it, any pains compass it, or the extreme shifte of begging attain it: I
would do all my self, whereby to maintain us, only that he would but bear
me company, for I would try all means that might be, ere I would forsake my
Faith.

This to be true, I am sure and certain himself will not deny, who seeing my
earnest in treaty, and the promises I made to the uttermost of my (...) to go
with me, and so we left the way to Rheimes, and went on strayte to Paris.

In Paris we met with a French man, who could speak a little broken
English, and he conducted us where my Lord the English Ambassador lay: to
whom I gave the Letters and after certain talk he used with us, he bestowed
his Honorable lyberalitie upon us, wishing us to return back again into
England.

Leaving my Lord, It is a good help, to meet a friend in a strange Country,
when a man is in some need.
and walking into the City, we met too certain English Gentlemen, some of
them for the knowledge they had of me in England, showed them selves very
courteous to me, both in money, lodging, and other necessaries. And through
them we became acquainted with a number of English men more, who lay in the
City, some in Colleges, and some at their own houses: where using daily
company among them, sometime at dinner, and sometime at supper, we heard many
girdes and nippes against our Country of England, her Majesty very
irreverently handled in words, and certain of her honorable Counsel,
vnduetifullie termed.

Great talk they had, about Doctor Saunders, who they said, either as then
was, or shortly would be, arrived in Ireland, how he had an Army of
Spaniardes with him, and how him self under the Popes Standarde, would give
such an attempt there, as soon after should make all England to quake, beside,
there were certain English men gone to the Pope, for more aid, if need
should be, at whose return, certain Noble men English men, then being in
those parts, whose names I omit for diverse causes, would prosecute the
matter, with as much speed as might be.

Any subject, that has either fear of God, or love to his prince would quake
to hear their Traiterous devises.

The Devil wants no instruments to help his cause.


The very same did the Priest at Amiens give us to understand of, almost in
every point agreeing with this: which made us to doubt* because in every man's
mouth; her Majesty still was aimed at, in such manner as I tremble and shake to
think on their words. All this time that we remained amongst them, diverse
of the Gentlemen and others (who were like factors for the Pope, as Master
Woodward at Amiens, Doctor Bristowe at Doway, and Doctor Allen at Rheimes were,
to increase his Seminaries with as many English men as they might,) very
earnestly persuaded us to travel to Room, assuring us, that we should be
there entertained to our high contentment, beside, they would give us Letters
for our better welcome thither.

We were soon entreated to take the journey on us, because we thought, if we
could go to Room, and return safely again into England, we should
accomplish a great matter, the place being so far of, and the voyage so
dangerous. Upon our agreement to undertake the travel, we received of every
one lyberallie toward the bearing of our charges, By their persuasions and
liberality, they win a number daily to them.
and Letters we had to Master Doctor Jews in Room, the Archdeaco^ of Cambra,
and to Doctor Morris, then the Rector of the English Hospital or College in
Room, that we might there be preferred among the English Students. Taking our
leave of them, and yielding them thanks for their great courtesy, we iournied
to Lions, where in the house of one Master Deacon, the words were spoken by
Henry Orton, one of them condemned, and yet living in the Tower, which in my
other book I have avouched. From thence we went to Millaine, where in the
Cardinal Boromehos Palace, we found the lodging of a Welshman, named Doctor
Robert Griffin, a man there had in a good account, and Co^fessor to the
aforesaid Cardinal. By him we were very courteouslye entertained, There are
Englishmen almost in every ^ittie by the way.
and sent to the house of an English Priest in the City, named Master
Harries, who likewise bestowed on us very gentle acceptaunce, as also three
English Gentlemen, who lay in his house, being very lately returned from
Room: they likewise both in cost and courtesy, behaved them selves like
Gentlemen unto us, during the time that we made our abode in Millaine.

Our coming to Millayne was on Christmas even, and having lain that night at
an Osteria where Master Harryes appointed us, on Christmas day we dyned with
Doctor Griffin, where we had great cheer, and like welcome. The talk that
Doctor Griffen had with us, being at dinner with him.
In the dinner time, he moved many questions unto us, as concerning the estate
of England, if we heard of any wars toward and how the Catholics thriued
in England: and at the last (quoth he) have you not seen three Gentlemen
that lie at Master Harryes his house? Yes that we have (quoth I) to us they
seem marvelous courteous, and offer us such freendshippe as we have never
deserved. Oh (quoth he) if all things had fallen right to their expectation,
they would have been jolly fellows. I am sure you have heard what credit
Captain Sukelye was in with the Pope, and how he was appointed with his Army,
to invade England: he being slain in the battle of the King of Portugal,
things went not forward according as they should have done. These three
Gentlemen came forth of the North parts of England, An unnatural desire of
men to seek the ruin of their own Country.
taking upon them to go forward with that, which Stukely had enterprised,
which was, to have the Popes Army committed to their conduction, and so they
would ouerrun England at their pleasure, then they would make Kings and Dukes
and Earls, every one that they thought well off. To help them forward in
this matter, they purchased the Letters of Doctor Saunders, Doctor Allen,
Doctor Bristow, and others, who thought very well of their intent, and therefore
furthered the^ in their Letters so much as they might, to Doctor Jews, The
secret seducing Priests, win a number to join in their traiterous intent,
Doctor Morris, Doctor Moorton, and diverse other Doctors and Gentlemen at
Room, all of the^ very earnestly following ye suit hereof to ye Popes
holiness, informing him, how they had already wun such a number in England, to
ioin with the^ when ye matter came to pass, ye granting the^ his holiness
Army, they would presently ouerrun all England, and yield it wholly into his
hand. But when the Pope had scanned on this hasty business, well noting the
simple and arrogant behavior of the men, and their vnlikelihoode, of
performing these things: even according as they deserved, they were denied
their request, and sent away without any recompense. The Pope seeks to
accomplish his desire, by the Subject that must betray his own Country.
The Pope was not to trust to any such as they, he well knows England is too
strong yet, and till the people be secretly persuaded, as I doubt not but
there is a good number, and more and more still shall be, by ye Preests are sent
over daily, and they must war within, while other holds the^ play with out:
till then England will not be conquered any way.

Other talk we had, not here to be rehearsed, but truly it would astonishe a
heart of Adamant, to hear the horrible Treasons invented against her Majesty
and this Realm, and so greedily followed by our own Country men. But some
perhaps will demand how we behaved our selves to come to the knowledge of
such traiterous intentions, judging yt they would rather keep the^ secret,
then reveal them to any: to answer such as so do question, thus it was.

When I was at Paris, The mean, whereby they made me acquainted with all their
devises.
the Gentlemen took me to be a Gentleman's Son here in England, whom I
refuse here to name, but as it seemed, they were some* what persuaded of him:
I perceiving they took me for his Son, called my self by his name, where
through I was the better esteemed, and beside, loved as I had been he in
deed. When they understood my fellows name to be Thomas Nowell, they
whispered among themselves, and said undoubtedly, he was kin to Master Nowell
the Deane of Paul's: and if they wist certainly that he were so, they would
use him in such gentle order, as they would keep him there, so that one day
he should stand and preach against his Kinseman. This suppose, serving so
well our necessitye, we were glad to use: which made us well thought on of all,
and keeping company so familiarlye with them, we were made acquainted with a
number more matters then may here be expressed.

While we were in Millaine, The treason against England, was common in every
Englishma^s mouth.
we visited Master Doctor Parker, who likewise told us the same tale that
Doctor Griffin had before rehearsed, beside, he told us that Priests were
appointed from Room and Rheimes for England, and that ore long they should be
sent. Soon after we departed thence, to Bologna, Florence, Scienna, and so to
Room, where how we were received the Chapter following shall amply unfold.
Thus, as well to certify the incredulous, as also to content those desirous
how I attained to Room: I have breeflye done my good will to please both.

You have heard herein, how at sundry places, and by several speeches,
there was a general agreement of Treason, expected and daily looked for, to
the harm of our gracious Sovereign, and hurt of her whole Realm. All these
matters we heard before we came to Room, from whence the treason should
cheefely proceed: we seeing such deuillish devises to be talked on by the way,
we might well judge Room to be Hell it self, in that all things should go
forward, as it was there determined. You are not altogether ignorant of their
intentes at Room, for that my other book has truly reveled some of their
traitorous and disloyal practices: and such as modesty will suffer me to
utter, and you to read, you shall here find faithfullye discoursed.

The Author being come to Rome, after what manner he was received into the
English Seminary. The emulation and dissension, between the Welshman and the
English men in the College, their banishment out of Room, and the Popes
sending for the^ again, as you shall read heareafter. Chap. 2.
OUr entrance into Room, was upon Candlemas even, when as it drew somewhat
toward night: for which cause, we refused as then to go to the English
College, taking up our Lodging in an Osteria somewhat within the City, and
determining to visit the English house on the next morning. On the morrow by
enquiring, we found the English College, where after we were once entered,
we had a number about us quicklye* to know what news in England, and how all
matters went there. Not long had we stood talking with them, but one entered
the College, A present of holy Candls brought from the Pope to the English
Students.
with a great many of war Candles in his hand: who gave them to understand,
that the Pope had sent to every Scholar in the College a Candle, which that
day at high Mass he had hallowed, for it was Candlemas day. They receiving
the^ with great account, both of the Popes favor, as also the holiness they
credited to consist in the Candles, went every one to lay them up in their
Chambers: in the mean time Master Doctor Morris the Rector of the house came
to us, to whom we delivered the Letter sent to him on our behalf from Paris,
which when he had read, he said we were welco^e, allowing us ye eight days
entertainment in the Hospital, which by the Pope was granted to such
Englishmen as came thither. Then he brought us to Doctor Jews, the Archdeacon
of Cambra, to whom we delivered his letter likewise, and with him we stayed
dinner, ignorant whither he were an Englishman or no, for that he gave us our
entertainment in Latin, demanded a number of questions of us in Latin, and
beside, dined with us in Latin: whereat we meruailed, till after dinner, he
bad us walk to the College again with Doctor Morris, in English. We were no
sooner come to the College, but the Scholars, who had already dined, and were
walking together in the Court, came about us, every one demanding so many
questions, that we knew not which to answer first: at last, one of them took
my fellow aside, and one of the Priests likewise desired to talk with me,
because he said he knew my Father well enough, The talk one of the Priests had
with me in the Garden.
using the name that I did, so, he and I sitting together in the Garden, among
other talk he asked of me, wherefore I came to Rome? Trust me Sir (quoth I)
only for the desire I had to see it, that when I came home again, I might
say, once in my life I have been at Room. Then I perceive (quoth he) you come
more upon pleasure then any devotion, more desirous to see the City, then to
learn the virtues contained in it: in sooth I see, you remain in the same
wildnes you did, when I lay at your Fathers house, but I do not doubt now we
have you here, to make you a stayed man ere you depart, that your Father may
have joy of you, and all your friends receive comfort by you. In deed Sir
(quoth I) I have always addicted my mind to so many youthful devises, Mine
own tale, which so well as I could, I made to agree with the Preests discourse.
that I little regarded any religion, which my Parents seeing, and fearing I
would never be bridled: sent me over to Paris, where I should remain at my
book. But there I found Gentlemen of mine acquaintance, who wished me to
travel hither, whereto I quickly gave my consent, being (as I have told you)
desirous to see a thing so famous. I think very well (quoth he) of your
words, as well for your Parents sake as also your own. But this I will say
unto you, there ought none to come hither, the place being so holy, ancient,
and famous, but only such as with earnest endeavor, seek and thirst after the
Catholic faith: being here taught and maintained, according as Christ
ordained it, the Apostles delivered it, Peter himself planted it, and all the
Fathers of the Church since, have followed it. Here may you behold, what
vnreuerent speeches they can affoorde her Majesty.
They must denounce that damnable heresy, crept in to the Church of England,
that proud usurping Iezabell, (meaning our bread and gracious Princess) whom
(quoth he) God reserueth to make her a notable spectacle to the whole world,
for keeping ye good Queen of Scots from her lawful rule: but I hope ere long,
ye Dogs shall tear her flesh, and those yt be her props and vpholders.

A paper of the names of such noble men of her Majesty's
Then drawing a paper out of his pocket, he said, I have a Bead role of them
here, who little knows what is providing for them, and I hope shall not know,
till it fall upon them. Then he read their names unto me, Counsel* whom they
meant to persecute, when their intent came to pass in England.
which, that all may perceive the villainous and traiterous minds of our own
Countriemen: so many of them as I can call to memory, I will set down, even in
the same manner as he read the^. But first I must crave pardon of those
honorable personages, to whom the words do offer great abuse, and whom I
vnfeynedlye reverence and honor: that they would not admit any evil conceit
against me, but in the noble nature wherewith they are daily adorned, I,
being but the reporter, I desire thee gentle Reader, to use some reverence in
reading these indecent words, because they are truly set down, after the
order as they were there spoken
may be pardoned and not reproved. First, (quoth he) here is my Lord Keeper,
the Bacon hog, the Butchers son, the great guts, oh he would fry well with
a Faggot, or his head would make a fair show upon London bridge, where I hope
shortly it shall stand. Next is eloquent Master Cecill, Lord Treasorer, you
shall shortly see if he can save his own life with all ye wit he has: had it
not been for these two before named, England had gone to wrack long since. Then
here is the Earl of Leicester, the Queens Ostler, and his brother Ambrose
Dudly, a good fat whoreson, to make Bacon of: with other words of my Lord of
Leicester, not here to be rehearsed. My Lord of Bedforde, he forsooth is ye
Queens Coozin, we will see how finely his Coozin and he can hang together. Sir
Fraunces Walsingha^, and Doctor Wilson, they be her Secretaries: for every
warrant they have suffered, to apprehend any of our Priests, our friends or
other, by that time they have counted their reckoning, they shall find they
have a dear payment. Sir Christopher Hatton, he pleased ye Queen so well,
dancing before her in a Mask, yt since yt time he has risen to be one of ye
Counsel: with other words, which I refer for modesty. Sir Fraunces Knowles,
and other of the Counsel whose names I well remember not: he gave them many a
heavy threatening. Then opening the paper farther, at the end thereof was a great
many of names, of Magistrates and other belonging to this City, Every one
that was named in the paper, the manner and order of of their death was
appointed.
among whom was Master Recorder, Master Nowell Deane of Paul's, Master
Fox, Master Crowlye, and sundry other, whose names I cannot very well
remember, and therefore am loath to set down any thing, but that whereof I am
certainly assured: but very well I remember, there was no one named, but he
had the order of his death appointed, either by burning, hanging, or
quartering, and such like.

It is not unlike, but that this vnreuerent matter will offend some in the
reading, that men of honor, and worship, and those of credit and
countenance, should have their names published in print in such sort: I
have had the judgment of those, of worship and learning, on this behalf,
and they have said, how it is necessary, that their own wicked speeches
should be set down, for an example to all men, how they abuse her Majesty,
her honorable Council, and learned and discreet Maiestrates, whereby their
traiterous dealings may be the better discovered. And to them thus undutifully
regarded, it can not seem an offense, considering, that Christ unto his
chosen vessels has said. Math. 5.11.
You shall be mocked, scorned, and reviled for my sake: but do you rejoice and
be glad, for your reward is the greater in the kingdom of Heaven, and you
remain blessed.

There are other here, to whom the like charge has been, given to justify
that I do not report any untruth.
Then putting up his Paper again, he began after this manner. As I have said
before, so now I say the same, such as come to this holy place, must
faithfully bend his life and conuersasion, to honor and reverence our
provident and holy Father the Pope, in all things, that shall like him to
command, to hold and confess him the universal supreme head of Christ's
church, and embrace his decrees, as the only ordenance and will of God. For he
is the person of God on earth, and he can not sin, because the spirit of
divine grace guides him continually: he has authority over all Kings and
Princes, to erect and suppress whom he pleases, and that shall England well
know ere long, that he has such power and authority. To honor and obey
him, to be a true and faithful member of his Church, and to live and die in
his cause, this ought to be the intent of all that comes here.

This long Tale, containing a number of more circumstaunces than I can unfold:
made me study what answer I should make him, which after some pause, came
forth as thus. Credit me Sir, I am but a Nouesse in these matters, and
therefore you might as well have disputed with me, in the deepest School
points that is, and I should have censured both alike. Nay (quoth he) I think
not your ignorance so great, albeit it seems great enough, though you have
been looselie brought up, yet you have been with me, both at Mass, and at
Confession diverse times, at such time as I served my Lady B.

Beside, A number of places he told me here in England, where priests have
entertainment.
there are a great many of Priests in England, as in Warwickshire, at Master
I. T. in Staffordshire, at Master G. of C. and at S. T. F. in the same shyre:
all these be near your Fathers, and not one of them but visits your Fathers
house, three or four times every year, as they did when I was there (for
there is no long tariaunce in one place for a Priest, but he must shifte still,
least he be taken,) and I am sure your Father would see you duly confessed.

Now I was put to so hard a shifte, that I knew not well what to say, I
knew none of these men he named, but one, and he in deed had a Priest, who
after his long raunging about his Master the Popes business here in England,
I thank God, I have caused to be stayed. Likewise, I knew not the Gentleman,
whom* both they at Paris, and he said, to be my Father, neither where he
dwelt, It was only God, that framed my aunswers to agree with the Preests
demands.
nor what he was: which made me stand in fear to be disprooued, having
avouched my self before to be his Son. Wherefore, referring my case to God,
who had so provided for me till that time, in his name I resolved my self on
this answer, not knowing how it might happen to speed.

In deed Sir, I can not deny, but that I have oftentimes heard Mass, as also
been at Confession, but my devotion thereto has been ^ender, An excuse
serving very fit for my purpose, and lyked the Priest well enough.
as you your self have seen, knowing me to be so wild, and, as it were,
without government: but when you departed from my Fathers, I tarried there but a
small time after you, for I obtained leave of my Father, to go lie at London,
at a Kinsemans house of his, because I would study the French tongue, to have
some knowledge therein against I went over, for my Father told me long before,
that I should go to Paris, and study there. When I was at London, I grew in
acquaintance with diverse Gentlemen, in whose company I frequented many
delightful pastimes: so that I could hardly refrain them, when my Father
sent for me, to the intent I should travel to Paris.

Well (quoth he) and though you did go to London so soon after I was gone,
any of the Priests that reforted to your Fathers, or he him self could have
certified you, of such places in London, where you might have heard Mass, and
been Confessed too, without suspect at all. A matter worthy to be regarded.
For at Master S. his house on the backside of P. you might diverse times have
heard Mass, and been Co^fest there likewise: I lay there an indifferent
while, and said Mass there, whereat diverse were present, also in the after
noone, when they have been at the Play, in all that time I have Confessed many.

Likewise, you might have gone to the Marshalse a, and enquired for Master
Fownd, and you should sildom have missed, Euerarde Ducket, was taken, going
into the Marshalsea, to speak with the Papists he being a Priest: and being
there taken, behaved him self in such traiterous manner, that he was executed
at Tiborne, 1581.
but have found a Priest there with him: for sometime under ye habites of
Gentlemen, Seruingmen, or what apparel they imagine most convenient for them,
Priests do daily resort unto him, where they confess him, and give him
such hallowed things as are sent him from Room, as Agnus Deis, Grana benedicta,
and other things: there, if you had made him privy to your intent, he would
have appointed one that should have done it for you. He likewise would have
bestowed on you some of those holy things, for he finds such means, what
with the Preests that come to him, and other, whom he hyreth or infreateth to
carry a Letter abroad now and then for him: that those holy things are
delivered to their hands, who do not a little rejoice in them. My self once,
made Norris the Pursuiuant carry a Letter for me, to one of my Lady B. her
Gentlewomen: and therein was two Agnus Deis, a hallowed Girdle, and above forty
or fifty Grana benedicta, which makes me to smile every time I think on it,
that I could make him my man, when I durst not deliver it my self.

Master Norris being told this: offers his life, if any such thing can be
proved, for he says, he never delivered any thing to any of my Lady B.
Gentlewomen. And for his faithful service to her Majesty, I have to show
under his own hand, the penalty he puts him self too, if any unjust
service can be laid to his charge.

By this time, the Bell rung for all the Students to come to Supper, which
made the Priest to stay at this Periadus, else he would have continued in
discourse, I know not how long: for what with the several charges wherewith he
sounded me, my care still how to shape a sufficient answer, and the
tediousness of his tale, mixed with so many words, far distaunt from
civil and duetifull regard, he was not so ready to go to his Supper, as I
was glad for that time to break off company.

So after certain familiar behavior, used between him and I, he glad to see
me at Rome, and well hoping in short time to make me a new man, I appliable
with thanks, for every thing; for that it stood with wisdom to accept all
thing: he went into the Refectorium, which is the name of their dining Hall,
and I to the Chamber appointed for me and my fellow, whom I found there
sitting with Doctor Morris, ^^aying my coming, that we might sup together,
which in deed we did, Master Morris using us very courteously, passing away
the supper time with much variety of talk, among which, Master Doctor said
his pleasure of diverse persons in England: which, for that it would rather
check modesty, then challenge any respect of honesty, I admit it to silence,
the talk being so broad, that it would stand as a blemish to my Book.

In what manner our English men pass away their time in the College, the
orders of the house and other things to be regarded. Chap. 3.
IT is impossible for me, to note down half the speeches, that passed between
ye Scholars and me, as also my fellow: but as for that was used to him, I
could seldom come acquainted with all, except I had stood by and heard it*
for either they had fully persuaded him, or he joined into consent with them*
so that he would never report any thing that had passed between them, he lyked
so well of every thing. But letting these matters pass a while, I think it
expedient here so set down, before I go any farther, the orders used in the
English College, how the English men spend the time there, and within what
compass they limitte them selves, which so breeflie as I can, I will pass
over.

The English College, The place where the English College stands in Room.
is a house both large and fair, standing in the way to the Popes Palace,
not far from the Castle Sante Angello: in the College, the Scholars are
divided, by certain number into every Chamber, as in some four, in some fix,
or so many as the Rector thinks convenient, as well for the health of the
Scholars, The order for the English men's lodging.
as the troubling not much room. Every man has his Bed proper to him self,
which is, two little Trestles, with sour or flue boordes laid along over
them, and thereon a quilted Mattresse, as we call it in England, which every
morning after they are risen, they sold up their sheets hansomelie, laying
them in the midst of the Bed, and so roll it up to one end, covering it
with the Quilt, that is their Couerlet all the night time.

First in the morning, The orders observed by the Scholars, every morning.
he that is the Porter of the College, ringeth a Bell, at the sound whereof
every Student arises, and turns up his Bed, as I have said before. Not
long after, the Bell ringeth again, when as every one presently kneeling on
his knees, prays for the spare of half an hour: at which time, the Bell
being souled again, they arise and bestow a certain time in Study, every
one having his Deske, Table, and Chair to him self very orderly, and all
the time of Study, silence is used of every one in the Chamber, not one
offering molestation in speech to an other.

The time of Study expired, the Bell calls them from their Chambers, down
into the Refectorium: where every one takes a glass of Wine, and a quarter
of a Manchet, and so he makes his Collatione. Soon after, the Bell is knouled
again, when as the Stude^ts two and two together, walk to the Roman
College, which is the place of School or instruction: where every one goes
to his ordinary Lecture, some to Divinity, some to Phisique, some to Logique,
and some to Rhetorique. There they remain the Lecture time, which being done,
they return home to the College again: where they spend the time till
dinner, in walking and talking up and down the Gardens.

And an order there is appointed by the Rector and the Jesuits, The diversity
of penance adjoined the English Students: which they must do openly in the
Hall, at dinner time.
and obeyed by all the Students, that who soever does not in the morning
turn up his Bed hansomlie, or is not on his knees at prayer time, or hears
not Mass before he go to School, or after he comes home, but forgets it:
or else if he go forth, and put not the Peg at his name in the Table. For
there is a Table hangs by the door, which has a long Box adjoined to it,
wherein lies a great company of wooden Pegges, and against the name of every
Scholar written in the Table (which is observed by order of the Alphabet)
there is a hole made: wherein, such as have occasion to go abroad, must
duly put a Peg, to give knowledge who is abroad, and who remains within.

Beside, diverse other orders they have for slight matters, the neglecting
whereof, is public penance at dinner time: when as all the Students are
placed at the Tables, such as have so transgressed, goes up into the Pulpit I
which stands there, because one reads all the dinner time*) and there he
says: Because I have not fulfilled this or that, whatsoever order it be that
he has broken, I am adjoined such a penance. Either to kneel in the midst
of the Hall on his bare knees, All these I have been forced to do, albeit it
were with an ill will.
and there to say his Beads over: Or to say certain Pater nosters, and Aue
Marias: Or to stand upright and have a dishe of potage before him on the
ground, and so to bring up every spoonful to his mouth: Or to loose, either
one or two or three of his dishes appointed for his dinner: Or to stand there
all dinner time, and eat no meat: and diverse other, which according as it is,
either afterward he has his dinner or supper, or else goes without it: And
all these penaunces I have been forced to do, for that I was always apt to
break one order or other. As for the private penaunces, it shall not be
greatly amiss to rehearse them here too: so long I shall desire you to stay,
from hearing the manner of the Students dinner. The private penaunces, which
are appointed by the ghostly Father.
The private Penaunces, are appointed by the ghostly Father at Confession:
which are fulfilled without public knowledge of the cause, and likewise of
the person. If his penance be, to whip him self openly in the Hall at dinner
time: then the Rector orders it after this manner, that he shall not be
known, to be reproched by any of his fellows, or that they shall certainly
say, it is such a one. At the dinner or supper, that this penance is to be
accomplished, the Rector causes seven or eight to keep their Chambers, and
commonly but one that time in a Chamber: their doors must be made fast to
them, and they, not so much as look out at their window, to see from which
Chamber he comes that does the penance. The whipping them selves, publicly
at dinner.
When they are all set at the Tables, he comes in, clothed in a Canuas
vesture down to the ground, a hood of the same on his head, with two holes
where through he has sight, and a good big round place bare, against the
midst of his back: in this order he goes up and down the Hall, whipping
him self at that bare place, in so much, that the blood does trickle on the
ground after him. The whip has a very short handle, not much above a handful
long, and forty or fifty Cords at it, about the length of half a yard:
with a great many hard knots on every Cord, and some of the whippes has
through every knot at the end crooked wiers, which will tear the flesh
vnmercifullie.

The manner of the Jesuits whips wherewith they whip themselves.
The Jesuits have, some of them, to whip them selves, whips with Cords of
wier, wherewith they will beat them selves, till with too much effuse of blood,
they be ready to give up the ghost. And this they will do in their Chambers,
either before a Crucifix, or the image of our Lady, turning their backs when
they bleed toward the Image, that it may see them. One of the Jesuits,
because they could never get me to whip my self, (for that I well knew God
said: Rent your hearts, Joel. 2.13. Psalm. 51.17
and not your skin: And that, A contrite and sobbing heart, is more acceptable
to God, then a bleeding body,) took me once with him into his Chamber, saying:
I should see (because I was so fearful) what he would inflict upon his own
body. The example one of the Jesuits gave me, to whip my self.
So when he was vnapparelled, he took a whip, the Cords whereof was wier, and
before the Picture of our Lady, he whipped him self very greeuouslie, saying:
Sancta Maria matter Dei, suscipe dolorem meum: Sancta Maria matter Dei, accipe
Flagitium meum: Et ora prome, nunc et in hira mortis: Which is as much to say,
Saint Marie mother of God, receive my dolor: O monstrous ignorance.
Saint Marie mother of God, accept my whipping, and pray for me, now and in the
hour of death. These, with other like words, he used to the Picture a great
many times: and then he went to the Crucifix, which stood upon his Deske, and
whipping him self still, he said these, or the very like words. O Jesus
obtestetur te virgo gloriosa Maria matter, quae (quod pro certo noui) pro me
nunc tecum agit. Flagitistu^, sanguinolenti tui sudoris, Cruci^ tuae, mortis ac
passionis tuae, pro me passae memoriae, ad hoc me faciendum impulit: eo quod
perpessus sis, his decies pro me grauiora: In English thus. O Jesus, Egregious
impudency
be thou entreated by that glorious virgin thy mother, who I am sure at this
time makes intercession to thee for me. The remembrance of thy whipping,
bloody sweat, Cross, death and passion, makes me do this, in so much as thou
have suffered ten times more for me.

In these and such like acclamations, be continued whipping him self, almost
the space of half an hour, bleeding so sore, as it grieved me very much to
see him. Afterward, he willed me to try it once, and I should not find any
pain in it, but rather a pleasure. For (quoth he) if Christ had his flesh
rent and torn with whips, his hands and feet nailed to the Cross, his
precious side gored with a Lance, his head so pricked with a Crown of thorn,
that his dear blood ran trilling down his face, and all this for you: why
should you fear to put your body to any torment, to recompense him that has
done so much for you? I desired him to bear with me a while, for I was not
endued with that strength and fortitude, as to abide and suffer the pains he
did: but yet in time I doubted not, to fulfill any thing on my body, he would
command me. My answer pleased him indifferently, so I left him in his
Chamber, and went down, lamenting to see a spectacle of so great folly.

Now as for the other penaunces, Diversity of penaunces, given them, all by
their ghostly Co^fessor.
as they be diverse, so be they diverse ways fulfilled, either by Fasting,
wearing a shyrt of heaire, trudging to the seven Churches, lying upon the bare
boardes, going into the dark vautes under the ground, or traueling on
Pilgrimage, and a number more, which exceeds my memory to unfold, they have
amongst them, as there be diverse can bear me witness, and some of them my
Confessor has constrained me to do.

Return we now to the Students, who being come from the schools, and have
recreated them selves some what, either in the house or in the Gardens: are now
at the sound of the Bell come into the Refectorium to dinner. The manner of the
English men's dinner.
The custom is, that daily two of the Students take it by turns, to serve
all the other at ye Table, who to help them, have the Butler, the Porter, and
a poor Jesuit, that looks to all the Scholars necessaries, to bring them
their clean shirtes, and foreseeeth, that neither their Gowns, Cassocks,
Dublets, Breeches, Hose nor shoes want mending. These bring in their hands,
each of them a round boorde, which has a staff about half a yard long, made
fast through the middle of it: and round about that board is set little
Saucers, wherein the Cook shareth every man a little quantity, which they
bring, and hold over the Table, when as every man takes his own mess.

As for their fare, trust me it is very fine and delicate, for every man has
his own Trentcher, The variety of dishes, and daintiness of the English men's
fare*
his Manchet, knife, spoone, and forke laid by it, and then a fair white
napkin covering it, with his glass and pot of wine set by him. And the first
mess, or Antepast (as they call it) that is brought to the Table, is some fine
meat to urge them have an appetite: as sometime the Spanish Anchouies, and
sometime stued Prunes and Raysons of the Sun together, having such fine tarte
sirope made to them, as I promise you a weak stomach would very well digest
them. The second, is a certain mess of potage of that Country manner, no
meat sod in them, but are made of diverse things, whose proper names I do not
remember: but me thought they were both good and wholesome. The third, is
hoylde meat, as Kid, Mutton, Chickin, and such like: every man a pretty
modicum of each thing. The fourth, is roasted meat, of the daintiest provision
that they can get, and sometime stewde and bakte meat, according as pleases
Master Cook to order it. The fifth and last, is some time Cheese, some time
preserved conceytes, some time Figs, Almonds and Raysons, a Limon and Sugar,
a Pomegranate, or some such sweet geere: for they know that Englishmen
looueth sweet meats.

And all the dinner while, The order that one of the Scholars observes,
reading all the dinner time.
one of the Scholars, according as they take it by weeklie turn, reads:
first a Chapter of their Bible, and then in their Martirilogium, he reads the
Martyrdom of some of the Saints, as Saint Fraunces, Saint Martin, Saint
Longinus, that thrust the Spear into Christ's side, Saint Agatha, Saint
Barbara, Saint Cecilia, and diverse other: among whom they have imprinted the
Martyrdom of Doctor Story, the two Nortons, John Felton and others, calling
them by the name of Saints, who were here executed at Tiborne for high
treason.

The dinner done, they recreate them selves for ye space of an hour, and then
the Bell calls them to their Cha^bers, where they stay a while, studying on
their Lectures given them in the forenoone: anon the Bell su^moneth them to
School again, where they stay not past an hour, They have feeding enough,
four meals a day.
but they return home again, and so soon as they be come in, they go into
the Refectorium, and there every one has his glass of wine, and a quarter of
a Manchet again, according as they had in the morning.

Then they depart to their Chambers, from whence at convenient time they are
called to exercise of disputation: the Divines to a Jesuit appointed for them,
and every Study to a several Jesuit, where they continue the space of an
hour, and afterward till supper time, they are at their recreation.

Their exercise after Supper.
After Supper, if it be in winter time, they go with the Jesuits, and sit
about a great fire talking, and in all their talk, they strive who shall
speak wurst of her Majesty, of some of her Council, of some Bishop here, or
such like: so that the Jesuits them selves, will often take up their hands and
bless them selves, to bear what abominable tales they will tell them. After
they have talked a good while, the Bell calls them to their Chambers, the
Porter going from Chamber to Chamber, and lights a Lamp in every one: so
when the Scholars come, they alight their Lamps, lay down their Beds, and
go sit at their Deskes and study a little, till the Bell ringes, when every
one falls on his knees to Prayers. Then one of the Priests in the Chamber, as
in every Chamber there is some, begins the Latin Letany, all the Scholars
in the Chamber aunswering him: and so they spend the time till the Bell ringes
again, which is for every one to go to bed.

Other matters of our English Students in the College, their days of
recreation at their vineyarde, their walk to the seven Churches, a report of
some of the Romish Relics, and other things concerning their behavior.
Chap. 4.
THe English Students every third or fowrth day, go not to the Schools,
but have access abroad; to sport and delight them selves: sometime they walks
to their Uineyarde, and the Jesuits with them, where they pass away the day
in diverse disportes, what game, what toy any one can devise, they altogether
in pastime join to perform it.

An other day they go to the seven Churches, which according as I remember
their names, I will here set them down. The seven Churches in Room, whereto
they go on pylgrimage.
S. Peter's, S. Paul's, S. John Lateranes, S. Maria maiore, S. Croce, S.
Laurences, S. Sebastianes. In all these Churches, there be diverse Relics,
which make them haunted of a marvelous multitude of people: whereby the lazy
lurden Friars that keep the Churches, gettes more riches, then so many honest
men should do. For either at the coming into the Church, or else at the
Altar where the Relics be, there stands a Basen, and the people cast money
therein, with very great liberality. And there stands a Friar, A crafty
kind of coosonage, whereby the ignorant people are beguiled.
with a forked stick in his hand, and thereupon he takes every bodies Beads,
that lays them on the Altar, and then he wipes them along a great
proportioned thing of Crystal and Gold, wherein are a number of rotten
bones, which they make the people credit to be the bones of Saints: so wiping
them along the outside of this Tabernacle, the Beads steal a terrible deal
of holiness out of those bones, and God knows, the people think they do God
good service in it: Oh monstrous blindness.

But because every good Subject may see into the Romish iuglinges, and
perceive the subtlety of Antichriste the eldest child of hell: I will
rehearse some of these Relics, as many of them as I can possibly call to my
remembrance.

A brief rehearsal of some of the Romish Relics, whereby the Pope
deceives a number, and has good gains, to the maintenance of his pomp.
In Saint Peter's Church.
The Popes brase^ Rock, taken for the Rock Christ spoke off.
AS we enter into the Court before Saint Peter's Church, there stands the form
of a Rock made of brass, an old and ancient thing: the which is kept there,
that the ignorant people should believe that to be the Rock, which our Savior
spoke off to Peter, when as upon Peter's confessing him to be, Christ the son
of the living God: Math. 16.16.18.
he answered. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, which Rock he meant by
him self, and not by Peter. This piece of brass they make the ignorant to
believe to be that Rock, and therefore a number as they go into the Church,
fall down on their knees, and worship this brazen Rock with their prayers.

The half bodies of S. Peter and Paul.
Going through the Church, we come to a Chapel, wherein is an high Altar,
whereon stands a Picture of S. Peter and S. Paul: within that Altar, they say,
lies half the bodies of these two Apostles and Saints, and therefore that
Altar is daily worshipped.

Coming back again into the Church, we come to a square Altar, The spear
that was thrust into Christ's side, and the handkercher wherewith he wiped his
face, when he carried his Cross.
wherein (say they) is the head of ye Spear that was thrust into our Saviors
side: but the point thereof, is broken off, and is in an other place. And in the
same Altar, is ye Ha^dkercher which Christ wiped his face with all, when he
carried his Cross sweating, and left the perfect print thereof on ye cloth:
this is called Vultus sanctus. How this altar is honored, you shall read more
in the Chapter, which talks of the Flagellante night.

What other Relics be in this Church, I certainly know not, but they say
there is the bodies of diverse Saints: whose names because I can not remember,
I will let pass, because I will not be found in an untruth.

In Saint Paul's Church.
IN this Church, The other half of S. Peter and Paul.
under the high Altar, is said to be the other half of the bodies of S.
Peter and Paul: this Altar is likewise adored with marvelous reverence.

Not far from this Church, there is a place called Tree Fontana, Three leapes
of S. Paul's head made three Fountains.
at this place they say Saint Paul was beheaded: and when his head was cut
off, it leaped three times, and in those places where it leapt, there sprung up
presently three Fountains, there is great devotion likewise used at this
place.

In Saint John Lateranes Church.
AS we come first to the little Chappelles before the Church (wherein, The
stone whereon the Cock crewe, when Peter denied Christ.
they say, our Lady has been diverse times seen and therefore has left such
holiness there, as they pray there a good while) there stands a round pyller
of Stone, seeming to be but lately made, and on this Stone, say they, the Cock
stood and crowed, at what time Peter denied Christ: and therefore they do use
to kiss it, make courtesy to it, and rub their Beads on it.

The rings wherein the Jews set their Banners, when Christ was crucified.
Near to this Stone, is a broad gate, being the entrance into the aforesaid
Chappelles, and on the one side of this gate, there is two round Ringes of
Iron, whereon sometime a gate has been hanged, to open and shut: in these
Ringes, say they, the Jews did stick Banners, all the while that Christ was
crucified, and therefore for the holiness of them, they will draw their Beads
through the said Kings, and kiss them when they have so done.

The Font wherein Constantinus Magnus was Christened.
From thence we go to a fair large place, in the midst whereof stands a
Font, wherein, they say, Constantinus Magnus was christened: in this Font
every year on Easter even, they do christen Jews, such as do change to
their Religion. For there is a certain place appointed for Sermons, whereat ye
Jews whether they will or no, must be present, because one of their own
Rabines preaches to them, to convert them, as him self has been a great
while.

In Room, the Jews have a dwelling place within them selves, being locked in
their streets by gates on either side, and the Romans every night keeps
the keys: all the day time they go abroad in the City, and will buie the
oldest apparel that is, an old Cloak Dublet, or Hose, that a man would think
not worth a penny, of the Jews you may have ye quantity of four or five
shillings for them. Now, that the Jews may be known from any other people,
every one wears a yellow Cap or Hat, and if he go abroad without it, they
will use him very ill fauouredlie.

In this order they come to the Sermon, and when any of them does change his
Faith: he takes his yellowe Cap or Hat off from his head, and throws it away
with great violence, then will a hundred offer him a black Cap or a Hat, and
greatly rejoice that they have so wun him. All his riches he then must
forsake, yt goes to the Popes use, being one of his shifts: and to this
aforesaid Font he is brought, clothed all in white, a white Cap, a white Cloak,
and every thing white about him, with a holy Candle burning, that he bears
in his hand. Bishop Goldwell. baptizeth the Jews in Room.
Then is he there baptized by an English man, who is named Bishop Goldwell,
sometime the Bishop of S. Asaph in Wales: he has this office, makes all the
English Priests in the College, and lives there among the Theatines very
pontificallye. After ye Jews be thus baptized, they be brought into the
Church, and there they see the hallowing of the Paschall, Hallowing of the
Paschall Candle.
which is a mighty great wax Taper: and then a devise (wherein is enclosed a
number of Squibs) is shot off, when through all the Church they then cry. Sic
transit gloria Mundi. From thence they go to a College, which the Pope has
erected for such Jews, as in this manner turn to his religion: there they stay
a certain time, and afterward they be turned out, to get their living as they
can, none of their former riches they must have again, for that goes to the
maintenance of the Popes pontificallitie. This aforesaid Font is a holy thing,
and there must prayers be likewise said.

From this Font we go up into a fair Chapel, Our Ladies holy Chapel.
wherein is an Altar dedicated to our Lady, in gold and sumptuous shows
surpassing, and all about the Chapel are hanged little wooden Pictures,
Tapers, and wax Candles, which are the Pilgrims vows to our Lady, and there
they leave them to honor her. Here must be used great devotion.

From thence we go into an old room, The three holy doors.
wherein is an old Wall standing along in the midst of this room, and in this
Wall is three old doors, having paynting on them that is not very old:
through one of these doors, they say, Christ went in to judgment, when he
came back from judgment, he went through the second, and through the third to
be whipped: these doors are worshipped every day.

The holy stayres that Christ went up to judgment on.
From thence we go a long through an old Gallerye, and there is a fair pair of
stayres of stone, that comes up into this Gallerie, being in number of
steps, about four or five and twenty: up these stayres they say Christ went
to judgment, and as he came back again, he let fall a drop of blood on one of
the steps, over ye which place (because the people with kissing it and rubbing
it with their Beads, have fretted a deep hole in ye stone) is made a little
Iron grate. The people must neither go up nor down these stayres, on their
feet, but creep them upon their knees, and on every step say a Pater noster
and an Aue Maria: so yt with the number that creep up and down these stayres
daily, they are kept as clean, as ye fine houses in London, where you may see
your face in the boordes. These stayres have no small reverence.

The veil of the Temple, that rent in the midst.
Near to the head of these stayres, on either side of the Gallery, there is in
the Walls two half pillars of stone, much like to Alablaster: which they say,
to be the veil of the Temple that rent in the midst, when Christ yielded up
the Ghost, upon these two half pillars, they rub their Beads, in sign of
great devotion.

The Pillar that Christ was whipped at.
Somewhat near to these half pillars, there is a long Marble pillar, at which
pillar, they say, Christ was fast bound, when he was whipped in Pilates hall.
This pillar is much adored.

Some of the Milk of our Ladies breasts.
Hard by, we go, into a little Chapel, which has a very rich and costly
Altar, wherein they say to be, some of the Milk that came out of our Ladies
breasts, and as yet remains pure and sweet. To this Relic is used
marvelous worship.

And in the same Chapel, hard by the door as we come in, A piece of the
Cross, whereon the good Thief was hanged
there hangs tied with an Iron chain a piece of wood, which is crossed every
way with diverse plates of Iron: this piece of wood, they name to be a piece of
the cross, whereon the thief was hanged, to whom our Savior said. This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. To this is given much devotion.

Beneath in the Church.
IN the Church at the high Altar, The first Shirt that was made for Christ
there is as they say, the first Shirt, that our Lady made for Christ, when he
was young.

In the same Altar, The heads of Saint Peter and S. Paul.
are the two sculs or scalps, of the heads of S. Peter, and S. Paul, with the
heir as yet on them: which are set in Gold and Silver very costlye.

There is also a glass vial, A glass, vial, full of the blood of Christ.
which is full as they say, of the blood of our Savior, that ran out of his
precious side hanging on ye Cross: the people when this is showe^, will take
their hands, and hold the palms of the^ toward the glass, and then rub all
their face with their hands, with the great holiness they receive from the
Glass.

Then there is a piece of Christ's Cote without seame, A piece of Christ's Cote,
with his blood yet fresh on it.
and it is the part of the Cote, which when it was turned down over his body,
that he should be whipped, yt blood did trickle down upon: and upon this piece
of his Cote, say they, ye blood yet remains as fresh, as it was ye first day
when it fell on it. This is a marvelous precious Relic too.

Likewise there is ye whole chain of Iron, The chain wherewith S. John was
led to Ephesus.
wherewith S. John the Evangelist, was led bound to Ephesus: this Chain is a
little old one, I am sure little above half a yard long.

One of the Nails that nailed Christ on the Cross.
There is also one of the Nails, wherewith our Savior Christ was nailed on the
Cross: and it has the blood yet fresh upon it.

And among all the rest, there is a great portion or quantity of the Crown of
Thorn, A part of the Crown of Thorn.
wherewith they say our Savior was crowned.

Diverse other Relics there be in that Church, which I cannot now very
perfectly remember: but these I am certain they make the people believe to be
there, for I have stood by among a multitude of people, that come thither to
see them on the day they are showen, and there have I heard all these named:
almost all the English Students can bear me witness, for I have gone in their
company, as it is a custom and an order among them, to go from Church to
Church all the Lent time, to the Stations as they call them, and then each day
in Lent, one Church or other has their Relics abroad to be seen. And the^
they tell the people, this is the Relics of such a Saint, and this is such a
holy and blessed thing: but they be either covered with Gold, Silver, or
Crystal, so that we can not tell whether there be any thing within or no,
except it be sometime in a broad Crystal Tabernacle, and there you shall
see a company of rotten bones, God knows of what they be.

In Saint Maria Maiore.
The Manger wherein Christ was laid.
THere is an old rotten Crib or Manger, wherein say they, our Savior lay,
between the Ox, and the Ass, when the Sheepheards came to honor and
reverence him. This is a thing highly honored.

Arons rod.
There is likewise Arons rod, as they call it, which is in the form of a
Bishops staff: a holy Relic.

There is also of the heir, Heir of our Ladies head.
that grew on our Ladies head: this is there reserved richly, and worshipped
for a singular Relic.

There is the form of a finger in Silver, S. Thomas his finger
wherein* say they, is the finger of S. Thomas, which he thrust into the side
of Christ: this is no simple Relic.

There is the point of the head of a Spear, The point of the spear that was
thrust into Christ's side.
which they say, to be broken off from the Spear, that was thrust into our
Saviors side on the Cross: a Relic of no small worshipp.

There is also certain pieces of Money, Some of the thirtye pence, for which
Judas betrayed Christ.
which they name to be of those thirty pence, which Judas received when he
betrayed his Master, wherewith (after he had hanged him self) they bought a
feeld, called: The feeld of blood. These are Relics of great estemation.

There is likewise an old rotten piece of wood, which they make the people to
think, A piece of Christ's Cross.
to be a piece of ye Cross whereon Christ was crucified: to see this Relic,
the people will come creeping on their knees, and behave them selves with
marvelous deuoutnes.

There is also certain of the Thorns, Thorns of the crown of Thorns
which sometime, as they say, were on the Crown of Thorn, wherewith our
Savior Christ was crowned: Relics of great authority among them.

In Sancta Croce.
THere is an other of the Nails, In other of the nails where with Christ was
nailed.
wherewith Christ was nailed on the Cross: and as they say, ye blood still
fresh upon it.

More of Judas pence
There is also three or four of the pence, which Judas received for the
betraying of his Master Christ.

More of the Cross.
There is a good big piece of wood, which they likewise say to be a piece of the
Cross, whereon Christ was crucified.

One of the whyppes wherewith Christ was whipped.
There is a Whippe, which they report to be one of those whips, wherewith Christ
was whipped in Pilates Hall. This is a holy and very precious Relic.

There is a Tabernacle of Crystal, the Pillars thereof are of silver, Relics
of Saints.
wherein is diverse old rotten bones, which they say to be the bones of Saints,
and holy Martires.

In Saint Lauraunces.
THere is made fast in a Wall, a great Marble stone, The stone whereon S.
Laraunce was broiled
about two yardes in length, and a yard in breadth, which is closed in with a
grate of Iron: upon this stone they say, S. Lauraunce was broyled. This is a
Relic much set by.

The Grediron whereon S. Laraunce was broiled
There also they say to be the Grediron whereon S. Lauraunce was broyled: but
that I never saw, therefore I will not make any certain report thereof.

The head of Saint Lauraunce
There at the high Altar, they say the head of S. Lauraunce is, which they
have set in Silver marvelous costly.

In Saint Sebastians.
THere under the High Altar, The body of Saint Sebastian.
they say lies the body of S. Sebastian, to whose shrine they offer very much
worship.

At all these seven Churches, there are a number more Relics then I can well
remember, which makes the people to resort to them almost daily: and our
Englishmen, they are as zealous in these matters as the best, and believe that
those Relics are the very certain things whereof they bear the name, so
great is their blindness and want of faith.

To these places they frudge commonly once every week, sometime twice, or as
the Jesuits think it convenient: but when they have been at these seven
Churches, and honored al these paltry Relics, they think they have done a
most blessed and acceptable service to God.

There are Relics beside these, at most of the other Churches and Chappelles,
but what they be, I do not as now remember: yet thus much I can say, that
when the Station has been at Saint Appolonias, all the way as we go, Prayer
to S. Appolonia. for the toothache.
the streets are full almost of lame and diseased people, who, when they
desire an alms of the passers by, say, they will pray to S. Appolonia for
their teeth, that she will keep them from ye toothache, or any other pain
that may happen to their teeth. This they do, because they report, that S.
Appolonia being Martired, had all her teeth by violence plucked out of her
head: and therefore they imagine, that she can defend any body from having any
pain in their teeth.

Likewise S. Agatha, whose breasts they say, were clipped off with a pair of
tongues, made red hot in the fire: Prayer to S. Agatha for women's breasts.
to her they will pray (if ye people will give the^ any money) yt any Woman
passing by them, this Saint will not suffer her to have any pain in her
breasts.

A cunning shift of Beggars.
Other of their Saints, who had any thing ministered by way of torment, either
on their head, arms, body, legs, or feet: because the people shall give them
somewhat, these Beggars will pray to any of those Saints, to defend the^ from
pain in any such place of their body.

Now some lazy Friar, or some other craftye companion, who will not take so
much pains as to beg, A commanding Beggar.
but that he will compel the people to give him somewhat: he gets a Pax,
and every one that comes by him, must make homage to it, come and kiss it,
and give him some Money, ere he go any further. This fellow stands as Master
of the Beggars, and all these knaueries, and an infinite number more, are our
Englishmen so insolent, both to like and allow off.

And now seeing I am among the Popes Pageants, I will blaze a little more of
his holy Hell: that those (to whose hands this my Book shall happen to come,
and are by some of our secret seducing Priests any thing moved that way)
may behold the egregious follies and deuillish drifts, whereby God is
despised, and me^ too much wilfully blinded. So that, turning to the bare and
naked truth, which craves neither shadow nor any coullored devise: they may
vomit up that Antechrist and his abominable inventions, and cleave only to
that which God him self has commanded.

A brief discourse of their dark Vautes underneath the ground, and how they
beguile a number by them. Of the Pilgrimage to S. James in Gallitia, to S.
Maria di Loreto, to Saint Clare at Mount Faulcon, and other places of like
holiness. Chap. 5.
AMong a number of their inventions, to uphold and maintain their wicked
dealings: they have certain Uautes underneath the ground, wherein they say, how
in the time that the persecuting Emperors lived in Room, Mark this good
Reader, and think well thereon.
the Christians were glad to hide them selves: and there they lived many
years, having no food or nourishment to maintain them, but only that they
were fed by Angels. Some time Christ him self came amongst them, and he fed
them by his heavenly Deity, When as he could not come, but was busied about
other affairs: he sent his Mother the Uirgin Marie to them. At other times,
the Archangell Michaell, the Angel Gabriell, or one Angel or other, was still
sent unto them: and Saints that were living on earth, came daily and preached
to them. This our English men has told to me and other, at diverse times: yea,
and when they have seen me to offer doubt of those matters, they have been
ready to swear it to be certain and true.

At a Church there called Saint Pancratia, The Uau^ at Saint Pancratias Church.
there is a Uaute, whereinto I have gone with the Jesuits of the English
College and the Students: and there they have showed me in diverse places made
on either side in the Uaut as we go, that there lay such a Saint, and there
lay such an other, there they were buried, and none was there, but they were
all Saints. Then (having every one of us a wax light in our hands, because it
is impossible to see any light in the Uaute, and for those lights, the Friars
that keep the Church must have money, which we put into a Basen, that stands
at the going down into the Uaute) they look on the ground under their feet
as they go: and if they chance to find a bone (as some sure are thrown in
of purpose, to deceive the people) whether it be of a Dog, a Hog, a Sheep, or
any Beast, they can tell presently what Saints bone it was, either Saint
Fraunces, Saint Anthony, Saint Blase, or some other Saint that pleases them
to name. Then must no body touch it, without he be a Priest, and it must be
brought home for an especial Relic: and thus (saving your reverence)
increases the genealogy of the holy Relics in Room.

A marvelous history and one of the Romish miracles.
In this aforesaid Uaute of Saint Pancratia, as one of the English Priests in
the College gave me to understand, there was some time a Franciscan Friar, who
having long time lived among his brethren in the Monastery, in chastity of
life, and deuoutnes in Religion: walking one day without Room, Saint Fraunces
appeared to him in his Friars Cowle, and calling him by his name, said unto
him. I know my good Brother, thou have long thus lived in my holy order, and
have obeyed me in every thing: therefore I will, that thou be no longer a
mortal man, but a Saint. And from this time foreward, thou shall leave thy
Cloister, and go to the Uaute under the Church of Saint Pancratia: where thou
shall be woorshipped of every one that comes into the said Uaute, and to
them thou shall give the bones and Relics of holy and blessed Saints, which
they in their Churches shall adore with great reverence: what thou will have,
shall be done, and what thou will not, shall not be done.

After these words, Saint Fraunces vanished from him, and he went home to the
Monastery, to tell his Brethren what had happened: soon after, with burning
Tapers, and great shows of holiness they brought him to the Uaute of Saint
Pancratia, Mark this.
wherein being entered, they found a seat ready prepared for him, which shined
as bright as the Sun, so that it dimmed the light of all their Tapers: it was
like unto the Clouds, very thick beset with twinkling Stars, and over the
head of it, it was covered with a goodly Rainbowe. Nothing could be seen whereon
this seat depended, it neither touched the ground, the top of the Uaute over
head, nor any part of the wall on either side, therefore it was supported by
Angels, whom though they could not discern, yet they heard them make very
mellodious hermony, to welcome this Saint to his new seat. Then the Friar being
bashful, to see such a glorious seat provided for him, O horrible and
abominable blasphemy.
withdrew him self, as though he were unworthy to sit therein: but then out
of one of the Clouds stretched a hand (which they said to be Christ's) wherein
they saw the fresh bleeding wound, being pierced through with the nail on the
Cross, and this hand pulled the Friar to the Seat, and placed him very roially
therein. At ye sight heerof, all his brethren fell down and worshipped him,
whereupon, he delivered unto every one of them diverse holy Relics: as the head
of such a Saint, and bones of diverse other Saints, which was put in to his hand
to give them. Some of them for pure zeal, would not depart from him, but
stayed there many years, being fed and nourished by Angels: the other, to
look to the good ordering of their Monastery, were forced to depart.

A long time this Saint remained in that Uaute, and many other that came to
him, whom he daily made Saints: so that, as well on the behalf of this
Saint, as diverse other as good as he, this Uaute is worshipped as though it
were a second heaven.

When he had ended this brave notorious Fable, delivered forth with far more
reverend iesture, then I can set down, or you imagine: he said. If a man
should tell this to the Heretics of our Country, they would strayte way
condemn it as a lie and untruth: so mightily does the devil prevail with
them, to deface the daily miracles shown in the Catholic Church. Trust me
(thought I) I know not whether they would esteem it for a lie or no: but I do
allow it for one of the notablest lies that ever I heard in all my life.

O my dear Countreimen, think how God has given over these men, that repose
credit in such abominable untruths: whereby he is robbed of his glory, and
the worship which we ought of duty to give to him, is bestowed on a rabble of
rascal Relics, a dunghill of most irksom and noysom smell, and they
themselves become spectacles to the world, following the whore of Room, as her
puddle of accursed filthiness. Their impiety has pierced the heavens, and
offended the Almighty, to see that his Creatures shall thus disdain their
Maker: and therefore, while they are glorying and triumphing in the midst of
their wickedness, he has thrown them down, accoumpted them as bastards, and
not children, that they might be an example to us, how to live in his fear,
and how to behave our selves like Christians, not to give his honor to
stocks and stones, not to lust after dreams and fantasies of the deuilles
inuencion: but while we have the light, to walk as becomes the children of
light, to keep our selves true and faithful Subjects, to her, by whom we
enjoy the light, and to pray to God, to bless her and us all, to continue in
the light. Amen.

I will set down one discourse more, of an other like miracle, done in an
other of their Uautes: and then I will trouble you no longer with such
friuelous and foolish stuff, which I will declare even in the same manner, as
a Priest of theirs, as yet not taken, yet he is here in England, told me,
when he, I, and two of the Scholars more, An other strange history, of a
Romish miracle, done in the Uaut of Saint Priscilla, without Room.
went into the said Uaute.

Without Room, about the distaunce of half a mile from ye City, there is a
huge great Uaute, which they call S. Priscillaes Grote: and within this Uaute,
there is a great many of several places, turning one this way, an other that
way, as in one street, there may be diverse streets and lanes, turning every
way. So that when they go into this Uaute, they tie the end of a line at the
going in, and so go on by the line, else they might chance to loose them
selves, and so miss of their ever coming out again: or else if they have not
a line, they take Chalk with them, and make figures at every turning, that at
their coming again, (being guided by Torch light, for Candles will go out
with the dampe in the Uaute) they may make accoumpt till they get forth, but
this is not so ready a way as by the line.

One day I was desirous to see this Uaute, for my fellow Thomas Nowell, in the
company of the Jesuits and the Scholars, had been therein, and I lying sick
in my Bed, both he and they made such a glorious report thereof to me, what a
Heavenly place it was, what a number of Saints and Martirs had been buried
there, and what precious Relics was daily found there: that I very much
desired to see the thing, whereto they gave such an admirable praise. For in
soothe, my fellow was even all one with them, his company was required of
every one, and he as lewd in speeches against his Country as the best: so
that I was esteemed I can not tell how, they would not misdoubt me for my
Parents sake, and yet they would give me many shrewd nips. As when they
demanded any thing of me, as concerning our gracious Princess, or any of her
honorable Council, I should answer: Her Majesty, God bless her, or, the
right Honorable, such a Noble man, of whom they asked me: whereat they would
check me very much, for using any reverence in naming her Majesty, or any of
the Lords of her honorable Counsel.

And this I may say boldly, for that it is true, as God is my witness, I speak
not this good Reader, either in pride or bravery.
that in all the time I was amongst them: I neither offered moitie of misordred
or vndece^t speech, either of her Majesty, or any Noble man in the Court, no,
nor so much as thought ill of any of them, notwithstanding the words they
used, sufficient (had not God ordered all my dooinges) to have moved a more
stayed man then my self to an error. I appeal to God, who knows I set down
nothing but truth, and to him that is my cheifest enemy, if he can justly
report otherwise by me: for I thank God, albeit I were so far from my
Country, he gave me the grace to consider, I was a Subject, and I was bound by
duty to regard and honor my Prince so long as I lived. And because my
adversaries object against me, that I went to Mass, and helped the Priest my
self to say Mass: so that (say they) who is wurst, I am as evil as he. I
answer, I did so in deed, for he that is in Room, especially in ye College
among the Scholars: must live as he may, not as he will, favor comes by
conformity, and death by obstinacy. These rash heads being in England, would
do many goodly matters at Room, they would tell the Pope of his lascivious
and unchristian life, the Cardinals of their Sodomiticall sins, the Friars of
their secret iugling with the Nuns, and the Priests of their painted
Purgatory, their wafer God, and their counterfeit blood in the Challice: all
this they would do, now they are in England, But I doubt if they were at
Room and beheld the merciless tyranny executed on the members of Christ.
God having not endued them with the spirit of perseuerannce, The will of God
must be done in all things.
to suffer and abide the like (for what can this frail carkase endure, if God
do not say: I will that thou shall suffer this?) I fear me, they would be as
ready to do any thing for the safeguard of their lives, as I was. You may note
a special example, in these our Countrymen lately executed, that neither
their cause was esteemed of God, nor perfectly persuaded in them selves: yet
they would die in a bravery, to be accoumpted Martyrs at Room, and in the
midst of their bravery, all the world might note their false and faint
hearts.

Sherwood, Sherwood, executed in Southwark.
he ran down the Ladder, when death should arest him, having killed one of
his fellow Papists. Campion, their glorious Captain, he looked dead in the
face, so soon as he saw the place of Execution, and remained quaking and
trembling unto the death. Shert, would have the people think, he feared not
death, and yet he catched hold on the halter, when the Cart was drawn away.
Kirbie quaking when he felt the Cart go away, looked still how near the end
of it was, till he was quite beside. And Cottom dismaying, died trembling and in
great fear. These are the Martirs of ye Romish Church, not one of them
patient, penitent* nor endued with courage to the extremity of death: but
dismaying, trembling and fearful, as ye eye witnesses can bear me record. We
may therfore-wel know, y^ a good cause does animate ye Martyr, which
belonging to God: let Room, Hell, and all the devils set them selves against
us, they ca^ touch us no farther, the^ God will suffer them. As Saint Lauraunce
being broiles on the Gridiren, S. Laurau^ce
to witness the invincible courage wherewith God endued him, he said: Thou
Tiraunt, this side is now roasted enough, S. Isidore.
turn the other. And Saint Isidore likewise said to the Tiraunt: I know thou
have no further power over me, then my God will suffer thee from abooue. But
now to our matter.

As I have said, through the great report they made of this Uaute, one of the
Preests, two of the Scholars and I, took with us a line, and two or three
great lights, and so we went to this aforesaid Uaute: we going a long in
farther and farther, there we saw certain places one above an other, three and
three on either side, during a great way in length: and these places they
said, to be some of them the graves of persecuted Saints and Martires, where
they hid them selves in the time of the cruel Emperors of Room, and there
they died.

Proceeding on forward, we came to an old thing like an Altar, whereon, in
old and ancient painting, (which was then almost clean worn out) was Christ
upon the Cross, and our Lady and Saint John by him: there the Priest said,
Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and many other Saints, had said Mass to the
Christians that hid them selves there. And besides this (quoth he) there
chanced not many years since, a poor man of the City to come into this
Uaufe, and when he was come so far as this Altar, the light he carried in his
hand, suddenly went out, so that he was forced to sit down, and stay here.

A strange and rare miracle, too strange to be true.
He being thus without any light, and ignorant of the way to get out again:
fell in prayer to our Lady, who presently appeared to him, having about her
little Angels, holding burning Lamps in their hands, where through, ye
place was illumined very gloriously. And there she questioned with him, and he
with her, about many holy and Religious matters: then she departing, left him
there accompanied with Angels, so that he remained there ten days, at the
end whereof, he came forth, and went and told the Pope what he had seen,
for which, when he died, he was canonized a Saint, and in this order arise many
of our Romish Saints.

As for the Pilgrimage to Saint James in Gallitia, The Pilgrimage to S. James
in Gallitia.
it is a thing that is usually frequented all the year, by such a number of
people, as you would scantly judge: among whom, diverse of our Englishmen be
so holy, that they will not stick to bear them company. There they say,
lies the bode of Saint James the Apostle: Relics at S. James in Gallitia.
and there is the Cock that crowed, when Peter denied Christ: some of the
heaire of our Ladies head: certain of the Thorns of the Crown of Thorn: the
Napkin that was about Christ's head in ye grave: certain drops of his blood:
a piece of the Cross whereon he was crucified, and a number such like Relics,
which are honored and worshipped, as if they were God him self.

Then one of the chief Pilgrimages, is to a place called Santa Maria di
Loreto, Pilgrimage to Saint Maria di Loreto.
where, within is an old little brick room, which they name to be the house
our Lady dwelt in: there is the Image of our Lady all in Gold and Silver, the
house round about her, beset with Challices of Gold and Silver, which are
oblations and offeringes of diverse Pilgrims, that come in whole companies
thither. All this helps to maintain the Pope.
And before her is a great barred Chest of iron, wherein they throw money to
our Lady, by whole goblets full at once: Within this little house, there is an
Altar made right before our Lady, and there is said every day, forty or
fifty Masses, whereat the people will throng in great heaps, to get into the
house, for they think them selves happy, if our Lady have once seen them.
And all the Church is likewise hung with pictures, Tapers, and wax Candles,
which are the vows of the Pilgrims to our Lady. I have heard of some, who by
the counsel of their ghostly Father, have made money of all their householde
stuff, and have come five or six hundred mile bare foot and bare legged, to
give it all to our Lady there: mean while, the holy Father has had liberty,
to play with ye man's wife, at etc. In all my life I never saw a place more
frequented with people, then this is daily, only for the admirable Miracles
yt be done there. Some have come thither for their eye sight: and when they
were there, The miracles at our Lady of Loreto.
they could see a little (as they say) but they have come away stark blind as
they were before. A man came thither, being greeuouslie wounded on the Sea, by
his enemies: and after he had seen our Lady, he went to the Hospital, and
within a quarter of a year after, at the furthest, the Chirurgions had healed
him. When he was well again, he went and hung up his picture in the Church,
that he was healed of his hurt, so soon as he looked upon our Lady. Diverse
have been brought thither in their Beds, some being sick, some wounded, or
otherwise diseased and there they were set before our Lady, looking when she
should say: Take up thy bed and walk. And because she could not intend to
speak to them, being troubled with so many other suitors: they have been
carried to the Hospital, and there they have been either buried or cured, then
such as recover their health must go set up their picture in the Church, how
that the very looking on our Lady has helped them. Sundry other holy Miracles,
done by our Lady of Loreto, I could rehearse, but they be so strange, that no
wise body will care for the hearing them: nevertheless, the Pope finds her a
good sweet Lady of Loreto, for ye pilgrimage to her, increases his treasure,
many thousa^ds in a year.

To Mount Faulcon, The Pylgrimage to Mount Faulcon, to see Saint Clare.
there is an other Pilgrimage, to see the body of S. Clare, which was buried I
know not how many hundred years ago, and yet the body remains whole and
sound, without any perishing of bone or skin. I have been at this place, and
there in a long rich Tabernacle of glass, lies, as they say, the same body
of Saint Clare: the hands and feet are to be seen, which I can aptly
compare to the manner of the Anotomie, whereon the Chirurgions show every
year their cunning, as for any flesh, there is none to be seen: but the bare
bones, and the withered sinews, which being kept so bravely as that is,
standing still in one place and never mooned, I judge will continue a great
while, and truly I take it to be some Anotomie, as diverse other have done,
that have seen it as well as I. The whole body (if there be any) is covered
with a gown of black Ueluet, and the head covered, so that none can see it.
The Relics of S. Clare.
There lies by her, a thing which they say, was her heart, which being cleft
a sunder in the midst: the whole torment and passion of Christ, was there in
lively form to be seen. Then there is likewise by her, a glass of her
tears, that she shed daily, in remembrance of the bitter passion of our
Savior: which tears, they say, are as fresh and sweet, as they were on the
first day.

There are a number other Pilgrimages, Other Pilgrimages to diverse places.
as to Thurine, to see the winding sheet wherein Christ was laid: wherein, as
they say, he has left the perfect Image of his body. This marvelous Relic,
is never showen, but once in foureteen year, and then to deceive the people
with the greater aucthority, there must six Cardinals come thither, and they
must hold it abroad for every one to see it, no other but they may presume
to touch it. To Paris, to Saint Dennis in France, to Poiters, and a number
other places there be daily Pilgrimages, to see a number like Relics, as I
have declared before: all these help to uphold the Pope, least his kingdom
should decay, and so his usurping title be clean worn out of memory.

A new Pilgrimage risen up in Room, called Madonna di Mo^te.
But now you shall hear of a new prop and pillar, wherewith the Pope is and
will be meruailously strengthened, that is risen up little more then two year
since: and at this new holy place* is wrought miracles of great accoumpt. In
the year of our Lord.1580. about the time of Easter, a certain poor man, one
that saw the simplicity of the people, how apt they were to believe every
feigned invention: he being a subtle and crafty fellow, thought he would
come in with some devise of his own, whereby he might yet a great deal of
money, and beside, be canonized for a Saint when he dyed.

He having concluded his practice, with diverse other crafty companions, as
subtle as him self, who should maintain all that he did devise: feigned him
self to dream in his Bed, that a vision appeared to him, wylling him to make
clean his house, and to fall down and reverence an old picture of our Lady,
which stood in his house, when presently there should be marvelous miracles
accomplished there. His companions noised this abroad, adding thereto such
admirable protestation of speech, as every one that heard thereof, conceived
no small cause of wundering. This aforesaid vision appeared to this man twice,
all in one manner, by which time it was spread abroad sufficiently: so that
when it came the third time, he did according as the voice bade him, he arose,
made clean his house, and fell down and worshipped the Picture of our Lady.

His companions had some of them, bound up their legs, and went on Croutches,
some of them feigned them selves to be blind: Miracles very stra^gely wrought.
so that they came no sooner before our Lady, but the lame recovered his
legs, and the blind his sight. Then those few Croutches, that these
counterfeit fellows came withal, where hung up by the Picture, and a number
more, to make the people believe so many lame folks were healed, and likewise
the report of the blind that received their sight, so that it was thought a
marvelous number were healed, at this new found holy place.

Upon this, the resort of people thither, Note the marvelous ignorance of
these people.
was truly incredible: Gentlemen would come thither, and there hang up their
velvet Cloakes, as an offering to our Lady: Gentlewomen, would come thither
bare foot and bare legged, and there hang up their velvet Gowns, their silk
Gowns, with other costly apparel, and go home again in their Peticoates.
As for the money, Iuelles, and other treasure daily offered there, it was most
marvelous to see: for therewith they have builded a very fair Church where
this house stood. When they saw they were grown so rich, they made no
accoumpt of the old Picture, wherewith all the aforesaid miracles were done:
but they erected a costly Altar, and thereon made a sumptuous new Picture of
our Lady, which the people do daily honor with marvelous resort. This is
faithfully affirmed by one John Young an English man, who not long since came
home from Room, and while he was there, he well noted the impudency of our
English men, in landing and extolling this place, and the miracles there
wrought: so that they as certainly believe in those miracles, as any Christian
does in God.

This John Young, once questioned with one of the English Priests, why God did
not as well suffer such miracles to be done by his Son Jesus Christ, as
altogether by our Lady: whereto ye Priest answered. Because among the
Heretics, A wise answer of an English man.
they use little or no reverend regard to our Lady, but rather despise and
contempne her: therefore it is the will of God, to witness the power and
heavenly authority she has, by these and many such miracles, both here
and in diverse other places, rather then by his son Christ. Here may every
good Christian, behold the horrible abuses, used among this Sathanicall crew:
their Pilgrimages, their Relics, and all their crafty inventions, is to be
meruailed, that people will be so fond as to believe.

As for the Nails wherewith our Savior was nailed on the Cross, it is
evidently registered by learned writers, that they were no more in number then
three: yet I am sure in Room, there is above a dozen nails, dispearsed there
through diverse Churches, and they are not ashamed to say, that with every one
of those nails, Christ was nailed upon the Cross.

Helena, the mother of Constantine, the Emperor, found the Cross of Christ,
and gave the nails to her son.
And for those three Nails, wherewith Christ was nailed on the Cross, Platina
records, that Queen Helena the mother of Constantine the Emperor, searching
in the ground, by chance found the Cross whereon Christ was crucified, and
wherein the Nails were still sticking, for which cause she builded there a
Temple in the same place, where she found the Cross. All these Nails she gave
to her son Constantine, which he bestowed in this order. One of them he
caused to be fastened in the bridle of his Horse, whereon he rode to the
wars: an other he made to be wrought into his Helmet, in the place where he
set his Plume of Feathers: and the third he used to carry about with him, till
on a time he sailing on the Hardriaticum Sea, a tempest arose, so that the Sea
wexed very rough, whereupon he cast the Nail therein, to assuage the rage
thereof. Thus have you heard what became of the three nails, wherewith our
Savior was nailed on the Cross: and yet it may be, that the Nail which
Constantine threw into the Sea (according as Ambrose does likewise affirm it
was) took upon it the nature of a Fish, and spawned a great many of other
Nails, whereof those may be some, that are held for such holy Relics. And
because you shall not doubt whether this be the opinion of Platina or no: I
will here set down the words according as they be in his works. Platina in
vitis Pontificum, et in vita Siluestri primi. Anno. 339. ab vrbe condita. 1191.
Helena vero aedificato, eo in loco Templo vbi Crucem repererat, abiens, clauos
quibus Christi corpus Cruci affixum fuerat, secum ad filium portat. Horum ille
vnum in froenos Equi transtulit, quibus in praelio vteretur: alio pro cono
galia vicbatur: tertium in mare Hadriaticum (vt ait Ambrosius) ad compescendas
saeuie^tis maris procellas deiecit.

Bishop Iuell, Bishop of Salisburie, preaching at Paul's Cross, A Sermon
of Bishop Iuell, at Paul's cross.
in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, took occasion by his Text, to
entreat of a company of the Popish Relics, where among he named the Nails,
that nailed Christ on the Cross, what a company the Papists had of them: two
in one place, two in an other, and here one, and there an other, so that he
could reckon to the number of seuenteen, that they had. And then he told, how
at a Uisitation in his Diocese, he found a Nail at a Gentleman's house, which
the Gentleman and diverse of his friends, did worship and reverence, for one of
ye Nails wherewith Christ was nailed on the Cross: from him he took it, and
said, I have already reckoned seventeen in diverse places, and this is the
eighteen, which he pulled forth, and showed it to all the people. This is the
merchandise of Room: from reposing any credit in them, or him that is the
Capitol master of them, Good Lord deliver us.

The manner of the dissension in the English College, between the English
men and the Welsh men: the banishment of the English men out of Room, and the
Popes sending for them again, with other matters worthy the reading. Chap. 6.
Having promised before in my Book, to rehearse after what manner the English
men and Welshe men fell at variance in the College: I thought good to drive
off the time no further, but even here to set down how and in what sort it
was. The Pope when he erected the College, gave it the name of the English
College, so that he supposed the Welshe and English, to be all as one, in
that they came all out of one Country, allowing them his liberality jointly
together. Now, in deed there are sundry Welsh Doctors in Room, who have
been longest, and of greatest familiarity with the Cardinal Morone, who was
the Protector of the English College, to whom likewise he allowed greatest
favor, so that imboldening them selves upon him, the Welsh men would be
Lords over the English men, and use them according as they thought good.

Doctor Morris, favored more his own Countrymen then Englishmen.
Doctor Morris, being a Welsh man, and Custos of the Hospital or College,
would allow his own Cou^treimen greater pre-eminence then English men: which
indeed they began to stomach, and would not esteem him for their governor,
but rather sought to have the Jesuits to rule them, by whom they applied their
studies, and beside, they would be indifferent men on either part.

When I had been there a pretty while, I know not how Doctor Morris conceived
anger against me, but he would not suffer me to tarry any longer in ye
College. As for my fellow, his sinceritye in their religion was such, his
natural disposition so agreeable with theirs, and every thing he did esteemed
so well: that Doctor Morris would suffer him willingly to remain there, but he
could not abide me in any case. The Scholars understanding this, as well they
that bare me affection, as they that made least account of me, agreed to take
my part, saying. That if Doctor Morris would put every Englishman, he thought
good on, out, in short time the College would be all Welshmen: so they bad me
stick to them and if I went away, they would go away too.

Beside, they moved a certain speech amongst themselves, that if I were not
received into the College amongst them, The English men's policce to keep me
there still.
and used in every respect according as they were* when I returned into
England, being known to come from Room, I might be compelled to tell the
names of them that were there, and what confe^ence I had among them, so that
their parents and friends should be discovered, and them selves be known
against their coming into England. To avoid therefore any such doubt, until
they had me sworn to Preesthood: they would keep me there, and th^^ I should
be as deep in any matter as they.

When I perceived ye scope of their devise, I behaved my self more frowardly
to Doctor Morris, the^ ever I did before: every thing yt I heard of him, I
told unto ye Scholars, and tarried there dinner and supper in spite of his
no^e. Where upon he went and complained to the Cardinal Morone, how the
Scholars used no regard to him, being their Rector, but maintained one lately
come forth of England, both to scorn at him, and to offer him too much abuse.

This being come to the Scholars ear, and how on the next day they must
appear before the Cardinal: they determined with themselves all one resolute
opinion, which was, that Doctor Morris should be Rector over them* no longer,
but the Jesuits that were kept in the house for the profit of their studies,
and upon this they would all stand, denyinge any Rectorshippe to Doctor
Morris,

The Scholars were sent for before the Cardinal, upon the complaint of Doctor
Morris.
On the morrow they were sent for before the Cardinal Morone, where they
found Doctor Morris, and Doctor Jews, they having made sound their tale
before they came. When they were come into the presence of the Cardinal and my
self with them, these, or the very like speeches he used unto us in Latin.

You Englishmen, what means this great disobedience, and uncivil behauioure
you use in your College? Master Doctor Morris, a man of ancient time, and
well esteemed here in the City, being appointed to be your Rector, and to
govern you in a good order, as a great while he has done: you contrary to
love and duetye, behave your selves ridiculouslye against him, and neither
respecting his credit and countenance, nor your own honestye, determine a
mutenie or tumulte among your selves. What is the cause of this? you are sent
for to manifest it, wherefore let me hear how you can excuse this blame
laid against you.

Master Sherwin* who was executed with Campion, being there esteemed a
singular Scholar, both for his eloquence, as also his learning: made answer
for them all after this manner.

I trust my gracious Lord, by that time you have heard, Master Sherwins
answer to the Cardinal, on the behalf of them all.
the good cause we have to stir in this matter: you will neither be offended
at our proceeding, nor displeased with us, the cause tending to your own
honor. It is not unknown to you, that the College or Hospital, which by
the gracious providence of our dear Father the Popes holiness, we enjoy our
abydinge in at this present: has been always allowed such a sufficient
stipende, that one should not be better then an other, or excel his fellow
in common behavior.

This most godly and holy appointed estate: we both have been, and at this
present are, content to obey: but when he that is the head shall fail in
his duty, and urge an inconvenience among a quiet assembly: no marvel if
the Woorme turn, being trodden upon, and we speak, being used with too
much spyght.

Master Doctor Morris, whose age we reverence, and obey the title of his
authority: dealing with us so vnfreendlye as he does, we can hardlye bear
it, much less abide it. For where his office does command him to deal
both just and vprightlye, and to use no partialitye to either, for favor or
alliance: he does not only abuse the credit of his authorytye, but also
maliciouslye deal with us, who have not so much as used an evil thought
against him.

When any Englishman comes to the Hospital, if his learning be never so
good, or his behauioure never so decent: except he be pleased, he shall not
be enterteyned. But if a Welshman come, if he be never so vylde a Runnagate,
never so lewd a person, be can not come so soon as he shall be^ welcome to
him, whither he have any learning or no, it makes no matter, Doctor Morris,
kind to his own Cou^teromen.
he is a Welshman, and he must be permitted. Then which of us has the best
gown, he must receive one that is all ragged and torn, and the newcome
Welshman must have the best, because he is the Custos Countreiman: and many
nights he must have the Welshmen in his chamber, where they must be merry at
their good cheer, we glad to sit in our studies, and have an ill supper,
because M. Doctor wastes our Commons upon his own Countrymen, so that we must
be content with a snatch and away.

If there be one bed better then an other, the Welshman must have it, if there
be any Chamber more hansome then an other, the Welshman must lodge there: in
brief, the things of most account are the Welshmens at command.

This makes many of us to wish our selves Welshmen, because we would gladly
have so good provision as they, and being Countrymen to our Custos, we should
be all used a like: excepting Master Doctors Nephew Morganus Clenokus, he must
be in his silk, though all the rest go in a sack.

To mittigate therefore all inconveniences, that neither the Englishmen shall
be despised* They desire the Jesuits for their governors.
nor the Welshmen contemned: we desire that the Jesuits in our College, may
receive the Rectorship, they labor for the profit of our studies, and they
being none of our nation or country, will see equity used to either side: so,
our discord shall be quietly reformed, our College a great deal better
governed, our selves be encouraged to imploye us more willingly to our studies,
and we shall jointly live together in quietness. Where other wife, our
emulation shall be known at home in our Country, how we fall at variaunce
here, and can not agree: and then shall our names be known, our parents and
friends openly discovered, then what the end will be, I leave to your
honorable judgment.

When the Cardinal had heard this discourse, (being greatly affected to
Doctor Morris, The Cardinal so affected Doctor Morris, that he should not
leave his Rectorshippe.
through his long abiding in Room) he would not grant that he should be put
from his office, but bad the^ depart home again; and show themselves obedient
to the Rector, that both the Pope and him self had appointed, promising if he
heard any more disturbaunce, he would inform the Pope of it, which should be
but small to their profit.

So the Cardinal not minded to hear them any longer at that time, they
departed home to the College, greatly offended with them selves that they had
spedde no better. And now, I must out of the College, there was no other
remedy: but yet through entreaty of the Jesuits, I had leave for a fortnight
to lie in a very sweet Chamber, filled with old rusty Iron, and all the trash
of the house was put into that Chamber, being a vaca^t place, and serving for
no other purpose, because it was next to the common house of office, which
ayred the Chamber with so sweet a perfume: that but for names sake of a
Chamber, and fear of catching some disease, I had rather have lain in the
street amongst the Beggars. Well, froward as I was, so was I frowardlye
served, which I think Doctor Morris did, only to tame my youthfulness: for
in this place, not long before my coming to Room, there lay one tormented
with a Devil, and so distraught of his wits, that they were feign to bind him
there in his bed.

So Doctor Morris, seeing I used my self, both careless of him, Doctor Morris
his provision for my lodging.
and with little regard to their Religion* yet in such an order as they could
have small advantage of me: chambred me there, where I think the Devil was
still left* for every night there was such a coil among the old Iron, such
rattling and throwing down the Boordes, that with the sweet smell came out of
the counting house to my Beds head: I lay almost feared out of my wits, and
almost choked with that pleasant perfume, so that when I was laid in my Bed, I
durst not stir till it was fair broad day, that I might perceive every
corner of my Chamber, whither the Devil were there or no.

Every morning the Priests and the Scholars would come to visit me, giving
me money to send for my dinner and supper into the Town: because Doctor Morris
mine old freende, watched them so near, that I could not have so much as a
draughte of Wine in the house. Then I told them of the noise that was every
night in my Chamber, when they verily believed, that the Devil, having
possessed a Woman on the further side of the Garden: did every night take up his
lodgeing in my Chamber among the old Iron.

Wherefore one night, two of the Priests came to hallow my Chamber, The
preests come with holy water to hallowe my Chamber.
and brought their holy water, and their holy Candles, and sprinkled about in
every corner: giving me also a pot of holy water, to hang by my Beds side, that
when I heard the stir again, I should with the sprinckling Brush, throw it
about the Chamber. And they gave me a pair of Beads, whereon I should say six
Pater nosters, and six Aue Mariaes, then they would warraunt me, the noise
would be gone straight way.

Night came, and supping so well as I could, with two Quatrines worth of
Leekes, one Quatrine bestowed in Ricoct, The manner of my supper at night.
which is hard Cruds to make Cheese, a Bayock in bread, and a demie Boccale,
of the Vine Romanesco, wherewith I supped so well as I might, albeit not so well
as I would, yet a little thing serves to quench hunger. I had not been in my
Bed full an hour and an half, not daring to sleep for fear, nor keep my
head out of the Bed, because of mine accustomed air: but then began the noise
again, more vehement then the night before, the old Iron was flung about the
Chamber, the Boordes that leaned against the Wall fell down, and such a
terrible coil there was, that I thought the house would have fallen on my
head.

Then I put forth my hand to throw the holy water about, which did as much
good, as the thing is good of it self: which set me in such a chase, that to
make up the Music among the old Iron. I sent the pot and the holy water,
with as much force as I could. As for my Beads, I was so impatient with my
self, that I gave them the place which they best deserved: and then I called
to old Sir Robert a Welsh Priest, S. Robert a Welsh Priest, coming to see
what was the cause of the noise, fell over a thresholde and b^ra^ his knee.
who lay in a pretty Chamber hard by, but before he would come* the noise was
indifferently pacified. For he coming with a Candle in his hand, which he
used to keep a light in his Chamber, and being in haste, fell over a stone
thresholde that lay in his way: so that he burste his knee very sore, and
could not light his Candle again in the spate of an hour, by which time all
was quiet.

The fear I took at this noise, brought me to be very weak and sickly, so
that I was very unwilling to lie there any longer. But Doctor Morris I thank
him was so gentle to me, that he said, and if I lyked not my lodgding go
hardly (quoth he) and lie in the street, for that place is more meet for
thee then any room in the house.

How I received these churlishe words, I leave to your judgments, but it
suffyseth* I gave him my blessing, and if I could have gotten him forth of
Room, I would have bumd him too.

On the next day, upon an other complaynte of Doctor Morris the Students
were all sent for again before the Cardinal* who plainly said unto them, that
except they would live in quietness one with an other, (because there was one
Hugh Griffin, a Welshman of a hot nature, and he would many times fall
together by the ears with some of the Scholars, that sometime the blood ran
about their ears) likewise, yt they should confess Doctor Morris for their
rightful Rector, and be obedient to what he appointed: or else to get them away
out of Room.

Well home they came again, incensed with such anger and choler, that they
were now more disobedient then before: saying to Doctor Morris, that they
would never consent unto him, and therefore provided them selves to be packing
out of Room* Doctor Morris thinking to bring them violently to his bow,
informed the Cardinal so severely against them: that they were sent for the
third time, when he commanded the^ to provide themselves, for they should stay
no longer in the English Hospital, but banished them all from the City.

Doctor Morris begins to offer me gentleness.
When they were come to the College, eueryman trussed up his needful things,
determining on the next morning to departs: then came Doctor Morris to me and
my fellow, willing us to stay, because the other would be gone, and he would
stand our friend meruailously Trust me no Sir (quoth I) since you would not
stand my freende when I was in great need, now I mean not to receive your
courtesy when I care not for it: for since the Students have stood my
friends so much, and you mine enemy so greatly. I will bear a share in their
travail how ever I speed. As for my fellow, since you have looued him all
this while, love him now so if you please: and let him stay and do what you
think best, for I have told you my mind.

The Englishmen avoid the College.
Well, on the morrow morning we went our way, with bag and baggage, to an
Englishmans house in the City, and as I remember, his name was M. Creed,
Creed, where to make ready our dinner* every one took an office upon him, one
to fetch milk, an other to make ready Rice for the pottage, some to make the
fire: so that every one was employed till our dinner was dispatched. Then they
concluded to buie every man an Ass, to carry his Books and his clothes
upon, as for money, there were Gentlemen's sons of such credit amongst them,
that Doctor Moorton, and the Gentlemen in the City, would provide them with
as good as five hundred Crowns quickly. Within one hour and a half after
dinner, The Scholars sent for before the Pope.
came Father Alfonso the Jesuit of the English College, whom the Students had
chosen, and made suit to be their Rector: he, I say, came running in such
haste, that he could hardly tell his tale, because he was almost out of breath.
But this was the sum of his news, that the Popes holiness had sent for them
in all the haste, and they must delay no time, but come to him with all speed
possible.

Then we went with him to the Popes Palace, where coming into the Popes
Chamber, and having every one kissed his foot: we stayde to attend what was
his pleasure. But before he spoke any word, with a dissembling and
hippocriticall countenance, he fell into tears, which trickled down his
white beard: and began in Latin with these, or the very like words. O you
English men, to whom my love is such, as I can no way utter, considering that
for me you have left your Prince, which was your duty, and come so far to
me, which is more then I can deserve: yet as I am your refuge, when persecution
deals straightly with you in your Country, by reason of the heretical
Religion there used, so will I be your Bulwark to defend you, your guide to
protect you, your Father to nourish you, and your friend with my heart blood to
do you any profit.

Behold, what deceites the devil has to accomplish his desire? tears,
smoothe speeches, liberallitie, and a thousand means: to make a man careless
of God, disobedient to his Prince, and more, to violate utterly the faith of a
Subject. These tears that he shed, these words that he spoke, made diverse of
them say within them selves, as one of them for example, presently to me said.

The words of one of the Scholars.
Oh singular Saint, whose life, love, and liberality, may be a spectacle to
the whole world. Who would live in England, under the government of so vile a
Iezabell: and may rest in safety* under the perfect Image of Jesus? who would
not forsake Father, Mother, friends, goods, yea, and the life it self: to have
the bountiful blessing of such a provident Father? The Pope recovering his
health again from his weeping: caused this devout fellow to stay his talk,
because he began again as thus.

What is the cause that you will depart from me, that have so well provided for
you: to thrust your selves on the rock of your own destruction? Then Master
Sherwin began, and told him all the dealinges of Doctor Morris toward them,
according as he had done before to the Cardinal, and how they would have the
Jesuits for their Gouerneurs, for the causes before mentioned. Upon these
words the Pope started out of his Chair. The Pope supposed Englismen and
Welshemen, all as one.
Why (quoth he) I made the Hospital for English men, and for their sake I
have given so large exhibition: and not for the Welsh men. Return to your
College again, you shall have what you will desire, and any thing I have in
the world to do you good.

Then he commanded one of the chief Gentlemen of his Chamber, to go with us,
and to certify the Popes mind to Doctor Morris, and so giving us his
benedicton, we all went merrily again to the College.

The Gentleman gave Doctor Morris to understand, he must be Rector no longer,
the Jesuit named Father Alfonso, whom the Scholars had chosen, must have his
office, then were the Scholars glad, that they had gotten the victory of the
Welshmen.

On the morrow, The Popes lyberallite.
the Pope sent four hundred Crowns, to new reparation the house, to buie the
Students all needful things that they wanted, and the house must no longer
be called a College, but a Seminary.

Then Cardinal Morone, because Doctor Morris should not loose all his
dignity, caused the house to be parted, and so made both a Seminary for the
Studientes, and an Hospital for the entertainment of English Pilgrims when
they came, whereof Doctor Morris continued Custos, by the Popes appointment.

Thus was the strife ended, and my self and my fellow, admitted by the Popes
own consent, to be Scholars there: but yet the sickness I got, with lying
in my former Chamber, hung still upon me, so that I was then removed to a
very fair Chamber, where the Scholars every day would come and visit me,
until such time as I recovered my health again.

Of the Carne vale in Room: the Popes general curssing on Maunde Thursdaie:
and the manner of the Flagellante that night. Chap. 7.
DUring the time of Shrouetide, there is in Room kept a very great coil,
which they use to call the Carne vale, which endures the space of three or
four days, all which time, the Pope keeps him self out of Room, so great
is the noise and hurly burly. The Gentlemen: will attire them selves in
diverse forms of apparel, some like Women, other like Turks, and every one
almost in a contrary order of disguising: and either they be on Horseback, or
in Coatches* none of them on foot, for the people that stand on the ground to
see this pastime, are in very great danger of their lives, by reason of the
running of Coatches and great Horses, as never in all my life did I see the
like stir. And all this is done where the Courtezanes be, to show them
delight and pastime, The Burdella, helps to maintain the Pope.
for they have Couerlettes laid out at their windows, whereon they stand
leaning forth, to receive diverse devises of Rosewater, and sweet odours in
their faces, which the Gentlemen will throw up to their windows.

During this time, every one wears a disguised visor on his face, so that no
one knows what or whence they be: and if any one bear a secret malice to an
other, he may then kill him, and no body will lay hands on him, for all this
time they will obey no law. I saw a brave Roman, who rode there very
pleasant in his Coatch, and suddenly came one, who discharged a Pistol upon
him, yet no body made any accoumpt, either of the murderer, or the slain
Gentleman: beside, there were diverse slain, both by villainy, and the Horses
or the Coatches, yet they continued on their pastime, not making any regard of
them.

The first day of their Carne vale, the Jews in Room cause an Ensign to be
placed at the Capitol, The Jews have small pastime in this. But it is an
order that they must do, whether they will or no.
where likewise they appoint certain wagers at their own coasts: and then
they run stark naked from Porta populo unto the Capitol for them, the which
I judge above a mile in length. And all the way, they gallop their great
Horses after them, and carry goades with sharp points of steel in them:
wherewith they will prick the Jews on the naked skin, if so be they do not
run faster then their Horses gallop, so that you shall see some of their
backs all on gore blood. Then he that is foremost, and soonest comes to the
Capitol, he is set on a Horse back without any saddle, one going before him
carrying the Ensign: but then you shall see a hundred boys, who have provided
a number of Orrenges, they will so pelt the poor Jew, that before he can got
up to the Capitol, he will be beaten beside his Horse four or five times.

The next day, there are certain of the Christians that run naked likewise,
but no body pursues them, either with Horse or Coatch: and the wager they run
for* the Jews must pay likewise* Then the Buffell and the Ass runs, but it
is impossible for me to tell all the knauerie used about this: and therefore
thus much shall suffice of the Carne vale, letting you understand, that they
who were most knauishlie disposed in this sport, on Ash wednesday came to take
Ashes in such meek order, as though it had never been they.

ON Maunde Thursday, the Pope comes into his Gallerie over Saint Peter's,
sitting in the Chair wherewith he is carried on men's shoulders: and there he
has a great painted holy Candle in his hand burning, when as a Cardinal on
each side of him, the one in Latin, the other in Italian, sigeth the Popes
general malediction.

There he cursseth the Turk, and her Majesty, our most gracious Princess and
Gouernesse, The Popes cursses will return to him self.
affirming her to be far wurse then the Turk, or the cruellest Tiraunt that
is. He cursseth likewise all Caluinians, Lutherans, Zwinglians, and all that
are not according to his disposition. When he has curssed all that he can,
saying, Amen, he lets the Candle fall: when as the people will skamble for
it, and every one catch a little piece if they can, yea, our English men will
be as busy as the best, and one of them chanced to get a piece of the wax
of the Candle, whereof he made such a bragging when he came to the College,
UUas this the part of a Subject?
as you will not think, that he had got a piece of the Candle, wherewith the
Queen of England was curssed, and that he would keep it so long as he lived.

The manner of the Flagella^te.
The same night a number of the basest people, and most wicked livers that be
amongst the people, gather them selves together in companies: as the company
of the Holy Ghost, the company of Charity, the company of Death, and such
like, every company their Crucifix before them, their singers following them,
on either side a number of burning Torches, and thus they go all whipping them
selves.

First they go up into the Popes Palace, and then down into Saint Peter's
Church, which is all adorned with a number of wax lyghtes: and there on the
top of an Altar stands a couple of Cardinals, who shows them the holy
Handkercher, A fine piece of knauerie, to deceive the people.
or Vultus sanctus, (which in deed is nothing but a lively painted Picture,
ouershaddowed with a couple of fine Lawnes, and no body must desire to see it
uncovered, because they say no body is able to endure the brightness of the
fare, a number have seen it, and have been the wurse a great while after) and
all the while that both this, and the Spear head is shown, they will whippe
them selves before them very greeuouslie, and give a general clamor through
the Church: Misericordia, Misericordia, Tu autem Domine miserere nobis: and in
this order they continue almost the whole night. This is the glory of the
Pope, the blindness of the people, and the great folly of our English men, to
bring them selves within the compass of such wicked order of life.

God continue his loouing and fatherly countenance over England: bless and
preserve her Majesty, and her Honorable Council: and exercise us all in
fear to him, obedience to her, and faithful and continual love to our
neighbors, Amen.

A true Report, of the Christian suffering, and merciless martyrdom, of one
Richard Atkins, English man, at Room: who for the truth of the Gospel, to the
great terror of all the beholders, endured the extremity of the torment, and
cruel agony of death, in the year of our Lord. 1581. Chap. 8.
ABout the time of Midsommer, in the year. 1581. one Richard Atkins, a
Hartfoord shyre man, came to Room, and having found the English College, he
knocked at the door, when as diverse of the Students came to welcome him,
knowing that he was an English man. Among other talk, they willed him to go
to ye Hospital, and there to receive his meat and lodging, according as the
order was appointed, whereto he answered. I come not (my Countrymen) to any
such intent as you judge, His council to his Countrymen.
but I come loouinglie, to rebuke the great misorder of your lives, which I
grieve to hear, and pity to behold. I come likewise to let your proud
Antechrist understand, that he does offend the heavenly Majesty, rob God of
his honor, and poysoneth the whole world with his abominable blasphemies:
making them homage Stocks and Stones, and that filthy Sacrament, which is
nothing else but a foolish Idol.

When they heard these words, one Hugh Griffin, a Welshe man, and a Student
in the College, caused him to be put in the Inquisition: where, how they
examined him, and how he answered them, I know not, but after certain days
he was set at liberty again.

And one day going in the street, he met a Priest carrying the Sacrament, which
offending his conscience, to His attempt, to smite down the Sacrament.
he caught at it to have thrown it down, that all the people might see what
they worshipped. But missing his purpose, and being judged by the people, that
he did catch at the holiness, that (they say) comes from the Sacrament,
upon mere devotion: he was let pass, and nothing said to him.

Few days after, he came to Saint Peter's Church, His attempt in S. Peter's
Church.
he using no reverence, stepped amongst the people to the Altar, and threw
down the Challice with the Wine, striving likewise to have pulled the Cake out
of the Priests hands. For which, diverse rose up, and beat him with their
fystes, and one drew his Rapier, and would have slain him: so that in brief,
he was carried to prison, where he was examined, wherefore he committed such an
heinous offense: whereto he answered, that he came purposelie for that intent,
to rebuke the Popes wickedness, and their Idolatry. Upon this, he was
condemned to be burned: which sentence he said, he was right willing to
suffer, and the rather, because the sum of his offense, pertayned to the
glory of God.

During the time he remained in prison, sundry English men came unto him, Our
English men's laboring to him, and his persuading them.
willing him to be sorry for that he had done, and to recant from his dampnable
opinion: but all the means they used were in vain, he confuted their
dealinges by diverse places of Scripture, and willed them to be sorry for their
wickedness, while God did permit them time, else they were in danger of
everlasting dampnation: these words made the English men depart, for they
could not abide to hear them.

His going to execution.
he being from ye middle upward naked, having some English Preests with him,
who talked to him, but he regarded them not, but spoke to ye people in so good
language as he could, and told them they were in a wrong way, and therefore
willed them for Christ's cause, to have regard to the saving of their souls.

All the way as he went, there were four did nothing else, but thrust at his
naked body with burning Torches: whereat he neither moved nor shrunk one
jot, but with a cheerful countenance, labored still to persuade the
people, Oh marvelous patience, and Christian boldness.
often bending his body to meet the Torches as they were thrust at him, and
would take them in his own hand, and hold them burning still upon his body,
whereat the people not a little wundered. Thus he continued almost the space of
half a mile, till he came before Saint Peter's, where the place Room many a
day. Then they offered him a Cross, They offered him a Cross to embrace.
and willed him to embrace it, in token that he dyed a Christian: but he put it
away with his hand, telling them, that they were evil men to trouble him with
such paltrie, when he was preparing him self to God, whom he beheld in
Majesty and Mercy, ready to receive him into the eternal rest. They seeing
him still in that mind, departed, saying: Let us go, and leave him to the
devil, whom he serves. Thus ended this faithful Soldier and Martyr of
Christ: who is no doubt in glory with his Master, whereto God grant us all
to come. Amen.

THis is faithfully avouched by the aforesaid John Young, who was at that
time, and a good while after in Room, in service with Master Doctor Moorton:
who seeing the Martyrdom of this man, when he came home to his house, in the
presence of Master Smithson, Master Creed, and the said John Young his
servant, spoke as follows. Surely, this fellow was marvelous obstinate, he
nothing regarded the good council was used to him, nor never shrunk all the
way, when the Torches were thrust at his naked body. Beside, at the place of
Execution, he did not faint or cry one jot in the fire, albeit they tormented
him very cruelly, and burned him by degrees, as his legs first, to put him
to the greater pain, yet all this he did but smile at. Doubtless, but that the
word of God can be but true, else we might judge this fellow to be of God:
for who could have suffered so much pain as he did? but truly I believe the
devil was in him.

Behold (good Reader) how they doubt among them selves, and because they will
not speak against their Master the Pope, they infer ye mighty power of God,
upon the devil: but he no doubt one day will scatter the chafe, and gather
his chosen Corn into his Garner. That we may be of this good Corn, let us
defy the Pope, his hellish abominations, continue in our duty to God,
faithful obedience to her Majesty, and unity among us all as Brethren: and
then no doubt but we shall enter the land of the living, to our eternal
comfort and consolation.

FINIS.
Anthony Monday.
The Picture heerin adjoined, does lively decipher the order of the Martirdom,
of the aforesaid Richard Atkins, at Room.




