THE DEVOVT SOVLES SEARCH. With the happy issue of Comfort found. IN A SERMON,
Preached at Paul's Cross. Ian. 14. 1610.

By Thomas Myriell, Preacher of the word of God, at Barnet.

Bonus es domine, animae quaerenti te. Si quaerenti, quanto magis inuenienti?
Si tam dulcis est memoria, qualis erit praesentia? Bern. LONDON, Printed by T.
C. For John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South door of
Poules. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, my
very good Lord, heavenly grace, and earthly peace.
RIGHT Reverend Father in God, and my very good Lord.
THere is no such motive, to give life, nor means to preserve life in the
affection of love, as love it self. Neither is any thing so kindly to man's
nature, or so natural to mankind, as to love, when one is beloved.

Therefore even he, which is love it self, takes this course, he loves us
first, that we may love him first, and last; Quid tam populare quam gratia?
says that generous Bishop. Favor and grace, as we affect and desire nothing
more; So, nothing so much affects and delights us. Hence, my Lord it is,
that as by duty, I must not, but honor; so by affection, I cannot, but love
your Lordship: my self in particular, having received as good cause to do
this, as you give to others in general, just reason to do that.

Your Lordships promise, that you would remember me, does make me vow, never
to forget you. Your kind affection, in wishing you might do me good, did me
much good presently, as soon as you wished it. And certes, I no ways doubt,
(such is your Lordships love and respect, with God himself in heaven, and his
vicegerent, and vice-rege^t in earth: such your dignity, and eminency in the
Church and Court,) that any reasonable matter is, or can be so difficult, that
your Lordship may wish for it, and yet not have it.

I know your Lordship look for no requital, and indeed I can make none. Yet,
if I should not so much, as once show some willingness, I should more then make
show of great unworthiness.

Aeschines, a poor scholar to Socrates, when he saw many of his companions
bestow great gifts on their master, himself grieuing, he could not be a
companion with them in giving rewards, as he was in receiving Learning: thus
said, Nihil dignum te, quod dare tibi possim, inuenio: Et hoc vno modo pauperem
me, esse sentio. Itaque dono tibi, quod vnum habeo meipsum. Hoc munus, rogo,
qualecunque est, boni consulas, cogite^que alios, cum multum tibi darent, plus
sibi reliquisse. I can find nothing to give you, which is any way worthy of
you; and herein only, I find my self to be poor. Therefore, lo, even all
that I have, I give you, that is, My self. This gift, I desire you, be it
never so simple, to take in good worth, and to reckon of others, that though
they gave much to you, yet they kept more for themselves. To whom Socrates made
this answer.

Quidni tu mihi magnum munus dederis, nisi forte paruo te aestimas? Habebo
itaque curae, vt te meliore^ tibi reddam, quam accepi. Without doubt, thou have
given me a great gift, unless thou accountest thy self little worth: I will
therefore endeavor, that I may restore thee again unto thy self, better worth
then I took thee at the first. The like gift, my Lord, I a poor Aeschines,
do most willingly bequeath to your Lordship; and that because I verelie hope,
that, with grave and wise Socrates, you will, ere long, restore me to my self
again, (now scarcely apud me, through an Ocean of worldly crosses) much
better then you now find me.

And for a pledge of this gift, I beseech your Lordship to accept this rude
sermon, and to give it your countenance to grace it, and protection, to defend
it. And then I doubt not, but, as it was once carefully attended from my mouth,
by honorable and religious hearers, since, earnestly requested from my hands,
by worshipful and dear friends: So, now, much more, it will be thankfully
received in the hearts of all devout Christians, not, because it is any longer
mine, but for that it is become wholly your Lordships. And so, humbly craving
pardon of your Lo: for my boldness, I cease further to trouble you: ever
resting, your Lordships humbly to be commanded,

Thomas Myriell.

TO THE READER.
Dear Christian Reader, (for dear I read thee, if thou be a Christian,) To
thee, I trust, I need not Apologize for Printing this Sermon. If it profit
spoken, it cannot but profit written. For other, if any complain, Eccl. 12.12.
There is no end of making many books; I answer, it is meant, of many books
made to no end. But for a Sermon, there is great reason, as to make it out of a
book in the pulpit, so to make it into a book in the Press. Every good thing,
the more common, the more commodious. And it is no less grief to the
spiritual father, to see that his offspring, (bred of his brain, and brought
forth by his breath) should die as soon as it begins to live; the^ it is for
the natural mother, to behold one and the self same day, to be unto her child
dies natalis, and dies fatalis, a day of birth, and a day of death. And surely,
we live in an age, where all knowledge abounds, save the true experimental
and practical knowledge of Christ, and therefore, we had need now, with the
Prophets of old; to Isa. 28.10.
add praecept upon praecept, by speaking, and line unto line, in writting.
These reasons, with the importunity of many friends, have made me yield to the
publishing hereof. Use it, and enjoy it in the Lord: in whom, and to whom, I
leave thee, ever resting,

August. ad licent. epist. 41.
Seruus tuus, per ipsum, and conseruus sub ipso. Thomas Myriell.

THE DEVOVT SOVLES SEARCH.
Mark. 16.6. But he said unto them, Be not afraid: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth,
which was crucified: he is risen, he is not here, behold the place where they
put him.


THough the wisest of the Sons of men had not said it, yet the experience of
the sons of men, had long since proved it, that Can. 8.6.
Love is as strong as death. Cant. 8.6. As strong (says Augustine, in a double
respect. Sieve quia nemo eam vincit, sicut mortem: sieve quia in hac vita vsque
ad mottem, est meosura charitatis. August. ad Hieron. Epist. 29.
Either because no man ouercomes love, no more then death; or else, because the
measure of love extends even unto death: so as the party loving, shrinketh
not at the sharpest sting of death, to express his affection to the party
beloved. Nay, if we say, love is stronger then death, we say no more then
reason will defend, which tells us; Death may extinguish life, but is not
able to extenuate love. Faith and hope, two great victors: 1. Cor. 13.13.
but the geeatest of these is love. 1. Cor. 13.13. The greatest, though not for
the No^ propter eminentiam, sed propter permanentiam. August.
emine^cie here in this life, yet for the permanency, when this life is done.

Which threefold strengh of love, is well exemplified in these three, holy
women, who loved Christ in his life, and Luc. 8.3.
ministered unto him of their substance. Lu. 8.3. Loved him at his death, and
Ioh. 19.25.
wept for him at his Cross. Ioh. 19.25. Loved him after death, Mar. 16 1.
and ran with ointments and odours, to embalme him in his grave. Mar. 16.1.
Where, their forward devotion being prevented by his early resurrection; and
their sorrowful eyes (in stead of his dead body) presented with the sight of a
glorious Angel: suddenly, their hearts were filled with as much new fear, as
before they were cloyed with old vexing grief. But he which defraudes not
good intention of the due incourageme^t, neither denies simple devotion of her
right instruction, purposely sent his Angel, both to direct the^ against their
error, and to comfort them against their fear, which made the Angel
according to his charge, kindly to bespeake them, saying: Be not afraid, ye
seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified, etc.

In which words, Right honorable, Right worshipful, and well-beloved Christians,
we may consider two things. First, the persons speaking, or doing. Secondly,
the matter spoken or done. The persons, in these words, But he said unto
them: And they are two* The Angel directing, the women enquiring. The matter
in these words. Be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was, etc. And
it is threefold. First, the Angels consolation: Be not afraid. Secondly, the
women's enquisition. Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified. Thirdly,
Christ's resurrection. He is risen, he is not here: behold the place where they
put him. Of these in order. And first of the persons.

Touching the first of the two persons: Our Evangelists here calls him Mar.
16 5.
a young man, Mark. 16.5. But Saint Matthew plainly, chap. 28.2. calls him,
Mat. 28.2.
the Angel of the Lord. An Angel then it was in the form of a young man:
which outward form Angels sometimes used, (as one uses a garment) to put on
and off at pleasure: as also their eating of meat, done says Saint Augustine,
August. ad Deogratias, Epist. 49.
non necessitate, sed potestate: not by any necessity which was in themselves,
but by a power which they had from God: using things agreeable with us, and
carrying themselves suitable unto us, that their strangeness might not be
terrible, but their familiarity comfortable. This Angel therefore, being sent
to comfort, not to astonish, took on him the form of a young man, in his
apparition to these most devout women. Of a man, a form customable, that he
might not affright: of a young man, a form amiable, that he might delight.

Now the word Angel, signifies a messenger. A name, says Augustine August.
in Psalm. 104. Ex eo quod est spi i^u. est: ex eo quod agit, ang lu^ est. Ibid.
officij, non naturae, declaring an Office, not describing a nature. For in
that he is, he is a spirit: in that he is sent, he is an Angel: but a name well
beseeming those pure, loving, and ready spirits, who always beholding Gods
face in heaven, are ready to execute his command on earth. The chief of all
Gods creatures, excellent in all things, but for three things most excellent:
that is to say, pureness of substance, readiness of obedience, feruentnes of
charity. Which three things the Psalmist covertly notes, Psalm. 104.4. Ps.
104.4.
He makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. He makes
them spirits, there is their pure substance. He makes the^ Ministers, there is
their ready obedience; he makes the^ a flame of fire: there is their heat of
love. But Moses declares these things more plainly, in the making of the
Cherubims, which were placed over the mercy-seate, in the Temple. These he
made, Exo. 25.19.
of the purest gold, with their wings stretched out, and their faces one
toward another. Exodus 25.19. Of the purest gold, there is the dignity of
their substance: for of all mettalls, gold is most excellent. With their wings
stretched out: there is the readiness of their obedience; for of all creatures,
winged are swiftest. With their faces one toward another, there is the
feruentnesse of their charity: for of all the gestures of the body, none is so
amiable, as kindly to behold him in sight, to whom we are beholden of duty.

That their nature is pure, their mansion declares. Mat. 18 10.
For they always behold the face of God, in heaven. Matthew. 18.10. Into whose
presence, no impure thing can be admitted. Reu. 21.27.
Revel. 21.27. Hence, for their shining, they are called Stars, and for their
brightness in shining, Job. 38.7
Stars of the morning. Job. 38.7.

That their obedience is swift, their name declares. A quo dominatio, ab eo
denominatio. From the the quality super-eminent, is the name derived. Having
then the name of a messenger, they are signified to be most diligent in
executing a message. Hence, as for brightness, they are compared to the stars:
so for swiftnes, they are likened to the winds: Psalm. 18.10.
He rode upon Cherub, and did fly; he came flying upon the wings of the
wind. Psalm. 18.10.

That their charity is most seruent, the scripture is evident. For every way
they desire our welfare. Touching our inward estate, so much wish they our
greatest good, that they joy in our Luc. 15.10.
conversion to God. Luke 15.10. Not only for that by the conversion of good
men, Jacob de vorag. dom. 3. post Tri.
their number is made up again. Stell in Luc. 15.10.
Nor yet only for that they see such a glorious fruit of their custody and
charge; that men by repentace forsake the Tents of ungodliness, and like good
Christian Soldiers, war under the banner of Christ. But also, for that, by
the conversion of the faithful, Chrysostom. in Matthew. bom. 1.
Facta est vna omnium perixtio, says Saint Chrysostom, there is made a
mixture of all creatures together; the Angels join company with men, in
praising God on earth, as it fell out when Christ was borne: and men are added
to the quiers of holy Angels in heaven, as it comes to pass when a Christian
dies.

For our outward estate, they wait on us, as if they were more ours then their
own. Mat. 18.10.
See, says our Savior, that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I
say unto you, their Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in
heaven. Mat. 18.10. Justly he says, their Angels, for they are, Heb. 1.14.
(...), Ministering spirits, sent out for their good, which shall be heirs of
eternal life. Heb. 1.14. Not that we are able certainly to determine, that
every one has his own Angel Specialiter defigna^um Lomb. lib. 2. distinc.
1^. Rhem. annot. in Mat. 18.10.
specially allotted unto him, as they of Rome teach: but that many Angels are
appointed unto one suruant, if necessity require; as the scriptures of god
teach. Psalm 91.13.
Psalm. 91.13. They stand sentinel always by us, and pitch their tents about us.
Psalm. 34.7.
Psalm. 34.7. And the more herein is showed Gods goodness to us, the more hereby
should be manifested our confidence in him. He has given his Angels charge
over thee says the holy Ghost. Bern. in (...) Quihabitat. verse. 13.
Qua^tam tibi debet hoc verbum infer reuerentiam, afferre deuotionem,
confer fiduciam? This sweet word of his, says Bern. how great reverence
should it strike, how great devotion breed, how great confidence kindle?
Reverence for the prefence of the Angels, devotion for their benevolence,
confidence for their custody. Bern. ibid.
Caute ambula, walk warily, the Angels of God are present with thee, when all
men on earth are absent from thee: presume not to do that in the sight of an
heavenly Angel, which thou would shame to do in the prefence of an earthly
man. And thus much touching the first person.

The second persons are the women which seek. Now who they were in particular,
none of the Evangelists in my judgment have so fully set down, as this our
Evangelist S. Mark; For he, verse 1. of this chapter, has set down their
number, and their names. Their number three. Their names, Marie Magdalen, Marie
the mother of James, and Salome; Together also with the end of their coming,
and the time of it. The end, to embalme the dead body of Jesus. The time,
very early in the morning while the Sun was rising. Very forward devotion
indeed, you will say, so soon to be stirring, but what might move them
hereunto? Some peradventure will say, pity of the dead corpse. For women have
this nature, when entreatie cannot move them, pity will drive them. When the
joy of his life could not bring them to his love, the sorrow of his death did
fetch them to his grave. Some again, happily may say: Desire of news. For
women like the men of Athens, Act. 17.21.
give themselves wholly, either to hear, or to tell some news. Act. 17.21. So
they, which were weary of his sight while he was alive, did now long after it,
when he was dead. But God forbid, so charitable creatures should ever undergo
so uncharitable a censure. I say therefore, it was love, it was piety, it was
decency.

First, it was love; For Luc. 7.47.
He loves much, to whom much is forgiven. Luke 7.47. But Christ, not only
forgave the^ much, but gave them much. Bern. super Cant. Ser. 20.
Dilectionem non reddidit, fed addidit, says Bern: He returned not love as a
debt, but bestowed it as a gift. And therefore if you marvel why thus they
loved him, Saint John answers for himself, and them also, 1. Ioh. 4.19.
We love him because he loved us first. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Hereunto add, that
beside his general love wherewith he loved them as his elect, he also affected
them in particular love as his friends. One of them, Marie Iacobi, was his
mothers sister; and his love was not wanting, either to her, or her children.
Not to her self, he made her his Aunt. Not to her children; For, of her four
sons, James, Ioses. Simon, Jude, he chose two, the eldest and the youngest to
be his holy Apostles. A favor so great, and a privilege so high, that if he
had made them Monarchs, it had come short of this. But to Marie Magdalen he
showed more love, and so much the more appears it, for that, she was not of
his kindred. She never wanted either his good deeds to comfort her, or his good
words to excuse her. Not his good deeds for her comfort, either for her self
or her friends. Not for her self. Luke 8.3.
Out of her he cast seven devils. Luke 8.3. Not for her friends. Ioh. 11.44.
Her brother Lazarus he raised from dead. Ioh. 11.44. Luc. 10.38.
Her sister Martha he graced with his presence, and preaching in her house,
Luke 10.38. As she had his good deeds, so had she always his good words. For
he excused her three times. First, to the Pharisee, who said she was a sinner.
Lu. 7* 39
Luke 7.39. Secondly, to her sister, who said she was idle. Luc. 10.41.
Thirdly, to Judas, who said she was prodigal. Mat. 26.10.
Mat. 26.10. What could Christ do more for them, while he was alive, or they
less for Christ now he was dead?

Secondly, it was piety, wherein they exceeded men. For as they showed more
sorrow then men at Christ's passion: so they showed more devotion then men at
his resurrection. Whilst then men were securely sleeping in the nightly grave
of their beds, these devout women were religiously seeking Christ in the quiet
bed of his grave. They feared not the darkness of the night, which might have
produced dangerous effects: they respected not the malice of the Jews, which
hated such as loved Christ: they shrunk not at the horror of the dead corpse,
which is a thing that flesh trembles at * they were not daunted at their own
weakness, the stoutest of them being but a woman, mulier, mollis aer, a soft
and tender breath, faemina, ferens minus, least able to endure and hold out:
not any of these, not all of them could hold them back from seeking of him
whom their soul loved. Cant. 3.1.
Cant. 3.1. Lo here dear Christians, most devout charity, most charitable
devotion. Lo, how true it is, that women, as by nature they parallel men in
wit; so by grace they equal them in virtue. What can you say against them? If
one were a cause of death, another was a means of life. One indeed, received,
t verbum adificatorium mor Tenull. lib. de came Christi.
is, the word that set up death; but another conceived verbum extructorium
vitae, the word which set up life again. One believed the devil, and another
gave credit to the Angel, Tertull. ibid.
Ei quod illa credendo deliquit, haec credendo deleuit, what the first by rash
crediting lost, the other by true believing got again. Verbum diaboli semen
illi fuit, (...) est One by believing denique diabolum fratricidam. Contra
Maria eum edidit, qui carnalem fratrem Israel, interemptorem suum, sal^^m
quandoque praestaret Tertull. ibid.
the devil, brought forth a murderer that slew his brother in the field; the
other, by believing God, brought forth a Savior slain by his brethren in the
flesh. Finally, Eve signifies life, and Marie imports bitterness, but they
were both contrary to their names: for Eve in stead of life, brought death:
and Marie in steed of bitterness, brought sweetness.

Now, these women were the reporters and proclaimers of this benefit. The
gloriousest message that ever was, was first committed to a woman, because the
woman first hasted to hear it. As Marie was the mean between God and man to
bear Christ, and bring means of salvation; so these women were the mean
between the Angel and men, to preach Christ, and bring news of the
resurrection. As there was a progress in the denunciation of death, from the
devil to the woman, from the woman to the man: so, there was a process in the
anunciation of life, from the Angel to the women, from the women unto men.
For, Missae ab angelo, opus faciant Evangeli. siae, factaque Apostole
apostoloru^, festiuantad annunciandum mane miseritordiam domin^. Bern. super
Cant. Ser. 75.
sent from a Angel, they do the work of an Evangelist, and being made
Apostles, to the Apostles, they go forth with speed, to sing the mercies of
the Lord, betimes in the morning. Quae prima iuit ad culpam, nu^e prima currit
ad veniam Ludolp. de vit. Chri. patt. 2. cap. 71.
The woman therefore which first fell to transgression, does now first fell to
transgression, does now first bring news of remission; and she which at first
brought death into paradise, does now first of all fetch life from the
sepulcher, Id ibid.
Contenders de morte rapere vitam, quae offendens de vita rapuit mortem,
contending, says one, out of death to fetch life, which before offending out
of life did bring death.

Thirdly, it was decency. Decency, two ways. First, naturally, which allows
it neither for customable, nor commendable, for matrons to go alone. And
indeed, in so heavy a case as death, at so vnwo^ted a season as night, to so
dismal a place as the grave, if they had gone single, they might have fainted,
and fallen, Eccle. 4.7.
vasoli, says the Preacher, Eccl. 4.7. Woe be to him that is alone,
especially, if he be alone in his woe. Therefore, as all had lost, so all
sought, and happily, and blessedly, all found. Secondly, spiritually, which
required, that amidst so many enemies of the resurrection, sufficient witness
should be produced, to confirm the truth thereof. Now the scripture says,
Deu. 19.15.
in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall stand. Deu 19.15. Two
then might have served, but here were three, and Eccle. 4.12.
a threefold cord is not easily broken. Eccle. 4 12.

In a word then, As devotion stirred up these women to seek, and finding,
encouraged their devotion: so let precept move us to be devout, that practice
may bring us to the like blessed finding. A first we all shamed not to imitate
woman in following the devil to damnation: let us now much less shame to
imitate these women, in running to Christ for salvation. Though they be women,
their example is notable. Peter himself at their word, ran out. John, not
only runs out with Peter. but Ioh. 20.4
outrunnes him. Ioh. 20.4. Peter has his name from Petra. a rock, and yet he
relented at the love of Christ: but O grauiores saxo and plumbo, quos ta ti a
noris vinculum, non t^^bit f^rsum ad deum* ex quo prins t^a^it deum corsum ad
homines ^nselme. lib. de simil.
Oh harder and heavier than stone, and lead, are their hearts, says Anselme,
who are not drawn from earth, to love God in heaven, by that band, which drew
God out of heaven, to love man on earth The grave of Christ is our hiding
place. As the beasts that are hunted by men, fly into dens and holes of the
earth, for safety against the fury of dogs: so let us, which are become
like the beasts that perish, when we are hunted by Satan, that mighty
Nimrod, fly, and hide our selves in the grave of Christ. There and no where
else, Et Reuera, vb firma tutaque secutitas est, oisi i^ vulucribus Saluatoris?
Bern: super Cant. Sermon.
is firm and safe security to be found. It is his promise* and he will not
shrink from it. Try him, O feeble soul, in thy greatest need, Psalm. 91.3.
he shall preserve thee from the snare of the hunter. Ps. 91.3. Thus much,
touching the persons. The matter follows, and first, of the Angels
consolation, Be not afraid.

At the first hearing whereof, peradventure some may be afraid, that it is not
the voice of a good Angel from heaven, it sounds so like the rotten stay of
security, which the Devil gave our first parents, to rest on earth, when he
said, Ye shall not die at all. Genesis 3.5.
Genesis 3.5. For, does not the Scripture by precept command Fear? Do not all
holy men by practice commend it? Was it not at first created and framed a
quality in the soul of man? Was it not afterward an affection in the soul
of him which was both God and man? Hearken dear Christians: He says not,
Fear not at all: but he means, (...), Ne auonito stupore exterreamini.
Fear not too much. And indeed, in this duty, great discretion is to be used.
Therefore, the scripture sometime says Fear: sometimes again, Be not afraid.
Fear, for too little fear, is want of grace. Be not afraid, too much fear is
want of faith. Fear, too little fear is presumption. Be not afraid, too much
fear is desperatio^. And this very precept, Be not afraid, instructs us in
three points.

First, who it is that ought to be feared. Not men, not Angels, not devils,
but God only. The servant fears not his fellows in the family, but Mal. 1.6
Mal. 1.6 God is Paterfamilias, master of the family, and the Angels be Reu.
22 9
our fellow servants. Reu 22 9. Again, whom we must worship, him must we
fear; for fear is a special part of Gods worship. But, Mat. 4 10.
Thou must worship the Lord thy God only, and him alone serve. Matthew. 4.10.
Therefore the Lord God must only be feared.

Secondly, who it is, that ought to fear. Not such as Custodes quide^ digni
sunt qui ^erre^ntur, vos autem discipulae domini, ne terre^mini. The op. in
Mat. 8.
seek Christ, like these blessed women, but such as kill Christ, like the
cursed Jews.

As there is a twofold composition of men; that is, of pride, and humility: so
there is double disposition in God, of Justice, and mercy. He, which is
Lactant. Inst^t lib. 1. cap. 1.
erg^pios, indulgentissimus Pater, a most loving and gentle Father to the
righteous; the same is also aduersus impios rectissimus iudex: A most severe
and just judge to the wicked. And here, the verse same God by his Angel, so
frighted the wicked keepers of Christ, Mat. 28.4
that they became like dead men, Mat.. 28.4. But yet, so cheered of these
blessed seekers of Christ, that he expelled all fear from them, saying: Be not
afraid.

Thirdly, how it is that we ought to fear. For there is one Fear, which, 1.
Ioh. 4.18
perfect love casts out. 1. Ioh. 4.18. And another fear, which Pro. 15 33.
brings in the love of God. Pro. 15.33. This we must embrace, not that.
This, because it is like the fear of a loving wife, which August. in Psalm. 19
quo quanto ardentius diligit, tanto diligentius cauet offendere, says Saint
Augustine: The more ardently she loves her husband, the more diligently she
takes heed of offending him. Therefore, David calls it Psalm. 19.9
Castus timor, Ps. 19.9. Chaste fear, August. in Psalm. 19. exposit. 2.
Gratis amans says Augustine, non puniri timens ab eo, quem tremit, sed
separari ab eo quem diligit. Loving freely, and fearing lovingly, not so much,
least she be punished of him whom she dreades, as least she be divided from him
whom she loves.

Hence it is, that by Fear is signified all Gods worship and service. David
calling to all Gods servants, intituleth them, Psalm. 66.16
such as fear God, Psalm. 66.16. Abraham when he would signify Abimelech,
and his servants to be without religion, said, Genesis 20.11
Surely, I thought the fear of God was not in this place. Genesis 20.11.11. When
Jacob and Laban made a covenant, Laban swear by his Idols, Genesis 31.54
but Jacob swear by the Fear of his father Isaac. Genes. 31.54. So true it is,
that one says, Vbi non est metus non est religio. Where fear is wanting,
Religion is absent. And Tertul. li. de penitent.
Timor hominis Dei honor est. Man's fear is Gods honor.

For this cause, Fear is compared to a Porter. A good Porter will keep out
rogues and varlets out of his Lords house: so does Fear thrust vices out of
the soul. Eccle. 1.26.
The fear of the Lord drives out sin. Eccl. 1.26. Herein, it is like to
Josiah, which signifies the fire of the Lord. He put down the high places,
cut down the groves, demolished Baals altars, sacrificed his Priests, and like
a fire, burned and consumed all the peoples abominations. 2. King. 23.5.
2. Kings. 23.5. So Fear, like a spiritual fire, both burns up our stubble
of vicious qualities, and warmes the heart inwardly with a zeal of Gods glory:
and like the good huswife, sweeps clean our heart, that it may be an holy
Temple for the Lord.

Again, A good Porter will let in all his Lords friends, that his house may
be furnished with guests. So does Fear, Eccle. 1.21
She fills her house with al^ things desirable, Eccl. 1.21. And therefore,
when David had some worthy matter to relate, he chose for his auditors Psalm.
66.16
Such as fear God. Psalm. 66.16. Aug. in Psalm. 65. Dei timor aperiat aures vt
sit quod intret, and qua intret Aug. ibid.
Non est quibus narretur, says Saint Augustine, vbs Dei timor non est Where
fear has made no passage, there words can have ^o entrance: but let fear
once open the ear, and there will be matter to enter, and entrance for matter.
To conclude, A good Por^er will retain vigilancie: for fear the thief enter
in, and spoil the house. So true Fear ever wakes, least the ^ule by
negligence be betrayed. For Eccl. 27 3
if a man hold him not sure in the Fear of the Lord, his house will soon be
overthrown, Eccles. 27.3. Hence Saint Jerome, Hieron. ad Fabiolam.
Timor vir^utum custos est, Securitas ad lapsum facilis. Fear is virtues
Guardian, whilst security makes shipwreck of goodness.

With this fear then, let us fear always, for it is the part of an Atheist,
at any time to want it: I say, at any time. For Pro. 28.14
He is blessed that fears always. Prou. 28.14. Not, that fears sometime,
but always. There be three estates of a Christian in this life, and Fear must
be wanting to none of them. Time cum arisent gragratia time cum abierit, time
cum denuo reuertetur. Bern super Cont^c. ser. 54.
There is the estate of grace, the estate of a lapse and the estate of
recovery. In the estate of grace, we must fear God, for his goodness. Romans 11 20
Through unbelief they are broken off and thou stand fast by faith. Be not
high minded, but Fear. To. 11.20. In the estate of a lapse, God must be
feared, for his Justice. Luc. 23.40
Fear not thou, seeing thou art in the estate of condemnation? Luke 23.40.
In the estate of recovery, we must fear God for his mercy. Psalm. 130 4
If thou mark our iniquities, who may abide it? but there is mercy with thee,
that thou may be feared. Psalm. 130.4. In the estate of grace, Fear, says
Bern Bern super Cantic. ser 54.
ne non digne opereris ex ea: Least thou turn grace into wantonness. Mat. 25.18
Least thou be like the sloathfull servant, that buried his talent in a napkin.
Matt. 25.18. Do thou not bury thy talent, when thou have learning and
riches, and yet helpest neither the poor, nor the ignorant? Or least thou be
like the unjust Steward, Luc. 16.1.
who was accused to his master, that he had wasted his goods. Luc. 16.1. Do
we not wast Gods goods, when gifts are given us to edify withal, and we
gain nothing by them, either to our selves or others? Again, in the estate of
a lapse: Fear, says Bern. Bern: vt supra.
Quia dereliquit te custodia tua: Because thy Guardian has left thee. Thou art
exposed like a young Moses, to the mercies of the insatiable gulf. The good
Spirit has left thee, and thou art in the hands of an evil vexing spirit. If
thy state be not to be feared, what is? Thirdly, in the estate of recovery.
Fear, says Bern. Ibid.
Quia recidere, quam incidere est deterius. The second fall, is worse then the
first. Repudiam and nam and mari, dicunt. Tert. de poenitent.
Many that have made shipwreck of goods, bid ship and Sea farewell: how much
more should a man fear a second shipwreck of his goodness? Say God has
pardoned thee once: Say twice: Say many times, will thou continue in sin,
that grace may abound? God forbid. No reason, says I ertullian, Nemo idcirco
deterior si^, quia deus melior est. Ibid.
that man should be worse, because God is better, and redundantia clementiae
caelestis, libidin^m faciat humanae temeritatis, and the abundance of heavenly
benevolence, should bring forth store of presumptuous impudency. Say not of
thy sins, as the drunkard of his wines, Pro. 23.25.
They have smitten me, but I was not sick, therefore will I seek it yet
still. Pro. 23.25. Rather, Dei benefi^ium salutem suam scilicet, memoria
periculi honore^t. Tert. lib de poe.
honor Gods benefits, with the memory of thy peril, and say, My former
danger shall be an afterwarning, I have been praemonitus, I will now be
praemunitus, once forewarned, and ever after forearmed. And thus much touching
the Angels consolation.

The next point, is the women's inquisition, in these words, ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was crucified.

And this depends on the former part, as a reason of it. Be not afraid, says
he. Why? Because ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified. Indeed, they
which seek Christ, and him crucified, have no reason to fear any thing,
especially, if they find what they seek. But they must go through to Christ
crucified, or else, their comfort is miserable, and their seeking of no value.
For in this inquisition, there are four degrees, and all good, if they tend to
Christ crucified, but none good, if they bend not thither. To make this
apparent, I will relate the comfort, and infer the objection Be not afraid,
says he, For ye seek. There is one degree. Indeed the scripture commands us
to seek, but it is the kingdom of God: and maine seek, but few the kingdom
of God; therefore one may seek, and yet justly he afraid. He replieth again.
Be not afraid, ye seek Jesus. A second degree, Matt. 1.21
Jesus signifies a Savior, and he that finds the true Jesus, finds the
true salvation: but every Jesus is not a Savior; therefore one may seek
Jesus, and yet justly be afraid. He adds in the next place, Be not afraid,
ye seek Jesus of Nazareth. A third degree, Nazaret signifies a flower: and he
that finds the true Nazarite, Isay 11.1.
finds the true Flower of Iesse. But as every Jesus is not a Savior, so every
Nazarite is not a flower: therefore, one may seek Jesus of Nazareth, and yet
justly be afraid. The Angel co^cludes, B^ not afraid, ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was crucified. The fourth degree, the degree of perfection:
against which, nothing can be objected, to make a man justly afraid. For more
instance in these points. To seek, absolutely, is not good, but only so far
forth, as it tends to Christ and his Cross. True it is, in this world we
are all at a loss, and can never find what we lost, till we be found of him,
Who came to seek, and to save that which was lost. Luc. 19.10
Lu 19.10. As all seeking is vain, unless we seek him; so all seeking of him
is in vain, unless he find us: and he must be praised for both, says
Fulge^tius, Sieve cum nos ad se quaerendu^ dormientes exsuscitat, seu cum se
inueniendu^ ^obis quaere^tibus donat. Falg. ad monim. li. 1.
Whether it be for stirring us up to seek him, when we are sleeping, or for
offering himself unto us, when we are seeking. He that seeks other thing
then this, or otherwise then thus, shall be sure to loose, as the proverb says,
op^ram and oleum: both his labor in seeking, and his cost in laboring. Psalm.
24.6
This way only, seeking is good, and seekers gainers. This is the generation
of them that seek thee, even of them that seek thy face. Psalm. 24.6. All
other seeking is vain, and finders, losers; Of which there are many
generatio^s in the world, and of whom Paul complains, saying: Phil. 2.21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.21.

For example.

Some seek their own wealth and riches. Say I some? I may say, All: for it is
that which we seek for, both All and Some. O ciues, ciues quaerenda pecunia
primum est, virtus post nummos Haec Ianos summus ab imo per docet etc. Hor.
^pist. 1.
Citizens give ear to such as speak from about the t^niple of lanus,
Quaerenda pecunia primum est. Seek money above all things; rather then to such
as exhort them in the Temple of JESUS, Mat 6.33
Quaerite primum r^gnum D^i; Seek first the kingdom of GOD, and then all
these things shall be minittred unto you. Mat. 6.33. Hence it comes to pass,
that many of them which be rich to the world, are very poor to God. For 2.
heavy burde^s, says Chrysostom, invade the rich man's thoughts. Chrysostom. in
Mat^h. hom. 45.
Deliciarum putredo, curarum magnitudo: the vanity of fleshly delight, and
the greatness of worldly cares: Quorum vnum quod que ad subige^dum nauigium
suf. ficit. Ibid.
of which, the least is able to sink a ship. Hence Christ compares a rich
man to a Camel, Ambro. Sermon 4. Ille o^cratus est car^^bus, iste peccatis
vterque habet propria^ sarcinam, says Saint Ambrose, They have each of the^ a
burden on their backs, the one of flesh, the other, of fleshly lusts. Not that
riches of themselves are evil but the immoderate love of riches; Paul says
not, They which are rich, but they which will be rich, fall into temptation, 1.
Tim. 6.9
1. Tim. 6.9. In diuitijs cupiditate^ reprehendit, non facultate^, says S.
August: de ciuit. dei, lib. 1. cap. 10.
Augustine: Reprehending indeed, the wretchedness of the mind, not the richnes
of the man.

Some seek for vainglory. An intolerable drunkenness of the mind, says
Saint Chrysostom. in Ioh. ho. 2
Chrysostom, and such a disease, as is not easily cured. Into this rank of
seekers, I may put (as I fear me) some of our brethren; or rather (for which
I grieve) they have put themselves. Who, as some old Monks were wont to be
proud of humility; so these men strive to be accounted most learned, by
showing no learning. We with our learning may sift while we will into the
deepest questions, but all the Flower. they say, is of their boulting. Great
Clerks with their learned preaching, do nothing: our their ignorance is the
only mother to breed and bring forth devotion. When we allege a Father, they
say, we preach our selves, whilst they, being as much beholding to them as
we, by concealeme^t of their names, father all upon themselves. Me thinks I
may apply Jobs words unto the^, though they have not half the eloquence of
Jobs friends: Job. 12.2
Because ye only are the people, learning must die with you. Job. 12.2. For
they are the only people now a days, and only the peoples; to whom they
suggest, that like new Palaemons, secum natae, and periturae literae; learning
has her birth, and her death with the^. Yea rather, because they are the
peoples, they willingly permit all learning to die with them, because they see,
that learning and the peoples love, no more the^ Dagon and the Ark can stand
together.

And certes in my judgment, this is the time of fufilling that proverb, which
Almighty God said should come to pass some time; Isa. 24.2
Like people, like priest, Isay. 24.2. It could not be so said in the primitive
Church: then the Priest was better then the people: nor was it verified in the
time of Popery, as Bern. does witness, Non potest ^ici, vt est populus, ita
est Sacerdos, quoniam non ita est populus vt Sacerdos. It cannot be said, As is
the people, so is the Priest, because the people is not so bad as the Priest.
But now, now it seems, is the time come, that the people and the priest are
both alike, whilst the one for fancy, will hear nothing but what he list; the
other for advantage, will speak nothing, but what may please.

Some seek for Honor, for which their soul gapeth, as much as the thirsty
land for rain, in the drought of Summer: and so fast has Ambition seized on
their souls that they grow proud of Honor before they have it. And sure it
is an evil which commonly accompanies preferment, that whereas it should make
a man more humble, and so more truly honorable, (as Augustine says, August.
de Temp. Sermon. 213.
Honoris laus, humilitatis virtus: the commendation of true honor, is the
virtue of humility:) yet men for the most part, then grow proud and arrogant.
Yea, and let me use Saint Bern: words, Bern. super M^ss^s est, hom. 4
Si audeo dicere, If I durst be so bold as to tell them of it, Me thinks I see
some, quod adepti sunt nu^mis, attribuere meritis: to impute that to their good
deseruings, which they have bought and paid for, with their full purses. Not
that Honor is any way evil in it self, August. de ve^b. ^om. Sermon. 12.
Bonum est, says Saint Augustine, sed hoc, si been vtatis. It is a thing good
enough, if thou use it well; yea a special good, if directed to the right
end. If thou use it well, it will be August. Ibid.
Ministerium boni operis, an opportunity to do many good deeds: if ill, it
will prove, occasio exitij: a means of a heavier judgment, when the mighty
shall be mightily tormented.

Some seek for pride: A sin hatched by the Devil at the first, and
harbored since by devils incarnate: yet, so common among us, that what only
we should yield to virtue, we frankly bestow on it, emulation.

Some, because they would be beyond emulation, so paint their bodies with
strange garments, and stain their faces with painted co^plexions, that they
grow out of the rank of humane creatures, and Idola me^tiuntur. Hieron ad
Marcell.
are become very Idols. And that which no man durst do to the picture of an
earthly Prince, says Chrysostom: in Matthew. hom. 31.
S. Chrysos. they presume to do, to the image of the K. of kings. Do thou
think thou art a better work man the^ God: Admit thy painting adds to thy
beauty, yet it takes away from thy comeliness; and in the freshest of thy
bastard beauty, thou art but Hieron: ad Marcell.
nimio candore deformis: deformed with overmuch fairness.

But if Gods commandment could prevail nothing, yet methinkes Women should
fear to paint, least men should point at them, for the Hieroglyphicke of an
hypocrite. For the hypocrites purpose is, says Lacta^t. Lactant: i^stit. lib.
3. cap. 26.
Non excindere vitia, sed abscondere: not to race vices quite out, but only to
cover the^ with a veil: or as Bernard more significantly has it, Bern: super
Cant: Sermon: 66.
Virtutes non colere, sed vitia colocare: not to embrace virtue with a good
inte^tion, but to paint over vice, with a fair complexion.

Some seek for pleasure: Volu^tas malorum esca.
Pleasure, the nourishment of all vices. Dum ludit, illudit.
The wily Parasite of the wanton flesh, deceiving thoroughly, while it sporteth
merrily.

D^m cantat, ^^^an at.
The Siren of the soul, stinging deeply, while it sings sweetly. Reu. 10.10
Like the book which S. John eat which was in his mouth as sweet as honey, and
in his belly as bitter agaul. And like unto the subtle harlot, Pro. 5.3.4.
Whose lips at the first drop as an home comb, k Pro. 5.3.4
but her latte^ end is bitter as wormwood.

Some seek for revenge. And of late we have seen, even unto ou^ grief, some
tragedies which it has brought forth, whisst they which sought it, have found,
not so much revenge upon others, as vengeance to themselves. For revenge is on^
of these 3. things which God has res^rued to himself. His glory is the
first: Isa. 4^.8.
My glory I will not giu^ unto another. Isa. 42.8. Judgment is the next. Iam
4.^^
There is one L^^-giuer, which is able to save and to destroy: wh^ art thou
that iudg^st another? Iam. 4.12. And the third is revenge. D^u. 3^.3^
Ven^^e^nce is mine, and I will repay it. Deuteronomy. 3^.35. What a lamentable thing
then is it, that now adays a man cannot be accounted rightly Honorable,
unless he prove himself desperately vicious? August. in Psalm. 30.
Vindicari vis Christiana, says Saint Augustine, Art thou a Christian, and
wilt be revenged? Tarry a while, Nondum vindicatus est Christus; Thy Lord and
master Christ Jesus, is not yet revenged of his own death. I cannot tarry,
says the hot spirit, nay I cannot live to bear this disgrace, without
eternal obliquie. But o inconsiderate fury, how it has gained an opinion of
magnanimity!

Some there be, which imagine this timorous resolution, to be the spirit of
true valor: but indeed it is far otherwise, and nothing else, but the
infirmity of the flesh. For true magnanimity begins at home, and subdues it is
own passions.

Cato, p August. de ^^u^. dei: lib ^. cap. 23. Ex velle^o Pater ad viu^c.
because he would not be vanquished by Caesar, k drew out his own sword, and
slew himself at Vtica. Some may think this great valor too, but what says S.
Augustine, August. vt supra.
Non fuit honestas turpia praecauens, ^ed infirmitas aduersa non sustinens: It
was no honest mind to avoid after disgraces, but a weakness that could not
endure former wrongs. And this is the best which may be thought of the boldness
of single co^batters, to omit the grievous hazard of their souls, in so
bloody a manner forsaking their bodies. Thus then, whilst the Citizen seeks
for wealth, the Churchma^ for popularities, the ambitious man for honor, the
Courtier for pride, the lascivious man for pleasure, the gallant for revenge,
it is come to pass, as Paul complai^eth, t All seek their own, and not that
which is Jesus Christ's. Phil 2.21.
and as David, Ps. 14.2.
There is none that understands, and seeks after God. Psalm. 14.2.

Come we to the second degree; Ye seebe Jesus. Neither does this commend
absolutely, because so many seek him dissolutely. For it is certain, some
corruptly seek the true Jesus; Some carefully pursue a false Jesus. While the
true Jesus was on earth, some sought him corruptly, viz. for the cure of their
bodies, rather the^ the saving of their souls; to behold his miracles, rather
then to admire his virtues; to fill their mouths with bread, rather then their
hearts with faith: and to catch him in his words, rather the^ to be catched by
his word. The 9. leapers cried after him to be cle^sed, but never returned to
give him thanks. Luke 17.17.
Herod Lu. 23.8.
desired to see a miracle, and presently sent him back to Pilate to be
crucified. Luc. 23.8. The Capernaits Ioh. 6.60
eat of the loaves, and were filled and afterward murmured and forsook him.
Ioh 6.60. The Pharisees and Sadduces, had all their questions answered, and
then Mat. 26.5.
gathered a Council to put him to death. Matthew. 26.3. Thus the true Jesus was
corruptly sought.

That Jesus which holy Ignatius says, is, Igna. Epist: ad Roman.
vita fidelium, life to the faithful in the bitterest death: and which, as
Bernard says, is Bern: super Canuc. Ser. 15.
mel in ore, in aure melos, in co^de iubilus; honey in the mouth, melody in
the ear, joy and ionisance in the heart, sought after for corrupt and sinister
respects, no whit profits the greedy seekers.

Some again carefully pursue a false Jesus. proposing to their mind, safety
in that thing which they most affect, and reposing in their hearts a confidence
therein. Yea, almost every kingdom in the world, almost every city in a
kingdom, almost every man in a city, has a false Jesus, in whom he
delights, and in whom he severely restes. The Turks Jesus is their
brainsicke prophet Mahemet, in him they place their faith, of him they hope for
salvation. To his bounty, they impute the largeness of their empire, the
fertility of their soil, and to his right hand, Lactan. Institut. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
quicquid est, propter quod furta and latrocinia, and homicidia quotidie
saeuiunt: whatsoever it is, for purchasing whereof, thefts, robberies, and
murders are every day among them outrageous, and whole cities and towns
overthrown and demolished, as Lacta^tius once said of the superstitious
heathen. The Romanists Jesus is the Pope; For of him they expect all, which is
only to be received from the true Jesus of Nazareth, which was cru^ified.
Remission of sins, imputation of righteousness, validity of merits,
inheritance of glory, they think to receive from him, which (alas) has it not
for himself. Has it not, and which is more, has less means to have it then
any, as being most contrary to Christ of all. Christ has an high title,
(...). The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Reu. 19.21
Reu. 19.21. yet an humble carriage. Phil. 2.8
He took on him the form of a servant. Phi. 2.8. Contrary, the pope has an
humble title, Seruus seruorum Dei, the servant of the servants of God; but a
most pompous and pontifical carriage, far exceeding the mightiest monarchs.
Christ refused sovereignty three times: contrary, the Pope takes 3.
soueraignties at once. The scriptures say of Christ, that he is, and deus, and
homo; both God and man: the Canonists say of the Pope, that he is, nec deus nec
homo, neither god nor man. I know not the^ what to make of him, but very
Antichrist.

To come to our selves. Who is it but has a Jesus by himself? The covetous
man's Jesus is his money. Did not the rich man hope for salvation in his riches,
when he said, Luc. 12.19.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for many years* eat and drink,
and take thine ease? Luke 12.19. So, the gluttons God, is his belly. Paul calls
it so, Phil. 3.19. Phil. 3.19.
Whose God is their belly, whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly
things. So, the ambitious man's God is honor, the lascivious man's God is
pleasure; and as the heathen says of a man in love, if he has what he loves,
Plautus.
id habet pro cibo, it is meat and drink to him. So I may say of every man's
delight, which his mind and heart is set upon, id habet pro deo, it is a Jesus
unto him. For there is no man in the world, but, as by nature he desires his
own safety, so by religion he chooses his own Savior: religion with men of
the world being nothing else, Lactant. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 7.
quam quod cupiditas humane miratar; but that which a man's fancy is in love
withal. So true it is, which that grave and judicious Father Saint Augustine
has observed, August de ciuit dei lib. 14. cap. 4.
Beatus vult esse homo etiam non sic viuendo vt possit esse. Man would be
blessed and happy, though he so lives, as he never treades the right way too
it.

Amongst these many vain seekers of Jesus, I may most fitly insert the sert of
Jesuits; who because they would make the world be^eeue, that they, and none
but they; had found Jesus, they have taken away his name from al others, and
appropriated it to themselves. Verbum cauponantes and Iesum vendentes Ignat. ad
Trallian.
In the mean time, they play the merchants with the word, and the Indaffas
with Jesus. And whilst they thus seem to have gotten Jesus from all others, it
is come to pass, that they have lost Christ from themselves. Let holy Ign tius
the Martyr, speak against their Ignatius ^arola, Ignatibid
Qui inim alio nomine appellatur* praeter islud, hic non est dei. Whosoever is
called by any other name, then the name of a Christian, is ^one of Gods. Some
therefore call them, not Jesuits but Iebusites: and I think, not without
very good cause. For as they of Jerusalem set up a company of blind and lame
Iebusites on the walls of their city, in disgrace of David, m 2. Sam. 156
when he came unto them, 2. Sam. 3.6.
Sam. 5.6. So, they of Rome have set up these Iebusites (^lind, through
ignorance of the truth; lame, through peruersenes in life) on the walls of the
city of God, up to the height of preferment in the Church, in disgrace of
Christ, and all his anointed Kings. But no doubt, as David fetched down those
base people, because his 2. Sam. 5.8.
soul hated them. Christ will one day pluck down this proud Sect, and
disperse them with the breath of his mouth, and dispatch them with the sword of
the spirit.

But I have to the third degree. Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth. Neither does
this commend more then the former For thus some have sought him without profit
in the Gespell; thus some seek him, all for profit in the world.

Read how unprofitably some have thus sought him, Ioh. 18.5. when they had
sought out the most cursed death, and were seeking the most blessed person for
that death; they meeting with him, he demanded of them, Whom seek ye? They
(vailing all their villainy, under a smooth answer) said, Jesus of Nazareth.
And whereas others which had sought him so before, hearing his sweet words,
were overcome with them in soul, and went back to the Priests with this
answer, Ioh. 7.46.
Never man spoke as this man. Ioh. 7.46. These me^ now seeking him, and hearing
his powerful words, were overthrown by them in body, Ioh. 18.6.
They went backward, and fell to the ground. Ioh. 18.6. O the power of the
Majesty of Christ hidden in the veil of our flesh. August in Ioh. Tract.
Quid indicaturas faciet, qui iudica^dus hoc fecit? What think you, will he
do, says Augustine, when he comes to judge the world, that thus could do
when he was to be judged in the world? What will he do, reigning as a king, ye
thus did do, dying as a captive?

Now to this inquisition, none in the world (in my judgment) is so like as the
inquisitio^ of Spain. For there Jesus of Nazareth, is still sought to be put to
death, and crucified in his members. They seek not Chrystum crucifixum, but
Christianos crucifigendos, not Christ crucified, but to crucify Christians.
Wherein the now Antichristian popes of Rome exceed in crucltie the former
heathen Emperors of Rome; for what was Traianes counsel to Pliny? Tertull.
apologet. capit.
Hoc genus inquirendos non esse, oblatos vero puniri oportere. That this kind
of me^, namely christians, should not be inquired after, when they were close,
out only, the^ punished when they were offered. But this most bloody
inquisition will not tarry til poor christians be brought but (like a cruel
mo^ster, clad in a Lisanders Lion-fox-skinne coare) hunts them out by craft,
and roots them out by cruelty.

Again, thus some seek him all for profit in the world; whilst they seek
indeed, Iesum Nazarenum, but not crucifixum; that is, as Ludolo. de vit. Chri.
par 2. cap. 7^. ex Chrisost.
one interprets it, Iesum floridum, but not Iesum flagellatum: a Jesus crowned
with flowers, but not crowned with thorns. That can take the sweet bread in
the passover, but not the sower herbs. That with Peter hold it good bein
gwith him in mount Tabor, where he was tra^sfigured, but deny him and forsake
him, in mount Caluerie, where he was transfigured. That will be religious so
long as they may gain either reputation o^ advantage in the world thereby: but
bid religion and God farewell, when profit and commodity is not annexed
thereto. Such ambodexters there be now adays, Bern: super Cant. Sermon. 16.
qui veterem hominem non exuerunt, sed nouo palliant, says Bernard, which have
not put off the old man with his Iustes, but covered him with the new man, as
with a cloak. God commanded his people that they should not plow with an ox
and an ass together, nor wear a garment of linsiwolsie; but I think
linsiwolsie was never more worn then in this age, it being grown from a
quality, to a habit. For who is it, but in serving God, seeks especially to
serve himself? For gain and outward respects, may men preach, and more
practice religion: viderit vtilitas. is now the only moderatour of our
spiritual edifying; and men grow rich in devotion, so far forth as they grow
rich by devotion.

To come therefore to the fourth degree; Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was
crucified. Only this is absolutely good, and the rest no further the^ they
tend to this. This only purchases matter of true security, and herein alone,
is just cause of rejoicing. Herein alone, because, Gal. 6.16.
God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 55.
Vellem cum Paulo posse dicere, says Saint Chrysostom. I would we could say
also with Paul, Whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world,
Gal. 6.16.

This cross of Christ, which to the Jews is a scandal, to the Centiles
folly, is to the faithful both of Jews and Gentiles, the power of God to
salvation: being like Jacobs ladder, the only way for us to climb up into
heaven, Tertul. aducrs. Iudaeos.
Vt quod perierat olim per lignum in Adam, id restitueretur per lignu^ Christi,
That we which perished by that which the first Adam plucked from the tree,
might again be restored by the second Adam, who was fastened to the tree.
Bern: in die S. An. dreae. Ser. 1.
Non est siluestris arbor, says Bernard. It is no barren tree, this same tree
of the cross, but a tree that bare such fruit, as whosoever tastes of it,
shall be sure to live for ever. Though it were Angust. de tem p. sermon. 138.
mortifera Christo, yet it was Salutifera, Christiona^: says August. a bitter
tree to Christ, yet the tree of life to a Christian. Hence sprang the great
rejoicing and glorying of the fathers in the cross. Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 55.
Gloria nostra, caput and origo beatitudinis, libertas and corona crux est,
says Saint Chrysostom. The cross, it is our glory, the head and fountain
of our happiness, our liberty from death, and crown in life. And this, says
he, let us cha^t out at all times, but then most, when the heathens are by us.
Hence came that ancient ceremony, of signing with the cross, so much
distasted by some of our brethren. For when as the Gentiles accounted it
foolishnes, the Christians to make them ashamed, purposely gloried in it the
more. And indeed, the Church, says Bern: thinks nothing more glorious to her
self, then to carry the disgrace of her Lord. Nihil sibi gloriosus purat,
quam portare ignominiam domini and Bern. Super Cant. Sermon. 25.
Grata ignominia crucis ei, qui crucifixo ingratus non est; No doubt, to him
will ye shame of ye cross be grateful, to who^ he which endured the shame of
the cross, is gracious.

Not that they gloried in a simple wodde^ cross, as they of Rome do. No, it
was the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death upon the cross, which they so
much gloried in. This, says Chrysostom, Hoc caput certa bonorum omniu^ est,
quod deus proprio filio, non peper cit, vt fugitiuo seruos sanaret. Chrysostom.
in Matthew. hom. 51.
is the fountain of all good things, that God spared not his only son, to
redeem his unworthy servants. Idem. in Matt. hom. 55.
Passio certe domini nostrae beatitudinis caput est. It is not the wodden
cross, no, it is the Lords passion, that is the fountain of our happiness.
Nor secondly, that they imputed any virtue to the transient cross, when it is
made in the air, as they of Rome do. Nay, when they signed the body at
baptism, with the cross, they taught, Id. ibid.
Non simpliciter digito in corpore, sed magna profecto fide in mente firmare.
Not simply, says Chrysostom, to sign the body with the finger, but to
strengthen the heart by faith. Nor thirdly, that they crouched to a piece of
wood, saying, Holy Cross save us, as they of Rome do; But when they came to
the Sacrament, and there remember the virtue of Christ's death on the Cross;
then says blessed Cyprian, Cypria. de coen. Dom.
Cruci haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa Redemptoris vulnera, figimus
lingua^. Then cleave we to the Cross, and fastening our tongue within the
wounds of our Redeemer: thence suck out the blood of our redemption. Lastly,
not that they adorned a wodden cross with precious stones, blue silk, etc. as
they of Rome do: but they adorned their crosses, with the same ornaments that
Christ adorned his Cross with all; they were four virtues, says Bernard:
Bern. in die Sant. Pasch. Sermon. 1.
Supereminentior charitas, etc. Charity on the top, obedience on the right
hand, patience on the left hand, and the foundation of all virtues, humility,
in the bottom. These were the ornaments which they adorned the cross withal,
and which they prectised, when they suffered their martyrdom.

Thus, o dear Christian, with these holy fathers, with these devout women, do
thou seek Christ Jesus, and him crucified. Let thy devout soul, with the
Spouse in the Canticles, go up and down, and make diligent inquiry for him,
whom thy soul loves. Make diligent enquiry for him in the City, the City of
God, the Church: in the field, sed in campo Scripturarum, in the field of the
holy Striptures, in the house, the house of God; there thou shall find him,
like Joseph and Marie in the Temple. Let the three faculties of thy soul,
Reason, will, and memory, like these three holy women, stir in the morning
of thy life, to find him in the bed of his grave.

O how happy will it be for thy erroneous reason, to find him which is Bern.
super Cant. Sermon. 11.
plenitudo Lucis, the fulness of Light: for thy captiued will, to find him,
which is, multitu^o Pacis, the multitude of Peace: for thy obliuious memory,
to enjoy him which is continuatio Aeternitatis, the continuation of Eternity.
Let this thy miserable Triplicie of defects, O beat and beatificans Trinitas,
ad te mea misera Trinitas, miserabiliter suspirat. Bern.
seek that blessed, and blessed maki^g Trinity, of fulness. He is Verity,
Charity, Eternity: apply him to thy several wants, and let him be another
soul to thy soul, 1. Cor. 15 18.
that GOD may be all in all. When thou have found him, do like the Spouse,
Cant. 3.4.
hold him fast, and let him not gee: Cant. 3.4. Nay when thou have fou^nd him,
seek him still, Ps. 105.4.
seek the Lord, and his strength, seek his face evermore. o Vt no^ huic
inquisitioni, qua significar amor, finem praestet inuentio, sed amore
crescente, inquisitio crescat inue^ti. Aug. in Ps. 104.
Psalm. 105.4. That which these holy women did in the morning, do thou all thy
life long: that so, the taste of him for a time, may not make an end of
seeking: but the often tasting of him, may increase thy love to him, and so
thou may seek him for ever. If thou find him for one virtue, seek him for
another. Bern: has a chain of 7. links, by which the devout soul, being
trained to seek the eternal word, Ps. 84.7.
grows from strength to strength, till she appears before the Lord in Sion,
Bern. suPer Cant. Sermon. 85.
she seeks him, to whom she may consent to amendment: from whom she may be
enlightened to knowledge; by whom she may be initiated to virtue: through whom
she may be reformed to wisdom; like whom she may be conformed to comeliness;
to whom she may be married to fruitfulness; and whom fully and for ever, she
may enjoy for delight. Be stirring then, and linger no longer. Mark how
peremptorily the Prophet speaks to thee. Isa. 21.12. Isa. 21.12.
The morning comes and also the night, if you will seek, seek. If ever you
mean to begin, now it is high time. Seek him in simplicity of heart: Non
aliud tanquam illum, non aliud praeter illum, non aliud po^t illu^. Bern.
exhor. ad Fratr. Sermon. 2.
not any thing else in stead of him, not any thing beside him, not any thing
after him. Do this now in the morning of thy life, the night comes when no man
can work. Thus have we heard the wome^s inquisitio^, by reason of which, we
have made inquiry of many things. Let us now come to the third part, Christ's
Resurrection: He is risen, he is not here; Behold the place where they put him.

In this part, 3. things are very obseruable. First, the power of his
Resurrection: He is riseu, says the Angel; he was not stolle^ away by his
disciples, nor raised by any other, but Ipse resurrexit, he alone raised up
himself. Secondly, the speed of his resurrection. He is not here, says he,
although your coming be early, and your devotion earnest, yet both come short
of his presencee, he has prevented you, He is not here. Thirdly, the truth of
his Resurrection; Behold the place where they put him, says he. Peradventure,
you may doubt, whether I say true, you may (happily) think he is still in
the grave. Come therefore, and see, use the benefit of your own eyes, Behold
the place where they put him.

Touching the first point, that is, the Power of his Resurrection, it is well
insinuated by the Angel, when he says, He is risen, He needed no hand to
pluck him up, as others that rose before him, and it was impossible that any
hand should hold him back, of all that were against him. As no man took away
his life, Ioh. 10.18.
he had power to lay it down: so no man could keep away his life, he had
power to take it again.

We read of some men, that while they were alive, had power to raise up the
dead, as Act. 9.41.
Peter raised Tabitha, Act. 9. 41. Yea which is more, of some, that when they
were dead, had yet a power to raise up other dead, x as Elizeus, who but
touching the dead Soldier with his bones, revived him, and set him on his
feet again. 2. King. 13.21
2. King. 13 21. But we never read of any man, that being dead, was able to
raise up himself, but only Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified. And he
could do both this and the former. For when he was living, he raised up the
dead, Ioh. 11.41.
as Lazarus, and others, Ioh. 11.41. and which is more, being dead, could
raise up other dead; for at his passion, Mat. 27.52.
the graves opened, and many dead bodies of the Saints arose. Mat. 27.52. And
which is most of all, himself being dead, yet the^ was able to raise up
himself, which no man in the world ever did, and which all the me^ in the
world could never do. Therefore, as he was declared truly to be the Son of
man, by yielding unto death; so, Romans 1.4.
says Paul, he was declared mightily to be the Son of God, by the
Resurrection from the dead. To. 1.4. Bern. paru. Sermon. 14.
qui Agnus extitteraet in passione, factus est Leo in Resurrectione. He, says
Bern: that was a Lamb in his Passion, became a Lion in his Resurrection. When
he was to be crucified, Isa. 53.7.
he was led, says Isay, as a sheep to the slaughter, Isa. 53.7. But when he
arose again, (it was Jacobs Prophecy) that Genesis 49.9.
As a Lions whelpe, he should come up from the spoil. Genes. 49 9. From the
spoil indeed, that is, from having spoiled, (as a most victorious and
conquering champion) death, and hell, sin and Satan, with the whole rabble
of the infernal powers, from all such force, as they had gotten against him,
and all his members.

Hence it is well observed, that Christ's resurrection has a double privilege
above the resurrection, or rather, resuscitation of all others. For though
others rose from the dead as well as Christ, yea, and in time, before him: yet,
says Bernard, Bern. in die (...). Pasch. Sermon. 1.
Resurrexerant mortui, iterum morit^ri. They rose indeed, when they were dead,
but yet, to die again when they were raised.

But Rem. 6.9
Christ rising from the dead, dies no more, death has no more power over him.
To. 6 9. And therefore, justly is he called 1. Cor. 5.20.
Primitiae dormientium, the first fruits of them that deep, which only rose
to immor^alitie, Bern.
Et fic resurrexit vt cadere ^on adijciat, rose in such manner at once, as he
was to fall again never after.

Again, all those which had power given them to raise others, yet had no power
to raise themselves. Elizeus that raised up another man dead, yet has no power
to raise up himself. Bern: ibi supra.
Lo how many years has he live in the grave, expecting a joyful
resurrection at his hand, which has triumphed over the grave; by which it
appears, that all such as raised others, did it, potestate precaria, non
propria, by a power, not resiant in themselves, but received from God.

But Christ, says Bernard, Bern: in die Sanct. Pas. Ser. 1.
Virtute propria victor prodijt de Sepulchro; by his own power raised up
himself, and by the strength of his own arm, made all things give way unto
him. Amb. de virg. lib. 3.
Erras mulier says Saint Ambrose, quae putas de monumento Christum esse
sublatum. O woman, that think some body has taken away thy Lord, and laid
him thou know not where, thou errest grosely. This victorious Sampso^
stoutly carried away the gates of Judge. 16.3.
Azzah, burst open ye door of his Tomb, where the Philistine Jews had shut
him; and in the morning when they sought him, was risen, was not there.

But the woman's error Saint Jerome salueth, Hieron. ad Hedibiam quaest.
Error mulieris cum pietate societus est; An error of infirmity, joined with
devotion. But the Jews, who can excuse? O foolish Jews, tell us, why did you
seal and lock down the stone so fast? Because (said some of your rulers)
Mat. 27.63.
We remember that this deceiuer said, within three days I will rise up again.
Ma. 27.63. Bern:in die. Sanct. Pas. Ser. 1.
Vere seductor, says Bern: Sed pius, non malitiosus; A deceiuer he is indeed,
but an holy, not a malicious deceiuer: and you may well say with Jeremiah your
Prophet, Ierem. 20.7.
O Lord thou have deceived me, and I am deceived, thou art stronger then I, and
have prevailed. Ierem. 20.7. What think you of him now? Is he still but the
Carpenters son? A Carpe^ters son he is we grant, Sed Bern:
hominis fabri filius, fabricator hominis, the son of man, and such a
Carpenter, as made man, and all the world. Will you still be obstinate? Will
you not yet believe? You will say, If he had come down from the cross, we
would have believed in him. Indeed so said some of your rulers, Mat. 27.42.
Desdendet de cruce, etc. Matt. 27.42. But o how like their father the devil,
speak these wicked children, says Saint Chrysostom. Chrysostom. Sermon. de
passione.
The devil said, Cast thy self downward from the Temple; and these men say,
Let him come down from the cross. Fraudu. lenta promissio. Hie. romans
But all this is but dissembling. For, Bern: in die Sa Pas. Sermon. 1.
Si non creditis resurge^ti, nec credidissetis desce^aenti. Surely, if you
believe him not rising out of the grave, neither would you have believed in
him, if he had come down from the cross. Leaving then these obstinate Jews
in the depth of their unbelief, till the time of refreshing comes; Let us
proceed to the second point, the speed of his resurrection, in these words, he
is not here.

Wherein the Angel declares, that though these women were early coming to
him, yet Christ was risen and gone before their coming at him. I may justly
therefore apply this second speech, to the speed of his resurrection. Who though
he were to answer the figure, which himself spoke of, Mat. 12.40. As Jonas was
three days and three nights in the whales belly, so must the son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth: y Mat. 12.40.
yet in very truth, he was not so long time in the bowels of the earth, as
Jonas was in the belly of the fish. For about the ninth hour, he died on the
cross: and about three hours after that, was he laid into his grave. Now
this, in our account, was about three of the clock in the afternoon. This is
but a small part of a day, yet this is reckoned for the first day. The second
day, being the day of rest to the Jews, he himself also rested in his grave.
The third day, being the first day of the week, so soon as the sun of the
firmament rose to cheer the eyes of the world, this glorious Son of
righteousness arose also, to cheer the hearts of the elect. Here you see is but
one whole day, with the end of that which went before it, and the beginning of
that which followed after it: and yet it is reckoned for three days, and that
justly; for the first day, says Augustine, is taken, August lib. de Trinit. 4.
Secundum partem sui posteriorem, according to the latter part thereof: the
second day, Secundu^ se totam and integram, according to it self, whole and
entire: the third, Secu^dum partem sui prima, only according to the former
part thereof.

And what may be the reason of this have, may you say. If any think he thus
hasted away, least his body should putrify, he thinks amiss. For seeing
putrefaction is a punishment of sin, then surely there was no reason that
Christ should fear corruption; For (as Augustine, in another case says)
August. de ciuit. dei lib. 13.4.
Cur esset vllo paena, vbi non erant vlla punienda? Why should there be any
fear of punishment, where nothing was found due to be punishment? In very
deed therefore the causes were these.

First, Vt propheta fidelis inueniatur. Bern: in die Sanct. Pas. Ser. 1.
that the prophet might be found faithful, who says, Hos. 6.2. Hos. 6.2.
He (that is) the Messiah, shall quicken us after two days, and the third day,
he shall raise us up, and we shall come into his presence. Wherein he
signifies the small time that Christ was to remain in his grave.

No doubt but death, as he was very greedy to devour Christ, so he was very
desirous to retain him. But Peter says, Act. 2.24.
It was impossible that he should be held of the sorrows of death. Act. 2.24.
That which death did, and does, to all other men, swallow and devour; he was
not able to do to the man Christ Jesus; but O mors ero mors tua ero morsus tuus
inf^t^e. Hos. 13.14.
was swallowed and devoured himself. And look as Adams stomach could brook
all the allowed fruits: but when he came to the tree in the midst of the
garden, and tasted of it, he set his teeth on edge and surfeited: even so
death, that feeds upon all other flesh, and can brook it well enough, when he
would needs be feeding on this mediator of God and man, surcharged his
stomach, surfeited of sweet meat, and within three days vomitted him up
again, out of his bowels.

Secondly, he arose within three days, that there might be a certain
resemblance, and analogy, between the two great works of the creation of the
world, and the redemption of the world. At the beginning in the sixth day of the
week, God created man. The next day God rested from all his works. The third
day he ceased from his rest. Even so, Christ Jesus, the sixth day of the week,
redeemed man on the cross, being the very day wherein he made him at the
first. The day following, Bern: in die ^anct. Paul. Sermon. 1.
sabbatizauit in monume^to, says Bernard, he kept sabbath in the grave. And
the third day, as the first fruits of the dead, he appeared a new man in the
face of the earth. Yea, not only himself, was then become new, but even all
the creatures became new again with him, and the whole world seemed to begin
afresh, for joy of the resurrection.

And, as Lactantius says, the budding of plants, blossoming of trees, an
springing of flowers, sufficiently witnessed, Lactan. in carminibus.
Omnia cum domino dona redisse suo, that all the creatures were returned from
death with their Lord: and we may now fitly with Paul and Isay, sing, 2. Cor.
5.17 Is. 43.19.
Old things are done away, behold, all things are now become new. 2. Cor. 5.17.

Thirdly, he arose within three days, to be a type unto us of our condition
after him. There is not one of us, but has, and shall have (as Christ) our
three days.

First, a day of suffering in this life. Secondly, a day of rest in the grave.
Thirdly, a day of resurrection up again.

Now he has instructed us, what we must do in those days, and what those
days shall be unto us.

In this first day of ours wherein we live, Mat. 16 24.
we must take up our Cross and follow him. Matthew. 16.24. Bern. in die sanct.
Pasch. Sermon. I.
Neminem audiamus fratres, says Saint Bernard, non carnem and sanguinem, non
spiritum quemlibet descensum a Cruce suadentem. Brethren, if any man in the
world, if our own flesh and blood, if any manner of spirit counsel us to
come down from the cross, let us hear none of them all.

Yea, if our dearest friends bid us favor our selves, as Peter did Christ,
let us reply to every one, as Christ did to Peter, Mat. 16.23.
Get thee behino me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. Mat. 16.23.

Thus if we spend the first day, at the second day, the day of our death, we
shall rest with Christ sweetly, we shall sleep quietly in the grave. For
Christ has gone to bed thither before us, as it were, to warm it against our
coming.

Therefore Ambrose says, In Ambrose.
Sepultura Christi, quies Christiani: The burial of Christ, is the rest of a
Christian. By it, Christ has both abated the sting of the pain, and also
increased the strength of the patient. For look as the first Adam was content
to be cast into a sleep, and to have a ribbe or bone took from him, to make a
wife, and to have the place filled up with soft flesh again: Even so, the
second Adam, CHRISTIESVS, was content to be cast into the sleep of death, to
give a bone, that is, strength and Fortitude, unto his Spouse the Church, and
have received nothing from her for it, but only the infirmities and weakness
of the flesh.

Now if we be crucified with him the first day, and rest with him the second
day, the third day Hos. 6.2:
he will raise us up, and we shall com into his presence. Hos. 6.2. For says
Paul, Rmo. 8.17.
If we suffer together with him, we shall reign with him in glory. Romans 8.17.
Indeed we also grant, the wicked shall rise: but not by virtue of the
resurrection of Christ, but by the power of the just judgment of God. They
shall rise I say, but not to life: Bern. super Cent. Sermon. 26.
Imo ad vitam, says Bern. vt vim in morte, infoelicius moriantur: yea, to life
too, in some sort; that living a dying life, and dying a living death, they may
ever live in most direful and deadly damnation.

But the righteous shall be sure, as they lived to Christ in this world, so to
live with him in the world to come; For Paul's rule is certain. Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in you, he that raised Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that
dwells in you.

Fourthly, he arose within three days, that he might not any longer perplex
the hearts of his disciples. When he died, one sold him, another foreswore him;
and all forsook him. When he was dead, and risen again, some believed, some
doubted, some were resolute in unbelief.

If they were thus perplexed, when he tarryed from them but three days, what
would they have been, if he had absented himself three weeks? Therefore,
says Leo: Ne De^^^ciatam tridui ^no ^am tam mira celeritate breuiauit, vt dum
ad integ^^u^ secundum diem pars primi nouissima, and pars certij prima
concurrit, and aliquantulu^ de spacio te^, poris decideret, and nihil de dieru^
numero deperiret. Leo de Resurr. Dom. Sermon. 1.
turbatos Discipulorum animos long a moestitudo cruciaret, etc. That continual
sadness should not perpetually vex the disciples hearts, the Lord
abbreuiated the appointed time of his being in the grave: that whilst the
latter part of the first day, and the first part of the latter day, be reputed
as days, no part of the number does perish, for falsifying the Scriptures, and
yet a great part of their length is cut off, for the comfort of his disciples.
And whereas he was absent from them in the grave, for the space of forty
hours; he afterward came, and remained with the^ in the world, for the space
of forty days.

And mark (with me) further, from hence a worthy point. So early in the
morning was Christ risen from the dead, that though these women, which came with
ointments and odors to embalme him, were coming (as Saint John says) Ioh.
20.1.
while it was yet dark, Ioh. 20.1. Yet such was the speedy vprising of our
Savior, that he was gone ere they came.

Shall we think Christ scorned their good devotion, now he was risen, which
he accepted kindly, ere he was crucified? Some of them had anointed him
living, and he took it graciously: his feet with tears, his head and feet
both, with spikenard.

Shall we think he now condemned, what before he commended? No, says Bern:
Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 12.
Renuit vngi, sed parcens, non spernens: he refused indeed to be anointed,
but sparing the anointed, not desprising the annointers.

Shall we think then that he delighted to delude and beguile these simple
women? Not so neither, says Bernard, Id. ibid.
Mulierum deuotioni, non clusit, sed instruxit. This devotion of theirs, he
intended not to delude, but labored to instruct.

What may it be then? Take it in a word. When they came with spices and
ointments to persume his dead body, he refused it: teaching them ever after,
how their devotion should be pleasing unto him: that is to say, not to spend
any thing upon his dead body in the grave; but to bestow all upon his living
body the Church. Bern. vt sup.
Ipsam vngi, ipsam foueri desiderat: The church, the church I say, his beloved
Spouse, that is it which Christ desires should be anointed.

The ministers, her mouth and teeth, which break the bread of eternal life,
together with all other her feeble members, would Christ have to be sweetened
with the perfumes of your most holy devotions, that so your liberality to the
church, may prove like the Philippians benificence to Paul, Phil. 4.18.
an odor that smells sweet, a Sacrifice pleasing, and acceptable to God.
Phil. 4.18.

Herein, besides the precept of Christ, to inform and command us, have we
also the practice of good Christians, to reform and amend us.

And, that I may not go any further then where we are, the former benefactors
to this present place, call for after benefits of the succeeding age,
plentifully to be bestowed to the good of the Church.

That worthy Lady Elizabeth, Countess of Shrewsburie, committed a great
sum of money into the hands of that Reverend father, John Ailmer, sometime
Bishop of this Sea, for the better promision of those Preachers, which are sent
unto this place.

O how right this fittes with my former assertion, that women by grace, equal
men in virtue, as by nature they come not behind them in wit. Whose example so
moved the Reverend father, that he gave out of his own revenues, three other
parts, and made of one hundred pou^ds, four, for the same end and purpose.
There in he proved himself a John, in that, though he did not at first go out
with her, yet afterward, he did out go her. For who should outstrip all men
in good example, if not Bishops? and who should shine forth to others, but such
as be the Lights of the world.

Afterward, one Thomas Russell, a good Citizen, added a yearly pension of ten
pounds, to the end abouesaid, to teach you Citizens, that as you have ever been
reckoned with the forwardest in good works, so you should be moved by his
example, both to retain, and also to increase that good reputation that has
bin had of you: that so, neither the wayfaring Prophet (who formerly with
Ezekiel has bin forced to lodge among scorpions) may from he^ceforth want,
either, a chamber, or a bed, or a table, and candlestick: nor the Papists any
longer accuse our religion of barrennes, saying we preach Faith, but overthrow
all good works: and that our religion is like the fig tree, having many fair
leaves of doctrine, but little or no fruit of good life. And thus much touching
the second point.

The third part follows, and that is the truth of his Resurrection: Behold
the place where they put him. A if he had said, Si non creditis oraculo,
credit oculo. If you cannot for joy, conceive the meaning of my words, or for
sorrow believe the truth of my words, look into the grave, see the place
empty, and him gone: Behold the place where they put him.

In this point (I trust) I may be brief. Certainly, I should do you injury
to urge it much, seeing you are all (as I trust) good Christians, and believe
it to be most true. And my much labor in proving the truth thereof, might
insinuat a suspicion of your want of faith therein, August. is di^^sanct. ^^ch
Sermon. 4.
Qui nouit defendere fidem, says Saint Augustine, titubartius est necessarius,
non credentibus: He that knows how to defend the says, is more necessary for
him that doubts, then profitable for him that believes.

But put case there were some Jew here, or Pagan; Is it possible that he should
not believe the truth of Christ's Resurrection? Let him with these women, use
the henefite of his eyes. Let him look to the manifold Prophecies and figures
concurrences, that happened together with it: and the often and undoubted
Apparitions that came to pass after it.

At the beginning, even GOD himself declared it by Prophecy, Genesis 3.15.
Genesis 3 15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. David
afterward is bold and says: Psalm. 16.10.
Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine Holy one to see
corruption. Psalm. 16.10. And what meant Genesis 2.21.
Adams sleep till Euah was taken out of his side, and his waking after to live
with her as a loving husband, but that Christ also should sleep in the grave,
that out of his pierced side, the Spouse might be purchased, to whom he should
ever after wake, as a most vigilant and careful defender?

What was signified by Genesis 22.11.
Isaac, laid as a Sacrifice on the Altar, ready to be offered, but presently
losed and unbound again; but that CHRIST JESUS, the true Sacrifice for the
sins of the whole world, should be offered to death on the Altar of the
Cross, and the sorrows of death, immediately losed again, whereof it was
impossible that he should be holden?

This glorious Resurrection of the SON OF GOD, was further signified by
Joseph, Genesis 41.14.
who a few days was imprisoned in the dungeen, and afterward, advanced to the
regiment of a Kingdom.

By Judge. 15 14.
Sampson, who while he slept was bound with ropes, but when he awaked again,
snapped them in sunder as threeds.

By Jonas, Ion. 2.10
who was swallowed of a fish, but after three days cast upon dry land again.

Look further, on the concurrences happening together with it, as the great
Earthquake Mat. 28.2.
which then was. Matthew. 28.2.

Sure, says Hilarie, it was the virtue of his Resurrection, and signified,
that Aquin. in Cate, super Mat. 28.
Resurgente virtutum coelestium domino, inferorum trepidatio co^mouetur. The
Lord of the heavenly powers arising, the weakness of the infernal powers should
be troubled.

Consider the huge stone rolled and turned away from the grave, with the
handsome folding of the clothes and napkins left behin de him, and weigh
seriously that same transparent Lie of the keepers; how even then they prove
Christ's resurection to be true: when they went about to make the world believe
it was false They being thereunto hired with money, gave out, that His
disciples came by night, g Mat. 28.13.
and stole him away, whilst they were sleeping. Matthew. 28.13.

But o Children of the devil, how absurdlie do you speak? For if you slept,
how can you tell he was stolen away? and if you were awake, why do you say
you slept?

Again, recount the many Apparitions that he made after his resurrection. If
I be not deceived, Paul and the Evangelists reckon eleven several Apparitions
of Christ after his Resurrection: for more confirmation of the truth thereof,
Sometime he appeared to comfort the sorrowful hearts of his Disciples:
sometime to convince the obstinate hearts of his enemies. Sometime he eat
meat with them, and showed them his wounds, which he kept, says Augustine,
August, in die Sanct. Pasch. Sermon. 4.
Non agestate, sed potestate, not for any weakness in himself, but for the
strengthening of others, especially, vt sanaret vulnus incredulitatis: That the
apparent wounds of his crucified body, might heal the hidden sores of their
unbelieving souls.

Afterward, says Paul 1. Cor. 15.6.
He was seen of more then five hundredth brethren at once: and lastly of me,
as of one borne out of due time. 1. Corinthians. 15.6.

These things being thus clear, peradventure now you will wonder, why the
Jews believe not Christ's resurrection to be true? Surely, no other reason can
be yielded of it, but this, that partly obstinacy is come upon Israel, till
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And certes, even we which believe the
truth thereof, are not beholding to our selves for it. It may be said to
every faithful soul among us, as Christ said to Peter, Matthew. 16.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee: but my Father which is in
heaven. Matthew. 16.17. For though Paul demands, Act. 26.8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible unto you, that God should raise
again the dead? Act. 26.8. And indeed, as Augustine says, Concidera autorem
and toll dubitationem. August in die San. Pas. Ser. 4.
There is no cause of doubting, if we consider the author: yet such is our
obstinate blindness by nature, ye the most easy, plain and true things, are
hard, harsh, and false in our judgment, till, 1. Cor. 2.12.
We have received the spirit of God, that we may know the things which be of
God. 1. Cor. 2.12. In this regard, the faith of Christ generally embraced in
the world, is numbered amongst the most famous mysteries of our religion. 1.
Tim. 3.10.
Without controversy, says Paul, great is the mystery of godliness, God is
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, BELIEVED ON IN THE WORLD, and received up into glory. 1.
Tim. 3.16. Hereupon Bern: has this observation, Bern: in vigili. Not. dom.
Ser. 3.
Tria opera, tres mixturas, etc. That omnipote^t majesty in the assumption of
our flesh, did three works, made three mixtures, so singularly marvelous, and
so maruellously singular, that as he never did them before, so he was to do
them never after, Coniuncta sunt quippe ad in vicem, deus and homo, matter and
virgo, fides and cor humanum. For there were joined together, God and man, a
mother and a Virgin, faith and man's soul. The like also has Augustine
observed. August de ciuit. de. lib. 22. cap. 5.
There are three incredible things, says he, and yet have they bin done. It is
incredible that Christ should arise in our flesh, and that he should ascend up
to heaven in our flesh: and thirdly, incredible est, mundum, remtam
incredibilem credidisse, it is also incredible, that the world should give
credit, to so incredible a matter.

To conclude then. As faith bids us believe the truth hereof, so, I am quippe
illum inuenit fidei, sed adhue eum quaerit spes. Aug. in Psalm. 104.
hope requires us to expect the power hereof: that is, that Christ our head,
which once arose in his own person, shall in due time also quicken us his
members, in our persons: that so the head and the body, being coupled
together, God may be all in all.

And let this hope be unto us an author, in all the storms of adversity, to
save our souls from shipwreck. What says Paul; Romans 8.34.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead. Yea, so the Jews and Pagans
believe says Augustine; therefore Paul adds, yea, or rather which is risen
again. This none believes but a Christian. And in a sound believing hereof,
consists the very salvation of our souls. Reu. 10.9.
For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Romans 10.9. Thus
Job comforted himself, Job. 19.25.
I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last on the earth.
Job. 19.25. It is our duty then, with patience to expect that in our selves,
which through power we believe God effected in him, and when death shall
approach us, as it were wholly to devour us; then, to comfort our selves, with
the thought of this, that, Job. 19.16.
Though after our decease, worms destroy this body, yet in the appointed
time, we shall see God in our flesh. Job. 19.16. which God, the Father, with
his dear Son our Savior, and the holy Ghost our comforter, three persons,
and one everlasting God, be all honor and glory, Majesty and dominion,
ascribed for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

