THE BISHOP OF LONDON HIS LEGACY.

OR Certain Motives of D. King, late Bishop of London, for his change of
Religion, and dying in the Catholic, and Roman Church.

With a Conclusion to his Brethren, the LL. Bishops of England.

Cum dederit dilectis suis somnum, ecce hereditas Domini. Psalm. 126 Beati, qui
ix Domin^ moriuntur. Apoc. 14. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXIII.

AN ADVERTISMENT OF THE PVBLISHER OF THIS TREATISE to the Reader.
GOOD Reader, It is an approved Method both of ancient and modern VVriters,
after they have made choice of the Subject by the^ to be entreated off,
sometimes by a Poetical Conceit, particularly to tie and apply the said
Subject, to some one peculiar person, or other circumstance; as if the Truth,
and Verity thereof, did really exist only in the same Person, or Circumstance.

Thus (for Example) Xenephon fashioning in his KYPO^ANAEIA, or Institution of
Cyrus; what a Princ^ ought to be, does person^^e all his Precepts therein in
Cyrus: Not that Cyrus was such a Prince, as he is there described; but that
according to the judgment of Xenophon, is Prince, or King is wished to be so
instructed and informed, as he feygneth Cyrus. And thus his Majesty (whom God
long preserve) following in part the like Method, does delineate, and draw
with his learned Pencil, the true portraiture of a good Prince in his Basilicon
Doron, a work of eternal memory, and worthy to be written in letters, not of
gould (too base a metal) but even in letters of Diamonds, if so they could be
melted and resolved. Thus also does Homer in his Odyssees (as it were)
incorporate all his instructions and docume^ts of a subtle and wise traveler,
in the person of Ulysses. The like may improportionably be auerred of Plato
touching his Commonwealth, of Aristotle touching his Felicity, and lastly of
that most glorious Martyr Sr. Thomas More in his Vtopia. All or most of which
Authors for their better warrant, do challenge to themselves a Poetical
liberty, in feyguing that really to be, which indeed is not.

Now to apply this to our present matter in had, ^^^hing the deceased Bishop of
London, D. King. That he altered his Religion before his death, and dyed
Catholic, is most certain, (howsoever his F^^^ries labor to suppress the
truth,) seeing if liberty were given, it would infallibly be made evident by
many unanswerable reasons. That he did write in time of his sickness, and
delivered to others before his death any reason, or motyues of such his change
in Religion, I will be sparing peremptorily to affirm; for I will not
exasperate his Friends, and other great Protestant personages, more then
necessity inforceth. For seeing they could not endure to hear, that he dyed
Catholic, what tragedyes and troubles would they attempt to raise, if it
should be auerred, that the Bishop did write any Motives of such his alteration
in Faith and Religion. Only I say, seeing it is most certain, that he dyed
Catholic: And seeing no learned Man changes his Religion, but upon some
Inducements and Motives: And lastly seeing in the judgment of the Publisher
heerof, no Motyues are more forcible for a Protestant (and perhaps particulerly
for the Bishop) to change his Religion, and embrace the Catholic Faith, then
these set down in this Treatise: Therefore the Publisher, as being warra^ted by
the former examples of Xenophon and others above mentioned, wishes, that
Himself may be here taken to have written these Motives, as a Precedent, or
Pat^erne, warranting any Protestant in the change of his Religion, though by a
Poetical freedom peculiarly applied to the Bishop, in regard of his like
change of Faith; and so accordingly the Treatise is styled, His Legacy.

And therefore to keep the better Decorum, where the Bishop in the Epistle
Dedicatory, assumeth the writing thereof to himself: Where also in the Book it
self, there is some enterchange of speeches between the Bishop and others:
And lastly, where the Bishop in the end thereof writes to the rest of the
Bishops his Brethren: All these passages, the Reader may (if it please him)
with my full consent and allowance, suppose to be fictiones Personarum, and
warranted by the figure Prospopcia: And that the Publisher heerof performs no
more, (if so much) then Plutarch does in his Parallels of the Romans with the
Grecians: That is, to appropriate certain Speeches, or Orations to certain
Men; and such speeches only, as are most fitting to proceed (with due
consideration of Circumstances) from the same parties, to whom they are by
supposall so ascribed.

Thus Good Reader, seeing matters must be cautelously carried in these days,
thou see, I will thee not, to take this Treatise, as written by the Bishop,
and delivered over to others in his life time, but (in Gods Name) repute it as
Mine. For I am not desirous to father any thing upon the dead (nor does the
Catholic Cause need any such Pretense) but what is acknowledged for such, by
the judgment of all Men; and I know well the B^. Friends are far from any
such acknowledgment. But howsoever, if thou reap profit heerby, I shall be glad;
but if neither the Bishops change in Religion, nor these present Motyues (by
whomsoever written) can withdraw thee from the Heresies of these times, I can
but commiserate the poor and dangerous estate of thy Soul.

If any of the Bishops nearest Friends, shall by answer impugn this Treatise,
let him take heed, that the birth of such a future work become not viperous,
as not regarding whose sides it la^ceth before it can take is being. But above
all, forbearing to cavil at the Method, let him be careful to answer the
Motyues in particular, and this directly and plainly, and to all the
authorityes, as here they do lie, without affecting any obscurity in Method,
or long and tedious Discourses, thereby to divert the Readers mind from the
point here handled, and to turn it to other by-matters. Thus much is expected
at his hands, and the rather, seeing aforehand he is premonished hereof only,
for the better manifestation of the truth. And thus (Good Reader) wishing thee
to take (at least) in good part, the publishing of this Legacy, which indeed
had been sent to the Press instantly upon the Bishops death (and so had then
immediately come forth) were it not, that it has been stayed till now, upon
some just and urgent Reasons, I bid thee heartily farewell.

Thy loving Friend A. B.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
GOOD Christian Reader (whether Catholyke or Protestant) here before my Death
I bequeath to thee (as my Legacy) these few leaves (though the weak and
feminyne Issue of my sick and distempered Age) containing (no doubt, with
amazement to thy self) certain grounds of my alienation of mind from the
Protestants Religion. True it is, that for some years past (though I was far
otherwise affected, when I did write my Lectures upon Jonas) I have preached
and taught the Protestant faith, with a certain hesitation and doubtfulnes of
Judgment, in regard of some time more seriously spent, then before in those
kind of studyes, in the which (to speak in the VVisemans Eccles. cap. 52.
) dialect): Modicum laboraui, sed inueni mihi magnam requiem.

Many are the Reasons warranting this my change, much traveled in, even by my
own pains and disquisition (for I grant, I scorned to look into these
weighty matters, with other men's eyes:) yet by reason of the present weak
state of my languishing Body, I have selected these few particular Motives
ensuing, hereafter in due time to be presented to the eye of the World.
Touching which I foresee, I shall find different (and perhaps some calumnious)
Censures.

For I probably presage, that since it will be interpreted injurious to the
present State, as if Tert. lib. aduers. Gentes.
non possumus and Romani esse, and hosts non esse; and displeasing to his
Majesty (whom in my soul I do affect with all true Allegiance, do acknowledge
with all Gratefulnes his many Honorable and undeserving Favors, and for whose
true Happiness I do, and daily will pray, as long as this enfeebled flesh of mine
shall enjoy this air (when it shall be reported, that the Bishop of London dyed
a Romanist in Religion, and has not been ashamed, even with his own pen,
to pull in those Colors of that faith, which himself before had adua^ced; that
therefore it must be diuulged, either he dyed not in that Religion; or at least
that these written Motives are but masked under his Name, as being framed by
some Catholic Pryest, for the greater defaming of the Protestants Gospel.

No, No. By Gods infinite grace, I am resoued (notwithstanding all contrary
assaults whatsoever) to die a menber of the Catholyke, or (as we term it)
Papist Church: Inueni Cantie, 8.
quem diligit anima mea, tenui eum, nec dimittam. And as an earnest given to
this my design, I have here written this small Treatise, which in my life
time is delivered to a friend. It is mine, and penned by my self, and to me the
dearest and choicest Child, that ever the womb of my brain brought forth;
howsoever it is likely that Orphanlyke it shall be cast out, and be betrampled
upon with all ensuing serpentine malignity.

I have purposely enleuened the most passages thereof, with the testimonies of
diverse Protestant Writers and Doctors; and this for two respects. One, because
my self being heretofore a Protestant Doctor, and placed in that eminency of
seat wherein I am, I thought it the more suitable, to produce authorityes of men
of my own former Religion, Rank, and Profession. The other for breuity;
seeing the acknowledgments of Protestants in points controuerted, prevent, that
we need not to recurre (through a long and wearisome enquiry) to Scriptures,
Fathers, or Historyes, for the determining of the said Points: and I remember
well, that dull and tedious reading, soon turns the edge of fastidious and
curious Wits.

The truth is here set down plainly, without Affectation of pleasing Oratory,
or (to use the Apostles phrase) the perswasible 1. Cor. 2.
words of humane wisdom, for at this time, and upon this subject, I little
pryze a fluent, smooth, and oyled tongue.

If it be demanded, why now (and not before) I do write this Apology? Let such
men know, i^lis the fear of Hell, and loss of Heaven (the only two
landing-places of the Soul, after her departure from hence, for all Eternity
that has forced me heerto. Alas, my poor languishing body every day decaying,
and assuring itself, that many months (for I look not for years) it cannot
hold out, sommons me now to display the very secrets of my soul, for the
saving of my soul; and not to draw any veyle between me, and my most inward
Thoughts and Intentions.

I have dissembled my Religion for some few years (so have Wife, Children, and
wordly Honors enthralled my Soul:) sweet Jesus forgive me. I have persecuted
the Church of Christ for many years. O blessed Apostle S. Paul! thou, who once
wast a Persecutour, but after a planter of Gods Church, intercede for me. But,
O the torment of my afflicted Conscience I have had my hand (would to God, both
hand and arm, for the preventing of such a mischeife, had then been cut off)
in sheeding of innocent Blood: And is it not high time for me, to cast up these
accounts, and to use an introuersion upon my own Actions?

O happy Almond, who hee^e upon earth did mask thy self under the name of
Mollineux! In thy blood, eu^^ in thy blood did I wash my hands. It was I, that
did further thy death: be thou O blessed Saint, who now see and hear me: (
Quid Creg. l. 4. dial.
non videt, qui videntem omnia videt?) be thou, I say, out of thy Seraphicall
Charity, as propitious to pray for remitting of that crying-Sinne, as I am
ready to acknowledge the Sin. And let thy blood (guilty of no other treason,
then in not being a ^raytour to Christ and his Church) not resemble the blood
of G^^es. 4.
Abel which cried for revenge against his brother; but rather the blood of
Christ which prayed Luc. c. 3.
for pardon of his Crucifiers.

Well then; the state of my former life, and my present weakness being thus;
have I not just reason to say with the Spouse Cant. 4.
: Vadam admontem mirrhae, and collem thuris (where a man by a spiritual
annibilatio^ of himself, enjoys a more perfect being,) That is, I will spend
the short remnant of my life, in Penance, and Prayer. Let my future
Adversaries spit our their Venom never so much in their contumelious Scripts
against me. I care not, I fear not, I am resolved, for my own good, to break
with flesh and blood, since shortly I am to leave all flesh and blood. I am
within the jaws of death, and all that I expect, is to save my soul. And
poor Doctor King dying Catholic, is not ashamed to acknowledge the
transgressions of Doctor King, living Protestant.

Therefore O most merciful Lord, (who a^t God of God, and Man for Man) who
have said to a sinful soul: Tu Ier^n. ^.
fornicata es cum multis amatoribus; tamen reiertere admo, and ego re^piam te;
do not repudiate this poor soul of mine, which has committed spiritual
fornication with Honors, Preferments, and other such glorious Miseryes. Thou,
who in thy holy Writ, have left recorded. Quomo^o Psalm. ^02.
miseretur Pater filiorum, misertus est Dominus timentibus s^* Be hold here
thy Prodigal son, prostrating my self at the feet of thee my heavenly Father,
humbly craving pardon for my misspent substance and partrimony, Finally; thou,
who thus assurest (...) Nolo Fzech. cap. 18.
mortem morientis, conuertimini and ^iuite: Look upon me, who now half dead
in body, and heretofore wholly dead in Soul, even loathing the vpbrayding
remembrance of my former courses, do cast my self between thy arms, to
receive a new spiritual life.

Sweet Jesus, who by my creation gave me a Being, by my Redemption a
Well-being, who suffered Deati^ to prevent death, and whose wound care our
wouds ( (...) Isa. c^ ^.
^^us sanatcsimi^^^) vouc^sa^e to sanctify me with thy soul; ^o me^^^ate my
intellectual powers with thy blood; and to wash away all their ordure and
filth, with the water of thy pierced side; that so, I poor, despicable, and
miserable man, seeing all my sins before drowned in the gulf of thy
inexhausted Mercy, may in the end enter into thy promised (and my hoped for)
Canaan.

Joan. Londinens.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL MOTIVES OF THIS TREATISE.
THE 1. MOTIVE. THAT the private spirit is the chief supporter of Protestancy.
Page 1. Motive 2. That the Prophesyes of Scripture confirm the Catholic
Religion, and refute Protestancy. page 10. Motive 3. That general Counsels,
confirming Catholic Religion, are rejected by Protetestants. page 33. Motive
4. That the Fathers of the Primitive Church (as Patrons of Papistry) are
rejected by the Protestants. page* 39. Motive 5. That the articles of
Protestancy are particulerly condemned for benes^es, by the ancient Fathers.
And that all Protestants originally came out of the Catholic Church. page 53.
Motive 6. That true Miracles have been wrought for proof of the Catholic
Religion; but not any for Protestancy. page 64. Motive 7. Absurdityes in the
Protestants Religion. page 77. Motive 8 Deceites, and sleightes practiced by
Protestant VVryters. page 93. Motive 9. That the doctrine of Catholic
Religion, tendes directly to Virtue; of Protestancy, to Vice and Liberty. page
118. Motive 10. That Luther and Calvin are chief Patrones of Arianisme; and
therefore in other points of faith are not to be followed. p 131 Motive 11.
That there is unity in Faith in Catholic Religion; and disagreements in faith
in Protestancy. page 139. Motive 12. That Salvation may be had in Catholic
Religion, by the confession of Protestants. page 154. The Conclusion to my
Dears, and Reverend Brethren, the Lords Arch bishops, and Bishops of England.
page 168
THE BISHOP OF LONDON HIS LEGACY.
THE 1. MOTIVE. That the private Spirit is the chief supporter of Protestancy.
THE affected, strange, and exorbitant course we Protestants hold (I yet range
my self with my former Brethren, according to my accustomed dialect) in
determining of doubts in Religion is able to cause the learnedest of us, to
fluctuate and waver in our already ietled judgments. We all know, it is our
own head Theoreme, that the Scripture alone (and but such as our selves admit
for Canonical) is to judge of all arising Controuersyes in faith and the
private spirit to judge of the sense of the Scripture: Which private spirit
(being but a mere intentionall and vnreall name) our own D. In Co^trou. 1. q.
^ c. 3. and 11.
Whitaker thus speciously entitles: An inward persuasion of the truth, from the
Holy Ghost, in the secret closes of the belieuers heart. Thus by recurring to
Scripture alone, we reject all Apostolical Traditions, all definitions of the
Church, and the most ancient practice thereof; by erecting the private spirit,
we make our selves sole Lords of the Scripture: A poor refuge (God knows)
discovering in a clear and impartial eye the feeblenes of our own cause;
since in so doing, we being but parties, constitute our selves as Judges,
daring in the closure of all, to judge even our own Judges.

Thus for example, if our Adversaries the Catholics, in justifying the
articles of their faith, do urge any passage of the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus,
Toby etc. acknowledged for Canonical Scripture by S. Augustine De doctrine.
Christian. l. 2. c. ^.
and the third Council Can. 47.
of Carthage; this Private spirit, in lieu of further answer, peremptorily
discanoneth all these Books, under the tecture, that they were Doctor Whitaker.
in his answer to M. Reynold^ ^efutation. p. 22. and 23. Calu. lib. 1. Insti^.
c. 7.. 1. and 2.
not first written in Hebrew, and that the Majesty and voice of God appears
not in them: Strangely inferred; as though the Spirit of God ought seruily to
be tied to any one tongue; or because in the silly weenings of this spirit the
Majesty and voice of God speaks not in the said Books, therefore they are
indeed wholly deprived thereof.

If our Adversaries, proceeding further, do insist, for proof of any
dogmaticall point, in the plain words of confessed Scripture, as for proof
of Apostolical Traditions (whereby this phantasy of the Scripture being sole
judge is impugned) in that passage 2. These. 2.
of the Apostle: Hold fast the traditions, which you have received (sieve per
sermonem, sieve per Epistol^m nostram) either by word, or by our Epistle; the
Private spirit (as it were, with it Mercuryes rod) here chaseth away the most
obuious and familiar construction, obtruding this Scholia upon the text: That
Kem^^. in (...) Conc. ^^dent.
the Apostle first delivered those things by speech, which after he left
written in his Epistle: Absured; since the dis^unctiue particle (sieve) implies
an Antithesis or opposition of the things delivered by speech, and the things
written.

If they fortify the plain and literal sense of the foresaid Text with the
answerable Constitutio^s and Canons of most ancient general Councels, as of
that of the second of Nice: Si Act. ^. ^om. 4.
quis traditione^ Ecclesiae sieve scripto five consuetudine valentem non
curauerit, Anathema sit; the Spirit spurneth here at, auerring, that So D.
VVh^^ak. l. de Co^^^il. con^^a Bellar^^. q. ^.
general Counsels may err. And that as So Peter Martyr. l. de votis p. 476.
long, as we insist in general Councels, so long we shall continue in the
Papists errors. Thus hoping that the splendor of the whole Church of Christ,
being once obscured, it self may shine forth with more luster; so the least
star discovers it light, through absence of a greater light.

If our Adversaries produce the testimonies, but of private Fathers in warrant
of Traditions, as of Lib. contra Donat. Quae vn^uersa tenet ^cclesia ab
Apost^lis praecepta, been creduntur, quanquam scriptanon reperiantur
Augustine, Lib. 2. epist. ^.
Cypri^n, and the like: O what indignity is it, to this all-controuling Spirit,
which even drunk with a self co^placency, can with one puff of his breath
blow away the force of all their authorityes, by saying: Gods Luth. tom. 2.
cont. Reg Angl fol. 344.
word is above all; the divine Majesty makes for me, in so much as I regard
not, if a thousand Augustines, a thousand Cyprians stood against me: vanting
further of it self: Non sinam ipsos Angelos de mea doctrina iudicare.

Lastly if they put us in mind, how it has been ever the proper Scene of
heretics to enamel and varnish the deformed face of their Heresies, with the
misapplyed texts of Gods sacred Word: Haereses Aug i^ hom. 9. tract. 18. in
Joan.
sumunt originem quando Scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been. Thus did the
Joan. 14. and 18. and 17. 1. Cor. 18. 1 Timothy 2. and Act. 2.
Arians, the Joan. 1. and 2.
Eutichians, the Philip. 2. Haebr. 7 Matthew. 27. Joan. 12.
Nestorians, all which for number were able to vye text for text in defense of
their blasphemies against Gods Church; a course anciently so much used, as that
S. Augustine Contra Maximin. Arian. l. 1.
introduces the Heretics of his days, provoking their adversaries only to
the Scripture. The Spirit replies, that indeed those Heretics and such others
pressed Scripture, but wrongfully; since they used not prayer, nor conference
of places, nor had knowledge in the tongues, all which the true Spirit, as
conducing means, does enjoy.

-- Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? For besides, (s) D. Reynolds in his
C^nfer. p. 83. and 84.
that these interuenient means even in the censure of D. Whitaker Whitaker.
Media interpretandi loca obscura, sunt incerta, dubia, and ambigua: ergo
fierinon potest, quin and ipsa etiam interpretatio fit incerta: si i^certa, tum
potest esse falsa. lib. 2. de Eccies. contr. Bellarm. controu. i. quest. 4.
include a doubtfulles of Judgment, in the interpretation of Scripture, under
what show of Reason can we persuade others, that our selus do practice in a
higher measure, these means, then the foresaid acknowledged Heretics did? Or
why should any man give a more certain and indubious assent to our spirits,
then to the Spirits of those other, or of our Adversaries?

But to draw to a more inward and particular fight herein. Luther and Calvin
enjoyed this Private spirit (as themselves do vaunt.) Furthermore this Spirit
(supposing it to be the gift of the holy Ghost) is infallible. This granted,
what unlucky constellation then reigned, when of these few words, Hoc est corp
is meum, the Spirits of Luther, Calvin, and their Scholars have delivered more
different constructions, then there are words in this short sentence; and such
constructions, as one is incompatible with another; so as if not all, at least
some of necessity, must be false. In like sort in these two words of the
Creed, Descendit ad inferos, what contrary senses of them are given by the
Protestants, all enjoying (in their own judgments) the infallibility of this
Apocalypticall and revealing spirit? It is needles to particularize their
several and contrary interpretations given of the two former sentences: Their
own Booke-warrs The different doctrines among Protestants, concerning these two
points and others, and all warranted by the interpretation of the Private
spirit, have occasioned above three hundred books to have been written by the
Protestants one against another, of which Hospinian (a Protestant) and the
yearly Catalogue of Fra^ckford make mention.
waged by Protestants against the Protestants, and undertaken with sharpened
pens in great hostility of style, originally for the maintenance of the
different doctrines rising through their misinterpretation of the former Text,
proclaims the truth of this to the world. Thus, suppose a man to be once
possessed (or, if you will, obsest) with this lying Spirit, how easily can he
ventilate strange and irreconciliable doctrines? Here then I urge: Is this
spirit of God? How can it then broach contrary and repugnant doctrines? Since
his Church is one Romans 12. Cant. 6. Joan. 10.
body, one spouse, one sheepfould. Is it not? Why then should I longer
persevere in that Religion, which sucketh it venom from so false a spirit? Non
Tertu* l. de Baptis.
idem Deus est nobis and illis, nec vnus Christus.

But what? Do our own writings really stand thus chargeable in defense of this
all judging Spirit? or is it but my unjust aspersion cast upon my Brethrens
wronged Pens? Read, and then censure.

One of us comes forth upon the stage (for the eye of the World is the stage of
man's actions) thus saying: The D. Bilson in his true difere^ce between
Christian subjection, and vnch istian rebellion.
people must be discerners and judges of what is taught. Another, That Luth.
tom. 2. VVittem. fol. 375.
the sleep is to judge, whether the Pastors propound to them the voice of
Christ, or of strangers. A third (to pass over the Brethren In their Appology
to the universities.
of Amsterdam, the branches and descendents of the Church of Geneua) acts his
part more lively, thus pronouncing of the privilege heerin, even of any
left handed, unlearned, and mechanical fellow: The Whitaker. de sacra Scriptura
p. 519.
unlearned in the exposition of the Scripture is to demand the opinion of the
learned, and to read the Commentaryes of Interpreters; Sed videndum interim
est, ne nimis illis tribuant etc. sed caute semper (belike for fear of sinning
in humblenes of mind) atque it a, vt c^rum interim libertatem retincant. Where
is Humility? Where is the 2. Cor. 10.
Apostles precept of captiuating our judgments? But it is exiled, and in it
room are stepped in, this Spirits assuming Pride, and blushles Ignorance: The
irreconciliable doctrines it broacheth, bewray it Ignorance, it control of
all authority, it Pride.

The difficulty of the Scriptures I will here pass over with a gentle touch
(for I affect breuity) though the consideration of their abstrusnes more fully
displayeth the vanity of this Private spirit, ever venditating the facility of
the^. For what can be found in any writings to occasion misconstruction which
here is not found? The sense? Where humane writings have commonly but one
sense, the Scripture in many places (besides the literal) is invested with To
wit sensu^ Alegorious, Tropologi^us, and Anogogious.
three. The Style? It is here most plain, yet most profound; familiar, yet
persuading; unaffected, yet inimitable; for the most part literal, yet
sparsedly fraught with Schems, Figures, and Allegoryes. The Subject? It is
here supernatural, transcending all reach of man's Reason: Since here we
learn (to omit all other misteryes of faith recorded in Gods sacred Writ) that
Omnipotency was once Luc. 2. she wraped him in swaddling clothes.
weak; Eternity Luke ibid. when eight days were accomplished, that they
should circumcise the child.
young; Omnipresency Matt: 28. He is not here, for he is risen.
confined; Infinitenes Luc. 2. And Jesus increased in wisdom, age, and grace.
increasing; Wisdom Marc: 13. of that day and hour knows no man, etc.
neither the son himself.
ignorant; the Word John 19. But Jesus gave him no answer.
silent; and finally the Lord of heaven and earth, poor Luc. 9. The birds have
nests etc. but the son of Man has not whereon to lay his head.
and despicable: so just reason had S. Ambrose to say: Mare Epist. 44. ad
Constantium.
est Scriptura diuina, hahens inse sensus profundos and so little reason our
Brethren to use for their Mot: Ad Beza. see D. Bancrofts survey page 219.
verbum Deiprouoco.

But to resume my former heads: Since then this revealing spirit is not afraid
to expunge out of the sacred Canon of Scripture such books as Apocriphall,
wherein it own Religion is evidently impugned; since it allows only such
expositions of confessed Scripture, as best sort to the supporting of it own
errors; since it betrampleth all authorityes of Counsels, and Fathers, who
expound Gods word differently from it: Since it has been the custom of all
Heretics, to withdraw themselves to the weak retire of only Scripture, and
their own spirit interpreting the Scripture (thus making a circular motion,
where from point to point there is a true progression, but from the first point
no progression at all:) since this Spirit enge^dreth contrarieties in doctrine
in the enioyers of it, through each man's misconstruction of Scripture: Since the
Scripture it self is of that abstruse sublimity, as that Man without Gods
directing grace, cannot lay any true level thereto: To conclude, since the
exorbitancy, pride, and petulancy of this Spirit is such, as it expects in
the end, that all men should receive from it (as from a second Moses) the
tables of our Evangelical Law, Non Tert. de Orat.
agnosei poterit a Spiritu sancto spiritus inquinatus: What then remains, but
that my self careful of my salvation, should for ever after become jealous of
the truth of that Religion, which I find to be seated upon those grounds (and
only those grounds) which every heresy promiscuously challenges to it self?
And that, relying on Gods holy visible Church, upon which he has Matt. 18. ^.
Tim. 3.
entayled his spirit of Truth, I may interpose her infallible authority, as an
Isthmos, or firmeland, to stop the intercourse of the two main Oceans; I
mean, the Scriptures abysmall profoundity, and this Private spirits floating
and boundles uncertainty.

But enough of this subject, of which (as potentially inuoluing all other
Controuersyes within it self) I have drawn, I confess, for my fuller
satisfaction, certain notes in some few scattered Papers.

THE II. MOTIVE That the Prophesyes of Scripture confirm the Catholic
Religion, and refute Protestancy.
PROPHESYES are divine, and infallible Predictions of things future: future in
respect of us, who measure all actions with the yard of Time; but present in
the eyes of God, with whom there is neither time past, nor time to come; both
being confounded in the depth of his own Eternity: Infallible, as proceeding
only from him, who by his power disposes all things, as shall best please
him; by his Prescience forseeth distinctly all things so disposed, as things
present in the clear glass of his own essence; And by his Will, vouchsafes,
that men shall warrant the certainty of his foreknowledge: Prescientia Dei
Tert. l. 2 contr. Marcion.
tot habet testes, quot fecit Prophetas.

Now of the Prophesyes recorded in the old Testament, I will take into my
consideration only two; The inditers of which (according to the judgment of In
Psalm 3^. conc. 2.
S. Augustine) as foreseeing Controuersyes and doubts in faith to come, spoke
more clearly of the Church then of Christ himself; The first shall concern
the propagation of the Church of Christ, and the converting of Kings heathen,
and kingdoms to it faith: touching which I will insist in those places of
Scripture, whose true sense and interpretation is acknowledged for such, both
by the Catholics, and by our Protestants Private spirit: the alleging of
which texts is the more forcible, since the confessed sense of Scripture is the
soul (as it were) which informs the body of the Letter.

Of this first point the Prophet I say thus speaks: The 60.
Isles shall wait for thee (meaning the Church) their Kings shall minister
unto thee, and thy gates shall be continually open; neither day nor night shall
they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches of the Gentiles etc. And
again speaking of, and to the Church, he further thus says: Thou Ibid.
shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings: Kings shall be
thy noursing Fathers, and Queens thy Mothers: And further: Enlarge 54.
the place of thy tents, spread out the curtains of thy habitation; for thou
shall increase on the right hand, and on the left; thy seed shall possess the
Gentiles, and inhabit the desolate Cittyes. To the truth of which conuersions
of Heathen Kings and Countries to the faith of Christ, the Kingly Prophet
speaking in the person of God to the Church, thus accords: I Psalm. 2.
will give thee the Heathens for thy inheritance, and the ends of the earth for
thy pessession.

That these places (besides diverse others) are understood of the enlargment of
Christ's Church, and the conuersions of Kingdoms and Nations unto it, is
warranted by the marginall annotations of our own English Frinted in the year
1576.
Bibles, and no less agreeable to the particular judgments of Upon Jeremy.
Oecolampadius (that learned Protestant,) D. Whitguift In his defense p. 466.
late Archbishop of Canterbury, D. In his answer M. William Reynolds.
Whitaker* and all other grave Writers.

The next point, which here presents it self to be wayghed, is to consider,
whether the foresaid predictions of the dilatation of the faith of Christ, and
converting to it Kings, and kingdoms have been accomplished in the
Protestants Church, or in the Catholic and Roman Church; for the clearing of
which point, we will begin with the times from Luthers first change of
Religion, and so ascend by degrees to the age of the Apostles; in the discovery
whereof we are to recurre to Ecclesiastical Writers: And thus the ground of
belief touching this point, is here removed from Scripture to man; and yet
man is here believed (to wit in relating whether the true or false faith was
then taught and brought in) by reason of the Scripture. And first that these
Conuersions and propagation of the Church any time for the space of these last
thousand years, even up to the days of Boniface the third and Gregory Bishops
of Rome, were not performed in the Protestant Church, is over evident from all
Ecclesiastical historyes and records, and from the voluntary confessions of
learned Protestants; so as to find the contrary in any approved Authors, we may
well make the subject of our desire, but not of our expectation. And first for
Historyes, we Protestants cannot produce any one authentical history or
narration (notwithstanding some late effectles attempts of our own Nation in
that nature, being still in labor of that which I fear, will never be borne)
intimating so much; And which is more the Protestant Ecclesiastical Writers do
even particulerly set down and relate the conversion of many Countries made by
catholics, even to their own mayn prejudice heerin.

But the better to enleuen our discourse with examples, where I will omit the
subiecting of many vast Countries to the sweet yoke of Christ, made in our
own days by the Jesuits, whose very name to us is ungrateful; but Quis
Tertul. aduerjus gentes.
nominis reatus? Quae vocabulerum accusatio? Osiander (a learned Protestant) in
his book of Ecclesiastical history, faithfully relates the Conuersions of
many Countries. Of which? Of the Cent. 9.10.11.12.13 14.15.
Danes, the Morauians, the Polonians, the Sclauonians, the Bulgares, the
Hunnes, the Normans, the Bohemians, the Swecians, the Noruegians, the
Liuonians, the Saxons, the Rugy, and Tusanes. By whom (says he) were they
converted? By the Bishops of Rome living in those several ages. To what faith?
To the now Catholic, or (as he terms it) papisticall faith. In like sort our
Century writers Cent. 8.9.10.11.
discoursing upon the same subject, affirm that the Countries of Germany, of
the Vandals, the Bulgarians, Sclauonians, Danes, Morauians* Hungarians, and
Noruegians were first reduced to Christianity by the Church of Rome, professing
then by their own acknowledgments the same religion, which at this present it
does. Thus has Rome Christian subjected to it more Nations and Kingdom; by a
peaceable and sweet force of Religion, then ever Rome Heathen did by war. And
here we are to note (a consideration not to be neglected) that as these and
other Protestants do confess, that all the Conuersions of the foresaid
Countries were made by Papists; (D. Lib. de Eccles. contra Bellarm..336.
Whitaker therefore styling them impure and corrupt conuersions) so not one of
the said Protestants, or any other, though writing elaboratly of this subject,
would ever ascribe the converting of any of these, or any other one Heathen
King or Nation, to the Protestants labors. But leaving these last thousands
years, let us ascend higher to the next three hundred years, ariuing from the
time of Boniface the third, up unto the days of Constantin the first Christian
Emperor. During the space of which three hundred years, no Countries or
Kingdoms were converted at all to Christian religion, either by Catholics or
by any others; most Nations (in respect of Religion) lying then wholly wast and
incultiuated. The truth of which point is even demonstrable; seeing in these
ages there were no Kings, who professed Christian religion, the Emperors of
the East and West only excepted: Among whom some were bastard Christians, as
being bra^ded with Vale^s, Constantius, Constans.
Arianisme; others Julian.
Apostata's, so enjoying but an abortiue faith, since it womb became it grave.

Now concerning the time it self of Constantin, it is so irrefragably true,
that neither himself, nor any Country by his means was converted to our
Protestant religion, Cent. 4,
as that our Magdeburgenses recording the state of the Church in his time, do
charge Constantine with all the Catholic points of religion at this day
professed by the Church of Rome, styling them, The errors of Constantine, and
of h^ age.

Lastly to rise higher in times, to wit, from the times of Constantine, to that
of Christ our Savior ^it is abundantly testified by all Historiographers,
that the Church of God was so straightened and shut up on all sides, and in such
violent persecutions (though otherwise glad to sweat under such a burden) as
that it had no means to enlarge it self, by converting to it Kings and
kingdoms; and if it had at that time converted any, yet the question would
then follow, whether such a Conversion had been made to the Protestant, or to
the Roman Church. But the luculency of this former point appears, both from
the writings of the Protestant In the book flyied, Disputationes etc.
Deuines of Wittemberge, and from the testimony of our home-brother D. Barlow
In his defense of the articles of the Protestant religion p. 24
thus discoursing hereof: In the primitive nonage of the Church, this promise
of Kings allegiance thereunto, was not so fully accomplished, because in those
days that Prophesy of our Savior was rather verifyed: You shall be brought
before Kings for my names sake by them to be persecuted even unto death etc.

But now to reflect upon this our Argument or Motive: Is the Protestant Church
the true Church of Christ? Then has it converted many Kings and Kingdoms
unto the faith of Christ* Let any particularize (if he can) the Countries and
Times, which, and when. Has not the Protestant Church converted any Kingdoms
and Nations to the faith of Christ? Then it self is not the true Church of
Christ; since the Prophesyes of Gods sacred Write are infallible: Non Tert.
aduers. Gnost.
licuisset aliter euenire, quam edixit, nec ipse aliter edixisset, quam euenire
voluisset. Which Prophesyes, as being already actually accomplished by the
Catholic Church, in subiecting to it diverse true Kings indeed; so the full
consideration of them has much prevailed (for his intended incorporating into
the Church) with one poor King in name.

To reply here and say, that these Prophesyes are to be full filled not
before, but after the preaching of Luthers Gospel, is controlled by the
judgment of all learned men, and by experience it self; since it is certain
(I must confess to the prejudice of our Gospel) that neither Luther, nor his
scholars, nor his party have as yet first converted any one Kingdom, Nation,
City, Village, or House from heathnish insidelity to the faith of Christ:
Therefore we must conclude with D. Whitaker Lib. 7. contra Duraeum page 472.
ingenuously thus confessing: Whatsoever the ancient Prophets have foretold of
the enlargment, amplitude, and glory of the Church, the same to have been
already performed is most evident out of historyes; so true is that: Lex est
Enangelium praedictum, ^uangelium lex completa.

The other branch of Prophesyes, wherein I here will insist, for^el, that in
the Church of Christ, there shall always be found Pastors and Doctors, and a
continual administration of the Word and Sacraments; the spiritual conduits,
whereby Gods grace is derived into man's soul; or the subordinate wheels of
his divine Majesty, by which the soul is moved and directed to gain it own
salvation. To this effect are alleged those words out of the Ephesians. 4.
Apostle (a text, which for it clearenes is able to comment it Comment) to wit,
that Christ has placed in his Church Pastors and Doctors to the consumation
of Saints, till we all meet in the unity of Faith; that is, as our D. In his
answer to a counterfeit Catholic.
Fulke truly expounds for ever Calvin Instit. 4. c* 3.64
himself concluding from hence in these words: The Church cannot at any time
want Pastors and Doctors. Now that these Pastors and Doctors must not in
their offices and duties be silent, is not only witnessed by the Holy Isa. 62.
Ghost, but also (besides the nature of their function requiring it)
acknowledged by us Protestants. And therefore D. Fulke well says: Truth Vbi
supra.
cannot be continued in the world, but by the Ministry of the Pastors and
Doctors In like sort touching the continual administration of the Sacraments,
the same is more particulerly euicted from the clear words of our Savior,
and S. Paul, seeing by the help of them, we shall show 1. Cor. 11.
the Lords death until be come A point so evident, that it lies out of the
way of all Contradiction; and therefore we Protestants in plain words
mantaine, That the absence Doctor VViles in his Synopsis page 1.
of the Sacraments does make a nullity of the Church. And again, in D.
Wh^takers Centra Du^a^^m l. 3. p. 249.
phrase. That the administration of the word and Sacraments being present, does
constitute a Church; being absent does subvert it: and again, as the same
Doctor Vbi supra page 260.
styleth them, that they are Ecclesiae essentiales proprietates. Thus do we and
Catholics jointly teach, that not at sometimes only the Church of Christ
(being his intemerate and immaculat spouse) is to enjoy Pastors and Doctors,
and the use of the word and Sacraments; at other times to be wholly destitute of
them (ague-like having thus accesses and remittings;) but that at all times, in
all ages, in all seasons, the Church without any interruption is to continue in
it full Orb, by ever enjoying the foresaid means of man's salvation.

Now this being the true and confessed sense of all sides of the former
Prophesyes; We are to examine, if in the Protestant Church the administration
of the word and Sacraments have for any ages, or years been interrupted;
since such an interruption being once proved, it then ineuitably follows that
the Protestant Church is not that true Church of Christ, which is delineated
and descrybed in the former words by the Apostle. To euict this, our
Adversaries the Catholics, do instance in the last hundred years before Luther
urging, that if any such administration of the Word and Sacraments had been in
that age, some one history or other would have mentioned the Pastors and
Doctors of those days. But all historyes and relations of that age (say they)
are most silent therein. What answer can we give heereto? To produce any one
Historiographer of that age, but intimating so much, we are not able. Shall we
then say (as some of us have not been ashamed to suggest) that the Pope did
determinately cause all such narrations both of former times, and of that age
above instanced, concerning Protestancy to be suppressed, thereby to bury in
oblivion all memory of Protestant Religion? It is a phantasy, it is a dream.

The personal faults and vices of some Popes are So was Gregory the sea^e^th
wrote against by B^nno Benedictus 3. by the Council of Constance. Eug^nius 4.
by the Council of Basil, and s^m others.
recorded in Historyes yet to be read. Is it then probable, that the Popes were
so solicitous to extinguish all remembrance of the Protestant Payth, and yet
content to suffer the less warrantable lives of themselves and their
Predecessors, to be recorded for all posterity? Again in the Canons of the
Cou^cells of every age, there is frequent mention made of particular heresies
(which then embroyled the Church) condemned by the said Counsels: Can we then
think it possible (to speak morally, not metaphisically) that the Pope, and
the Counsels should be so distracted in judgment, as carefully to register all
other impugned Heresies; and on the other side, as carefully to suppress all
arysing opinions of Protestancy? It is improbable, it is absurd. Lastly,
(besides that the particular subject of all Ecclesiastical historyes in the
relation of new doctrins recorded in the said historyes) are not the writings
of Husse, Wykcliffe, and others (wherein they first disgorged forth some few
points of Protestancy) yet extant even to these days? So transparent in a
clear eye the former answer is Or shall we secondly labor to euade our
Adversaries, pressing us, by clayming Waldo, VVikcliffe, Husse, and such others
for pastors of the Protestants Church in their times? Durum telum necessitas:
our challenging of them ryseth from our extreme want and penury. It is most
clear, that the foresaid men were no true Protestants; since not only they
ever retained most of the points of Catholic religion, comparting with us
Protestants only in three or four articles; but also they broached diverse
errors vniustify able in our own, and our Adversaries judgments, with which
their own writings do still vpbraid them: So much have some of us Pox Act.
and Mon. page 618. and p. 85. and diverse other Protestants.
wronged the reputed honor of our own Church, by pretending those former
Heterogeneous and mongrill Sectaryes to be true members thereof. Again suppose
them to be entyre Protestants, it but iustifyeth the being of Protestant
Doctors and Pastors only for their own times, we not being able to insta^ce
the like for diverse ages before them. But sooner shall the seas ebbing and
flowing forsake the moons course, then the true Church of Christ be deprived,
but for one age, year, or day, of her Pastors, and an answerable
administration of the Word and Sacraments.

Or shall we say, that in the age above instanced as also in many other ages
before, there were Pastors and Doctors of the Protestant Church;
notwithstanding by reason of the tyranny of the Pope, they were latent and
unknown? How inexplicable, or rather contraditory is this? Did those Pastors
conceal their own faith through sear of persecution (the strongest pulse,
which beats in weakest minds) joining in outward show with the supposed
Idolatry of the Church of Rome? Then were they dissemblers, forsakers of their
own Religion, and no good members of the Church: Ore Romans 10.
fit confessi^ ad salutem. Did they openly profess (notwithstanding the
imaginary rage of their enemies) their faith, and exercise the Word and the
Sacraments? Then by so doing they were made most eminent: for what Church is
better known, the^ that Church, which lives under the hatches of persecution,
resembling the Sun, which is best subject to the eye, in it lowest descent?
Or what man can for his religion be persecuted, which is not known?
Eyewitnesses hereof are those Countries, wherein the Catholic religion at
this day suffers pressures and tribulations.

But to draw toward an end; the doctrine of the Churches inuisibility,
mantayned by many of us Protestants, is a Supersedeas to all our former
answers: since it irrefragably euicteth the want of Pastors and Doctors, and
consequently an interruption of the Word and Sacraments, except we will misapply
to the Pastors and Doctors, those words of Tacitus: Eo ipso praefulgebant
quod non visebantur. For if the Protestant faith for many ages was absolutely
extinct, and no such religion was then mantayned in any Country; then
follows it, that there were neither men in the world to preach the Word, and
minister the Sacraments according to that religion, nor any to hear it
preached, or receive the^ ministered. Touching the doctrine of the inuisiblity
of the Protestant Church for many ages, we do find our Brother D. Parkins In
his exposition of the Creed. And Lut. ep. ad Argentin. says Christum a nobis
primo vulgatum audemus gloriari.
thus to write: During the space of nine hundred years, the Popish heresy has
spread it self over the whole earth. And further: For many hundred years our
Church was not visible to the world: an universal apostasy ouerspreading the
whole face of the earth* With whom accords D. In his answer to a
counterfeit Catholic page 16.
Fulke saying: From the time of Boniface the third, which was Anno Domini 607.
the Church became invisible, and fled into the wilderness, there to remain a
long season. But M. Napper In his treatise upon the Revelation. page ^8.
ryseth higher teaching, That between the years of Christ 300. and 316. the
Antichristian and Papisticall raigue began, reigning ^niuersally without any
debatable contradiction one thousand two hundred and sixty years. M. Brocard
Upon the Revelation p. 110.
affirms, that during the second and third age after Christ, the true temple
of God, and light of the Gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist
himself. But Sebastianus In epistola de abrogandis in vniuersu^ on. nibus
statutis Ecclesiasticis.
Francus (otherwise a learned Protestant) stretches far further saying: For
certain, through this work of Antichrist, the external Church together with
the faith and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure;
and that for these fourteen hundred years the Church has not been external
and visible: with whom conspireth D. In his answer to a counterfeit Catholic
p. ^5,
Fulke, in these words: The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles
time. A strange and inconsiderate assertion, thus to insimulate and charge the
times next to the Apostles; since (besides the Scripture Isa 2* Miche as 4
Psalm. 19. Matthew. 5.
witnessing in many places, a continual visibility of the Church, and true
faith at all times) it was Gods good pleasure, that his Church concerning true
faith and doctrine, should (contrary to the course of other things) enjoy her
greatest strength and force in her greatest infancy. But to the point. From all
these testimonies may be inferred, that if the Protestants Church was for so
many ages invisible, and that the true faith and Sacraments thereof were
vanished away for so long a time, then during the length of so many ages there
were no Doctors to preach the Protestants faith, nor Pastors to minister
their Sacraments; (though the same ever to have been in the Catholic Church,
the Protestants foresaid testimonies do necessarily and implicitly witness) and
consequently that the above alleged Prophesy, touching the continuance of
Pastors and Doctors in the Church of Christ, at all times till the end of the
world, is not accomplished in the Protestant Church.

Thus far heerof: only for greater perspicuity, I will wind up the two
different parts of all the foresaid. Prophesyes, in this ensuing argument. Then
thus.

It is prophesyed of the true Church of Christ, that she must convert heathen
Kings, Kingdoms, and Nations unto her faith and Religion: A^ also that she
must in all times, and ages without interruption, entoy aflours and Doctors,
and an administration of the word and Sacraments.

But by the confessions of our learned Brethren the Protestants, the Protestant
Church has never as yet converted to it any one Heathen King, kingdom,
Nation: and for many ages together (by the Protestants like acknowledgments)
it has wanted Doctors and Pastors ^^preach the Protestants faith, and to
minis^er the word and Sacraments.

Therefore the Protestant Church is not that true Church of Christ, which is
figured out in those foresaid Prophesyes.

The inference I urge, this I press, in this I make my station: It is drawn
from acknowledged Scripture on all sides; and from the acknowledged sense of
the said Scripture on all sides. Let any learned Protestant, or all the learned
Protestants living, sincerely and plainly, without subtle euading and
declyning the point urged, give any satisfactory answer heereto, and I will
indisputably become recreant in my faith. The demonstration is unavoidable, and
such, as that several markable Protestants, one way not confessing (out of
their implacable hatred) the former Prophesies to be fullfilled in the
Catholic Church; another, seeing by all proof of historyes whatsoever, that
they have not been performed in the Protestant Church, 1. (s) David George,
Professor at Basil.
did from hence conclude (a thought horrible to be entertained) that the
Christian Religion (as wanting the accomplishments of the foresaid Prophesyes)
was a false Religion, 2. Beruardin Ochine, a man highly commended by cali^^n l.
de scandalis page 111.
ou^ Savior a seducer, and themselves thereupon sinally became (s) Jews. I
execrate a Jew; therefore, seeing there is no other Medium, I will dye herein
a Roman Catholic. 3. Neuserus, chief Pastor of ^eide^hergc. 4. Almanus a
Zuinglion: all which throught the reasons above touched, forsook the Christian
faith See of these and some others, Conradus Schluffelburg in his Theolog.
Calu. and Osiander Cent.


THE III. MOTIVE. That general Counsels, confirming Catholic Religion, are
rejected by Protestants.
IT is certain, that the spiritual Enemy of man's soul (though hating Order,
yet) in impugning the Truth, observes order. For after his rejecting of
Canonical Scripture, and expounding falsely (by his Ministers) confessed
scripture, he next makes violent incursions upon sacred Oecumenicall Councels:
they being in matters of faith the highest Judgments upon earth; whose
semences are above all appeal; and whose testimonies I hold, as so many
sealing arguments. Therefore I much grieved, to find the first and chiefest of
our Religion, peremptorily to sindicate and censure (next to that of the
Apostles) the first and chiefest general Council; (I mean Luther, the Nicen)
styling it ^uth. l. de Council.
decrees, f^enum, stramen, ligna, stipula etc. But no marvel, since so long
as we continue in condemning the articles of Catholic religion; so long are we
forced to break with those Primitive general Synods. To exemplify in some few
for the truths sake (though it be more hard to erect a truth by proofs, then
to confute an error:) Who is so Alphabeticall and young a Controuersist, but he
knows, that the doctrine of Peter's Primacy, and his successors is confirmed
in the Canons of the second general Epist. ad Damal. quae exstat apud Theodor.
Council of Constantinople, and the third of Apud Eugagrium lib. hist. c. 4.
Ephesus? In the one by plainly acknowledging the doctrine; in the other by
deposing Nestorius, by the authority of the Sea of Rome? That Apostolical
traditions are warranted by the first and second Nicen Council? the first
conde^ning the In actis eiusdem Concii.
heresy of Arius (besides by Scripture) even by force of Traditions; the other
Epst. Cyrill. ad Nestor.
by teaching in express words the doctrine of Traditions? That Baptism
(wherein man is borne, but not borne the son of Adam) even by force and
virtue of the Sacrament it self, takes away sin, is evident out of the
first of Cap. de Baptism.
Nice, and the first of In symbol.
Constantinople? That vowed Virgins, and Monks are to be in the Church of
Christ, and that such cannot marry, is decreed by the Council of Can. 16.
Ca^^edon? Lastly that appeals to Rome (which implicitly inuolues the Primacy
of that Sea) were ratifyed by the Council of Can. 7.
Sardis? Thus much for instance (though the same might be justified in many
other Catholic articles) where I have restrained my proofs only to general
Councels, and such as were celebrated within the first five hundred years,
after the divine Majesty vouchsafed for our good, to embase himself by putting
upon the poor rags of our humanity.

But here I must needs take leave to cast a more fixed eye upon the dignity of
general Councels (abstracting them from all priority and laternes of time)
since then, our own Brethren absolutely rejecting all such Counsels, as
subject to error, will needs ascribe that respect to their own Private
spirit, which by all reasons both divine and humane, has been ever due to
general Counsels; unto which perhaps they have been sooner moved, partly
through the infelicity Many synods of Protestants have been, but without any
good event (not any one yet succeeding we.) as that at Maspurge anno 1529. at
Smal^ald, at Mull ru^, at Montbelgard, at Heidelberg at Aldeburge, at Herizburg
at Hamburge, at Tubinge, and finally (besides deuers others) this last at Dort.
of their own so many Provincial (at most but National) Conuenticles in
Germany and else where, as yet never having good success. I hold it therefore
not impertinent to display in some particulers, the advantages between a
general Council, and any Sectaryes private judgment; where (no doubt) we
shall find, that as easily may the lowest shrubs compare in height with the
Cedars of Libanus, as the sentence of any Private man (who like a mastles ship
is tossed with every wind of Innouatio^) contend in authority with a general
Council. Thus then. If an Oecumenicall Council, indicted and confirmed by
lawful authority; representing the Majesty of Gods Church, as being the
supreme Tribunal So does Augustine term a general Council ep. 162.
thereof; assured by promise where tow or three are gathered together in my
name etc. Matt. 18.
of Christ his assisting presence; warranted with the first example of that
kind, by the blessed Act 15
Apostle; highly reverenced and magnifyed by the ancient Aug. vbisupra^ and l.
de Bapt. 6.18. Athan ep. ad Epictet. Basil ep. 78. Ambr. ep 32. Leo epist. 53.
Hieron. l. contra Luciferian. etc.
Fathers; acknowledged for the only means of determining Controversy by some
of our learnedest Protestants Doct. Bilson in his perpetuali government page
174. D. Couell in his modest examinat. page 110. and ethers.
; consisting of several of hundreds of most venerable Prelates, conspicuous for
virtue, readynes in the Scripture, variety of tongues, and infinitenes of
reading; gathered from the most remote and opposite regions of Christendom;
and therefore the less probable upon their such sudden meeting, jointly to
embrace any one point of Innovation; battering daily upon their knees, at the
ears of Almighty God, with most humble and feruerous prayer, seconded with
austere fasting; and all this, to the end, that it would vouchsafe his divine
Goodness, so to guide and stern this reverend Assembly with his holy spirit, as
what expositions it gives of the Scripture, or what otherwise it determines for
undoubted faith, may be agreeable to his sacred Word, and Truth.

Now, notwithstanding all this, if such a celebrious concourse and confluence
of Pastors (being the Mart or Rendeuous for the time of Virtue and Learning)
shall so fail therein, as that they may, and have, sundry times, most fowly
erred (as our supercilious and contumacious Sectaryes D. Whitaker. l. de Conc.
contr. Bellarm. q. 6. D. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page
35. D. VVilet in his syaopfis p. 29^.
avouch) in their constructions of Scripture, and resolutions of faith; though
all such their decrees be otherwise warranted with a judicial conference of
Scripture, the general practice of the Church, and the conspiring testimonies
of all Antiquity: If this (I say) may happen (the best means thus producing
the worst effects) what shall we then conceive of an obscure Sir John (a man
engendered in the slyme of pride and ignorance) who in some points ever
subdiuideth himself from the rest of his brethren (thus being resolved from
whom to fly, but not whom to follow) so as he is truly condemned of heresy,
even by the lying mouth of Heresy: A man but competent in learning, sometimes
of a disedifying life, not having any warrant from God for his proceeding, nor
president from his holy church; yea one, to whom God flatly denies No
prophesy of s^riptur is of any private interpretation 2. Pet. c. 1.
this presumed certainty of his expounding his word, and determining which is
true faith; and further, of whose spirit we are commanded to Dearly beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits. 1. Joan. c. 4.
to doubt; and (which is more) of whose seducing we are most cautelously These
things I have written unto you concerning those which deceive you. Joan. 1. c.
2.
premonished. Now if this man being in his Pulpit upon the Lords day, in the
presence of his ignorant (yet censuring) and psalming Auditory (a fit Pathmos
for his ensuing Revelations) and there opening the Bible (for thus falsehood is
forced to beg countenance from truth) and undertaking to expound some text or
other, for the establishing of his late appearing faith (though contrary to the
judgment of all ancient Counsels) affirming him self to be secured by special
Euthysiasmes and illuminations from God, for the better judging the point
controuerted, rising from his own explication of Scripture. Which being done,
what assurance may we have of the truth of this his al-defyning spirit? and is
there not reason to expect more errors, then sentences to drop from this man's
mouth? And what stupor then and dulnes is it to allow to such an one, that
infalibility of spirit, which himself denies to a general Council? Yet such
is the forward blindness of our enchanted Nouellists heerin, who mantaine So
teach D. VVhitik lib. de Council. contra Bellar q 6. Peter Mar tyr lib. de
votis. D. Fulke in his answer to a counterfaite Catholic page 80. and 90. D.
Willet in his synops page ^^0. And Beza in his Preface of the new Testament
anno 1587. thus says. Even in the best times the ambition, ignorance, and
lewdnes of Bishops was such, as that the blind may easily perceive; how Satan
was president in their assemblyes or Councels. Thus Beza of the Counsels even
of the Primitive Church.
that many virtuous and learned men gathered together, for the disquisition of
Truth, must necessarily err; one sole, one lateborne, obscure, illiterate,
irreligious Scripturist cannot err: O Galat. c. 3^
insensati Galatae, quis vos fascinauit etc.

THE IIII. MOTIVE. That the Fathers of the Primitive Church (as Patrons of
Papistry) are rejected by the Protestants.
INTERROGA generationem pristinam, and diligenter inuestiga patrum memoriam;
hesterni quippe sumus, says the Mirror Ioc. (...) 8.
of Patience: To which words old Vincentius Lyrinensis Aduer. baeres.
twelve hundred years since, thus subscribeth: If any new question do arise,
we are to recurre to the judgments of the holy Fathers. Which rule if it were
strong in those Primitive times, how much more forcible should it be (though
the accession of so many hundreds of years since passed) with us, who are but
Hodierni?

The ancient Fathers (we know) have diversely traveled in the subject of
Christian Religion; some of them in their Commentaryes, others in their
Homilyes, Sermons, and Catechismes: Others again in their Catalogue of
condemned Heresies and their Epistles; and some in all these, making the
intended sense of the holy Ghost in the Scripture, and the doctrine thence
deduced, the Center or quiescent Point, in all their Motions or Labors.

Their Laborious Industry herein, our Brethren at the first seem to prize,
granting, that in the mines of the Fathers wrytings, there is to be found much
golden Ore; yet such, as must after be purged and refyned in the fyar of their
own private judgments from all dross of supposed Errors, before it can
receive the print and stamp (they say) of true Euangedical doctrine (yea) of
Innovation and Nouellisme.

Thus do we teach, that their wrytings may be profitably tasted of, if so they
be taken with the true Correctiue of our own contronling liberty. But if our
Brethren be further urged, whether they will humbly embrace such peculiar
doctryns, as the Fathers did jointly teach, then they more openly dismaske
themselves, disclayming from them, as from mantayners of Papistry. To manifest
this in all Articles controuerted at this present, Breuitye preuents: four of
the chiefest shall serve for instance; And those four fathers of the Church,
which have obtained by a privilege, and (...), that title (I mean, Ambrose,
Jerome ^ugustin and Gregory) shall be therein chiefly produced teaching the
said doctrynes, even by the acknowledgment of us Protestants.

And first to begin with the doctrine of Prayer for the dead, and to retaile
here some particular co^fessions of our own; do I not find D. Fulke In his
confuta^io^ of purgatory p. 78.
(to use his own words) thus speaking, Ambrose allowed prayer for the dead;
and further, Ibidem p. 104.
Jerome allowed prayer for the dead; And yet further, Vbi supra page ^49.
Augustine blyndly defended it. And which is more, our said Doctor Fulke thus
further verbally says: Ibidem page 362.
Augustine, Jerome, and agreat many more do witness, that Sacrifice for the dead
is a Tradition of the Apostles. To be short in exam. part. 3. page 9^. and 107.
Kemnitius accords with D. Fulk heerin, affirming that prayer for the dead
was taught (besides by others) by Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine.

Touching the real Presence (in the which, Vocatur Aug. tract. 26. in Iom.
caro, quod non capit caro) and it being a true Sacrifice, Antony de Adamo (no
obscure Protestant) thus In his Anatomy of the Man fol. 221.
writes: The book of Sacraments ascrybed to Ambrose, affirms the opinion of
Christ's bodily presence in the Sacrament. The like we find auerred of Ambrose,
by our Brethren the C^nt. 4. c. 4. col. 205.
Centurists. Kemnitius speaking of certain sentences of Ambrose, Augustine,
and other, containing the adoration of the Sacrament (which necessarily
includes the Real Presence) thus says: In Exam. part. 2. p. 91.
my judgment, they contain the adoration of the Sacrament. Again: Jerome
with many other Fathers is reprehe^ded for teaching the reservation of the
Sacrament, by Ibid. page 102.
Kemnitius, and by Lib. against Heskins, Sanders etc. p. 458.
D. Fulke (to use the Doctors words) for giving admonition to married persons
before the time of Communion, to abstain from company of their wives, (who
terms it popish divinity) both which points in regard of the reverence
therein exhibited, probably imply the doctrine of the Real presence. Calvin
Lib. de vera Eccle. reformat Extat in tract theolog. Calu.
gives this Theta, or mark of condemnation, upon the writings of Augustine,
Ambrose, and others in these words: They forged a sacrifice in the Lords
supper, without his commandment; and so adulterated the supper by adding of
Sacrifice. They also expounded the sacrifice of Malachy, Lib. de abrogand in
universe. statut. Ecclestast.
and the oblation of Melchisedech to be a figure of the sacrifice of the Mass.

Finally the doctrine of the Real presence was so common to all the Fathers of
the Primitive Church, that Sebastianus Francus thus writes: Presently after
the Apostles days, all things were strangely turned; the supper of the Lord
being transformed into a sacrifice. And Adamus Francisci (another of our
censuring and Lynxeyed brethren) thus plainly confesses: In Margarita
Theolog. page 236.
Papistarum Commentum etc. The Papists invention touching Transubstantiation
crept early into the Church. Concerning Prayer ^o Saints D Fulke with an
irreparable prejudice to his cause, thus says: l In his Reioynder to Br^flow
page 5.
confess, that Ambrose, Augustine and Hierome held invocation of Saints to be
lawful. And the same does Exam. part. 3. p. 200.
Kemnitius acknowledge of these three foresaid Fathers, a point so evident, that
D. Whi^guift thus writes: Almost In his defense against the reply of
Cartwright.
all the Bishops and Writers of the Greek Church, and Latin also, were spotted
with the doctrines of invocation of Saints, merit of works etc and such like:
and the like sentence does D. Couel give, both of the Greek and Latin Fathers,
touching the innocation of Saints, and the other foresaid doctrines: so
agreeing heereto is another such confession of D. Fulke saying, Many Against
the Rhemist Testament. in 2. 1.
of the ancient Fathers held that Saints departed pray for us. Lastly touching
the doctrine or Vows (inu^suing within it self the doctrine of ^uangelicall
Counsels) Kemnitius Exam. part. 3. p. 41.
allead geth the several sentences of Augustine, ^mbrose, and Hierome,
justifying the said doctrine, and then he after rejects them all, thus
concluding of the Fathers in general: Non ignoramus etc. We well know that the
Fathers allowed the vows of perpetual Chastity, and that they acknowledged
them to be oblegatory.

Now touching the Authority of S. Gregory, in all the foresaid Points, we have
reserved the confessions of them to this last place; both because he lived many
years after the other fathers; as also in that his judgment in all the said
Articles is made manifest by two acknowledgments; the one of D. Hu^frey the
other of the Centurists, D. Humfrey In Iesuitis. p. 2. rat. 5. p. ^.
speaking of the says first planted in our Country by Gregory and Augustine,
whom he sent, thus answers himself: In Ecclesiam quid inu^exerun Gregarius
and Augustinus? intulerun onus Caeremonia^u^ etc purgetorium etc. oblatione^
salutaris hostiae, preces pro mortuis, Transubstantiationem etc. The Century
See the alphabeticall table of the fixed Century at the word Gregory.
Writers agreeing heereto, witness that Gregory preached in England by the
sending of Augustine hither, the doctrynes of prayer for the dead, the Real
Presence, Invocation of Saints, the vows of Chastity, besides all the other
Articles of the Roman Religion mantayned at this day.

Thus far chiefly of these four points of the Catholyke Religion, taught
(besides by others) by the former four pillars of Gods Church, even by the
free and vncoacted acknowledgme^ts of such of our Brethren, as are of no vulgar
note or rank, but most accomplished with all good litera^^re.

And here though my intended breuity suffers me only to run over some few
points, taught by the Fathers, who are rejected by us; yet I will somewhat
enlarge my self in the Article of the Sacrifice of the Mass; as being one of
the chiefest points, controuerted between our Adversaries and us, and
containing in it self the daily worship of God. And here it is manifest, that
throughout all the ages of the Primitive Church (without exception of any) it
was generally taught by the Fathers of every such age; and yet are those
Fathers for this very doctrine rejected by us Protestants. And to begin at the
end of the first five hundred years, and so to ascend, for after that time
^ill Luthers days, it is granted by most Protestants, that the Mass reigned
in all the Churches of the West part of the World; which point is further
proved from our own acknowledged doctrine of the inuisibility of the
Protestant Church, during all that time.

First then Anno Domini 501. Symmachus Cent. 6. c. 10. c^. 664.
was Bishop of Rome, of whom our Centurists thus speak: Notas Antichristi
Symmachus hab^is: Missa^ enim in forman redegit: that is, Sym^^^^^^ had the
notes of Antichrist, for he reduced the Mass into a form. Before Symmachus
was the Council of Car^hage, (whereat S. Augustine was present) of which
Counsel Pelargus (a Protestant) thus speaks: Haec In his schola sidei tract.
de Council. p. 3.
Synodus carthaginensis intercessione^, and Missam pro defunctis iniunxit. This
Synod of Carthage did ordain intercession of prayers, and Mass for the dead.
Ambrose lived in the year 370. of whom the Cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295.
Centurists thus: Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur, quibus ante cum ex Patribus
nemo vsus est, vt Missam facere, offerre Sacrificium. Ambrose did use certain
speeches, the which no Father before him did use; as to say Mass, to offer up
Sacrifice. Gregory Nissen in the year 340. whom Andreas Lib. 1. de opisie.
Miss^ sect. 104.
Crast^uius (a Protestant) thus reprehendeth: Nyssenus ille ait, cum dedit
Christus discipulis suis corpus suum ad comedendum etc. iam latenter, ineffa
biliter, and inuisibiliter corpus immolatum erat. Gregory Nissen says, That
when Christ gave to his disciples his body to eat etc. that then his body was
immolated and offered up latently, ineffably, and inuisibly. Cyrill of
Jerusalem (one of the Greek Church) lived Anno 320. whom Histor. Sacram. p.
167.
Hospinianus (a Protestant) thus speaks of: Quoad Cyrillum Hierosolymitanum
attinet, dicit ille quidem pro sui temporis consu^tu^^ine, sacrificium Altaris
maximum iuuamen esse animarum. Concerning Cyrill of Jerusalem, he says indeed
(according to the use of his time) that the sacrifice of the Altar is a great
help to souls. Cyprian lived Anno 240. him the Cent. 30. c. 4 Col. 33.
Magdeburgenses, or Centurists thus charge: Sacerdotem Cyprianus inquit vice
Christi fungi, and Deo Patri sacrificium offerri; and hereupon they reprove In
the alphabeti. table of the third entury under the letter S
Cyprian of superstition. In like sort, D. Against Heskins, S^nders p. 10^.
Fulke thus confesses of Cyprian: It is granted, that Cyprian thought the
bread and wine brought forth by Melchisedech, to be a sigure of the Sacrament,
and that herein Melchisdech resembled the Priesthood of Christ.

Terfullian lived Anno 220. whom thus Luke Cent. 3. l. c. 9.
Osiander accuses: Te^tullianus approbaui^ oblationes prodefunctis: Tertullian
aid allow of oblations for the dead, (meaning the oblation of the sacrifice of
Mass) who also for this his said doctrine, is with other Fathers thus
reprehended by D. In his confutatio^ of Purgatory p. 302. Vide p. 103. and ^3.
Fulke: Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Hierome, and a great many more, do
witness, that sacrifice for the dead is a Tradition of the Apostles. Irenaeus
lived in the year 170. whom the Centurists thus censure: De Cent (...) c 4.
col. ^3.
oblatione Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 23. satis videtur lequi incommode cum ait, Nou^
Testamenti nouam Christus docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens in vntuersomundo offers Deo. Irenaeus in lib. 4. cap. 23. s^^meth to
speak in conveniently enough of oblation or sacrifice, when he says, that
Christ has taught a new oblation in the new Testament, the which the Church
receiving from the Apostles offers to God throughout the whole world Of this
Father De vera Eccles. resorm. ex^ant in tract. theolog. p 389
Calvin thus writes: Obijciunt locum Malachia de missae sacrificio ab Irenae
exponi and breuiter responsum est: ita ridicule, vt nos dissentire cogat ratio
and verit as. The Papists do object to us, that the place of Malachy is
expounded by Irenaeus of the sacrifice of the Mass; but the answer is at hand
to wit, it is so ridiculously expounded, as that all reason and truth force us
to dissent from him.

Ignatius (the Apostles scholar) lived Anno whom the Centurists thus censure:
Cent. 2 c 4. col. 63.
Quaeda^ ambigua and incommode dicta, in quibusdam occurrunt^, vt in epistola
^gnatij ad Smirnenses: non licet (inquit Ignatius) sine Episcopo neq offerre,
neque sacrificium imm^lare. There are certain doubtful and inconvenient
sayings, which do occur in diverse places, as in Ignatius his epistle ad
Smirnenses, where he says it is not lawful without a Bishop, to immolate or
offer up Sacrifice; which very words of Ignatius the said Centurists Cent. 2.
c. 10. col. 107.
elswheresty le to be, periculosa and quasi errorum semina. And thus far for
truth of the sacrifice of the Mass, from the end of the first four hundred
years even up to the days of the Apostles, though all such testimonies be
rejected by us Protestants. A truth so evident that Calvin Lib. 4. instit. c.
18. sect. (...)
thus confesses: Veteres illos video etc. I do see, that the ancient Fathers
did wrest the memory of the Lords supper otherwise then was agreeing to the
institution of the Lord. Since the Fathers supper did bear the show and face
of a renewed oblation etc. they imitating more nearly the Jews manner of
sacrifycing, then either Christ did ordain, or the nature of the Gospel
would suffer. Calvin In omnes Pauli epist. in Heb. c. 7. page ^2^.
further charging them: That they adulterated the supper of the Lord, by adding
sacrifice unto it. And Hospinian Histor. sacram l. 1. c. 6 p. 20.
thus further acknowledges: I am tum primo illo saculovi uentibus adhuc
Apostolis etc. Even in the very first age (the Apostles being alive) the Devil
endeavored to deceive more about this Sacrament, then about Baptism;
withdrawing men from the first form thereof. To whom Sebastianus Iu epist. de
abroga^dis in universe omnibus statut. Ecclesiast.
Francus thus accords: Statim post Apostolos omniae inuersa sunt etc. Coena
Domini in sacrificium transformatu est. Thus far of the Mass.

But if we proceed further in a more large and ample manner, touching the whole
body of Catholic Religion, taught by the Fathers in general, we shall rest
amazed to see, what a corrent and inundation of our Brethrens sharp censures do
ouerflow the writings of all the Ancient Fathers.

Sortably heerto (to omit the depressing speeches of Luther, touching
particular Fathers, saying, Cyprian I^ colloquijs mensal. c. de Patribus
Eccles. and lib. de ser^o arbitrio.
is a weak Denine; I hold Origin long since accursed; Basil is of no Worth,
he is wholly a Monk; In the Writings of Hierome, there is not one Word of true
says in Christ, and perfect Religion; Tertullian is but superstitious, and
other such base refuse of Inuectiues) do we not find Luther Luth. (...) supra.
to conclude thus against all the Fathers without exception: The Apology of
Philip Melancthon does far excel all the Doctors of the Church, and exceed
even Augustine himself. And yet further with greater acerbity in these words:
The Fathers Luth. lib. de seruo at bitrio printed an. 1^^1 page 434.
of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most i^norant in the
Scriptures; they have erred al^ their life time; and unless they were amended
before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church.
See how Apostasy is the Daughter and Mother of Pride.

But to proceed further, the Archbishop of Canterbary, though more mild, yet
most boldly, thus censureth In his defense of the answer to the admonition p
472. and 473.
the Fathers: The doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this day, is
more perfect and sounder then it commonly was in any age, after the Aposties
etc. With which sharp censure B^^^ In ep. theolog. ep. 1.
thus iumpeth: If we compa a our ^y^es, with the times next to the Apostles, my
judgment is, that those times had plus conscientiae scientiae minus; and we,
scientiae plus, conscientiae min^^.

Melancthon (as loath to be flow in so charitable an act) thus In 1. Cor. c. 3.
writes: Presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers
obscured the doctrine concerning Justification of says, increased Ceremonies,
and devised peculiar worships. D. Humfrey charge D. Jewel with great
inconsideration in appealing to the Fathers, saying: He In vita lewel. printed
at La^don page 212.
gave the Papists too large a scope, was injurious to himself, and in a manner
spoiled himself, and his Church. I will conclude this Scene (full of scurility
and un worthy criminations) with Doctor Whitakers Contra Dur^^um l. 6. page
413.
saying: Ex Patrum erroribus ille Pontificiae religionis cento consequutus est.
The religion of the Papists is a patched cloth of the Fathers errors sowed
together. Add for the close of all, our own doctrine of the inuisibility of
the Church for many ages together, even in those Primitive times: for if the
Protestant Church during those times by our own frequent Confessions, was
latent and invisible, (as above is showed) then follows it, that the Fathers
of those ages in their wrytings and Commentaryes mantayned not the Protestant,
but the Catholyke and Roman Religion.

But here (notwithstanding our absolute disclayming from the Fathers in
general) I will annexe (as an Appendix) one observation concerning
particulerly Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian (Fathers of great Antiquity,
learning, and Judgment.) It is this: These three Fathers erred in certain
points; Origin in teaching, that the Devils should in the end be saved;
Cyprian in Rebaptization, Tetullian in denying second Marriages. All these three
were written against for these their errors by See August. against Origin in
baeres. 43. against Tertul. in haeres ^6. against Cyprian in tom. 3. de
Baptism. l. 2. c. 7. Vide Hier. in l. contr. Iounianu^, and Vigil. Vide
Epiphan. l. de haeresibus.
Augustine, Jerome, and other acknowledge mantayners of the Roman Religion. Now
here Ivrge, Augustine and Jerome (as is above showed) are charged by our
Brethren, as Patrones of Papistry; if then Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian had
dissented from Augustine, Jerome, and other Fathers in those Catholyke points,
wherewith we truly charge them; no doubt, but Augustine, and Jerome, in their
Catalogues of Heresies, would as well have registed other their opinions for
heresies, in which Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian dissented from them, as they
did register their three former Heresies: But no such censure or condemnation
do we find in their wrytings: from which we may infallibly conclude, that what
Articles of the present Roman and Catholic Religion were mantayned by
Augustine, Jerome, and others of those ages, writing of the heresies of their
times; the same were also taught by the foresaid Origin, Tertullia, and Cyprian
Thus much of these three Fathers, in whom (by the way) we may gloss, how
dangerous it is, to shut our sight against the radiant beams of the Churches
authority: so the eye suddenly coming out from a great light, presently sees
worse.

And here I am to certify the Reader, that some few testimonies (among many
others) of our own Brethren, alleged in this treatise, I did find produced
in certain Catholyke Books; but at the first reading of them, I rested much
doubtful of the ingenuous, plain, and true alleging of them, till by my own
perusal of our said Brethrens books, I found them most sincerely urged. Which
serious disquisition and search of mine (I grant) first invited me, to spend
the more time and labor after in the reading of all our Protestant Writers of
any eminency: And therefore what authorityes of Protestants are in these
Motives insisted upon by me (I except not one) I do justify them, not as
borrowed from any Catholic writer (for I hold that course unworthy a Man of
my Place) but as from my own most diligent and laborious reading of the
Protestant Books themselves.

But to return. We have above evidently proved, that the ancient Fathers were
supporters and defenders of the Roman Religion, and that in their writings they
do transmit and commend over the same to all posterity. Can we think, they
justified a false faith, they being the Churches Sentinells in those times?
Upon thy walls Isa. 6^.
O Ierusa^em, I have set watches for ever. Or shall we dream (the Church of
Christ being then in her greatest purity) that upon her Altar the Arc of Truth
could be compatible with the Dagon of Heresy? It is repugnant to Gods
Providence, repugnant to his Matthew. 16.
Promise. And doubtless, if the Fathers faith were false, and Protestancy the
true Faith, I may justly say (all collateral respects weighed) that here
Falsehood is much honored with probabilityes, and Truth discountenanced with
Unlikely hoods. But for my self in particular (my body daily hasting to it
grave through it languishing sickness) the question is, Whether during this
short remnant of Time, I should longer consociate my self in faith and
Religion with my former Brethren the Protestants, or subscrybe to the
Cristalline and clear judgments herein of the Ancient Fathers. But the
election is already made: And in these few leaves (so my leaves shall not be
without fruit, that is, my desires without effect) I do protest to God and the
world, that I have, and do renounce all Innovation of doctrine, heretofore
embraced by me; and do with all resignation of mind submit my judgment, to the
judgments of those Primitive, reverend, virtuous, and learned Fathers; whose
voluminous Wrytings (I grant) for some years past, have had an influence and
sovereignty over my Understanding.

THE V. MOTIVE. That the articles of Protestancy are particulerly condemned for
Heresies, by the ancient Fathers. And that all Protestants originally came out
of the Catholyke Church.
IALLOVV well the proceeding of Theodosius Sozomen. l. 7. histor. cap. 12.
the Emperor, who, for his better suppressing of the arrising Heresies of his
days, was accustomed to demand of their chief Patrones, whether they
thought, the ancient Fathers, living and sterning Gods Church, before those
new doctrines first appeared, were orthodoxall in their faith, or no? To which
question, when they gave their assent, by reputing the said Fathers for such,
he thus concluded: Examinemus ergo doxtrinam vestram ad illorum scripta, and si
cum illis consenserit, retineamus; sin winus, abijciatur. The like course I
hold to be observed in trial of our Protestant doctrine: But I much fear the
event, and this for two different reasons: The one, in that I find (as above is
showed) our own brethren openly to break with the chiefest Fathers of the
primitive Church, reputing them, as so many supporters of Papistry: The other,
because many articles of our Protestant religion newly springing up in those
times (thus the Gospel (d) teaches us, Matt. 13.
that the Cokcle was presently sown after the good seed) have been condemned
for Heresies by Irenaeus, Jerome, ^piphanius, Augustine, and other Fathers in
their Catalogues of Heresies, and other their wrytings. I do not speak this of
every article of Protestancy, since I grant some have taken their first being
from out own sensuality; like unto certain weeds, which grow rather out of
the Lust of the earth, then from any formal seed. Now these Fathers, since they
were learned, could not but know; since they were pious and godly, would not
but confess the said then arysing doctrines to be cross to the general
professed Religion of their own, and former times. And it cannot be as yet,
nor has been (by way of retaliation) answered, that any one of them, were
ever reprehended for ranging that opinion in the Catalogue of heresies, which
was not then generally accepted for heresy.

Let us exemplify in some: The Arians (besides their greater blasphemies)
taught, that all unwritten Lib. 1. c. a. contra Matrimin. and. l. vlc.
Traditions were to be rejected; they further perpetrated many sacriledges
Atha. in apoleg. pro fuga.
against the Sacraments, Altars, Priests, and religious or professed persons.
And do not we Protestants bring them upon the stage again, acting their parts
in our writings and deportments?

The Aeri^ns (to use S. ^ib. de Haeres. c. 33.
Augustines words) thought it unlawful, orare, vel offerre promortuis, to
pray or offer up sacrifice for the dead, or to observe set days of fast; and
hereupon they were condemned for eating flesh in Lent. See how we Caluinists
are lineally proseminated and sprung from the loins of Aerius, so fully we do
reintegrate his heresies.

The heretic Hier. l. 1. and 2. contr. Iouinian. and Aug. lib. de haeres. cap.
82.
Iouinian taught, that Fasting was not meritorious; that Virginity was not to
be preferred before Wedlock; and that a man once having true faith, could not
sin. Either we Caluinists are herein Posthumi to Iouinian, or Iouinian by
prevention of time was an anti-dated Caluinist: the difference is but small.

The (o) Eunomians maintained, Aug. l. de haeres. cap. 54.
that no sin could be hurtful to one having faith. Will you have this
doctrine delivered in Luthers Lib. de capt. Babylon. c. de Euchar.
words? Tam dives est Christianus, vt non possit perire, etiamsi velit,
quamtumq, male viuat, nisi nolit credere: so conspiringly we iumpe together in
embracing this confident presumption; which (as I may term it) is no better,
then Hope out of it wits.

The Manichees deprived man of freewill, according to that of S. Augustine:
Peccatorum Lib de haeres c. 46.
origine^ non tribuunt Manichaei libero arbitrio. Now Luther and Lib. de seruo
arbit.
Calvin Lib. 2. Insi^t. c. 2.3. and 4.
are so precipitate and headlong in this doctrine, that neither of them can
brooks the name or sound of the word, Freewill: yet heerin they dissent from
the Manichees; in that they, by taking away freewill, ascribed all sins and
wickedness to that God (which they termed an evil God) as to the first cause;
whereas our men will needs impute the perpetrating of the greatest sins
whatsoever, to that God, which they acknowledge for good.

The Donatists Aug. l. 1. contra Petilian. cap 51. and 61. and l. 3. cap. 40.
most implacably hated the Bishop of Rome, calling his feate, Cathedram
pestilentiae; (the very dialect of us Protestants) they most cruelly persecuted
Monks and Religious men; they brake down Altars, sold their sacred chalices,
and contumeliously cast out of the Churches holy Oil. Finally they taught the
Church of Christ to consist only of the Aug. lib. de vni^al. c. 12.
Just; so consequently (as not knowing, who are truly Just) making it to be
invisible: How punctually do we run, one and the same line of doctrine with
these men? And in this last point we ouerrunne them, since we auerre, that the
Church for many hundred years together remained invisible; so making it to
consist of certain aerie and imaginary Inuisibility. O phantasy! The word Matt.
7.
of God styleth him a fool, that builds his house upon the sands; what is he
then to be reputed, who erecteth the house of God (which is his Church) in the
air; since an aerie foundation is less firm, then a sandy?

But to proceed. Ecclesiastical Primacy, as claymed by civil Magistrates, was
condemned in the Emperors Constantius, and Valentinian, as witness Athanasius
In ^p. ad so^itar. vitam agentes.
and Ambrose. Such respect did Antiquity give to spiritual jurisdiction, ever
advancing it in matters Ecclesiastical above the temporal, even where both
these powers did concur and meet in one and the same person. Epist. 32.
And therefore by analogy, that saying of one was good, though intricate, to
wit, The Prophet David was in higher favor with God, then King David.

The denial of the real Theod. dialog. 3.
presence (in which sacred banquet, as one Father says: Idem est conuiua and
conuiuium; idem comedens and qui comeditur) was condemned in the old Heretics
of S. Ignatius his time; they further affirming Hier. epist. ad Hedibi. us.
no true visible sacrifice to be in the Church of Christ. The same was in like
sort condemned by the Manichees: Aug. tom. 6. contra aduersar. leg. and prophe.
c. 19.
And wherein do they differ from us Caluinists, and Sacramentaryes?

Vigilantius (as S. Hierome Lib. contra Vigilantium.
witnesses) taught that it was not convenient to forsake the world, and enter
into Religion; that the relics of Saints are not to be worshipped; that the
prayers of the dead could not be heard for others (which implicitly frustrateth
the Prayers of Saints:) And that Churchmen were bound to lead about with them a
sister in the 1. Cor. 9.
Lord: (...). I mean they ought to be married. And is not all this good
Protestancy? thus we preferring herein Vigilantius a branded heretic, before
S. Hierome an Orthoxall Father.

I pass over for have, how Proclus the Heretic was condemned by Epiphanius
Haeres. 64.
for maintaining concupiscence to be a mortal sin after Baptism, with whom
agrees Art. 2. and 31.
Luther. How the Pelagians were condemned by S. Hierome Lib. 2. contra Pelag.
for teaching every sin to be mortal: How Xena as Persa played the
Iconomachist, in impugning all worship due to the Images of Christ, and his
Saints, as appears out of Lib. 16. c. 27.
Nicephorus: How the denial of the possibility of the Commandments was
condemned in certain old Heretics by In explicat. Symboli ad Damas.
Hierome, and De te^ poreserm. 91.
Augustine: And finally (to pretermit many other points) how Probianus the
heretic denied all reverend estimation due to the Cross, and was therefore
Tripar. histor. lib. 2. c. 19.
highly taxed.

Now in the recital of the condemnation of all these former Articles, we are
to observe, that no general profession of all these points was made in those
days; but that only particular Heretics, then maintained such or such
particular errors; though they all be now engrossed, or (as it were)
incorporated together in us Protestants: So as it may be truly said, that the
mishappen Embryo of Protestancy was first conceived by those ancient Heretics,
after borne or brought forth by Luther; and lastly received it further growth
and strength from Calvin; though not to wrong Luther, we must confess that he
was more remiss in the defense of some points, then either those old
Sect-maisters, or we are; we resembling heerin those children, who are more
like to the grand Father, then to the Father.

But what? Is there no other association between us and those former old
heretics, then to maintain the opinions maintained by them? (though this
intercourse of friendship carries a main blemish to our new pretended
Gospel.) There is. And it is this: We are not ashamed (in our conflicts with
the Catholics) to take from the said Heretics those particular arguments and
objections which they in those former times used against the then Roman faith.
I am loath to be tedious, and two or three example; shall at this present
serve. Thus did Faustus the heretic (and thus do we at this present) urge that
Text in 1. Tim. cap. 4. viz. (In the later days there shall come some,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from certain meats.) against
abstinence and single life: The alleging of which text for both these points,
is recorded and condemned by S. ^ib. 10. c. 4. contra Faustum Manich. and l.
cont. duas epist. Pelag.
Augustine. Thus the urging (as in respect of the Sacrament) the gross and
carnal eating of human flesh (which very objection we now make) by the said
old heretics is registered and condemned by Justinius In colloquio cum Tri^hone,
and Eusebius. l. hist 5. c. 1.
Martyr. Finally (to remember my intended breuity) thus the old obiecting of
many points of the presene Roman Religion to be taken from the Gentills as D.
Reynolds Lib. de Romans Eccl. idololatr. p. 168 248. and 381.
Kemnitius Exam. part. 3. p. 83.
and others do now urge) is related and condemned by Cont^ ^austum l. 20. cap.
11.
Augustine, and Lib. 2. contra louini n.
Hierome. So dishonorable a war we wage against the Church of Rome; as not
being content to revive the opinions and doctrine first taught by certain
stigmaticall and registered heretics in the time of the Primitive Church; but
also to borrow from the said heretics their very weapon^ and other their
supplies, for our better mantaining and justifying of this war.

Thus far to euict, that the Roman Religion is more ancient, then
Protestancy (and consequently it true, and the other false; since God is more
ancient then the devil, and Truth then falsehood.) There remains yet another
Way (in which I will here a little insist) though not much beaten and tracted,
yet securely leading to the designed mark: And therefore I hope it deserves
the judicious Readers intense and serious consideration.

The sacred Scripture (Gods holy language) describes certain Innouatours in
doctrine (and in them, all such others) in these few words 1. loa^. c. 2.
Exierunt ex nobis, They went out of us: meaning heerby, that those Men
departed from the known society of Christians of that time, and consequently
embraced another religion less ancient. These words contain a stamp or
Character impressed upon Innovation, to distinguish it from Antiquity. Whereunto
well accords that sentence of Optatus: Cont. Donat. l. 1.
Videndum est, quis in radice cum toto orb manserit, quis for as exierit; and
more literally that of Tract 3. in epist. Joan.
Augustine: Omnes Haeretici, omnes Scismatici ex nobis exierunt, idest, ex
Ecclesia exeunt: intending heerby, that whosoever makes choice of any new sect
or doctrine, the same Man either in himself, or in his predecessors in
doctrine, did depart from a more general society of men, houlding a more
ancient faith, then that, which by him is chosen. From which ground the two
words: Haeresis and Apostata, took their Ecclesiastical signification; the
one signyfying a separation or choice; the other a Man going out, or reuolting
from.

Here now I provoke my own Brethren (how learned soever) to make good two
things: The one, to show from what company or Church more ancient, they
catholics departed. The other, to nominate any one Sect-mayster of Protestancy,
who was not originally a Catholyke, and retayning other points of the said
Religion, departed from this more ancient Co^munity of faith, by forging some
one heresy or other.

Concerning the first, it is not sufficient for our Brethren (under their
reducing of the matter to the scripture interpreted by the private Spirit
(being but an idle circulation and maze of dispute) to affirm, that the
Catholykes have departed from the ancient faith first instituted by Christ,
except withal they show some certain Community of Christians, more ancient
then the Catholyks, from whom they departed; the Catholics by by this means
taking upon them a certain name of the first stampers of their doctrine (as
the Manichies, the Donatists, the Iouinians, and all others have done) or from
the doctrine it self. But hic labor, hoc opus est: Our Brethren can never do
it: Neither in my reading have I found any one Protestant (how conversant
soever in Ecclesiastical historyes) either to attempt to prove this point
(though most material) or but once to urge it against the Catholyks: so
dangerously he forsaw, it might be retorted upon himself, and his Religion.
Concerning the second: Our Brethren cannot name any one Protestant, even from
the first five hundred years or before to the days of Luther (a compass of
time, containing at least a thousand years) which was not originally a
Catholyke; himself being before a member of the Catholic Church, and going out
of it, by dogmatizing some few new doctrynes, still believing the rest of the
articles of Catholic Religion. The Precedents of the Hussies, Wicleffists, and
Waldenses may clear this point; all which (supposing them for the time to be
Protestants) are reduced (as the stream to the fountain, and the branch to
the tree) to a known Catholyke beginning; to wit, to Husse, Wicleffe and
Waldo; who by our own acknowledgment were borne and baptized in the Roman
Church; themselves after leaping out of it, by mantayning and broaching some
one new doctrine or other, not allowed by the Church of Rome, according to that
of Adue. Marcione^.
Tertull. Haereses prodierunt ex nobis, non nostrae.

If then the matter stands thus, that our Brethren (notwithstanding their
most diligent perusing of all Ecclesiastical writers, whose proiected labor
is to relate al occurents of the Church) cannot show any visible society of
Men, professing the crew Christian faith, from which (as more ancient) the
present Roman Religion ever departed or went out; And that on the contrary
part, out Adversaries are able to prove, that even from the first five hundred
years till Luthers days, not any one Man can be suggested, or put forth for a
Protestant, who was not originally a Catholyke, and no Protestant, departing
from the Catholyks by his after making choice of some Innovation in doctrine:
If then (I say) this be so, what inference more irrefragable can be made, or
what mathematical demonstration more counincing, then that the Catholyke faith
was more ancient, then Protetestancy? that being the Matt. 13.
good seed, which was first sown, though hindered by an after casting into the
ground of some tares of Nouelli^me and Heresy. And thus far of this point;
the which once more I commend to the diligent perusal of a clear Judgment.
The force of which Argument more easily inuadeth a vulgar Understanding, by
forging this supposall.

Imagine then two great familyes or Houses, the one in the first times of all,
coming out of the other (but whether not confessed) both standing in this
competency of Antiquity: If here the heir of the one should not only provoke
and will the other, to show by good evidence, when any of this heirs
ancestors desceded out of the others family, he not being able by sufficient
wrytings to prove any such descent; but withal would engage himself to
manifest by most ancient and undoubted Records, that all the other parents in
their first Ancestors were primitiuely descended from out his own House: And
upon such their descent, and other circumstantiall occasions, had their names
first changed: Now this heir thus undertaking, and thus performing, follows
it not most evidently, that his house is the more ancient, it being indeed the
stem, and the other but the branch? Our Case herein is the same, both (in
respect of the point questioned) being cast in one Mould.

THE VI. MOTIVE, That true Miracles have been wrought for proof of the
Catholyke Religion; but not any for Protestancy.
SVCH is the benign and merciful proceeding of God with Man (humbling
himself, in a certain manner, to the weakness of our Nature) as that he
expects not, true faith and doctrine at it first promulgation, should under
any penalty of punishment, be believed, except the truth of it were then
fortifyed, and warranted with some strange and great Miracles. Thus he thought
good, in the unsearchable and abysmall depth of his wisdom, to ordain a
necessity of Miracles to the confirmation of every true new doctrine, and
extraordinary mission for the preaching thereof: Both the Testaments afford
plentiful proof herein. In the old, we read, that when Moses was sent by
God to the People, and said to God: They Exodus 4.
People will not believe me, nor hear my voice; God thereupon instantly gave
him power to work miracles, to the end (as God said) that the People may
believe, that the Lord appeared unto thee: a point so evident, that in our
English Bibles, our own marginall Note to this place is thus: Printed anno
1^76.
This power to work miracles, was to confirm his doctrine, and to assure him
of his Vocation. In the New, the words of our Savior to his Apostles proclayme
the like truth, saying: As Mate. 10.
you go, preach, heal the sick, cleanse the leprous, raise up the dead, cast
out the devils etc. And hereupon our Lord Jesus in another place thus
speaks of himself: If Joan. 15.
I had not done the works, which no other Man did, they had not sinned. To
conclude, S. Mark seals up his Gospel with the like words touching the
Apostles, saying: They Mar. v^^.
preached every where, and the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word
with signs, that followed.

Now, from these sacred texts of Scripture ryseth this Resultancy; to wit, What
Church enjoys this guyft of Miracles, the same is the true Church (since true
Miracles are wrought only by the power of God, though not always by good men,
yet ever to a good end:) And what Church wants this privilege, especially in
the first planting of a new Religion, or in an extraordinary Mission or
vocation of Ministers, the same is not to be reputed the true Church of God,
but the Conuenticle of Satan; which later point is acknowledged for true even
by us Musculus thus writes in loc. com. Vocatio, quae immidiate est a Christo
etc. babebat sua signa, vnde cognosci potuis, de quibus meminit Marcus
Euangelista cap. vis. Amandue Pol^^us in partis. theolog. l. ^. p. 308.
Ministrorum extraordinary vocatoru^ ^tiam dona extraordi^aria fuere ne^pe
Prophetia, do^um edendi miracula. Vide D. Sauaria in defens. tract. coutra
respons. Bezae cap. 2. p. 38. Luth. in loc. com. class. 4. c. 20^ Bullinger
aduers. Anabapt. lib. 3. cap. 7. saying: Si dicitis vos instar Apostolorum
peculiarem vocationem bab^re, probate eam signis and miraculis.
Protestants: thus are we content to lend a hand, for the drawing out of that
sword, which our Adversaries after do sheath in our own sides; for if I can
prove, that in the Catholic and Roman Church, there has been in all ages the
patration of true Miracles, and that never any one has been performed by us
Protestants (notwithstanding our undertaking to plant a new Religion, and
challenging to our selves an extraordinary vocation) what can be more
irrefragably concluded, but that the Catholic Church is that true Church,
whereunto our Savior has tied this glorious gift; and that our Protestant
Church is but a false and late erected synagogue? According to that of S.
Augustine Culmen Lib. de ^tilitate cred^^di cap. 17.
authoritatis obtinuit Ecclesia Catholica, Haereticis Miraculorum maiestate
damnatis. And first to examine us Protestants touching this point; where, as
forseeing and acknowledging our want of miracles, it will not be sufficient for
us by way of preue^tion to say; That since the doctrine now taught by us, was
confirmed in the beginning by the Apostles and Martyrs with infinite miracles;
therefore it is not to be expected, that we should work any miracle for the
second warranting of it. This (I say) is but a subtle and subterfugious
declyning of the point; for seeing our doctrine is confessed by us, to be
repugnant to all Antiquity (as appears from our rejecting of the ancient
Fathers) and seeing we vendicate to our selves, an extraordinary vocation, as
not being sent by ordinary Pastors, but immediately Doctor Fulke against Stapl.
Marti. etc. p. 2. thus writes: The Protestants, that preached these last
days, had likewise extraordinary calling. The Same is affirmed by Calvin
Instit. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 4. by Philip Mornay in his treatise of the Church,
translated, and printed anno 160^. by Beza in epist. Theolog. epist.
from God, as we are forced to teach; therefore we are obliged to make good this
our doctrine, vocation, and mission, by some supernatural and divine
testimonies, that is, by exhibiting of miracles.

Now, how far we Protestants are distant from the working of any such
stupendous actions, will appear from the liberal acknowledgments of our want
therein. And first, as confessing so much, D. Sutcliffe thus writes: We In his
examen of Doctor Kellisons Survey printed 1606. page 8.
do not practice Miracles; nor do we teach, that the doctrine of Truth is to be
confirmed with miracles. To whose judgment D. Fulke accords in these words:
It Against the Rhemish Testament in Apocal. cap. 13.
is known that Calvin and the rest, whom the Papists call Archeretikes, do
work no miracles. A point so evident, that through our own want of miracles,
we peremptorily teach and mantaine, that all true Miracles have ceased ever
since the Apostles times.

And yet here I cannot pretermit to note, how in the life of Calvin, written
by Hierome Bolsecus, it is certainly affirmed and recorded for true, that
Calvin (emulous of the Catholic Church for working miracles) contracted with a
poor man of his own Religion, to counterfeite himself dead, that he for
confirmation of his own doctrine and vocation might seem to raise him to
life* But Calvin in the presence of many, began no sooner to call the poor
supposed dead man to life, but that instantly (through Gods just judgment) he
became dead indeed, and so was buried. And thus though Calvin never wrought any
miracle, yet God vouchsafed to exhibit this miracle for his greater confusion:
So as those words of Tertullian may well be here verifyed: Apostoli Lib. de
praescript.
de mortuis suscitabant; Haeretici de viuis mortuos faciunt.

Now, that the Catholic Church ever enjoyed this privilege and honor of
working miracles, (and this often in proof of some Catholic point or other) I
thus prove. And first, to begin with the time of the Primitive Church, and for
taste of some particulers: I find in proof of the Real presence in the
Sacrament, S. Chrysostom De sacerd. l. 6. c. 4.
thus to record of one: A certain venerable and aged man was vouchsafed by
God, to be made worthy of a vision, which was, that during that time (meaning
of celebrating the sacrifice of the Mass) he did see whole multituds of
Angels to descend suddenly down, being clothed with shyning vestements, and
standing round about the Altar, and bowing down their heads in such sort, as
if one should behold soldiers bearing themselves in the presence of their
King. Thus far S. Chrysostom.

Touching the virtue of the sign of the Cross, In vita Hilarionis
Hierome, In vita Antonij.
Athanasius, Her. 30.
Epiphanius, and Hist l. 5. cap. 21.
Theodoret, do make so ample relation of many miracles done by it, as that D.
In his answer to John Burges p. 138.
Couell speaking thereof, thus writes: No man can deny, but that God, after
the death of his son, manifested his power to the amazement of the world in
this contemptible sign, being the instrument of many Miracles.

Touching the Image of Christ, Eusebius thus writes: The Hist. l. 7. c. ^.
image of Christ was erected by that woman; whom Christ cured of the flux;
and an unusual herb did grow at the bottom thereof; which after it growing
up, and once touching the garment of the Image, had power to cure all diseases.
Thus Eusebius.

Concerning Prayer to Saints, S. lib. de ciuit. Dei 22. cap. 8.
Augustine relating of a holy woman, called Palladia, being diseased, and
praying to S. Steven before his tomb or monument, thus writes: Adsanctum
Martyrem orare perexerat; quae mox vt cancellos attigit, collapsa velut ad
somnum, sana surrexit: that is, She coming to pray to the holy Martyr, and
touching the cancels or borders of his monument, fell (as it were) into a sleep
or slumber; but waking, she found her self cured of her sickness. Thus
Augustine, who reports this miracle to be done in the presence of himself,
and diverse others.

Touching the honoring the Relics of Saints bodies, S. Augustine relates,
how at the dead bodies of Geruasius and Protasius (which were many years after
found incorrupted) a blind man received his sight: A miracle (says Augustine)
done at Millan, Lib. 9. Confess. c. 7. and. 8.
when I was there, many people being witnesses thereof. S Augustine also Lib.
de ciuit. Dei 22. c. 8*
mentions, how ten infirm people were in the sight of himself and many
hundreds more, being eyewitnesses thereof, miraculously cured, at the Monument
of S. Steven.

To be short, the working of miracles at the monuments of Saints was so
frequent in S. Austines days, that thus he Aug. vbi supra.
writes: It would require many books to set down the miracles of healings
and curings done only at the monument or tomb of S. Steven: A verity so
irrefragable, and acknowledged by all men of those times, that D. Contra
Duraeum l. 10. page 8^6,
Whitaker thus confesses of this point saying: I do not think those miracles
vain, which are reported to have been done at the monuments of Saints.

Touching the many Miracles performed by Monks (who confessedly being
Catholics in Religion, could not work any one true Miracle, if their Religion
were false) read Histo. l. 4. c. 13. and lib. 6.28.
Zozomene, In vita Hilarion.
Iereme In his Theoph.
Theodoret, and Viz. Socrates hist. lib. 4. c. 18. Euagrius hist. lib. 6. cap.
22.
others (besides our own Centurists) by diverse of which Miracles, men were
raised from death to life; others were cured of diseases by Prayer; the raging
and inundation of the Sea was suddenly stayed, and the like.

But to omit for breuity other infinite Miracles, recorded by the Fathers of
the Primitive Church (many of them being exhibited in proof of the Catholyke
faith; and all of them performed by men, that professed the Catholyke faith;)
we will descend to these later ages, Cent. 4. col. 493
by degrees even to our days. And first for the space of thirteen hundred
years next after Christ, we will content our selves in that behalf (besides
that, which is already delivered) with the testimonies and acknoledgments of
the Magdeburgenses our Brethren, who out of the most approved and authorized
Cronicles and writers, do record the miracles of every age successively; making
the thirteenth chapter of every Century, the subject thereof. To whose wrytings
concerning so many ages, for greater expedition, they being earnest Protestants
and enemies to the Roman Religion, I refer the Reader, as to so many
impartial witnesses.

In the fourteenth age, many were eminent for working of miracles, but
especially S. Nicolaus Tolentinas, S. Catharine of Siena, and S. Bernardinus;
as Antoninus In (...) part. histo. tit. 23. and 24.
relates. In the fyfteenth age, S. Vincentius was celebrious for Miracles, as
also S. Antonius, whose life may be read in Surius.

And lastly to arryue to this our own age; It is most certain that S.
Franciscus Vide Surium.
de Paula wrought diverse most stupe^dious miracles; also that See the book of
the life of Xauerius.
Xaucrius the Jesuit, in the conversion of the East Indians, did work the
like; for the more precise examination of whose Miracles by oath, See Abraham
Heart well his book heerof, servant to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
the King of Portugal did send forth a Commission to his Viceroy there, dated
in April 1556. the which were so evidently true, that D. Whitaker Lib. de
Eccles. co^t. Bellar. p. 353.
acknowledging the^, calls them Antichristian Miracles. Again the Miracles
done in Congo in Afrike upon it Conversion to the present Roman Religion, are
diuulged by Protestant (g) Writers.

But we will come near at home, and will somewhat insist in the many
astonishing Miracles wrought these late years in the low Countries at Sichem;
of which forty (or above) are recorded by the learned and eminent man In his
book entitled: Diua Sichemiensis, sieve Aspricollis, then being a Protestant*
Iustus Lipsius, then living in those Countries; one of too great judgment to
give credit (much less to diuulge in print) every fabulous wonder, which might
come to his ears (and a man, with whom in my younger ears I have had
intercourse by letters:) Therefore we may morally assure our selves, that he
would not record any one, for miracle, but such (and so himself affirms) as
either by his own knowledge were warranted for true, himself seeing and
speaking with the parties upon whom the miracles were wrought; or by the
testimonies of many Oaths, taken before the Magistrates in those places. The
consideration of which Miracles, fortifyed with all probabiltyes of truth
whatsoever (especially, either all, or most of them consisting in
supernaturally curing, without any physic, incurable diseases) has, and does
still, much prevail with me; and the more in regard of that great considence
of truth, which the forsaid Iustus Lipsius shows in his relation of them, for
thus he writes: Vbi supra p. 1. and 5.
Ecce in oculis and auribus omnium gesta: ecce concursu, plausu, fructu gentium
celebrata: quae sides potest esse in rebus humanis, si hac non est? and again:
Miracula Sichemiensi in agro euenere, itemque eueniunt, a bitris his sensibus:
Nos ^idemus, nos audimus quis profestus abnuet? in so much that in respect of
his own reverence given to the place of Sichem, (where these miracles were
wrought) he Vbi supra p ^6.
mentions, that himself made a pilgrimage to it. But enough of Sichem; and
thus far concerning the glorious guyft of working Miracles, promised by our
Savior ever to be in his Church; never practiced as yet by any one Protestant;
but in all ages peculiar to the Catholyke Church; and all this by the plain
confessions of us Protestants.

Now, what can we justly reply, or oppose against the Miracles wrought by the
members of the Catholyke Church? To deny the working of all such Miracles, were
to deny all Ecclesiastical records and testimonies, and indeed to take away
by the same ground all authority of history, either ecclesiastical or
profane. Therefore if we will but ascry be as much credit to the wrytings of
Zozomene. Augustine, Jerome Chrysostom, Theodoret, Eusebius, and others of those
primitive times, recording the miacles of their days; as we commonly give to
the Commentaries of Caesar, or to the Lives of Liuy, or any other ancient
profane Authentical Author, we must be forced to acknowledge, that such
miracles were really wrought, and no forged lies. Again touching the
particular miracles of Sichem (diuulged by Lipsius, as is said,) it is known,
that in Brahant, and all other Provinces now under the Archduke, near
adjoining to Sichem, there are many Protestants at this day; how chances it
then, that among so many Miracles there said to be done, no one Protestant
would take exception against any one of them, as not done at all, or otherwise
but effected by confederacy of parties, and by deceit? Which one point
(considering, how vigila^t we Protestants are to take advantage of our
Aduerl^ryes proceedings) mightily strenghneth the certainty and truth of the
said Miracles, Neither for the disgracing of all Miracles in general, as mere
forgeryes, is it sufficient to allege some one or two (perhaps) supposed to
be Miracles, and yet found after to be but feygned; for if any one Miracle
(among so many hundreds, as are related by grave Authors) be true, supposing
for the time, all the rest to be false; that one Miracle irrefragably and
demonstratiuely proves the truth of Catholyke Religion; since God concurreth
to the working of Miracles only with those of a true foyth, or to confirm true
Faith.

Again, by the former Reason, we should reject all the books of holy
Scripture; seeing there were some other counterfeyted Books, obtruded for
Scripture, being merely forged under the Apostles names, as Hist. l. 3. c. ^^*
Eusebius Cone. Aduers. leg. and Proph. l. 1. c. 20.
Augustine Hist. l. 7. c. 19.
Zozomen do witness.

Or secondly, shall we, confessing the matter of fact of miracles, (as granting
them to be truly done) yet seek to ascry be the doing of them to the power of
the Devil, tearming them Antichristian Wonders, and lying signs, as Osiander
Cent, 10.11.12. etc.
and the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 1445. and Cent. 5. col. 148^. etc.
do style them? Do we not blush thus in our answer to conspire and compart
with the Pharisces, in condemning the Miracles of our Lord and Sauiou: this Man
Matthew. 1.
casts not out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils? But against
this second refuge; First it cannot be applied to those infinite Miracles,
recorded in confirmation of diverse Catholyke points, by Zozomen, Augustine,
Jerome and oaths (as above in part is showed) since those Miracles were wrought
in the Primitive Church, and long before Antichrist his coming, even
according to our own doctrine of Antichrist, first reign; who commonly teach,
that he came not before the first six So does teach D. Fulke in his answer to a
counterfets Gaetholike p. 30. D. Willet in his Symops. p. D. Downham in his
treatise of Antichrist l. 2. p. 4. and others
hundred years, placing his first coming in Boniface the third, Anno Domini
607. Secondly, Antichrists miracles are no true miracles, but such (as our own
learned Visinus truly teaches) As, the order of Nature olserued, may be
effected by the deceit of Men, or Devils. But instantly to cure diseases,
without any secondary humane means whatsoever; or upon the suddayn to stay the
natural flowing (x) of the Sea, and the like (where Omnipotency is necessarily
required, to suspend the working of that, which Omnipotency first ordained) is
both supra and contra Naturam; and therefore can be accomplished only by his
power, who is able at his pleasure to disioynt the est ablished course of
Nature. In Comment. Catech p. 28.
And yet even of these kinds of Miracles there are abundant testimonies of
approned Authors, that they were performed in the Catholyke Church, throughout
all ages of the said Church. Thus we see, Euag. l. 4.
now weak our former enasion is. And therefore I cannot but commiserate our
own D. Whitaker, who foreseeing all other former answers to be defective;
betaketh himself to this last despayring refuge; to wit, that Lib. de Ecces.
p. 48.
God does give power of working true Miracles unto false, teachers, not to
confirm their false Opinions, but to tempt those, unto whom they are sent.
Omisery and feeblenes of Nouelisme in doctrine, which is forced (through it
own poverty) to sustentate and support it self for the time, by mantayning
assertions, repugnant to the providence and charity of God toward man, and to
all light of natural reason: for here the Doctor acknowledges them to be
true miracles, and wrought only by God, and yet only exhibited for temptation
of others. And thus, if we believe that doctrine, which is accompanied with
true miracles, wrought by God alone, may we not well say (supposing the
doctrine to be false) with one writer, Domine, Rich. de sancto Vic^^^. l. 1. de
Trinit. e. r.
si errorest quod credimus, a te deceptisumus? And with this I here end,
agreeing in part with S. Augustine, whom as (among other reasons) Miracles did
(as himself Tom. a. contra epist. Manich. c. 4.
affirms) justly hold within the Catholic Churches besome; so the forces of
miracles (among other Motives) has first reduced me to the said Churches
bosom; since indeed I can repute it, little less then a miracle, that a man of
judgment and reading, should incorporate himself into any other Church, then
which is honored and confirmed with mir^cles.

THE VII. MOTIVE. Absurdityes in the Protestants Religion.
IT is most true, that our Protesta^nt Faith is not inuolued with such
obscurityes, perplexing the judgment of Man, as we find to be in the Catholic
faith (where, in some points instead of discourse, the understanding yealdeth
an unexamined and humble assent; and where reasons of credibility first urged
concerning faith, cause us in the end to expect no reasons for proof of faith,
laudo Ter^^^. de Corona m^litis.
fide^ quae antea credit, quam didicit,) the primitive cause of the disparity
heerof being, in that the Protestant faith ( eloquar an sileam? but my
tonguescornes any longer to betray the truth) is indeed a mere Negative faith,
consisting for the most part in annihilating and destroying the positine
assertions of the Catholics. Which being so, what then can be more easy to the
Understanding, then to conceane, that such or such a thing or point not? Since
so the understanding is only exercised; like the ear judging of silence, or
the eye of darkness. Never the less if we take into our consideration, diverse
of the Protestants positions, we shall find included therein (in lieu of high
Misteryes) such real contrariety in sense, and gross absurdityes in the
immediate and inevitable illations from them, as that they impugn all natural
light; and so a man beginning to give assent thereto, cease to be himself,
that is, a Creature endued with reason.

I will exemplify this in some few for a taste; and I will only pass them over
with a gentle pen, rather intimating them to the Reader, then displaying them
at large. And first touching the actual faith (for habitual with them is not
sufficient) which So Luther teaches lib. de captiu. Babil. c. de Baptis. See
further of this Arti^le agreing with Luther, Kenmiti^^ ^n 2. part, a^am.
Con^il. Trid. ad Ca^on. (...). and the Centurists, Cent. ^. c 4. col 63. and
Cent. 5. c. ^. col. 517.
Luther and others exact of infants, at the time they are baptized; and this by
force and mediation of the words pronounced by the Minister. Now what judgment
can give assent heereto? To wit, that faith can be wrought by certain words,
and yet the party believing, not to hear or understand the words: fides ex
auditu. If Infants understand the words of Baptism, why do they resist (what
they can) their baptising, by wayling and other motions of the body? Or how can
their unwillingness thereof be excused from sacrilege? And thus their Baptism
washes not away, but contracteth new blemishes. Poor Innocents, who know not
whether they live or no, and yet they must be presumed actually to know the
misteryes of faith: since otherwise in the cold severity of these our men they
cannot be saved: strange, harse, and incridible! Not, the late invested soul
departing from it body baptized, is assured of it salvation; since it is free
from original sin, as enjoying the benesit of this sacred mystery, where the
ablution of the body is the abstersio^ of the soul; Caro Tert. l^de
resierrect. carn.
abluitur, vt anima emaculetur, free from actual, as wanting reason, whereby it
otherwise might work against reason.

In our doctrine of Justification do we Ita Luth in art. 10.11, 12. Mela^ct. in
locis titul. de fide. Caluiu. in Antid. Council. Trident. sess. 6. Kemuit. in
exam. Council. Trident. sess. 6.
not teach, that sin is remitted by a sole special faith, by the which a
sinner thinks himself to be just? Which granting, we grant, that the truth
of the thing depends upon the opinion (though later) had thereof, and not the
opinion (as in reason it should) upon the truth of the matter. Which is no
less, the^ to grant, that things subsequent in nature, can exist in priority
of being, before things precedent in nature; or that the effect (still
remaining the effect) can produce it cause.

Further I do here urge: When I begin to believe, that I am just? Either I am
thus Just, or not Just. If just; then I am not justified by that faith, by the
which I believe I am just; because this faith (as is said) is later then my
justice. If unjust; then this faith of mine, by which I believe I am just, is
false; therefore it is no divine and supernatural faith. Finally, if by this
faith of mine I am just, then do I want all sin; If I have no sin, I
cannot without committing sin, repeat that sentence in our Lords prayer:
Dimitte nobis debita nostxa, forgive us our sins. For it is a sin to ask
remission of sins, when it is certain, that I have no sins to be remitted:
See what absurdityes, Justification by faith engenders.

Concerning that heathnish and impious doctrine, which teaches, that God is
the author of sin (for howsoever we verbally disclaim from it, yet do our
positio^s Luther says, God works the wicked work in the wicked. and again,
Nulliest in mani^quippiam ^ogi tare mali aut boni, fed ^^mnia de necessi tate
absoluta venit^nt. In assertion bas damnat. per Leonem. art. 36. Beza says,
God ex^yteth the wicked will of one th^ef to kill another. In his display of
Popish practis. p. 202. D. Willet, God not only permits, but leads into
temptation with an active power, and not permissieuly. In Synops. papism. page
(...) ^^^ngiius says, God moves the thy fe to kill etc. and the thief is
enforrel to sin. Tom. 1. d prouidentia. fol. 306.
necessarily include the same:) Now what can be more dissonant from all
probability of Truth, or further from winning an assent in our understanding,
then to believe, that who redeemed us by death from sin, should thirst after
our eternal death, by forcibly incyting us to sin? That who by his sacred
Word most vehemently disswades us from offending him by our wickedness, should
(not withstanding such his perswasiue disswasions) will us to persevere in our
wickedness? That who in this life temporally chastizeth us, thereby to draw us
from all enormous courses, should most effectually work in us a resolution
still to lie groueling in the mudd of such enormityes? To be short, that he
whose nature is even goodness it self, should be the fountain, from whence all
evil and impiety receaues it emanation and flowing; thus most desiring that
which he most hates. And here when we are charged by our Adoersaryes with
whole shot of Texts of E cles. 2 and 14 Toby ^^. Psalm. 3.943.36, 7^ besides
infinite others, in both the old and new Testament.
Scripture, prohibiting sin, as the soul of all evil, threatening most
dreadful punishments for the perpetrating thereof; and promising most
honorable and mutificent rewards for the avoiding of the same; then do we
labor to divert the forces thereof, by interposing an idle and intentionall
distinction of a double Of this double will in God, Calu. instis l. 1. c. thus
says. Non capimus, quomodo fires velis Deus quod facere vetat.
, Will in God (whereby indeed we distinguish God from Justice and Mercy:) The
one his secret and concealed Will; the other his ^e^ea^ed Will in the Scriptur,
impugning his concealed will: As if God were a deluder of men, speaking one
thing, yet intending another: thus profering his lip-fauours of grace, and
rewards for the avoiding of sin, but inwardly resolved to impell man
irresistably thereto, and after to punish him eternally for the same; so
injurious it is to God, and repugnant to the natural light of our
Understanding, to a^^ribe any other Will unto him (whose love here toward
man, is increased through man's hate toward sin, thus Hate engendring Love)
then an unleavened and pure intention, desirous only of our relinquishing of
sin, and of our souls salvation: Nolo Ezech. 18.
, mortem peccatoris, sed magis vt conuertatur and vinat. Since otherwise it
would follow, that by sinning against his Commandments (a strange duty
consisting in breach of duty) we performed his will and Commandment: such
exhorbitancyes in sense this our doctrine exhaleth forth.

Touching the Pope being Antichrist: do we not mantaine, that the Pope is that
Antichrist, which is foretold in Gods holy 2. These 2.
write? And do we not withal confess, that during the time of his reign,
till Luthers Luther in epist. ad Argentina. Christum (...) nobis primo vulgatum
aude^^^is glori^^. See the testimonies above touching the inuisibility of the
Church.
revolt, our Church was altogether unknown and latent; so as further we
acknowledge, that for the space of many hundred years, the Papacy D. Field in
his book of the Church l. ^. c. 6. says, The Church when Luther began was that
apparent Church, wherein Luther, and the rest were baptized, ^eceaued their
Christianity, ordination, and power of Ministry. osiander ^p^som. ^ent. 16. p.
1073. Ecclesia, quae sub Papa^u fuit, ^obuit ministerium Euangelij, sacra
biblia, Baptismum, Coenam Domini etc. And Luther in loc. comm. class. 1. says:
In medijs furoribus etc. Even in the midst of the furours of the Dragon and
the Lion, there did remain Baptism, the Eucharist, the power of the Keys*
holy Scripture etc. Thus Luther.
alone enjoyed the safe keeping of the Scriptures, and an auaylable
administration of the Sacraments. Now here I would demand of our
Inuisibilists, how these two assertions can stand together; to wit, the Pope
is Antichrist, and the Pope (so being) preserved for so many ages the
Scripturer incorrupted, and administrated the Sacraments profitably? Which if
they can, then can Israel be found in Babylon, and participation be between
Christ and Belial; then must Antichrist only preserve the means for the
descryall of Antichrist; and he who is falsehood it self, be (by our own
inference) columna and firmamentum veritatis: Then can heavenly musick^ (for at
least in part the Pope expounded the Scriptures truly) proceed from the Dragons
voice, and medicinable physic be drunk out of that cup, which shall
inebriate the Kings of earth; then must our souls salvation (for without the
use of the Sacraments it cannot be obtained) be wrought by our souls chiefest
enemy, and Heaven be purchased by the mediation of the Man 2 Thessalonians. vbi supra.
, of sin, and son of pocalyps (thus is Antichrist become Christ's setuantes
best supporter) keep safe those records, whereby those many hundred thousands
Apocalyp. 14.
of Christ's Virgins, make their claim to the inestimable reward, allotted for
their vowed chastity. As easily may we believe, that the Arc and the Idol
Dagon could be placed together; or dream with Copernicus, that the heavens
stand still, and the earth moves. Neither will that extrauagant answer given by
some of Doctor Whitaker. lide Eccles. p 165. so says. And Beza epist. Theo. ep.
1. Volui^ Deus in papatu seruare Ecclesiam, et fi papatus no^ est Ecciesia
us, when we are demanded to reconeyle these points, avail us at all.

The Church was in the Papacy; the Papacy was in the Church; and yet the Papacy
was not the Church.

O Delphick, and Aenigmatical! or other childish, idle, and false! since, if we
believe S. Augustine: Nihil prodest esse in Ecclesia, nisi sis cum Ecclesia.

Lastly diverse of us Protestants (I do not say all) do implye in our writings,
that a man may have ^^luation in any religion, so he hold the fundamental
points of the Trinity, the Incarnation, that Christ suffered for us etc. This
is evident from the testimonies of such of our Protestant Brethren, as
acknowledge the Lutherans, who dissent from them in the doctrine of the Real
presence, and the Puri^^ns differing also from them in several articles of
faith, for members of the Church: Yea our Brother, M. D. In his treatise of the
kingdom of Israel, and the Church. p. 94.
Morton (I infinitely marvel, he would ever suffer such words to fall from
his pen) teaches, that the very Arians may be saved; for ^^us he writes: The
Churches of the Aria^s are to be accounted the Church of God: because they
hold the foundation of the Gospel, which is faith in Jesus Christ, the son
of God and Savior of the world: where by the way I note, that it is strange he
should be so severe toward Catholics (if reports be true) being so indulgent
to the very Arians. To this sentence D. In his answer to a counterfeite
Catholik^ p ^9.
Fulk seems well to agree, saying: The true Church under the Emperors
Constantine, Constans, and Valens, was greatly infected with the heresies of
Arius. Thus in his judgments, an Arian is a member of the true Church, and
consequently in state of salvation. But our foresaid D. Vbisupra p. 91.
Morton comprehends al sects and heresies whatsoever within the compass of
Gods Church (and consequently of salvation) if so they believe in Christ; for
thus he writes: Wheresoever a company of men do jointly and publicly, by
worshipping the true God in Christ, profess the substance of Christian
Religion, which is faith in Jesus Christ the son of God, and Savior of the
world, there is a true Church, notwithstanding any corruption whatsoever. Where
we are to note the last words, notwithstanding any corruption whatsoever. Good
God! how different is this man (as hereafter I will show) from the judgment of
the ancient Fathers, and practice of the Primitive Church?

But to proceed, this most pernicious (yet plausible) doctrine, being the
Prodromus, and forerunner of Libertinisme, originally springs from the
Private Spirit; since this spirit gives reins to every Man to believe, what
it self best suggesteth.

But since the Canker hereof is secretly spread into the hearts of many men at
this day; I will therefore rest the longer in discovering the absurdity and
falsehood thereof, by stirring a little the earth about the root of it; it being
indeed a faith consisting in a wast of faith, and a Religion resting in the
denial of the necessity of any one Religion.

And first it is certain, that without faith a Man cannot be saved: sine Hebr.
11.
fide impossible est placere Deo. And again qui Marc. 16.
non crediderit, condemnabitur. Withal it is as certain, that this faith
(according to that: Ephesians. 4.
vna fides, vnum baptisma) ought to be One, True, and Supernatural: for if it
be not One and True, it saves not Man, but seduceth him, since Truth is One,
and Error, various and multiplicious. Now here I urge, that one faith cannot
be in several Sects; seeing these Sects teach points not only in themselves
disparate and different, but contradictory and merely repugnant.

Furthermore, that that faith, which saves man, must be entyre and true in all
points, is confirmed by other two irrefragable Reasons. The first altogether
insisted upon by S. Thomas ^n ^. distinct. 23. and 22 q. 5. art. 5.
and all chief Schoolmen, is this: True Christian faith, as being a
supernatural and infused Virtue, has a necessary reference to two things;
the first is that, which Deuynes here call, Prima Veritas reuelans, which is
God revealing all truths of faith, to the Church; the second the authority of
the Church, which God here uses as a means, by the which he propou^deth the
said truths to be believed: So as no true supernatural faith can be produced
but where these two concur. The first of these is called by the Deuines:
Obiectum formale of faith; the second, Amussis, Regula, or the Propounder of
the articles of faith.

Now from hence it proceeds, that whosoever denies any one Truth, propounded
by the Church (to whom God reuealeth it) does not believe any other Article
with a true faith; Since the authority of the Church does indifferently and
alyke propound all Articles to be believed; Therefore who beleiueth the Article
of the Trinity, or the Resurrection of the body, through the Authority of the
Church, propounding them to be believed; will also believe Freewill, Prayer to
Saints etc. and any other point; seeing these are no less propounded by the
Church to be believed, as revealed by God, then the former are. Thus it is
evident, that who beleiueth one article of true Christian faith, and beleiueth
not another; this Man beleiueth not any one article, by reason of the authority
of Gods Church (and consequently, has no true supernatural faith at all,
which is available to Salvation) but beleiueth it, in regard only of the
probability of the point in his Judgment; and thus it is not Belief, but
Opinion only in such a Man. For seeing the same credit and affiance is ever to
be given in all things, to the same authority; whosoever does not believe the
said authority in any one point, does not (as is said) believe it in any other;
from whence it follows, that the authority of God and his Church is equally
contemned in the denial of the smallest articles, as of praying to Saints,
Purgatory etc. as in the greatest articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, or any
other sublime and high mystery.

The second Reason: It is peculiar to Virtues Theological, and Infused, to be
obliterated and extinguished by one only contrary Act. Thus for example, one
mortal Sin wholly takes away Charity and Grace; One act of desperation the
virtue of Hope; the same may be exemplifyed in the virtues of Pe^nance,
Religion, and others. Now here by the same reason I infer, that one Heresy
(I mean an obstinate ma^tayning of any one error in faith, how small soever,
against the authority of Gods Church) depriueth a man of true faith, which (as
other Virtues above are) is supernatural, theological, and infused.

In this next place, we will see, how the judgments of ancient Fathers do
approve the former doctrine. Two or three for instance shall serve. And first,
that light of the Latin Church, I mean, S. Augustine Lib. 18. de civil. Dei c.
91.
does thus pensill forth an Heretyke: Qui in Ecclesia Christi aliquid prauuns
sapiunt, si correpti, vt sanum rectumque sapiant, resistant contu naciter,
Haeretici fiunt; and for as exeuntes, habentur in exercentibus Haereticis. That
is, Who beleiueth any wrong or false thing in the Church of God, and being
admonished to believe the truth, do resist contumaciously, they become
Heretyks; and departing out of the Church, they are reputed for open and
wilful Heretyks.

S. Ambrose thus answerably writes; Lib. ^. in Luc. (...) 9.
Negat Christu^, qui non omnia quae Christi sunt co^fitetur he denies Christ,
who beleiueth not all points or articles concerning Christ. Thus who denies
Lymbus Patrum, denies that Christ descended therinto, and consequenly he
denies Christ. Finally S. Gregory Orat. ^7.
Nazianzene thus elegantly conspireth heerto: Vnum vnicohaeret, and ex ijs
quaedam vere aurea and salutaris fit catena; ideo si vel vnum dogma auferatur,
aut reddatur incertum tota catena disrumpetur. That is: One Article of faith is
so cohering with another, that of them all, there is made a goalden and
healthful chain of faith; so as if but one article be taken away, or made but
doubtful, the whole chain becomes broken. See the like agreeing testimonies
in Apud Theod. l. 4. hist. c. 19.
Basil, Lib. ^. Apolog. contr. Ruf.
Jerome, Lib. 1. epist. 6. ad Magnum.
Cyprian, and In Sym.
Athanasius.

The ancient Fathers mind in this point is manifested (besides by their
particular Sentences) from the practice of the Primitive Church against
Heretics; I mean from the perusal of the Catalogues of heeresyes written by
them, as is evident out of the Catalogues of heresies, and other such wrytings
composed by Irenaeus, Hierome, Epiphanius, Augustine, Theodoret, Philastrius
and others; in all which we shall find diverse condemned and branded for
express Heretics, for their wilful maintayning (in our judgments) but
small errors; though otherwise they believed all the chief points of Christian
faith, as the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the like. For proof whereof I will
here alleadg the words of S. Austine against the Pelagians; whom he absolutely
and resolutly condemns for Heretics, for their believing, that man could
keep the law of God only by force of nature, without the force of Gods grace.
His words are these: Nec Epist. 120. c. 37.
tales sunt Pelagiani etc. Neither are the Pelagians such men, as thou
should easily contemn them; for they live continently; are laudable in good
works; they believe not in a false Christ (as the Manichees do) etc. yet
because they are ignorant of the justice of God, endeavoring to make it their
own, they are Heretyks and cast out of the Church. And thus far for a touch of
the practice of the ancient Church, and the Fathers like conspyring testimonies
herein; where I may remit the Reader, to what has been above alleged,
touching the condeminatio^ (by the Primitive Fathers) of our Protestant
doctrynes Which ancient Fathers, as being learned and virtuous, neither would
nor durst, register any for Heretyks, but those, who by the whole Church of God
were reputed for Heretyks (as before I have ^^ted:) which point is made more
evident, in that we do not find any one of the said Fathers (among so many) to
be contradicted by any other orthodoxall Father, for such his proceeding.

But to leave humane authority, and to come to divine; if we look into Gods
sacred Word, it is clear, that who maintayneth any one Heresy, the same has
no more true hope of his salvation, then a Heathen or a Publican: for we find
our Savior to use this commination: Qui Matt. 18.
Ecclesiam non audi^^it etc. He that will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee, as a Heathen or Publican. Where we may observe, that Christ said not, Who
will not hear the Church in all things, but absolutely pronounced, Who will
not hear the Church. If then a Sectary or Heretyke will not hear the
authority of the Church, proposing such and such points (for example of
Freewill, Indulgences, Prayer for the dead etc.) to be believed, how shall he
escape the Anathema here threatened? And though these words immediately be
intended of fraternall correction; yet a fortiori, they are to be understood of
him who reiects the authority of the Church in matters of faith Since this man's
contempt toward the Church is far greater, and less pardonable. For who
refuset^ to obey the Church in one point, does (as above is said) wholly and
absolutely contemn all the authority of the Church.

Again, we find the Apostle speaking of the works of the flesh (meaning those
works, which are committed by wicked men without the assistance of the Holy
Ghost) thus to write: Galat. ^.
The works of the flesh are Adultery, Fornication etc. Idolatry, Witchcraft
Hatred, Debate, Emulations, Wrath, Contentions, Seditions, Heresies etc. they
which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God: where we find the
word Heresy particulerly set down in our English Bibles; though the latin word
being Sectae, is more remiss, and therefore increases here the force of our
illation. Now from hence, I thus argue: As the Apostle does in this place
pronounce sentence of condemnation against the Sin of fornication, though but
once committed; so also against but one sect or Heresy: Since he here makes
no mention of the plurality of times, in committing any Sin, nor of the
number of Heresies; before the workers and defendours of them can deserve
damnation.

And thus far of our Adiaphorists or Neutralls in faith (for I can term
them no better) who though they believe some articles, that are true, yet
believe those truths falsely; as not relying upon the grounds of belief (to
wit, God revealing, and the Church propounding.) And indeed such men (if they
be punctually examined (are found to believe nothing, but their Sense, at most
their Judgment: So they give credit to the matter, but not to the Author; and
so much every man affoards to a discredited and blemished witness. Away then
(among Christians) with this tepidity or cold indifferency in faith, which is
of that charitable disposition (forsooth) as to promise that to all others (I
mean Salvation) of which it self is not capable. Therefore to conclude, my
last Arrest and sentence heerin it; that indifferently to allow all Religion,
is to take away all Religion; and that Neutralisme in faith, finally discargeth
it self into Libertinisme in manners.

I will here stay my Pen, passing over many other Positions of like nature,
breathing such (...) and impossibilityes, which we mantayne. Only I say, as
above I touched, that if we balance them with the most abstruse difficultyes
to be found in the Catholyke Religion (yea with those in the doctrine of the
Real Presence) we may conclude, that those more easily may become the Object
of our belief (and so to be believed) then these, and other such like
exorbitant, gross, and absurd Assertions or Connexions of ours. Since those
former only transcend Reason; these manifestly impugn Reason: By beleiuing the
first, we forbear to be Heathens; by beleiuing these other, we cease to be
Men: Those do advance and magnify in Man, the power of God; these obliterate
and deface in him (by giving assent thereto) the Image of God. To be short,
those may be apprehended by the light of faith; these are even incompatible,
with the light of our Understanding.

THE VIII. MOTIVE. Deceites and sleights practiced by Protestant VVryters.
I HAVE ever been of mind, that matters of Religion are to be proceeded in
with a fearful and innocent pen; and that who approaches thereto, ought with
Exodus cap. 3.
Moses to put their shoes off their feet, the place wherein they stand, being
holy ground, that is, ought to cast off al imperfections of intended calumnyes,
impostures, and other frauds, in regard of the venerable subject to be
entreated of. I would to God, I could not justly charge my own brethren with
faultines herein, so exempting them out of the number of those, who (to use
the Prophets phrase) Dolosam Ose. 12.
calumniam diligunt. But it falls out far otherwise, to their dishonor and
my grief; since (if trial be made) we shall find many Babylonians to dwell in
our supposed Jerusalem.

Our own fraudulent deportements in this great business of Religion (great, in
that it concerns our souls interminable weal or woe) have much disedifyed me,
begetting at the first in me a staggering opinion, whether that can be Truth,
which needs such supporters of deceit and collusion. I will exemplify in
diverse. And to omit our pretense of the Private spirit, for the avoiding of all
authorityes, as already discovered above: The first kind of these shall
concern the English translation of our Bibles: The slight consists in
translating such texts, as mention Traditions, and merit of Works. I will here
forbear to show, how the Scripture Joan. ^ic. and 1 Thessalonians. 2.
commands us, not to rely only upon Scripture, or how our men have borrowed
our faith herein from the old Heretics, Nestorius Vt habetur in sexto Synodo
act. 1.
and Dioscorus, so as we receive by Tradition to reject Traditions: The
imposture only in translating it is, wherein I now dwell. Whereas then the new
Testament makes relation of good traditions and bad, wicked and Jewish
traditions, expressing them both by one and the same greek word, to wit,
(...), which properly signifies Traditio: Now our English translations in such
1. Cor. 2. I pray you Brethren that you be mindfud of m^, and as I have
delivered unto you, you k^ep my Ordinances. The l^ke translating of the word
Ordinances is in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
texts, wherein are understood good and profitable Traditions, do translate
instead of the word Traditions, the word Ordinances. But where the texts speak
of wicked Matthew. 15 Why do you transgress the Commandme^ts of God by your
Traditions.
and frivolous Traditions, there they remember precisely to set down in their
translations the right word Traditions, and not the word Ordinances, or any
other word in lieu of it, as may be seen in these Textes quoted. But this (I
fear) was done, in dislike of Apostolical traditions, that so the ignorant
Reader should never find the word tradition in Scripture in a good sense, but
always in a bad and disallowed: Though now in our last translation (but not in
any former) for the better plaistering of the matter, we put in the margent of
such texts speaking of godly Traditions, the word, Traditions.

The like course we take in translaring the greek word (...), signifying
dignus, in english worthy; and the verb (...), to be made worthy; for in those
Texts Luc. 21. watch at al^ry^as praying, that you may be accounted worthy to
stand before the son of God. The like i^ done in the Greek verb (...). in
Luc. 20. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.
which concern merit of works, wherein these foresaid words are used, we
translate them to seem to be worthy, and to seem only to be made worthy,
thereby to weaken such texts for the proving of merit of Works: But in other
Texts O how much forer punishment shall he be worthy, which tredeth under foot
the son of God
not touching the doctrine of merit, we can be content to translate the said
words truly, that is, to be worthy, and to be worthy indeed. But alas! is
Gods holy word so little favorable to our Protestant faith, that we must be
forced thus to adulterate and corrupt it for the better sustayning of our cause?

The next sort of Collusions may be extended to our deceitful setting down
the doctrine supposedly maintained by Catholics; indeed obtruding upon them
certain absurd Positions, from which they utterly disclaim. And thus do we
no less charge them with believing of errors, then with not believing of our
presumed truth.

To instance this. Touching the merit of works; Do we not usually affirm in
our Sermons and Books that the Papists do so believe to be saved by their own
works without the passion of Christ, as that we hold their doctrine therein
to be dishonorable to his Passion? We do. And yet the Council Sess. 6.
of Trent (wherein is contained a summary of their faith) teaches that al good
works, which a Christian can do, receive their force, value, and price from
the Passion of our Savior; for otherwise it houlds them as no good works; to
which works as proceeding only from the grace of God, the Catholics teach,
our Savior Matt. 3 16. and 10
has promised his reward: So confidently they affirm, that it is of the grace
of God, that we concur with the grace of God; and worthily, since as the
soul informs the body, so Grace informs the Soul.

Touching the Catholics praying to Saints; We charge them in great estuation
and heat of words, that thereby they dishonor Christ his Passion; making the
Saints in praying to them their Redeemers and Saviors. When (God knows) all
that the Catholics do, is but to pray to them, that so the Saints (as being
more gracious in the sight of God) would intercede for them: with no other
intention, then S. Paul requested the Romans ^s I befeech you etc. strive with me
by prayers to God for me.
Romans 1 Thessalonians. 5. Brethren pray for me. The like words he uses to the
Hebrews c ^5.
Thessalonians, and Hebrews in his Epistles, that they would remember him in
their prayers to God. And from hence does grow, that most warrantable
distinction of Mediators, to wit, of Reaemption (of which kind the Catholics,
no less then we, acknowledge no other, then Christ alone) and of Intercession,
of which sort, every virtuous and good man (much more, the Saints and Angels)
may be (without any indignity to our Savior) one for another; since no prayers
(even by the Catholics own doctrine) are auailable, but such, as are founded
in the belief in Christ, and in the virtue and force of his most dear and
precious Passion: So wilfully we mistake the doctrine of the Church of Rome
herein.

Concerning Indulgences, How frequent are these and the like bold reproaches
with us? That the Paprsts teach, the Pope can give aforehand pardon for any
subject to murder his King; that he can absolve one from the sin, which
here after he is to comnit. What fooleryes are these? And how idly do we diuer
berate the air in delivering in our Sermons such improbable or rather senseles
assertions; they being indeed incompatible with common Reason? Do not the
Catholics own books show; first, that the Pope can no more forgive aforhand
any one sin, which hereafter is to be perpetrated, then he can create a new
world; since the object of the Sacrament of Penance is a sin already
committed? Secondly, that the Pope cannot remit the guilt of sin (I mean the
punishment of damnation due to sin) by means of any Indulgences; for it is
their own general doctrine, that no man can be partaker of any Indulgence,
but at the time of his receiving thereof, he must be in state of grace, to
which state he is first brought by virtue of a sacramental Confession, or
(when that cannot be obtained) by force of a true and perfect Contrition?
Thirdly and lastly, that the guilt of eternal damnation being before remitted
(as is said) by the sacrament of Confession, or (in want thereof) by perfect
Contrition, there remains a temporal punishment for the said sins before
remitted, for the satisfying of Gods justice; which temporal punishment (as
being the only object of Indulgences) the Catholics hold, the Pope as Christ's
Vicar here upon earth, and dispenser of his spiritual Treasure, can
either-lessen or wholly take away (if so the party be capable thereof, in being
at that instant in state of Grace, and performing the pennances enjoined upon
him) by applying unto him upon just occasions the superbunda^cy of Christ's
passion. In whose passion for the more fully satisfying of all eternal (much
more temporal) punishment, the sheeding of one drop of blood was sufficient to
redeem thousands of Worlds; since then (his Humanity being accompanied with
the Divinity) Innocence did suffer for sin, Justice for offense, Health for
infirmity, and finally God for Man. Thus, and no otherwise do the Catholics
teach herein, as is evident out of their chiestest Set hereof S. Thomas
Aquinas 4. sent. d. 10. art. 5. Sotus 4. sent. d. ^^ Caietan tom. 1. Bellar
lib. de indulg. possim.
writers: Who (notwithstanding their defense of the doctrine of Indulgences)
may (I fear) justly charge us Protestants with relying too much upon a I
lenary Indulgence (as I may term it) of a solifidian faith.

The next point of this nature shall be concerning Images; touching which our
Eiconomachi, or impugners of the lawful use of them, do run into strange
exhorbitancy of speeches; accusing Catholics, that they place a kind of
divinity or deity in Images, and that they pray to them (so wonderfully does
prejudice of opinion transport men's minds and tongues.) When the Catholics
are charged heerewith (yea the most silly and ignorant women on their side)
they answer, that for the images themselves, they know, they are made of
stone, wood, or such other matter; and that in regard of their substances, they
account them no better then stone, wood, or the like: They use them (they say)
not to pray to them (since this were no better, then a godles religion, or a
devout impiety) but only (besides a peculiar respect given unto them, above
other things made of like substances) to supply the wants of their ^emory, that
so their corporal eye being fixed upon them, the eye of their understanding,
during the time of their devotions, may be more intent upon our Saviors
Passion, or the Saints represented in them. See hereof the second Council of
Act. 7.
Nice, Epist. 119.
S. Augustine, Lib. 7. epist. 107.
S. Gregory, S. Thomas Suarez, and others.

Finally, do we not diuulge, that the Pope, and his Church advance themselus
above the Scripture, allowing for Scripture that, which is not; and altering at
their pleasure the true sense of the scripture, by obtruding upon it, any sense
of their own. Good God! that men (otherwise learned and witty) should thus
idly in their speeches and writings rarell out the time working with such
improbity of libour and toil the^pyders webb, which is so easily swept away*
Labor^ose nihil agunt (to say with Seneca.) The Pope and the Church thus far
proceed: They declare only, what books be Scripture, or not Scripture, among
many Apochriphal writings; and which construction of true Scripture (among many
suggested senses thereof) is the intended meaning of the Holy Ghost. Thus they
neither make nor unmake Scripture, nor impose any sense upon it, which before it
had not, but only declare, which before it had. And thus by this means, they
assume no more to themselves, then any private Protestant practices by the
help of his revealing spirit. But what? Must it needs be inferred, that the
Pope, and the Church for such their proceeding, seek to be above the
Scripture? Then may it be alike concluded that the Judge is above the Law,
since he expresses, what is Law, and which is the true meaning of the
Lawgiver therein. All that hence may be truly deduced, is this, viz. That the
Pope and the Church is not above Scripture (which with all reverence they
affect) but above the Judgments of private men expounding the Scripture.

But here (to make an end of the Catholics mistaken doctrines) I cannot, but
call to mind, how I was several tyms accustomed to charge the Priests, and
others of their Religion appearing before me, with the defense of the former
absurdityes (though I confess, I did then well know, what their learned men
did hold therein:) And I do assure the Reader, that the Priests, being
expostulated hereof, did seem half amazed at these my strange demandes. Yea
one of the Priests (a bold and resolute man) thus answered me: My Lord, if you
demand of me and others in earnest, whether these senseles positions be our do
Irines, it seems, you know not, what the Catholic Church teaches herein; and
then it is strange, his Majesty should place you in seat of judgment against
us, to punish us for that Religion, your self not knowing the doctrine, which
the said religion teaches. An answer blunt and without respect, yet not much
to be disliked, since it is a wrong to truth, to be outfaced and depressed
with calumnyes.

Toward the Ancient Fathers we have several peculiar deportments; first we
strive to break through their authorityes with sleighty euasions; this
failing, next to break down their authorityes by open disclayminges.

Thus in the former manner we proceed diverse ways. First, when any place of a
Father is objected against us, we endeavor (so loath we are to make an absolut
departure from them, if possibly it could be avoided) to interpret the Fathers
words in some other sense, then they are urged by our Adversaries or intended
by the Fathers. Thus where Lib. 4. de Trinit. cap. (...) 4.
Augustine, Lib. 6. desacerd.
Chrysostom, In psalm. 38.
Ambrose, and Lib. 6. contra Parmenianum.
others, do teach, that the Sacrament of the Excharist contains in it self a
true and proper sacrifice; Our Brethren in answer heereto, say these Fathers
meaning only to be, that the prayer powered out by the faithful at the time of
the Communion are Spiritual Sacrifices. But this is but a shadow of an
answer, since the Fathers affirm literally, that the body and blood of
Christ (without the least intimation of any prayers) being offered up in the
celebration of the Eucharist, is a proper and true sacrifice: Quid gratius
offervi (says V by supra.
Augustine) aut suscipi possit, quam car^ sacrificij nostri, corpus effectum
sacerdotis nostri?

Next if the place of the objected Father be so perspicuous, as that it will
receive no other tincture of Interpretation, then what the natural color of
the sentence will properly bear; we then labor to oppose another Father
against him in the said point; or (if possibly we can) the said Father aginst
himself, by vrgi^g some seeming contrary sentence our of him; and all this to
disualew in the Readers eye the authority of the said Father. Thus where Basil
is produced in defense of Traditions, D. Lib. de sacra scriptura p. 670
Whitaker answers thereto (pretending some other contrary place out of
Basil) saying: Basilius secumpugnat. After the same manner D. Whitaker V by
supra page 6.6.
auoydeth S. Augustins authority touching Traditions, saying: Although
Augustine in this place may seem to favor Traditions, yet in other places he
defends earnestly the ^erfection of the Scriptures: An unworthy aspersion
upon the Fathers; as if they were of that wavering irresolution in their faith,
as to mantayne mere contrary doctrynes, at one and the same time.

Another slight used by us is, that if the Father urged in defense of any
Catholyke point, can be deprehended to have maintained any one acknoledged
error; then we usually reject the said Fathers authority in all points of
Catholyke Religion. This chiefly takes place in the produced testimonies of
Cyprian, Tertullian, and Origin, every one of them mantayning their peculiar
error. This evasion is most weak, except we could prove, that these Fathers
are condemned by the joint consent of other Fathers, for their houlding of
Catholyke doctrynes (which is impossible to prove) as well, as they were
written against by other Fathers, touching their acknowledged Errors.

Another of our Sleights or Subtiltyes touches Mission and Vocation of
Ministers, which the Scripture teaches to be visible, according to those words
of the Apostle: No Hebr ^ 5.
man takes to him the honor of Pryesthood, but he, that is called of God, as
Aaron was; which calling in the Apostles times, was only by Imposition 2. Tim^
1.
of Bishops hands. Now then when we are charged by our Adversaries in the first
planting of Protestancy, to want this lawful Vocation and Mission (since no
man did either send us, nor from any did we receive this Imposition of hands)
we to extricate and free our selves out of this Labyrinth, have excogitated out
of the delicacy of our wit (or rather extreme Necessity) a new kind of calling,
honoring it with the title, of an Extraordinary, and immediate calling from
God, Without any authority of man therein. And so our first broachers of
Protestancy do challeng this to themselves (besides, that our doctrine of the
Inuisibility of the Church, potentially implies the same.) Answerably heerto
Calvin thus says: Quia So alleged to say, by Lasciuius (a protestant) in his
book de Russar^^^ etc. religi^n^ p. 2^.
Papa tyrannide etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, the true order of
ordination was interrupted, therefore in these days we have need of a new
help; and this guyft is altogether extraordinary. Likewise D. Fulke Againest
Stapleton and Martial. p. 2.
: The Protestants, that first preached these last days, had likewise
extraordinary calling. A slight, invented to free our selves from the
authority of the visible Church of God, examining this our Vocation and
Mission, and yet withal most uncertain in it self; since every Heretyke,
stamping any new blasphemies whatsoever, may with the like indifferency and
freedom, assume to himself this extraordinary Calling or Mission to preach his
said blasphemies*

And thus far heerof: where we see, that without any example, since the
Apostles times, till the days of Luther, we reduce the warra^tablenes of our
own Calling to the Ministry, to our own bate and naked justifying of it; as
at other times, we presume to recall the authority of the Scripture, and the
exposition of confessed Scripture, the testimonies of the Fathers, and the
continual practice of the whole Church, to the balance and examination of our
own private Spirit: Such a Fastus, and Magistrality we do take to our selves,
in laying the first and fundamental stones of Protestancy.

But in the last place, when all other shows of answers are wanting, rhen we
flatly and peremptorily reject their authorityes, pronouncing them to be
absolute ma^tayners of Papistry. Touching our sharp and severe condemnations
passed upon them, both in particular and in general, I refer the Reader to
the former chapter, concerning our rejecting of the Fathers. But even here we
show our selves not impoliticke; and thus we varnish over our bad cause with
this borrowed color. When our Adversaries charge us for rejecting the Fathers
testimonies in proof of the present Roman Religion, our accustomed shift is,
to turn the question controuerted, from the authority of the Father alleged,
to the authority of the Scripture; saying in such, and such a doctrine, the
Papists rely upon the Fathers, men subject to error; whereas we Answerabey
heereto Beza thus says: If any shall oppose against me the authority of the
encient Fathers, I do appeal to the word of God So related by D. Bancroft in
his Survey p. 219.
Protestants in the same points rest upon Scripture, (thus subtly making an
Antithesis and opposition between the Scripture and the Fathers.) And we
appeal to all learned men (say they) whether the Scripture is not to be
preferred before the Fathers. This reason in a clear eye is transparent: for
the Question here is not, whether the Scripture is to be preferred before the
Fathers; since the Catholyks grant, that the Scripture, as being most divine,
certain, and infallible, is to ouerballance by infinite degrees all other
wrytings whatsoever; but the touch of the point here controuerted is, whether
the ancient Fathers urging the Scripture are to be preferred before the
Protestants urging the Scripture; that is, whether the expositions of the
Fathers given upon places of scripture in proof of the Papists religion (as we
call them) are to ouersway the contrary expositions of the same texts, given by
our nouellizing Brethren And here the question rests.

But I will close this point touching the Fathers, with a cautelous and
pregnant observation of our Brethren. Whereas we reject the Fathers for
maintayning the Papists religion; the articles of the same religion, as they
are believed by our Adversaries, we This different ap^ellation is precisely
observed by Illyri^us, and the other Century writers, by D. Whitaker. and by
diverse other Protestants
usually term, Heresies, Idolatry, blasphemies etc. thereby to show, that the
Papists are no members of Christ's Church; the which very articles, being taught
by the Fathers, we gently style them in the Fathers, naeuos, naeniae, and (at
the most) e^rores, sears, blemishes and errors; to the end, to intimate, that
we do not separate our selves from that Church, in which the Fathers are.
Deceitfully, and withal unlearnedly; either Heresies in all, or but blemishes
and errors in all; since it is the doctrine, which denominates and gives
appellation to the Man; not the Man to the doctrine.

Hitherto we have taken in part a view of the several sleights practiced in
our answers to the Catholyks authorityes. Next we will call to mind our like
carriage houlden by us, in impugning our Adversaries and their doctrine.

And first touching Counsels or Definitions of the Pope; When we make show to
produce either of these authorityes against the Catholykes, we commonly urge
some Provincial, or National Council, under the name of a general Council
(the difference wherein an ignorant Reader does not easily discover;) Or else we
produce some one or other Council, which for number of Bishops assembled, may
be termed General, yet Schismatic; that is, a Council not celebrated and
allowed by the chief Pastors of Gods Church and thus we urge the Council of
Constantinople, assembled against the doctrine touching Images, Anno Dom. 730.
it being very numerous, but celebrated without the authority of the Pope or any
Patriarch, the Patriarch of Constantinople only excepted, who for assenting to
the Council, was deprived of his Patriarchship.

Sometimes again we insist in the authority of a lawful general Council, to
prove the beginning of some point of our Adversaries doctrine, but then our
urging of it is commonly attended on with a wilful mistaking: for the Council
does but only first impose the name of the article, the doctrine it self being
believed many ages before. Thus does D. Lib 7. contra Duraeum page 480.
Whitaker (besyds diverse others of us) alleadg the Council of Lateran for
bringing first in the doctrine of Transubstantion; Whereas this Council only
imposed the name of Transubtantiation (as the Council of Nice did the name of
Tr^nity, the doctrine being received long before) the doctrine of
Transubstantiation being generally many ages before believed and taught by
Cyrill Peter Martyr contra Gardener. part. 4. p. 724.
, Cyprian The treatise attributed to Vrsinus called, Commonefactio cui^sda^
Theologi de sancta Coena p. 2.1.
, Eusebius Centurists Ceut. 4. col. 10. page 980.
Emissenus, Centurists Cent. 5. col. 517.
Chrysostom, and D. Humfrey Jesuit sm. part. 2. ^at. 5.
Gregory the great, even by our own Confessions.

When we object the Decree of any Pope, thereby to show the first Institution
of such a Catholyke point, we often make choice of some Catholyke articles,
where the Decree of the Pope touches only the execution or practice of the
doctrine, before partly intermitted through negligence, and not the doctrine it
self. In this sort we find D Whitaker (who has much dishonored his good parts
by these unworthy proceedings) to allege Innocentius the third Pope of that
name, saying Contr^ Duraeum l. 7. p. 490.
Innocentius the third was the first, that instituted an^icular Confession for
necessary. Whereunto our Adversaries do answer, that this Innocentius
commanded, that the practice of Confession should be better and more often
observed; they further proving even by the confession of our own Centurists,
that Tertullian and Cyprian (who lived long before Innocentius the third) did
teach (to use the Centurists Cent. 3. c. 6. c. 27.
words) Confession even of thoughts and lesser Sins. With the same fraud does
(e) D. Whitaker charge Pope Calixius, Lib 7. centra Duraeum page 480.
with the first instituting of the fast of Lent, being in his time negligently
observed; the doctrine of which fast was so ancient, that Exam Coucil. Trid
part. ^ page 89.
Kemnitius thus writes heerof: Ambrose Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophilus,
Jerome, and others do affirm the fast of Lent to be an Apostolical Tradition.
Now the Collusion here used in these examples, rests in a wilful
confounding of the first Institution of a thing, with a renouation of the
practice of the said thing.

Again, we sometimes object (thereby to intimate an uncertainty of Catholic
Religion) some canon or sentence decreed before by a lawful Council and true
Pope, and after impugned by another lawful Council and true Pope. But this
then (which the vulgar does not observe) does concern not matter of faith and
doctrine (which never fuffereth any alteration by Popes or Counsels) but only
matter of fact; the sentence whereof) though before given) may without any
impeachment of the Churches authority, upon better and later information, be
altered. Such were the alterable decrees of the Popes Formosus, and Stephanus
the seventh, in their several Counsels, grounded principally upon matter of
fact, and usually objected by us against our Adversaries; of which point see
Sigebert in his Chronicle.

Whereas our Adversaries (as above is delivered) show, that many of our
Protestant doctrines were condemned for heresies by Augustine, Hierem,
Epiphanius, and others in those primitive times. Now we by way of recrimination
do confidently avouch the same of diverse Catholic articles, to wit, that even
in those days they were condemned for heresies by the said Fathers: but how
truly we auerre this (good Reader) observe, and if thou be a Protestant, blush
in thy brethrens behalf. Two examples shall serve for many.

Well then, D. In his Challenge concerning the Roman Church p. 113.
Sutcliffe, and D. In his answer to a counterfeit Cath. page 22.
Fulke insimulate the Catholics with the heresy of the Collyridans, who
according to Epiphanius were condemned (as these men say) for worshipping the
Virgin Mary. But let Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius here explain himself, his words are these: Hi qui hoc docent
qui sunt, prae terquam mulieres? Who teach this, except they be women? So as
this fect consisted only of women, of whom Epiphanius thus further writes:
Sellam Vbi supra.
quadratam ornantes, panem proponunt, and offerunt in nomine Mariae etc. that
is: These women adorning a square table, do set bread thereupon, and offer it
in the name of Mary. Thus their error consisted in instituting a feminin
Priesthood, and in sacrifying to Mary, believing her to be a God. And thereupon
Epiphanius in the very same place thus censureth heerof: Deo ab aeter^o
nullatenus Mulier sacrificauit etc. And again: Neq Deus est Maria etc. and
nemo in nomine eius offerat. How far distant are the Catholics from
mantayning this Heresy, either in their doctrine or practice?

Again for a second example. D. In his answer to a Counterfeit Cat^. page 22.
Fulke thus speaks to the Catholics: Of the Heretics Caiani, you have
learned to calvpo^ the Angels, he alleging Epiphanius for the same. But
Epiphanius words are these far different from D. Fulkes application: Non
Haeres. 38.
posse, aiunt, aliquos saluari nisi etc. The heretics Caiani taught none could
be saved, till they had gone through all sins; and committing thereupon
wicked things and actions they called upon the name of such, as were true
Angels, and of such as were by them untruly termed Angels; referrin to this
Angel, and that Angel (proprian actionem) their peculiar action; saying when
they committed their wickedness: O tu Angele, vtor tuo opere O Angel, I now use
or execute thy work etc. Thus their error consisted not in calling upon the
Angels, but in calling both upon true and false Angels, as making them
Patrons of their wicked actions. Would any man think, we should wrong our own
reputation and honors in using these wilful and iniustifyable
misapplications and forgeryes against the Catholics? We are scholars, and
should remember, that as learning beautifyeth the mind, so candor and integrity
learning. And therefore it is strange to see D. Willet in his Tetrastyson
Papiseni, D. Fulke, and D. Sutcliffe in their before alleged books, thus to
blo^ paper in laboring (by these, and other such like detortions of the
Fathers words) to persuade their Readers, that many articles of Catholic
Religion were condemned for heresies in those ancient times.

But to proceed to other passages of this our Scene, whereby we seek thus to
bleare the judgments of our credulous followers; The better to grace our
Religion with the venerable title of Antiquity, some of us D? Pulk in his
answer to a counterfeit Cat^. passim. M VVotion in his desence of D. Perkins
page 500. touching ^ou^nian.
are not ashamed to insist in the former old registered heretics of the
primitive church above rehearsed, urging them for Protestants. But what gain
we hereby? For first not any one of them did hold more, then two or three
points of Protestancy, in all others being Catholic. Again such their points
of Protestancy (though first broached so long since) were instantly condemned
by the whole Church of God: And who knows not that erring Antiquity is no
better, then late appearing Innovation? I here pass over our alleging for
these later ages (as partly above touched) of Waldo, Wicklifse, Husse, Polydor
Virgil, Nilus, Cassander, and the like, for members of the Protestant Church;
of which not any one was a perfect Protestant, both because every one of them
ever believed most articles of the Catholic Church, dissenting from it only in
two or three: as also in that diverse of them mantayned sundry gross Whereof
see their ow^ books yet extant.
and absurd doctrines, both in our, and the Catholics judgments, and this
with great stifnes and pertinancy of will, which pertinacy ever consummates and
perfects an heresy. And thus by this their obstinancy contemning the authority
of Gods Church, they became (as I may term them) formal and positive
heretics; though heresy be but a privation.

To prove, that Catholics do disagree in matters of Faith, we object some
differences among them, but such (if they be well observed) do not rest in the
Conclusion it self of the doctrine believed, but in the manner, or some other
circumstance of the Conclusion or article of faith, which manner (except it be
defy ned by the Church) may be disputed of, and severally mantained without
breach of faith: Thus they all conspyre and agree in the (...) (as Schoolmen
speak) though not in the (...); which later point is commonly reduced and
tried by scholasticall divinity. Thus for example, when Christ descended into
Lymbus Patrum, to deliver the souls of the Just from thence: some few
Catholics mantaine, that he descended efficacioussy and vertually only; others
(which is the more sound opinion) that he descended in soul, and really. But
all of them believe, that there was a true Lymbus Patrum (which is the (...),
or conclusion it self) from whence Christ delivered the souls of the
Patriarks. And I refer to any scholars judgment this inference: Some Papists
do teach and believe, that Christ did descend into Lymbus Patrum, only
vertually or efficaciously; others (and this with far greater consent) that
he descended in soul, and really: Ergo, some of them do believe there was not
a Lymbus Patrum, exorbitantly concluded.

To this Head may also be referred, how our Protestant D. Jewel in his Apology
of the Church of England p. 96. D. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic page 65. D. Willet in his Synops. p. 60.
Doctors (they are not ashamed to urge it, and yet I am half ashamed but to
relate it) for proof of disagreements in Catholyke Religion, have objected the
diverse Religious Orders in the Church of Rome; to wit, that some are Bernardins
other Franciscans and the like; some go in black other in graye or white;
these do eat flesh, those do not etc. These arguments (as discovering our
extreme penury of better stuff) were far more conveniently forborne, then
insisted upon, fince they prove no contrariety at all in matters of faith (for
they all believe the same articles of Catholyke Religion) but only do show, who
were the first beginners of those Orders; and that some members of the
Catholyke Church do live in a more gentle and remiss, others in a more strict
and severe degree of devotion and Virtue (like the Centurion and Zachaeus, who
by different ways honored Christ:) Nevertheless they all take the three
essential Vows (I mean, of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience) necessary to
every Religious Order; and by their first Institution, do spend much time in
Prayer, which is the Winge of the Soul; much time in fasting and other
corporal chastisements, the wings of Prayer; good Men, still mortifying both
body and Soul; their Will being indeed to deny their Will, and their freedom
consisting in restraint of Liberty; comforting themselves with that sentence of
Augustine: Omnia inucnit an De^, qui propter Deum ^mnia relinquit. And thus far
hereof.

Concerning the Marks of the Church, what stratagems of wit do we use? Do we
So teaches D. VVhitguift in his* defense of the answer p. 81. Calu. insti. c.
1 sect. ^^. D. Whitaker cont. Campian. rat. ^. page 44. and others.
not mantayne (as a Cardinal point of our Profession) that the true preaching
of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, are the only signs of the
true Church, to distinguish it from all false Synagogues and heretical
Conuenticles? To what end are these erected by us for Notes? To the end
(forsooth) that our selves alone may be the sole judges, which is the true
Church. For we reject all authority of Fathers, Counsels, and practice of Gods
Church in teaching, when, and where the Word is truly preached, and the
Sacraments duly ministered; and in the closure of all we will suffer no other
Judgments, then our own, to pass upon these points; though every registered
Heretyke may and will, with as great confidence in his own Opinion, challenge
these Notes to his Church and Professors, as we do. And thus by these
Meandrian wynding, we reduce the knowing, which is the true Church, unto the
grave Appeal, made to our own Private Spirit (above discovered) within the
vast Circumference whereof, this particular Collusion (besides many others) is
contained.

I have been over long in revealing our own blemishes and scarrs, (so Light
discovers Shame) and indeed I greiue (as tendering my Brethrens reputation)
that so unworthy a subject should so long arrest my Pen. Therefore I will
close up in few words diverse other sophistications and subtiltyes practiced by
us, both in impugning and answering our Adversaries. As how we are accustomed
to deprave, either by adding to, or concealing part of the sentence, in the
testimonies of the Authors, produced by us (I speak confidently, for upon my
own knowledge, we Protestants rest inexcusable heerin:) As also how after the
end of the authority produced in a different letter, we begin with some few
short words of our own, directly against Catholyke Religion, causing them to
be printed in the like different letter; that so the Reader through diversity
of the letter, may take them for the words of the for mer alleged Author; And
if we be expostulated thereof, we then ascrybe it to the Printers oversight.

And for the better preventing of all discovery thereof (as also when we urge
some authorityes without corrupting the words, yet insisted upon by us, most
differently from the Authors mind) we often all^adg the Authors name only,
but without any citation of the Book, where such words are to be found; and if
of the Book, yet without noting the chapter of solio; or if with noting the
folio, yet not showing what edition (when their are diverse) we do follow,
seeing the same sentence or authority in several Editions is to be found in
several folios. Also I briefly pass over, how ambitiously and affectedly we
fill the margents of our Books with numberles citations of Texts of Scripture,
merely impertinent for proof of the point questioned, but serving only to
cast dust to the eyes of the ignorant; How in refuting our Adversaries Book,
when we seem to answer to some objected Authority or argument, we often give
slip to the authority or point produced, and either by degrees fly to the
state of the Question (as though before it were not acknowledged) or to the
Scripture (the accustomed Ocean of Heretyks, wherein they may wander up and
down at large) or to some by-circumstance, Hier. in epist. ad Paulinum, Sola
Scripturari^^ ars est, quam sibi passim omnes vendicant^ bane garrut^ anus,
hanc destrus Senex, hane Sophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi praesumu^t, lacerant,
docent ^n requam discunt.
merely accessory to the doubt there controuerted, or use long and
extrauagant discourses and ambages of Words; and all this, to entertayne the
Reader therewith, that so vnespyedly we may divert the Readers eye and memory
(being thus fixed upon our digressions) from the Authority or Reason alleged.
And finally how in our Answering, we still set down in our books only such
passages of our Adversaries wrytings, whereunto we are able to give best color
of answer; concealing the most material and forcing proofs and arguments of
our Adversaries said Books; Or if pretending integrity, we do reprint our
Adversaries Books at large, then we commonly make choice of a very dark, and
little Character or letter for it, thereby more easily to withdraw the Readers
eye from perusing it at full; our own answer thereto being set down, in a
fair, large, and pleasing letter or Print: So cautelous and subtle we are in
our proceedings heerin. But enough of this Subject, and Sir Edwin In his
relation of Religion.
Sands his words (a man of great eminency among us) shall seal up all the
Premises of this chapter: The Protestant Writers in relation of things, have
abused this present age, and prejudiced Posterity; Love and Dislyke have so
dazzled their eyes, that they cannot be believed. But here I must take leave to
use a kind of introuersion upon our former deportments. When I first noted
diverse of these peculiar deliueryes of our own Brethren, I confess, I was
moved to a virtuous anger. O how often (sweet Jesus) did I demand in silence of
spirit: Can that Religion be true, which for the supporting of it self, is
forced to fly to these Collusions and Deceits, as to it strongest Sanctuary?
Must the light of the Gospel be needs thus blemished (for it own maintenance)
with such works of darkness? Cannot true faith be preached and planted in Men's
souls, but by such deceauable means? Yes. Different Centers have ever in
their Orbs different motions; and truth and falsehood cannot run one and the
same line of proceeding. Poor man then, that I am; have I so many years in my
sermons and speeches so much labored to persuade to that Religion, which
otherwise, then by these base and ignoble means cannot be vpholden? But
merciful Lord look upon me with the eye of Pity: I acknowledge my fault, and
do confess in the words of Jeremy, that perhaps even from my tongue and pen at
unawares, calumniam sustinuerunt filij Israel: Iere^^ cap. 50.
The Catholyks and their religion I have wronged and depraved: so justly are
thy own words verifyed in my weakness: Quod natum Joan. cap. 3.
est ex carne, caro est: flesh and blood were the motives, which for some
years past sealed up my lips from delivering and preaching the Truth.

THE IX. MOTIVE. That the doctrine of Catholic Religion, tendes directly to
virtue; of Protestancy, to vice and Liberty.
THE Prophetical King delivers this Encomion or praise of the kingdom of
Christ, which is his church: That it is, Lex Psalm. 18.
Domini immaculata, testimonium fidele, praeceptum Domini illucidum? Meaning
hereby, that the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ contains nothing that is
false, in respect of faith, nothing unjust or wicked, in regard of manners. The
former point being in part already discussed, in this other I will a little
insist, briefly running over some few articles both of the Catholic and
Protestant Religion; and so will refer to the indifferent Reader, which is
that faith, which leads to the broad way Matt. 7.
of destruction, and which to the narrow and strait Luc. 1^. and Matthew. 7.
way of life.

And first touching our Protestant doctrine of Justification by only faith,
what liberty breeds it in man's soul? Since by it we are taught, that
notwithstanding our perpetrating of the most facinerous crimes, one naked act
of faith in believing, that Christ dyed for our sins, washes away all our
ordure and stench. This faith assures us, that Confession of sins is
needles; that all satisfaction and Almesdeeds are bootles; that instantly upon
our deaths (without suffering any temporal punishment in Purgatory) we fly up
to heaven: And all this because Christ has suffered, and paid for us all; so
little we believe that saying: Satisfactio Tert. l. de poeni^^nt.
Confessione disponitur, Confessio poenitentia nascitur, poenitentia Deus
mitigatur. Now does not this open the sluice to all licenciousnes? May not a man
reply upon this ground, that we need not either to pray or fast at all; since
Christ has prayed and fasted for us?

Our doctrine of depriving man of Freewill, how prejudicial is it to a
virtuous life? Since it deadeth and blunteth all our endeauours in seeking to
live virtuously: For it teaches, (to deliver it in Luthers Sermon. de Moyse.
words) That the ten Commandments appertain not unto Christians; or in M.
Fox his phrase, That the ten Commandments were given us, not to do them, but
to know our damnation, and to call for mercy to God. And hereupon one Thesis
or Conclusion of our faith is, The impossibility of keeping the Commandments,
taught by us all, and particulerly by D. Willet Synop. pa^ism. p. (...).
in these words: The law remains still impossible to be kept by us, through
the weakness of our flesh: Neither does God give us ability to keep it, but
Christ has fullfilled it for us. Now if we want Freewill, to what end should
we strive to observe the Commandments by mortifying our passions, or by for
bearing the actions prohibited by them? Or to what end are admonitions to
virtue, or threats deterring from vice to be used, either by God in his holy
write, or by man in humane laws? In like sort, this doctrine of want of
Freewill teaches us, that we have not the gift of Chastity: a doctrine most
M. Perkins in his reformed Cath. page 161. say^h: The vow of continen^y is not
in the power of him, that voweth.
dangerous to all men and women unmarried; and also to those in state of
Wedlock, when the one party either through absence or impotency cannot
discharge the due of Marriage. And out of this puddle streamed that filth of
Luthers words: It Tom. 5 Wittenberg. s^rm, de Matrimo.
is not in our power to be without a woman etc. It is as necessary as to eat
drink, purge, make clean the nose etc. And again: If the wife will not let
the maid come. What flesh-diuinity is this? Thus does our first Evangelical
Prophet (who vaunted ever much of the spirit) like a good peacemaker, join
those two things together (I mean the Spirit and the Flesh) which the
Scripture Matt. 1^. Romans 8. Cala^. 1.
ever deuydeth and opposes.

Our doctrine of the division of sins, teaches, that to the faithful
professors of the Ghospel, all sins (though in others most heinous and
grievous) are but Musculus in loc. comm. de pe^cat. sent, 5. and D. Pulke
against the Rhemish Testament in epist. Joan.
venial. Now what encouragement to sin does this doctrine affoard to all
those, who are persuaded, they have true faith? Since by this their doctrine,
commit they what sins they will; they learn their sins shall not be
imputed unto them. And heereto even D. Whitaker De Eccles. co^t. Bellarm.
contro. 2. quast. 5. p. 301.
accords in these words: Si quis actum fidei habet, eipectata non nocent.
Sin does not hurt him, who actually belieueth. And Luther: No In his Sermons
englished, and printed anno 1578. page 126.
work is disallowed of God unless the Author thereof be disallowed. And M.
Wetton. To In his answer to the late popish arti^ies page 91. and 41.
the faithful sin is pardoned, as soon as it is committed, they having
received forgiveness of all their sins past, and to come: strange and
dangerous assertions.

Our doctrine of Reprobation, teaching, that let one, who is reprobate, labor
never so much to serve God in virtue and piety, nevertheless he shall not, nor
cannot be saved, engenders many terrors in the soul of man, and cannot, but
discourage man from virtue and piety. In like sort our undoubted certainty of
salvation taught by us, gives to man a great liberty to sin; since by this
doctrine a vicious life (though contaminated with all kinds of flagitious
enormityes) cannot prejudice him, who is assured of salvation. And which is
more, this certainty of salvation we teach, even during our voluntary
committing of sin; since otherwise if upon the new committing of any sin,
the party should begin to be uncertain of his salvation, then was his former
certainty no true certainty at all. And hither tend those most dangerous words
of Luther A Tom. 1. wittem. de captiu. Babyl. fol. 74.
Christian man is so rich, that although be would, he cannot loose h s
salvation by any sin, how great soever, unless he will not believe. And those
of D. Fulke: David In the tower dispu^. with Edm. Ca^p. the second days
conference. ^. b.
even when he committed adultery, was and remained the child of God. What
bellows of Libertinisme are these our positions?

Concerning good Works, how much do we disparage them by our doctrine, since
we teach, they cannot justify man, nor merit any thing at Gods hands? Now who
belieueth this, can he with any alacrity undertake feriall and painful works
(they being otherwise cross and repugnant to man's natural disposition?)
therefore how dangerous are these and the like positions of our own Brethren?
viz. To hold Illiricus in praefat. ad Romans
that good works are in respect, but of presence necessary to salvation (as
some Protestants do hold) is a papisticall error. Yea Illyricus Vid^ Acta ^ol
loq. Aldeburgen. p. 120 sect. 11.
further proceeding, says thus: Good works are not only not necessary to
salvation, but hurtful to it, alleging in defense of this monstrous opinion
even Luther. Tindall thus assenteth heereto: There Act. Mon. p. 1330.
is no one work better then another, as touching to please God; to make water,
to wash dishes, to be a sower, or an Apostle, all is one to please God.

But to descend more particulerly to the doctrine of good works: And first of
Chastity, thus basely hereof does Luther speak, saying: If we Tom. 5.
VVitte^. ad c. 7.1. Cor f. 107
respect the nature of Matrimony, and single life in themselves, Matrimony is
as gould, and the spiritual state of single life, as dunge And D. Whitaker
Contra Camp rat. 8. p 15^. See also D. Fu^k against the Rh^mish Testament in 1.
Cor. 7.
depresseth Virginity in these words, saying: Virginity is not smply good, but
after a certain manner: How much are the thousands of Virgins mentioned in the
Apocalips (who follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes) behoulden to these two
good men?

Of Voluntary poverty, we find D. Willer thus to auerre: He In his Synops. p.
245.
is an enemy to the glory of God, that changes his rich estate (wherein he may
serve God) for a poor. Belike our Doctor was afraid to be perfect in
following our Savior, by giving his goods to the Matt. 19.
Poor.

Of Fasting, our said D. Synop. p. 24^.
Willet thus pronounces: Neither is God better worshipped by eating, or not
eating. And M. In his reformed Cathol. p. 220.
Perkins: Lasting in it self is a thing indifferent as is eating and drinking.
It is well, that these our Brethren were not Ninevites, since perhaps they
would have sought to appease Gods wrath, by eating and drinking rather, then by
Jonas 4.
fasting. But to the point. Seeing then by these our former doctrines, all good
works are bootles and unnecessary; and any sins whatsoever not prejudicial
to man's salvation (if so he can but believe) I refer to all impartial
judgments, whether in an even libration and wayghing of the matter, these our
positions tend not directly to the suppressing of Virtue, and advancement of
sin and sensuality.

Now if we next cast our eyes upon the Catholic positions, they do (in my
judgment) contain the very seed of all virtue and godly conversation: since
they teach Confession of sins (a thing ungrateful to man's nature) and this to
be acco^panyed with a true resolution (at least not to commit after the like,
or otherwise improfitable. They teach restitution for iniuryes committed; set
times of Fasting, and Prayer; they further propose to the Caedar of Libanus (I
mean to those of the Church, who strive to ariue to the height and perfection
of Christian virtue) Chastity, Obedience, and Poverty. By Chastity, the
professors thereof overrule and beat down all rebellious suggestions of the
flesh; by Obedience, they curb the inuate obstinacy and pride of man, wholly
submitting themselves in their lives to their Superiors disposal; thus being
become men merely passive, and in whom (as showing no reluctation therein)
there is found no Reaction; by Poverty, they renounce all superfluityes, and
riches of the world fruitless for the most part, and through abuse, barrenner
then Want; following herein the Council of the 1. Joan. 2.
Evangelist in contemning the world: principles so peculiar to Catholics, and
so disclaymed from by us Protestants, that one Iacobus Aco^tius sermon. 4. in c.
21. Lucae.
of us lamenteth thereat, thus saying: A serious and Christian discipline is
censured with us, as a new Papacy, and a new Monachisme. And Sir Edwin In his
relation of Religion. etc.
Sands (a great Master in Israel) through rack of truth, and his own
experience in travel, is forced thus to confess: Let the Protestants look
with the eye of Charity upon those of the Papacy, and they shall find some
excellent Orders of government, some singular helps for increase of godlynes
and devotion, for the conquering of sin, for the prositing in Virtue etc.

But setting a part the different doctrines of both sides, and coming to
peruse the lives of both professions, we shall find no small disparity therein.
Touching the Protestants, I will pass them over in silence, they being
heretofore (and yet are) my dear Brethren, whom I affect with all true
Christian Charity; referring each man to his own experience of these days, and
to Luthers judgment of his time, saying: The In poslida. Euangel. Dom 1.
Aduentus
world grows every day worse, men are now more reuengefull, covetous, and
licentious, then they were ever in the Papacy. Only I cannot forbear my own,
and others men's observation; which is, That men departing from the Catholic
Church to us, ever become worse in conversation, then before; and leaving us to
embrace our Adversaries religion they insta^tly begin a more reformed life.
Touching the first, who more depraved in all licentiousnes and luxury, then our
Renegades, or Protestant Ianisaryes (as I may term them) after they have once
forsaken the Catholic Church; they being descended from those, mentioned in
Job Cap. 15.
Bibunt (quasi aquam) iniquitatem: They even meditate how to become extremely
vicious; and (as I may say) they hold it a sin to be but second in any
sin, so much they affect all principality therein. Witnesses hereof are the
revolted Priests (the very scumm and improfitable burdens of the earth.) Good
God! what base, treacherous, and inhumane motions have some of them made to me,
for my employing of their service! But I will stay my pen.

Concerning those, who leaving Protestancy, become Catholyks; Many, even
Protestants do observe and confess with me, that by such their change in
faith, they make a greater change in manners (the will thus expecting to
partake of the Understandings good) still bettering their course of life, and
regulating in part their former exorbitancyes. My self have much marked this
alteration, and one example I cannot without wrong pass over: It is this. One
year in my Vice chancelouriship in Oxford (my dear mother, from whose
breasts, I have sucked my best milk) there was a Master of Arts, a man of
reasonable years; in judgment a most forward and earnest Protestant; of a
delicate and choice wit; good literature; a great spirit; but extremely
dissolute, and loose in manners, as wholly given over to Sensuality. I wished
him well for his good parts (though his tares did ouergrow his wheat) and for
his friends behalf. My many persuasions for his change of life, was but as
seed sown in a barren ground; in so much, as I was forced otherwise to
chastize him for his public disorders. This Man leaving Oxford, traveled
beyond the Seas; there stayed some years; altered his judgment in Religion;
renewed his studyes; was made Priest; returned into England; was apprehended,
and conuented before me, then B. of London At the first sight I remembered well
the Man, and he me. I could him I was sorry to hear that he had changed
Jerusalem for Babylon (I did mean England, for Rome, and the light of the
Ghospel, for supposed blind Superstition.) I talked with him in private: He
denied not his Priesthood: I urged him, that his former bad Course of life
served, as a disposition to his now worse state. I proffered him (if so h^ would
return to the Truth) to procure (besides his liberty) present competency of
Means, and hereafter better aduancements; for I thought, such a man might be
much serviceable in our Church. He kyndly thanked me for my proffers. But I
remember, at my touching of his life, he gushed out into abundance of tears,
fully acknoledging his former enormous courses; and his tears ceasing, thus
replied: My Lord, (for this was his answer) it is to be feared, that I may say
with some Ancients: perijssem si non perijssem, since the reflecting upon the
deformity and vglines of my own former wicked courses, was occasionally a
means for my change of Religion, and my incorporating into Gods Church,
through his infinite mercy, who works good out of evil, as once he 2. Cor
1.4.
did command Light to shine out of Darkness. Me thought I saw compunction and
humility in his face (such a change there was between him, and his former
self:) he told me, for temporal benefits, he expected none; his enlargment
he desired so far forth, as thereby he might more fully execute his Priesthood;
saying he desired no other harvest in this World, then to reduce poor straying
souls to the Catholic Church. But touching my motioning his revolt in his
faith, his reply was, that if he had as many lives, as there are stars in
Heaven (a supernatural and wonderful resolution) he would lose them all,
before he would change his religion. I inquired of his carriage in prison, and I
was informed, that, besides the affliction of the place (which might seem
sufficient) he used diverse voluntary austerityes. The end was, I not preuayling
with him in my desires, did hasten his banishement. But observing his different
comportmentes at these two different times, how often thought I (for then I
made no other construction, though I grant, since I have given it another
Comment) must it be the mishap of the Gospel of Christ, and the advantage of
Superstition, that a Man professing the true says, must engulfe himself in all
wickedness; and after coming from the light into the darkness of Error, must
instantly breath penitency of former sins, humility, charity, and sanctity of
life? But enough of this Man.

As concerning other Priests in general, my experience taken from their often
appearance and conviction before me, assures my judgment, that (abstracting
from the Laws of the Realm) they are good Men, greatly devoted to virtue and
piety, laboring (with exposall of their lives to imminent danger) to save
seduced Souls. And indeed it is above the level of Nature, to see most of
them, Gentlemen by birth, of liberal education, having otherwise competency of
means (yea some heirs to their parents whole Patrimony and state) thus to
shake hands with the world, and all the pleasures thereof (so bearing a
spiritual death, in a natural life) and ready only for the good of other
souls, to become so many young Isaacs, expecting to be made sacrifices, if the
Angel of mercy stay not the hand of the Law. Thus where some two or three of
them (among many scores) through a base reuolting pusillanimity (commonly
vshered before with a secret vicious course) are glad to purchase an ignoble
life with overthrow, the rest stand prepared to suffer a most happy death with
Victory.

For the Lay-Catholykes, I know they are commonly of most tender Consciences.
How many (besides men) even Women, yea Gentlewomen and Ladies of note, have
been before me? to whom I have proffered all kyndnes, if they would show but the
least relenting in the smallest point of their Religion; but their resolution
was so unalterable, that I was wont to muse thereat, and say to my self: see
how weakness remaynes firm and unvanquished, when strength oftentimes does fall
and yeald. Besides, how many young gentlewomen of good portions, and fitting
for the World, do leave for ever their Country and friends, only to cloister
themselves within a wall, and there to sper^^ all their days in Chastity,
fasting, prayer and devotion? Holy Jesus, forgive me, for my hindering of
diverse such, from taking this holy Course.

But to hasten to an end. Since the doctrine of Catholyks and Protestans are so
different in nature; the one even exhaling forth liberty and sensuality; the
other virtue, piety, and mortification; and since the like disparity would be
found in their lives, if due examination were made thereof; what else, can I
conclude, but that the Catholyke Religion is the true Religion, and Protestancy
but Error and Innovation? Except I should mantayne (contrary to the
providence, goodness, and charity of God, and to all natural Reason) that true
faith must needs be accompanied with a bad life, and false faith with a good
life; as if Truth in doctrine had interleaged and couenanted with Vice, and
Virtue with falsehood and Error, to deceive Mankind.

THE X. MOTIVE. That Luther and Calvin are chief Patrones of Arianisme; and
therefore in other points of faith are not to be followed.
NVM QVID Matt 6 7.
colligunt de spinis vuas aut de tribulis ficus? says our Blessed Savior. By
which words I am taught, that Truth in particular doctrynes, hardly takes it
flowing and emanation from those Men, who are transcendently evil, either in
their lives, or in their mayntenance of any execrable blasphemies. Since then I
find Luther and Calvin (the two chief Corner-stones in the edifice of our
Protestant Church) maynely in their wrytings to impugn the sacred Mystery of
the holy Trinity (the most supreme and Cardinal point of Christian Religion,)
I cannot easily be induced any longer to embrace and entertayne other
dogmaticall points of faith (as true) first broached in these days by them.
Good Protestant Reader, who shall deigne to peruse this passage I do not wish
thee here to blush through shame, at these thy Grand Masters proceedinges
(for that were an over myld and gentle redargution of them;) but I will thee
even to grow pale through fear and horror, to find Men (upon whose credit and
affiance thy faith, and consequently the weal or woe of thy own Soul greatly
depends) to rise to that ascent of Impiety, as to reuine and raise up out of
the depth of Hell the most blasphemous Heresy of Arius, against the Majesty of
the Son of God, and Savior of the world. But here I see it is true; Tert.
contra Gentes.
fiunt, non nascumtur Christiani.

To come to the point. And first concerning Luther, Is it not confessed, that
Luther was so adverse to the Blessed Trinity, as that he would not brook this
Verse to stand in the Litanyes: In postil. maiore Basileae, printed 15^7.
Holy Vide Enchirid. precum, anni 1543.
Trinity, one very God, have mercy upon us? He affirming (c) the word Trinity,
to be an humane invention, and to sound coldly. And hence it is, that Luther in
these ensuing words disgorgeth forth his poison against the most sacred
Trinity: Anima Luth. ^il. cont. Iacobum Latomum tom. 2. VVittemb latineedito
anno 15^^. though in later editions these words are purposely left out and
omitted.
mea odit (...); and optime exegerunt Ariani, ne votem illam prophanam and
nouam, regulis fidei statui liceret. that is, My soul even hates the Word
(...), or Consubstantialie; And the Arians justly urged, that this profane and
new word should not be inserted within the rules or principles of our faith.
And beer upon also it well may be that Luther purposely expungeth out of his
Dutch Bibles, this following place of Scripture, being a markable text in proof
of the Trinity: There be 1. Joan. 5.
three which give witness in Heaven; the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost;
and these three be one And thus much for some taste of Luthers mind herein; who
stands so justly chargeable with this execrable Heresy of Arius, that Zu nglius
writing against him touching that subject, thus rebukes him: In Tom. 2. in
resp. Luth. sol. 474.
verbis Lutheri grauissimi errores latitant etc. There lie most great errors in
Luthers words. When I read Luthers book, it seems to me, that a beastly Hog
does gruntle in a garden, beset with most fragrant flowers so impurely, so
unlike to a Deuyne, and so improperly Luther disputes of God and al holy
things Thus Zuinglius.

To come to Calvin ( Luthers heyre-apparent, though by his own industry, he
has much improued (as I may say) his bequeathed inheritance:) Caluins absolute
dislike of the Trinity, and the doctrine thereof is manifested three several
ways. First by his own speeches delivered against the Trinity; and his
different expounding (from all Antiquity) the chiefest passages of Scripture,
usually alleged in proof of the Trinity. Secondly, from the testimonies of
other learned Protestants (for I purposly forbear all authority of Catholics
herein) charging Calvin with Arianisme. Thirdly, from the examples of the new
Arians, who before their revolt thereto, were commonly earnest and forward
Caluinistes. To begin with the first. And first we do find Calvin to tread the
steps of Luther, in disallowing that somer prayer: Holy Trinity, one God, have
mercy upon us. For thus Calvin In epist 2. ad Polonos in tract theolog. page
796.
writes: Precatio, sancta Trinitas, vnus Deus miserere nostri, mihi non
placet, ac omnino barbariem sapit. That is, That prayer, holy Trinity one God,
have mercy upon us, pleases not me since it wholly tastes of Barbarism.
Touching Caluins contrary interpreting of the chiefest texts of Scripture,
alleged by all antiquity, for proof of the Trinity, two or three texts shall
serve for example. And first that principal passage: I, and Joan. 10.
the Father are (vnum) one, viz. thing, ever mainly insisted upon by the Viz.
Basi^. l. 1. in Eunom. circa fine^. Chrysostom in hunc locum Augu. in hunc locu^,
and omnes adj.
Fathers against the old Arians, for proof of the Trinity, is thus avoided by
Calvin: Abusi In Joan. cap. 10.
sunt hoc loco veteres, vt probarent Christum esse Patri (...). Neq: enim
Christus de vnita^e substantiae disputat, sed de consensu etc That is, The
Ancients have abused this place, to prove from thence, Christ to be
consubstantiall to his Father; for Christ here disputes not of the unity of
essence, but of the unity of consent and Will; this being indeed the old
condemned interpretation of Arius. Again, that text: Thou Psalm. 2.
art my Son (hodie) this day I have begotten thee, interpreted not only by
the Fathers, but even by the Apostle Hebr. cap. 1.
himself, to prove Christ's divinity, is in these words shifted off by Calvin
Scio Calu. in psalm. 2.
hunc locu^ de aeterna Chris^i generation^ a mult is fuisse expositum, qui and
in verbo (hodie) argute philo ophati sunt etc. I know well, that many have
interpreted this place of the eternal generation of Christ, subtily disputing
about the word hodie.

Again, that markable passage above touched, There 1 Joan. 5.
be three, that give testimony in heaven, the Father the Word and the Holy
Ghost; and these three be one. Which words all Fathers Hier. in hunc locum
Cypr. l. de unit. Eccles* ^than. in l. 1 ad l be^ph.
and Interpreters ever expounded of the Trinity, is thus answered by Calvin:
Quod Calu. in hun. locum.
dicit tres ess^ vnum, ad essentiam non refertur, sed ad conscusum potius That
is, Where it is here said, these three are one; these words are not to be
referred to one, in respect of essence, but rather in respect of consent. And
thus far of some few chiefest texts of all (pretermitting diverse others As in
Genes. c. 1. touching the word E^oim, and Genes c. 19. Psalm. 33. and di^e^ 3
other textes proving the Blessed Trinity.
for breuity) proving the doctrine of the most B. Trinity; yet otherwise
depraved and misconstrued by Calvin

Now that Calvin is charged by diverse Protestants, for mantayning of Arianisme,
is no less evident. For (among others) Aegidius Hunnius (a most remarkable and
learned Protestant) writes a book against Calvin even of this subject,
entituling it, Caluinus Iudaizans: Hoc est Iudaicae glossae and corruptelae,
quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca and testimonia de
gloriosa Trinit ate etc. aetestandum in modum corrumpere non exhorruit In like
sort the said Author writes a second book of the same subject calling it:
Anti-paraeus. Again, Conradus In theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 38.39.4^. etc.
Schlusselburg (a Protestant) deeply and frequently charge Calvin with
Arianisme. Ioannes Matthaeus (a Protestant) writing against Calvin for teaching
Arianisme, entituleth his book: De cauendo Caluinistarum fermento etc. Also
Pelargus (a Protestant) thus passes over Calvin and his scholars in these
words. Non In his admenit. de Arianis
hic Caluinum and Caluinianos in plurinis scripturae expositionibus (...), and
(...), laboriose ostendam etc. That is, I here pretermit to show, how Calvin
and the Caluinists in many expositions of sacred Scripture, do play the Jews,
and the Arians. Lastly Stancarus (a Caluinist in other points) thus writes to
Caeluin: Conclusum Contra minist^os Ge^teuenses and Tygu^inos.
est (o Calvin doctrinam tuam de filio Dei esse plane Arianam; de qua resilias
qua^primum te ^ro atque obsecro: that is: O Calvin, it is concluded that thy
doctrine touching the Son of God, is plainly Arian; from which I beseech
thee, that thou would presently depart.

Now to cross these learned Men's judgments passed upon Calvin, it is not
sufficient to affirm, that Calvin ever in his life professed himself to
believe the doctrine of the Trinity: since such his profession can be, but only
external, and in words: for how can he be presumed inwardly and undoubtedly to
believe that doctrine, the greatest authorityes in proof of which doctrine
himself labors to overthrow, at least, to eneruate and weaken?

Touching the third point, to wit, that most of our new Arians at this day were
before earnest Caluinists, is auerred by diverse learned Protestan s And first M.
Hooker thus faith of this: In his Eccles. policy l. 4. p. 183.
The Arians in the reformed Churches of Poland (meaning thereby the reformed
Churches of the Caluinists there) think the very belief of the Trinity to be
a part of Antichristian corruption; And that the Popes triple crown is a
sensible mark, whereby the world might know him to be that mystica^l beast
spoken of in the Revelation; in (...) respect so much, as in his doctrine of
the Trinity. Again the before alleged Stancarus Contra Ministros Ge^teuenses
and Tygu^mos. fol. 94.
thus peremptorily auerreth: The reformed Churches of Geneua and Tigure, are
Arians. Iacobus ^^^n praefat. refutat. Apolog. Dauaei.
Andraeas (a learned Pro^esta^t) thus gives his judgment herein: Minimu
mirandum est ex Caluinianis in Polania, Transilua^is and H^ungaria, ^ly^que
locis, quamplurimos ad Arianismum accessisse etc that is: It is not to be
woundred, that very many Caluinists in Polonia, Transiluania, Hungary, and
other places, do embrace Arianisme etc. to which impiety the doctrine of Calvin
has prepared way. Thus Andraeas: to whose sentence the learned In his
Antiparaeus p. 97
Hunnius subcribeth in these words: Tot celebres Anti-trinitary ex
Caluinianorum Scholis and Ecclesijs prodierunt etc. So many eminent
Anti-trinitarians (or enemies to the doctrine of the Trinity) have issued out
of the Schooies and Churches of the Caluinists etc.

But to seal up the truth heerof, with producing examples of particular men,
who being Caluinists, became Arians, I will here content my self with one
testimony only. Adam Neuserus (a Caluinist of great note, and once chief
Pastor of Heidelberge) became an Arian, and after a Turk, and thereupon
flying to Constantinople, did write from thence to one Gerlachius (a Protestant
Minister) in July 2. anno 1574. in this sort. None This is related by Osiander
in Epitom. ceut. 16. p. 208.
is known to be in our time made an Arian, who was not first a Caluinist, as
Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, Francis us David, Gentilis, Gebraldus,
Siluanus and others: Therefore who fears to fall into Arianisme, let him take
heed of Caluinisme. Thus much Neuserus for example of himself, and these other
particular Arians, who first were Caluinists. And thus far of this subject,
where we find by several kynds of proofs, that Luther and Calvin are Posthumi
to Arius, and that Man's Understanding in these our times, never receaueth the
deep and full dye of Arianisme, except first (as for a due preparation
thereto) it be drenched and steeped in the tincture of Caluinisme.

But now to turn back upon the Premises, and upon my self: What Reason can
I probably have, that Luther, Calvin, and their offspring (thus maynly erring in
the fundamental points of Christianity) does not also err in other lesser
principles of their own religion? Is it possible, that the wronging of Christ
in his Essence, being, and honor, should be a step or disposition, to preach
in other points, the true faith of Christ? Or shall the supporters and reuiuers
of Arius (the designed enemy of my Savior) be my instructors and guydes,
touching my belief in my Savior? No. Such Pseudochristians, and their
serpentine and hidden malice against thee (sweet Jesus) I loath, and disclayme
from: who, though not as the Lamb of God (which takes away the Sin of the
world) yet as the Lion of Apoc. cap. 5.
the Trybe of Judah (which confounds his enemies) will for thine honors sake,
inflict just punishments upon them, for these their perpetrated indignityes.

THE XI. MOTIVE. That there is unity in Faith in Catholic Religion; and
disagreements in faith in Protestancy.
AMONG other incommunicable Attributes of God, it is ascribed unto him, that he
is Since his unity is opposed to all multitude, as his simplicity of nature is
to all composition.
sum Vnus (though this his unity of Essence and Nature comprehends
(eminenter) all multiplicity of perfections in creatures.) This Unity by way of
Analogy (that so the spouse might be herein like to her Brydegrome) God has
imprinted upon his Church, as an inseparable mark or Character. And this
consists, in that her members are to embrace one faith, one Religion, and
(according to the Apostles words) endeavoring Ephesians. 4.
to keep the unity of spirit in the band of peace; continuing Philip. 1. and 1.
Petr. 3.
in one spirit and one mind. Which sacred and indeleble stamp of unity is so
proper to God (even in this secondary acceptance) that therefore the 1. ^or. 14.
Apostle styleth him, the God not of dissension, but of unity. Here then it
comes to be examined, to which Church this venerable title of Unity may best
seem to be appropriated. Touching the Catholic Church, we find our own
Brethren (though loath to ascribe to her greater perfections, then she truly
enjoys; for willingly, Nolunt Tert. coutra Gentes.
audire, quod auditum damnare non possunt) to confess thus much: Contentiones
D. Whitaker de Eccles. cont. Bellarm. cont. 2. q. 5. page 327.
Papistarum sunt friuolae and futiles, de figmentis and commentis sui cerebri;
meaning hereby, that the Catholics contentions strike not at the heart of
their Religion, but concern things only of small moment; so granting their
differences to be only about Indifferencyes. But D. Fulke Against Hes^ms,
Sanders etc p. 295.
acknowledges of this point more fully, saying: As for the consent and peace
of the Popish Church, it proves nothing, but that the Devil had then all
things at his will, and therefore might sleep, thus granting an unity of
faith in the Roman Church, but falsely obtruding it upon the enemy of Unity.

But if now we look back upon our selves, it is clear, that D. Whitaker Vbi
supra.
had good reason to say: Nostrae contentiones sunt propter fidem, they shaking
indeed the whole Systema, and frame of Protestancy. For we do nothing else, but
by our reciprocal writings one against another, labor to reedify the tower of
Babylon: Such a tumultuous and confused heap and mass of dissentions in
doctrine we have raised up by our pens, and now raised cannot lay them; we
resembling heerin the Moon, which is able to stir and move the humors in man's
body, but not of force to dissipate and dispell them. And first we disagree
even in the approuall or dispronall of Scripture; since there are whole
Churches These books are denye^ by most Lutherans in Germany, both beertofore
(and particulerly by Ke^nitius in ^nchi^id. p. 63. end in exam. Conci. Tri.
part. 1. p. 55.) and at this day, they not suffering these books to be printed
in the same volume with other acknowledged Scripture.
in Germany, and all professing Protestancy, which at this day do reject the
Epistles of Iame^, of Jude, the second of Peter, the second and third of John,
the epistle to the Hebrews and the Apocalips Secondly we disagree in our
translating of confessed Scripture, as hereafter shall be demonstrated. Thirdly,
we disagree in the construction of that Scripture, which we acknowledge to be
Canonical and truly translated, as will more fully appear hereafter in our
mutual accusations.

But to approach more nearly to this point; the Reader is to conceive, that
our interchangeable dissentions and condemnatious in matters of Religion are in
several sorts. First the Lutherans with the Sacramentaryes, I mean with the
Zuingliaus and Calninists. Secondly the Sacramentaryes condemning the
Lutherans. Thirdly, the Lutherans among themselves. Fourthly the Sacramentaryes
among themselves, under whom are comprehended the Protestants and Puritans
here in England.

And first to begin with the judgment of the Lutherans passed upon the
Sacramentaryes, Luther himself thus says: We These. 21. contra Louaniens.
seriously judge the Zuinglians and Sacramentaryes, to be heretics, and aliens
from the Church of God. And again he says: The Epist. ad Ioanne^ Heruag.
Typograp. Argent.
Sacramentaryes began their opinion of the Sacrament with lies, and with lies
they end it. And yet further: We will Tom. 7. in def^ns verbo. Coenae Domini
fol. 386.
reprove and condemn them (to wit the Sacramentaryes) for Idolaters,
corrupters of Gods word, blas^emers and deceauers; and of them, as of the
enemies of the Gospel, we will sustain persecution and spoil of our goods
etc. Thus much Luther himself.

Neither are Luthers Posthumi (I mean the Lutherans, whom by testimony of D
In his answer to F. Camp. his 8. reason.
Whitaker the English Protestants embrace, as their dear brethren in Christ)
more mild in censuring the Sacramentaryes, then their Father was. For Luke
Enchi. cont. Calu. cap 7.
Osiander (a Lutheran) speaking of certain wicked assertions touching Christ,
says thus: But here (gentle Reader) beyond and above those blasphemous things
which in the discourse before we have heard against the Son of God, out of the
opinion of our Adversaries (the ^aluinists) there opens it self a gulf of
hell of Caluinian doctrine, in which God is said to be the Author of sin.
etc. And hence of necessity, must arise in the hearts of men manifest
blasphemies against God. West halus (a Lutheran) auerreth, Apol. cont. Calu. p.
430. c. 19.
that all the Caluinian works are stuffed with taunts, curses, and lies. And
he further affirms: That there are certain pages of Caluins works of which
every one contains above twenty lies and tau^ts. In his epist, dedicatory to
the co^^utations of Caluins deprauatio^s.
Hunnius (a most remarkable Lutheran) charge Calvin, that he wresteth the
Scriptures horribly, from their true sense, to the overthrow of himself and
others. Brentius In recognit. Prophetar.
says: All the Zuinglians works are full of deprauations, cunnings, deceits
and slanders. Conradus In praesat. Theo. Ca^ui^*
Schlusselour^e confidently auerreth; That the Caluinists do nourish Arian, and
Turkish impietyes in their hearts, which does not seldom, at sit times openly
disclose it self. And thus passing over the censures, which the Books
Caluinus Iudaizans, and Caluinopapismus (both written by Lutherans) do give,
besides many other books written against him, and the Sacramentaryes by the
Lutherans; this already set down, shall suffice concerning the Lutherans
condemnation of Calvin, and other Sacramentaryes.

Next let us observe how the Sacramentaryes carry themselves toward Luther.
And first Zuinglius Zuing. tom. 2. in resp. ad Luth. Confess. fol. 4^8 and 469.
calls Luther, Marcion (the old heretic) and further says, that Luther is
guilty of high blasphemy against the nature and essence of God, in that he
taught, that Christ dyed according to his Divinity. He Further speaks of
Luther touching the same point, saying This can be, by no reason, explayned or
excused: for Luther clearly and manifestly confesses, that he will not
acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, if only his Humanity had suffered.
Zuinglius, also writing in another place against In resp ad Luther. I.
desacrament. fol. 401.
Luthers doctrine, thus provoke. Thou (Luther) shall be forced either to
deny the whole Scripturs of the new Testament, or to acknowledge Marcions
Heresy. And in the same place fol. 478. Zuinglius says of Luther thus:

-- En vt totum istum hominem Satan occupare conetur. Calvin speaking of
Luthers Heresies Instit. l. 4. c 317.. (...) 17.
says: By the Lutherans Marcion is raised out of Hell; and in one Admonit. 3.
ad VVestphalum.
place, Calvin thus further writes: The Lutherans are forgers and Liars
Ioannes (z) Campanus (a Sacramentary) thus anathematizeth Luther: In colloq.
lat. Luth. tom. 2. cap. de Aduers.
As certain as God is God, so certain it is, that Luther was a devilish liar.

Finally for greater breuity (occasioned rather through leaving much out of this
subject, then contracting of all which can be said) Oecola^padius (that ^ial.
contra Melancth.
glittering Caluinist) affirms, that the Lutherans bring forth only a color
and shadow of the word of God (as Heretyks commonly are accustomed to do.) They
bring not the Word of God and yet they will seem to build upon the Word of
God; and of Luther in particular he thus says: Let Oecol. in resp. ad confess.
Luther.
Luther take heed, least being puffed up with pride, he be deceived by Satan.
See with what full and intemperate terms the Caluinists do charge Luther,
from whom they first received the supposed splendor of their Gospel; bearing
their selves heerin, as ungratefully, as the Moon does to the Sun, which in
enjoying her greatest borrowed light, shows her greatest Opposition: He
taking that name, as supposed to be (according to the Etymology) La^spas domus
Dei.

Now, as we have seen, the Lutherans condemning the Sacramentaryes, and the
Sacramentaryes them again; So neither of these two s^rtes does absolutely
approve such, as are of their own faction. And first we find, that Conradus
Schlusselburg In Catalog haeretic. ^ostritemporis l. ^.
(the foresaid Lutheran) places six sorts of his own Lutherans in the
Catalogue of Heretyks: And so through the disallowing of one another doctrine,
did first rise the distinction of Molles and Rigidi Lutherani; so as it is
manifest even out of their own books and Inuectyues, that they hold one
another for Heretykes.

Touching the differences between the Caluinists amongst themselves; they are
these which follow, to wit, Concerning the Churches Visibility; Christ's
suffering in soul the pains of Hell, his descending into Hell after death;
Baptism of lay Persons in time of Necessity; reprobation and Universality of
Grace; whether in case of adultery, the innocent party may marry again;
whether Usury be lawful; Whether Christ's body be really and substantially
present in the Sacrament to the mouth of faith, as D. Whitaker, M. Hooker etc.
do hold, or but Sacramentally only present, as the Puritans maintain; whether
Bishops be lawful, or Antichristian; whether the sign of the Cross in
baptism, and the use of the surplisse be lawful; whether the Civil Magistrate
may be head of the Church; and finally (to omit many other doctrines,
controuerted among the Protestants) whether God does decree and will Sin, or
but only decree to permit sin. All which points (besides many more) are
severally mantayned by several Protestants; yea most of the points by those
Protestants, not being Lutherans, which are adverse to the Puritans.

To exemplify in one or two of the former: Does not Lib. de Coena Domini and l.
4. Instis. c* 15. 1.
Calvin condemn Zuinglius for teaching, that the Sacraments are bare external
signs? And is not Calvin reciprocally condemned by Zuinglius Epist. ad quanda^
Germaniae ciuitat. fol 190.
again, because he attributed more to the Sacraments, then external signs?
Castalio (a Sacramentary) charging Calvin to be the author of Sin, makes a
distinction of the true God, and of Caluins God; and among other things he
thus says: By Lib. ad Calu^. de praedestin.
this means, not the Devil, but the God of Calvin is the Father of lies; but
that God which the holy Scriptur teaches, is altogether contrary to this God
of Calvin. And then after: The true God came to destroy the works of the
Caluinian God: And these two Gods, as they are by nature contrary one to
another; so they beget and bring jorth children of contrary disposition, to
wit, that God of Calvin, children without mercy, proud etc. Thus far
Castalio. D. In his Meditat. upon 122. Psalm.
Willet (a formal Protestant) speaking of certain doctrines mantayned by M
Hooker, D. Couell, and others, and thinking them to be erroneous, thus writes:
From this fountain have sprung forth these, and such other whirlepoints and
bubles of new doctrine; As for example, that Christ is not originally God etc.
That Sacraments do give and confirm grace etc. And rejecting diverse other
points, thus concludes: Thus have some been bold to teach and write, who as
some Schismatikes (meaning the Puritans) have disturbed the peace of the
Church, one way in external matters concerning discipline; they have troubled
the Church another way, by opposing themselves by new quirkes and devises, to
the soundnes of doctrine amongst Protestants. Thus D. Willet.

But now in this last place, to come to the mutual accusations of English
Protestants only, and English Puritans only (as most nearly concerning us) we
find, that the book entitled Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
printed anno 1604. by the appointement of the Bishops, does ipso facto
excommunicate the Puritans, for their mantayning of these positions following
(besides others) as they are in that book set down.

The worship in the Church of England is corrupt; superstitious, unlawful,
repugnant to the Scriptures.

The articles of the Bishops Religion, are erroneous, their rites Antichristian
etc.

The government of the Church of England under his Majesty by Archbishops,
Bishops, and Deanes, is Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God.

The Puritans in another The mild defense of the silenced Ministers
supplication to the high Court of Parlame^t.
of their books, thus write: Dowe vary from the sincere doctrine of the
Scriptures? Nay rather many of them (meaning the Bishops and their adherents)
do much swerve from the same touching general grace, and the death of Christ
for every particular person etc. Touching the manner of Christ's presence in the
Eucharist; that the Pepe is not Antichrist; concerning the necessity of
Baptism etc.

In another Entitled, A Christian and modest Offer p. 1^*
of the Puritans books we thus find them to say: If we be in error, and the
Prelates on the contrary have the truth, we protest to all the world, that the
Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God and Christ Jesus) have great wrong
and in dignity offered unto them, in that they are rejected etc. But we will
insist more particulerly in relating the Puritans dislike in two things; the
one concerns the Common prayer-booke, the other our English Translations of
the Bible

Touching the first, the Puritans in one I^tit^led, The petition of twenty two
preachers in London.
of their books thus write: Many things in the Communion book are repugnant
to the word of God. And again: In the Communion-booke there be things of which
there is n^ reasonable sense; there is contradiction in it, even in necessary
and essential points of Religion; the holy Scripture is disgraced in it etc
Others of them In the Survey p. 20. and 24.
say thus: The Communion book of England is not agreeable to the word of God in
many things. A third Certain confiderations printed anno 1605. fol. 10.11.12.
thus censureth of it: The Protestants Communion-booke and service i^ naught,
it has gross and palpable repugnancy in it. This dislike of the Puritans of
the Communion-booke is so evident, that D. Couell In his exam. page 179.
their adversary, and allowing the Communion book, thus sets down their
judgment herein: The Communion-booke is boldly despised; gross err^urs, and
manife^t impietyes (meaning in their opinion) are in the Communion-booke. Thus
much of the Communion-booke.

Touching our English translations of the Scripture, we find the Puritans most
violent and headlong in condemning of them. Answerably heerto diverse of In the
abridgme^t of a book delivered by certain Ministers to the King. page 11. and
12.
the Ministers with one consent, thus write of the english Translation: A
translation, that takes away from the Text; that adds to the text; and this
somtymes to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost. And
again: A translation, which is absurd and senseles, perverting in many places,
the meaning of the holy Ghost.

M. Burges In his Apology sect. 6.
speaks in this sort of the English Translation: How shall I approve under my
hand a Translation which has many omissions, many additions, which sometimes
obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense; being sometimes senseles, sometyms
contrary? M. In his aduertisment to the Bishops.
Broughton (the great Hebrician) thus says: The public translation of the
Scripture in English is such as it peruerteth the Text of the old Testament in
eight hundred forty and eight places; and it causes millions of millions to
reject the new Testament, and to run into eternal flames. Thus he. D. In his
answer to M. William Reynolds page ^25.
Whitaker (though favoring the English Translation of the Bible, as much as
possibly he may) thus confesses: I have not said otherwise, but that
somethings in the English translation might be amended.

To conclude this point, we find, that at the Conference at Hampton Court
before the Kings Majesty, D. Reynolds (the foreman for the Puritans) openly
refused to subscribe to the Communion-book; because (said he) it warranted a
corrupt and false translation of the Bible. Thus far of this second point.

Now in the last place, let us take a short view how we, that are moderate and
Parlamentary Protestants, do censure of the Puritans. M. Powell in his
considerations.
Powell censureth the Puritans, to be notorious and minifest Schismatiks, out
off from the Church of God. M. In his enist. dedic. page 3.
Parks auerreth thus: The Puritans seek to undermine the foundation of faith.
And further he thus says: The Creed it Vbi supra.
self, which always has been the badge and cognizance, whereby to discern
and know the faithful from unbelievers etc. is the maine point in question
between us, and the Puritans. D. Couell Exam* page 71.
speaking of certain hot and fyrebrand Ministers, thus writes: The first
english Ministers so far dissented, that some books and the greatest part of
Christendom was filled with irreuerent, unholy, and unnatural Contentions etc.

I will close this point with the testimony of a great In the Survey of the
pretended discipime c. 5. etc. 24. and cap. 3^
Pillar of our church, who thus charge the Puritans: They pervert the true
meaning of certain places, both of Scriptures and Fathers, to serve their own
turns. And again, the said Author says of them: The word of God is troubled
with such choppers and changers of it; finally (to leave out diverse other such
passages) he further thus complayneth: The Caterbrawls, pittisull distractions,
and Confusions among the Puritans, proceed of such intollerab e presumption, as
is used by perverting and false interpretation of holy Scripture. And thus far
for some taste (not setting down thereof the hundred part) of our
recriminations used against the Puritans.

But before I come to the Catastrophe and end of this Scene, I am to put the
Reader in mind, that as avoiding prolixity, and unwilling to lance deeper into
our own wounds, I pass over; first, How the very names of Lutherans,
Caluinists, Protestants, and Puritans are not invented by the Papists, or out
of malice by each others Adversaries; but even of Necessity, to distinguish the
different doctrine of every Professor, as D. Whitakew In his answer to to M.
Reynalds prafat. p. 44.
, and (x) Conradus Schlusselburge do acknowledge. In his catalog. h^retic. p.
866.
Secondly I pass over the infinite books written by foreign Protestants, one
against another, amounting to the number of four hundred and above, as is
evident, to any one, who will peruse Iudocus Coccius his Thesaurus tom. 2.
Hospinan his historia Sacramentaria part altera, and the yearly Catalogues of
Books returned from Franekford. Thirdly I pretermit to show, how the
Contentions of foreign Protestants (only for matter of Religion) have been so
violent as that they have prohibited Vide Hospinan in historta Sacram. part,
altera fol. 393.
sale of each others Books, have appointed Hosp. vbi supra.
Articles of Visitation, concerning the apprehending of each ones Adversaries;
and (which is more) not forbearing to Hosp. vbi supra fol. 395. and Ofiander
epitom cent 16. p. 7^5.
enter into open arms and hostility. Lastly I pass over to mention the Books
made by English Protestants one against another, touching these questions
following. 1. Of Christ's descending into Hell. 2 Of Bishops and Ceremonies. 3.
Concerning the sufficiency of our Redemption by our Saviors bodily death upon
the Cross, or whether that his further suffering in Soul the pains of Hell,
was also needful. 4. Concerning Universality of Grace. 5 Concerning the
lawfulnes or unlawfulness of Usury. 6. Touching the Innocent parties marying
again, in case of divorce upon Adultery, besides some others; the number of
all which will amount to several scores.

All this, I say, I pass over; but I cannot pass over but observe (and thereat
smyle) the subtle deportments of us Protestants, in this matter of our
Dissentions; Since when we write one against another, we with great
intemperance of words do deeply charge our Adversaries (other Protestants)
with obscuring the Gospel of Christ, and laboring to maintain their own
darkness of Ignorance, eve in the fundamental points of Christian faith as is
showed. But when we Protestants are vpbrayded by our Adversaries (the
Catholyks) for such our divisions in matters of faith; then the Case is
altered, and we bear it out (as though the Sun equally and indifferently
shyned upon us all) auerring with D. ^e well in his Apology of the Church of
England p. 101. says thus: The Zuinglia^s and Lutherans are good friends, they
vary not betwe^ne themselves upon the principles and foundatio^s of our
Religion, but upon only one question which is neither weighty, nor great. The
like says D. VVhitak^ in resp. ad rations Camp. rat. 8. p. 155.
monstrous boldness, that the Protestant differ among themselves, not in any
main points of faith, but only in Ceremonies, and some few matters of
Indifferency; so making our pens and Controuersyes (for our own advantage) to
partake of the nature of diaphanous and transparent bodies, which are equally
capable of light and darkness.

In like sort, I cannot, but observe, in the thronge of so many great
differences among our selves, the detriment we suffer, particularly by our
dissensions, touching our Communion-Booke of Prayer, and our English
Translation of Scripture: Since by the first, we are not resolved, how we ought
to pray to God, and whether our prayers made for the remitting of our Sins,
be not an increase of our sins (since wrongfully, and with a false faith to
pray, is but to offend God.) And thus do we deprive our selves of the chief
means of pacifying Gods wrath and indignation. Seeing Prayer is a secondary
Mediator between God and man; by means of it, God (as I may say) knows not
that (to wit, our Sins) which from all Etermity he did know; nor remembers
that, which before the perpetrating thereof, was firmly registed in the Book
of his Prescience: Prayer indeed being the spiritual air, which refrigerates
the heat of our Passions: Os Psalm. 1^8.
meum aperui, and attraxi spiritum.

In like sort we being at wars, which is the true Word of God in our
translations of Scripture, we are in the mean time deprived (even by our own
grounds) of the true Judge for the appeasing and determining of Controuersyes
in Religion; since granting the Scripture to be this Judge, yet this is to be
understood of the Scripture, as it is pure in it self, and incontaminated; not
as it is abastarded with false Translations. Besides being unresolved which is
the true Word of God, we know not, which is that heavenly Kings true
^^mbassadour, bringing to mankind the comfortable message of Salvation; or
rather which is the Great Seal of that most great God, whereunto he has set
his hand, obliging himself by promise, to give Pardon to all truly Penitent;
every sentence thereof being indeed the Lyse of our Soul; and Soul of our
Life: Joan. cap. 6.
Verba, quae ego locutus sum vobis spir tus and vita s^nt.

But to conclude this Chapter; since the Catholyks (in respect of faith) enjoy
a perfect Unity; since the Protestants maintain strange diuersityes of
doctrine, attended on with intestine simultyes, and unchristian
Anathematizings; And since I have but one poor indivisible soul, not capable
of several ways; therefore I am resolved, that this one soul of mine, shall
in her faith, (according to her own being and essence) tread the path of
Unity; not of multiplicious Contrariety, and repugnancy in Religion.

THE XII. MOTIVE. That Salvation may be had in Catholyke Religion, by the
confession of Protestants.
PERVERSITAS fidei est probata non credere, non probata prasumere, says the
ancient and learned Aduer. G^osticos.
Tertullian. By which words, we are taught, that an indubious and and fully
warranted Truth, ought to ouerballance in matter of faith, all uncertain and
iniustifiable fluctuations of a contrary judgment. Here then the Question
being, in what fa th and Religion a man dying may be saved (a primary and
Cardinal point) I find, that the learneder sort of Protestants do conspiringly
seach, that a Catholyke, or (in our own phrase) a Papist, dying a Papist, may
be saved; but I do not find the like favorable censure of our learned
Adversaries, so unanimously to pass upon us dying Protestants. Thus the first
point, as being on all sides approved, I may securely believe; the second as
not granted, I must apprehend (at least) as doubtful. The consideration of our
own Brethrens judgments here in the behalf of our Adversaries (I grant) has
much swayed me. For as some of us do teach: Peter Martyr. in his Comm. places
part. 2 p. 319.
Among all testimonies, that testimony is of greatest respect, which is
witnessed by the Enemy, since such an author by disprouing the truth, most
strongly approues it, and by impugning, propugnes it.

This point then (to wit, that the hope of Salvation belongs to Papists,
dying Papists) shall be demonstrated four several ways, even from the
ingenuous and plain acknowledgment of those Protestants, whose pens and
wrytings have most strongly invaded the judgment of their Readers. First by
showing, that diverse of us do hold, that the chiefest Articles of Catholyke
Religion, are but points of Iudifferency, and compatible with Salvation; and
(which is more) by proving, that sundry learned Protestants have actually and
really believed the said Catholic Articles as true. Secondly by manifesting
even from our own wrytings, that the Church of Rome is the true Church of
Christ, and that in that Church Salvation is to be obtained. Thirdly from our
doctrine and practice in baptizing the children of Catholyks. Fourthly by
insisting in diverse examples of particular men, which have dyed in the Roman
and Catholic Church, and yet by us Protestants are reputed for glorious Saints
in heaven.

As touching the first, I will rest for greater expedition in some few of the
chiefest articls of the Roman faith, the which being accounted by us as matters
of indifferencyes, may stand (by our own censures) with salvation; from whence
we may infer, that then much more many other articles of the said Religion be
reputed by us to be of the like indifferency. And first concerning the primacy
of the Church, Luther In assert. art. 36.
himself thus says: The Popes supremacy is among those unnecessary trifles,
wherein the Popes leuity and foolery is to be borne withal. Melancthon In his
epist. extant in the book styled Centuria epist. Theolog. epist 74.
proceeds more plainly, saying: An agreement may easily be established in
the Article of the Popes Primacy, if other articles could be agreed upon. The
doctrine of the Primacy (to wit that one must be chief in the Church of God)
is taught by Vbi supra.
Melancto^, So related by Hospinian hist. p. 389.
Iacobus Andreas, Luth. in loc. com class. c. 37
Luther, and D. D. Couell. in his exam. fol. 106.
Couell, who gives this reason thereof, saying: If there were not one supreme
head in the Church of God, the Church should be worse, then the meanest
Commonwealth, yea then any den of thieves.

Touching the real presence, D. Reynolds In his conclus. annexed to his
conference page 722.
so depresseth the weight thereof, that he says: The Real presence is but as
the grudging of a little ague, if otherwise the party hold the Christian
faith. Iacobus Acontius (a In lib. stratagem. Satan. page 135.
learned Protestant) accords with D. Reynolds saying: It is evident,
concerning as well those, who hold the real presence of Christ's body in the
bread as those others, which deny it; that although of necessity the one part
do err, yet both are in way of salvation, if in other things they be obedient
unto God. The like judgment gives As he is cyted by Amandus Polanus in his
Syllog. These. Theolog. page 464.
Luther of Transubstantiation.

Now the doctrine touching Communion under one, or both kinds, is of that
indifferency with Luther Ine^. ad Bohem.
that thus he says thereof: Quamuis pulchrum etc. Though it were very good, to
use both kinds in the Eucharist, and that Christ commanded herein nothing, as
necessary; yet it were better heerin to seek after peace, then to contend
touching the shecies or kinds.

Now that the doctrine of the Real presence is true (besides that it is
defended by Luther, and all the Lutherans, that Christ's body is really given in
the Sacrament to the bodily mouth) it is further raught, that not only the
efficacy of Christ's body (as the Sacramentaryes do hold) but that the body it
self, after a wonderful and incomprehensible manner, is given to the mouth of
the faithful. And this is acknowledged for true (though with great dislike of
other Sacramentaryes) by In script. Anglican. page 548.
Bucer, Contra Duraeum page 119.
D. Whitaker, and Eccles. policy l. 5. sect. 67.
M Hooker. In like manner the indifferency of one, or both kinds is defended by
Luther, saying: Si ineris etc If thou shall go to a place, where they use to
communicate in one kind, communicate thou also in one kind; in like sort by In
cent. epist. theo. page 2^1.
Melancthon, (q) De va traque specie Sacram.
and by others alleged by D. In his reply page 110.
Jewel, who were (as I may say) but of halfe-bloud to Luther, in the doctrine
of the Sacrament.

Concerning Prayer for the dead, the indifferency of it (as not being necessary
to salvation) is taught by M. Cartwright, thus writing: The doctrins of prayer
for the dead, freewill, (t) So cyted by M. Whitgift in his defense p. 82
and a number of other as necessary doctrines, are such wherein men being
nuzzeled, have notwithstanding been saved. The same is likewise taught by D.
In his confut. of Purgatory page 3.6.
Fulke, and M. In his answer to John d'Albins page 382.
Sparks. Now the doctrine of prayer for the dead is taught and believed by As
witn^sseth Vrbanus Regius in prima part operum in formula caute loquendi c.
desanctoru^ cultu.
Luther, Vrbanus Regius vbi supra.
Vrbanus Regius, In script. Anglic. p. 450.
Bucer, and the Printed anno 1649.
Communion-booke, in King Edwards time.

The doctrine of Free Will is taught as a point not necessary, by M. In M.
VVhitgif defense vbi supra.
Cartwright in these words: If you mean by matters of faith those, without
which, a man cannot be saved, then the doctrine, which teaches, there is no
freewill, or prayer for the dead, is not within your compass. By M. In his
^^osition of the ^reed page 402.
Parkins, who thus writes: A weakening error is that, the houlding whereof
does not ouerturne any point in the foundation of salvation, as the error of
free will, and sundry such like. The doctrine of Free Will is taught for true
by the two Protestants Secanus, and Hemingius, as witnesses D. In his sinops.
printed 1600. page 808.
Willet, and by diverse other Protestants, mentioned by M. Act. mon. page 1533.
Fox.

Of the doctrine of satisfaction and merit of works, D. Whitak. thus
discourses The Contra Camp. page 73. and the like in his answer to Master
Reynoldes. p. 135.
Fathers thought by their external discipline of life, to pay the pains due
for sin etc. which though it be an error, yet were they notwithstanding good
men, and holy Fathers. Happy souls, with whom to fear wisely, was to free
the^ from fire; they being indeed more truly confident of their salvation,
then we Protestants can be, through our uncertain certainty. Now the doctrine
of the necessity of works to salvation, is affirmed by D. Against the Rhemish
Testament in 2. Pet. 2.
Fulke, and D. In his (...) page 90^
Willet, though contradicted by In praefat. ad Roman.
Illirycus, for new papistry (to use his own words) as pernicious as the old.
In like sort voluntary Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience are taught, by M. In
his Eccles. ^ist: l. 2. p. 102.
Hooker, and D. In his defense of M. Hook. art 8 page ^2.
Couell.

Concerning Invocation of Saints, D. In the tower disp. with ^a. Camp. the 2.
days conference argum. 8. R. 11 and R. 111.
Fulke, and D. Goad affirm, that this article does not exclud men from being
members of the Church of Christ: In like manner for honoring of Saints
Relics M. In his answer to Ichn d'Albins page 382.
Sparks thus says: We are not so hasty to pronounce sentence of condemnation
of any, for such errors: as that either we think all must be saved, that
hold one way, or all condemned, that hold another way. The doctrine of
Invocation of Saints, is taught and believed by ^n purgat. quorumdam articul.
as also in epist. ad Georgium Spalatinum.
Luther, who thus writes: De intercessione Diuorum etc. Touching the
intercession of Saints, I believe and judge with the whole Christian Church,
that is, That Saints are to be honored and inuoked; by In orat. 1. Chrysostom.
de Iuuentio and Maximo.
Oecolampadius, by Act. mon. page 462.
Bilney a Protestant, and by Act. mon. page 1312.
Latimer.

Finally the worshipping of Images is held a point indifferent, by M. In his
treatise tending to pacification page 104.
Bunny, who thus says of this article, of the Conception of our Blessed Lady,
and some others: In these or such like articles whosoever will condemn all
those to be none of the Church, that are not fully persuaded, as we are therein
etc. commits an uncharitable part, toward those his Brethren.

The doctrine it self of worshipping Images is defended; as true, by Thomas
Act. mon. page 462.
Bilney above alleged, and by certain Protestants of Germany, as Bezi In his
^isp ad acta. ^loq montisbolgar. part altera page 23.
relates. In like sort, reverence and bowing down at the name of Jesus is
affirmed, and commanded by Q Elizabeth's Act. 92.3.
Iniunctio^s, by D. In his defense p. 742.
Whitguyft, In loc. com. p. 59.
Muscu^u^. and in ep. Paul. ad Philipens. Coless etc. fol. 223.
Zanchius. But if bowing to the Name of Jesus, being heard or read, be lawful;
then follows it irrefragably, that the honoring of Christ's Image is lawful:
since the name of Jesus is to the ear, as his Image is to the eye And thus far
of certain main points of the Catholic Religion acknowledged but as matters
of Indiffere^cy by certain Protestants (and therefore not excluding in their
Judgments the beleiuers of them from Salvation) and taught and believed for
most true, by other learned Protestants.

In this second place, we will show, that our learned Brethren, do teach, the
Church of Rome (notwithstanding her certain supposed Errors) to be the true
Church of Christ, and consequently her Professors to be, not Analogical and
half Christians, but true and perfect Christians, and therefore not excluded
(even by our own men's judgments) from the hope of Salvation.

First then, we do find our Brother In his treatise of the kingdom of Israel,
and of the Church p. 24.
D. Morton (now Bishop of Couentry and Lichfyeld) thus to write: Papists are to
be accounted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of the
Gospel, which is faith in Christ Jesus, the Son of God, and Savior of the
World: If then the Papists by the Church of God, it follows, they are the
true Church of God; since to speak with S. Cyprian: Adulterari Lib de unit.
Eccl.
non potest sponsa Christi incorrupta est, and pudica.

In like sort, M. In his fifth book of Eccles. policy page 188.
Hooker gives this honorable and worthy respect to the Church of Rome,
saying: The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the house of God, a limme
of the visible Church of Christ; and we gladly acknowledge them, to be of the
family of Jesus Christ. M. Bunny In his treat. tending to pacific. p. 109 and
111.
speaking of the Catholics and I rotestants thus writes: Neither of us may
justly account the other to be none of the Church of God; we are no several
Church from them, nor they from us. D. Field thus writes: We Of the Church l.
3. cap. 46.
doubt not, but that the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome, with more then
Luciferlike pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church of God
that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ; therefore in his
judgment, those which dyed in this Church, might be saved. D. Some: If In his
defense against Penry p. ^76.
you think, that all the popish sort, which dyed in the Popish Church, are
damned, you think absurdly, and do dissent from the judgment of all learned
Protestants D. Barow: I In his 4. sermons and 2. questions disputed ad Clerum
p. 448.
dare not deny the name of Christians to the Romanists, since the learneder
writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be the Church of God.

To be short (leaving out the authorityes of many others) D. in his defense of
M. Hook. etc. p. 77.
Couell thus auerreth: We affirm them of the Church of Rome, to be paries of
the Church of Christ, and that those that live and dye in that Church may
notwithstanding be saved: This Doctor further charging those, that think the
contrary, with (l) ignorant zeal. Thus we see, how the Sphere of Catholic
Religion (even according to the Theoryes of our best Evangelical
Mathematicians) turns upon the Poles of Man's salvation.

A third way of proving the former verity, may be taken from the Protestants
doctrine, and practice, touching the baptizing of Catholic children; which
baptism we Protestants teach to be good and auaylable, whether it be ministered
by Catholic Priests, or by Protestant Ministers; and this (as we So teach the
Deumes of Geneua in the propositions and principles disputed at Geneua p. 178.
The same is taught by D. VVhigist in his defense p. 623. by M. Hooker in his
Eccles. policy. l. 3. page 131.
affirm) because they are comprehended within the covenant of eternal life,
by means of the faith of their parents. Now when we Protestants baptize the
children of Catholics, it is not (says M. Vbisupra.
Hooker very learnedly) in regard of Gods promise, which reaches unto a
thousand generations; since if it were so, then (says he) all the world might
be baptized (meaning the children of Jews, Turks etc.) in so much, as no man
is a thousand descents removed from Adam; but it is, by reason of the faith of
their Catholic parents. And hence it is, that D Some In his defense against
Penry cap. 22.
affirms, That Infants and children of West Indian Christians (whose former
Ancestors, in regard of their late conversion to Christianity, never knew the
Christian faith) being baptized by their Catholic Priests, receive true
baptism (to use his words) and are engrafted into Christ.

But here I urge. If the faith of Catholyke Parents be auaylable for their
Childrens Salvation, much more then is it auaylable for their own Salvation;
except we will imagine their faith, to participate of the nature of the Air,
which is a principal Cause, why all other things may be seen; and yet it
self deprived of the benefit of being seen.

The fourth and last Medium, which I will here use, for the warranting of the
foresaid Verity of Catholyks Salvation, shall be to apply the former universal
Truth of Schools and learned Protestants to particular Persons; that is, to
set down the judgments of us Protestants, articulately and punctually passed
upon certain men, who by our own Confessions, dyed Catholyks, whom
nevertheless we affirm to be saved.

And first touching the Fathers in general, whom to have lived and dyed
Papists (as being rejected for their doctrine by us) is evident out of our
former passages. Now of them In his reply, and in ^octor VVhirgif. defense p.
82.
M Cartwright thus charitably writes: I doubt not but diverse Fathers of the
Greek Church, who were Patrones of Free will, are saved The like judgment D.
Whitaker Contra rat. Camp. page 78. us supra.
gives of the Fathers, notwithstanding their doctrine touching Satisfaction
and Merit of works; And the same judgment of us, is proved even from the word
and title of Saint, which almost all the sober and learned Protestants commonly
give in their wrytings and speeches to Augustine, Jerome, Ignatius, and the rest
of the Primitive Church. Now if we entitle them Saints, then do we acknowledge,
they are saved, except we would say, there are some Saints, which are not saved.

But to descend to more particular examples: Beda (as Osiander In epitom. cent.
8. l. 2. c. 3.
witnesses) was wrapped in all popish errors, wherein we at this day dissent
from the Pope; and yet he is acknowledged by D. In ^esu^^sme par. 2. rat. 3.
Humfrey, to be in the number of godly men (to use his words) raised up by the
Holy Ghost. Again, Gregory the Great, and Augustine, who first planted in
England Christian Religion, are confessed by us, to have been Papists (as
above is showed* and yet they are thus styled by us: That M. Godwin in his
Catal. of Bishops page 3. See the like commendation given to them by D. Fulke
against Heskins, Sanders etc p. 561.
blessed, and holy Fathers S. Gregory, and S. Augustine our Apostle. S. Bernard
by our acknowledgment, was so confessed a Papist, as that he was an Abbot, and
Osiand. in epitom. Cent. 12. p. 309.
Author of many Monasteryes in France, and Flaunders; and yet D. Lib. de E
cles. p. 369.
Whitaker thus writes of him: Ego quidem Bernardu^ vere suisse Sanctum
existimo. And Osiander Cent. 12. p. 309.
terms him: A very good man. Of Bernard, Francis and others. Tindall Act.
mon. page 1338.
thus acknowledges: I doubt not but S. Bernard, Francis, and many others, like
holy men erred as concerning Mass; thus he confessing them to be men of
Sanctity and holiness, and consequently in state of salvation. And touching the
same point, Luther In col loq Germ. cap. de Missa.
thus says: Private Massse has deceived many Saints, and carried them away
into error from the time of Gregory, for 800. years.

Of S. Dominicke, who was the Author of the Order of the Dominican Friars, In
Chronic. p. 200.
Pantaleon (a Protestant) relates much; and speaking greatly of his piety and
virtue, concludes thus: Dominicus erat vir doctus and bonus, and Praedicatorum
Ordinem instituit. His like confessed Holiness is celebrated much at large by
the Cent. ^^. col. 1179.
Centurists. To conclude of these three former Saints, Luther thus confesses:
Fateor etc. I g^aunt, that the gifts of God were not want ng to Francis,
Dominicke, and Bernard, and to others, who were the first Authors of Colleges
for Monks, but these gifts are but personal. But such gifts cannot stand
without true virtue, nor true virtue without hope of salvation. And thus far
of this most certain and vndeleble truth, that Catholics dying as Catholik^,
may be saved, confessed in the clear words of the most learned Protestants;
from whence we may be assured of their judgments (especially delivered in the
behalf of their Adversaries) answerable herein to their writings; since
words are the natural shadow of the mind, cast by the light of the
Understanding.

But here do present unto us, two Porismata or Resultancyes, out of the
Premises of this Passage. The first. That all true Reason persuades me to
implant and ingraft my self in that Church, which I find to be acknowledged,
for the true church, promising Salvation to her members, even by her
Adversaries. For if I dye Catholyke (my life being agreeable thereto) both
Catholyks and Protestants warrant my Salvation; But dying in the faith of
Protestancy, the Protestant alone (and this in honor of their own Religion)
assure me of it For there is never a learned Catholyke writer in the world (an
observation much to be weighed) who grants, that a Protestant dying with a
positive, settled, and contumacious neglect of the Catholyke Church and faith,
can be saved. This then being thus, shall I in so great a business leave a
certainty for uncertainty? God forbid. We Protestants expect to be believed in
other our Positions and doctrynes; Why not then in this? Since then the
Protestants do teach, that Catholyks (so dying) are in state of Salvation, I am
resolved, my Brethrens wrytings shall have that powerful influence over me, as
what themselves, do heerin teach, I will (through Gods grace) put in
execution. And so my Will shall become in this point, a ready and serviceable
Handmayd to their Judgments.

The second. The Wrong, which we Protestants commit, in afflicting the
Catholyks, and in unnaturally betrampling upon their dejected estats, only for
matters of Religion. Alas! by our own doctrine, they are neither Babylonians,
nor Egyptians; both they and we being (as we teach) Isralits; why then should
Israel thus persecute Israel? Are we not become the gaze of Christendom, thus
to fight without an enemy? Thus for kynred to wound it own kyndred, yea often
the Father the Son? so turning our own swords into our own childrens
breasts; we still inciting his Majesty to greater severity (a Prince of his
own disposition, of the most benign, merciful, and commiserating nature,
that the World at this day enioyes) and all this for the Catholyks living in
that faith and Religion, in which our selves teach, they may be saved; thus do
we make the confessed hope of their salvation, to be the sole cause of their
pressures and calamityes. Good God! who would think, that Christians, the
chiefest articles of whose faith are either reputed but as Indifferencyes, or
(which is more) believed for true doctrine by their Oppressors; whose Church
is acknowledged to be the D^ Morton vbi supra.
Church of God, houlding the foundation of the Gospel; the M. Hooker vbi supra.
family of Jesus Christ; it being no several M. Bunny vbi supra.
Church from theirs, nor theirs from it; houlding D. Field vbi supra.
a saving Profession of the truth in Christ; in which many D. Couell with the
other Doctors vbi supra.
dying, are by their Adversaries registered for most glorious Saints; should
nevertheless be persecuted by other Christians of their own Country (yea their
own flesh) for their only perseuering in the foresaid Church, with
confiscation of goods, restraint of body, and sometimes with sheeding of most
innobloud, and suffering a cruel death: Obstupescite Hierem cap. 2.
Cali super hoc, and portaecius des^lamini vehementer.

Here now I will stay my pen, making this last Motive, as a fitting
Catastrophe for all: Since that Closure, and End is warrantable enough, which
euicteth from the ingenuous Confessions of the most learned Protestants, that I
may be saved in that Religion, wherein I am resolved to dye.

THE CONCLUSION TO MY DEAR, AND REVEREND BRETHREN, THE LORDS ARCHBISHOPS AND
BISHOPS OF ENGLAND.
REVEREND, and Learned Brethren (the ouerlooking eyes of our Nation) my Pen
here salutes your Lordships, before it takes it last pawse. This small Legacy
I have determined to leave behind me, primitiuely for the justifying of my
unrepented revolt from you in matter of Faith; for, Non Tert.
suffundar errore, quo caruisse delector. Secondarily, for the benefit of those
whose weak Judgments have been abused, through their ouer-hasty swearing
Fealty to their Protestant Masters. To your selves it is needles, as already
enjoying the same, and other forcible demonstrations in the like behalf. Diverse
of you have spent (I know) many years in seriously perusing the holy
Scriptures, the voluminous Commentaryes of the Lights of Gods Church, the
Ecclesiastical Historyes of all ages, the Oecumenicall Counsels of the
Primitive Church, as also of later times, and all other authorityes whatsoever,
wherewith either Catholics or Protestants seek to support their cause.
Therefore open but the book of your own dispassionate, retired and secret
judgments, given upon all the foresaid authorityes, and I doubt not, but you
may therein distinctly read the truth of Religion. Here I speak in sincerity,
I hold it (morally) most improbable, that such of you as have been much
conversant in the study of Controuersyes, can in your souls, give an absolute
allowance to your own Religion; since in so doing, your own reading tells
you, that you are forced to break with all authority both Divine, and Humane.

Give me leave to vnbreast the secrets of my thoughts to you. The member
da^gerously affected in you, is your Will: It is Wife, Children, Honors,
Preferments, and the like, (snares, wherewith my self heretofore have been
shackled, but now with thanks to God, Laqueus Psalm. 1^3.
contritus est, and nos liberati sumus) which withould the learnedest of you
from open profession of the Catholic faith. O madness! He is a Romans 2.
Jew, who is allone with a Jew. Let the Theory in this art be coincident with
the practice, and incorporate your speculations in your selves. Know, but
withal do, and let your will be ready to execute the Arrests of your own
learned judgments. You are all (as being in years) posting to your graves;
and a Christian man's care ought to begin and end, in the circle of himself: Tu
tibi primus, and vltimus. Can Wife, can Children, can Honors, or any other
worldly blandishments free the body from the cold grave, or an vnrepenting
soul from hellfire? Why then will you suffer, through an (...), or forgetful
and insensible stupidity, the noble substance of your souls, to be thus
immersed in these earthly benefits? Which being given to you, as means
conducing to your ends, you in a retrograde manner, make them your sole ends.
Or why so long do you thus struggle through over much solicitude and care,
touching flesh and blood, as if in the end you could command time, and
Repentance? Therefore for the honor of God, and good of our your own souls,
curb your desires herein, and remember that Actions unrestrained in time
resolve to Habit; Habit to Nature; and Nature is hardly changed. You are
Christians, beat then the children of Babylon (I mean, your affections)
against the stone, which is Christ, and let your Motte be: Deus meus, and
omnia. Contemn all imaginary bugbears of ensuing losses and disgrace; since he
is both Rich and Honorable enough, who gains Heaven.

Now then, begin to espouse your Pens and Tongues to the Truth; and be not
ashamed to profess that faith openly, which you find by your own study, and
painful disquisition to be the true faith of Christ: ponder well that, Ore
Romans 10.
fit confessio adsalutem, and loath that Ianus of dissimulation in Religion,
where the eye looks one way, the understanding another; still remembering,
that as long as your bodies are in Egypt (I mean as long as you externally
communicate with a false Religion) so long your souls cannot participate of
the benefits of Israel: To conclude, you are Bishops in Europe, not of Asia,
stain not then your selves with the blemishes of those Asian Bishops, so much
reprehended, by the beloved Apoc. cap, 1. and 2.
of our Savior. But above all, remember (and let this still be riuetted in
your thoughts) the time will come, when it will be sufficient for the best men,
to answer for themselves; how hea^^y then and in supportable will that burden
be for those, who marst give account, at that most dreadful day (besides for
their own perpetrated sins) for the loss of all those poor souls, through
want of true faith, damned in hell, which themselves through false and subtle
persuasions have thus perverted? The inward conuulsions and secret grypings
whereof my Self daily feels.

But pardon me (dear Brethren:) the bloody Ruptures of my vlcered Soul
wherein I glass your dangers) and my present languishments of body, give life
unto my speeches, and emboulden me to power words of oil into the wounds of
your Consciences. I love you in Christ, and no waters of pain or tribulation
(while I remain in this poor ruinous carcass) shall be able to extinguish the
fire of my Charity: But still my prayers shall be, that by redeeming the time
past, and true repentance (which changes the mind of him, who is unchangeable,
and shuts up his eyes, who is ever vigilant) you may, while you live here
upon earth, first expiate your errors committed, and after become truly
serviceable to his divine Majesty; that so (after this our mortality is once
put off) we all meeting together in the heavenly Jerusalem (to use the words
of one Doctor) In lumine Dei, lumen Deum videamus.

Your Lordships poor, and loving Brother, Joan: Londinens.

FINIS.

