A Most true Relation of a very dreadful Earthquake, with the Lamentable
effects thereof, Which began upon the 8. of DECEMBER 1612. and yet continues
most fearful in Munster in Germany.

READ AND TREMBLE.

Translated out of Dutch by Charles Demetrius, Public Notarie in London. And
Printed at Rotterdame in Holland, at the Sign of the White Gray-hound.

depiction of comet sighting

A MOST TRVE Relation of a very dreadful Earthquake, with the lamentable
effects thereof, which began upon the eight of December this present year
1612. and yet continues most fearful in Munster in Germany.
HOw happy was Adam (our Father) to have the world (then unspotted) his
Kingdom, Paradise his Palace, all creatures upon Earth his Subjects, God
himself his Protector, good Angels his counselors, Sun, Moon and Stars
his Books of contemplation, and Eden his Garden of plenty and pleasure, where
he had all things that were good, and was in danger of nothing that was
evil. But how wretched was he for disobeying his Creators commandment, to
loose all this happiness, and in that Treason of his to condemn all his
posterity? How miserable are the Sons become by the Fathers fall? How
blessed had they been, if he had stood? For reckon up their losses: the World
that should have been their Paradi^e is now their Prison. Man's protector (God)
has given him over: Angels (that then were his equals) are now far above
him, All creatures that were his Subjects, rebel at their Lord and Master* a
little Be dares sting him, the smallest Gnatte is ready to choke him: The
earth brings forth Briars and Brambles to scratch him, poisons to kill him,
Serpents to devour him, yea the heavens themselves empty their full Quiuers of
dreadful vengeance, shooting tempests of Hayle, Ice, Snow, Waters, Winds,
Thunder and Lightning, upon his miserable and sinful head. That which has a
Sun placed in it to give him heat, food and life, powers upon him her
Vyols of wrath: That which was made firm for his footing, and to bear up
Kingdoms, Cities, and all the creatures in the World, now shakes, and opens
her entrails to swallow him in that womb, where first he was begotten.

Shall I draw before your eyes a lively Picture, to make you see these things?
Alack! we write our passed punishments upon the breast of Time, and when his
back is turned, it is like Childrens books clasped up, we forget what
lessons we read there. We are all like Zenophantus, that could do nothing but
laugh: yea, our escaped miseries are but our mockeries; for (as dull beasts
do) we feel stripes to day, but forget the smarting to morrow; growing fat
with afflictions as Asses do with blows, and the more beaten, the harder our
hearts are, like iron, lying under the hammer.

Since then we never fear Ship wrack, but when we see our Vessels ready to
Split upon Rocks, and that we think never to fall, but when the Axe is laid
to the root; Since no rod can terrify but what is presently held over us; O
ye Worldlings, (unless your bosoms be as cold as your Charity is) I shall
melt you all into Water, and startle your Souls out of their deadly slumbers,
unless they be as dull and heavy as your sins are, by rattling in your
ears the Thunder of Divine vengeance, whose noise does now at this very
instant terrify us your disconsolate Neighbors.

The Earthquake in Munster, with other fearful Prodigies seen in the Air.
Munster is a City, situate in Westphalia, a part of the lower Germany: It
stands upon a hill, favored by Heaven for sweet and wholesome air, and
wanting nothing which the Provinces, adjoining to it, do plentifully enjoy. It
is rich in people, and the people rich in pleasures, and therefore in sin, no
winds being able to wey down the full ears of their pride, but the breath of
his nosethrils which can make Princes to bow beneath his foot stool.

In this City (swelling with the abundance which her own womb bears and
brings forth:) when her head lay in the soft lap of ease, when Peace sat at
her Gates, Freedom walked in her Streets, and when security laid all the
Inhabitants upon their wanton Pillowes. Behold, the Reuealer and Revenger of
all close and hidden impiety suddenly snatched out his Sword, and (smiting at
them) made their loftiest Pinnacles to tremble. For upon the eight day of
December (now last) a universal Earthquake shook the deepest foundations of
the strongest buildings; Churches and Steeples reeled in the Air like Ships
(in storms) beaten upon the Waves, and in a moment, their highest Battlements
came tumbling to the Earth. Towers of Flint and Marble cannot resist this
battery. The wrath of ten thousand Canons cannot confound so quickly, for
whole streets of Houses stand tottering* and whole streets of Houses fall.
Safety has no Walls to dwell in, no corner to fly to. Men, Women and
Children are with the terror thrown to the Earth, and as there they lie, their
own Buildings fall on them, and grind them into dust. If any have so much
heart left, as to lift up his hands to Heaven, he is presently struck dead by
Thunder and Lightning, which rage with such terrible fury, over all the poor
desolately ruined City* As if GOD in anger had swore to make this an example
to other places of his Judgment, as he did his holy City Jerusalem, not to
leave one stone standing upon another.

Armies of fiery clouds thus fight against these wretched people in the Air:
thunder frights their souls, and astonisheth their hearing, the ground
trembles under them, and because every Sense should be punished, according to
his offenses, the eye that once scorned to look up so high as heaven, is now
forced full of tears, from thence to beg one drop of mercy, but in stead
of that, it beholds a blazing and direful Comet: The Stars that are the
glorious Scutcheons of the Creator, and stuck as candles in heaven to light
man in the night, because he should work no wickedness in darkness, are now
changed into prodigious, dreadful, and fiery Meteors. They are out of that
celestial order which the Great General above placed them in: And like a
Kingdom in civil vprores threaten nothing but plagues, mischief to the world
and confusion. Misery is ever borne with a twinne. These prodigies come not
alone, but other strange and horrid apparitions fly up and down the Air: No
time being free, as if night and day contended together, which of them should
afflict and insult over a wretched downe-trodden City, with sharpest tyranny:
For the Earthquake, with Thunder and lightning does twice every day (at
distinct times) shake, disioynt, and beat to the ground the howses, and kill
the people, and when night should lend them rest to their calamities, they are
kept waking by these second allarms in the Element. Not far from Munster
stands a Castle called Bileuelt, strongly built upon a mighty rock, and
this Fort (for all it seemed to be impregnable) has been shaken by the battry
of this Earthquake, and such a breach made into the very Rock it self, that
the Castle is sunk beneath his settled and first foundation more than the
depth of two men's height: That which remains vndeuoured in this stony and
craggy Gulf, above ground, ^eeling, wauing, and tottering too and fro, as
easily (when the blow is given) as you see standing corn shaken by some
mighty wind. Thus the poor people live in this city, thus they perish: but
leaving them a while.

Into whose bosom shall I pour the river of my tears? Into my countries? she
is overwhelmed already in the torrent of her own sorrows: Shall I sigh my
lamentations up into Air? She is frighted with the unusual prodigies which
the wrath of her Maker sticks upon her beauty: will men hear me? Sin
hardens their hearts, and they are more senseless than Rocks: to the Rocks,
Mountains, and Hills then breath I out my Tragical condolements: Alas, they
tremble too, as ready to feel the general dissolution: Let me open therefore
the mangled book of thy Ruins only (O thou my inexpressibly dilacerated
country) because in these leaves are written the blotted Stories of thy
downfall.

Why art thou (above all thy fellows) marked out and drawn to the slaughter?
Is it because thy iniquities exceed the rest, as thy punishments do? Or is it
because God is but angry as a father, (chastising any one yt is next his hand)
not in a particular quarrel to yt one, but to make these stripes given to him,
startle all the rest, and so to keep them in fear of correction. Or shall I
let fly none of these arrows but shooting at Rouers in another bow, shall I
with the Naturalist and searcher of secrets, conclude that these Earth frauers
have their shakings from the ordinary distemperature of Winds, stealing into
the bowels of the earth, and there (with rombling, tossing and straggling to
acquire vent and passage) they open yt Cauernes of the massy foundation, and
so tumble down all weighty matter yt compresseth their violence? Shall these
Crutches serve for my belief to lean upon? No, let the Lame and halting
Heathen (that never trod in y^ right path of his Creation) hold up his
knowledge by that weak staff. Let him suppose that the wheels of this great
Universe are set a going by the subtle workmanship of Nature, and that their
motions shall grow flow, and weaken according as she her self waxes old and
decaying.

But if I (that am a Christian) can read that there is a God (who controlles
Nature,) a God that made the Sun to shine by day, a Moon by night, with
Stars in the firmament not so much to beautify that Roof, as to serve the
use of man. And that those officers of light, (those celestial torchbearers)
are appointed to keep a decent, settled and unchangeable orderly course, if I
can also read that the same Omni-sufficiently-skilfull Enginer, is at all times
furnished with Thunder, Lightning and Tempest, (the Artillery of his
vengeance:) The natural Philosopher shall pardon me, if I think (and so wish
all Christians to be of this opinion) that as in our Earthly or Lunarie
bodies, accidental violent diseases are forerunners of languishing Sickness,
or Imminent Death, So when those heavenly bodies are out of tune, distempered,
and distracted, they are predictions of some fatal, fearful, and portentious
calamities, assuredly threatening some particular Nation, not shot from an
ordinary, but a supernatural hand. And I do farther think that if the
omnipotent Thunderer could lock up sufficient store of Waters to drown all
the world, as by his word (given since) he has sworn to destroy it with fire,
sure it is that his opening of the same Sluices now (which ouer-flow and swallow
up our corn fields in their merciless inundations) are but to show us the
old whip which he then held in his hands, when first he gave correction, as
these tearings of the Element, with fires darted from his lightning upon one
especial city, are mere Items to put us in mind of that dreadful last
blow, which shall pash the world in pieces in her universal consummation.

No no, It is an extraordinary Finger, that points out where such Tempests
shall fall. The Lord of Hosts has some great Battle to be fought, and he
does now but levy his forces: The Judge of all Kingdoms is to arraigne the
sins of some one people, and these are now but the summons sent from his
court to warn their appearance. You never shall see these gentle Lashes upon
the outward flesh of a few, but be assured they are Flagella Dei, his Rods
which he ties up in bundels against some more terrible execution.

I should here weep mine eyes into Ink, to set down the deplorable condition
of my country, if I saw her only tied to the Stake of these afflictions? But
is Germany in a flame, and do other Nations stand a loofe off, warming their
hands by her fires? Not so, Denmark our next neighbor, with France, England,
Scotland, Ireland, and many other Maritime Kingdoms, have eaten of this sour
Grape as well as Germany: they (as we) sit still on the weather beaten shores,
increasing the wrathful Seas with Waters showring from their eyes, for their
fresh bleeding and never to be forgotten Irrecuperable losses.

Awaken therefore (O you seventeen daughters of Belgial) you that are rich in
Possessions, glorious in beauty, princely in ornaments, leave listening to the
charms of your light and wanton instruments, and let the cries of us your poor
Neighbors force you to lift up your eyes to heaven. Think not, though you
stand higher than us, that you stand snrer, for the same Arm that has shook
our strong Battlements, can as suddenly crumble yours into dust, your
amendment may sue out our general Pardon. Look upon your feet then and
blush (for all your gay Feathers) at your deformity. Your ancient and noblest
virtues have you turned into Sordid and most ugly abominations, Peace has
made you proud, pride has made you ambitious, ambition warlike, and War
bloody and insolent. Your industry so admired throughout the World, and so
commendable at home, is now like a Spiders Loome, curiously wrought but to no
good purpose.

Sloth sits in your gates, and wantonness lies dallying in your chambers:
temperance in diet is grown to surfeting, and those surfets breed oaths and
quarrels. All your good deeds may be engraven within a ring of gold, but your
bad-ones stretch beyond all dimension. These are the trees of your glories: but
note I pray how the fruits have been blasted. The Spaniard has marched with
swords of fire, upon the hearts of your proudest cities, your marriage-beds have
suffered deturpation, and felt the hot lust of strangers, your fairest Froes
have been ravished of their honors by the mercenary soldier: yea the Dutch
themselves have (like Vipers) eaten out the belly that brought them forth,
Inhabitants of cities have made their own cities desolate, and beaten down
those walls that should have defended their families: Fathers have murdered
sons, sons fathers, and kindred made triumphs at the deflowring of their
Neeces. Your goodly streets (O you Belgians) have been turned into
Churchyards, and your sumptuous State-Houses into shambles and graves, yet
these Drums cannot wake you.

O would to God therefore (you my countrymen the Dutch Nation,* as you are now
held valiant and warlike both by seas and land that you had in you less
courage, for it is only boldness that makes man wicked. Or would to God that
as you have drawn your swords against the bosom of your country, you had
likewise unsheathed them against the sins of your country, the^ happily had not
we drunk of this bitter cup of calamities, then happily (which heaven auert)
God will not physic you with the same strong potion. But because our falls may
make you look to your footing, Behold how your country lies once more
bleeding, struck by the same hand of heaven.

Other fearful Examples, upon some swallowed (in their Cups) within the
bowels of the Earth: with other terrible and ashonishing Accidents.
THE first part of this Germaine-Tragedie is acted, the second (full of Blood
and Horror) shall now be plainly showed. It begins with a Marriage, but ends
in Murder: Banquets, and full Cups of Wine lay the Cloth, but shrikes and
dismal crying take away the Table.

Know therefore, that in a Town of Germany called Sybellen, a rich young man,
(of the age of two and twenty years) called by the name of Antiochus, happened
to be married to a Gentleman's Daughter of the same town. The Nuptial being
(according to the custom of the Country) orderly celebrated in the Church,
home the married couple come, accompanied with kinsfolk, friends, and
acquaintance, who are all invited to the solemnization of so happy a day.

The knot being now tied, which to Lovers is so welcome, Music is called for,
to stir up their blood and youthful Spirits. Daunces having wearyed them,
they all sit down at the Bridall-Table, where Plenty her self could not have
invented one dish more to furnish out the feast.

At the table (after the Dutch fashion) they sit long, and drink hard, and
being cloyed with Glasses of Sugar and Rhenish, whose poison goes down
smoothly, they fall again to their Lauoltaes: and in ths manner do they for
three or four days together, renew good cheer, their carowsing, and their
dancing.

And (as it commonly happens at such meetings) it being famed abroad that two
wealthy persons were married, a number of poor and aged people swarmed about
the gates of the Bride-house: But whether it were the covetousness of the
Parents, the pride of the Bridegroom and Bride, or the neglect of Servants, or
whether it was Gods will to harden all their hearts, only to show some
punishment on such as are uncharitable, to express his detestation of that
sin: or else whether he suffered them to drown themselves in Wine,
Belly-cheere and Pleasures, of purpose to lay his judgment upon sensual and
luxurious Dives, whilst he suffered poor Lazarus to beg crummes at his Gate*
yet to have none: but sure it is, that commandment was given, that no meats
which came from the Wedding-Table, should not only not be given to the
Beggars, but that rather they should be all beaten with cudgels from the gates,
which was done accordingly. And so the Beggars being as uncharitable in their
prayers, as the other were cold in their alms, went away with hungry Bellyes,
but their mouths full of curses, which they sp^tefully spit forth against the
House, the Owners, the Bridegroom, Bride, Servants, and Guests.

But their*breath had no power to hurt them, it was God that was to take the
quarrel in hand, not for any love to such wicked and licentious idle
Caterpillars, against whom he often hardens peoples hearts, to punish their
abominable living, but to revenge himself upon them, who in their fullness
despise those poor members that beg bread in the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ. Yet he strikes them not presently, because they should have time given
them to bethink themselves, and to remember the needy. But the hearts of them
all being frozen up, and pity not enduring in so cold and comfortless a
lodging: Behold, all at their plenteous and Epicurean voluptuous tables, fall
to drinking, swilling, and carowsing deep healths, which swim from lip to
lip in oaths, in cursing and in quarrels: the Wine (ordained by God for man's
nourishment) washing the ground, the earth being made drunken with her own
fruits: and the delicate meats (whose scraps the hungry beggar would have
been glad of) were thrown in sinful meriment, in one another faces, and
then spitefully trodden in mockery under their feet.

At this impiety the fire of Gods indignation being kindled, he made the earth
to cleave, and to swallow those that devoured the blessings of it: her womb
opened like an insatiable Grave, and in the same were they (All) buried alive.

The terror of this struck them half dead with astonishment that escaped the
blow: yet afterward even they accounted them happy that were so taken away,
when they felt the sharpness of those miseries which presently Heaven threw
upon them. For suddenly, the Day lost his light, the Sun hid his head, as
ashamed, or rather detesting to look upon such wretches: and in stead of his
comfortable brightness, a melancholy, pitchie, glutinous, and stinking, misty
darkness covered all the place: fearful to behold, and yet the more
fearful, because nothing could be seen. And this black Image of Hell and
Night stood before them by the space of five days. At whose end (albeit no man
thought that God would ever have said once more, Let there be Light) yet the
Light appeared: but how? Not to cheer up their afflicted Spirits, but as it
did to Adam, to discover both their Sin, their Shame, and a further
Punishment. For the Day was only shown to them to vex them the more with
sight of so dear a loss, and to make them know how powerful he was that
could take it from them.

And again, to manifest that power, he struck the Heavens blind again, and
in stead of light to glad them, rayned down showers of Fire mixed with Blood.
And then to shake the World with belief and fear, that her last and most
dismal day was come, an Earthquake (no less dreadful then the former) both
increased their miseries* and ended them: for God (according to his divine
promise and property) being never angry long, was satisfied with this their
punishment, and restored unto them that which they were in despair never to
have seen, that is to say, light and life.

Only let not this be unremembered, that as the Land felt the strength of his
arm and trembled, so did the waters, for the storm of his wrath powered down
it self upon the neighboring Seas, so that many* Ships were utterly cast
away, the Goods lost, and the People in them drowned: No Pilot in the World
(how skillful soever) being able to overcome a Tempest, when He who once made
all this World an Ocean, commands the Waves to execute his displeasure.

Of which Tragical fury of the Billows this is one memorable and notorious
proof, (to be lamented in more words then I set it down in letters) that
amongst those numbers of dead carkases which the Sea (as unwilling to bear
such unnatural and ignoble Burdens) paid back again upon the Shore, a dead
Woman was one, about whose body were found tied (as it seemed in the heat and
height of the Tempest) seven Children, she her self being great with the
eight.

Thus have you heard a true report of the Almighties Anger and his Mercy, his
Power both by Sea and Land: let us therefore (whose lives and possessions he
might have confiscated in his just indignation, yet has spared them) fall upon
our knees with thanks for his deliverance, and bringing us safe through this
Red*Sea of troubles, in which (if it had pleased him) we might with the rest
have been for ever confounded. For our hearts (made so by our sins) are
hardened, (not only one against another, but against him) as much as theirs
were, or ever Pharaohs was. Open the Closet of every man's conscience, and you
shall find a Book there, all blotted, and written full of impieties, blacker
then the incke: yet so marble-breasted are we, that (like fools going laughing
to the stocks) we are insensible of our own harms.

The Vine (untimely cut) weeps away her strength at the wound, but no misery
that cuts us (early or late) can make us weep for our sins. Sin and we
are as inseparable as treachery is from the Soul of a Turk, or blackenes from
the cheeks of an Ethiope. We feel the smarting pain of a slight blow, it
angers us: nay, the loss of a little blood makes us cry out, and almost stark
mad for the fear of approaching death: but if our souls be buffeted, we laugh
at it: if they be shattered in pieces, rent, and ruined, we stir not at that:
Her ill days we write down in no Calendar, for we think there are not any
can hurt her. Swallows would not come within Thebes, because the walls were so
often* besieged: but wretched man puts on wings to fly to those Cities, which
are most shaken with vices. The more rotten the heart of this Worlds Kingdom
is, by feeding on sweet and bewitching pleasures, the more we dote (like fond
Lovers) upon it.

To set down our sins, is as infinite a task as to paint our thoughts: it
is a chain reaching down as low beneath us, as the glories of heaven are
above us. To set down our sins at full, we had need to study a new
Arithmeticke: to be as long-liude as the Heart when we sit to do it: to turn
the Sea into Incke when we write the Figures: to bind up a Book with as many
Leaves as are rent by Autumn: and to have the Sands of the Ocean for Compters,
yet all these helps are not able to cast up the Sum. For we are still at
difference with God, yet is he loath to fall out with us: we owe him Millions,
yet pay him not a Mite: He loves us as the Apple of his Eye, yet we cast his
love at our feet: he sings sweet Notes of mercy in our Ears, and they make us
presume: he then shakes his Iron Mace of Justice at us, and then we despair.
So that his patience and our wickedness, our provocation and his
tender-hartednesse, are no more tunable together then Lute-strings of a Wolf
and a Lamb, which never agree in Music.

If then the number of our bad deeds swells to a heap so great, how can we at
Gods hands but look for as great, and as many punishments? If a debtor owe us
money, we look to have all, we spare not him, we vex him, we pluck out his
throat for our own: Why should not God (then) handle us so? Yet he reckons
seldom, and forgiues much: when he sees us wasting the Talents he trusts us
with, and too too lauishly consuming them, then, then, we must be sure to pay
for all.

Every man has by himself an account to make up: every Nation runs in
Arerages, yea, the World it self is behind hand with his Lord and Maker. The
Audit day is set down in his everlasting Reportary, (known to man that it
must come, but known to the King of Heaven only when it shall come:) for when
either we (by our selves) personally, or any Nation particularly, or the world
in generally is to be summoned to make his rest even, lies hid in a Book which
none can unclasp. All of us therefore had need to be in readiness because the
hour is uncertain when he will call.

How unspeakable then is the Mercy of our Savior? how indemensiue is his
bounty? that our offenses being as innumerable as the torments of hell, and our
least deserving them all, yet he whips us but with silken rods, and gives us
fillops when he might dash us in pieces? We are all his flock, and all have
gone astray, yet he strikes but one to warn the rest. For the Devil (like the
Teumesian Fox) over takes and tears all that he hunts, but he that saved the
Prophet in the belly of the great Leuiathan of the sea, can and does deliver us
when we are held fast between his paws.

O my dear Country of Germany, this is not the first warning that thou have
had from Heaven to amend thy wickedness. Many a Trumpet have the Angels from
above sounded in thine Ear to awake thee: but seeing thou will not listen to
the song of the Lark, thou art enforced to hearken to the hoarsnesse of the
Screech-owle. Thou have longed for the fleshpots of Egypt, when thou feddest
upon Quails and Manna: and that is the cause that thou art worthily afflicted,
and compelled in stead of rich Wines, to drink thine own tears: and for thy
full banquets, to eat the bread of thine own, and thy childrens sorrow. Least
therefore that this thy present calamity be but unto thee as a fearful
dream, and least thou should write this fresh and bleeding misery in water,
when it is most fit to be engraven in leaves of Adamant, or rather printed in
the palms of thy hands to be ever in thine eyes, I entreat thee to look
back upon the woes which thou have borne in ages past: Remember some sorrows
of thy younger days: though the wounds be closed up, yet behold the scars, and
in beholding them, weep that thou should so incense Heaven to strike, and
yet rejoice that the punishment is so gentle. Amongst many therefore of the
rods, with which thou have been beaten, I will only show thee three, and
these are they.

In the year 1346. (upon the Regal of S. Catharine) the City of Basil,
being one of the noblest buildings in Germany, and for the bravery of it called
Regnopoli (the Kingly City) was (as Munster is at this present) shaken with an
Earthquake: which was so violent, that by force thereof a great part of the
Cathedral Church (or Summum Templum) fell down: and a magnificent Palace
adjoining to that Temple drowned her loftiest Pynnacles in the River Rhyne,
upon which that renowned City stands.

And again in the year 1356. on the day of S. Luke, another Earthquake did
not only shake and search the foundations of all Germany, but (for many times
one after another) tossed the foresaid City of Basil, casting down her
Towers, Churches, Palaces, and Walls, and murdring in their ruins, above one
hundred persons, and with the fall of stones and timber, striking infinite
numbers lame. Yet the rage of it was not satisfied thus: for by the shaking in
pieces of houses that had fires in them, a lamentable destruction fell upon the
whole City: insomuch (the flames being exceeding great, and not able any ways
to be quenched) men, women, and children stood afar off, wringing their
hands, to see their riches, their dowries, and patrimonies swallowed up in
flames, which burned day and night, and in their greedy and merciless fury
consumed (besides the City of Basil) these places also: viz. Schouuenberg,
Vuartenberg, Reichenstein, Angenstein, Berenfelss, Pleffingen, Scholberg,
Froburg, and many others, as by a Letter sent to Sebastian Munster, (by Bonif:
Amerbachius) is to be seen in his description of Germany.

The same Author sets down likewise, the sad remembrance of a misery which
fell in August 1545. upon Mechlyn in Brabant, where God thundered first so
terribly on the buildings and the sins of the people, that Mechlyn shook and
trembled to her very foundations. That dreadful voice of Thunder being quiet,
a darkness followed, with a most horrible stench of Brimstone, more terrifying
the Inhabitants then the Thunder did. And that misery being likewise removed
from them, as bad or worse succeeded: for the Clouds opening their revenging
bosoms, threw down such fearful Lightning, that men expected when the whole
frame of Heaven would have melted. And (to increase that terror) the flashes
brake into a Tower that was stored with eight hundred Barrels of Gunpowder,
which taking fire, blew up a great part of the Tower in a moment: Stones,
Timber, and men's quarters flying up into the Air, and many whole carkases
found dead the next morning. No Church stood undefaced, no house vnruined, no
man but undone by it.

At the same time three men sitting at Cards were struck dead, whilst the
woman that went into the Cellar to fetch them drink escaped alive: yet
dismayed no doubt, but not so much terrified as he was, who in the heat of
those divine punishments, fled and hid himself in a cave by the space of three
days: from whence being driven out by Famine (for no force else could have
made him adventure to the light) he with faint voice, and trembling joints
asked aloud, If the world stood still or not. Thus Munster.

And thus far having led thee back to look upon thy ancient ruins, I wish
thee the full fruit of all those Prayers, which the Country round about,
(terrified by thy miseries, and pitying them) do daily pour out in their
Churches, commanded thereunto by their Rulers. And with their Prayers do I
mingle mine, that it would please God to deliver not only this our Country
from his heavy punishments laid upon it for the sins of the people in it:
but also that he would call home those angry messengers of his wrath, whose
stormy rage has afflicted England, France, and other neighboring Nations, to
the undoing of thousands, in their goods, and leaving many Widows and
fatherless children, by loss of their husbands lives.

FINIS.

