THOMAS BELLS MOTIVES: CONCERNING ROMISH FAITH AND RELIGION.

Exodus cap. 8. verse. 19. (...)



Printed by John Legate, printer to the University of Cambridge. 1593.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in London.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's MOST
HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
IF Tertullian (right honorable) erred montanizing: if Cyprian rebaptizing: if
Origin corporizing; if Nazianzen angelizing; if Eusebius arrianizing; if
Hieronymus monogamizing; if Ambrose millenizing; if S. Paul gentilizing; if
Augustine retracted many things; if Aquinas, Navarrus, Victoria, and many
others best learned papists, have often changed their opinions; if all this I
say, be true, as true it is indeed: it will not I trust, (for it can not justly
I wot) be imputed as blameworthy: that I upon better advise submit my self
to my undoubted Sovereign, most gracious and bountiful Queen Elizabetb: that
I recognize mine errors, that Ireclaime my former unsoundly conceived
opinions, as best learned writers have done before me. Which alteration he has
mercifully and wonderfully wrought in me, (qui attingit a fine ad finem
fortiter, and disponit omnia Sapient. 8. 1.
suaviter;) Our merciful God, I mean, who has of late revealed in time, that
which in his eternal purpose, he ordained before the world was made. For our
good God, who according to his common course of proceeding, directs things
inferior by superior, and uses humane means in producing visible external
effects: first inclined my heart to peruse more seriously, some learned papists
before studied; and that done, to provide and revolve other most renowned
papists, which before I had neither read nor seen. By means whereof God
illuminating mine understanding, I have by little and little perceived the popes
own doctors, to impugn his Romish religion, and so detested all popish
faction. As who at this hour (God be thanked for it,) behold as in a glass
of crystal, the false, erroneous, and execrable doctrine of the Church of
Rome. And because omne bonum est sui diffusivum, as says Areopagita: neither
Dionys. Ar^^* page de divinis nominibus, c. 4
can I with safe conscience hide that light under abushell, which God of his
great mercy has bestowedon me, no doubt as well for the benefit of others as
of my self: I have thought it worth the labor to set down my chiefest
motives, by which and through which next under God, I was persuade to renounce
the Romish faith and religion: as who per swade my self constantly, that what
soever papist in the whole world, shall with an indifferent judgment peruse
the same, having are solved mind to embrace the truth when it appears: that
self same papist will utterly renounce with me, the false, erroneous, and
execrable doctrine of the Church of Rome. For I will prove the said Romish
doctrine by Gods holy assistance, to be of such quality as is already said;
not only by scriptures, authorities, and reasons, (though such proofs I
purpose to use:) but (which is most forceable against papists,) by the evident
testimonies of best learned papists, and who are of best account: even in the
Church of Rome. And consequently, that great learned men of all ages since
popery began, yea, in the very altitude of popedom and in the Church of Rome:
have approoved, holden, and defended, weighty and important points of doctrine:
contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Which thing so soon as I once
understood, my mind and will was by and by alienated from the Church of Rome.
This rare methodicall discourse (my right honorable good Lords all,) as in
which papistry is effectually confuted and confounded by papistry it self: I
have presumed to dedicate unto your honors, for two especial consider ations.
First, that so I might exhibit some sign of a grateful and dutiful mind,
for your Lordships most honorable countenances and rare great good wills
toward me. Secondly, because this my discourse, will not want many potent and
mighty adversaries; and so stand need of honorable, wise, and grave patrons,
for the honest and lawful approbation of the same. The Almighty grant unto
your Lordships many joyful and happy years, with much increase of zeal in
true religion: to his eternal glory, the faithful service of her Majesty,
and the common good of our native country most noble England, Amen. From
Cambridge the third of November, 1593.

Your Lordships in all dutiful manner, THOMAS BELL.

The Preface general to the Christian Reader.
ALbeit I will not now dispute, whether the Bishops of Rome be that Antichrist,
of whom the Apostle speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
to the Thessalonians, or no? (notwithstanding the affirmative be the judgment
of sundry great learned men;) yet dare I, and do I boldly avouch, that Bishops
of Rome have for many years past, been the precursors and forerunners of that
very Antichrist, whereof mention is already made: which to hold and think,
many weighty and important reasons have moved me. For first, 1
who but Antichrist, or his precursor, will either ascribe, or suffer to be
ascribed unto him: such power of majesty, and titles of Deietic, as are proper
and peculiar to God aloue? And yet is this to be verified of the pope
undoubtedlie, by the popes own doctrine, and his popish doctors. The pope (if
we will believe him) tells us: that God, when he instituted two great lights
in the firmament: to wit, the Sun and the Moon: signified thereby, the
authority of popes and of kings: giving us to understand, that the pope is as
far above a king in authority, as is the Sun above the Moon in
excellency: yea, he adds further; that Kings and Emperors have no power, to
draw the sword against popish bishops and priests: as who forsooth, are not
subject to their jurisdiction. And least I should be thought, to father
untruthes upon the pope: I will (which is my wonted manner throughout my whole
book,) allege his own words, which are these: Ad firmamentum Greg. 9. lib.
1. decret. tit. 33. cap. 6.
coeli, hoc est, universalis ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna luminaria, id est,
duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt, Pontificalis autoritas, and Regalis
potestas: sed illa, quae praeest diebus, id est, spiritualibus, mayor est: quae
vero carnalibus, minor: ut, quanta est inter solemn and lunam, tanta inter
Pontifices and Reges differentia cognoscatur. To the firmament of heaven, that
is, of the universal Church, God made two great lights: to wit, ordained two
great dignities, which are the authority of the Pope, and the power of the
King: but that power, which rules spiritual things, is greater: and that which
rules things carnal, is lesser: that so great difference may be known
between Popes and kings, as is between the sun and the moon. The popish
gloss in the same place, sets down Glossa. ibid.
precisely, how far the King is inferior to the Pope, in these words:
Restat, ut Pontificalis dignitas quadragesies septies sit mayor regali
dignitate. It therefore remains, that the pontificality of the Pope is seven
and forty times greater, then is the regalitie of the king. Pope Gregory
Gregor. ubi supra.
says further, in this express manner: Intelligendum non est, quod Rex vel
Imperator super bonos and malos gladii acceperit potestatem; sed in eos
solummodo, qui utentes gladio eius sunt iurisdictioni commissi. We must not
understand, that the King or Emperor has received power of the sword over
the good and the evil; but only over them, who using the sword are committed
to his jurisdiction. Behold, how the Scripture is tossed and wrested: to take
from kings, that power which God has given them. The popish parasites, the
glossators of the Canons, ascribe more magnificall and plain divine titles
unto the Pope; even such as no way can be denied, to be proper and peculiar to
God alone. These are their express words: Sic (Papa) dicitur habere coeleste
arbitrium, and ideo Glossat. lib. 1. decretat. tit. 7. cap. 3.
etiam naturam rerum immutat, substantialia unius rei applicando alij; and de
nihilo potest aliquid facere. So the pope is said to have celestial
arbitreme^t, and therefore does he alter the nature of things, by application
of the substantial parts of one thing to another; and he can make of nothing
something. Thus verily do they write, and yet no greater blasphemy can be
uttered. Ioannes Gerson, though otherwise a great papist, makes rehearsal of
intolerable dignities, and titles ascribed to the pope; which notwithstanding
the pope himself has acknowledged as pertaining to him, but the said Gerson
them reprooveth and derideth. These be his express words: Consurgit ex adver
so blandiens and Gerson. de potestat. eccles. consider. 12. part. 3.
subdola adulatio; and ad aures Ecclesiasticorum praecipue summi Pontificis
insusurrans; o quanta quanta est sublimitas ecclesiasticae potestatis tuae?
quonians sicut Christo collata est omnis potest as in coelo and in terra, sic
eam Christus omnim Petro suisque successoribus dereliquit. Vnde nec
Constantinus quicquam Sylvestro papae contulit, quod non esset prius suum;
sedreddidit unjust detentum. Porro, sicut non est potest as nisia Deo, sicnec
aliqua temporalis velecclesiastica, imperialis, velregalis, nisia Papa: in
cuius foemore scripsit Christus, Rex regum, Dominus dominantium; de cuius
potestate disputare, instar sacrilegij est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest,
cur ita facis? mentior si non inveniantur haec scripta, ab illis etiam qui
sapientes sunt in oculis suis. There starteth up on the contrary side
faire-spoken and crafty adulation: whispering in the ears of Clergy men,
especially of the pope; Oh how great, how great is the Majesty of thine
Ecclesiastical power? for as all power was given to Christ, in heaven and on
earth; So Christ left all the same power, to Peter and his Successors.
Wherefore the Emperor Constantine gave nothing to Pope Sylvester, which was
not his own before; but only restored that, which was uniustly detained from
him. Further, as there is no power but of God, so is there neither any
temporal or Ecclesiastical, Imperial or Regal, but of the Pope; in whose
thigh Christ has written, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; of whose
power to dispute, is as mere sacrilege; to whom no man may say, Why do
thou so? I am a liar, if these things be not written: even of them, who are
wise in their own conceits. These are Doctor Gersons words: who though he
were a great Papist, yet could he not digest these Antichristian blasphemies,
neither hide or conceal them within his breast. Nevertheless Pope Bonifacius
did not only acknovvledge them, but with great pleasure practiced the same,
as witnesses the said Gerson in these words: Hanc existimationem habuisse,
visus est Bonifacius Gerson ubi supra.
octavus in quadam decretali: putatur ab alijs, depositio unius Regis Franciae
per Papam Zachariam hic esse fundata; tanquam Papa sit, qui trasferre possit
Reges and regna. Pope Bonifacius the eight of that name, seems in a certain
decretall, to have had this opinion of his own authority. Others think, that
the deposition of (Childericus) the French King by Pope Zacharias, was
grounded in this (Antichristian and godless conceit:) as if for soothe the
Pope were he, that could depose Princes, and translate their kingdoms. And
our Jesuit Bellarminus, is so far from blushing at this most detestable fact
of Pope Zachary: that he yields the reason si dijs placet, for the
justification thereof. Childericum (inquit) deposuit Papa, and in eius
Bellarminus de Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8
locum Pipinum Caroli magni patrem Regem creari iussit: cuius causa fuit, quia
propter socordiam Childerici, and Religioni, and Regno in Gallia, extrema ruina
imminere videbatur. The Pope (says our Jesuit) deposed Childericus, and
commanded to place Pipinus father to Charles the great, in his throne. The
cause whereof was this; because forsooth through the negligent government of
Childericus, the Kingdom and Religion of France seemed to be in great
danger. Thus says the Popes vassal; out of whose words I gather first,
that so much may be truly verified of Popes, as Gerson has avovvched. 1


I gather secondly, that the Pope chalengeth both swords, and himself to be
not only universal Bishop, but universal King 2
also over all the world.

I gather thirdly, that the Jesuits (howsoever they dissemble by their fondly
imagined aequivocation,) think of our most gracious 3
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and mean to do with her most excellent
Majesty, as the Pope thought and did with Childericus; and for that end
saltem secundario, are so many Jesuits sent seditiously into Secundo
principaliter.
this land.

Secondly, my L. Abbot their own dear Bernard, savve in his time such
tyranny and Antichristian dealing in the Church of Rome, as he was thereby
and therevvith enforced to exclame in these words: Tempus faciendinunc, quia
dissipaverunt legem. bestia illa de Apocalypsi, Bernar. ad Gaufridum, epist.
125.
cui datum est os loquens blasphemias, and bellum gerere cum Sanctis, Petri
Cathedram occupat, tanquam Leo paratus ad praedam. It is now high time to do
good, for they have trodden under foot Gods Law. That beast mentioned in the
Revelation, to whom was given a mouth speaking blasphemies, and to make
vvarres with the Saints: sits in the chair of Peter, as a Lion ready to
take his pray.

Thirdly, the Pope does not only take upon him, to depose kings and Emperors
him self; but he avovvcheth further, that Subjects 3
may and are bounden to depose their dread Sovereigns, whensoever they
decline to infidelity: which certes is by popish interpretation, when any King
or Queen embraces syncerely the holy Gospel of Christ, and denies Romish
popery. For thus vvriteth Bellarminus, whose doctrine the Pope has lately
approoved; At si isti ijdem principes conantur avertere populum a fide, omnium
consensu possunt Robertus Bellarminus lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. cap. 7.
and debent privari suo dominio. But if these Princes go about, to avert the
people from the faith (of the Church of Rome:) then by the consent of all, they
may and must be dispossessed, of their Scepters and Regalities.

Again, in the second Chapter he says thus: Quod si Christiani olim Bellarm.
cod. cap.
non deposuerunt Neronem, and Diocletianum, and Iulianum apostatam, ac Valentem
Arianum, and similes; id fuit, quia deerant vires temporales Christianis. If
the Christians in times past, deposed not Nero, Diocletian, Julian, Valens, and
such like Emperors; the cause thereof was, for that they wanted power and
force, and were not strong enough for that attempt. Again, a little after he
has these words: At non tenentur Christiani, immo nec debent cum evidenti
periculo religionis, toler are Regem Bellarm. cap. codem.
infidelom. But Christians are not bound to tolerate a King, that is an
Infidel, (or not a Papist;) nay, they must not tolerate such a one, with the
evident danger of Religion. And our said Jesuit yields this reason hereof;
because forsooth says he, De iure humanoest, quod hunc aut illum habeamus
Regem. For it is by the Law of man, that we Bellarm. ubi supra.
have this or that man to our King. This is the doctrine of our Popes, and
lately hatched Jesuits: out of which most disloyal and unchristian assertion;

I infer first, that the Pope and Jesuits would most willingly, deprive
our most gracious Sovereign of her Royal throne and Regalitie; 1
if they were of force and power so to do.

I infer secondly, that our Jesuit does here approve peremptorily. 2


First, the diabolical excommunication of Pope Pius.

Secondly, the disloyal fact of Murton, who brought the same into this Realm.

Thirdly, the publishing thereof by Felton.

Fourthly, the practicing of the curse by Sanders, Fitz-morice, Ballard, and
others their seditious accomplices.

Fifthly, the renewing of the print, and dispersing of the copies in Rome, by
our Jesuits, Persons, and Campion; as a compendious preparative, for their
commodious entrance into this land.

I infer thirdly, that all subjects are by this doctrine, stirred up and
encouraged to manifest rebellion; and to have no scruple of conscience 3
therein. The reason hereof is evident, because if kings receive their
authority from man, as this Jesuit avouches: then may kings indeed be
displaced by man, as Romish parasites, and irreligious politikes bear the
world in hand. yet Solomon the wise replenished with holy inspiration,
teaches us another doctrine: Per me inquit, reges regnant, Prou. c. 8. 15.
and legum conditores iusta decernunt. per me principes imperant, and potentes
decernunt iustitiam. By me (says God in Salo^mon) kings reign, and princes
decree justice. By me princes rule, and all nobles, and judges of the earth.
And the Apostle says: Omnts anima potestatibus Romans c. 13. v. 1.
sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisia Deo. Let every soul
be subject to higher powers: for there is no power but of God. But hereof more
at large, in the sixth chapter and third conclusion of the second book.
Fourthlie, Sylvester Pryeras that great popish Thomist, tells 4
us roundly and malepertlie: that empires and regalities are not from God
immediately, but from God by means of the pope. And he says further, that
royal power is so subordinate to popery, or papacy: as is the Moon unto the
Sun. These are his own words: Nec obstat, quod potestas imperialis est a
deo concessa secundum multa Sylvest. de papa. para. 2.
iura: quia est a Deo, mediante papa: quia eam concedit non vt homo, sed vt
vicarius Det. Nec sunt sic distinctae potestates, spiritualis scilicet and
temporalis: quin vna alteri subalternetur, ad instar lunae and solis: nec sunt
distinctae, quasi semper sint in diversis: sed quia sunt ordinatae ad
distincta, scilicet spiritualia and temporalia: and in vno eodemque summo
pontifiee, est vtraque in summo. It skilleth not, that many laws affirm
imperial power to be of God. For it is from God, the Pope being the mean, who
grants it not as man, but as the vicar of God. Neither are the two powers,
(the spiritual and the temporal,) so distinct: but that they remain
subordinate the one to the other, after the resemblance of the sun and moon.
neither are they distinct as being always in diverse subjects, but as ordained
to distinct things, spiritual and temporal. For they both are in one and the
self same pope, even in the highest degree. Fiftlie, such as is the ruler of
the city, (says Bellarminus our Jesuit,) 5
such are the inhabitants thereof: But pope Boniface the eight entered Bellar.
derom. pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
into his popedom as a Fox, reigned in it as a woolfe, and died out of it as
a dog, as I have proved in my 2. book, in the 3. chapter and second
conclusion: ergo all the citizens of Rome in his time began as foxes, continued
as wolves, and ended their days as dogs: and consequently, the whole church
of Rome during the time of Pope Boniface: was wicked, diabolical, and mere
antichristian. what shall I say of kissing the popes foot? of bearing the pope
upon men's shoulders? of the popes dispensing with the law humane, the law of
nature, and the law divine? these may suffice, to teach us to walk warelie, to
look about us withal circumspection, to be very careful what doctrine we
embrace: and ever to set before our eyes, the admonitions and premonitions of
our savior Jesus Christ. Attendite, inquit Dominus, a fermento Pharisaeorum
quodest hypocrisis. Beware says our Lord, of the leven of the Pharisees, that
is, their false doctrine, infected Luc. 12. 2.
and infatuated with the traditions of men: as it is expounded in another
place of the gospel. We must therefore here observe, that in the scribes and
Pharisees rested in those days the ordinary external face, power, regiment,
and jurisdiction of the church. For so says our savior, in another place of
the gospel: In cathedra Mosis Mat. 16. 13.
sedent Scribae and Pharisaei: omnia ergo quaecunque praeceperint vobis
servare, servate and facite. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in the chair of
Moses: therefore, whatsoever they shall command you to keep, that keep Mat.
23. 3.
and do. Wherefore since our Lord commands us, to beware of the
hypocritical doctrine of the Pharisees, who had the primacie in the visible
Church of that age: and since Christ commanded this for no other end, but
because they had corrupted the sacred and pure word of God, with the mixture of
their own foolish traditions: for that Christ objected against them, saying:
Quare and vostransgredimini mandatum Dei, propter traditiouem vestram: why do
you tra^sgresse Gods commandment, for the accomplishment of your own Mat. 15.
3.
tradition? and in another place: (...): But in vain do they worship me,
teaching Mat. 15. 9.
doctrines the commandments of men: since I say, our savior thus commands
us: it follows, that we must refuse, reject, and contemn, all prelates, all
bishops, all priests, and all whosoever have any administration in the
church, by what name or title soever they be called: if they deliver to us the
word of God impurelie, or mixed with traditions of men: and consequently, that
we must reject and renounce, the pope, and all the rabble of popish
cleargie-men: as who do either not deliver the word of God at all, or at least
so mingled, so pestered, so corrupted, so adulterated with man's traditions: as
no part there of remains sound, pure, and entire. It then stands us upon,
to employ our whole care, study, and industry, that we may live secure from
the leaven of these Pharisees: that is, of these popes and popish vassalles:
who in steed of christian doctrine, do hypocriticallie deliver unto us, yea
with threats of fire and faggot enforce upon us, the present poison of our
souls. For if he that sits in Peter's chair be Antichrist, as witnesses
their own Bernard: if the bishops of Rome have written in their thighs, the
king of kings and Lord of Lords, as their Gerson avoucheth: if all power
asvvell civil as ecclesiastical be challenged of popes, as their Silvester
affirms: if popes can place and displace kings and Emperors, and
dispossess them of their regalities, and royal seats, as their Jesuit
Bellarmine boasts: if the bishops of Rome be as far above kings in
authority, as is the Sun above the Moon in excellency, as pope Gregory
teaches: if no king can draw the sword against any of his subjects, being
cleargie-men without the popes good license and favor, as the said Gregory
tells us: if the pope be taken to be greater then any king by seven and
forty fold, as the popish gloss proclaims, nay, if the pope apply the
substantial parts of one subject to another: if the pope take upon him to make
of nothing something, as affirms another gloss: then doubtless does it
necessarily follow, that if the pope be not that Antichrist, whereof S. Paul.
speaks to the Thessalonians: yet is he perforce that Antichrist, where of
Saint John writes in these words: Omnis spiritus qui solvit Iesum, ex Deo non
est: and hic est antichristus, de quo audistis quoniam venit, and iam in mundo
est. Every spirit that dissolveth Jesus, is not of God: and this is
Antichrist, of 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
whom you have heard, that he is already come, and is even now in the world.
For not only they dissolve Jesus, that deny his divinity, or his humanity,
or the hypostaticall union of the same: but they also that derogate in any
point from the office authority, and power of Christ, (who is our eternal
king, our head, our prophet, our priest:) and in like manner, all they that by
any means depresse or obscure the same: as do the papists, in innumerable
particulars: to wit, in their real inherent justice, in their condign merits
of works, in their congruent dispositions, in their massing sacrifice, in
their carnal presence, in their accidents without subjects, in their lordly
papal primacie, in their purgatorie-purifications, in their satisfactorie
supplements, in their disholie supererogations, in their pharisaical
flagellations: and in many other like superstitions, fondly reputed holiness.
these things are partly proved already: but more fully and exactly, throughout
the whole discourse following, pervse it therefore gentle reader willingly,
mark it attentively, judge of it friendly, condemn nothing rashly, revolve
the authorities seriously, approove the truth constantly, reject falsehood
zealously; and if thou shall perceive thyselfe, to reap any spiritual
commodity by this my labor: then vouchsafe to commend me in thy hearty
prayers, to the father of all mercy: to whom with the son and the holy
ghost, be all honor, power, glory, and dominion, now and evermore,

Amen.
The preface special, to the simply seduced Papists.
LIke as the soul surmounteth the body, in original dignity; so do the
diseases of the soul exceed the diseases of the body, in all impiety. And
consequently, greater consideration ought to be had in providing remedies for
the soul, then for the body. Nevertheless so it is, that none will or can in
deed provide a remedy for that sore, whereof he has no feeling or intelligence
at all. In regard whereof, especially because papistry is of papists reputed
no disease or sore; I have employed that small talent, which God of his mere
mercy has bestowed on me, to the end that all papists who shall seriously
peruse this my brief discourse; may with all facility perceive such to be
grievous diseases of the soul, as heretofore they deemed to be none. But as
they that are ignorant of their disease, neither do nor can provide a
sovereign remedy for the same: in like manner, neither can they at any time
be perfectly cured, who though they know both the disease and the medicine for
the same, yet will they not apply that medecin unto their sore. Even so in the
subject matter: that papist who will not once read this short volume, which
unfoldeth the abomination and manifold deformities of popery: and that by most
lively and evident demonstration, deduced out of the bowels of popery it self:
must perforce still remain in the agony of his said disease. Again, if any
papist shall read it, but with a resolved mind to contradict it, and so either
rashly to contemn it, or without just trial to discredit it: Such a papist
(as many I fear will be found by sinister persuasion of seditious seminaries,)
can not for want of due application, attain the expected effect otherwise
correspondent thereunto. And that thou beloved papist whosoever thou art, may
with more alacrity read this little book; I do assure thee, that my proceeding
in the discovery of popish superstitions, vanities, enormities, falsehoods,
dissentions, errors, heresies, and blasphemies, is such and so sincere; as
upon a salvo conducto (as they term it) granted from any king christian, and
license procured of my gracious dread sovereign; I am and will be most
willing, to repair into any province in Christendom; there to give an account,
and to make trial of the same. Let therefore no popish censurers,
comminations, or excommunications, terrify thee from beholding the dangerous
wounds of thy soul. Let no sinister persuasions, of such as are wedded to
their own imaginations, dissuade thee from the reading of this discourse. Let
no wilful conceit so take place in thine heart, as thou will rashly condemn
it, before thou make due trial thereof. Call to mind for Jesus Christ his sake,
and for the salvation of thine own soul; that thou art not this day more
zealously affected to Popery, then I my self was of late years. Add hereunto
for Gods love, that the perfect and exact knowledge of popery, which I have
attained by Gods grace and painful study; has so lively set before mine eyes
the popish enormities, superstitions, absurdities, errors, impieties, and
blasphemies; as upon the due consideration thereof, I could not but loath,
detest, and abhor all papistry; and stand at open defiance with the same.
Especially, because at length I perfitly understood, that papistry in all ages,
had civil wars against it self. Which thing is made so clear and manifest
by this little book, as more shall not need to be wished. I have charitably and
faithfully penned it, principally and chiefly for thy sake. And I nothing doubt
but through the power of God, it will so sufficiently persuade thee, to use the
ordinary means of thy salvation; that is, humbly to read the holy scriptures,
which has not heretofore been thy custom; diligently to frequent godly
sermons, which are now common in this Realm, God be thanked: and often to
confer with zealous preachers, for thy better instruction and sound
confirmation; as thou will shortly be a greater enemy to popery, then thou wast
before a friend thereunto. For in this small volume thou shall perceive
evidently, that not only popish monks, friars, and Jesuits; but also their
schoolmen, their Summists, their Canonistes, their Thomistes, their Scotists,
their Abbots, their Bishops, their Archbishoppes, their Cardinals, yea, and
their greatest popes themselves, have all in their domestical dissentions and
civil wars, so battered and made equal with the ground, the bulwarks of
their popery; as no foreign enemy shall henceforth need, either to stand in
fear of their fortresses, or to make assaults against the same. So surceasing
to speak of their muttering upon beads; their prayers in strange tongues;
their consecrations of bells, Churches, altars, chalices, patines, corporals,
copes, vestments, albes, girdles, tunicles, chesibles, miters; their exorcismes
or incantations over oils, chrismes, ashes, palms, candles, salt, water,
bread; their sacrificing upon such altars, in such Churches, before such
relikes; to which their sacrifices such sanctimony and merits are ascribed, as
that seminary is deemed best disposed for English long intended invasion; who
has occupied himself most busily, in that their superstitious kind of doting;
their reservations of their bread-gods, often putrified, and now and then of
myse devoured; their idolatricall adoration of relics, especially of their so
termed vultus sanctus: surceasing I say, from speaking of these and like popish
deliraments, and instantly wishing thy christian conversion in Christ Jesus, I
bid thee heartily farewell.

The names of the ancient writers and holy fathers, alleged in the treatise
follovving.
Dionysius Areopagita. Irenaeus. Tertullianus. Origenes: Cyprianus. Justinius.
Lactantius. Athanasius. Hilarious. Eusebius Caesariensis. Basilius. Ambrosius.
Hieronymus. Augustinus. Chrysostomus. Beda. Euthymius. Ruffinus. Platina.
The names of popish vvriters alleged in this volume, who all are of great
estimation amongst the papists, and highly renowned in the church of Rome.

Popes, or Bishops of Rome.
Clemens. Gregorius magnus. Adrianus. Innocentius.
Cardinals, to the popes or Bishops of Rome.
Caietanus. Turrecremata.
These were popish archbishops of great learning.
Antonius. Panormitanus.
Popish Bishops excellently well learned.
Ioannes Roffensis. Ambrosius Catharinus. Melchior Canus.
Popish Abbots.
Rupertus. Bernardus.
Popish Canonistes.
Gratianus. Angelus. Navarrus. Covarruvias.
Popish summistes.
Sylvester. Fumus.
These were popish monks or Popish friars.
Alphonsus. Victoria. Dionys. Carth. Carranza. Joseph. Ang. Bellarminus.
Popish scholemen.
Lombardus. Albertus. Alensis. Richardus. Bonaventura. Aquinas. Durandus. Dom.
Soto. Paludanus. Mayro.
Popish writers, who though they were not equal in dignity, yet not inferior
in learning to the rest.
Lyranus. Gersonus. Almaynus. Cusanus. Abulensis. Viguerius. Snoygoudanus.
Burgensis. Ben. Arias. Matthias Thoring. Joan. de Combis. Bryto.
These were popish Synodes.
Conc. Constantinopolitanum. 6. Conc. Constantinop. 8. Conc. Basiliense. Conc.
Lateranense. 1. Conc. Later. 2. Conc. Tridentinum.
Catholic Councels.
Concilium Nicaenum. Conc. Chalcedonense.
Popish constitutions, or books equal with popish synodes.
Decreta. Decretalia. Liber sextus. Missale Romanum.
Popish commentaries of great account in the Romish Church.
Glossa decretalium. Glossa decretorum. Glossa ordinaria. Glossa interlinialis.
THE FIRST BOOK CONTAINING CERTAIN preambles for the better satisfaction of
the simply seduced Papists; as also that the motyues in the other book
following may be read with greater profit.
The first Preamble.
IN the church of Rome for many years together, were learned and godly
bishops, who lived orderly; preached the word of God sincerely, and fed their
flock carefully: but in success of time, by little and little the Romish
bishops did degenerat from the godly life and holy doctrine of their
ancestors, and became wolves unto their flocks, tirants unto the world. This
is prooved at large by the testimonies of approved popish doctors, in the
second book and third chapter in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. conclusions. The great
popish scholeman and Spanish Friar Victoria, vvriteth in this manner; by little
and little, not all at once, we were brought to this in ordinat course, and to
this so miserable state, that now we are neither able to endure our griefs,
nor such remedies as the church of Rome assigns for the same. but if we had
this day such good bishops or Popes, as Clemens, Linus and Sylvester were,
then might we commit all things safely unto them: but alas to say the best of
them, because I would not willingly reproove them, the Popes now are far
inferiors to the ancient bishops of Rome. Read Victoria his own words, in
the fourth conclusion of the fifth chapter: in which chapter the reader shall
find much other vvorthie matter to the like effect; as that the dissolute
practice of the church of Rome is now so intolerable, that the world is not
able to endure it; that not only the simple sort, but even the best of all are
greatly scandalized therevvith; that none seek for dispensations, whether it
be for marriages, or for irregularities, or for spiritual benefices, but they
roundly obtain their suites; that not so many keep the law, as are
dispensed to break the law: add hereunto the seventh preamble for more
perspicuitie.

The 2. Preamble.
Blind Byardes, that neither had any thing neither knevv any thing, desirous
to speak placentia, and to flatter the Popes for their own preferment, began
to write glosses upon the popish law, and therein to ascribe lordly and
more then royal titles to the Pope: so doubtless says their religious Friar
Victoria. Read his words in the sixth chapter, and third conclusion. So then
through ignorance and poverty, our holy father aspired to his tyranny.

The 3. Preamble.
THe Pope has no power coactive over any king, but is the Emperors subject,
and owes him obedience: Pope Gregory surnamed the great, does confess no
less, read the sixth Chapter.

The 4. Preamble.
POpe John was enforced to recant his false doctrine, before the king and the
learned at Paris. Read the third chapter, and the fifth conclusion. ergo Peter's
faith failed in the Pope.

The 5. Preamble.
THe Pope in S. Cyprians time, was esteemed but as fellovv and companion to
other bishops: for which cause S. Cyprian contemned his opinion, and rejected
his determination, though set down by the consent of a provincial council:
which doubtless S. Cyprian would never have done, if he had acknowledged or
granted any such authority to the Pope, as the Pope this day chalengeth to
himself. Nay S. Cyprian thought himself every way the Popes equal, and the
African counsel to be of as good authority, as the Italian or Romish sinode,
and therefore reprooved the Pope very sharply both of pride and ignorance.
read the third chapter and last conclusion.

The 6. Preamble.
ALl the Apostles had not only the same power and authority, but
jurisdiction also, as wholy, largely, effectually, and in all respects as
Peter had. Read the sixth chapter and first conclusion.

The 7. Preamble.
POpish purgatory was invented by Popes and Popish parasites, neither was it
ever admitted, liked, or believed of the greek church until this day. Read the
7. chapter and 2. conclusion. and here I will allege the very words of our
Roffensis sometime bishop of Rochester, a man so renowned not in England
only, but through out the world amongst papists, as his words may carry
credit sufficient with them. thus he vvriteth, I vvil not alter or change one
word.

Sed and graecis adhunc vsque die^, non est creditu^ purgatoriu^ esse. legate
qui velit Graecorum veterum commentarios, and nullum quantum opinor, Roffensis
cont. assertion: Luther. art. 18. prope initium.
aut quam rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inveniet. sedneque latini simul
omnes ac sensim, huius rei veritatem conceperunt. and paulo post; no^ absque
maxima sancti spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod post tot annorum
curricula purgatorij fides, and indulgentiarum vsus ab Orthodoxis generatim sit
receptus, quumdiis nulla fuer at de purgatorio cura, nemo quaesivit
indulgentias. nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum existimatio. si tollas
purgatorium, quorsum indulgentijs opus erit? his enim si nullum fuerit
purgatorium, nihil indigebimus. contemplantes igitur aliquandiu purgatorium
incognitum fuisse. deinde quibusdam pedetentim, partim ex revelationibus,
partim ex scripturis fuisse creditum, atque ita tandem generatim eius fidem ab
orthodoxa ecclesia fuisse receptissimam, facillime rationem aliquam
indulgentiarum intelligimus. quum itaque purgatorium tam sero cognitum ac
receptum ecclesiae fuerit vniversae, quis iam de indulgentijs mirari potest,
quod in principio nascentis ecclesiae nullus fuerat earum vsus? caeperunt
igitur indulgentiae, postquam ad purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum er
at.

The Greeks to this day, do not believe that there is a purgatory. read who
vvil the commentaries of the ancient Grecians, and he shall find either very
seldom mention of purgatory, or none at all. for neither did the Latin
Church conceive the verity of this matter at one time, but by leisure. neither
was it done without the great dispensation of the holy ghost, that after so
many years Catholics both believed purgatory, and received the use of
pardons generally. so long as there was no care of purgatory, no man sought
for pardons. for of it depends all the estimation, that we have of pardons.
if thou take away purgatory, to what end shall we need pardons? for if
their be no purgatory, we shall need no pardons: considering therefore how
long purgatory was unknown, then that it was believed of some by little and
little, partly by revelations, and partly by the Scriptures, and so at the last
believed generally of the whole church, we do easily understand the cause of
perdons. since therefore purgatory was so lately known and received of the
universal church, who can now admire pardons, that there was no use of them
in the primitive Church. pardons therefore began after the people stood in some
fear of purgatory. these are the words, of this popish bishop. which
words, if they be well marked with all the circumstances, are able without
more ado, to persuade any man to detest the Romish religion, for which
cause I have alleged them at large.

1 First therefore we learn here, that the greek church never believed
purgatory to this day.

2 Secondly, that the Latin church and church of Rome did not believe the said
purgatory, for many hundreds of years after S. Peter's death, whose
successor the pope boasts himself to be.

3 Thirdly, that this purgatory was not believed of all the latin church at
one and the same time, but by little and little. where note by the way, that
popery crept into the church by little and little, and not all at one time.
which is a point that galleth the papists, more then a little I vveene.

4 Fourthly, that purgatory was believed in the latter days, by special
revelation of the holy ghost.

5 Fiftlie, that pardons came not up, till purgatory was found out. for in
purgatory rests the life of pardons, as which there being no purgatory,
are not worth a straw.

6 Sixthly, that purgatory was a long time unknown.

7 Seventhly, that purgatory could not be found in the scriptures, of a long
time.

8 Eightlie, that it was not wholy found out by the scriptures, but partly
by revelations.

9 Ninthly, that pardons were not heard of or known to the primitive church.

10 Tenthly, that then pardons began when men began to fear the pains of
purgatory,

Behold now gentle reader, what a vvorthie fisher was my popish Lord of
Rochester? he has caught with his net at one draughtten goodly fishes, that
is to say, ten worthy observations for Christian aedification. Further then
this, out of the seventh and eight observations, I gather three special
documents by a necessary and irrefragable consecution. First, that the second
book of the Machabees is not Canonical, or penned by the holy ghost. For if
that book were of canonical authority, which the papists purgatory could
not but have been known, so soon as that book was known, which yet
Roffensis denies. The reason is evide^t, because purgatory is very
effectually and plainly contained therein.

Secondly, that the Church of Rome (for of that church speaks the Bishop)
reputeth the works of God imperfect, albeit Moses avoucheth the contrary.
Dei, inquit, perfecta sunt opera. The works Deuteronomy. cap. 2. verse. 4.
of God, says he, are perfect. I prove this, because as the Bishop says, the
scriptures made purgatory known to the church, but vnperfectlie: yet the
truth is, that if God make purgatory known by the scriptures, then
purgatory is made known perfectly by them, or else Gods works, that is,
the holy scriptures, must be imperfect. but I vvil rather believe Moses the
holy prophet of God, then my lord our fisher, though the popes canonized
martyr.

Thirdly, this Bishop for this his doctrine, must either come again to
retract his opinion, or else will he nil he, condemn the pope and church of
Rome. This I will prove, by a most plain and evident demonstration. For the
better understanding vvherof, I shall desire the gentle reader to observe three
things with me.

First, that the church of Rome preaches now and did in this Bishops time,
that the books of Machabees are canonical scripture, and penned by the holy
ghost.

Secondly, that the church of Rome neither believed nor knevv purgatory, for
many years together after the receite of holy scripture, and these books of
Machabees.

Thirdly, that purgatory is effectually and plainly contained in the second
book of Machabees by popish estimation, in that their Latin vulgata edition,
which their tridentine council has most straightly charged all chistendome to
observe, as all papists now a days repute the same a stable bulwark for
their purgatory. the words are these: sancta ergo and salubris est cogitatio
pro defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis solvantur, it is therefore a good and
godly consideration 2. Machab. cap. 12. verse. 26.
to pray for the dead, that they may be cleansed from their sins. these
words are so plain and so easy, as not only the whole church, but my lord
Bishop, yea and every scholar that but meanly knows the latin tongue, must
needs understand the same. And consequently must needs know purgatory by
them, if he can use any discourse at all, as my lord of Rochester could do
right well. upon these observations then I infer first, that the church of
Rome not knowing purgatory for many years, after she had received the
scriptures, in which purgatory was so plainly and effectually contained as
they now grant, did not repute the books of Machabees for canonical
scriptures, and consequently did not believe purgatory mentioned therein. For
this indeed is most true, of the old and good church of Rome, as Roffensis has
proved against his will.

I infer secondly, that the church of God never had or can have other
scriptures or other faith, then the apostles had, and believed in their time.
For the latter church never had nor ever shall have authority, to coin any
new scriptures or new faith. The church of Rome therefore taught most wicked
doctrine in my L. Bishops time, which he well perceived and acknowledged in
his own conscience, or else was in that point infatuated and become a very
fool, according to this saying of the Gospel,

Confiteor tibi pater domine coeli and terrae, quia abscondisti haec a
sapientibus Matt. cap. 11. verse. 25.
and prudentibus, and revelasti ea parvulis.

I give thee thanks, O Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and men of understanding, and revealed them unto
babes.

The 8. Preamble.
ALbeit the papists do reprove others bitterly, when they reject some
authotities, though upon important and grounded reasons, yet themselves with
all liberty reject and contemn authorities at their pleasures. They reject
the fourth book of Esaias, as Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo dei. cap. 4.
Bellarminus confesses. They reject the last clause of the Lords prayer, as
Arius Montanus witnesses. They reject the 65. canon of the Apostles, as
grants Bellarminus in these words: Respondeo canonem Aries Montanus in cap.
6. Matt. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 27.
istum supposititium videri, solum. n. quinquaginta canones apostolorum
ecclesia recipit. I answer that this canon is a counterfaite, for the church
(of Rome) receives only 50. canons of the apostles. Mark gentle reader,
that this canon reproves the practice of the Church of Rome, and so the
church, si dijs placet, will not receive it. They reject the sixth general
council, because forsooth it prescribes limits to the bishop of Rome, and
denies his usurped jurisdiction. That they reject this solemn and universal
council, Bellarminus avouches stoutly: but pope Adrian reputed a most grave
writer by the learned papists, received and reverenced the said council.
Bellar. vbi sup.
for these are his words, cited in their own canon law: Sextam synodum
sancta^ cum om nibus canonibus suis recipio. I receive the sixth holy Did. 16.
cap. 6.
synod, with all the canons thereof. Lo, the Pope himself and their own
canon law, confirm this council to be of good authority. Read the next
chapter in the said canon lavy, for there is large matter uttered for the
approbation, of the same. They reject that part of the council of Constance,
which Pope Martin would not allow. And why would not he allow that part,
as well as he approved the other parts? because for sooth it denies the Popes
authority, to be above the council. but because I will not rip up Bellar.
lib. 2. de conciliis, cap. 19.
popish licentious liberty to the bottom, I will rest with recital of that
only liberty, which Bellarminus uses in defense of popish mass: these are
his words; Porro epistolae duae quae circumferuntur Bellar. lib. 2. de Missa.
cap. 16.
de hac re, Damasi ad Hieronymum and Hieronymi ad Damasum, supposititiae sunt.
Furthermore the two epistles which are carried about, of Damasus to Hierome,
and of Hierome to Damasus, are counterfaite. But the absurdest Epistles,
Canons, and writings that ever were or can be, are very authentical with
them, and most current, so they make for our holy father the pope his usurped
jurisdiction. For proof of this point, I vvil content my self with two
examples for brevitie sake. For by them and the disproofe thereof, the reader
may have a sufficient conjecture of the rest. The former example, Epist. 1.
Clementis ad Jacobum fratrem dom. 1. council.
is taken out of S. Clements epistle to S. James. in this and the other
epistles follovving put forth in the name of S. Clement, is commended unto us,
auricular confession, the sacrifice of the mass, the subjection of kings to
bishops, the primacie of S. Peter and such like, for which respects the said
epistles are current and authentical amongst the papists. but magna est
veritas and praevalet, great is 3. Esd. cap. 4. verse. 42.
the truth and it prevails, for the very words of the epistle betray and
bewray the same, and make it manifest unto all the world, that it is a
counterfeit. These therefore are the words: Clemens Iacobo domino, episcopo
episcoporum regenti Hebraeorum sanctam ecclesiam Hirosolymis, sed and omnes
ecclesias quae vbique Dei provide^tia fundatae sunt, cum patribus and
diaconibus, and caeteris omnibus patribus, pax tibi sit semper. Clement to lord
James the bishop of bishops, that governs the holy church of the Hebrews at
Jerusalem, as also that governs all churches founded by Gods providence
throughout the world, with the fathers and deacons, and all other fathers,
peace be to thee alvvaie. Now gentle reader thou have heard the words, and so
beholdest no doubt the vanity thereof: for if S. James were not only bishop
of Jerusalem, but the bishop of bishops, and the governor of all Churches in
the christian world, as this epistle affirms; then doubtless was S. James
the pope and supreme head of the church, and not S. Peter; and yet does the
self same epistle avouch, that S. Peter was the head of the church, and that
S. Peter lying sick in his bed called S. Clement unto him, and told him that
his hour of death was at hand, and that therefore he appointed the said
Clement to be his successor, and to sit in his chair at Rome. But S. James
succeeded Christ himself at Jerusalem, who was indeed the head of holy
Church: and therefore S. James should rather be Pope then S. Clement, if there
were indeed any such pope at all. the latter example is taken out of that
work which is fathered upon S. Augustine, of true and false repentance.
which book, because it seems to approove confession of sins to priests,
is good and authentical with papists; but as God would have it, the self
same book confuteth it self so plainly, as none with reason can esteem it
worth a straw. For in that very book the author thereof (who soever Aug.
dever. and falls. poenit. cap. 17.
he were) alleges S. Austens opinion, and confuteth the same. These are the
words: quod quam vis licet de eius salute Augustinus potuit dubitare, credo
quidemilli qui dixit; quacunque hora peccator ingemuerit, and conversus fuerit,
vita viuet. because although S. Augustine doubted of his salvation, yet do I
believe him that said: at what hour Ezech. 33.
soever a sinner shall repent and be converted, he shall live. These are the
words of this writer, which doubtless cannot be S. Augustines, because S.
Austen would never speak of him self as of a strange third person, and
purposelie confute himself, as this author confuteth Augustine. Besides this,
S. Augustine in his books of confession does utterly condemn confession of
sins unto Priests, as I have prooved in the chapter of auricular confession,
but alas, the Papists as they have but one only place of the Machabees for
their forged pugatorie, so have they but only this place of S. Augustine for
their popish confession. And therefore no marveile if they invent poor and
miserable shifts, to have them both reputed authentical if it would be.

The 9. Preamble.
THe cheifest and principal thing that seduceth and makes so many wilful
papists, is this (gentle reader) for certainty. when so ever any one of what
degree, calling, or condition soever, shall become a papist and yield himself
to the slanedome of popish religion, that person must bye and bye prosesse ipso
facto, to believe and embrace all the popes decrees of faith and manners, as the
very self decrees of the holy ghost, and also to obey his ordinances and
censures, as the laws of God and not of man: their reason whereof is, because
as they say, the holy Ghost does so direct, couduct, and guide the Popes
tongue and pen, that he can neither define, command, or write any thing in
judicial and difinitiue manner, but it must perforce proceed from the holy
ghost: out of which falsely supposed ground, two most pernicious evils follow
of necessity. The one, that whenever any difficulty, doubt, or
controversy arises about any matter of religion, then by and by the Papists
consider first of all what the pope holds (whether it be in the decrees,
decretals, the sixth book, Clementines, extravagants) and that done, they will
coin one distinction or other, by which they will rack the meaning of the
question, difficulty, reason, father, or scripture propounded, to agree with
that which the pope holds. For they will never examine the popes decrees by
the scriptures, fathers or councils: but the fathers, or councels, and
scriptures, See the 13. orticle of dissension, cap. 8. and the words of
Couarruvias in the 5. chap. and 1. conclusion.
by the Popes faith, constitutions, and practice. for if any can once say, the
Church, that is, the pope holds so, then is the controversy at an end, he
shall be demed an heretic that proceeds one jot further. for their canon law
has made it sacrilege, to dispute, of the popes power. Read the first
chapter. the other, that none may or dare read, either the scriptures
translated into their vulgar tongue, or any expositours upon the latin Bible,
or any book of controversies, or any writer whosoever in any matter of
religion, popish writers only excepted, unless they first have a license
from the pope: which license is never granted, but to special persons and upon
special considerations. And out of this sharp, unchristian, and diabolical
prohibition, issues the third evil; to wit, that not one papist among ten
thousand knows any thing perteining to religion, save only a few special
points of popish doctrine. For they are taught, that to believe as the fable
of the Colier teaches them, is sufficient: the devil as cardinal Hosius
reports, disputed with a poor colier, asking him how he believed, I believe,
said the colier, as the church believes: then the devil demanding how the
Church believed, the colier answered in this manner: I believe as the church
believes, and the church believes as I believe, and there he rested, and
would not remove one jot. At the same stay are all papists this day, who
believe as the church of Rome believes, though they cannot tell how it
believes, but only in a general and gross manner, and so they often times
believe they know not what. Marry our English papists for fear of the
statute, dare not stand upon this belief, (though it be their stay indeed,)
but flee to another bulwark as they deem it, to wit, it is against my
conscience, when yet in very deed, they can no more tell what conscience is,
then they know what the romish church believes.

The 10. Preamble.
THe religion this day established by godly laws in this realm of England,
is the ancient, christian, catholic, and apostolic doctrine, which was
taught by Christ and his apostles, practiced in the primitive church, and ever
continued in the hearts of the faithful until this hour, and shall no doubt
to the worlds end. And though the common people for the greater part, call it
the new religion: yet is that a mere childish vanity, and the popish doctrine
the new religion in very deed. For the old Romish religion, is this day holden
and observed in this Realm. which thing is proved at large, These Capuchenes
are yet in Rome.
throughout my second book: for example, the profession of the romish
Capuchenes is not a new profession in religion, but the old franciscan
profession newly reformed: and therefore do they term themselves the
reformed franciscanes, which yet the other corrupt, and dissolute franciscans
will not acknowledge, and even so in our case, the religion now established in
England, is not a religion opposite to the first old Romish religion, but the
old Romish religion newly reformed, and purged from the corruptions and abuses
crept into the same. From which ancient and pure religion the pope and his
adherents are departed, like as the franciscans are also gone from their old
popish franciscan profession.

The 11. Preamble.
THe ignorant papists (that is, all papists or very few excepted) do
greatly loath and abhor the christian catholic religion, now established in
this land by godly laws in a godly manner. And this they do upon a ground
falsely so supposed, by reason of their ignorance therein. their falsely
conceived ground is, that our religion contemns good works, and justifies
the most wicked livers upon earth: which if it were as they imagine, then were
it indeed a great motive to dislike of our religion. But gentle reader, it is
a most notorious slander doubtless, as I shall evidentlie prove unto thee.
Hieronymus Zanchius writes thus: Primi affectus Zanch. de nature. dei lib. 5.
cap. 2. part. 2. q. 6.
regenerationis ac spiritus, sunt amor iustitiae, legisque divinae, and odium
peccati: The first affects or fruits of regeneration and of the spirit, are
love of justice, and of the law divine, and hatred of sin: and a little after
he says thus; Fily Dei and diligunt and faciunt iustitiam, filii autem
diaboli, and amant and faciunt peccatum. The children of God both love and do
justice, but the children of the devil both love and do sin. and again,
Manifestum fit studium bonorum operum effectum esse preaestinationis: It is
manifest, that study to live well, and to do good works, is the effect of
predestination: and an hundred such like places the same author has, which I
let pass for brevitie sake. neither does any other of the learned amongst
us: hold contrary to this doctrine. nay all the pulpets God be thanked, found
out and extol the praise of good works, yea which is more to be admired of
the papists, who think so baselie of our religion, we affirm the good
works of the regenerate to be so acceptable in Gods sight, that he will not
suffer the least thereof to be unrewarded. and further we teach and affirm in
our religion, that the regenerat and children of God ca^ not continue in gods
favor, unless they detest sin, strive against the concupiscence of the flesh,
and do good works. yet further we avouch co^stantlie, that none ca^ believe
truly in Christ, which does not love Christ, and which does not emploie his
whole care, study, and industry, to do the will of Christ, and to keep his
commandments. And that this is the faith and doctrine of the Church of
England very many God be thanked for it, have left to their posterity
livelie testimonies of the same: whereof I will only name one, who as he did
inwardly in his heart believe the gospel, so did he outwardly in his life
profess it, and after his death confirm the same, with a most charitable and
christian testimony of immortal memory. I speak of that honorable and
zealous christian Sir Walter Mildmey, the late fou^der of a most famous
college in the university of Cambridge, which he termed not after his own
name (as the greater part uses,) but Emanuell, that is, God with us: giving us
to understand thereby, that as he believed and loved God, so he would testify
the same to al posterities by that, worthy act, as by the effect and fruit of
a lively faith. Now then how do we differ from the papists herein? Zanchius
shall answer. Atque hic est vnus ex praecipuis vsibus bonorumoperum, quod ijs
non tanquam Zanch vti supra.
salutis causis, sadtanqua^ effectis predestinationis and fidei, tum nos, tum
proximi, certiores fimus nostrae electionis, eoque and salutis. And this is one
of the chiefest uses of good works, that both we and our neighbors are
assured by them of our election and salvation, not as by the causes of
salvation, but as by the effects of predestination and of faith. But the
papists will say: if good works cannot merit glory nor justify: wherefore
then must we do them? I answer, that we must live well and do good works,
for the love and duty we owe to God, and because so is his holy will and good
pleasure. so says the Apostle, in these words, ipsius enim sumus factura,
creati in Christo Jesus in operibus bonis, quae preparavit Deus vt in illis
ambulemus. for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them. so then, we
think as reverently and esteem as worthily of good works, as does any
papist in the world. for we grant that none can be saved or sanctified without
good works: and further, that none is truly justified which has not good
works: and yet for all that do we constantly affirm, and that by the
authority of holy writ, that no man is or can be justified, by virtue of
his good works: and the error of the Papists consists in this, that they do
not distinguish between sanctification and justification. the truth of our
doctrine (which is the verity grounded in the sacred scriptures,) is this, that
sanctification and iustificatio, are inseparably united in one and the same
subject, in eode^ instanti teporis no^naturae, as the schools speak, that is:
we are freely justified and sanctified also in the same instant of time, but
first justified in prioritie of nature: for example, fire and the heat are
both at one and the same time, though fire be before in prioritie of nature:
that is, though fire go before: as the cause of every thing is before the
effect of the same, and as fire is not before heat in time, and yet the cause
of that heat, so is our justification not before our sanctification, or our
inherent justice in time, and yet is it the cause of our sanctification, of our
inherent justice, and of all the good works we do: which thing if the
papists would once seriously observe, they would not differ from our opinion
in this behalf, unless they have fully resolved, to oppose themselves
desperately against the truth.

The 12. Preamble.
Who so ever will but even superficially consider the uncertainty of popish
doctrine, shall thereby without further discourse find svfficient matter to
abhor and detest the same, as most frivolous, most ridiculous, most
irreligious. For example, in the sacrament of the altar as they term it: if
certain questions be propounded unto them, the best learned know not what to
answer, but so simply and so sottishly, as every child may epsy the folly
of their doctrine. If any papist can truly and without blushing say the
contrary, let the same be notifyed by his answer, to these my brief
demaundes. 1. First, I demand how they excuse the people that adore with
divine worship, the thing elevated over the priests head at Mass, from
idolatry, from heresy, from false belief. For if either the Priest want
intention to consecrate (which often chances by reason of wandering
imaginations,) or of purpose means not to consecrate, or of negligence
omitteth any word of consecration, then by popish religion the thing adored,
is but pure bread, and so the adorers thereof become idolaters, worshipping a
piece of bread for Cap. dubium de haeret. Nauarr. cap. 11. parag. 18. Barthol.
fumus de haeres. parag, 17.
the everliving God. And if the people either refuse to adore, or doubt if they
may adore, they are deemed heretics ipso facto for their pains, because as
the Popes disholie canons tell us, he that but doubts of Romish definitions,
concerning faith and manners, is an heretic.

2 Secondly, I demand what it is that the priest receives and delivers to
the communicants, when he having 40. breads before him, supposes them to be
but 38. or 39. and so intends to consecrate no more? for beyond the priests
intention, consecration cannot extend, as all wise Papists grant, neither is
his intention more limited to one bread then to an other, and therefore can no
more consecrate one bread then another.

3 Thirdly, I demand which part of the host as they term it, is the popish
made God, when the sacrificer intends indefinitelie to consecrate the one
half of the said host, and how there in adoring they can avoid idolatry.

4 Fourthly, I demand how many gods, or how many times God is made in one and
the same host, in and at that Mass, when all the newly made priests do
consecrate, in their Romish Church Latheran? for they are all appointed to
consecrate, they do all pronounce the words, they are all bounden to have
intention, and yet when the principal author, to wit, the Bishop, is at the
last syllable, some of the rest be in the midst, some in the beginning, some
in one place, some in another, never a one jumping with other in that instant,
in which they should their bread-god make: for of this matter are three solemn
dissonant opinions, amongst the great Romish Rabbis. Pope Innocentius
Josephus Angles, in 4. s. q. 7. de Eucharist. 8. diffic.
holds, that all do consecrate: Durandus avowcheth that that Priest only
consecratetth, which with greatest speed first comes to the end: but
Cardinal Caietan has another consideration.

5 Fifthly, I demand concerning their words of consecration, what is in the
priests hand when he has uttered all the words save one? if they answer the
body of Christ, then does it follow, that the principal word of their
consecration is needless, that their words of consecration be uncerten, and
that their consecratorie words so called, be not causative of their falsely
supposed effect: if they say it is pure bread, or bread in substance but
altered in quality, then does it follow necessarily, that the consecration
consists of the last word only, and that all the rest are mere extrinsecall
to their imagined transubstantiation: if they say it is neither Christ's body,
nor bread, but an unknowen substance, or as they term it sometime, individuum
vagum, we may truly tell them, that their certentie of their idolatrous
sacrament, is as uncerten as the weather-cocke.

6 Sixthly, I demand of them how Christ's natural body being large, is
contained in around cake being little, since Christ's body is a true
organicall body, which has diverse parts every one distant from another: if
they say that Christ's body is there without dimensions, their own
angelical, and famous Doctor Aquinas is against them: if they say, that though
it can not be so by natural power, yet can God miraculously Aquinas. p. 3. q.
76. art. 4.
bring so much to pass: to that I answer, that so to say can not serve their
turn, for by the confession of all learned men, yea, even of all popish
schoolmen and Doctors, there be many things which God can not do, or rather
many things which can no way be done: for example, God can not sin, God can
not make time past not to be past, God can not make that a blind man remaining
blind, do not want his sight, though he can give sight to the blind: God can
not make that a dead man remaining dead, have life, though he can restore life
to the dead: in fine, God can do nothing that implies contradiction: and yet
does not this want of doing argue impotencie in God, who is omnipotent; but
defect in the thing that should be done. Now so it is, that this imagined
being of Christ's body in a little round cake implies in it self
contradiction, and consequently, can not possibly be done. For example, no
power can bring to pass, that a body being six cubits long, and two cubits
broad, remaining still so long and broad, shall be contained in another body,
being only three cubits long, and one cubite broad: and the reason hereof is,
because so to contain, and be contained, implies contradiction. And this is
the case now put, of Christ's body in the round popish cake. Let all the
papists in England or else where solve this reason, and I will be their
bondsman. And if they can not solve it, (which indeed is impossible to be
done,) then must they perforce confess which they would not, that their
doctrine is ridiculous, impossible, and execrable.

Seventhlie, I demand how they can defend Christ's body from being broken
and divided, when they break and devide their round cakes, since by their
doctrine Christ's body is reallie contained in the same?

Eighthly, I demand how they can distinguish division of the bread from
consecration of the same, or how they can deny it to be of equal force with
consecration thereof? for by consecration of one bread, Christ's body is but
in one place: but by division of one bread, his body is locallie in many
places at once.

Here ends the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK: Wherein are confuted the principal grounds of all Romish
religion.
CAP. I. Of the principal grounds of all Romish faith and religion.
TWO things there be which mightily keep all Papists in a certain
external uniformitie of Religion: as all, whosoever deeply ponder the same,
must perforce acknowledge with me. The One is the severe punishment and sharp
tortures, executed upon all persons whatsoever without exception, of what
degree, state, or condition soever, that do but once whisper against the least
jote of Popish religion: for better success and Cap. Quicunque de haeret. lib.
6.
more free passage of the said Romish religion, the laicall people are
prohibited by Popish canon law, under pain of excommunication, not to reason
at all in matters of faith; and the learned not to examine or discuss, how
far the Popes power does extend; whatsoever or howsoever, he appoint them to
believe: which their own Popish friar Franciscus a Victoria did not dissemble,
when out of their own Canon law, he uttered these express words.

Non spectat ad subditos determinare aut examinare, quid possit Victor. relect.
4. de potest. Papae, and concilij, proposit. 16.
Papa, aut quid non possit, and quomodo teneantur parere vel non, quia
sacrilegium est disputare de potentia Principis, and praecipue Papae.

It belongs not to Popish vassals, to determine or examine what the Pope may
do, or what he may not do. For his law has made it sacrilege, to dispute
of the Popes power: yea, this their irreligious manner of proceeding is
executed in such strict sort, as neither any of the laytie nor of the Clergy,
can under Pius 4. in bulla synod. Trident.
pain of Popish excommunication, read either the Old or New Testament,
translated into the vulgar tongue, or any other book of controversy, or
Divinity, set forth by any not professed vassal unto the pope, unless such
person or persons be specially licensed from the pope thereunto. All which is
confirmed by daily practice of the Romish church: in so much, as if any utter
any one word, that may any way sound or be racked to the dislike of popish
doctrine, that man shall bye and bye be castinto their disholie inquisition, and
shortly after be burnt with fire and faggot, unless he both swear and
subscribe to every article, of their erroneous romish religion. And further,
unless he also protest by oath, to disclose whom soever he knovveth then, or
shall know afterward, to hold any opinion against the said romish religion.
Nay, though a man be never so sound a papist, yet if he be but found in
company with his dear friend, who in affection is opposite to the romish
religion, that self sound papist shall be put into the inquisition, and there
abide with hard usage, until he pay the last farthing* this to be so, M.
Massey of Audforth in Cheshire must witness with me, who is this day in
Chester jail for his vvilfull seditious behavior: for he (though at that time
fled into Italy for popish zeal,) was yet thrust into the romish inquisition
with young master Dutton now his sonin law: where how long they remained,
what was their intertainement, to what they did swear, and so forth,
before they were dismissed, atatom habent, let them answer for themselves,
they are yet living: it is needelesse for me to tell their tale. One Aldcorne
likewise a citizen of York, was cast into the laid Romish disholie
inquisition, upon a very light or rather no suspicion, and there used very
hardly a long time, though he were in deed a Papist, and had no language
save only his vulgar English tongue. This man is yet living in York, let
him say if it be not as I do write. I my self was a mean for his dispatch,
and so am notignorant of his case. A thing more strange then the rest: If one
pass by an image, or their house of inquisition (which they term the holy
house) and do not reverence thereunto, it is enough to cast that man into the
said disholy prison. which kind of sharp correction, if it were upon just
causes executed within her Majesty's Dominions, shortly few or no disloyal
subjects, would be found in England. Neither is this my bare opinion, but the
constant resolution of that most grave, wise, learned, and holy father S.
Augustine, who though sometime he had been of the conttarie opinion, was
nevertheless taught by long experience to acknowledge it: these ate his
express words.

Donatistae nimium inquieti sunt, quos per ordinatas a Deo potestates Aug.
epist. 48, ad Vincent, Tom. 2.
cohiberi atque corrigi mihi non videtur inutile: nam de multorum iam
correctione gaudemus, qui tam ver aciter unitatem Catholitam tenent, atque
defendunt, and a pristino-errore se liberatos esse laetantur, vt eos cum magna
gratulatione miremur. qui tamen ne scio qua vi consuetudinis nullo modo mutari
in melius cogitarent, nisihoc terrore perculsi. and paulopost: nam mea primitus
sententia er at, neminem ad vnitatem christiana^ esse cogendum, verbo esse
agendum, di sput atione pugnandum, ratione vincenaum, ne fictos catholicos
haberemus, quos apertos haereticos noveramus. Sedhaec opinio mea non
contradicentium verbis, sed demonstr antium super abatur exemplis nam primo
mihi opponebatur civitas mea, quae cum tot a esset in part Donati, ad vnitatem
catholicam timore legum imperialium conver saest.

The Donatistes are to to unquiet, and therefore I think it convenient, that
they be restreined and corrected by powers ordained of God. for we already
have joy of many, by reason of their correction, who keep and defend
catholic unity so sincerely, and A point worthy to be well considered, as
which greatly respects our case in England.
so reioise, that they are delivered from their old error, as we with great
congratulation do admire them who for all that I know not by what force of
custom, would never once think of reforming them selves, but only through
this fear and terror. My former opinion was, that none should be constrained
to christian unity, that we should strive with the word, contend with
disputation, and overcome with reason: least we should have them counterfeit
catholics, whom we had known to be open heretics. But this my opinion
was over ruled not with words of contradiction, but with examples of
demonstration. For first of al mine own city was objected unto me, which
standing wholy upon Donatistes, was for all that brought to catholic
unity, by sharp imperial laws. Thus far S. Augustine.

The other thing is a point of so great importance, as none can be more. for if
it were true, as the papists with tooth and nail avouch it to be, then
were all other religions false, and theirs only true: for there is but one
God, one faith, one baptism, one religion; yet if it be false, as false it is
indeed, (which by the power of God I shall prove by evident demonstration,
and that even by the testimonies of the best learned popish doctors:) then
must their religion of necessity be naught, how soever others be. this great
and weighty point is, that the Pope can not err in his definitive sentence,
whether he define concerning faith or manners. For (say they) Christ committed
his church to saint Peter, praying that his faith should never fail: and
consequently, he prayed that the Pope as Pope should never err, because the
Pope is Saint Peter's successor, and Christ's vicar general upon earth. I say,
the pope as pope with reduplication in way of my sincere dealing with the
papists, because by the uniform consent of all learned papists Albertus
Pighius only excepted: the Pope in his own private person may be a Judas, a
fornicator, a simonist, an homicide, an usurer, an atheist, an heretic: and
for his manifold iniquities be damned into hell. that this is the doctrine of
all papists, as well concerning the popes private person, as touching his
judicial definitions, is confessed by Robertus Bellarminus, Bartholomeus
Carranza, Melchior Cauus, Dominicus Soto, Thomas Aquinas, Antoninus, Caietanus,
Covarruvias, and others: but that the pope as pope and public person can
err, that all the said papists with their accomplices constantly deny: as
which one only point once cofeffed, would utterly confound them, and make
frustrate their whole religion. For in all difficulties, doubts, and
distresses, the papists have ever recourse unto this point, as unto the divine
oracle of great god Apollo: that is to say, the church of Rome teaches so:
ergo we must believe so. This point, as it God grant that others may perceive
it, as I hauedone.
makes many others to be papists, so made it my self one, and kept me one,
until by Gods holy inspiration, I perceived the absurdity thereof. This
point therefore shall by Gods help, be so effectually proved throughout the
chapters following: as if any papist in England, or elsewhere in Europe, (I
speak a big word for the confidence I have in the justice and verity of the
cause,) can truly and substantially confute the same: I will once again
embrace his religion, which notwithstanding, I abhor and detest as the poison
of my soul. And my proceedings throughout this whole treatise shall be such,
and so sincere: as if I can be convinced by the adversary, either to allege
any writer corruptly, or to quote any place guilefullie, or to charge any
author falsely: I will never require credit at the readers hand, nether in
this work nor in any other, that I shall publishe at any time hereafter:
requesting the adversary, that shall perhaps reply upon me, (which is but
reason:) to use like sincerity, and to covenant in like manner with me. which
if he refuse to grant and observe, he shall condemn himself in every wise
man's judgment, before he begin.

The second Chapter, of the Popes pardons, with the quantity, quality, and
original thereof.
Wonderfully have the popes or bishops of Rome seduced Gods people, many and
sundry ways: but never more groslie infatuated or bewitched them, then by
their ridiculous, mo^struous, and execrable pardons: as which are foolish,
uncertain, absurd, new, and the deadly wounds of all popish doctrine. For
plain and evident demonstration of this assertion, I put down these
conclusions following.

The first Conclusion.
THe popes pardons are too too foolish, as which are repugnant to common sense
and reason. My proof stands thus: all relaxations being larger then any man
living or dead does or can need, are too too foolish, but the popes pardons are
such: ergo the popes pardons are to to foolish. The consequence is good, and
the consequent directly and truly inferred upon the premises, as which is in
prima figura, and modo darij, as the Logicians term it: the proposition is so
evident, as none can or will deny the same: so the difficulty rests only
in the assumption, which I prove three several ways.

First, by the huge and infinite numbers of pardons, hanged up in pardoning
tables at the pillars of every church for the most part in Rome. which not
only my self have seen and read, but many thousand besides me.

Secondly, by pardons containing many thousand years, expressly set down
in old English primars: whereof the papists seem now at length so ashamed,
that the like is not to be found in the new tridentine primars.

Thirdly, by a little pamphlet of the marvelous things of Rome, which is
commonly to be sold every where, one of which I brought from thence my
self, and have at this hour. For in all these three, pardons are granted
prodigally, (I would say charitably,) for many thousands of years. yea, in
the little romish pamphlet to omit other churches, are granted every day to
S: John Evangelists church, 6048. years of pardon. Now, least any be so
sottish as to imagine; that a man can need so many years of pardon: that I
will disprooue sundry ways.

First, because it is against the holy scripture, that any man should live so
long.

(...)

The days of our years in the^ 70. and if they be of strength 80. years.
which words saint Hierome glosseth in this manner:

Vbi sunt mill anni? in feptuaginta annis contracti sumus, si autem multum,
octoginta. Si autem plus vixerimus, i am non est vita sed mors. Hier. in psa. 99


Where are the thousand years (that they lived of old?) we are now brought
to seaventie years, and if we endure long, to eighty. but if we live
longer, then is it not life but death.

2 Secondly, because no man can abide so long in purgatory. And least some
papist reply, and say, that one may be so long in purgatory, I will prove
mine assertion by the best popish doctors. Bellarminus in his defense of the
pope thinks that opinion very probable, Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans pont. cap. 3.
which holds, that the world shall not henceforth endure above 400. years
at the most. And of his opinion are great learned men, Ireneus, Justinius,
Lactantius, and others. yea Saint Augustine and S. Hierome, are not dissonant
from that supposition. the Thalmudistes likewise had a prophesy of Elias, as
they say: that the world should continue 6000. years, to wit, 2000. before
the law, 2000. in the law, and 2000. after the law: that is, from Christ's
incarnation until the second aduent, or doomesday. Dominicus Soto co^menting
upon the master of sentences, holds as a stable and constant ground, that no
soul in purgatory abides the pains thereof above ten years. and doubtless,
if the popes pardons (...) Soto in 4. lib. Petr. Lombardi. did. 19. quaest, 3.
arg. 2
were of force. So to his opinion could not be false. the reason thereof is
evident, because all that will may upon small suit (if not without suit,)
have not only for themselves but for their friends also, so many thousands of
pardons as they shall desire: which liberality in pardoning, pope Gregory
bestovved on our disloyal captain Stukeley, when he employed him to invade
his natural country England. but as the pardons were counterfaite, and
Stukeleys heart disloiall: so was the Popes intention frustrate, and Stukeley
revvarded accordingly: that is, justly slain for his proud attempt, while my
self was at Rome.

The 2. Conclusion.
THe virtue and efficacy of Popes pardons is so uncertain and doubtful, and
that even amongst the greatest popish doctors: as themselves can not tell,
what in the world to say or think thereof. This conclusion I prove thus:
Angelus de Clauasio a famous canonist and religious Friar, recites 6. several
and dissonant opinions Angelus de indulgentia.
concerning the virtue of pardons, and after he has confuted them all, he
sets down the seventh for his own, and the best, which as he says is
true, it is therefore no doubt substantial, as shortly shall be seen. The
first opinion (says our holy Friar,) holds that the Popes pardons only
remit that punishment, which God appoints to be imposed in another world,
for a supply unto those, who have done penance only according to the Canons,
but does in no case remit that penance, which is imposed and taxed by the
Canons. The second opinion holds, that the Pardons only forgive that
penance, which is taxed by the law and penitential Canons; but not that pain,
which Gods justice appoints to be imposed. The third opinion holds, that
Pardons forgive pain due for sin, as well before God as before his Church:
but this opinion adds a clause so sharp, as our holy Father does not brook
it, to wit, that the Pope is bound to do penance, for that person whom he
pardons. The fourth opinion holds, that the pain of hell is partly
remitted by the Popes pardons, as which becomes thereby more tolerable. The
fifth opinion holds, that that penance only is pardoned, which the party
omitted of negligence, not of purpose or contempt. The sixth opinion holds,
that the Popes pardons remit not only penance imposed by the Priest, but that
also which is taxed of God: marry this opinion has one limitation, which
forsooth is this: that the Priest must be content therewith, or else the Pope
can not work his will. The seventh opinion holds, that Popish pardons
forgive, and are worth so much, as the words of the Pardons do sound: that is
to say, if the Pardons contain an hundred thousand years, then the party
obteining such pardons at the Popes hands, must have remission of so many
years. Thus gentle Reader stands the doctrine of Popish pardons, amongst the
greatest Doctors of that faction. He that lists to peruse the place quoted by
me out of Angelus, shall find every thing as I have set it down. The
rehearsal of the variety and uncertaintie of these opinions, is a most
sufficient confutation of the same. Sylvester Prieras a great Sylvester de
indulgent.
Thomist, and sometime Master of the sacred palace, recites three several
opinions, and disliking them all, sets down the fourth for the truth.
Antoninus sometime the Archbishop of Florence, alleges three opinions, and
scarce knows which of them he should prefer. Bellarminus in his written
disputations abridged by Robert Persons his brother Jesuit, defends and
approoveth another opinion plain opposite to all yet rehearsed, and makes in
deed the Popes pardons not worth a button: which is the cause (as I probably
conjecture,) that the third and last part of his disputations, is not permitted
as yet to come abroad: and either will never be published, or wholly omitted,
or at least changed before it come abroad. The Council of Trent speaks very
slenderly and coldly, of the Popes pardons.

The third Conclusion.
TO give pardons as the Pope does, is a strange and new doctrine of a most
damnable Religion, which neither Christ nor his Apostles ever taught or
practiced. This I will prove, as I do other things, by the express
testimonies of the Popes own renowned Doctors: that so all the world may
perceive and behold, Papistrie confuted and confounded, by papistrie it self.
Sylvester reputed, and as it were surnamed absolutus Theologus, has these
very words:

Indulgentia nobis per Scripturam minime innotuit, licet inducatur illud
Apostoli, (si quid donavi vobis,) sednec per dicta antiquorum Sylvester de
indulg.
Doctorum, sed modernorum.

The Popes pardons (says the Popes own dear Doctor,) were never known to us
by the Scriptures, although some allege Saint Paul for that purpose: neither
were they known by the ancient Fathers, but only by late writers. Antoninus
in his first part has the very words already cited, and holds the self
same opinion with friar Sylvester. Petrus Lombardus, who with great diligence
collected into one volume, all worthy sentences of the ancient fathers: and
therefore was surnamed the Master of sentences, makes no mention of the Popes
pardons at all; as which he could not find, notwithstanding his painful
Antoninus part. 1. rit. 10. cap. 3. Lombardus: could not find the Popes pardons
in the holy fathers.
industry employed in that kind of exercise. For as Sylvester truly writes,
the old writers were not acquainted with any such thing. The like may be said
of S, Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Nazianzene, and others of antiquity:
for which cause Durand, Caietain, and sundry other schoolmen, affirm the
popes manner of pardoning, to be a new thing in the Church of God. Neither can
Dominicus Soto deny the same indeed, albeit he busieth him self more then a
little, in the Popes defense if it would be. Yea, the original of popish
pardoning is so very young, as their famous martyr and bishop, M. Fisher in his
answer to M. Luthers articles: was enforced to admit the newness and young
age of the same, and to yield this reason in defense Soto in 4. sent. did. 21.
quaest. 1. art. 3. Roffensis contra artic. Luther.
thereof: to wit, that purgatory was not so well known at that time to the
Church, as it is now. which saying I ween is true indeed, because purgatory
and pardous were not heard of in old time, and now only known by vain,
gross, and sensual imaginations. O worthy pardons? O brave purgatory? O
holy pope of Rome? what strong reasons, what forcible arguments, what grave
authorities, are alleged in your behalf? Let us hear with attention the
final resolution hereof, set down by Sylvester and Antoninus for their holy
father the pope.

Quia inquiunt, Ecclesia hoc facit and servat, credendum est ita esse.
Sylvester and Antoninus ubi supra.


Because the Church this does, and thus observes, we must believe that it is
so. Lo, a short and sweet conclusion: as if they should say, though we can
prove the popes pardons, neither by Scriptures, nor by fathers, nor by
reasons, yet must we believe them, because the Church, that is, the pope says
so, who can not err: which saying, (gentle Reader,) both has been, and is,
the sole and only foundation of all notorious Papistry.

The 4. Conclusion.
THE Popes manner of pardoning, argues as well inordinate affection of filthy
lucre, as also want of charity. His want of charity is prooved, and
convinced, in that he can deliver (as his religion teaches,) all souls out of
purgatory with his word: and nevertheless suffers them to abide most bitter
torments, so many years in that affliction. For the papists hold, that the
pains of purgatory are as great and painful, as be the torments of hell:
and that they differ accidentally in this only, because the pains of
purgatory shall once have an end, but the pains of hell, never. Thus writes
Sylvester Prieras.

Sicut potest (Papa) liberare a poena peccatorum debita in hoc mundo Sylvester
ubi supr. Par. 7.
omnes qui sunt in mundo, si faciant quod mandat, etiamsi essent millies plures
quam sunt: it a liberare potest omnes qui sunt in purgatorio, siquis pro eis
faciat quod iubet.

As the Pope can deliver al in this world, from pain due for sin in this
world, if they do that which he appoints, though they were thousands more
then they be: even so can he deliver all that are in purgatory, if any do
that for them which he commands: and lest any man should think that
impossible, or a very difficult matter, which the Pope requires to be done:
Sylvester in another place tells us, that it is a thing most easy. These be
his words:

Indulgentiae simpliciter tantum valent, quantum praedicantur, Sylvester ubi
supr. Par. 7.
modo exparte dantis sit autoritas, ex part recipientis charitas, and ex part
causae pietas.

Pardons are simply worth so much as they are preached, so there be authority
in the giver, charity in the receiver, and piety in the cause or motive. But so
it is, that the souls in purgatory be in charity by popish confession, for else
they could not be out of hell: and that the pope has authority, as also that
he grants his Pardons for good and godly causes, I suppose no Papist will
deny: if they do, my argument is the stronger, and my self shall easily
agree there to. Bartholomaeus Fumus confirms this point, when he thus
writes. Barthol. Fumus de Papa. Par. 11.


Papa posset liberare omnes animas Purgatorij, etiamsiplures essent, si quis
pro eis faceret quod iuberet, peccaret tamen indiscrete concedendo.

The Pope could set at liberty all the souls of Purgatory though never so
many, if any would do that for them which he appointed: marry he should sin
by his undiscreete pardoning. And the popish schole-doctor Viguerius proceeds
further, and avowcheth it to be neither inconvenient, nor against the justice
of God: these are his express words.

Nec est inconveniens quod Papa Purgatorium posset evacuare, non enim per hoc
aliquid detraheretur Divinae iustitiae. Viguerius de Sacrament. ordinis in fine.


Neither is it inconvenient that the Pope can harrowe hell, for that does
nothing derogate from the justice of God. Now to say that he can this do, but
yet does it not, to keep him self from sin: is altogether vain and
frivolous. For first, he should no more sin in delivering all, then he does
in setting one only at liberty, as is already prooved by Sylvester and
Viguerius. Again, plenarie Pardons are so common at the hour of death, as
none that either have friends or money, are or can be destitute thereof: which
yet is a point more undiscreete then the other, by their own doctrine.
Thirdly, the three conditions required for the legitimation of Popish
Pardoning, concur as sweetly in delivering all together jointly, as in
delivering one by one severallie. His inordinate affection of lucre is
convinced in this, that albeit he can with one only pardon set open the gates
of Purgatory, and so set all the prisoners at liberty: yet will he not extend
that compassion to them, but takes this course with them, that they shall
appoint Pia Legata by their last wills and testaments, for Masses, Diriges,
and Trentals to be said yearly, or rather perpetually, (if their ability will
extend so far:) with which Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, his pardons shall
concur, and so deliver them by discretion. By reason of which ungodly
policy, we may this day behold with our eyes, so many altars erected, so many
Churches sumptuously decked, so many Priests richly maintained, especially in
Saint Gregory's Church at Rome. For which Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, huge
sums of money are given, daily, yearly, perpetually, not for the Masses
formallie concedo, but yet formally for the Priests pains, and materially for
the Masses, constanter assero.

The 5 Conclusion.
THE foundation of the Popes pardons is wicked, blasphemous, and derogatorie to
the most precious blood of Christ, shed for man's redemption. This is the proof
of this conclusion: the Pope and many of his popish Doctors tell us, that the
foundation Sylvester de indulg. Pat 4. Soto in 4. sent. did. and art. 2.
of their popish pardons is this, Thesaurus meritorum Christi, and Sanctorum
eius: the treasure of the merits of Christ, and of his Saints. For say they,
not only Christ, but many of his Saints also, suffered much more then was due
for their own sins: which works of supererogation or satisfactions, they
call the treasure of the Church: and because (say they,) Gods Saints did not
apply those their superaboundant passions to this or that person, the Pope
therefore must make application thereof at his pleasure, as one that has
Christ's full authority, or plenitudinem potestatis, being his Vicar general
upon earth. And here note by the way (gentle Reader,) that for the execution of
this Vicars office, there be ever in Rome two Vicars general, and one
substitute Vicar, whereof two neither preach, teach, or execute any priestly
function usuallie: but the poor substitute, must do all that is done. So in
my time, Gregory the foureteenth was Vicar general to Christ, si dijs placet,
Cardinal Sabello Vicar-generall to Gregory, and our Goldwell, sometime
Bishop of Saint Assaph, substitute to Sabello: which poor Bishop took all
the pain, and had the least gain. For it is not the usual manner of Popes and
Cardinals in these latter days, to say Mass, to preach, to teach, and so
forth, (I speak of Cardinals resiant at Rome,) but to join living to living,
benefice to benefice, promotion Here would I learn, why the Queens May estie
may not employ Abbeyes to the maintenance of the whole Realm, with suppression
of abuses: as well as the Pope may bestow the same, upon irreligious and idle
Cardinals.
to promotion, and which is more absurd in their own religion, to be so lordly
Abbots, or rather so idle Lubbards, that they will take and snatch all the
commodities of the whole Abbeyes unto themselves, and neither grant sufficient
food and raiment for the Monks, nor competent allowance for the necessary
maintenance of the house it self, for their Mass, Mattins, and service: Such
is their charity to their neighbors, zeal to their office, and reverence to
their own religion. This is also true, as if any Papist will deny the same, his
own breath will witness against him. For to omit others, S. Laurence and S.
Pancratius their Abbeyes and Churches are so poor and beggarly (through the
pilling and polling of Cardinals their Abbots,) that when priests come thither
to say Mass, (as the usual manner there is,) they can neither find wine nor
candles without money: which default when any one obiecteth as a disgrace to
their profession and Religion, the poor Monks answer in this manner; Alas,
we can not do withal, my L. Cardinal has all the living, and allows us a
small portion, not able to fill our bellyes. But to leave this digression, and
to return to the scope and matter in hand: this foundation of pardons to be
the superaboundant merits and satisfactions, not only of Christ, but of his
Saints also, holds Thomas Aquinas, Dominicus Soto, Sylvester Pryeras,
Antoninus, and others. Sylvester has these words: Sylvester de indulgent.
Par. 4.


Ratio quare valere possunt indulgentiae, est unitas corporis mystici, in qua
multi supererogaverunt admen suram debitooum suorum, and multas tribulationes
unjust sustinuerunt patienter, per quas multitudo Josephus Angles in 4. sent.
quaest. de indulg. holds the self same opinion.
poenarum poterat expiari, sieis deberetur: quorum meritorum tantaest copia,
quod omnem poenam debitam nunc viventibus excedunt, and praecipue propter
meritum Christi.

The cause that pardons are of force, is the unity of the mystical body, in
which many have supererogated in the works of penance, to the measure of their
own demerits, and have sustained patiently many unjust tribulations, through
which the multitude of pains might be purged, if it were due unto them: of
whose merits there is such plenty, that they exceed all pain due for those
that now be living, and especially for the merit of Christ. This is the
testimony of Sylvester, and Aquinas Tho. Aquinas in supplem. quaest. 25. art.
primo.
their angelical Doctor proceeds further, and says thus:

Christus poterat relaxare, ergo and Paulus potuit, ergo and Papa potest, qui
non est minoris potestatis in Ecclesia, quam Paulus fuit.

Christ could pardon, therefore Paul could pardon, therefore the Pope also can
pardon: as who is of no meaner authority in the Church, then Paul him self
was. So then a primo ad ultimum The Popes power as great as Christ's.
by Aquinas his doctrine, the Pope can do as much as Christ. He can make the
deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to walk, the blind to see, and
the dead to arise to life: which I must first see, before I believe it,
howsoever their holy Aquinas write: and yet should this follow necessarily, if
Aquinas his reason were good. And doubtless, this which Aquinas here
attributes to the Pope, is not far from the peculiar mark of Antichrist,
but I will not now stand upon that point. We see evidently the foundation of
Popish pardons, confessed by the best learned Romish doctors. which manner of
establishing popish pardons, to be blasphemous and derogatorie to the blood of
Christ, I prove many and sundry ways. First, by the testimony of holy
writ.

Advocatum habemus apud Patrem Iesum Christum iustum, and 1. Johan. 2. 2.
ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris.

We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. And as it is said more significantly in the
Greek, (...). He is the atonement and reconciliation for our sins: it is
he, through whom we are accepted of God. Of him only said the voice from
heaven, This is my beloved Son, (...), in whom I am well pleased. Again,
Matthew. 3. 17.


Si autem in luce ambulemus, sicut ipse est in luce, societatem habemus ad
invicem, and sanguis Jesus Christi Filij eius emundat 1. Johan. 1. 7, 8.
nos ab omni peccato.

If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowshippe one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all sin. Again,

Vna oblatione consummavit in sempiternum sanctificatos.

With one only oblation has he consummate for ever, those Heb. 10. 14.
that are sanctified. Again,

Ego Dominus Deus tuus ex terra Aegypti, and Deum absque me nescies, Osee. 13.
4.
and salvator non est praeter me.

I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and thou
shall know no God without me, and there is no Savior but my self. Again,

Ego sum, Ego sum ipse, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me.

I, even I am he, that blot out thine iniquities for mine own Esa. 43. 25.
sake. Which is most significantly uttered in the Hebrewe phrase.

(...)

I, even I mine own self wipe away, and utterly destroy thy rebellious
transgressions, for none other cause but for mine own sake. Again,

Ipse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter Esa. 53.
5.
scelera nostra.

He was wounded for out iniquities, he was torn for our offenses. By which
manifold places of holy Scripture it is evident, that Christ did both merit
eternal glory for us, and also did offer to his Father eternal satisfaction
for our sins. Which S. Augustine declares finely, in brief and pithie
words.

Dominus noster Jesus Christas mori venit, peccare non venit, Angser. 141. de
tempor. Tom. 10.
communicando nobiscum sine culpa poenam, and culpam solvit and poenam.

Our Lord Jesus came to die, he came not to sin, communicating pain with us
without sin, he cleansed both the sin, and the pain of sin. I prove the
same secondly by the evident testimonies of the Popes own Doctors, because no
better arguments can possibly be alleged against them, then such as them
selves have made and approved. Angelus writes thus: Angelus de indulgent. Par.
9.


Communis opinio tam Theologorum, quam Canonistarumtenet, quod indulgentia sunt
ex abundantia meritorum, que ultra mensuram demeritorum suorum sancti
sustinuerunt, and Christus: sed ego teneo cum Francisco de Mayrone, quod cum
merita sanctorum sint ultra condignum Mayro in 4. sent. did. 19.
remunerata a Deo, and sic exhausta, quod solum dantur ex merito Christi, and
passionis eius.

The common opinion as well of Divines as of Canonistes, holds that pardons be
granted of the abundant merits, which Christ and his Saints here suffered,
far above the measure of their demerits: but I (says Angelus) hold with
Frauncis Mayro, that since God has remunerated the merits of his Saints above
their condign deserts, and so they are exhaust, nothing remaining unrewarded,
that pardons only are given of the merit of Christ, and of his passion.
Durandus also a famous popish Doctor, holds the self same opinion with
Durand. in 4. sent. did. 20.
Angelus: for albeit he admits the treasure of Christ, yet does he deny
the treasure and supererogations of Saints: and that, because as Angelus and
Mayro teach, Saints have received remuneration far above their deserts:
which opinion of Durandus, Angelus, and Mayro, S. Paul confirms in his
Epistle to the Romans, in these words.

(...). Romans Cap. 8. verse. 18.
For I count, that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the
future glory, which shall be revealed toward us: in which words, the
Apostle confuteth manifestly that foolish distinction of the Papists, unto
which they flee as to an holy sanctuary, so often as they feel them selves
galled in defense of the Popes pardons. They say forsooth, that Saints have
received full remuneration as their works be meritorious, but not as they be
satisfactorie, or penal. Saint Paul (I say) reprooveth this their vain and
ungrounded distinction, by the word ((...)) passions, afflictions, or
penalties. for he says, not the merits: of this time, but the passions of this
time, and that those passions of ours are unworthie of the glory Mark well
the word Passions.
to come: which point Durandus, Mayro, and Angelus perceived right well, and
therefore would not in any wise admit the treasure of Saints, though they were
great Papists all three. Their own popish gloss confesses the same in the
comment upon the text rehearsed, to wit, that our passions or satisfactions (as
papists term Glossa interlin. ibidem.
them,) are not worthy sidistricte nobiscu^ ageretur, if God should deal with
us according to justice. But as the said gloss adds wisesely, facit spiritus
quod merita non possunt, the holy ghost supplieth that which wants in our
merits. And their clarke Nicolaus Lyranus can not deny the same, for these be
his words: Lyranus in cap. 8. ad Ro^.


Ratio consistit in hoc, quod praemium excedit incomparabiliter meritum nostrum
in tolerantia passionum, propter quod patienter sunt merito tolerandae.

The reason says Lyra, for which the apostle moves us to bear patiently
the afflictions of this world, consists chiefly in this, that the reward
which God will bestovv on us, does infinitely exceed the worthiness of our
aflictions, or the condignitie of our passions: and for that respect, we ought
vvorthilie to endure them with patience. Nevertheless, Lyra would gladly have
our work to be meritorious, and for that end he distinguishes them as they
proceed of free will, and as the holy Ghost works them, these are his words:

Sciendum tamen, quodpassiones istae dupliciter possant consider ari. vno
Lyranus vbi supra.
modo vt acceptantur a libero arbitrio, and sic loquitur hic apostolus. alio
modo, prout spiritus sanctus mouens liberum arbitrium, est huius acceptionis
principium: and sic est meritum de condigno, quia principium meriti est eiusdem
dignitatis cum praemio.

We must know for all this says Lyra, that our afflictions may be considered
two ways: one way, as they are accepted and received from our free will: and
so the apostle speaks, when he says, they be unworthy. Another way, as the
holy ghost moving our free will, is the beginning of this acceptance. And so
there is merit of condignitie, because the beginning of merit, is of the same
dignity with the reward. These are the words of Lyra, Note well the
confutatio^ of Lyra his distinction.
cited with all advantage for that cause, that he being once directly and
fully confuted, all other papists may be confuted in him: as who doubtless
being all joined in one, can lay no more then he has done, in behalf of their
merits and supererogations. I therefore say first, 1
that Saint Paul affirms with me, that our afflictions or passions are not
worthy the glory of heaven.

I say secondly, that Lyra himself grants so much, as his own words
already alleged do witness. 2


I say thirdly, that their gloss is on my side. 3


I say fourthly, that if al were granted which Lyra says, yet would it little
or nothing help his purpose. 4


For first, our passions are no way ours, but as they proceed from 1
our free wills: omnis enim actio humana est voluntaria: yea so voluntary,
that as Saint Augustine truly says: if it were not voluntary, it should not
be man's: and yet our afflictions or passions considered, as they proceed from
our free will, are not worthy of the glory to come by Lyraes own grant.
Again, when the holy ghost, and man work both one and the same act: that
which the holy ghost does, can no more be reputed man's act, then that which
man does can be demed Gods act. But so it is, that that which man does can
not be demed the holy ghosts deed: ergo neither that which does the holy
ghost, can be demed man's deed. The assumption wherein consists the
difficulty, (if there be any at all,) is proved by man's sinful actions. For
the most cruel and wicked fact that can be imagined, is not done without the
concourse of the holy ghost, as all learned papists do and must confess: and
yet are man's sinful acts so far from being deemed Gods acts, as the
deformities and irregularities thereof be only man's, and never Gods: and yet
does God concur more to those wicked acts, in that he is the principal
agent of the real and positive entities of the same, then man does or can
concur to any act of Gods: that is to say, to any good act that he himself
does. For as S. James says, every good thing that man does, is of God.
Iacobis. v. 17


Thirdly, because great absurdities do follovv upon this opinion, to wit, that
many sins freely remitted and forgiven in this life, should be punished
eternally in the world to come. greater then which, no absurdity can be
thought upon. the reason of the consequent is yielded by Thomas Aquinas,
Dionisius Carthusianus, Dionysius Aquinas, p. 1. q. 114. ar. 3. ad 3, Dionys.
Carthus. lib. 1. orthod fid. ar. 156. Areop. dc divine. nominib apud Carthus.
Areopagita, and others. Who all do hold, (neither is holy writ dissonant to
their opinion,) that the devils concur if not to all, yet to the greater part
of sins, committed in this life by sinful mortal men. vvhereupon I infer
first, that the Devils sins are man's, and man's sins the Devils: if Lyraes
distinction were of force the reason of the consequence is evident, because
the devil and man do both one and the self same act.

I infer secondly, that the sins forgiven to penitent sinners in this
life, are punished in the Devils world without end.

For what reply so ever the adversary can make, or what evasion so ever he
shall use in this point: the same can I make, and the same shall I use against
himself, in the passions and merits of Saints. Let what papist as will,
begin when he will, to make trial thereof: For no effectual disparitie
doubtless, can ever be yielded in that behalf.

Another absurdity is, that God should hereby be the author or partaker of
sin. The reason hereof is evident, because as man's acts be meritorious, for
that God concurreth to them: in like manner Gods acts must be demeritorious,
for that man concurreth to the same. For God and man concur no less to that
self same act, which is sin: then they do to that act, which the
papists term of condign merit. that there is no comparison between man's
deserts and glory eternal, Saint Bede shows pithilie and plainly in
these words:

Ipse dicit qui patiebatur and sciebat pro quo nomine patiebatur, and quo Beda
in c. 8. ad Romans
fructu patiebatur: non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram
gloriam, quae revelabitur in nobis. appendo quod patior, contra id quod spero,
hoc sentio: illua credo, and tamen plus valet quod credo, quam quod sentio.

He says, who suffered, and who knevv for whose sake he suffered, and with
what fruit he suffered: the sufferings of this life are not vvorthie of the
future glory, which shall be revealed in us. I weigh in the balance that
which I suffer, against that which I hope for: this I feel, that I believe,
and yet that is of more force which I believe, then that which I feel. yea,
as their own durand tells the^, Christ himself could not satisfy in rigore
iustitiae as he was man, but only Durand. in 3. sent. did. 20. and in 4. d.
15.
in respect of hipostaticall union: and therefore is it impossible that
satisfaction of pure man, I say of corrupt and sinful man, shall any way be
equivalent or perfect: for as the popes dear monk Dominicus So to grants:

Perfecta satisfactio est illa, cuius valor and pretiu^totu^ emanat a debitore,
Soto de not. and great. lib. 3. c. 6.
nulla vel preueniente vel interveniente gratia creditor is: taliter visit
redditio aequiualentis alias indebiti voluntary.

Perfect satisfaction is that, whose valor and price wholy. proceeds
from the debtour, without either preventing or interventing grace of the
creditour: so as the reddition be of that, which is equivalent and not
otherwise due. This is truly said of Soto, which Aristoteles perceived by
very natural discourse, teaching that we cannot make condign satisfaction to
God and our parents. in the description Arist. lib. 8 ethic. cap 7
of our Friar Soto, we have to note 4. things. First, that the valor of
satisfaction must proceed wholy from the debtour. Secondly, that there must be
no preventing or interventing grace of the creditor. Thirdly, that there must
be equivalent restitution. Fourthly, that that equivalent reddition must be a
work, othervvhise not due. which four when any papist in the world, can
prove to be in any satisfaction made by pureman, (neither shall the popes
holiness be excepted,) I vvil be a papist once again. For our satisfaction is
so imperfect indeed, as no one of the 4. conditions here required, ca^ be found
and approved therein. For first, what act soever proceeds from our selves,
as of our selves, is lothsom in Gods sight, according to this say-ing of the
Prophet:

(...). Esai. c. 6^. v. 6.


All our righteousness is as a filthy cloute, nothing pure or clean.

2 Secondly, what act so ever proceeds from us without Gods preventing
grace, cannot possibly be void of sin: for as the apostle says:

Non sumus sufficientes cogit are aliquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis, sed
sufficientia 2. Cor. 3. v. 5
nostra ex deo est.

We are not able to think one good thought of our selves, as of our selves,
but all and every part of our sufficiency is of God.

And again he says:

Nemo potest dicere dominus Jesus, nisiin spiritus sancto.

No man can say Lord Jesus, but by the power of God.

We owe of duty to God, more then possibly we can ever perform, 1 Cor. 12.
v. 4
and therefore can not justly, nay therefore can not without the note of
intolerable pride, smelling of more then pelagianisme, term any of our best
works, a work not due to God, or a work of supererrogation. For Christhath
taught us another lesson:

Cum fecerit is omnia quae precepta sunt vobis, dicite, servi invtiles sumus,
quod debuimus facere fecimus. Luke cap 7. verse. 10.


when ye have done all things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which we were bound to do.

4 Fourthly, concerning equivalent satisfaction, their own angelical D.
Aquinas shall answer them, whose words are these:

Dicendum, quo daliqua satisfactio potest dici dupliciter sufficiens: Uno modo
perfect, quia est condigna per quandam adaequationem ad reco^pensationem
culpae commissae, and sic hominis puri satisfactio sufficiens Aquinas in 3.
part. q. 1. ar. 2. 2m.
esse non potuit pro peccato; alio modo potest dici satisfactio hominis esse
sufficiens imperfecte, scilicet secundu acceptationem eius, qui est ea
contentus, quauis non sit condigna. Et hoc modo satisfactio puri hominis est
sufficiens.

We must answer, that satisfaction may be called sufficient two ways: one
way perfectly, because it is vvorthie by a certain adequatio nor equality to
the compensation of the fault committed: And so the satisfaction of pure man,
can not be sufficient for sin. Loc, here is a mystery, for not sufficient is
sufficient.
Another way imperfectly to wit, according to his acceptance who is content
with it, although it be not vvorthie: and this way the satisfaction of pure
man is sufficient.

This is the answer of Aquinas, whose doctrine is confirmed for
authentical, by papal authority. Now mark it well, for Christ's love. This
great doctor was so busied to defend popish pardons, and the ground or
foundation of the same, (which is the supererogation of man's deserts, as we
have heard,) that he had no other shift in the world, but to coin a new no
distinction of dubble sufficient satisfaction. which distinction for all that,
if I do not prove it to confute and make frustrate it self, I will desire no
credit of the reader.

Satisfaction (says Aquinas) may be called sufficient, either because it is
indeed sufficient, as which is an equivalent compensation: or it may be called
sufficient, not because it is equivalent and sufficient indeed: but because it
is accepted and admitted, albeit it be not worthy.

Now what I pray you, can be more foolishly spoken, or more against a man's own
assertion? he would establish a sufficient satisfaction, and yet is enforced
to acknowledge a satisfaction not sufficient, but accepted as if it were
sufficient. which is the very same that I would never deny, and which
overthrows all popish doctrine: For it prooveth in deed, that no works of
the regenerate are good and without sinue, though they be accepted and imputed
for good and without sin: and consequently, if the papists would be constant
in their own doctrine, we and they would soon agree. But what? does not
our holy father the pope tell us, that though Christ pardon a penitent sinner,
yet must he suffer temporal pain in purgatory, and so to need the popes
pardons? yes doubtless as you have heard, and the pope and papists glory in
the same. And yet this notwithstanding, if a man can get a plenarie pardon from
the pope for the hour of his death, he shall come to heaven with all speed,
and never once enter in at purgatory gates. If any credit not my words, let
him yet credit their doctout Sylvester, who writes in this manner: Sylvest. de
in-dulg. par. 33.


Qui plenariam indulgentiam rite assecutus est, si eo instanti moreretur,
evolaret statim ad coelum.

He that has lawfully gotten a plenary pardon, if he should die at that
instant, should incontinently go to heaven. The popes pardons then, are so
far from being such as they are preached to be: that they do not only not
yield us any remission of pain, but greatly increase our pain when we
believe them: as which derogate no little from Christ's passion, and from the
verity of his sacred word. For indeed saints can no more satisfy for us,
then Soto in 4 sent. d. 21. q. 1. ar. 2. prope finem.
they can merit for us: and yet dares not Dominicus Soto avouch their merits
for us, though he be the popes doctor dear. For which cause vvisely and
gravely says Augustine:

Vaeetiam laudabili vitae hominum, siremota misericordia discutias eam. Aug.
lib. 9. confess. ca. 13.


VVoe even to the laudable life of men: if thou discuss and examine it, thy
mercy set a part. which thing their own friar John de Combis did well
perceive, when in his Theological abridgement he affirms itto be a maxim
with God, ever to reward us above our well doings, and to punish us less our
evil demerits. His words be these:

Et hoc patet quia Deus semper remuner at supra meritum, sicut punit citra
condignum. Io. de Combis lib. 5. theol. verit. cap. 11.


And this is evident, because God ever rewards above our merits, and
punishes us less then we be worthy. so then we see it manifest, that even by
popish doctrine, there is no place for popish pardons.

The sixth Conclusion.
POpes usually give many pardons, affirming most impudently in the same, that
whosoever shall pray in such manner, say mass over such relics, visit such a
Church, or contribute so much to such an end, shall deliver a soul from
purgatory. which kind of pardons, Pope Gregory granted often during my
abode at Rosse: as to the bishop of Rosse, in the behalf of the Scottish
Queen: to Stukeley, for the treacherous practices he should have contrived
against England: to Alphonsus the Jesuit, for the success of English
complots, and such like. This notwithstanding, these solemn and glorious
pardons be nothing else, but mere fabulous and lying graunts.

For first, there is no purgatory after this life as shall be prooved
hereafter, and consequently the pope can deliver no soul from thence, though
he grant never so many pardons.

Secondly, because to give pardons is an act of Jurisdiction, as appears by
the Scripture which they allege, and consequently Mat. 16. v. 19.
that act can not be exercised but upon the popes subjects, and therefore not
upon the souls in purgatory, who are exempt from his jurisdiction. All which
their own school doctor Richardus de Mediavilla prooveth out of their
canon law in these words: Richard. de Mediavilla in 4. sent. did. 3. q. 3.
did. apud mag. 20. extra de pe. and re.


Indulgentiae non prosunt illis qui non sunt de jurisdiction illius qui eas
concessit, extra de pe. and re. illi autem qui sunt in purgatorio, non sunt sub
jurisdiction praelatorum Ecclesiae, quod satis datur intelligi, cum dixit
dominus Petro: quodcunque solveris super terram. addendo enim super terram,
videtur refer collationem huius potestatis tantum superviventes hac vita
mortali.

Pardons do not profit them, who are not of his jurisdiction that grants
them: but they who are in purgatory, be not under the jurisdiction of our
prelates of the church. which is sufficiently given to be understood, when
our Lord said to Peter: (whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth:) for adding
upon earth, he seems to refer and extend this power, only to the living
here on earth. Now, if answer be made as is used by the vviser sort of
papists, that the pope pardons in purgatory only by way of suffrage, then
do I reply, that that is petitio principij, and that that kind of pardoning is
uncertain and fallible, and so still I have my purpose. For the preachers of
the pardons, and the pardons also tell us: that whosoever visits such a
church, says mass at such an altar, or contributeth to such an end, shall
deliver a soul from purgatory. and yet by way of suffrage no such thing can
be assured, no more then when an other devoute papist shall offer up his
prayers for them. which thing seemed so to trouble Bellarminus, that in his
written dictates he knovveth not well what to hold or write, concerning
romish pardons. Thirdly, because the pope can not apply Christ's satisfaction
more effectually to them by his pardoning, then the same is applied to them by
the saying of mass, as which by popish religion is the self same sacrifice
reallie, that was offered upon the cross: and yet does no papist say or
think that our saying of mass, can or vvil deliver his friends soul from
purgatory. For otherwise, there would not be so many masses said so many
times for the self same persons, as has been and is daily seen, amongst the
papists. For to this end do they celebrate and observe yearly anniuersaries,
for souls departed 10. 20. 30. 40. 60. years before. which the pope,
cardinals, and monks had taught the people to frequent, as most necessary for
their friends souls in purgatory. Fourthly, because it cannot be proved, that
after God has pardoned our sins and the eternal pain due for the same,
there still remains some temporal pain, remissible by the popes pardons.
Fifthly, because all the three things required of papists in popish pardoning,
are most firm, certain, and ready, in the souls of purgatory: to wit,
authority in thhe giver, charity in the receiver, and the cause of piety.
For first, the souls of purgatory be in charity, as all papists confess:
as who otherwise, could never be saved.

2 Secondly, it is mere cruelty not to help the faithful in such woeful
case. Thirdly, if they deny the popes authority, I will willingly deny
it with them: though he accurse me as he has already done, for my pains.
For I nothing doubt, but God of his great mercy will convert his curse, to my
greater joy and bliss. And here, because the Seminaries never cease to boast
in corners amongst the simple: that none in this realm dares to dispute with
them, I offer public dispute with what seminary in England soever he be, no
one or other excepted who soever: so it may stand with the honorable license
and good liking of higher powers, whose minds I am of duty bound to obey in
that behalf. For I nothing doubt, if my option may be granted: but that it
will tend to the glory of God, the service of my sovereign, the honor of my
country, the edification of the auditors, and the comfort of mine own soul.
The reason is, for that I know very sufficiently, the foundations, grounds,
auctorities, and reasons, of both sides: and vvithal behold as in a glass of
crystal, the evident confutation of all whatsoever, can possibly be said in
defense of papistrie: which if I had not first seen, I had never departed from
popish doctrine.

The 7. Conclusion.
IF the popes pardons be not of so great force, and worth so much as they are
said and preached to be: then is the popes religion vain, and of no credit at
all. This proposition both is and must be granted of all papists, if they
will defend their now professed Romish religion. Thomas Aquinas (whose doctrine
and books diverse popes have approoved for good and godly,) writes thus:

Ecclesia praedicando indulgentias non mentitur, and ita tantum valent quantum
praedicantur: sicut enim dicit Augustinus, si in sacra A quin. in supplement.
3. part. q. 25. art. 2. in corpore.
Scriptura deprehenditur aliquid falsitatis, iam robur authoritatis sacrae
Scripturae perit. Et similiter si in praedicatione ecclesiae aliqua falsitas
deprehenderetur, non essent documenta Ecclesiae alicuius autboritatis
adroborandam fidem.

The Church preaching pardons does not lie, and so they are worth no less then
they are preached. For as Augustine says, if in holy Scripture any falsehood be
found, even then the full authority of holy scripture perishes utterly. And
in like manner, if in the preaching of the Church any falsehood should be found,
the doctrine of the Church should not be of any force to establish our faith.
These are the words of their canonized saint and renowned doctor Aquinas,
which show unto us so plainly, as more plainly nothing can be told: that if
the Church of Rome err in any one point, as in giving pardons or such like,
then must we give no credit to it in other points of religion. Neither is this
the opinion of Aquinas only, but their other great Thomist Dominicus Soto
sings the same song.

These be his words:

Alij dixerunt indulgentias nihil prorsus valere, nisi quantum unusquisque
devotione sua faciendo quodindulgentia praecipit, moeretur. Soto in 4. sent.
did. 21. q. 2. art. 1.
Attamen isti seu blasphemi non sunt audiendi, sane qui authoritatem Ecclesiae
infringunt: si enim de hac re nos Ecclesia seduceret, nulla ei esset in
reliquis adhibenda fides.

Some said that pardons were no more worth at all, then every man does merit
by his own devotion. But these fellows are to be rejected as blasphemous,
because they infringe the authority of the Church: for if the Church should in
this point seduce us, then were there no credit to be given unto it in other
points. These are the express words of the Popes own and best Doctors,
Aquinas, and Soto: whose testimonies, with that which is said in other
conclusions: disable altogether the authority and religion of the Church of
Rome. For if the Church of Rome deceive us in her pardons, (as is sufficiently
prooved that she has done:) then is she not to be credited in other things, as
both Aquinas and Soto tell us: whose doctrine the pope, yea, sundry Popes of
Rome have confirmed.

THE COROLLARIE.
FIRST therefore, since the Popes pardons be foolish and repugnant to common
sense: Secondly, since the verity and efficacy of pardons be so uncerten, as
the best learned Papists, can not tell what to say or write thereof: Thirdly,
since to give pardons, as the Pope does, is a strange and new thing: as which,
neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever taught or practiced: Fourthly, since the
Popes manner of pardoning, (ordinary popish practice considered) is most
absurd: Fifthly, since the Popes pardons in Romish doctrine, are reputed
aequivalent with holy martyrdom: Sixthly, since the Popes pardons be not such,
nor so forcible, as they are preached to be: Seventhly, since the foundation of
Popish pardons, is blasphemous and derogatorie to Christ's passion: Eighthly,
since the Pope takes upon him by his pardons, to deliver souls from
purgatory, which he can not perform: Nynthly, since, Aquinas, Soto, and
Sylvester, his own renowned Doctors do affirm, that if the Pope preach
falsely in his pardons, all his other doctrine is false and naught: I conclude,
that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as
false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the first Motive.
THE THIRD CHAP ter: Of the Popes manners, Faith, and Religion.
ALbeit concerning Sanctimonie of life, and honest conversation among men; the
learned Papists will not defend their Popes, whom they use to term by name
of holiness: yet do they all persist in this, that none of them can err in
their judicial decrees, concerning either faith or manners: for better
examination whereof, I put down certain conclusions.

The 1 Conclusion.
THE lives and manners of Popes have been most wicked, most notorious, and most
scandalous to the world. This conclusion I will only prove, by the
testimonies of great Romish doctors, that so my words may be of better credit
therein. Hear therefore what Bartholomaeus Carranza writes of them.

Stephanus Sextus magno odio persecutus est nomen Formosi, cuius Carranza in
summa Conc. fol. 354. and fol. 355.
and ordinationes omnes rescidit and damnavit: iam enim tunc coeperat
Pontificum and virtus and integritas desinere.

Pope Stephanus the sixth persecuted the very name of Formosus, all whose
ordinations, or giving of orders, he disanulled and condemned: for even then
began, the virtue and integrity of Popes to fail.

Romanus universa acta Stephani improbat and abrogat.

Pope Romanus does reproove and abrogate, the whole acts of Pope Stephanus.

Sergius Tertius Formosi nomen prosequitur, cuius corpus humatum truncari
capite iussit. Res plena horroris, at videas quantum degener abant Pontifices a
maioribus suis: ne cui mirum sit, interim si qui abusus and perversae opiniones
in Ecclesiam irrepserunt.

Pope Sergius the third does persecute the name of Formosus, Lo, the Popes
own dear Doctor, can not deny errors to be in the Church of Rome.
whose body after it was buried, he commanded to be beheaded. A thing very
doleful, that thou may see how much the Popes in these days did
degenerate from their ancestors: least any marvel if in the mean time,
abuses and perverse opinions be crept into the Church.

Johannes 13. venationibus, magis quam orationibus vacabat: and multa alia
auditu indigna de eo dicuntur.

Pope John the thirteenth was more addicted to hunting, then to prayer: and
many other unworthy factes are reported of him. This is the censour of
Bartholomaeus Carranza, a learned Thomiste, and Dominican Friar: and therefore
has he not said more against the Popes of Rome, then the force of verity
induced him unto. Platina affirms no less then Carranza, of the wicked lives
of Popes: but I will only allege one place or two, omitting all the rest for
brevitie sake.

Nihil enim aliudhi Pontifices cogitabant, quam and nomen and dignitatem
Platina in vita Romans primi. page 147.
maiorum suorum extinguere.

For these Popes went about no other matter, but only how to extinguish the
name and dignity of their ancestors. And in another place the said Platina
writes thus:

Vide quae so, quantum isti degenerarunt a maioribus suis, illi enim utpote
Platina in vita Sergii 3. page 148.
viri sanctissimi, dignitatem ultro oblatam contemnebant, orationi and
doctrinae christianae vacantes: hi vero largitione and ambitione pontificatum
quaerentes, and adepti, posthabito divino cultu, inimicitias non secus ac
saevissimi quidam tyranni inter sese exercebant: suas postea voluptates
securius expleturi, cum nullibi extarent qui eorum vitia coercent.

Behold, I pray thee, how much these bishops do degenerate from their
ancestors: for they, as most holy men, contemned dignity offered them,
giving them selves to prayer, and Christian doctrine: but these popes, seeking
and attaining their popedomes by bribes and ambition, (Gods devine worship set
aside,) did exercise enmities among them selves, as most cruel tyrants:
thinking after to enjoy their pleasures more securely, when there should be
none to reproove their vices. Thus says Platina a very learned Papist, who was
abbreviator Apostolicus to the church of Rome.

The second Conclusion.
MANY Popes have aspired unto popedom, by most naughty and ungodly means.
Pope Christophorus the first, shall first begin this proof, of whom thus
writes Platina:

Christophorus, cuius patria and cognomentum ob ignobilitatem ignoratur,
pontificatum malis artibus adeptus, male amisit; septimo enim Platina in vita
Christopheri primi.
mense dignitate ac merito eiectus, monasticam vitam unicum calamito sorum
refugium obire cogitur.

Pope Christopher, whose country and surname by reason of his baseness is not
known, came naughtilie by his Popedom, and lost it as naughtily. For before
the seventh Month was fully expired, he was deprived of his Pontifical
dignity, and enforced to be a Monk, the sole and only refuge of all
distressed persons. Carranza reports this to be true, which Carranza in summa
conciliorum, fol. 354.
Platina has set down. Pope Bonifacius the seventh, and Sylvester the second,
aspired to their Popedomes by Necromancy, and Diabolical means. Sylvester the
third, attained his Popedom by sedition: and Damasus the second, was made Pope
by violent means, without consent, either of the Clergy, or of the people.
This to be so, witnesses both Platina and Carranza. And Platina adds these
words

Eo enim tum Pontificatus devenerat, ut qui plus largitione and ambitione,
Platina in vita Sylvestri 3.
non dico sanctitate vitae and doctrina valeret, is tantummodo dignitatis
gradum bonis oppressis and reiectis obtineret, quem morem utinam aliquando non
retinuissent nostra tempora.

For to that pass was Popedom now brought, that who so could more in giving
bribes, and in ambition, (I say not in good life and doctrine,) he only should
have the degree of honor, and good men should be rejected: which custom,
would to God, it had never been in our time kept. And the said Platina says in
another place:

Adeo enim inoleverat hic mos, ut iam cuique ambitioso liceret, Petri Platina
in vita Damasi 2.
sedem invadere.

For this custom did so increase, that now every ambitious fellow, might
invade Peter's seat or chair. Gregory the fifth, was by sedition thrust out of
his throne, and Pope John 18 by tyranny occupied the Popedom: so say Carranza
and Platina. Yea, Platina proceeds Carranza ubi supra fol. 355.
further, and says thus:

Qua quidem beatitudine Ioannes caruit, fur certe in Pontificatu, and Platina
in vita Joan. 18.
latro: non enim ut par fuerat, per ostium intravit.

Which happy life Pope John wanted, as who was a thief and a robber: for he
entered not in by the door, as he ought to have done. And to be brief, Pope
Bonifacius 8. shall sound the trumpet for the rest, of whom thus writes
Carranza: Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut lupus, Carranza ubi supra fol. 369.
mortuus est ut canis. He entered as a fox, he reigned as a wolf, he dyed as a
dog. Thus he did, and thus he lived, after he had gotten his Popedom by
deceitful means, as is already prooved.

The 3. Conclusion.
POPES may not only err, and hold false opinions, but also become most
notorious heretics; and for their heresies, be deprived of their popedomes.
This conclusion may be proved, both by the testimonies of great learned
papists, and also by the flat decrees of many Popes. Dominicus Soto has these
words: Quamvis Papa, ut Papa errare non possit, hoc est, statuere errorem
nequeat tanquam articulum fidei, Soto in 4. sent. did. 22. q. 2. art. 2.
quia spiritus sanctus idnon permittet: tamenut singularis persona errare in
fide potest, sicut aliae peccata committere.

Albeit the Pope as Pope, can not err: that is to say, can not set down any
error as an article of our faith, because the holy Ghost will not that permit:
nevertheless, as he is a private person, so may he err even in faith, as he
may do other sins: and for full proof of this point, only Sylvester Prieras
is sufficient, who albeit he extol the Popes power above Kings, and Emperors,
and Angels in heaven their authority; yet does he confess, that our holy
father the Sylvester in Papa. Par. 4.
Pope, in casu haeresis, both may be judged and deposed: yea, this point is
very manifest in many texts of the popish Canon Law, for in one place it is
thus written:

Oves, quae suo pastori commissae sunt, eum nec reprehendere, nisi a fide
exorbitaverit, 2. Quaest. 7. cap. Oves.
nec ullatenus accusare possunt.

The sheep that are committed to (the Pope) their Pastor, neither can reproove
him, nor any way accuse him: unless he shall swarve from the faith. In another
place it is said, that though the Pope be never so wicked, (though he carry
thousands with himself headlong Did. 40. cap. si Papa.
to hell,) yet must no man judge him, unless he be an heretic.

Quia cunctos ipse iudicaturus, a nemine est judicandus, nisi deprehendatur a
fide devius. Because (says the Popes law) he must judge all, and none judge
him, unless he be found to have forsaken the faith. Josephus Angles, in his
book which he dedicated to the Pope himself, confirms this matter in these
words:

Papa haereticus ut apostata, ab universali Concilio deponi potest: and Joseph.
Angl. in 4. sent. part. 2. quaest. de excommunicat. art. 4. diffic. 1.
ratio est, quia sicut nullus potest esse alicuius religionis praelatus, qui
non sit in illa religione professus: it a neque potest esse Papa, si fide
ecclesiae careat.

The Pope being an heretic, as also an apostate, may be deposed by a general
Council: and the reason is, because as none can be a prelate of any religion,
which is not professed in that religion: so neither can he be Pope, that
holds not the faith of the Church.

The 4. Conclusion.
MAny Popes have de facto forsaken the Christian faith, and become flat
heretics. This proposition, though it seem strange to many, shall be prooved
(God willing) effectually, and that by the express testimonies of great popish
doctors. For it is so certain, that Pope Honorius was an heretic, as their
eight solemn Council holden at Constantinople, can not deny the same. Melchior
Canus gives this sentence of the said Honorius: 8. Conc. Constant. act. 7.
Canus de locis Theolog. lib. 6. cap. ult.


At Honorium quomodo ab errore vindicabit? quem haereticum fuisse tradit
Psellus in carmine de septem synodis, Tharasius ad summos Sacerdotes
Antiochiae, Alexandriae, Sanctae urbis, ut septima Synodo act. 3. scriptum est:
Theodosius cum Synodo sua Hierosolymitana, in confessione fidei quae habetur
eadem action 3. Epiphanius respondens haereticis iu conspectu Concilij
eiusdem, act. 6. Tota demum ipsa septima synodus action ultima, and in
Epistola ad omnes sacerdotes and clericos. But how will (Pighius) deliver pope
Honorius from error? whom to have been an heretic, witnesses Psellus, in
his verses of the seven synodes: Tharasius to the patriarks of Antioch, of
Alexandria, and of the holy city, as it is written in the 7. Synod: Theodosius
with his Synod at Jerusalem, in the confession of their faith: Epiphanius
answering to the heretics, in the sight of the said Council: finally, the
seventh Synod wholly in the last action, and in their Epistle to all priests
and Clergy men. Viguerius holds for a constant position, that pope
Anastasius erred in an article of the faith: his words be these:

Si dicamus, quod summus Pontifex errare potest, and in animo suo concipere
aliquem articulum orthodoxae fidei contrarium, and etiam priuatim Viguerius de
virtute fidei. cap. 10. Par. 3. verse. 13.
proferre, ut legitur de Anastasio 2. dicendum quod summus Pontifex, ut privata
persona errare potest, non tamen ut est summus Pontifex.

If we say that the pope may err, and conceive in his mind some article
contrary to the Catholic faith, and pronounce the same also privately:
answer must be made, that the pope may err as a private person, but not as he
is Pope. Nicolaus Lyranus utters this matter As we read of Anastasius.
so plainly, as no man can long stand in doubt thereof: these be his words:

Ex quo patet, quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominih. ratione potestatis, vel
dignitatis, ecclesiasticae, vel secularis, quia multi principes, and summi
Lyranus in cap. 16. Matt.
Pontifices, and alij inferiores, inventi sunt apostatasse a fide: propter quod
Ecclesia consist it in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, and
confessio fidei, and veritatis.

Whereby it is evident, that the Church does not consist in men, by reason of
power or dignity, either ecclesiastical or secular: because many Princes, and
Popes, and other of the inferior sort, are found to have swarved from their
faith: for which cause the Church consists in those persons, in whom there
is true knowledge, and confession of the faith, and verity. Lo, the judgment
of their own Doctor: not they that sit in S. Peter's chair, are the true and
lawful successors of S. Peter: but they that confess, and preach S. Peter's
faith and doctrine. We therefore impugn nothing in popish proceedings, but
the self same, which popish Doctors reprooved before us: and that in their
public writings, published to the world.

The 5. Conclusion.
MANY Popes have erred, in their public doctrine of faith and manners. Pope
John the 22. of that name, as witnesses Okam, Erasmus, Alphonsus, Adrianus,
and others, taught the people that the souls of the just do not see God,
before the resurrection: yea, Gerson that great popish doctor, (who sometime
was Chancellor of Paris,) affirms this matter in these express words:

Hoc fecit latroni, qui verisimiliter nondum complever at poenitentiam pro
omnibus peccatis suis, qui fuit illa hora propria beatificatus, and vidit Deum
facie ad faciem, sicut Sancti in Paradiso: propter quod insuper apparet
falsitas doctrinae Papae Ioannis 22. Quae damnata fuit cum 10. Gerson. in ser.
de pasch. tom. 4.
sono buccinarum coram Rege Philippo per Theologos Parisienses, and credidit
potius theologis Parisiensibus, quam curiae.

This he did to the thief (which by likelihood had not yet accomplished Of
Pope John
penance for all his sins,) who was blessed in that very hour, and saw God
face to face, as do the Saints in Paradise: by reason whereof, further
appears the falsehood of the doctrine of pope John, which was condemned by the
sound of trumpets before K. Philip by the devines of Paris, and the King
believed rather the devines of Paris, then the court. In which words, we have
to note first, that Gerson a voucheth the thief: crucified with Christ, to
have seen 1
God face to face in that hour, and so to be blessed. Secondly, that he
reproves the false doctrine of Pope John, Thirdly, that his doctrine was 2
condemned with the sound of trupets, in the presence of the king of 3
France. Fourthly, that the K. gave more credit to the devines of Paris, then
to the judgment of the court of Rome. Fifthly, that neither the 4
K. nor the learned papists, did at that time grant such authority to the 5
Pope, as now the pope chalengeth. whreupon it follows consequently, that the
pope taught false doctrine in a weighty matter of faith: which thing not only
Gerson affirms, as you have heard: but Pope Adrian himself testifies the
same, as records the zealous papist Alphonsus in these words:

Sexta haeresis docet nullam animam ante diem iudciij esse beatam, quu^ (ut
ait) nulla anima ante illum diem videt Deum. Huius haeresis auctores sunt
Armeni, eandem etiam tuentur Graeci, post istos surrexit Johannes 22. huius
nominis pontifex. Sed ne verbis meis aliquis in hac part deroget, Alphonsus de
Castro. lib. 3. adversus haereses. prope finem.
verba Adriani papae referam, qui in suo 4. sententiarum in calce cuiusde^
questionis de Sacramento confirmationis, it a ait: Novissime fertur de Ioanne
22. quod public docuit, declaravit, and ab omnibus teneri mandavit, quod
animae purgatae ante finale iudicium non habe^t stolam, quae est clara and
facialis visio Dei: and universitate^ Parisien sem ad hoc induxisse dicitur,
quod nemo in ea poter at gradu^ in Theolog. adipisci, nisiprimitus hunc errore^
iurasset se defen suru^, and perpetuoei adhae suru^. haec Adrianus.

The fixed heresy teaches no soul to be in bliss, before the day of
judgment, because (as it says,) no soul before that day sees God. The
Armenians are the authors of this heresy and the Greeks hold the same. After
these rose up pope John, the 22. of that name. But least any man distrust my
words in this point. I will recite the words of pope Adrian, who in his 4.
book of sentences in the end of a certain question of the sacrament of
confirmation, says this: Last of all, it is reported of Pope John the 22.
that he publicly taught, declared, and commanded all men to hold, that the
souls of the lust, before the day of judgment, have not the stole which is
the clear and facely vision of God. And he is reported, to have induced the
University of Paris to this: that no man could take degree in the same, but he
that first did swear to defend this error, and to adheare unto it forever.
Thus says Adrian, who was him self pope of Rome: and thus reports Alphonsus
a popish Friar. And it will not help to say, as Bellarminus does, in defense
of popish faith: to wit, that pope John erred as a private man, but not as
pope: for that distinction does not only want a good foundation, whereupon it
should be built, but also it flatly destroys the plain text: the reason
hereof, is evident to every child. First, because Adrian says, docuit, he
taught. 1
Secondly, because he says, public, publikly. Thirdly, because he says, 2
mandavit, he commanded al to hold it. Fourthly, because none could 3
be made graduate, which held not this opinion. Fifthly, because every 4
graduate did swear to defend it, and to hold it forever. So then the 5
pope may err in public decree of faith, as well as an other man. And that,
even by the consent of Adrian, who was pope him self: yea, who for learning
and knowledge, was one of the rarest popes that ever was at Rome. Canus tells
us, that Gerson, Almain, and Thomas Waldensis, do all hold, that the pope may
err, as is said. Pope Celestine erred not only as a private man, (but even as
pope and public person,) in his public decree of matrimony. This to be so,
witnesses the said Alphonsus, in these very words: Coelestinum papam errasse
Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 4. advers. haereses.
circa matrimonium fidelium, quorum alter labitur in haeresim, res est omnibus
manifesta. neque hic Coelestini error talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae
imputari debuit, ita ut illum errasse dicamus, velut privatam persona^, and non
ut papam, qui in qualibet reseria definienda consulere debet viros doctos:
quoniam huiusmodi Coelestini definitio habebatur in antiquis decretalibus, in
cap. laudabilem, titulo de convers. infidelium: quam ego ipse vidi, and legi.
That pope Celestine erred about matrimony of the faithful, whereof the one is
^^ Pope Celestus.
fallen into heresy, is a thing so manifest, as all men know the same: neither
was this error of Celestine such, as it ought to be imputed to negligence, so
as we may think him to have erred as a private man, and not as pope, who ought
in the decree of every serious matter, to ask counsel of learned men: for
that definition of Celestine was in the old decretals, in the chap. laudabilem,
and in the title de conversione infidelium, which I my self have seen and
read. By this assertion of Alphonsus, it is clear that pope Celestine erred in
the decree of faith. For first he says, that Celestine erred, not as a private
man, but as a pope, and as a public person. Secondly, he called it the decree 1
of a serious matter. Thirdly, he termed it a definition, enrolled in the 2
popes decretals. he therefore erred, as a public person, in the public 3
definition and decree of faith. Pope Nicholas their. taught baptism given
only in the name of Christ to be of force and good, which is not only an
error, but a flat heresy, neither vvil it help the papists, to say as Bellar
minus does, that the pope did not define any Of pope Nicolas.
thing, but only uttered his own opinion as a private doctor. For if they
vvil deny the popes public resolutions set down in their own cannon law,
to be decrees, and definitions: they may with as good reason call white black,
and black white, good evil, and evil good: and say the pope cannot err
indeed in their sense. But let us examine the popes words, who writes thus,
as is to be seen in their own law:

A quodam Iudaeo nescitis vtrum christiano an pagano, multos in patria vestra
baptizatos asseritis, and quid de ijs sit agendum consulitis: hi de consecrat.
did. 4. cap. a quoda^ Iudaeo.
profecto si in nomine S. trinitatis, veltantum in Christi nomine, sicut in
actibus apostolorum legimus baptizati sunt, (vnum quippe idemque est vt sanctus
exponit Ambrosius) constat eos non esse denuo baptizandos.

You say, many in your country were baptized of a Jew: but ye know not
whether that Jew be a christian or a pagan, and ye ask counsel of me,
what is to be done in that case. doubtless they must not be rebaptized, if they
were baptized either in the name of the holy trinity, or only in the name
of Christ, as we read in the acts of the Apostles: for it is all one, as
says S. Ambrose. Bellarminus confesses this sentence of Nicholas to be false
indeed, but he denies it to be heretical, because the church, that is, the
pope has not so defined it. Which answer of Bellarminus, does not defend
that prerogative in decrees of faith, which the pope chalengeth unto himself,

1 For first, this was a public decree, because the Bulgarians asked the
popes judgment, as appears by the word (consulitis) ye require my counsel.

2 Secondle, he erred herein, as Bellarminus is enforced to grant, and
consequently in his public decree.

3 Thirdly, this his decree was contrary to the Gospel, as pope Pelagius
defines in the said canon law. and therefore is Bellarminus his destinction
frivolous, when he grants the popes definition to be false, but not
heretical: as if forsooth an opinon repugaant to christ's gospel can not be
heretical, unless the popes holiness so appoint it.

4 Fourthle, it is enough, that the pope has erred in his decree of faith,
whether they grant it to be heretical or no.

5 Fifthly, pope Pelagius, pope Zachary, and a provincial counsel of England
holden in time of papistrie, have decreed his sentence to be heretical. Pope
Pelagius has these words: De consecr. did. 4 cap. multi.


Multi sunt qui in nomine solummodo christiani, vna etiam mersione se asseru^t
baptizare, euangelicu^ vero praeceptu^ ipso deo et domino saluatore nostro Jesus
Christo tradente, nos admonet in nomine trinitatis, trina etiam mersione,
sanctum baptisma vnicuique tribuere.

There be many that say, they baptize only in the name of Christ, with one
mersion also: but the commaundment of the gospel delivered by God himself, and
our savior Jesus Christ, does advertise us to baptize euety one in the name of
the trinity, with three mersions. Pope Zachary has these words:

In synodo Angloru^ decretu^ et iudicium firmissime praeceptu^, et diligenter
demo^statu^ esse digno scitur: vt quicunque sine invocatione trinitatis mer De
consecr. did. 4. cap. in synodo.
sus fuisset, sacramentu^ regenerationis no^ haberet. quod omnino veru^ est,
quia silotus in fo^te baptismatis quis fuerit sine inuocatione trinitatis, per
fectus christianus no^ est, nisi in nomine patris, et filij, et spiritus sa^cti
fuerit baptizatus hoc quoque obseruari in praedicta synodo sacerdotes volueru^t
vt qui velvna^ de trinitate persona^ in baptismo no^ nominaret, illud baptisma
esse veru^ no^ posset. quod pro certo verum est, quia qui vna^ex sancta
trinitate confessus non fuerit, perfectus christianus esse non potest.

It is well known that it was decreed in a council of England, and that
judgment was given most constantly, and exactly proved, that who soever was
baptized without the invocation of the trinity, he could not have the
sacrament of regeneration: which is altogether true: because, if that any
shall be washed in the fountain of baptism, without the innocation of the
trinity: he is no perfect christian, unless he be baptized in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. This also the priests in that
synod would have observed, that who so should omit but one person of trinity
in baptism, that baptism could not be true. which thing is true for certainty:
because, he that shall not confess one person of the trinity, can not be a
perfect christian. by which testimonies being not only of popes, but of
english papists also assembled in council, we have to note 2. things: the one,
that the resolution of pope Nicholas was a public decree, and no private
opinion: the other, that his decree was false, erroneous, and contrary to the
gospel of Christ Jesus. Josephus Angles, a learned popish Friar, in a book
dedicated to the pope, shows this whole matter distinctly in these words. Si
baptismus modo in nomine Christita^tum, vel sanctissimae trinitatis implicit
conferatur, non erit sacramentum. definita est a Gelasio Josephus Angles de
forma baptismi, ar. 4. co^clus. 3.
papa in canone sirevera, and in canone si multi, vbi dicuntur agere contra
praeceptum evangelicu^ sic baptizantes, and baptismum esse reiterandum. If
baptism this day be given in the name of Christ only, or in the name of the
holy trinity, but not expressly, it shall not be the sacrament of baptism.
this is defined by pope Gelasius in the cano^ sirevera, and in the canon si
multi, where they are said to do against the precept of Christ's ghospel, that
baptize in that manner, and that their baptism must be iterated and done again.
in fine, it is wonderful and almost incredible, what gross, shameful, and
unchristian co^stitutions many popes have made, as well in decrees of faith as of
manners. But I surceasing from recital of huge numbers, will content my self
with only 3. to wit, Stephanus the 6. John the 9. and Sergius the 3. For
first, pope Stephanus made frustrate Platina in vitis pontificum.
and of none effect, the orders received of pope Formosus his predecessor. but
shortly after, pope John disanulled and made frustrate the acts of pope
Stephanus, and approved the acts of pope Formosus. yet after all this, pope
Sergius undid again the acts of pope Formosus, and of pope John, and approved
the acts of pope Stephanus the sixth. These shameful and erroneous
constitutions and factes of these three popes are so true, as not only
Baptista Platina, a grave popish historiographer, but Carranza also, yea and
Bellarminus himself do al confess the same. wherein we have first to consider,
that amongst the papists order is an holy sacrament, and impresseth in the
receiver, an indelible character: by virtue whereof once a bishop must ever he a
bishop by popish doctrine, how soever jurisdiction be taken away: and
consequently, since For nosus was once a bishop: to wit, episcopus Portuensis,
as Argumentum ad hominem.
says Platina: and by virtue thereof had their indelible character, and power
to give orders: it was a most manifest error in faith, and most wicked fact in
manners, to decree as pope Stephanus, and pope Sergius did: that orders given by
pope Formosus were not true orders, but none at all: and thereupon to command
with the notorious scandal of all the world: that all such as were made
priests by him where is now their character indelibilis?
should take orders again, as if they had been of the mere laicall order.

The 6. Conclusion.
NOt only the pope as pope may err in his public decrees, when he alone
defines matters of faith or manners: but also when he so defines, with a
provincial romish council. This conclusion is certain and undoubtedly true,
even by the testimonies of best learned papists. And because Bellarminus dorh
not deny this to be so, I will allege his words, which be these:

Secunda opinio est, pontificem etiam vt pontificem, posse esse hereticum,
Bellarminus lib. 4. de Romans po^tifice cap. 2.
and docere haeresim, si absque generali concilio definiat, and de facto
aliquando accidisse. hanc opinionem sequitur and tuetur Nilus in suo libro
aduer sus primatum papae. eandem sequuti sunt aliquot Parisienses, vt Gerson,
and Almain in libris de potestate ecclesiae, nec non Alphonsus de Castro libro
primo, capit 2. contra haereses, and Adrianus sextus papa in questione de
confirmatione: qui omnes non in pontisice sed in ecclesia, sieve in concilio
generali tantum, constituunt infallibilitatem dicij de rebus fidei.

2 The second opinion is, that the pope even as pope, may be an Lo the
doctrine of the best learned papists is good, and altogether against the
popedom.
heretic, and teach heresy: if he define without a general council: and
that this has in very deed sometime chanced so. this opinion does Nilus
follow and defend, in his book against the popes primacie. The same opinion
have some of the university of Paris followed, as Gerson and Alma in in their
books of the churches power, and of their opinion are also Alpho^sus, and pope
Adrian: who all do not ascribe the infallibility of judgment to the pope,
but to the church or to a general council only, in all matters of faith: out
of which words I note:

1 First, that the pope as pope may err when he alone decrees any matter of
faith.

2 I note secondly, that the pope, as pope may err, when he defines any
matter of faith without a general council: and consequently, that he may
err with a provincial council.

3 I note thirdly, that popes as popes, that is as public persons, have erred
already, and de facto: when they have decreed without a general council.

4 I note fourthlie, that all this is testified by four great learned
papists, whereof one was pope himself.

These testimonies are important, doubtless, and very sufficient to establish
my conclusion. But I will allege yet another proof, so excellent, so
evident, and so irrefragable, as more cannot be wished. The proof stands
thus.

Pope Stephanus, with a council of all the bishops and priests of Italy,
defined flatly against rebaptization. which decree of council with the
popes assent thereto: Saint Cyprian contemned, after it defending his former
opinion constantly. yea he was so far from acknowledging that prerogative in
popes, which they of latter days challenge unto them selves, that he would
not take pope Stephanus for his superior, or to have any jurisdiction over
him, but termed him, superbum, imperitum, and caeeae ac prauae mentis, proud,
ignorant, blind, and naughty, as is evident to such as read his epistle to
Pompeius. Out of which I note:

1 First, that Cyprian was an holy martyr, and now a saint in heaven..

2 I note secondly, that he was a very ancient father and a great learned
clarke.

3 I note thirdly, that he knevv what the pope and his council had decreed.

4 I note fourthly, that he judged a romish counsel to be of no greater force
than a Council African. I note fiftlie, that he judged the Council of Italy
to be of no greater force for the Popes consent, then was 5
the Council of Afrike for his own consent. I note sixtlie, that provincial 6
Councels are of no greater authority for the Popes confirmation, than for the
confirmation of another bishop: all which points are necessarily deduced, out
of Saint Cyprians fact, and writings. And Bellarminus Bellarm. lib. 4 de Romans
Pont. cap. 7
answer hereunto is frivolous, and not worth the rehearsal. The Pope defined
not the controversy as a matter of faith (says Bellarminus) because he did
not excommunicate Saint Cyprian: A sweet dish of a mess of mustarde. The Pope
utterlie disliking Saint Cyprian his opinion, and deeming it repugnant to
Christ's Gospel, and for that end convocating all the Clergy men of Italy,
did define the controversy, but not Bellerminus is confuted.
as a matter of faith, says Bellarminus. The controversy was about
rebaptization, which was either flatly with the Gospel, or flatly against
the same. If it were flatly with the Gospel, then erred the Pope and his
Council egregiously: If it were flatly against the Gospel, and the Pope
decreed it, then decreed he against it, as against a matter of faith, or else
opinions against the Gospel are not against faith.

The Corollarie.
First therefore, since the Popes lives have been most wicked, most notorious,
and scandalous unto the world: secondly, since Popes have aspired unto their
Popedomes by naughty and ungodlie means: thirdly, since Popes may not only
err, and hold false opinions, but also become notorious heretics, and for
their heresies be deprived of their Popedoms: fourthlie, since many Popes have
de facto forsaken the Christian faith, and become flat heretics: fiftlie,
since many Popes have erred in their public doctrine of faith and manners:
sixtlie, since not only the Pope, as he is Pope, may err in his public
decrees, when he alone defines matters of faith and manners, but also when
he so defines with a provincial Council: I conclude, that it is a
sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous,
and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the second motive.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the authority of general Councelles in these our
days.
I Have sometimes had the decrees of general Councelles, aswellatter as former
in great admiration, thinking them the determinations and resolutions of the
holy Ghost: but of late years I have changed my opinion upon sundry weighty
motives, the chiefest whereof I will set down by way of conclusions.

The first Conclusion.
THe decrees of general Councels in these latter days, are nothing else but a
mere mockery and sophistical subtlety, to deceive Gods people withal. For
although there be before every general Council, solemn convocation,
sumptuous preparation, and chargeable peregrenation: and before the end, long,
costly, and tedious abode, yet neither do or can the Fathers of the councels
determine any thing there, which the Pope has not before concluded, sitting
in his chair at home. This may seem strange unto thee (gentle Reader,) as
sometimes ir did unto my self: but I shall (God willing) unfold the obscurity
with such evident perspicuitie, as never man henceforth can stand in doubt
thereof. This shall be performed, if I prove 4, things: First, if I prove
that the decrees of Councels be of no force with papists, unles the Popes
Legates consent unto the 1
same. Secondly, if I prove that though the Popes Legates agree unto the
decrees of Councels, yet are the said decrees of no force: if the legates 2
shall consent unto any one jot, contrary to the Popes appointment. Thirdly,
if I prove that the pope cannot delegate his authority, unto the Legates 3
whom he sen death to the Council. Fourthlie, if I prove that he will not come
to the Councels himself, but determine every thing at home 4
in his chamber. the proof hereof shall be the flattestimonie of Melchior
Canus, a most profounde Schoolman in reasoning, a most reverend Bishop in
dignity, a most sound papist in opinion and sometime the chiefest and most
excellent pofessour of Divinity, in Salmantica. This Canus writes in this
manner:

Si Legatus contra instructionem agit, non censetur ex potestate delegata Canus
lib. 5 de auctor. Conc, cap. 5.
agere, atque adeo non est, cur eo modo act a superioris auctoritate probata
esse credantur. Et paulo post? Decreta igitur quae a Legato contra sedis
Apostolicae traditionem approbentur, non habent Romanae Ecclesiae authoritatem,
nec aliter se habent, quam sia Concilio sine Lega. it is prodijssent. and paulo
post. Solidam auctoritatem, quam in confirmandis and fratribus and dogmatibus
Petrus habet, in Legatos transfer non potest.

If the Legate do any thing contrary to instruction given him, he must not
be deemed to proceed of power delegate, and so there is no cause why the pope
shall be thought to approve the decrees: The decrees therefore, which the
Legate shall approove against tradition of the Church To what end are
Councels, when every thing must be as the Pope says at home.
of Rome, have no authority from the Church of Rome, neither are they of any
more force, than if they had proceeded from the Council without consent of the
Legates: The sound authority therefore, which Peter has in confirming his
brethren and decrees, he cannot transfer unto his Legates. These are the
express words of Canus, that great pillar of popish doctrine. Out of whose
words I note first, that decrees of Councels be of no force without consent
of the Legates. I note secondly, that the decrees of Councels, even when they
have the consent of the Legates: are yet of no force when the Legates
condescend to any thing, against the Popes mind. I note thirdly, that the
Pope cannot translate or give his authority unto the Legate, and
consequently, the Pope greatly abuses the whole world, when he calls
together all bishops in the Christian world, and yet will allow nothing that
they do: unles it be the same that he decrees, in his chair at home. Now
that he never comes to Councels in his own person, Bellarminus records in
this manner:

Summus Pontifex nunquam interfuit Concilijs Orient alibus per Bellarm. lib. 1
de Conciliis. cap. 19
se, etc.

The Pope was never present at the Councels in the East Church, in his own
person: and why was not the Pope present at general Councelles in the East
Church? Bellarminus gives two reasons; the one forsooth, because it was not
convenient, that the head should follow the members. The other, because the
Emperor would ever sit in the highest Mark what the Popes vassal says,
place: which our humble Father the Pope, could not endure. Out of whose
words I note two things: the one, that the highest place in Councels, was in
old time reserved to the Emperor: the other, that the Greek Church did never
acknowledge the Popes primacie.

The second Conclusion.
IN these latter days since the Pope attained his usurped jurisdiction,
general Councelles are so destitute of the holy Ghostes asistance, (though
the Papists never cease to brag thereof) that they decree altogether against
the holy Ghost. This is manifest by the solemn decrees of the late Council of
Trent, as after due examination will evidentlie appear. First therefore, the
said Council decreed flatly, that to be no matrimony which was approoved
Matrimony, by the uniforme consent of the ancient Catholic Church, and which
is this day perfect Matrimony by Christ's institution: These be the words of
the Council,

Qui aliter quam praesente parocho vel alio Sacerdote de ipsius seu ordinarii
licentia, and duobus vel tribus testibus matrimonium contrahere Conc. Triden.
de reformatione. Sess. 8. p. 46. 9.
attent abunt, eos sancta synodus ad sic contrahendum omnino inhabiles reddit,
and huiusmodi contractus irritos and nullos esse decernit presenti decreto.

They that shall go about to marry otherwise, than in the presence of the
parish Priest, or of some other priest, by his license, or grant of the
Ordinary, and with two or three witnesses those the holy Counsel makes
utterlie incapable of Marriage, and defines by this present decree, such
contracts to be frustrate and of no force. By which words and by which decree
we see plainly, that this day those persons are made incapable of matrimony,
and their marriage disanulled, whom Christ Behold here the magnifice^ce of
popish Councels.
pronounces capable, and whose marriage he approoved. For before this decree
of the late Council of Trent, all papists in the world approoved private and
secret matrimonies, for true and perfect: yea, all learned papists do
confess constantly, such clandestine matrimonies to be true marriages in
England, albeit that such contracts be of no force neither in Spain nor
Italy, by their religion. The reason hereof is, because promulgation of the
said Tridentine Councels decree was not yet made in England, as appears by
the first Cannon in the eight section dereformatione. This constant opinion of
all Divines, the Council it self acknowledged in these words,

Dubitandum non est, clandestina matrimonia libero consensu facta rata and vera
esse matrimonia, quandiu Ecclesia ea irrita non fecit. Conc. Triden. Sess. 8.
de reformatione.


There is no doubt, but clandestine and secret matrimonies made with free
consent, were perfect and true matrimonies, so long as the Church did not
disanull the same. Yea, the Council of Trent acknowledges matrimony, to be
one of the seven Sacraments of the new Testament instituted by Christ, and yet
accurseth all such as believe not the Church of Rome, to have authority to
dissolve the same. These be the words:

Si quis dixerit matrimonium non esse vere and proprie, unum ex septem Conc.
Triden. sess. 8. Can. 1 de matimon,
legis Evangelicae sacramentis a Christo domino institutum, sed ab hominibus in
Ecclesiam invectum, neque gratiam confer, anathemasit.

If any shall say that matrimony is not truly and properly, one of the
seven Sacraments of the Evangelicall law instituted by Christ our Lord, but
brought into the Church by men, neither to give grace, accursed be that man.
And in another place it has these words,

Si quis dixerit Ecclesiam non potuisse constituere impedimenta matrimonium
dirimentia, vel in ijs constituendis errasse, anathemasit. Sess. 8. Can. 4


If any shall say, that the Church could not appoint impediments which dissolve
matrimony, or that the Church erred in appointing them, accursed be that man.
These be the decrees of the holy Council of Trent, which, as the Papists
believe, had the assistance of the holy Ghost, and therefore could not err.
Out of which decrees we have first, that matrimony 1
is a contract instituted by Christ himself: we have secondly, 2
that it is an holy Sacrament with the Papists: We have thirdly, that it is
now no Sacrament with the Papists, which by Christ's institution is a 3
Sacrament in their religion: We have fourthlie, that matrimonial contractes,
made without the presence of a Priest: are true and perfect matrimonies, 4
by Christ's law and institution: We have fiftlie, that such matrimonies, 5
to wit, clandestine, are disanulled and made no matrimonies, by the Pope and
his Tridentine Council. neither will it help to say, as the wiser sort of
Papists does, that the Council does not unmarie persons already married,
but only disableth unmaried persons so, as their prohibited marriages cannot
be of force. For, first, the Council pronounces that to be no Marriage, by
reason of man's prohibition, which 1
without such prohibition should be perfect marriage by Christ's institution: as
is already prooved out of the said Council. Secondly, that prohibition
takes away the liberty of the Gospel, as which implies a 2
negative precept not contained in the law of nature: for as their famous
popish doctor Franciscus a Victoria writes,

Lex Evangelicalex libertatis d Christo and Apostolis vocatur, quod Victoria
rele. 7. de matrim. page 280.
solo jure naturali post Evangelium Christiani teneantur, ex omnibus quae in
veteri lege erant.

The law of the Gospel is termed the law of liberty, by Christ and his
Apostles: because after the Gospel Christians are bound only to the law of
nature, concerning all such things as were in the old Law. Thirdly, because
this to do, is to challenge greater authority than Christ has, and to be
above Christ. The reason whereof is evident, because an inferior cannot
change the law of his superior, unless he have from his superior commission
so to do: which Victoria well observed in these words:

Dispensatio in lege spectat solum ad legislatorem, vel superiorem, Victor. de
potest. Papae. and Council. relect. 4. ad, S. p. 133
vel adillum cui specialiter commiserint ipsi.

Dispensation in the Law pertains only to the lawmaker, or to his
superior, or to whom they specially grant commission: If answer be made,
that the Pope has such commission: then would I know, whether he received it
by word or writing: in the mean season the said Victoria tells the Pope,
that he cannot dispense in the law divine. These be his words:

Manet ergo conclusio tanquam certa and firma, quod in primo genere Victor. ubi
supra.
praeceptorum Concilij, scilicet quae sunt iuris divini, Papa non potest
dispensare.

The conclusion therefore abides firm and sure, that in the first kind of
precepts of the Council: to wit, which are of the law divine, the Pope
cannot dispense. And of Victoria his opinion, are Thomas Aquinus, Anthoninus,
Sylvester, Soto, Covarruvias, and all learned papists. Fourthlie, because that
which is of more force, to wit, a simple vow, does 4
not dissolve matrimony: for if that which is of greater force cannot disanull
matrimony, much less can that do it, which is of lesser force, as both the
rule of logic and experience teaches. Now, that a simple vow is of greater
force than the Popes prohibition, cannot be denied: for it is de iure divino,
as all the Papists confess, and as the Scripture records. And Psalm. 75
Eccl. 5
that a simple vow does not dissolve matrimony: Angelus prooveth at Angelus
de mattimon. imped. 5
large, out of the popish Cannon law. Fiftlie, because the Pope or Council
cannot change the essence or essential parts of matrimony, for so says the
Tridentine Council. And if it were otherwise, the Pope might 5
make more or fewer Sacraments at his pleasure: whereupon it follows
necessarily, that all matrimonial contractes be as perfectly matrimonies
this day, as they were in Christ's time: notwithstanding the prohibition of the
Pope, or of his Council. For the essence and substantial parts abiding
unaltered and perfect, the matrimony must needs be perfect. Sixtlie, because
the Priest is mere extrinsecall unto the contract, and therefore cannot
necessarily concur to the essential 6
constitution thereof. The Council then in this decree, was destitute of the
holy Ghost. The said Council affirms the solemn vow of religion, to
dissolve matrimony in these words:

Si quis dixerit matrimonium ratum non consummatum, per solemnem Conc. Triden.
de mat, Sess. 8. can. 6.
religionis professionem alterius coniugum non dirimi, anathemasit.

If any shall say that matrimony firm not consummate, is not dissolved by
solemn profession of religion of the one party, accursed be that man. This
decree likewise is flat against the holy Ghost: which to be so, I prove by
sundry means. The Council it self shall first confute it self, when it
says thus:

Matrimonij perpetuum indissolubilemque nexum, primus humani generis Conc.
Triden. Sess. 8. in init.
parens divini spiritus instinctu pronuntiavit, cum dixit: hoc nunc os exossib.
meis, and caro de carne mea: and paulo post: quod deus coniunxit, homo non
separet. The first parent of mankind pronounced by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, the perpetual and indissoluble bond of matrimony, when he said: this
is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: and a little after: what
therefore God has coupled together, let no man put asunder: These are the
words of the Council: by which we see evidentlie confessed, even of the
Council: that matrimony was indissoluble by Gods The Council that dissolveth,
which it confesses to indissoluble.
appointment, before the consummation (as they term it,) or before copulation
carnal, which is all one. Whereupon I infer first, that matrimony before
consummation, or carnal copulation: is indissoluble by the holy Ghosts
appointment. I infer secondly, that the Council of Trent dissolveth
matrimony before consummation. I infer thirdly, directly upon the first
and second illation: that the decrees of the Council, are flatly against the
holy Ghost. I infer fourthlie, that that may truly be verified of the Pope
and his Council of Trent: which their own Doctor Victoria sounds out
against them, in these words:

Officium Apostolorum Paulus semper vocat ministerium, and certe si quis
mandata Christi relaxaret, non se haberet sicut Dei minister, sed sicut Victor.
relect. 4. de potest. Papae. and Con. ad. 5. Arg. page 132
aequalis, aut potius superior.

Paul terms the office of the Apostles always ministry: and doublesse,
if any should dissolve Christ's commandments, he should not behave himself as
the minister of God, but as his equal, or rather as his Supeour.

The third Conclusion.
ALthough the Popes of latter years take upon them to like or dislike, to
prove or disproove the decrees of general Councels at their pleasures: yet is
every general Council above the Pope, yet may every general Council
excommunicate, judge, and depose the Pope, yet may every general Council
set down laws and decrees concerning faith and manners: which no Pope has
authority, once to alter or change. All which shall be prooved, Gods holy
Spirit assisting me, by the flat testimonies and opinions of the best learned
Papists. Victoria writes in this manner,

Si Concilium declarat aliquid esse de fide, aut de iure divino, Papa in hoc
nihil potest aliter declarare aut immutare, maxim sitale ius spectet Victor.
ubi supra. council. 2, page 133.
adfidem vel admores Ecclesiae universalis.

If the Council declare any thing to be of faith or of the law divine, in
this point the Pope can nothing otherwise declare or change: especially, if
such law appertain either to faith or manners of the universal Church. Of this
opinion are many other learned papists, and especially, their Angelical
Doctor Thomas Aquinas: that every general Council is above the Pope: great
learned papists affirm constantly, to wit, Abulensis, Panormitanus, Ioannes
Gerson, Almainus, Cardinalis Cameracensis, and Cardinalis Florentinus.
Panormitanus argues out of Pope Panorm. in Council. Basil. number. 18. apud Vict.
page 139.
Gregory's words, that as the Pope cannot change any thing in the contents
of the Gospel, so neither can he change any thing in the decrees of
Councels. Yea Ioannes Gerson proceeds further, and says, that a general
council cannot only limit the Popes power, so as he can neither Io. Gerson 1.
part tract. 3. apud Vict. page 138.
dispense nor abrogate the decree of the Council: but also that the Council
may upon a reasonable cause, exempt any man from his jurisdiction. that the
Council may judge and depose the Pope, as also compel him to appear, and for
his disobedience excommunicate his Holiness: The Popes own dear Friar Josephus
Angles Valentinus, avoucheth in these words,

Concilium ecclesiae potest Papam per excommunicationem compellere, Josephus in
4. sentent. p. 2. q. de excom. art. 4. diffic. 1. conclus. 3.
nt redditurus rationem haeresis aut apostasiae criminis cuius accusatur,
compareat, and in his duobus casibus illum excommunicare. patet, quia cumpossit
in his duobus casibus papam deponere, erit tunc illo superior, and
exconsequenti antequam deponatur, per excommunicationem illum ut in iudicio
compare at, compellere: aliter enimsi non posset Concilium Papam compellere,
neque posset illum iudicare.

A general Council may by excommunication compel the Pope to appear, and to
give an account of that heresy or apostacy, whereof he is accused: and in
these two cases excommunicate him. The thing is evident, because when it can in
these two cases depose the Pope, it shall then be his superior: and
consequently, before he be deposed, compel him by excommunication to appear
in judgment. For otherwise, if the Council could not compel the Pope,
neither could it judge him. I could allege more like testimonies in this
behalf, but it is needles: because many express textes in the Popes own
cannon law, do witness the same: whereof this one of Pope Zozimus may
suffice for many,

Contra statuta sanctorum Patrum condere aliquid aut immutare, 25. q 1. cap.
contra.
nec huius quidem sedis potest authoritas.

To make any law, or to change any thing against the decrees of the holy
fathers: this our seat of Rome has no authority. Vict. relict. 4. de potest.
papae. concl. 20. p. 149.


Victoria says thus:

Been scio quod Pavormitanus, and Gerson, and Okam defendunt, quod licet
appellare a papa ad concilium.

I know right well, that Pavnormitaine, Gerson, and Okam do hold, that we
may appeal from the pope unto a general council,

Bellarminus grants, that albeit Cameracensis, Gerson, Almaine, Cusanus,
Pavnormitanus, Florentinus, Abulensis, (who all are great popish doctors,) do
differ in the manner, yet do they all acknowledge the power of a general
council, to be greater then the authority of the pope.

These be his very own words:

Convenient tamen in eo omnes, vt doceant esse hanc potestatem immediate
Bellar. de con. lib. 2. 1. 14.
in ecclesia, and proinde mortuo papavel deposito vel nolente adesse concilio,
concilium non propterea esse corpus imperfectum, sed perfectu^ and habere
potest ate^ papale^ definiendi de fide, sanciendi leges, dandi indulgentias
etc. exquib. deducunt concilium esse supra papam, and posse ipsum indicare, and
punire: and idem esse querere, an papasit mayor concilio, ac si quereretur, an
pars sit mayor suototo.

But they all agree in this, that they teach this power to be immediately in the
church: and therefore when the Pope is dead, or deposed, or will not come to
the council (as he never does,) that then the council is not an imperfect
body, but perfect, and has papal power to define matters of faith, to make
laws, to give pardons, etc. VVhereupon they gather that the council is above
the pope, that it can judge him and punish him, and that it is all one to
demand if the pope be greater then the council, as if it were asked if the
part be bigger then the whole. The council of Basil defined it for an article
of our faith, to believe that the council is above the pope.

These be the express words of the council:

Veritas de potestate concilij generalis vniuersalem ecclesiam repraesentantis
Cont. Basilensess. 33.
supropapam and quemlibet alterum, declarata per Constantiense and hoc
Basileense generalia concilia, est veritas fidei catholicae.

The verity of the power of a general council representing the universal
church above the pope, and every other person declared by the general
council of Constance, and this of Basil, is the very truth of the catholic
faith. And the council adds another clause, to wit, that whosoever denies
this verity obstinately, is to be reputed 25. q. 1. cap. unt quidam.
for an heretic. In fine, Pope vrbanus says thus:

Vbi aperte Dominus veleius apostoli, and eos sequentes sancti patres
sententialiter aliquid definierunt, ibi non novam legem Romans Pontifex dare, sed
potius quod praedicatum est, vsque ad animam and sanguinem confirmare debet.

where our Lord or his apostles have spoken any thing plainly, and the holy
fathers coming after them, have defined any thing iudicially, There the bishop
of Rome must not make any new law, but rather confirm that which is
preached, with the best blood in his body.

The fourth Conclusion.
General and popish councels in these days, are as a nose of wax, and the
decrees thereof as uncertain as the wind.

This conclusion is proved to be such, by the express judgment of great
learned papists.

Bellarminus writes of councels, in this manner:

Nos dicimus, concessum episcoporum in concilijs legitimis esse verum Bellar.
de conlib. 1. cap. 18.
iudicum concessum, and eorum decreta and leges necessario sequendas.

we say, that the assembly of Bishops in lavvfull councels, is the true
assembly of judges, and that their decrees and laws must be followed of
necessity.

But in another place, the same Bellarminus has these words:

Dico igitur, concilium illud non posse errare, quod absolute est generale,
Bellar. lib. 2. de council. cap. 11.
and ecclesiam vniversam perfect representat: eiusmodi autem concilium non
est, antequam adsit sententia summi pontificis.

I say therefore, that that council cannot err, which is absolutely general,
and which represents the universal church perfectly: but such a council is
not before the pope give his assent. And he says again in the self same
chapter:

Idem enim est sive pontifex express concilium reprobet, sive conciliu^ agat
contra pontificis sententiam.

For it is all one, whether the pope expressly disalow the council, or the
council do against the popes mind. Now in the first place Bellarminus tells
us, that bishops are true judges in the councels, and have definitive voices in
the same: and that their decrees must Mat contradiction in the Jesuit.
needs be followed. But in the other two places he sings another song and
tells us, that though the Pope comes not in person to the councels, but
sends his legates in his place: yet are the decrees of such councels of no
force, nor to any purpose, unless they be according to the popes mind. They
are therefore as a nose of waze, because, when the bishops have employed their
whole industry, when they have used long consultation, when they have disputed
the matter pro and contra: when they have inuocated the holy ghost, and have
with mature deliberation set down cannons, accursing such as will not obey the
same: the pope notvvithstanding says, all this is not worth a straw, as which
is contrary to his opinion, that cannot err, and so of none effect.

For the uncertainty of the decrees of councels, Bellarm. says thus:

Non potest fieri vt aliquando adfinem controuersiarum deveniatur, nisidetur
Bellarm. de council. l. 1. c. 21.
locus maiori parti suffragiorum.

It cannot be, that ever an end of controversies should be made, unless the
greater part of voices be of force: and he says in another place.

Est autem verum decretum concilij quod fit a maiori part, alioqui nullum Idem
Bellar. li, 2. ca. 11.
esset legitimum concilij decretum, cum semper aliqui dissentiant.

For it is the true decree of the council, which has the consent of the
greater part: otherwise there should be no lavvfull decree made, because ever
some dissent.

But Melchior Canus tells us another tale, and says in this manner:

Non itaque quod in Romany concessionibus fit, plurium apud nos sententia
praevalet: Canus li. 5. de auct. concilii, cap. 5. p. 164 Of the popes gravitie
and authority, see at large in the 3. chapter.
and paulo post, no^ enim numero haec indicantur, sed pondere. Pondus autem
concilijs dat summi Pontificis, and gravitas, and auctoritas: quae si adsit
centum patres satis sunt, sin desit nulli sunt satis, sint quamlibet plurimi.

Not therefore as in human consents the voices of more are of force with us:
for these things are not judged in number, but in weight: and the councels
receive their weight from the gravity and authority of the pope: which if it
be once present an hundredth fathers are enough, but if it want, none are
enough, be as many as they will.

Now sir, Bellarminus tells us, that more voices in councelles must needs be
of force: But Canus says, it is not so: for be they many, be they few, what
part the pope likes shall be true.

The decrees therefore of popish councels, are as uncertain as the vvind. For
after the fathers of the councels have fasted long, prayed much, consulted
gravely, deliberated maturely, decreed soberlie, commanded strictlye, and
accursed severely: neither others, nor yet themselves can tell, what shall be
of force therein: for all must be as pleases the popes holiness, and perhaps
their decrees will not content his mind.

The fifth Conclusion.
NO bishops can in these our days have voices in councels, but such as first
swear obedience to the pope, and promise to defend his canon law: which thing,
though most absurd, is for all that so clear, as Bellarminus cannot deny the
same.

These be his words. Bellar. lib. 1. de council. cap. vltimo.


Istud iur amentum non tollit epi scoporum libertatem, quae in concilijs
necessaria est. iur ant enim se fore obedientes summo pontifici, quod
intelligitur donec pontifex est, and dum iubet ea quae secundum deum and sacros
canones iubere potest, seanon iur ant se non aicturos quod sentiunt in
concilio, vel se non deposituros eum si hereticum esse convincant.

This oath takes not away the liberty of Bishops, which in councels is
necessary. For they swear that they will be obedient unto the pope, which
is to be understood, so long as he is pope, and while he commands those
things, which he may command agreeable to God, and to the holy cannons: but
they swear not, that they will not speak what they think in the council,
or that they will not depose him if they prove him to be an heretic.

Thus says Bellarminus, whose only testimony is most sufficient A point
worthy the observation.
in all popish affairs, as who is the popes sworn and tenderlye beloved
vassal: Out of whose words for more perspicuitie, I note.

1 First, that all Clergy men admited to give voices in councelles, are
sworn wholy to obey all the popes constitutions.

2 I note secondly, that the said persons are sworn to believe, that the pope
cannot err in his judicial decrees of faith or manners: that no councels are
of force, without the popes confirmation: thatall councels confirmed by him,
are approved by the holy ghost: that he can excommunicate and deposeall
Emperors, kings, queens, and bishops in the christian world, that he can
deliver by his pardons all souls out of purgatory, and a thousand like
things. For all such matters are contained in his canons, and consequently in
their most lamentable oath.

3 I note thirdly, that they are sworn to admit his decrees, who as they
believe, may be an heretic.

4 I note fourthly, that they are sworn to admit his judgment in all matters
of faith, whom yet they may judge and depose for heresy.

5 I note fifthly, that their fundamental article, in appointing the Pope judge
over all controversies: is quite overthrowen and turned vpside down, in this
Bellarminus his explication. For when he says, (while he commands, etc.) he
grants every Bishop freedom The inconstancy of Popish doctrine, is the
cause of dissenting from them.
to examine and judge, when the Pope commands things agreeable to God and
the Canons. Which liberty, if they would constantly perform: all true
Christians and perfect Catholics, would agree with them. For none that believe
rightly in God, will deny obedience to the Pope: when he preaches and
teaches any thing, agreeable to God and holy Canons. But true Christians
finding his canons to be disholy, and his decrees to be against God: think as
Bellarminus here teaches them, that they are not bound to obey him. For as an
other great learned papist Franciscus a Victoria says profoundly, the unjust
laws of the Pope do not bind in conscience. These are his very words:

Ego pro certo habeo, quod omnes leges iniustae etiam Papae, non obligant
Victor. relect. 4. de potest. Papae and Concilii propos. 17. page 157.
in foro conscientiae.

I hold it for a constant and undoubted truth, (says the Popes learned
Doctor,) that all unjust laws even of the Pope, do not bind in the Court of
conscience.

The Papists then, who charge us so strictly to obey the popes laws, and
withal prohibit us to examine the same, do deny us that liberty, which they
take unto them selves: and that the Reader may fully understand the abomination
of the oath, which all popish Bishops swear unto the Pope: I will here set
down the express words thereof, as I find them in their own decretals:

Ego N. Episcopus, ab hac hor a fidelis ero S. Petro, sanctaeque Romanae
Ecclesiae, dominoque meo Papae N. eiusque successoribus Canonice intra^tibus.
Sequitur: Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae, and regulas sanctorum patrum, adiutor ero,
ad defendendum and retinendum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuvet, and
haec sancta Evangelia.

I (John Fisher,) Bishop, will be faithful from henceforth to S. Peter,
Decret. l b. 2. tit. 24. cap. 4.
and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my L. (Boniface) the pope, and to his
successors chosen Canonically: and I will be an helper to defend (against all
the world,) the popedom, or Papal superiority, and the rules of the holy
fathers; so God me help, and the holy Gospel.

Lo 'here gentle reader, open rebellion is required and by evangelicall oath
coufirmed, of suhiectes against their sovereigns: for the bishops of every
country, are fubiects to kings of the same country, and yet do they swear
to defend the popes tyranny, and usurped jurisdiction, against their natural
dread Sovereigns. For they swear to defend the popes usurped authority
against all people none excepted: which his usurped authority, (as you have
partly heard, and shall hear more at large in the sixth Chapter following,)
extends it self to the translation of kingdoms, empyres, and regalities.

The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, since general counsels in these days, are nothing else, but
a mere subtlety to deceive Gods people withal.

2 Secondely, since the said councels decree all together against the holy
Ghost.

3 Thirdly, since Popes take upon them, to approve or disprove councels at
their pleasures.

4 Fourthlie, since by popish doctrine, councels can judge and depose popes.

5 Fifthly, since councels be as a nose of wax, and as uncertain as the
vveathercocke.

6 Sixthly, since appeals may be made unto councels from the Pope, though the
pope deny the same.

7 Seauenthly, since the popes doctrine can not be maintained, but by extorted
oaths.

I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the mish
religion, as false, erroneous and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the third Motyve.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the Popes Dispensations
THe enormities in popish dispensations, are such, so great, and so many: that
if I should receite all, time would sooner fail me then matter whereof to
speak. I will therefore at this present content my self with some fevv,
reserving the residue till more convenient time.

The 1. Conclusion.
THE pope usually dispenses with professed Monks, that they may marry
lawfully: which dispensation is not only against the law divine with them,
but flatlye against the Popes own religion.

In this conclusion, three things are to be proved.

1 First, that the pope does dispense, as is said. 2 Secondly, that his
dispensation is against the law divine. 3 Thirdly, that it is against his own
religion.
For the first part, Navarrus writes in this manner: Navarrus de iuditiis,
notab. 3. p. 275


Papa potest dispensare cum monacho iam professo, vt contrahat matrimonium: imo
de facto multi papae dispensaru^t. Consentit ipse Caietanus, Antoninus, and
Paludanus.

The pope may dispense with a Monk already professed, that he may take a
wife and marry: for many popes de facto have dispensed so Caietanus,
Antoninus, and Palludanus are of the same opinion. For the second point
Victoria writes thus: Multitenent quod victor. de potest. papae, relect 4. ad
3. argument.
Papa non potest dispensare in votis, quia dispensatio proprie est relaxatio
iuris. vnde cum sit de ture divino, dispensatio erit iuris divini relaxatio,
quod sane ad papam non spectat. and vtinam haec opinio non sit vera.

Many hold, that the Pope can not properly dispense in vows, because
dispensation properly is the relaxation of the Law. whereupon since a vow is
of the law divine, dispensation must be remission of the law divine: which
thing doubtless belongs not unto the Pope: and would to God this opinion were
not true.

Lo, this religious Friar is so zealouslie affected toward the popes credit,
that he wishes the opinion which overthrovveth his practice were not true.

And the Popes famous Canonist Covarruvias, writes to the same effect in these
words: Covarruvias to. 1 c. 20. par. 11 in med. ipsius col. prima


Nec me latet D. Thomam previa maxima deliberatione asserere, Romans Pontificem
non posse propria dispensatione continentiae solemn Monachorum votum tollere.
and paulo post: oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere, ne quae passim fiant
evertantur omnino.

Neither am I ignorant, that Saint Thomas affirms after Necessity has no
law, the popes mind must be obered.
great deliberation; that the Bishop of Rome can not with his dispensation,
take away from Monks their solemn vow of chastity: This notwithstanding
we must defend the first opinion, lest those things which are practiced
every where, be utterly overthrown: thus says the great Canonist and reverend
The popes doings must be defended, because otherwise popery cannot stand.
popish bishop Covarruvias, out of whose words sundry things may be noted
worthy the observation.

First, that the papists cannot agree about the Popes authority.

Secondly, that great learned papists among whom Thomas Aquinas is one,
(whose doctrine sundry Popes have confirmed,) 1
do deny the Popes authority in the premises. 2


Thirdly, that the contrary opinion must be defended, for the honesty and
safeguard of the popes religion. 3


Fourthly, that most miserable is the Popes doctrine, which needs such poor
and beggarly shifts for the maintenance thereof. 4


Fifthly, that the papists have no cause so to exclaim against priests marriage,
since the Pope dispenses with his monks to marry at 5
their pleasures. For the marriage of priests is only prohibited by the Popes
law, but the marriage of monks by the law divine, as the Popes own dear
doctors Victoria and Aquinas tell us.

Sixthly, that Aquinas his doctrine, which the Pope has approoved, 6
confuteth the Popes religion. For the third point, Thomas Aquinas gives this
testimony, out of the Popes own law.

Abdicatio proprietatis sicut etiam custodia castitatis, adeo annexa est
regulae monachali, ut contra ea^nec summus Pontifex possit indulgere.

The renouncing of property, as also the keeping of chastity, is so annexed
to the rule of monks, that the Pope him self cannot dispense against the
same: this saying of Thomas Aquinas, is found verbatim in the popes canons,
Extra destatu monachorum Extra de statu monachorum cum ad mon.
cum ad monasterium.

The 2. Conclusion.
THe Pope often pronounces matrimony dissolved by his dispensations, which is
firm and stable by Christ's own institution. The first part is prooved by
Martinus Navarrus, in these words.

Dividitur (matrimonium) ante consummationem, per dispensationem Papae iusta de
causa factam. Navarr. in enchir. cap. 22. par. 21.


Matrimony is dissolved before consummation, by the popes dispensation upon
just cause granted. And a little after he has these words:

Quorum opinio adeo observatur, quodetiam ter vel quater adpetitiones consilio
meo antequam in urbem venissem oblatas, Paulus 3. and Pius 4. per suas
dispensationes dissolverunt quaedam matrimonia omnino clandestina nondum
consummata, in remedium animarum alioquin probabiliter periturarum.

whose opinion (he speaks of the Canonistes who generally are of his own
opinion,) is so observed, that thrice or four times before my coming to Rome
upon petitions made by my advise, Lo, how readily the Pope displeases God,
for the pleasure of man.
Pope Paulus the third and pope Pius the fourth, with their dispensations
dissolved certain secret matrimonies not yet consummate, for the safeguard of
souls which by likelihood would otherwise have perished. And Covarruvias
affirms Paulus the fourth and Julius the third, to have dispensed in like
manner: these be his words. Nec me latet Paulum quartum summum ecclesiae
Pontificem, Ann. 1558. hac vsum fuisse dispensatione quibusdam ex causis, quas
iustissimas esse idem summus ecclesiae praesul existimavit. idem paulo ante
Julius Covarruvias, tom. 1. cap. 7. par. 4. n. 13. col. 1.
3. fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum ecclesiae universally praesideret.

Neither am I ignorant that Pope Paulus the 4. put this dispensation in
practice, for certain causes which the same Pope thought to be most just.
Julius the third when he was Pope, granted in like cause the same dispensation.

The second part is prooved, by the uniform consent of all divines. For
Bellarmine says; Bellar. lib. i. c. 5. de matrim prope finem.


Non autem essentialia matrimonia (ecclesia) vllo modo mutat, aut mutare
potest.

But the essential parts of Matrimony, the Church neither does change,
neither can change.

And doubtless if the Church can not do it, a fortiori, the Pope can not do
it, which Bellarmine will not deny, and Victoria does witness no less in
these words:

Communis schola theologorum negat maiorem, scilicet quod Papa Victor. in
relect. 4. de potest. papae and conc. page 128. ad primum.
possit dispensare, sed in contrarium sunt multi doctores Cannonistarum.

The common school of Divines denies the mayor, to wit, that the Pope can
dispense with matrimony, but many Cannonists hold the contrary.

Cov arru vias likewise says thus:

Tutior ac verior est communis theologorum opinio, quae probat matrimonium
Covarruv. to. t. par. 2. cap. 7. par. 4. n. 14. in medio.
ratum nondum secut a commixtione carnis and sic non consummatum, minime posse
dissolvi Romans Pontif. dispensatione.

The common opinion of Divines is more safe and true, which prooveth that
matrimony perfected by consent, but not consummate by carnal copulation, can
not be dissolved by the Popes dispensation.

And the said Covarruvias adds these words:

Ipse vero non auderem a communi theologorum sententia discedere.

I my self truly durst not forsake the common opinion of devines. And no
marvel: for Christ himself puts the marter out of all doubt, when he
says: Mat. c. 19. v. 7.


Quod Deus coniunxit homo non separet.

That which God has conioined, let no man put asunder.

And in another place he says thus:

Omnis qui dimittit vxorem suam, and alteram ducit, maecatur. Luc. c. 16. v. 18.


Every one that puts away his wife, and marries another, commits
adultery.

And Saint Paul upon the same argument, has these words:

His autem qui matrimonio iuncti sunt, precipio non ego sed Dominus, 1. Cor. 7.
v. 10.
Uxorem a viro non discedere, quod sidi scesserit, manner innuptam, aut Uiro
suo reconciliari, and vir vxorem non dimittat.

Those that are married command not I, but the Lord, that the wife depart not
from her husband: but if she shall depart, then to abide unmarried, or to be
reconciled to her husband.

Thus says Christ, thus says saint Paul, that man and wife joined by Christ,
must abide during life together, or live unmarried, and nor be severed by the
popes dispensation. Neither will it help to say as Bellarm. does, and others
with him: that Christ only speaks de matrimonio consummato, and that
matrimonium ratum, with which the pope dispenses, is not de iure divino: For
first, if matrimonium ratum what an absurd answer is this?
were not de iure divino: the greatest popish deuines would not deny the popes
dispensation therein: as who grant him power over all laws humane.

2 Secondly, Christ speaks absolutely, and makes no mention of copularion or
popish consumation, which is all one.

3 Thirdly, with papists matrimony is a divine sacrament, and so is perfect
without carnal copulation.

For as their own Canus says:

Sanctus spiritus and sacramenti gratia, per coitum non datur. Canus, lib. 8.
de locis theol. c, 5. p. 246.


The holy ghost and grace of sacrament, is not given by copulation.

4 Fourthly, it follows hereupon, that matrimony is not fully perfect in
the popish Church, because copulation follows a good while after.

5 Fifthly, because it is absurd to say, that it begins to be a sacrament by
carnal copulation, and was not a sacrament by the priests action.

6 Sixthly, it follows hereupon, that the marriage between the blessed Virgin
and S. Joseph was not perfect matrimony: For there doubtless wanted popish
carnal copulation.

7 Seauenthly, it follovveth hereupon. that there was not perfect matrimony
between Adam and Eve: For their matrimony was in the state of innocence, and
before all carnal copulation.

8 Eighthly, because if matrimony be not de iure divine before copulation:
there is no cause why both parties agreeing together, may not release the
bargain, and quite dissolve the contracte. For as the Vide Victor. de potest.
papae. p. 128. and Soto, in 4. did. 27. p. 48.
law says: Quisque potest suo iuri cedere: Every man may yield up his right:
which thing all, both canonistes and devines, admit for good in sponsalibus.

The 3. Conclusion.
AS the pope pronounces, that matrimony dissolved by virtue of his
dispensation, which remains true and perfect matrimony by Christ's
institution: So does he likewise pronounce by like dispensation that to be
true and perfect matrimony, which both by the law devine, and law of nature,
is no matrimony at all. The former part of this assertiue proposition, is
proved in the conclusion going next before. For probation of the second part, I
make this supposall: that the pope has dispensed with brothers in the
marriages of their brothers vviues, as the world right well knows to be
true.

This supposall made, I proceed in this manner. The law of Moses was partly
judicial, partly ceremonial, and partly moral. The judicial and ceremonial
parts were abrogate by Christ's passion, as witnesses Saint Paul in these
words: Translato sacerdotio, necesse Heb. c. 7. v. 12.
est vt and legts translatio fiat. Translation of priesthood being made, there
must also be translation of the law: but the moral and part natural is still
in force, in so much as al Christians are this day bound to keep the
decalogue: notvvithstanding the translation of the law of Moises, even as were
the Gentiles before the said law was given. For the gentiles were as much
bound before the law, and we now after the law: to abstain from Idolatry,
theft, adultery, and the rest, as were the Jews in time of the law. For as
Victoria has well observed, the gospel is called the law of liberty, because
Christians after promulgation of the gospel, are only bound to the law of
nature: of all such things as are contained in the old law: and all devines
are of the same opinion, as witnesses the said Victoria in these words:
Receptissimum est apudomnes theologos, and necessarium est it a tenere, ex
omnibus precept is veteris legis, sola moralia integra and firma restitissein
nova lege. It Victor. de matrim. sect. 2. relect. 7. p. 280
is a general opinion approved of all divines: and it is necessatie so to
hold, that of all precepts in the old law only moral abode firm and intier
in the new law. Thus then is it plain, that that part of Moises law which
is moral, or natural, abides still in full strength and virtue. To which I
must ad two things, for the exact and perfect probation of this my third
conclusion.

1 The one, that the law of nature is immutable, and indispensable by the
power of man: and consequently, that the pope cannot dispense therewith. The
other, that all the laws prohibited in the 18. of Leviticus, especiallly that
of marying the brothers wife, are moral and prohibited by the law of nature.
For the former part, Victoria writes in this manner. In hoc genere decretorum
aut Canonum, Victor. relect. 4 de potest. papae, prop. 1. page 126.
papa nihil potest immutare dispensando, and multominus abrogando. Conclusio
est omnium theologorum absque controversia, and potest breviter probari, quia
ius natural est immutabile, and ut legitur in decretis, natural ius semper
permanet.

In this kind of decrees or Canons, the Pope can change nothing by
dispensation, and much less by abrogation. It is the conclusion of all divines
without any controversy, and it may be prooved briefly, because the law of
nature is immutable, and as it is in the decrees, the law of nature abides
always. Thomas Aquinas confirms the same in these words:

Sed praecepta decalogi sunt de iure naturali, ideo nec in eis nec in alijs,
Aquin. in lib. 3. sent. did. 37. art. 4.
prout vim eorum continent, licet alicui homini dispen sare.

But the precepts of the decaloge are of the law of nature, and therefore no
man can dispense either with them or with others, that contain the force
thereof. And the Popes famous archbishop Autoninus tells his holiness
flatly, that his fulness of power does in no case extend it self, to the
law divine or law of nature. These are his words:

Quantum vero ad illa quae sunt de iure naturali vel divino, iurisdictio seu
potest as papalis non se extendit: sic vero quod ista possit mutare, Antoninus
de potest. papae, part 4. tit. 22. cap. 3. par. 1.
vel etiam dare eis vim obligandi: and ratio est, quia inferior non potest
mutare leges superioris: deus autem est superior ad papa^.

Concerning those things which are of the law of nature, or law divine,
jurisdiction or papal power does not extend it self: so to wit that the Pope
can change these things, or give power obligative unto them: and the reason is,
because an inferior can not change the laws of his superior, and God is the
Popes superior. I deem he be in very deed.
Thus then have I prooved evidently by the Popes own doctors, that the Pope
can not dispense with the law divine, or with the law of nature. It remains
that I likewise prove, the laws prohibited in Leviticus to be the laws of
nature: and consequently, indispensable by the power of man. First therefore,
it is written in the self same chapter after the prohibition of the said
degrees, in this manner. Nec polluamini in omnibus his, quibus contaminatae sunt
universae gentes, Levit. 18. 24.
quas ego eijciam ante conspectum vestrum, and quibus polluta est terra, cuius
ego scelera visitabo, ut evomat habitatores suos. Be ye not polluted in all
these things with which all nations are defiled, whom I will cast out before
your sight, and with which the earth is polluted, whose iniquities I will
visit, that it may vomit out the inhabitants thereof. By which words we see
evide^tly, that the breach of these laws was wicked and unlawful among the
Gentiles: and consequently, that the Gentiles marrying within degrees here
prohibited, transgressed the law of nature. For they being free from all
other laws, could not be polluted by the breach of any law, save only of
the law of nature.

2 Secondly, every one knows, and can easily discern by natural
discourse, that a brother to marry his own sister, is against the la we of
nature: and yet does Thomas Aquinas affirm, that there is like prohibition in
affinity.

His words be these.

Natural propinquitie (says he) comes alio modo per carnalem copulam,
Aquinas in 4. sent. did. 4. ar. 2.
quae est etiam actus naturae adgenerationem ordinatus, and exhac causatur
affinitas, quae quidem impedit matrimonium eisdem rationibus, quibus and
consanguinitas.

Natural propinquitie comes another way by carnal copulation, which is an
act of nature ordained to generation: and of this is caused affinity, which
verily prohibiteth Matrimony by the self same reasons by which
consanguinity does.

3 Thirdly, because many late popish writers do affirm the same.

Victoria has these words:

Aliqui, vt Archiepi scopus Florent. 3. p. tit. 1. cap. 4. and Palud. in 4.
Victor. relict. 4. de potest. papae, page 129. ad, 2.
d. 40. Videntur tenere, quodin omnibus gradibus prohibitis in Leuttico, Papa
non posset dispensare. and hoc reputat Silvester probabilius.

Some, as Archbishop of Florence, and Paludanus seem to hold that the pope can
not dispense, in any of the degrees prohibited in Leviticus: And this opinion
Sylvester thinks more probable:

4 Fourthly, because the common opinion of the Fathers was, that all degrees
prohibited in the said Leviticus, are prohibited now by the law devine. Which
Josephus Angles constantly avoucheth to be so, in these words.

Duae sunt opiniones, prima omnium fere antiquorum, qui affirmabant omnes
gradus in Levit. prohibitos, esse etiam nunc iure divino prohibitos. Joseph.
Angles in 4. S. p. 1. q. 13. ar. 3.
Haec fuit S. Bo. Tho. Ric. and Dur. quibus adhaesit Sylvester, affirma^s Papam
non posse dispensare in gradibus in Levit. prohibitis.

There be two opinions:

1 The first was of all the old vvriters some fevv excepted, who affirmed
that all degrees prohibited in Leviticus, are now also prohibited by the law
devine. This was the opinion of Saint Bonaventure, of Thomas, of Richardus,
and of Durand, with whom Sylvester took part, affirming that the pope can not
dispense with degrees prohibited in Leviticus.

This then is true not only by the scriptures, but even by the testimony of
the popes own doctors, and by the uniform consent of approved antiquity.

Absurd therefore is Cardinal Allens opinion, and most disloyal Allens words
disloiall.
are his speeches: when he in his apology for the seminaries, justifies James
Laborne his opinion against the premises.

The fourth Conclusion.
THE popes dispensations are as general as ungodly: his corrupt vassals daily
gaping and expecting, who will ask dispensations for every jot in the law.
This conclusion though strange to many men's cogitations, shall be proved by the
constant assertion of the best learned popish doctor.

Thus therefore writes Victoria.

Videmus quotidie a Romana curiatam largas, imo omnino tam dissolutas Victor.
de potest. papae and conc. relect. 4 p. 139.
dispe^sationes profectas, vt orbis far non possit, non solum in scandalum
pusillorum, sedmaiorum.

We see daily so large, yea altogether so dissolute dispensations come from
the court of Rome, that the world cannot endure it, neither is that to the
scandal only of the weak, but even of the perfect sor^^.

And in another place, the said Victoria says thus:

Sed clamat experientia in contrarium, and videmus quodnullus quaerit
dispensationes, quin obtineat.

But experience exclameth to the contrary: and we see that no man seeks for
dispensations, but he atteineth the same.

And in another place he says thus:

Ego nullam dispen sationem in particulari condemno, sed video duo: primum,
quod in fine anni sunt tot dispensationes factae, vt nescio an sint Vbi supra
page 149.
tot qui legem servent. Secundo, video quod omnes qui petunt afferunt
dispensationes, quos mirum est habere legitimas causas, vt cum eis dispensetur
in impedime^tis matrimonij, and irregularitatis, and in pluralitate
beneficiorum.

I condemn no dispensation in particular, but I see two things: First, that
in the end of the year there are so many dispensations gotten, as I know not
if so many keep the law. Secondly, I see all Lo, for spiritual livings and
matrimony, and such like, dispensations are never denied.
that ask bring dispensations, whom I marvel if they all have lawful causes,
that they may be dispensed withal, in the impediments of matrimony, and of
irregularitie, and for the plurality of spiritual livings.

And in another place the said Victoria has these words.

Et paultim adhanc intemperantiam dispensationum deventum est, and hunc talem
statum, vbi necmala nostra nec remedia pati possumus, Victor. vbi supag. 151.
and ideo necesse est aliam rationem excogitare adconservandas leges. Da mihi
Clementes, Linos, Sylvestros, and omniapermittam arbitrio eorum. Sed vt nihil
gravius dicatur in recentiores pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis
illis inferiores.

By Title and little we are brought to these in ordinate dispensations, and to
this so miserable state, where we are neitherable to endure our own griefs,
nor remedies a sligned for the same. And therefore must we perforce invent
some other way, for conferuation of the laws. Give me Clements, Lines,
Silvesters: and I will commit all things unto their charge. But to speak
nothing grievously against these latter popes: they are doubtless inferior to
popes of old time, by many degrees. I could all eage many other testimonies:
But this Victoria being of great credit among the papists, is a most
sufficient witness in their own proceedinges.

The Corollarie.
First therefore, since the Pope dispenses usually with professed monks,
against his own canons, and religion.

2 Secondly, since the pope dissolueth by his dispensations, such matrimonies
as are indissoluble by Christ's institution.

3 Thirdly, since the pope pronounces that to be true matrimony by virtue of
his dispensation: which both by the law divine, and law of nature, is no
matrimony at all.

4 Fourthly, since the pope does not only dissolve Christ's law: but also
turns his own law vpside down, by his ungracious and intolerable
dispensations.

I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish
religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the fourth Motyve.
THE SIXTE CHAPTER. Of the Popes authority, and Jurisdiction.
THe papists boaste, that the pope is Christ's vicar general, that he has
fullness of power, that all ecclesiastical jurisdiction is dependent upon
him: that he can excommunicate kings, depose kings, and give their
kingdoms unto others: concerning which points, I vvil proceed by way of
conclusions.

The first Conclusion.
THe ecclesiastical power of all the Apostles, was general over all the
world, equal with Peter's, and the self same that Peter's was.

Christ himself proves this conclusion, when he says:

Data est mihi omnis potest as in coelo and in terra, euntes ergo docete Mat.
cap. vlc. verse. 19.
omnes gentes.

All power is given me in heaven and in earth: go therefore and teach all
nations.

In an other place he says thus:

Hoc facite in meam commemorationem.

Do this in the remembrance of me. Luc. 22. v. 20. John 20. v, 23


And again thus:

Quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis.

Whose sins ye shall forgive, are forgiven them.

And in another place, thus:

Amen dico vobis, quaecunque alligaueritis super terram, erunt ligata and in
coelo, and quaecunque solueritis super terram, erunt soluta et in coelo: Mat.
28. v. 18.


Verily I say unto you, what things soever ye shall bind upon earth, shall be
bound also in heaven: and whatsoever things ye shall loose upon earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven. All which sayings, Christ spoke and uttered of and to
his apostles all, as well as to Peter: making them al apostles, as well as
Peter. And as they were all apostles as well as Peter, so had they all equal
power, not only of order, but Mat. 10. v. 1. Mark. 3 v. 14. Luc. 6. v. 14.
Victor. de potest. eccles. relect. 2. conc. 3. p. 84.
of jurisdiction also: which their Victoria records in these words:

Adofficium Apostolatus, spectat potestas ordinis and iurisdictionis.

To the office of Apostleship, pertains both the power of order and of
jurisdiction. And S. Cyprian decideth this matter in most plain and evident
words, when he says thus:

Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Ego dico tibi, quiatu es Petrus, etc. and Cypr. de
simppraelat. p. 113.
paulo post; Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari
consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, sedexordum ab vnitate profici
scitur, ut Ecclesia vna monstretur.

Our Lord speaks unto Peter, I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon
this rock will I build my Church. etc. and a little after: The same were the
rest of the Apostles doubtless, that Peter was: endued with equal fellowship,
both of honor and of power: but the beginning proceeds from vnitre, that the
Church may be showed to be one.

Covarruvias their famous Canonist, albeit he would very gladly defend the
Popes pretended power, and have only Peter's power ordinary and independent:
yet can he not deny our Savior Christ to have given equal power to all the
Apostles. These be his very words:

Etenim iuxta catholicorum virorum auctoritates, and communem omnium
traditionem, Covarruvias to. 1. part. 2.. 9. page 242. col. 4. prope finem.
apostoli parem ab ipso Domino Jesus cum Petro potestatem orainis and
iurisdictionis acceperunt: it a quidem, vt quilibet apostolorum aequalem cum
Petro habuerit potestatem ab ipso deo, in totum orbem, and in omnes actus quae
Petrus agere poterat.

For according to the auctorities of Catholic writers, and the common
tradition of all, the Apostles received from our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
equal power with Peter, both of power and jurisdiction: in so much doutlesse,
as every Apostle had equal power with Peter from God himself, and that both
over all the world, and to all actions that Peter could do.

Out of which testimonies I note first, that all the Apostles had equal 1
authority with Peter. I note secondly, that all the Apostles had power 2
over all the world, even as Peter had. I note thirdly, that what act so ever 3
Peter could do, every other Apostle could do the same. I note fourthly, that
the jurisdiction of every Apostle, did extend as far as Peter's. 4
I note fifthly, that Christ's speeches to Peter in the singular number, 5
did not argue superiority of jurisdiction: but did only signify the unity
of his Church. I note sixthly, that all this is confirmed by the opinion of 6
Catholic writers, and by tradition of all generally. For all these six
points are expressly contained, (if they be well marked,) in the auctorities
already alleged. The same are confirmed by the testimony of S. Augustine, in
sundry places of his works.

Claves (inquit Augustinus) non vnus homo Petrus, sed vnitas accepit Aug. in
sermon. Petr. and Pauli, apud Canu^.
Ecclesiae.

Not one only man Peter received the keys, but the unity of the Church.

In an other place, the same S. Augustine writes in this manner: Aug. in lib.
de agone Christ. cap. 30. tom. 3.


Ecclesiae catholicae personam sustinet Petrus, and cum ei dicitur ad omnes
dicitur; amas me, pasce oves meas.

Peter represents the person of the Catholic Church, and when it is said to
him, it is said to all: Love thou me, feed my sheep.

So then, that text of Scripture, which with the Papists is the foundation of
popish primacie, to wit, Feed my sheep: makes no more for Peter's
superiority, then it does for the supremacy of other Apostles. For as you
have heard out of S. Augustine, it was as well spoken to all, as to Peter. Yea,
the gross imagination of papists, concerning the building of the Church upon
Peter, is lively and evidently confuted of S. Augustine in an other place,
where he thus writes:

Tu es inquit Petrus, and super hanc Petram quam confessus es, super August. de
verb. dom. sermon. 13. 10. 10.
hanc Petram quam cognovisti, dicens, tu es Christus filius dei vivi,
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. id est, super meipsum filium dei vivi, aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam. super me aedificabo te, non me super te.

Thou art Peter says Christ, and upon this rock which thou have confessed,
upon this rock which thou have acknowledged, saying, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God, will I build my Church: that is, upon my self the Son of
the living God, will I build my Church. I will build thee upon my self, but
not my self upon thee.

Mark well these words, (gentle Reader,) with the other last rehearsed out of
Saint Augustine: and doubtless, if plain and manifest exposition of the
Scripture will content thy mind, thou can not but now have thy desire. The
great general Council of Constantinople, makes the Church of Constantinople
equal in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, with the Church of Rome. These be the
words:

Renovantes quae a s. patribus, 150. qui in hac regia vrbe convenerunt, Council.
Constable. 6. can. 36.
and a 630. qui Chalcedone convenerunt, constituta sunt; decernimus, vt thronus
Constantinop. aequalia privilegia cum antiquae Romae throno obtineat, and in
Ecclesiasticis negotijs vt illa emine at, secundus post illam existens.

We renewing the Canons which were set down by the 150. holy fathers,
assembled in this royal city, and by the 630. fathers gathered together in
Chalcedon: do define, that the Sea of Constantinople have equal privileges
with the Sea of old Rome, and that it excel as Rome in Ecclesiastical
affairs, being the second after Rome.

And long before all this, that famous Council of Nice distributing circuits,
and assigning determinate jurisdictions to the Patriarchall seats, appointed
to the Church of Rome prefixed limits, as to the rest. These be the words:

Mos antiquus perduret in Egypto, vel Lybia, and Pentapoli, vt Alexandrinus
Conc. Nicen. can. 6.
Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quoniam quidem and Episcopo Romans
parilis mos est.

Let the old custom continue in Egypt, or Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the
Bishop of Alexandria may have power over them all, because like custom has
the Bishop of Rome.

Which Canon is reported in the Council of Carthage, and there uttered in
plain terms.

Antiquiores obtineant qui apud Egyptum sunt, and Lybiam, and Pentapolin, Conc.
Carth. 6. can. 6.
ita vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium exhibeat solicitudinem, quia and
vrbis Romae Episcopo similis mos est. similiter autem est circa Antiochia^, and
in caeteris provincijs privilegia propria reserventur metrapolitanis Ecclesiis.

Let the ancient obtain which are at Egypt and Lybia, and Pentapolis, so that
the Bishop of Alexandria may have the charge of them all, because also the
Bishop of Rome has the like custom. In like manner also, let the proper
privileges be reserved to metropolitain Churches, about Antioch and other
Provinces.

By which words we see evidently, that this ancient and famous Council
makes no other account of the Church of Rome, then it does of other
Patriarchall seats. Which Ruffinus himself, though reputed a great Papist,
has confessed bountifully in these words:

Vt apud Alexandriam vel in vrbe Roma vetusta consuetudo servetur, Ruffin. lib.
10. hist. Eccles. cap. 6.
vt vel ille Aegypti, vel hic subvrbicarum Ecclesiarum sollicitudinem gerat.

That the old custom may continue, and that the Bishop of Alexandria may have
the charge of Egypt, as the Bishop of Rome has charge of the Churches nigh to
Rome.

Lo, in Ruffinus his days, the Bishop of Rome had his jurisdiction limited,
which extended only to certain special Churches of Italy. For which cause
Saint Hierome, a dear friend and great favourer of the Church of Rome,
confessed for all that, the Bishop of Rome to be of no greater merit,
excellency, or authority, then other Bishops are: as also that the custom of
Rome, could not overruled other Churches.

These are S. Hieromes own and express words:

Si auctoritas quaeritur, orbis mayor est vrbe vbicunque fuerit Episcopus,
Hier. epist. ad Evagr. tom. 3. fol, 150.
sive Romae, sive Eugubij, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegij, sive Alexandriae,
sive Tanis: eiusdem meriti, eiusdem est and sacerdotij. potentia divitiarum and
paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Epi scopum facit,
caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Sed dicis, quomodo Romae
adtestimonium diaconi presbyter ordinatur? quid mihi profers vnius vrbis
consuetudinem?

If we look for authority, the world is greater then one city. Where so ever
a bishop shall be, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at
Rhegium, or at Alexandria, or at Tanis; he is of the same merit, and of the
same priesthood. The magnificence of riches, and the baseness of poverty, does
make him higher or lower, but all are the successors of the Apostles. But thou will say, how is a priest made at Rome by the testimony of a Deacon? why do
thou allege unto me the custom of one only city?

Thus S. Hierome agrees with Ruffinus, Ruffinus with the Council of Nice, and
the Council of Nice with other Councels, fathers, and Scriptures. And all
jointly conclude the equality of other Bishops and Churches, with the Bishop
and Church of Rome.

The second Conclusion.
ALL the Apostles received their universal power immediately from Christ, and
not from Peter at all; and consequently, their jurisdictions were no less
ordinary then Peter's was. This to be so, (though this day much impugned by the
Papists,) prooveth a great popish Doctor Franciscus a Victoria, in these words:

Omnem potestatem quam Apostoli habuerunt, receperunt immediate Victor. de
potest. eccles. relect. 2 conclus. 3. page 84.
a Christo.

All power which the Apostles had, they received it immediately from Christ.

And in an other place, the said Victoria has these words:

Lex iniusta Episcopi non obligat, ergo nec Papae. Antecedens est notu^,
Victor. de potest. Papae, and concilii, relect. 4. page 157.
and concessum ab omnibus; and consequentia videtur not a, quia no^ habet
maiorem auctoritatem Papa adinferendum iniuriam, quam Episcopus; circa ea enim
quae sunt sui officij, and in proprios subditos, non minus potest quam Papa.

The unjust law of the Bishop does not bind a man, ergo neither does the
unjust law of the Pope bind a man. The antecedent is known and granted of
all, and the consequence seems manifest, because the Pope has no more
authority to do an injury, then has the Bishop. For in those things which
perteine to his office, and to his proper subjects, he can do as much as the
Pope.

Lo, this great learned Papist, who for his learning is reverenced of all
Papists in the world, ascribes no less authority to every Bishop in his
diocese, then to the Pope himself. Again, he affirms that no bishops
authority is dependent upon the Pope, but is immediately from Christ: so that
papistrie is still confuted and confounded by it self, and that by the best
doctors of greatest authority, even in the Church of Rome. Josephus Angles,
though otherwise he flatter the Pope and advance his authority, yet has Gods
Spirit enforced him to testify the same truth. These are his words:

Si comparemus B. Petri and aliorum Apostolorum potestatem ad gubernationem
Joseph. Ang. in 4. sent. q. de clavib. diffic, 2. conclus. prima, page 6.
omnium credentium, tantam alij Apostoli habuerunt potestatem, quantam B.
Petrus habuit, it a quod poterant quemlibet Christianum totius orbis, sicut
modo Romans Pont. excommunicare, and in qualibet Ecclesia Episcopos and
sacerdotes creare. ratio est, quia omnis potestas B. Petro promissa and
tradita, fuit and caeteris Apostolis collata, and hoc sine personarum, loci,
vel fori discrimine.

If we compare the power of S. Peter and of the other Apostles, to the
government of all the faithful: other Apostles have even as much power as S.
Peter had, so that they could then excommunicate every Christian in the whole
world, as the Bishop of Rome does now, and also make Bishops and Priests in
every Church. The reason is, because all power promised and given to S. Peter,
was also given to the rest of the Apostles, and that without difference of
persons, place, or consistory.

This is the sentence of fiyer Joseph, who unwittingly and unwillingly Magna
est veritas and praevalet, 3. Esdrae 4. 42.
(such is the force of verity,) does wonderfully advance the truth, even
while he seeks to oppugn the same.

1 For first, he grants that every Apostle had as much authority as S.
Peter.

2 Secondly, that every Apostle had then as much authority, as the Pope
chalengeth now.

3 Thirdly, that every Apostle had authority from Christ, to create Priests
and Bishops every where.

4 Fourthly, that all this their authority was given them, without difference
of person, place, or consistory.

O merciful God, blessed be thy holy Name for ever: such is the majesty of
thy holy Gospel, that the enemies thereof justly infatuated for their sins,
do unawares even then illustrate thy truth, when they think the most to
obscure the same. This I did not see, O God, when I was abandoned from thee:
this I now behold, O God, when thou of thy mercy have called me to thee.
Grant, O sweet Father, that all seduced Papists may behold the same with me,
to the glory of thy holy Name, the honor of thy Church, and the eternal
solace of their own souls. For more then the Popes own dear doctors do
teach us, we desire not at the Popes hands. The general Councels of Constance
and Basil, decreed this matter in these manifest terms:

Ipsa synodus in spiritu Sancto legitime congregata generale concilium Constable.
Conc. Ses. 4. and Basil. Conc. Sess. 2. and 3.
faciens, and Ecclesiam militantem representans, potestatem immediate a Christo
habet.

The Synod lawfully assembled in the holy Ghost, making a general Council,
and representing the Church militant, has power immediately from Christ.

Thus says the Council, and doubtless where power comes immediately from
Christ, it can not be derived from the Pope. Thirdly, S. Paul had special
authority over the Gentiles, and largely as much as Peter, if not more: and
consequently, since all Christians now, were Gentiles then: the Pope if he will
needs have superiority over his brethren Bishops, must reduce his succession
from S. Paul. For thus says S. Paul of himself: (...). The Gospel Gal. 2. 7.
of the uncircumcision was committed to me, even as the Gospel of circumcision
to Peter.

The third Conclusion.
Kings have power coactive over Popes, but Popes have no coactive power over
Kings: albeit Popes of late days, have not only excommunicated Princes, but
deposed them also. For proof of this conclusion, many texts of holy Scripture
are consonant. King Solomon deposed Abiathar, and placed Sadock in his room.
For so the book of Kings says:

Abiathar quoque sacerdoti dixit rex, vade in Anathoth ad agrum tuum, 3. Reg.
2. verse. 27. and 35.
and quidem vir mortis es, sed hodie te non interficiam, quia portasti arcam
domini dei coram David patre meo, and sustinuisti laborem in omnibus, in quibus
laboravit pater meus. eiecit ergo Solomon Abiathar, vt non esset sacerdos
domini. and paulo post: and Sadoc sacerdotem posuit pro Abiathar.

Then the King said to Abiathar the priest, go to Anathoth unto thine own
farm, for thou art worthy to die, but I will not this day kill thee, because
thou barest the Ark of the Lord God before David my father, and because thou
have suffered in all where my father has been afflicted. Solomon therefore
cast out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord, and set Sadock the priest
in the room of Abiathar.

King Iosaphat appointed both Ecclesiastical and secular Magistrates,
commanding them strictly to look unto their charge. These be the words of holy
writ:

In Jerusalem quoque constituit Io saphat Levitas, and sacerdotes, and
principes familiarum ex Israel, vt iudicium and causam domini iudicarent 2.
Par. 19. 8, 9.
habitatoribus eius. Praecepitque eis dicens: sic agetis in timore domini
fideliter, and cord perfecto.

King Iosaphat appointed in Jerusalem, Levites and Priests, and Princes of the
families of Israel, that they should judge the judgment and cause of the Lord
to the inhabitants thereof. And he commanded them, saying: Thus shall ye do in
the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect heart.

And it follows in these words:

Omnem cau sam quae venerit ad vos fratrum vestrorum qui habitant 2. Par. 19.
10.
in vrbibus suis, inter cognationem and cognationem, vbicunque quaestio est de
lege, de mandato, de caeremonijs, de iustificationibus, ostendite eis vt non
peccent in Dominum.

Every cause which shall come unto you of your brethren which dwell in their
cities, between kindred and kindred, where soever question is of the law, of
commandment, of ceremonies, of iustifications, tell them that they sin not
against the Lord. It follows thus:

Amarias aute^ sacerdos and Pontifex vester, in his quae ad deum pertinent, 2.
Par. 19. 11.
praesidebit: porro Zabadias filius Ismaelqui est dux in domo Judah, super ea
operaerit quae adregis officium pertinent.

Amarias the Priest and your Bishop, shall bear rule in those things which
perteine to God: and Zabadias son of Ismael captain in the house of Judah,
shall be over those works which belong to the office of the King.

These are the express words of holy Scripture, which I have alleged at
large, because if they be once applied effectually, they can not but prove my
opinion fully.

1 First therefore, as the Queens most excellent Majesty that now is,
appoints Bishops and Priests: so king Iosaphat appointed Priests and
Levites, so king Solomon appointed Sadock.

2 Secondly, as her Majesty deposes Priests: so king Solomon deposed Abiathar.

3 Thirdly, as her Majesty commands her Bishops in England: to preach the
Gospel, to administer the Sacraments, to reform abuses, and to execute
censures Ecclesiastical according to the Scriptures: so commanded king
Iosaphat his Priests in Jerusalem: to decide all controversies arising about
the law, about commandments, about ceremonies, about iustifications, and to
teach his people their duty therein.

4 Fourthly, as king Iosaphat appointed Amarias ruler in spiritual causes, and
Zabadias governor in secular affairs, distinguishing their offices, and
limiting their jurisdictions: so does her Majesty refer Ecclesiastical
affairs to her clergy men, and matters of state to her secular lords,
neither confounding their functions, nor disabling their persons.

5 Fifthly, as King Iosaphat did neither bear the Arc, nor burn incense, nor
offer up sacrifice, nor initiate his priests; so neither does her Majesty
preach the Gospel, administer the Sacraments, consecrate her Bishops, or
personally execute any Churchly function. And therefore are the Jesuit
Bellarmine his words most absurd, when he says:

Et iam reipsa Calvinistis in Anglia, mulier quaedam est summus pontifex.

And now in very deed, a woman is Pope of the Calvinists in England.

He might more probably have said, that a woman was once Pope to Romish
Jesuits his brethren. For so much he may read this day, painted upon the Church
walls in Syenna: which in the late repairing of that famous Church, the Bishop
would not suffer to be defaced, albeit the Jesuits made such request unto him.
I will omit to speak of king David, king Josias, king Ezechias, and others;
who all practiced like jurisdiction 1. Par. 23. 2. Par. 35. 2. Par. 31.
in Ecclesiastical affairs: one only text of the Scripture shall be
sufficient, with popish glosses upon the same. Thus therefore is it written by
the holy Prophet, (...) To thee, to thee alone have I sinned. Where the
gemination Psalm. 51.
of (to thee) after the Hebrew manner and custom, argues the vehemency of
the subjection and gravitie of the trespass: that is, David being king,
sinned only to the king of all kings, God him self. Which Euthimius in his
gloss upon the same words, confirms in this manner:

Tibi soli peccavi. cum sim rex and te solum commissorum a me scelerum
Euthimius, in psalm. 50.
iudicem habeam, tibi soli peccasse videor, hoc est, tibi soli iudici
subiicior. caeterorum enim omniu^ ego dominus sum, and ob potentiam meam,
licere mihi videntur quaecunque libuerint.

To thee only have I sinned: because being a king, and having thee only
judge over my trespasses, I seem to have sinned to thee only: that is, I am
only subject to thee, as to my judge. For I am lord over all others, and in
respect of my magnificence, whatsoever does please me, seems to be lawful
for me.

Raynerius Snoygoudanus and diverse others, have set down the like
interpretation, upon this portion of Scripture. The popish gloss upon the same
text, has these words:

Tibi soli, quia rex omnibus superior, tantum a deo puniendus est. Glossa
ordin. in psalm. 50.


To thee only, because the king is above all men, and can only be punished of
God.

Nicolaus Lyranus a man of no small account with the papists, glosseth the said
text in this manner:

Tibi solipeccavi, scilicet tanquam iudici and punire potenti. peccaverat
Lyranus in psalm. 50.
enim contra Vriam, and alios occasion huius interfectos. tamen quia er at
rex, non habebat iudicem superiorem qui posset eum punire nisi Deum.

To thee only have I sinned: that is to say, to thee only as to the judge and
him that can punnish. For he had no we sinned against Vrias and others, whom he
caused to be murdered by that occasion: but because he was a King, he had no
superior judge that could punnish him, save God alone.

What can be more plainly spoken? for if none but God be superior to the King?
if none but God can judge the King? if none but God ca^ punish the King? (all
which the Popes own doctors affirm, then doubtless, can not the Pope depose
the King. The King therefore by popish resolution, is greater and above the
Pope. Yea, which is wonderful: Thomas Aquinas, who is as it were the platform
and pattern, or Idaea: according to which the Popes of late years do fashion
and frame their laws, and whose doctrine is as the Gospel with the Papists,
does confirm Lyra his exposition in these words:

Tibi soli peccavi: dicit glossa, quodrex non habet hominem, qui sua fact a
Aquinas, 12. quaest. 96. ar. 5. ad 3.
diiudicet: sed quantum ad vim directivam legis, princeps subditur legi propria
voluntate.

To thee only have I sinned. the gloss says, the King has no man, that can
judge his doings: but yet touching the directive force of the law, the Prince
is subject of his own accord unto the law.

Which Victoria utters wisely and learnedly, in these words:

Leges latae a rep. obligant omnes, ergo etiam sifer antur a rege, obligant
Victor. de potest. civili, relect, 3. page 120.
ipsum regem; and confirmatur, quia in aristocr atico principatu senatus
consulta obligant ipsos senatores auctores illorum: and in populari regimine
plebiscit a obligant ipsum populum: ergo similiter, leges regiae obligant ipsum
regem. and licet sit voluntarium regi condere legem, tamen non est in voluntate
sua non obligari aut obligari, sicut in pactis; libere enim qui squis
paciscitur, pactis tamen tenetur.

Laws which the commonweal makes, bind all: therefore if the King make
them, they bind him also. And it is confirmed, because in the aristocraticall
government, the laws of the senate bind the fenatours the auctors thereof:
and in popular regiment, the decrees of the common people bind the people:
ergo in like manner, the kings laws bind the king. And although the king make
laws voluntary, yet is it not in his will to be bound or unbound, as in
covenants: for every one makes covenants voluntarily, and yet is every one
bound by his covenants.

Ambrose who freeth Kings from all laws made by man, shall conclude this
point. Thus does he write:

Qui tenentur legibus, audent suum neg are peccatum, de dignantur rogare Ambr.
l. de Apolog. David, cap. 4.
indulgentiam: quam petebat, qui nullis tenebatur legibus humanis.

They that are bound to laws, dare deny their sin, and disdain to ask
forgiveness: which he desired, that was bound to no law of man.

And again, he says:

Rex vtique erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur: neque enim vllis adpoenam
Ibidem, cap. 10.
vocantur legibus, tuti imperij potestate. homini ergo non peccavit, cui non
tenebatur obnoxious.

He was in deed a king, he was bound to no laws: for kings being free by the
power of Empire, are not punnished by any laws. He therefore finned not to
man, to whom he was not subject.

Most impudent therefore and intolerable, is the Popes insolency: when he
exalts himself above Kings and Emperors, threatening them that he can depose
them from their scepters and regalties, and dispossess them of their Empires
and dominions. Which for all that, Cardinal Allen is not ashamed to avovch
with lying lips, in the Popes behalf: in that his disloyal pamphlet, which
he published without name in defense of the Seminaries. But such flattery of
feyned titles, a Pope of famous memory shall confute. Gregory surnamed the
great, himself being Pope of Rome: at what time as he was appointed by
Mauricius the Emperor, to publish a certain law sent him from the Emperor:
did not refuse to accomplish the said Emperors assignment, but acknowledged
him by duty bound to execute his commandment therein: albeit he thought the
law in some part: disagreeable to Gods will. This to be so, the Popes own
words shall witness, which be these:

Ego quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per diversas terrarum Gregor. lib.
2. epist. exregist. indict. 11. epist. 62. cap. 100.
parts transmitti feci: and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti Deo minime concordat,
ecce: per suggestionis meae paginam, sereni ssimis dominis nunciavi: vtrobique
ergo quae debui exolvi, qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo
quod sensiminime tacui.

I subject to your commandment, have caused the same law to be sent through
diverse parts of the land: and because the law does not agree with Gods will:
behold, I have intimated so much unto your Majesty by my epistle: I have
therefore discharged my duty in both respects, as who have yielded my
obedience unto the Emperor, neither concealed what I thought, in Gods behalf.

These are the Popes words, besides many others in the same epistle, to the
like effect. Which being uttered by the chiefest Pope, are most effectual to
prove the subjection of Popes unto Kings.

1 For first, Pope Gregory acknowledges the Emperor, to be his lord.

2 Secondly, he confesses him self to be the Emperors subject.

3 Thirdly, he grants that he owes loyal obedience to the Emperor: for
which duty, he durst not but publish the Emperors law, though in some part,
it were very rigorous: and that least he should have bin guilty of distoyaltie
toward his Prince.

Now that Romish pontificalitie, and pomp of Popery, came up first by
beggarly Canonists: who to advance them selves, flattered the Pope, and gave
him more then princely titles: the Popes own dear Doctor, (who carries
therefore credit on his back,) tells us, who after he has rehearsed many
lordly titles, and more then royal power, ascribed to the Pope: has these
express words;

Sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent Victor. de
potest. Eccl. relect. 1. sect. 6. p. 39.
pauperes rebus and doctrina.

But the glossers of the Popes law, gave this dominion (and these royal
titles) unto the Pope, when them selves were blind bayards, and beggarly
fellows.

Thus says the Popes Doctor: and thus we see, that poverty and ignorance,
were the beginning of Pope dome. For by reason of poverty, they flattered and
sought to please: and by reason of their ignorance, they avouched many things
which they did not understand.

The fourth Conclusion.
THE Pope had no authority to give dominion of the Indians to the King of
Spain, albeit many defend the spanish invasion, by virtue of that donation.
The latter part hereof, Victoria shows in these words:

Secundus titulus qui praetenditur, and quidem vehementer asseritur ad instam
possessionem illarum Victor. relect. quinta, de Indis. page 188
provinciarum, est exparte summi Pontificis. dicunt enim quod summus Pontifex
est Monarcha and etiam temporalis in toto orb, and per consequens quod potuit
constituere Hispaniarum reges principes illorum barbarorum, and it a factum
est.

The second title which is pretended, and earnestly affirmed, for the just
possession of those provinces, consists in the Popes grant. For say they,
the Pope is a temporal Monarch, even of the whole world: and consequently,
that he could appoint the Kings of Spain Princes over those Barbarians, and so
it came to pass.

The former part of the conclusion, Aquinas prooveth in these words:

Ad Ecclesiam autem non pertinet punire infidelitatem in illis, qui Aquinas 22.
quaest. 12. ar. 2. in corp.
nunquam fidem susceperunt, secundum illud Apostoli, 1. Cor. 5. quid mihi de
his qui foris sunt iudicare?

But it belongs not to the Church, to punnish infidelity in them, who never
received the says, according to that saying of the Apostle; What have I to do
to judge of those, that be not in the Church.

Dominicus Soto is of the same opinion, whose words are these: Soto in 4. did.
5. ar. 10. in med. art.


Ad hoc autem respondetur, in primis Pontificem neque concessisse, imo vero
neque (vt cum omni reverentia and obedientia de sanctissimo Christi vicario
loquar,) concedere potuisse eorum suorumve honorum dominium, quasi dominium in
eos ipse haberet.

But to this I answer, (be it spoken with all reverence and obedience to the
most holy Vicar of Christ) that neither the Pope did grant, yea neither could
he grant unto the King of Spain, dominion over those Indians or their goods:
as though himself had dominion over them.

It follows in the same Soto:

Lex fidei dominium rerum ab infidelibus non aufert, quod sibi nature a
concessit.

The law of faith does not take away dominion of possessions from infidels,
which nature has granted them.

Victoria accords to Aquinas and Soto, in these words: Victor. in relect. 5.
de Indis, page 193.


Ex quo patet, quodnec iste titulus est idoneus contrabarbaros, vel quia Papa
dederit provincias illas tanquam dominus absolute, vel quia non recognoscent
dominium Papae.

Whereby it is plain, that neither this title is sufficient against the
barbarians: either because the Pope gave those Provinces, as being absolute
lord thereof: or for that they do not recognize, the Popes authority.

Josephus Angles likewise says:

Hinc neque poterit alicui regi Christiano potestatem dare, vt sibi Indorum
Iosep. Angles, de sacram. ord. page 518.
regna v surpet; non enim est orbis temporalis dominus.

For this cause he can not give any Christian king authority, to usurp the
kingdoms of the Indians to himself: for he is not the temporal lord of the
world.

By which testimonies it is clear, that the Pope could not give to the Spanish
King any just title over the Indians, because he could not give that which
himself had not. Yet ^hust Emperors hold his bridle, and Kings be his
footestoole, if they will.

The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, since all the Apostles were equal with Peter in power,
authority, and jurisdiction: secondly, since all the Apostles received their
power immediately from Christ: thirdly, since all the Apostles had ordinary
calling and jurisdiction, as well as Peter had: fourthly, since Kings have
power coactive over Popes, and not Popes over Kings: fifthly, since the Popes
pretended power, is controlled by his own popish doctors: I conclude, that it
is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false,
erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the fifth Motive.
The VII. CHAP. Of popish Purgatory, with circumstances thereto pertaining.
THE Papists dreaming upon man's justification by his own good deeds, and
consequently imagining no glorification before condign satisfaction for evil
deeds: have invented a purgation satisfactorie in the life to come, that so
such as depart this life without complete satisfaction: may accomplish that
which wants, in their purging fire. For confutation whereof, I put down
conclusions.

The first Conclusion.
EVery one in what state he dies, remains in the same world without end. For
probation of this conclusion, Ecclesiastes writes in this manner:

Siceciderit lignum ad Austrum, aut ad Aquilonem, in Eccles. 11. 3, 4.
quocunque loco ceciderit, ibi erit.

If wood shall fall to the South, or to the North; in what place soever it
shall fall, there shall it be.

Christ himself confirms the same, in these express words:

Et ibunt hi in supplicium aeternum, iusti autem in vitam aeternam. Matt. 25.
46.


And these shall go to eternal punishment, but the just to life everlasting.

And in an other place, he has these words:

Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur, amodo iam dicit spiritus vt a laboribus
requie scant suis. Apoc. 14. 13.


Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for from henceforth says the
spirit, They shall rest from their labors. Which saying S. Cyprian explicateth
in most manifest terms. Qualem te invenit Deus cum vocat, talem pariter and
iudicat. Cypr. in sermon. de mortalit. circa medium


As God finds the when he calls, so does he judge thee. And in another
place he has these most excellent and golden words:

Hortamur, inquit, dum facultas adest, dum adhuc aliquid de seculo superest,
deo satis facere, and ad verae religionis candidam lucem de profundo tenebrosae
superstitionis emergere.

Et paullo post,

Quum istinc excessum fuerit, nullusiam locus poenitentiae est, nullus
satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur, hic saluti
aeternae cultu dei and fructu fidei providetur. Nec quisquam aut peccatis
retardetur aut annis, quo minus veniat ad consequendam salutem. In isto adhuc
mundo manenti, poenitentia nulla sera est: patet adindulgentiam aditus,
quaerentibus atque intelligentibus veritatem facilis accessus est.

We exhort, says he, to satisfy God while we may, while we are in this
world, and to come from the depth of dark superstition to the bright light of
true religion. When we shall go hence, there is no place of repentance, no
effect of satisfaction. Here life is either lost or won, here provision is
made for eternal life, by the service of God and fruit of faith. No man is
hindered through his sins or years, but that he may attain salvation. While
one is this world, no repentance is to late: the gate is open to pardon, the
access is easy to such as seek and understand the truth.

Saint Ambrose writes in this manner:

Qui enim hic non accipit remissionem peccatorum, illic non erit. Non erit
autem, quia adaeternam vitam non poterat pervenire, quid Ambr. tom, i. lib. de
bono mortis, cap. 2.
vita aeternaest remissio peccatorum: ideoque dicit (David) remitte mihi
(peccata) vt refrigerer, priusquam abeam.

He that receives not remission of sins here, shall not come there: and he
shall not be there, because he can not come to eternal life, for that eternal
life is remission of finnes.

And therefore says David, Forgive me my sins, that I may be refreshed
before I go hence.

Saint Hierome has these words:

Dum estis in hoc seculo, hortor vos agere poenitentiam. Confitemini Hier. in
Psalm. 105.
ergo Domino, quoniam in isto tantum seculo misericors est. Hic misereri potest
poenitenti, quia ibi iudex est, non est misericors. Hic misericors est, ibi
iudex est. hic porrigit manum cadenti, ibi sedet iudex.

While you are in this world, I exhort you to do penance. Confess therefore
unto the Lord, because he is merciful in this world only. Here he can show
mercy to the penitent: there because he is judge, he is not merciful. here he
is merciful, there he is judge: here he reaches his hand to him that
falls, there he sits judge.

Again, the said Saint Hierome writes thus in another place:

Obscure licet docemur, per hanc sententiolam novum dogma quod Hier. tom. 9. ad
Gal. cap. 6.
latitat: dum in praesenti seculo sumus, sive orationibus, sive consilijs
invicem posse adiuvari. Cum autem ad tribunal Christi venerimus, non Job, non
Daniel, non Noe, rogare possepro quoquam, sedvnumquenque portare suum onus.

We are taught here though obscurely, a new doctrine that is hid: that
while we are in this world, one may help an other, either by his prayer or
counsel. But when we shall come to the tribunal seat of Christ, then neither
Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe, can make intercession for any man, but every one must
bear his own burden.

Augustine is of the same judgment in many places of his works:

Tuus certe dies vltimus, long abesse nonpotest. Adhunc te praepara: qualis
enim exieris de hac vita, talis redderis illi vitae, Aug. in Psalm. 36. conc. 1.


The last day doubtless can not be far hence: prepare thy self for it. For
as thou shall depart out of this life, so shall thou be restored to that life.

Again, in another place:

Quod autem dicit adealoca in quibus torquentur impij, iustos etiam sivelint
non posse transire: quid aliud significat, nisipost hanc vitam ita receptis in
carcere, vt inde non exeant donec reddant novissimum quadrantem, Aug. in
quaest. evang. q. 38. to. 4. page 249.
per incommut abilitatem divinae sententiae, nullum auxilium misericordiae
posse praeberi a justice, etiamsi velint illud praebere.

In that he says, to those places in which the wicked are tormented, the
just can not come though they would, what other thing does he signify, but
the immutabilitie of Gods sentence to be such, as the just, though most
willing, can yield no help of mercy after this life to those that be so in
prison, as they can not get out till they pay the last farthing.

Again, in an other place:

Ille autem iudex novit quantam vnicuique sit daturus gloriam, qui in hac vita
per misericordiam gratis iustificando praevenit, quos ille per iustitiam
glorificare dispo suit. tempus vero acquirendi vitam aeternam Aug. de fide ad
Petrum, cap. 3. circa medium.
in istatantum vita deus hominibus dedit, vbi voluit etiam poenitentiam esse
fructuo sam.

That judge knew how much glory he would give to every one, who prevented by
justifying freely in this life through mercy, whom he disposed to glorify in
the other by justice but time to attain eternal life God granted to men in
this life only, where he would have penance to be of force.

The second Conclusion.
CHRIST'S blood is the true and only purgatory for man's sins, as well
quoad poenam, as quoad culpam: that is, both concerning the sin, and
punishment due for the same. This conclusion S. Paul makes plain, writing
thus to the Hebrews:

Qui cum sit splendour gloriae and figura substantiae eius, portan sque omnia
verbo virtutis suae, purgationem peccatorum faciens, sedet ad dexter
ammaiestatis in excelsis. Hebr. 1. 2, 3.


Who being the brightness of his glory, and the figure of his substance, and
susteining all things by the word of his power: did by him self purge our
sins, and sits on the right hand of majesty on high.

And in an other place, he says thus:

In quo habemus redemptionem and remissionem peccatorum. Coloss. 1. 16.


In whom we have redemption and remission of our sins.

Again, in an other place:

Hi sunt qui venerunt de tribulatione magna, and laverunt stolas suas, and
dealbaverunt eas in sanguine agni. Apoc, 7. 24.


These are they that came from great tribulation, and washed their stoles, and
made them white in the blood of the lamb.

Again in an other place:

Sanguis Jesus Christi, emundat nos ab omni peccato. 1. Ioh. 1. 8.


The blood of Jesus Christ, does purge us from all sin.

Again, in an other place:

Is qui non nover at peccatum, peccatum pronobis fecit, vt nos efficeremur
iustitia dei in ipso. 2. Cor. 5. 21.


He that knew not sin, suffered pain due for sin for us, that we might be
made the justice of God in him.

Again.

Ego sum, ego sum ipse, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me. Esai. c. 43. v.
25


I, even I am he, that blot out thine iniquities (not for thy deserts, but for
mine own sake.

Again in another place:

Ipse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter Esai. c.
23. v. 5
scelera nostra.

He was wounded for our iniquiries, he was torn in pieces for our offenses.

Again in another place:

Christus nos redemit de maledicto legis, factus pro nobis male dictum. Gal. c.
3. v. 13.


Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being a curse for us.

Neither will it help the papists to answer, that these textes of scripture
are understood only of the guilt of sin, and not of the punishment due for
the same.

1 For first, no scripture makes that distinction between the guilt of sin
and punishment correspondent to the same.

2 Secondly, no ancient writer did ever so expound such textes of scripture.

3 Thirdly, because their own doctor Aquinas avoucheth our redeemer to have
suffered not only for the guilt of our sins, but also for the punishment due
unto the same.

These be his words:

Christus dedit maximum exemplum poenitentibus, dum non pro peccato proprio,
sed pro peccatis aliorum voluit poenam subire. Aquinas in part. 3, q. 15. ar.
1. ad. 5.


Christ gave an exceeding great example to penitent sinners, while his pleasure
was to sustain punishment, not for his own sin, (which was none at all,) but
for the sins of others.

And Saint Augustine writing upon the Psalms has these words:

Ergo apud te est propitiatio, nam-sinon esset apuate propitiatio, siiudex
solum esse velles, and misericors esse nolles, siobservares omnes iniquitates
Aug. in ps. 129. to 8. page 1036.
nostras, and quaereres eas quid sustineret? quis ante te staret and diceret
innocens sum? quis staret in iudicio tuo? spes ergo vna est, quoapud te est
propitiatio.

Therefore with thee is mercy: for if there were not mercy with thee, if thou
would only be our judge, and not show us mercy, if thou would look
into our iniquities, and seek them, who were able to abide it? who could stand
before thee, and say, I am innocent? who could stand in thy judgment?
Therefore there is one only hope, because with thee mercy is to be found.

And the same Saint Augustine in another place, has yet more plain words:

Dominus noster Jesus Christus mori venit, peccare non venit, communicando
nobiscum sine culpapaenam, and culpam solvit and paenam.

Our Lord Jesus (says saint Augustine) came to die, he came not to sin,
communicating pain with us without sin, he loosed both Aug. ser. 141. de
tempore to. 10
the sin and pain of sin.

4 Fourthly, because it would follow thereuppon, that Christ's works were
very imperfect: and yet does the scripture say:

Dei perfecta sunt opera. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4.


The works of God are perfect.

But doubtless, he wrought not man's redemption perfectly, if man's
satisfaction must concur to the perfection thereof: and yet concur it must
perforce if another purgation be established in purgatory fire, besides that
purgation which Christ's blood has wrought.

5 Fifthly, because Christ's satisfaction otherwise had been in vain. For if we
can satisfy for our selves, or by the help of our neighbors in purgatory fire:
then did Christ in vain satisfy for us upon the Cross: then did not Christ
loose both the sin and pain of sin, as Saint Augustine avoucheth.

6 Sixthly, because our satisfaction speaking of the best, is not, nor can be
infinite: and consequently, cannot make compensation for infinite transgression.

For as Aquinas says:

Peccatum contra Deum admissum, quandam infinite atem habet ex infinitate
Aquinas 3. p. quaest. 1. ar. 2. ad 2.
divinae maiestatis tanto enim offen sa est gravior, quanto mayor est ille in
quem delinquitur.

Sin committed against God is infinite, by reason of his infinite Majesty:
For so much is the offense greater, by how much he is greater against whom we
sin.

7 Seventhly, because it is flatly against the opinions of the holy fathers.
Thus says Saint Augustine:

Primum locum fides cabolicoru^ divina auctoritate credit, regum coelerum: Aug.
l. 5. hypognost, vltra med. sermo. 14. de verb. apost. l. 1. c. 28. de
peccatoru^ merit and remis.
secundum gehennam, vbi omnis apost at a vel a fide Christi alienus, aeterna
supplicia experietur: tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec in scripturis sanctis
inveniemus.

The faith of Catholics by Gods authority, believes the first place to be
the kingdom of heaven: the second place to be hell, where every apostate or
infidel shall be punished everlastingly: the third place we are utterly
ignorant of neither shall we find it in the holy scriptures.

which assertion saint Augustine does often inculcate, in sundry of his
books. Saint Hierome likewise teaches us, that after the separation of the
soul from the body, there is no resting place, but either heaven or hell.
These are his words:

Quum anima vinculis laxata corporis, volandi quo velit, sive quo iure Hier. in
c. 9. Amos prope med. capitis.
compellitur, habuerit libertatem: aut adinferna ducetur, de quibus scriptum
est: in inferno quis confitebitur tibi? aut certe adcoelestia sublevabitur.

When the soul shall be leused from corporal bonds, and shall have liberte
to go whither it will, or whither it is compelled to go: either it shall be
brought to the infernal spirits, of whom it is written, in hell who will
confess unto thee? or doubtless it shall be exalted to heaven above. To
conclude, their famous bishop and holy martyr Roffensis, confessing the late
original of popish pardons, among other reasons, yeldeth this for one:

Quarum prima est, quodolim non erat vsque adeo ecclesiae notum purgatorium.
Imo Graecis inquit, adhunc vsque diem non est creditum. Roffe^sis apud Domin.
Soto in 4. sent. did. 21. q. 1. art. 3


whereof the first reason is, that in old time, purgatory was not so well
known unto the church. yea says he; the Greeks do not to this day believe it.

And doubtless, if there were any purgatory besides Christ's passion, the
thief that lived wickedly to the last hour, should have had his part therein;
who yet went incontinently to paradise, as says Luc. c. 23. v. 43.
the holy scripture.

The third Conclusion.
AFter this life is neither place to merit, demerit, or satisfaction. This
conclusion is proved out of Ecclesiasticus, where it is written. Ante obitum
tuum operare iustitiam, qui a non est apud inferos invenire Eccles. c. 14. v.
17.
cibum.

Before thy death, work justice, because there is no relief to be found among
the dead.

Correspondent hereunto, is this saying of Aquinas:

Dicendum, quod mereri and demereri pertinent ad statum viae: vnde bona in
Aquinas 22. q. 13. ar, 4. ad. 2. and 1. p. q. 62. ar. 9. corpor.
viatoribus sunt meritoria, mala vero demeritoria. in beatis autem bona non
sunt meritoria, sed pertinentia ad eorum beatitudinis premium, and sic mala in
damnatis non sunt demeritoria, sed pertinent ad damnationis poenam.

we must answer, that to merit and demerit, perteine to the state of the way:
wherefore, good works are meritorious to such as be viatores, and live in
this world: and likewise evil works demeritorious.

But in the saints of heaven good works are not meritorious, but appertain
to the reward of their beatitude.

And in like manner evil works in the damned are not demeritorious, but
perteine to the pain of their damnation.

Dominicus Soto commenting upon the master of sentences, holds the self
same opinion. For which cause saint Paul exhorts Dominic. Soto in 4. did. 19
quaest. 3. ar. 1, ad arg. 1.
us to do good, dum tempus habemus, while we have time.

This the preacher confirms in these words:

Viventes sciunt quod morientur, and mortui nesciunt quicquam, and non est eis
amplius merces, in oblivione enim est memoria eorum. Gal. 6. v. 10. Eccle. c.
9. v, 5,


The living know that they must die, and the dead know nothing at all, neither
have they henceforth a reward, for their memory is forgotten.

Upon which words saint Hierome has this gloss:

Viventes metu mortis possunt bona operaperpetrare, mortui uero nihil Hier. in
9. cap. eclesiastes.
valent adid adijcere quod semel secum tulere de vita. Sed and dilectio eorum,
and odium, and aemulatio, and omne quod in seculo habere potuerunt, mortis
finitur adventu: nec just quippe possunt agere, nec peccare, nec virtutes
adijcere, nec vitia.

The living may do good works for fear of death: but the dead can ad
nothing to that, which they once took with them out of this life. Their love
also and their hatred, their emulation, and what soever they could have in this
world, all is ended with death. For they can neither do well nor sin,
neither addevice nor virtue.

All which, Saint Cyprian comprised in these few golden words: Cypria. contr.
Demetr. in fine


Quumistine excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus paenitentiae est, uullus
satisfactionis effectus.

When we shall depart out of this life, there will be no place to penance, no
effect of satisfaction.

Saint Augustine teaches the course of Gods justice to be such, as we must
either attain remission of our sins in this world or never to expect the
same.

These are his words:

Morum porro corrigendorum, uullus alius quam in hac vit a locus: na^ post hanc
quisque idhabebit, quod in hac sibimet conquisierit. Aug. epist. 54 tom. 2. in
initio.


There is no other place but this life to reform our manners: For after this
life every one shall have that, which he purchased for himself in this life.

many other like sayings the said holy father has to the like effect and
purpose: which I now let pass with silence, thinking that sufficient which is
already said hereof.

Most miserable therefore are the souls in popish purgatory, as who by popish
doctrine can neither merit nor satisfy for their sins.

For if souls in purgatory can satisfy or merit, then can they also demerite,
(because the self same reason holds in both alike,) and if they can
demerite, they can also sin mortally, and so perish eternally, contrary to
popish doctrine.

Again, if any mercy can be found after this life: the reason made by saint
Paul to the Corinthians which was grounded upon the chiefest mystery of our
Christian faith is doubtless of no force at all: to wit, when he concludes
of the faith upon Christ his resurrection from the dead.

Thus stands the Apostles discourse: they that die in the faith of Christ,
are either saved or damned: who if they be saved, then is Infra cap. 9. per
totum.
Christ risen again, and become a true savior: but if they be damned: then
doubtless is Christ not risen again, neither become a true savior. Now to
confess a third place, where souls remain neither saved or damned, but in a
perplexe manner, that indeed may stand with popish doctrine, but is flat
against Saint Paul's discourse.

Again, to hold a third place does overthrow another of Saint Paul's reasons,
when he affirms the being in this body, to keep the faithful from Christ.

For if popish purgatory be admitted, the souls suffering there shall be as
well absent from Christ's presence, as when they were in 2. Cor. 5. v. 7. 8.
Christ's body.

But perhaps, saint Paul knew not how to conclude his purpose, or at least was
not in love with papistrie. Yet the papists will say, that it is very common
with the fathers to pray for the dead.

To this I say, that in very deed it cannot be denied, but that sundry of
the fathers have both prayed themselves for the dead, and have also approved
the prayers of others to the like end. But this will neither establish the
popish purgatory, nor their manner of praying for the dead.

Which objection, because it seems to carry a great majesty with it, and
indeed seduceth many a one, (as which is plainly set down in very express
terms, in many places of the ancient writers,) I purpose a little to stand
upon it, nothing doubting but to satisfy the indifferent reader therewith
through the power of God, so he will yield attentive ears unto my words.

1 I therefore say first, (as is proved elsewhere in this treatise,) that 1.
Cor. c. 15. v. 17. 18.
what writer so ever affirms any doctrine, contrary to that which is taught
in the holy scriptures: he who soever he be, must be rejected, and his doctrine
in that point contemned.

Which thing I do not barely say, but I have prooved the same out of the
doctrine of the fathers, by the flat and express words of the fathers
themselves. peruse the ninth chapter, of credit to be given to writers.

2 I say secondly, that it is a seemly, good, and godly manner, to pray for the
dead: so our hearts be rightly disposed, and our prayers framed accordingly.

As for example: when it is said of some friend departed out of this life, God
grant him a joyful resurrection: which is the most orderly and plainest form,
of praying for the dead.

3 I say thirdly, if one say God have mercy upon the soul, being well
instructed for the true sense thereof: it is not to be reproved, though the
other phrase and manner of praying, ought rather to be used: especially in these
days, when the latter kind is commonly abused. for albeit the holy and
ancient fathers, when they prayed for rest and mercy to the dead, understood
nothing else but the resurrection of the body, and the complement that
redoundeth to the soul by union of the same: yet have the papists taught, and
this day teach the people to understand thereby, the mitigation of purgatory
pains: which the souls of the dead enjoy (as they groslie imagine,) either by
prayers of the faithful, or by masses, trentals, and diriges, or by the popes
pardons. So that the evil of this manner of praying, consists not in the
phrase and prayer it self: but in the erronius affection of the party that so
prays.

For the better understanding whereof, we must observe:

1 First, that it is lawful to pray for such things, as are very certain:
but not yet accomplished or brought to pass.

And consequently, that it is lawful to pray for the resurrection of the
body: as also that the souls in the second advent may be united again to the
bodies: that so the faithful may in complete manner, be made partakers of the
vision beatificall.

This observation is manifest by that prayer which our savior himself prayed:
whose actions, as writes the apostle, are our instructions.

For our Lord Jesus prayed for the salvation of his elect, who neither 1 Pet.
2. v. 22.
shall nor could perish by any possibility.

That he prayed for them, is manifest in these words:

Non pro mundo rogo, sedpro his quos dedisti mihi, quia tui sunt. Pater John.
c. 17. v. 9. 12.
sancte, seruaeos in nomine tuo, quos dedisti mihi.

I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given me, because they
are thine. holy father, keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me. Yea,
the very elect are commanded to pray for their salvation, because that is
one of the petitions in the Lords prayer, which appertains to all, especially
to the elect.

And that the elect cannot perish, is evident by this testimony of the holy
gospel:

It a vt in errorem inducantur (sifieri potest) etiam electi: Mat. c. 24. v. 24


So that the very elect should be seduced, if it were possible.

2 we must observe secondly, that in the^ writings of the fathers, sin is
often taken for the corruption and mortality of the body: as the papists
themselves do ever in their romish pardons, understand by sin the pain due
for sin.

which observations well remembered, all objections out of the fathers, touching
praying for the dead, may be answered with all facility. For first, when the
ancient churches offered up their sacrifices of thanks giving, and prayers for
the dead:

2 And secondly, when the fathers do desire eternal rest unto the dead: they
desire nothing less, then that such souls may be delivered out of purgatory,
or have remission of their sins.

which thing I will prove, by two very sound foundations.

1 The one, because such prayers or oblations were made for those, who (not
only as the fathers believed, but even as the papists themselves confess)
were then in heaven, where they neither needed nor could be relieved, by such
prayers or oblations.

2 The other, because the fathers have ackowledged so much, by express words
in their writings.

1 The former foundation is evident in the liturgy of S. Chrisostom, Chrysostom.
in liturg. prope finem. to. 5. p. 1377.
who there offered his sacrifice of thanks giving, for the prophets, apostles,
martyrs,, and for our blessed lady the holy virgin Marie. whom all I am well
assured, the papists will confess to have been in heaven, long before saint
Chrysostom was borne.

2 The second foundation is plainly confessed by saint Ambrose, who in his
funeral orations for the emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus with his
brother Satyrus: both confesses them to possess eternal rest in heaven, and
nevertheless prays for eternal rest unto them.

which words, though they seem to implie manifest contradiction: yet are they
no less exact and sound, then godly and easy to be understood: if my
rehearsed observations be well marked. For though their souls were in eternal
bliss, that is, in heaven: yet neither were their bodies then, neither are
they now, neither shall they be, until the second advent of our redeemer, in
that eternal rest.

Which rest that Valentinianus, Thedosius; and Satyrus may enjoy after the day
of dome in complete manner: that is, in soul and body united in perpetual
union: Saint Ambrose prayed so instantly.

Now for thy better instruction and satisfaction, (gentle Reader,) I will
allege Saint Amhrose words, as himself has uttered them.

Of his brother Satirus he says thus:

Tibi nunc omnipotens Deus innoxia^ commendo animam, tibi hostiam meam affero:
cape propitius ac serenus fraternum munus, sacrificium In oratione funebri pro
Satyro, to. 3. in fine.
sacerdotis.

To thee now, O almighty God, I commend his innocent soul: to thee I offer my
oblation, accept favorably my brotherly present, the sacrifice of thy priest.

Of Theodosius he says thus:

Da requiem perfectam servo tuo Theodosio, requiem illam quam preparasti In
oratione funeb. pro Theod. to. 3. p. 52.
sa^ctis tuis.

Give perfect rest to thy servant Theodosius, that rest which thou have
prepared for thy saints.

Of Valentinianus he says thus: Ambr. de obitu Valent. p. 12. to. 3.


Nulla dies vos silentio preteribit, nulla inhonoratos vos mea transibit
oration, nulla nox non donatos aliqua precium mearum contextione transcurret.
omnibus vos oblationibus frequentabo.

No day shall pass with silence, none of mine orations shall pass without
your honor, no night shall slide away without some prayer of mine for you. I
will frequent you with all oblations.

Thus we see plainly, that Saint Ambrose both offered sacrifice of lawde, and
prayed for Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Satirus being dead.

Let us now proceed a little further.

Thus says saint Ambrose of Satyrus:

Intravit in regnum coelorum, quoniam credidit Dei verbo.

He is entered into Heaven, because he believed the word of Ambt. vbi supra de
sing.
God.

Thus says he of Theodosius:

Manet ergo in lumine Theodosius, and sanctorum caetibus gloriatur. fruitur
Augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua.

Theodosius therefore abides in light, and in the glory and fellowship of
Saints. Theodosius of famous memory, enjoys perpetual light.

Thus he says of Valentinianus:

Creaimus quia ascendit a de serto, hoc est, ex hoc arido and inculto loco
adillas florulentas delectationes, vbi cum fratre coniunctus aeternae vitae
fruitur voluptate.

Let us believe, that he is ascended from the desert: that is, from this dry
and untilled place to those flourishing delectations, wherein the fellowship of
his brother he enjoys the pleasure of eternal life.

These words are plain, and need no gloss. Saint Ambrose then believed,
that Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Satyrus were in heaven, and enioied
eternal rest: and nevertheless, even then prayed for their eternal rest. But
doubtless his prayers had been both vain and foolish if he should have
prayed for that unto them, which they had and enjoyed already. He therefore
prayed, (as my observations declare,) not for the rest and bliss of the
souls, which the^ possessed eternal rest and bliss: but that the bodies also
may be pertakers of that place and rest, which they wanted them, and shall
until the day of dome.

And for the better confirmation of this mine assertion, saint Ambrose does in
express words so expound himself:

For thus he writes:

Te quae so sum Deus, vt charissimos iuvenes matura resurrectione Ambrosius
vbi sup.
resuscites. and immaturum hunc vitae istius cur sum matura resurrectione
compenses.

O high and mighty God, I beseech thee to raise up most dear young youths
with mature resurrection, and to recompense the unripe course of this their
life, with mature and ripe resurrection.

Lo here in plain and brief terms, the compendious explication Let this be
well noted.
of that popish objection, and doubt, which so troubles and seduceth many a
one.

And so Saint Ambrose his prayer for the dead, was even this and no other: God
give them a joyful resurrection.

The fourth Conclusion.
IF popish purgatory were admitted to be (...): yet would it follow by a
necessary consequent, that the souls tormented there should perish
everlastingly.

This conclusion is thus proved.

There is no salvation to be expected out of the church, as witnesses their
great council of Lateran, and the holy fathers accord thereunto. But souls
boiling in purgatory papisticall, be neither in the church triumphant,
because there is no need of purgation, neither in the church militant, because
there is place for merit and satisfaction: ergo they be out of the church: And
consequently without the state of salvation: and in the state of eternal
damnation.

And that the best learned papists stand in doubt of their salvation, it
cannot with right reason be denied. For in their Masses of Requiem, the
priests are commanded to pray in these express words:

Ne absorbeat eas tartarus: In missa requiem pro defunctis.


That hell swallow not them up and devour them.

And doubtless, if they be assured of their salvation: it is a vain and
ridiculous thing to pray, that they be not swallowed up of hell: And
consequently, their holy Mass is farced with a bundell of vanities. Neither
will it help the adversary to say, that though the souls in their purgatory
can not satisfy for themselves: Yet may the living satisfy for them, which is
of as much force, as if they did satisfy for themselves. For as the
transgression is personal, so must the satisfaction also be.

The reason hereof is evident, because to accept ones satisfaction for another:
may well stand with acceptance or mercy, but never with justice.

For which justice notwithstanding, popish purgatory was invented, and this
day is defended: as their reverend professor of divinity Dominicus Soto,
plainly testifyeth in these words:

Respondetur, quod licet tunc moriens satisfacere nequeat, culpa sua fuit, quod
tempus adid antea non elegit: and ideo poena quae per contritione^ Soto in 4.
did. 19. q. 2. ar. 5. in fine.
nonfuerit ei dimissa, in purgatorio est luenda: vt ratio divinae iustitiae
servetur. I answer,

That although he that dies, can not satisfy for his sins: yet was it his own
default, because he chose not before time for it: And therefore, the punishment
which was not remitted by contrition and confession, must be punished in
purgatory: that the order of Gods justice may be observed.

The 5. Conclusion.
IT is evident even by the opinion of great papists, that many souls in
purgatory shall abide there for ever: and yet is that flat against popish
religion.

This conclusion shall be manifest, if I prove three points.

1 First, that every sin is mortal.

2 Secondly, that no mortal sin can be remitted or forgiven in popish
purgatory.

3 Thirdly, that many depart out of this world, not having their venial sins
(of the papists so termed) before remitted, or forgiven.

For first, if every sin be mortal: and secondly, if no mortal sin be
forgiven in purgatory: and thirdly, if sundry be in purgatory, whose sins
be not all forgiven: it must needs follow by a necessary sequel, that such
persons must continue in purgatory eternally, because they cannot come from
thence until their sins be remitted wholly.

1 First therefore, that every sin is mortal, is confessed by three great
papists: that is to say, Roffensis, Gersonus, and Michael Baius.

For these three confess plainly, that every sin is mortal of it own
nature, and only venial through Gods merciful acceptance: and therefore may
it be justly punished everlastinglie.

Roffensis writing against Luther, has these express words. Roffensis art.
32. advers. Luther. page 328.


Quod peccatum veniale solum ex Dei misericordia veniale sit, in hoc tecum
sentio.

That a venial sin is only venial through the mercy of God (and not of it
own nature,) therein do I agree unto you.

Lo, my Lord of Rochester confesses plainly, that every sin is mortal of
it own nature.

And Ioannes Gerson sometime chanceler of Paris, that famous university,
though otherwise a great papist, can not deny this verity: for these are his
words.

Nulla offensa Dei est venialis de se, nisitantum modo per respectum ad divina^
misericordia^, qui nonvult de facto qua^libet offensam imputare Joan. Gers. de
vita spirituali, lect. 1. p. 3. in 1. corollar.
ad mortem, cu^ illud posset iustissime. Et ita concluditur, quod peccatu^
mortale and veniale in esse tali, non distinguuntur intrinsece and
essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad divinam gratiam, quae peccatum istud
imputat ad poenam mortis, and aliud non.

No offense of God is venial of it own nature, but only in respect of Gods
mercy, who will not de facto, impute every offense to death, although he
might most justly do it.

And so I conclude, that mortal and venial sins as such, are not
distinguished intrinsecallie, and essentiallie: but only in respect of Gods
grace, which assigns this sin to the pain of death, and not the other.

Many other sentences to the like effect the said Gerson has, but these may
suffice to content any reasonable mind.

Other papists are of the same opinion in very deed, though they do not
disclose their minds in such manifest terms.

Thus writes our father Jesuit Bellarminus:

Respondeo, omne peccatum esse contra legem Dei non positivam sedaeternam, vt
Aug. recte docet. omnis enim iusta lex sieve a Deo, sive ab Bellar. de Ro^.
Pontif. cap. 21.
homine detur, ab aeterna dei lege derivatur: est enim aeterna lex, vt malum
sit violare regulam.

I answer, that every sin is against the law of God, not positive, but
eternal, as Augustine rightly teaches. For every just law, whether it be
made by God or by man, is derived from the law of God eternal. For the law
eternal is, that it is sinue to transgress the rule.

And this is the common opinion, as I have proved out of Josephus Angles.

Neither will it help the papists to say as the Thomistes do: that venial
sins are praeter non contra legem, besides the law, but not against Legendus
est Joseph. Ang. sup. cap. 7. ar. s
the law.

1 First, because saint Augustine defines sin generally to be a against the
law of God, writing in this manner:

Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum, contra legem aeternam Aug. l.
22. c. 27. contra faustu^.
dei.

Sin is a saying, or doing, or coveting, against Gods eternal law.

Secondly, because as Josephus Angles their own doctor says: every venial
sin is against right reason, and to do against right reason, Joseph. Angl.
in 4. sent. part. 3. p. 215.
is to do against the law of nature, which commands not to depart from the
rule of right reason.

3 Thirdly, because we must give an account of every idle word in the general
day of judgment, as Christ himself tells us: and for noother end doubtless
must this account be made, but only because Mat. 12. v. 36. This reason
convinces doubtless.
every idle word is against the law of God.

This the papists can never deny, and yet must they likewise confess, that
idle words be those sins, which they term venialles: and consequently
that venial sins be against the law of God.

Secondly, that no mortal sin can be forgiven in purgatory, is confessed of
all papists without contradiction.

Thus writes Bellarminus:

Manet vltima sententia vera and catholica, purgatorium pro ijs tantum esse,
qui cum venialib. culpis moriuntur. and rur sum pro illis qui Bellar. lib. 2.
de purgat. c. 1. in fine.
decedunt cum reatupaenae, culpis iam remissis.

The true and catholic opinion remains, that purgatory is only for those,
that die with venial sins: and again, for those that die with the guilt of
sin, after their sins be forgiven.

And with Bellarminus do all other papists agree, that such as die in mortal
sin, go incontinently to hell.

Thirdly, that sundry having venial sins abide the pains of purgatory,
appears by Bellarminus his words before alleged, and by Dominicus So to in
these words:

Qui dixerit verbum contra spiritum sanctum, no^ remittetur ei in hoc seculo,
neque in futuro. Vbi Gregorius lib. 4. di alogorum, adnotavit aliqua Soto in 4.
s. did. 19. q. 3.
leuia peccata remitti in futuro seculo, per ignem purgationis.

He that shall blaspheme the holy Ghost, shall neither be forgiven in this
world, neither in the vvosld to come.

In which place, Gregorius pope of Rome, noted certain light sins to be
forgiven in the world to come, by the fire of purgation. Ide^ habeturd. 25.
can. qualis.


And their Aquinas says thus.

Secundum enim quod peccata venialia sunt maioris vel minoris adhaerentiae vel
gravitatis, citius vel tardius per ignem purgantur.

For venial sins are purged by fire sooner or latter, according to A quini
12. q. 89, ar, 2. ad. 4.
their greater or lesser adherence or gravitie.

And for a full accomplishment of this conclusion, Josephus Angles utters the
great perplexity of papists, concerning this their purgative imagination.

These are his words:

Quo igitur modo remittuntur (venialia) in purgatorio? varij sunt modi dicendi.
Scotus dicit in instanti mortis, idest, in primo non esse hominis, Joseph. Ang.
in 4. senten. de sacr. poenit. page 219.
propter merita quae homo habuit in vita: Dur andus dicit remitti quoad culpam
in purgatorio, propter displicentiam quam habent illic animae venialium, cum
sint in charitate. Soto asserit remitti quoad culpa^ in purgatorio, propter
actum chariiatis and continuam patientiam, quam dum cruciantur, habent.

How then are venial sins forgiven in purgatory? diverse hold diversely.
Scotus says, they are forgiven in the instant of death: that is, when man
first begins not to be, by reason of his merits in his life time.

Durand says, the fault is remitted in purgatory, for the displicence of
venials, which the souls have in that place: and that because they be in
charity. Soto says, the sin is remitted in purgatory, for the act of
charity and continual patience, which they have in there torments. Whom
will not this discordant theology, utterly dissvvade from papistrie.

The sixth Conclusion.
THe book of Machabees, (which is the sole and only foundation of popish
purgatory,) is of no force at all to establish the same. This conclusion
shall be evidently prooved, when I shall effectually disproove the authority of
the said book of Machabees, wherewith many have a long time been most
miserably seduced. Mark therefore my discourse herein.

To prove that the 2. book of Machabees, (out of which, prayer and sacrifice
for the dead, and consequently purgatory is gathered,) is not Canonical, that
is, not penned by the assistance of the holy ghost, I say first, that it is not
in the canon of the Hebrews, neither 1
did the Jews or Hebrews at any time repute it, as a part of holy and divine
scripture. This S. Hierome witnesses in these words:

Sicut ergo Judith, and Tobiae, and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia,
sedinter Canonicas scripturas non recipit, sic and haec duo volumina legit ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum Hier. in epist, ad
Chromatium and Heliodorum, de lib. Solomonis.
dogmatum confirmandam.

As therefore the Church reads the books of Judith, and of Toby, and of the
Machabees, but receives them not amongst the Canonical scriptures, so does it
read also these 2. volumes for edification of the people, but not to confirm
any Ecclesiastical doctrine. S. Cyprian has the very same words in effect,
in Symb. expositione.

S. Augustine does testify the same, when he thus writes: Cyprian. in expos.
Symb. Aug. contra 2. Gaudentii epist. lib. 2. cap. 23. tom. 7.


Hanc scripturam quae appellatur Machabaeorum, non habent Iudaei sicut legem,
and prophetas, and Psalmos, quibus dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam
testibus suis: dicens: oportebat impleri omnia, quae scripta sunt in lege, and
Prophetis, and in Psalmis de me. Sedrecepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si
sobrie legatur, vel audiatur: maxim, propter illos Machabaeos, qui pro Dei
lege sicut very martyrs, a per secutoribus tam indigna atque horrenda perpessi
sunt.

This scripture which is of the Machabees, the Jews repute not as they do the
law, the Prophets, and Psalms, to which the Lord gave testimony as to his
witnesses, saying: It behoved all things to be fulfilled, which are written in
the law, in the Prophets, and Psalms of me: but it is received of the Church
not without profit, if it be read or heard soberly: especially, for those
Machabees, who for the law of God as true martyrs, suffered of their
persecutors so unworthy and horrible torments. And their own dear friar
Bryton tells us, that neither is it known who was the author of these
books, neither did Bryto in Prolog. Match.
the east Church ever receive them. I say secondly, that this second book (out
of which purgatory is collected,) was never in Hebrew: and consequently, never
authentical among the Jews. I say thirdly, 2
that many things found and affirmed in the books of Machabees, 3
prove the same to be of no credit at all. For first, those for whom Judas
offered sacrifice and prayer, could not be helped therewith: because as 1
the text records, they perished for their secretidolatry: and so says the
Gloss also. and consequently, Judas erred grossly in praying and sacrificing
for them, and the author of the book likewise in comme^ding Judas his fact.
whereupon it follows necessarily, that the writer was not directed by the holy
ghost: because he concluded prayer for the dead, upon a notorious known fact
condemned by the scriptures. Secondly, this book says, that the Jews were
led captives into Persia: but they were translated indeed, not into Persia but
into Babylon, as their 2
own Lyranus does testify. Thirdly, the second book says, that Judas with 2.
Mac. 1. 19.
others wrote their epistle to Aristobolus in the 188 year, but the first book 3
affirms Judas to be dead in the year 152, so that he must perforce write 2.
Match. 1.
his epistle 36 years after his death. Fourthly, the first book says, that
Antiochus 1. Match. 9.
died in Babylon in his bed for sorrow: but the second book avoucheth, 4
1. Match. 6.
that he was slain in the temple of Nannea. Fifthly, because the author of 2.
Match. 1.
the books of Machabes desires pardon, if any thing be done amiss. These 5
be his words. Si been and ut historiae competit, hoc et ipse velim: si autem
minus 2. Match. 15.
digne, concedendumest mihi. If I have done well and as is decent for the
history, that is my desire: but if not worthily, I must crave pardon. And 2.
Match. 14. 37.
doubtless, he that writes by the direction of the holy ghost, needs no
pardon at all. Sixthly, the wilful murder of Razias is there commended, which
commendation can not proceed from the holy ghost. Seventhly, 6
the author of the Macchabees does only conclude praying 7
for the dead, because Judas offered sacrifice for the dead. Which general
illation upon a particular fact, is not good in popish manner of proceeding. For
as their Maxim says, which is true indeed:

Privilegium paucorum, non facit legem communem.

The privilege of a few, can not establish a general law: neither will it
help the papists to say, that saint Augustine and others alleged this book.
For so saint Paul alleged the testimonies of Tit. cap. 1. 12. 1. Cor. 15. 33.
Acts 17. 28.
Ethnickes, Epimenides, Menander, and Aratus: and popish divines allege now
and then Esops Fables.

But in what manner and to what end S. Augustine alleged this book, I have
showed out of Augustine already. Neither yet will it help to say, (which some
repute for a great argument) that this book is in the corpse of the Bible. For
so is the fourth book of Esdras within the corpse of the bible: and yet do the
papists themselves repute it, no better then a fable. yea, which is more to be
noted: they will not have the last end of the Lords prayer, to be canonical:
albeit it be found in the greek original, and placed in the corpse of the
bible.

For the great popish linguist Benedictus Arias Montanus, tells Arias Mont.
in cap. 6. Mat. verse. 13.
the reader in his observation upon that place, that it is not of the text
though he can not deny it, to be in the greek and first original.

To conclude, neither did Judas pray himself, neither did he will others to
pray for remission of sins unto the dead: neither is it flatly so said in the
Greek copy, neither did he offer sacrifice for the sins of the dead, but
for the resurrection of the body, understanding by sin the death and
corruption of the body, which proceeds of sin and follows the same.
Which my interpretation may be gathered out of these words of the text it
self:

Been and religiose de resurrectione cogitans.

Thinking well and religiously of tbe dead. 2. Match. 12. 43.


And therefore is the illation of the popish latin translation, so highly
commended and strictly commanded by the synod of Trent, vain, frivolous, and
foolish. He that penned the story, has without all rhyme and reason infarced
the same: because no such conclusion can be truly gathered, of Judas his
oblation and fact.

The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, since there is no purgatory but Christ's blood.

Secondly, since after this life there is no place for merit or satisfaction.

Thirdly, since the book of Machabees is not Canonical: I conclude, that it
is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false,
erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the sixth Motive.
The VIII. CHAP. Of dissension amongst the Papists.
ALthough nothing is more common with the Papists, then to charge protestants
with dissension: yet is it their own peculiar badge, as will appear by due
examination thereof.

The first article of dissension.
THe first erection of the English seminary at Rome, began with dissension,
between the students on the one part, and Master Morice the VVelsh-man on the
other part. This Morice was appointed the rectour of the seminary, with whom
took part doctor Jews an other VVelsh-man, (who was Archdeacon to the
Archbishop of Cambrey, and referendarie to the Pope at that time,) and also
Cardinal Morone then the protector of the English nation.

With the scholars took part, the close and politic Jesuits, who would seem
to do nothing in the matter openly, but in deed did all in all secretly. For
the space of some days, (in which time the matter was hotely handled on both
sides, daily suits being made, and supplications exhibited unto his holiness,)
the Cardinal prevailed, and the pope discharged the scholars. But the
Jesuits labored so forcibly (and yet covertly:) that within three days,
(notwithstanding all the means that the Cardinal did and could make,) the
scholars were again restored to their places. For Toledo the Jesuit was
commanded by the general of their society, to fall prostrate This Toledo was
pope Gregory's preacher, and adviser in all important Ecclesiastical causes.
on his knees before the popes holiness, and there to make a pitiful
lamentation for the overthrowe of England. that is forsooth, that now were
rejected the finest wits, the most toward youths, the seed of popery, and
the only hope of the English nation: who now exiled for zeal in religion, and
come to be his popish vassals: must either be trained up in papistrie after the
Jesuitical manner, or else should England never be reclaimed world without end.

Which sweet narration, no sooner sounded in the popes ears: but he
commanded the scholars, to be received into the College again. And shortly
after by Jesuitical policy, Master Morice was officiperda, and a Jesuit
made rectour in his place.

This dissension still continues in that seminary, as in which have been
four or five (to speak of the least,) notorious combattes or endeavors
between the rectour and the students: who should expulse each other. And
sometime the rectour has so prevailed by policy, that some few have been
dismissed: and other-somtime the general of the Jesuits has bin glad to
change the rector, so to appease the dissension.

The like agreement is, amongst the papists at home here in England: for I
pray you, did not their holy confessor M. Sherewood, even in the time of his
bonds for popery, murder his brother papist in the tower of London? I wot he
did. Did not old Sir John in the kidcote at York so agree with Comberforth
the priest, that they would never keep company the one with the other: though
living both in one little prison, and imprisoned for the self same cause? it
was so, my self was testis oculatus. Did not Wright, Fletcher, and
Comberforth, imprisoned all together in the blockehouses at Hull upon
Kingstone, agree in deviding their contributions which were right large ones,
even as thieves agree in deviding their spoils and robberies? Their mutual
contumelies filled the ears of countrey-papistes, their writings were lamented
of the readers.

Let Padley, Norlees, and Haversiege say, if it be not so.

What holy amity is between the Jesuit Mushe, and other seminarie-priestes,
Brodell, Dakins, Butler, and others his brother priests will witness with me.

And that ye may know in one word the perfection of the English Romish
seminary, you must understand, that by the Jesuits their advise, the students
in their supplications to the pope in their great conflict with the Cardinal,
promised that they would all be romish priests, for the conversion of England
to his Romish religion.

Which offer and promise was very plausible in the popes ears.

For the better confirmation of which promise, all the scholars were shortly
after called to their corporal oaths.

All which was wrought and contrived, by the politikes the Jesuits: some few
scholars only acquainted with the promise and oath, until the very instant
in which they did swear.

Which oath as it was ungodlily made, so is it and will be ungodlily
performed, so long as that college can stand, by all probability.

I say by all probability, because I have great reason so to think: though I
can not as a God, divine of future contingents.

That it is ungodly performed, too much experience shows by so many
seminaries sent daily in multitudes, oddely and disloyally into this land.

The like experience we have in John Gower, who so long resisted the Jesuits
in refusing to be made priest, and at length was made against his will for
fear: as also in Humfrey Maxfielde and Thomas Nevvell very proper scholars
for their time, who staying in the seminary until they were urged to be
priests, were at the last expulsed because they would not be priests. But now
to dissentions of more importance.

The second Article.
BEllarminus avouches, that it neither is nor ever was lawful since Christ's
time, for Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, to marry after taking of their
orders: as which says Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis ca. 19.
he, is prohibited by the apostolic law.

But their Canon law tells us another tale, for thus is it written in their
own decrees:

Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos pontifices supra legantur esse
promoti, non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de Did. 56. cap.
cenomane^se^.
legitimis coniugijs nati: quae sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem vbique licita
erant, and in Orient ali Ecclesia vsque holy eis licere probantur.

When therefore, we read that they are promoted to the popedom, who were
the sons of Priests: we must not understande that such were bastardes, but
borne in lawful wedlock and legitimate: which marriages were lawful for
priests every where before the prohibition: and in the east church they are
approoved to be lawful until this day.

And in other place of the said Canon-lavve we are told of many popes that
were priests sons: to wit, Bonifacius, Agapitus, Did. 56. cap. Osius.
Theodorus, Sylverius, Foelix, Deusdedit, and others.

The third article.
COncerning venial sins, how they are remitted in purgatory: the
dissension is such and so great, as of the schoolmen each one differs from
other.

Scotus says, they are forgiven in the instant of death: that is, when man
begins first not to be, by reason of his merits Joseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de
sacrament. poenit. p. 219.
in his life time.

Durandus says, they are forgiven for the displiecence of venials, which the
souls have in that place: and that because they are in charity.

So to says, the sin is remitted in purgatory, for the act of charity,
and continual patience, which the souls have in their torments.

The like dissension is about their pardons, as is said already.

The fourth article.
NAvarre tells us, that we are only bound to confess our mortal and
great sins; and that a papist coming to their sacramental confession, may
confess some, and conceal other Navarr. ca. 21. n. 34. in ench.
some.

These are his words:

Hoc praeceptum non includit venialia, etiam si mixta sint mortalibus. Quibus
consequens est posse quem si velit, confesso uno peccato veniali alterum
tacere.

This precept does not include venial sins, albeit they be mingled with
mortals. whereupon it follows, that the penitent may if he list, confess one
venial and conceal another. Thus Navarre. To which I add: that by this
doctrine, the penitent may dissemble egregiously in confession, and deceive his
ghostly father: and yet not sin at all.

But the famous popish Chancellor of Paris Johannes Gersonus, tells another
tale. Thus he writes:

Omne peccatum pro quanto est offen sa Dei and contra legem eius aeternam, est
de sua condition and indignitate mortiferum, secundum rigorem Gerso. de vita
spirituali, lect. 1. circa medium part. 3.
iustitiae, and a vita gloriae separativum. Ratio est, quoniam omnis offen sa
in Deum, potest just ab ipso iudice deo puniri poena mortis t^n temporalis
quam aeternae, imo annihilationis poena. est igitur de se mortifera. assumptum
deducitur ex hoc, quod nulla poena talis est ita mala, quam mala est ip sa
offen sa. Et ex alio: quia potius toleranda esset omnis mors paenalis and
annihilatio, quam committenda esset quantumlibet parva offen sa in deum, da
oppositum, iam offen sa Dei licite fieri deberet in casu.

Every sin in that it is an offense against God and his eternal law, is
mortal of it own condition and indignity according to the rigor of justice,
and devideth us from the life of glory. The reason is, because God may justly
punish every offense done against him, as well with eternal as temporal
death, and with the mult of annihilation. It is therefore mortal of it own
nature.

The assumption is gathered of this, for that no such punishment is so evil as
the offense. as also because every penal death, and annihilation both: ought
rather to be tolerated, then the least sin to be committed: Grant the
contrary, and in some case sin shall be done lawfully, and be no sin at
all.

Thus says Gerson, and this is a true, learned, and comfortable saying.
whereof more shall be said hereafter.

The fifth Article.
NAvarre says, that one may both deny in word and upon his oath, that which
the judge requires of him: so he equivocate, and make his own sense unto
himself: but their learned doctor Navar. in enchir. cap. 18. n. 61. cap. 25.
n. 43.
Genesius Sepulveda, tells him it may not be so. Yet all our politikes, our
Jesuits I would say, hold with Navarre. Yea, the Jesuits will now and then
by equivocation, deny them selves to be Christians: as their dear brother
John Mushe confesses, in his answer to my addition. whose words Irehearsed
at large, in my counterblast against him and his adherents.

The sixth Article.
ALL the Romish Jesuits and other papists now adays avouch obstinately, that
matrimony is a sacrament, and conferreth grace ex opere operato: but their
own Durandus and Gaufridus, affirm boldly the contrary.

Durand has these express words:

Praeter duo praedicta, sunt alia duo circa matrimonium, Durand. in 4. sent.
did. 26. q. 3.
circa quae sine periculo haeresis, licitu^ est contraria opinari: quorum unum
est theologicum, videlicet, vtrum in matrimonio confer atur gratia ex opere
operato, sicut in aliis sacramentis novaelegis. Secundum est logicum,
videlicet, vtrum matrimonium habeat plenam vnivocationem cum alijs sacramentis.

Besides these two, there be other two things to be considered in matrimony,
wherein we may without danger of heresy think the contrary. The one is
theological, to wit, if in matrimony be conferred grace ex opere operato, as in
other sacraments of the new law. The other is logical, to wit, if matrimony be
a sacrament properly and univocally so called. And Durandus avoucheth Gaufridus
with other Canonists, to be of his opinion. So then, matrimony neither gives
grace, nor yet is properly a sacrament.

THE SEVENTH ARTICLE of their Dissension.
SYlvester Prieras has these words:

Papa est imperatore mayor dignitate, plus quam aurum plumho. Sylvest. de papa
number. 10.


The pope does more excel the Emperor in dignity then gold excels lead.

Again he says thus

Donavit Constantinus papae in vener ationem and recognitionem Dominij,
administrationem temporalem imperij, and eandem immediate Papa conceait
imperatori in vsum, and stipendium officij, pro gubernatione and defensione
pacifica ecclesiae.

The Emperor Constantine gave the pope temporal administration of the Empire,
in token of his reverence and homage: and the pope gave the Emperor the same
again, as the stipend of his service, for his peaceable protection of the
church.

And a little after he has these words:

Vnde dico, quod de plenitudine potestatis ex causa rationabili, potest omnes
leges civiles evertere, and alias condere: nisi in quantum spectant ad Sylvest.
de papa number. 14.
ius natural aut divinum, nec imperator cum omnibus legibus and populis
Christianis possent contra eius voluntatem quicquam statuere.

Where upon I say, that of the fulness of power upon reasonable cause, the
pope may dissolve all the civil laws, and make others: neither can the
emperor with all laws and consent of Christendom determine any one jot
against his mind.

Archidiaconus and Augustinus de Ancona, are of the self same opinion with
Sylvester. But other papists are ashamed now thus to hold: and therefore write
sharply against this opinion.

Bellarminus says thus:

Christus vt homo dum in terris vixit, non accepit, nec voluit vllum temporale
dominium: summus autem Pontifex Christi vicarius Bellar. li. 5. de Romans pont.
c. 4. A.
est, and Christum nobis represent at qualis erat dum hic inter homines
vlveret. Igitur summus Pontifex vt Christi vicarius, at que adeo vt summus
Pontifex est, nullum habet temporale dominium.

Christ as man while he lived on earth, neither had nor would have any temporal
dominion: but the pope is Christ's viear, and represents Christ to us, in
such sort as he lived here among men: therefore the pope as Christ's vicar, and
consequently as pope, has no temporal dominion. Victoria has these words:

Potest as temporalis non dependet a summo pontifice, sicut aliae potestates
Victor. test. ecclesiae page 38.
spirituales inferiores. Et paulo post: licet assertores alterius partis
communiter dicunt, quod papa instituit omnem potestatem temporalem, tanquam
delegatam and subor dinatam sibi, and quod ipse constituit Constantinum
imperatorem: sedtotum hoc est fictitium and sine quacunque probabilitate, nec
innititur vel ratione, vel testimonijs, vel scripturae, vel saltem alicuius
expatribus, vel vere theologis, sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium de derunt
papae, cum ipsiessent pauperes rebus and doctrina.

Temporal power does not depend upon the pope as inferior spiritual powers
do: although others of the other part commonly say, that the pope ordained all
temporal power, as delegate and subordinate to himself, and that he made
Constantine emperor. But all this is a mere fable, and void of all
probability, neither has it any ground, either of reason, or of scripture, or
of ancient fathers, or good divine. yet the glosses of the canons gave the pope
this pre-eminence, Lo, ignorance and poverty are the adva^cers of popedom.
because themselves were beggarly follows and unlearned. Behold here the
lively original of popedom, even by the testimony of the best learned popish
doctor.

The eight article of Dissension.
THe papists this day do constantly hold and teach, as a necessary doctrine
of faith: that there be venial sins which do not dissolve the amity
between God and man: because they are not (say they) contra but praeter legem
dei. which distinction Thomas Aquinas utters very plainly in these words:

Peccatum veniale dicitur peccatum secundum ratione^ imperfectam, and in ordine
ad peccatu^ mortale, sicut accidens dicitur ens in ordine ad substantiam
secundum Aquinas 12. q. 88. ar. 1. ad 1.
imperfectam rationem entis: non enim est contra legem. quia venialiter peccans
no^ facit quod lex prohibet, nec praetermittit ia, ad quod lex per praeceptum
obligat, sedfacit praeter legem, quia non observat modum rationis qua^ lex
inte^dit,

A venial sin is termed sin, after an imperfect manner, and way to a mortal sin,
even as accidens is called ens in order to substantia, after an imperfect
reason of ens. For it is not against the law: because he that sins
venially, does not that which the law forbids, neither does omit that to
which the law by precept does oblige, but does besides the law, because it does
not observe the manner of reason which the law intends. But this opinion is
sharply reproved, and flatly confuted, by many learned papists. For Michael
Baius apud Bellar. Mich. Baius apud Bellar. de purgator. l. 2. cap. 4.
Ioannes Gerson de vita spirituali, lect. 1. circa med. and Roffensis artic.
32. cont. Luther, affirm, that every sin is mortal of it own nature and
therefore may justly be punished eternally. Durandus proves by many reasons,
that every sin is against the law of God. Ioannes Gerson and Almain Apud
Navar. prelud. 7. nu^. 16.
hold the same. For thus speaks Joseph. Angl. of them.

Tertia opinio est Gerso. and Almaini asserentium venialia and mortalia non
differ ex natura rei, sed tantum ex divina misericordia, eo Joseph. Ang. in
2. s. d. 37. diffic. 6,
quod placuit divinae maiestati imputare ad paenam aeternam mortale, veniale
autem ad temporale^. vtrumque tamen ex natura sua, cum sit in Deum, esse dignum
poena aeterna.

The third opinion is Gersons and Almains, affirming that venial and mortal
sins do not differ in the nature of the thing, but only Gerson. part. 3. de
vita spiritualilect. 1.
by the mercy of God: in that it pleased the majesty of God, to assign
eternal pain for the one, and temporal for the other. For both of them
deserve eternal pain of their own nature, because they are against God,

And in another place, the same Josephus writes in this manner.

Durandus tamen and alij permulti hanc sententiam impugnant, affirmantes Idem
Joseph. vbi supr, diffic.
peccata venialia esse contra mandata: and haec opinio, videtur modo in scholis
communior.

But Durand and many others impugn this opinion, auouching venial sins to
be against the commandment: and this opinion now adays, seems to be more
common in the schools. where note The popish doctrine is mutable. See the 1. c.
and 4. concl.
by the way out of the word (modo now adays,) the mutabilitie of tomish
religion.

THE NINTH ARTICLE. of Dissension.
THe council of Trent, Thomas Aquinas, Bellarminus, and many other papists,
affirm matrimony to be properly a sacrament of the new testament, and to
confer grace.

But Durand denies it, either to give grace, or to be properly a sacrament.
Durand. in 4. d. 26. quest. 3.


So Alphonsus a Castro, and Petrus a Soto, deny it to be properly a
sacrament of the new Iawe. Apud. Bellar. l. 1. de matr. c. 6.


And Melchior Canus, having sundry others of his opinion, (as he says,)
holds matrimony to be a sacrament, yet not every matrimony to be so: but
only that matrimony, which is celebrated a ministro Canus de locis l. 8. c. 5.
fol. 246.
ecclesiastico sacris et solennibus verbis: by the minister of the church in
sacred and solemn words.

The like dissension is among Papists, about the matter and form of the said
sacrament. For Josephus Angles recites five several opinions, Joseph. Ang. in
4. s. de matri. ar. 4. diffi. 1.
for and concerning this one point of popish doctrine.

And Melchior Canus beholds such variety in this matter, as he reputeth him
a mad man, that will believe their sayings. whose words for better credit sake,
are these: Canus de locis lib. 8. cap. 5, p, 245.


Lege magistrum. D. Tho. Scotum, Bonav. Richard. Palud. Durand. caetero sque
scholae theologos, and nisi statim eorum pendentes ac vacillantes animos
deprehenderis, tum vero me aut stultum, aut temerarium iudicato. Nam and cum
quaerunt an matrimonium conferat gratiam, id quod maxim eo loco finiendum
erat, non definiunt tamen: sed in his referunt quae in hominum opinione sunt
posita. In materia item and forma huius sacramenti statuenda, adeo sunt
inconstantes and varij, adeo incerti and ambigui, vt ineptus futurus sit, qui
in tanta illorum varietate and discrepantia, rem aliquam certam, constantem,
exploratam conetar efficere.

Read the master, S. Thomas Bonaventure, Richardus, Paludanus, Durandus, and
other school divines: and if by and by thou do not perceive their wavering
and doubtful minds, then judge me either a fool or a rash fellow. For when
they enquire if matrimony confer grace, that which was especially to be
defined, that define they not at all, but only tell what others think
therein: and in determining the matter and form of this sacrament, they are so
unconstant and various, so uncerten and ambiguous: that he may be deemed a
fool, who in such their variety and dissent, will establish any constant
doctrine. Here gentle reader, thou may behold the dissension of papists,
even in their sacraments and matters mostimportant.

The tenth Article of dissension.
PAnormitanus, Abulensis, Gerson, Almaine, Cusanus, with all the fathers of the
counsel assembled at Constance, affirm every general council to be above
the Pope, as I have proved in the 4. chapter and third conclusion: But all our
Dominicanes, Jesuits, and seminaries, do with open mouths avouch the
contrary, as their writings Let not the Papists hence forth boast of their
unity.
and experience this day teaches us.

The eleventh article of dissension.
THe Jesuits and seminaries tell us, that the Church consists in those
popes, who sit by material succession in Peter's chair at Rome: how badde
soever their lives be, and how erroneous soever be their private opinions: but
their own great doctor Nich. Lyranus, does sharply impugn that their
sottish assertion: telling them that many popes have forsaken the christian
faith and become atheists, and therefore that the church does not consist in
the material succession of men, but in the faith of Peter and doctrine which
he preached. Read the place and mark the words, for they are most evident.


Read his words in the third chapter, and fourth conclusion.

The like dissension is amongst papists, about the popes dispensation in
matrimonio ratonon consummato, as is already prooved in the fifth chapter:
read and peruse the chapter.

The twelfth Article of dissension.
MAny papists, as Aquinas, Richardus, Paludanus, Marsilius, pope Gregory, and
all his canonists do hold, that a simple priest by virtue vide Bellar. and Ios.
Ang. de sacram. confir.
of the popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectually minister their
sacrament of confirmation.

Which opinion Covarruvias records and justifies in these words:

Tertio probatur simplicem sacer dotem posse ex Romans pontificis dispensatione,
sacramentum hoc confirmationis ministrare, auctoritate D. Gregorij Covar. tom.
2. l. 1. c. 10. pa. 24. de sacr. consir.
qui permittit and vere concedit licentiam presbyteris, ubi desunt Episcopi
ministrandi sacramentum confirmationis: quod si fieri iure non posset, vir
doctissimus and sanctissimus minime permisisset.

It is prooved thirdly, that a simple priest may upon the popes grant,
administer this sacrament of confirmation by S. Gregory's authority, who
permits and indeed gives license unto priests where bishops want, to do
the same.

But his opinion and practice is stoutly impugned by other great vide Covarr.
Ios. and Bellar. de sacr. confir.
papists, to wit, Bonaventura, Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus, Mayor, and pope
Hadrian, who all avouch that pope Gregory was a man and therefore might err,
and erred indeed egregiously, what greater and more important dissension can be
then this? for confirmation is a sacrament with the papists.

The thirteenth article of dissension.
ALbertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Ioannes Mayor, Bonaventura, Almain,
Richardus, and other papists affirm, that every vide Bellarm. and Ios. Ang.
of their 7. orders is a sacrament. VVhereupon I might infer right
consequently, that the papists have by iustnumber, 13. sacraments in all.

But their Durand does reject this common opinion, as foolish and improbable.
Yea, Victoria, Josephus Angles, Caietanus, and Petrus Lombardus their master of
sentences, are no small patrones of Durandus his opinion.

Josephus Anglus writes thus:

Non est erroneum affirmare cum Dur ando, solam or dinationem sacerdotis Ios.
Ang. de sacram. ord. ar. 2. diffic. 3.
esse sacramentum ordinis, reliquas vero ordinationes sacramentalia esse, quia
Ecclesia hactenus non declaravit oppositum, neque eius opinio scripturae sacrae
and sanctorum auctoritatibus contradicit.

It is not erroneous to affirm with Durande that only priesthood is a
sacrament, and that the six other are mere sacramentals, because the Church
hitherto has not declared the contrary, neither is this opinion contrary to
holy scripture, or to the doctrine of the fathers. Victoria has these words:

Sienim aliqui ordines non sunt iuris divini ut certo constat deminoribus: non
est dubitandum, quin collatio illorum committi possit non Episcopo. Victor. de
potest ecclesiae, relect. 2. p. 90.


For if some orders be not de iure divino, as it is certain of the lesser
orders: there is no doubt but the collation thereof may be committed to him
that is no bishop.

And in another place the said Victoria says thus:

Opinio Durandi and Caietani est probabilissima, scilicet quod solum
sacerdotium est sacramentum, vel saltem quod quatuor minores non Victor. de
sacramento. ord. p. 119.
sunt sacramentum.

The opinion of Durand and Caietane is most probable, to wit, that only
priesthood is a sacrament, or at the least, that the four lesser orders are
not a sacrament. And a little after he tells us, that pope Vrbanus and
Innocentius are of the same opinion.

These be his words:

Innocentius vir doctissimus, allegans Vrbanum papam dicit: Vrbanus ait quod
solum presbyteratus and diaconatus sunt sacri ordines, and Victor. ubi su-pra.
quodilli solum leguntur fuisse in primitiva Ecclesia.

Innocentius a very learned pope affirms with pope Vrbane, that only
priesthood and deaconship are holy orders, and that they only were in the
primitive Church.

The fourteenth article of dissension.
COvarruvias having alleged many writers touching the exemption of Clergymen
from secular judgments, has these words: Covarr. tom. 2. cap. 3. pract.
quaest.


Quorum omnium ea est concors sententia, quodhaec clericorum exemptio sit
omnino iuris divini, cut per humanam legem derogari non possit.

Who all hold this opinion constantly, that this exemption of Clerks is
wholly of the law divine: from which, man's law can not derogate. Yet as says
the said Covarruvias in the same place, the contrary opinion is defended of
many other papists: to wit, of Aquinas, Medina, Alciatus, Innocentius and
others: so doubtful is their popish doctrine. The like dissension is about the
conception of our Lady: for the pope and his Jesuits hold, that she was
conceived without sin, and therefore do they celebrate the day of her
conception: Aquinas in 3. part. q. 27. ar. 2. ad. 3.
but Aquinas (whose docttine sundry popes have confitmed) defends constantly
the contrary opinion. And all Thomistes take part with him, some few excepted.

The fifteenth article of dissension.
IT is a constant position with the papists, as which is lately defined
bytheir council of Trent, that no man knows himself to be in the favor of
God: and yet does their religious bishop Amb. Catharinus, oppose him self with
tooth and nail against the same: as appears evidently to such as list to
read them, by the bitter invective treatises between Dominicus Soto and him,
concerning moral good acts. The Scotistes hold, that we can keep all the
commandments, quoad substantiam operis: the Thomistes say, we can do some,
but not all: their great schooleman Gregorius holds, that we can do none at
all.

The sixteenth Article of dissension.
THat the Emperor Constantine was baptized at Rome by Sylvester then bishop
there, is constantly affirmed by Damasus, Nicholaus, vide Canum de locis, lib.
11. cap. 5. p. 320.
Clemens, Thomas, Platina, Marianus, Sabellicus: yea, Nicephorus avoucheth it
to be so certain, as every one may think it, and securely believe it. yet is
this opinion sharply impugned, by many others with them deemed papists:
Hieronymus, Eusebius, Socrates, Argumentum ad hominem.
Theodoritus, Zozomenus, Cassiodorus, and Pomponius.

The seventeenth article of dissension.
THe pope and his Jesuits tell us, that in the eucharist, the substance of
bread is transsubstantiated into the body of Christ, so as accidents remain
there without their subjects: but my L. Abbot their Rupertus says, that Christ
is personally bread in hypostaticall union by force of consecration, even as he
is personally man Apud Bellar. lib. 3. de euch. cap. 11.
by incarnation.

The eighteenth article of dissension.
THe pope and his Cardinals with the troops of Jesuits, tell us, that private
Mass is lawful, and that the priest may devour De consecr. did. secunda,
cap. peracta. d. 1. c. omnes, and can. 10. apostolorum.
up all himself: but apostolical canons appoint all to communicate, or else to
be driven out of the congregation: and pope Calixtus affirms the very same.

The ninteenth article of dissension.
POpish dissension touching the production of a substance, out of the accidents
which papists imagine, to remain without Ios. Ang. in 4 art. vlt. de accid.
euchar.
subjects in the eucharist: is incredible. Innocentius holds one opinion:
Aquinas two, the one repugnant to the other: Richardus another, Caietane
another, Scotus another.

The twentieth article of dissension.
THe Church of Rome teaches it to be a matter of faith, to believe Christ's
body to be in every part, when one of their consecrated hosts is broken in
many pieces: but their schoole-doctour Ios. Angl. in 4. s. q. 1. de euch. 7.
diffic.
Johannes Mayor, says it is a problem.

The 21. article of Dissension.
TOuching the quantity of bread and wine, how much may be Joseph. Angl. in 4.
s. de euchar. 5. diffic. q. 1.
consecrated at one mass: there are three opinions amongst the papists.
Bonaventura holds one opinion, Caietain another, and the third is the common.

The 22. article of dissension.
COncerning the bread to be consecrated: Albertus magnus holds, that either
wheat or barley bread will suffice. Caietaine Ios. Ang. in 4. de euchar. art. 3.
says, any bread what soever is used to be eaten in any country, may be the
bread of consecration.

3 The third opinion holds, that only bread of wheat can suffice.

The 23. article of Dissension.
COnfirmation with the papists is a sacrament, and therefore can it not be
omitted without sin, as Richardus, Durandus, Adrianus q. de confir. ar. 1.
and Sylvester affirm: yet do Aquinas and pope Adrian, defend the contrary.

The 24. article of Dissension.
IOannes Parisiensis affirms the substance of bread, to Aquinas p. 3. q. 65.
ar. 4. Apud Joseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de convers. p. 166.
be united to the body of Christ hipostatically: Durande holds that the
substance of bread is destroyed, but the matter of bread abides still with
Christ's body. Cardinal Caietain says, that nothing in the Gospel enforces us
to understand these words, (this is my body,) so grossly and carnally as the
papists do. The council of Trent avoucheth, that the bread neither is
annihilated, neither abides it still in the sacrament: quod qui potest capere,
capiat: for if it neither abide in the sacrament, neither is annihilated, that
is, become nothing: I would know what it is, and where it abides.

The 25. article of Dissension.
AQuinas and Caietanus affirm, that the quantity of a popish consecrate host,
may be corrupted naturally Scotus says, that is Joseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de
accident. eucharist. p. 172.
impossible, to every natural agent: Josephus Angles holds, that a natural
agent may corrupt the whole quantity, by division of the parts thereof: but
neither by way of condensation, neither by transemutation into another form:
and that forsooth, because the quantity of popish sacrament, is there without
a subject: which subject is the ordinary object of every natural agent.

The 26. article of Dissension.
COncerning consecration of the chalice, (as the papists term it,) Aquinas
holds, that all the words set down in the romish missall, are of the
essence of the form. Alexander Alensis, Bonaventura, and Durandus affirm,
that more then the one half of the said words, are mere extrinsecall and not
of the essence thereof. Scotus says, that the form is not certainly known
unto the Church of Rome: and therefore none can be-secure, but he that
pronounces all the words. Soto avoucheth, that if the priest have intention
to consecrate by the former words, (which Bonaventure, Alensis, and Durand
Joseph. Ang. in 4. sent. de euchar. p. 104.
teach to be the form,) then the said priest consecrateth, but commits
thereby sacrilege: because forsooth, says Soto, peradventure the other
opinion is true. And Josephus exhorts very gravely, to have intention,
neither to consecrate precisely by the former words, nor yet by the latter,
but to have the intention of the Church, (inmpe with the colier:) for in so
doing says he, the sacrificer shall be in no danger.

Now I beseech thee gentle Reader, what horse would not break his halter to
hear this melody.

The 27. article of dissension.
COncerning the formation of Eve, wonderful are the exclamations of Catharinus
against Caietanus, and of Antonius Fonseca against Catharinus: as also of
Paulus Burgensis against Lyranus, and of Matthias Thoring against Burgensis. in
many other things pervse their glosses upon the old and new testament, and
all this will appear.

The 28. article of Dissension.
IT is a great question amongst the papists, what that is which a mouse eats,
when she catches their reserved host. Bonaventura, and their Lombard. and
Bonavent. in 4. s. d. 13.
master of sentences affirm, that the mouse eats not Christ's body: but
our popes, Cardinals, and Jesuits defend the contrary, as a grounded article
of their belief.

The 29. article of Dissension.
POpe Adrian, Richardus, and Panormitanus tell us, that a priest being
contrite, may say mass before he be confessed: but by Joseph. Ang. in 4. s. p.
117.
the decree of our council of Trent, this fact is a damnable sin.

The 30. article of Dissension,
OUR pope, Cardinals, and Jesuits tell us, that infidels are not Joseph.
Angl. iu 4. s. ar. 2. de confess.
bounden to their auricular confession: But Richardus, Gabriel, and Angelus,
defend the contrary.

The 31. article of dissension.
BEllarminus avoucheth, that more voices in councels must needs Read their
words in the 4. chap.
be of force: but Canus affirms, that the lesser part is the best, if the
pope hold with the same. And yet in this point notwithstanding their good
agreement rests the foundation of their popish religion.

The 32. article of dissension.
THe council of Lateran, (where were present 284. persons, patriarchs, Council.
Later. can. 1. de fide cathol.
metropolitanes, bishops, and abbots) defined absolutely, that angels were
created at one and the self same time with the world: and yet Basilius,
Nazianzenus, Damascenus, Hieronimus, Augustinus, and Aquinas, deny the same to
be a matter of faith. Canus de Iocis lib. 5, 169.


Many other like dissentions I could easily allege, as of Cardinal Caietanes
dissension about divorse and such like. But because mine intent is to be
brief, these for this time may suffice.

For if I should touch all dissentions amongst the papists, the day would
sooner fail me, then matter whereof to speak.

The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, since the papists are at bloody conflict, concerning the
popes civil regiment. Secondly, since they teach venial sins not to dissolve
amity between God and man, their greatest doctors impugning the same.
Thirdly, since some of them constantly affirm matrimony to be a sacrament:
and other some deny the same with tooth and nail. Fourthly, since to hold the
pope to be above the general council, is with some no article of faith nor
error at all, with other some an error in faith, and flat heresy. Fifthly,
since some papists maintain romish doctrine by material succession, and other
some bitterly exclaim against the same. Sixtlie, since some do affirm, that
the pope may dispense for the ministry of confirmation: and other some that it
is a heinous crime. Seaventhlie, since some hold, that every of their orders is
a sacrament, and some zealouslie impugn the same. Eighthly, since many papists
defend our Ladies co^ceptio^ without sin: and many other avouch it to have bin
in sin. Ninthly, since it is a constant doctrine among the papists, that
Constantine was baptized at Rome, and that notwithstanding ancient fathers
with uniform consent, repute the same a fable: a lie, since those and many
other important dissentions, be amongst the papists: I conclude, that it is a
sufficient motive for me to renounce the romish religion, as false, erroneous,
and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the seventh motive.
THE NINTH CHAPTER: Of credit due unto vvriters.
THe papists exclame against protestants, because they reject now and then the
authority of man.

For whose better satisfaction in that behalf, if they will be satisfied with
reason: these conclusions following may suffice.

The first conclusion.
THe protestants speaking of the wiser and discreter sort, do highly reverence
the holy fathers and ancient writers, diligently read their works, and
gladly use them as good helps and ordinary means under God: for and
concerning the exact explication of holy writ. Of this conclusion none can
be ignorant or stand in doubt thereof, that seriously peruse doctor Jewel,
the famous and worthy bishop of Saris bury against Doctor Harding: Doctor
Whitgift, the most reverend, learned, and virtuous arch bishop of Canterbury,
against M. Cartwright: Doctor Cooper the reverend bishop of winchester, against
the Martinistes: Doctor Reinolds, Doctor Seravia, Doctor Sutliue, and others.

The second Conclusion.
THE Protestants, although they speak and think reverentlie of the ancient
fathers: yet do they neither repute their works of equal authority with the
holy Scriptures: neither to be free from all errors and imperfections.
wherein they nothing at all swerve from the modest estimation, which the said
holy fathers had ever of themselves.

For proof of this conclusion. S. Augustine writes in this manner. Ego solis
eis scriptur aru^ libris qui iam canonici appellantur, hunc timorem and honorem
didici defer, vt nullum eorum auctorem scribendo Aug. epist. 19. ad Hero.
aliquiderrasse firmissime credam. alios autem it a lego, vt quantalibet
sanctitate doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi it a
censuerunt, sed quia mihi velper illos auctores canonicos, vel probabili
ratione quod a veritate non abhorreat, per suadere potuerunt. I have learned to
give this fear and honor to those only books of scripture, which are called
canonical, that I firmly believe no author thereof to have erred in any point:
but yet I read others so, that how holy or learned soever they be, I do not by
and by think it true, because they say so: but because they persuade me by
those canonical writers, or by probable reason, that that is true they say.

And in another place, the same saint Augustine has these words.

Ego huius epistolae authoritate non teneor, quod liter as Cypriani vt
canonicas Aug. contra Cresconium l. 2. c. 32.
non habeo, sed eas ex canonicis considero, and quod in eis divinarum
scripturarum auctoritati congruit, cum laud eius accipio: quod autem non
congruit, cum pace eius respuo.

I am not bound to the authority of this epistle, because I take not Ciprian
his writings for canonical, but consider them by the canonical, and what I
find in them agreeable to holy writ, that with his praise do I receive: but
what is dissona^t, that with his favor I reject.

And again he says of him self in this manner:

Negare non possum nec debeo, sicut in ipsis maioribus it a multa esse Habetur
did. 9. c. negare 4.
in tam multis opusculis meis, quae possunt iusto iudicio et nulla temeritate
culpari.

I neither can nor dare deny, but as in our ancestors, so in my works also
are many things, which may justly, and without all temeritie be reproved. yea
the same saint Augustine opposes only saint Paul's testimony against all the
writers Saint Hierome could Aug. epist. 19. ad Hier. tom. 2. page 50.
allege, about the great controversy, where saint Peter was reproved of saint
Paul. By which testimony it is very plain, that S. Augustine did reverence
the old writers, but yet did think them men, and to have their errors: and
therefore would be not admit for truth what soever they wrote but only that
which he found to be consona^t to the holy scriptures. And because my L. of
Roch. is so highly renowned in the church of Rome, he shall make an end of this
conclusion, where he writes in this manner: Nec Augustini nec Hieronimi, nec
alterius cuinslibet auctoris doctrinae sic ecclesia subscripsit, quin ipsi
locis aliquot ab ijs lice at dissentire. nam in nonnullis ipsilocis se plane
monstrarunt homines Roffensis art. 32. advers. Luth. p. 420.
esse, atque nonnunquam aberrasse sequitur: quo fit, vt tametsi propter aliquas
humanas hallucinationes, de multis (quae dicti patre, in commentarijs suis
reliquerunt) dubitare liceat: sanctitatem tamen eorum haud licet in dubium
revocare.

The church (of Rome) has not so subscribed to the doctrine, either of
Augustine or of Hierome, or of any other writer: but that we may dissent from
their opinions in some places. For themselves have in certain places showed
plainly that they were men, and wanted not their errors. Wherefore albeit by
reason of human frailty we may lawfully doubt of many things which the
said fathers have left behind them in their books: yet may we not now call
their holiness into question. In which words, our great popish bishop
teaches us three documents.

1 First, that their church gives every one liberty, to dissent from
Augustine, Hierome, and other writers whosoever.

2 Secondly, that the fathers have plainly declared themselves to be men, and
to have had their imperfections accordingly.

3 Thirdly, that many errors are to be found in the commentaries of the
fathers. So then our bishop is of my opinion, and so also should the rest be:
if they would be constant in their own doctrine, which is published to the
view of the world.

The 3. Conclusion.
NOt that which the greater part of the fathers or more voices agree unto, is
always the undoubted truth: but often times that which the lesser part, and
fewer persons do affirm.

For the proof hereof, Melchior Canus writes thus:

Scimus frequenter vsu venire, vt mayor pars vincat meliorem scimus Canus de
locis lib. 5. c. 5. page 164.
non ea semper esse optima, quae placent pluribus: scimus in rebus quae ad
doctrinam pertinent, sapientum sensum esse praeferendum: and sapientes sunt
paucissimi, cum stultorum infinitus sit numerus.

We know it often chances so, that the greater part prevails against the
better. we know that those things are not ever the best, which please the
most. we know that in matters of doctrine, the judge meant of the wise ought to
be followed: for wise men be few, and fools infinite. Josephus Angles, Thomas
Aquinas, and Petrus Lombardus affirm it to be the opinion of the old fathers,
of Basilius, of Joseph. Ang. de creat. reru^ did. 12. q. 1.
Ambrosius, of Chrisostomus, of Hieronimus, of Eusebius, of Damascenus, of
Gregorius, and of others, that the world was created in 6. natural days
successivelie, as Moises records the same: yet this notwithstanding, saint
Augustine holds opinion against them all, Tho. Aquinas 1. p. quest. 74. ar.
2. in cor. p. Lombard. l. 2. did. 12.
and says, that the 6. days mentioned by Moises were metaphorical, not
natural. Moises dividing those things which were made by parts, for the better
capacity of the rude and ignorant people to whom he spoke. which opinion of
one only Augustine, was ever preferred in the church, as testifyeth Melchior
Canus in these words:

At communis hic sanctorum consensus nullum argumentum certum Canus de locis.
l. 7. cap. 1 p. 116.
theologis subministrat, quin vnius Aug. opinio caeteris omnibus adversa,
probabilis semper in ecclesia est habita.

But this common consent of the holy fathers does not yield any found argument
to devines, for the opinion of one only Augustine repugnant to the rest was
ever thought probable in the church.

All the old writers, Augustinus, Ambrosius, Chrisostomus, Remigius, Canus, vbi
supra, p. 217.
Eusebius, Maximus, Beda, Anselmus, Bernardus, Erhardus, Bernardinus, Bona
ventura, Thomas, Hugo, and all the rest without exception, affirm uniformly
citing express textes of scripture for their opinion, that the blessed virgin
Marie was conceived in original sin: and yet does the late hatched nest of
Jesuits, and sundry other papists avouche this day the contrary for the
truth. Therefore says their own archbishop and great canonist Panormitanus:
that we ought at all times to give more credit to one only prelate whosoever
alleging the scriptures, then to the resolution of the Panormit. apud.
Sylvest. de conc. par. 3
pope himself, or of his counceil, not grounded upon the said scriptures.

The 4. Conclusion.
THe papists themselves do often reject the general and common opinion, and
follow their own private judgments, never remembering, or little regarding,
that they condemn the like in others.

This writes their own Melchior Canus.

Vbi ego si Thomistae omnes cum Scotistis existant, sicum antiquis iuniores
vellent contra me pugnare, tamen superior sim necesse est. non enim Canus de
locis, l. 8. c. 5. p. 245.
vt nonnulli putant, omnia sunt in Theologorum auctoritate.

wherein, though all the Thomistes stand with the Scotistes, though the old
writers with the young fight against me, yet shall I of necessity have the upper
hand over the^. For all things rest not as some do think, in the authority of
divines. Their own Cardinal Caietain, notwithstanding his zealous affection
toward popery and his own popish estate, did for all that freely
acknowledge the truth in this point: in so much that he prefers a sense
newly perceived, but grounded upon the scriptures before the old received
opinion of how many fathers so ever. whose words because they are worthy the
hearing and reading I will allege at large. Thus does he write. Super quinque
libris Mosis iuxta sesum literalem novumque scripturae sensum quandoque
illaturus sub s^matris Caietai, in sua prefat. in 5. libros Mosaicos
ecclesiae aec apostolicae sedis censura, rogo lectores omnes ne precipites
detestentur aliquid, sed librent omnia apud sacram scripturam, apudfidei
christianae veritatem, apud Catholicae ecclesiae documenta ac mores.

and siquando occurrerit novus sensus textui consonus, nec a sacra scriptura,
nec ab ecclesiae doctrina dissomus, quamvis a torrente doctorum sacrorum
alienus, aequos se prebeant censores. meminerint ius suum vni cuique tribuere,
solis scripturae sacrae authoribus reservata est authoritas haec, vt ideo
credamus sic esse quodipsiita scripserunt. nullus itaque detestetur novum
sacrae scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat a priscis doctoribus. sed
scrutetur per spicacius textum ac contextum scripturae, and si quadrare
invenerit, laudet deum, qui non alligavit expositionem scripturarum sacrarum
priscorum doctorum sensibus, sed scripturoe ipsi integrae sub catholicae
ecclesiae censura. alioquin spes nobis ac posteris tolleretur exponendi
scripturam sacram, nisitransferendo (vt aiunt) de libro in quinternum.

Being now ready to write upon the pentateuch of Moses according to the
literal sense, and purposing to bring now and then a new sense of the
scripture, under the censure of our holy mother the church and apostolic
seat: I desire all that shall read my commentaries, to contemn nothing rashly,
but to ponder every thing with the scripture and the verity of the christian
faith, and the doctrine of the catholic church. And if at any time a new sense
occur, which is consonant to the text, and not dissonant from holy writ or
doctrine of the church, although it swarve from the opinion of never so many
fathers: yet let the readers judge thereof indifferently, and according to
equity: Let them remember to give every one his right: for this privilege is
only granted to the writers of the holy scriptures: that we must therefore
believe it to be so, because they have written so. Let none therefore loath a
new sense of holy scripture, because it dissenteth from the old doctors: but
let him exactlie consider the text and context of the scripture: and if he find
it to agree, let him praise God, who has not tied the exposition of the holy
scriptures, to the opinions of the old doctors, but to the integrity of the
scripture it self, under the censure of the catholic church. For otherwise
neither we nor our posterity should have any hope to expound the scripture,
but only to translate out of one book into another.

Thus we hear the verdict of our Caietaine, our Thomist, our friar, our
Cardinal of Rome: by whose resolution it is evident, that no sense, though
never so new, no exposition though never so strange, no opinion though
different from never so many fathers, ought to be rejected if it be agreeable
to the scriptures. and consequently, it follows by the said resolution, that
every truth is to be tried by the scriptures and none by the fathers.

For first, our Cardinal tells us, that he purposes now and then, to bring
new senses, new Glosses, new expositions of the Scriptures. 1


Secondly, he says, that such new senses must not rashly be contemned, but
duly examined by the scriptures: and then admitted, if 5
they be found consonant to the same.

Thirdly, he teaches us this golden lesson, that God has not tied the
exposition of the scripture, to the judgment of any ancient 3
father or fathers whosoever.

Fourthly, he tells us, that the Apostles and such as only penned the holy
scriptures, had this special prerogative, that they could 4
not err. All which important points, are so learnedly, so gravely, and so
christianly observed by this Cardinal, as more cannot be wished: yea, in the
self same preface he professes constantly, that he will neither expound the
Greek nor the Latin text: but the fountain Caiet. vbi supra.
and the original, to wit, the Hebrew. And his reason is, because the Hebrew
only is authentical.

Where note by the way, that the Latin edition which the papists term
vulgata, and which is so magnified by the late council of 1
Trent, as both the Greek and the Hebrew must give place unto the same: is of
small or no authority in respect of the Hebrew, by Cardinal Caietanus his
resolution.

Note secondly, that this Cardinal did dedicate these his commentaries, 2
(in which all these memorable observations are contained,) to our holy father
Pope Clement him self, who perused them and difallowed no part thereof: and
consequently, that this doctrine of Caietane is confirmed by the pope. For so
mightily has God always wrought for the truth of his Gospel, as evident
testimonies are set down even by the adversaries, and remain this day with
them uncancelled, for confirmation of the same. Neither is this the opinion of
the popes Cardinal only, but of Aquinas also his angelical and best
approoved doctor.

His words I will likewise allege at large, because, albeit they belong, yet
can they not be thought tedious to such as love the truth: as which are most
significant and effectual for the controversy now in hand.

Thus therefore does he write:

Licet locus ab auctoritate quae fundatur super oratione humana, sit
infirmissimus; locus tamen ab auctoritate quae fundatur super revelatione
divina: est efficacissimus. Vtitur tamen sacra doctrina etiam Aquin. p. 1, q.
1. ar. 8. ad 2. argumentum.
ratione humana, non quidem ad probandum fidem, (quia per hoc tolleretur
meritum fidei,) sed ad manifest andum aliqua aliaquae traduntur in hac
doctrina. Cum igitur gratia non tollat naturam sed perficiat, oportet quod
naturalis ratio sub serviat fidei, sicut and naturalis inclinatio voluntatis
obsequitur charitati. vnde and apostolus dicit, 2. Cor. 10. in captivit atem
redigentes omnem intellectu^ in obsequium Christi. Et inde est, quod and
authoritatibus philosophorum sacra doctrina vtitur, vbi per rationem naturalem
veritatem cogno scere potuerunt: sicut Paulus act. 17. inducit verbum Arati,
dicens. sicut and quidam poetarum vestrorum dixerunt, genus Dei samus. sed
tamen sacra doctrina huiusmodi auctoritatibus vtitur, quasi extraneis
argumentis and probabilibus. auctoritatibus autem canonicae scripturae vtitur,
proprie ex necessitate argumentando. auctorit atibus autem aliorum doctorum
ecelesiae, quasi arguendo ex proprijs, sed probabiliter. innititur enim fides
nostra revelationi apostolis and prophetis factae, qui canonicos libros
scripserunt. non autem revelationi, si qua fuit alijs doctoribus facta.

Although the place of authority, which is grounded upon man's reason, be most
weak and infirm: yet the place which is grounded upon divine authority, is
most sure and effectual. nevertheless, sacred doctrine uses also man's
reason, not indeed to establish faith, (for so faith should lose it merit,)
but for the manifestation of some other things which are delivered in this
doctrine.

Since therefore grace does not destroy nature, but does pervert the same, it
is expedient that natural reason be servant unto faith, even as natural
inclination of the will is servant unto charity. whereupon the apostle wills
us, to bring our understanding captive to the obedience of Christ. And from
hence comes it, that sacred doctrine uses also the authorities of
philosophers, when they could by natural reason have knowledge of the truth,
as Saint Paul alleged the saying of Aratus. yet sacred doctrine uses such
authorities, as arguments which are external, and only probable. But uses
the authorities of canonical scripture, as arguments that are proper, and
which conclude of necessity. as for authorities of the doctors of the church,
it uses them as proper arguments: but which are only probable, and do not
conclude necessarily. For our faith is grounded upon revelation made to the
apostles and prophets, who wrote the canonical scripture: but not upon
revelation of any other writers, if any were made unto them. Thus says
Aquinas. Out of whose words I gather First, that the authority brought from
man, is ever insufficient.

2 I gather secondly, that that ground whereupon we must build, as upon an
undoubted truth, is only and solelie the authority of the scriptures.

3 I gather thirdly, that man's reason may never be used, to establish any
point of doctrine.

4 I gather fourthlie, that the fathers are to be read reverentlie, and their
authorities to be used as probable reasons, but not as necessary
demonstrations.

5 I gather fiftlie, that feined romish revelations are not authentical. And
consequently, that all revelations divulged under the name of Saint Bridget
and others, are either meereillusions, or of small force, and which can yield
no sound argument in matters of faith.

Victoria in very brief words, utters this point effectually.

Licet in hoc omnes conveniant, non est tamen mihi certum. Victoria de sacram.
p. 118.


Although (says he) all agree in this, yet do not I make it certain.

Navarre sings the same song in many places, whereof I will recite only
one.

Tum quod fundamentum principale ipsius est; quod communis tenet Navar. in
en-chir. cap. 7. paral. 4.
oppositum, quodip sum etiam ipse assero: sed non obstat, quia a communi
recedendum, quum pro contraria est textus velratio, cui non potest satis been
responderi.

Because also his principal ground is, that the common opinion is to the
contrary: which thing I my self also grant. But that is not of force: for we
must renounce the common opinion, when there is either text or reason, which
can not be sufficiently answered.

In fine, their own gloss in their decrees rejects saint Augustine roundly
in these words:

Cum enim salva sua pace, Augustinus non been opponit istis, and it a dormit
27. q. 1. c. nupr.
avit hic Augustinus.

Where saint Augustine by his favor does not well object against this: and so
Augustine here was a sleep.

Lo, when the fathers speak not placentia, every beggarly popish gloss
rejects them at pleasure. And yet must we under pain of excommunication
admit their authority, when they seem to make for popery. albeit, they
speak never so flatly against the holy council. later. 2. sess. penult.
scriptures. yea their late council of Lateran charge all preachers under
pain of excommunication, that they expound the scriptures according to the old
doctors, received in the church of Rome.

The Corollarie.
1 FIrst therefore, since the ancient fathers may err, and have also erred de
facto.

2 Secondly, since Saint Augustine admits the opinion of fathers, no
further then they agree with the scriptures.

3 Thirdly, since that which is holden of the greater part of the fathers is
often false and disagreeable to the truth.

4 Fourthly, since the papists them-selves prefer the opinion of one before
many:

Fifthly, since Caietanus, Canus, Navarrus, and others, do al roundly reject
the common opinion, when it disliketh them:

6 Sixthly, since their own gloss makes no account of S. Augustine, when he
speaks not placentia: I conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to
renounce the romish religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctriue.

Thus much of the eight Motive.
The X. CHAP. Of Traditions written and vnwritien.
THe Papists bear the world in hand, that many things necessary for man's
salvation, are not contained in the written word: and consequently, that none
can be saved, but such as believe their unwritten traditions.

Wherein, that truth may plainly show it self, after mine accustomed
manner, I put down conclusions.

The first conclusion.
THe written word or holy scripture, contains in it self every thing
necessary for our salvation.

For proof of this conclusion, S. Paul writes unto Timothy in this manner:

Quia ab infantia sacras literas nosti, quae te possunt instruere ad salutem
per fidem in Christo Ie su. 2. Tim. 3. 15.


Because thou have known the Scriptures from thy infancy, which are able to
instruct thee to salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus.

Now, if the scriptures be able so to instruct one, as he may thereby attain
his salvation: it can not doubtless be denied with reason, that every thing
necessary for man's salvation is contained therein.

For which cause the Apostle adds these words:

(...). Cap. cod. verse. 16.


The whole scripture is given by the inspiration of God: and is profitable to
doctrine, to redargution, to correction, to instruction, which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, prepared to every good
work.

In which words the holy vessel of God Saint Paul, confirms that which he
said before, to wit: that the holy scripture is able of it self, to instruct
us fully unto salvation.

And the Apostle declares this by an argument drawn from the sufficient
enumeration of those parts, which are required unto our salvation: and withal
he commends the scripture, of the sufficient cause, end and use thereof.

The cause is, in that he says the scripture is (...), that is to say The
cause.
given by the inspiration of God. The use is four fold, whereof the two former
pertain to doctrine: the two latter to life and manners. The use.


1 For first, it is profitable to the doctrine of faith, and holy obedience.

2 Secondly, to the refutation of errors, contradictions and false opinions.

3 Thirdly, for the correction of abuses as well public as private.

4 Fourthlie, for instruction unto righteousness, that is, to lead a godly and
holy life. The end.


The end is, that the man of God, to wit, he that is the true worshipper of
God may be sound, perfect, and most absolute furnished in ail kind of
goodness. which being so, we must needs confess, (if we will not obstinately
deny the manifest truth,) that the scriptures contain all things necessary
for christian doctrine, and for the full accomplishment of eternal life.
Neither will it help the papists to answer, (as their wonted manner is,) that
the greek word ((...)) signifies every, not all: so as the Apostle should
say, not the whole scripture, but every scripture. For first, every scripture
is not so copious or fruitful, as it can afford us all those goodly affects,
which saint Paul here rehearses.

Again, the self same greek word ((...)) is used for the whole, by saint
Paul's own interpretation in another place of holy scripture, where he has
these express words.

(...). 1. Cor. c. 13. v. 2


And if I have all and the whole miraculous faith, so that I can remove
mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.

In which place the papists can not possibly interpret the self same greek
word, though they would never so gladly, but for all and the whole, because
otherwise the sense would be most absurd. as which would prove saint Paul to
speak of every kind of faith, and consequently of the justifying faith with
the rest: albeit, it is most clear: that he speaks of the miraculous faith
only, which is often in the very wicked.

The same greek word in two several places of saint Matthew, is likewise
taken for the whole.

For in the second chapter it is thus written.

When king Herod heard, he was troubled and the whole city of Jerusalem with
him. Mat. cap. 2. v. 3. 4.


Where if the greek word ((...)) were interpreted every, and not the whole,
the sense would be absurd: to wit, every city of Jerusalem, being yet but
one only Jerusalem in all. but ((...)) being taken for the whole, the sense
is plain and easy: to wit, the whole city of Jerusalem.

So in the sixth chapter it is thus written. Mat. c. 6. v. 29.


Neither was Solomon in all his glory, araied like one of these.

Where if the word ((...)) be taken for every, the sense is not current,
because Christ compares his bountiful providence over herbs and flowers,
not with a piece of Salomons glory, but with all and the whole. For whosoever
shall otherwise interpret the greek word (...), shall no little derogate from
the magnificence of Christ his providence, as also frustrate his comparison.

Our holy father Abraham in matters of salvation, does not send us to
traditions, but to the scriptures of Moses and the prophets.

For thus it is written:

Habent Mosen and Prophetas, audiant illos.

They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. Luc. c. 26. v. 29.


As if he had said, now the law is not studied, now the prophets are contemned:
now God is not heard speaking in his word:

Some would have angels come down from heaven: some desire miracles, other
some the dead to rise again: But to hear Moses and the prophets, that is, to
read the scriptures, is the true and only way to attain eternal life.

And doubtless, if the scriptures be means to bring us to salvation, (which
the papists dare not deny,) then must they be sufficient for that end, or
else Christ's works should be imperfect.

For which cause Saint John writes thus:

Haec autem scripta sunt, vt credatis quod Jesus est Christus filius Dei, Ioa^.
c. 20. v. 30.
and vt eredentes, vitam habeatis in nomine ipsius:

But these things are written, that ye may believe Jesus to be Christ the
son of God, and that by belief, ye may have life in his name*

Lo, Saint John affirms so much to be written, as is sufficient for our
belief, through which we must be saved.

The popish gloss upon the same text has these words:

Haec quae fecit Jesus and ante resurrectionem et post, dicit se scripsisse
Glossa ordin. super cap. 20 Ioannis.
vt fidem astruat qua vita habeatur.

The things that Jesus did before and after his resurrection, he caused to be
written, for the establishing of that faith which gives life.

Nicolaus Lyranus their own dear doctor, confirms the same in these words.

In nomine eius. i. per fidem nominis Christi, quia secundum quod dicitur Act.
4. neque enim aliud nomen est sub coelo datum hominibus, in quo nos oporteat
salvos fieri. Lyran. in c. 20. Ioa^nis.


In his name, that is, through faith of the name of Christ, because as is said
in the acts: there is no other name under heaven given unto men, in which we
can be saved.

S. Hierome, though so much liked of the papists, is not for all that
dissonant from the rest.

For thus does he write.

Ergo nec parentum, nec maiorum error sequenaus est, sed auctoritas
scripturarum, and Dei docentis imperium. Hier. in 9. cap. Ier. tom. 5.


Therefore we must neither follow the error of our parents, nor of our
ancestors: but the authority of the scriptures, and the commandment of God
that teaches us. S. August. that grave father, that glistering beam that
strong pillar of Christ's church, does avouch the same truth in words yet more
manifest, writing in this manner:

Cu^multa fecisset Dom. Jesus, no^ omnia scripta sunt: electa sunt autem quae
scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. August. in Joan.
tract. 49. to. 9. in initio.


where as our Lord Jesus did many things, all were not written, but so much
was appointed to be written, as was thought sufficient for the salvation of the
faithful.

What more forceable words can be wished? what more effectual narration can
be expected? what more sensible speeches can be used? yet if it be possible to
say more herein, the self same Augustine will perform it in another place,
where he has these express words.

In his enim quae aperte in scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem more sque vivendi, spem scilicet, atque charitatem. Aug. de
doctri na Christ. li. 2. c. ^. tom. 3.


For in those things which are plainly set down in the scripture, are found
all those things, which contain our faith and manners, that is, hope, and
charity.

Lo, all things that concern faith, hope, and charity, are plainly found in
holy scripture. where it is diligently to be observed, that Saint Augustine
does not only say, that all things containing faith, hope, and charity, are
to be found in the scripture: but he does further say, that all such things
are plainly set down in the scriptures.

Whereupon I infer this notable document against popish doctrine, that
albeit many things in many places of the scripture be obscure and
intricate, (which I willingly grant unto the papists,) and consequently,
that the same surpass the capacity and judgment of the vulgar sort: yet are
all things concerning our belief, concerning our manners, concerning our hope,
concerning our charity, concerning our salvation so plain and so manifest, as
every one even of the meanest judgment, may easily perceive, and understand
the same: and this the papists must perforce grant unto me, neither will I
require more at their hands.

This is confirmed by my Lord of Rochester, their learned Bishop and reputed
martire.

For these be his words, as he himself has uttered them:

Scriptura sacra conclave quoddam est omnium veritatum, qua Roffensis art. 37.
aduers. Luth. p. 411.
Christianis scitu necessariae sunt.

The holy scripture is a cellar, parlour, or storehouse of all truths, which
are needful to be known of Christians.

NOW gentle reader, by this bishops confession it is evideut, that popish
unwritten traditions are not needful or necessary for christians: and so with
no reason can they be thrust upon us.

Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the Apostles time, is of the same mind:

These are his words:

Omnino igitur non audendum est, quicquam de summa abstrusaque divinitate aut
dicere, aut cogitare, praeter eaquae nobis divinitus scriptae Dionys. Areopag.
de divinis nominib. cap. 1. in initio.
divinae enuntiarunt.

In no wise therefore may we make bold to speak, or think any thing of the
most high and ineffable divinity: but that only, which holy writ has
revealed unto us from heaven.

Melchior Canus, albeit he labor with tooth and nail to prove the consent of
the fathers, to yield us an undoubted argument of Canus de locis l. 7. c. 3.
page 228.
the truth: yet can he not deny that the scripture is perfect and most
sufficient in everierespect:

These are his words:

Sedquaer at hic for sit an aliquis: cumsit perfectus scriptur arum canon,
sibique adomnia satis superque sufficiat: quid opus est, vt ei sanctorum and
intelligentia iung atur and auctoritas.

But some man happily here will demand: that since the canon of the scripture
is perfect, and most sufficient of it self to every end, and in every
respect: what need have we to join with the same, either the exposition or
the authority of the fathers.

Thus says Canus, not denying the sufficiency of the holy scripture: but
requiring the commentaries of the fathers, for the better understanding of the
same. whose opinion in that respect I do not wholly dislike, as is already
declared in the ninth chapter.

This being so, it follows by a necessary consequent: that neither young nor
old, rich nor pore men nor women, learned nor unlearned, ought to be debarred
from reading of the scriptures. which my doctrine was altogether practical, in
the ancient and primitive church.

For confirmation whereof, no greater testimony can be had, then the old
vulgar translations of the bibles.

In which behalf, I savv very lately to my great comfort in the library of
Emmanuell college in Cambridge, an English Bible of such antiquity, as I
could not understand perfectly the greater part of the words. which is an
evident demonstration, that bibles were in old time translated into the vulgar
tongue, so as the common people might read them.

Thomas Aquinas, (whose person the church of Rome has canonized for a saint,
and his doctrine for authentical,) teaches us not to believe any thing
concerning God, save that only which is contained in the scripture
expresselie, or at least significantlie.

These be his words:

Dicendum quod de deo dicere non debemus, quod in sacrae scriptur a non Aquin.
p. 1. q. 36. ar. 2. adprimum.
invenitur, velperverba, velper sensum.

we must answer, that nothing is to be verified of God, which is not
contained in holy writ, either expresselie, or else in sense.

And in another place, the same Aquinas says thus.

Quicquid enim ille (Christus) de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit,
Aquin. p. 3. q. 42. ar. 4. ad 1.
hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit.

For whatsoever Christ would have us to read of his doings and sayings,
that he commanded his Apostles to write, as if he had done it with his
own hands.

In which words Aquinas avoucheth most plainly, that al things necessary
for our salvation, are contained in the scriptures. For in Christ's deeds, are
contained his miracles, his life, his conversation: in his sayings are
contained his preaching, his teaching, hic doctrine.

If then this be true as it is most true, (for the papists neither can nor
will deny Aquinas,) that whatsoever Christ would have us to know, of his
miracles, of his life, of his conversation, of his preaching, of his teaching,
of his doctrine, the same is now written in the scriptures: no man
doubtless, but he that will cum ratione insanire, can deny all things
necessary for our salvation, to be contained in the holy scriptures.

with Aquinas agrees their own renowned professor and dear friar
Franciscus Victoria, whose words are these:

Non est mihi certum licet omnes dicant, quodin scriptur a non continetur.
Vict. de sacra^. p. 120.


I do not think it certain, albeit all vvriters say so, because I can not
find it in the scripture.

Again in an other place, he vvriteth in this manner.

Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo debemus discedere a regula and synceritate
Victor. relect. 8. de augmen. charit. p. 308.
scriptur arum.

For which opinions we must by no means depart, from the rule and sincerity
of the scriptures. I could say much more herein, but nothing can be more
effectual against the papists, then to confute them by their own approved
doctors. And my desire also is to avoid all superfluous words.

The second Conclusion.
ALL persons ought to read the scriptures diligently, because out of them even
the simplest of all may gather so much, as shall be necessary for their
salvation.

This I say, against that popish ridiculous, unchristian, and pestilent abuse,
in which they deliver by way of tradition to the people, the scriptures,
sacraments, and church service, in a strange tongue to them unknown. which
their ungodly and intolerable dealing. S. Chrysostom most sharply
reprooveth in many places, vvherof I will only allege some fevv.

In his commentary upon Saint Paul, he has these words:

Et vos itaque silectioni cum animi alacritate volueritis attendere, nullo
Chrysoft. in proaemio epist. ad. Romans
alio preterea opus habebitis. verus enim est sermo Christi, cum dicit,
quaerite and invenietis, pulsate and aperietur. verum quia plures exijs qui huc
convenere, and liberorum educationem and vxoris curam gubernandaeque domus in
sesereceperunt, atque ideo non sustinent totos se labori isti addicere, saltem
ad percipienda quae alij collegerunt excitamini, tantum ijs quae dicuntur
audiendis impendite diligentiae quantum colligendis pecunijs. tametsi enim
turpe sit non nisi tantum a vobis exigere, tamen conenti erimus, sivel tantum
prestetis. nam hinc innumera mala nata sunt, quod scripturae ignorantur. hinc
erupit multa illa haere seon pernicies, hinc vita dissoluta, hinc inutiles
labores. que^admodum enim qui luce ista privati sunt, recta vtique non pergunt:
ita qui adradios divinarum scripturarum non recipient, multa coguntur continuo
delinquere, vtpote in long peioribus tenebris ambulantes: quod ne nobis
vsuveniat, oculos ad spelndorem apostolicorum verborum aperiamus.

If therefore you vvil read the scriptures with alacrity of mind, you shall
need no other help at all: for Christ's word is true.

when he says:

Seek, and yeee shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Mat. 7.


But for that many of you are charged with vviues, children, and domestical
regiment, and so cannot wholy addict your selves to this stndie: and yet at
least be ready to hear what others have gathered, and bestovv so much
diligence in heering what is said, as you do in scraping worldly goods
together: for although it be a shame to ask no more of you; yet will I be
content, if ye do so much.

For this is the cause of infinite evils, that you are ignorant in the
scriptures. From hence springs the manifold mischief of heresies, from hence
dissolute life, from hence vain, and unprofitable labors.

For even as they that are deprived of this light, can not go on the right
way: so they that do not behold the beams of holy scripture, are enforced
incontinently to offend in many things, as walking in far greater darkness.

This is the censure of saint Chrysostom: out of which I note,

1 First, that whosoever studieth the scriptures seriously, and with
alacrity, shall find therein, and understand so much, as is necessary for
his salvation. And consequently, that our disholie father the pope, debarreth
us of the ordinary means of our salvation: when he upon pain of
excommunication, inhibiteth us to read the scriptures in our vulgar tongue,
unless we have his license and dispensation so to do.

3 I note secondly, that if it be a shame for such as are charged with wives,
children, and families, only to hear sermons, and not to study the scriptures
vvithall: much more is it a shame for others that be more free, not to read
them diligently: and greatest shame of al for a bishop to approve them that will
not so do.

I note thirdly, that heresies, dissolute life, and all other evils, proceed
of ignorance, and not reading the scriptures.

Again, the said Chrysostom in another place has these words.

Propterea obsecro, vt subinde huc veniatis, and divinae scripturae lectionem
diligenter auscultetis: nec solum cum huc venitis, sed and domi Chrysostom. in c.
9. Gen hom. 29. tom. 1.
divina biblia in manus sumite, and viilitatem in illis positam magno studio
suscipite. and paulo post: tantum igitur lucrum oro, ne per negligentiam
amittemus, sed and domi vacemus divinarum scripturarum lectiooni; and hic
praesentes non in nugis and invtilibus colloquijs temporis decoquamus.

I beseech you therefore, that you come hither now and then, and attend
diligently the hearing of holy scripture: neither only when ye come hither,
but at home also take the holy bibles into your hands, and with great study
receive commodity which is in them contained.

I pray you therefore let us not negligently loose so great gain: but when
we are at home, let us then apply our selves to read the holy scriptures: and
being here, let us not spend our time idly and vainly.

And in another place he speaks in this manner:

Hoc igitur pacto, si scripturas diligenter scrutari voluerimus, salutem
assequi poterimus: sipenitus in eis ver sabimur, and doctrinam rectam and
Chrisos. hom. 52. in cap. 8. Ioannis.
vitam erudiemur. Et paulo posi: Non enim fieri potest, vt qui Deum and audiat,
and alloquatur Deu^ assequatur vtilitatem. sequitur: vacemus ergo scripturis
dilectissime, et salte^ evangelijs, ea freque^ter pertractemus.

By this manner then if we will search the scriptures diligently, we shall
attain salvation: if we shall be wholly conversant in them, we shall be taught
both right doctrine and good life. For it can not be but he shall get profit,
that both hears and talks with God.

Let us therefore study the scriptures, (my dearest,) and at the least let us
often read the holy gospels.

In and by which words (as we see most evidentlie,) SaInt Chrysostom greatly
lamenteth, that the people in his time were so negligent, in reading the holy
scriptures. what therefore would that holy father say, if he lived in these
our days when the pope burns such scriptures as the people understand? when
the pope commands all things to be done in strange tongues? when the pope
excommunicateth all lay persons be they never so well learned, that reason in
matters of their faith?

What would he say, if he heard priests pronounce absolution in 6. decret. l.
5. c. quicunque.
their popish sacrament of penance, which neither the penitents, nor the
priests themselves do oftentimes understand.

Nay, what would he say, if he were this day in romish churches, where they do
not only read their church service in Latin, but also Latin homilies, or
sermons unto the vulgar sort, which yet they teatme, an exposition of the
scripture? Which thing is done in every festival day of nine Lessons in the
time of Mattins.

In fine, what would he say, if he knew the rude vulgar sort commanded to
hear the gospel read in Latin: and withal should see them listening with
their ears, least any word should not be heard, though impossible to be
understood? would he not, and might he not justly say with the holy
Apostle, that they were mad?

Ves doubtless.

Origin, who lived above a thousand and three hundred years sithence, does not
only exhort the people seriously to read the 1-Cor. 1. 14. verse. 24. Orig.
hom. 4. super Levit. propesiuem.
scriprures: but withal shows plainly, that in his time, they were read
in the vulgar tongue.

These are his words:

Certe si non omnia possumus, saltem ea quae nunc docentur in ecclesia, vel
quae recitantur, memoriae commendemus.

Doubtless, if we can not bear away all things contained in the scriptures,
at the least let us remember those things, which are taught, and read in the
Church.

In which words he speaks not only of sermons, but also of the gospels,
epistles, prayers, lessons, and histories of the bible. For sermons are
contained in the word (decentur) which are preached, and the rest in the word
(recitantur) which are read or rehearsed.

And if such things had been read in a strange tongue, the vulgar sort could
not have committed them to memory.

Saint Augustine does not only exhort to read the scriptures, but also gives
great encouragement thereto, avouching that the scriptures may be understood
with all facility.

Magnifice igitur and salubriter spiritus sanctus ita, scriptur as sanctas
modificavit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus Aug. de
doctr. Christi lib. 2. cap. 6.
autem fastidia detergeret.

The holy ghost has so magnificallie and healthfullie measured the holy
scriptures, that in the obscure places lothsomnes is taken away: and with the
places that be plain and easy, our hunger is satisfied. And his reason hereof
follows in these next words.

Nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non plani ssime dictum
alibi reperiatur.

For almost nothing is contained in obscure places, which is not most plainly
uttered in some other place. so then by the testimony of this holy father, so
ancient for antiquity, so holy for virtue, so grave for authority, so
profound for his judgment, so rare for his Lo, the scriptures are plain and
easy.
wit, so renowned for his learning, that the papists hitherto have admired his
doctrine as an oracle from heaven: the holy scriptures are easy to be
understood: and whatsoever is obscurelie spoken in one place, the same is
plainly told in another.

To conclude, the practice of those godly Christians, of whom we read in the
Acts of the Apostles, decideth this controversy sufficiently: as who being
mere laymen, did notwithstanding study the Act. 17. v. 11.
scriptures most seriously.

The 3. Conclusion.
TRaditions are to be examined by the holy scriptures the true touchstone of
verity: and to be admitted, when they are found consonant to the same.

This conclusion is evidentlie proved, by the judgment practical of saint
Cyprian. For he being required by Stephanus then bishop of Where was the
magnifice^ce of popedom then?
Rome to yield unto traditions, did not term the said Stephanus by the title
of Pope, or holiness, (as now the romish manner is,) but by the name of fellow
or brother, and calling him blind byarde (not Saint Peter's successor, who
could not err) did contemn and utterly reject that tradition, which the said
Stephanus requested him to yield unto.

His very own words are these:

Nihil innovetur, inquit, nisiquod traditumest? vnde est istae traditio?
Cyprian ad Pompeium, page 228.
vtrumne de dominica and evangelica auctoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum
mandat is atque epistolis veniens? ea enim facienda esse quae scriptae sunt,
Deus testatur, and proponit ad Iesum Nave. dicens: non recedet liber legis
huius ex ore tuo, sed meditaberis in eo die ac nocte, vt observes facere omnia
quae scripta sunt. item, Dominus apostolos suos mittens, mandat baptizari
gentes and doceri, vt observent omnia quae cunque ille praecepit. Si ergo aut
in evangelio praecipitur, aut Apostolorum epistolis, aut actibus continetur, vt
a quacunque haeresi venientes non baptizentur, sedtantum manus illis imponantur
in paenitentiam, observetur etiam and haec sancta traditio.

Let nothing be renewed, says Pope Stephanus, but let that be done which was
received by tradition. from whence came this tradition? whether does it descend
from the authority of our Lord and of his gospel, or comes it from the
epistles, or acts of the Apostles? For God testifyeth that those things must
be done which are written, and propounds them unto Nave, saying: Let not the
book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate in it day and night,
that thou may observe to do all things that are written. Our lord also
sending forth his Apostles, charge them to baptize the gentiles, and to teach
them to do all things which he commanded them. If therefore it be commanded
in the gospel, or in the epistles of the apostles, or acts, that such as came
from any herisie should not be baptized, but only receive imposition of
hands for penance, then let this holy tradition be observed.

Thus we see, that this ancient father, canonized by the pope for an holy
and blessed martyr, will indeed admit traditions, (as the wiser sort of
protestants do admit with him,) but yet no other traditions, then are found
constant to the scriptures:

By which scriptures saint Cyprian examineth the verity of al traditions,
admitting those that be consonant, and rejecting such as be dissonant from the
same. At what time the Arrians would not admit the word (...),) because it
was not found in the scriptures, the fathers of the council did not then
allege traditions for proof thereof, neither did they say, that many things
must be believed, which are not written.

But they answered simply, that though that word were not expteslie written:
yet was it virtuallie, and effectually contained in the scriptures. which
thing is evident by the testimony of Athanasius, who writes in this manner.

Sed tamen cogno scat qui squis est studiosior is animi, has voces tametsi in
Athanasius de decret. nic. synod. to. 2. prope fine^.
scripturis non reperiantur, habere tamen eas eam sententiam quam scripturae
volunt.

Although the words be not found in the scripture, yet have they that
meaning and sense which the scripture approves, and intends, as every one
that studieth the scripture seriously, may easily understand.

Origin gives counsel to try all doctrines by the scriptures, even as pure
gold is tried by the touchstone.

Thus does he write.

Debemus ergo ad testimonium omnium verborum quae proferimus in Origenes in
Matthew. hom. 25.
doctrina, proferre sensum scripturae, quasi confirmantem quem exponimus
sensum. sicut enim omne aurum quodquod fuerit extra templum, non est
sanctificatum, sicomnis sensus qui fuerit extra divinam scripturam (quamvis
admirabilis videatur quibusdam:) non est sanctus, qui non continetur a sensu
scripturae, quae solu^et e sensum solu^ sanctificare quem habet in se, sicut
templum proprium aurum, Non ergo debemus ad confirmandam doctrinam nostram
nostram nostras proprios intellectus iur are, and quasi testimonia assumere,
quae vnusqui sque nostrum intelligit, and secundum veritatem aestimat esse: ni
ostenderit eos sanctos esse ex eo, qui in scripturis continetur divinis quasi
in templis quibusdam Dei.

Stulti ergo and caeci omnes qui non cognoscunt, quin templum, idest, lectio
scripturarum, magnum and venerabilem facit sensum, sicut aurum sacratum.

We must therefore allege the sense of scripture, for the testimony of
every word we utter in doctrine, as which confirms the sense of our
exposition.

For as all gold which is without the temple is not sanctified: so every
sense, which is without the holy scripture (albeit it seem to some
wonderful,) is unholy, because it is not contained in the sense of scripture:
which only sanctifyeth that sense which it has in it self, as the temple
sanctifyeth the gold. we must not therefore for the confirmation of our
doctrine, swear to the sense, which every one of us understands, and
conceives to be true, unless we can show it to be divine, because it is
contained in the divine scriptures: as in the temple of God.

Foolish therefore and blind are all those, who know not that the temple, to
wit, the reading of scriptures, makes the sense great and venerable, as
hallowed gold.

In another place, the said Origin has these words:

Querimus verba quae dicta sunt, iuxta personae dignitatem exponere: Origin.
hom. 1. in 1. c. Iere.
quapropter necesse est nobis scriptur as sanct as in testimonium vocare.
Sensus quippe nostri and enarrationes, sine ijs testibus non habent fidem.

We seek to expound the words rehearsed, according to the dignity of the
person: wherefore we must of necessity, call the holy scriptures to witness.

For our judgments and expositions without those witnesses, are of no credit
at all.

Thus we see, Origin his judgment, and that nothing can be of credit, which
is not grounded upon the scriptures.

But what? is Origin only of this opinion? no verily, for all ancient,
grave, and learned fathers, are of the self same mind.

Saint Augustine writing against Petilianus, has these words.

Proinde, sive de Christo, sive de eius ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re
quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, nos aut angelus de coelo Aug. cont.
liter. Petilia^. l. 3 cap. 6. tom. 7.
vobis annunciaverit preterqua^, quod in scriptur is legalibus and evangelicis
accepistis, anathemasit.

Wherefore, whether we speak of Christ, or of his church, or of what other
matter soever, which apperteineth to faith or manners, whether we, or an angel
from heaven shall announce otherwise the^ ye have received in the scriptures
of the law and the gospel, accursed be that man.

The same saint Augustine in another place has these words:

Nemo mihi dicat, O quid dixit Donatus, aut quid dixit Parmenianus, Aug. de
unit. ecclesiae, c. 10 no^ long abi nitio.
aut Pontius, aut quilibet illorum. quia nec catholicis episcopis consentiendum
est, sicubi forte falluntur, vt contra canonicas Dei scriptur as aliquid
sentiant.

Let no man say to me, Oh what said Donatus, or what said Parmenianus, or
Pontius, or any of them: because we must not consent to catholic bishops, if
they chance to err in any thing, and speak against the canonical
scriptures.

Saint Chrysostom agrees uniformly unto the rest, writing in this manner:

Cum videritis haeresim impiam quae est exercitus antichristi stantem Chrysostom.
in c. 24. Mat. ho. 49
in locis sanctis ecclesiae, in illo tempore qui in Iudaea sunt fugiant ad
montes, idest, qui sunt in Christianitate conferant se ad scripturas. and quare
iubet in hoc tempore omnes christianos confer se ad scripturas? quia in
tempore hoc ex quo obtulit haeresis illas ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse
verae christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse christianorum aliud volentium
cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi scripturae divinae.

when you shall see wicked heresy, which is Antichrists army, standing in
the holy Church: at that time they that be in Jury must flee to the
mountains, that is, they that are Christians must flee unto the scriptures.

And why commands he at this time all Christians to flee to the scriptures?
because at that time, when heresy has yielded up the churches, no proof can
be had of true christianity, neither any other refuge is left to christians
desirous to know the verity of faith, but only the holy scriptures.

Again, the said Crisostome says in an other place after this manner:

Neque enim quicquam dicere oportet sine testibus solaque animi cogitatione nam
si quid dicatur absque scriptura, auditorum cogitatio claudicat, Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 95. prope finem. tom. 1.
nunc annueus, nunc haesitans, and interdum sermone^ vt frivolum aver sans,
interdum vt probabilem recipiens. verum vbi e scriptura divinae vocis prodijt
testimonium, and loquentis sermonem, and audientis animum confirmat.

Neither must we say any thing without witnesses, and upon our own cogitation
only. For if any thing be spoken without the scripture, the cogitation of the
auditors halteth, sometime granting, sometime doubting, sometime rejecting
that which is spoken as frivolous, and sometime accepting it as probable. But
when testimony is brought out of the scripture of Gods word, then it
confirms both the words of the speaker, and the mind of the hearer.

And yet the said Chrysostom has an other place, well worthy to be written
in golden letters.

Thus he says:

Quomodo autem non absurdum est propter pecunias alijs non credere, sedipsas
numerare and supputare, pro rebus autem amplioribus aliorum Chrysostom. in 2.
cor. ca. 7. hom. 13. in fine.
sente^tiam sequi simpliciter: presertim cum habeamus omnium exactistissimam
trutinam, and gnomonem ac regulam, divinarum inquam legum assertionem. Ideo
obsecro and oro omnes vos, vt relinquatis quidnam huic vel illi videatur: deque
his a scripturis haec etiam inquirite, and ueras divitias discentes eas
sectemur, vt and aeterna bona assequamur.

How is it not absurd for money not to credit others; but to tell the money
our selves, and yet for more important matters, to follow simply the judgment
and opinion of others: especially, when we have the most exact balance and
rule, I mean the assertion of all divine laws. I therefore pray and beseech you
al, that you let pass what this man, or that man thinks, and search al
things out of the scriptures: and learning true riches let us follovv them,
that so we may attain eternal beatitude.

Behold here a most godly exhortation, and grave advise, given us by this
holy father. As we will not says he, trust others to tell our money, but
tell it our selves: much less should we trust others, depending upon them in
matter of our salvation, but should our selves learn and know the same* by
diligent reading of the scriptures.

Neither must we believe and do what this or that man says, but what we find
to be true, by painful study of the scriptures.

For which cause, vviselie and gravelie said Tertullian:

Idesse verum quodcunque primum, id esse adulterum quodcunque posterius.
Tertul. advers. praxe: in initio.


That is: that to be true, vvatsoever was first, and that to be counterfeit
whatsoever came after.

And for the same end said the holy Prophet:

Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, and lumen semitis meis.

Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Psalm. 1. 119.
nun.


As if he had said, of our selves we are but darkness, and can not see, except
we be lightened with Gods word. And consequently, if we desire to have our
sight, our chiefest and principal sight, the inward and spiritual sight of
our souls: we must employ our whole industry in reading the holy
scriptures, and with all humbleness of mind study them day and night.

The fourth Conclusion.
POpish traditions are so uncertain and doubtful, as the best learned
papists are at great contention about them, and can not possibly be accorded
therein. For the exact proof of this conclusion, that intolerable and endless
strife, which was a thousand and four hundred years sithence between Victor
then bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of Asia, may suffice if nothing else were
said. For on both sides tradition apostolical was alleged and stoutly
avouched, for and concerning the celebration of Easter.

Of this matter, thus writes Eusebius Caesariensis.

Episcopis autem in Asia coactis, qui morem iam olim ipsis a maioribus troditum
sedulo observandum constanter asseverabant, praefuit Polycrates. Eusebius.
Caesariens. l. 5. c. 23. hist. eccles.
qui in ea epistola quam ad Victorem and ecclesiam Romanam scripsit,
traditionem ad ipsius vsque tempora deductam, his fere verbis exponit. Nos diem
paschatis integre in corrupteque recolimus, neque addendo quicquam, neque
detrahendo.

The bishops of Asia assembled in council, Polycrates being president,
affirmed constantly, that that custom ought to be observed, which they of old
time had received by tradition. which tradition to have been continued until
his days, the said Polycrates in his epist. to Victor and the church of Rome,
shows plainly in these words: We keep easter entirely, and
incorruptlie: neither do we add or detract any thing

And in the same epistle he tells us, that Philip one of the seven deacons,
Saint John the Evangelist, Saint Polycarpe, Saint Papirius, Saint Melito, and
others, did all observe the same tradition.

These be his words.

Isti omnes diem paschatis 14. die lunae ex evangelij prescripto observarunt,
nihil ab eo instituto ac more plane digressi: sed secundum regulam and normam
fidei eum assidue tenuerunt.

All these have observed Easter the fourteenth day of the moon after the
prescripr of the Gospel, declining nothing at all from that custom and
ordinance, but daily retained it according to the rule and analogy of faith.

But Victor and other bishops with him, defended bitterly a contrary
tradition. For thus writes the said Eusebius of him:

Uictor qui tum Romans ecclesiae praeerat, totius Asiae ecclesias cum alijs
finitimis, tanquam alterius fidei and opinionis, simul omnes (vt complectar
brevi) a Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24. hist. eccles.
communi vnitate ecclesiae amputare conatur, and in eos per literas graviter
invehitur.

Victor then governing the Church of Rome, indeavoureth to cut off from the
common unity of the Church, all the Churches of Asia together with others
adjoining, and very bitterly inveigheth against them by his letters.

Which fact of Victor, Irenaeus and other Bishops sharply reprooved in their
letters to the said Victor. Which thing Ruffinus plainly testifies, in these
words:

Sed hoc non omnibus placebat Episcopis, quin potius and e contrario scribentes
Ruffinus, in sua trans.
ei iubebant, vt magis quae pacis sunt ageret, and concordiae atque vnanimitati
studeret. denique and extant ipsorum literae, quibus asperius obiurgant
victorem, velut invtiliter ecclesiae commodis consulentem.

Yet this his dealing pleased not all Bishops, but contrariwise they wrote unto
him, bidding him to practice rather that belonged to peace, and to study for
concord and unity. Finally, their letters are also extant, in the which they
sharply chide Victor, as one that respected unprofitably the good of the
Church.

Thus says Ruffinus. In like manner, (though with more modesty,) dissented
Anicetus an other bishop of Rome, from S. Polycarpe bishop of Smyrna. Of which
variance, thus writes Eusebius:

Neque tamen Anicetus Polycarpo poterat persuadere, vt suum observandi Eusebius.
l. 5. c. 24. hist. eccles.
morem deponeret, neque Polycarpus Aniceto persuasit, vt consuetudinem
Asiaticam vllo modo observaret.

Neither could Polycarpus persuade Anicetus, to keep the custom and tradition
of Asia.

Now, gentle Reader, what need more to be said, for the uncertainty of
traditions?

1 For first, these Bishops that thought thus diversely of traditions, lived
within one hundred years of Christ: at what time the Church was in good
estate, and stained with very few or no corruptions at all.

2 Secondly, the one side doubtless, was seduced with false traditions.

3 Thirdly, S. Polycarpe and other holy bishops of that age, made no more
account of the bishop of Rome his opinion, or authority, then of an other man's.

4 Fourthly, they were so far from acknowledging him to be the supreme head
of the Church, that they all reputed them selves his equals: and controlled him
as sharply for his doctrine, as S. Paul reprooved S. Peter for his conversation.

5 Fifthly, if S. Polycarpe had cause in his time, being the flourishing age of
the Church, to doubt of Romish traditions; much more have we cause in these
latter days, to stand in doubt thereof. For now has iniquity the upper
hand, now are corruptions more frequent, no we do errors in every place
more abound. Let us therefore follow S. Augustines advise, let us admit nothing
rashly, let us examine all doubtful traditions and doctrines, by the
touchstone of verity, the holy Scriptures. And least any man think S.
Augustine to be of another mind, these are his own express words:

Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis: sed audiamus, haec dicit dominus: sunt
certe libri dominici, quorum ant horitati vtrique consentimus, vtrique
credimus, vtrique August. de vnitate eeclesiae, cap. 3. tom. 7.
servimus: ibi quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram.

Let us not hear, I say this, thou say that: but let us hear, this says
the Lord: for our Lord has books, whose authority we both admit, we both
believe, we both obey: let us there seek the Church, let us there decide our
cause.

But what need many words? For either popish unwritten traditions, are
repugnant to the Scriptures, or consonant to the same. If they be repugnant,
then is there great reason to reject them: if they be consonant, that must be
tried by comparing them to the Scriptures, which is the conclusion I defend.
But the Papists, perceiving them selves to be convinced by the Scriptures: tell
us plainly, that they must have their cause tried by other means. For so
writes my L. of Rochester, in these express terms:

Contendentibus itaque nobiscum haereiic is, nos alio subsidio nostram oportet
tueri causam, Roffensis, verit. 4. advers. art. Lutheri.
quam Scripturae sacrae.

When therefore heretics, (he means all, not Papists,) dispute with us: we
must use other help in defense of our cause, then the Scripture.

Lo, they dare not be tried by the Scripture. Which if a papist had not
spoken, who would have believed it?

The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, since the written Word contains in it self, every thing
necessary for our salvation: secondly, since no traditions are to be admitted,
but such as are consonant to the holy Scripture: thirdly, since Papists load us
with huge numbers of traditions, without warrant of the written word: fourthly,
since popish traditions were in old time, most doubtful and uncertain; I
conclude, that it is a sufficient motive for me to renounce the Romish
religion, as false, erroneous, and pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the ninth Motive.
CHAP. ix. Of Popish auricular confession.
ALthough popish doctors do wonderfully magnify their auricular confession,
persuading the vulgar sort, that they can not attain salvation without the
same: yet is it in deed a mere invention of man, the bitter torment of
conscience, and the ready way to desperation. For manifest probation whereof,
I proceed in this manner.

The first Conclusion.
ALL Christians must confess their sins to God, with internal contrition of
heart, with full purpose to amend their lives, and with steadfast hope of
remission by the mercy of God, through the merits of Christ his Son our
sweet redeemer. Of this kind of confession, the Scripture speaks abundantly.

Delictum, meum cognitum tibi feci, and iniustitiam meam non abscondi. dixi
Psalm. 32. 5.
confitebor adversum me iniustitiam meam domino, and tu remisisti impietatem
peccati mei.

I have made my sin known unto thee, and mine injustice I have not hid. I
said, I will confess to the Lord my injustice against my self, and thou have
forgiven the impiety of my sin.

Qui abscondit scelera sua, non dirigetur: quiautem confessus fuerit and
reliquerit ea, misericordiam consequetur. Prove 28. 13.


He that hides his offenses, shall not be directed: but who shall confess and
forsake his sins, shall attain mercy.

Sidixerimus quonia^ peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, and veritas in
nobis non est. si confiteamur peccata nostra, fidelis est and iustus vt
remittat 1. Joan. 1. 8, 9.
nobis peccata nostra. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us: but if we confess our sins, etc.

That this confession must be joined with hope of remission, S. Chrysostom
teaches in these words:

Quid proderunt lachrymae and confessio, sinulla adsit abolitionis fiducia?
Chrysostom. ad Theodor. laps.


What shall tears and confession avail, if there be no hope of forgivenes?

And that we must add hereunto amendment of life, S. Hilarie teaches us, when
he says: Quid aliud est confessio erroris, quam confessio desinendi ab errore?
Hilar. in 135. psalm.


What other thing is the confession of error, then to confess that we will
forsake error?

So then, when we be wayle our sins, confess them, and purpose to amend our
former lives, with steadfast hope of Gods mercy, through atonement made in
Christ's blood, we shall doubtless have remission of our sins. Then though
our sins be as red as scarlet, yet shall they be Esaias. 1. 17.
made white as snow.

The second Conclusion.
WE must confess our sins one to an other, when we offend one an other.
Which fraternall reconciliation done upon earth, God promises to ratify in
heaven. To this confession, holy writ does seriously exhort us in many places:

Si offers munus tuum ad altar, and ibi recordatus fueris quod frater tuus
habuit aliquid adversum te, relinque ibi munus tuum ante altar, and vade prius
Matt. 5. 23.
reconciliari fratri tuo, and tunc veniens offeres munus tuum.

If thou offer thy gift before the altar, and shall remember that thy brother
has some matter against thee: leave there thy offering before the altar, and
go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and make thy offering.

This offering (says the gloss) is the sacrifice of a good work: the altar
Glossa interl. supera hunc locum.
is Christ, to whom we must offer our good actions by faith. And another
gloss says:

Vade non pedibus, sed animo humili te ei prosternas, in conspectu illius cui
oblaturus es: vel petendo veniam, si praesens est. Glossa ordinar. in cod. loco.


Go not with thy feet, but fall prostrate with an humble heart before him, to
whom thou make thy offering: or ask forgiveness, if the party be present.

Christ says in an otherplace:

Si septies in die peccaverit in te, and septies in die conversus fuerit ad te
dicens, poenitet me, dimitte illi. Luc. 17. 4.


If thy brother shall offend thee seven times a day, and shall seven times a
day be converted to thee, and say, it repents me, for give him.

Confitemini altervtrum peccata vestra inquit apostolus, and orate pro invicem
vt salvemini. Confess your sins one to another, says the Apostle, and pray
Iacobi 5. 16.
one for another, that ye may be saved.

The third Conclusion.
THere is yet a third kind of confession commended in holy writ, which is a
general confession of our sins: not only internally before God, but also
externally before the ministers of his word and sacraments: but this kind
does not include in it a total and specifical enumeration of our sins. This
manner of confession made king David before the Prophet Nathan, when he
reprooved him for his offenses.

Peccaui domino, I have sinned unto the Lord, says David. And the Prophet
answered: Dominus quoque transtulit peccatum tuum: the Lord has forgiven 2.
Reg. 12. 13, 14
thee thy sin. In like manner the sinful woman, of whom S. Luke makes
mention, confessed her sins generally in tears, signs, Luke 7. 38, 48.
and gestures, and received incontinently absolution at Christ's hands: for he
said unto her, Remittuntur tibi peccata, thy sins are forgiven thee. Which
manner of confession is fitly described in the book of Nehemias, 2. Esd. 8.
and 9.
in the 8. and 9. chapter. For when Esdras and the Levites did interpret the
law unto the people, then the people acknowledging their offenses and the
offenses of their forefathers, did lament, weep, and confess their sins
before the Levites and the whole congregation: and that done, the Levits
repeated their confession, and desired pardon of God for the same. So this The
true manner of confessing our sins
day in the Church of England, the people confess their sins generally
before the minister, and in the face of the whole congregation. Yea, in
Germany they confess such special sins, as grieve and clogge their
consciences, and for which they stand in most need to have advise and
counsel. Which liberty is granted in England also: for such as list may
confess their sins to the minister privately, and have both his advise and
absolution, if he find them penitent. Which confession and absolution, would
It is to be wished, that confession were more used the^ it is now a days.
God it were more in practice then it is: because instruction and consolation
might redound unto the penitent, by virtue of the same. This kind of
confession was much frequented in the primitive Church, at such time as the
zeal of Gods people was great, and their devotion fervent: then did all
confess their sins generally: then were none commanded to confess
specifically: then did Christ's ministers execute their functions duly: then
did S. John Baptist in zealous manner reproove vice, extol virtue, thunder out
Gods wrath and ire against wicked and impenitent sinners, and with all promise
free pardon and remission of sins, to all such as would lament their sins,
amend their lives; reform their manners, and believe in Christ Jesus the
innocent lamb, that takes away the sins of the world. Then the Scribes,
Pharisees, and great multitudes of people were inflamed with compunction at S.
John's preaching, bewailed their former lives, confessed Mat. 3. 6, 7, 8.
generally their sins, and desired baptism for the same. Then the holy
vessel of God S. Paul, wrought great miracles by the power of God; in so Act.
19. 18, 19.
much that many of the faithful came unto him confessing their sins, and
such as had followed magical arts brought their books together, and burnt
them in the presence of the people.

The fourth Conclusion.
THE Popish specificall enumeration of all our sins, is both impossible to
man, and neither commanded by Christ, nor practiced by his Apostles. That it is
impossible to be performed by man, the Prophet prooveth, when he says:

Delicta quis intelligit? ab occultis me is munda me. Psalm. 18. 13, 14.


Who does understand his offenses? cleanse me from secret faults.

Quis potest dicere, mundum est cormeum, purus sum a peccato? Prove. 20. 9.


Who can say, my heart is clean, I am free from my sin?

Neither will it serve their turn, to say as Cardinal Caietan does, that
confession is taken two ways: to wit, absolutely; and as it is the act of man.
Caietanus in sum. in vltima pagella.
To confess all sins absolutely, is to leave no sin unconfessed: but to
confess all sins, as confession is the act of man, is to confess all those
sins which are in the power of man: that is, which man does, or may remember
after diligent examination of his conscience. And therefore says Caietan, when
the Gospel requires the confession of all sins in the Sacrament of penance:
it is not meant of all sins absolutely, but of all sins which are in man's
power to confess. This distinction, I say, will not serve;

1 First, because this distinction, is not mentioned in the Gospel.

2 Secondly, because there is no more reason for the confession of one, then
for the confession of all.

3 Thirdly, because this notwithstanding, a man shall always remain perplexe: as
who can never tell, when he has used sufficientinquisition in that behalf.

4 Fourthly, because one mortal sin can not be remitted without another, as
all papists confess; and consequently, either the secret not confessed
mortals, are remitted with the confessed mortals, or none at all be remitted
by the absolution: if they answer, that none are remitted, because some are not
confessed: then shall the penitent never have absolution, because he can never
confess al as is prooved: if they say, the secret not confessed mortals, be
remitted with the other: then is it not needful to confess them after, when
they come to remembrance: which yet al papists require, as necessary to
salvation.

5 Fifthly, because it follows hereupon, that penitents are bound to confess
their sins very many times, which the Popes law requires but once in the
year: I prove it, because if they stay any time from confession, they may
forget their sins through their own default, and so make frustrate their
absolution.

6 Sixthly, because the priests are often so ignorant, that they can not
distinguish mortal and venial sins: which yet is necessary in absolution.

7 Seaventhly, because the priest stands often excommunicate, and often
deals with reserved cases, and a thousand such like things chance in
absolution. Yea, the archpapists this day, perceiving this matter to be so
intricate and dangerous: partly by reason of the cases so reserved, partly by
reason of innumerable excommunications, and partly by reason of ignorance in
their priests: have invented this poor shift for an help, if it may be: to
wit, that the Pope shall give to every seminary priest, full authority to
absolve from all excommunications and reserved cases what soever: so that now
we have so many virtuall Popes in England, as seminary priests. For every one
of them, has plenitudinem potestatis: and it is a world to consider, how this
power is used. For because neither the penitent, nor the priest can tell, how
often the party is excommunicate; the priest for security, pronounces every
time over every person, these words:

I absolve thee from every bond of excommunication, so far forth as I can,
and thou stand need. and this is done in latin.

All which frustrate the same, and open to the penitent the gate of
desperation. That this manner of confession, is neither commanded by Christ,
nor practiced by his Apostles: may be evidently prooved by their own
canon law, as their own doctors testify.

Thus writes the great Thomist Sylvester Prieras:

Quarto, vtrum ad confessionem teneamur divino iure vel humano? and dico
Sylvester. de confess. secundo, par. 4.
quod canonistae videntur tenere, quod sit de iurepositivo. and ad hoc est
glossa de pen. did. v. in summa, quae vult quod instituta sit a quadam
universally traditione ecclesiae: ideo infert, quod confiterinon tenentur
infideles, nec similiter graeci, ex quo non acceptaverunt huiusmodi
constitutionem, sicut nec votu^ castitatis.

It is demanded fourthly (says the great papist Sylvester,) whether we be
bound to popish confession, by the law of God, or by the positive law of man?
and I say, the canonists hold, that we are but bound by the law of man. And
of this opinion is the gloss, which is of this mind, that confession was
institute by a certain universal tradition of the Church; whereupon the said
gloss infers, that infidels are not bound to confession, neither the
Greeks in like manner: since they did never approove such constitution, no
more then the vow of chastity.

Yea, the Popes own decrees admit no less: for these are the words of his
canons; Quibus authoritatibus vel quibus rationu^ firmament is vtraque
sente^tia satisfactionis Depoenit. d. 1. cap. quamvis plenit.
and confessionis nitatur, in medium breviter exposuimus. cui autem harum
potius adhaerendum sit, lectoris iudicio reservatur. vtraque enim fautores
habet sapientes and religiofos viros.

Upon what authorities of foundations of reasons either opinion is grounded, I
have briefly showed. Now to whether of them, the reader should adhere, I leave
it to his own discretion. For either opinion has wise and religious men, for
the patrons of the same.

Behold here, gentle reader, that not only the Popes doctors, but his own
canon law, and the commenters upon the same: do all confess, that confession
after popish manner, is only grounded upon man's law. Yea, the gloss adds
that both wise and religious men do so think, though some others hold the
contrary.

Martinus Navarrus, (though he hold a contrary opinion to the canonists,
Navar. in enchirid. cap. 2. de confess, n. 3,
) confesses plainly, that their solemn gloss commonly received and approoved
of all canonists, holds confession to be commanded by the Church.

The famous Canonist and honorable Archbishop Panormitanus, was of the same
opinion with the gloss, as confesses Covarruvias in these words: Covar. tom.
1. par. 1. p. 155.


Quam ex nostris plerique secuti sunt, maxim Panormitanus: ex ea asserentes
confessionem sacramentalem quae sacerdotibus fit, iure humano institutam esse.

Which gloss many of our canonists have followed, especially Panormitan:
affirming out of that gloss, that sacramental confession which is made to
priests, was ordained by the law of man.

This to be true, S. Christome confirms in these words:

Non tibi dico vt te prodas in publicum, neque apudalios te accuses: sed
obedire Chrysostom. supra cap. 12. ad hebrae: homil. 31. post med. eiusd. tom. 4.
te volo Prophetae dicenti, revela domino via^ tuam, antedeu^ ergo tua
confitere peccata: apud verum iudicem cum oratione delicta tua pronuncia, non
lingua, sed conscientiae tuae memoria, and tunc demum spera te misericordiam
posse consequi.

I do not bid thee come forth in public, neither to accuse thy self before
others: but I would have thee to obey the Prophet, when he says, reveal thy
way to God. Before God therefore confess thy sins, before the true judge in
prayer pronounce thine offenses, not with thy tongue, but with the memory of
thy conscience: and then hope to have mercy.

And in another place, the same S. Chrysostom has these words:

Peccata tua quotidie dicito, vt deleas ea. sed si confunderis alicui dicere,
Chrysostom. apud Lombard. in 4. s. did. 17.
dicito ea quotidie in animo tuo. non dico vt confitearis ea conservo tuo, vt
tibi exprobet. dicito deo, qui curat ea.

Confess thy sins daily, that thou may blot them out. But if thou be
ashamed to confess them to an other, confess them daily in thine heart. I do
not bid thee confess them to thy fellow servant, that he may vpbraide thee.
Confess them to God, who can cure the same.

Saint Augustine is very plain in this point, for these are his express words:

Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus vt audiant confessiones meas, quasi ipsi
sanaturi fint omnes languores meos? curiosum genus ad cogno scendam vitam
alienam, Aug. lib. 10. confess. cap. 3. tom. 1.
desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. quid a me quaerunt audire qui sim, qui nolunt
a te audire qui sint? and vndesciunt cum a meipso de meipso audiunt, an verum
dicam, quandoquidem nemo scit hominum quid agatur in homine, nisi spiritus
hominis qui in ipso est.

What have I therefore to do with men, that they must hear my confessio^s? as
though they should heal al my diseases? a curious kind to know an others man's
life, and sluggish to correct their own. Why seek they to hear of me what I
am, who will not hear of thee what them selves are? And how know they when
they hear me tell of my self, that I say truly? since no man knows what is
done in man, but the spirit of man that is in him.

These are S Augustines own words, so plain and effectual against popish,
unchristian, foolish, and execrable confession, as nothing more needs to be
said therein.

The fifth Conclusion.
ALbeit Popish auricular confession be so magnified with Papists, that every
one is commanded under pain of damnation to believe the same, as instituted by
Christ himself: yet was it not an article of popish faith, for the space of
one thousand and five hundred years after Christ. This conclusion, because it
is very important, I shall desire thee, gentle Reader, to ponder deeply with me
my discourse.

Josephus Angles Valentinus a popish friar, and bishop of Bosana, in the second
tome of that work which he dedicated to the Pope himself Sixtus Quintus, has
these express words:

Ante concilium Later. erat haereticum negare necessitatem confessionis,
negantes tamen Joseph. Angl. in 4. sent. q. de confess. p. 255.
non erant haeretici. ratio est, quia nondum erat ab ecclesia declaratum.

Before the council of Lateran it was heretical to deny the necessity of
confession, but yet they were not heretics that denied it. The reason is,
because the Church of Rome had not yet declared it to be an article of faith.

Lo, these words contain effectually, the exact proof of this conclusion, if
they be well marked.

1 We must therefore observe first, that whosoever believes not steadfastly
every decree of the Church of Rome in matters of faith, is holden of that
Church for an heretic.

2 We must observe secondly, that the council of Lateran, (whereof this friar
speaks) was holden in time of Pope Julius the second, and Pope Leo the tenth,
that is 1500. years after Christ.

3 We must observe thirdly, that until fifteen hundred years after Christ
were expyred, they that believed not popish auricular confession to be ordained
by Christ, were no heretics. For so, as you see, this friar teaches, and the
Pope him self grants.

4 We must observe fourthly, that the Church of Rome has no authority, to
coin any new article of faith.

5 We must observe fifthly, that the Church of Rome has no new revelations in
matters of faith, but the very same which it had in the Apostles time: both
which latter observations, their own dear Canus tells us, in these words:

Omnia siquidem fidei dogmata ab Apostolis accepit ecclesia, vel scripto, vel
Canus, de loc. lib. 3. cap. 4.
verbo. quoniam ij ministri fuere sermonis, nee vllas in fide novas
revelationes ecclesia habet.

For the Church received all doctrines of faith from the Apostles, either by
word or writing. Because the Apostles were the ministers of the word, neither
has the Church any new revelations in faith.

Now out of these observations which are evident, it follows necessarily,
that confession this day ought not to be an article of faith, no not in the
Church of Rome.

1 For first, during the time of fifteen hundred years after Christ, it was
no article of faith in the Church of Rome.

2 Secondly, the Church of Rome can not make that an article of faith now,
which was no article of faith in the Apostles time.

3 Thirdly, the Church of Rome has no new revelations, in matters of Christian
faith. For so as you have heard, has their own Melchior Canus avouched.

Neither will it help to say, that auricular confession was an article of
faith in the Apostles time, but not then revealed to the Church. For as Canus
has told us plainly, the Church receives no new revelations of faith.

This doctrine is confirmed by their famous Cardinal Caietan, who avoucheth
two special grounds against popish auricular confession. For Caietan. super
Joan. cap. 20.
first, although Christ by his opinion instituted confession, yet did he make
it voluntary, and left it in man's election, whether he would confess, or not
confess. Again, he tells us that the manner of popish confession, to wit,
to confess secretly in the priests ear, was not ordained by our Savior
Christ. Out of which assertion, I infer a double conclusion against the
Papists. The one, that confession is not necessary to salvation. For that
which is voluntary, as to be a Monk, a Nun, a Priest, a Jesuit; is not
necessary to salvation, as every papist grants: but is as a counsel, and
work of supererogation. The other, that popish law urging men to auricular
confession, is flat against Christ's institution. And thus I ween, I have
prooved this conclusion.

The sixth Conclusion.
IF Popish confession were ordained by Christ, as the papists falsely and
grossly imagine: yet would it follow by a necessary consecution, that every
Pope should be in danger of his salvation. This conclusion may seem somewhat
strange: but I prove the fame. By popish doctrine every man and every woman of
lawful years, are bound under pain of damnation, to the said confession; and
consequently, the Pope being either man, or at least woman, (as is thought of
pope John,) is strictly bound unto the same. Now sir, how our Pope his
holiness shall come to confession, and have absolution of his sins, hoc
opus, hic labor est. And that the reader may fully understand the difficulty
herein: it is to be noted, that no priest can absolve any person from his
sins, over whom he has not superiority and jurisdiction but, his holiness
has both the swords, his power is above Kings and Emperiours, and over him no
mortal creature, no not an Angel of heaven, has any jurisdiction at all, as
holds popish faith. The Pope then being subject to none, and must yet be
absolved of some; which some, must have jurisdiction over him; stands
doubtless in great perplexity, and in no small danger of his salvation. Let us
therefore find some poor shift, to help his holiness if it may be. What if we
say, that the Pope has no mortal sin, and so is not bound to popish
absolution. But, alas, all Popes are not Saints, as is prooved, and so some
must perforce have absolution. Let us say, that he may absolve himself, as
well as he may grant pardons to him self. But, alas, that implies
contradiction: because so he remaining one and the same man, should be both
superior and inferior to himself: superior, as he did absolve: and
inferior, as absolved. Let us say, that he voluntarily submits himself,
and so receives absolution. But, alas, so shall his holiness still be inferior
to the silly priest: because as S. Paul discourses to the Hebrews, he that
blesses, is greater then he that is blessed. Let us say, Hebr. 7. ^.
that the Pope gives to the priest power over him, for that time only. But,
alas, that would be a rare and strange metamorphosis, with an impossibility
annexed thereunto. For first, by this means the simple priest should be Pope
in time of absolution, as having then greatest power upon earth. Secondly,
after absolution, he that was pope, should cease to be pope: and he Argumentum
ad hominem.
that was not pope, should without election or consecration, be pope again.
Which is a thing impossible, even by popish proceeding. Let us say, that some
other pope has given this authority to the priest. But, alas, that can not
possibly be granted. For this is a constant axiom with the papists: par in
parem non habet potestatem. When two are of equal authority, the one can not
make a law for, or against the other. Well, since none of these ways can
content his holiness; let us hear what his own dear vassals can say in his
defense.

Josephus Angles unfolds this great difficulty at large, when he thus
writes:

Canus affert tres opiniones: prima est S. Thomae, and D. Bonaventurae, quibus
adhasit Turrecremata. Secunda opinio est Paludani, asserentis habere
authoritatem Joseph. Ang. in 4. s. q. de confess. p. 257.
absolvendi non a Papa, sed a Christo. Tertia est Caietani, dicentis
iurisdictionem quam habet sacerdos absolvendi Papam, nec esse a Christo, neque
a Papa, neque ab ecclesia, sed solum ex electione, per hoc scilicet quod papa
se subiicit illi illumque eligit. Est and quarta opinio, qua tenetur, quod
quemadmodum in receptione ordinis datur vnicuique simplici sacerdoti potest as
iurisdictionis respectu venialis, and mortalis quae poenitens alias confessus
est, and etiam respectu cuiuscu^que peccatoris in articulo mortis: ita datur
tunc iurisdictio eidem sacerdoti absolvendi papam.

Master Canus brings three opinions* the first is, of S. Thomas and S.
Bonaventure, to whom agrees Turrecremata. The second is, the opinion of
Paludanus, who avoucheth that the Priest receives his authority, not from the
Pope, but from Christ him self. The third opinion is Caietans, who affirms,
that the Priest has authority to absolve the Pope, neither from Christ, nor
from the Pope, nor from the Church, but only by election: to wit, in that the
Pope submits him self to the Priest, and chooses him. And there is yet a
fourth opinion, which holds that as in receiving of priesthood, power of
jurisdiction is given to every simple priest, in respect of venial sins, and
of those mortals which the penitent nath otherwise confessed, and also in
respect of every sinner in the point of death: so is jurisdiction then given to
the said Priest, that he may absolve the Pope.

Thus says our reverend bishop, and worthy friar Joseph. Out of whose words I
note;

1 First, that since our Lord is the God of peace, and not of dissension, as
records his holy Apostle in many places: it must needs follow, that this
popish doctrine is not of God, which is so divided against it self: and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. 1. Cor. 14. 33.
therefore said Caietain truly, though unwittingly, and to another end: when
he denied the priest to have his authority, from Christ, or from his Church.

2 I note secondly, that their doctrine is mere opinative, as which is only
grounded upon man's invention.

3 I note thirdly, that as the priests jurisdiction is uncertain, so is the
Popes absolution also, as which is consectarie thereunto: and consequently,
that the Pope stands in danger of his salvation. And so, if I be not
deceived, the obscurity of this conclusion is made evident.

The Corollarie.
FIRST therefore, since auricular popish confession is not commanded by
Christ: secondly, since it was not practiced by the Apostles: thirdly, since it
was instituted only by the positive law of man: fourthly, since the Greek
Church never admitted that law: fifthly, since it is contrary not only to
the fathers, but to popish doctors also: sixthly, since it brings the Pope
him self to the hazard of his salvation: I conclude, that it is a sufficient
motive for me to renounce the Romish religion, as false, erroneous, and
pernicious doctrine.

Thus much of the tenth and last Motive.
Peroratio.
I HAVE in this discourse (gentle Reader) briefly confuted ten special
articles, of popish faith and religion.

1 First, I have showed the insufficiency, blasphemy, and absurdities of
popish pardons.

2 Secondly, that the Pope both may err, and has erred defacto, not only as a
private person in private opinion: but even as Pope and public person, in
judicial definitions.

3 Thirdly, that general councels in these latter days, are nothing else but a
mere mockery and sophistical subtlety, to deceive Gods people withal.

4 Fourthly, that the Popes dispensations are wicked, licentious, and
intolerable.

5 Fifthly, that Kings are above Popes: that their power is independent: and
that they are subject to none, but to God alone.

6 Sixthly, that popish dissension is of matters most important, and incredible
to such, as are not well acquainted with their books.

7 Seaventhly, that the writings of the ancient fathers, are to be received
with great reverence: yet so, as we acknowledge them to be men, to have their
errors, and to bind us to their authorities no further, then they accord with
the holy Scriptures.

8 Eighthly, that all things necessary for our salvation, are contained in the
holy Scriptures; and that popish traditions are so uncertain, as the best
learned papists can not agree therein.

9 Ninthly, that after this life, there is neither merit, nor demerite, nor
satisfaction to be made: and that the book of Machabees, can not establish
popish purgatory.

10 Tenthly, that the specificall enumeration and confession of all our sins:
is not only not commanded by the Scriptures, but repugnant to the same, and
impossible to be accomplished by the power of man.

All which points I have proved, not only by Scriptures, authorities, and
reasons; but even by the express testimonies, of best learned papists. A thing
heretofore never performed by any, to my knowledge: and yet so forceable
against the papists, (if I be not deceived,) as nothing can be more. My desire
was to content all, to offend none, to confirm the weak, to instruct the
ignorant, to reclaim the seduced, and to confound all arrogant disloyal
subjects. If ^ffect succeed correspondent to my option, God be thanked for it,
who is the chief worker of every good act; to whom with the Son, and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor, power, glory, and
dominion, now and ever.

AMEN.
(...). (...).

