THE CHRISTIANS MANNA.

OR A TREATISE Of the most Blessed and Reverend Sacrament of the EVCHARIST.

Divided into two Tracts.

Written by a Catholic Divine, through occasion of Monsieur Casaubon his
Epistle to Cardinal Peron, expressing therein the Grave and Approved Judgment of
the KINGS MAJESTY, touching the doctrine of the Real Presence in the EVCHARIST.

Patres vestri manducauerunt Manna in deserto, and mortui sunt: Qui manducat
hunc panem, viuet in aeternum. Joan. 6. Tune in aenigmate erat Manna cibus:
nunc autem in specie caro Verbi Dei est verus cibus. Origin. homil. 7. in lib.
Numer. Imprinted with License, Anno 1613.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST WORTHY KING, AND MY DREAD SOVEREIGN,
LET it not seem offensive, that I (one of your Majesty's meanest subjects) do
here presume to present this unpolished Discourse to your Highness; whose
Judgment in Learning is so exquisite, as that it brooketh therein only labors
of Perfection. Nevertheless this my humble Ambition (so to term it) appears
to me vvarrantable for several reasons.

One, in that Princes are truly interessed not only in their Subjects goods of
Fortune, but even in their Intellectual goods of the Mind; and therefore how
small soever my Talent is herein, it ought to be appropriated and referred to
your service.

The other (more particular) is, because your Majesty is the principal Motyue
of my writing this little imperfect work. Now, vvhither should the rivers
run, but into the Ocean, from whence originally they received their springs?
For having perused the Epistle of Monsieur Casaubon, written to the Learned
and Illustrious Cardinal Peron, as himself intimates, by your Highness
priuity, if not command and direction, I find therein, that your Grave and
Learned Judgment does most fully embrace the Orthodoxall doctrine of the Real
Presence of the Eucharist, dissenting from the Roman and Catholic Church only
in resting doubtful of the manner of the Presence. For these (besides other
like passages) are Monsieur Casaubons words: Haecfides Regis, haec fides
Ecclesiae Anglicanae etc. concluding, after he has related the judgment of the
Bishop of Ely herein, thus in the Bishops words? Dixit Christus, Hoc est
Corpus meum; non, hoc modo, Hoc est Corpus meum Nobis autem vobiscum de obiecto
conuenit, de modo lis omnis est etc. Praesentiam credimus, nec minus quam vos
veram etc.

Now seeing your Majesty has made such a happy declaration in the belief of
this high Mystery, I thought it my duty (soluing aforehand all such
difficultyes, as may seem in a vulgar Eye to imply an Impossibility thereof)
to publish to the world the chief Reasons which do fortify your former
received doctrine; and further humbly to present and exhibit to your Judicious
Eye the weighty Authorities, which move the Church of Rome to believe the
particular manner of Christ's Existency in the Sacrament.

Which two Points are promiscuously handled in this Treatise, since both in
explicating the doubts, and in diverse of the Proofs alleged, the one does
often inter-ueyne the other: yet for the greater perspicuity, I have forted to
one Head all the most forcing Authorityes of the ancient Fathers, which in
plain and direct terms do euict a true and perfect Change of the Bread and
Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ; so clearly acknovvledging by such
their testimonies the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Among so many of which
kind, I cannot here omit that of S. Cyril of Jerusalem an ancient and learned
Father, Catech. 4. Hocsciens, and pro certissimo habens, pane^ hunc, qui
videtur a nobis, non esse panem, etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed esse
corpus Christi. Et vinum, quod a nobis conspicitur, tametsi sensui gustus vinum
esse videatur, non tamen vinum, sed sanguine^ Christi esse.] A point so
evident, that Monsieur Casaubon ingenuously confesses, that the Greek words
(...) (which do necessarily imply a true chang of one thing into another) are
heerin frequently used by the Greek Fathers.

THIS THEN is that faith, which was so unanimously maintained (as shall
hereafter fully appear) by the Reverend Doctors of the Primitive Church, and
no less religiously believed by so many of your Royal Ancestors, and
particulerly by that most virtuous and renowned Queen, your Maiestyes dear
Mother; to whom it was granted by God, that she should vvash her robes in the
blood of the Lamb: A Princess, in whom abounda^ce of Goodness at length
became criminal; and who, as being a Queen, and excelling not only all of
her State, but of her Sex in a spiritual Resolution and greatness of Mind,
was much admyred throughout all Christendom; and yet for bringing forth so
fortunate and worthy a Branch, as your Majesty is, ought to be more peculiarly
reverenced by us English. And therefore in this respect, I may freely say, that
since the Child is the Image of the Parent, we Englishmen by eternizing her
Memory, have just reason (contrary to the doctrine of the Schools) here to
honor the Prototypon even for the Image sake: Fevv other Mothers in our age
being worthy of such a Son, fevv other So^ns worthy of such a Mother.

But now (most Gracious Prince) since the former doctrine of the Real
Presence is one main Article of that Religion, for which the Professors
thereof are daily so grievously afflicted; We the impouerished, dejected, and
(in our Adversaries Eye) despicable Catholics of England, do here upon our
knees lie battering at your Majesty's ears, with our incessant Supplications,
for some ease and release of our former pressures, and vexations.

This Mercy we humbly beseech at your hands, even for his sake, who out of a
sea of Mercy was content to abase himself to the opprobrious death of the
Cross; for the Honor and Love of him, whose Image not only by Creation, but
in Government all Princes are (Ego dixi Dij estis) and therefore are bound the
more zealously to imitate him in his most glorious title of Mercy; even by that
hope of Mercy, which your Majesty appearing before the Divine Majesty, at the
most dreadful Day, does expect to obtain: Finally for the dear remembrance
of that blessed Princess your Mother, who dyed (I will not say chiefly for,
but I am certain) in our Catholic Religion, and does (no doubt) now daily
offer up an incense of prayers to God for the relenting of your mind herein,
naturally inclined to the co^miseration of the distressed.

Suffer not (o suffer not) so many innocent and Loyal Subjects, thus, year
after year, to breath (for our afflictions considered, how can it be said we
live?) in a continual Night of Misery; whose Bodies and States (like Balls)
are tossed to and fro, at the will and pleasure of our hungry and pitiless
Adversaries.

You are our Prince, and therein ordained to protect us from wrongs and
iniuryes: and in further vvarrant of the same, your Highness may say with Lot,
Ingressi sunt sub vmbra culminis mei. We are your Subjects, and therefore stand
obliged to acknovvledge the strictest Band of Allegiance, due either by the
Law of Nature, by the Law of God, or by the example of any Christian Subjects
toward their Princes, ever since our Redemption, till the fall of that most
unhappy and Apostating Monk.

Let not then the perpetrated crimes of some fevv, so divert the beams of your
Gracious Clemency from us all, as that the Punishment due only unto them (like
the Effect of another Original Sin) should propagate and extend it self
upon the whole Body, and Posterity of Catholics: but rather, rejecting all
the subtle Machinations and wise follyes of our Politic Adversaries (which
we trust that finally God will frustrate) have a frequent remembrance of that
saying: Superexalt at Misericor dia iudiciu^ Iustitiae tuae; in which words
your Highness may think, that the Apostle James preaches to King James.

BUT NOW, as fearing to become over tedious (for which reason, as also out of
an humble Reverence I do forbear hereafter in this Treatise to direct further
speeches to your Highness) I here will cease, casting my self at your
Maiestyes feet as lovv, as Humility and Loyalty can prostrate themselves, and
praying to the Almighty to preserve you in a Blessed Government over us many
(many) years; and after the Period of this life, to grant your Highness the
Honor and Happiness in being another David, by enioyning two Ierusalems.

Your Majesty's most Loyal and humble Subject. R. N.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
GOOD Christian Reader,
Here I present thee with a small Treatise of a large Subject; it being one of
the chiefest Questions of Christian Religion, co^trouerted at this day between
the Catholic, and the Caluinist. It is written with intention to confirm thy
Judgment in so weighty a Point, being already rectified; to reform it, being
erroneous; and therefore I expect a retaliation, charitably to entertain my
charitable meaning.

If this little work (the young Samuel proceeding from the long barren womb of
my Brain) may become profitable to any one, I have my desire. As for the
censures which will pass thereof, I presage they will be as various, as Men's
judgments are various; but heerin I am indifferent, for (how mean soever) it
is, as it is, and of all the Elements I least pryze the Air: Yet here by the
way I must advertise my ignorant Protestant Reader (for to the more Learned
this is needless) who ever dislikes, what is not so courteous, as to come
within the reach of his narrow headpeece, that I do look, that he should
charge these poor Leaves (especially the first Part heerof) with main
Contrarieties, and Contradictions; Yet if his Pride would vouchsafe to remember
(or rather to learn) that all true Contradictions do ever consist in one and
the same reference of Circumstances, and that such seeming here, are
reconciled by different Respects explicated in the marginal Annotations, he
might well rest satisfied.

Wherefore I do here premonish all such, but particulerly them, who either by
Pen, or Tongue are become public Patrones of the Sacramentarian Nouelty, not
maliciously to insist alone in the said naked appearing Repugnances, concealing
their Illustrations; tragically by this means, amplifying the strange supposed
Paradoxes (forsooth) defended by us Catholics heerin: Which if they shall
attempt (by diuorcing the one from the other) now after this convenient
forwarning, they are to be reputed, but as Men conscious of their own bad
Cause, and willing fraudulently to abuse the weak Judgments of their followers.

I have divided this Treatise into two Parts. In the first, I prove, that it is
possible (for the existence of any thing ever presupposes a possibility of the
same existence) that the sacred Body and Blood of our Savior, may truly and
really be contained under the forms of Bread and Wine; and that though the
effecting thereof does transcend Nature, yet does it not overthrow Nature.

This labor I am forced to vndertak^ (...) regard of our Adversaries (...),
and ^o^^^station with God heerin: for they maintain in their Wrytings with
great estuation and heat of dispute (like Raging waves.] Iudae Epist.
raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame) that to be at once in
diverse places, or to want all circumscription of place (besides many other
difficulties occurring in the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist) are against
the nature of a true Body, and therefore cannot be accomplished by God. In which
point they partake over near with the ancient Philosophers, though (perhaps)
with their greater offense toward God, then it was in those Heathens; since in
such cases that saying houldeth, (...) (...) etc.] Falsa fides infidelitate
peior.
(...).

The reason why the Sacramentaryes do believe the words of Christ in the
doctrine of the Eucharist so little, is because they believe their Sense therein
so much: for they are resolved, that their outward sense shall here even
prescribe Laws to their faith; and whatsoever may seem to be inco^patible
therewith (as the form, the color, the taste etc.) the maintayning thereof to be
reputed as an exploded Error. In which kind of proceeding they appear in my
conceit, to deal more niggardly with the faith of Christ, then ever the
Donatists.] August. de Vnitate Ecclesiae.
Donatists did with the Church of Christ; since they, though banishing the
Church out of all the other parts of the World, yet were content to allot to
it the whole Country of Afric: whereas these labor to withdraw our faith
heerin from all the chief Powers of our Mind, and to confine it within the
narrow compass of the ball of the Eye, or the end of the tongue: So far off is
the Soul (immersed in Sense) from apprehending truly this high and reverend
Mystery.

The second Part heerof justifying his Majesty's learned Judgment heerin,
delivers the divine Authorities of both the Testaments, for confirmation of
the Real Presence: it contains the Prophesies of the ancient Rabbyns thereof;
it reports the Miracles exhibited by God in warrant of the same; it
discovers the weakness of such testimonies as are out of the Scripture
objected to the contrary; finally, it displayeth the innovation and first
appearance of the Sacramentarian Doctrine. But because our Adversaries do use
diverse circulations, and inflexions to and fro (for they most strangely detort
the holy Scripture, and insolently reject the other proofs) therefore to draw
them to a more particular fight, I have reduced the issue of this point to the
judgments of the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, in whose In whose
wrytings.] See hereof the later end of the Marginall References of the first
Chapter of the Second Part, at the letter (q).
Wrytings many of the Sacramentaries seem to have good confidence, and from
whose Censures they cannot justly appeal, since it is said: Non Non te
praetereat.] Ecclesiast. cap. 8.
re praetereat narratio Seniorum; ipsi enim didicerunt a Patribus suis.

And so the main drift of that Part is to show, that those Fathers unanimously
maintained the now Catholic doctrine of the Real Presence, and of
Transubstantiation. Which point being once proved, conuinceth fully, and
i^repliably the Sacramentaries in this Controversy: both because it must of
necessity be presumed, that the Fathers did draw their faith heerin from the
true exposition of the Scriptures; as also in that the time wherein they lived,
was (even by the general acknowledgment of all) then, when the glorious
splendour of Christ's Gospel was never hid from the Christians of those Ages,
still openly shyning without any Eclipse, or supposed darkness; like the Sun
which in some Countries, and for certain seasons never Never setts.] The Sun
being in the Septentrionall part of the Zodiac, never sets for half of the
year together, to those, to whom the North Pole is so elevated, as that it
becomes to them their Zenith or Vertical Point. The reason hereof is, in
that to the Inhabitants of such a Climate, the Horizon is coincident and one to
the Equinoctial Circle; and therefore seeing every Diurnall Circle, which the
Sun makes, is to the eye parallel to the Equinoctial, and consequently to
the Horizon of such a Climate, it follows that the Horizon does not
intersectany of the Diurnall Circles; and therefore the Sun during all that
time, never sets to such Inhabitants.
sets, but continues rolling about with great light in the eyes of the
Inhabitants.

GOOD READER, if thou be unlearned, I could wish thee (resting thy self in the
second Part, which is facile and easy) to pass over this first; since it will
rather intricate thy judgment, then iustruct it, it being thereunto as strong
Wines to weak brains. For it in treats of diverse high and speculatiue
Points, and such as are adverse to a common Understanding, and therefore an
ignorant Man (whose Reason oftentimes is but his Sense) can hardly penetrate
them. And though thou shall find there all such difficultyes fully explaned,
yet it is questionable, whether thou art able (presuming thee to be such an
one, as here I mean) to apprehend the Answers as well as the Doubts: for a
weak and confused judgment may suggest or conceive difficulties, but it is a
clear Judgment, that must resolve them. And the reason of the disparity heerin
is this* To take one thing for another, or to err in the proper nature and
essence of things (which is incidenr especially to the unlearned) is the sourse
of Doubts and Questions; but to be able to marshall together things of one
nature; and to sever and fan things asunder, which carry a great likeness
one to another (for such resemblance of particularities ever begottes
mistakings) as also ^^ know what essentially is agreeing to the nature of any
thing, and what but accessorily and accidentally accompanyeth the same, is a
work of the Judicious: Wherefore it is no vulgar hand, that can euenly cut the
small thread in such nyce speculations. Hence it is, that in regard of the
manifold errors of this nature, whereunto the unlearned are subject, we hold,
that in such abstracted difficulties, as also in some others, beating only upon
some circumstance of the high Mysteryes of Christian faith (so that our
ludgment be implicitly at least resigned to the Church therein) an humble and
unaffected Ignorance is a safe and secure knowledge.

This first Part then was written to give satisfaction to those curious prying
Wits of this Age, who even mad with Reason (and may I not so term them, who
labor to wound him by force of Reason, who is the only Author and giver of
Reason?) do seek to destroy the Catholic faith heerin, by restrayning the
Power of him (even of him, who has Founded the Earth.] Psalm. 28.
founded the earth upon the seas, and established it upon the floods) within
the narrow lymits of Philosophy; so making Aristotle, and other unbelieving
Philosophers to set down certain cancells; and bounds to his Divine Majesty,
beyond which he must not pass: Thus do those, who vaunt themselves, as the
Children of Light, borrow their Light from the Children of Darkness. And so
these Men (being become learnedly ignorant) can hardly believe any thing, which
may seem to carry repugnancy to the settled course of Nature, expecting indeed
at our hands (though contrary to the Apostles The Apostles definition] Heb. c.
11. Where by the Apostle, Faith is defined to be, The substance of things
hoped for; the evidence of things not seen. From which definition it
appears, that our Sense cannot give any square and measure to our faith.
definition thereof) a demonstrable faith. But against such as impugn faith by
natural Reason, we may well apply the reprehension of S. Augustine: Ecce Ecce
qualibus.] ^. de Ciuitate Dei l. 22. c. 11.
qualibus argumentis Omnipotentia Dei humana contradicit Infirmitas, quam
possidet Vanitas.

Now further in behalf of our Catholic doctrine in this great Controversy,
and to obtund and blunt in general all reasons deduced from Reason, for the
destroying of the same; I do here avouch, that Man's Understanding does find a
greater repugnancy in giving an assent to those immediate, and necessary
Inferences, which do ineuitably flow from the Protestants Principles, then in
believing the most abstrusest Difficulties in the Eucharist: Which point (I
grant) does not rise from any inexplicable or supernatural Mysteries,
appearing in such their Illations (for since their faith is mainly Maynly
Negative.] For they deny Traditions, deny Peter's Supremacy, deny Christ's
descending into Hell, deny Evangelical Counsels, deny Purgatory and Prayer
for the Dead, deny Justification by Works, deny Freewill: Finally (besides many
other points) deny the Real Presence of the Eucharist, and Sacrifice of the
Mass.
Negative, consisting, for the most part, in annihilating, and overthrowing the
affirmative Positions of the Catholic faith, it cannot be inuolued with any
such obscurities:) but it proceeds, in that their Doctrine does necessarily
exhale, and breath forth such gross, absurd, and exorbitant Conclusions, as
that by believing them, they darken and cloud even the natural Light of the
Understanding. I will instance this (as unwilling to transgress the bounds of
an Epistle, and reserving the larger displaying of this point to such
opportunity, as may (perhaps) hereafter present it self to some one Catholic
Writer or other) in this one Assertion, first broached by By Luther himself.]
So teaches Luther to his sayings alleged in Actis Colloquij Alteburgensis.
Luther further says upon the Galathians Englished c. 2. It is impiety to
affirm, that faith, except it be adorned with Charity, iustifyeth noi* Yea he
avouches tom. 1. prop. 3. Fides nifi fit fine etc. faith, except it be without
the least good works, does not justify, nay it is not faith. And answerably
hereto Doctor Whitaker de Eccles. contra Bellarm. Controu. ^. quaest. 5.
says: Nos dicimus, fi quis actum fidei habeat, ei peccata non nocere: id
quidem Lutherus affirmat, id nos omnes dicimus: And Illy-icus in praefat. ad
Roman. In like sort Amsdorfius a great Protestant says: Good works are not
only not necessary to Salvation, but also hurtful. Finally, Conradus
Schluss^lburge another Protestant in Catalog. Haeret. l. 1^. in Epistol.
Dedicat. will not admit good works to be necessary to our Salvation,
necessitate praesentiae only.
Luther himself, to wit, that faith alone is so potent in causing our
Justification, that works are not only not necessary, but hurtful thereto; and
so the most perfect faith is the least spotted (in his judgment) with good
Works.

Now here I would demand, how it can enter into any brain, but to ween,
that faith in Christ should engender a life impugned by Christ? and believing
in him, that dyed for the expiation of sin, should be no small inducement to
us for to sin? Or that Works should be hurtful to the great Work of our
Justification? And thus if we credit these Men, we are commanded by the By the
Apostle.] Philip. c. 2.
Apostle, to work, without works (mark you the riddle?) our salvation in
fear and trembling. Is man created to the Image of God, I mean his Soul
endued with the fiery spark of Reason (deryued from that stillburning Lamp
thereof in God) and can it nevertheless give assent to such unreasonable,
improbable, and impossible resultancyes?

But to return. Here I think good to put the Reader in mind, that whereas
diverse of the most eminent and learned Protestants here in England (as
appears from the Pens of the Bishop of Bishop of Ely.] To wit most fully in
the former place alleged in the Epistle to his Majesty; Whose words shall
here be more largly recyted; Thus then he writes in his Book* against
Cardinal Bellarmine cap. 1. Quod Cardinalem non late^, nifi nolentem and
vltro, dixit Christus, Hoc est Corpus meum: Non, Hoc modo, Hoc est Corpus meum.
Nobis autem vobiscum de Obiecto conuenit; de modo lis omnis est. De Hoc est,
firma fide tenemus* quod fit de Hoc modo est (nempe Transubstantiato in Corpus
pane) de modo quo fiat, vt fit Per, five In, five Cum, five Sub, five Trans,
nullam inibi verbum est. Et quia verbum nullum, merito a fide ablegamus procul;
interscita scholae fortasse, inter fidei articulos non ponimus etc.
Ely, and Monsieur Monfieur Casaubon: Cum ab omni curiositate velit Rex suorum
ingenia abstinere; quaecunque tamen pij Patres primorum saculorum ad
commendationem ineffabilis. Mysterij dixerunt, e^ipse admittet. Patrum etiam
Verba, (...), and similia, ex mente ipsorum s^accipiantur, and exponantur, non
reij it. Hac Regis, and Ecclesiae Auglicanae doctrina: si vobis non satisfacit,
nempe illud restat, vt Transubstantiationis dogma, quo vobis placatis, possit
vti, approbet. Istud vero non est rei veritatem pie credere, sed importuna
curiositate modum decernere. Thus Monfieur Casaubon in his Book to Cardinal
Peron, besides many other like Passages.
Casaubon) do absolutely acknowledge a real and true being of Christ's Body in
the Eucharist, far different from Caluins, and the Sacramentaryes mere
representative, and typical Presence thereof; it therefore follows, that the
said Protestants so believing, stand as full chargeable for the soluing of all
the great Difficultyes thereof, as we Catholics do; whether they concern a
body being at once in several places, or a body to exist indiuisibly without
any circumscription of Place, and the like (those only excepted which are both
fewer, and less abstruse) as spring from the Question of Transubstantiation,
which is but one branch (as respecting only the manner of the Presence) of this
great Question of the Eucharist. Hence then it ryseth, that such other
Protestants, as disclayme from the doctrine of the Catholics in the point of
the Real Presence, by reason of so many Difficulties appearing therein, must
also for the same respect, disauow the doctrine of the former Learned
Protestants. And therefore I could wish them (since Humility exacteth so much
at their hands) to submit themselves herein (though not to our Authorityes,
yet) to the grave judgments of our Sovereign, and their own English Church,
who for the more clear explicating of all such doubts, must needs admit the
Catholics Solutions and Answers.

And now before I end, I am to admonish the Reader still to have in his
remembrance, whose and what Body it is, which we believe to have this
supernatural existence in the Eucharist. It is his Body, of whom in this
dreadful Mystery S. Hierome Hierome says.] Epist. ad Hedibiam. quaest. 2.
says, Ipse est Conuiua and Conuiuium: ipse comedens, and qui comeditur. It is
also that Body, about the which so many astonishing wonders have at several
times been effected: A little before the Nativity thereof (for we read,
Conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto,) at the very instant of his Birth (for, natus
est ex Maria Virgin,) some small time after his Death (for, tertia die
resurrexit,) upon his last departure from us (for, ascendit ad Caelos,) Nature
her self was in all these Passages, if not dissolved, yet at least suspended:
Yea when he here conuersed upon Earth, was not that same Body sometimes
Nourished without eating.] To wit during Christ's fast of forty days; He also
did eat without nourishment, when he did eat with his Apostles after his
Resurrection, for his body being then glorified, could not requeaue any
nourishment by meat.
nourished without eating, at other times did eat without any nourishment
thereby? Did it not (even remaining Remaining visible.] according to S. Luke 4.
Ipse transiens, per medium illorum ibat.
Visible) become Invisible? Finally, did it not walk most firmly upon the The
liquid Element.] Matthew. 14.
liquid Element, so as the unstable water then supported him, who supports the
Heavens? If then Nature did subject and humble herself so often to this sacred
Body, how can we Christians doubt of the infallible certainty of those words,
Hoc est Corpus meum (in which as the chief Latin Latin Father.] S. Augustine
tract. 26. in Ioannem, expounding those words: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea
est.
Father says, vocatur Caro, quod non capit Caro) proceeding from our true and
Powerful Lord, since Truth acknowledges not Falsehood, not Omnipotency
Deficiency?

AND thus (Good Reader) remitting thee to the perusal heerof (which I much
wish, that it may be to thy spiritual Good) I take my leave, earnestly
entreating thy remembrance of me, at the times of thy best Devotions.

Thy Catholic and vvellvvilling friend, R. N.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS of the first Part, wherein is proved the
Possibility of the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist.
THE Subject of this Treatise. Chap. 1. Of the Omnipotency of God, and what he
is able to perform. Chap. 2. The first Passage of the difficulties in the
Blessed Eucharist explicated. Chap. 3. The Second Passage of them explicated.
Chap. 4. The Third Passage of them explicated. Chap. 5. The Difficulty of a
Body being in diverse places at once, answered from more difficult Mysteries of
the Trinity, and the Incarnation. Chap. 6. The same answered by the like
difficulty drawn from Eternity. Chap. 7. The same answered from the Vbiquity
of God, acknowledged by all Christians. Chap. 8. The difficultyes of a Body
wanting Circumscription of Place, and of an Accident without a Subject,
explayned by the difficultyes discovered in the power of Seeing, and the
Circumstances thereof. Chap. 9.


The Contents of the Chapters of the second Part, wherein is proved the Doctrine
of the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation in the Eucharist.
THE Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist proved from the Figures of the Old
Testament; from the Prophesyes of the Rabbyns; from the New Testament; from
Miracles; from the first beginning of the Sacramentaries doctrine etc. Chap. 1.
That the Ancient Fathers taught our Catholic doctrine; and first of such their
Testimonies, as concern their appellations, and naming of the Eucharist. Chap.
2. Of the Fathers Authorityes, touching the Chang made in the Eucharist, from
whence is demonstrated the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Chap. 3. Of their
Authorityes, containing their Comparisons of the Eucharist with other
Mysteries. Chap. 4. Of their Authorityes confessing the inexplicable Greatness
of this Mystery. Chap. 5. Of their Authorityes expressing the Effect of the
Eucharist, and the Veneration exhibited to the same. Chap. 6. Of their
Authorityes, showing that the Celebration of the Eucharist contains a proper
and true Sacrifice; from which doctrine (as from all the other Heads of their
Testimonies) is necessarily euicted and proved the doctrine of the Real
Presence. Chap. 7. Of the diverse manners of the Protestants Euasions and
Answers to the Authorityes of the Fathers. Chap. 8. That all the chief
objected Authorityes of the Fathers, urged by our Adversaries, are impertinent.
Chap. 9. That by the Confessions of the most Learned Protestants, the Fathers
do teach the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation. Chap. 10. Of certain
Considerations drawn from Luther, the Lutherans, and other Protestants,
concerning the doctrine of the Eucharist. Chap. 11. That there are many
Congruentiall Reasons, showing the conueniency why Christ might be induced to
leave his Body and Blood in the Eucharist to us Christians; as also the
Conueniency of the manner of Transubstantiation. Chap. 12. The Conclusion.
Chap. 13.


THE CHRISTIANS MANNA.
THE FIRST TRACT.
The subject of this Treatise. CHAP. I.
O O Altitudo diuitiarum.] Romans c. 11.
ALTITVDO diuitiarum Sapientiae, and Scientiae Dei! Thus did that That heaven
rapt Apostle.] viz. S. Paul, who 2. Cor. 12. says of himself: I know a man
even rapt to the third Heaven.
Heauen*rapt Apostle burst forth into admiration of Gods unsearchable Wisdom,
through the contemplation of his will and pleasure, whereby he was moved to
draw some out of that heavy and dreadful mass of damnation, caused through
the all-spreading fall of our first Parents, as also to leave therein others (no
more interessed in the fault of Adam, then the rest) Vessels and Vassalls of
wrath, and thrall to eternal perdition: And thus may we Catholics have no
less reason to admire the inscrutable Wisdom, and Goodness of the said
divine Majesty, if we enter into consideration of diverse Articles of Faith,
taught by the Catholic Church, and believed by her obedient Children; to see
how far some of them are estranged from all humane Prudence, and how far
discosted others do lie from the reach of Man's capacity. And to particularize
this in some Examples, we find, that answerably hereto it was our Saviors good
pleasure among all the Apostles to institute him, as Head of the rest, who
openly forsook his Lord and Master, and after increased his sin of
Abnegation, with the aggravating circumstance of Perjury: So as Jesus thought
it best in the abyssmall depth of his Wisdom, to build the Confession of Faith
upon the denial of Faith, and to appoint him, who disclaimed in Christ, to be
the future Anchor and stay of all those, who should after trust in Christ.

In like sort the Sacraments (which are ordained to be certain conduits, and
passages, whereby to deryue into Man's soul Gods grace) do consist of external
signs, or forms, wherein the stupendous wonder is (though I grant Some
congruentiall Reasons.] Among diverse other Reasons, this is the chiefest: That
seeing Man as well consists of a corporal Substance, as of a spiritual
Substance (the Soul) therefore our Savior thought it convenient, that the
Sacraments should consist of material, and external signs, or forms,
answerable to the nature of our Bodies, and so externally working upon the Body
internally, and spiritually, they work upon the Soul, according to that
saying of Tertullian lib. de resurrect. Carnis. Caro abluitur, vt anima
emaculetur; Caro inungitur, vt anima consecretur; Caro corpore, and sanguine
Christi vescitur, vt anima de Deo saginetur.
some congruentiall reasons may be given thereof) to observe, that things
material, and sensible are ordained to sanctify our immateriall and spiritual
souls, where through the action of them, being in their very use Elevated
above themselves.] The manner how the Sacraments do work in Man's
Justification, being not the Conclusion it self between the Protestants, and
us, but a circumstance only of the Conclusion, is disputable, and not a point
of Faith, and therefore is severally defended by the Schoolmen. For some of
them do teach, that the Sacraments, are Causae morales of our Justification,
even as he is the true cause of a Man's death, who comaundeth the Man to be
killed, though himself do not touch the Man. Thus does Scotus, Durand,
Bonauenture, and others hold. But the more probable opinion is that of S.
Thomas 3. part. quaest. ^2. art. 4. who teaches, that the Sacraments are
Causae efficientes Physicae, and Instrumentales of our Justification, and that
the virtue here infused by God, is not any new inherent quality, either
spiritual or corporal, but only the Motion, and use of God therein: for in
that God does use this Sacramental action to produce Grace, he does eleuate
the same action, and makes it to beget a supernatural effect, the which
effect it could not, if it were moved by any other then God.
elevated above themselves, and transce^ding their own worth, and dignity,
they produce spiritual, and celestial Effects. Thus we see, that things not
capable of sense (much less of Grace) cause that in another, which themselves
enjoy not; like the Sun which animateth the inferior Bodies with heat, and
life, and yet it self not Not having either heat.] The Distinction which the
Philosophers do here use, is, that the Sun, and other Heavenly Bodies, have
heat, and other such qualities per productionem, non per inhaerentiam, that
is, they cause the same qualities in other Bodies, (and so may be said to have
them) but these qualities do not inhere in the said heavenly Bodies; for these
primae qualitates are originally peculiar, and natural to the Elements only,
and to other Bodies compounded of them, by participation. But the Heavens are
not compound of the Elements.
having either heat or life.

But now if we turn our Pen more particulerly to the most Blessed, and
Reverend Sacrament of the Eucharist (where the Word being made Flesh, by his
Word, made Bread Flesh) we shall be able to discover whole seas of wonders, and
be forced to acknowledge, that Man's understanding is not of force to sound
them, or that it best apprehends them, in not apprehending them (still
bearing an obsequious, and inuolued belief of what Gods Church teaches
therein) no otherwise then the Memory often serves to remember, that some things
it did not remember.

Now seeing it is my intended Method to spend this first Part in explicating,
and unfolding our Adversaries greatest, and strongest difficulties which they
use, as so many Arietes, or Engines, to ruinate and batter down the walls of
the ancient Catholic doctrine therein: All which though they shall be fully
reconciled, and explaned, so as our understanding shall be convinced of the
possibility thereof (and consequently that Christ was able to exhibit his Body
truly, and really under the forms of Bread, and wine) yet nevertheless the
external betraying Sense (the alluring Eve, entising our Understanding, the
proper seat of Faith, to give assent to it own danger) will still be
whispering in our ears the contrary doctrine. Therefore I have thought good to
premonish the Reader in the entrance hereof, that in this Mystery he is to
relinquish all intercourse with Sense, and to stand in hostility with the same,
yea even forcing, and constrayning his Understanding to receive no intelligence
from thence; and ever to remember, that he who first made the Eye, still
retains a command over the Eye. Thus violence, only in enjoying of him, who
forbids all violence, is warrantable (for not only touching life, but faith
also) Regnum Caelorum.] Matthew. c. 11.
Regnum Caelerum vim patitur, and here rapine is true purchase: so in all
other things, for using of force we are punished, here for not using we are
punished.

OF THE OMNIPOTENCY OF GOD. AND What he is able to perform. CHAP. II.
THE small streams, wherewith the flood of the Sacramentarian Heresy is fed,
and maintained, spring chiefly from the extenuating of Gods omnipotency:
intimating thereby that the abstruse Mysteries which are confessedly
acknowledged by the Catholics to be in the Real Presence, are greater, then
can be performed by that power, which through it infiniteness is ever unknown,
though through it continual manifestatio^, still eminent. In this manner does
that French Apostata.] viz. Calvin, who says. l. 4. Instit. c. 72. Cur
inquiunt (vi^. Catholici) non faciat Deus, vt caro eadem plura diuersaque loca
occupet, vt nullo loco contineatur, vt forma and specie careat? Insane, quid a
Dei potentia postulas, vt carnem faciat, simul esse, and non esse carnem?
first French Apostata, and that late Late Patriarch.] viz. Beza, lib. de Coena
Domini contra Westphalum.
Patriarch of Geneua dispute of this matter. In like sort that False Martyr.]
Peter Martyr, lib. contra Gardinerum. object. 10. 11. 12. etc.
false Martyr (who with the Apostle of his own name denied his Master, but
never with him lamented his denial) labored to shorten Gods arm, and
omnipotency heerin: so ready are these great Rabbis to interleague, and
compart with the very Heathens in depressing of his might, whose Greatness is
without Without Quantity] The having of Accidences ever implies composition:
therefore God being most simple, can have no Accidences.
Quantity, whose Goodness without Quality, and whose Eternity without Time.

But before we undertake to show the possibility of all such points, as are
found in this Mystery of the Eucharist, it will much conduce (I suppose) to our
intended project, if we lay down the grave judgments of the learned,
concerning what things be factible, or may be done by God, and what things may
seem to transcend his might, who in might transcendeth all things: fince so
the impartial Reader may the better observe, whether the acknowledged doubts
in the Eucharist imply in themselves any absolute impossibility, or no.

First then it is generally agreed upon by the Learned, that God is able to do
every thing, which Man's understanding is able to conceive. The reason hereof
being, that fince the Object of our mind is Ens, and Verum in general, and
that which may be conceived or understood, may really and truly exist: Therefore
it follows, that God can effect all that, which Man is able to conceive in
his Mind.

Secondly, the Learned (especially those which are Christians) affirm, that
not only those things, which Man is able to apprehe^d in his mind, but also
many other things incomprehensible in Man's understanding, God can effect. For
seeing (say they) that totum Ens of it self is intelligible, and to be
conceived, and that which is non Ens cannot be conceived; nevertheless our
Understanding through it weakness, and imbecility (except it be cleared with
the Light of Grace) is often deceived in co^ceauing of things, and supposes
many things cannot exist, or be (and consequently not to be apprehended by our
Understanding, or in themselves to be factible) which may indeed exist, and so
become the object of our Mind. Thus our Understanding may apprehend, that some
things there are, which it cannot apprehend: nevertheless the more the
understanding does lift it self up toward God, the more it is illuminated,
and the better refined for the penetrating of any difficulty; no otherwise
then a vapor the higher it is elevated up by the Sun, the more clear, and
purified it becomes. This doctrine of theirs, as it is warrantable in the
Authority of Gods sacred word, so is it justifiable in diverse exemplified
Articles of our Faith, which the Heathen Philosophers esteemed, as things
impossible, and by denial thereof ascribed unto God, only a kind of impotent
Omnipotency.

Thirdly, they teach, that God has in all things so much an Active Power, by
how much they have in themselves a Passive Power: And in this sense perhaps the
Heathen Philosophers acknowledged Gods Omnipotency. But their Error was, in
that they thought, that the Active Power of God could not extend beyond the
Passive Power of things (thus we see it verified in these learned men, That the
world.] 1. Cor. c. 1.
That the world through wisdom knew not God) whereas all Christian Philosophers
do teach the contrary: and therefore they believe, that God could, and did
create the world of Nothing. Now to make a thing of Nothing, is not to depend,
and rely in any sort of the Passive Power of the Subject, since in this kind of
producing there was no preexistent subject at all, much less any Passive power
thereof.

Fourthly, they further proceed, and affirm, that God can do all things,
which can by any means exist, agreeably to that of our Savior, Omnia Omnia
tibi.] Marc. 14.
tibi possibilia sunt: Now all that may exist, which in it own nature implies
a Being only, and not a Not-being And from hence proceeds that common Axiom
of Deuines: That every thing is possible to God to be done, which implies not
a contradiction: Now what implies a contradiction, is impossible to be done.
And the reason heerof is in that, what implies a contradiction supposes a
Being, and a Not-being of a thing, and all this at one time: and therefore if
such a thing could be, then could a thing be, whose Being should consist in a
Notbeing. Now only that, which has no Being cannot be effected by God; since
every thing that is, ought in some sort to be like to him, of whom it is.
Besides to make that which is not, and has no Being, is not to make, but
rather a Not-making, to the which, not any Power, but an Impotency belongs;
which Impotency can in no sort be assigned to his Divine Majesty, who only is
weak, in not being able to be weak. Thus is his mighty Arm shortened in
deficiency, but extended in strength, since to him it is more easy to do, then
not to do. And thus we teach, that he is not able to make Nothing, who yet of
Nothing made all things. And therefore answerably hereto (because God is not
capable of any defect) we say, God cannot dye, because Death is formally non
Ens (besides, that true Divinity is impatible.) By the same reason we affirm,
that God cannot sin, since the power required to Sin, is only a want of
Power, though powerfully reigning in Man. So free is he from all such
weakness, since he shows himself most Omnipotent, in being herein not
Omnipotent.

And thus much of these four points, which are (as it were) four graduall
steps, whereby Man's Understanding may climb up, to see how far Gods Power may
extend it self; or so many high Turrets (from whence our soul, ouerlooking
the low, and beaten paths of Nature) may with an inward reflexe view the
boundless, and vast heights of Gods infinite Might, and Puissance: The use
whereof is, that the Reader may make application of this doctrine to the
difficulties of the Blessed Sacrament, and so see, if any of them (according to
the former rules) may imply any Impossibility, or not. For though we grant,
that many things therein do transcend the created course of Nature; yet
nevertheless, God (who is Natures Nature) is able at his pleasure to disioint
the settled frame thereof; and therefore here appears the great Indignity,
which these Idolaters of Nature (I mean the Sectaries of this Time, who impugn
the doctrine of the Eucharist, namely, because it is repugnant to natural
Reason) do offer unto God, in seeking to confine his force within the narrow
lymits of Nature; as if the precincts thereof were the Herculean Pillar, beyond
which his Omnipotency (which is only bounded within a boundless compass)
cannot pass: So apt these Men are to breath out blasphemies against him,
through whom they breath, and to speak in dishonor of him, in whom they
speak.

THE FIRST PASSAGE OF THE MYSTERIES AND other difficulties of the Eucharist.
CHAP. III.
BUT now at the last to come to those great difficulties, which present
themselves in the Blessed Sacrament. I will touch them in these three Passages
following, which shall be accompanied with their Marginal References, containing
the explication, and unfolding of them. Which Obscurities (even for the more
advantage to our Sectaryes) I have set down in seeming Contradictions, that
being thus delivered in the fullest show of Impossibilityes, if they can be
solued; then no doubt, but being more nearly, and not so litteraly weighed,
they may the more easily be reconcyled.

But now since in an erring and mistaking Eye, they may appear mere
Repugnances, I have thought good therefore (once more, this second time) to
forwarne our Adversaries (for their former sleights with other Men's labors do
presage their like dealing heerin, if full prevention and caution be not made
before) that they do not diuulge to their followers (less capable of such nice
speculations) the bare difficultyes alone, as here they lie, concealing their
Explications drawn from Philosophy and Divinity, and so traducing us (though
most falsely) as mantayners of most evident and irreconciliable contradictoryes:
but that they would vouchsafe withal to take notice of their Marginall
illustrations; and so either to relate them both together, or to pass them
over together, since this deportment is best sorting to the candor and
integrity of an ingenuous and wellmeaning Adversary.

And first if we look into the stupendous, and miraculous Conversion made
therein, we shall discover these points following.

We shall find it to be a A Change] This Conversion is not wrought by any
assumption of Bread to the Person of the Word: Nor by any local, and simple
union of the Bread with the Body; Nor by any partial change of the Bread into
the Body; but is an entire, and whole conversion of the Substance of Bread, and
wine into the Body, and Blood of Christ.
Change of one thing into another, and yet contrary to all other conuersions
whatsoever, nothing of that thus altered Remaining.] In all natural
Conuersions, the Materia prima of the thing converted, remains under both the
Termini of the Conversion, and by the Conversion this Materia prima is invested
only with a new essential form; so when water is turned into air, the
Materia prima of water remains, and is not altered, but only takes the form
of air. But here the Materia prima of Bread and wine does not remain, and
therefore the Council of Trent teaches, that the Conversion is made of the
whole substance of Bread, and wine, meaning thereby both of the matter, and
form thereof.
remaining, nor any other thing Produced of new.] In natural Conuersions, that
into which any thing is changed, is produced of new: for the Terminus ad quem,
not before existing, but only by virtue of the change, must be of necessity
produced of new; and this Conversion is called by Philosophers Conuersio
productiua. But here in the Eucharist the Body of Christ preexisting before the
Conversion, though not under the species, or form of Bread, does cause that
the Conversion here makes, not that the Body of Christ should simply begin to
be, but only, that it should begin of new to be under the form of Bread.
produced of new: and therefore we may truly say, the Bread was, but is not; is
Nothing, and yet Not annihilated.] Because, as it is above said, the Materia
prima of bread remains not: the Bread is nothing; and yet the bread is not
annihilated: for Annihilation is an action, which terminateth, and ends in
Nothing; but this action in the Eucharist, by the which the bread cease to
be, does not terminate in nothing, but in something, to wit, in the body of
Christ.
not annihilated.

A Change, which is caused by a Successiue]. The words of Consecration are the
cause of this conversion, and therefore this conversion is not made without a
true successiue pronouncing of the said words.
Successiue pronouncing of several words; and yet wrought in an Instant.]
Though all the words successively pronounced do work this Conversion, yet the
said words have no perfect signification (and consequently causes not the
change) till the last instant, wherein the last word is pronounced: for in that
last instant, and not before, the effect of the words do really, and truly
exist; that is, the Conversion of Bread into the Body of Christ, and of the
wine into his Blood. The like difficulty we find in the words of Baptism,
which produce no effect till the last Instant. Now here it is to be observed,
that though the signification of the words, and the Conversion be perfected
together in one instant, yet in order of Nature they reciprocally precede, and
follow one the other; for as the truth of this Proposition, This is my Body,
depends a rei essentia, of the essence, or being of the thing touched in this
Proposition, so the Conversion does precede the signification of the words; but
as those words are the Cause of the Conversion, so the words precede the
Conversion.
instant. A Change, wherein the Priest may be said of Bread To make.] In a
sober construction the Priest may be said to make the Body of Christ, in that
by his only (and no lay persons) pronouncing of the words of Consecration, the
bread is really turned into the Body of Christ; and in this sense the Ancient
Fathers do most frequently teach, that the Priest makes the Body of Christ:
See Cyprian l. 1. epist. 2. and 9. and lib. 3. epist. 25. Athanasius 2. Apolog.
contra Arianos. Basil. l. ^. de Baptisin. c. S. Chrysostom l. 3. and 6. de
Sacerdotio. Hierome lib. contra Luciferianos. Now though the Fathers in this
their peculiar sense were accustomed to write so, in regard, that none could
consecrate, but a Priest; yet if we will speak in precise terms, the Priest
makes not the Body of Christ, because Christ's Body being before, the Priest by
his words does not produce it of new, but only causes it to be under those
external forms of Bread and wine, under which before it was not.
to make the Body of Christ; and yet the Priest makes not the Body of Christ.

A Change, wherein the Body being made Of Bread.] The Body of Christ may be
said to be made of Bread, because the Bread is truly, and really converted into
his Body, though the Body does truly exist before any such Conversion. And in
this sense diverse ancient Fathers do write, that the Body of Christ is made of
Bread: Cyprian says Sermon. de Coena Domini: Panis iste, quem Dominus Discipulis
porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Dei factus est caro.]
Gaudentius tract. 2. de Exodo. Ipse naturarum Creator, and Dominus, qui
producit de terra panem, de pane rursus, quia and potest, and promisit, efficit
proprium corpus: and qui de aqua vinum fecit, de vino sanguinem suum facit.] S.
Augustine in his Sermon cited by S. Bid upon the tenth chapter of the first to
the Corinthians says: Non omnis Panis, sed accipiens benedictionem Christi,
fit Corpus Christi.] so usual, and obuious was this phrase with the ancient
Fathers, which is so harsh to the curious ears of our new Brethren.
of Bread (a thing far different from flesh) is the very same, which was made
of the flesh of the Queen of Heaven. A Change, where, by the force of
Consecration the Body is without Blood; and yet even then the Body is Not
without Blood.] The reason hereof is, because Christ is there whole under
either of the external forms, in regard of the natural union of his soul
with his Body, which union is never more to be dissolved, since he is never
more to die. But if his Body should be without Blood, then should it be a dead
Body, and consequently himself were hereafter to die again, contrary to that
of the Apostle Romans 6. Christus resurgens ex inortuis, iam non moritur: mors
illi vltra non dominabitur.
not without Blood. In like sort by the same virtue, the Humanity of Christ is
only intended, and yet His Divinity.] The Humanity of Christ is ever
accompanied with the Divinity, and therefore his Humanity being in the Sacrament
by force of Consecration, his Divinity is also there with it per
concomitantiam, as the Deuines do speak. Now, that where the Body of Christ
is, there the Divinity of Christ must be also, is proved from this Principle of
Faith: to wit, That Christ is one divine Person subsisting in two natures, and
therefore wheresoever the Body of Christ is, it can have no other then a divine
subsistence, which subsistence is the same in matter with the divine Essence.
So as we see by force of the Hypostaticall union (which is never to be
dissolved) where the Body of Christ is, there the Divinity is also.
his Divinity, which is ever In all places.] If the Divinity of God were not in
all places, then should it be circumscriptible, or at least, definitive in
place, and consequently not Infinite; and then it were no true Divinity.
in all places, is Here of new.] In like sort all do grant, that the Divinity
of Christ was in the womb of the B. Virgin before her Conception; and yet the
Divinity was there (after another manner) at the time of her Conception.
here of new, truly, and really exhibited.

A Change, where the Body of our Savior is present, and yet Represented.] It
may be said to be represented. First, because the external forms of Bread,
and wine do represent the Body of Christ, as it dyed upon the Cross; and the
Blood, as it was shed upon the cross; for the Eucharist is a commemoration of
the Passion of Christ, according to those words of S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. Mortem
Domini annunciabitis, donec veniat. And in this respect his Body may be said to
be represented in the Eucharist, because it is not there after the same manner,
as it was upon the Cross, but only by similitude; and in this sense Augustine
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium, is to be understood, where he says: Secundum quemdam
modum, Sacramentu^ Corporis Christi, Corpus Christi est. Secondly it is said to
be represented, or in figure, because the external forms of Bread, and wine,
are the signs of the Body, and Blood of Christ there present, though veyled
over with those forms. And thus is S. Basil to be understood in sua Liturgia,
who calls the Eucharist (...), a Figure, or Representation of the Body of
Christ. And in this sense all the Sacraments of the new Law, may be called
Figures, or Representations, because they are external signs representing,
and withal working an inward Grace.
represented. A Change, whereby that sacred Body, at the first Institution of
the Eucharist, being yet mortal, and passible, was then received, as
Immortal.] For as it was at the first delivered to the Apostles, it was in that
spiritual manner under the external forms, as now at is after his death.
immortal, and impassible. A Change, where the external forms of the things
changed, do by themselves after a sort After a sort subject.] The Accidences
of Bread, and Wine are said to be in themselves, because they are not in a
liquo suppofito, or subject, and yet they do not truly subsist by any positive
act, but are in Corpor^ Christi, as they are preserved there, though not by way
of inherencie. Now, where our Adversaries do usually object, that it is of the
essence of an Accident to inhere in the Subject, and therefore the Accidences of
Bread, and Wine, must either inhere in the body of Christ, which all Catholics
deny, or else in the bread and wine, and consequently no Transubstantiation: I
answer hereto, that all chief Philosophers deny it to be of the essence of an
Accident: for Aristotle himself, lib. ^. de Anima text. 9. says: Aliud est
magnitude, aliud magnitudinis esse. Now, if the existence of an Accident be
distinguished from it essence: much more is the inherency thereof, which is but
the manner of it existency. Besides if Inherency were of the essence of an
Accident, Aristotle would never have demanded 4. Physic. text* 58. whether
that space were supposed to be vacuum, where there should be only sound, and
color, intimating thereby, that though by natural Reason, an Accident cannot
exist without a subject, yet that inherency is not of the essence of color, or
sound; since otherwise his demand should be absurd, and idle; for who should
suppose Color or Sound, would necessarily presuppose a subject, and therefore a
Body.
subsist, and yet are not substances; they inhere not, and yet are Accidents:
they are in themselves in respect of negation, and not of position; in another
by way of preservation, not of inherency.

A Change, whereby, the Testament made, being Christ's Christ's Blood.] As the
Blood of Christ is taken for that Blood which was in the Chalice under the
external species of wine, so it is a Sacrament, and consequently a Will, or
Testament. But as his Blood is taken for that Blood, which was shed upon the
Cross: so is his Testament sealed, and established in the same Blood. And
therefore according to this double acception of Christ's Blood, we find, that S.
Luke did speak in these words: Hic Calix nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo,
where by the word Calix, is meant Blood, and consequently the Testament.
Blood, was yet sealed in his Blood.

A Change, where the External Forms.] We hold, that when the External
Species are corrupted, the same substantial Form succeeds, which would
naturally have succeeded, if the Bread, and Wine had not been changed into the
Body, and Blood of Christ. And yet we teach not, that this comes by any
Generation, for in every Generation there is eadem materia numero under both
the Termini, or Forms, which here is not; for the same Materia prima which
was in the Body of Christ, is not in the new introduced form. Now then, though
it does not proceed from any preexistent Matter, yet it cannot be said to be
Created: for Creation properly has no reference, or relation (as proceeding
merely of Nothing) to any former thing whatsoever; but here this new form
has a necessary relation, and dependency of the corruption of the former
species of bread, and wine; for if the said forms were not, and after became
not corrupted, this new substantial form would not succeed. Lastly we teach,
that this new substance is substituted, or brought in by God, even in that very
Instant, when the Forms of Bread, and Wine cease to be. And this nevertheless
is not accomplished by any second and new Miracle: for even as when the matter
of a Man's Body being sufficiently disposed, God does immediately create and
infuse the soul, and yet this is not called a Miracle, because the order of
things already set down by God, does require it. In like sort, when the
alteration of the species of Bread, and Wine is proceeded so far, that then are
made present requisite dispositions (as the course of things requires) to
introduce some form, then does God in that very instant minister the matter,
and so the substantial form is introduced. Now here we are to note, that
when any part of these forms are corrupted, the Body of Christ either in
whole, or in part is not extinct thereby, but only cease to be under those
corrupted forms, still continuing whole under the rest not corrupted, and if
all the forms be corrupted, then it cease to be there at all, not much
otherwise, then when a Man's Leg is cut off, the soul which was in the Leg,
dies not (for if it dyed, then he who wanted a leg, should want a part of his
soul) but only cease to inform that part, informing all the rest: and if
all parts of the Body were disioynted asunder, then the Soul not dying,
cease only to inform any of the said parts.
external Forms being corrupted, a new substantial Form is introduced, and
yet here is no Generation; it is not produced out of any preexistent Matter,
and yet no Creation; it is exhibited immediately, and only by God, and yet
without any new Miracle.

To conclude, A Change (see here repose in Motion) wrought without Change,
since the Body of our Savior suffered no alteration thereby; for it
Relinquished Nothing.] For Christ's Body in the Sacrament enjoys all those
essential perfections of a true Body, which before it had in Heaven, only it
receaueth a new relation to the species of Bread, and Wine, as it is in the
Sacrament, which it has not as it is in Heaven, and consequently it is
invested thereby with some other circumstances accompanying that it existence
under it species, as to be freed from all extension of place, as also to be
freed from that relation of place, which it has, as it is in Heaven.
relinquished nothing, which before it had; but acquired some things, which
before it had not. Thus though, what he here is, he was not; yet what he was,
he here is.

Now out of this Passage it appears, how the Catholics dissent herein, both
from the Lutherans, and from the Sacramentaries. From the Lutherans, for though
they acknowledge the true presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, yet they
teach, that no real Change is made of the Bread into the Body, but a
Consubstantiall coexistency of both: which opinion, though resting only in the
manner of the Conclusion, we repute no less then Heresy; since in points
doctrinall (once Definitiuely.] For the General Council of Lateran under
Innocentius the third defined for an Article of Faith the doctrine of
Transubstantiation (though this doctrine was generally believed before) in the
first Chapter of the Decrees of that Council. He therefore that rejects the
authority of a lawful Council, rejects the authority of Gods Church, and
consequently his Error (though resting but in the manner, or circumstance of
any question) cannot be small, since in such his Error is included his greater
Error, in thinking, that a true and lawful General Council may
definitiuely, and sententially err.
definitiuely true, or false) who erreth little, erreth much.

We also dissent from the Sacramentaries, who relying altogether upon their
sense herein (like Labans sheep led mainly by their Eye) do enforce an
impossibility of our Doctrine; whereas Faith assures us, that the Body of
Christ is here really exhibited. And therefore we teach, that the
understanding (which is in this place the Eye to the Eye) though borrowing all
knowledge from Sense, even in knowledge here controles Sense, and secureth us,
that his Sacred Body, and Blood (through the virtue of his own speeches) is
here really present; though (through the dignity thereof) veyled over from our
sight, and yet not veyled over with any thing, since they are not Are not
things.) The Philosophers do teach, that Substantiae only, are truly and
perfectly Entia. And that Accidentia, are only Analogice Entia, being in their
own nature imperfect. And thus in this sense the Accidents of Bread, and Wine
(under which the Body and Blood of our Savior lie) may be truly termed Non
Entia.
things, but forms, under which it lies. Thus against the Sacramentaries we
hold it most clear, that here to pervert Christ's words, is to impugn Christ's
power.

THE SECOND PASSAGE. CHAP. IIII.
BUT let us pass on to the difficulties of another nature. We find, that
Christ's Body by force of those operative words, is in diverse places, and
Churches at one, and the same time: for though Christ be incircumscriptibly in
the Sacrament, yet we teach, that as a Body by Gods power may want all Want
all Circumscription.] See the explication of this difficulty hereafter in the
next Passage at the letter D
Circumscription; so by the same power it may have diverse Diverse
Circumscriptions.] A Body may by Gods Power have at one time diverse
Circumscriptions; which is, to have several places extensiuely. And the reason
hereof is, because that only implies a contradiction (and consequently, as we
touched before, cannot be done by God) which impugnes the very essence of a
thing, so as it does presuppose a Being, and a Not-Being of the said thing. But
to be in place, or in diverse places at once, is extrinsecall, and accidentary,
and not of the Essence; but what is extrinsecall, or Accidentary, is posterius,
and later then the thing it self, and consequently by Gods Omnipotency may be
divided from the nature, and essence thereof. The proof of this doctrine is
also deduced from the example of our Savior, who never leaving Heaven,
appeared to S. Paul upon the Earth, as we read Act. c. 9. and 22. That it was
not any voice (which spoke to him) made by Gods Power, or the ministry of the
Angels only (as some do answer) but our Savior himself, appears: both
because mention being made hereof in diverse places of the Acts, it ever
touches Paul's seeing of Christ in his own Person. So we read Act. c. 22. That
Ananias put Paul in remembrance of his seeing of Christ. In like sort c. 26.
Christ himself says, That he appeared to him, thereby to make him a witness
of the things, which he saw, but he could not be a witness thereof (especially
of the Resurrection) except he had truly, and really seen the very Body of
Christ. And answerably hereto we read, that S. Paul 1. Cor. 15. after he had
reckoned diverse, who had seen our Savior after his Resurrection, concludes
in the end with these words: Nouissime tamquam abortiuo visus est mihi, which
saying of his had been false, except he had seen Christ himself, seeing that
the rest numbered by S. Paul, had seen him in his own true, and natural Body.

Neither can it be said (as some others would have it) that S. Paul saw Christ,
as he was in Heaven, and not here upon the Earth, or in some near place of
the air; and this for diverse reasons. First because those, that were with
Paul, did hear a voice, and saw a great light, Act. 9. and 22. but the Ears,
and Eyes of his Companions, could not penetrate so far as Heaven. Secondly,
because the light, which appeared to S. Paul himself, was so great, as it
almost stroke him dead for the time; which could not have had in likelihood
such force, if it had come so far, as from Heaven. Thirdly, if S. Paul had
seen Christ only in Heaven, it might have been objected to him, that he was
no true witness of his Resurrection, and that what he had said to have seen,
was only in imagination, and a strong apprehension of the Mind.

Now our Adversaries cannot here object, that if our Savior did appear here
upon the Earth, or in the Air, truly, and really to S. Paul, that
notwithstanding he was not circumscriptible in that place for the time, in that
he is only circumscriptible, as he is in heaven. This urges nothing: For, for
a Body to be circumscriptible in a place, it is not required, that it should
not be circumscriptible in no place also, but only it is required, that it
should be truly commensured with that place; so as the Termini of the Place,
and the Body be answerable the one to the other.


Circumscriptions; much more then may it be at once in diverse places
Sacramentally, since Unity of Essence.] The essential unity of a thing
dependes not of the unity of Place, seeing a thing is one, before it has one
place: so as to be in place is but subsequent, and accessory to the nature of
any body; but it dependes of the internal principles of the said thing.
Unity of Essence, and Nature is not dissolved by diversity of place. Hence is
it, that it may be near Near to the Earth.] The same Body in several places
may be near to the ground, and far of from the ground. Neither does this imply
any contradiction; for seeing, that when a Body is in diverse places, and the
relation is terminated to diverse places, it therefore necessarliy follows,
that this diverse relation is multiplied; for it is to be understood, that
those contrary relations are in one, and the same subject per diuersa
fundamenta, to wit, in a different respect of several places; which diversity
of respect takes away all contradiction in the thing it self.
to the Earth, and remote from the same; moved, and not moved; remaining upon
the Altar, and received by the Communicant, and all at one, and the same time.
And yet if the same Body (supposing it were patible) be in one place wounded,
it would also be found Remain wounded.] For those things, which are received
in the Body it self (be they either Actions or Qualities) are not multiplied:
And the reason hereof is, because the Body is but one, and not many, or diverse:
And being but one, it can but have vnum esse Substantiale, though diverse esse
Localia, as the Schoolmen do speak, who thereupon teach, that all those
relations, and actions, which are terminated ad Loca, to the diversity of
places, are multiplied, because they follow, and depend upon esse Locale: but
such Actions, or Qualities, as are received within the body placed, are not
multiplied, because they follow esse Substantiale.
wounded in another, for Nature keeps her certain bounds, even in
transgressing her bounds.

Thus answerably hereto we teach, that it may be in a place, where before it was
not; and yet neither through any Local Local Motion.] The Body of Christ is
in a place, where before it was not; and this neither by any Local Motion, or
new Generation of it, but by a true Conversion of the Bread into the Body; not
much unlike unto the new being of the Soul in the Matter, or Substance, which
is added to Man's Body by nutrition, where we see the Soul to be in that part,
not by any Local Motion, nor Generation of the Soul, but only by informing
that part newly adjoined to the Body, which before it did not inform.
motion (for it never leaves Heaven) nor by any Generation, for before it was.
It is not Not continued] The Body of our Savior, as it is in the hands of the
Priest, cannot be said to be continued with the same Body, as it is in Heaven,
nor yet to be divided from the same, seeing those things only, which are many
and diverse (whether they be Tota, or Parts) are capable of continuation, or
division: Now, Christ's Body (as it is in Heaven) and in the Priests hands, is
not two several entire things, neither several parts thereof, but only one
whole, and entire Body. And though there be a great distance of place, and
interposition of many other Bodies between Christ's Body in Heaven, and upon
the Altar; this only proves, that those places, to wit, Heaven, and the Earth,
are discontinued, and divided one from the other; and that Christ's Body is
divided from it self, in respect of such diversity of place, but not in
respect of it proper substance.
continued with the same Body, being in another place, nor yet discontinued, or
divided from the same; and yet neither is the Body multiplied, or doubled, nor
the places confounded. Briefly it is here upon Earth, and yet it leaves not
Heaven.] According to that in Acts, c. 3. Oportet illum Coelum suscipere,
vsque ad tempus restitutionis omnium. And yet our Adversaries do idly cavil in
charging us, that we force Christ to leave Heaven by this doctrine of
Transubstantiation. And when we reply, that we teach that Christ never leaves
Heaven, but is both in Heaven, and upon the Altar; then they ignorantly object,
that for a Body to be in Heaven, and upon the Altar at one time, is a mere
contradiction, and consequently impossible. But this is gross Ignorance, for,
for to be in Heaven, and not in Heaven, or upon the earth, and not upon the
earth at one, and the same time, is a flat contradiction, and consequently
cannot be performed by God. But to be in Heaven and upon the earth at one time,
is no more a Contradiction, then the soul to be at once, both in the Head, and
the foot.
Heaven; and even then it enjoys a perfect Neernesse to it self.] Because
(as it is said above) it is one, and the same Body, as it is in Heaven, and
upon the Altar; and consequently in substance, and quantity cannot be divided,
or separated from it self, notwithstanding any distance of place.
neernesse to it self in so great a distance. Thus through it being in such
distance, and diversity of places, it seems to To transcend.] If to be in a
place, were of the essence of a Body (as we have proved before, that it was not)
then the being of a body in diverse distant places, may seem to increase the
quantity of the said body. Furthermore the Body of Christ being under the
forms of many consecrated hoasts, does no more increase in quantity, then the
soul being first in a child, and after dilating it self through the Body
being grown greater, can be said to be greater, then before it was.
transcend, and through it being contained under a small host, to lessen it
own natural, and true Quantity, and yet is the Quantity One, and the same.]
Quantity cannot be separated from a true natural body, and therefore seeing
Christ's Body (as it is in Heaven, and upon the Altar) is but one; so must it
quantity be one, and the same.
ever one, and the same.

Furthermore we see, that this sacred body by force of Consecration, inioyeth
the Being in diverse places, which it obtains not by virtue of Hyposticall,
and inseparable union with the Divinity, which is in all places. For though by
this union, the Divinity, and Humanity is made but one Person, and (this Person
being an An individual Substance.] This indiuision of Substance is not so
meant, that where one part of the Person is, there should be another (for this
is most false) but the Person is so called, because it is one subsistng thing,
not divided in it self, in respect of it subsistence, yet divided from all
other things.
Individual Substance) the Humanity (where it is*) does ever Accompany the
Divinity.] For where the Humanity is, there is the Divinity (as is above
proved) yet follows it not, that where the Divinity is, there is the Humanity
also.
accompany the Divinity, which is in all places; yet we teach not, that the
Humanity is in all places. Neither may it be inferred hereupon, that the Word
is somewhere Man, somewhere Somewhere not Man.] Though the Word may be
somewhere, where the Humanity is not, notwithstanding there the Word is Man,
because the Word existing there, does support the Humanity, as proper to it
self, though existing in another place.
not Man. Thus we reject that fantasy of Luthers Vbiquity, as overthrowing
many Mysteries Overthrowing many Mysteries.] For it is impossible, that Christ's
Body being in all places, should be truly conceived in the womb of our
Blessed Lady, or that it was borne, and dyed, or did arise again, or ascended
up to Heaven; for if his Body be in all places, then it was in the Virgins
womb after his birth; so also it was in the grave both before his death, and
after his resurrection, as also in Heaven before his Ascensio^. Again these
Mysteries could not be truly performed except the Body of Christ did truly. and
really move from one place to another: But Christ's Body being in every place
cannot be said to move from place to place; for true Local Motion of a Body
cannot be conceived, without obteyning of a new place, which before it had not:
so many points of Christian Religion, and of all true Philosophy Luthers
Vbiquity impugneth.
of our Faith, and retayning over much leaven of Eutyches his Heresy: so
easily will a Lutheran transplanted, grow up a perfect Eutychian. And thus much
of Luthers error herein, in this progressiue digression.

Now here we are to note, that the difficulties in this Passage sway much the
judgments of our sensible, and material Christians (for so I may well style
them, since they measure their faith by the Lesbian Square of their Sense.) And
therefore in regard thereof, I have thought good, in two or three subsequent
Chapters, (seposed only to this end) to exemplify the said difficulty of
multiplicity of places, in other points acknowledged, and confessed by our
Adversaries. Wherefore I could wish, that when they do look upon the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, they would shut the Eye of Sense, and Natural
Reason; since so they might (no doubt) by seeing the less, be able to see the
more; and be like herein to that great Apostle, who by loosing his Eyes,
obtained Light. (q) Eutiches Heresy.] The Heresy of Eutiches (besides other
points) was, that the Flesh of Christ was not of the same nature with ours. And
that the Word was not changed into true flesh, but rather into an apparent
only, and seeming flesh. So as the Word rather counterfaited it self to be
Man, to be borne, to have died etc. then that there was any such true
performance of these things. He further taught, that because the Divinity was
in the Sun, the stars etc. that therefore this apparent Body of the Word
was there also. And hitherto does Luthers Vbiquitie tend; for how can Christ's
Body be a true, and natural Body, if it be in all places?


THE THIRD PASSAGE. CHAP. V.
NOW to ascend to the last Mount of difficulties in this miraculous
Transelementation: We are to observe, that though the Body of Christ be here
endued with Life, yet it is not Not obiectiuely sensible.] That is, that the
external sense of another cannot apprehend it to have life. Now, the
Catholics do generally teach, that (in regard of the peculiar manner of the
existence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist) Adjectives, which include a
necessary reference ad Corpora circumstantia, do not predicate of his Body, as
it is in the Eucharist, though they may be said of it, as it is in heaven. The
reason hereof being, in that the Body of Christ is under the forms of bread,
and wine, without any reference, respect, or order ad Corpora circumstantia.
And therefore though his Body, as it is in the Sacrament be a natural, and
corporal substance, endued with life, sense, and color; yet it is not there
tangible, sensible, or visible etc. because to be actually tangible, sensible,
or visible, implies a reference ad Corpora circumstantia, in whose senses, and
eyes the Body is so to appear.
obiectiuely sensible; though it be a true corporal Substance, it is not
tangible; and though it be colored, it is not visible. In In like sort we
teach.] Christ's Body in the Eucharist has eyes, and ears, because it is there
a true, and perfect body, which it could not be, except it were organized with
those parts. And yet those organs of Sense do not exercise in the Eucharist (as
they are in the Eucharist) these facultyes (as the Eye to see, the ear to
hear.) The reason hereof is that, which was touched before, to wit, that not
only Adjectives which have relation ad Corpora circumstantia, but also Verbes,
which imply a presence of his Body in the Eucharist with reference ad Corpora
circumstantia, do not predicate of his Body, as it is in the Eucharist, in
regard of his spiritual, and peculiar manner of existing there, though they do
predicate of it, as it is in heaven. Now to see, to hear etc, bears a
necessary reference ad Corpora circumstantia, to wit to the external object of
the Eye, and to the sound caused by some body etc. Notwithstanding Christ in
the Eucharist may be said to see, to hear etc. and this for a double reason.
First, because it is there the said body, which it is in heaven, but his body
in Heaven sees, hears etc. therefore his Body in the Sacrament does see, and
hear, though not quatenus est in Sacramento. A second Reason may be, in that
as his body is in the Sacrament, so it is accompanied with the Divinity, in the
fruition whereof the Humanity sees, and hears all things. And in these two
respects the ancient Fathers (according to that saying of S. Basil: Verba
Inuocationis etc. quis Sanctorum scripto nobis reliquit? c. 27. lib. de Sp.
sancto:) as also the Priest in those words, Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata
mundi, miserere nobis, did, and does daily pray unto Christ, as he is in the
Eucharist, as being most confident, that he does there hear him.
like sort we teach, that it here performing the operations of Sense, and
enjoying the organs of Sense, does yet perform them without the help of those
said organs. We here also find Quantity without Without Division.] The Body
of Christ as it is considered in it self, has a true quantity, and
consequently it is diuisible, but yet in regard, that it existeth in the
Eucharist after the manner of a spirit, and not of a natural body, as being
exempted from all extension of place (for it is whole in every part) therefore
it may in this sense be said, that it is not diuisible.
Division, Magnitude without Magnitude without place.] Most of the difficulties
in this Chapter are solued, by knowing, what is of the essence of Magnitude, or
Quantity, and what not, therefore I will insist the longer in setting down the
judgments of the best learned herein. The Philosophers then do assign three
things to concur to Magnitude, of which the one ever causes the other.

The First of these three is, that every Magnitude should have an extension in
it self, and have Partem extra Partem, that is, that one Part should not be
confounded in it self with another Part, and consequently an intrinsecall
site, and disposition of parts. And this is of the very essence of every
Magnitude, and cannot be separated from the same. Thus we say, that a Body is
an extension in Longitude, Latitude, and Profunditie: Superficies an extension
in Longitude, and Latitude; A Line an extension in Longitude only. So as
extension ever presupposes different parts of the body, and consequently a
Body cannot want extension.

The second thing agreeing to every Magnitude, is, to have a commensuration, or
coextension with place, that is, an extrinsecall disposition, and order of
Parts according to Place. And this second arises from the first, and
consequently as being later in nature, then the first, may by Gods Power, be
separated from the same, yea it is actually separated from the first in the
highest Sphere, which being a true Body, has true Magnitude, and Partem extra
Partem, and yet it has not any Coextension, or Commensuration with place, for
it is in no Place. In like sort, if God before the Creation of the world, had
created a Man, or a stone etc. this Man or stone would have had Partem extra
Partem, and yet without any coextension or commensuration with Place.

The third, and last property of Magnitude, is, to extrude, and drive away all
other Magnitudes from that place, which is made equal, and commensurable to it
self, that is, not to suffer another Magnitude to be in the same place with
it. Now, as the second was later, and proceeded from the first, so this third
resulteth out of the second, and is later then the same in nature: So
answerably hereto we see, that the reason why one Magnitude does not suffer
another to be in the same place, is, because it does possess all the place it
self. But now seeing, that the later depends on the firster, and not the
firster of the later, therefore we do hold, that Diuina potentia it may be
effected, that a Body may possess, and occupy a place, and yet not expel
another from the same. And this is that, which we call penetration of bodies,
so much ^mpugned by our Protestant Philosophers. Now according to this doctrine
(which is delivered by all our best Philosophers) we hold, that Christ's Body
in the Sacrament has the true, and whole Magnitude of his body. But this
Magnitude has there only the first condition, which is essential to every
Magnitude (to wit, to be extended in it self, and by reason of that
intrinsecall extension, to have Partem extra Partem) but it has not the second
condition (much less the third) for it is not coextended with any place, since
though it have true Quantity, yet it is not co^mensurable with any place, but
existeth whole (in respect of all external place) in every part. And thus what
is assigned in this Passage to our Saviors Body in the Sacrament, which seems
to be common to every natural body, it is to be understood (according to the
first condition of Magnitude) of the extension of the body in it self, and
intrinsecall disposition of it parts without any reference to Place. But what
is here denied to the said body, as it existeth in the Sacrament, which is
incident to every other natural body, that is meant of it (according to the
second, or third condition) only in respect of external extension of parts,
and outward commensuration with place, which here it wants. And this may
suffice for this Point, where by the true application of it, most (if not all)
of the doubts of this Passage may be answered; and therefore they will only need
a short application hereof for their full Illustration.


Place, a Body without Without Circumscription.] viz. External Commenfuration
of Place.
Circumscription, Parts really Really distinguished.] viz. Distinguished in
respect of an intrinsecall disposition of parts in it self, though confounded
in regard of Place, it being whole in this respect (as also in respect of the
outward sensible forms) in every Part.
distinguished, yet confounded; and being Remote.] They are separated, and
remote one from another in regard of the inward distinctions of Parts, yet they
touch one another, because they want all Circumscription of place.
remote one from another, yet touching one another. So as we here find
Contiguity in Contiguitie in distance.] viz. In the different respect of the
inward site, or disposition of parts, and the outward coextension of place.
distance, Confusion (as I may say) in distinction, and a joining together in
separation. My meaning is, that Christ's Body, though having Quantity, yet does
here exist, as if it were without Without Quantity.] Because it wants the
second, and third condition of Magnitude above mentioned, which are incident to
every Body, as it is naturally in place.
Quantity, for the parts thereof are received in the same place, and yet do not
penetrate themselves. In like sort his Body has here the true quantity, and
distinction of parts, which it has in Heaven, and yet it is (without being
greater, or lesser) wholly contained within the least part of a consecrated
Host. Thus we see, that though a Though a Spirit.] A Spirit cannot be extended
in place, because it has not any extension of Parts at all, and therefore it is
indivisible; for seeing, to be extended in place is a formal effect,
proceeding from it formal cause of Extension in it self* if therefore a Spirit
should be extended in place, we should admit the formal Effect without the
formal Cause, which cannot be, since the formal Effect is later in nature,
then the Cause, and cannot be without the Cause, though the formal Cause may
be without the Effect, as we say here; that the inward Extension of Christ's
Body does want (by Gods power) all extension of place.
Spirit (even by Gods Omnipotency) cannot be extended in place, yet that a Body
may want all such extension. And thus answerably heereto we teach, that this
sacred Body is whole in every part, and yet has a true distinction of Parts.
And so though the external forms be broken, or disparted in themselves; yet
the Body lying under them, remains in the least parcel thereof, entire, and
undivided; as we see that when a looking-glass is broken, a man's whole face
will appear in every parcel thereof. Briefly we hold, that in this
stupendous Mystery, that Christ's Body remaining a Body, and not a Spirit, yet
does exist as a Exist as a Spirit.] viz. As not having any Coextension with
place, no more then a Spirit.
Spirit, and not as a Body: so as we may well term it in a sober construction
a Body Spiritualized.] Not that the Body by this means is become a Spirit, for
that is false: Nor that still remaining a Body, is withal a Spirit, for that
is impossible: Nor that the Body of Christ is in the Eucharist only
Spiritually, as the word Spiritually in our Adversaries construction is opposed
against the words Truly, or Really: But it may be said to be spiritualized,
because (as it is often said) it existeth in the Eucharist like a Spirit, to
wit, without any extension of place, but being (in respect of all such
extension) whole in every part.
spiritualized.

These (lo) alleged, and at large in the marginall References solued, are the
chiefest Mysteries, and difficulties, which are produced in the doctrine of the
Real Presence. And here I am to advertise the Reader of two things: the one,
that the most (if not all) of these obscurities were first through an incessant
agitatio^ of the mind discovered by our Catholic Catholic Schoolmen.] For
these, and such like are handled, and discussed by S. Thomas Aquinas, The
Master of the Sentences, Scotus, Suarez, Vasquez, and diverse others.
Schoolmen for the more exact search of the truth, and after most fully
answered by them; so as these short currents of doubts, from thence received
their stops, from whence they first did spring. But now our Adversaries (for it
is the misfortune of learning, ever to be wounded by her own hand) are not
ashamed even to turn the edges of those Arguments (first propounded, and
answered by Catholic Deuines, upon us, who maintain the said faith which
those Doctors did. By which course of proceeding, we may easily discover, how
barren, and dry our Sectaries are, for they bring little, or nothing of
themselves to impugn our faith heerin, but only Echo forth what they have
heard our learned Catholics before speak; yet do they Echo after a strange
manner, for they do not repeat the last words (as in nature, and reason they
should) but this were for their disadvantage, since they contain the answers,
and solutions; but only the firster part thereof, wherein do lie the objections.

The other point, whereof the Reader is to take notice, is this: That most of
the former difficulties (especially of the two latter Passages, or Chapters) do
consist in the repugnancy, which they bear to the outward Sense, and therefore
seeing, that these are chiefly insisted upon, and more and more reinforced by
our Adversaries, we may here truly say, that no small part of a Sacramentaries
Faith lies in his eye. Thus howsoever such rapt Spiritualists will at other
times vaunt of their hidden revelations from God, concerning the secrets of
their Profession; yet you shall ever find them, even in the midst of these
their aerie, and high-towring Illuminations, to look down upon Sense and
natural Reason (though Reason teaches* us not to rely upon Reason in things
transcending Reason) bearing themselves herein, not much unlike to your great
unprofitable Kites, which though they fly high, yet they have their Eye still
fixed upon the earth.

THE PROTESTANTS DIFFICVLTY OF A Body being in diverse Places, answered from two
more difficult Mysteries of the Trinity, and the Incarnation. CHAP. VI.
Now after we have dissected (as it were) point after point such difficulties
in the Blessed Sacrament, wherein the very synewes, and strength of our
Adversaries cause do chiefly lie; We are further here to advertise the
Reader, that through the consideration of many Dogmaticall Dogmaticall
Assertions.] A third Example (besides those two chief Mysteries before
specified) may be the wonderful difficulty of Creation, or Annihilation, which
to Heathen Philosophers may seem to imply a Contradiction; for to say, that
Something may be made of Nothing (which is Creation) and that Something may be
turned into Nothing (which is Annihilation) may be thought to say, that
Something is Nothing, and Nothing Something. And doubtless it cannot be
apprehended by Man's understanding, that a Thing should now exist, which before
was Nothing; and in like sort, that Something should be turned into Nothing,
except this Nothing be Something.

A fourth Example may be the Resurrection of the Dead. Now the difficulty in
this Mystery is, how one, and the same Indiuiduum, or particular Body should
be twice made; for if it be twice, then is it with a double action; and if with
a double action, how comes it to pass, that it is not two? seeing that the
Effect depends on the Action, vt eius Terminus.

Furthermore this Mystery is made more incomprehensible, by reason of the
Anthropophagi, or Cannibals, who feeding upon Man's flesh, nevertheless both
their own bodies, and the bodies of those others (upon whom they feed, and
whose flesh is turned into the flesh and substance of the Canniballs) shall
rise at the day of the resurrection most distinct, and several Bodies: where
we see, that one Body is turned into the substance of another, and yet
hereafter that very said substance is to rise up most different, and distinct
Bodies.

A fifth Example may be taken from the Pains of the damned, where the souls,
and the Devils are tormented, and punished with corporal fire: for if the
burning of the fire does not otherwise torment a thing then dissolueudo
continuum, then how can it afflict an Indivisible Substance, as the Soul of
Man, or a Spirit is? of which Point see Augustine lib. 21. de Ciuit. Die. cap.
2. 3. 4. and 5.

A sixth, is the Observation, how a Spirit can be detayned, and holden by a
Body; for it seems no less difficult to be understood, how a Spirit should
be holden by a Body, that it passes not wheresoever it would, then that a Body
should not be detayned, and hindered by another Body, but that it may freely
pass through any solid bodies, as if they were no Bodies at all. Now the
firster part of this difficulty appears in the former example of the Devils,
who (being incorporall Substances) are detayned with Hell fire, so as that they
cannot pass whither they would; which point may be also exemplified by our
Soul, which being an immateriall Substance, is deteyned, and holden by our
Body.

A seventh, may be taken from the Examples out of the Scriptures, where we
read, that the Fire by Gods Power did suspend it faculty of heating, Dan. 3 And
that Christ, and S. Peter by the same Power did walk upon the waters, Matthew.
14. and the like. Now, if God can effect, that, that which is naturally hoate,
shall no^ heat, and that which is naturally ponderous, and heavy, shall not
descend downwards having no hinderance; by the same reason is he able to make,
that a true body may want also circumscription of place. For the reason, why
through divine power, that which is hot, shall not heat, nor a thing
ponderous shall not descend toward the Center, is, in that Causa est prior
Effectu, the cause is before it effect, and therefore not depending on the
effect, may by God be separated from the same; but the like reason is found in
Magnitude, which is the Cause, and to fill, or possess a place, which is the
effect arising from the said cause, and therefore later in nature then it.
Besides, Grauitas, or Ponderosity is not only the cause, why a heavy body does
descend being out of it natural place, but it is also the cause thereof even
in that kind of Cause (to wit, in genere causae formalis) in which, Magnitude
is the cause, why a Body does possess a place.

An eight may be deduced from other Examples in Scripture, whereby is proved,
that diverse bodies may possess one, and the same place, and consequently, that
a Body may want all circumscription of place. Hereof are no few Examples
borrowed from our Savior himself, as that of his Nativity, where our Savior
did proceed out of the womb of the Blessed Virgin without any breach of the
Virginal parts. For thus hereof do the Fathers write, to wit Hierome in
Apolog. pro libris contra Iouinianum, Gregory Nazianzen in Tragoedia, Christus
Patiens. Augustinus epist. 3. ad Volusianum, Ambrose lib. de instit. Virginum
c. 7. A point so generally believed by the ancient Fathers, that Iouinian is
for the denial thereof registered for an Heretic by Ambrose epist. 80. and 81.
In like sort we read John 20. that Christ came to his disciples Ianuis clausis,
which action howsoever our Adversaries seem to elude, yet do the Fathers
generally acknowledge the Wonder herein to be, that the Body of our Lord did
then penetrate another solid, and firm body; thus Hierome epist. ad
Pamachium, de erroribus Ioannis Constantinop. Epiphanius haeres. 64. Ambrose in
cap. vlt. Lucae, as also Chrysostom, and August. upon this place. Again
another is of our Saviors rising out of the grave, the monument, or door
thereof being shut. In which point also the Fathers put the former like
Miracle, to wit, that a true natural body should pass through the grave, it
still remaining shut. See hereof August. sermon. 138. de Tempor^. Hierome epist.
ad Hebidiam quaest. 6. Chrysostom. Homil. de S. Ioa^^^^ Baptista. Justinius
quaest. 117. besides diuer^ others.


Assertions in Christian Religion (whereof some are set down in the Marginall
References, besides others reserved to their peculiar Chapters) and of other
irrefragable Positions in Philosophy, we may fully perceive, that Man's
understanding is too short a scantling to measure out Gods power. For diverse
such Passages there are, and other Conclusions in Nature, whereunto all
Christians give an absolute assent, and yet their proofs cannot be deduced
from the grounds of Natural Reason: so true it is, that perfection in
knowledge is not in this life the portion of Man. I will insist in some
particulers, so shall our Adversaries see, that they have reason either to
admit the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist, or else with the denial thereof
to deny the said Articles of Christian Faith, and other Philosophical
Demonstrations.

First then may be presented to us that Cardinall-Mistery of the Trinity, which
is indeed the basis, and foundation, whereupon the edifice, or structure of
Christian Religion is builded. Here now our Faith teaches us (for by the
Eagle wings thereof only we do mount so high, our Sense, and natural Reason
fluttering over near the ground) that there is one peculiar nature in three
different Persons; so as to pattern this to that in the Eucharist, we find an
Unity, or (as I may term it) an Indiuiduality of Nature, and a diversity of
Persons, sortable to the Unity of a Body, and multiplicity of places. Now here
we are to know, that every one of these three Persons is identified really, and
formally with this nature (the strictest Union that can be conceived) whereas
the Body is only externally conjoined with the place; so much is the difficulty
of a Body enjoying at once diverse local Circumscriptions, surpassed by this
dogmaticall Point of one nature being in several Persons without any
distraction, or multiplication thereof.

Now secondly, if we look into that other chief Point of the Incarnation,
whereby the Deity of God appeared in the frailty of Man's nature (as the Su^ne
shines in a pudled water) we shall be oppressed even with store of difficulties
presented to us therein. I will not insist in every particular thereof; therefore
I will pass over, how in this astonishing doctrine of Christianity, Christ
being borne in Time, was yet begor before all Time; and but newly borne, was
full grown; lying weakly in a Cradle, yet able to dissolve with his finger the
whole frame of this world; ignorant (in some sense) of the end of the world,
yet knew all things; dyed in the reign of Tiberius, yet slain from the
beginning of the world. Finally his Soul separated from his Body by death, yet
could not dye, since death over him had no power.

These, and the And the like] To wit, how in the Mystery of the Incarnation,
God separateth from the Humanity of Christ his manner of subsistence, inse^ting
it in his Divinity; A point, which hardly can be understood without presuming
some change in God, of which he is in no sort capable. Now, it is no more
incident to an Accident to inhere in a Subject, then it is natural to a
Substance to subsist by it self: if therefore God can effect, that a Substance
shall not subsist by it self, as here it does not, why should not he be able
to preserve an Accident without i^ Subject?
like (I say) I will pretermit, and will chiefly rest (as most pertinent to
this place) in this one Point, to wit, how one Hypostasis, or Person is in two
Natures; for whatsoever our Adversaries can allege for impugning of a Body to
be in several places, the same is here found with all aggravating
circumstances. Will they object, that the Places are really diverse, and far
distant one from another? But here the Natures are more different, and
dislike, the one being Divine, and the other Humane. Or will they say, that the
union of the Body, and the place is so strait, as that it hinders, why the
said Body should be in another place? But here the Union between the Person,
and the Nature is far greater; since that former is merely accidentary and
extrinsecall, this intrinsecall and substantial: And which is more, here the
Person, or Hypostasis is identified, and made the same really, and formally
with it divine Nature, and ye is united most inwardly with the Humane Nature.
If therefore one Person may be in two different, and unlike Natures, being
united most intrinsecally with either of them, and yet neither this Person
divided, nor the Natures confounded: much more may a natural Body be in diverse
places (whose possessing of them is mere extrinsecall) without either division
of the Body, or confusion of places.

Thus we see how our Adversaries confessing the greater difficulty, cannot be
induced to believe the lesser: such blind Blind Guydes.] Matthew. ^^.
Guides they are, who strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Camel Now if they were
pressed to falue all doubts in this Article by Natural Reason, I am sure (how
learned soever they are) they would confess a great Impossibility therein;
since God as Man, is scarce able to penetrate the Mysteries of Man as God. Then
by the same Reason they are to reject in any other dogmaticall Point
whatsoever, these first Conceptions, and secret breathings of Atheism: How?
and by what means? Whereunto to answer only by the Light of Reason, and to
deny whatsoever cannot be made good thereby, is to show himself more conversant
in the Natural Philosophers Catechism, then in his Creatours sacred Writings;
so prudently therefore it was said of our Father (...).] Nazianzen. Orat. 1. de
Theologia, signifying as much, as, Ne anxie (...) modum rei.
(...).

And thus much of this Pair, or Twins of Christian Mysteries (for their
resemblance is great) the one consisting in the unity of Nature, with reference
to diversity of Persons, the other in the Unity of the Person, with respect to
diversity of Natures.

THE SAME ANSVVERED BY the like difficulty, drawn from Eternity. CHAP. VII.
A SECOND Example shall be drawn from that, which in it Concrete, is the
peculiar, and incommunicable Attribute of God, I mean Eternity: for if we find
Mysteries far passing Man's understanding in the Proprieties of God, how much
short are we from sounding the bottomless gulf of his Power, who is the
sourse of the said Proprieties? But here we are first to know, what Eternity
is. The Philosophers The Philosophers define.] Aristot. in Metaphysic. passim.
define it to be, Instans Duration is non fl^ens; An Instant of Duration, or
continuance, which is ever present, and never passes away. Thus Eternity,
besides, that it has no beginning (according to Philosophy) consists of
that, which is shorter, then the shortest time, and therein Indivisible; and yet
the continuance thereof, extends it beyond the length of all Time, and therein
Interminable.

Now, the main difficulty heerin is this (and such which in the like touch of
the doubt is greater, then the former confessed difficulty of multiplicity of
place) to wit, That this Instant of Duration, being but one instant, yet is,
and coexisteth in several Times, both past, and to come; and yet neither is
this Instant divided, or distracted in it self, nor these several times
confounded. He that seriously penetrateth this difficulty, how can he make
doubt, but that by Divine Power, one Body may be in several places, without
either division of the Body, or confusion of the places? And this the rather (a
circumstance much increasing the Mystery here alleged) in that, diverse
places, wherein we suppose a Body may be, do still remain at one time, though
far distant one from another; whereas these precedent, and future times (in
both which one, and the same Instant of Duration or Eternity is) are ever in a
flowing, and departing Motion; and consequently cannot by any possibility
whatsoever remain, and exist together; for we see, that the Time past ever
gives place to the Time to come.

And thus much of this abstruse difficulty of Eternity (the doctrine whereof who
denies, denies withal Gods everlasting Being) of which I was the more
willing to entreat, because it is that, whereto after our Pilgrimage ended in
this world, we all trust most joyfully to arrive. And therefore (by allusion)
we may truly say, that as Eternity in it own nature consists of a continued
Instant; so of this short Instant of Man's Life depends all Eternity of future
Joy, or Calamity. Furthermore, not only we, but all Creatures whatsoever, shall
finally have their Periode, and Dissolution in Eternity; yea Time it self,
wherein all things are now swallowed up, shall hereafter be absorpt in the
abyssmall depth thereof. Thus what gave an end to every thing, shall in an
endless Eternity receive it end.

A THIRD ANSWER drawn from the Vbiquity of God. CHAP. VIII.
PHILOSOPHY teaches us, that the highest Heaven is in Quantity finite, because
the revolution of that huge Body is periodicall, and terminable, as being
perfected within a prefixed time. The consequence whereof is euicted, (by force
of a contrariety) from a received Axiom among the learned; to wit, What Body
accomplisheth not it course in a designed, and limitable time, the same (if any
such were) is of an infinite, and immensurable Quantity. Now, upon this Basis,
or ground (by resemblance) we may stay our selves in the search of his Power,
who is the Creator of all the Heavens: for since his Omnipotency is not
confined within the compass of any time (for himself was before Before all
Time] Seeing that Time (according to it definition in Philosophy) is but the
course, or Motion of the highest Heaven secundum prius, and posterius,
according to the firster, or later part of the said motion; and that seeing all
the Heavens were once created of God; therefore it must needs follow, that God
was before all times.
all time:) nor of things (for he gave the first The first Being to all
things.] viz. through the creation of them, according to that of the Scripture,
In Deo sumus, and mo^^mur. Act. 17.
being to all things:) nor of Place (for he is both by By presence in all
places.] According to that Hierem. 23. Caelum and terram ego impleo. And that
God is actually, and truly present in all places, is proved: First because (as
it is above said) it should otherwise follow, that he (...) circumscribed, or
defined in some certain place, and consequently he should not be infinite.
Secondly, God is united with every thing he created, since the consistence, and
the preservation of each thing depends on God. but this union between God, and
his creatures, is not by the means of any Quality in God (for in God there is
no Quality) therefore the union is with the Essence of God.
Presence, and Might, in all places:) It therefore may be assumed as an
inexpugnable verity, that his said Power is infinite, boundless, and
illimitable, and consequently that our weak understanding is not able to lay
any true level thereto.

But since I have here named Gods Vbiquity, I will insist a little in one
incomprehensible Mystery found therein, it being such, as that it incomparably
surpasses that of one Body being in several places. For how can our
understanding comprehend, that G^d (being one One simple, and indivisible
thing.] The like Example may be taken from the Soul of man, which being
indivisible in it self, and most simple, is in every part of the body, and
whole in every part; since otherwise, if it should be extended to the extension
of the Body, it should be material, and depend only of the Body, and
consequently it should not be immortal. Neither avails it to answer heerto,
that the Soul possesses the whole Body, as one Place; And that a sign hereof
is, in that, if any one member be separated by any change from the Body, the
soul cease to be in that member, in that, that said part begins to be a
different Body, excisting by it self, and not depending on the former. This
satisfies nothing, for although the soul cannot naturally be preserved in a
member cut from the rest of the body; yet there can be no reason assigned, but
that God is able to preserve the soul in a part of the Body cut from the rest.
simple, and indivisible thing) should be at once in all places, and things
whatsoever? A doubt so inexplicable, that it forced S. Augustine to say thereof:
Miratur hoc men's humana, and quia non capit, fortasse non credit. They cannot
salve this Point in answering, that God does replenish all places, as one
place. For though we acknowledge, that all places are to him, as one; yet who
will not grant, but that he is able to create another world, far remote from
this? and so should be present in the fame world, and consequently in several,
and far distant places. Nor can they further reply, that it is less possible
for a true natural Body to be in sever all places at once, then for God who is
only a spiritual substance. This aduantageth them nothing, since the main
reason, why it should seem, that a Body cannot be in diverse places, is not
taken so much a mole corporis, qua^ ab vnitate, not from the heavy weight of
the Body, but from the unity thereof; which unity, as it is no less (but much
more Much more perfect.] The Unity of God is much more perfect, then the Unity
of any thing whatsoever; for seeing that the Philosophers do define Vnum, to be
that, which is Indiuisuma se, sed diuisuma quocu^que alio, and that this
definition is more agreeable to God, then to any creatures; Therefore it
follows, that his Unity is more perfect then the Unity of any other thing.
And hence it is, that among the other Attributes of God given him by the
Philosophers (as Primus, Infinitus, Optimus, Omnipotens etc.) he is styled by
them also to be Vnus. Now, as he is Vnus, in respect of all Incomposition; so
is he Vnus in regard, that he is but One, and not Many. Which point appears
demonsttatiuely from hence* for seeing that God is infinite (for otherwise he
can have no true Divinity) we cannot conceive, how there can be many Gods, and
consequently many Infinities, without prejudice, or impeachment of one
Infinity in respect of another.
perfect) in God, then in a Body; so it should seem to be no less divided, or
distracted in it self in God, then in a Body, through his being in diversity
of places. Thus we see, how this difficulty of being in diverse places, so often
urged, and reinforced by our Adversaries is avoided even by the judgment of
all, except of those (if any such be) who will not confess, that they can find
him, who is in every place; nor see him, who is in every thing they see.

And thus much of these few Instances; the nature, and deliberate consideration
whereof may seem justly to extenuate the objected difficulties in the blessed
Sacrament. And howsoever the learned Deuines have labored much in the
explicating of these points; yet it is observed, that hitherto they could never
be brought to allow any one Man's Illustration of them: A Document to teach us,
that the wit of Man is too weak an Interpreter of Gods Power; and withal to
admonish us (for the more humbling of those high wits and conceits, who have
eyes to see difficulties, but not judgments to unfold them) that in things
once made questionable, in regard of the probable impugning of either part, and
the uncertainty of what side the truth is (it not being matter of Faith) much
Learning, is but much artificial, and paynfull Ignorance.

To these former might be adjoined many other Philosophical Philosophical
Speculations.] Besides such difficulties in Philosophy (as are hereafter set
down in their particular References) which may seem to transcend Man's
capacity, there are many other. As for example, The least mote in the Sun, or
other smallest thing that the Eye can hardly discern, to have in it self,
truly, and really infinite parts; which thing the nature of quantitas continua
conuinceth; which is defined to be semper diuisibilis in indiuisibilia: which
if otherwise it should be, then might a ^ody even by natural reason in the end
become to be nothing, or annihilated, which can only be effected by Gods power.

In like sort, Man's understanding cannot conceive, how a true, solid, and
firm body should be carried with that rapidity, or swiftness, as the Heavens
are carried in their courses: for the highest Heaven (going his whole course in
24. hours) by the judgment of Mathematicians and Philosophers, is really moved
at least twenty thousand miles in the twinkling of an Eye; which thing what
understanding can conceive? when the swiftest thing, that is in this world
(whether it be the flying of a Swallow, or a bullet shot out of a Gun) if it
should continue it motion for the space of an whole hour, would not go at the
most, past fifty, or threescore miles, within the same time.


Speculations, which cannot be confined, and (as I may say) circumscribed
within the compass of Man's wit; as that the least Quantity should be diuisible
into infinite parts; That the highest Heavens being a true Body, should be
carried with such a rapidity, and swiftnes of motion, as we see it is; That a
That a Vapor.] A Vapor is essentially water, for we see it being resolved,
turns again into the same water, ^amdem numero, which before it was. It is
therefore altered only accidentally, to wit, in these three qualities, in Heat,
in Tenuity or thinness, and in L^uity; so that a Vapor is the same water,
which before it was, but more hot, more thin or attenuated, and more light.
Vapor (how familiar, and obuious soever this observation seems) being only
but water rarefied, should possess a greater place, then when it was
elementall water; and seeing that before it was attenuated, there were as many
puncta, or parts of it, as when it is become a Vapor, every Punctum, or part
thereof having before it due circumscription. Now then, it does seem as much
repugnant to a determinate, and limitable substance, to exact a greater
circumscription of Space, then before it had, still remaining without any
addition (eadem substantia numero) as for a substance to require a lesser, or
none at all as we affirm of the Body of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament.

And finally (to omit many others) that the The Loadstone, or a piece of Iron,
after it is but touched therewith.] I will not here insist so much in the
difficulty, how a Loadstone does draw Iron to it, to wit, whether it be through
a Sympathy of Nature between these two bodies, or through the proper form of
the Loadstone; or if through the proper form thereof (which is the more
general Opinion) whether immediately of it self, or by the inte^uention of
some Instrument; or if by the mediation of some Instrument (which is also the
more neceaded conjecture) whether this Instrument is a sending forth of
certain corporeal A^omi, or spirits of the Loadstone, or only a transfusion
of an incorporeall quality, or virtue thereof* and finally if it be a
transfusion of an immateriall virtue (which is in like sort more commonly said
to be) whether this virtue comes out of the Loadstone, and so is really
carried to the Iron, or only propagated by the medium thereto, so as the virtue
still remaining in the stone, does only beget, or multiply the like virtue
through the air, till it come to the Iron, no otherwise, then when the heat
of the fire by being multiplied in the air, does affect with heat, bodies in
good distance from the fire; which later sentence is also more approved. In
refelling of these, I will not insist, for seeing, they are merely
speculatiue, and by the urging of several reasons in defense of every opinion,
(as being most remote from sense) may all be made coniecturally probable;
Therefore I will chiefly rest in the other point, that is, in maintayning, that
no true, nor certain reason can be given, why the Loadstone it self hanging
in the air by a thread, or being put in a vessel of water, does at all times
tend with one, and the same point thereof in the same place, toward one, and
the same point of the North (for it being placed after either of these two
ways, is free from all letts of it natural motion) or that a needle touched
therewith, will in like sort direct the one end, still toward the North. Many
reasons hereof I find alleged, but all are insufficient, and convinced as
false, even by the Eye, and experience it self.

The first Reason, is given by those, which do assign the cause hereof to be
some Northern part of the Heaven, to which the Loadstone, or Needle ever
tends, though in setting down, which this part should be, they dissent. Some
do maintain, that the Northern Pole of the world, in the Point* whereunto the
stone is directed, as Petrus Peregrinus in tract. de Magnete. But this sentence
is thus overthrown, First, because then there should be no variation of the
Needle, but that in all places it should directly tend toward the North Pole,
which is found by experience, that it does not. Now, hereby the variation of
the Needle is understood, when the Needle tends either Eastwardly, or
Westwardly from the Pole, which in several Countries is found more, or less
to do. Secondly, if the Pole it self, were the Point, then the Northern end of
the Needle should eleuate it self toward the Pole with us here in England
(much more in other more Boreall Clymates) because to all such places the Pole
is elevated many degrees; but we see just contrary hereto, that even in all
these Countries, the Northern part of the Needle does depresse it self
downwards to the earth, bending to some point many degrees under the Horizon,
and consequently bearing it self more low, then the Southern part thereof.
And this depression, of that part is commonly called, the Declination of the
Pole of the Loadstone, or Needle.

Others do teach, the Pole star to be the point, as Franciscus Lopez* lib.
1. hist. Occidental. and. c. ^. and Cardinus de subtilitate l. 7. This also is
false. First by the former reason of the before alleged declination of the
Needle, seeing that even with us, the Pole star is ever many degrees above
our Horizon. Secondly, because the Pole star is ever in motion, and
revolution about the Pole of the world, and makes it diurnall circle each way
distant more then two degrees from the Pole; therefore if this Star were the
cause hereof, then should the Needle follow the motion of that star, and so
every hour of the day be in changing it course in any one place; which we
find, that it does not at all. Thirdly, because we find, that the Needle in
some Countries does vary it motion above thirty degrees from the Pole of the
world, whereas the furthest distance of the Pole star from the Pole it self
(as is said above) is not three degrees. Fourthly, because it would follow,
that in those Southern parts, where the Pole star does not rise, the
Loadstone should not turn toward the North, by reason that this influence,
and virtue of the Pole star could not penetrate through the earth, and yet in
those Australl Countries, the Needle retains it former quality: for even in
Freto Magellani^o it is observed to tend directly toward the Pole of the world.

There are also some, who assign the cause hereofto other stars, and
constellations near unto the Pole, and not to the Pole star, as Petrus
Gregorius art. intrab. l. 36. c. 7. and Collegium Conimbricense ad 7. Physic.
2. but this their error is refuted by all these former Arguments, which prove
that the Pole star is no cause thereof.

Finally, some others will have some point above, but extra Caelum, to be the
reason heerof; for they say, it cannot be referred to any point of Heaven it
self, seeing that every part thereof (the Pole excepted) is mouable, and yet
the needle in any one place, or Country never changes it certain site, and
resting. Of this opinion is Cortes part. 3. art. nauig. c. 5. But this is
refelled (besides by some of the former alleged Arguments) even from
Philosophy it self; for seeing there is no Body or Subject extra Caelum, there
can no virtue, or influence proceed from thence, since other wise there should
be Accident originally fine Subiecto, which cannot be. Again that supposed
point should be either moveable, or not moveable if moveable, then should not
the Needle in the same place always look, and tend one way if immovable,
then should the Needle in all places respect one and the same point, but both
these are false. And thus much of the first general opinion which ascribes
the difficulty hereof to some part of the Heavens, or point beyond the Heavens.

The Second maine opinion, is of those, who allot the virtue of the Loadstone
to a Mountain of Loadstone, or a great Mine thereof under the North Pole. Of
this opinion are Olaus lib. 12. c. 1. Francostor. de Sympath. and Antipath.
Seuert. lib. 1. in s^hol. definition* ^^. to which place (say these men) that
by reason of the attractiue for^^ of this great Mountain, the Loadstone, or a
needle touched therewith, tends unto.

This opinion is also refelled: First because it would follow from Hence, that
a Loadstone, or Needle swimming freely, and without hinderance in the water,
should be moving with change of place evermore forward toward the North, and
should not lie still upon the water, only bearing one end toward the North:
but this it does not.

Secondly, in that it is found by experience, that in a Port of the ^^and Elba
in Italy, not distant more then a mile from a great Rock of Loadstone, the
Needle touched with a Loadstone does not turn toward that Rock, but toward
the North: if then that great Rock in Elba has not the virtue to draw the
needle to it, being so near, how can it be thought probable, that the other
Rock under the Pole can send it virtue so far to Needles touched with the
Loadstone in Countries remote, and distant from it?

Thirdly, because as Scaliger well notes, Exercit. 132. the attractiue force,
and virtue of that mountain of Loadstone under the Pole, should be
intercepted, and broken by reason of the swelling, and roundnesse of the earth,
before it could could come to other places far distant from this mountain*
and it is most improbable to say, that this virtue does penetrate through the
earth to Countries far distant; Or if it did, then it would follow, that in
Countries, more or less Southren, the Northren end of the needle should more,
or less tend downwards into the earth, and under the Horizon: but no such
change of declination is observed to be.

Fourthly, because that whersoeuer any one do put the Pole of the Loadstone in
respect of that Rock, yet it would follow, that a Needle being placed in the
same Parallel of this Pole yet distant far from it, should tend directly to
the East, and in other places of the same Parallel to the West, but not at all
to the North. But experience to the contrary hereto is made, since in those
places it ever tends toward the North. And thus much of this second opinion.

The third, and last is of those, who attribute this virtue of the Loadstone
only to the Specifica and int^rna forma thereof, whereby it self should ever
bend one way, or a needle touched therewith: Even as the earth out of it
specificall nature, and form tends toward the Center. This Reason is
assigned, not because it can be demonstrated (for it is merely in speculation)
but only as for their last refuge, in that all other supposed causes thereof are
found defective; which though it be over general, and little better, then
Petitio princi^ij, and not much more, then to say, The Loadstone tends
toward the North, because it tends toward the North: yet it is otherwise
evidently confuted.

And first, seeing there is but one internal, and specificall form of all
Loadstones, and seeing it is observed, that, that very part of the Loadstone
does bear ever toward the North, which was found to lie toward the North in
the Mine, or ground, and that all Loadstones do not lie after one, and the same
manner in the Mine, the veins, or grain of several Loadstones lying in the
Mine several ways; it therefore follows, that this peculiar direction
toward the North, cannot be assigned to the internal form of the Loadstone.

Secondly, the form of the Loadstone (as the forms of all other compounded
bodies) does proceed from the mixture of the Elements, but we find this virtue,
or propension of moving not to be in any of the Elements; How then can they
impart it to the Loadstone?

Thirdly, if the form should be the cause of it direction, then should it (in
all probability) be performed by the mediation of some virtue or quality of the
form. Now, all qualities caused by the mixture of Elements, originally proceed
a pain is qualitatibus, and consequently they are sensible: but this quality
(if there be any such) is insensible.

Fourthly, the Loadstone being Corpus grave, has a propension even from it
form to descend downward (as we see it does) therefore it cannot receive from
the same form any other kind of motion, for so one, and the same form should
affoard two different motions; which is absurd to affirm.

Fifthly, if the proper form should thus move it self, then should the stone
be a living creature, for it is only peculiar to a living creature locally to
move it self.

Sixthly, and lastly; If there were no variation of the Loadstone turning it
self toward the North, the cause of this motion might with more probability
be assigned to the form of the stone; but the variation thereof (according to
the diversity of Countries) is most diverse: for in some places it has no
variation at all; but directly tends to the Pole of the world: in other
parts, to wit, in all the Occidentall Maritime places of Europe, and Afric,
from Norway to the Cape of Buona Speranza, it bends more, or less toward
the East from the North Pole: and in all the Oriental Maritime places of the
North Parts of America from Terra Florida, to Virginia, nuoua Francia etc. the
Needle turns it end toward the West from the Pole. Now then, seeing this
irregularity, and diversity of variation is such, and so great, in so much,
that in some Countries the needle turns from the Pole thirty degrees, and in
other Countries more, or less Eastward, or Westward: how can it proceed from
the internal, and specificall form of the Loadstone, since the form of every
body affoardes a certainty, and immutability of that motion, which it gives
thereto.

And here now I will end: All which I have produced only to this purpose, to
show, that the cause of the motion of the Loadstone (though the effect thereof
be subject to each man's eye) cannot possibly be apprehended by Man and that it
is Gods pleasure, either to be the immediate cause thereof himself; or at
least resolved to conceal the same from us. Now, if Man's understanding be not
able to penetrate into the causes of things sensible, material, and of what we
have daily trial; can it be able in the mystery of the Eucharist (being a
point supernatural, and altogether removed from sense) to sound all the
difficulties thereof? Or shall it presume to confine Gods power within those
limitts, and bounds, which shall be assigned as answerable to the weak
proportion, and measure of it self, concluding thus: Man's understanding cannot
conceive how all those seeming impossibilityes in the Eucharist can be salued:
Therefore God cannot effect them. An Illation fitting to proceed from an
Atheist, or an Heathen Philosopher, not from a Christian.


Loadstone, or a piece of Iron, after it is but touched therewith, should ever
have their ends turned one way; The experience whereof, in that it falls
under every vulgar eye, and the reason most inexplicable, I will therefore the
more laboriously insist (in the reference hereto appropriated) in refuting all
the most probable conjectures given thereof by the Learned: which is not
undertaken impertinently out of any venditation, or vaunt of reading, for this
were idle, and a foul blot of a Scholars Pen; but only to this end, to
manifest, that all the Learning, and wit of Man is not able to set down any
sufficient, and satisfiable cause thereof, and that consequently it is perhaps
to be referred only to the immediate will, and pleasure of God; who as in this
(though experimentally subject to each Man's sense) so much more in the Mystery
of the Eucharist (being a sublyme and supernatural point of faith) is able to
accomplish that, which Man's capacity, and judgment is not able to conceive, or
find the reason thereof. And therefore I admonish my Reader, that as here the
Needle, before it be touched, is ready to turn it self indifferently toward
any quarter, or part of the world, but after, still tends to one only coast;
even so it should fall out in our Judgment, which though naturally without
respect it may propend to any opinion in matters in Religion, yet after it has
enjoyed that Magneticall, and Attractiue touch of the Churches Authority, it
ought then to direct it course only to that Faith (how intricate and perplexed
soever it seems) whereunto God by his said Church persuades.

THE DIFFICVLTIES OF A Body wanting Circumscription of Place, AND Of an
Accident without a Subject, are explained by the difficulties discovered in the
Power of Seeing, and in the Circumstances thereof. CHAP. IX.
AMONG other Elementary grounds and Principles of the Mathematikes, this is
one; Maximus Circulus.] Apud Euclidem. Those Circles are called Maiores
Circuli, whose Center is the same Ce^ter with the Sphere whereof they are
Circles. And this is the demonstration, why the Sun being in the
Equinoctial, the day, and night is of an equal length in all places, to wit,
because the Horizon, and the Equinoctial are Circuli Maiores, having their
Center the same with the Center of the world, and therefore intersecting
themselves, they cut one the other into two equal parts; and consequently so
much of that Circle which the Sun then runs, is under our Horizon, as is
above our Horizon.
Maximus Circulus, maximum Circulum secans, secant se inuicem in duas aequales
parts; secus autem de Minoribus: A great Circle cutting a great Circle, they
ever divide the one the other into two equal parts. The like may we say (by
allusion) of the two vast Circumferences of Gods Power, and Wisdom, both which
meeting together in the Center of every thing created, and in the Creation
thereof mutually intersecting themselves, they appear of one, and the same
Proportion, I mean, both discovering themselves to be infinite, and surpassing
all humane capacity. Now these being indeed of the very essence of God (for
that Axiom is true, Quicquid Quicquid in Deo etc.] The reason hereof is (as is
above touched) because to have Proprietyes as Qualities, and Accidents, implies
composition, and imperfection* from which God is most free, as being Maxim
Vnus, and Simplex.
in Deo est, Dei est) do with most admiration manifest themselves, among all
his Creatures, chiefly in those which enjoy life. Among those which enjoy life,
chiefly in Man; among all the corporeal parts of Man, chiefly in that small
great organ of the Eye. For who will not be astonished, and burst our with the
Psalmist, The Psalmist.] Psalm. 103.
Quam magnificata sunt opera tua Domine, in co^templating the fabric thereof!
First to behold the prominency, and bearing out of the Forehead and Nose,
which serves as certain fortresses to bea^e back all sudden attempts
endangering the same: Then the hayres of the Eyelids standing in most precise
manner, and order, as pales, or pikes to repel, and keep of the entrance of
any noisome thing: Next to observe the Lyddes themselves, which (as
Portcullisses lifted up and down by the help of the synewy chains) do let in
all pleasing objects to the Eye, and forbids entrance to all things
domageable. After these are presented to us the many Tunicles.] There are six
Tunicae, or Skins, of which the Eye consists, to wit, 1. Adnata (otherwise
called Alba) 2. Innominata. 3. (...), or Cornea. 4. Vuea (called also
Secundina.) 5. Amphiblistroides, or Retina. 6. (...), or Arauea.
Tunicles, and Skins, which serve (as certain walls, or Countermures) to
incompasse, strengthen, and fortify this little (yet rich) City of the Eye. And
lastly (besides the The Veins etc.] It is a Principle in Anatomy, that all
Veins proceed from the Liver, and give nourishment; all Arteries from the
Heart, and give life; all Synewes from the Brain, and give Motion and Sense: I
mean, that the gross blood in the Veins does give nourishment; the
spiritual Blood in the Arteries, life; and the Animal Spirits in the Nerves,
or Synewes, Sense and Motion.
veins giving nourishment, the The Veins etc.] It is a Principle in Anatomy,
that all Veins proceed from the Liver, and give nourishment; all Arteries from
the Heart, and give life; all Synewes from the Brain, and give Motion and
Sense: I mean, that the gross blood in the Veins does give nourishment; the
spiritual Blood in the Arteries, life; and the Animal Spirits in the Nerves,
or Synewes, Sense and Motion.
Arreties life, and the The Veins etc.] It is a Principle in Anatomy, that all
Veins proceed from the Liver, and give nourishment; all Arteries from the
Heart, and give life; all Synewes from the Brain, and give Motion and Sense: I
mean, that the gross blood in the Veins does give nourishment; the
spiritual Blood in the Arteries, life; and the Animal Spirits in the Nerves,
or Synewes, Sense and Motion.
Synewes, motion to the same) as also, besides the two Opticke Opticke
Synewes.] These two Opticke Synewes are termed Nerui visibiles: by these the
Species, or forms of all Objects are carried from the Eyes to the common Sense.
Synewes, which serve (as the Porters between the common Sense, and the Eye)
to consider the diverse Diverse Humors.] There are three Humors in the Eye. 1.
Aqueus, which is in the uttermost part of the Eye. 2. Chrystallinus, whose
place is almost in the middle of the Eye; this Humor is almost the chiefest
Instrument of seeing, and therefore it is called Idolum, or Simulacrum
Visionis. 3. Vitreus, which is seated in the inmost part of the Eye; so as the
Christalline Humor is placed between the Vitreus Humor, and the Aqueus.
Humors, which are to the Eye, as so many Rivers, by means whereof sufficient
provision Provision.] For these Humors give nourishment to some of the
Tunicles, as also the Eye purges it self by the means of them.
is brought in for the maintayning of the several Parts thereof; as also all
Ordure.] For these Humors give nourishment to some of the Tunicles, as also the
Eye purges it self by the means of them.
ordures (whose stay, and putrefaction would much offend it) are conuayed away.

And thus much of the compacture, and frame of the Eye; where (if we remember)
that all those parcells (most different one from another in substance, form,
use, and operation) are made by Gods power of one, and the same part of a
little slimy matter; and by his Wisdom, and Providence are become thus
subordinate one part to another, and all serviceable to the faculty of Seeing;
how can we rest doubtful, that the same Power, and Wisdom are not able to
effect the greatest difficultyes appearing in the Mystery of the Eucharist?
But to proceed further herein; all this curious structure of the Eye is framed,
that this Instrument may perform the operation of Seeing, and so we find it
does. But if we should enter into the manner, how it absolueth this it faculty,
we enter into a Labyrinth of intricate speculatio^s, in regard of the different
Different Opinions.] There are two chief Opinions touching the manner of
seeing; The one, they call Extramittendo, that is, That the Eye does send forth
certain Spiritus visibiles to the Object which the Eye sees, and do return
back again to the Eye with the true form of the said Object. The other is
Intromittendo, that is, That the Species, or forms of the Object are
spherically multiplied in the Air, or water, and are received in at the Eye
per medium Conoidis, viz. in a Pyramidall manner.
opinions delivered hereof. Thus, that we see, it is clear: but how we see (if
we believe diverse) no Man yet clearly sees.

And now to come to that point which may seem in some sort to pattern one of
the greatest obscurities in the Eucharist: we find here (following the most
approved judgment of the best The best Learned.] The most Learned do for the
most part hold, that the Eye sees after this second manner, to wit,
Intromittendo.
Learned) that the Eye being small in Quantity, is able to contain in it the
true proportion of things most great, since the forms thereof multiplied in the
air, and still retayning the figure of the true Quantity, are at the last
received in at the Eye, there appearing in those perfect dimensions of breadth,
and length, which their subjects do truly enjoy. And which is more: we see by
experience, that the Eye is able to discern the true proportion of a great
body in a small glass, or in a point of a Diamond, where it is more
wonderful, because the form of the said Body enters into the glass or
diamond in a Pyramidall, or Spyre-like point, and yet being multiplied from the
glass, to the Eye, recouereth again (as I may say) it former Quantity, and so
is presented from the glass to the Eye, as it was first from the subject to
the glass: An observation most strange, were it not, that the daily, and
familiar sight of any thing is ever the greatest Enemy to Admiration.

Now, out of all this I thus infer; That if naturally the forms of things so
great, can truly appear in their own bigness, in the small compass of a
glass, or the Eye; cannot a Body really be in a lesser place, then naturally
is answerable to the external coextension of all it parts? And where it may be
here replied, that the forms, which are received into the Eye are only
immateriall; we grant this to be true, and therefore we urge this Example not
to parallel it exactly in all circumstances with the other, but to prove thus
far (since there seems to be in some sort the like touch of the doubt) that
if the one be daily performed by the ordinary course of Nature, why may not the
other be also accomplished by the Omnipotency of that one (yet Vntuersall:)
Nature, who gave the first being to this secondarie Nature.

A Second Point, wherein I will here insist, is, that these Species visibiles,
or forms of Subjects, being multiplied in the Air, as they come to the Eye,
if the Air be changed, either by any wynd, or sudden alteration, yet (as the
chiefest Chief^st Philosophers.] Many great Philosophers of our time do teach,
that such Accidences, which do naturally continue their Inherence in that Body
from which they first proceed, cannot naturally remove from this their Subject
into another; such is the whiteness in the Swanne, and the Blackness in a
Crow etc. But their Judgment is otherwise in those Accidences which have their
Inherence in another Subject, then that, from which they originally proceeded;
Such is the beams of the Sun inhering in the Air, and the forms of Objects
multiplied in the Air: In these they hold, that the Beams of the Sun, and
the forms of the Objects (being the same numero) may, and actually do remove
from one part of the Air into another, if so the Air it self be changed: And
their Reason hereof is this: For (say these Men) the beams of the Sun, or
the forms of Objects, and the like, have no affinity with the Air in respect
of their original proceeding, but only by reason of existency. But any one
part of the air is as indifferent, and ready to affoard them existence, as
another part; Therefore (say they) there can be no reason assigned, why such an
Accident may not remove from Air to Air, rather then through the chang only
of the firster part of the Air to be extinct.
Philosophers of this time, both Catholics, and Protestants do hold) the
said forms (even eaedem numero) are not extinct, but that they inhere in the
next succeeding Air, and so do remove from one Subject to another Subject.
Now this consideration moves us thus to conclude; That if the same Accidences
do naturally remove from Subject to Subject, without any destruction of them,
cannot God supernaturally preserve an Accident without a Subject? as we
Catholics do believe, that he does so preserve the forms of Bread and Wine
in the most holy Mystery of the Eucharist. And thus far concerning these
difficulties.

But now seeing we have begun to entreat of the Eye, I will end this Chapter
with certain pertinent animaduersions drawn from this Instrument, and applied
to our understanding, the Eye of our soul.

First then we know, that Nature has given to Man two eyes, either of which,
though they see a thing, as one thing, severally by themselves, yet both of
them looking upon the same thing, do behold it, but But as one.] The Reason
hereof is, in that the sight of any thing is not perfectly performed, until
the form thereof be conuayed to the common Sense. Now this Conueyance is made
by the means of Neruus Opticus, which Neruus does divide it self into two
parts from the Forehead to either Eye: But from the Forehead to the common
Sense it is but one; and therefore the form of any Object being carried
through this Neruus Opticus, does represent the Object but as one (not as two)
to the common Sense.
as one, not as two: whereby we may learn, that the Natural light of our
understanding ought to conspire, and join with the supernatural light of
faith in apprehending one, and the same thing: And so in the Mystery of the
Eucharist, our Understanding, and Reason ought not in seeing the difficulties
thereof to vary from our Faith; but to subordinate, and subject it self to
that heavenly, and infused Power.

Again, that very part of the Eye (to wit, Pupilla Oculi) where with we
properly see, is deprived of all Colors, to the end, that it may indifferently
see all Colors: So should his understanding (who either in this Mystery of
the Eucharist, or in any other, would sincerely behold the grounds, and
reasons both of Catholics, and Protestants) be voyded of all prejudice of
judgment, wherewith the Intellectual faculty is otherwise discolored, and
blemished: for so shall he more clearly, and indifferently weigh, and consider
the force of the several Reasons, and Arguments produced on each side.

Lastly (to omit many other resemblances, and Proportions herein) the Optickes
do teach.] So we see, that the different falling of the beams of the Sun
upon the Cloud, which causes the Iris, or Rainbow, does cause to the eye the
different representation of several Colors; for as the Beams do more, or
less fall upon the Cloud, so accordingly the Colors appear varied to the Eye.
Optickes do teach, that one, and the same Color does appear, as diverse,
either to the same Eye, or to several Eyes, according to the different Angles
(to use the imposed Phrase herein) of Irradiation, or Incidency, made by the
entrance of the Object into the Eye: whereby we may be admonished, that in
points of faith, one, and the same Authority does seem of a different weight,
according as the Understanding is before either lightened with Gods Grace, or
darkened with the mist of Passion. And thus far hereof: where we see, that the
Body (contrary to the accustomed manner) is able to school, and instruct the
soul.

HERE now I will conclude this first Part, in which the Reader has all the
chief obscurities of this great Mystery explicated at large, and diverse of
them paralelled by other acknowledged difficulties, both in Divinity and
Philosophy. For the close whereof I only wish him to have his mind ever fixed in
this one position, which is: That, what Faculty, or Operation God does impart
to any thing created, the same he also eminenter retains to himself (since
otherwise the Creature should transcend in Might the Creator) and is able to
perform it without the help of any secondary Cause: being in such cases sole
Agent of the same Effect: Which Axiom if he do apply to most of the Most of
the abstrusest Points.] To instance this ground in some difficulties of the
Eucharist; God has imparted to a Substance the faculty of supporting, and
sustentating an Accidence by means of Inherency; therefore it follows out of
this Principle, that God is able of himself to support an Accident without it
Subject, for otherwise he should give more power, and ability to the Subject,
then he keeps to himself, or can by himself perform, which were both
impious, and absurd to maintain. In like sort God has given this property to
Place (for the better conseruing of the Subject contained) that it should
circumscribe every sublunary natural Body with a certain coextension
answerable to the Quality of every such body: Therefore God can of himself (as
we believe he does in the Sacrament of the Eucharist) keep a Body without any
such circumscription of place; since otherwise it would follow, that he has so
qualified this circumstance of place to perform that, which himself
immediately cannot. This might be exemplified in many other difficulties
touching the doctrine of the Real Presence, neither is there found herein (in
a clear Judgment) the least appearance of any Contradiction.
abstrusest Points in this Question of the Eucharist, he shall easily
acknowledge, that the extending greatness of them, become confined by him who
is only confined within his own illimitable Power, and unsearchable Wisdom:
himself being the sole bound to himself.

The end of the first Tract.
THE CHRISTIANS MANNA. THE SECOND TRACT.
The Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist proved from the Figures thereof in the
Old Testament; from the Prophesies of the Rabbis; from the New Testament; from
Miracles etc.

CHAP. I.
IN the precedent Passages the possibility of the Catholic doctrine herein, is
(I hope) most clearly, and irrefragably proved, partly by soluing all the
abstrusest difficulties, which are accustomed dangerously to invade our
Judgment by the assault of the Eye, of other the senses, and of natural
Reason; and partly by showing, that God still is God, and his divine Majesty
ever himself, I mean, that he is in Power infinite, boundless, and
inscrutable; And that whenever this proud slyme of Man presumes to assign
limits to him, by obiecting, that Omnipotency cannot pass it self, and the
like; he endeauours but to graspe the water, or to bind the Air, since he
labors to restrain him (even Him) whose Ocean ever flows without any
borrowed streams, whose Day still continues without ensuing Night, and whose
Center is without any bordering Circumference.

It now remains briefly to demonstrate, that not only it is possible, that
Christ's sacred Body, and Blood may lie really under the forms of bread, and
wine, but that actually in the Eucharist so it does. Which point, though it
receive it chiefest synewes, and strength of proof from the two Oracles of
Gods written Word, to wit, from the Prophetical, and Apostolical Scriptures;
yet such is the petulancy and wantonness of our Adversaries in detorting those
sacred Testimonies, as that they tell us, except we will admit their own
expositions of the said Scriptures (though contrary to the words themselves,
and to all the accessarie circumstances) we do but idely diuerberate the air
with impertinent allegations.

And thus, Let us produce such Texts of God Word, which conteyne (even by their
own confessions) the Types, or Figures of the holy Eucharist during the time
of the Law (which Time Which Time served.] According to that, Omnia ei^
contingebant in figuris. 1. Cor. c. 7.
served but as the Eve to the greatest Festival day of Christianity) as that
it was shaddowed by the Paschall Paschall Lamb. Exodus 12.] S. Augustine says
of this Figure, l. 2. contra literas Petiliani cap. 37. Aliud Pascha, quod
Iudaei de oue celebrant, aliud quod nos in corpore, and sanguine Domini
accipimus.] That the Paschall Lamb was a figure of the Eucharist is further
testified by Leo Sermon. 7. de Passione Domini, by Cyprian. lib. de Vnitate
Ecclefiae, by Chrysostom homil. de proditione Iudae, by Hierome in c. 26.
Matthew. by Tertullian l. 4. in Marcionem, and diverse others.
Lamb, by the The blood of the Testament. Exodus 24.] That this blood was a
figure of the Eucharist appears out of Luc. 22. where our Savior plainly
says, Hic calix nouum Testamentum est in meo Sanguine. In like sort Matthew. 26.
Our Lord in these words (Hic est Sanguis meus noui Testamenti) seems in both
places to allude to the words of Moses: Hic est Sanguis Testamenti, quem misit
ad vos Deus. Now, here it cannot be replied, that the blood of the Testament
was a Figure only of the Passion, and not of the Eucharist, and the reason
hereof is this, in that a Testament ought to be made by a free man, before his
death, and by some public Instrument, for the remembrance thereof after the
Testators death. All which circumstances are more truly, and lively found in
the Institution of the Sacrament, then in his Passion.
Blood of the Testament, and by the Manna Manna descending.] Of this we read
Exodus 16. That the Manna was a Figure of the Eucharist, appears from our
Saviors own words Joan. 6. Patres vestri manducauerunt Manna in Deserto, and
mortui sunt: Qui manducant hunc Panem, viuent in aeternum. The same is
confirmed by the Fathers: See hereof Ambrose l. 5. de Sacramen. c. 1. and, De
ijs qui initiantur Mysterijs. c. 8. and. 9. Augustine, Theophylact, Cy^il, and
Chrysostom in c. 6. Ioannis.
descending from Heaven upon the Jews, wherein we affirm, that the
accomplishment of these figures ought to be more noble, and worthy, then such
naked representations, and that therefore if nothing be in the Sacrament but
bread, and wine, it is not It is not better.] That these Figures are not
inferior (if not superior) to the Eucharist (if nothing be there, but Bread,
and Wine) either for substance, or signification, it is most clear. And first
touching the Paschall Lamb, If we consider a Lamb, and Bread, as things
natural, the Lamb (as being a Creature endued with sense) is more noble. And
if we consider them as Sacraments, that is, as external signs, the Lamb also
excels Bread; for the Flesh of Christ is better represented by the flesh of
the Lamb, then by Bread. Again, the death of Christ is more lively figured by
the killing of the Lamb, then by breaking of Bread. Finally, the Innocency,
and other Proprieties of Christ are better signified by a Lamb without any spot
(for such the Law commanded to be sacrificed) then by Bread. In like sort, the
effect of the Sacrament is better obtained by the eating of the Lamb, then by
eating of bread* for if the effect thereof be a spiritual nutrition, we know,
that flesh nourishes better then bread; and if it be only a stirring up of a
Man's faith, then does the killing of the Lamb perform it better, in that it
more lively sets forth the death of Christ.

Concerning the Blood of the Testament, the same former Reasons, which did
prove the Lamb to be more noble then Bread, do also serve to prove, that blood
is better (both for substance and signification) then the Eucharist, if nothing
be there but Wine; for Blood is a more noble substance, then Wine, and the
Blood of Christ is better represented by blood, then by wine. Touching the
Manna, It is in like sort most clear, that supposing the Eucharist to contain
in it only bread, it is inferior to the Ma^na. And first considering their
natures, and essences, the Manna it most excellent, as being made by the hands
of the Angels, descending from heaven, and having in it all kind of tastes, or
so tasting, as every one eating thereof would desire. And according to these
points, we find it called Panis Angelorum, Psalm 77. and Panis de Caelo, Joan.
6. whereas bread is made by the hands of a Baker, coming out of an Oven, and
having only but the taste of bread. In like sort if Manna, and bread be
considered as external Symboles, and signs, Manna represents, or signifies
Christ better then bread, in that it came from heaven, was endued with all
kinds of tastes, and was received of every one in a like measure. Thus we see,
that the Figures in the old Law, do every way excel the Eucharist (they being
but Types of the same) if so nothing be therein, but bread. Now it is evident
even in reason, that Figures ought to be inferior to those things whereof they
are Figures; which point also appears out of the Apostle Colos. 2. who there
compares the Figures of the old Testament to the shadows, and the fulfilling
of the said figures to the body.

Now, whereas our Adversaries do answer to our Argument, in saying, that our
Sacraments (and consequently the Eucharist) do excel the Sacraments of the old
Law (even with reference had only to the external signs) because (say they)
our Sacraments are more firm, as never again to be altered; and because they
show, and figure out a thing already done, and not hereafter only to be done,
and because they are more simple, and belong to a greater multitude of people;
and lastly, in that they are more clear then the other, not so much in regard
of external representation, as for the euidency, and cleernesse of the words
there spoken. This is the answer of our Adversaries, and particulerly of Peter
Martyr in sua defens. de Eucharist. part. 3. page 692. But this takes not away
the force of our Argument* for all these Prerogatives of our Sacraments,
ascribed by him, are extrinsecall, and accidentary to Sacraments, as they are
Symboles, and Signs; seeing that they altogether depend of the bare will of
him, who did first institute, and ordain them; and therefore they bring small,
or no dignity of signs, as they are signs; but the comparison is to be made in
the signification it self, in seeking the internal dignity, and worth of
signs, for those signs are better, which better do signify; but signs do
signify better, or worse in regard only of their external signification.

Add hereto, that when our Savior did first institute the Eucharist, his
death was to come, and consequently it did then figure a thing to come.

Lastly add, that the Scripture, and the Fathers do not teach, that our
Sacraments do not excel the old Sacraments, because they better signify, but
because they were but as figures, and the Eucharist the thing figured, so as
the comparison made both in Scriptures, and by the Fathers, is the comparison
of the things absolutely in themselves, without any reference had of the
signification of them.


better if not inferior to those Legal Figures, either in regard of their
natural substances, or their signification implied by them: Yea, let us tell
them, that they debase overmuch the Jewish Sacraments, as teaching, that they
did but adumbrate shadows, and represent Representations, since they account
them no better, then Types of Types, and Figures of Figures; yet cannot this at
all sway the judgments of our Adversaries, which is carried away violently
with the stream of prejudice, and partiality.

Let us bring forth the Ancient Ancient Rabbis.] Among the Rabbis, which have
prophesied hereof, we find, that Rabbi Symeon, lib. Reuelat. Secretoru^. thus
says, The Sacrifice, which after the Messiah his coming Priests shall make
etc. they shall make i^ of bread, and wine etc. and that Sacrifice, which shall
be so celebrated upon every Altar, shall be turned into the body of the
Missias.] Rabbi Cabana, ad cap. 46. Genes. writes, That the Sacrifices which
shall be offered of wine, shall not only be changed into the substance of the
Blood of the Messiah, but also into the substance of his Body. The Sacrifice,
which shall be of Bread, notwithstanding it be white as milk, it shall be
converted into the Body of the Messiah.] Rabbi Barachias, in Ecclesiast.
affirms, That, at the coming of the Messiah, food shall come from heaven
like a little ea^e.] Finally, Rabbi Hadarsan, in Psalm. 1^6. (to omit the
testimonies of others) writes: Taste, and see, how good is God; for the bread,
which he gives to all, is his Flesh, and whilst it is tasted, it is converted
into his Flesh.] So clear these Jews were in this point, that Galatinus (who
urges these their sayings) writes of them, That they may be thought not so
much to have fore^ould things to come* as to have reported Euangelist-like
things already done.].
Rabbis, most of them (if not all) living before our Saviors Incarnation, who
in a Prophetical spirit (directed no doubt by him, with whom their is no
distinction of Times, though himself first distinguished Times) tell us, that
in the after days, the Messiah himself shall offer up his own body, and
blood for sacrifice, under the forms of Bread, and Wine; yet they proceed
against them (and this is an ordinary disease, and distemperature of Heresy in
other like cases) with a Lordly, and peremptory Arrest, pronouncing, that such
their writings are Suppositious Suppositious and Forged.] All these testimonies
of the Rabbis (besides many more) are recorded by Galatinus, de arcanis
Catholicae Veritatis l. 10. c. 5. 6. 7. etc. Yet Doctor Whitaker absolutely
rejects them l. 9. contra Duraeum, page 818. And yet the sayings of the said
Jews in other points (recorded by the former Galatinus) are of such weight in
the judgments of other learned Protestants, as that we do find them urged in
their books against their Adversaries. Thus we find them produced by Parkes
against Willet page 170. by Philip Mornay in his book Touching the trueness
of Christian Religion, and englished Anno 1592. page 434. 436. and in diverse
pages following. In like sort by Pau^us Phagius a Protestant, touching
Traditions delivered by word of mouth; and finally by the silenced Ministers in
their defense of their Reasons for their refusal of subscription, page 188. If
then the authorities be of force to be alleged by the Protestants for proof
of other points, shall they not be of the like weight being produced for
justifying of our Catholic doctrine in this Controversy?

Now, whereas some of our Adversaries to maintain, that these, and other like
sayings for justifying of Christian Religion, were first forged by Galatinus,
or some of his time, and fathered upon the Jews for their greater credit; this
is most false: for we find, that one Hieronymus de sancta Fide, being a Jew,
and converted to Christianity in the time of Pope Benedict the 13. (which was a
good time before Galatinus) whose Physician he was, wrote a book entituling
it, Hebraeo-mastyx, or Vindex Impietatis, ac Perfidiae Iudaicae: wherein he
proves diverse points of Christianity from the three alleged Testimonies, and
Sentences of the said former Jews mentioned by Galatinus. This book of his is
printed at Franckford Anno 1602.


and Forged.

Let us come to the Time of Grace, when we Gentiles first became Antipodes (as
it were) to the Jews; since our heavenly Sun then setting to them, did
instantly rise unto us, and lay down Christ's own words, wherein he ordained
this most Reverend, and high Mystery, to wit, Hoc Hoc est Corpus meum.] The
Real Presence is evidently proved out of these words of the Institution,
recorded by all the Evangelists. And first to give a short Exposition of every
such word therein, which may enforce the true Presence of Christ's body, we say,
and teach thus.

The Pronowne HOC, must be taken here, either Adiectiuely, or Substantiuely;
if it be to be taken Adiectiuely, then it is to agree with some Substantive,
and consequently it must demonstrate Corpus, and not Panis, because the word
Panis (being in Greek (...)) is in both tongues of the masculine Gender. And
yet this Pronowne being in Greek (...), used here by the Evangelists, and in
Latin Hoc, is in both the said Tongues of the Neuter Gender: so in the other
sentence following, Hic est Sanguis meus, the Pronowne Hic, cannot demonstrate
Vinum, because Vinum is of the Neuter Gender. Now if the particle Hoc, be taken
substantiuely, then Hoc must here signify Haec Res, but that this word Hoc,
or Haec res, should predicate of the bread there present, were ridiculous and
absurd, for we do not usually say Hoc, signifying Haec res, if the thing be
present, and known, except the said thing be of the Neuter Gender; and the
reason hereof is, in that seeing the Subiectum ought to be more known, then
the Pradica^um, if therefore the Subiectum be known to the hearers in
particular, it ought not to be delivered by an universal Name, but only then
it is so universally to be delivered, when it is only known in general.
Therefore seeing the Apostles did at the Last Supper see bread in our Saviors
hands, and knew it to be bread, it had been an absurd kind of speech, if our
Savior had said of the bread, Hoc est. Corpus meum, since he ought to have
said, Hic Panis est Corpus meuin.

This point is also made more evident out of the Greek Text: for if Hoc should
have demonstrated Bread, then by the same reason, the Pronowne Hic, in these
words, Hic est Sanguis meus, should demonstrate Vinum, and not Sanguis. But S.
Luke is manifestly against this second point, who cap. 22. thus says: (...).
viz. Hic Calix nouum Testamentum in Sanguine meo, qui pro vobis effunditur,
where the words in Greek signifying, qui effunditur, are not joined in
construction with those words, in Sanguine meo, but with the other words Hic
Calix. Therefore whereas S. Luke says, that the Cup was shed for us (but the
Cup it self, or the wine in the Cup is not shed for us but the blood of
Christ) it follows that Calix here does not signify a Cup of wine, but a
Cup of blood; Therefore it remains by force of inference of the former
premises, that the Pronowne Hoc in the words of the Institution does
demonstrate not Bread, but that which is contained under the species, and form
of bread, the which thing, though before it was bread, yet after the words
ended, and perfected by our Lord, it was the body of Christ.

Touching the Verb (EST) in the said words of the Institution, which word our
Adversaries do strive to prove, that it is here taken for Significat,
whereas the Catholics do teach, that the word Est implies here no other
signification, then it own natural signification.

Now this is proved; First, because we find not Tropes, or Figures to be placed
in Verbes, but by reason of some peculiar thing, or nature, which is employed in
one Verb, and not in another; but the Verb ^^st signifies nothing else, then
a Conjunction of one thing with another, or a common being incident to all
things. Again, this Verb Est, ca^ never leave it own signification, in that
it is the Copula of all Propositions. Therefore since of necessity it is in
every Proposition, it cannot leave it own signification, and receive another.
Lastly, and chiefly, this Verb has the most simple, and most common
signification, so as all other Verbes may be resolved into it, and something
besides; Thus were solues Plato legit, id est, Est l^ge^^; hence it follows,
that this verb Est (because it being the most simple of all Verbes, cannot be
resolved into it self, and something besides) cannot be drawn to receive the
signification of any other Verb. Now against this doctrine, the example of
words objected, when Est in taken ordinarily for Significat, preuayleth
nothing: As for example, ^raecari; est Ora^e, the reason here of being, in that
the essence of a sign is signification, therefore in all such Propositions by
the Verb Est, i^ understood the essence of the same sign. Now then, seeing in
those said former examples, and propositions one sign does predicate of
another (for words are nothing else but signs) it follows, that the Verb
Est is taken for Significat, and yet without any Trope therein.

Touching the word CORPUS, in which word most of our Adversaries do choose
rather to place the figure, then in the former Verb Est: Now, that this word
Corpus cannot signify figura^ Corporis (as our Adversaries pretend) is most
evident. And, first this is proved out of the words following, to wit, Quod pro
vobis d^tur; in Greek being for the word datur, (...)* as also out of these
other following touching the Cup, Qui pro vobis effunditur; in Greek (...).
Now, these two Greek Participles, being put in the Nominative case, ought to
be joined with a Substantive of the same case, therefore they are to be joined
in construction with that which ^^ called Corpus, and Sanguis, and not with any
words put in other cases, as Corporis, and Sanguinis; Therefore either the true
Body, and Blood is in the Eucharist, or his Body by way of representation, and
signification only, to wit, the Bread, and Wine were given for us, and shed for
us, which is absurd to affirm.

Secondly, the same is proved from the former observations touching the
Pronowne Hoc, for seeing that this Pronowne does not demonstrate. Bread, there
is nothing left, of which these word^ ^ig^^^ Corporis, should predicate, except
they will say, that the true* and natural Body of Christ is a sign, and
figure of it self.

Lastly, the Body of Christ, wheresoever it is read in Scripture, is either
taken for his Mystical Body, to wit, the Church, or for his true, and natural
Body: but for a sign, and figure of his body, we never find it to be taken.
Therefore the Construction of the Sacramentaries given of the words of the
Institution is most forced, and without any example, or president of that kind
throughout the whole Scripture. But the more evidently to prove, that the words
of the Institution cannot be taken figuratively, I do further present (besides
what has been already alleged) to the Reader these few ensuing Observations.

First, that this Pronowne Hoc, designing some particular thing, pr^uents all
Figurative constructions; And therefore we find, that in other acknowledged
Metaphorical speeches of Christ touching himself, the Pronowne Hoc is
wanting, as in these, Ego sum Ostium, Ego sum Vit^ etc.

Secondly, In all Metaphorical speeches, that are used by way of Explication,
it is not accustomed, that one thing do predicate, or be affirmed of another
thing, except the Praedicatum be some such thing, in the which the propriety
(according to the which the similitude of the Metaphor is chiefly intended) is
more known and evident, then it is in the other thing, of the which the said
Metaphor is affirmed. And this is the reason, that in Metaphorical
Propositions one thing does predicate of another, for the most part in genere,
or in specie at least; But no such observation is here found in the words of
the Institution. For here (according to our Adversaries) the Body, and Blood
of Christ are affirmed of Bread, and Wine, and yet the virtue of nourishing
(which they here assign to be the ground of the supposed figurative speech)
is less evident and known in the Body and Blood of Christ, then in the Bread
and Wine, which before his pronouncing of the words, Christ did hold in his
hands.

Thirdly, It is to be observed, that in the words of the Institution, the Body
and Blood of Christ do not expressly predicate, or are affirmed of Bread and
Wine, but only they do predicate of a word signifying some thing, but with
confusion and uncertainty, to wit, of the Pronowne Hoc. And yet in other
metaphorical speeches ever a thing which is of one nature, does predicate of
another thing of a different nature, as Christus erat petra etc.

Fourthly, we are here to note the words following; to wit, quod pro vobis
datur, qui pro vobis effunditur etc. Which are added to demonstrate the truth
and propriety of the precedent Affirmation. But in all Metaphorical
Affirmations nothing for the most part is wont to beadded, but what does more
clearly express the propriety of that thing, from the similitude whereof the
Metaphor is drawn.

Thus one may say: Caesar was a Lion, by reason of his courage and fortitude,
which later words are added to express more clearly the nature of the
Metaphor. But now if the addition of words following, does not explicate the
similitude of a Metaphor, but absolutely does show the truth of the thing
therein affirmed, then does such an Addition manifest withal the Propriety of
the precedent affirmation: as in these words: That Christ suffered upon the
Cross, who was borne of a Virgin, where we find, that the later words not
expressing any similitude of a Metaphor, do intimate a Propriety and literal
acception of the former words concerning Christ. In like sort we say, that
those words: Quod pro vobis tradetur, and, Qui pro vobis fundetur etc. Which
stalbe diliuered for you etc. and, Which shall be shed for you etc. do not
import and signify any virtue of nourishing, which they should have done, if
the Propositions (to which they are adjoined) had been Metaphorical; but they
do signify, that Christ's Body and Blood were the price of our Redemption, which
point has no necessary conjunction with the virtue and faculty of nourishing.
And thus much in further explication of the word of the Institution.


est Corpus meum, and, Hic est Sanguis meus etc. A text in respect of a A
Sacrament instituted heerin.] Sacraments are accustomed to be instituted by God
in most plain words, least otherwise we should err in the use thereof, as
appears by the Examples of the old Law, and of Baptism.
Sacrament instituted herein, of a Testament A Testament left thereby.] That the
Eucharist conteyneth in it self a Testament, appears out of those words of
Luke 22. Hic est Calix nouum Testamentum in meo Sanguine. But nothing is
accustomed to be expressed in more plain, and litterall words, then a Will or
Testament, that thereby may be prevented all occasion of contention, as
touching the Will of the Testator. And this appears by the example of the old
Testament, which being instituted in Exodus 24. is there explicated in most
proper, and familiar words. The like course we see performed in the making of
the Testaments of men.
left thereby, and of a Precept, A Precept, or Law.] That there is a Divine
Precept in the Institution of the Eucharist, appears out of those words,
Accipite, Edite, hoc facite. But the words of Laws, and Precepts ought to be
most perspicuous, and clear, since otherwise occasion of erring would
presently arise: Hence is it, that not only the Decaloge, but also other
Passages of the old Law, wherein certain rites are ordained, are set down in
very plain, and proper words. In like sort we say, that seeing the Institution
of the Eucharist conteyneth in it self (in the judgments of all) one of the
chiefest dogmaticall points of Christian Religion, it therefore ought to be
delivered without any Tropes, or Figures: for we find that all such principle
Articles of Religion, and Faith are delivered in Scripture in a most facile,
and easy phrase of speech.
and Position of faith contained therein (ever to continue in the Church)
necessarily challenging a literal, plain, and obuious Interpretation: Yet our
Tropicall, and Figurative Sectaries are not here afraid (o monstrous
impiety!) even to force, and violate with their strained Glosses the true sense
thereof.

Let us examine the former words, by recurring to the Greek, wherein the
Evangelists (our Lords true Historians) did first write, to wit, (...) (...)
etc.] This point is explicated above at the letter (h) in the explication of
the Pronowne Hoc.
(...); where the words do by all natural Construction signify, that the Cup
was shed for us, and consequently that Wine was not in the Cup. They reply,
that the words (here making for us) are mere Surreptitious.] So says Beza,
as not being able to answer to the argument of the Catholics, drawn from the
Greek Text.
surreptitious, and in time by negligence crept out of the margent into the
text; thus daring in a supercilious, and impudent manner, to expunge out of the
holy Writ it self, what may seem to eneruate, and destroy their Typical
Communion.

Let us pass on further to such Texts of the Apostle, which do imply an use,
and practice of the Eucharist; as, Calix Calix Benedictionis.] 1. Cor. c. 10.
In English thus: The Chalice of benediction, which we do bless, is it not the
communication of the blood of Christ? And the Bread, which we break, is it not
the participation of the Body of Christ? Now this place affoards diverse
Arguments in proof of our Catholic doctrine. And First from those first
words, Calix benedictionis, cui benedicimus. Out of which words we deduce, that
Consecration is necessary to the Sacrament of the Eucharist; but it were not
necessary, if the Eucharist were but only a Figure of our Saviors Body, since
for the effecting of thus much, the first institution of Christ, and his will
manifested in the Holy Scriptures were sufficient; for the Paschall Lamb, and
Manna were figures of Christ's Body, and Sacraments (according to our
Adversaries doctrine) and yet there was not required any consecration for the
making of those figures. In like sort we find, that no Consecration is used to
the water of Baptism, to make it thereby a Sacrament.

Another Argument may be taken from the words, Panis, quem frangimus. In which
place the word Fractio, is as much as Immolatio, or Oblatio, according to that
of the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis frangitur: For
all these are the words of the same Apostle in the same Epistle, and entreating
of the same matter. Besides the Apostle here describes the Cup, not by words
of distribution, but of Consecration: Therefore it is most probable, that he
did in like sort describe the Bread by way of Consecration, not of
distribution. Now then, if in this place Frangere, does signify Immolare, to
immolate, or offer up in Sacrifice; then it ineuitably follows, that the word
Panis, does not here signify natural wheaten bread, but the very Body of
Christ, which is supersubstantiall, and celestial Bread; for no man will say,
that we do immolate, and offer up to God plain natural Bread.


benedictionis, cui benedicimus, nonne communicatio Sanguinis Christi est? Et
Panis quem frangimus, nonne co^municatio Corporis Christi est? As also the said
Apostle in another place, Qui Qui manducat.] 1. Cor. 11. He that eats, and
drinks unworthily, eats, and drinks judgment to himself, not discorning
the Body of our Lord.]

Now out of this Text, thus we argue: Here certain are reprehended for the
receiving of the body of Christ vnworthili^, and of such it is said, that they
eat, and drink judgment, and not life to themselves. But of these it cannot
be said, that they receive the body of Christ in spirit, and Faith (because in
so doing they should receive it profitably) therefore they receive it in Body
alone, and consequently the Body of Christ is really, and truly in the
Eucharist, since the Body of Christ, ^s it is in heaven, cannot be taken with
our bodily mouth.

It cannot be replied heerto (as some of our Adversaries have written) that
such persons are said by the Apostle to eat judgment to themselves, because
they do not receive truly the Body of Christ, which God does offer to them in
those signs, which is as much, as if they should cast it upon the ground, and
betrample it. This refuge avails nothing, the reason thereof being, in that
the Apostle in this place faith not, that such offend in not receiving, but in
receiving unworthily; so as their sin consists in the taking of it, not in
the omission thereof, and not taking.

Neither will that other answer of Calvin, lib 4. Instit. c. 17. ^. 3^. and of
Peter Martyr in comment huiu^ loci, advantage them any thing a^ all, who teach;
That the meaning of the Apostle in this former place is, that the wicked are
said to eat, and drink to their own damnation, in that by taking of the
Eucharist, they wrong the Symboles, or Signs of Christ's Body: Now (say they)
the injury offered to a Sign, or Image, redoundeth to that of which it is a
Sign, or Image. This answer overthrows themselves, in that it inforceth
them to acknowledge, that they wrong the Catholics, against whom they at other
times inueigh so much (even charging them with idolatry therein) for giving
acertaine honor to the Images of Christ, and the Saints, and teaching that the
reverence given to them is transferred from the^ to Christ, and his Saints. As
in like sort, the wrong, or injury done to the Images (in which point the
Sectaries of this Age do exceed) results to Christ, and his Saints. Again, if
this were the only reason of S. Paul's words, then he which receaueth the
Eucharist in mortal sin (so that he come not with an intention of violating,
or dishonouring the Symboles of Christ's Body) should not be guilty of Christ's
Body, nor eat Judgment to himself, and yet in so doing, he is most guilty
thereof. The reason of this Inference is, in that, if an Image be destroyed, or
defaced by any means, so that it be not done with an intention of dishonouring
the Saint (whereof it is an Image) there is no offense committed against the
Saint. Lastly, by force of this Answer, it should not be lawful for a sinner,
to look upon the picture of Christ, nor to hear the word of God, since both
these do represent, and offer Christ unto us. Hence then we may conclude, that
it was not the Apostles meaning, that therefore they did sin, who did receive
the Eucharist un worthily, because it does represent Christ.


manducat, and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manducat, and bibit, non dijudicans
Corpus Domini. And again he there faith, that such an one, reus erit Corporis,
and Sanguinis Domini: In all which words the often, and reverent ingemination
of flesh, of blood, of the Body of Christ, of the most dreadful comminations,
and threats to the unworthy receauers thereof, may seem well to Paraphrase, and
comment our Saviors own words, and to free them from all ambiguous
acceptance: Yet do they most pertinaciously persist in their former
Allegorical Constructions, abastarding thereby the native, and genuine sense
thereof.

Let us not only fortify our doctrine with the warrant of Gods word, but also
repel all weak assaults, and forces, gathered out of certain wrested Texts
of the said Word, for the impugning of this our faith; for thus do our
Adversaries bandie Scripture against Scripture, as if the Pens of the
Evangelists, and the Apostles had at unawares made some blots, or blurres of
contradictions or mistakings.

Now to this their drift many Passages are urged by them; As first, diverse
Diverse examples.] Many examples of this kind are alleged by the
Sacramentaries; as Agnus est Pascha, id est Transitus, Exodus 1^. Petra erat
Christus, 1. Cor. c. 10. Baptis^^^s est lauacrum regenerationis, Tit. 3. Septem
boues sunt septem anni, Genesis 14. Ego sum ostium, Joan. 20. and diverse other
such like.

To these I answer, First, that most of these places are s^lfly expounded.
And, first as touching that, Petra erat Christus, These words (according to the
exposition of Ambrose, Chrysostom, and others upon this place) are not to be
understood of the material Rock, which signified Christ, for that followed not
the Jews, but of the spiritual, and invisible Rock, which provided all
necessary things for the Jews, which Rock was properly, and truly Christ as
God. Now, though the Trope be, that Christ is there called the Rock, ye^ by the
addition of the word Spiritualis, the Trope is explaned, and therefore this
Proposition, Spiritualis petra erat Christus, is taken properly and not
figuratively.

To that other, Baptis^^^ est lauacrum regenerationis, I say, that Baptism
does not signify only here the Lauacre of Regeneration, but it truly washes
the soul of Man from sin, if the effect thereof be no^ hindered by our
indisposition.

To that, Agnus est Pascha, we reply, that Agnus Paschal^s, the Paschall Lamb
is not here Tropically called the Pascha, because it signified Transitum, but
it was called the Pascha, properly, no otherwise then as the Festival Day was
called Pascha, from the word derived a Transitu Domini; because the Lamb was
then sacrificed, and that Day was made Festival in remembrance of that
Transitus, or Pass^ouer.

To that, Septem boues sunt septem anni.] we say it is a Par^ble, and in such
Parables, Similitudes, and V^^ions, the verb Est is ^^ken for Significat, and
yet without any Trope; the reason heerof being, because (as is above touched)
the whole essence of all such things i^ pl^ced in signification; And therefore
the sense of these words is no^, that the seven Oxen did signify the seven
years, but that the Oxen appeared in vision to signify those years.

Secondly we answer, that in all examples ^lledged by our Adversaries, there
immediately follows an explication of the Trope, and Figure: but of the words
of the Institution there follows no explication.

Thirdly, in most of the examples alleged by our Adversaries (for there are
diverse others produced by them) ever* pr^dicat^^ dispatatum de disparato, that
is, that which is of a most different nature, is said of another thing of a
like different nature, ^^ in those, Boues sunt Anni, Christus est Ostium etc.
for seeing that in these, and such like, the Propositions cannot be by any
means properly, and literally true, we are forced to expound the same by*
Tropes, and Figures; But in these words, Hoc est Corpus meum, there is no such
kind of strange and unnatural predication, at least in the appearance of the
words themselves.

Lastly, if we should admit that in the examples produced, Est is taken for
Significat, yet seeing this verb is more often taken in it own natural
signification, then otherwise, it follows, that it should be so taken in the
words of the Institution, rather then without sufficient reason to the
contrary, to be expounded figuratively.


Examples (to countermaund the natural construction of the words of the
Institution) wherein by the word Est, is understood Significat. In like sort
they object, where it is said, That the Eucharist is to be taken in In
Remembrance of Christ.] Hoc facite in meam commemorationem: Do this in
Remembrance of me.] From hence it follows not, that because we are
commanded to celebrate the Eucharist in remembrance of Christ, that therefore
Christ's Body is not there really present. For the meaning of these words is set
down by Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. saying, Mortem Domini annunciabitis donec
veniat: you shall show the death of our Lord, v^till he shall come.] Therefore
we are commanded to take the Eucharist in remembrance of our Lords death, and
Passion, which is not present, but absent, or rather it is not, but was.
Remembrance of Christ; That, Christ shall not leave Not leave Heaven.] Act. 3.
Oportet illum Caelum suscipere vsque ad tempus restitutionis omnium. Whom
(meaning Christ) Heaven must receive, until the time of the restitution of all
things.] It follows not from hence, that Christ never leaves Heaven: Ergo
his Body is not in the Eucharist; for we teach, that Christ ought not to leave
Heaven, or to descend with a Local Motion, when he is in the Eucharist, for
here no question i^ made of the Article of Ascension, but rather of Christ's
Omnipotency; to wit, whether Christ by his Divine Power may place himself in
several places at one Time; of which Point it is sufficiently treated above in
the first Part of this Treatise.
Heaven, till the consummation of the world; That Christ to show himself to
have a true Body consisting of flesh, and bones etc. would have it touched Have
it touched.] P^lpate, and videte, quia Spiritus carnem, and ossa non habent,
sicut me videtis habere. Handle, and feel, for a Spirit has not slesh, and
bones, as you see me to have. Luc. 24.] To argue thus: It is felt, and seen,
Ergo, It is a body, is a good consequence* and this is the force of our
Saviors words. But it is no good sequel to argue thus negatiuely (as our
Adversaries here do.) It is not felt, not seen, Ergo, it is not a Body; for
it may be, that a true body may be present, and yet neither seen, nor felt,
either in that it is covered with a new Body, or else because God may hinder,
that it shall not transmit any s^nsi^les species to the sense of sight. Besides
it may be effected by divine power, that a Body may exist indiuisibly after the
manner of a spirit, and yet it is impossible, that a spirit should exist
diuisibly after the manner of a true, and natural Body. But of this point also
I have discussed in the former part hereof.
, and felt; That the Eucharist even after Consecration is called Is called
Bread.] The Eucharist is called indeed Bread in the two former texts of the
first to the Corinthians; yet it follows not, that therefore Christ's Body is
not in the Eucharist; for it may be called Bread, in that, in the Hebrew Phrase
under the name of Bread is understood all kind of meat.

Again, it may be so called, in that the Scripture is often accustomed to call
things, as outwardly they appear; so it calls the Brazen Serpent, a Serpent;
Angels appearing in Men's shape, Men* the brazen Oxen of the Temple, Oxen etc.
Therefore in that the Eucharist externally differs nothing from Bread, no
marvel if it be so termed.

Thirdly the Eucharist may be called Bread, because it is made of Bread, or
because it was Bread before. Thus we find, that Matthew. 11. the blind are said
to see, and Exodus 7. the wands changed into Dragons, were notwithstanding
after called wands; And Genes. 3. Eve is called the Bone of Adam.


Bread; That the Jews (who received not the Eucharist) did nevertheless eat
the same spiritual The same spiritual meat.] 1. Cor. 10. Patres nostri
eamdem ^scam spiritualem manducauerunt, and eumdem potum spiritualem biberunt*
All our Fathers did eat the same spiritual food, and did drink the same
spiritual drink.] This place proves not, that the Jews did eat the same
spiritual meat, which we Christians do eat (which point is to be proved, or
else these words make nothing against the Real Presence) but it only euinceth,
that all those Jews, which then did live (as well the wicked, as the virtuous)
did eat the same spiritual meat; And therefore S. Augustine to distinguish
the spiritual meat of us Christians from that of the Jews, thus says: Aliud
est Pascha, quod Iudaei de oue celebrant, aliud quod nos in corpore, and
sanguine Domini accipimus.
meat with Christians; That whatsoever enters in Enters in at the Mouth.]
Matthew. 15. Omne quod intrat in ^s, in ventrem vadit, and in secessum
emittitur.] Here our Savior speaks only of meats, which are taken for the
nourishment of the body, for such meats do hold their ordinary course;
wherefore when after his resurrection he did truly eat, and drink, yet seeing
he did it not to the end of nourishing his Body, therefore that meat, and
drink so taken by him, had not the ordinary passage with other meats
described by our Savior. In like sort, the Body of Christ, which is taken by
the faithful not to nourish their bodies, but their souls, is not corporally
disgested, nor has the common passage with other meats.
at the mouth, is to have it ordinary, and natural passage with common meats.
Finally, that our Savior himself affirms, that it is the spirit The Spirit
which quickens.] John 6. Spiritus est, qui viuificat, caro non prodest. It is
the spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing.] From which place our
Adversaries do gather, that seeing the flesh profits nothing, that therefore
Christ's flesh is not truly in the Eucharist: which Inference is false; for
here the litterall sense of these words is not, that the flesh of Christ does
not profit, but that a carnal understanding of spiritual things does not
profit, and so is this place explicated by Cyprian Sermon. de caena Domini,
Origin, lib. 3. in epistola ad Romanos, Chrysostom upon this place, and by
diverse others. Now this construction heerof is proved, because almost in every
place in the Scriptures, the flesh is distinguished against the spirit; as we
find in Genesis 6. Matthew. 16. Romans 8. Gal. 1. and in diverse other places; Therefore
our Saviors meaning in the former words is, that to think, that the flesh of
Christ is to be eaten after a carnal manner, as other meats are, to wit, to
be cut in pieces, to be boiled, to be converted into our proper substance by
force of the natural heat (in which sense the Capharnaites did before think our
Lord to have spoken) that thus carnally to imagine, profits nothing; and
therefore our Lord immediately subioyneth, Verba, quae ego locutus sum vobis,
spiritus and vita sunt, that is, they are words explicating divine, and
spiritual things, and such as bring eternal life, and therefore they are not
to be understood after a humane, and carnal sense.

But let us suppose, that Christ spoke of his flesh, yet it proves nothing
against his being in the Eucharist, both because by the same reason, we may
conclude, that the bread is not in the Sacrament; for if the body of Christ
profits us nothing, much less will a little piece of wheaten bread profit
us: Again, if our Lord had spoken of his flesh, he would not have understood
it absolutely, but only that the flesh without the spirit profits nothing;
since otherwise our Lord should have crossed himself, who says even in the
said Chapter, Qui manducat carnem meam, habet vitam aeternam.] Lastly, it is no
less then a great impiety to deny, that the flesh of Christ (being united with
his Divinity) profits us nothing, seeing that S. Paul. Coloss. 1. attributes
all our salvation to the flesh of Christ, since he says, that we are
reconciled to God by the said flesh.


which quickens, and that the flesh profits nothing. Let us (I say) display
at full, how in these Texts, they even divorce the letter from the true sense
of the Holy Ghost, and that they are so impertinently, or forcedly applied by
them, as that they appear hereby (to use the Prophets Idiome) In sua
fortitudine confusi.] Ezech. 16.
in sua fortitudine confusi, their weakness thus rising out of their
imaginary strength, yet as men desirous still to intertaine further
contestation, and dispute, they never cease to make their sallyes, and attempts
out of these weak fortresses; thus here enlarging overmuch the sense of the
letter, where it is to be rather straightened, as before straitning it, when it was
to be enlarged, and ever forgetting, that (notwithstanding all contrary
machinations of Sectaries whatsoever) it is recorded in the Scripture, that
Scriptura non potest solui.] John 2.
Scriptura non potest solui.

Let us (laying aside the written Word) allege the diverse, stupendous, and
astonishing Miracles (Gods peculiar Language, and Dialect, wherein he
immediately speaks to Man, persuading him without words, and instructing him
without Letters, or Characters) whereby his Divine Godnesse has vouchsafed to
seal up the truth of this high Mystery (for here we may break forth with the
Psalmist, Mirabilia testimonia tua.] Psalm. 120.
Mirabilia testimonia tua) and these not borrowed out of any fabulous Legend,
nor grounded upon uncertain hear-sayes, but on the grave testimonies of most
ancient, and learned Authors, and circumstanced with time, place, persons, and
other particulers of Moral Certainty.

Examples hereof are diverse: As that the B. Sacrament, in proof of our
Catholic doctrine, has cured Possessed persons] In vita S. Bernard. l. 2. c.
3. Where it is recorded, that a woman being a long time most dangerously
possessed with a Devil, S. Bernard bringing the Blessed Sacrament, and
houlding it over the head the of possessed person, dispossessed the Devil.
possessed persons. That it has (to the same end) appeared sometimes in the
form of a Humane shape.] Paschasius, lib. de Corpore Domini. c. 14.
mentions, that a certain godly Priest prayed denoutly unto God, that he
would vouchsafe to let him see that Body, which he verily believed did lie
under the forms of Bread, and Wine, who at the length obtained his desire, and
saw the Body of our Savior in the shape of a young child.
true humane shape. That the misbelieuers, or doubters therein have been
Punished by God.] S. Bernard in the life of S. Malachias reports, that a
Clergyman denying the Body of Christ to be really in the Sacrament, was
oftentimes admonished by Malachias, but he not acknowledging his Heresy,
Malachias prayed to God in these words: Dominus faciat te veritatem confiteri,
vel ex necessitate.] to which words the Heretic said Amen. Whereupon presently
he was taken with a mortal disease, acknowledged his Heresy, was reconciled
to the Church, and instantly after dyed.

In like sort Tilmannus Bredenbach^us, l. 6. Sacrarum collationu^. c. 60.
reports, that in a City of Geldria Anno 1561. die 8. Aprilis, the Parish
Priest of the Town did carry (after the custom of Catholics) the Blessed
Sacrament to a sick woman, and passing through a a street, where two young
youths were wagering, whether of them could soonest swallow down their Easter
Egg, the one of them being an Heretic, said, that he could sooner swallow
down his egg, then the Woman could swallow her God; whereupon he putting the
Egg into his mouth, the Egg did stick in the midst of his throat, and he
perceauing the same, did take a white candle (which was near to him) and with
it endeavored to thrust the Egg down, but he fainting, instantly dyed, his
face growing most black, and ugly to behold; And after he being opened, the
Egg was found not in the throat, but in the other part called aspera Arteria,
or Windpipe.


punished by God, even with death.

Lastly (to omit some of other kinds) that the truth hereof has been
confirmed by the testimonies (such as they could give) even of Brute Beasts.]
Antoninus in summa historiali, part. 3. titul. 24. c. 3. relates, that S.
Antony disputing with a certain Heretic (who denied the Real Presence) in
the Country of To^osa, the Heretic demanded, that the truth thereof might be
confirmed by S. Antony, by some Miracle, and said, that he without some such
proof would not believe the Real Presence. It was concluded between the^,
that the Heretic having an Ox, or some such beast, he should forbear to give
him any meat at all for the space of three days, and then after S. Antony
should bring the Blessed Sacrament where the Beast was, and the Heretic should
set before him some corn, if then the Beast should not touch the corn, but
prostrate himself (in such sort as he could) before the Blessed Sacrament,
that then the Heretic would be content to believe the Catholic doctrine
therein; All which being thus far prepared in the presence of infinite people,
S. Antony houlding the Eucharist in his hands, spoke to the Beast certain
words, whereupon the Beast having Corn before him, did eat no part thereof,
but with bowing down his head, and body, did prostrate himself before the
Blessed Sacrament to the great wonder, and confirmation of the faithful.

Another Example here happened in our Country in the Church of S. Paul in
London, as Waldensis reports (who was there present) tom. 2. c. 63. A
certain Mechanical fellow, not believing the Real Presence, was conuented in
the Church before the Archbishop; and obstinately answered the Bishop, that he
would rather worship a spider, then the Eucharist; at the speaking whereof,
instantly there came down a huge Spyder by his thread, or Web from the top of
the Church, hastening to enter into the Heretics mouth, which was prevented,
but by much difficulty of the standers by.


brute Beasts (for it is said, Glorificabit me bestia Agri.] Esaias 43.
Glorificabit me Bestia agri:) Thus Creatures, which want Reason, have here
exceeded in use thereof Men, who only enjoy Reason: Yet do they hold all such
narrations but as forged wonders, and condemn with a censorious temeritie the
belieuers of such, of a mere doting Doting credulity.] So do most of the
Sacramentaries answer, as thinking all such reports to be mere fictions.
credulity; or at the most repute them, as prestigious Sleights of the Devil.]
So answers Peter Martyr to these Miracles lib. contra Gardinerum, confirming
this his answer from the Examples of Marcus, and Magus, who both being
Archheretickes wrought appearing Miracles by the power of the Devil. But I
would demand of Martyr, what comparison is there between those Heretics, and
these other holy Men? Again, I say, that this his Answer cannot be applied to
those Miracles here alleged, which consist in the death of Men, for their
deaths were true deaths, and not counterfaite, or forged.
sleights of the Devil. But here by the way, we are to advertise them, that
if indeed, there were ever any such Miracles exhibited for the confirmation of
the Catholic faith herein, then is their Sacramentarian Heresy to be utterly
abolished; If none such were ever performed, then what greater Miracle, then
that an Article of Faith mainly impugning all sense, and yet not warranted by
any Miracle, should for so many ages generally be believed? Or what stronger
Reason in defense thereof, then for it to be unanimously embraced, and
received, being above Reason?

Let us show, That as God was before the Devil, so Truth (which receaueth her
emanation, and flowing from God, the first Truth) is more ancient then
falsehood, the attendant of those Apostating, and revolted spirits.

Thus is Antiquity the badge of Truth, and Novelty of Error. Now, that the
Catholic Faith of the Eucharist is more ancient, then the Sacramentarian
Heresy, we prove even from the Nature of the Conception, Birth, and Growth of
every Innovation of Faith. Of our Faith there can be no instance pretended,
when first it When first it began.] I know well that most of the vulgar
Sacramentaries diuulge in their writings, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation first came in, in the Lateran Council holden under
Innocentius the 3. yea Doctor Whitaker himself is not ashamed to teach so
much lib. 7. contra Duraeum. page 480. The falsehood of which common error is by
several means discovered.

First, because that Council was gathered chiefly to condemn the contrary
doctrine of Berengarius, then first broaching this Heresy; so as this Council
did then suppress, and disallow all innovation of doctrine; which very point
is acknowledged by Fox himself, Acts, and Monurn. page 1121. who thus there
writes: About the year of our Lord 1060. the denying of Transubstantiation
began to be accounted Heresy, and in that number was first Berengarius, who
lived about Ann. Dom. 1060.

Secondly, It is most improbable, that a Council gathered out of all the most
distant Nations of Christendom, should upon a present so conspiringly embrace
an innovation of doctrine so contrary to Sense, as the Catholic doctrine
herein is.

Thirdly, and Lastly, The Protestants themselves do acquit this Council from
bringing in the doctrine of Transubstantiation, since they do charge diverse
Fathers therewith, living long before this Council of Lateran. As for Example
(to omit those confessions of the Protestants, which hereafter upon another
occasion shall be alleged) we find, that Doctor Humfrey in Iesuitism. part. 2.
rat. 5. thus writes: In Ecclesiam quid inuexerumt Gregorius, and Augustinus?
Intulerunt onus cerimoniarum etc. Transubstantiationem etc.] In like sort we
find, that Vrsinus Commonefact. cuiusdam Theologi de Sacra Domini Caena, page
211. reprehendeth Theophylact, and Damascene for the doctrine of
Transubstantiation in these words: Theophylactus, and Damascenus plane
inclinant ad Transubstantiationem.] Yea Damascene was so full in this doctrine,
that he is charged therewith by diverse other Protestants, to wit, Doctor Fulke
against Heskins page 217. and 204. Oecolampadius l. epist. Oecolampad. and
Zuing. l. 3. page 66^. so true is that confession of Antony de Adamo (a famous
Protestant) who thus writes hereof in his Anatomy of the Mass, page 236. I
have not hitherto been able to know, when this opinion of the Real, and
bodily being of Christ in the Eucharist did first begin.] And thus far of
this point; where only it can be objected, that as the former Council invented
only the word Transubstantiation, but not the doctrine; so the Council of Nice
invented the word (...), though the doctrine thereof were before.


began, and entered into the Church; whereas of the other, we are able to
note the Author who first did disseminate it, to wit, Berengarius Berengarius
Archdeacon.] This appears out of Paschasiui lib. de verbis Instit. Sacramenti.
Archdeacon of Angiers. The Time when: Anno 1051. The place where: France. The
paucity (at the first beginning) of his followers; some few scholars first
allured to him by gifts. The astonishment of the Church hereat, as wondering at
so strange a Paradoxe (like men gazing at a new appearing Comet:) And lastly
the Contradiction, and Opposition.] For he was written against by Lanfrancus,
Guitmunaus, and Algerus.
Contradictio^, Opposition, and Censure of the Church given against his
doctrine in ten Tenseuerall Counsels.] To wit, in Concilio Romano,
Vercellensi, Turonenfi, Romano under Nicolas the 2. Romano under Gregory the
seventh, Romano under Innocentius the 3. Viennensi, Romano under John the
thirtenth, Constantiensi, Tridentino.
several Counsels, his Heresy being condemned in them all, and himself
personally Anathematized in some of them: So deservedly was he deprived of the
Communion of the Holy Church, since he labored to deprive the Church of her
Holy Communion.

Add hereto, for the greater accession of reasons herein, that he was so
irresolute in this his Opinion, as that he did abjure it three several times;
so forsaking his faith twice (for so often he revolted after his Oath taken)
with breach of Faith, though finally he dyed therein Catholic. And thus much
of the first origin of the Sacramentarian Heresy, from whence it appears,
that it is of a far later Date, then our Catholic Faith; the discovery of all
which particulers does sufficiently argue the falsehood thereof; since it is
true, that to reduce an Heresy to the beginning thereof, is a confutation of
the said Heresy: Let us (I say) allege all this, yet will our Adversaries
maintain the former Innouator, though not as an Inuentor of any New Heresy,
but as a Restorer (forsooth) of a former more ancient Faith: whereas indeed it
is most certain, that before the revolt of Berengarius, this rare Vtopian
Nouelist, iumping in doctrine with Berengarius, and our Sacramentaries, was
Never heard of.] For though Ignatius in epist. ad Smyrnenses makes mention of
some, who denied the Real Presence in the Eucharist; yet those Heretics were
not properly, and formally Heretics in this point, but chiefly in the
Article of the Incarnation; for seeing they denied, that our Savior took upon
him true flesh, they consequently, and by way of inference only, denied that
his flesh was in the Eucharist.
never heard of in any place or time.

And as touching so many Counsels condemning Berengarius, they reject, and
traduce them all most unworthily, affirming them either to be Schismatic, or
at the most but Men, and therein subject to Error. Fie of this Jewish obstinacy
of our Sectarie, who spurns at the alleged Testimonies of whole Counsels
(the highest Tribunalls in Gods Church) because they are but Men, and yet
himself expects (for Heresy cannot subsist without Pride) that others
should swear fealty to his Judgment, being but the seely weening of one Man.

Lastly, let us demand of the^ (that seeing they cannot be induced to admit
our Interpretation of Scripture, nor any other before alleged Authorities or
Reasons; and seeing it is against the custom of al Schools, and against
Reason it self, that the Parties should become their own Judges, and that they
relying only upon Scripture, themselves only should expound Scripture) whether
they will be pleased to acknowledge for Vmpiers in this point the most ancient
and learned Fathers; Men in their life time, though much disterminated by Sea,
and Land, yet all breathing one, and the same Faith; And though Neutralls to
our present factions, yet parties (no doubt) to the causes of the said
factions: Finally such, as we (who now live in these Autumnall, and decaying
days of the Church) may in their writings be able to glass the face, and
beauty of Christ's intemerate Spouse, I mean, the purity, and integrity of the
faith of Christians, during the Period of the Primitive Church. But here even
at the sound, and name of the Primitive Church, our Adversaries grow pale, and
yet they blush; they are afraid to accept of these conditions, as men guilty
to themselves of their future overthrow; and yet they are ashamed, that the
world should at length discern, that they refuse so reasonable an offer, and
that they must needs break with that Illustrious and Famous Church, the rays
and beams whereof being sent so far off, do reflect a greater heat of
admiration and reverence, then such, as are nearer at hand can perform.

In these straights, present shame preponderating, and waighing down with them
all after-dangers, they accept of this our proffer, and so (like Bank-rupts
vaunting most of their riches, before their near approaching breach) they
pretend great Great confidence etc.] Answerably heerto did M. Jewel make his
acclamation at Paul's Cross. O Gregory, O Austen, O Hierome etc. If we be
deceived, you have deceived us: this you taught us. And then further says in
the said Sermon. As I said before, so I say again, I am content to yield and
subscribe, if any of our learned Adversaries, or if all the learned Men that be
alive, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic
Doctor, or Father, or out of any old General Council, or for the space of
six hundred years after Christ. Which general Challenge M. Jewel did make
concerning 27. several Articles of faith. And which Challenge was afterward
iterated by D. Whitaker in respons. ad rations Campiani rat. 5. in these
words: Audi Campiane, quamea die Iuellus vocem verissimam ac constantissimam
emifit, quando ad sexcentorum annorum antiquitatem prouocauit, vobisque
obtulit, vt si vel vnicam ex aliquo Patre, aut Concilio, claram and dilucidam
sententiam afferetis, non recusaret, quin vobis palmam concederet* ea est
nostrum omnium Professio; idem omnes pollicimur, fidem non fallemus. In like
sort M. Willet in his Antilog. page 263. writes: I take God to witness, before
whom I must render account etc. that the same faith and Religion, which I
defend, is taught and confirmed in the more substantial Points by those
Histories, Counsels, Fathers, that lived within five or six hundred years
after Christ. Finally, M. Sutcliffe in his Examination of Doctor Kellisons
Survey says: The Fathers in all points are for us, and not for the Pope.
Confidence in the Fathers (poor men, well knowing, that they are wounded
almost with every splinter, and little passage of their writings:) And which is
ridiculous, some of them give out (such is the Serpentine malice of Heresy)
that we either in this Controversy, or any other, are unwilling to submit our
selves to the sentence and final determination of the Fathers, and dare not
endure the touch of such a proof. From which unworthy recrimination we all so
far disclaim, as that even in this question here controuerted we will be
content, indisputably to resign our Judgments to the Judgments of the
Fathers; so willingly we remember, that it is said Interroga de diebus.]
Deuteron. 4.
Interroga de diebus antiquis.

Therefore in the subsequent Chapters, I will set down such material, and
weighty Testimonies of them, as we produce in defense of our Faith herein; and
will satisfy such their obscure sayings; wherein our Adversaries do chiefly
insist for the impugning of the same: and lastly I will prove by the
confessions even of their own Brethren that the writings of the Fathers, do
altogether fortify, and confirm the Catholic, Faith in this high Mystery:
So shall the impartial Reader perceive, that falsehood is ever supported with
falsehood, and Heresy begun with lies, does finally end with lies, like unto
warrie Meteors, which still resolve into that, of which they were first
engendered.

THAT THE ANCIENT FATHERS taught the Real Presence. AND First of such their
Testimonies, as concern their Appellation, and Naming of the Eucharist. CHAP.
II.
SVCH was the confidence of Confidence of Samnel.] 1. Reg. c. 10.
Samuel in God, that after he had anointed Saul King of Israel, he was
content, that Saul for the time should relinquish all former right obtained by
law full Inauguration, and should adventure his regayning thereof by trial of
Lots, not doubting, but that God would infallibly te^per, and dispose the Lots
for Saules advantage.

And such is the assurance, which we now show herein: For whereas we have
already drawn our chiefest forces from the holy Scriptures, and other most
conuincing proofs, for the advancing, and warranting of our Catholic faith in
this weighty Controversy; Nevertheless (as provoked thereunto through the
circular tergiuersation of our Adversaries) we are pleased (for the present) as
supposing our selves to be disimpatronized of our best Forts, to suffer the
matter to be definitiuely decided by the voices, and suffrages of the ancient
Fathers, as by so many Lotts; being acertained, that God has altogether
directed their pens (through a prenotion, and foreknowledge of these
lamentable times) for the justifying, and maintaining of this our doctrine; for
Dominus Deus.] 2. Machab. 7.
Dominus Deus aspiciet veritatem.

This proof made by the Fathers, we cannot but willingly embrace, in that we
do acknowledge them to have been most shining Lamps in the Church of God; and
therefore we will here use the light of their Testimonies, as a means to find
out the light of the Truth, imitating therein the three Magi, of whom the Church
says: Lumen requirunt lumine, since a Star did guide them to their Sun.

And here (for the greater satisfaction of our Aduesaries) I will restrain my
self to those Fathers, which lived within the first five hundred years, both
because they do but scorn with an unaccustomed insolency (the very eye, and
countenance of Heresy) all Doctors of later times; as also in that they set
down the Circle of these Ages, as the Horizon, which terminates, and ends our
sight between the first supposed light of their Gospel, and the Babylonian,
and Cymerian darkness (to speak in their language) of Romish superstition.

But hear it will not be amiss to instruct the Reader aforehand, in what Age
or Century uery Father (whose Authority shall hereafter be alleged) did live,
that thereby he may know how near or remote in time every one of them was to
our Savior, and his Apostles.

In the fifth age or hundred years from Christ, did live Gaudentius,
Chrysostom, Hierome, Augustine, Cyril of Alexandria, Porclus
Constantinopolitanus, Theodoret, Gelasus, Leo, Hilarious Pope, Eusebius
Emyssenus.

In the fourth Century, the first Council of Nyce was celebrated; in the same
age lived Athanasius, Hilarious, Cyryl of Jerusalem, Ambrose, Basil, Optatus,
Gregorius Nyssenus, and Nazianzenus, Ephrem, Epiphanius.

In the third Age, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian.

In the second, Justinius Martyr, Pius Pope, Irenaeus.

In the first, even in the time and days of the Apostles, the disciples of S.
Andrew, Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita: where we are to remember, that a Father
(as for example Justinius Martyr) may be said to live in the second age, and yet
to have been but a hundred and some very few years distant from Christ; And
the like proportionably may be said of diverse Fathers of the other succeeding
Ages.

With these then (and no others) at this time will I hold intelligence, whose
Judgments, and sentences (as so many pointed weapons) shall every way endanger
our Sacramentary; since the admitting of their Authorities proclaymes his
certain Overthrow; the rejecting, his most dishonorable retyring, and giving
back.

Now, in the handling of this point for the more perspicuitie, and clearness,
I will reduce such testimonies of the Fathers, as I intend to allege, to
certain principal Heads.

The first whereof shall be taken from the different appellations of this great
Mystery, given by the Protestants, and by the Fathers: where we are to
remember, that since Man's immanent Thought (which is an inward progression of
the Mind) is best become Transient, or externally manifested by the Mediation
of words; Therefore Nature (Gods obsequious Agent) has imparted to him the use
of Speech, which Speech ought among men to be a true and sincere Interpreter of
the Souls mental Language, for we find those to have been greatly
reprehended, Qui Qui linguis.] Romans 3.
linguis suis dolos^ agebant. Hence is it, that as long as Man conformes
himself to Gods intended use herein, his conceit, judgment, and opinion had
of any thing, is best discovered by his words delivered upon the same.

Now then let us see, how the Fathers in words entitle this Sacrament. First we
find, that they call it, the Body, and Blood of Christ; again they further
proceed, and call it, The precious Body of Christ, Man's Price, The pledge of
Man's health, The most dreadful Mysteries, and the like. But what? Is this the
Dialect of our Adversaries? Or, are they accustomed to speak in this manner of
language? No. For when they speak of the Eucharist, their natural and mother
tongue, is to term it only the Symboles, and signs of the Body and Blood of
Christ, Quantum distat.] Psalm. 103.
Quantum ^^stat ortus ab occasu? If then our Adversaries can in no case brook
to speak hereof, as the Fathers did, how can it probably be presumed, that
they believed therein, as the Fathers did? Since words are the true Counterpane
of the Mind, written with the pen of it own Tongue.

But now to come to these Testimonies, wherein the Eucharist is thus termed, and
to begin with the latter part of the fifth Age, that so ascending up by
degrees to higher times, we may consequently ascend in force, and weight of
Argument, drawn from such their Authorities. And here because many testimonies
will occur far more pregnant, and clear for us Catholics, then the Protestant
Reader (not conversant in the Fathers works) will perhaps expect, and thereupon
might conjecture some slight, and imposture to be used in the Englishing of
them, I have therefore thought good to set down in every passage, and head of
their authorities, six testimonies each of them at large in Latin of several
Fathers (for to observe this Method all were needless, as tending only to fill
up paper.) The places that in this sort I make choice of, are such, as seem
more conuincing, and evident then the rest, so that if the Reader do see, that
the more forcible authorities are free from all suspected corruption in the
translating of them, he may the more probably assure himself, that the rest
are in no sort wrested from their true, and natural meaning; for who in this
sort corrupts, is presumed to use his art in those passages, as make most for
his advantage. Thus shall the Reader discern the Catholics integrity, candor,
and confidence in this weighty Controversy.

First then occurreth S. Leo, who thus writes Sermon. 6. de Ieiunio septimi
mensis. Sie sacrae mensae communicare debetis, vt nihil prorsus de veritate
Corporis Christi, and Sanguinis ambigatis. Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide
creditur, and frustra ab illis, Amen, respondetur, a quibus contra id quod
accipitur, disputatur.] So you ought to communicate of the holy Table, as that
you doubt not at all of the Body and Blood of Christ. For this is taken by the
mouth, which is believed by faith, and in vain they do answer, Amen, who
dispute against that which is taken.]

S. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, who was President of the General Council of
Ephesus, against Nestorius the Heretic, epist. ad Nestorium says: Sic etiam
ad mysticas benedictiones etc. Thus do we come to the mystical blessings, and
are sanctified, being made partakers of the holy Body, and precious Blood of
Christ, who is the Redeemer of us all; we take it not, as common flesh (God
forbid) nor as the flesh of a man sanctified, but the proper flesh of the Word
himself.] Which testimony was approved by the General Ephesine Counsel.

S. Augustine expounding those words of the Psalm 21. Manducauerunt, and
adorauerant omnes diuites plebis, in epist. 1^0. c. 17. ad Honoratum, thus
writes: Et ipsi adducti sunt etc. And they are brought to the Table of Christ,
and they take of his body, and blood; they worship only, but they are not fed
therewith, because they do not imitate: for they eating him who is poor, do
not brook, that themselves should be poor.] Here for further explication we
may add, that proud and wicked men do take from the Table of our Lord the
body, and blood of Christ, and that they do adore it; from the which it
follows, that (according to S. Augustines Judgment) by the body of our Lord,
is not understood the sign of the body, to wit, Bread, because Bread it not
adored, neither is understood the body of Christ, as it is in heaven, and not
upon the Altar, because S. Augustine says, it is taken from the Table of our
Lord, and by they wicked.

The same S. Augustine also in lib. 2. contra Aduersarium Legis, and
Prophetarum, c. 9. thus writes: Mediatore^ Dei and hominu^, hominem Christum
Iesum carnem suam nobis manducandam, bibendumque sanguinem dantem fideli cord,
atque ore suscipimus: quamuis horribilius videatur humanam carnem manducare,
quam perimere, and humanum Sanguinem potar^, quam fundere. We take with a
faithful heart, and mouth the Mediator of God, and Man, to wit Jesus Christ
being Man, who gives his flesh to us to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken;
though it may seem a more horrible matter to eat Man's flesh, then to destroy
Man's flesh, and to drink blood, then to shed blood.] Where he says that
Christ's flesh is not taken only with the heart, but with the mouth: Again it
is not more horrible to eat Man's flesh, and drink Man's blood only in figure,
and representation, then to kill a Man, or shed his blood.

He also lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. speaking of his Mother says: Adcuius pretij
nostri etc. To the Sacrament of our price (meaning the Eucharist) thy handmayd
did bind her soul with the band of faith.]

Again Tomo nono tract. 11. in Joan. explicating that, Jesus non se credebat
ijs, says, this saying to agree with such as are Catechumeni, to whom our Lord
gave not his Body. Thus he says: Si dixerimus Catechumeno etc. If we say to
one that is but Catechumenus, Do thou believe in Christ? He answers, I do
believe, and he signeth himself with the sign of the Cross of Christ,
neither is he ashamed of the Cross of his Lord; for behold he belieueth in
his name. But let us demand of him, Do thou eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink the blood of the son of Man? He knows not what we say, for
Christ herein has not commended himself to him.] But if the body of Christ be
taken in the Eucharist, only in sign, and by faith, then Saint Augustine says
false, that Christ has not committed himself to the Catechumeni, for they
have Christ in sign, and they eat his body by faith, because they believe in
Christ, and sign themselves with the sign of the Cross. Besides, there were
no reason, why the Eucharist should not be given to the Catechumeni, seeing
that more clear signs are given to them, to wit, the written, and preached
word of God.

In the tenth Tome sermon. 2. de verbis Apostoli, he calls the Eucharist,
Precium nostrum, in these words: Audiuimus ver^cem Magistrum etc. We have heard
the true Master, the divine Redemptour, the Savior of Man, commending to us
his Blood, which is our Price; for he did speak of his Body and Blood, which
Body he said to be Meat, and Blood to be Drink. Such as are Faithful
acknowledge the Sacrament of the faithful.] Here he speaks not of the
figure of his Blood, since the figure thereof is not our Price. Neither can they
say, that this meat, and drink is taken only by faith, for he there
adioyneth, that it is the Sacrament of the faithful, which the faithful only
do know, intimating thereby, that only the faithful do understand this
Mystery, how the Body and Blood of Christ can be meat, and drink.

Lastly, in sermon ad Neophytos, as Paschasius witnesses epist. ad
Feudegardum he says: Hoc accipite in pane, quod etc. Take that in the Bread,
which did hang upon the Cross; take that in the Cup, which flowed from the
side of Christ.] But his Body did hang upon the Cross, and Blood issued from
his side.

S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesi 4. Mystagogica, thus plainly writes: Haec
Beati Pauli doctrina satis potest efficere vos eertissimos de diuinis
Mysterijs. This doctrine of S. Paul is of force to make you assured of the
divine Mysteries.] And after he says: Cum Christus ipse sic affirmat, atque
dicat de Pane, Hoc est Corpus meum, quis deinc^ps aude^t dubitare? Ac eod^m
quoque affirmante, ac dicente, Hic est Sanguis meus, quis, inquam, dubitet, ac
dicat non esse illius Sanguinem? Seeing that Christ himself affirms, and
speaks of Bread, This is my Body, who after this dare doubt thereof? And he in
like sort confirming, and saying, This is my Blood, who is he (I say) that
doubts, and will say, it is not his Blood?] So clear is S. Cyril herein; his
book (from whence these places are drawn) being most certain, and undoubted
of, and entreating of such things, and in such Method (to wit in a Catechism)
which require a most literal, and plain explication.

S. Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinitate, de veritate Carnis etc. There is no place
left to doubt of the truth of (Christ's) flesh, and Blood; for now even by the
profession (or speech) of our Lord himself, and according to our belief, it
is truly Flesh, and truly Blood.]

S. Cyprian, Sermon. 5. de La^sis. Vis infertur etc. Violence is offered to
Christ's Body, and Blood, and they now offend more against our Lord, with their
hands and mouths, then when they denied our Lord.* Hence Cyprian reprehendeth
such as denying Christ before, would receive the Eucharist without any former
due penance. But it cannot be a greater sin to handle with unworthy hands a
Sign or Figure of Christ then to deny Christ, therefore he there speaks not
of the sign, but of the true Body, and Blood of Christ. He also in Sermon. de
Caena Domini (which book though perhaps it was not written by Cyprian, yet our
Adversaries confess, that it is written by a most ancient, and learned Father)
thus says: Noua est huius Sacramenti etc. There is a new doctrine of this
Sacrament, and the Evangelical Schools have brought forth this first kind of
learning, and this discipline first appeared to the world by Christ, the
teacher thereof. That Christians should drink blood, the eating whereof is most
strictly forbidden by the authority of the Old Law. Thus the Law restrayneth
altogether the eating of blood, but the Gospel commands to drink it.]
But the old Law did not forbid the taking of blood in figure; for the Jews did
drink in figure the blood of Christ, in drinking the water which flowed from
the Rock.

Origin homil. 5. in diuersa loca Euangel. where he entreats of the
Centurions child, thus says: Quando sanctum cibum, illudque incorruptum
accipis epulum, quando vitae pane, and poculo frueris, manducas, and bibis
corpus, and sanguinem Domini, tunc Dominus sub tectum tuum ingreditur. Et
tuergo humilians temetipsum, imitare hunc Centurionem, and dicito: Domine non
sum dignus, vt intres sub tectum meum. Voi enim indigne ingreditur, ibi ad
iudictum ingreditur accipienti. When thou take the holy meat, and this
incorruptible banquet, when thou enioyest the Cup, and Bread of Life, thou
eatest, and drinkest the Body, and Blood of Christ; Then does our Lord enter
into thy house. Therefore thou humbling thy self, imitate this Centurion, and
say: Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my house. For where he
enters unworthily, there he enters unto the judgment of the receauer.] Here
cannot be understood the Bread signifying Christ's Body, because the Bread is
not Epulum incorruptum, an incorruptible Meat, or Banquet; neither to the
Bread can it be said: O Lord I am not worthy etc. Neither can here be
understood the body of Christ, as it is eaten by Faith; because then it could
not be said: Where he enters unworthily, there he enters unto Judgment of
the receauer. For our Adversaries do teach, that Christ is taken by faith of
the godly only, and not of the wicked, and that the godly take it to salvation:
and that which the wicked do take unworthily, is only the external signs.

Tertullian lib. de resurrect. Carn. Caro abluitur, vt anima emaculetur: Caro
inungitur, vt anima consecretur: Caro corpore, and sanguine Christi vescitur,
vt anima de Deo saginetur. The flesh is washed, that the soul may be made
clean, the flesh is anointed, that the soul may be consecrated; the flesh
feeds of the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be nourished of
God.] But the flesh is washed really, and truly with water, as also it is
anointed really, and truly with oil; therefore it ought really, and truly to
feed upon the Body, and Blood of Christ.

Ignatius, epist. ad Smyrnenses (as Theodoret cites, Dialog. 3.) thus says:
Eucharistias, and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse Carnem Saluatoris, quae, pro peccatis nostris passa est, quam Pater sua
benignitate suscitauit. They do not admit (to wit, certain Heretics denying
that Christ had true Flesh) the Eucharists, and Oblations, because they
acknowledge not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior, which flesh
suffered for our sins, the which the Father through his benignity raised up
again.] Here Ignatius says not, that the Flesh of Christ is given to us in
some one manner, or other (as our Adversaries would expound him) but he says,
that the Eucharist is the flesh of Christ. Here also we are to note, that
these Heretics (against whom he here speaks) did refuse the Eucharist,
least they should be enforced to confess, that Christ had true flesh, if they
did admit the Eucharist, which was the Flesh of Christ. But if the Eucharist
did only signify the flesh of Christ, they had no reason to deny the Echarist,
for they did not deny the Images, and Figures of Christ, but only his true
Flesh; for such bodies as are only apparent, and not true bodies, may be
painted, or figured out in Images, as appears by the Images, and Pictures of
Angels.

OF THE FATHERS AVTHORITIES. touching the Change made in the Eucharist. CHAP.
III.
A SECOND Branch of the Fathers Testimonies, may extend it self to the Change,
which is made in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; which change, that it is
real, is necessarily included in their writings. For they teach, that after
the Mutation is once made, the Bread remains not: and in further
acknowledgment heerof they purposely do parallel it with other real Mutations.
As first with that of the Water turned by our Savior into Wine; But if an
imminent Act of his will was of Power to turn water into wine, cannot a
Transient operation of the said will (breaking out into words of a positive
Assertion) change wine into Blood? Secondly, they compare the change here with
that of the Wands of Moses turned into Serpents. But what proportion can there
be, between these stupendous Mutations, and a little representative Bread,
and Wine, still remaining Bread, and Wine? Therefore we may justly say, that as
those true Serpents True serpents.] Exodus 7.
of Moses did eat up those counterfaite Serpents made in emulation thereof by
the false Prophets, even so ought the real Transelementation taught by the
Fathers, exyle, and banish this but Sacramental, and Sophisticated chang,
brought in by the Sacramentaries.

They further teach, for the more facilitating of this great work, that he,
who could first give the Essence and Form to every thing, could more easily
superinduce a second form. And therefore with good reason one of them says,
Non Non minus est.] Ambros. de mysterijs initiand. c. 9.
minus est nouas rebus dare quam mutare Naturas. Since the first includes an
Absolute, and Primative Creation, the very Maister-peece of Gods Omnipotency,
and such as Man cannot apprehend, but by apprehending, that Nothing is
Something. The second implies a former Existence of something, and
consequently only a new kind of inuesting of it. Which later point (much more
the First) the Fathers ascribe only to his power, who causing all changes, is
yet himself unchangeable, and producing all mutations, is immutable: Ego Ego
sum Dominus.] Malach. 3.
sum Dominus, and non mutor.

Now then by reason of the true, and real chang here made, the Fathers do
further write, that our Sense (which in other things has a great Sovereignty
over our Judgment) is here deceived; for though the Eye would persuade us,
that there is Bread, and Wine in the Eucharist, yet they say plainly, that
there is neither bread, nor wine; thus teaching, that the understanding here
corrects the Eye in seeing, though only by the Eye it learnes, that there is
any seeing; and affirming, that the understanding (for Faith is an Act thereof)
which sees not at all, here only truly sees. Thus if we believe those
ancient Doctors, a Faith wrought out of sense only, is no better, then Israel
(whereof the The Apostle.] 1. Cor. 10.
Apostle speaks) according to the Flesh.

But now to descend particulerly to their authorities sorting to the passages
of this Chapter. First then Eusebius Emissenu sermon. de Corpore Dom. says:
Inuisibilis Sacerdos etc. The invisible Priest does change through a secret
power of his word the visible Creatures into the substance of his body and
blood.] And again he says more plainly: Quando bencdicendae etc. When the
Creatures (which are to be blessed) are placed upon the Altars, before they be
consecrated with the invocation of the highest Power, they are the substance of
Bread, and wine; but after the words of Christ, they are the body, and blood of
Christ. What marvel, if those things, which he could create by his word, he
can chang being already created?

Proclus Bishop of Constantinople lib. de Trad. diuinae Liturgiae. Per quas
preces Spiritus sancti aduentum expectabant, vt eius diuina praesentia
propositum in Sacrificio panem, and vinum aqua permixtum, ipsum illud corpus,
and sanguinem Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi efficeret. By the force of these
prayers (meaning the words of the Institution) we expect the coming of the
Holy Ghost, that so, his divine presence might make the bread, and wine mingled
with water, the very Body, and Blood of Jesus Christ our Savior.

Augustine sermon. quem citat Beda in c. 10. prioris ad Cor. Non omnis panis etc.
Not every bread, but that receiving the benedictio^ of Christ, fit Corpus
Christi, is made the Body of Christ, where the word (fit) includes here a
true change at least against the Lutherans.

Chrysostom homil. 83. in Matthew. Non sunt humanae etc. The words here
performed, are not in the power of Man; we only hold the place of Ministers,
but it is he that sanctifies, and changes the things.] And then after: Qui
dixit etc. He who said, This is my Body, confirmed the fact with his word.] And
homil. de Eucharist. in Encaenijs. Number vides panem? number vinum? number sicut
reliqui cibi in secessum vadunt? Absit, ne sic cogites. Quemadmodum enim sicera
adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit; sic and
hic puta, mysteria consumi corporis substantia. Do thou see Bread? Do
thou see Wine? Do these things pass into the Common passage, as other meats
do? Let it be far from thee to think so. For even as wax (laid near to the
fire) does assimilate it self to it, nothing of the substance thereof
remaining, or superfluously redou^ding; So may thou suppose the Mysteries
here to be consumed by the substance of the body.

Gaudentius, tract. 2. de Exodus Ipse Naturarum Creator, and Dominus, qui
producit de terra panem, de pane rursus (quia and potest, and promisit) efficit
proprium Corpus: and qui de aqua vinum fecit, and de vino Sanguinem suum. He
who is the Creator, and Lord of all Natures, who brings forth Bread out of
the earth, and again who of the bread makes his proper Body (for he is able,
and he promised to do it) and who made wine of water, and of wine his own
Blood.] And after again: O altitudo diuitiarum etc. O the depth of the riches
of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! Do not think that terrestrial, which
is made heavenly by him which passes into it, and made it his own Body and
Blood.] And finally, Non infringamus os illud etc. Let us not break that most
solid and firm bone, This is my Body, This is my Blood. Now what remains in
the sense of any one, which he cannot conceive by this exposition, let it be
consumed, and burnt away with the ardour, and heat of faith.

Epiphanius in Ancora to circa medium. Videmus quod accepit Saluator etc. We do
see, what our Savior took into his hands (as the Evangelist notes) that he
did rise from Supper, that he did take these things, and when he had given
thanks, he said, This is mine, and This, and This. And we do see, that it is
not equal, nor like to the proportion, or Image in flesh, to the invisible
Deity, to the lineaments of Members, for this is of a round form, and
insensible according to Power; And he would through grace say: Hoc meum est,
Hoc, and Hoc; And yet every one belieueth his speech, for who belieueth not to
be his very true Body, does fall from grace, and salvation.] Now when he here
says, that it is to be believed, though it be repugnant to sense, this must
needs be understood of the Body it self, and not of the signification thereof,
since the sense rather helps, then hinders, why we should believe the
Sacrament. And when he says, that we ought to believe, that it is ipsum verum
Corpus, the true Body, hereby are excluded all Tropes, and Figures.

S. Gregory Nyssen, Orat. Catechetica c. 37. Quamobrem recte etiam nunc Dei
verbo etc. Wherefore we now truly believe even by the word of God, that the
sanctified Bread is changed into the Body of the word of God etc. That these
things, which are seen (to wit bread, and wine) are changed into that Body of
oar Lord, is to be attributed to the virtue of Benediction.

S. Ambrose l. 4. de Sacramentis. c. 4. Tu forte dicis, Panis meus etc. Perhaps
thou say, My bread is usual bread; but this bread, is bread before the
words of Consecration, but after Consecration is finished, of bread it is made
the flesh of Christ.] Though our Adversaries do answer this place, by
rejecting this book, as not written by S. Ambrose, yet is it cited under his
name by Lanfrancus, Guitmundus, and others, who lived above five hundred years
since. In like sort in his book de mysterijs init. c. 9. he thus writes:
Forte dicas; Aliud video, quomodo tu mihi asseris, quod Christi Corpus
accipiam? Et hoc nobis adhuc superest vt probemus, quantis igitur vtimur
exemplis, vt probemus non esse hoc, quod Natura formauit, sed quod Benedictio
consecrauit? maioremque vim esse benedictionis, quam Naturae, quia Benedictione
etiam Natura ipsa mutatur? Virgam tenebat Moses, proiecit eam, and facta est
serpens etc. Quod si tantum valuit humana benedictio, vt naturam conuerteret,
quid dicimus de ipsa consecratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa Domini Saluatoris
operantur? Nam Sacramentum istud, quod accipis, Christi sermon conficitur etc.
Quod si tantum valuit sermo Heliae, vt ignem de Caelo depon^r^t, non valebit
Christi Sermo, vt species mutet Elementorum? De totius mundi operibus legisti:
Quia ipse dixit, and facta sunt, ipse mandauit, and creat a sunt: Sermo ergo
Christi, qui potuit ex nihilo facere, quod non erat, non potest ea, quae sunt,
in id mutare, quod non erant? Non enim minus est nouas rebus dare, quam mutare
Naturas. Perhaps thou may say; I see another thing, how prouest thou to me,
that I take the body of Christ? And this remains yet for us to prove. What
then, or how great examples may we use, to prove, that it is not that, which
Nature formed, but what benediction has consecrated? And that there is greater
force of Benediction, then of Nature, for even Nature it self is changed by
Benediction? Moses houlding a wand in his hand, did cast it from him, and it
became a serpent etc. Now if Man's Benediction, or blessing be of such force, as
that it can chang Nature, what do we say of that divine Consecration where the
very words of our Lord our Savior do work? for this Sacrament, which thou
take, is made by the speech of Christ. And if the speech of Elias was of such
power, as to draw fire from heaven, shall not the words of Christ be of force
to chang the forms of the Elements? Thou have read of the works of the whole
world: Because he spoke the word, they are made; he commanded, and they are
created. Therefore the words of Christ, which of nothing could make that, which
was not, can they not chang those things, which are, into that, which before
they were not? for it is not a less matter to give new natures to things, then
to chang Natures.] So clear, and evident is S. Ambrose in these places for a
true, and real chang in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

S. Cyril of Jerusalem Catechesi 4. Aquam aliquando mutauit in Vinum etc. our
Lord did once by his sole will in Cana of Galilee turn water into Wine, which
is near to Blood, and is he not worthy to be believed, that he has changed
wine into blood? Wherefore with all assuredness let us take the body, and
blood of Christ: for under the form of Bread is given to thee his Body; and
under the form of Wine is given his Blood.].

The same Father in the same Book also says thus: Ne ergo consideres tamquam
nudum panem, and nudum vinum, corpus enim est, and sanguis Christi, secundum
ipsius Domini verba: Quamuis enim sensus hoc tibi suggerit; tamen fides te
confirmet, ne^ ex gustu rem iudices etc. Hoc sciens, and pro certissimo habens,
panem hunc, qui videtur a nobis, non esse panem, etiamsi gustus panem esse
sentiat, sed esse Corpus Christi: Et vinum quod a notis conspicitur, ta^^tsi
sensui gustus vinum esse videatur, non tam^^ vinum, sed Sanguin in Christi
esse: which latter words are before related. Do not then consider it as bare
Bread, or bare Wine; for it is the Body, and Blood of Christ according to the
word of our Savior himself. For though sense may suggest this to thee, yet
let thy faith so confirm this, as that thou judge not the matter from thy
taste.] And again after. Hoc sciens etc. This knowing, and accounting it as
most certain, that this Bread, which we see, is not Bread, though our Taste do
tell us that it is Bread, but it is the Body of Christ; and the Wine, which we
behold, though it seems wine to our sense of Taste, yet it is not Wine, but
the Blood of Christ.] And can any Catholic at this time speak more plainly,
then are the sayings of this Father? One, who is most ancient, learned, and of
whose book (from whence these testimonies are produced) there was never any
doubt made.

S. Cyprian sermon. de Coena Dom. Panis iste, que^ Dominus Discipulis porrigebat,
non effigy, sed natura mutatus, Omnipotentia Verbi factus est Caro, and sicut
in persona Christi Humanitas apparebat, and latebat Diuinitas; ita Sacramento
visibili ineffabiliter diuina se infudit Essentia. This Bread, the which our
Lord gave to his Disciples, is changed not in outward appearance, but in
substance, and by the Omnipotency of the Word it is made Flesh. And as in the
Person of Christ the Humanity did appear, and the Divinity did lie hid; so in
the visible Sacrament, the divine Essence has ineffably infused it self.] But
what Omnipotency is required to give a signification to any substance? Or if
the Change be only by adding a new signification, how can the Bread be said to
be changed, non effigy, sed natura? Lastly, the Divinity was truly, and really
latent in Christ's Humanity, therefore the Body, and Blood must be truly and
really latent under the forms of Bread, and Wine; which to be Cyprians meaning
appears even by the word Ineffabiliter, there added by him; but what
difficulty, or mystery is it, that Bread should signify Christ?

Tertullian l. 2. ad Vxorem: where speaking of Christian Women that are married
to Gentiles, and showing that such marriages are hurtful to the receiving of
the Blessed Sacrament, thus says: Non s^iet Maritus etc. The Husband shall not
know, what thou do taste before all other meats; and if he did, he belieueth
not the Bread to be him, whom it is said to be.] Which words do evidently
imply a Change of the Bread into the Body of Christ.

Irenaeus lib. 4. contra Haereses. cap. 34. disputing against such Heretics,
as denied Christ to be the Son of the Creator, thus disputes: Quomodo autem
constabit ijs etc. How shall it be made evident to such men, that Bread
(whereupon thanks are given) to be the Body of Christ, and the Cup, the Blood
of him, if they will not acknowledge him to be the Son of the Maker of the
World? That is, the Word of him, by the which Word, the Wood does fructify,
the Springs do flow; who first gives a kind of grass, then an Ear of corn,
lastly the Ear full of wheat.] Here we are to observe, that Irenaeu^ proves
Christ to be the Creator from this, that Bread by force of Consecration is
made the Body of Christ; therefore he believed that Bread was really, and truly
changed into the Body of Christ, and not only in signification; for it is not
an imposition of a new signification, but a true, and real chang which
necessarily requires Gods Omnipotency.

OF THEIR TESTIMONIES CONTAINING The Comparisons of the Eucharist with other
Great Mysteries. CHAP. IIII.
A THIRD point (which indeed is the Ce^ter wherein the Lines of diverse such
passages do meet) manifesting the Fathers belief herein, may be the
Observation of their Comparisons of the Eucharist with other things. Thus they
compare it with the Paschal Lamb, with the Manna, with Panis Propositions;
teaching, that it does transcend all these, as much as a Divine, and
inconsumptible substance excells a terrene, and corruptible, the Body the
shadow, and the Truth the Figure. But if Christ's Body be here only by
representation, then is the Eucharist a thing corruptible, a shadow, and a
mere Figure; and then may our Savior worthily use toward them the
expostulation in Esaias, Cui Cui comparastis me?] Esa. 46.
comparastis me.

Others also in regard of the sublimity thereof, compare it with the Creation
(as I touched before) where (not to insist in other points) we find, that by
force of the Creation, all Creatures are contained in the Creator (for in ipso
viuimus etc.) and by force of this Sacrament, the Creator is contained (after
a peculiar manner) under the forms of some of his meanest Creatures.

Some likewise do teach (besides other such comparisons) that Christ in the
Sacrament is to the eye of the soul, as when Angels by assuming bodies
appeared to Men, though these being spiritual, seemed corporal, and Christ
being Corporal appears here only as spiritual.

Finally, diverse of them seem to equal it with the Mystery of the
Incarnation; and one Father resembles the difficulty herein to that, where
Christ (being as well God as Man) was borne of a Woman, and a Virgin. Now, if
the chiefest obscurity in the Eucharist does rest in Types, Representations,
and Resemblances, how cold, disproportionable, dissorting, yea absurd and false
are the comparisons here made with those former stupendous Mysteries of
Christianity, and particulerly of the Incarnation? Where (to omit all other
passages thereof above our capacity) we find the Vine to bud out of the Branch;
the Ocean to flow from a shallow River; and the Sun to borrow it light from a
small Star.

First then occurreth S. Leo sermon. 7. de Passione Dom. who thus says: Vt ergo
Vinbrae etc. That therefore the Shadows might give place to the Body, and
Images, or Resembla^ces to the presence of the Truth, the ancient observation
is taken away by a new Sacrament; the Host is changed into an Host, blood
excludes blood, and the Legal Solemnity whiles it is changed, is fulfilled,
and accomplished.

S. Augustine l. 3. Trinit. c. 10. Illas etiam Nubes etc. What man knows, how
those Clouds, and Fires were made, which the Angels assumed, and took on to
signify, what they were to deliver or speak, yea though our Lord, or the Holy
Ghost appeared in these forms? Even as Infants knew not that, which is placed
upon the Altar, and consumed after the celebration of Piety is finished, how it
is made, and by what means it is used in Religion. And if they never learned,
either by their own experience, or of others, and should never see the forms
of those things, but in the celebration of Sacraments, when it is offered, and
given, and said to them by most grave authority, whose Body, and Blood it is,
they would believe no otherwise, but that our Lord appeared only in that form
to the fight of men, and that kind of liquour only flowed from his wounded
side. Here we are to note, that these Infants could not believe, that those
things which they there did see, were the Body, and Blood of Christ, only by
way of signification; but truly, and properly. For of themselves they could not
understand these Tropes; neither can it be said, that these children had a
false faith, for it is said, they believed so, Authoritate grauisima.

Again, lib. 2. contra litteras Petiliani, c. 37. Aliud est Pascha, quod
Iudaei de oue celebrant, aliud quod nos in Corpore and sanguine Domini
accipimus: There is one Pascha, which they yet celebrate of the Lamb but that
is another, which we receive in the Body, and Blood of our Lord.] But if he
should speak of our Lords Body in sign only, his words were false, because
the Paschall Lamb was in signification the Body of Christ, as well as the
Bread; as is proved above.

He also in epist. 86. ad Casulanum, where reprehending one Vrbicus, for
teaching that the Law was so turned into the Gospel, as that a sheep should
give place to Bread, and Blood to the Cup, thus writes: Dicit cessisse pani
pecus etc. Vrbicus says, that sheep did give place to Bread, as being
ignorant, that even then Panes Propositionis, the breads of Proposition, were
wont to be placed upon the Table of the Lord, and that now himself takes part
of the body of the immaculate Lamb: in like sort, he says, that Blood did
give place to the Cup, not remembering, that himself now takes Blood in the
Cup.] And then a little after S. Augustine subioyneth: Quanto ergo melius etc.
How much better, and more agreeingly might Vrbicus have said, that those
ancient things did so pass away, and so became new in Christ, that the Altar
should give place to the Altar, the sword to the sword, fire to fire, bread to
bread, sheep to sheep, blood to blood.] But here Vrbicus (according to the
sentence of our Adversaries) did not err, for if we respect the sign, or
representation only, Christ was no less in the Sheep of the Old Law, then now
in Bread; and his Blood no less in that Blood, then in our Wine. And therefore
in our Adversaries judgments, the sheep did truly give place to Bread, and
Blood to Wine.

S. Hierome in Comment Psalm. 109. Quomodo Melchisedech etc. Even as
Melchisedech being King of Salem offered up Bread, and Wine; so thou offerest
up thy Body, and Blood, being true bread, and true Blood. This our Melchisedech
has delivered to us these Mysteryes, which now we enjoy, for it is he, who
said: Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit sanguinem meum etc.] In this place
the body, and blood of Christ is clearly opposed to the Bread, and Wine of
Melchisedech: And his Body, and Blood is here called True Bread, and True
Blood (to wit, in regard of the effect, which is to nourish our Souls, but not
in respect of Nature) for if we respect the Nature of Bread, the Bread of
Melchisedech was true Bread.

He also in Comment. c. 1. Epist. ad Titum. Tantum interest inter Panes
Propositionis etc. There is as great difference between Panes Propositionis
(the Shewbread) and the Body of Christ, as there is between the Image, and
the Truth; between the Examples of Truths, and those Truths, which are
prefigured by the Examples.] Where we are to note, that in this place Hierome
entreats particulerly of the Eucharist. Now if in the Eucharist be the Truth
which was figured per panes Propositionis, then there is not in the Eucharist
material Bread signifying the Body of Christ, but the true Body it self; for
the body of Christ (even in the judgment of all) was that Truth, which was
prefigured by those Breads.

S. Chrysostom Homil. 24. in 1. ad Cor. compares the Magi with us, saying to
this effect, that the Magi had this body in the Manger, but we have it upon the
Altar; They had it only in the arms of a woman, but we in the hands of a
Priest; they only saw the simple body of Christ, but we see the same Body, but
withal do know his power, and virtue. Thus in this Antithesis does S.
Chrysostom conclude, that we have his body in a more worthy sort, then the
Magi had it; which he could not affirm truly, if we have his Body only in
sign, and representation.

And Homil. 51. in Matthew. Adeamus Christum etc. Let every one of us, which are
sick, come to Christ; for if those, which only touched the edge of his
garment, were all perfectly recovered, how much more shall we be strengthened,
if we shall have him whole in us?] Here he cannot speak of Christ as in sign
only, in that, there is not so great a virtue of the sign of Christ, as was of
the hemme of his garment.

Likewise, Homil. 24. in priorem epist. ad Corinth. he says: Dum in hac vita
sumus, vt terra nobis Caelum sit, facit hoc mysteriam. Ascend igitur ad Caeli
port as, and diligenter attend, imo non Caeli, sed Caeli Caelorum, and tunc
quod dicimus intueberis. Etenim quod summo honor dignam est, id tibi in terra
ostendam. Nam quemadmodum in Regijs non parietes, non tectum aureum, sed Regium
Corpus in Throno sedens omnium praestantissimum est: ita quoque in Caelis
regium Corpus, quod nunc in Terra videndum tibi proponitur; neque enim Angelos,
neque Archangelos, non Caelos, non Caelos Caelorum, sed ipsum horum omnium
Dominum ostendo: Whilst we here live, this Mystery makes, that the Earth
becomes Heaven to us. Therefore ascend to the gates of Heaven, yea not only of
Heaven, but of the highest Heaven, and observe diligently, and then thou shall
behold, what we here say: for what is worthy of chiefest honor, that I will
show thee here upon the earth. For, even as in Princes Courts, not the walls,
nor the Chamber, or Cloth of Estate, but the Body of the Prince sitting in his
Throne, is the chiefest thing there: eue^ so is the like of that Princely Body
in Heaven, which is here upon the earth set forth to thee to behold; for
here I do not show thee the Angels, nor Archangells, not the Heavens, nor the
highest Heavens, but I show thee the Lord of all these.] But there is none, but
he had rather see the Angels, and Archangells, then Bread, and Wine
representing only Christ.

And also Chrysostom in the same place makes another comparison in these
words following: Si puer Regius etc. If the Princes Child clothed in Purple,
and crowned with the Diadem, should be carried by thee, would thou not
(casting away all other things upon the ground) take him into thy arms? But
now here, when thou take, not the Son of any Prince, being but a Man, but
the only begotten Son of God, art thou not afraid, and do not thou cast
from thee the care of all secular things?] But if Chrysostom did here speak
of Christ only in Sign, and representation, the comparison should have been
made only between the Image, or Picture of the Kings Son, and not with the
Son himself

And Homil. ad Neophytos. Sicut Regnantium statuae etc. Even as the Statuaes,
or Images of Princes have been accustomed to succor such, as have fled to them
for Sanctuary, and this not because they are made of brass, but in that they
do bear the Image of the Prince; even so that blood did free (meaning that
Blood of the Lamb in the old Testament, which was sprinkled upon the Posts to
free the Israelites from the striking Angel) not because it was blood, but
because it did figure out the coming of this Blood. But now if the Enemy shall
see, not the blood of the Type cast upon the posts, or walls, but the blood
of Truth shining in the mouths of the faithful, he will much more withdraw
himself from hence. For if the Angel gave place to the Example, how much more
will the Enemy be terrified, if he shall behold the Truth it self?] In which
place we see, that Chrysostom places the truth of the Blood, not in the mind,
but in the mouths of the Faithful.

And, Homil. 51. in Matthew. O quet modo dicunt etc. O how many do now say, I
would see the form of Christ, and his favor, I would see his vestments, and
even his shoes! Now thou see him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him.] Where
he means, that we see, feel, and eat Christ truly, and really under those
forms of Bread, and Wine, which are properly seen, and touched.

Again, he says in the same place: that there was never Shepherd, who fed
his shep with his own flesh, as Christ did, and that diverse Mothers are to be
found, who deliver over their Infants to others to be noursed, contrary to the
procedings of our Savior: which comparisons can have no fitting proportion, if
we eat the Body of Christ only in Figure, and sign.

Lastly (to omit for breuities sake diverse others of his similitudes) he thus
writes Hom. 2. ad Pop. Antiochenum: Helias melotem etc. Helias did leave to
his disciple his vestement, but the Son of God ascending to Heaven, did leave
his flesh; But Helias by leaving it, was disuested thereof; whereas Christ
leaving his flesh to us, yet ascending to Heaven, there also has it.] So
frequent is this holy Father in Comparisons, and Similitudes, all brought in to
show the excellency of that thing, which we receive in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; which if it were not the body, and blood of Christ, then were these
comparisons most cold, and disproportionable.

Gaudentius Tract. 2. de Exodo. teaches, that the Jews had not all one
Paschal Lamb, but diverse, in that every family did kill it peculiar Lamb; but
that among the Christians one, and the same Lamb (to wit, the body, and blood
of Christ) is offered up, and eaten in all the Churches. Which words signify,
that the body of Christ is not offered up only in representation, since in that
sense the Jews had one, and the same Lamb, in that all their Lambs did
signify one Lamb, to wit Christ.

S. Basil l. 2. de Baptismo c. 2. thus writes: Si tales minae etc. If such
threats be ordained against those, who come rashly to such holy things as are
sanctified by Man; what shall we say of him, who is temerarious, and rash
toward such, and so great a Mystery? For by how much Christ is greater then
the Temple, according to the voice of our Lord, by so much it is more greiuous,
and terrible, rashly to touch the body of Christ in impurity of soul, then to
approach to Rams, or Bull^ etc.] But this saying of S. Basil cannot be true,
except the body of Christ be really in the Eucharist For between Christ, and
the Rams sacrificed by the Jews the difference is infinite; but between
those Rams signifying Christ, and bread figuring our Savior, the difference
is but small.

S. Ambrose lib. de Mysterijs initiandis, c. 9. teaches, that a more excellent
meat is given to us in the Eucharist, then ever the Manna was to the Jews.
The like he has l. 4 de Sacramentis c. 3. 4. and 5. But Manna was both for
substance, and signification (as is proved before) better then bread, only
representing the body of Christ.

Again, lib. 6. de Sacramentis c. 1. Sicut verus est Filius Dei etc. Even as
our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Son of God, not as Men are his Sons by
grace, but as a Son of the Substance of the Father: so it is true Flesh, even
as himself said, which we take.] Out of which sentence it follows, that as
Christ is truly and really the Son of God: So is that, which we take in the
Eucharist, the true body, and blood of Christ.

Again, lib. de Mysterijs initiandis c. 9. he proves the same from the
mystery of the Incarnation in these words: Liquet, quod praeter naturae
ordinem Virgo generauit, and hoc quod conficimus, Corpus ex Virgin est. Quid
hic queris Naturae ordinem in Christi corpore, cum praeter natural sit ipse
Dominus Jesus partus ex Virgin? It is manifest, that a Virgin brought forth a
Son beyond the course of Nature; And this Body, which we make, proceeds
from the Virgin. Why do thou here expect the course of Nature, since our
Lord Jesus is borne of a Virgin above nature?] But if the Bread did only
signify our Saviors Body in the Eucharist, this proof of S. Ambrose had been
superfluous.

S. Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinitate, speaking of the Truth of the Body, and Blood
in the Eucharist, thus concludes: An hoc veritas non est etc. What, is not
this Truth? Let it not be a truth to those, who deny Christ Jesus to be true
God.] Thus Hilarious here proves the Mystery of the Eucharist, by the
Mystery of the Trinity.

S. Athanasius (as he is cited by Theodoret in 2. Dialog.) thus writes: Corpus
est, cui dicit etc. It is a Body, to whom it was said, Sede a dextris meis, of
which Body the Devils with all the wicked Powers, as also the Jews, and
Grecians were Enemies; by means of which Body (Christ) was both the High
Priest, and an Apostle; and this Body is specified in that Mystery, which is
delivered to us, when himself said: This is my Body which is delivered for
you, and the blood of the New Testament, not of the Old, which is shed for you.
But Divinity has neither a Body, nor Blood.] Here he proves, that Christ
has a true Body, in that Christ as an High Priest gave his Body to us in those
words, Hoc est Corpus meum: but if his true body were not delivered to us
thereby, his reason would prove nothing against the Heretics denying the Truth
of his Body, in that it might be replied, that the Eucharist was but a Figure
of the apparent, and seeming body which they taught, that Christ had.

S. Cyprian sermon de Coena Domini, says: Coena disposita etc. The Supper of
those sacramental Banquets being prepared, the Old, and New Institutions did
there meet together, and the Lamb (which the Ancient Tradition proposed)
being spent, the Master gave to his Disciples an inconsumptible meat.] Here
by the words, Cibum inconsumptibilem, cannot be understood the Body of Christ,
as it is eaten by Faith, because in that the Jews by their Paschall Lamb had
that meat (to wit by representation) as well as we Christians. Neither by the
said words can be understood the Bread in the Eucharist, because Bread is as
well consumptible, and to be spent, as a Lamb is.

In the same Sermon he also says: (of which place I have entreated before)
Sicut in Persona Christi etc. Even as in the Person of Christ, his Humanity
appeared, but his Divinity was hid, or latent, so in the visible Sacrament, the
Divine Essence does ineffably infuse it self.] From which words, the truth of
the Doctrine of the Eucharist is proved from the Mystery in the Incarnation.

Origin homil. 7. in Lib. Numeri: Tunc in enigmate erat Manna cibus, nunc autem
in specie caro verbi Dei est verus cibus, sicut ipse dicit, Quia caromea est
vere cibus. Then (to wit in the Old Law) the Manna was meat obscurely, and
Enigmatically, but now indeed the Flesh of the Word of God is true meat, even
as himself said: Quia caro mea vere est cibus.] But the Manna was the body of
Christ tropically, and figuratively.

Tertullian lib. de Idololatria, thus says: Pr^h Scel^^l semel Iudaei etc. O
Villainy! the Jews once offered violence unto Christ, but these Men daily do
wrong his body. O that their hands might be cut off!] In which place he
inueigheth against certain men, who made such Priests, or at the least
Deacons, which were artificers, or makers of Idols. But if Tertullian had
thought, that there were only, Bread in the Eucharist representing the Body of
our Savior, he would not compare such, as handled the Sacrament unworthily
with those which crucified Christ. Where also we are to note, that he there
speaks not of such, who with affectation, and intended purpose did wrong
Christ by violating the Sacraments, but of those only, who being sinners, dared
to deliver the Sacrament to the Communicants.

Irenaeus l. 4 contra Haeres. c. 34. Quemadmodum qui est a terra panis,
percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis Panis est, sed Eucharistia ex
duabus rebus constans, terrena, and caelesti; sic and corpora nostra
percipientia Eucharistia^, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis
habentia. Even as the Bread proceeding from the Earth, receiving the invocation
of God, is not now common Bread, but it is the Eucharist, consisting of two
things, to wit, a terrene thing, and a celestial thing; so our Bodies
receiving the Eucharist are not corruptible, as having thereby the hope of
rising again.] Where Irenaeus makes a Comparison between the Eucharist, and
the Article of the Resurrection. But our Body really and truly after the
Resurrection shall become immortal, and not in signification only, therefore
the Bread is truly become the Body of Christ, and not in signification only.
Now how the Eucharist may be termed terrena, see S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose
in the sixth chapter of this 2. Tract.

S. Justinius Martyr, in Apolog. 2. ad Antoninum Imperatorem, says: Non enim vt
communem Panem, neque communem Potum haec sumimus; Sed quemadmodum per Verbum
Dei Incarnatus Jesus Christus Saluator noster, and carnem, and sanguinem pro
salute nostra habuit: sic etiam per preces Verbi Dei, ab ipso Eucharistiam
factum cibum, ex quo sanguis, and carnes nostrae per mutationem aluntur, illius
Incarnati Jesus, and carnem, and sanguinem esse edocti sumus. We do not take
these, as common Bread, and common Drink; but as Jesus Christ our Savior
being Incarnated by the Word of God, had flesh, and blood for our health and
salvation: even so we learn, that through the prayers of the Word of God, that
meat (whereby our blood, and flesh are nourished through the alteration
thereof) being made the Eucharist, is the Flesh, and Blood of Jesus, who was
incarnated.] In which words, there is a comparison between the Eucharist, and
the Incarnation of Christ, and he proves the Catholic doctrine of the
Eucharist from the Mystery of the Incarnation, inferring, that by the same
power the Bread might be made the Body of Christ, by the which power God was
Incarnated: but if he did understand, that the Bread was the Body by
representation only, then in vain is brought the Example of the Incarnation,
since it is no Miracle, that Bread should signify the Body of Christ. Add
heerto, that Justinius Martyr if he did mean the Body only in sign, had reason
to explane himself to the Emperor, in that he here did write an Apology for
the Christians, to whom (besides other crimes) it was objected that in the
mysteries of their Religion they did eat Man's flesh.

OF THEIR TESTIMONIES CONFESSING The inexplicable greatness of this Mystery.
CHAP. V.
THE fourth Classis may conteyne such passages of the Fathers, wherein is
acknowledged a Supreme Mystery in the Eucharist. For first, they teach, that
it transgressing the bounds of humane capacity, is to be apprehended only by
faith. Thus advancing the dignity, and worth of faith, as being able to
understand that, which the understanding (of which Faith is but an Act) cannot
naturally understand: So cloudy, and dark is that Faculty of the mind, except
the mysts thereof be dispelled, and diffipated by the illuminating beams of
Gods grace. Hence it arises, that they are very frequent in their
exhortations, that we should not fluctuate in any uncertainty of Judgment, but
assure our selves (by disclayming from sense, humbling our Judgments, and
voyding our minds of all prejudice of opinion) of the infallible Truth thereof,
since it is wrought by the virtue of his words, who is Truth it self Veritas,
and Via.] John 14.
Ego sum Veritas, and Via. So well those holy Doctors did know, that the more
Chrystalline, and clear the chiefest faculties of our Souls are become, and
the more polished, and freed from all natural blemishes the glass thereof is,
the more perfectly we may behold this high Mystery, since during our exile
here, all such abstruse difficulties we do but see as it were per Per
speculum.] 1. Cor. 13.
speculum in aenigmate. But when we are arrived by means of death into our
Country (for Heaven is the souls proper Orb) then all such heavenly
mysteries, being now over ponderous, and weighty for us, as pressing our
understanding too much; shall bnecome there most light, and easy to be
apprehended, according to that (to speak allusiuely) in Philosophy, Nullum
Elementum ponderat in sua propria Sphaera: for then we shall contemplate not
only all Creatures, but other things worthy of knowledge, intuitiuely in God,
as now we do behold God discursiuely in his Creatures.

But to return. The Fathers finally do refer the miraculous change made in
the Eucharist, only to Gods Illimitable Puissance, within which vast
circumference, every thing is contained, that may in any sort exist, confessing
fully, that it cannot be wrought by any inferior Power, for he only is able to
perform such (as I may term them) possible Impossibilities; since his
Omnipotency does facilitate that, which otherwise in Nature is not factible.

Here now I refer to the Judgment of the impartial Reader, how unaptly, and
untowardly all such passages of the Fathers are applied to Bread, and Wine,
signifying only the body, and blood of our Savior. We will then come to those
Testimonies acknowledging so great a Mystery herein.

Eusebius Emyssenus (or whosoever else was the Author of that Treatise,
entitled Sermo de Corpore Demini, which Book was alleged by Paschasius
Corbeiensis eight hundred years since) thus writes in the said book: Recedat
omne infidelitatis ambiguum etc. Let all doubt of infidelity d^part from thee,
since ^e, who is the Author of the gift, is witness of the Truth.] And again:
Ad cognoscendum etc. To know, and perceive the Sacrifice of the true Body, let
the Power of him who consecrateth it, confirm thee therein.] So clear is this
Father herein.

S. Leo Sermon. 14. de Passione Domini. Ipsum per omnia etc. Let us taste him
fully, both in spirit, and in flesh.]

S. Cyril of Alexandria l. 4. in Joan. explicating those words, Quomodo potest
hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manducandum? thus writes: Firmam fidem Mysterijs
adhibentes, numquam in tam sub^imibus, rebus illud Quomodo, aut cogitemus, aut
proferamus, etc. We firmly believing these mysteres, never let us in such high
points either think, or bring forth this word Quomodo, How? etc.]

S. Augustine l. 3. de Trinitate c. 4. Quod cumper manus etc. Which thing
(speaking of Bread) when it is brought by men's hands to that visible form, it
is noe otherwise sanctified to be so great a Sacrament, then by the invisible
working of the spirit of God, since all those things, which are in this work
performed by corporal motions, God does work.] But this working of the holy
Ghost is not necessary, that Bread should signify only the Body of Christ. Add
hereto, that S. Augustine in this place does reckon the work here in the
Eucharist among other great Miracles, to wit, the Rain of Hebas obtained of
God, the Wand of Aaron which budded fresh, the Wand of Moses turned into a
Serpent, the water turned into wine by Christ.

And in Psalm. 33. Conc. 1. upon those words of the Psalm, Et ferebatur manibus
suis etc. thus writes. Hoc quomodo potest fieri in homine, quis intelligat?
Quis enim portatur in manibus suis? Manibus aliorum potest portari homo,
manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo intelligatur in ipso David, secundum
literam non inuenimus; in Christo autem inuenimus: ferebatur enim Christus in
manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum; ait, Hoc est Corpus meum:
ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis. Who can understand, how this can
happen in Man? For who is carried in his own hands? A man may be carried in
the hands of another, but in his own hands he cannot be carried. How this may
be literally understood in David, we find not, but in Christ we find: for
Christ was carried in his own hands, when commending his body, he said, Hoc
est Corpus meum, for then did he carry that body in his own hands.] But if
Christ did carry his body in his own hands, only in sign, and representation
(as a Man bearing about him the picture of himself) then were it no difficult
thing; and yet S. Augustine says, it is a thing impossible, and cannot be
performed, but only by Christ. Neither do our Adversaries satisfy this place in
replying, that Christ did carry himself in a Sacrament, but none but Christ
can institute a Sacrament, and consequently none can carry themselves, as
Christ did. This, I say, avails nothing, because our Adversaries do
confess, that Christ is said to carry himself in the Sacrament, not because a
Sacrament is an Instrument of conferring Grace (for this they deny) but because
it is a sign of Christ; and so in this last respect there is no difficulty
for one to carry himself.

Finally S. Augustine, tract. 26. in Ioannem, explicating that, Panis, quem ego
dabo, Caromea est, thus writes: Hoc quando caperet caro, quod dixit panem
carnem? vocatur Caro, quod non capit Caro. When would flesh conceive, or
apprehend how he called Bread Flesh? That is called Flesh, which Flesh
apprehends not.] But flesh, or a sensual understanding may easily conceive,
that bread may be called flesh figuratively, and by way of representation only.

S. Hierome epist. ad Hedibiam quaest. 2. Nec Morses dedit etc. Neither did
Moses give to us true Bread, but our Lord Jesus is the Guest, and the Banquet,
the Person eating, and the thing eaten.] But it cannot be truly said, that
Moses did not give Panem verum, that is, the body of Christ, if the Eucharist
were no otherwise the Body of Christ, then by signification. Add heerto, that
S. Hierome here implies a difficulty, in being the thing eaten, and the party
eating; which point cannot be referred to Christ eating Bread, which only
represents his Body.

S. Chrysostom, Homil. 60. ad popul. Antiochenum, says: Credamus vbique Deo,
nec repugnemus ei, etiamsi sensui, and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse
videatur, quod dicit. Superet and sensum, and rationem nostram sermo, quaeso,
ipsius, quod in omnibus rebus, sed praecipue in mysterijs faciamus, non illa,
quae ante non iacentes solummodo aspicientes, sed verba eius quoque tenentes:
nam verbis illius defraudari non possumus: Sensus noster deceptu facillimus
est, quoniam ergo ille dixit, Hoc est Corpus meum, nulla dubitatione teneamur,
sed credamus.] Let us believe God in every thing, neither let us gainsay him,
though what he says may seem absurd to our sense and cogitation. I beseech
thee therefore, that his speech may overcome our Sense, and Reason. Which point
we are to observe in all things; but especially in the Holy Mysteries, not only
behoulding those things, which lie before us, but also laying full hold of his
words; for his words cannot deceive us, but our sense may easily be deceived.

Also in Homil. 51. in Matthew. Qui mains, id est, animam etc. He that laid down
a greater thing for thee (to wit his soul) why should he disdain to deliver
to thee his Body? Therefore let us Priests, as well as others hear how
admirable a thing is granted to us; Let us hear (I beseech you) and let us
tremble thereat, for he has delivered his Flesh to us he has laid down
himself to be sacrificed.]

And the same Father l. 3. de Sacerdotio. O miraculum! o Dei benignitate! etc.
O the Miracle! o the goodness of God! He that sits above with his Father,
even in the very same instant of time is handled with the hands of all, and
delivers himself to such, as are willing to entertain, and embrace him.]

Gaudentius tract. 2. in Exodus says: Quod annuntiatum est credas etc. Thou
may believe that, which is showed thee, for that, which thou take is the
body of that Heavenly Bread, and the blood of that sacred Vine, for when he
delivered conseerated Bread, and Wine to his Disciples, he said: Hoc est Corpus
meum. Hic est Sanguis meus. Let us believe him, whom heretofore we have
believed, for Truth knows not to lie.]

S. Ephrem lib. De Natura Dei minime scrutanda. c. 5. thus writes: Quid
scrutaris inscrutabilia? Si ista curiose rimaris, iam non fidelis, sed curiosus
vocaberis. Esto fidelis, atque innocens, participa immaculato corpori Domini
tui fide plenissima, certus quod agnum ipsum integrum comedis. Why do thou
search things which are inscrutable? If thou do weigh these things
curiously, then thou shall be called not faithful, but curious. Be thou
Faithful, and Innocent; participate thou of the immaculate Body of thy Lord,
being assured through a most strong faith, that thou do eat the very whole
Lamb it self.]

And the same Father after in the said book: Hoc sane excedit omnem
admirationem etc. This verily exceeds all Wonder, all Thought, and all
Speech, which the only Begotten Son of God Christ our Savior has performed
to us. He has given to us fire, and the spirit to eat, and drink, to wit his
Body, and Blood.] Here the Miracle exceeding Man's capacity, the difficulty of
believing it, and the inscrutablenesse thereof do prove, that the Eucharist in
his Judgment, was not only material bread signifying the body of Christ.

S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 2. de Paschate, thus writes: Absque confusione,
and dubio come de corpus, and sanguinem bibe, si saltem vitae desiderio
teneris: neque sermonibus, qui de carne habentur, fidem deneges, neque ob
passionem offendaris. Constans esto, firmus, and stabilis, in nulla re propter
Aduersariorum sermones fluctues. Eat his body, and drink his blood without
any confusion, or doubt, if at least thou have any desire of health: neither
deny thy faith herein for any speeches, which may proceed of flesh, neither be
thou scandalized by reason of his Passion. Be thou constant, firm, and stable,
neither fluctuate, nor doubt thou by reason of any speeches of the
Adversaries.] where we are to note, that he persuadeth his Reader to this so
great a Mystery, though the Adversaries (to wit, the Gentile Philosophers) do
scoff thereat, meaning in that the Christians believed, that they did eat the
Flesh of Christ; which cohortation of Nazianzene were needless, if only we do
eat the flesh of Christ in sign, and Figure.

S. Gregory Nyssene Orat. Catechetica. c. 36. and 37. thus writes:
Considerandum est, quomodo fieri queat, vt cum vnum illud corpus assidue per
totum orbem terrarum, tot fidelium millibus impertiatur, totum cuiusque
perpartem euadat, and in seipso totum permaneat. It is to be considered, how it
can be effected, that, that very one same Body can daily throughout the whole
world be distributed to so many thousands of the faithful, it notwithstanding
remaining whole in it self, and whole, or entyre in every part.] But this were
idely demanded, if the Body of Christ were eaten only in sign, since there is
no difficulty in apprehending the eating of it in sign, and figure.

S. Ambrose l. 4. de Sacramentis c. 5. says: Deinde ipse Dominus Jesus
testificatur nobis, quod corpus suum accipiamus, and sanguinem, numquid debemus
de eius fide, and t^st^ficatione dubitare? Et infra: Dicit tibi Sacerdos,
Corpus Christi, tu dicis, Amen. Hoc est verum. Quod confitetur lingua, teneat
affectus.] Furthermore even our Lord himself does testify unto us, that we
take his Body, and Blood. What ought we to doubt of his credit, and testimony?
And afterward. The Priest says to thee, The Body of Christ, thou say, Amen.
This is true: therefore let thy affection hold that, which thy tongue
confesses.]

The first Council of Nyce (as it appears in the Acts of the said Council)
thus says: Item etiam hic in diuina Mensa etc. Furthermore in this divine
Table, let us not only with humility consider the Bread, and the Cup, but
lifting up our mind in faith, let us understand, that, in that sacred Table,
there is placed that Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, and
that he is vnbloudily sacrificed by Priests: and we truly taking his precious
Body, and Blood, do believe the taking thereof to be a sign of our
Resurrection, and therefore we take not in a great quantity, but in a small,
that thereby we may know it to be taken not for society, but for
sanctification.] In these words the Counsel persuades us that we should not
rest in the forms of Bread, and Wine (as if nothing were there else) but that
we are to consider, that there is the true Body, and Blood of Christ, though to
our Eye it seems otherwise.

Now that this is the meaning of the Counsel, appears: First, because it
there teaches, that we do take Preciosum Corpus eius vere, his precious Body
truly: where the word Vere does bear an opposition to that, which is in
Figure. Secondly, in that the Council says: that the Lamb of God is
sacrificed by Priests upon the holy Table, which words cannot extend to
Christ, as he is in heaven only. Thirdly, in that the Council says, that we
are to apprehend by faith, that the Lamb of God is placed upon that holy
Table, therefore the Council did teach, that Christ himself was upon the
Altar, and not only in Heaven, as our Adversaries do hold. So forcible and
strong is this grave Testimony of so Ancient, and Reverend a Council in
defense of our Catholic doctrine heerin.

OF THEIR TESTIMONIES EXPRESSING The effect of the Eucharist, and the
veneration exhibited to the same. CHAP. VI.
THE fifth Mount of the Fathers Authorities in this Controversy is gathered,
or heaped together out of such their Sentences, co^teyning the Effect, Virtue,
and Energy of the Eucharist, as also their care, reverence, and veneration
exhibited to the same. Concerning the first point, they teach, that it is the
Pledge of our Resurrection, and Salvation; that by it (to use the Apostles
phrase) we are made diuinae Diuinae etc.] 2. Pet. 1.
consortes Naturae, that Christ is thereby inwardly, and corporally united with
us. Which corporal union (being most precious) serves as a means to procure
our conjunction (caused thereby) with him, in all virtues flowing from him, as
from our Savior, and Redeemer; And therefore we are not only armed by force
hereof against the assaults of all future temptations, but also Grace is
derived to us, to have a true loathing, and contrition of our former Impieties,
and withal to receive a full remission of the same; for we hold, that this
Holy Mystery is not only a Commemoration, but also an application of Christ's
death to us, and we willingly acknowledge, that touching the expiation of our
Sins, the fire of the Fathers wrath is only quenched in the Blood of the
Sons Passion.

All which Celestial Operations, as streaming from the Blessed Eucharist, he
may more easily believe, who will consider, that Christ is the proper Sphere,
wherein the soul reposeth her self; His grace being the spiritual Air that
she anhales, and draws in, the which she no sooner cease to Breath, then she
cease to live; for it is written, She, who She who lives.] 1. Tim. 5.
lives in sin, dies while she lives.

Now as for the second Point; we gather out of their Writings, first that they
were most sollicitous, and careful, that no part of the Consecrated Host
should fall upon the ground; and if casually it did, then was that place
scraped, and the small parcells thereof put in the fire. Secondly, that they
did adore the Sacrament; which Action how can it be given by them without
manifest danger of Idolatry, if nothing but Bread, and Wine be there? Thirdly,
that they taught, that the Eucharist was to be inuoked, according to that of S.
Basil: Verba Inuocationis, dum ostenditur Panis Eucharistiae etc. quis
Sanctorum nobis in Scripto reliquit?

Finally, that even Angels (capitibus inclinatis) did attend upon the Altar,
whilst the most dreadful Sacrifice of Christ's Body, and Blood was offered up
in the forms of Bread, and Wine: Hostia in manibus (says one One Father.]
Chrysostom. homil. 21. in Act Apostol.
Father) adsunt Angeli, adsunt Archangeli, adest filius Dei; cum tanto horrore
astant omnes. Which Harmony, and Concent of doctrine in the monuments of so
many of the Fathers, if it seem harsh, and distunable to our nice Sectaryes,
we marvel not, since they have vowed, that their ears shall receive no other
intelligence herein, then from their Neighbors, their Eyes. But we Catholics,
who cannot brook to have the humanity of Christ (which we assure our selves to
be in the Eucharist) divorced from the Divinity, do easily believe, that in
this most holy Oblation, his Godhead is there waited on with millions of
Angels: No less happy then are those most blessed Spirits for enioyning the
honor of such an Attendance, then are those men, in whom he vouchsafes for the
time to Inn, that in him themselves may hope for ever after to dwell.

First then S. Cyril of Alexandria l. 4. in Joan. c. 15. thus writes: Sicut
scintilla ignis etc. Even as a spark of fire lyghting upon hay, or straw, does
presently inflame it all; even so the word of God joined to our corruptible
nature by means of the Eucharist, does make it all to rise immortal, and
glorious.

And, l. 10. in Joan. c. 13. Non negamus recta nos fide etc. We do not deny,
that we are joined with Christ spiritually in true faith, and sincere charity,
but we altogether deny, that we are not in no sort conjoined with him
according to the flesh, and we affirm it to be altogether contrary to the
divine Scriptures. And a little after, he thus enlarges himself: An fortassis
putat etc. What is it to be thought, that we know not the virtue of the
mystical Benediction? The which being in us, does it not make through the
communication of the Flesh of Christ, Christ himself corporally to dwell in
us?] Where we see, that he teaches, that we receive Christ not only by Faith
(as our Adversaries do teach) but also corporally, so making an Antithesis, or
opposition between these two manners of receiving him.

S. Augustine l. 9. Confess. c. 13. speaking of his Mother Monica, thus
writes: Tantummodo memoriam sui etc. Only she desired, that she might be
remembered at thy Altar, where she knew that Holy Sacrifice to be dispensed, by
the which that Handwriting, which was contrary to us, is cancelled.] But here
this Victima or Sacrifice cannot be any thing, but the Flesh of Christ, for the
Bread was not sacrificed for us, and where he says, that this sacrifice is
dispensed, or ministered, at, or from the Altar, he shows that he means not
Christ, as he is taken by faith only, but bodily by mouth.

And, Epist. 118. c. 3. he teaches great Reverence to be given to the
Eucharist, saying, that such as do frequent the Sacrament daily out of
devotion, or forbear it sometime for devotion also, may be compared to
Zachaeus, or the Centurion, whereof the one said, Lord I am not worthy, that
thou spouldest enter into my house, the other received him into his house.
Which comparison had been most disproportionable, if we take nothing but Bread,
as the sign of Christ's Body.

And, in Psalm. 98. expounding those words, Adorate scabellum pedum eius, says:
That the Footstool of our Lords feet is the Earth, according to that of Esaias
66. Terra autem Scabellum pedum meorum. Now S. Augustine expounding how the
Earth may be adored without sin, thus writes: Fluctuans conuerto me ad
Christu^, quia ipsum quaro hi^, and inuenio, quomodo sine impietate adoretur
terra, adoretur Scabellum pedum eius; Suscepit enim de terra terram, quia Caro
de terra est, and de carne Mariae, carnem accepit. Et quia in ipsa carne hic
ambulau^t, and ipsam carnem manducandam nobis dedit ad salutem: Nemo autem
illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adorauerit. I nuentum est quemadmodum
adoretur tale Scabellum pedum Domini, vt non solum non peccemus adora^do,
sedpeccemus non adorando. I doubting herein do turn my self to Christ,
because I seek him here, and do find, how without a^y impiety the Earth may
be adored, the footstool of his feet may be adored; for he did take earth from
earth, because flesh comes of the earth, and he took flesh of the flesh of
Mary. And because he did here walk in that flesh, and gave that flesh to be
eaten by us for our health: now no man does eat that flesh, except he adore it
before. Here then it is found, how such a Footstool of the feet of our Lord
may be adored, so as that here not only we do not sin in adoring, but we
sin in not adoring.] Now here it cannot be replied, that the meaning of this
Father is, that the faithful do eat the Body of Christ existing only in
Heaven with the mouth of faith, because the Faithful do only adore it. This is
false, for even according to the judgment of S. Augustine, the wicked do adore
the Body of Christ, and eat his Body from the Altar. For, epist. 120. ad
Honoratum c. 27. where speaking of the wicked, he says: Adducti sunt ad Mensam
Domini, and accipiunt de corpore, and sanguine cius, sed adorant tantum, non
etiam saturantur, quia non imitantur.

Finally, S. Augustine l. 50. Homil. 26. warns most earnestly, that Men
should be careful, that no part of the Host should fall upon the ground.

Chrysostom homil. 3. in epist. ad Ephesians. Et tu ad saluturem hanc hostiam etc.
And thou art ready to come to this healthful host, which even the Angels do
behold with fear.] And, Homil. de Eucharist. in Encaenijs. Agnus Dei immolatur
etc. The Lamb of God is offered up in Sacrifice. The Seraphims are present
covering their faces with wings.] But how fantastical and imaginary a conceit
were it to think that these places can be applied to Bread, and Wine,
signifying only the Body, and Blood of Christ?

Again, Homil. 60. ad Populum Antiochenum, he says: Cogita quali sis
insignitus honor etc. Bethink thy self, with what honor thou art here
graced, what Table thou enioyest. We feed of that, and are united therewith,
the which the Angels beholding are afraid, and dare not look upon the same in
regard of the illustrious splendour thereof.] And in the like sort, Homil. 61.
Huic and supernae potestates etc. The higher powers do asist, and wait
hercupon, because they behold the virtue of the things there placed, more then
we do, and do admire the inaccesible splendor, and lightness thereof.] And
that these places of this Father are to be taken literally, appears out of
another place of his wrytings, to wit l. 6. de Sacerdotio in these words: Ego
vero and commemorantem quemdam audiui etc. I did over hear one reporting, who
told, that a certain old and venerable Man (to whom many Mysteryes had before
been revealed) was vouchsafed by God to be made worthy of a Vision, and that
during this time (viz. of celebrating the sacrifice of the Altar) he did see
whole multitudes of Angels to descend suddenly down (as much as the sight of
Man could endure) being clothed with shyning vestements, and standing round
about the Altar; and bowing down their heads in such sort, as if one should
behold shoulders bearing themselves in the presence of their King. Thus far
S. Chrysostom. The truth of which narration I do not so much urge (since I
presume our Adversaries will esteem it as fabulous) but I urge, that S.
Chrysostom thought it to be true (since otherwise he would never have recorded
it) and consequently, that he believed, that Angels were truly, and really
present at the Altar during the time of the celebration of the Eucharist.

In like sort, Homil. 41. in priorem ad Corinth. Non frustra memoriam mortuorum
inter sacra mysteria celebramus, aut accedimus, pro istis Agnum illum iacentem,
and peccata mundi tollentem deprecantes. We do not in vain celebrate the
memory of the dead at the Divine Mysteries; neither do we in vain approach,
beseeching that Lamb there lying for them, and taking away the sins of the
World.] which words imply manifestly, that the Eucharist was in his time
inuoked.

The same Father, Homil. 60. ad Pop. Antiochenum. Non sufficit etc. He could
not be contented to become Man, to be beaten in the mean while with wands, but
he does bring us into one mass (as I may say) with himself: Neither fide
solum, sed reipsa, by faith only, but in very deed, he has made us his Body.]
In which place, we find the very distinction invented by our Adversaries to be
excluded by S. Chrysostom.

In like manner, Homil. 61. ad Popul. Antiochenum, he affirms, that Christ's
Flesh by means of this Sacrament is mingled with ours, not only by Charity,
but reipsa, in very deed. See him also Homil. 24. in priorem ad Corinth. where
he says, that we are so united to the Body of Christ by the Eucharist, as his
Body was united to the word by the Incarnation, to wit, truly, and really, and
not figuratively; but all these sayings of Chrysostom were very idle, if we
received Christ only in a sign, and by representation.

S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. de obitu Gorgoniae Sororis eius, thus writes: Ad
altar cum fide procumbit, cum, qui superillud colitur, magno cum clamore
obtestans. She (viz. Gorgonia) did prostrate herself before the Altar with
faith, praying to him with great clamor, who is worshipped upon the said
Altar. But Gorgoma prayed not to Bread, or Wine. Which action of hers (as she
acknowledging thereby the true presence of Christ's Body, and Blood upon the
Altar) is much reprehended by Peter Martyr l. contra Gardinerum, object. 38.
saying: that she was not well instructed in Christian Religion; so far
different was his judgment from the judgment of S. Gregory heerin: but of this
place more hereafter.

S. Gregory Nyssene, Orat. Catechetica c. 36. and 37. among other things thus
writes: Quemadmodum parum fermenti etc. Even as a little Leaven does make the
whole mass like to it self; so that body which is made immortal by God,
entering into our Body, does transfer, and change it into it self.] And
after: Fidelium corporibus etc. That Body is joined with the bodies of the
faithful, that by that conjunction with the Immortal Body, Man may be made
partaker of Immortality.

S. Ambrose, l. 1. in Lucam, expounding those words, Apparuit ill^ Angelus,
thus writes: Non dubites assistere Angelum, quando Christus assistit, Christus
immolatur. Do not doubt, but that an Angel is there present, when Christ is
there present, when Christ is sacrificed.]

The same Father l. 3. de Spiritu sancto c. 12. expounding those words of the
Psalm. 98. Adorate scabellum pedum cius, thus writes: Itaque per scabellum
terra etc. Therefore by the Footstool the Earth is understood, and by the
earth, the Flesh of Christ, which we now do adore in the Mysteries, and which
the Apostles adored in our Lord Jesus, as we have said before.] Where he says,
that the Flesh of Christ (being united with the Word) is adored by us in the
Mysteries, that is, in the Eucharist.

S. Cyril of Jerusalem thus writes: Sic Christophori erimus, id est, Christum
ferentes etc. So shall we be Christophori, that is Men bearing Christ, when we
shall receive his Body, and Blood into our Members, and as S. Peter says: We
shall be made Partakers of the divine Nature.]

S. Hilarious l. 8. de Trinitate: Sienim vere verbum etc. For if the Word be
truly made Flesh, and we truly take the Word made Flesh, in our Lords meat,
how can he not be thought to remain naturally in us.] And in the same place he
also says: De naturali in nobis Christi veritate etc. Of the natural verity
of Christ in us, whatsoever we speak, we speak foolishly, and wickedly,
except we learn of him, for it is he, that said: Caro mea vere est esca.

Origin Homil. 13. in Exodus expounding the 21. Chapter of that Book, says:
Volo vos admonere religionis vestrae exemplis; nostis, qui diuinis mysterijs
inesse consucuistis, qucmodo, cum suscipitis Corpus Domini, cum omni cautela,
and veneratione seruatis, ne ex eo parum quid decidat, ne consecrati muneris
aliquid dilabatur; reos enim vos creditis, and certe creditis, si quid inde per
negligentiam decidat. I will admonish you by the examples of your Religion: You
know well, who have been accustomed to be present at the divine Mysteries, how
when you take the body of Christ you observe with all wariness, and
veneration, that no part of the consecrated Gift do fall down, for you believe
them to be guilty (and you believe truly) if any parcel thereof do fall down
through negligence.

Tertullian lib. de Corona Militis, speaking of diverse Christian Rites:
Calicis, aut Panis etiam nostri etc. We do suffer with grief, that any part
of our Cup, or bread should fall upon the Earth.]

S. Irenaeus l. 8. contra Haeres. c. 34. Quomodo autem rursus dicunt. etc. How
do they say again, that the Flesh comes into corruption, and receaueth not
life, which is nourished of the body, and blood of our Lord?] Where he makes
the receiving of the Eucharist to be a Pledge of our Resurrection, and
Immortality.

S. Pius the first Bishop of Rome of that name, did set down certain severe
punishments for such, by whose negligence any part of the Body, or Blood of our
Lord did fall upon the ground, yea, or upon the Altar, commanding the place to
be licked with the tongue, and to be scraped. But if the Eucharist were not the
true Body of Christ, but only by representation, there were no reason, why
there should be greater diligence given to prevent, that no part thereof do
fall upon the ground, then there was, that the water of Baptism, the Images of
Christ, or the Holy Bible should not fall upon the ground. His Decree touching
the former point appears out of Gratian de Consecrat. distinct. 2. Can. Si
per negligentiam etc.

S. Dionysius Areopagita lib. de Hierarchia Ecclesiast. c. 3. part. 3. thus
speaks to the Blessed Eucharist. O Diuinissimum, and Sacrosanctum Sacramentu^
obducta tibi significantium signorum operimenta dignanter aperi; and perspicue
nobis fac appareas; nostrosque spirituales oculos singulari, and aperto tuae
lucis fulgore imple. O most Divine, and most holy Sacament, vouchsafe to
remove from thee the veyles, or couerings of those signifying signs, and
appear to us perspicuously, and fill our spiritual Eyes with a singular, and
clear resplendency of thy Light.] Here it cannot be said, that he did so
inuoke the bread, because such Invocation were most ridiculous. Neither can it
be said, that Dionysius did make an Apostrophe, or Chang of speech, from the
Symboles of the Eucharist to Christ signified thereby, inuoking Christ before
the Symboles: for here Dyonisius does not inuoke Christ, as he is in Heaven,
but inuokes the Sacrament it self, and demands of it such things, as are to
be obtained of God alone. Add hereto that the ground of this Answer does
warrant the Catholics praying before Images, for if a man may pray to Christ
before the Symboles of his Body, by the same reason may he pray to him before
his Image.

The said Father also in the former book, thus further writes: Pontifex, quod
Hostiam salutarem etc. The Priest when he sacrifices the healthful Host,
which is above him, does excuse himself, speaking to it: Tu dixisti, Hoc
facite etc. Thou have said, Do you this etc.] But the Bread is not above us,
neither is there more reason, that we should excuse our selves for handling the
Bread, then for handling the Water of Baptism; or other sacred things
belonging to our Christian Faith. Such was the reverence of this most ancient
Father (for he lived in the time of the Apostles) to wards the blessed
Sacrament. And though our Adversaries do impudently maintain, that this book
was not written by the said Dyonisius, yet others of them do acknowledge at
least, that it is the work of a most ancient Father, yea Peter Martyr prizeth
this book, as he is not afraid to wrest a place of the said work, for the
defense of his Heresy herein. Now, that the Author of this work is most
ancient, it appears from this one consideration, to wit, that the Author
thereof is cited for an ancient, and reverend Father by S. Gregory, Homil. 34.
in Euangel. but if S. Gregory, who lived above a thousand years since, did
account this Author for an Ancient, and Venerable Father, then what estimation
of him ought we to have?

OF THEIR TESTIMONIES SHEVVING That the Celebration of the Eucharist,
contains a proper, and true Sacrifice. CHAP. VII.
THE last Branch of Authorities shall be deduced from the common Doctrine of
the Fathers, which teaches, that when our Savior had in place of the
disobedient, and degenerating Jews adopted us Gentiles, that even out of a
more then Seraphical, and burning charity toward us, he was content before
his death to bequeath to his Church the true Sacrifice of himself, there to be
daily offered up under the forms of Bread, and Wine. The which was (according
to the The Psalmist.] Psalm. 109. in these words: Iurauit Dominus, and non
poenitebit eum: Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech.
Psalmist) so long before shaddowed by that of Melchisedech, whereof one One
Father.] viz. Chrysostom homil. 35. in Genes.
Father with reference thereunto says: Videns Typum, cogita (oro) and
veritatem: and of which (by reason of it perpetual continuance to be in the
Church) the once Glory, and Pride of Afric thus writes: Perpes est hoc.]
Cyprian Sermon de Coena Domini.
Perpes est hoc Sacrificium, and semper permanens Holocaustum.

Now here it will not seem needful to allege the Authorities of the Fathers
(though most frequent, and punctual therein) expounding the Sacrifice of
Melchisedech as a Type of the Eucharist, therefore (for greater breuity) I will
content my self in laying down the Sentences, and Judgment of the said
Doctors, wherein they plainly acknowledge, that the Eucharist does contain in
it self a Sacrifice, not in a forced, and Metaphorical, but in a true, and
native acception of the Word. And yet for the more clear conuincing of our
Adversaries herein, I will for bear all Inferentiall Deductions drawn by long
circuitions, and ambages of Sequeles, and will tie my self only to such their
sayings, wherein we find the Eucharist to be called Sacrificium, Victima etc.
or where the words, Immolare, Offerre, and the like, are said of the Eucharist;
or finally where the word, Altar, is expressly mentioned, which word (even by
the confession of Doctor Doctor Reynolds.] viz. in his Conference with M.
Heart. page 552.
Reynolds) necessarily implies a true Sacrifice. Which point being once
cleared, we shall thereby more easily discover the malice of our Sectaryes
against Gods Church, since they labor to wound her in the Maister-veyne of
Christian Religion, by depriving her of the most auayleable, and healthful
Oblation of Christ's Body, and Blood, left for the better expiating of Man's
sins. Which Mystery of our Catholic Faith these new Brethren are loath to
acknowledge, in that (besides other Reasons) it comprehends, as being a
Sacrifice, no small difficulties. For it is a Sacrifice remitting our Sins,
where no Blood No Blould is shed.] Christ's Blood was to be shed in a bloody
manner but once, in that he was but once to dye, according to that Heb. 9.
Christ was offered once to take away the sins of many. And from his Passion
the Sacrifice of the Eucharist receaues it virtue, and force. And therefore in
this sense Sins may be said to be remitted in the Eucharist by sheding of
blood. Besides Christ's blood is truly shed (though in an unbloody manner) in
the Sacrifice of the Mass, through the worth whereof our Sins are remitted.
is shed, and yet without Without shedding of blood.] Heb c. 9.
shedding of Blood there is no remission: or if blood be here shed, yet in an
incruent, and unbloody manner. Where what is here sacrificed remains Remaynes
incons^mptible.] Christ's Body in the Sacrifice of the Mass remains
inconsumptible, in that it being glorified, is impatible, and not capable of
any such alteration, or change. And yet his Body, as it is a Sacrifice may be
said in some sense to be consumptible, in that by the reason of the receiving,
and eating of it, it cease to be under the forms of Bread, and Wine, and
consequently cease to be that (to wit, to lie under those forms) which before
it was. Now that there should be a Transmutation, and chang of the thing
sacrificed, is apparent, in that it is one particle in the definition of a true
Sacrifice, as also the same appears by the example of all the Sacrifices in
the Old Law.
in consumptible, and yet every such true Litation necessarily implies a
consumption, and destroying of the thing sacrificed. Where Innocence assayles
Iniquity; and to prevent the punishment of God for the sin of Man, both God
God and Man.] In that Christ's Body is upon the Altar, and that his Humanity is
never more to be severed from his Divinity; therefore it follows that his
Divinity is there present with his Humanity, as in the first Tract is fully
demonstrated.
and Man are upon the Altar: Where the holy thing was but once to be immolated
Once to be immolated.] To wit, in a bloody manner, and this was performed but
once, viz. at the time of his Passion: And yet he is often to be sacrificed in
the Eucharist, in that himself faith, Hoc facite.
, and yet was commanded to be often immolated: Where being a true Sacrifice,
is yet (according to the According to the Apostle.] Viz. 1. Cor. 11. in these
words: Mortem Domini annunciabitis, donec veni^t.
Apostle) a Commemoration of a true Sacrifice: Where that, which descended from
Descended from God to man.] The Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament, that is, an
external sign of an invisible Grace, and refection, which is conferred to us,
whilst we take the Eucharist aright; so it proceeds from God (as all
Sacraments do) but as the Body of Christ is there sacrificed up by the Priest,
so according to the nature of a Sacrifice, it is offered by him to God.
God to Man, is offered up by Man to God: Where the The Creator.] In that the
Priest receiving the Body of Christ, his body is there accompanied with the
Divinity of Christ, as is said above.
Creator by means thereof vouchsafes to be contained within his Creature; and
the Supreme Agent within his Mynisteriall Agent: Where (as one Father says,
Idem est Conuiua etc.] S. Hierome Epist. ad Hedibiam quast. 2.
Idem est Conuiua, and Conuiuium; idem comedens, and qui comeditur. And (as
another teaches) where one and the same body is borne up by the hands of the
said body; Ferebatur Perebatur Christus.] So writes S. Augustine in Psalm. 33.
concion. 1.
Christus in manibus suis: So the hands became the Altar, whereupon the Body
was sacrificed: Finally, where the Priest is become the Sacrifice, according to
that Father: Caro sacrificij nostri corpus est effectum Sacerdotis nostri.

But to leave these subtilties; Here we are to advertise the Reader, that the
Fathers teaching the Eucharist to comprehend in it self a true Sacrifice: This
their doctrine cannot be applied to Bread, and Wine. First, because the
Sacrifice of Bread, and Wine either in respect of the natural Substances of
the things themselves, or their significations, and representations, is
inferior to the Sacrifice of the Old Law (as appears above in the Figures of
the Eucharist.) And secondly, in that the Fathers do ascribe an infinite virtue
to the Sacrifice here made (of the power whereof we have entreated in the
former precedent Chapter) but no such imputative efficacy can with any
probability be assigned (especially now in the time of Grace) to the
sacrificing of a little Bread, and Wine: Thus according to the Fathers, what to
a vulgar Eye here seems to be offered up, is not: and what is, seems not.

And now to proceed to these their Testimonies: First we read (besides those
few places already alleged, though ranged to some one of the former heads, in
regard of the particular respect there specified) in S. Leo, sermon. 8. de
Passione, and in S. Cyril l. de Adoratione in spiritu, and veritate: That the
Body of our Savior is offered up as a sacrifice in the Mystery of the
Eucharist.

S. Augustine l. 4. de Trinitate, c. 14. Quid gratius offeri, aut suscipi
posset, quam Caro Sacrificij nostri Corpus effectum Sacerdotis nostri? What can
be offered up, or accepted more thankfully, then that the Flesh of our
Sacrifice should become the Body of our Priest?]

The same Father l. 2. quaest. Euangel. q. 3. showing, why Christ commanded
the Leprous Man to offer up Sacrifice for his clensing, thus writes: Quia
nondum institutum erat etc. Because as yet this Sacrifice (being the Holy of
Holies) which is his Body, was not as yet ordained.] The said Father lib. de
Ciuit. Dei 8. c. vlt. and l. 22. c. 8. makes frequent mention of Altars.

S. Chrysostom l. 6. De Sacerdotio. Per id tempus, and Angeli Sacerdoti
assident, and caelestium potestatum vniuersus ordo clamores excitat, and locus
Altari vicinus in illius honorem, qui immolatur, Angelorum choris plenus est;
id quod credere abunde licet, vel ex tanto illo Sacrificio, quod tunc
peragitur: At that time the Angels draw near to the Priest, and the whole
Order of the Heavenly Powers causes great voices, and the place near to the
Altar, by reason of the honor of him (who is there immolated) is full of
Angels; which thing we may fully believe in regard of so great a sacrifice
there performed.]

Again, Homil. 17. in Epist. ad Hebraeos. In multis locis etc. In many places
are offered not diverse Christ's, but one only Christ every where, remaining
entire both here, and there, being but one Body, not many Bodies.] And, Homil.
24. in priorem ad Corinth. he says: Pro victimarum etc. He has commanded
himself to be offered up in place of the slaughter of sheep, and such like
Sacrifices.] And, Homil. 53. ad Populum: Si quis vellet etc. If any should
endeavor to destroy this Altar, would not you destroy, and kill him with
stones?] And, Homil. 20. in 2. epist. ad Corinth. Tu Altar honoras etc. Thou
do honor the Altar, which receaueth upon it the Body of Christ.]

S. Gregory Nyssene, Orat. de Resurrect. Dominus praeoccupans impetum Iudaeorum
etc. Our Lord preventing the violence of the Jews (being both Priest, and
Lamb) made himself a Sacrifice. But thou demaundest of me, when this did
happen? Even then, when he gave to his Disciples his Body to eat, and his
Blood to drink.

S. Ambrose in cap. 1. Lucae. Cum sacrificamus etc. When we do sacrifice,
Christ is present, Christ is immolated.] And, in Psalm. 38. Etsi nunc Christus
non videatur offerre, ipse tame^ offertur in terris, cum corpus cius offertur.
Although Christ may be thought now not to offer, notwithstanding he is offered
here upon Earth, when his Body is offered.]

Optatus Mileuitanus l. 6. contra Parmenianum, thus writes: Quid est enim tam
sa^rilegum, quam Altaria Dei, (in quibus aliquando vos obtulistis) frangere,
radere, and remouere? in quibus vota populi, and membra Christi portata sunt?
quo Deus Omnipotens sit? quo postulatus descendit spiritus Sanctus? vnde a
multis ^ ignus aeternae salutis, and tutela fidei, and spes resurrectionis
accepta est? What is more sacrilegious, then to break, to scrape, to remove
the Altars of God upon the which your selves sometimes have offered? In the
which the Vows of the People, and the Members of Christ are borne? where God
(who is Omnipotent) is called upon? whereupon the Holy Ghost (being prayed
unto) descends? from whence the Pledge of eternal Salvation, and the defense
of faith, and hope of the Resurrection is taken.] And a little after: Quid est
Altar etc. What is the Altar, but the seat of the Body, and Blood of Christ?]
And again: Quid vos offenderat Christus etc. In what has Christ offended you,
whose Body, and Blood does there stay by certain times?] And again after, Hoc
tamen immane etc. Notwithstanding this cruel, and heinous offense is
performed, whenever you have broken the Chalices, which are the Porters, or
Carryers of the blood of Christ.] Eusebius l 1. demon. Euang. c. 6. writes
much concerning Altars in the time of the Gospel.

S. Cyprian l. 1. ^p. 9. speaking of a certain Priest deceased, who for
leaving of a temporal, and worldly prohibited business to be performed by
another Priest, deserved not (according to Cyprians Judgment) to have the
sacrifice offered for him, because (says he) he did withdraw the Priest of God
from the Altar.

Tertullian lib. de Poenitentia mentions kneeling before the Altars of God.

Dionysius Areopagita c. 3. Eccles. Hierarch. makes mention of Altars.

Hippolytus Martyr Orat. de Antichristo, brings in Christ thus speaking:
Venite Pontifices, and Sacerdotes, qui preci^sum corpus, and Sanguinem meum
quotidie immolastis.] Come hither ye High Priests, and other Priests, who
daily do sacrifice my precious body, and blood.]

In the Canons of the Apostles (viz. 3. and 4.) there is frequent speech
touching Altars.

Lastly S. Andrew the Apostle (as his Disciples do write in his Passion) thus
says: Ego Omnipotenti Deo immaculatum Agnum quotidie sacrifico etc. Qui cum
sit vere sacrificatus, and vere a popi^o carnes eius manducatae, integer
perseuerat, and vinus.] I do daily sacrifice unto Almighty God the immaculate
Lamb. Who, when he is truly sacrificed, and his flesh truly eaten of the
People, does nevertheless persevere whole, and alive.]

Thus have I gone over certain principal Heads, carrying in themselves a
natural dependency (^rke the four Beasts in Ezechiel, which were joined one
to another by their wings) wherein is contained, a short Compe^dium of the
Fathers writings in this Point; out of which abstract, we may easily extract
their Faith, and Belief had in this high Mystery, and withal conclude, that
the Sacramentaries are no more distant, and remote from the Times, wherein the
Fathers lived then from the Doctrine maintained in the said Times. For (as we
have showed) the Fathers not contenting themselves with ordinary, positive, and
measured speeches delivered of the Eucharist, do use high, and superlatiue
Titles of the dignity, and worth thereof: The Sacramentaries only affoard such
appellations, as Nature has already given to the same. The Fathers
acknowledging heerin a true, and real Change, have paralelled it with the
greatest supernatural Cha^ges whatsoever: The Sacramentaries can find no other
alteration, but that before it being common Bread, and Wine, is now only
reserved (a strange, and stupendous Mutation) for the use of their Winy
Communion.

The Fathers postpose the Types of the Old Law to it, yea compare it with the
chiefest Articles of Christian Faith: The Sacramentaries as long as they teach,
that it but Typically represe^teth the Body, and Blood of Christ, can at the
most but prize it at the equal value of those Legal Figures.

The Fathers ascribed the Conversion there made, only to the Omnipotency of
God, affirming, that not sense, but only Faith is able to conceive the
Mysteries therein: The Sacramentaries (for the more cou^tenancing of their
Bread, and Wine) verbally somtymes acknowledge, that a lively Faith only is of
force to apprehend the difficulties of these their representing Elements. O the
penetrating Faith of our Sectaries! the work (no doubt) of the Holy Ghost! the
seed of Abraham, able (according to the Apostle) to move Mountains,
transcending the narrow, and niggard Limits of Sense, and Reason, since it is
of power (most supernaturally) to apprehend, how one thing may represent, and
signify another thing! But to pass on.

The Fathers do attribute even most divine, and celestial effects to this
Sacrament: The Sacramentaries, what efficacy they assign thereunto (to wit, the
apprehending of Christ by Faith) do teach, that it rises only from the
signification, and remembrance of Christ employed in the external Signs, the
which may as auailably (even by their own Principles) be performed by any of
their ten-shilling-Sermons.

The Fathers exhibited with great humility all due reverence, and adoration to
Christ's Body there present: The Sacramentaries cannot be induced to give any
such respect at all. Finally, the Fathers do maintain, that the Eucharist is a
true, and Propitiatory Oblation: The Sacramentaries acknowledge no other
Oblation in the Church, then only a spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer, and
Thanksgiving.

Thus we see, what Alienaton there is between the Writings of the Fathers, and
of our Nouellists. But we are not to marvel, that the Sacramentaries do
never speak in one, and the same Catholic Idiome with those Primitive
Doctors, since they are deaf heerin, and will not be brought to hear, what
the Church of God, either in those ancient Times, or in these latter days do
teach concerning the same; And we know, it is a Conclusion in Philosophy, that,
He who never hears, never speaks.

But before I conclude this Point, I will put the Reader in remembrance of some
other Observations contained in the Testimonies of the Fathers, which may at
least morally assure him, that they maintained our Catholic doctrine of the
Eucharist: Most of which Observations (though different from the foresaid
heads) are to be found in their former alleged Authorities: Others of them in
other their Sentences: Of both which for aduantaging the Readers memory, and
for avoiding a wearisome prolixity, I will only refer him to the places,
where such their Sentences may be read.

As first we find, that the Fathers resting upon the doctrine of the Real
Presence, as a confessed Article of Christian Faith, did from thence, as from
an acknowledged Principle refell diverse Heresies. Thus did Irenaeus.] l. 4. c.
34.
Irenaeus against the Valentinians, prove from this Mystery, that Christ was
the Son of God the Father; which Doctor also proves from the same ground
the resurrection of the flesh, giving a reason thereof in these words: Quoniam
Quoniam corpore.] Irenaeus ibidem.
corpore and sanguine Domini alitur. In like sort he proves against the
Gnostici.] l. 5 c. 2.
Gnostici, that Christ came in true flesh, even from the former dogmaticall
point of the Eucharist. After the same manner Hilarious.] l. 8. de Trinitate.
Hilarious proves, that Christ had a true Body and Blood, in that his true
flesh and blood was in this Sacrament. Finally Cyril of Alexandria Cyrillus.]
l. to in Joan. c. 13.
teaches against the Arian, that Christ both according to his Divinity, and
Humanity did exercise his influence upon us, in that his Body and Blood was
taken in the Eucharist to nourish in us a spiritual life.

Secondly they acknowledge a great miracle to rest, that Christ as being in the
Eucharist, is in diverse several places at one and the same time. Thus does
Chrysostom.] l. 3. de Sacerdot.
Chrysostom, Basil.] in Liturgia.
Basil, and Gregory Nyssenus.] Orat. de Paschate.
Nyssene.

Thirdly they assign a reason, why Christ would latently be under the forms
of bread and wine, to wit, lest otherwise the Communicants should receive his
body with horror and fear: So Ambrose.] l. 4. de Sacramentis.
Ambrose, Cyril.] apud D. Thomam, in Catena, circa caput 2^. Lucae.
Cyril of Alexandria, and Theophilact.] in c. 26. Matthai.
Theophilact do teach.

Fourthly they affirm, that Christ, as he is taken in the Eucahrist, is
neither corrupted nor diminished, placing a great difficulty therein, as we find
out of S. Andrew.] In his Passion written by his Disciples.
S. Andrew. The like we read in Cyprian.] Sermon de Coena Domini.
Cyprian Augustine.) Sermon. 2 de verbis Apostoli.
, Augustine, and Cyril Cyril.] Catech. 5. Mist.
of Jerusalem. But this difficulty were idly suggested, if Christ were in the
Sacrament only in representation.

Fifthly, they teach, that the Union of Christ with us in the Sacrament is not
only spiritual, and fide tantum, but reipsa, in very deed and truly. This is
affirmed by Hilarious.] l. 8. de Trinitate.
Hilarious, and Chrysostom.] homil. 45. in Joan. and 83. in Matthew.
Chrysostom. Yea they further proceed, writing, that this spiritual Union
which is made through faith and grace, does rise from the corporal Union of
Christ with us, as the Effect proceeds from the Cause; so Cyril.] l. 4. in
Joan. c. 14. and 15.
Cyril, and Tertullian.] I de resurrect Carnis.
Tertullian.

Sixthly, they mantayne, that the Body of Christ is truly taken, as well by the
wicked, as the virtuous and godly, mere contrary to the doctrine of the
Sacramentaries, who affirm, that Christ's Body (because it is in the Sacrament
only Typically) is only taken by the faithful. Yea the Fathers are not afraid
to say, that his Body is received by the wicked ore sacrilego, with a
sacrilegious mouth, so distinguishing this kind of receiving, from a spiritual
and fruitful receiving. See heerof Augustine.] tract. 27. in Joan. and l. 5.
de Baptismo contra Donat. c. 8.
Augustine, Chrysostom.] homil. 83. in Matthaeum.
Chrysostom, Origin.] in Psalm. 37.
Origin, Cyprian.] l. 3. epist. 15.
Cyprian, and Basil.] l. 2. de Baptismo c. 3.
Basil.

Seauenthly they do teach, that Christ at his last Supper did eat his own
Body. Thus Chrysostom.] Homil. 83. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, and Hierome.] In Hedibiam.
Hierome. But this cannot probably be understood according to the Caluinian
participation through Grace and faith, since no new accession, or increase of
Grace came to Christ after the very first moment of his Incarnation. Besides it
is most absurd to say, that the Flesh of Christ is the isntrumental cause of
the Grace given to Christ.

Eighthly, and lastly, they intimate diverse things touching the Praxis, and use
of the Blessed Eucharist, which are altogether incompetent to a Typical and
figurative Presence. As first (to omit the Adoration and Invocation of the
Eucharist, already entreated of) they did place a great religious act in taking
this Sacrament fasting: as Augustine.] epist. 118.
Augustine, and Chrysostom do witness: yea Chrysostom.] Epist. 3. ad Ciriacum.
Chrysostom affirms it to be a sin to take it not fasting. They also
affirmed that a most diligent examining of our Conscience ought to precede the
participation thereof: So Chrysostom.] l. 6. de Sacerdotio.
Chrysostom. They commanded that it should not be seen of such as were
Infidels: So Dionysius.] Cap. 7. Eccles. Hierarch.
Dionysius; and which is more that it should not be seen of the faithful yet
unbaptized, as appears out of Augustine.] Tract. 11. in Joan.
Augustine. Hence it is that in the presence of the misbelieuing Infidels they
used most secret and cautelous phrases, speaking of the Eucharist, as
Sacramentum fidelium norunt Fideles: So Augustine.] Sermon. 2. de verbis Apostol.
Augustine. And, Norunt, qui mysterijs imbuti sunt. So Origin.] Homil. 13 in
Exodum. and 9. in Leuiticum.
Origin. They taught that in extremity of sickness it was to be taken of every
Christian pro Viatico, as appears out of the first Council of Council of
Nyce.] Canon. 12.
Nyce, Eusebius.] l. 6. c. 34.
Eusebius, and Chrysostom.] l. 6. de Sacerdot.
Chrysostom. Finally, hither may be referred, what the Fathers of the
Primitive Church do teach touching the sanctity of Temples, Vestments,
Chalices, and other religious Vessels, all used in the celebration of the
Eucharist; All which things, as Hierome.] Ad Theophilum Alexand.
Hierome says, propter consortium corporis and sanguinis Domini magna
veneratione coluntur. And Optatus.] l. 6. contya Parmenianum.
Optatus writes, that they being contaminata, Sacrilegos faciunt. And hence it
rises, that it was objected to the Arians by Athanasius, that, fregerunt
mysticum Calicem, which offense was acknowledged to be most heinous by the
Council of Alexandria, as Athanasius.] Apologia 2.
Athanasius writes. To the same end (to wit, as tending to the facred function
of consecrating the Eucharist) may be referred what the Fathers have written of
the Dignity of Priesthood: Of which point entreates Nazianzen.] Apolog. 1. and
Oratione ad Iulianum.
Nazianzen, Chrysostom.] Lib. de Sacerdot.
Chrysostom, and others; as also of their vowed Vowed Chastity.] Of which
point do occur most frequent Authorityes in the wrytings of the Fathers.
Chastity, principally directed for that purpose.

Now, who shall weigh all these several Observations, accompanied with the
former heads set down at large, and all literally, and plainly expressed in
the Fathers Writings; and not any one of them sorting in nature to a bare
Typical Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, but all most suitable and
agreeable to the worth of his true and real being there, how can he be
otherwise persuaded, then that those Doctors did jointly agree with us in this
high Article of faith? Wherefore the determination of this matter (to wit,
whether the Fathers were Sacrame^taries, or Catholics heerin) I remit not so
much to the censure of the Learned (for this were to wrong their Judgments, in
making a Point so evident, the Object of their grave Resolutions) as I refer
it, even to the five Senses of the ignorant and illiterate.

OF THE DIVERSE MANNERS of the Protestants Euasions to the Authorities of the
Fathers. CHAP. VIII.
ALTHOUGH in setting down the Authorities of the Fathers in the precedent
Chapters, I have illustrated most of the^ with such short Animaduersions, as
best unfold the true Sense of the said Authorities, and consequently prevent
all such sleighty elusions, as are used by our Adversaries for the avoiding of
the same: Nevertheless I have thought good here to amasse together all their
diverse kinds of Answers, being severally applied in general to the produced
sayings of the former chief Heads (for commonly to all Testimonies of one
Nature, they do appropriate one, and the same Answer.) Thus shall the discreet
Reader have at once a Synopsis, or entire view of the Sacramentaries feeble
euasions, being full of tergiuersation, and distrust.

Now then, one Kind of their Answers (if so I may term it) is to give no
answer at all; for when they are pressed with such perspicuous, and evident
places of the Fathers, as are in no sort to be obscured with any mist of words
(for the Sun is sometimes so radiant, as that it cannot be ouerclouded) then
in their Replies to Catholic Books therein, they are content, not taking
notice thereof (like men of good natures) to suffer all such sentences quietly
to pass by them in Gods name, and the Kings. Thus we find most clear passages
of the Fathers set down in Catholic Books, yet never answered by Calvin,
Peter Martyr, or others, who have undertaken a refutation of the said Books,
but altogether passed over, as if no such places had been objected: Such
careful Pylotes they are, as willing to avoid the most dangerous Rocks. Which
course of theirs I cannot condemn as impoliticke, since it is less
disaduantagious silently to give way to all such Assertions, then by opposition
to display openly the forces of the same; for we see, that the strength of the
Wind is best discerned by finding resistance.

Of the many Authorities of the Fathers, whereunto the Protestants (to wit
Calvin, Peter Martyr etc.) give no Answer at all, I have thought good to note
these few, viz. The Passion of S. Andrew. Origin homil. 13. in Exodus in ^. 25.
and hom. 5. in diuersa loca Euangelij. Cyril Catech. 4. Mystagog. Gregory
Nyssene Orat. Catechet. c. 36. and 37. Ephre^ lib. de natura Dei minime
scrutanda. Gaudentius Tract. 2. de Exodo. Chrysostom H^mil. 83. in Matthew. and
51. in Matthew. and Homil. 21. in Acta. and Homil. de Eucharist. in Encaenijs.
and lib. 6. de Sacerdotio. Proclus Constantinopolitanus lib. de Traditione
diuinae Liturgiae: besides many other Testimonies of these, and other Fathers.

The first form then of their Positive Answers may be assigned to those
Authorityes, wherein the Fathers do absolutely call the Eucharist, the Body,
and Blood of Christ; as where they teach, that we do eat his Body, and drink
his Blood, or that the Body, and Blood, which we receau^ in the Eucharist is
our price, the Pledge of our Salvation, or the like.

To the Testimonies of this Nature, our Adversaries do shape a double Answer.
For either they understand those places of the True Body, and Blood of Christ,
as it is in Heaven, and received by us by faith; or else of the signs thereof,
which we truly, and really do take in the Eucharist. But if we do observe
intensly, and deliberately the circumstances of those Passages, it will be
evident, that neither part of this Answer is in any sort satisfactory.

For first, that the Fathers meaning is not, that we take his Body (as it is in
Heaven) by faith, is proved, in that you shall for the most part ever find,
that in such places they teach, that we receive it from the Altar, or at the
Priests hands (and consequently not as it is in Heaven) or that the Sacrament
of the Eucharist is his Body, and Blood: or finally you shall find there some
other such like accession of Words, as do force the Place to be interpreted of
his Body, and Blood, as it is under the external forms, and not as it is in
Heaven.

And as touching the second Branch of their former Evasion, to wit, that the
said Testimonies are not to be interpreted of the Bread, and Wine signifying,
and figuring his Body, and Blood, in which they say Christ's Body is
symbolically taken, is no less manifest; the reason whereof being this:
Because the words of those Testimonies do almost ever intimate some effect, or
efficacy of the Eucharist, which to Bread, and Wine is incompetent; as that it
nourishes our Souls, or that it is the Price, or Pledge of our Salvation, or
hope of our Resurrection, or that it suffered for our Sins, or some other
such spiritual work, energy, or operation, whereof the bare Symboles of the
Eucharist are not capable.

Thus may the obseruant Reader clearly discern the feeblenes of this their
Answer, and conclude with himself, that such Testimonies of the Fathers
cannot be construed of Christ's Body, as it is in Heaven; since the Words
precedent, or consequent restrain it to the Altar: Nor of Bread, and Wine
Symbolically, and Sacramentally representing the Body, and Blood of Christ;
since Bread, and Wine cannot produce the spiritual Effects there specified: so
clear it is, that our Sectary in approaching to answer the said Sentences,
does ineuitably run upon some one circumstantiall pyke, or other, of the said
Authorityes, wherewith he is most dangerously wounded.

That this my Reply may be more clearly conceived, I will instance it in this
one Testimony following which shall serve, as a Precedent for all the rest of
the same nature; The like couse of exemplifying I will observe in all other
kynds of their Answers; and though such places were before alleged, yet here
they are produced upon a different occasion.

S. Augustine then in l. 6. Confess. c. 13. thus writes touching his Mother:
Tantummodo memoriam sui ad Altar tuum fieri desiderauit, vnde sciret
dispensari Victimam sanctam, qua deletum est chyrographum, quod erat contrarium
nobis.] Only she desired, that remembrance of her might be made at thy Altar,
from whence she did know the holy Sacrifice to be dispensed (or given) by the
which the handwriting, which was contrary to us is defaced.] Out of this place
we prove (as we showed above) that by Victima sancta here specified by S.
Augustine, is understood the Body and Blood of Christ. Now here it cannot be
answered, that the Body of Christ is meant, as it is in Heaven; because he
says, that this Victima is dispensed, or distributed from the Altar, which
thing agrees not with his Body, as it is in Heaven: Neither can it be said (as
some seem to interpret it) of the Bread, and Wine Typically signifying the
Body, and Blood of Christ, in that the Bread and Wine was not the Sacrifice,
which was offered for us upon the Cross. And thus much of this first kind of
our Adversaries Answer.

Another form of euading the pressures, and weights of the Fathers Authorityes
is this: That if in the alleged Authority, there can be found but any one
word, which is to be accepted not literally, but figuratively, metaphorically,
or in some other forced construction; then our Allegorical Sectarie inferres
thereupon, that the whole Sentence (though most strongly fortifying the
Catholic doctrine heerin) is to be taken figuratively, and not literally,
urging, that seeing, both the points are contained in one, and the same
Sentence, or Period, and that the one by our confession is not to be understood
literally, why should the other objected by us, be taken literally?

The Transparency of which Answer is easily seen through. And first we are to
know, and observe, that every thing, which is not delivered in plain, and
literal words, proceeds not always from an intention of Rhetoric, or
Amplification in the Writer, but often even out of Necessity, since sometimes we
are forced thereunto, as not having that native habit of speech, and words,
wherewith otherwise we would apparel the true conceits of our Mind; which
scarsitie of apt words, may perhaps be sometimes found in the writings of the
Fathers: yet hence it follows not, that all the rest (adjoined thereto) must
partake of the same want.

Again, whether this kind of writing rises out of a defect of words, or out
of a delicacy, and choicenesse of a Man's pen, yet the Argument hence deduced is
inconsequent, since by this reason we may infer, that almost no one Text of
the Apocalypse may be alleged as literally to prove, or disprove any thing: and
why? because some adjoining parcel thereof is set down in a Figurative kind of
speech. And thus we cannot allege (contrary to all ancient Expositours) that
Text in the Apocalypse, These are they, which have washed their Robes, and have
made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, cap. 7. to prove, that Martyrs, and
other Saints of God are saved by the Blood of Christ: because (forsooth) in the
said Sentence there are two Metaphors; to wit, the long Robes (whereby are
signified the Bodies of the Saints) and the word Lamb (meaning thereby Christ)
and therefore it should follow upon the said ground, that the word Blood, must
also be here a Metaphor, not signifying blood indeed (and so excluding the
Blood of Christ from our salvation) but some other thing shaddowed thereby. Yea
which is more (if this kind of Answer were solid) we could scarce produce any
one sentence of the Psalms, literally to be expounded of Christ, or his Church
(in which Authorityes we Christians mainly insist against the Jews) since that
part of Scripture is most luxuriant of Tropes, Schemes, and other Figurative
speeches; And yet we see, that it is most incongruous to maintain, that any
whole Psalm is to be interpreted Allegorically, because we find certain
Figures in some Passages thereof.

Thus it is evident, how defective this Answer is, which consists in
resolving the Fathers sentences into Figurative Senses. But our Adversaries
boldness stays not here in deprauing after this sort Man's word; but
extends it self to corrupt in like manner (by over much origenizing, and
mystically interpreting it) Gods sacred word.

This second Form of Answer I will illustrate with this Testimony following.
S. Chrysostom Homil. de Eucharist. in Encaenijs, thus writes. Number vides
Panem? number Vinum? number sicut reliqui cibi in secessum vadunt? Absit, ne nec
cogites. Quemadmodum enim si cera igni adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil
substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit; sic and hic put a mysteria consumi
corporis substantia. Do thou see Bread? do thou see Wine? do these
things go into the common passage, as other meats? Let it be far from thee
to think so. For even as Wax being put in the fire, is assimilated, or made
like to it, no part of the substance remaining: or redounding: So here
imagine, that the Mysteries are consumed through the Substance of the Body.] Of
this place I have entreated above. But here now we are to take notice, that
our Adversaries labor to delude the force thereof by answering, that those
words of this Testimony Mysteria consumi, are not to be understood literally
(for so they should be false) in that the external Forms of Bread, and Wine
(which are contained in the word Mysteria) are not consumed by the accession of
the Body of Christ: for we see that the Accidences of Bread, and Wine remain
even after Consecration; seeing then, say they, that these words are not to be
taken literally, but figuratively, therefore the whole sentence aforegoing is
also to be taken figuratively, and not literally. And thus they seek to euade
this most pregnant Testimony; whereby the Word Mysteria is understood, that the
Substance only of the Bread, and Wine are consumed.

A third Branch of their Euasio^s, shootes out to such Authorityes of the
Fathers, as refer the effectuating of this Mystery to Gods sole Omnipotency,
marshalling it (in regard of the difficulties discovered therein) with the
abstrusest points of Christianity, and ranging it (by reason of the great
Miracle there exhibited) with the greatest Miracles ever performed by God.

Now their Answer heerto is, that the Eucharist is wrought by the Omnipotency
of God; for seeing it is a Sacrament, not Man, but God only (and consequently
his Omnipotency is here necessarily exacted) is able to institute the same.
How rouing, and wandering this is from the scope, and drift of the Fathers shall
here appear. First from the words of the Fathers themselves, which do even
depose a contrary meaning in them; for they in those places alleged of this
nature, do not assign the Omnipotency of God to the Eucharist, as it is a
Sacrament (for hereof they intimate for the most part, not the least touch) but
to it, as therein one Substance by force of certain words, is truly turned
into another Substance.

Secondly, the weakness of the former Answer appears, in that we grant,
that an Omnipotency indeed is required to the Institution of any Sacrament,
whereby it should justify a Man: but our Adversaries will not believe, that the
Sacraments (as Instruments of Christ, and where due preparation is) do confer
immediately Grace (for this were in them an ouer-vnkind relinquishing of Sense,
and too strait an Intercourse, and Co^merce with their understanding) but they
teach, that the Sacraments do justify us, only by signifying, and
representation; because (say they) they are made things to us, in the
signification whereof we apprehend Christ by Faith. And so their Omnipotency
here formally rests in creating a new signification of a thing; to wit, that
the natural substance of the Sacraments should represent, and signify Christ,
whom (before his Institution thereof) they did not signify. Now, if Omnipotency
must necessarily concur to the making, that one thing may signify another
thing, then by the said ground every seely Ale-wife is Omnipotent, in that her
red Lattice, or Bush at the door (things of themselves indifferent, as not
carrying any reference to her profession) are made by her to be a sufficient
Type, Sign, or Representation to the Passengers, of the Ale which she has to
sell; so clear it is, that a Real change, not an Imposition of a new
signification requires an Omnipotency. Now (as in the former I have done) I
will instance this answer in some one authority.

S. Cyprian Sermon. de Coena Dom. (of which place I have entreated above) thus
writes: Panis iste, quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed
natura mutatus, Omnipotentia Verbi factus est Caro etc. This Bread, which our
Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed not in outward show, but in nature,
is by the Omnipotency of the Word made Flesh.] Now, what intimation is here
made to ascribe the Omnipotency of God here expressed, to the Eucharist, only
in that it is a Sacrament? Or with what tecture, or pretext of Reason can any
such exorbitant co^struction be here forged? since (as is already proved) an
Omnipotency is required in the Institution of Sacraments, that they may truly
perform that, which they do signify, to wit, that they do justify Man (but
this efficacy of them, our Sacramentaries do altogether reject) but no
Omnipotency is exacted to make, that a thing may signify what before it did not,
for this not only God, but Man is able to perform.

Their fourth Answer belongs to such places, which prefer the Eucharist
before the Jewish Types, and Figures (wherein Christ was as perfectly shaddowed
and signified as in the Eucharist, if there be nothing else there, but Bread,
and Wine.) The insufficiency of the Sacramentaries Answer heerto made, is
fully, and at large displayed in the Marginall References touching the
diversity of the Types of the Eucharist, and the Eucharist it self: to which
To which place.] Viz. the first Chapter of this second Tract.
place I refer the Reader, partly as affecting here expedition, and breuity;
and partly as being loath, wearisomely to cloy with a needless iteration of
one, and the same thing, the fastidious ears of our curious Age.

Another form of their shuffling Answers is that, wherewith they labor to
break through all such Passages of the Fathers, which do assign any reverence
whatsoever to the Eucharist either of Adoration, Invocation, or in any other
sort. To all which they give us this yawning, heedlesse, and doubtful
solution: That if any such reverence was exhibited by the Fathers to the
Eucharist, it was not terminated in the Eucharist it self, but directed to
Christ (signified therein) and so by the mediation of those earthly Elements,
transferred to him, who is in Heaven; no otherwise then when the Papists (for
thus do they particulerly instance) praying before Images, direct not their
prayers to the Image, but to Christ, or the Saint represented therein. But
here I would ask them what secret Intelligence they (now coming so long
after) can have of the Fathers minds, and intentions heerin? If they insist in
the words, we find no appearance of the least glance thereof; if they call to
mind the practice of the Church of those Ages (the securest Scholie, or
Paraphrase of the Fathers writings) it seals up the Truth in our behalf.

Furthermore I say, that the Sacramentary is of a Lethargious, and forgetful
constitution (a point, according to the old Oportet etc. very disaduantagious
to his profession;) or if not so, then is he so Serpentinely affected against
the Catholics, as that, so he may be opposite to them, he is content to be
unfaithful to himself. For at other times he ryots both in Pulpit, and by Pen
with great profusion of Words, and Time, telling such as will believe him, that
the Catholics do pray to Pictures, and place in them a kind of Divinity;
whereas now, he is content (courteously) to acknowledge the lawful, and
religious practice of the Catholics therein; since he cannot cast any
aspersion of Idolatry, or superstition upon us, but he is forced (except he
will receive a more dangerous Wound) to insimulate the Fathers within the said
Error.

Here then I demand of them (for they are most fugitive, and uncertain in
answering heereunto) will they acknowledge the Fathers Reverence, Adoration,
and praying to the Eucharist it self? why then do they longer so
pertinaciously persist in defending their Sacramentarian doctrine? Will they
seek by inflexions, and wyndings to divert the honor done to the Sacrament, to
Christ only (represented therein) as he is in Heaven? If so, why do these
Anti-Saints, and Enemies of Gods Servants at other times spend themselves out
in such estuation, and heat of railing inuectiues (the scumne of base malice,
and proper Scene of too many of our Sectaryes) against the Catholics for
performing that, which now for their own advantage in a different example,
though like reason, they willingly (yet falsely) obtrude upon the Fathers; thus
if the Sacramentary do escape the sword of Iehu, yet shall the sword of
Elisaeus slay him; and thus we see, how weak this his answer is, wherein his
gain here made, is like to the gain of ground, which a running Water
causes, getting no more on the one side of the Bank, then it loses on the
other.

This their Answer shall be exemplified in that Testimony of S. Dionysius, who
lib. de Hierarch. Eccles. c. 3. part. 3. thus writes: O Diuinissimum, and
Sacrosanctum Sacramentum! obducta tibi significantium signorum operimenta
dignanter aperi, and perspicue nobis fac appareas; nostrosque spirituales
oculos singulari, and aperto tuae Lucis fulgore imple. O most divine, and holy
Sacrament! vouchsafe to open (or remove) the couerings of thy signifying
signs, and make thy self to appear clearly to us, and fill our spiritual
Eyes with the open Fulgor of thy Light.] Whereto Peter Martyr lib. contra
Garainer. part. 1. object. 150. answers according to the tenor of the former
Evasion. Where we see (besides what is already said) that Dionysius does not
here inuoke Christ only before the Sacrament (as the Catholics do before his
Image) but he does inuoke the Sacrament it self, and desires such things of
it, as are required only of God; from whence it follows, that Dionysius
thought, that Christ being God, and Man, was contained truly in the Sacrament,
or rather, that Christ with the external Symbols together was the Sacrament.

The sixth, and last Ward, wherewith our Adversaries seek to put by the
da^gerously pointed Sentences of the Fathers, is appropriated only to such
their Authorities, wherein it is affirmed, that in the celebratio^ of the
Eucharist, there is a true, and Real Sacrifice performed, meaning the offering
up by the words, and hands of the Priest the very Body, and Blood of Christ to
his Father. Now, to these Authorities they frame an answer wouen of several
threeds, either of ignorant, or wilful mistakings. For, they say that the
Eucharist might be termed by the Fathers a Sacrifice for diverse reasons. And
first, by reason of the Oblation of the Faithful, who in the Supper of our
Lord do consecrate themselves to God. Or, of the Preaching of the death of our
Lord. Or of the diverse exercises of Piety (as of Faith, Hope, Penitency,
Charity etc.) or of Prayers, or of Thanksgiving to God, or finally of the
Alms: all which several points, were particulerly performed (say they) in
those former ancient Times in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and which may
be rightly termed Spiritual Sacrifices.

Now, that these Actions (supposing that in a Metaphorical construction they
might be so styled, and were used then) are not understood in the former
passages of the Fathers, I thus prove, in that those Doctors plainly teach,
that the Body, and Blood of Christ is the Sacrifice, which is offered up in the
Church, but those former Actions cannot be meant, and signified, (by any kind
of speech ever heard of) by the Body, and Blood of Christ. As for example, S.
Ambrose writes in Psalm. 38. Etsi Christus nunc non videatur offerre, ipse
tamen offertur in terris, cum corpus eius offertur. Though Christ now may be
thought not to offer up (or sacrifice) yet he himself is here offered up upon
earth, when his body is offered up.] Which words can in no sort be applied to
those former actions specified to be in the Administration of the Eucharist.
Again, the Fathers teach, that only Priests, and no others can offer up this
Sacrifice. Thus does S. Hierome epist. ad Euagrium, yea the Council of Nyce it
self exempteth Deacons from offering up the Sacrifice: and Tertullian l. de
velandis Virginum, Women in general; and Epiphanius haeres. 79. particulerly
the Virgin Mary; but it is manifest, that Prayers, Alms, Lauds, giving of
Thanks, an internal offering up of the Soul (of all which points the former
answer is aggregated) are offered up, and performed by the whole People, much
more then they may be by Deacons.

A second Branch of their Euasions to the said Authorities is deduced from the
Etymologies of the word Sacrificium, or Sacrificare, which is but Sacra facere,
therefore say they, because the Consecration, or Distribution of the Eucharist
is Sacra actio, the Action, or Celebratio^ of it, is called Sacrificium, and
the Minister, who performs the same, may be said Sacrificare. which
Grammatical, or Dictionary Answer (unworthy indeed the learned Ears of the
Judicious) is thus refelled. First, because in all Etymologies we are to
respect non tam aquo quam ad quid; not so much the Primatiues, or Originalls
from whence they are derived, as the applications, whereunto by use, and custom
they are particulerly tied. And thus answerably hereto, we grant that Baptism
is Sacra actio (since it is Lauacrum Regenerationis) and yet we cannot read in
any place of their Writings, where Baptism is called Sacrificium, or he who
baptizeth, is said Sacrificare. Again, though every sacred Action might (...),
and abusiue be called a Sacrifice, yet this would advantage our Adversaries
nothing; since in the former testimonies of the Fathers, not the transient
Action of celebrating the Eucharist, but the permanent thing, which is
sacrificed (to wit the Body, and Blood of Christ) is called by them the
Sacrifice.

Lastly, though by this slight the Sacramentaries might seem to wrench the
ordinary, and natural construction of all such places, where the word
Sacrificium, or Sacrificare is found, yet this is impertinent to diverse
passages of the Fathers above cited, wherein the words Oblatio, or Offerre are.
As that (besides many others) of S. Augustine l. 4. de Trinitat. c. 14. Quid
gratius offerri, aut suscipi possit, quam caro Sacrificij nostri corpus
effectum Sacerdotis nostri?]

The third, and last kind of their expounding the former Authorities, is, that
the Supper of our Lord is called a Sacrifice, or an Oblation, because it
includes in it self a certain Commemoration, or Representation of a true
Sacrifice, viz. of the death of Christ.

To this we reply, that it is true, that the Action of the Eucharist is a
Similitude, or Memorial of the Sacrifice of the Cross: yet hence it follows
not, that the Fathers therefore thought not, that a true, and proper sacrifice
was offered up in the celebration of the Eucharist. Now, that the Fathers did
believe the Eucharist to be a true Sacrifice, and not only a representative
Sacrifice, is clearly euicted out of these ensuing observations. First,
because Baptism is a Sacrament representing the death of Christ; for the
Apostle Romans 6. teaches, that the immersion of the party baptized
represents the death of Christ, and the taking him out of the Water, the
resurrection of Christ, and yet no one of the Fathers do term Baptism a
Sacrifice.

Again, the Fathers do often adioyne certain Epithets, which are peculiar
only to a true Sacrifice: Thus S. Cyprian l. 2. epist. 3. calls the Sacrifice
of the Eucharist. Plenum, and Verum Sacrificium: and S. Chrysostom,
Sacrificium terribile, and plenum horroris. Which Adjuncts are most fondly
given to a mere representative Sacrifice.

Thirdly, the Fathers diverse times do use the words Victima, and Sacrificium,
in the plural number (so does S. Cyprian l. 1. epist. 2. and. l. 2. epist. 3.
etc.) but this phrase were most improper if it should be understood of the
Eucharist, as it is only a commemoration of the death of Christ; for since only
one thing is here represented, therefore the name thereof is to be delivered
only in the singular number.

Fourthly, and lastly if this consequence were of weight: The Eucharist is a
Representation of the Sacrifice of the Cross, Ergo, it is no true, and proper
Sacrifice: then this Illation should also be necessary (for both are wrought
upon one, and the self same frame) The Sacrifices of the old Law were
representations of the Sacrifice of the Cross, Ergo, they were no true (but
only representatine) Sacrifices. For as the Eucharist is a Remembrance, and
Representation of the sacrifice of the Cross already accomplished: so they
were Representations of the said Sacrifice then to come.

And thus far concerning the Sacramentaries Euasions in general, wherewith they
labor to corrupt the most forcible, and conuincing places of the Fathers (so
the Harpyes ever defiled the purest meats.) Indeed they prevail with some of
the vulgar sort, whose Judgments are so aerie, vaporous, and light, as that they
are not able to descend into the depth of any exquisite enquiry of things; and
so by these sleights our Sectaries (rather then they will acknowledge the
Fathers true meaning) do retain for the time their honor, and credit with
such their followers; but when this their Sophistry comes to be examined by the
clear, and impartial judgment of the learned, either Catholic, or
Protestant: then are their answers found to be attended with such violent, and
forced constructions of the Fathers writings, necessarily exhaling forth
strange improbabilities, mistakings, and absurdities; as that they being once
scanned, are the cause of their greater, and more shameful future overthrow.
And thus their fortune heerin may seem to partake of the misfortune of the
poor Hare, which for a time by the help of her feet, auoyds the danger of the
Hu^ters, but yet after, her said feet betray her a new to her enemies, to her
greater peril.

Now, I will close up this Chapter with one weighty consideration: It is this.
Whereas the Fathers have written of the Eucharist most reverently in all fulness,
and transcendency of style (as appears out of their places alleged) so as if
their sayings be not to be disuested of their litterall sense, then they
irrefragably (even by our Adversaries confessions) do warrant our Catholic
doctrine. How chances, that not one Father (among so many) would never give
some caution, nor the least insinuation, that either his own Sentences, or
those of the rest of them (as being powered out in great abundance, all
magnifying, and advancing the dignity of this Mystery) were not to be taken
literally, but that they were Hyperbolical speeches delivered by them, only by
way of Rhetorical amplifications? What can our Adversaries reply heerunto?
Shall we charge all the Fathers with forgetfulness in such a point? But that is
most improbable, considering the weight of the matter, and their accustomed
solicitude in things of lesser consequence? Or shall we think, that being
maliciously bent against all posterity, they determinately did leave behind
them such sayings, thereby to disseminate Idolatry (for no less a fault can it
be esteemed in them, if purposely they did write heerin otherwise, then they
thought) in the minds of all Readers? But what Christian is so void of Charity,
and Sense, as to traduce so many holy Fathers living in those purer times with
so heathenish, and hellish an Impiety? Nay I will proceed further in this
Point: It is most clear that the Fathers were so far from giving any such
caution for the sensing of their writings, that some of the^ have left a
caution just to the contrary, I mean, that their sayings touching the
Eucharist are not to be perverted by any Figurative, or Allegorical
constructions, but as the words do lie, are so to be taken.

The president of Hilarious (a very ancient, and Learned Father) shall here
serve in place of many, who as it were through a Prenotion, and foresight of
this our Schismatic Age (guided by him, with whom there is no Priority or
Laternesse of Time) has set down his Syntax, or Grammar for the construction
both of himself, and the rest of the Fathers in all passages touching the
Eucharist. Thus then he says c. 8. de Trinitate. Non est humano, aut Saeculi
sensu in Dei rebus loquendum, neque per violentam, aut impudentem
praedicationem caelestium dictorum sanitati, alienae, atque impiae
intelligentiae extorquenda peruersitas est. Quae scripta sunt legamus, and quae
legimus intelligamus, and tunc perfectae fidei officio fungemur. De naturali
enim in nobis Christi vnitate etc. We are not to speak in an humane, or
secular sense of the things concerning God, neither through a violent, and
impudent form of speech, any peruersity of a strange, and wicked construction
is to be extorted out of the wholesomnesse of those heavenly sentences. What
are written, let us read, and what we read, let us understand, and then we
shall enjoy the office of a prefect faith. For what we speak of the natural
Unity of Christ in us, except we learn it of him, we speak foolishly, and
wickedly, for he says, Caro mea vere est esca.] Thus far S. Hilarie: So much
estranged was he, and the rest of those venerable Writers from willing, that
their Testimonies herein should be cast in the mould of a forced, and
figurative Interpretation.

THAT ALL THE CHIEFEST OBJECTED Authorities of the Fathers urged by the
Protestants are impertinent. CHAP. IX.
I KNOW well that Nature, and Art (Natures Counterpane) do instruct us, that
in every perfect discourse of any subject, we ought in the Front, and beginning
to plant the state of the Question proposed, circumstancing it with all such
due restrictious, and other cautionary explications, as the mainteiners, and
patrons do willingly acknowledge. For by so doing, the very entrance of the
work (like unto the skill used in the Perspectiues) will cast light upon the
ensuing parts, and withal the Reader may (as it were) optically glass therein
a contracted, and epitomized sight of the whole Treatise. Notwithstanding
(contrary heerto) I have thought good in this Question of the Eucharist, thus
far to defer the placing of the state thereof (except what is scatteringly
touched, as occasion sometimes has served) Which dislocation (I hope) is
justly excusable, since we are not always seruily to tie our selves to other
Men's precepts, for in the best Writers sometimes, Art has ouerruled Art, and
Method lied in breach of Method. My reason heerin is, to prevent a tedious, and
needless repetition of one, and the same thing, for seeing in this Chapter we
undertake to show, that the doubtful, and obscure places, borrowed out of the
Fathers writings for the impugning of our Catholic faith, do not in any sort
disable the same; it is certain, that this point will be best cleared, by
setting down, what the Catholics do hold in this sacred Mystery: since in a
true unfolding, and explication thereof, we shall find virtually included the
solutions of the chief objected Passages; thus shall we discover, that the
Sacramentaries greatest Pieces of this nature, wherewith in vain they play upon
the impregnable Fort of Christ's own words, are but charged with certain
rouing, and hurtlesse paper bullets of wrested Authorityes.

Well then, first we teach, that notwithstanding the true, and real being of
Christ's Body, and Blood under the external forms of Bread, and Wine, the
Eucharist may be termed a sign in two respects.

First it is a Sign, since it represents the Body of Christ dying upon the
Cross, and his Blood shed upon the same, answerably to that of S. Paul 1. Cor.
11. Mortem Domini annunciabitis, donec veniat: You shall show the death of our
Lord until he come.] Which words do truly paraphrase that saying of our
Savior, Hoc facite in mea^ comemorationem: having therein relation to his
Passion. Now in this reference we hold, that the Eucharist is distinguished
from his Body, and Blood, since it is not here in the same manner, as it was
upon the Cross; the Sacrament being thereof but a representation, or
commemoration. And in this sense of the Eucharist being termed a sign does
Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph. distinguish the Eucharist from Christ's Body, and
Blood.

In this sense also S. Ambrose Coment. in c. 11. in 1. ad Cor. writes, that
the Body, and Blood, which were offered for us upon the Cross, are signified
in the Eucharist; as also he there says, that the mystical Cup is a Type of
our Lords Body, and Blood. The same construction does Basil receive, who in his
Liturgy calls the Eucharist (...), that is the Figure of Christ's Body.

Hitherto also are referred those words of S. Chrysostom Homil. 83. in Matthew.
there calling the Eucharist Symbolum Passionis Christi. And the same
construction is to be given to that so often objected place of S. Augustine
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium, where he teaches, that the Sacraments have a
similitude, or likeness of the things, whereof they are Sacraments; and that
the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ is, secundum quemdam modum, the
Body, and Blood of Christ, meaning thereby, that though the Body, and Blood of
Christ be in the Eucharist, according to it true substance; yet it is not there
as it was upon the Cross, but only in similitude; for even in this place S.
Augustine speaks of the Passion, and Death of Christ. And this very
explication does that other testimony of S. Augustine admit lib. contra
Adimantum. c. 12. where he says, that our Savior in giving his Body, did give
the sign of his body, which will clearly appear to any one, who with
deliberation will consider the place.

The second Respect, wherein the Eucharist may be called a sign, is because it
is a Sacrament, and every Sacrament (according to part of it definition) is
Signum rei Sacrae. For we hold that those external species of bread, and wine
do signify the true Body, and Blood of Christ lying under them. And in this
reference of the external forms to the body, and blood veyled under them, are
to be understood Origin in c. 15. Matthew. where he calls the Eucharist a
Typical Body. Ambrose l. de mysterijs initiandis c. 9. where he says, that
after the consecration, the Body of Christ is signified.

Now out of these Premises we may collect, that it is a dissolute, and loose
kind of reasoning thus to infer; The Fathers do call the Eucharist a sign,
or Type of Christ's Body, and Blood: Ergo, they taught, that his body, and blood
were not really in the Eucharist. For these two points (as we have showed
above) are not incompatible, but may stand together; for even in humane
matters we find, that one, and the same thing may be a sign of a thing, and
the thing signified: thus the wares stalled forth in a shop (as silk, cloth
etc.) are signs of merchandise to be sold, and are themselves merchandise to
be sold. Therefore if our Adversaries will produce any available authority
touching this point, they must allege the Fathers, teaching, that the
Eucharist is only a sign of Christ's Body, or that it is a mere represe^tation
of a thing being absent: but such Fatherless Positions, as these, cannot yet
be found in the wrytings of the Fathers.

And seeing, that the Eucharist is (as we teach) a representation of Christ's
Body, and Blood in some peculiar senses. I will add (as an appendix hereto) an
Annotation of certain places of the Fathers, wherein the Word Repraesento is
used; the places be, Tertullian l. 1. contra Marcionem. S. Hierome in c. 26.
Matthew. These Testimonies our Adversaries do object, in that, it is there said,
that the Eucharist does represent Christ, or the body, and blood of Christ, or
the like. For the true meaning of which testimonies, we are to observe, that
the Verb Repraesento, is ambiguous, for it signifies to make a thing present,
either truly, and really, or else only in sign, and figure. Now we say, that
these Fathers did use this word in the firster signification, to wit, that
Christ did truly, and really exhibit his Body, in that, which was bread before.
Which point we prove because these Fathers have else where written most
clearly, and evidently in behalf of the Real Presence, and therefore if these
their Authorities were otherwise to be understood, then should they either
retract their former doctrine (whereof there is no sign) or else should mainly
cross, and contradict themselves; wherewith to charge them were most absurd.

That the Verb Repraesento, is sometimes taken to exhibit, or make a thing
present truly, and really, I will content my self with the testimony even of
Tertullian himself. For he lib. contra Praxeam, calls Christ the Son, the
Representation of the Father, and yet the Father is truly in the Son. In like
sort, when God the Father said in Mount Thabor: Hic est filius meus etc.
Tertullian l. 4. in Marcionem says: Itaque iam repraesentans eum: Hic est
filius meus; meaning, that, God the Father, who sometimes had promised his
Son, did represent him truly, when he spoke those former words in the Mount.

A second Point, which we are to observe in the state of this Question, is;
That the Eucharist even after Consecration is by the Scripture sometimes called
Bread, for so we find it termed by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. Panis quem
frangimus etc. The Bread which we break, is it not the participation of the
Body of Christ?] Now, this appellatio^ may be for a double reason. First, in
that it is an accustomed Dialect of Scripture to call a thing by that name,
which before it was, or of which it is made (as hertofore I have showed.) Thus
we read Genesis 3. that Eve is called the Bone of Adam, because she was made
thereof. And Exodus 7. the Serpents of Moses are termed Wands, because the Wands
were turned into Serpents. For this very reason we find, that the Eucharist is
sometimes called Bread by the Fathers (which places our Adversaries are not
ashamed to object against us.) Examples heerof we have in Origin l. 8. contra
Celsum, where he calls the Eucharist Panes oblatos, Bread which are offered up
in Sacrifice; where instantly after he shows, that Bread is changed into the
Body of Christ, thereby distinguishing it from other bread. In like sort, the
Eucharist is called by Irenaeus l. 4. contra Haeres c. 34. (...), the meat, or
bread sanctified, or made the Eucharist. In this sense also the Eucharist is
called bread by Ignatius epist. ad Philadelph. Chrysostom also homil. 24. in
prior. ad Cor calls the Bread, the Body of Christ, meaning bread consecrated,
and not common Bread. Finally, S. Augustine c. 19. l. de fide ad Petrum, calls
the Eucharist, the Sacrament of Bread, and Wine.

The second reason, why the Eucharist may be called Bread by the Scripture, is,
in regard of the similitude, which it has with bread; I mean, in nourishing
the soul, as the bread nourishes the body; And in this sense it is so called
in John 6. Panis: quem ego dabo, caro mea est pro mundi vita: The bread, which
I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world. And by reason also of the
said resemblance, we find the Eucharist termed Bread by the Fathers; for
Dionysius Eccles. hierarch. c. 3. part. 3. calls the Sacrament Divine, and
Heavenly Bread; for the same reason Tertullian l. 3. contra Marcion. terms the
Eucharist Bread, to wit, the bread of Life; for there the Trope is, that the
Body of Christ is called Bread, because it nourishes like bread; and not, that
the bread is there called the Body. Between which two Propositions there is
great difference, since the first (which is commonly used by the Fathers) to
wit, the Body of Christ is Bread, presupposes a true being there of Christ's
Body, but yet (in regard of nourishing our souls) with some resemblance of
bread; whereas the other Proposition (to wit the bread is the Body of Christ)
neither hurts, nor aduantageth our cause, since thereto is only required, that
bread be in the Eucharist, as far forth, as belong to signification; that is,
that the external forms thereof be there, for by reason of the Accidences
only, the bread, and wine do signify; thus may Bread be said to be some where
in respect of it Accidences only, and not of it Substance: though the body of
Christ has not any such relation of being, I mean, only in regard of it
Accidences, and not of it Substance. And here we may see, how our Sectaries
dissent from the Fathers; since they alluding to the nourishment thereof, do
figuratively call the body of Christ, Bread; whereas the other, with reference
only to a naked representation, do figuratively call the Bread, the Body of
Christ.

And thus much of these two Reasons, why the Scriptures, and the Fathers do
sometimes call the Eucharist, Bread, or Wine. Whereunto I might adioyne a third
cause, in that the Scripture (and consequently the Fathers) does often call
things, as they externally appear to the Eye; So the Scripture (as above I
showed) calls Angels, which appeared in humane shape, Men; the Brazen
Serpent, a Serpent etc. Wherefore the Eucharist may be termed Bread, and Wine
either by the Scripture, or the Fathers, in that to the Eye, it seems only as
Bread and Wine.

To this point I think good to range this one Note touching the writings of
the Fathers, which is, that some of the Fathers (though most seldom) do say
that the substances of the external Symboles do remain after Consecration;
Where they are to be understood, that they speak of the essence, and nature of
the Accidences, and not of the substances of Bread, and Wine: An example
whereof we find in Theodoret Dialog. 2. who there teaches, that the Mystical
signs after consecration do remain in their former substances, figure, and
form. Now this is meant of the nature of the accidences, and not of the
Substance of bread, and wine; This is proved diverse ways: first, because the
two Greek words. (...), and (...) (both which Theodoret being a greek Father
here uses) contain every kind of essence, and nature, as well of accidences
as of substances. Secondly, because Theodoret does expound himself in the
words following, saying that we see, and touch the said color, and form,
which words have necessarily reference only to the outward Accidences. Thirdly,
in that we Catholics do urge this very place in proof of the Real Presence,
for here Theodoret plainly says, that the Body of Christ is to be understood,
to be believed, and adored in the Eucharist; and therefore to be understood,
believed, adored (says he) because the bread of the Eucharist (to wit, the
bread consecrated) is truly that, which is understood, believed, and adored.

The same exposition does a Testimony alleged out of Gelasius admit lib. de
duabus naturis; which testimony we also produce, in that, it teaches, that the
bread is changed into a divine substance by the working of the Holy Ghost. Thus
we see, that the Sacramentaries are not ashamed (so needful, and begging of
proofs is Heresy) out of the least appearance of advantage, or naked sound of
words; to retort the very same sayings of the Fathers against us, in which, we
for the fortifying of our Catholic doctrine do vehemently insist; Belike they
think, that the Fathers were irresolute in their faith, or that their writings
do stand according to the Prospectiue of each Man's humor, so as the Sense may
that way look, as every Eye (behoulding the words) would have it.

Here now I will end this consideration of the Eucharist being called bread,
with a short animaduersion of our Adversaries petulant frowardnes discovered
herein, who lighting upon some few straying passages, where the Eucharist is
called Bread, presently (as if they had found another Sparta, to enrich with
their discourse) they cry out in great prodigality of words, that it is
nothing but material bread; and yet when in every leaf, or page of the
Fathers works upon this matter, they find it termed, the Body, and Blood of
Christ, all such places (or else we wrong them) must needs be interpreted
figuratively: Thus insisting much in those phrases, which are but rare in the
Fathers, and passing over with a censuring neglect, such form of speeches, as
most frequently occur in their books.

A third Point, which we hold in this high Mystery, is, touching the effect
thereof, of which, much has been already delivered, only here it will be
necessary to recapitulate some of the former matter. Here we teach that though
the end thereof be principally to feed our Souls, yet does it give a spiritual
nourishment to our bodies; since our Bodies thereby are nourished to
immortality, taking even from the touch of Christ's Flesh a certain disposition
to a glorious resurrection, and immortal life, sorting to that of John c. 6.
Qui manducat meam carnem etc. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has life everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day. Now though the
Fathers in their Writings do conspire with the Scripture, and us heerin; yet
will our Adversaries pervert such their Testmonies, who finding, that they say,
that the Eucharist does nourish our bodies sometimes without any further
explication of the manner, do thereupon enforce, that since Christ's Body does
not nourish our bodies, therefore only bread, and wine, and not his Body, is in
the Sacrament; so materially, and grossly do our Adversaries mistake the
Fathers judgments heerin. Examples of this we have in many of the Fathers, as
Irenaeus lib. 4. contra Haeres. Nyssenus Orat. catechet. c. 36 and 37. besides
diverse others heertofore alleged; So as these very places ascribing (according
to their true exposition) a greater virtue to the Eucharist, then our
Adversaries will acknowledge, may fully instruct us (as before is showed at
large) that the Fathers believed the very Body, and Blood of Christ to be in
the Eucharist.

A fourth Point also touches the efficacy of the Eucharist; for we teach, that
the fruit, and benefit thereof consists not in delighting our Bodies (as
corporal meats do) but in nourishing, and strengthening of our Souls: and
therefore in respect of the effect, and fruit thereof, to eat the flesh of
Christ, is to believe in him, and to remain in him by Charity. This we deduce
out of the words of our Savior himself, who speaking of this Mystery John 6.
thus says: Spiritus est, qui viuificat etc. It is the spirit which quickens,
the flesh profits nothing. And again, subioyneth to the former words: Verba
quae ego etc. The words which I have spoken to you are spirit, and life.] The
meaning of which latter sentence (being coincident with the former) instructs
us, that a carnal understanding of the Eucharist, as if it should be eaten as
other meats are (for so the Capharnaites framed to themselves) avails
nothing; but that we ought to conceive, that things divine, and spiritual are
here delivered to us, which we are not to entertain in a humane sense, but by
faith, and apprehension inspired by God; yet so by faith, as that we believe
Christ's sacred Body, and Blood to be here truly, and really taken.

Hence now it is, that the Fathers resting upon the former words of Christ, and
therefore chiefly aiming at the auaylable receiving of the Eucharist, do write
sometimes, that we are to eat the Body of Christ by Faith, and not with teeth,
not excluding thereby a corporal receiving of Christ (as the Sacramentaries do
suggest) but teaching, that the benefit, and operation of the Eucharist is
chiefly to nourish, and fortify our Souls with spiritual, and Theological
virtues. In this sense is S. Cyprian to be understood in several passages of
his Sermon de Coena Domini, who there thus concludes: Quod esca est carni, hoc
animae est fides. In the same construction also is Athanasius (tract. upon the
words, Quicumque dixerit verbum in filium hominis) to be taken, who there
calls the flesh of Christ Alimoniam spiritualem, a spiritual nourishment, in
that it is given for meat of the Spirit, and not of the Body. The same
Interpretation is to be made of S. Augustine tract. 25. in Joan. Quid paras
dentem, and ventrem? creed, and manducasti. And tract. 26. Credere in eum, hoc
est, manducare panem viuum; though the one (if not both) of these places by the
judgments of some, not without great probability, is to be understood, not of
the Eucharist, but of the spiritual eating of Christ, through faith, and
belief of his Incarnation.

Now out of this former ground resultes an observation not to be neglected, to
wit, that seeing the effect of the Eucharist is, that the soul may remain in
Christ by faith and charity, and that such, as do not truly believe in Christ,
do not with the intended fruit thereof eat the Sacrament; therefore the
Fathers (leuelling only at the benefit, which the Receauers reap thereby) do
write sometimes, that the Misbelieuers, and Men of bad life, do not eat in the
Sacrament the body, and blood of Christ; which sayings our Adversaries do most
calumniously wrest, inferring from thence, that the Fathers doctrine was, that
such misbelieuers, and other wicked persons do not take at all the Body, and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, and that therefore his Body, and Blood is not
in the Eucharist; which is most far from their meaning; who in such places
(as I have said) have reference only to the profitable eating of Christ's Body,
whereof the wicked are not partakers. In this sense is to be understood Origin.
in 15. Matthew. S. Hierome in comment. in c. 66. Isaiae. and in c. 22. Ieremiae;
and finally S. Augustine. tract. 59. where he says, that the rest of the
Apostles did eat Panem Dominum, but Judas only Panem Domini, because he
received no fruit by his eating: See him also in sermon de Verbis Apostoli,
where he writes, that the wicked do not take the body of our Lord, who (as
chiefly insisting in a fruitful eating thereof) there says: I llud manducare,
refici est: I llud bibere, quid est nisi credere?

And thus much concerning the true state of this question of the Eucharist,
which being here sincerely set down, may serve to salve diverse such places of
the Fathers, as seem to fortify, and strengthen the Sacramentarian Heresy.
Some other few Passages there are, of which our Adversaries take hold, which
receive their Answers out of the circumstances of such places, so as an
obseruant Reader (carefully there noting the scope of the Father, as also the
words precedent, and subsequent) may easily find out; and therefore, as not
being reduced to any one general head of explication, I remit them (for
greater breuity) to the studious search of the judicious Reader.

But before I finish this Chapter, I will subnect thereto some few short
animaduersions, which a discreet Reader may take as a Correctiue, wherewith to
taste the more obscure writings of the Fathers herein without danger; The which
observations, in that they shall not be merely aerie, and speculatiue, or like
Accidences without Substances, I will make choice of S. Augustine, i^ whom
they shall (as I may term it) inhere; exemplifying them in him (rather then in
any other) because our Adversaries in this Controversy with great vendication,
and show of confidence, seem to rely upon this Father.

First then, he is to know, that the Fathers omitting sometimes the literal
sense of the words of the Evangelists, or Apostles (as confessed) do give some
other Tropicall, or Mystical interpretation of them (which course they often
use in exposition of other parcells of Scripture.) After this manner S.
Augustine passing over the immediate, literal, and acknowledged sense of
eating Christ's Body, thus says, in 26. in Joan. Credere in eum, hoc est,
manducare carnem eius.

Another Animaduersion may be, diligently to confer the more clear places of
a Father touching the Eucharist, with the more doubtful of the same Father;
for it is true, that their Writings do affoard some dark sayings touching this
Mystery; but it as is true, that they do minister us most pregnant, and
unanswerable proofs for our Catholic doctrine heerin; Thus do we find, that
diverse passages alleged out of S. Augustine, as particulerly, in Psalm. 33.
concion. 1. upon the words, Et ferebatur manibus suis: and l. 3. de Trinit. c.
10. disputing upon the forms, wherein the Angels appeared, and, in Psalm. 98.
upon the words, Adorate scabellum pedum eius; do more strongly prove, and
fortify this our Catholic doctrine, then any other Countertexts objected out
of him, do weaken it. Seeing then, that Augustine vnretracted, does not impugn
Augustine, is follows even in reason, that the more obscure passages are to
be illustrated by the more perspicuous, and evident, and not the contrary;
since Darkness cannot give Light to light: nor Uncertainty become a Rule of
Certainty.

A third Caution is, to remember that some of the ancient Fathers are so full,
and resolute in this point, as that even by the acknowledgment of all, they are
not capable of any solutions, but confessed (and therefore rejected) to confirm
the Real Presence. Now, seeing that such Fathers so writing are not
co^tradicted by any other Fathers; it is therefore from hence necessarily
inferred, that those other Fathers, that write more obscurely thereof, did
nevertheless conspire, and agree with the former in doctrine heerin: which
contradiction of any Nouelisme in Religion, we find to have been in all ages;
as appears (to omit the examples of Tertullian, Origin, and Cypria^) by the
many registered Heresies by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Augustine. If then S.
Augustine had written heerin contrary to the plain testimonies of his age, or
the immediate times after him, is it probable, that none of them would have
taxed him, as swaruing in this point from the unity of Faith? Or if the Fathers
of his days, and other precedent times, had in such their perspicuous sayings
of the Eucharist broached a new Heresy in the Church, can we suppose, that S.
Augustine (who purposely, and elaborately wrote of other men's heresies) would
have been silent in so important a matter?

A fourth Caution, which partly conspireth with the former, is: That we are to
observe, what Fathers in any age, have lived in any strait enter course of
friendship together, either by writing, or otherwise. For we are to presume,
that the Faith of one of such (if the contrary appear not by writing of either
side) was agreeable to the faith of the other. Seeing then, that S. Augustine
was tied most firmly in freindship with S. Ambrose (whose Testimonies touching
the Eucharist, are acknowledged for us, even by the Sacramentaries) how can it
be probably presumed, that S. Augustine should dissent from him in so high a
Mystery, and yet on note, or remembrance thereof left in the monuments, and
writings of either of them? How can it be (I say) that they should mainly
dissent in faith, since unity of faith was the band of their most freindly
agreement? Or that they should be Heretics one to another, when their mutual
profession of being scourges of Heretics, gave the first cementation, and
strenghtening to their inviolable amity? Or finally (if we will believe
credible Authors) how could they so conspiringly, and unanimously (as if but
one Soul had informed two Bodies) have said in that divine Hymme of theirs, Te
Deum laudamus, Te Dominu^ confitemur, if there had bin any disparity in their
worship of God, or different confession of him, as their Lord?

The Fifth, and last Caution, which I will here deliver, is to weigh, whether
the actions recorded by any Father do rather sort to the doctrine of the
Catholics touching the Real Presence, or to the opinion of the Sacramentaryes,
since the Fathers approbation of any such works, does sufficiently warrant in
their Judgments the faith whereunto such actions are truly appropriated. Thus
answerably heerto we find, that S. Augustine lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 8.
reports, that a certain House infested] The words of S. Augustine in that
place are these: One Hesperius having his house infested with wicked spirits,
to the affliction of his beasts, and servants, desired in my absence certain
of our Priests, that some would go thither etc. One went, and offered there
the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ, praying what he might, that the vexation
might cease, and God being thereupon merciful, it ceased.] Thus S. Augustine.
house infested with wicked spirits, was delivered of the said spirits, through
the offering up of the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ (as this holy Father
there says) by certain Priests thither sent. Now here he says not, that the
particular prayers of the Priests freed the house of them, neither can we
think, that, that Learned Doctor believed the sacrificing of a little bread,
and wine to work such stupendous effects; but he plainly affirms, that this
great Miracle was performed by the offering up of Christ's Body, and Blood;
Therefore it follows even (...), and demonstratiuely, that S. Augustine
believed, that Christ's Body, and Blood was truly, and really in the celebration
of the Eucharist.

And thus much touching these Observations. And now I will end this Chapter,
affirming that in regard of what has been delivered in this second Part, we
may be the more bold to reprove the precipitate, and wilful blindness of the
Sacramentaries, who (by reason of some few scattered dark passages found in
the Fathers) are not ashamed to vociferate, and cry mainly out with Dioscorus
the Heretic in the Council of Chalcedon: We defend the opinions of the
Fathers; We have their Testimonies, not by snatches, or at the second hand, but
uttered in their own Books; We are cast out with the holy Fathers: whereas
indeed, these vauntes are as far from being justified, as their belief
herein is distant from our Catholic belief.

THAT BY THE CONFESSIONS OF THE Most learned Protestants, the Fathers do teach
the Real Presence. CHAP. X.
WE We read.] 1. Samuel 5. and 6.
read, that as through Gods permissio^, the Arc was for the time with houlden
by the Philistians; so through the sweetness of his Providence (which ever
works good out of evil, as he once did Light Light out of Darkness.] 2.
Cor. 4.
out of Darkness) it was in the end safely restored to Israel. The like may we
say of the writings of those primitive Fathers, which (next to the Sacred
Scriptures) may be termed the Arc, or Tabernacle, wherein do lie entreasured
the riches of the Evangelical Law. Of this Arc our Adversaries would seem in
the beginning to have impatronized themselves (I mean in their own vaunts,
and in the Eye of the unlearned, not of the Judicious) but not being able to
make good their supposed title thereto, and frustrated of their expected gain
thereby; they are at the last pleased to relinquish all such usurped interest,
and freely to surrender it to the true Israelites of the Catholic Church.

This shall be here made evident (to omit what has been already delivered) even
hy the vncoacted, and voluntary confessions of the Sacramentaries; who
absolutely disclayming in this great Controversy from the Fathers, as being
chief Patrons of our Catholic Faith heerin, do betrample their Writings, and
Testimonies with an unaccustomed contempt, and scorn: charging both them, and
the times wherein they lived with great superstition concerning the same. Thus
we see, how our fastidious, and delicate Sectarie, weary still of plodding on
the common path, and tract of faith (though beaten with a continual practice
of Gods Church, and a General Warrant of the Fathers since the Apostles)
delights himself (according to that (...)) with certain Deuiations, and
By-ways of Innovation, and Nouelty; since this (says he) begets a
manu-mission, and freedom of his vnderstauding unworthily heertofore
enthralled to the judgments of the Papists Church, and Fathers.

But to proceed. I will produce (as I said) in this point the Sacramentaries
own words (so shall the Enemy wound the Enemy, and Truth receive a
strenthening from her impugners) wherein they most fully acknowledge in behalf
of us Catholics, that the Fathers did jointly teach our now professed faith of
the Eucharist. Which kind of proof both by their own Their own Assertions.]
For Doctor Whitaker de Eccles. controuers. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 14. says:
Firmum fit necesse Argumentum illud quod sumitur ex Aduer sariorum confessione
etc.
Assertions, as also even in reason it self is auayleable: since as a
Testimony of a friend, against a friend, so of an Adversary for an Adversary
is most conuincing.

Now that the Fathers in this weighty Controversy are on our side, shall
appear four several ways by the plain confession of our Adversaries; in
the unfolding whereof by certain steps, and degrees, I will (in part)
retain my former prescribed Method. First then this shall appear, in that the
Fathers taught the reservation of the Eucharist. Secondly, the Adoration of the
same. Thirdly, that it was a true, and perfect Sacrifice offered to God for the
expiation of our sins; all which three points do potentially, and
necessarily include our Catholic doctrine. Fourthly and Lastly, that even in
direct, and plain words they taught the Real Presence, and
Transubstantiation. All which shall be proved even from the Sacramentaries own
pens.

And First, touching Reservation, which most consequently implies the Real
Presence, since if the Eucharist be nothing else but Bread, and Wine, to what
end is it to be reserved? especially considering the Doctrine of our
Sacramentaries, who Who teach.] So writes M. Willet in Synopsi Papismi. p.
460. besides, it is the common doctrine of all the Protestants. M. Willet
words are: It is no Sacrament except it be received.
teach, that this Sacrament consists only in action; to wit, during the time
of celebrating, distributing, and eating it: which being expired, they say,
that the Bread, and Wine then cease to be any longer the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Now the Fathers in this point of Reservation are charged by diverse.
And first Kemnitius (that insolent Judge of his own Judges) acknowledges this
point, saying: Saying: VVitnesses.] Examen. part. 2. pa. 102.
Witnesses of this custom of private Reservation of the Eucharist, are
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, Basil etc. He also in the same place
says; That certain of the Fathers greatly commended the Reservation of the
Sacrament. And finally there concludes saying; that it was, Antiqua
consuetudo, late patens, and diu propagata.

Calvin Calvin says.] Instit. 4, c. 17.. 39.
says: That the Reservation of the Sacrament is veteris Ecclesiae exemplum: An
Example of the ancient Church.

The Centurists The Centurists.] Cent. 4. col. 427.
do reprehend the Ancient Fathers for the Doctrine of Reservation, and withal
they They show.] Cent. 4. col. 878.
show, that it was the Viaticum of such as were sick; which point evidently
argues the doctrine of Reservation.

That it was a Viaticum for the sick, is further confessed by Monsieur
Monfieur Casaubon.] Who in his Epistle to Cardinal Peron, writes, that Patres
Concilij Niceni, and ^ota Antiquitas etc. The Fathers of the Nycene Council,
and all Antiquity did minister the Eucharist to the sick, and in that respect
did call it their Viaticum.
Casaubon. Cartwright in his second Reply Second Reply.] part. 1. p. 77.
thus censureth S. Justin for this point: Iustins saying of Deacons carrying
the bread of the Holy Supper of the Lord, is contrary to the Institution.

Doctor Fulke D. Fulke confesses.] Against Heskins, Sanders etc. page 77.
confesses no less freely in these words: That the Sacrament was reserved in
the elder days of the Church, is not so great a Controversy as whether it
ought to be reserved. To conclude, this point is so clear, as that Cyril ad
Calosyrium condemns the Anthropomorphites, as Heretics, for denying the
Reservation of the Eucharist. And therefore he is deeply reprehended for so
doing by Peter By Peter Martyr.] lib. aduersus Gardinerum de Eucharist. col.
838. printed at Basil.
Martyr, who says thereof thus: Ea consuetudo, etsi saperet nonnihil
superstitionis etc. Though that custume of Reservation may seem somewhat to
taste of superstition, yet did Cyril, and others subscribe thereto.] And Martyr
there further thereof: Statim enim ab Apostolorum temporibus etc. Presently
after the times of the Apostles, men did degenerate from that ancient
simplicity of the Divine worship.] So evident a thing (we see) it is, that the
Fathers even by the confessions of our Adversaries did teach the reservation of
the Eucharist. Which thing being granted, and consisting chiefly in practice
(which might well descend from Age, to Age) whether is it not more probable,
that the Fathers above censured some of them living but fifty, or threescore
years after the Apostles, should be better informed of the Apostles use
heerin, then these vpstarts, who appear above fifteen hundred years after
the Apostles.

Concerning the second point, which is Adoration of the Sacrament, the Fathers
even in our Adversaries judgments rest chargeable therein. Which doctrine (as I
have showed above) implicitly inuolues in it self the doctrine of the Real
Presence; for seeing we cannot imagine, that they would ascribe any Adoration
to Bread, and Wine (still believing it to be but bread, and wine) we must
assure our selves, that they exhibited this adoration to the Eucharist, as
believing, that under those external forms did lie the true Body of Christ
accompanied with his Divinity.

Now, touching our Adversaries censuring the F^thers, as faulty heerin; we
find, that whereas Nazianzen Nazianzen tells.] Orat. 11. de Sorore Gorgonia.
tells of his sister Gorgonia (a testimony heertofore by us alleged) how she
(before being dangerously sick) prostrating her self before the Altar, and
calling upon him who is worshipped thereon, departing (not without Miracle)
presently receiving health. Which place Doctor D. Fulke.] Respons. ad
Stapleton. de success. Eccles. page 230.
Fulke not acknowledging, nor denying, concludes thus: Fucharistia in altari
etc. The Eucharist upon the Altar was not worshipped of her, although it was
had in great reverence, and perhaps not without superstition.] Thus D. Fulke.
Which denying-granting Answer of his, well discovers, what he thought of
Gorgonia's action heerin. This action of Gorgonia is also reprehended by Peter
Martyr (as I showed before) lib. contra Gardener.

In like sort we find, that S. Ambrose is controlled for the adoration of the
Eucharist by the Centurists, who speaking of Ambroses prayers in orat.
praeparat. ad Missam, say: Continent adorationem.] Cent. 4. col. 430.
Continent adorationem Panis in Sacramento. They contain the Adoration of
Bread in the Sacrament.

Chemnitius Kemnitius also.] Exam. part. 2. page ^2.
also sets down several sentences of Nazianzen, Ambrose, and Augustine,
pronouncing thereupon, that in his judgment they contain the Adoration of the
Sacrament. John Fox Fox writes.] Act. Mon. page 896.
writes touching the Antiquity of this point of Adoration, that if Honorius
(who lived anno 1220.) did not bring it in, we cannot find it to come in by
another. Now that Honorius did not begin it, appears out of all the former
Testimonies alleged therein.

To conclude this point, S. Basil speaking of unwritten Traditions, says:
Verba inuocationis, dum ostenditur panis Eucharistiae, and pocusum
Benedictionis, quis Sanctorum scripto nobis reliquit?] Which place having
reference to the particular words of Adoration, is acknowledged, and
reprehended by D. Fulke By M. Fulke.] In his Reioynder to Bristow. p. 685.
: so true it is, that the Fathers by the confessions of the Sacramentaries
taught the doctrine of the adoration of the Eucharist.

Touching the third Branch, that is, that the Eucharist was in the judgment of
the Fathers (whose Testimonies to that end are already before alleged) a true,
and perfect Sacrifice, even by the acknowledgme^t of our Adversaries; we find
that the Carthage Council, whereat S. Augustine was present, and subscribed,
teaches the Sacrifice of the Mass, and therefore is controlled therein by the
The Centurists.] Cent. 4. page 16. there speaking of the 79. Canon of the
fourth Council.
Centurists who thus write: Hic Canon etc. This Canon, if it be not forged,
shows, that even in that time, Prayers, and Oblations for the dead were
made.] Where by the word Oblations, they mean the Sacrifice of the Mass.

S. Ambrose in like manner is charged by the Centurists Centurists.] Cent. 4.
c. 4. col. 295.
in these word^s Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur etc. vt Missam facere, offerre
Sacrificium. Ambrose used those kind of speeches etc. as for example, to say
Mass, or offer up Sacrifice.

Gregory Nyssen is also reprehended by Crastouius Crastouius.] Lib. de opificio
Missae. Sect. 164.
a Protestant, for mantaining the doctrine of the Sacrifice in these words: An
ignoramus opinionem Nysseni etc. Are we ignorant, that the opinion of Nyssen is
of it self absurd, who said, that when Christ gave his body to his disciples
to eat, that then his body was latently, ineffably, and inuisibly sacrificed
up?] This Father is also for the same point reprehended by D. Doctor
Whitaker.] contra Duraeum. l. 4. page 320.
Whitaker.

S. Cyril of Jerusalem is charged by Hospinianus Hospinianus.] I^ Sacrament.
page 167.
in this sort: Quod ad Cyrillum Hierosolymitanum attinet etc. As concerning
Cyril of Jerusalem, he indeed affirmed, according to the custom of his time,
that the Sacrifice of the Altar was a great help of the souls.

S. Cyprian is deeply reproved for his doctrine herein by the Centurists The
Centurists.] Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.
in these words: Sacerdotem inquit etc. Cyprian says that the Priest does
enjoy the place of Christ, and offers sacrifice to God the Father.] In like
sort, D. Fulke D. Fulke says.] Against Heskins, Sanders etc. page 100.
says of him: It is granted, that Cyprian thought the Bread, and Wine, brought
forth by Melchisedech, to be a figure of the Sacrament, and that herein also
Melchisedech resembled the Priesthood of Christ.]

Tertullian receaues this Censure from the Centurists: The Centurists.] Cent.
3. l. 1. c. 5.
Tertullianus approbauit etc. Tertullian did approve oblations (or Sacrifices)
for the dead etc.]

Irenaeus also has his doom from the said Centurists: The said Centurists.]
cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63.
De Oblatione porro Irenaeus satis etc. Furthermore Irenaeus is thought to
speak over incommodiously of Oblation, when he says, that Christ did teach a
new Oblation of the New Testament, the which the Church receiving from the
Apostles, does offer up to God throughout the whole world.]

To conclude, S. Ignatius, the Apostles undoubted Scholar, is traduced by the
By the Centurists.] cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63.
Centurists, as favoring this doctrine: thus they write of him. Quaedam
ambigua, and incommode dicta etc. Certain things occur in this Fathers
writings, which are ambiguous, and incommodiously spoken, as in the Epistle of
Ignatius ad Smyrnenses: where Ignatius says, that it is not lawful without a
Bishop neither to offer, nor to immolate a Sacrifice.] In this sort the
Centurists in another Another place.] Cent. 2. c. 10. col. 167.
place say of Ignatius, that his words touching this Doctrine are periculosa,
and quasi errorum semina.

Thus we see, how every particular Father is particulerly charged heerwith: yet
Calvin even with one With one sentence.] Instit. l. 4. c. 18.
Sentence condemns diverse of them at once, who thus writes: Veteres quoque
illos video etc. And I see, that those Ancient Fathers did wrest otherwise the
memory hereof (meaning of the Lords Supper) then was agreeing to the
Institution of our Lord; for their Supper makes show of an iterated, or at
least renewed Sacrifice etc. for they have imitated more nearely the Jewish
manner of Sacrifising, then either Christ ordained, or the Gospel could well
suffer.] And in another Another place.] lib. de vera Eccles. reformat.
place, Calvin thus proceeds: Solenne est nebulonibus ^stis etc. It is an
accustomed manner with these Knaves (so raylingly he terms the Catholics) to
scrape together, what faults soever they find in reading the Fathers.
Therefore when they object, that the place of Malachy is expounded by Irenaeus
of the Sacrifice of the Mass; and the Oblation of Melchisedech in like sort is
so interpreted by Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine, Arnobius: I answer in few
words, that the same Writers do also in other places understand by bread, the
body of Christ, but so ridiculously, as both Reason, and Truth force us to
dissent from them.] Thus Calvin.

Neither do we find Ke^mtius Kemnitius.] page 798.
to be much less sparing in censuring the Fathers concerning this point; for
he thus pronounces of them: Neque Veterum qualescumque sententiae etc. Neither
in this Controversy the sentences of the ancient Fathers, but the Canonical
Scripture is to be the Rule, and Square of faith.] And again, reprehending the
Fathers for calling the Eucharist a Sacrifice, he says: that the so naming of
it, is, de Naeuis quorumdam Veterum.

And thus much concerning our Adversaries charging the Fathers of every age,
even from the Apostles to S. Augustine (even insimulating S. Augustine himself
within the same supposed Error) with the doctrine of the Sacrifice. And
therefore no marvel, if Sebastianus Sebastianus Francus.] lib. de abrogandis
in vniuersum omnibus statutis Eccles.
Francus, an eminent Protestant, did peremptorily pronounce, that, Statimpost
Apostolos etc. Presently after the Apostles all things are turned vpside down,
the Supper of the Lord is transformed into a Sacrifice.] And yet Hospinian not
content heerwith proceeds further saying: Iam tum primo.] in Histor. Sacram.
l. 1. c. 6.
^^m tum primo illo saeculo, and viuentibus adhuc Apostolis etc. The Devil in
the very first age, and when the Apostles were yet living, gave subtily more to
this Sacrament, then to Baptism, and by little, and little withdrew Men from the
first form thereof.] And thus far of the Protestants acknowledgment of the
Fathers minds, touching this point of the Sacrifice.

Now to come to the last Point, which is to show out of the Protestants
Writings, that the Fathers did in plain, and direct words, without the help
of any inferences, (though never so immediate, and necessary) teach the
doctrine of the Real Presence. First then (to omit Gregory the Great, as not
being within the first five hundred years, condemned by Doctor Humfrey
heerin) we find S. Chrysostom reprehended by the The Centurists.] Cent. 5.
col. 517.
Centurists, because Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare.

In like sort Eusebius Emyss^nus is charged by the Centurists, in that Parum
commode.] Cent. 4. c. 10. col. 985.
Parum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit: He spoke unprofitably of
Transubstantiation.

Neither does S. Ambrose Ambrose escape.] Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
escape the like rebuke of the Centurists, since he is affirmed by the^ in the
books of the Sacraments ascribed to Ambrose, to confirm the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which Father for the very same is taxed by By
Oecolampadius.] Lib. epist. Oecolampad. and Zuinglij l. 3.
Oecolampadius.

S. Cyril in like manner is heynously traduced by Peter Martyr for his doctrine
of the Real Presence, for thus Martyr says: I will not so easily.] Peter
Martyr l. Epistol. epist. ad Bezam, annexed to his Common places.
I will not so easily subscribe to Cyril, who affyrmed such a Communion, as
thereby even the substance of the Flesh and Blood of Christ is joined to the
blessing, for so he calls the holy bread etc.]

Martyr also In another place.] In his second Alphabeticall Table (annexed to
his Common places) of the Additions under the letter H. at the word Heresy.
in another place thus says: The Heresy of Cyril touching our Communion with
Christ.] As also in a third In a third place.] Epist. ad Caluinum.
place, he further reproves the doctrine of Cyril, and of diverse other Fathers
in this point.

S. Cyprian also is charged in the book ascribed to Vrsinus, entitled,
Commonefactio cuiusdam Theologi de sancta Coena: who there There writes.] page
211. and 218.
writes thus: In Cyprian are many things, which seem to affirm
Transubstantiation.] And hence it is, that the Sermon of Cyprian de Coena
Domini, wherein he writes so fully in defense of Transubstantiation is said by
our Adversaries to be but counterfeit; And yet notwithstanding D. Fulke against
the Rhemish The Rhemish Testament.] in. 1. Cor. c. 11.
Testament acknowledges the author thereof to be in the time not much
inferior to Cyprian, and there produces Authority out of the same Book.
Lastly Ignatius is acknowledged by By Kemnitius.] Exam. part. 1. page 94.
Kemnitius to have confirmed the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in that
eminent place of his, Eucharistias, and Oblationes non admittunt etc. already
herefore alleged.

Now seeing the voluntary Confessions of our Adversaries concerning the Fathers
Judgments in this point, are so clear, I cannot but approve the ingenuous,
plain, and impoliticke dealing of some other Protestants, who in regard of the
truth hereof freely confess the further Antiquity of this Doctrine. And
according hereto we find, that Antony de Antony de Adamo.] In his Anatomy of
the Mass page 236.
Adamo (a markeable Protestant) says: I have not hitherto been able to know,
when this Opinion of the Real, and Bodily being of Christ in the Eucharist did
first begin.] And in like sort Adamus Adamus Francisci.] In margarita
Theolog. page 256.
Francisci (another Protestant) confesses no less thereof, saying: Commentum
Papistarum etc. The Papists Invention, touching Transubstantiation crept early
into the Church.]

Thus have I here set down the Fathers Judgments in this high Mystery,
confessed by the most Learned (though to their own Prejudice) of our
Adversaries by the four former ways; to wit, by acknowledging, that the
Fathers did teach the Reservation, the Adoration, the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist (each of these necessarily inuoluing our Catholic Faith) and lastly,
the Conclusion it self, in plain, direct, and literal words. Wherefore if
any of the Sacramentaries shall seem to have just reason, to use hereat the
complaint of that Apostata Anti-Constantyne.] Thus Theodoret records Julian
to say l. 3. c. 8.
Anti-Constantine, I mean, Lucian: We are wounded with our own quills: out of
our books they take armor, which in fight they use against us.] Let such
remember, that Truth has a Sovereignty, and Influence over a Man's Pen;
forcing her Enemies at unawares even in impugning her, to defend her (for so
our Sectaryes do mightily strenghten this our Catholic Faith, when in
refuting of it, they acknowledge the Fathers to be our chiefest Patrons) and
extorting at their hands the like benefit, which Premeth^us Thessalus (recorded
by Plutarch) had received from his capital Adversary, who in fight intending
to kill him, launced only with his sword a most dangerous mole, or wenne, and
so thereby without any further hurt restored him to his more perfect health.

But as here I have delivered the Protestants Assertion, to wit, that the
Fathers of the Primitive Church did with a full consent maintain the Real
Presence; so I take it not impertinent here to set down briefly another
Position, to wit; That the Primitue Church did never jointly err in Faith, and
Religion. Which Proposition is most true both in reason it self, and by the
acknowledgment of our Adversaries. In Reason, for seeing that Christ founded his
Church with such solicitude, as he did, and being founded, did water it (for it
increase, and continuance) with the shedding of his own most precious Blood,
and the Blood of infinite Martyrs during those Primitive times; can it stand
with his divine, and benign Providence, presently after his Asce^sion, or at
the most upon the death of his Apostles, to abandon his former care had thereof?
Or shall we imagine him so unkind, and unmerciful (who through a merciful
kindness was content corporally to dye, to prevent our eternal death) as
instantly then to repudiate his most dear, and chaste Spouse, by suffering an
utter disparition, and vanishing away of the true Faith? By the acknowledgment
of the Protestants the former Assertion is also most true, as shall evidently
appear out of their own words, from the Reference From the Reference
appropriated] Answerably hereto we find, that Jewel in his defense of the
Apology thus says: The Primitive Church, which was under the Apostles, and
Martyrs, has evermore been accounted the purest of all others without
exception. Kemnitius says in his Exam. Conc. Tride^t. part. 1. page 74. We
doubt not, but that the Primitive Church received from the Apostles, and
Apostolical Men, not only the Text of Scripture, but also the right, and
native sense thereof. And in the same part he also says: We are greatly
confirmed in the true, and sound sense of Scripture, by the testimony of the
Ancient Church. Doctor Sarauia in defens. tract. de diuersis Ministrorum
gradibus page 8. writes: Spiritus Sanctus (qui in Ecclesia praesidet) verus
est Scripturarum Interpres: ab eo igitur est petenda vera interpretatio, and
cum i^ sibi non possit esse contrarius, qui primitiuae Ecclesiae praesedit, and
per Episcopos eam guberuauit, ipsos iam abijcere consentaneum veritati non est.
In like sort the Confession of Bohemia, in the Harmony of Confessions page 400.
acknowledges, that, The Ancient Church is the true, and best Mistress of
Posterity, and going before leads us the way. Finally Doctor Bancroft
speaking of Calvin, and Beza, thus writes in his Survey of the pretended Holy
Discipline: For M. Calvin, and M. Beza, I do think of them, as their writings
do deserve, but yet I think better of the ancient Fathers, I must confess.
All which praises, and commendations given by so many of our Adversaries to the
Primitive Church, and the Fathers of those Ages, are unworthily, wrongfully,
and untruly applied, if so the Church of that Time, or the Fathers thereof
should have generally erred in matter of faith.
appropriated to this place. Now these two Propositions (to end this Chapter
withal) I will combyne, and incorporate together in this one Argument, whereby
our Adversaries may more clearly discern the inevitable, and dangerous
resultancy, issuing from such their confessed (yet true) Assertions. Thus then:

Whatsoever the Primitive Church did jointly teach in matter of Faith, the same
is by the confession of the Protestants most true.

But the Primitive Church did jointly teach, by the confession of the
Protestants, the Doctrine of the Real Presence.

Therefore, the Doctrine of the Real Presence, is, by the confession of the
Protestants, most true.

The Proposition is acknowledged by our Sectaries in the Marginall Reference.
The Assumption is abou^dantly confessed by them throughout this whole Chapter
(for it cannot be denied, but that doctrine, which was taught by all the
chiefest, and learned Fathers of the Primitive Church, was the generally
taught, and received Doctrine, and Faith of those Ages, and Times) therefore the
Conclusion is most truly, and necessarily inferred. And thus my nyce Protestant
Reader, if so his stomach can endure the the taste of an Argument, has here a
Compound (to wit, that the Doctrine of the Real Presence, is by the confession
of the Protestants, most true) made of the mixture or the two former Simples.
(l) By D. Humfrey.] In Iesuitismi part. 2. ra^. 5.


OF CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS Drawn from Luther, the Lutherans, and other
Protestants, teaching the doctrine of the Eucharist. CHAP. XI.
HAVING in the former Chapter proved even from the Testimonies of our
Adversaries (so receiving from them thereby a benefit, but not a courtesy) that
the ancient Fathers (though most remote from us in circumstance of Place, and
Time) were nevertheless conspiring with us in faith, and belief of the
Eucharist, and therefore altogether opposite to the professed doctrine of the
Sacramentaries, Thus the Fathers God is not as our Adversaries God, even our
Even our Enemies.] Deuteron. 32.
Enemies being Judges: It will not in this place seem (I hope) inconvenient,
if I present to the Readers judgment two observations; the deliberate
consideratio^s whereof (though but Moral inducements) are able to obtund, and
blunt the most forcible reasons urged to the contrary.

The first of these shall be taken from Luther, whose malice toward the Pope
(for indeed he breathed nothing but Malice, Pride, and Lust) was so implacable,
as that he endeavored by all means possible to annoy, and endomage the Sea of
Rome; and thereupon (as the World knows) he did burst out from the Catholic
Church, by denying the most points denied at this day by the Protestants. Hence
now I would demand, how chanced, that he changed not his opinion in the
Article of the Real Presence, as well as in the rest, since the detriment
coming to the Pope by this means, must have been very markeable, and far
extending, for it would have brought in an Innovation of the external, and
daily worship of God throughout all Christendom? Truly we can assign no other
reason, but that the euidency of the Evangelists, and the Apostles Texts (for
Himself confesses.] to wit, in his epistle ad Argentinos.
himself of this point confesses no less) was so unavoidable, as that he
could pretend no color of dissenting from the Church of Rome heerin. And so
being here convinced with the perspicuity of Christ's own words, was
constrained to acknowledge him to be in the Eucharist, no otherwise then the
Devils overcome with Christ's Miracles, even forcedly noysed him to be the The
Son of the Living God.] Matthew. 8. Mar. 1.
Son of the Living God. Thus we see, that out of an impartiality of judgment
(which in other matters was darkened with passion) he here was compelled to
maintain the same Doctrine, which was maintained by his designed Enemy; In
defense whereof we may easily discover his fervor, by his acerbity of writing
against the Zuinglians in these words: We We censure.] Epistol. contra
Articul. Louan. these. ^7. tom. 2.
censure in earnest the Zuinglians, and all the Sacramentaryes for Heretics,
and alienated from the Church of God.] And again: Cursed Cursed be.] Tom. 7.
Wittenberg. fol. 381.
be the Charity, and Concord of the Sacramentaries for ever, and ever to all
eternity.]

To the Judgment of Luther I will subordinate the judgment of his own brood
(the Lutherans) ever since his time, who (though according with the Caluinists,
and Zuinglians in many of the other points controuerted between them, and the
Catholics) with greater earnestnes have ever maintained the doctrine of the
Real Presence: Witness hereof are their long continued Continued
Booke-warres.] There has been several hundreds of Books written by the
Lutherans against the Caluinists, or Zuinglians, and by these against the
former, and the Subject of very many of those books is only touching the
doctrine of the Sacrament. See of this point Coccius his Thesaurus tom. 2.
Hospinianus his Historia Sacrament. part. 2. and the yearly Catalogue of Books
returned from Franckford.
Booke-warres, their Proscriptions, their Banishments, and other temporal
dishonors, wherewith they afflict one the other, and all undertaken originally,
and primatiuely for justifying of Christ's corporal, and real being in the
Sacrament. Now the Motive of the Lutherans Agreement with the Catholics
herein, cannot be derived from any friendly association between us, and them;
for we see, that not only in most other Articles, but also in diverse
circumstances, and accessorie Inferences upon this very doctrine, they dissent
from us (as in the manner of the Presence, the Adoration, the Sacrifice etc.)
and therefore we may assure our selves, that it is the euidency of Gods word,
attended on with an answerable practice of the Primitive Church, and a joint
consent of the Fathers, which did force their judgments herein, and has made
them such resolute, and constant Propugners of the Real Presence.

The second Observation (to pass over the former acknowledged doctrine of the
Real Presence, taught by the most eminent Deuines of England, as appears in
my Epistle to his Majesty, and the other to the Reader, whose Position therein
seems more Catholic, then that of those hereafter alleged) whereupon I will
here rest, shall be drawn from such our Adversaries, who, though they embrace
not the truth of Christ's Real Being in the Sacrament to the bodily Mouth, yet
they altogether disauow, and reject the common doctrine of the Sacramentaries,
and so (as if the verity hereof did partake of a Moral virtue, to be bou^ded
on each side with extremes) they come crowding in with a middle kind of faith,
teaching with the Catholics, that Christ is really, and truly in the
Eucharist; and with the Sacramentaries, that his Body is taken only with the
mouth of faith.

The doctrine of these Participles in faith (so to term such Men) though
erroneous, I allege to this end, to demonstrate hereby, that the luculency,
and clearness of the Proofs for this our Catholic Belief, though it has
not (through their own defaults) that working influence upon such judgments,
as to draw them entirely, and wholly to the Truth, yet is it able to hinder,
that they entertain not that gross (yet spiritual) mistaking of the
Sacramentaries; even as the Sun, whose heat sometimes is such, as though it
cannot dispell, and consume the vapors near to it, yet is it of force to
prevent, that they thicken not into any dark clouds of storms, and tempests.

Diverse Protestants of great eminency (as Hooker.] l. 5. of Ecclesiastical
Policy sect. 67.
Hooker, D. D. VVhytaker.] Contra Duraeum. page 168.
Whitaker, and And others.] as Bucer in Script. Auglic. page 548. The
Confession of Belgia in the English Harmony, page 431. and by diverse others.
others) have maintained this kind of Christ's being in the Sacrament, and for
their so doing, have been sharply rebuked by other Protestants, as inclyning
heerin (to use their own words) overmuch to Overmuch to Popery.] So is this
their Opinion reprehended by Peter Martyr in his Epistles annexed to his Common
places in English. epist. 25. who is for the same reciprocally controlled by
Bucer in his Script. Auglic. p. 548. The same Opinion of Christ's existency in
the Sacrament is reprehended by our English Puritants in their Christian Letter
to M. R. Hooker, by Aretius Sermon. 3. de Coena; and finally (to omit diverse
others) by Ludouicus Alemannus in positionibus apud Lugdunenses editis Anno
1566. who thus there writes hereof: Neque etiam per fidem, seu
incomprehensibili modo, vt vocant, quia hoc totum imaginarium, and repugnat
apertissime Dei verbo.
Popery, the particulers of which I have displayed in the marginall Notes. Yea
even Calvin himself, (as seeming to allow the former Protestants assertion)
yet chiefly out of Policy, the more to countenance his wheaten Communion, thus
bursteth forth into admiration of Gods power, manifested in the Eucharist,
saying: Nihil Ni^hil restat.] l. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 7.
restat, nisi vt in eius Mysterij admiratione^ prorumpam, cui nec Men's plane
cogitando, nec lingua explicando par esse potest.] So desirous is a Babylonian
to speak heerof in the Dialect of an Israelite. Now the (...), or Resultancy
of all heertofore delivered in this Chapter, is, to discover that both the
Lutherans, and infinite others of the most learned, and grave Protestants, do
concur heerin, that the words of Christ, and his great Apostle S. Paul
(besides other humane authorityes) are so clear, and evident, for his true,
and corporal Presence in the Sacrament, as that no wit whatsoever can probably
wrest them (and therefore Impudency it self might well seem to blush at such
forced Detorsions) to the vphoulding only of a bare, naked, and Typical
Presence. And that, if either of these two sorts were demanded, whose
particular faith among the Christians of this Age, they would admit next to
their own, they both would prefer our Catholic Faith before the
Sacramentarian Innovation; for they both participate heerin much more with the
Catholics, then with the Sacramentaries. Out of which we may justly infer,
that the Faith of the Church of Rome only is true, and undoubted, and all the
rest erroneous, according to that most probable Position: Cui ceterae parts,
vel sectae secundas vnanimiter deferunt, cum singulae principat^^ (...)
vendic^^^, melior reliquis videtur.] For we must presume, that the first
Censure, terminating in their own Faith, proceeds out of Prejudice, and
Self-love; the other out of a clear, and impartial Judgment.

And here now I will close up this Chapter with a discovery of one notorious
sleight of the Sacramentaries, which shall serve, as a Chorus to this second
Tract. It is this; That now at the length they are content to diuulge, that the
Article of the Real Presence, is but a Point adiaphorous, or indifferent, and
therefore may be maintained on all sides without endangering the Foundation of
Christian Religion. But what? Do they thus teach in favor toward us, thereby
to lessen our supposed error heerin? No verily. This show of kindness we
admit not, for Timeo Danaos.] Virg. Aneid. 4.
Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes. The true Reason then heerof is this: They
seeing, that Gods sacred word (at least in the litterall, and genuine sense
thereof) the vn-interrupted Practice of the Church, the conuincing testimonies
of the Fathers, and finally their own Brethren (though comparting with them in
other Articles of their own Religion) do all jointly corroborate, and
strengthen the Catholic doctrne in this High Mystery. And on the other side,
unwilling to recall (for Pride cannot brook a just yielding, or submission to
an Adversary) what they have heertofore so pertinaciously defended, they have
therefore thought it good Policy, to suggest to the world, and Indifferency of
this Point, that by so doing they may intimate to all, that though they err
therein (as having so many great Evidences against them) yet their Error (not
touching any Cardinal, and supreme article of Faith) is the less dangerous,
and therefore the more sufferable, and pardonable.

Now answerably to this my Asseueration, we find even Doctor D. Keynolds.] in
his fifth Conclusion annexed to his Conference.
Reynolds, no vulgar Idol in our English Temple (to assign To assign diverse
others.] Answerably hereto, we find Iacobus Acontius l. 3. stratagem. Sat. page
135. thus writing. It is evident concerning as well those, who hold the Real
Presence of Christ's Body in the Bread, as those others, which deny it, that
although of necessity the one part do err, yet both are in way of Salvation,
if in other things they be obedient to God.] So also the indifferent judgment
of John Frith, Acts. and Mon. 503. who there says hereof: The matter touching
the substance of the Sacrament, byndeth no man of necessity to Salvation, or
Damnation, whether he believe it, or no.
diverse others to the Marginall Reference) to affirm, that the Real Presence,
is but as it were, the grudging of a former Ague, if otherwise the party hold
the Christian faith. Thus we see how our Adversaries comportment in this
Controversy is full of fraud, morefull of Malice. Their incorrigible humor of
contradicting the Catholic Church (for their Sacramental Position is grounded
merely upon Opposition) displayes their Malice; their false extenuating (for
their own advantage) the greatness of this Mystery, their Fraud.

THAT THERE ARE MANY CONGRVENTIALL Reasons, showing the Conueniency, why Christ
might be induced to leave his Body, and Blood in the Eucharist. As also showing
the Conueniency of Transubstantiation. CHAP. XII.
IT is an accustomed, and approved Method both of Philosophers, and Deuines,
after they have fortified their Assertions (the subject of their Discourse)
with the most forcible Testimonies, which are to be alleged in that behalf,
then to attend the said Proofs with certain Congruentiall Inducements,
persuading the conueniency, and fitnes of such their doctrine.

Thus the Philosopher (for instance sake) after he has much discoursed of the
number, the vastness, and the beauty of the Heavens (Gods Hieroglyphick
Characters, wherein are written his Power, and Glory) and descending to
demonstrate the roundnesse of those Bodies, as also the answerable roundnesse
of the Earth, from the unchangeable Motions, Phainomena, and Appearances of the
Heavens; he shows the sutablenesse of this form of them both, and how it
sorteth to the benefit of all Creatures, and the Irregularities, and
exorbitant Effects, rising from any other supposed form given to them.

In like sort, the Divine conuincing against the Arian, that Christ is both
God, and Man, from the holy Scriptures, and the authority of the Church, does
warrant his doctrine with certain perswasiue motyues, drawn from the
consideration of Gods Justice, and the Atrocity of Sin; including, that it
was convenient, that since Sin did first divide God from Man, he, who by
redeeming the world, should reunite them, should be both God, and Man. And thus
the firster kind forces our Judgment; the other, as sorting with Reason, and
Prudence, and in some sense presuming the former, serves only (as sweet meats
to our stomakes) pleasingly to close up our judgment. The same order will I
here observe: For having (I trust) already sufficiently proved the Truth of
the Real Presence in the Eucharist from all the former Authorities, drawn
from the Word both of God, and Man, I will set down certain Congruences, and
Prudentiall Reasons, wherewith our Savior might well seem to have been induced
to leave his Sacred Body to his Church, that by the authority, and disposal
thereof, it might be truly, and really exhibited to all Christians whatsoever.

And here by reason of the great number of them, I will chiefly insist in some
few (for I am desirous to contract this Treatise within as small a Compass, as
conveniently I can) in regard whereof I will not much more enlarge my self
upon those Effects, and Operations of this most heavenly food, which heretofore
I have touched by way of alleging the Fathers Authorities; which show, that
the Eucharist is a Pledge of our Salvation; that by it we are not only by
Faith, but even corporally united with Christ; That in regard of this union,
the Eucharist is a Seal to us of our Resurrection; finally that through it we
are made Partakers of the divine Nature; All which admirable Effects and
virtues, may probably be imagined (among other Motives) to have been most
preuayling with our Lord for the first institution of this holy Mystery; for
Man cannot conceive, how Christ could invent more forcible means to produce
such spiritual operations, then by instituting this Sacrament. In respect also
of the same desired expedition, I will not long rest in displaying, and
amplifying the dignity, and worth of such Inducements, as I intend here to
urge, but will pass them over with a cursory Pen, briefly intimating them to
the studious Reader.

Well then, one Inducement of the Institution of this Sacrament may be, that
seeing Mortal sin (which is the Harbinger of eternal damnation) cannot be
avoided altogether, but by the Grace of God; what better means could his
divine Majesty invent for the watering our Souls with his Grace, then the
ordayning of this Sacrament? for since we are hereby truly, and really united
with Christ (the Fountain of Grace) how can we be altogether estranged, and
divided from such Influences, as proceed from Christ? yea we are to believe,
that this joining of Christ with us, does not only enable us to prevent future
Sins, but also affoardeth means to salve, and medicine other spiritual
diseases. Which Effect is worthy to proceed from such a Conjunction, since we
read, that the The woman in the Gospel.] Mark c. 5.
woman in the Gospel by touching only the hemme of Christ's garment, was cured
of her corporal sickness.

In like sort, Christ intending to enrich Man's soul with all necessary, and
spiritual knowledge for the avoiding of Sin, and guyding him in the way of a
virtuous life, could not by more convenient means perform this his design,
then by our receiving him within us, who is knowledge it self. For let us
consider his Humanity, we find him to be fraught with such a (...), and
fullness of wisdom, as that, De plenitudine De plenitudine eius.] John cap. 2.
eius omnes accepimus. Let us ascend higher with respect to him, as to the
Second Person in the most Blessed Trinity, and we may glass in him all
sufficiency without any blemish of Imperfection, for we are taught, that he is
Lumen de Lumen de Lumine.] Symbolum Athanasij.
Lumine. Finally, let us contemplate him in the supreme Majesty of Deity, and
our weak sight is even dazeled with the rays of his brightness, since he is
that Sun from whence all reasonable Creatures do deryue their Intellectual
beams. Therefore it must needs follow, that, that Christian, who with due
preparation receaueth him in this high Mystery, is much enlightened with
spiritual, and heavenly Knowledge; and this not only during that most happy
(though short) presence of him within us, but also for no small season
thereafter; even as we see the Sun does leave unto us for a reasonable time,
a secondary light after his departure from our Horizon.

A second Motive heerof may be for our increase of Faith. For in regard of the
many obscurities encompassing the Catholic doctrine heerin on all sides, it
follows, that the Faith of him, who gives an immovable assent heerto, is
mightily advanced: for the difficulties in any dogmaticall Point, and a faith
of the said Point, may well resemble a pair of Balance, whereof how much the
lower one part descends, so much the higher the other rises; for so we find,
that the greater the difficulties are which depresse our understanding against
the belief of any Mystery, the higher aspireth our faith in believing the
same. Wherefore in such cases our understanding (especially if we be unlearned)
must before digest all such subtiltyes with an unexamined intertainment, free
from all inquisitiue rumination of them; no otherwise then in the Old Law the
Paschall Lamb (an express figure of the holy Eucharist) was commanded to be
eaten by By swallowing the parts.] Exodus c. 12.
swallowing the parts thereof down, without any chewing of the same.

Our Hope in like sort is raised heerby to a higher strain; for since the
Object of Christian Hope is the Joys of Heaven, what greater assurance can we
have of a future accomplishing of our said Hope, then in the mean time (as
meat given to strengthen us in our spiritual Journey) to feed upon him, who
is the Lord, and King of Heaven? Or how can we doubt, that we shall not in due
time (if our own demerits do not merit the contrary) enjoy those rivers of the
water of life, when whilst we are here upon earth, we drink the Blood of our
Savior, which is the Source, and Wellspring it self? Not without cause
therefore did our most gracious Author heerof affirm, that, Qui manducat meam
carnem.] John 6.
Qui manducat me am carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam aeternam. Yea
one Father is so strong in this point, that he is not afraid to pronounce,
that, Dum in hac vita.] Chrysostom homil. 24. in prior. ad Corinth.
Dum in hac vita sumus, vt terra nobis Caelum sit, facit hoc Mysterium, so as
that by the operation, and Presence of the Blessed Eucharist, we enjoy Heaven,
before we be in Heaven: So true it is, that a confident, and erected Hope is a
pleasing anticipation of a future good.

Fourthly who will not acknowledge our Charity, and Love toward our Savior to
grow more intense, and to become more inflamed heerby? I mean, in
contemplating the immensurable Goodness of God manifested to us heerin, who
would not only vouchsafe to become Man for Man, but also is content so much to
abase himse^fe, as to enter (being accompanied with his Divinity) into the body
of a most sinful, and wretched Worm; which proceeding of Christ, in that it
did flow from an infinite gulf of Charity toward us, how can we be so
monstrously ungrateful, as not (though in a lower proportion) to meet him
with some retaliation of burning zeal? for seeing even unreasonable Creatures
are heerin so reasonable, as that they show a liking toward the^, of whom they
have received any good turns; much more then with man, should Love be the
usury of Love, and Affection ever reflect Affection. And therefore a Christian
Soul ought in this place to strive through an height, and extremity of Love
(whose Nature is to incorporate together things different) to be most
inwardly, and inseparably conjoined with her Creator, even dwelling, and
residing in him, and so making good in herself that saying: Anima magis est,
vbi amat, quam vbi animat. And thus far of these three Theological virtues,
and how consorting, and suitable the Institution of the Blessed Eucharist is to
the progress, and increase thereof; from which holy Mystery though these
virtues receive their augmentation, and perfection; yet not their beginning;
for we teach (according to that of the Apostle, Qui Qui manducat, and bibit
indigne.] 1. Cor. c. 11.
manducat, and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manducat, and bibit) that he, who
is altogether deprived of them, can no more (as being spiritually dead)
profitably relish, and taste this celestial Manna, then a Body (naturally dead)
can digest corporal meats.

Another Reason of ordayning the Eucharist, may be to bind all Christians
together not only by Charity, but even in a certain real, and substantial
manner. Now this union is performed, in that all Christians do communicate of
one, and the same spiritual food; according to those words of the Apostle
(which though immediately they be appropriated to the former union of mind by
Charity, yet may they well be extended to this more strait, and intrinsecall
union) Vnus Vnus Panis.] 1. Cor. 10.
Panis, vnum corpus multi sumus, qui de vno Pane participamus. Thus does this
Real union of Christians through Christ beget an union of them in Charity; and
this of Charity (for who loves truly his Neighbor, loves Christ) engenders
again a Secondary union of them in Christ: so powerful, and operative is
here this Circulation of union.

Sixthly, how could our Savior more feelingly express a perseverance of his
Love toward Man, then by leaving at his departure his sacred Body with his
Spouse, wherewith the devout Soul might at all convenient times be fed, and
nourished? The immensenes of which Love our understanding cannot comprehend,
and therefore we may here well use that forcible word (...).] Matthew. 14. Mark
6.
(...) of Christ (the which the Evangelists upon other occasions often apply to
him) that is, that he was touched even in his bowels of Love, and kindness,
when he first resolved, and thought upon (for Love is most inuentiue) to
institute this dreadful Mystery. For if we consider the thing here given, or
the giver himself (both being here coincident, and both being God, and Man)
or the end whereunto it was bestowed, to wit, the spiritual nourishing of our
Souls, or the small deserving of Man receiving it, who daily crucifieth him
with his sins, it will assure us, that such wonderful Munificence issued
from a Sea of most vehement Love, and Affection.

Furthermore his zeal to us herein appears in that he is content by his
entering into us (a strange affection which brings forth such strange effects)
that we do enter into him, and thus we are (without any disordered confusion
of things) in that meat, the which is in us, himself witnessing no less in
those words: Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me In me
manet.] John 6.
manet, and Ego in eo.] Therefore to conclude this point, it remains (since
flames ever beget flames) that seeing the burning Love of Christ did first
procure this Conjunction with us in the Eucharist, the said Conjunction ought
reciprocally to engender in us a grateful Love toward Christ for so great a
benefit, Ego Ego dilecto meo.] Cantic. 6.
Dilecto meo, and Dilectus meus mihi, still acknowledging it full worth, and
still remaining desirous by often participation of so high a Mystery, without
any fastidious, or cloyed conceit thereof to renew all spiritual operations
flowing from the same: Qui Qui edunt me.] Eccles. 24.
edunt me, adhuc esurient: and qui bibunt me, adbuc sitient.

There are many other Inducements (according to the judgments of the Learned
Fathers, and Doctors) which might inuit our Savior to leave his Body, and
Blood in the Eucharist; for they teach, that it is a perpetual Sacrifice ever
to continue in the Church: That it is a condign, and worthy Sacrifice for
Christ to offer up to his Father: That it is a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving for
the Saints in Heaven: That it is not only for the Living, but for the Dead also
a Propitiatory Sacrifice: That it is a Commemoration of Christ's Passion: That
it is a confirmation of his Testament: That it is an Abstract, or Abridgment of
diverse of Gods chiefest Miracles: That in a sort it Deifieth the Soul: That
thereby we have God present under a se^sible object to hear our Prayers, which
point mightily increases our devotion, and reverence: Finally, that it is a
Viaticum for the souls ready to depart out of this world. All which several
Reasons (besides diverse others) if we should insist in unfolding the value,
and worth of them (of which this place is not capable) might well seem to be
most important, and urging occasions of the institution of this Sacrament;
since such spiritual ends, intendements, operations, and effects (supposing
that Christ would establish in his Church some settled course tending to the
same) could not by any other more convenient, and proportionable means be
accomplished, then by the ordayning of this most dreadful Mystery; so
agreeable is our Catholic doctrine heerin to all Prudence, Reason, and Moral
Persuasion. And thus we see, how the Institution of this Sacrament, and the
many seeming inducements thereof do in a different respect reciprocally
presuppose the one the other.

And hence therefore more evidently appears the froward obstinacy of our
Adversaries, who either not knowing, or not weighing these, and other such
Arguments of credibility, alleged in defense of the Real Presence, are not
ashamed to urge (grounding themselves upon our Method heerin by way of a
Contrariety) the unprofitableness thereof, as also certain Inconveniences, and
Indignityes to Christ, proceeding in their opinion from this our Catholic
Doctrine; affirming the^ to be such, as that they minister strong
probabilityes, that Christ would never leave his Body, and Blood to be given
truly, and really in the celebration of the Eucharist. But this their
Lightness, and want of solid Judgment, consisting in dishonouring Christ
under the texture of honoring him (so did the Jews conuitiate him in words of
Reverence) shall be discovered Hereafter in the Marginall Reference.] The chief
Reasons, which our Adversaries do allege, both from the unprofitableness of
the Catholic doctrine, as also from the indignity, which seems to be offered
to Christ's Body, are these following. And first touching the seeming indignity,
and dishonor redounding to the sacred body of Christ by the doctrine of the
Real Presence: They object, that from our doctrine it follows, that the Body
of Christ might fall, might be burnt, might become rotten, and moldy (for so
we see the external symboles sometimes to appear) might be eaten by mice,
should pass into the belly, and so to the common passage etc.

To all this we Answer; First, that these supposed Indignities do not touch
the Body of Christ, but only affect the species, and forms of the Eucharist,
which are joined with the Body. As for example, when the consecrated host
falls from the Altar upon the Earth, yet cannot the Body of Christ be truly
said to fall; for that is said properly and truly to fall, which does exist,
and is moved corporally (which cannot be properly said of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist.) And therefore when a Man falls on the ground, we use not to say,
that his Soul falls, though accidentally it changes it place therewith.
Answerably therefore, we teach, that the Body of Christ existing after a
spiritual manner, and indiuisibly in the Eucharist, changes it place, but
properly falls not, when the Host falls.

Secondly, we answer, that seeing our Christian faith, teaches us, that
Christ was included for a long time in the womb of a woman; that he was
swadled, and lapped in Clothes; that then he might fall upon the earth; and
might also have been eaten with beasts, or burnt (if so by miracle, he were
not preserved from such mischances) if then he was truly, and in his own
person subject to all these difficulties without any dishonor; what dishonor
is it to him, if he did undergo (in another form) the former supposed
indecencyes urged by our Adversaries?

Thirdly, The former Indignities do no more truly, and properly touch the Body
of Christ, then the Divinity (because it is present in all places) can be said
to be burnt, it being in the fire, or to be rotten, it being in bodies that are
rotten etc.

Lastly, this kind of our Adversaries arguing is borrowed from the old
Heretics, denying other points of Christian Religion. Thus we find, that the
Arians impugned the Divinity of Christ (as appears from Hilarious l. 12. de
Trinitate) from reasons drawn concerning the honor, and dignity of the
Father. In like sort, the Marcionistes, denying the Incarnation did object (as
we read in Tertullian lib. de carne Christi) that it was an Indignity to God,
to be enclosed in the womb of a woman, to lie in a Manger etc. Finally, the
Jews chiefly rest in obiecting against us Christians, that we believe in a
Man (as Justinius witnesses in Dialogo cum Tryphone) which was crucified among
thieves By all which examples we are instructed, how little auayleable those
Arguments are, which our Adversaries do draw from the Indignities (supposing
that they were true) which seem to proceed from our Catholic doctrine of the
Eucharist.

Now touching the unprofitableness of the Catholic doctrine in this point,
our Adversaries do object, that the real being of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist is needless, in that seeing the end, and fruit of the Eucharist is
to nourish the Soul, and this nourishment consisting in Faith, and Charity,
may as auaileably be performed by apprehending Christ by faith, as he is only
in Heaven; it follows, that no profit arises from the Catholic doctrine
herein, which is not by other means as well effected.

To this I answer: First, that it is false to affirm, that the same fruit is
reaped by apprehending Christ in heaven, as by receiving him really into our
Bodies; Since experience does witness, that by this receiving him in the
Eucharist, our Faith, Charity, Devotion, and Reverence are more increased:
Besides our Real Conjunction with Christ affoardeth many benefits to the
Soul, which Christ gives not without this Conjunction; no otherwise then he
cured all such, as touched the hemme of his garment, whom he would not
(notwithstanding that he could) if they had not touched it.

Secondly, it is a false Illation, to conclude, It was not convenient, that
Christ should be really in the Eucharist, because the fruit reaped thereby, may
be obtained by other means; for that is profitable, which does confer any
good, though the same good may be obtained by other ways, for no man will
deny, but that Christ could have cured the sick, and infirm, if they believed
in him, though they had not touched his garments, or his hands, yet it
follows not that the touch thereof was unprofitable to them. In like sort, one
drop of Christ's Blood, or any laborious work undertaken by him for our good,
had been sufficient for our Redemption; yet it follows not, that all his
pains, wounds, effusion of his Blood, and death it self were unprofitably,
and bootlessely performed; yea God could have redeemed the world without the
Incarnation of Christ, shall we therefore say, that the Incarnation of Christ
was needless, inconvenient, and unprofitable?

Finally, our Adversaries object, that the doctrine of the Real Presence is
hurtful, in that it follows, that the Body of Christ is given to the wicked
with profaning thereof. To which may be answered (besides that, which is above
said, touching the Indignity offered to Christ by this Doctrine) that no
inconvenience, or damage aryseth to Christ's body, being distributed to the
wicked, but the great Charity of God is showed therein; for we see that the
Sunne-beames do light upon most foul places, and putrifyed bodies, they being
in no sort corrupted, or defiled thereby; why should then the Body of our
Savior being after a spiritual, and supernatural manner in the Eucharist,
receive any detryment, hurt, or loss, by it entering into the bodies of the
wicked?


hee^after in the Marginall Reference, and their supposed wrongs against
Christ's sacred Body, solued: The which are not rested upon by them, for any
tender regard had of our Saviors dignity, and glory, but because they are
resolved in all points to be mainly cross, and contrary to this our Catholic,
and ancient Faith; not only touching the Presence, but also the manner thereof,
which is warranted from From reasons drawn.] Seeing that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, does ever presuppose the Real Presence, therefore the
Reasons here alleged are preuayling chiefly against the Lutherans, and all
such Protestants, as do acknowledge a true and real being of Christ's Body in
the Eucharist. Therefore supposing that Christ would truly exhibit his body to
us, these Congruentiall Motyues following may persuade us that he would not
there have it joined with bread, but to be absolutely alone by it self.

First, in that if the substance of bread should remain with the body of
Christ in the Eucharist. Then two different Substances should have one and the
same respect and relation to the same Accidences, and should be demonstreted by
the same Accidences, as by certain external signs: And which is more, the
first and principal relation of the Accidences should be to the Bread, and
only a secondary relation to the Body of Christ; the reason heerof being, in
that the substance of the bread (and not the Body of Christ) is informed with
those Accidences. But this would be most inconvenient, since from hence it
would follow, that the Actions performed by the Priest, or the Co^municant
should first agree to the bread, and secondarily only to the Body of Christ;
And thus if one do ask, what is elevated, what is eaten, or what the
Accidences do there signify, or one should then answer, a piece of Wheaten
Bread, and the Body of Christ; which point could not stand with the dignity and
reverence of Christ's Body.

Secondly, it would appear much opposite to the dignity of Christ's Body, that
one and the same meat should be nourishment both to our Souls and Bodies, and
it consequently would breed in us a less reverence to the Body of Christ there
present.

Thirdly, supposing the Bread to be in the Eucharist, then could not the
Eucharist be taken fasting: and hence it follows, that none could several
times communicate the same day: And yet according to S. Augustine epist. 118.
c. 6. even by the Decree of the Apostles, the Body of Christ ought to be taken
only of such as are fasting: As also it appears from S. Gregory homil. 8. in
Euang. that upon Christmas day the Priest did celebrate three times, during the
time of the Primitive Church.

Fourthly (and perhaps principally) it is fitting, that the bread should not be
in the Eucharist with the Body of Christ, in regard of the danger growing
thereby, to wit, for fear that the more ignotant and simple should adore the
bread, since such do not distinguish, but absolutely adore that which lies
under the Accidences. Now that it was convenient, that the Accidences of bread
and wine should remain, and not be changed, appears by other like Reasons of
Co^gruency. First, because if they were absent, then there would be no sensible
sign in the Eucharist, and consequently it would cease to be a Sacrament.
Secondly, by reason, that in regard of the presence of the Accidences, the
worth and merit of our faith is increased. Thirdly, they being absent, it would
be a horror to Man's nature to eat Man's flesh Fourthly, if they were absent,
then this Proposition (Hoc est Corpus meum) could not be true, since then the
whole should be so changed into the whole, as that nothing should remain
common to both the Termini of this Conversion.


Reasons drawn in like sort from Conueniency (for they are strange
Mathematicians) since of all the several Aspects, which may be borne to the
Sun of Gods Church (for, in sole posuit Tabernaculum suum) they approve, and
allow only a mere Diametricall Opposition: thus (gravely) esteeming themselves
to be so much the nearer to the Truth, by how much they are further of from the
The pillar and foundation.] According to that, Columna, and Firmamentum
Veritatis. Tim. c. 3.
Pillar and Foundation of Truth.

THE CONCLUSION.
HERE now, Good Reader (for to thee only I will turn my pen, since my humble
thoughts dare not presume to direct any further speeches unto his Majesty) thou
have this mean, and impolished discourse, in regard of the Subject whereof all
Pens (yea the tongues of Angels) are to be reputed most unworthy: from hence
thou may (according to my Method) be instructed of two things. First of the
Possibility of this great Mystery: Secondly of the Authorities (both humane,
and divine) proving, that what herein by Gods Power may be performed, the same
was through his Divine Godnesse, and pleasure in the Institution of the
Eucharist, actually effected.

And concerning the first Point, we are to conceive, that as in the firster
part hereof, it is demonstrated, that God is Omnipotent; so does our Christian
Faith teach us, that he is he is just.] Psalm. 11.
just. Through his Omnipotency he is able to perform what he promises;
Through his Justice he promises nothing, but what he will perform. Both these
drawing equally together in him (for he has For he has promised] Answerably
to that of S. John 6. Pauis, quem ego daho, caro mea est pro mundi vita.
promised by the infallible Oracle of his written word, that he would give his
sacred Body, and Blood to eat, and drink) may warrant us of the Truth of this
high Mystery.

In the second Part (to convince, that Christ at his last Supper performed,
what before was proved, that he was able to accomplish) thou have set down all
the chiefest Authorities drawn from Gods sacred word; the answerable
Prophesies of the Ancient Jews herein; the beginning, and progression of the
Sacramentarian Heresy particulerly displaied; the wrested testimonies of
Scriptures alleged to the contrary, fully and satisfyingly answered; the
stupendous Miracles wrought in proof hereof recorded; and lastly (to omit
other short insertions) the Fathers Judgments in the same, as also in the
particular manner of Transubstantiation, most abundantly manifested both by
their own express sayings, and by the plain acknowledgement of our
Sacramentaries.

It now remains, that upon the mature deliberation of the former Premises,
thou consider (seeing with the With the Psalmist.] Psalm. 24.
Psalmist, Thou have not received thy soul in vain) to which side thou
intendest to subject thy judgment herein. That is, whether thou will embrace
the Sacramentaries opinion (notwithstanding it is impugned by all forcible
Proofs whatsoever) or that thou will be content (with all humble resignation
of thy own spirit to impath thy self in the way of reverend Antiquity, and to
follow their judgments who in Faith, and doctrine followed the Apostles, I
mean, the Judgments of those Primitive Fathers, Men remarkable for Learning,
since their own Labors (left as Momuments to Posterity) are sufficient
witnesses thereof; Men of most eminent virtue, since God has vouchsafed to
seal their sanctity of life with the irrefragable testimonies of diverse Great
Miracles.] Examples hereof see recorded in diverse Authors, and Historiographers.
great Miracles Finally men of a pure and uncorrupted Faith, since they then
lived, when the Church of Christ was for her time, but in her Infancy, but for
her perfection, in her youth and full growth, and therefore even by the
confession of our Sectaries, could not with a joint consent teach any thing
contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles.

And thus the maine drift of these precedent Passages (for this is the Issue of
the matter chiefly intended by me, and here it rests) resolves to this one
point, to wit whether a Man desirous of his own salvation, should in this
high, and most reverend Mystery (upon the true or false belief whereof depends
his souls interminable weal, or woe) run one, and the same line of faith with
Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, the Gregory's, the Cyrills, Basil,
Ambrose, Hilary, Athanasius, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Ignatius, and the like; or with
Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza.

But now since we are Christians, and are to believe in Christ, not in outward
sense; Let us turn our pen from all disputable Points of the matter, and
acknowledging the certainty, admire Gods inco^prehensible Goodness therein; for
as the Heavens spend their Motions by distributing their Heat, Light, and other
virtues to the earth; so the Creator of the Heavens has vouchsafed the
Influence of his Grace by bestowing himself (in this most dreadful Mystery)
upon Man, the Earths chiefest creature. Thus by receiving his sacred Body, and
Blood, we contain him within our selves, whom the Heavens cannot contain, and
enclose him in our breasts, who in himself incloseth all this ALL.

In like sort at this celestial Table we feed on him, who gives himself
as well to thousands, as to one, and yet every one receaues as much thereof, as
those thousa^ds: who equally imparteth himself to good, and bad, and yet they
both partake thereof with most unequal Effect. To be short, who Commanding
every one.] According to those words John 6. Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij
Hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis.
commanding every one to ear of his flesh, and drink of his blood, is much
offended with diverse men communicating thereof, and yet commands nothing
wherewith he is offended; for it is the Vnpreparation, not the Participation,
which displeases him: which Point cannot seem strange to us Christians, for
we read, that the The Incircumcised.] Exodus c. 12.
Uncircumcised could not eat the Phase: Which Phase, or Paschall Lamb (since
Typically it represented.] Hereof S. Augustine l. 2. contra ^teras Petiliani c.
37. Aliud est Pascha, quod Iudaei de ave celebrant, aliud quod nos in corpore,
and sanguine Domini accipimus.
typically it represented the Eucharist) could not be eaten but with gyrded
loins, and shoes on their feet, which figure out in our Lords Supper our holy
desires; with unleavened bread, whereby is shaddowed our azimous, and pure
intentions; finally with the mixture of certain bitter herbs, signifying
sharp compunction for our former Impieties; so necessary it is for our soul to
be clothed with her wedding garment, when she presumes to come to so great a
banquet.

And now to draw to an end of that, which in it self is endless; since Gods
Power and Goodness are in the Institution of this Sacrament, parallel one to
the other, and that Man's understanding cannot penetrate into the depth of
either of them (for between things finite, and infinite, there is proportion
only in disproportion) let us admire his Power, as being able to effect so
great a work. Let us admire his Goodness, as being willing to work it far Man's
benefit; and in a deep, and silent Co^templation of both (for words are
defective herein) let us conclude with that Grave, and Reverend Reverend
Father.] Ephrem lib. de Natura Dei minime scrutandae c. ^.
Father: Ignis immortalis sunt Mysteria Christi; noli temere ea perscrutari, ne
in ipsorum perscrutatione comburaris.

(a) He is just.] Psalm. 11.

(b) For he has promised.] Answerably to that of S. John 6. Pauis, quem ego
dabo, caro mea est pro mundi vita.

(c) With the Psalmist.] Psalm. 24.

(d) Great Miracles.] Examples hereof see recorded in diverse Authors, and
Historiographers.

(e) Commanding every one.] According to those words John 6. Nisi
manducaueritis carnem silij Hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non
habebitis vitam in vobis.

(f) The Incircumcised.] Exodus c. 12.

(g) Typically it represented.] Hereof S. Augustine l. 2. contra ^teras
Petiliani c. 37. Aliud est Pascha, quod Iudaei de ^ue celebrant, aliud quod nos
in corpore, and sanguine Domini accipimus.

(h) Reverend Father.] Ephrem lib. de Natura Dei minime scrutanda c. 5.

FINIS.

