CERTAIN Characters and Essays of Prison and Prisoners. COMPILED BY NOVVS
HOMO A PRISONER in the Kings Bench.

Experientia est optimus magister.

LONDON Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse street. 1618.

TO HIS MOST KIND AND EVER RESPECTIVE Kind Uncle, M. Matthew Mainwaring of
Namptwitch in Chesshire.
SInce my coming into Prison, what with the strangnes of the place, and
strictness of my Liberty, I am so transported that I could not follow that
study wherein I took great delight and chief pleasure, and to spend my time
Idly would but add more discontentments to my troubled breast, and bring in
this chaos of discontentments, fantasies must arise, which will bring forth the
fruits of an Idle brain, for e Malis minimum. It is far better to give some
account of time though to little purpose then none at all. To which end I
gathered a handful of Essays, and few Characters of such things as by my own
experience, I could say Probatum est: not that thereby I should either please
the reader, or show exquisitnes of inue^tion, or curious style. Seeing what I
write of, is but the child of sorrow, bred by discontentments and nourisht up
with misfortunes, to whose help melancholy Saturn gave his Judgment. The
night Bird her invention, and the ominous Raven brought a quill taken from his
own wing, dipped in the Ink of misery as chief ayders in this great Architect
of so row.

This child is borne and brought to the Font all things ready, only there
wants a patron. Hoc difficillimum est. For who will defend sorrow, and misery,
who will give him entertainment, who will countenance this work the Author
being miserable, who will respect the matter, the man being an abject, who will
cherish the circumstance when the substance is almost perished? Surely non in
his diebus, for friendship is banished, love extinguished, natural affection
gone to travel, gould is dearer then a friend, treasure is nearer the^ a
kinsman, and mammon better beloved then a son. Yet in this famine of true
friends I will venture upon you (most loving Uncle) as a godfather to this my
first borne though in misery. I can have but a denial which if you do it must
dye in oblivion. But why should I fear since you have always bin my anchor
when I have bin Ship-wrackt, and many times saved my poor Barque when it was
ready to split. Why the^ should I doubt of your friendly patronage which have
never failed me? Be bold then, and go thy way, thou shall be entertained
though not for any worth which is in thee, yet in respect thou do but show a
willing heart, and do endeavor to expel ingratitude a thing most odious not
only to man but God, not to Christians but Heathens, not to Heathens but
Beasts.

What then should I give to you for all your kindnesses which you have
continually bestowed upon me which are so many that if I should endeavor to
recite (Ante diem clauso componet vesper olympo) but to show my willingness to
my power though I am not able to requite (for, vltra posse non est esse) do
offer up unto the Oracle of your love the sacrifice of a loving heart, hoping
that what is amiss you will impute it to the slendernes of my judgment, and
the dulnes of my brain which this place has made worse (and not to the lest
defect of goodwill.) and that you would let none but your self see my
imperfections, which are suficiently divulged by my own actions, and would be
unwilling to have a second edition of them by my writing this was the chiefest
cause I took. This in hand; another was because that happily some friend of
mine (post mea funera) by accident may find this paper, and read them and by my
example say. Foelix sum quem pericula huius authoris faciunt me cautum, for qui
non ante cauet post dolebit, and that they may be afraid to enter into debt
any further then necessity urges, and if they be forced to borrow to pay as
soon as the can (for usury and extortion bite deep) and credit once cracked is
not easily recovered nor all creditors of on mind, for some will in pity
forbear and others will show the greatest severity.

So hoping you will accept non donum sed animum* I rest this 27. of January
Anno 1617. From the King's Bench Prison in South-warke. Your euer-louing nephew
Yarffeg Lluhsnym.

TO THE COVRTEous Reader.
Courteous Reader only to banish mela^choly and to wade through tedious time,
tedious in respect of this place, I gathered a few essays and characters, with
an intent not to have the^ seen of any, but to him to whom they were sent,
being on that I might truly ground a certainty of, who would excuse my
imperfections, and judge charitably of my slendernes of judgment, this copy by
accident came to some of my friends hands, who having perused it wished me to
put it in print, which I altogether refused, because I would not presume of my
own judgment, or dare to venture to put my self to the censure of so many
understanding readers into whose hands it is subject to fall, these persuasions
prevailed not, entreaties were laid aside, and I must either divulge them, or
else loose their love this was the first motive that with an unwilling
willingness caused me to put my book to censure. Another was in respect some
obdurate creditors may read it, and by reading mollify their strong hearts.
The last reason because it may be as a caveat to young gallants, to terrify
them how they run in debt, wherein they may know that imprisonment is of all
miseries most lamentable.

So hoping that the judicious will with laudable censure mittigate my many
imperfections, and the other judge favorably of my intention, which if it take
well is better then I can expect, if otherwise they do not injury me, giving
desert his reward.

Essays of a Prison.
TO what end or purpose should I entreat half of the Muses for the aid of
invention, or Cicero to adorn my phrase with eloquence, or Floras deep
judgment to write iudicially, or implore aid of Martial to speak mistically,
or Virgills heroicke style to please the hearers, since what I write is nothing
but of sorrow, the subject but discontentme^t, and the whole matter but an
Index of many miseryes, and therefore my phrase shall be altogether unpolished,
being the servant of my more dull apprehension.

Vade, sed incultus, qualem decet exulis esse,
Infoelix habitum temporis huius habe.
My purpose is with dim water coulors to lime me out a heart, yea such a heart
so disconte^ted and oppressed, that I need not to be curious in fitting every
coulor to his place, or to choose the pleasantest chamber to draw it in, because
in it I am to lay down the bounds of those tempestuous seas in which ten
thousands are every day tossed, if not overwhelmed, which is so usual here
amongst us that every one is arts master in this workmanship, and every minute
some thing or other is still added to this distressed Picture, whose ponderous
weight is so great that the frame is scarce able to bear the effigies.

My trauells hither to this infernal Island was but a short voyage, and my
abode here as yet but few months, but it was longer to me then an East Indian
voyage, and I am sure far more dangerous for if from the Indyes of sixty men
twenty come home safe it is well, but in this if eighty of a hundred be not
cast-ouer board it is a wonder

Being once arrived, Loci incommoditas.
no star of comfort here can be seen to sail by, no haven of happiness
near, no anchor of hope to cast out, Top-sayle, Foresayle, Spritsayle, Mizen,
Main, Sheate, Bollings and Drablers are all torn by the winds, and the
Barque it self so weather-beaten, that there is few can come near to touch at
the Cap of Bona Speranza.

Being once arrived at, all are not only stayed, but the in chauntments are so
strong that it transformeth all that come thither. First the greatest courages
are here wracked, the fairest revenues do here come aground, it makes a wise
man to loose his wits, a fool to know himself, it turns a rich man into a
beggar, and leaves a poor man desperate, he whom neither Snowes nor Alps can
vanquish, but has a heart as constant as Haniball, him can the miseryes of a
Prison overcome.

The Character of a Prison.
A Prison is a grave to bury men alive, and a place wherein a man for half a
years imprisonment may learn more law, then he can at Westminster for a
hundred pound.

It is a Microcosmos, a little world of woe, it is a map of misery, it is a
place that will learn a young man more villainy if he be apt to take it in one
half year, the^ he can learn at twenty dycing howses, Bowling allies,
Brothelhouses, or Ordinaryes, and an old man more policy, then if he had bin
Pupil to Machiauill.

It is a place that has more diseases perdomina^t in it, then the pesthouse
in the plague time, and it stinckes more then the Lord Mayors dogge-house or
paris-garden in August.

It is a little common wealth, although little wealth be common there, it is a
desert where desert lies hoodwinckt it is a famous City wherein are all
trades, for here lies the Alchymist that can rather make ex auro non aurum,
then ex non auro aurum.

It is as intricate a place as Rosamunds Labyrinth, and is as full of blind
Meanders; and crooked turnings that it is impossible to find the way out except
he be directed by a silver clue, and can never overcome Minotaure without a
goulden ball to work his own safety.

It is as Innes of Court, for heerin Lawyers inhabit, that have crochets to
free other men yet all their quirks and quiddities cannot infranchise them.

It is the Doctors Commons where skillful Physicians frequent, who like
Aesculapius can cure other men's diseases, yet cannot Quintessence out of all
their Vegetalls and Mineralls a Balsamum, or Elixir to make a sovereign
plaster to heal the surfeit the mace has given them.

It is the Chyrurgions hall where many rare artists live, that can search other
men's wounds yet cannot heal the wound the Searieant has given them.

It is your Bankrupts banqueting house, where he sits feasting with the sweet
meats borrowed from other men's tables, having a voluntary disposition never to
repay them again.

It is your Prodigalls (vltimum refugium) wherein he may see himself as in a
glass what his excess has brought him to, and least that he should surfeit,
comes hither to Physic himself with moderate diet, and least that his bed of
down should breed too many diseases, comes hither to chang his bed where he is
scarce able to lie down.

It is a Purgatory which does afflict a man with more miseries then ever he
reaped pleasures.

It is a pilgrimage to extenuate sin^ and absolve offenses: for here be
Seminaries and Mass -- Priests which do take down the pride of their flesh
more, then a voyage to the holy Land or a hair shirt in Lent.

It is an exile which does banish a man from all contentments, wherein his
accounts do so terrify him, that it makes a man grow desperate.

To conclude what is it not? in a word it is the very Idea of all misery and
torments, it conuerts joy into sorrow, riches into poverty, ease into
discontentments, and further, Of all the ill that may be thought,
Imagind or be writ:
In prison here a man shall find,
Which will his own heart split.


Of Prisoners.
I Could wish that every one that comes to prison should not be dismayed, but
carry it out bravely and with resolution, and to consider that no misery in this
world is endless. After storms calms will arise, and though sorrow be over
night yet joy will come in the morning, and to say as Caesar did to the Pilott
that carried him when he was afraid, (quoth he) thou cariest Caesar: So every
generous mind ought to be armed with resolution to meet all storms of
adversity, Omnis homo Miser.
and to consider that man was borne to misery, and therefore natural to him.

But thou will peradventure say the name of a Prisoner is loathsome to thee, is
it because thou art cooped under lock and key? Is it because thou feel
wants? Is it because thou art barred of freedom? Is it because thy friends
look strangely on thee or forsake thee? Is it because thou art disgraced and
holden in scorn? Is it because thou lodgest hardly and peradventure with an
ill bedfellow: Yet let not all these dismay thee, for had thou the whole
Country to walk in, yet thy soul is still imprisoned in thy corrupted body.
Let not want discourage thee, for thy redeemer suffered hunger and cold to
fulfill thy wants. Let not want of freedom trouble thee, thy Savior was
fettered and manackled to infranchise thee. Let not the coy looks of thy
friends dismay thee, thy Lord was scorned of all men to bring thee into favor.
Let not disgraces molest thee, the King of Kings was most disgraced to honor
thee, let not thy lodging or forced chamber fellows afflict thee, the Pilot of
thy safety was lodged in a manger and made a companion for thieves. But look
into thy own bosom and learn but a short rule yet very difficult viz: (Nosce
te ipsum) and thou shall find it is not imprisonment that afflicts thee, nosee
tuipsum.
but the evil which is in thy self, makes thee so distasteful, for had thou
all things at will, yet still thou would wish for more. The greatest Monarch
lives not without some coffeehouse, Nemo vinit contentus.
and comfort thy self that one day thou shall be infranchised and go to that
place and mansion house which is prepared for thee, where all scores shall be
paid, all cares banished, and all tears wiped away.

Varlets and Catch-poles arrest thee, fret not at it, if law have power to whet
an axe, she must pick out a hangman to strike the mace, this does but only
put thee in remembrance of that arrest which shall Summon thee to appear at the
Imperial Court of heaven.

Thy accounts are many and great which are against thee, Read rationem.
yea some of you come to a tormenting execution, grieve not at this, it does
but teach thee that thy accounts must be brought against thee, to draw thee to
a reckoning to make thee to know that thou owe a reckoning to heaven as well
as man, and Justice will execute her power not to drive thee to despair, but
to a mendment.

Further I persuade my self their are many prisoners whose resolution are so
noble, and resolute that before they would yield to the threats of an insulting
creditour, they would cherefully thrust their nekes into the yoke of
aduerfity, if no more veins herein were cut but their own, but here is none
so poor which dies in prison but the last gap does crack the heartstrings of
a wife, Parents et Liberi sunt chari.
children, father, mother, friends or allies, therefore art thou bound to take
pity of thy self, and to hang out the flag of truce to thy bloudy-minded
Creditor, and seek or ransom to pay all so that thou may escape with life,
though it be upon some ignoble terms, and much loss to thee, if none of
these respects, yet for thy Countries sake, to whom thou art a Traitor if thou
give thy self to thine enemies hand when upon parley thy peace may be made.
Come forth of Prison, and dye not there, that thou may honor thy King, and
do service to thy country, and pay thy dets so far as thou art able, decause
the greatest debt that ever thou did owe was paid for thee.

Prisoners of another nature.
SOme there be which have gotten other men's goods and so lie here to defraud
them, these of all men deserve no pity, or compassion, which tie their own
hands, and make themselves gally slaves only to wear golden setters, how
can thou say thy prayers, and expect a blessing should be poured on thee,
that so willingly errest from the type of a just man which is (Suum cuique
attribuere) I will not speak much of thee, Fac alijs fieri quod velis ipse
tibi.
because it must be all gall. In a word the gallows on which the poor thief
hangs is most fit for thee, he robs one man, thou whole families, he is a
felon to man only, thou art a felon to God and man, if he kill, he does it
suddenly and but one, when thou with a lingering ^eath destroyest father,
mother, children, and peradventure many Orphants left to their charge. Diuiti^
faciunt homines potentiores non. meli ores.
But look to it that although thou compound for two shillings or three
shillings in the pound, the overplus which thou so ill have got will bring thy
soul into such debt that the remainder will not pay the interest to save the
forfaiture of thy soul to the Devil, which will damn thee and thy angels,
with him and his angels, and thy issue or allies which shall enjoy them shall
never prosper with them.

The Character of a Prisoner.
A Prisoner is an impatient patient lingrin^ under the rough hands of a cruel
physician, Bona male parta, male di^abuntur.
his creditour having cast his water knows his disease, and has power to cure
him, but takes more pleasure to kill him. He is like Tantalus, who has
freedom running by his door, yet cannot enjoy the least benefit thereof, his
greatest grief is that his credit was so good, and now no better his land is
drawn within the compass of a sheep skin and his own hand the
fortification that bars him of entrance, he is fortunes tossing-ball, an object
that would make mirth melancholy, to his friends an abject, and a subject of
nine days wonder in every Barbers shop, and a mouth-full of pity (that he
had no better fortune) to Midwiues, and talkeatiue gossips, and all the content
that this transitory life can give him seems but to flout him, in respect the
restraint of liberty bars the true use. To his familiars he is like a plague,
whom they dare scarce come nigh for fear of infection, he is a monument ruined
by those which raised him, he speads the day with a hei mihi, vae miserum, and
the night with a Nulla dolor estmedicabilis herba: and to conclud A Prisoner is
a woeful man,
Oppressed with grief of mind.
And tell his miseries, no man can:
Which he is sure to find.


Of Creditors.
A Creditor has two pair of hands on of flesh and blood, and that nature gave
him; another of Iron and that the law gives him: but the one is more
predominant then the other, for mercy guids the one, and ma^mon the other. But
if he once consider what he goes about to do, and that it is the image of God
who^ he goes about to deface and oppress with miseries, Deus fecit hominem
secundum imaginem suam.
and calamities then the softnes of the one does so operate, that it meets with
the hardness of the other, which never co^es to pass but when grace and mercy
kiles Law and Justice, but such days are seldom set down in our Calenders,
neither will it serve this Island, but persuade my self that for a strange
meridian is that Almanac calculated in which they are found.

I by mine own experience (though little, yet too much to learn it here)
have known of my own knowledge a hundred creditors which have laid their
debtors in irons as relentles as themselves, and of those hundred, if I should
add a hundred more, I think I should nominate but one only, and only on of a
merciful breast, who did not only greiue to see his debtor oppressed with
misery, but also laid money out of his purse to free him, he shot a second
arrow to find the first and suppose he shot both away, do you think his
quiver was the emptier? No, he scattered a handful of corn and reaped a
bushel, he received treble interest, he gained by this new security, and such
as would not fail him at the day; God became his debtor, and paid him more
then his account came to.

Thou that art a Creditor wilt not believe this: Ironia.
do not. But in stead of this man's weeping make thy debtor melt into tears,
and in stead of his lamentation rejoice he is in thy hands to use him cruelly,
and flatter thy self in saying thou have no reason to loose so much by him,
and I will have his body, or in persuading thy self that his friends will not
let him lie for such a debt, and that thou will not forgive him, but nolens
volens will be satisfied, or else he shall starve and rot: Homo homini lupus.
o thou wicked man, thou never do consider what tears thy Savior shed to
free thee, and when thou wast given up to the prison of hell by the hands of
thy cruel creditour the Devil to be cruelly tormented, yet Christ paid all thy
scoares with his precious blood, and how can thou lie down on thy pillow to
pray to God to forgive thee a million of debts, nay they run into infinitum,
which will not forgive thy brother one debt. And when all thy friends would not
redeem thee thy Savior freed thee, how can thou do these things with a
safe conscience? Post thou not sleep on the pillow of thy own damnation, thy
prayers turn into cursings, and thou do but mock him that thou prayest unto.

Consider what a great scoare thou art to pay, what an account thou art to
make, and how thou shall not escape if thou use such cruelty till thou have
paid the utmost farthing, thou that art a cruel murderer whom the revenge
and wrongs of a wife, children, parents, and orphants will like the blood of
Abell call to heaven for vengeance on thee and thy posterity: do but consider
of this, and then thou will be affaid to torment thy brother. But imitate the
Romans who builded a temple for the relief of those which were fallen into
decay and poverty, then find a prison to starve them in, and follow Titus
Vespacian who having omitted but one day to do Justice caused that day to be
put forth of the calender. So that day when thou shall have but a thought of
torme^ting thy poor brother* do but look into thy own consience and it will
make thee repent that ever thou have lived such a day wherein thou have played
the tyrant in thy heart. The rocks have yielded relief to men oppressed, but
you more harder then they, are the cause of their misery. Be thou as great a
tyrant over thy poor debtor as Nero was, as cruel as Phalaris, as inhumane as
Lycaon, and in the end thou do with these get a staff to break thy own
head, and lay a snare which thou thy self shall fall into, which though thy
own person escape, yet thy posterity shall be sure to feel the punishment.

Thou that vauntest, and wilt make dice of thy debtors bones, be these the
words of a man? no, of a monster? no, but a devil, nay worse then a diuill, a
thing not worthy name, for these words thou art as infamous, as the Jews
hateful for casting of dice for the Lords garments, that garment was but a
senceles thing but thou casts dice for a piece of thy redeemers body.

Thou take with one clap of a Varlets hand, from the Courtier his honor,
from the Lawyer his tongue, from the Merchant the seas, from the Citizen his
credit, from the Scholar his preferment, from the husband man the earth it
self (and from all men as much as thou may) the brightness and warmth of the
sun of heaven, in a word if nothing will make thy stony heart relent, thou in
being cruel to thy debtor, art worse then the hang man, he before he strikes
begs pardon, thou take a pride to condemn where thou may save.

But it may be thy estate is sick, thy credit much engaged, and to save thy
self thou art forced to do this. In so doing thou do well, if another wear
thy coat and thou go cold thou may pluck it from his shoulders. If thou
art hungry and another keeps thy meat, thou may take it off his table; if
he be able to cure thy wound, which for his sake thou have made, thou have
reason to seek thy remedy, but if he which has borrowed thy coat, has worn
it out, and has not a ragge to cover him with, will thou trample upon his
naked body? If with the Jew of Malta in stead of coin thou requirest a pound
of flesh next to thy debtors heart, will thou cut him in pieces? If thy debtor
offer thee his bed he lies in, his chamber he sleeps in, his dish he drinks
in, nay all that he has, so that he leaves himself, wife and children as
naked as they came into the world, will thou for all this suffer him to lie in
prison? If thou be merciful to thy debtor that cannot pay thee, alas what is
it? No more then if thou should lift up the head of a sick man upon his
pillow to ease him, he may recover and do as much for thee; in prison poverty
is made beggary, and so thereby thou do not only undo thy debtor, but loose
all, therefore be merciful and pitiful, and thou shall not loose thy
reward.

Lycurgus being asked why he made no law for parracides, Particides.
he answered because he thought there were none so unnatural: so if I should
have studied all the days of my life, and that my years should be doubled, I
should never have Imagined either to have invented, or to have bin an
eyewitness of such vnnaturallnes as is here exemplary, as the son who
being bound for his father, to free himself has laid his father up in close
prison, and here has detayned him seven years never yielding to any
composition, but his poor father lives at his merciless mercy, and again
the father suffers his son to be imprisoned for his own debt at his own
suit, surely a thing so abhorde, that I tremble to write it, and none can read
it without blushing. What will this world come to, when the Mammon of this
world shall set father against son, son against father, and make them more
merciless then Tigers, and more unnatural then beasts: for a beast forsakes
not his own, but man respects gold before his friend, and the father, coin
before the son of his body, flesh of his flesh. And the son the God of this
world before his father, which gave him life, and being whom he ought to
cherish, and undergo all troubles to ease him. But look to it, both fathers
and children, least in a moment the just judgment of God fall upon you, and
damn them and your gold together, loving it better then those whom you ought
to cherish, and the one to be but a thing of the basest esteem in respect of
the other. Ex paucis dictis plurima in^endere potes.
I could exemplify it with historyes as well foreign as domestique but that
it is not my purpose, for Ex paucis plurima concipit ingenium.

The Character of a Creditor.
A Creditor is a man whose estate is wrapped up in sheepe-skins, his rising
grows by his debtors fall, his credit relyes upon his debtors performance, and
the death of a young gallants father is more pleasing to him the^ fasting days
to a Usurer, or death to a Broker, he grows rich only by putting forth
commodities, which mediately conuerts* to discommodities, he will not put out
money for ten in the hundred, for usury is hateful to him, but he loves
extortion and makes that his summum bonum, for he will merchandise with you,
whereby he will gain sixty in a hundred, he is your Cities honest man, which
is, to speak the truth, more the^ a knave, for a knave that is crafty needs no
broker, but he cannot live without one. He is a man composed of all love, and
protesting kindness to pleasure the occasions of his gallant debtor, with his
much affirmation of his respect, how willing he is to do his worship a
pleasure, whereby the chief aim of his pleasure is to have a footing upon
some capital message, or else to be fingring some petty Lordshippe, or co^ely
ma^nor, who having no sooner glutted himself with the rich banquet of his
debtors dear cost, but immediately to physic himself he is at the charge of
a fair hackney Coach with three most absolute lades to draw him (whither he
most willingly is drawn) with his curious wife, and two or three of his own
conditioned neighbors, Similis simili gaudet.
to see this goodly purchase, who prepare themselves some fortnight before
hand, and prune themselves up in their Peacocks feathers like the puppets in a
Lord Mayor his pageant, and for this his great act he is admired at amongst his
neighbors as the Owl in the day time amongst other birds, and esteemed of
with as much respect as that captain Pigmi was, which was commander in that
bloody wars against the terrible black Crows.

A Creditor may further be said to be either, homo, monstrum, or demon. A man
when he casts his debtor into Prison with a determination to seek his own,
not to ruin him, and if he be not able to pay all, to take what he can spare,
and give him day for the rest, and so release him: this man is (homo homini
Deus) that as he does punish, so he does preserve.

A Monster when he has not only extended his substance but casts him in
Prison, and is as deaf as an adder to hear of releafe till he have paid him
the utmost farthing.

A Devil when he has ruined him does rejoice to see him fall, and in stead
of coin will have his carcass, but to find a creditor both Homo et Angelus,
that will release his prisoner when he is not able to pay him, and that will
consider that vltra posse non est esse. Such a one is Rara auis in terris, etc.

Some creditors are pitiful,
And mercy still will show:
And some as flint will harder be,
Which many debtors know.
Of choice of company in Prison.
Would thou learn to dispute well, be an excellent Sophister, would thou
dispute of foreign affairs, and be an excellent linguist, I counsel thee to
travel? Would thou be of a pleasing and affectionate behavior? Frequent the
Court. Would thou diue into the secret villainies of man? Lie in prison. Via
perieu losa.


Take heed when thou entrest into this wilderness of wild beasts, what path
thou take, some guide is necessary, or else unawares, thou will with the
Roman Emperors Steward fall into a pit, where cruel devouring are intrapped,
which will ruin thee.

Society is the string at which the life of man hangs without which is no
music, two in this mask is but a union, Adam had his Eve, and every son of
Adam has his brother whom he loves.

No Chariot runs with one wheel, two makes it steady, a third is superfluous,
four too cumbersome, thou must choose one and but one, who walks alone is
lame.

Men of all conditions are forced into prison, as all rivers run into the
sea, therefore it is good to be familiar with all, acquainted with few, and if
with any eandem cantilenam cano, but with one, make trial what the vessel
will hold before thou power thy self into him, and be wary what thou say
or do, for thou shall have the eyes of envy, not of reproof which will
look upon thee, to malice thee if thou do well, and if thou deny to follow
them in their humors, or to dance after their own pipe, thou shall be more
emulated then the boy was of the two Ladies when he preferred Venus before in
giving her the golden bal, and if by accident thou do any thing amiss, as
humanum est errare thou shall be more vilified, and with inueterate malice
more prosecuted to disgrace thee, then the Pharisees did the Hugonites.

Be wary therefore of thy company, for to be a bowl for every alley, and run
into every company proves thy mind to have no bias.

Thy coming into prison is like a traveler coming into strange countries,
and takes up several lodgings, has many welcomes, but they are not to him,
but to his money.

If thou will dwell with thy self be not giddy, but composed, for he that is
every where is no where, therefore be wary whom thou selectest, for here be of
all sorts, for thou shall as well find a flattering Gnatho, as a dissembling
Sinon, and if thou have store of crowns, then thou shall be sure to be humored
and be beloved with outward respects, and then they will counsel and advise
thee with protestations of their love, but look to such, whose counsel to
hear, and not embrace will do hurt but may much improve thee, but if once
taken it will operate as the apple which Valentine duchess of Orleans cast to
the young Princes which once tasted, will so poison thee with corruption that
thou art incurable.

Further here be vain glorious and taska iue headed fools, snch will more
trouble thee, then any action of debt which is laid one thee here be common
drunkards, which will lie heavier one thee then an execution.

But if thou suffer a man to ly long in thy bosom, albeit his conditions be
full of flawes, yet labor to piece and seame up his vices, rather then to cast
him off least that it call thy own judgment in question.

All men have imperfections, humanum eum errare.
and being in prison we must not look to have them stars, this place is noe
Orb for such constellations.

Let not thy companion be a miserable base minded fellow, for then
nigardlinesse will hold her fingers one thy purse stringes, let him not be a
Prodigal for then he will draw thee to riot, of adultery to lust, of swearers
to damned oaths, Diuitiae faciunt homines potentiores non meliores.
of pot companions to drunkenness, acquaint thy self therefore not with the
most, but best, not the best in cloths or money, but in virtue, if there be
none such in prison then keep company with thy self, Cum bonis bonus.
and in thy chamber keep company with Plutarke and Seneca, or rather Perkins
and Greeneham, the one will teach thee to live well, the other to die well.

The good will teach thee good, Cum bonis bonus, cum malis malus.

The bad will thee defame:
The one to virtue thee will bring
The other grief and shame.
The Character of Companions in Prison.
Quot homines, tot sententiae.
All companies are not alike, neither is there a union in their dispositions. I
will therefore touch but three kinds of persons which thou shall be sure to
find in prison. viz.

1 A Parasite. 2 A John indifferent. 3 A true hearted Titus.
The first loves thee better for thy means then merit, thy substance then thy
self, who will rippe open thy bosom to thy enemy, and when thy money begins
to sink, will fly from thee, and will be the first that will disgrace thee.
He is like a whore who will no longer fawn, then thou will feed him. He is
a trencher rascal, which will more hate thee when thou leauest to relieve him,
then ever he did seem to love thee.

The second is one that will flatter thee, and will neither absolutely love
thee nor hate thee, but when present will be with thee, when absent against
thee, he is hic et vbique, here and every where, and in very truth he is no
where.

The last of these thou may call the masculine sweet heart, on which may be
resembled to truth whose bosom is allwaies bare, and has a breast of
Chistall, that thou may look through his body to his heart, he is one that
will love thee in adversity, he will respect thee in the kitchen as well as in
the parlor, he will reverence thee in the hole as well as in the masters side
he will look on thee in rags as well as in robes, and will acknowledge thee
in fetters as in a feather-bed, come storms, come calmes, come tempests, come
sunshine, come what can come, he will be thine and stick to thee therefore.

Be careful that thou keep always, Verus ami, cus optimus thesaurus.

A friend in time of need:
That will thee help without delay,
If that thou stand in need.
Of Visitants in Prison.
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
From a ruinous house every man flies, they that are abroad ask every day how
thou do, when in prison they protest they are sorrow for thy misfortunes,
but never come to thee, such are idle passengers pressing about a Barbers
shop, when a man is carried in wounded, who will peep in a^nd climb about
the windows, but dare not enter into the shop, for fear they should fall
into a swoond to see him dressed, a Prisoner is as much beholding to such
leape-frogge acquaintance as a man shaken with an ague to every gossoping woman
he meets who will teach him a hundred medicines and not one worth taking.

But if thy abiility be such that thou workest thy liberty then thou shall have
as many hands embracing thee as Centimanus had, much wine with little love
bestowed upon thee, with oaths infinite that they were coming forty times to
see thee, but this or that occasion hindered them, when indeed they were
afraid thou should have had occasion to use them, and they had purposed to
has come this day, but they are happy that thy so much desired liberty have
prevented them, to such give no credit, only salute them with a Salve, and a
Vale.

Others will come to thee with weeping and sighthing to cheer thee up, but
such are like Robin-redbrests that brings strawes in their charitable bills to
cover the dead.

Others will promise to lend thee money, but try them before thou have
occasion to use them, which if they deny thee, when thou art at liberty be then
unto them as a shadow. But true friends in a prison are like strawberries in a
barren country, that one can hardly get a handful in a whole year, nay they
are like your roses here in Christmas, a thousand to one if in an age, one be
found so in prison it is a great ods if of a thousand kinsmen, allies, and
acquaintance I find but one true friend.

Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos.
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.
But if in this great dearth of friends wherein we live, under what fortunate
plannet may I judge my self to be borne, and that the constellations of the
stars have much favored me, that amongst all my flesh and blood I have found
one true Damon or faithful Pylades, and amongst all my acquaintance have found
some faithful, and more constant in their love and respect to me in this
place, then when I was at liberty they did make show of, that I may truly say.

Of Visitants some faithful are,
When Prisoners them require:
And to them nothing will deny,
If that they them desire.
The Character of Visitants.
Visitants for the most part are men composed all of protesting promises, and
little or no performance they are like your Almanacks, which when they promise
fair weather, it is a million to a mite if it prove not contrary, they are
like the German clocks which seldom go right, their tongues run faster then
the clock one shroue-tuesday, the pissing Conduit in cheapeside, or an Irish
man's pair of heels when he runs one a wager, he will tire thy ears more in
one hour with his loud protestations, then a Scholar, Citizen or Tailor will
a hackney horse in half a days riding, but in performance will be as slow as
a Snayle in her pace, and when thy messenger comes to them for money, the^ they
will be sure to have the Strongullion, or Cholick that they cannot speak, and
look as rustily one thy messenger, as a Lawyer will one his clyent which sueth
under forma pauperis, your letters as acceptable as water into a ship, the
Kings privy seal to a usurer, a Subpoena to a country Gentleman, or a
catchpole amongst the freindly society of Gallants.

They are like the riches and chains bought at Saint Martynes who were fair
for a little time, but shortly after will prove alchamy or rather pure copper.

Lastly, they are like the apples which grow on the banks of Gomorrah, they
have crimson and beautiful rindes, but when they come to gather them, they
crumble all to dust; and truly can I say: Of Visitants some deserve the name,
And freindly are to some:
And some there be that mea^e no good,
But hurt to them they come


Of entertainment in Prison.
AS soon as thou come before the gate of the Prison, do but think thou
art entering into hell, and it will extenuate somewhat of thy misery, for thou
shall be sure not only to find hell, but fiends and ugly monsters, which with
continual torments will afflict thee, for at the gate their stands Cerberus a
man in show but a dog in nature, who at thy entrance will fawn upon thee,
bidding thee welcome in respect of the golden Cruse which he must have cast
him, then he opens the door with all gentleness, showing thee the way to misery
is very facile, and being once in, he shuts it with such fury, that it makes
the foundation shake and the door and windows so baracadoed, that a man so
loses himself with admiration that he can hardly find the way out, and be a
sound man. Now for the most part your Porter is either some broken Citizen,
who has plaide lack of all trades, some Pander* Broker, or Hangman, that has
plaide the knave with all men, and for the more certainty his emblime is a red
beard to which sack has made his nose cosen Ierman.

No sooner shall a man pass this fury, but he is conducted to little ease his
chamber, where he no sooner has entered, but (hard usage) his chamberlain
salutes him, and protests he has lodged thee with as honest a man as himself,
when in truth, as a pair of Sheeres cannot part the knave betwixt them, and
protests thou shall have a clean pair of sheets, and of the best, who
having no sooner fingred thy coin but sends thee a pair of sheets fitter for
a horse then a man who having plaide the lade so with thee, then leaves thee.
He no sooner departs but thridbare, and monilesse thy chamber-fellowes, come
upon thee for a Garnish, which if thou deny them or have no money, then Exit
cloak from thy shoulders, and enters two dousen of pots, and one dousen of
pipes, this is the pillowe which shall be given thee to sleep on the first
night: now thou must be saluted in the morning, or else peradventure thou will
think thy self not welcome.

In the morning at thy vprising, (Pothearbe) the Gardener appears in his
likeness, and he will have vnguentum arum for the narrow path thou have to
walk in.

Then to whet on thy stomach to dinner comes (Cut-throate) the Steward for his
crown, who professes much kindness he will show thee, for thou have bound
him with thy courtesy, to cousen thee, not only in thy meat but money.

Next after this comes (Mistress Deceit) the head Cook, who protests thou
shall command her, who having no sooner greased her fingers with thy silver,
but ever after she will have a hand in thy dish what thou can to prevent it,
so on all sides the blood of thy purse must be powered out to maintain such
merciles blood* hounds and continual purse-leaches.

These furies, as they have diverse shapes, so have they several kinds of
temptations, for after thou have been some fortnight in prison, they will come
to thee, to cheer thee least thou should add melancholy to coffeehouse,
and will tell thee they wish thee well, and thou shall command them, and in
their opinion the sight of thee street will much content thee, and they will
attend thee to the Tavern within the rule, where thou must quench their thirst
with sack, and what is got of thee is well got, being obtained by rule, for he
that lives by rule cannot err.

Suppose thou either perceiuest these things by others, or by thy own example,
and so refuse this proffered courtesy of theirs purchased for their pleasures
at thy own cost. Then if at any time upon just occasion thou desire it, then
thou must give them a cup of aurum potabile, or else expect not the least
favor, or smallest courtesy for no penny no paternoster, no gold no
friendship.

If thou continually be offered injuries bear them patiently, or else thou
shall be laid in yrons for satisfaction.

If they perceive thou art like to continue, and have good means, thou shall
want no content that prison can yield, but every dram of content will cost thee
a pound of silver.

When they hear thou art upon discharge, then they will be very sorry and
make all the best means that possibly they can to detain thee, but if there
be no remedy, but thou must needs depart, then what with their three
halfpence apound for Action money, and three in the pound for Execution, they
will make such a large bill, which will be more unconscionable then a Tailors,
for he will abate of the Summa totalis, but in this, here is nothing to be
abated, all their speech is legem pone, or else with their ill custom they
will detain thee, for thy denial is an Execution without trial by law, for
notwithstanding that amongst just men malus vsus abolendus est, here
conseruandus et preseruandus, and so thy entrance into prison* thy continuance
in prison, and thy discharge out of prison will be nothing but racking the
heartstrings of poor prisoners, and exhausting the substance of the
distressed, whatsoever their wants be, holding it for a maxim, that Summa
iniuria est summum ius.

Of Keepers which go abroad with Prisoners.
Have thou a desire to go abroad thy Argos which attends thee, 4 shillings per
diem cum Cerere et Baccho.
will be more chargeable then the Lord Majors gally foyst on Simon and Iudes
day, or a Citizens wife to her husband when strawberries and cherries are
first cried in the streets, and will consume thee if thou forbear not, thou
may better cheaperide one thy foote-cloth, then go adroade with thy keeper.

If thou walk abroad with thy keeper use him freindly, but respectively, so
manage him, that he shall rather think himself beholding to thee then thou to
him, for howsoever he fawnes upon thee with complements standing bare with
officious attendance, yet know he serves in his place but as the dog the
Butcher he is to thee as a curre to a drove of beasts if thou go one quietly
(be it to thy slaughter amongst griping Citzizens, and cruel creditors to
work thy own freedom, he waits gently and brings thee to the door, but if
thou once off^r to stray he woo^e es thee.

Remember his eye shootes at two whites, thy person and thy purse, the one is
to guard thee the other to feed him, thou art compelled to ptotect thy carcass
under his shelter, as a sheep in a terrible storm under a bryar, and be sure
thy standing there is to hae some of thy woo^ torn off.

The Character of Keepers.
YOur Keepers most commonly are insinuating knaves, and mercinary rascals*
wearing their masters livery, but their own badge which is slave, in full
proportion they look like the picture of envy, with their hands continually
diuing into poor Prisoners pockets, with their heads uncovered, still
proffering courtesies when their hearts make answer, what kindness they do
is (non tibi sed pecuniae,) they most commonly feed well, to their masters
creddit, but the tablers charge. Now if any take exception of the badge knave
which I have given them, as the old proverb is, touch a gald horse and he will
kick. I will maintain (I say) what out of their own authors, a bird of their
own nest vet not altogether so ill, who said to me that he was weary of his
slavish life, in respect he must be knave in his place, who said, if he were
true to his Master, he must be knave to prisoners, if true to prisoners, knave
to his master. So be he honest in his vocation, or dishonest, he must be
still knave for mala men's, malus animus.

There are abundance of these snakes which lie lurking in this place, whose
chiefest felicity is to talk of so many new prisoners which are committed,
and are ready to faint if they but hear of release, and all the dogs at
Paris-garden keep not such a bawling as these curres every morning in the
Term, to go abroad with poor prisoners, by rule only to prey and seize
upon their coin, and they will not abate one penny of their extortion, though
the poor prisoner fast a week with bread and water* And they rejoice more for
a Habeas Corpus in the vacation. then the husband man for a plentiful harvest,
or the Merchant for the safe landing of his ship.

For money they will do any thing, be it never so ill, so thereby they may
purchase coin, holding it a maxim, that silver is well gotten, if by any
means obtained, and to use cruelty to prisoners, is policy, and wisdom;
because now is the time or never, for being once infranchised they will be as
wary to come in again as the bird which has escaped the fowlers net.

Of Iaylors, or the Masters of prisons.
VTrum horum mavis accipe, there is not a hair to choose, the old proverb
must be verified, never a barrel the better herring, Jack must be equal to
Gill, they are all one in nature, in place only they differ (nomine tantum:
but learn them as you please, or by what name, they are as origin, but
laylors.

All laylors are not alike, some are more worthy then other, I only touch the
worst sort of them, and that for the most part, for the baseness of the one
cannot any ways impeach the worth of the other, but does give greater
splendour to the truly noble, being most contrary, for Duo contraria opposita
magis elucescunt.

For the most part your keepers of prisons are very obdurate, and will show no
favor and do look to be spoken to by men of worth to be favorable to
their prisoners, who will promise faithfully, but the crossing of the water
derounes their remembrance, they put much confidence in the porter, and other
officers, and will believe the words of such insinuating knaves, before the
oaths of Gentlemen of worth, or other conscionable men their prisoners, they
are more griping then an Usurer, for he will be content with security, but
when a prisoner is upon discharge they will not take bail or security, nay
they will not abate one poor twenty shillings, though they have gained never
so much by them, but will be King and Keysar having the laws in their own
hands, will iustrfie the detaining of trunkes or clothes; if the prisoner have
none, then they by violence will take cloak, or doublet, and turn you out
naked.

Further, they are far more unconscionable then a Broker, who takes forty in
the hundred, but they will think it charity to take fifty, I and for a
chamber where poor prisoners lie like beasts, not men.

For cruelty they exceed Nero, for he would kill suddenly, but your laylors
do detain men of good parts, who have lain there seven year, not taking any
commiseration, in being content to take what they can spare, and give day for
the rest, but when the cruel creditor has relented, then the obdurateness
returns, and penetrates the breast of his keeper not to redeem him till he
have paid all demands. But what are they enriched by it? It so consumes them,
that they are so poor, so compassed about with troubles, that they live
beggarly, and dye poor, and that which they enrich themselves by exhausting
their substance out of the very blood of prisoners, their issue lives the worse
by it; and, without godly repentance, they may keep hell gates to give his men
place, which for their tallent has been worse then their master.

The Character of Iaylors.
A Iaylor is as cruel to his prisoners, as a dogge-killer in the plague time
to a diseased curre, and shows no more pity to a young Gentleman, then the
unconscionable Citizen that laid him in: when they meet you in the streets
they show themselves more humble to you, then a whore when she is brought
before a Constable, or a cheater before a Justice, but when you fall into their
fingers, they will be as currish as they seemed kind.

They are like Bawdes and Beadles,, that live upon the sins of the people, men's
follies fill their purses.

But some conflict is, he has some misery, for his pillowe is more stuffed with
feats then feathers, and though every prisoner sinkes under the weight of his
own debts, yet his keeper feels the burden of all, and if sometimes by
escapes (though against his will) he did not pay some poor men's debts, his
extortion would be so weighty, that the earth could scarce bear him and to
conclude, he deserves the old proverb, as cruel as a laylor.

FINIS.

