Two notorious Murders. One committed by a Tanner on his wives son, nere
Horne-church in Essex.

The other on a Grasier nere Ailsburie in Buckinghamshire. With these is
intermixed another murdrous intending fellonie at Rislip in Middlesex. All done
this last month.

depiction of hanged man

LONDON, Printed for William Blackwall, and George Shaw: and are to be sold
over against Guild Hall gate.

Three cruel felonies and two hated murders performed this last month by the
father and brother in law against the Sun and brother, the neighbor against
the neighbors child, the false familiar against his vnmisdeeming friend.
Birds observe seasons, Beast know the course of times, either to their own
kind are kind: but men neither regard time, nor make use of example but with a
headlong fury follow their own appetite. Experience in all ages has approved
that Sin has not been in the highest Estate unpunished especially that sin,
that is to nature abhorting, before good men most detestable, of God from the
beginning detested. Murder, I mean, that crying sin, that sin which gave
the first murderer horror of heart, and presents all his successors, with hell
of conscience. Of so many thousand bloodthirstie tirants, close plotting
poysoners, felonious waiting murderes, let any man tell me, which went unto his
grave in peace? the scripture, profane Stories, the records and cronicles of
all nations, remember not one, but all point out a miserable, sudden and
certain ruin to him that lay in wait for blood. The wisdom of our fathers
in elder ages, the policy of maiestrates in these times, wherein iniquity
rages, by punishment have sought to warn the living untouched to remember the
guilty put to death, that they may fear to fall into such misfortune. To this
they thought good to ^dde yt publishing of their detested crimes, that those
whose eyes could not behold their deserved ends, might yet by hearing be
warned. The imitation whereof we follow, and in as few words as the matter
will give leave describe three sorrowful accidents, gathered from the confession
of the malefactors.

The murder of Thomas Chambers.
In Essex not far from London in the parish of up master, at a place called
Corbetts Tie, dwelt on John wright, who had married the widow of one Chambers
a Tanner: whose Son Thomas Chambers being a young man of great towardnes, of
condition gentle, of body well proportioned, was bereft of life even when he
began to live, by the conspiracy of his unkind brother in law John Graygoose
of Epping husbandman, that had married Chambers sister, and John Wrights cruelty
the unnatural husband of his mother. The cause that moved these two this
sin to attempt, arose from hence Thomas Chambers being by his father left
heir to 30. l. a year, and a portion of 200. l and upwards in money, which
money and land at christmas next was to come to his hand, or if he died under
age a great part of it, then to fall unto the wife of the above named
Graygoose: Graygoose (as at his death Wright protested) about Ca^dlemas last
came unto him and plotted murder, promising the benefit that by Chambers death
to either of them might arise. O false temptation of deceiving gain: how blind
are men to be so abused? how fond to fall so fondly? to believe the devil so
quickly? when they can no sooner have perfected so odious an ill, but vengeance
like a thief in the night seazeth on them: nay like a violent tempest beats
down their violence. But to our matter. Graygoose was the wicked tempter,
Wright as willingly tempted, the one conceiues the mischief, the other
consentes: many times they meeteplott, conspire, and in the end conclude, that
about Epping or Weeldside in Essex, in one of the Whitson holidaies he should
be slain: which of the^ could first meet him promised to be the murderer. So
part these vile conspirators, either attending the dismal time of Chambers
destruction. Wright being always in the house, had fitter opportunity than his
confederate, and on the sixth of June before the appointed time, knowing Thomas
Chambers to be forth between the hours of ten and twelve awaited at a place
called Rushy green nere Barrow hill, in the parish of horne-church, and with a
stake taken out of a style he there assaulted the vnmistrusting young man, and
at one blow given on the right side of his head stroke out his brains: which
done dragd him into a bush, and there hid the murdered body: and with a bold
face returned home. The youth being well beloved was in sundry places sought
for, and no small suspicion of his murder had by those of good conceit. At
length on whitson monday being the ix. of June a gray-hound found the murdered
body, and never left baying till it was drawn forth. Oh wretched estate of
blood guilty murderers, how often have the fowls in the air wonderfully
bewraied your long concealed acts, how often have brute beasts wondered at
you? how often have your treacherous hearts betrayed you? Though men see ye
not God does? though men bewray ye not, birds may? if birds do not, beasts
may, if neither do, your own consciences shall, but if they be seared up, God
certainly will find out a mean.

When Chambers body was thus found, a rufull sight it was to look upon, his
fair countenance was discoulored, worms cralled in his mouth, nose, ears,
and his whole body was putrefied. The missing of Wright that evening the deed
was done, some suspicious words, but cheefely Gods will made Wright to be
suspected: and albeit, at the first he sought to face it out, yet before a
Justice he confessed it presently, in manner as is before recited: for which
he worthily suffered death on Monday the 14. of July at Rumforde in Essex, and
Graygoose is to abide his trial at Chelmesford. O that all stepfathers and
mothers might possibly have heard Wrights lamentation, how he exhorted them to
beware, how he exclaimed on coueteousnes, how he desired forgiveness, they
would then remember the children that were orphans committed to their
patronage, were to be used as derely as their natural children, but it seemed
he knew his duity and forget it; and if (...) he not (as he was) given over,
they will remember it.

The robbery of Pets house with the wounding of his son.
Our Second seen of this threefold tragedy, was acted in Rislip a country
town in Middlesex. Two neighbors dwelt in that parish, Murdox the one an
honest wealthy Farmer, Pets the other a carpenter though not rich, yet of
honest reputation: Murdox had among diverse children a young man to his youngest
son, of body well proportioned, of face lovely, a great company keeper, given
much to riot, yea given over as it proved, so that no allowance of his father,
nor counsel of his mother prevailed with him: but will was to him a law, no
profit seemed to him so pleasing as wanton pleasure: but as one sin is father
to another, so riot be got greedy desire of getting to maintain wast, and this
youth (being persuaded Pets was very rich) on sunday the 22. of June, after his
own Father was rid to Hounslow, Pets and his wife being at church, entered the
house, and found a son of Pets about 10. years of age in the house. The child
knowing Murdox, had no fear: albeit Murdox in his sight had rifled the house,
and missed four pounds that was tied in the corner of a sheet, taking only a
little purse (as was proved by evidence) wherein fourteen pence was. Finding
no more, he called the boy, Jack says he, will thou not tell? No indeed says
the child. Then come and bring a knife quoth Murdox, and we will into the
grove to cut whipstockes. The simple child took a knife and followed him, and
being come through a close into the grove, he with the knife the child
brought, gasht him about the throat but mist the weason, and so thinking the
child to be dead left him, but hearing the boy cry, returned and (...) him
into the right breast then listening again, he again returned and sta^^ him
again: and the third time coming back, stopping the childs mouth with
(...), he thinking him surely dead, and leaving him, went toward the Church,
by which time ^ neighbor Petshis. Thither the mother and her eldest son went
to see the cause: the young son would not go. When Murdox wife came there,
they saw the house rifled, but only the woeful mother cried for her son, her
son. Some neighbors spied a footing toward the grove followed it, and found
the boy all to be weltred in gore. And perceiving life to be in him, two laid
him on a cloak, and beetweene them brought him home. Where murdoxes mother most
of any other when he had recovered speech) sought to have him tell who did the
deed. At last with great fear he told, and presently young Murdox was
apprehended, and found bail, denying the deed with many bitter curses. That
day he carelessly followed his pleasure, but the childs constancy in his
accusation, made the parents to bring him before the Lord Anderson, who so
sifted him that he confessed the fact. For which he was condemned at the
Sessions at newgate, and executed on monday the 14. of July. The moon he made,
yt grief he had of his misspent life, too late too helpless was lamentable,
but such is the reward of riot, where no regard is had of spending above the
course of lawful getting, necessity must needs follow: games, wantonness, and
ease, are not continued without excessive cost. He died in his prime of youth,
in ye flower of his strength, in the blouming of his hopes, making his own
end shameful by wastfull oversight. The child (by Gods power) is recovered,
and at the bar gave evidence against him.

The murder of the Grasier.
Our last part is composed of envy, Avarice, false freendship, murder,
massacring, and their reward. For envy. One Dernly a grasier about Essex side
being very familiar with William Randolph a man of his own profession,
dwelling about Cardiffe, and having much dealing about London, stomacked (as
diverse men of one trade do) the great dealings of Randolph. Randolph seemed to
be a man of gentle nature and very open to his friend, taking Dernley for no
(...) of his, for Dernley was privy that Randolph had received above three
hundred pound, and was to ride from London through Ailsbury toward Wales.
Whereupon he acquainted, one Parry dwelling in Shorditch, and Richardson
another of his confedrats dwelling in Knight-rider street in London with
Randolphs condition, charge of money, and the way he had to ride. They fell in
company with Randolph a little from London, and very curteousty bare him
company to Ailsbury: and by the way one Tailer of Ailsbury chanced among them,
and noting by Randolphs talk that he concealed not his charge of money,
besides observing how Parrey and Richardson were horst, and weaponed, told
Randolphe secretly at his coming to Ailsbury, that he did not wisely to ride
so open, and willed him to look well to Parrey and Richardson, for he
mistrusted them. The good old man believing the fair speeches of the ill
intending murderers, better than the honest advise of the plain meaning man,
replied, they were very freendly Gentlemen dwelling in London, such as had used
him very kindly, and that for a world of wealth he would not have an evil
thought of them, so honest they seemed, so gentle, so fair conditioned,
whereupon Tailer seeing Randolphs mind des^^^ed to use more words. But this
talk of his, either by Randolphs means or some other course came to Parrey
and Richardsons hearing, whereupon making show or displeasure, in the morning
they went before him out of town, pretending have also of their way. Randolph
hearing they were gone, greatly blamed the Chamberlain, and with all speed
hasted to poast after them, and coming about some mile from Ailsburie met one
who told him two such Gentlemen were easily riding not a full mile (...). When
(...) is marhed to mischance, with what violence does his evil (...) draw him
onward. As fast as horse could run he galleys after, and to some get sight of
them that were ready to him his fight with eternal darkness: when he was
(...) them they were (...) hollow hearted companions, under coleur of kind
salutation, turning their horses heads to bid him welcome, Parrey first with a
Judas like welcome dischargd his pistol in his bosom: with the entrance of the
bullet the poor man laid his faint hand on his wounded breast, while Richardson
with the second bullet shot him through hand and belly. So fell he down, and
they like bloodsucking wolves ceasd on this innocent, dubbling in his death
wound upon wound, mangling his face with such inhumane cruelty, as no barbarous
tirant could more outragiously have done. Then drew they him into a thicket,
and rifled his dead body: where Richardson yet unsatisfied with cruelty stabd
him into the neck, with such violence that in pulling back his hand, the
pummell and handle of his dagger came off, but she blade he left sticking in his
neck, which blade was one witness against the murdrous master. This done, they
turned his horse into the wood and houer about the country some two days and
more after. For it was the second day before ye murdered body was found, by a
fellow that sought cattle. When the hue and cry came to Ailsbury, Tailor among
other went to see the body, and by the apparel better than the face he knew it
was the carcass of that wretched man, who had refused his counsel at Ailsbury
the other night before. He descried their apparel, proportions, horses and all
such marks as he advisedly had taken while he rid in their company. To
London, toward Wales, and every way the hue and cry went. Parrey was taken in
Wales, and contest the fact. Richardson at his own door in London. A while he
denied the deed, but long he stood not in it, both of them accused Dernley, and
to Ailsbury they are all gone to suffer desera^d death. God give them repentant
hearts so lament earnestly the cruelty of their hands, for wc more bloodinesse
have I not heard a murder of long time to be followed. The murdered man as I
before said, was plain, simple, and of no mistrustfull heart. The murderers to
the world eye well thought off. Dernley the causer of Randolphs death, a very
wealthy man esteemed of honest conversation. Parrey and Richardson the
executioners, borne of honest parentage, fair conditioned, not thought to live
so disorberly as it seems they now did. For had they not been exercised to
robbery and spoil, how durst Dernley have broke so heinous a matter to them,
or if he had not before time so purpost, how could he so suddenly have found
them for his purpose: but the community of the evil has an evil end, and
though they band themselves for a time together, death gapes for them, and
their destruction comes suddenly. Would some by these and many more examples
would take heed. It is impossible murder should be hid, and therefore it is
folly for any man to follow it. This brother in law and father in law Graygoose
and wright Murderers of innocent Thomas Chambers, thought that their secret
mischief could have been as secretly conceiled as wickedly conceived? but even
the day the dead body was found, their treachery was found: Murdox thought he
had made sure work with youg Pets, but he yet lives, whom he cruelly intended
to have slain, and being but a child condemned him a man, before the seat of
judgment. These last three thought themselves as sure, but blood cried from the
earth, and the voice of the revenger has made them tremble. Look, look, ye
murderers how many miseries ye bring to those that live, by your complotting
others deaths: the parents, wives, children, followers of those you murder,
that never meant you ill, are when your hateful deed is done, vexing followers
of you to your deserved deaths: your parents wives children, followers,
friends mournful and helpless lamenters for your amiss, your own names
perpetually enrolled among murderers. If you be tempted to any ill, remember
the end, shame misery and confusion of face, you that were wont to walk
freely, must be led like bondmen, that have been well thought on, must be the
peoples wonder: that were friends sole comfort, are most sharp percing swords
unto their hearts. Let thought of blood be far from ye, for it is a sin God
hats, and no man will not pity.

FINIS.

