THE TRAGEDY OF NERO, Newly Written.

Imprinted at London by Augustine Mathewes, and John Norton, for Thomas Jones,
and are to be sold at the black Raven in the Strand, 1624.

THE TRAGEDY OF NERO.
Astus Primus.
Enter Petronius, Arbyter, Antonius, Honoratus. Petronius. TVsh, take the wench
I showed thee now, or else some other seek;
What? can your choler no way be allayed?
But with Imperial tytles?
Will you more tytles unto Caesar give?

Anto. Great are thy fortunes Nero, great thy power
Thy Empire lymited with natures bounds;
Upon thy ground, the Sun does set, and rise;
The day, and night are thine:
Nor can the Planets, wander where they will:
See that proud Earth, that fears not Caesar's name,
Yet nothing of all this, I envy thee;
But her, to whom the world, vnforst, obayes,
Whose eyes more worth then all it looks upon:
In whom, all beautyes Nature has enclosed,
That through the wide Earth, or Heaven are disposed

Petro. Indeed the steals, and robs each part o'th world,
With borrowed beauties to inflame thine eye;
The Sea, to fetch her Pearl, is diu'd into:
The Diomond rocks are cut, to make her shine:
To plume her pride, the Birds do naked sing
When my Enanthe, in a homely gown.

Ant. Homely I faith.

Petro. I, homely in her gown,
But look upon her face, and that is set out
With no small grace, no vayled shadows help;
Fool; that had rather with false lights, and dark
Beguiled be, then see the ware thou buy est.

Poppea royally attended, and pass over the Stage, in State. Ant. Great
Queen, whom nature made to be her glory:
Fortune got eyes, and came to be thy servant,
Honor is proud to be thy title; Though
Thy beauties do draw up my soul; yet still,
So bright, so glorious is thy Majesty,
That it beats down again my clyming thoughts.

Petro. Why true;
And other of thy blindnesses thou see,
Such one to love thou dare not speak unto.
Give me a wench, that will be easily had,
Not woed with cost; And, being sent for, comes,
And when I have her foulded in mine arms,
Then Cleopatra she, or Lucres is:
I Will give her any title.

Anto. Yet not so much her greatness, and estate
My hopes disharten, as her chastity.

Pet. Chastity, fool a word not known in Courts:
Well may it lodge in mean, and country homes,
Where poverty, and labor keeps them down,
Short sleeps, and hands made hard with Thuscan Woll.
But never comes to great men's Palaces,
Where ease, and riches, stirring thoughts beget,
Provoking meats, and surfeit wines Inflame:
Where all there setting forth's but to be wooed,
And wooed they would not be, but to be won.
Will one man serve Poppea? Nay, thou shall
Make her, as soon, contented with an eye.

Nimphidius to them. Nim. Whilst Nero, in the streets, his Pageants shows,
I, to his fair wives chamber, sent for am.
You gracious Stars, that smiled in my birth,
And thou bright star more powerful then them all,
Whose favoring smyles have made me what I am
Thou shall my God, my Fate, and fortune be. Ex. Nim.

Ant. How sausely you fellow.
Enters the Empress chamber.

Pet. I, and her too? Antonius know thou him?

Ant. What? knows the only favorite of the Court?
Indeed, not many days ago thou might,
Have not unlawfully asked that question.

Pet. Why? Is he raised?

Ant. That have I sought in him,
But never piece of good desert could find:
He is Nimphidias son, the freed woman,
Which baseness to shake off, he nothing has
But his own pride

Pet. You Remember, when Gallus, Celsus,
And others too, though now forgotten were
Great in Poppeas eyes.

Ant. I do, and did enterpret it in them
An honorable favor, she bare virtue,
Or parts like virtue.

Pet. The cause is one of theirs, and this man's grace,
I once was great in wavering smiles of Court,
I fell because I knew: Sense have I given
My time to my own pleasures, and would now
Advise thee too, to mean, and safe delights:
The thigh's as soft the sheep back covers
As that which crimson, and with Gold adorned:
Yet cause I see, that thy restraind desires.
Cannot their own way choose, come thou with me
Perhapps I Will show thee means of remedy.

Exeunt. Two Romans at several doors. 1 Romans Whither so fast man? whither so
fast?

2 Romans Whither? but where your ears do lead you;
To Neres Triumphs, and the shouts you hear.

1 To. Why? comes he crowned with Parthian overthrow.
And brings he V^legaesus with him, chai'nd?

2 To. Parthian overthrown? why, he comes crowned
For victories which never Roman won;
For having Greece in her own arts overthrown;
In Singing, Dancing, Horse-rase, Stage-playing.
Never, O Rome had never such a Prince.

1 Romans Yet, I have heard: our ancestors were crowned
For other Victories.

2 Romans None of our ancestors, were ere like him. within Nero, Apollo, Nero,
Hercules.

1 Romans Hark, how th'applauding shouts do clear the air
This Idle talk will make me loose the sight.

Two Romans more to them. 3 Romans Whither go you? alls done in the Capytall,
And Nero, having there his tables hung,
And Garlands up: is to the Palace gone.
It Was beyond wonder; I shall never see,
Nay, I never look, to see the like again
Eighteen hundred and eight Crowns
For several victories and the place set down
Where, and in what, and whom he overcame.

4 Romans That was set down in the tables, that were borne
Upon the Soldiers spears.

1 Romans O made, and sometimes use to other ends.

2 Romans But did he win them all with singing.

3 Romans Faith all with singing, and with stage-playing.

1 Romans So many Crowns got with a song.

4 Romans But, did you mark the Greek Musicians
Behind his Chariot, hanging down their heads?
Shamed, and overcome, in their professions,
O Rome was never honored so, before.

3. Romans But, what was he that rode'ith' Chariot with him?

4. Romans That was Diodorus the Mynstrill, that he favors.

3. Romans Was there ever such a Prince.

2. Romans O Nero Augustus, the true Augustus.

3. Romans Nay, had you seen him as he rode along,
With an Olympicke Crown upon his head,
And with a Pithian on his arm: you would have thought,
Looking on one he had Apollo seemed,
On the other Hercules.

2. Romans I have heard my father often repeat the Triumphs,
Which in Augustus Caesar's times were shown,
Upon his Victory ore the Jllirians;
But it seems it was not li^e to this.

3, and 4. Romans Push, it could not be like this.

2, 3, and 4. O Nero, Apollo, Nero, Hercules.

Exeunt. 2, 3, and 4. Romans Manet Primus. 1. Romans Whether Augustus Triumph
greater was
I cannot tell; his Tryumphs cause I know
Was greater far, and far more Honorable.
What are we People? or our flattering voices,
That always shame and foolish things applaud
Having no spark of Soul; All Ears, and eyes,
Pleased with vain shows, deluded by our senses
Still enemies to wisdom, and to goodness. exit.

Enter Nero, Poppea, Nimphidius, Tigellinus, Epaphroditus, Neophitus, and
others. Nero, Now fair Poppea, see thy Nero shine
In bright Achaias spoils, and Rome in him.
The Capital has other Trophies seen
Then it was wont; Not spoils with blood bedewed,
Or the unhappy obsequies of Death:
But such, as Caesar's cunning, not his force,
Has wrung from Greece; too bragging of her art.

Tigell. And in this strife, the glories all your own,
Your Tribunes cannot share this praise with you;
Here, your Centurions has no part at all,
Bootlesse your Armies, and your Eagles were;
No Nauies helped, to bring away this conquest.

Nim. Even Fortunes self, Fortune the Queen of kingdoms
(That Wars grim valor graceth with her deeds,)
Will claim no portion in this Victory.

Nero. Not Bacchus, drawn from Nisa down with Tigers,
Curbing with viny raines, their wilful heads,
Whilst some do gape upon his Iuy Thirse,
Some, on the dangling grapes, that Crown his head,
All praise his beauty, and continuing youth:
So struck, amassed India, with wonder.
As Neroes glories did the Greekish towns
Elis, and Pisa, and the rich Mic^^na,
Iunoman Argos, and yet Corinth proud
Of her two Seas; all which ore-come, did yield
To me their praise, and prises of their games.

Poppea, Yet, in your Greekish journey, we do hear,
Sparta, and Athens, the two eyes of Greece,
Neither beheld your person, nor your skill;
Whether, because they did afford no games,
Or for their to much gravity,

Nero: Why? what
Should I have seen in them? but in the one,
Hunger, blacke-pottage, and men hot to di^,
Thereby to rid themselves of misery:
And what in the other? but short Capes, long Beardes,
Much wrangling in things needless to be known,
Wisdom in words, and only austere faces,
I will not be A^ecelans, nor Solon.
Nero was there, where he might honor winn,
And honor has he wonn, and brought from Greece,
Those spoils which never Roman could obtain,
Spoils won by wit and Trophtis of his skill.

Nim. What a thing he makes it to be a Minstrill.

Pop. I praise your wit, my Lord, that choose such safe.
Honors, safe spoils, wonn without dust, on blood.

Nero: What, mooke ye me Poppea?

Poppea: Nay, in good Faith my Lord, I speak in earnest,
I hate that headie, and aduenturous crew,
That go to loose their own, to purchase, but
The breath of others, and the common voice,
Them that will loose there hearing for a sound;
That by death only, seek to get a living,
Make skarrs there beauty, and count loss of Limme^
The commendation of a proper man,
And so, go halting to immortality:
Such fools I love worse then they do their lives.

Nero: But now Poppea, having laid apart
Our boastfull spoils, and ornaments of Triumph.
Come we, like Ione from Phlegra --

Poppea: O Giantlike comparison.

Nero: When, after all his Fires, and wandering darts,
He comes to bath himself, in Iunos Eyes:
But thou, (then wrangling Juno,) far more fair,
Stayning the evening beauty of the Sky,
Or the days brightness; shall make glad thy Caesar,
Shall make him proud such beauties to Enjoy: Exunt.

Manet, Nimphidius solus. Nymph: Such beauties to enjoy, were happiness,
And a reward sufficient in it self,
Although no other end, or hopes were aimed at:
But I have other; It Is not Poppeas arms,
Nor the short pleasures of a wanton bed,
That can extinguish mine aspiring thirst
To Neroes Crown; By her love I must climb,
Her bed is but a step unto his Throne.
Already, wise men laugh at him, and hate him;
The people, though his Mynstrelsie does please them*
They fear his Cruelty, hate his exactions,
Which, his need, still, must force him to increase.
The multitude, which cannot one thing long
Like, or dislike, being cloyed with vanity,
Will hate their own delights, though Wisdom do not,
Even weariness, at length, will give them eyes,
Thus, I by Neroes, and Poppeas favor,
Raised to the envious height of second place,
May gain the first: Hate must strike Nero down.
Love make Nimphidius way unto a Crown.

exit. Enter Seneca, Sceninus, Lucan, and Flauius. Sceu. His first beginning
was his Fathers death,
His brothers poisoning, and wives bloody end
Came next, his mothers murder closed up all:
Yet hitherto he was but wicked, when
The guilt of greater evils, took away the shame
Of lesser, and did headlong thrust him forth,
To be the scorn, and laughter to the world;
Then first, an Emperor came upon the Stage,
And sung to please Carmen, and Candle-sellers,
And learnt to act, to dance, to be a Fencer,
And in despite of the Majesty of Princes,
He fell to wrestling, and was soyl'd with dust,
And tumbled on the Earth with servile hands.

Seneca He sometimes trained was in better studies,
And had a Childhood promised other hopes;
High fortunes, like strong wines, do try their vessels.
Was not the Race, and Theater big enough,
To have enclosed thy follies here at home?
O could not Rome, and Italy contain
Thy shame? but thou must cross the Seas to show it?

Scen. And make them that had wont to see our Consuls,
With conquering Eagles wauing in the field;
Instead of that; behold an Emperor dancing,
Playing oth' stage, and what else, but to name
Were infamy.

Lucan. O Mummius, O Flaminius;
You, whom your Virtues have not made more famous
Then Neros vices; You went ore to Greece,
But the other wars, and brought home other conquests.
You Corinth, and Mic^^^ overthrew;
And Perseus self, the Great Achilles race
Ore came; having Mineruas stained Temples.
And your slain Ancestors of Troy revenged

Senec. They strove with Kings; and kinglike adversaries.
Were even in their Enemies made happy;
The Macedonian Courage tried of old,
And the new greatness of the Syrian power:
But he for Phillip, and Antiochus,
Has found more easy enemies to deal with,
Turpuus, Pammenes, and a rout of Fiddlers.

Sceuin: Why all the begging Mynstrills by the way,
He took along with him, and forced to strive
That he might overcome, Imagining
Himself Imortall, by such victories.

Flaui: The Men he carried over were enough
To Have put the Parthian to his second flight
Or the proud Indyan, taught the Roman Yoke.

Sceuin: But they were Neroes men, like Nero armed
With Luts, and Harpes, and Pipes, and Fiddle-cases:
Souldyers to th shadow traynd, and not the field.

Flaui: Therefore they brought spoils of such Soldyers worthy.

Luca: But to throw down the walls, and Gates of Rome,
To make an entrance for an Hobbyhorse;
To vaunt toth' people his rediculous spoils;
To come with Laurel, and with Olyues crowned,
For having been the worst of all the Singers,
Is beyond Patience;

Sceuin: I and anger too,
Had you but seen him in his Chariot ride.
That Chariot in which, Augustus late
His Triumphs ore' so many Nations showed,
And with him in the same a Minstrell placed,
The whilst the people, running by his side,
Hayle thou Olimpick Conqueror did cry,
O hail thou Pithian, and did fill the sky
With shame, and voices, Heaven would not have heard.

Senec: I saw't, but turned away my Eyes, and Ears,
Angry, they should be privy to such sights.
Why do I stand relating of the story,
Which in the doing had enough to grieve me?
Tell on, and end the tale, you, whom it pleases;
Me mine own sorrow stops from further speaking.
Nero, my love does make thy fault, and my grief greater. ex. Se.

Sceuin: I do commend in Seneca this passion;
And yet me thinks our Countries misery,
Does at our hands crave somewhat more then tears.

Luca: Pity, though it does a kind affection show,
(If it end there) our weakness makes us know.

Flaui: Let children weep, and men seek remedy,

Sceui: Stoutly, and like a Soldier, Flauius:
Yet, to seek remedy to a Princes ill,
Seldom, but it does the Physician kill.

Flaui: And if it do Sceuinus, it shall take
But a devoted soul from Flauius,
Which, to my Country, and the Gods of Rome,
Already sacred is, and given away,
Death is no stranger unto me, I have
The doubtful hazard in twelve Battles thrown,
My chance was life.

Luca: Why do we go to fight in Brittanie?
And end our lives under an other Sun?
Seek causeless dangers out? The German might
Enjoy his Woods, and his own All is drink,
Yet we walk safely in the streets of Rome:
Bodinca hinders not, but we might live,
Whom, we do hurt; Them we call enemies,
And those our Lords that spoil, and murder us.

Sceuin: Nothing is hard to them that dare to die.
This Noble resolution in you Lords,
Heartens me to disclose some thoughts that I --
The matter is of weight and dangerous.

Luca: I see you fear us Seruinus.

Sceuin Nay, Nay, although the thing be full of fear.

Flaui: Tell it to faithful Ears, what ear it be.

Sceuin: Faith let it go, it will but trouble us,
Be hurtful to the speaker, and the hearer.

Luca: If our long friendship, or the opinion.

Sceuin: Why should I fear to tell them?
Why is he not a Parricide, a Player?
Nay Lucan is he not thine Enemy?
Hate not the Heavens, as well, as men, to see
That condemned head: and you O righteous Gods
Whither so ere you now are fled, and will
No more look down upon the oppressed Earth;
O severe anger of the highest Gods,
And thou stern power, to whom the Greeks assign
Scourges, and swords to punish proud men's wrongs,
If you be more then names found out to awe us,
And that we do not vainly build you alters,
Aid that just arm, that is bent to execute
What you should do.

Luca. Stay, you are carried too much away Sceuinus.

Sceui. Why, what will you say for him? has h^ not
Sought to suppress your Poem, to bereave
That honor every tongue in duty paid it.
Nay, what can you say for him, has he not
Broa'cht his own wives (a chaste wives) breast, and to^ne
With Scithian hands his Mothers bowels up,
The Inhospitable Caucasus is mild:
The More, that, in the boiling desert, seeks
With blood of stranger to imbrue his jaws
Vpbraides the Roman, now with barbarousnesse

Luca: You are to earnest,
I neither can, nor will I speak for him:
And, though he sought my learned pains to wrong,
I hate him not for that, My verse shall live
When Neroes body shall be thrown in Tiber,
And times to come shall bless those wicked arms;
I love th'vnnaturall wounds, from whence did flow*
Another Ciria, a new Hellicon.
I hate him that he is Romes enemy,
An enemy to Virtue; fits on high
To shame the seat; And in that hate, my life,
And blood, ^le mingle on the earth with yours.

Flaui: My de^ds Sceuinus shall speak my consent.

Sceui. It Is answered, as I looked for, noble Poet,
Worthy the double Laurel; Flauius,
Good luck I see, does virtuous meanings aid,
And therefore have the Heavens forborne their duties,
To grace our swords with glorious blood of Tyrants.

exeunt. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Petronius Solus. HEre waits Poppea her Nimphidius coming,
And has this garden, and these walks chose out,
To bless her with more pleasures then their own:
Not only Arras hangings, and silk beeds
Are guilty of the faults we blame them for:
Somewhat these Arbors, and you trees do know,
Whilst you kind shades, you to these night sports show.
Night sports? Faith, they are done in open day,
And the Sun see'th, and enuieth their play.
Hither have I Loue-sicke Antonius brought,
And thrust him on occasion so long sought:
Showed him the Empress in a thicket by,
Her loves approach waiting with greedy Eye;
And told him, if he ever meant to prove,
The doubtful issue of his hopeless Love;
This is the place, and time wherein to try it,
Women will here the suite, that will deny it.
The suit's not hard that she comes for to take;
Who (hott in lust of men) does difference make?
At last, loath, willing, to her did he pace;
Arm him Priapus, with thy powerful Mace.
But see, they coming are; how they agree
Here will I harken, shroud me gentle tree.

Enter Poppea and Antonius. Anto. Seek not to grieve that heart which is thine
own,
In Loves sweet fires, let heat of rage burn out;
These brows could never yet to wrinckle learn,
Nor anger out of such fair eyes look forth.

Poppea: You may solicit your presumptuous suites;
You duty may, and shame too laid aside,
Disturb my priuacies, and I forsooth,
Must be afeard even to be angry at you.

Anto: What shame is it to be mastred by such beauty?
Who, but to serve you, comes, how wants he duty?
Or if it be a shame, the shame is yours;
The fault is only in your Eyes, they drew me;
Cause you were lovely, therefore did I love:
O, if to Love you, anger you so much,
You should not have such cheeks, nor lips to touch,
You should not have your snow, nor currall spied;
If you but look on us, in vain you chide,
We must not see your Face, nor hear your speech:
Now, whilst you Love forbid, you Love do teach.

Pet. He does better then I thought he would.

Pop: I will not learn my beauties worth of you,
I know you neither are the first, nor greatest
Whom it has moved: He whom the World obayes
Is feared with anger of my threatening Eyes.
It is for you a far off to adore it,
And not to reach at it with sawsie hands.
Fear, is the Love that is due to Gods, and Princes

Pet. All this is but to edge his appetite.

Ant. O do not see thy fair in that false glass
Of outward difference; Look into my heart,
There, shall thou see thy self, Inthroaned set
In greater Majesty, then all the pomp
Of Rome, or Nero; It Is not the crowching awe,
And Ceremony, with which we flatter Princes,
That can to Loves true duties be compared.

Pop: Sir, let me go, or I Will make known your Love
To them, that shall requite it, but with hate.

Pet. On, on, thou have the goal, the fort is beaten,
Women are won when they begin to threaten.

Anto. Your Nobleness does warrant me from that,
Nor need you others help, to punish me,
Who, by your forehead am condemned, or free.
They, that to be reuendg'd do bend their mind,
Seek always recompense, in that same kind
The wrong was done them; Love was mine offense,
In that revenge, in that seek recompense.

Popp. Further to answer, will still cause replies,
And those as ill do please me, as your self:
If you will an answer take, that is brief, and true,
I hate my self, If I be loved of you. exit Popp.

Petro. What gone? but she will come again sure, no;
It passes clean my cunning, all my rules;
For Women's wantonness there is no rule.
To take her, in the itching of her Lust,
A propper young man putting forth himself?
Why Fate; There Is Fate and hidden providence
In cod piece matters.

Anto: O unhappy Man,
What comfort have I now Petronius?

Pet. Counsel your self, I Will teach no more but learn.

Ant. This comfort yet; He shall not so escape,
Who causes my disgrace, Nimphidius
Whom had I here. -- Well, For my true-hearts love
I see she hates me; And shall I love one
That hates me; and bestows what I deserve
Upon my rival? no, Farewell Poppea,
Farewell Poppea, and farewell all Love;
Yet thus much shall it still prevail in me,
That I will hate Nimphidius for thee:

Pet. Farewell to her, to my Euanthe welcome,
Who, now, will to my burning kisses stoop,
Now, with an easy cruelty deny,
That, which she, rather then the asker, would
Have forced from her, then begins her self.
Their loves, that list upon great Ladies set;
I still will love the Wench that I can get.

Exeunt. Enter Nero, Tigellinus, Epaphroditus and Neophilus. Nero: Tigellinus,
said the villain Proculus
I was thrown down in running?

Tigel: My Lord, he said that you were crowned for that
You could not do.

Nero, For that I could not do?
Why, Elis saw me doet, and do it with wonder
Of all the Judges, and the lookers on:
And yet, to see, A villane? could not do it?
Who did it better? I warrant you he said
I from the Chariot fell against my will.

Tigil: He said my Lord, you were thrown out of it,
All crushed, and maimed, and almost bruised to death.

Nero. Malicious Rogue, when I fell willingly,
To show of purpose, with what little hurt
Might a good rider bear a forced fall.
How say thou? Tigillinus, I am sure
Thou have in driving as much skill as he.

Tigil: My Lord, you greater cunning showed in falling,
Then had you sat.

Nero, I know I did; or bruised in my fall?
Hurt! I protest I felt no grief in it.
Go Tigillinus, fetch the villains head,
This makes me see his heart in other things?
Fetch me his head, he nere shall speak again. ex. Tigil.
What do we Princes differ, from the dirt,
And baseness of the common Multitude,
If to the scorn of each malicious tongue
We subject are: For that I had no skill;
Not he, that his far famed daughter set
A prise to victory, and had bin crowned
With thirteen Suitors deaths, till he at length
By fate of Gods, and servants treason fell,
(Shoulder pack't Pelops glorying in his spoils,)
Could with more skill his coupled horses guide.
Even as a Bark, that through the moving Flood.
Her linen wings, and the forced air do bear,
The Byllowes foam, she smoothly cutts them through;
So past my burning Axeltree along,
The people follow, with their eyes and voice,
And now the wind does see it self outrun,
And the Clouds wonder to be left behind;
Whilst the void air is filled with shoutes and noise
And Neroes name does beat the brazen Sky,
Jubiter cruying, loath does hear my praise:
Then there green howes, and Crowns of Olive wre'aths
The Conquerors praise, they give me as my due,
And yet this Rogue says no we have no skill.

Enter a servant to them. Servant, My Lord, the Stage, and all the furnitures

Nero: I have no skill to drive a Chariot:
Had he but robde me, broke my treasury,
The red-Sea's mine, mine are the Indian stones,
The Worlds mine own, then, cannot I be robde?
But spightfully, to undermine my fame,
To take away my art; he would my life
As well, no doubt; could he told how.

Enter Tegillinus, with Proculus head. Neoph: My Lord,
Tegillinus is back come with Proculus head strikes him.

Nero, O cry thee mercy good Neophitus;
Give him five hundred sesterces for amends,
Have brought him Tegillinus?

Tegil: Here Is his head my Lord.

Nero, His tongue had bin enough,

Tegil: I did as you commanded me my Lord.

Nero, Thou toldst not me, though he had such a Nose.
Now are you quiet, and have quieted me;
This it is to be commander of the World,
Let them extol weak pity that do need it,
Let mean men cry to have Law, and Justice done
And tell their griefs to Heaven, that hears them not
Kings must upon the Peoples headless courses
Walk to security, and ease of mind.
Why what have we to do with th'ayrie names
(That old age, and Philosophers found out,)
Of Justice, and never certain Equity;
The Gods revenge themselves, and so will we;
Where right is scand, Authoritie'is orethrowne,
We have a high pre^ogatiue above it;
Slaves may do what is lust, we, what we please,
The people will repine, and think it ill,
But they must bear, and praise too, what we will.

Enter Cornutus to them. Neoph: My Lord, Cornutus whom you sent for's come.

Nero, Welcome good Cornutus
Are all thigs ready for the Stage,
As I gave charge.

Corn: They only stay your coming.

Nero, Cornutus, I must act to day Orestus.

Cornu: You have done that already; and too truly -- aside

Nero, And when our Scene is done, I mean besides
To read some compositions of mine own,
Which for the great opinion I my self,
And Rome In general, of thy Judgment, has,
Before I publish them, I Will show them thee.

Cornu: My Lord, my disabilities

Nero: I know thy modesty,
I Will only show thee, now, my works beginning:
Go see Epaphroditus,
Music made ready, I will sing to day. Exit Epa.
Cornutus I pray thee, come near,
And let me hear thy Judgment in my pains;
I would have thee more familiar good Cornutus,
Nero does prise desert, and more esteems
Them, that in knowledge second him then power,
Mark with what style, and state my work begins.

Cornu: Might not my Interuption offend
What Is your works name my Lord, what write you of?

Nero, I mean to write the deeds of all the Romans

Cornu: Of all the Romans? a huge argument

Nero, I have not yet bethought me of a Title
You Enthrall Powers which the wide Fortunes doom he reads
Of Empire crowned, seven Mountaine-seated Rome
Full blown; Inspire me with Machlaean rage,
That J may bellow out Romes Prentisage,
As when the Menades do fill their Drums
And crooked horns with Mimalonean humme:
And Ennion do Ingeminate a round
Which reparable Ecchoe does resound.
How do thou like our Muses pains Cornutus.

Cornu: The verses have more in them, then I see;
Your work my Lord I doubt will be too long.

Nero, Too long?

Tigel: Too long?

Cornu: I, If you write the deeds of all the Romans
How many Books think you t'include it in?

Nero, I think to write about four hundred Books.

Cornu: Four hundred? why my Lord the'yle nere be read.

Nero, Hah?

Tigil: Why he, whom you esteem so much Crisippus,
Wrote many more.

Cornu: But they were profitable to common life
And did Men, Honesty, and Wisdom teach.

Nero: Tigillinus? Exit Nero and Tigeli.

Cornu: See with what earnestness he craved my Judgment,
And now he freely has it, how it likes him?

Neoph: The Prince is angry, and his fall is near;
Let us begone, least we partake his ruins.

Exeunt omnes praeter Cornn, Manet Cornutus solus. What should I do at Court?
I cannot lie;
Why did thou call me, Nero, from my Book?
Did thou for flattery of Cornutus look?
No, let those purple Fellows that stand by thee,
(That admire show, and things that ^^ou can give,
Leave to please Truth, and Virtue, to please thee.
Nero, there is nothing in thy power, Cornutus
Does wish or fear.

Enter Tigellinus to him. Tigel: It Is Neroes pleasure that you straight depart
To Giarae, and there remain confined:
Thus he, out of his Princely Clemency,
Has Death, your due, turned but to banishment.

Cornu: Why Tigellinus?

Tigel: I have done, upon your peril go, or stay, ex Ti.

Cornu: And why should Death? or Banishment be due?
For speaking, that which was required, my thought;
O why do Princes love to be deceived?
And, even, do force abuses on themselves?
There Ears are so with pleasing speech beguiled,
That Truth they malice, Flattery, truth account,
And their own Soul, and understanding lost,
Go (what they are) to seek in other men.
Alas, weak Prince, how have thou punished me,
To banish me from thee? O let me go
And dwell in Taurus, dwell in Ethiop^,
So that I do not dwell at Rome, with thee.
The farther, still, I go from hence, I know,
The farther I leave Shame and Vice behind.
Where can I go, but I shall see thee, Sun?
And Heaven will be as near me, still, as here.
Can they, so far, a knowing soul exyle,
That her own roof she sees not ore her head? Exit

Enter Piso, Sceuinus, Lucan Flauius. Piso, Noble Gentlemen, what thanks, what
recompense
Shall he give you, that give to him the world;
One life to them, that must so many venture,
And that, the worst of all, is too mean pay;
Yet can I give no more; Take that, bestow it
Upon your service.

Lucan: O Piso, that vouchsafest,
To grace our headless party with thy name;
Whom, having our conductors, we need not
Have feared to go again the well tried valor
Of Julius, or stayednesse of Augustus,
Much less the shame, and Womanhood of Nero;
When we had once, given out, that our pretenses
Were all for thee, our end, to make thee Prince,
They thronging came to give their names, Men, Women,
Gentlemen, People, Soldiers, Senators,
The Camp, and City, grew ashamed that Nero,
And Piso should be offered them together.

Sceu. We seek not now (as in the happy days
O'th common wealth they did, for liberty;
O you, dear ashes, Cassius and Brutus
That was with you entombed, there let it rest,
We are contented with the galling yoke,
If they will only leave us necks to bear it;
We seek no longer freedom, we seek life
At least, not to be murdered, let us die
On Enemies swords; Shall we, whom neither
The Median Bow, nor Macedonian Spear
Nor the firce Gaul, nor painted Briton could
Subdue, lay down our necks to Tyrants axe?
Why do we talk of Virtue, that obey
Weakness, and Vice.

Piso: Have patience good Sceuinus

Lucan: Weakness, and servile government we hitherto
Obeyed have, which, that we may no longer,
We have our lives, and fortunes now set up,
And have our cause with Pis^es credit strengthened.

Flaui: Which makes it doubtful, whether love to him
Or Neroes hatred, has drawn more unto us.

Piso: I see the good thoughts you have of me, Lords.
Lets now proceed to the purpose of our meeting,
I pray you take your places.
Lets have some Paper brought

Sceuin: Whose within

Enter Milichus to them. Meli. My Lord

Sceu. Some Ink, and Paper Exit Meli -- and enter again with Incke, and Paper.

Flaui: Whose that Sceuinus?

Sceui: It is my freed man Melichus.

Luca: Is he trusty?

Sceuin: I for as great matters, as we are about.

Piso: And those are great ones.

Luca: I ask not that we mean to need his trust.
Gain has great soueragintie ore servile minds.

Sceui: O but my benifits have bound him to me.
I, from abondman, have his state not only
Advanced to freedom, but to wealth and credit.

Piso: Meli. waire ith'next chamber tell we call. abscondit se
The thing determinde on our meeting now,
Is of the means, and place, due circumstance,
As to the doing of things it is required,
So done it names the action.

Melis: I wonder,
What makes this new resort to haunt our house,
When wonted Lucius Piso to come hither?
Or Lucan, when so often, as now of late. aside

Piso: And since the field, and open show of arms
Dislike you, and that for the general good,
You mean to end all styrres, in end of him:
That, as the ground, must first be thought upon.

Melic: Besides, this coming cannot be for form,
Our visitation, they go aside, aside
And have long conferences by themselves.

Luca: Piso, his coming to your house at Baiae
To bathe, and banquet, will fit means afford,
amidst his cups, to end his hated life,
Let him die drunk, that nere lived soberly.

Pisa: O be it far, that I should stain my Table,
And Gods of Hospitality with blood;
Let not our cause (now Innocent) be soyld
With such a blot, nor Pisoes name made hateful.
What place can better fit our action
Then his own house? that boundless envied heap,
Built with the spoils, and blood of Citizens
That has taken up the City, left no room
For Rome to stand on; Romans get you gone
And dwell at Vciae, If that Vciae too
This house ore run not.

Lucan. But twill be hard to do it in his house,
And harder to escape being done.

Piso. Not so,
B^fus the Captain of the Guard's with us,
And diverse other oth' Preterian Band
Already made; many, though unacquainted
With our intents, have had disgrace and wrongs,
Which grieve them still; most will be glad of change,
And even they that loved him best, when once
They see him gone, will smile o'th coming times,
Let go things past, and look to their own safety:
Besides, th'astonishment and fear will be
So great, so sudden, that 'twill hinder them
From doing any thing.

Meli. No private business can concern them all; aside.
Their countenances are troubled, and look sad,
Doubt and Importance in their face is read.

Lucan. Yet still I think it were
Safer t'attempt him private, and alone.

Flaui. But 'twill not carry that opinion with it,
Twill seem more foul, and come from private malice.
Brutus, and they, to right the common cause,
Did choose a public place.

Serui. Our deed is honest, why should it seek corners?
It Is for the people done, let them behold it;
Let me have them a witness of my truth,
And love toth' Commonwealth; The danger's greater,
So is the glory. Why should our pale counsels
Tend whether fear, rather then virtue calls them:
I do not like these cold considerings;
First, let our thoughts look up to what is honest,
Next, to what is safe; If danger may deter us,
Nothing that is great, or good shall ere be done;
And, when we first gave hands upon this deed
Toth' commons safety, we our own gave up.
Let not man venture on a princes death,
How bad soever, with belief to escape;
Despair must be our hope, fame, or reward.
To make the general liking to concur
With others, were even to strike him in his shame,
Or (as he thinks) his glory, on the Stage,
And so too truly make it a Tragedy;
When all the people cannot choose but clap
So sweet a close, and 'twill not Caesar be
That shall be slain, a Roman Prince:
Twill be Alemaeon, or blind Oedipus.

Meli. And if it be of public matters, it is not aside.
Like to be talk, or idle fault finding,
On which the coward only spends his wisdom:
These are all men of action, and of spirit,
And dare perform what they determine on.

Luca. What think you of Poppea, Tigellinus,
And tho'ther odious Instruments of Court:
Were it not best at once to rid them all?

Serui. In Caesar's ruin, Anthony was spared:
^ets not our cause with needless blood distaine,
One only moved, the change will not appear
When too much license given to the sword,
Though against ill, will make even good men fear:
Besides, things settled, you at pleasure may
By Law, and public Judgment have them rid.

Meli. And if it be but talk oth'State, it is Treason,
Like it they cannot, that they cannot do:
If seek to mend it, and remove the Prince,
That Is highest Treason; change his Councillors, aside.
That Is alteration of the government,
The common cloak that Treasons mufled in;
If laying force aside, to seek by suite,
And fair petition, to have the State reformed,
That Is tutering of the Prince, and takes away,
The One his person, this his Sovereignty;
Barely in private talk to show dislike
Of what is done, is dangerous; therefore the action
Mislike you, cause the doer likes you not?
Men are not fit to live ith state they hate.

Piso. Though we would all have that employment sought,
Yet, since your worthy forwardness, Seruinus,
Preuents us, And so Nobly beggs for danger:
Be this the chosen hand to do the deed,
The fortune of the Empire speed your sword.

Sceui: Virtue, and Heaven speed it; O you homeborne
Gods of our country, Romulus, and Vesta,
That Thuscan Tiber, and Romes towers defends:
Forbid not yet at length a happy end
To former evils; Let this hand revenge
The wronged world; enough we now have suffered. exeunt.

Manet Melichus solus. Meli Tush, all this long Consulting's more then words,
It ends not there; th'haue some attempt, some plot,
Against the state: well, I Will observe it farther,
And if I find it, make my profit of it. exeunt.

Finis Actus Secundus.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Poppea Solus. POppea: I looked Nimphidius would have come ere this,
Makes he no greater have to our embraces?
Or, does the easines abate his edge?
Or, seem we not as fair still as we did?
Or, is he so with Neroes playing won,
That he, before Poppea, does prefer it?
Or does he think to have occasion still?
Sill, to have time to wait on our stolen meetings?

Enter Nimphidius to her. Poppe: But see his presence now does end those doubts,
What is it Nimphidius has so long detained you?

Nymph: Faith Lady, causes strong enough,
High walls, bard doors, and guards of armed men.

Poppe: Were you Imprisoned, then, as you were going
To the Theater.

Nimphi: Not in my going Lady,
But, in the Theater, I was Imprisoned:
For, after he was once upon the Stage,
The Gates were more severely looked into
Then at a town besieged; No man, no cause
Was Current, no, nor passant; At other sights
The striefe is only to get in, but here
The stir was all, in getting out again;
Had, we not bin kept to it so, I think
It Would nere have bin so tedious, though I know,
'Twas hard to judge, whether his doing of it
Were more absurd, then 'twas for time to do it.
But wh^^ we once were forced to be spectators,
compelled to that, which should have bin a pleasure,
We could no longer bear the wearisomnesse:
No pain so irksome, as a forced delight;
Some fell down dead, or seemed at least to do so,
Under that color, to be carried forth,
Then death first pleasur'd men, the shape all fear
Was put on gladly, some clombe ore the walls,
And so, by falling caught in earnest that,
Which the other did dissemble; There were women,
(That being not able to entreat the guard
To let them pass the gates,) were brought to bed
Amid'st the throngs of men, and made Lucina
Blush, to see that unwonted company.

Poppe: If 'twere so straightly kept, how got you forth?

Nimp: Faith Lady I came, pretending have
In Face and Countenance, told them I was sent
For things, bith' Prince forgot about the scene,
Which, both my credit made them to believe,
And Nero, newly whispered me before.
Thus did I pass the gates, the danger Lady
I have not yet escaped.

Poppe: What danger mean you?

Nim: The danger of his anger, when he knows
How I thus shrunk away, for there stood knaves
That put down in their Tables all that stirred,
And marked in each there cheerfulness, or sadness.

Poppe: I warrant I Will excuse you: But I pray,
Lett's be a little better for your sight;
How did our Princely husband act Orestes?
Did he not wish again his Mother living?
Her death would add great life unto his part:
But come I pray, the story of your sight.

Nim: O do not drive me to those hateful pains;
Lady, I was too much in seeing vexed,
Let it not be redoubled with the telling;
I now am well, and hear, my ears set free;
O be merciful, do not bring me back
Unto my prison, at least free your self,
It will not pass away, but stay the time;
Wrack out the hours in length; O give me leave,
as one that wearied with the toil at sea,
And now on wished shore has firm'd his foot;
He looks about, and glads his thoughts and eyes,
With sight oth' green clothed ground, and leauy trees,
Of flowers that beg more then the looking on,
And likes these other waters narrow shores;
So let me lay my wearines in these arms,
Nothing but kisses to this mouth discourse,
My thought be compast in those circl'd Eyes;
Eyes on no object look, but on those Cheeks;
Be blessed my hands with touch of those round breasts,
Whiter and softer then the down of Swans.
Let me of thee, and of thy beauties glory,
And endless tell, but never wearying story. Exeunt.

Enter Nero, Ephaproditus, Neophilus. Nero: Come Sirs, I faith, how did you
like my acting?
What? wast not as you looked for?

Epaph: Yes my Lord, and much beyond.

Nero: Did I not do it to the life?

Epaph: The very doing never was so lively
As now this counterfeyting.

Nero: And when I came,
Toth' point of Agrippa, Cliteunnestras death,
Did it not move the feeling auditory?

Epaph: They had been stones, whom that could not have mon'd.

Nero: Did not my voice hold out well to the end?
And served me afterward afresh to sing with.

Neoph: We know Apollo cannot match your voice.

Epaph: By Jove, ^ think you are the God himself
Come from above, to show your hidden arts;
And fill us men with wonder of your skill.

Nero: Nay faith speak truly, do not flatter me;
I know you need not: flattery's but where
Desert is mean.

Epaph: I swear by thee O Caesar;
Then whom no power of Heaven I honor more,
No mortal voice can pass, or equal thine.

Nero: They tell of Orpheus, when he took his Lute,
And moved the noble Iuory with his touch:
Hebrus stood still, Pangea bowed his head,
Ossa then first shook off his snow, and came
To listen to the moouings of his song;
The gentle Popler, took the Oak along.
And called the Pyne down, from his Mountain seat:
The Virgin Bay, although the Arts she hates
Oth' Delphick God, was with his voice ore come,
He his twice-lost Euridice bewailes,
And Proserpines vain gifts, and makes the shores
And hollow caves of forests now vntreed
Bear his grief company, and all things teaches
His lost loves name: Then water, air, and ground
Euridice, Euridice, resound.
These are bold tales, of which the Greeks have store;
But if he could from Hell once more return,
And would compare his hand and voice with mine,
I, though himself were judge, he then should see,
How much the Latin stains the Thracian liar.
I often have walked by Tibers flowing banks,
And heard the Swan sing her own Epitaph
When she heard me, she held her peace and died.
Let others raise from earthly things their praise,
Heaven has stood still to hear my happy airs
And ceast the eternal Music of the Spheres
To mark my voice, and mend their tunes by mine.

Neoph: O divine voice,

Epaph: Happy are they that hear it.

Enter Tigellinus to them. Nero: But here comes Tigellinus, come, thy bill,
Are there so many; I see I have enemies.

Epaph: Have you put Caius in, I saw him frown

Neoph: And, in the midst oth' Emperors act on
Gallus laughed out, and as I think in scorn.

Nero: Vespasian too a sleep; was he so drowsy?
Well, he shall sleep the Iron sleep of death
And did Thrasea look so sour^ly on us?

Tigil: He never smilde, my Lord, nor would vouchsafe
With one applause to grace your action.

Nero: Our action needed not be graced by him,
He Is our old enemy, and still Malignes us;
It Will have an end, nay it shall have an end.
Why, I have bin too pitiful too remiss,
My easiness i^laught at, and contemned,
But I will change it; Not, as heretofore,
By singling out them, one by one to death,
Each common man can such reuenges have;
A Princes anger must lay desolate
Cities, Kingdoms consume, Root up mankind.
O could I live to see the general end,
Behold the world en^rapt in funeral flame,
When, as the Sun shall lend his beams to burn
What he before brought forth, and water serve,
Not to extinguish but to ^uise the fire:
Then, like the Salamander, bathing me
In the last Ashes of all mortal things
Let me give up this breath: Priam was happy,
Happy indeed, he saw his Troy burnt,
And Illion lie on heaps; Whilst thy pure streams,
(Divine Scamander) did run Phrygian blood
And heard the pleasant cries of Trojan Mothers.
Could I see Rome, so?

Tigell: Your Majesty may easily,
Without this trouble to your sacred mind.

Nero: What may I easily do? kill thee, or him,
How may I rid you all? where is the Man
That will all others end, and last himself?
O that I had thy Thunder in my hand,
Thou idle Rouer, I Will not shoot at trees,
And spend in woods my unregarded vengeance,
I Will sheuire them down upon thtir guilty roofes,
And fill the streets with bloody burials.
But it is not Heaven can give me what I seek;
To you, you hated kingdoms of the night,
You severe powers, that not like those above,
Will with fair words, or childrens cries be won,
That have a style beyond that Heaven is proud off,
Deriuing not from Art a makers Name,
But in destruction power, and terror show:
To you I fly for succor: you, whose dwellings
For torments are bely'de, must give me ease;
Furies, lend me your fires, no they are here,
They must be other fires; material brands
That must the burning of my heat allay;
I bring to you no rude vnpractiz'd hands,
Already do they reeke with mothers blood:
Tush that is but innocents, to what now I mean,
Alas what evil could those years commit,
The world in this shall see my settled wit. exeunt.

Enter Seneca, Petronius. Senec: Petroneus, you were at the Theater.

Petron: Senica I was, and saw your kingly Pupyll
In Mynstrils habit, stand before the Judges,
Bowing those hands, which the worlds Scepter hold,
And with great awe and reverence beseeching
Indifferent hearing, and an equal doom:
Then Caesar doubted first to be oreborne,
And so he joined himself to the other singers,
And straightly all other Laws oth' Stage observed,
As not (though weary) to sit down, not spit;
Not wipe his sweat off, but with what he wore;
Mean time how would he eye his adversaries,
How he would seek to have all they did disgraced,
Traduce them privily, openly rail at them:
And them he could not conquer so, he would
Corrupt with money, to do worse then he.
This was his singing part, his acting now.

Senec: Nay even end here, for I have heard enough,
I have a Fiddler heard him, let me not
See him a Player, nor the fearful voice
Of Romes great Monarch, now command in Jest
Our Prince be Aegamemnon in a Play.

Petron: Why Seneca, It Is better in Play
Be Aegamemnon, then himself indeed;
How often, with danger of the field beset,
Or with home mutineys, would he vnbee
Himself, or, over cruel alters weeping,
Wish, that with putting off a vizard, he
Might his true inward sorrow lay aside;
The shows of things are better then themselves:
How does it stir this ayrye part of us,
To hear our Poets tell imagined fights,
And the strange blows, that fained courage gives,
When I Achilles hear upon the Stage
Speak Honor, and the greatness of his soul;
Me thinks I too, could on a Phrygian Spear
Run boldly, and make tales for after times;
But when we come to act it in the deed,
Death mares this bravery, and the ugly fears
Of the other world, sit on the proudest browe,
And boasting valor loses his red cheek.

A Roman to them. Rom: Fire, fire, help, we burn.

2. Rom: Fire, water, fire help fire.

Senec: Fire, where?

Petron: Where? what fire.

Rom: O round about, here, there, on every side.
The girdling flame, does with unkind embraces
Compass the City.

Petro: How came this fire, by whom?

Senec: Wast chance, or purpose?

Petro: Why is it not quenched?

Rom: Alas there are a many there with weapons,
Aod whether it be for pray, or by command,
They hinder: nay, they throw on firebrarnds.

Enter Antonius to them. Anton: The fire increases, and will not be staid,
But like a stream that tumbling from a hill,
Orewhelmes the fields, orewhelmes the hopeful toil
Oth' husbandman, and headlong bears the woods;
The vnweeting Shepherd on a Rock a far,
Amazed, hears the fearful noise; so here,
Danger and Terror strive, which shall exceed,
Some cry, and yet are well, some are killed silent,
Some kindly run to help their neighbors house,
The whilst their own's a fire: some save their goods,
And leave their dearer pledges in the flame;
One takes his little sons with trembling hands,
The Other his house-Gods saues, which could not him,
All bann the door, and with wishes kill
Their absent murderer.

Petro: What? are the Gauls returned?
Does Brenius brandish firebrarnds again.

Senec: What can Heaven now unto our sufferings add.

Enter Another Roman to them. Rom: O all goes down, Rome falls from the
Roof,
The wind's aloft, the conquering flame turns all
Into it self; Nor do the Gods escape,
Pleidds burns, Jupiter Stator burns.
The Altar now is made a sacrifice;
An Vesta mournes, to see her Virgin fires
Mingle with profane ashes.

Senec: Heaven, have thou set this end, to Roman greatness?
Were the worlds spoils, for this, to Rome divided,
To make but our fires bigger?
You Gods, whose anger made us great, grant yet
Some change in misery; We beg not now,
To have our Consul tread on Asian Kings,
Or spurn the quiuerd Susa at their feet;
This, we have had before; we beg to live,
At least not thus to die; Let Cannos come,
Let Allius waters turn again to blood.
To these will any miseries be light.

Petro: Why with false Auguries have we bin deceived?
Why was our Empire told us, should endure
With Sun, and Moon, in time; in brightness pass them,
And that our end should be oth' world, and it.
What, can Celestial Godheads double too?

Senec: O Rome, the envy late,
But now, the pity of the world thee gets,
The men of Choleos at thy sufferings griue,
The shaggy dweller in the Scithian Rocks;
The most condemned to perpetual snow
That never wept at kindreds burials,
Suffers with thee, and feels his heart to soften.
O, should the Parthyan hear these miseries,
He would, (his low and native hate apart)
Sit down with us. and lend an Enemies tear,
To grace the funeral fires of ending Rome. Exeunt.
Soft Music, Enter Nero above alone with a Timbrell. I, now my Troy looks
beauteous in her flames,
The Trirhnen Seas are bright with Roman fires,
Whilst the amazed Mariner a far,
Gazing on th'vnknowne light, wonders what star
Heaven has begot, to ease the aged Moon.
When Pirrhus, stryding ore the cynders, stood
On ground, where Troy late was; and with his Eye
Measured the height of what he had thrown down,
A City, great in people, and in power:
Walls built with hands of Gods; He now forgive
The ten years length, and thinks his wounds well heald,
Bathed in the blood of Priams fifty sons.
Yet am not I appeased, I must see more
Then Towers, and Collomns tumble to the ground;
'Twas not the high built walls, and guiltless stones
That Nero did provoke; Themselves must be the wood
To feed this fire, or quench it with their blood.

Enter a Woman with a burnt Child. Wom: O my dear Infant, O my Child, my Child;
Unhappy comfort of my nine months pains;
And did I bear thee, only for the fire,
Was I to that end made a Mother?

Nero: I, now begins the scene that I would have.

Enter a Man bearing another dead. Man: O Father speak yet; no, the merciless
blow
Has all bereft, speech, motion, sense, and life.

Wom: O beauteous innocence, whitnes ill blackt,
How to be made a coal could thou deserve?

Man: O reverend wrinckles, well becoming palenesse,
Why has death now life's colors given thee,
And mockes thee with the beauties of fresh youth?

Wom: Why were thou given me, to be taken away
So soon, or could not Heaven tell how to punish
But first by blessing me.

Man: Why were thy years lengthned so long,
To be cut off untimely?

Nero: Play on, play on, and fill the golden skies
With cries, and pity; with your blood; Men's Eyes.

Wom: Where are thy flattering smiles, thy pretty kisses,
And arms, that wont to writhe about my neck?

Man. Where are thy Counsels, where their good example?
And that kind roughnes of a Fathers anger?

Wom: Whom have I now to leave my old age on?

Man: Who shall I now have to set right my youth, within.
Gods if ye be not fled from Heaven help us.

Nero: I like this Music well; they like not mine:
Now in the tears of all men, let me sing, Cantat.
And make it doubtful to the Gods above;
Whether the Earth be pleased, or do complain.

Man: But, may the man, that all this blood has shed,
Never bequeath to the earth, an old gray head;
Let him untimely be cut off before,
And leave a course like this all wounds and gore.
Be there no friend at hand, no standers by,
In love, or pity moved, to close that Eye.
O let him die the wish, and hate of all;
And not a tear to grace his Funeral. exeunt.

Wom: Heaven, you will hear (that which the world does scorn,)
The prayers of misery, and souls forlorn:
Your anger waxes by delaying stronger,
O now for mercy be dispis'd no longer.
Let him, that makes so many Mothers childlesse,
Make his unhappy, in her fruitfulness.
Let him no issue leave to bear his name
Or some to right a Fathers wronged fame,
Our flames to quit; be righteous in your ire,
And when he dies, let him want funeral fire. exeunt.

Nero: Let Heaven do what it will this I have done
Already: do you feel my furies weight,
Rome is become a grave of her late greatness;
Her clouds of smoke have taken away the day,
Her flames the night.
Now unbelieving Eyes what crave you more?

Enter Neophilus to him. Neoph: O save your self (my Lord) your Palace burns.

Nero: My Palace? how? what traitorous hand?

Enter Tigellinus to them. Tigel: O fly my Lord, and save your self betimes,
The wind does beat the fire upon your house,
The eating flame deuoures your double gates,
Your pillars fall, your golden roofes do melt,
Your antique Tables, and Greek Imagery:
The fire besets, and the smoke you see
Does choke my speech, O fly, and save your life.

Nero: Heaven, thou do strive, I see, for victory. exeunt.

Enter Nimphideus solus. See how Fate works unto their purposed end;
And without all selfe-Industry will raise,
Whom they determine to make great and happy;
Nero throws down himself, I stir him not,
He runs unto destruction studies ways
To compassed danger, and attain the hate
Of all; Be his own wish is on his head:
Nor Rome with fire, mo^e then reuenges burn^;
Let me stand still, or lie, or sl^epe, I ^^se.
Poppea some new favor will seek out
My wakings to salute, I cannot st^rre,
But messagers of new p^eferment meet me:
Now, she has made me Captain of the Guard,
So well I bear me in these night Allar^^^,
That she imagined I was made for Arms;
I now command the Soldier, he the City,
If any chance do turn the Prince aside,
(As many hatreds, mischiefs threaten him,)
Ours is his wife, his seat and thrown is ours.
He Is next in right that has the strongest powers. exit.

Enter Sceuinus, Melechus. Sceui: O Troy, and O ye souls of our Forefathers,
Which in your countries fires were offered up,
How near your Nephews, to your fo^tunes come:
Yet they were Grecian hands began your flame;
But that our Temples, and our houses smoke,
Our Marble buildings turn to be our Tombs,
Burnt bones and spurnt at Cou^ses fill the streets,
Not Pirrhus, nor thou Hanniball, art Autho^,
Sad Rome is ruined by a Roman hand.
But if to Neroes end, this only way
Heavens Justice has chose out, and peoples love
Could not but by this feebling ills be moved;
We do not then at all complain our harms,
On this condition please us, let us die,
And cloy the Parthian, with revenge and pity.

Melic: My Master has sealed up his Testament,
Those bondmen which he likes best set free,
Given money, and more liberally then he used:
And now, as if a farewell to the world
Were meant, A sumpteous banquet has he made;
Yet not with countenance that feasters use,
But che eres his friends the whilst himself looks sad.

Scen: I have from fortunes Temple taken this sword,
May it be fortunate, and now at least
Since it could not prevent, punish the Evil;
To Rome it had bin better done before,
But though less helping now, they will praise it more.
Great Sovereign of all mortal actions
Whom only wretched men, and Poets blame,
Speed thou the weapon, which I have from thee.
'Twas not amidst thy Temple Monuments
In vain reposed, somewhat I know 't has done:
O with new honors let it be laid up:
Strike bouldly, arm so many powerful prayers
Of dead, and living houer over thee.

Melic: And though sometimes, with talk impertineur,
And idle fances, he would feign a mirth;
Yet is it easy seen, somewhat is here
The which, he dares not let his face make show of.

Sceuin: Long want of loss has made it dull, and blunt:
See, Melichus, this weapon better edged.

Melic: Sharpning of swords, when must we then have blows,
Or means my Master, Cato-like, to exempt
Himself from power of Fates, and cloyed with life,
Give the Gods back their unregarded gift,
But he has neither Catoes mind, nor cause;
A man given ore to pleasures, and soft ease:
Which makes me still to doubt, how in affairs
Of Princes he dares meddle, or desires?

Sceuin: We shall have blows on both sides, Melichus;
Provide me store of clothes to bind up wounds;
What an't be heart, for heart, Death is the worst;
The Gods sure keep it, hide from us that live
How sweet death is, because we should go on
And be their bailes: There are about the house
Some stones that will stanch blood, see them set up:
This world I see has no felicity,
I Will try the other.

Melic: Neroes life is soft,
The sword's prepared against another breast,
The help for his; it can be no private foe,
For then 'twere best to make it known, and call
His troops of bond, and freed men to his aid:
Besides his Counselors, Seneca,
And Lucan, are no Managers of quarrels.

Sceuin: Me thinks, I see him struggling on the ground,
Hear his unmanly outcries, and lost prayers
Made to the Gods, which turn their heads away.
Nero, this day must end the worlds desi^es,
And headlong send thee, to unquenched fires. exit.

Melic: Why do I further idly stand debating,
My proofs are but too many, and too pregnant,
And Princes Ears still to suspicions open:
Who ever, being but accused, was quit;
For States are wise, and cut of ylls that may be;
Mean men must die, that the other may sleep sound,
Chiefly, that rule, whose weakness apt to fears,
And bad deserts of all men, makes them know
There Is none but is in heart, what he is accused. exit.

Finis Actus Tertij.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Nero, Poppaea, Nimphidius, Tigellinus, Neophitus, and Epaphroditus.
Nero: THis kiss sweet love, I Will force from thee and this,
And of such spoils, and victories be prowder,
Then if I had the fierce Panonian,
Or gray-eyd German ten times overcome.
Let Julius go, and fight at end oth' world,
And conquer from the wild inhabitants
Their cold, and poverty; whilst Nero, here,
Makes other wars, war^es where the conquered gains,
Where to ore-come, is to be prisoner.
O willingly, I give my freedom up;
And put on my own chains;
And am in love with my captivity;
Such Venus is, when on the sand shore
Of Xanthus or on Idas ple^s^n^ green
She leads the da^c^; Her, the Nymphs all are we,
And smyling graces do accompany.
If Bacchus could his straggling Mynion
Grace, with a glorious wreath of shining S^arres;
Why should not Heaven my Poppaea Crow^e?
The Northern teeme shall move into a round;
New constellations rise, to honor thee;
The Earth shall wone thy favors, and the Sea
Lay his rich shells, and treasure at thy feet.
For thee, Hidaspis shall throw up his gold,
Pauchaia breath the rich delightful smells,
The Seres, and the feathered man of Inde
Shall their fine arts, and curious labors bring:
And where the Sunn's not known, Poppaeas name
Shall midst their feasts, and barbarous pomp be sung.

Poppae: I, now I am worthy to be Queen oth' world,
Fairer then Venus, or the Bacchus love:
But you will anon, unto your cutt-boy, S porus,
Your new made woman; to whom, now I hear
You are wed led too.

Nero: I wedded?

Poppae: I, you wedded;
Did you not hear the words oth' Auspyces,
Was not the boy in bride-like garm^n^s dressed,
Marriage books sealed, as 'twere for issue, to
Be had between you, solemn feasts prepared;
While all the Court, with God-giue you Joy, sounds.
It had bin good Domitius your Father
Had nere had other wife:

Nero: Your froward fool, you are still so bitter, whose that?

Enter Melichus to them. Nymph: One that it seems, my Lord, does come in have.

Nero: Yet in his face he sends his tale before him,
Bad news thou tellest.

Melic: It Is bad I tell, but good that I can tell it,
Therefore your Majesty will pardon me,
If I offend your ears to save your life.

Nero: Why, is my life indangerd?
How ends this circumstance, thou wrackst my thoughts.

Meli: My Lord your life is conspired against,

Nero: By whom?

Meli; I must be of the world excused in this,
If the great duty to your Majesty:
Makes me all other lesser to neglect.

Nero: Thou Art a tedious fellow, speak, by whom?

Melic: By my Master.

Nero; Who Is thy Master?

Meli: Sceuinus.

Poppae: Sceuinus, why should he conspire?
Unless he think, that likeness in conditions
May make him too, worthy oth' Empire thought.

Nero: Who are else in it?
I think Natalis, Subius, Flauius,
Lucan, Seneca, and Lucius Piso,
Asper, and Quintilianus.

Nero: Ha done,
Thou'ilt reckon all Rome anon and so thou may,
They Are villains all, I Will not trust one of them;
O that the Romans had but all one n^cke.

Poppae: Pisoes she creeping into men's affections.
And popular arts, have given long cause of doubt,
And the others late observed discontents
Risen from misinterpre^ed disgraces,
May make us credit this rel tion.

Nero: Where are they? come they not upon us yet?
See the Guard doubted, see the Gates shut up.
Why, the'yle surprise us in our Court anon.

Meli: Not so my Lord, they are at Pisoes house,
And think themselves, yet safe, and vndiscry'd.

Nero: Lets thither then,
And take them in this false security;

Tigel: 'Twere better first publish them traitors.

Nymph: That were to make them so,
And force them all upon their Enemies;
Now, without stir, or hazard they will be taken,
And boldly trial dare, and law demand;
Besides, this accusation may be forged
By malice or mistaking.

Poppe: What likes you, do Nimphidius, out of hand,
Two ways distract, when either would prevail;
If they suspecting but this fellows absence,
Should try the City, and attempt their friends,
How dangerous might Pisoes favor be.

Nymph: I to himself would make the matter clear,
Which now upon one servants credit stands:
The Cities favor keeps within the bonds
Of profit they will love none, to hurt themselves;
Honor, and friendship they hear others name,
Themselves do neither feel, nor know the same;
To put them yet, (though needless) in some fear,
We Will keep their streets with armed companies:
Then if they stir, they see their wives, and houses
Prepared a pray to the greedy Soldier.

Poppe: Let us be quick then, you, to Pisoes house,
While I, and Tigellinus further sift
This fellows knowledge. Ex. omnes Praetor Nero.

Nero: Look to the gates, and walls oth' City, look
The river be well kept, have watches set
In every passage, and in every way;
But who shall watch these watches, what if they
Begin, and play the Traitors first? O where shall I
Seek faith, or them that I may wisely trust?
The City favors the conspirators,
The Senate, in disgrace, and feate has lived;
The Ca^p, wh^ most are soldiers that be named
Besides, he knows not all; and like a fool
I interrupted him, else had he named
Those that stood by me; O security.
Which we so much seek after, yet art still
To Courts a stranger, and do rather choose,
The smoaky reeds, and sedgy cottages,
Then the proud roofes, and wanton cost of Kings.
O sweet despised joys of poverty,
A happiness unknown unto the Gods:
Would I had rather in poor Gallij bin,
Or Vlubrae, a ragged Magistrate,
Sat as a Judge of measures, and of corn,
Then the adored Monarke of the world.
Mother, thou did deservedly in this,
That from a private, and sure state, did raise
My fortunes, to this slippery hill of greatness;
Where I can neither stand, nor fall with life. Exit.

Enter Piso, Lucan, Sceuinus, Flauius. Flau: But since we are discovered, what
remains?
But put our lives upon our hands, these swords
Shall try us Traitors, or true Citizens.

Sceui: And what should make this hazard doubt success,
Stout men are often with sudden onsets danted,
What shall this Stage Player be?

Luc: It is not now,
Augustus gravity, nor Tiberius craft,
But Tigellinus, and Crisogorus
Eunucke^, and women that we go against.

Sceui: This for thy own sake, this for ours we beg,
That thou will suffer him to be overcome;
Why should thou keep so many vowed swords
From such a hated throat?

Flaui: Or shall we fear,
To trust unto the Gods so good a cause.

Luca: By this we may, our selves Heavens favor promise,
Because all nobleness, and worth on earth
We see's on our side; Here the Faby's son,
Here the Coruini are, and take that part;
There noble Fathers would, if now they lived;
There Is not a soul that claims Nobility
Either by his, or his forefathers merit,
But is with us; with us the gallant youth
Whom passed dangers, or hot blood makes bold:
Staid men suspect their wisdom, or their faith,
To whom our counsels we have not reueald.
And while (our party seeking to disgrace)
They traitors call us, Each man treason praises,
And hates faith, when Piso is a traitor.

Sceui: And at aduenturer what by stoutnesse can
Befall us worse, then will by cowardice?
If both the people, and the soldier failde us,
Yet shall we die at least worthy our selves,
Worthy our ancestors: O Piso think,
Think on that day, when in the Parthian fields
Thou cryedst to the flying Legions to turn,
And look Death in the face; he was not grim,
But fair and lovely, when he came in arms.
O why, there di'd we not on Syrian swords?
Were we reserved to prisons, and to chains.
Behold the Galley-asses in every street,
And even now they come to clap on yrons;
Must Pisoes head be showed upon a pole?
Those members torn; rather then Roman-like,
And Piso-like, with weapons in our hands
Fighting, in throng of enemies to die:
And that it shall not be a civil war
Nero preuents, whose cruelty has left
Few Citizens; we are not Romans now,
But Moors, and Jews, and utmost Spaniards,
And Asiaes refuge that do fill the City.

Piso: Part of us are already taken, the rest
Amazed, and seeking holes; Our hidden ends
You see laid open, Court, and City armed,
And for fear joining to the part they fear.
Why should we move desperate, and hopeless arms
And vainly spill that noble blood, that should
Crystal Rubes, and the Median fields,
Not Tiber color: And the more your show be
Your loves, and readiness to loose your lives,
The lother I am to adventure them.
Yet am I proud, you would for me have died,
But live, and keep your selves to worthier ends;
No Mother but my own shall weep my death,
Nor will ^ make by overthrowing us,
Heaven guilty of more faults, yet from the hopes,
Your own go^d wishes, rather then the thing
Do make ^ou s^^, this comfort I receive
Of death vn^orst. O friends, I would not die
When I can live no longer; It Is my glory,
That free, and willing I give up this breath,
Leaving such courages as you^s vntri'd.
But to belong in talk of dying, would
Show a relenting, and a doubtful mi^d:
By this you shall my quiet though^s intend;
I blame nor Earth, nor H^auen for my end. He dies.

Lucan: O that this noble courage had bin shown,
Rather on enemies breasts, then on thy own.

Sceui: But sacred, and inviolate be thy will,
And let it lead, and I teach us;
This sword I could more willingly have thrust
Through Neroes breast; That, fortune denied me,
It now shall through Sceuinus.
Enter Tigellinus solus. What multitudes of villains are here gotten
In a conspiracy; which Hydra like,
Still in the cutting off, increases more.
The more we take, the more are still appeach,
And every man brings in new company.
I wonder what we shall do with them all,
The prisons cannot hold more then they have,
The Iayles are full, the holes with Gallants stincke,
Straw and gold lace together live I think:
'Twere best even shut the gates oth' City up,
And make it all one Iayle; for, this I am sure,
There Is not an honest man within the walls:
And though the guilty does exceed the free;
Yet through a base, and fatal cowardice,
They all assist, in taking one another,
And by their own hands are to prison led.
There Is no condition, nor degree of men,
But here are met; Men of the sword, and gown,
Plebeans, Senators, and women too,
La^ies that might have slain him with their Eye,
Would use their hands, Philosophers,
And Politicians; Politicians?
Their plot was laid too short; Poets would now,
Not only write, but be the arguments
Of Tragedies: The Emperor's much pleased:
But some have named Seneca, and I
Will have Petroneus, one promise of pardon,
Or fear of torture, will accusers find. exit.

Enter Nimphidius, Lucan, Sceninus, with a guard. Nymph: Though Pisoes
suddenness, and guilty hand
Prevented has the death he should have had;
Yet you abide it must.

Luca: O may the earth lie lightly on his Course,
Sprinckle his ashes with your flowers and tears,
The love and dainties of Mankind is gone.

Sceui: What only now we can, we will follow thee
That way thou lead'st, and wait on thee in death,
Which we had done, had not these hindered us.

Nymph: Nay, other ends your grievous crimes awaite,
Ends which the law and your deserts exact.

Sceui: What have we deserved?

Nymph: That punishment that traitors unto Princes,
And enemies to the State they live in merit.

Sceuin: If by the State, this government you mean,
I justly am an enemy unto it.
That Is but to Nero, you, and Tigellinus:
That glorious world, that even beguiles the wise,
Being looked into, includes but three, or four.
Corrupted men, which were they all removed,
'Twould for the common State much better be.

Nymph: Why, what can you in the government mislike?
Unless it grieve you, that the world's in peace,
Or that our arms conquer without blood.
Has not his power with foreign visitations,
And strangers honor more acknowldg'd bin,
Then any was before him? Has not he
Disposed of frontier kingdoms, with success,
Given away Crowns, whom he set up, prevailing?
The rival seat of the Arsacidae,
That thought their brightness equal unto ours,
Is It crowned by him by him, does reign?
If we have any war, it is beyond Rheme,
And Euphrates, and such whose different chances
Have rather served for pleasure, and discourse,
Then troubled us; At home the City has
Increast in wealth, with building bin adorned;
The arts have flourisht, and the Muses sung,
And that, his Justice, and well tempred reign,
Has the best Judges pleased, the powers divine;
Their blessings, and so long prosperity
Of the Empire under him, enough declare.

Sceui: You freed the State from wars abroad, but 'twas
To spoil at home more safely, and divert
The Parthian enmity on us, and yet,
The glory rather, and the spoils of war
Have wanting bin, the loss, and charge we have.
Your peace is full of cruelty, and wrong,
Laws taught to speak to present purposes,
Wealth, and fair houses dangerous faults become,
Much blood in the City, and no common deaths,
But Gentlemen, and Consulary houses:
On Caesar's own house look, has that bin free?
Has he not shed the blood he calls divine?
Has not that neerenes which should love beget
Always on him, bin cause of hate, and fear;
Virtue, and power suspected, and kept down:
They whose great ancestors this Empire made,
Distrusted in the government thereof;
A happy state, where Decius is a traitor,
Narcissus true, nor only wast unsafe
To Offend the Prince, his freed men worse were feared,
whose wrongs with such insulting pride were heard,
That even the faulty it made innocent:
If we complained, that was it self a crime,
I, though it were to Caesar's benefit;
Our writings pried into, falce guiltines
(Thinking each taxing pointed out it self)
Our private whisperings listened after; nay,
Our thoughts were forced out of us, and punished:
And had it bin in you, to have taken away
Our understanding, as you did our speech,
You would have made us thought this honest too?

Nymph: Can malice narrow eyes,
See anything yet more it can traduce.

Sceui: His long continued taxes I forbear,
In which he chiefly showed him to be Prince,
His robbing Alters, sale of Holy things,
The Antique Goblets of adored rust,
And sacred gifts of Kings, and people sold.
Nor was the spoil more odious, then the use,
They were imployd on, spent on shame, and lust
Which still have bin so endless in their change,
And made us know a diverse servitude.
But that he has bin suffered so long,
And prospered, as you say: for that, to thee
O Heaven, I turn my self, and cry; No God
Has care of us, yet have we our revenge,
As much as Earth may be revenged on Heaven;
Their divine honor Nero shall usurp,
And prayers, and feasts, and adoration have,
As well as Jupiter.

Nymph: Away blaspheming tongue
Be ever silent for thy bitterness,

Exeunt. Enter Nero, Poppaea, Tigellinus, Flauius, Neophilus, Epaphroditus, and
a young man. Nero: What could cause thee,
Forgetful of my benefits, and thy oath,
To seek my life.

Plaui: Nero, I hated thee;
Nor was there any of thy soldiers
More faithful, while thou faith deseru'dst then I,
Together did I leave to be a subject,
And thou a Prince, Caesar was now become
A player on the Stage, a Waggoner,
A burner of our houses, and of us,
A Paracide of Wife, and Mother.

Tigel: Villain do know where, and of whom thou speakst?

Nero: Have you but one death for him, let it be
A feeling one (Tigellinus) be it
Thy charge, and let me see thee witty in it.

Tigell: Come sirrah
We Will see how stoutly you will stretch out your neck.

Flaui: Would thou durst strike as stoutly, Ex. Tig. and Flau:

Nero: And what is he th^re?

Epaph: One that in whispering oreheard
What pity 'twas, my Lord, that Piso died.

Nero: And why wast pity sirrah, Piso died?

Young: My Lord 'twas pity he deserved to die.

Poppae: How much this youth, my Otho does resemble;
Otho, my first, my best love, who is now
(Under pretext of governing) exyl'd
To Lucitania, honorably banished.

Nero: Well, if you be so passionate,
I Will make you spend your pity on your Prince,
And good men, not on traitors.

Young: The Gods forbid my Prince should pity need.
Somewhat, the sad remembrance did me stir
Oath frail and weak condition of our kind,
Somewhat his greatness; then whom yesterday,
The world, but Caesar could show nothing higher;
Besides, some virtues, and some worth he had,
That might excuse my pity, to an end
So cruel, and unripe.

Poppae: I know not how this stranger moves my mind,
His face me thinks is not like other men's,
Nor do they speak thus; Oh, his words invade
My weakened senses, and overcome my heart.

Nero: Your pity shows, your favor and your will
Which side you are inclinde too, had your power,
You can but pity, else should Caesar fear,
Your ill affection then shall punished be.
Take him to execution, he shall die,
That the death pities of mine enemy.

Young: This benefit at least.
Sad death shall give, to free me from the power
Of such a government; and if I die
For pitying humane chance, and Pisoes end,
There will be some too, that will pity mine.

Poppa: O what a dauntlesse look, what sparkling eyes,
Threating in suffering; sure some noble blood
Is hid in rags, fears argues a base spirit
In him what courage, and contempt of death,
And shall I suffer one I love to die?
He shall not die? hands of this man, away,
Nero, thou shall not kill this guiltless man.

Nero: He guiltless, strumpet. Spurns her and Poppaa falls.
She Is in love with the smo^th face of the boy.

Neoph. Alas my Lord you have slain her.

Epaph: Help she dies.

Nero: Poppaa, Poppaa, speak, I am not angry,
I did not mean to hurt thee, speak sweet love.

Neoph: She Is dead my Lord.

Nero: Fetch her again, she shall not die,
I Will open the Iron gates of hell,
And break the imprisond shadows of the deep,
And force from death this far too worthy pray,
She is not dead.
The crimson red, that like the morning shone,
When from her windows, (all with Roses strewde,)
She peepeth forth forsakes not yet her ch^ekes,
Her breath, that like a hony-suckle smelt
twining about the prickled Eglintine,
Yet moves her lipes; those quick, and piercing eyes,
That did in beauty challenge heavens eyes
Yet shine as they were wont: O no they do not,
See how they grow obscure: O see, they close,
And cease to take, or give light to the world.
What stars so ere you are assured to grace
The firmament, (for lo the twinkling fires
Together throng, and that clear milky space
Of storms, and Phiades, and thunder void,
Prepares your room,) do not with wry aspect
Look on your Nero, who in blood shall mourn
Your lucklesse fate; And many a breathing soul,
Send after you to wait upon their Queen;
This shall begin, the rest shall follow after,
And fill the streets with outcryes, and with slaughter. Ex.

Enter Seneca, with two of his friends. Senec: What means your mourning, this
ungrateful sorrow?
Where are your precepts of Philosophy?
Where our prepared resolution,
So many years fore-studied against danger?
To whom is Neroes cruelty unknown?
Or what remained after mothers blood,
But his instructers death? Leave, leave these tears,
Death from me nothing takes, but what is a burden,
A clog, to that free spark of Heavenly fire:
But that in Seneca, the which you loved,
Which you admired, does, and shall still remain
Secure of death, untouched of the grave.

1. Friend. We Will not belie our tears, we wail not thee,
It is our selves, and our own loss we grieve;
To thee, what loss in such a change can be,
Virtue is pai^ her due, by death alone;
To our own losses do we give these tears,
That loose thy love, thy boundless knowledge loose,
Loose the vnpatternd sample of thy virtue,
L^ose whatsoeu'r may praise, or sorrow move;
In all these losses, yet of this we glory,
That it is thy happiness that makes us sorry.

2. Friend. If there be any place for Ghosts of good men,
If (as we have bin long taught) great men's souls
Consume not with their bodies, thou shall see,
(Looking from out the dwellings of the air)
True duties to thy memory performed;
Not in the outward pomp of funeral,
But in remembrance of thy deeds, and words,
The often recalling of thy many virtues,
The Tomb, that shall the eternal relickes keep
Of Seneca, shall be his hearers hearts.

Senec: Be not afraid my soul, go cheerfully,
To thy own Heaven, from whence it first let down,
Thou loath by this imprisoning flesh putst on,
Now lifted up, thou ravished shall behold
The truth of things, at which we wonder here,
And foolishly do wrangle on beneath;
And like a God shall walk the spacious air,
And see what even to conceit's denied.
Great soul oth' world, that through the parts defus'd
Of this vast All, guid'st what thou do inform;
You blessed minds, that from the Pbeares you move,
Look on men's actions not with idle eyes;
And Gods we go to, Aaid me in this strife,
And combat of my flesh, that ending, I
May still show Seneca, and my self die.

Exeunt. Enter Antonius, Enanthe. Anto: Sure this message of the Princes,
So grievous and unlooked for, will appall
Petronius much.

Enan: Will not death any man?

Anto: It will; but him so much the more,
That having lived to his pleasure; shall forgo
So delicate a life, I do not marvel
That Seneoa, and such sour fellows, can
Leave that they neu'r tasted: But when we
That have the Nectar of thy kisses felt,
That drinks away the troubles of this life,
And but one banquet make of forty years,
Must come to leave this: but soft, here he is.

Enter Petroneus, and a Centurion. Petron: Leave me a while, Centurion to my
friends,
Let me my farewell take, and thou shall see,
Neroes commandment quickly obaid in me. ex. Centurion.
Come let us drink, and dash the posts with wine*
Here throw your flowers; fill me a swelling bowl,
Such as Mecenas, or my Lucan drank
On Virgills birth day.

Enan: What means (Petroneus) this unseasonable,
And causeless mirth? Why, comes not from the Prince
This man to you, a messenger of death,

Petro: Here fair Enanthe, whose plumpe ruddy cheek
Exceeds the grape, it makes this; here my g^yrle. He drinks.
And think thou death, a matter of such harm,
Why, he must have this pretty dimpling chin,
And will pecke out those eyes that now so wound.

Enan: Why, is it not the extremest of all il^s?

Petro: It is indeed the last, and end of ills;
The Gods, before th'would let us taste deaths Joys,
Placed us ith toil, and sorrows of this world,
Because we should perceive th'amends, and thank them,
Death, the grim knave, but leads you to the door,
Where entered once, all curious pleasures come
To meet, and welcome you.
A troop of beauteous Ladies from whose eyes,
Love, thousand arrows, thousand graces shootes;
Puts forth their fair hands to you, and inuites
To their green arbours, and close shadowed walls,
Whence, banished is the roughness of our years:
Only the west wind blows; Ith ever Spring,
And ever Summer: There the laden bows
Offer their tempting burdens to your hand,
Doubtful your eye, or taste inuiting more:
There every man his own desires enioyes;
Fair Lucrese lies, by lusty Tarquins side,
And wooes him now again to ravish her.
Nor us, (though Roman) Lais will refuse,
To Corinth any man may go; no mask,
No envious garment does those beauties hide,
Which Nature made, so moving, to be spide,
But in bright Crystal, which does supply all,
And white transparent vailes they are attyr'd,
Through which the pure snow underneath does shine;
(Can it be snow, from whence such flames arise?)
Mingled with that fair company, shall we
On banks of Violets, and of Hiacinths
Of loves devising, sit, and gently sport,
And all the while melodious Music hear,
And Poets songs, that Music far exceed
The old Anaicean crowned with smyling flowers,
And amorous Sapho, on her Lesbian Lute
B^a^ties sweet Sca^res, and Cupids godhead sing,

Anto: What, be not ravished with thy fancies, do not
Court nothing nor make love unto our fears.

Petro: ^st nothing that I say?

Anto: But empty words.

Petro: Why, thou requir'st some instance of the eye,
Will thou go with me then, and see that world?
Which either will return thy old delights;
Or square thy appetite anew to theirs.

Anto: Nay; I had rather far believe thee here,
Others ambition such discoueries seek;
Faith, I am satisfied with the base delights
Of common men; A wench, a house I have,
And of my own a garden, I Will not change,
For all your walks, and Ladies, and rare fruits.

Petro: Your pleasures must of force resign to these,
In vain you shun the sword, in vain the sea,
In vain is Nero feared, or flatered;
Hither you must, and leave your purchased houses,
Your new made garden, and your black browd wife,
And of the trees thou have so quaintly set;
Not one, but the displeasant Cipresse shall
Go with thee.

Anton: Faith it is true, we must at length,
But yet Petroneus, while we may, awhile
We would enoioy them, those we have, we are sure of,
When that you talk of 's doubfull, and to come.

Petro: Perhaps thou think to live yet twenty years,
Which may unlooked for be cut off, as mine,
If not, to endless time compared, is nothing
What you endure must ever, endure now;
Nor stay not, to be last at table set,
Each best day of our life at first does go,
To them succeeds diseased age, and woe;
Now die your pleasures, and the days your pray
Your rimes, and loves, and jests will take away.
Therefore my sweet, yet thou will go with me,
And not live here, to what thou would not see.

Enan: Would y'haue me then kill my self, and die,
And go I know not to what places there.

Petro: What places do thou fear?
The'll favored lake they tell thee thou must pass.
And thy black frogs that croake about the brim.

Enan: O pardon Sir, though death affrights a woman;
Whose pleasures, though you timely here divine,
The pains we know, and see,

Petron: The pain is life's, death rids that pain away,
Come boldly, there is no danger in this foord,
Children pass through it: If it be a pain,
You have this comfort, that you past it are.

Enan: Yet all as w^ll as I, are loath to die.

Petro^ Judge them by deed, you see them do it apace

Enan: I, but it is loathly, and against their wills.

Petro. Yet, know you not that any being dead,
Repen^ed them, and would have lived again,
They then there errors saw, and foolish prayers,
But you are blinded in the love of life,
Death is but sweet to them that do approach it
To me as one that taken with Delphick rage,
When the divining God his breast does fill,
He sees what others cannot standing by,
It seems a beauteous, and a pleasant thing;
Where is my deaths Physician?

Phisi: Here my Lord.

Petro: Art ready?

Phisi: I my Lord.

Petro; And I for thee:
Nero, my end shall mock thy tyranny. Exeun^^

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Nero, Nimphidius Tigellinus, Neophilus, Epaporoditus, and other
attendants. Nero: ENough is wept, Poppaea, for thy death,
Enough is bled, so many tears of others
Wailing their losses have wipt mine away
Who in the common funeral of the world
Can mourn on death?

Tigell: Besides, your Majesty this benefit
In their diserued punishment shall reap
From all attempts hereafter to be freed,
Conspiracy is now for ever dashed,
Tumult suppressed, rebellion out of heart;
In Pisoes death, danger it self did die.

Nymph: Piso that thought to climb by bowing down,
By giving a way to thrive, and raising others
To become great himself, has now by death
Given quiet to your thoughts, and fear to theirs
That shall from treason their advancement plot;
Those dangerous heads, that his ambition leand on,
And they by it crept up, and from their meannesse
Thought in this stir to rise aloft, are off:
Now peace, and safety wait upon your throne;
Security has walled your seat about,
There is no place for fear left.

Nero: Why, I never feared them.

Nymph: That was your fault.
Your Majesty must give us leave to blame
Your dangerous courage, and that noble soul
Too prodigal of it self.

Nero: A Princes mind knows neither fear, nor hope,
The beams of royal Majesty are such,
As all eyes are with it amazed, and weakened,
But it with nothing; I at first contemned
Their weak devises, and faint enterprise:
Why, thought they against him to have prevailed,
Whose childhood was from Messalinas spite
By Dragons, (that the earth gave up) preserved,
Such guard my cradle had; for fate had then
Pointed me out, to be what now I am.
Should all the Legions, and the provinces
In one united, against me conspire:
I could disperce them withone angry eye.
My brow's an host of men; Come Tigellinus,
Let turn this bloody banquet, Piso meant us,
Unto a merry feast, we will drink and challenge
Fortune; whose that Neophilus?

Enter a Roman. Neoph: A Currier from beyond the Alps my Lord.

Nero: News of some German victory belike,
Or Britton overthrow.

Neoph: The Letters come from France.

Nimp: Why smiles your Majesty?

Nero: So I smile, I should be afraid there is one
In Arms Nimphidius.

Nimp: What armed against your Majesty?

Nero: Our Lieuetenant of the Province, Julius Vindex.

Tigell: Who, that guiddy Frenchman?

Nimp: His Province is disarmed my Lord, he has
No legion, not a soldier under him.

Epaph: One that by blood, and rapine would repair
His state consumed in vanities, and lust.

Enter another Roman. Tigell: He would not find out three to follow him.

A mess: More news my Lord.

Nero: Is it of Vindex that thou have to say?

Mess: Vindex is up, and with him France in Arms.
The Noble men, and people throng to the cause,
Money, and Armor, Cities do confer,
The country does send in provision
Young men bring bodies, old men lead them forth,
Ladies do coin their Jewels into pay,
The sickle now is framed into a sword,
And drawing horses are to manage taught,
France nothing does but war, and fury breath.

Nero: All this fierce talk's, but Vindex does rebel,
And I will hang him.

Tigell. How long came you forth after the former messenger.

Mess: Four days, but by the benefit of sea,
and weather, am arrived with him.

Neoph. How strong was Vindex at your coming forth?

Mess: He was esteemed a hundred thousand.

Tigell: Men enough,

Nymph. And soldiers few enough.
Tumultuary troops, vndisciplin'd,
Vntrain'd in service, to wast victuals good,
But when they come to look on wars black wounds,
And but a far off see the face of death.

Nero: It falls out for my empty coffers well,
The spoil of such a large and goodly Province,
Enricht with trade, and long enjoyed peace.

Tigell: What order will your Majesty have taken
For leuying forces to suppress this stir?

Nero: What order should we take? we will laugh, and drink,
Think thou it fit my pleasures be disturbed
When any Frenchman list to break his neck?
They have not heard of Pisoes Fortune yet,
Let that Tale fight with them.

Nymph. What order needs: your Majesty shall find
This French heat quickly of it self grow cold.

Nero. Come away.
Nothing shall come that this nights sport shall stay.

Ex. Ner. Manet Neophilus, Epaphroditus. Neoph. I wonder what makes him so
confident
In this revolt now grown unto a war,
And ensigns in the field, when in the other,
Being but a plot of a conspiracy,
He showed himself so wretchedly dismayed,

Epaph. Faith, the right nature of a coward to set light
Dangers that seem far off. Piso was here,
Ready to enter at the Presence doote,
And dragge him out of his abused chair,
And then he trembled; Vindex is in France,
And many woods, and seas, and hills between.

Neoph. It Was strange that Piso was so soon suppressed,

Epaph: Strange, strange indeed, for had he but come up,
And taken the Court, in that affright and stir,
While vnresolu'd for whom, or what to do,
Each on the other had in jealousy
(While as apaled Majesty not yet
Had time to set the countenance) he would
Have hazarded the royal seat.

Neoph: Nay, had it without hazard; all the Court
Had for him bin, and those disclosed their love,
And favor in the cause, which now to hide,
And color their good meanings ready were
To show their forwardness against it most.

Epaph: But for a stranger with a naked province,
Without allies, or friends in the sta^e to challenge
A Prince vpheld with thirty Legions
Rooted in four discents of Ancestors,
And fourteen years continuance of reign,
Why it is --

Enter Nero, Nimphidius, Tigellinus to them. ex Nor Nymph: Nero: Galba and
Spain, what Spain and Gala too?

Epaph: I pray thee Tigellinus, what furie's this?
What strange event, what accident has thus
Orecast your countenances?

Tigell. Down we were set at table, and began
With sparckling bowls to chase our fears away,
And mirth and pleasure looked out of our eyes;
When lo a breathless messenger comes in
And tells how Vindex, and the powers of France
Have Segius Galba chosen Emperor,
With what applause the Legions him receive,
That Spaines revolted; Portingale has joined;
As much suspected is of Germany;
But Nero, not abiding out the end,
Orethrew the tables, dashed against the ground
The cup which he so much you know esteemed;
Teareth his hair, and with incensed rage
Curses false men, and Gods the lookers on.

Neoph: His rage we saw was wild and desperate.

Epaph: O you unsearched wisdoms, which do laugh,
At our security, and fears alike;
And plain to show our weakness, and your power
Make us contemn the harms, which surest strike
When you our glories, and our pride undo,
Our overthrow you make rediculous too. exeunt.
Enter Nimphidius solus. Slow making counsels, and the sliding year
Have brought me to the long foreseen destruction
Of this misled young man; his State is shaken,
And I will push it on; revolted France;
Nor the coniured Provinces of Spain,
Nor his own guilt, shall like to me oppress him;
I to his easy yielding fears proclaim
New German mutenys, and all the world
Rowsing it self in hate of Neroes name;
I his distracted counsels do disperce
With fresh despaires, I animate the Senate
And the people, to engage them past recall
In prejudice of Nero, and in brief,
Perish he must, the fates and I resolve it;
Which to effect, I presently will go,
Proclaim a Donatiue in Galbaes name.

Enter Antoneus to him. Anton: Yonder Is Nimphidius our Commander, now,
I with respect must speak, and smooth my brow;
Captain all ^aile.

Nimp: Antoneus well met,
Your place of Tribune in this Anarchi.

Anton: This Anarchy my Lord, i^ Nero dead?

Nymph: This Anarchy, this yet vnstiled time,
While Galba is un eased of the Empire
Which Nero h^^h forsook.

Anton: Has Nero then resigned the Empire?

Nymph: In effect he has, for he is fled to Egypt.

Anton: My Lord you tell strange news to me,

Nymph: But nothing strange to me,
Who every moment, knew of his despaires,
The Curriers came so fast with fresh alarmes
Of new reuolts, that he unable quite
To bear his fears, which he had long concealed,
Is now reuoulted from himself, and fled.

Anto: Thrust with reports, and rumors from his seat.
My Lord you know the Camp depends on you
As you determine.

Nymph: There it lies Antonius,
What should we do, it boots not to rely
On Neroes stinking fortunes, and to sit
Securely looking on, were to receive
An Emperor from Spain; which how disgraceful
It were to us, who if we weigh our selves
The most material accessions are
Of all the Roman Empire, which disgrace
To cover we must join our selves betimes,
And thereby seem to have created Gabba;
Therefore I Will straight proclaim a Donatiue,
Of thirty thousand sisterces a man.

Anto: I think so great a gift was never heard of.
Galba they say is frugally inclinde,
Will he avow so great a gift as this?

Nymph: How ere he like of it, he must avow it,
If by our promise he be once engaged;
And since the soldiers care belongs to me,
I will have care of them, and of their good.
Let them thank me, if I through this occasion
Procure for them so great a donatiue. Ex: Nimp:

Anton: So you be thankt, it skils not who prevail,
Galba, or Nero, traitor to them both;
You give it out that Neroes fled to Egypt,
Who with the frights of your repotts amazed,
By our device, does lurk for better news,
Whilst you ineuitably do betray him,
Works he all this for Galba then? not so
I have long seen his climbing to the Empire
By secret practices of gracious women,
And other instruments of the late Court,
That was his love to het that me refused;
And now by this he would give the soldiers favor;
Now is the time to quit Poppaeas scorn,
And his rivallity; I Will straight reveal
His treacheries, to Galbaes agents here. Exit:

Enter Tigellinus with the Guard. Tigell: You see what issue things do sort
unto,
Yet may we hope not only impunitie,
But with our fellows part oth' gift proclaimed.

Nero meets them. Nero: Whether go you, stay my friends;
It Is Caesar calls you, stay my loving friends.

Tigell: We were his slaves, his footstooles, and must crouch;
But now, with such observance to his feet,
It is his misery that calls us friends.

Nero. And moves you not the misery of a Prince?
O stay my friends, stay, harken to the voice
Which once ye knew.

Tigell: Hark to the peoples cries,
Hark to the streets, that Galba, Galba ring.

Nero: The people may forsake me without blame,
I did them wrong to make you rich, and great,
I took their houses to bestow on you:
Treason in them has name of liberty,
Your fault has no excuse, you are my fault,
And the excuse of others treachery.

Tigell: Shall we with staying seem his tyrannies
TO uphold, as if we were in love with them?
We are excused unless we stay too long,
As forced Ministers, and apart of wrong. ex. preter Nero.

Nero: O now I see the vizard from my face
So lovely, and so fearful is fallen off
That vizard, shadow, nothing (Majesty)
(Which like a child acquainted with his fears,
But now men trembled at, and now contemn*
Nero forsaken is of all the world.
The world of truth; O fall some vengeance down
Equal unto their falsehoods, and my wrongs;
Might I accept the Chariot of the Sun.
And like another Phaeton consume
In flames of all the world; a pile of Death
Worthy the state, and greatness I have lost.
Or were I now but Lord of my own fires,
Wherein false Rome yet once again might smoke,
And perish, all unpitied of her Gods,
That all things in their last destruction might
Perform a funeral honor to their Lord.
O love dissolve with Caesar, Caesar's world;
Or you whom Nero rather should inuoake
Black Chaes, and you fearful shapes beneath,
That with a long, and not vain envy have
Sought to destroy this work of the other Gods;
Now let your darkness cease the spoils of day,
And the worlds first contention end your strife.

Enter two Romans to him. 1 Rom: Though others, bound with greater benefits
Have left your changed fortunes and do run
Whither new hopes do call them, yet come we.

Nero: O welcome, come you to adversity,
Welcome true friends, why there is faith on earth.
Of thousand servants, friends, and followers;
Yet two are left: your countenance me thinks
Gives comfort, and new hopes

2 Rom: Do not deceive your thoughts,
My Lord we bring no comfort, would we could;
But the last duty to perform, and best
We ever shall, a free death to persuade,
To cut off hopes of fearcer cruelty,
And scorn, more cruel to a worthy soul.

1 Rom: The Senate have decreed you're punishable,
After the fashion of our ancestors;
Which is; your neck being locked in a forke
You must be naked whipped, and scourged to death.

Nero: The Senate thus decreed? they that so often
My virtues flattered have, and gifts of mine,
My government prefert'd to ancient times,
And challenge Numa to compare with me;
Have they so horrible an end sought out?
No, here I bear which shall prevent such shame,
This hand shall yet from that deliver me,
And faithful be alone unto his Lord.
Alas how sharp, and terrible is death;
O must I die, must now my senses close,
For ever die, and nere return again,
Never more see the Sun, nor Heaven, nor Earth?
Whither go I? what shall I be anon;
What horred journey wandrest thou my soul,
Under the earth, in dark, dampe, duskie vaults?
Or shall I now to nothing be resolved?
My fears become my hopes, O would I might.
Me thinks I see the boiling Phlegeton,
And the dull poole, feared of them we fear,
The dread, and terror of the Gods themselves,
The furies armed with linkes, with whippes, with snakes,
And my own furies far more mad then they;
My mother, and those troops of slaughtred friends,
And now the Judge is brought unto the throne,
That will not leave unto authority,
Nor favor the oppressions of the great

1 Rom: These are the idle terrors of the night,
Which wise men (though they teach, do not believe)
To curb our pleasures feign, and aid the weak.

2 Rom: Deaths wrongful defamation, which would make
Us shun this happy haven of our rest,
This end of evils; as some fearful harm.

1 Romans Shadows, and fond imaginations,
Which now you see on earth; but children fear.

2 Rom: Why should our faults fear punishment from them,
What do the actions of this life concern
The the other world, with which is no commerce?

1 Rom: Would Heaven, and Stars, necessity compel
Us to do that, which after it would punish?

2 Rom: Let us not after our lives end believe
More then you felt before it.

Nero: If any words have made me confident,
And boldly do, for hearing others speak,
Boldly this night; But will you by example
Teach me the truth of your opinion,
And make me see that you believe your selves,
Will you by dying, teach me to bear death
With courage?

1 Rom: No necessity of death
Hangs ore our heads, no dangers threatens us,
Nor Senates sharp decree, nor Galbaes arms.

2 Rom: Is this the thanks then thou do pay our love?
Die basely as such a life deserved;
Reserve thy self to punishment, and scorn
Of Rome, and of thy laughing enemies. exeunt.

Manet Nero. Nero: They hate me, cause I would but live, what was it
You loved kind friends, and came to see my death;
Let me endure all torture, and reproach
That earth, or Galbaes anger can inflict:
Yet hell, and Rodamanth are more pitiless.

The first Roman to him. Rom: Though not deserved, yet once ^gaine I come,
To warn thee to take pity on thy self;
The troops by the Senate sent, descend the hill
And come.

Nero: To take me, and to whip me unto death:
O whither shall I fly?

Rom: Thou have no choice.

Nero: O hither must I fly, hard is his hap,
Who from death only must by death escape,
Where are they yet? O may I not a little
Bethink my self?

Rom: They are at hand; hark, thou may hear the noise.

Nero: O Rome farewell farewell you Theaters,
Where I so often, with popular applause
In song; and action; O they come I die. He falls on his sword.

Rom: So base an end all just commiseration
Does take away, yet what we do now spurn,
The morning Sun saw fearful to the world.

Enter some of Galbaes friends, Antoneus and others, with Nimphidius bound.
Gal: You both shall die together, Traitors both,
He to the common wealth, and thou to him,
And worse, to a good Prince; what, is he dead?
Has fear encouraged him, and made him thus,
Prevent our punishment; then die with him.
Fall thy aspyring at thy Masters feet. He kills Nymph:

Anton: Who though he justly perished, yet by thee
Deserved it not, nor ended there thy treason;
But even thought oth' Empire, thou conceiu'st
Galbaes disgrace in receiving that
Which the son of Nimphidia could hope.

Rom: Thus great bad men above them find a rod:
People depart, and say there is a God.

Exeunt. FJNJS.

