24. of August. 1578.

A discourse of the present state of the Wars in the low Countries.

Wherein is contained the pitiful Spoil of Askot: And the Articles of Peace
to be concluded between the States, and Don John de Austrea.



The pitiful Spoil of Askot, by Don Joan de Austria.
I May not seem so ungrateful unto you my louinge freinde, in recompense of
your great benefits which I have sundry ways received from you, as not to
certify you of all such occurantes as here are reddy past. But from time to
time, God lending me life, I mind still as just occasion shall serve to
signifye unto you how things here shall pass. You understand that on the syxt
day of this month of August, how that the Vicount of Gaunt (understanding
that Don John his forces were retired toward Louin) beseeged Askot with three
thousand Soldiers and 2. great pieces of Ordinance, and put to the Sword
200. Alboneys, and 500. Almaynes and VVallons, Soldiers, who were there in
garrison, which when the Vicunt of Gaunt (had by the valiancye of English men
and the Sckots slain so many before specifyed) gave commandment that neither
Burger nor Inhabitant should be hurt, only their goods and munition for
war, whose commandment was accomplished, and as it is surely notifyed that
the spoil of that Town is valued too be better worth to the Souldyers then
five thowsande pownde, although the same Town was but of very small
countenance. When this exployte by our Countrymen was fynished they returned
too their Camp again: Which when Don Ihoan had intelligence hereof, he
went in parson to view the same, and found as before is mentioned, being all
bent with furye for that which had happened, gave commandment to kill men,
women, and Children, which was a great number, and a sorrowful sight. Yet
notwithstanding he was not so pacifyed, but also caused the Town to be burnt
and utterly defaced to the ground. Thus my beloved I have certifyed you of the
utter ruin of this little Town.

And furthermore, to let you understand, that on wednesday last, our
Ambassadors departed from Machelen toward Don John, accompanied with certain
Lords of the Country, for the conclusion of a Peace (if it may be) according
to certain Articles which I send you herewith.

We hear not yet what is effected, a murmor of Peace here runs. But yet
greatly doubted: and that all is but practizes, and the French thought to be
all one with Don John.

The French Ambassador is returned, but not heard what he has brought with
him for news, being thought his coming to be rather to get some conclusion
of his message, for the which he came first for his master, to the end he
might be dispatched, then otherwise to venture him self longer here, fearing
the smoother and smooke is so sore seen and smelte, as the flame must needs
ere long, burst out.

The Duke Allonson florysheth at Mons, where he has feasted all the Nobles and
Gentlemen. That place is sure enough for him: other Towns in Henego, will not
yet accept of him.

In Valencine (as men report) they have been in Arms, and fought together, but
wherefore, or who have gotten the better, is not yet here certainly known.

Cassimerus is now in the Camp with his Forces, where the Archduke Mathias
has been: And he met Cassimerus before Leyre, and so returned to the Town,
and dyned together.

Now it is thought, that the Camp shall presently march, either to the
syege of some Town, that Don John holds, or else to follow his sorces,
until they meet with him.

There is money, Municion, and all other kind of Furniture, sent to the Camp
of the States to maintain the Soldiers the better.

Don John for certain, has a great number of Spaniardes, and Italians,
coming unto him, which by report has been seen Marching in Piemont, and are
about right, or ten thousand.

The.13. of Augu. 1578.
The Articles which are given by the States to the Ambassadors of the Queens
Majesty of England, and certain other Lords of the Country, by them to be
agreede upon, with Don John de Austrea, between the.22. of August, and the.3.
of September next.1578.

IN Primis, to forgette all that is past.

To confirm or allow the administration of the States, from the entering of
the said Don John, in the Castle of Namur.

That he shall depart with his Adherentes and Allies, except those of the
Country.

To render the Provinces, or Countries into the hands of the States.

That within this month of August, he shall render and restore the Cities on
this side the Mase: that is; Deuenter; L^^borche, and Remmond.

The Duke Mathias shall remain Governor.

The States in general, and particular, shall hold and keep their
aucthorities, under the obeysaunce and homage of his Majesty.

Those of Burgondy and Luxenbaurge shall be bound to maintain the
pacifycation of Gaunt.

Touching the Religion, men shall govern them selves after the best manner as
shall be possible, according to the necessytie of the Countries, and
Provinces shall require.

An Prisoners to be released.

No Governor to be put in these Countries, without the consent of the States.

That the Princes, and others confederated, shall be comprehended in the Peace.

Imprinted by VV. B.


