A PLEASANT Comedy, called Summers last will and Testament.

Written by Thomas Nash.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, for Water Burre. 1600.

SVMMERS last will and Testament.
Enter Will Summers in his fools coat but half on, coming out.
NOctem peccatis, and fraudibus obiice nubem. There is no such fine time to
play the knave in, as the night. I am a Goose or a Ghost at least; for what
with turmoyle of getting my fools apparel, and care of being perfect, I am
sure I have not yet supt to night. Will Summers Ghost I should be, come to
present you with Summers last will, and Testament. Be it so, if my cousin Ned
will lend me his Chain and his Fiddle. Other stately pac't Prologues use to
attire themselves within: I that have a toy in my head, more then ordinary, and
use to go without money, without garters, without girdle, without a hat-band,
without points to my hose, without a knife to my dinner, and make so much use
of this word without, in every thing, will here dress me without. Dick Huntley
cries, Begin, begin: and all the whole house, For shame come away; when I had
my things but now brought me out of the Lawndry. God forgive me, I did not see
my Lord before. I Will set a good face on it, as though what I had talked idly all
this while, were my part. So it is, boni viri, that one fool presents another;
and I a fool by nature, and by art, do speak to you in the person of the
Idiot our Playmaker. He like a Foppe and an Ass, must be making himself a
public laughing stock, and have no thank for his labor; where other
Magisterij, whose invention is far more exquisite, are content to sit still,
and do nothing. I Will show you what a scuruy Prologue he had made me in an old
vain of similitudes: if you be good fellows, give it the hearing, that you
may judge of him thereafter.

The Prologue.

AT a solemn feast of the Triumuiri in Rome, it was seen and observed, that
the birds ceased to sing, and sat solitary on the house tops, by reason of
the sight of a painted Serpent set openly to view. So fares it with us nouices,
that here betray our imperfections: we, afraid to look on the imaginary
serpent of Envy, painted in men's affections, have ceased to tune any music of
mirth to your ears this tweluemonth, thinking, that as it is the nature of the
serpent to hiss: so childhood and ignorance would play the goslings,
contemning, and condemning what they understood not. Their censures we wey not,
whose senses are not yet vnswadled. The little minutes will be continually
striking, though no man regard them. Whelps will bark, before they can see,
and strive to byte, before they have teeth. Politianus speaks of a beast,
who, while he is cut on the table, drinks, and represents the motions and
voices of a living creature. Such like foolish beasts are we, who, whilst we
are cut, mocked, and flowted at, in every man's common talk, will
notwithstanding proceed to shame our selves, to make sport. No man pleases
all, we seek to please one. Didymus wrote four thousand books, or as some
say, six thousand, of the art of Grammar. Our Author hopes, it may be as
lawful for him to write a thousand lines of as light a subject. Socrates (whom
the Oracle pronounced the wisest man of Greece) sometimes daunced. Scipio and
Lelius by the seaside played at peeble-stone. Semel insaniuimus omnes. Every
man cannot, with Archimedes, make a heaven of brass, or dig gold out of the
iron mines of the law. Such odd trifles, as Mathematicians experiments be,
Artificial flies to hang in the air by themselves, daunsing balls, an
egge-shell that shall clyme up to the top of a spear, fiery breathing goares,
Poetae noster professes not to make. Placeat sibi quisque heebit. What Is a
fool but his babble? Deep reaching wits, here is no deep stream for you to
angle in. Moralizers, you that wrest a never meant meaning, out of every thing,
applying all things to the present time, keep your attention for the common
Stage: for here are no quips in Characters for you to read. Vain glozers,
gather what you will. Spite, spell backwards, what thou can. As the Parthians
fight, flying away: so will we prate and talk, but stand to nothing that we
say.

How say you, my masters, do you not laugh at him for a Coxcombe? Why, he has
made a Prologue longer then his Play: nay, it is no Play neither, but a show.
I Will be sworn, the sigge of Rowlands God-sonne, is a Giant in comparison of it.
What can be made of Summers last will and Testament? Such another thing, as
Cyllian of Braynfords will, where she bequeathed a score of farts amongst her
friends. Forsooth, because the plague reigns in most places in this latter end
of summer, Summer must come in sick: he must call his officers to account,
yield his throne to Autumn, make Winter his Executour, with tittle tattle Tom
boy: God give you good night in Watling street. I care not what I say now: for
I play no more then you hear; and some of that you heard to (by your leave)
was extempore. He were as good have let me had the best part: for I Will be
revenged on him to the uttermost, in this person of Will Summer, which I have
put on to play the Prologue, and mean not to put off, till the play be done.
I Will sit as a Chorus, and flowte the Actors and him at the end of every Scene:
I know they will not interrupt me, for fear of marring of all: but look to
your cues, my masters; for I intend to play the knave in cue, and put you
besides all your parts, if you take not the better heed. Actors, you Rogues,
come away, clear your throats, blow your noses, and wype your mouths e're
you enter, that you may take no occasion to spit or to cough, when you are non
plus. And this I bar over and besides, That none of you stroke your beardes,
to make action, play with your cod-piece points, or stand fumbling on your
buttom, when you know not how to bestow your fingers. Serve God, and act
cleanly; a fit of mirth, and an old song first, if you will.

Enter Summer, leaning on Autumnes and Winters shoulders, and attended on with
a train of Satyrs, and wood-Nymphs, singing. Fair Summer droops, droope men
and beasts therefore:
So fair a summer look for never more.
All good things vanish, less then in a day,
Peace, plenty, pleasure suddenly decay.
Go not yet away bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou lean'st to appear.
What, shall those flowers that decked thy garland erst,
Upon thy grave be wastfully dispersed?
O trees, consume your sap in sorrows sourse.
Streams, turn to tears your tributary course.
Go not yet hence, bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou leau'st to appear.

The Satyrs and wood-Nymphs go out singing, and leave Summer and Winter and
Autumn on the stage. Will. Summer. A couple of pratty boys, if they would
wash their faces, and were well breecht an hour or two. The rest of the green
men have reasonable voices, good to sing catches, or the great Iowben by the
fires side, in a winters evening. But let us hear what Summer can say for
himself, why he should not be hist at.


Summer. What pleasure always lasts: no joy endures:
Summer I was, I am not as I was:
Harvest and age have whit'ned my green head:
On Autumn now and Winter must I lean.
Needs must he fall, whom none but foes uphold.
Thus must the happiest man have his black day.
Omnibus vna manes nox, and calcanda semel via laethi.
This month have I layne languishing a bed,
Looking each hour to yield my life, and throne;
And did I had in deed unto the earth,
But that Eliza Englands beauteous Queen,
On whom all seasons prosperously attend,
Forbad the execution of my fate,
Until her joyful progress was expired.
For her does Summer live, and linger here,
And wishes long to live to her content:
But wishes are not had when they wish well.
I must depart, my death-day is set down:
To these two must I leave my wheaten crown.
So unto unthrifts rich men leave their lands,
Who in an hour consume long labors gaynes.
True is it that diuinest Sidney sung,
O, he is mard, that is for others made.
Come near, my friends, for I am near my end.
In presence of this Honorable train,
Who love me (for I patronize their sports)
Mean I to make my final Testament:
But first I Will call my officers to count,
And of the wealth I gave them to dispose,
Know what is left. I may know what to give
Vertumnus then, that turnst the year about.
Summon them one by one to answer me,
First Ver, the spring, unto whose custody
I have committed more then to the rest:
The choice of all my fragrant meades and flowers,
And what delights soever nature affords.

Vertum. I will, my Lord. Ver, lusty Ver, by the name of lusty Ver, come into
the court, lose a mark in issues.

Enter Ver with his train, ouerlayd with suites of green moss, representing
short grass, singing. The Song.
Spring, the sweet spring, is the years pleasant King,
Then bloomes each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold does not sting, the pretty birds do sing,
Cuckoo, judge, judge, pu we, to witta woo.
The Palm and May make country houses gay.
Lambs friske and play, the Shep herds pype all day,
And we hear aye, birds tune this merry lay,
Cuckoo, judge, judge, pu we, to witta woo.
The fields breathe sweet, the dayzies kiss our feet,
Young lovers meet, old wives a sunning sit:
In every street, these tunes our ears do greet,
Cuckoo, judge, judge, pu we, to witta woo.
Spring the sweet spring.

Will Summer. By my troth, they have voices as clear as Crystal: this is a
pratty thing, if it be for nothing but to go a begging with.


Summers: Believe me, Ver, but thou art pleasant bent,
This humor should import a harmless mind:
Know thou the reason why I sent for thee?

Ver. No faith, nor care not, whether I do or no.
If you will dance a Galliard, so it is: if not, Falangtado, Falangtado, to
wear the black and yellow: Falangtado, Fala^gtado, my mates are gone, I Will
follow.


Summer. Nay, stay a while, we must confer and talk.
Ver, call to mind I am thy sovereign Lord,
And what thou have, of me thou have, and holdst.
Unto no other end I sent for thee.
But to demand a reckoning at thy hands,
How well or ill thou have imployd my wealth.

Ver. If that be all, we will not disagree.
A clean trencher and a napkin you shall have presently.

Will Summer. The truth is, this fellow has bin a tapster in his days.

Ver goes in, and fetches out the Hobby horse and the morris dance, who
dance about.
Summer. How now? is this the reckoning we shall have?

Winter. My Lord, he does abuse you: brook it not.

Autumn. Summa totalis I fear will prove him but a fool.

Ver. About, about, lively, put your horse to it, reyne him harder, ierke him
with your wand, sit fast, sit fast, man; focle, hold up your ladle there.


Will Summer. O brave hall! O, well said, butcher. Now for the credit of
Wostershire. The finest set of Morris-dauncers that is between this and
Stretham: mary, me thinks there is one of them dau^ceth like a Clothyers horse,
with a wool-pack on his back. You friend with the Hobbyhorse, go not too
fast, for fear of wearing out my Lords tyle-stones with your hob-nayles.


Ver. So, so, so, trot the ring twice over, and away. May it please my Lord,
this is the grand capital sum, but there are certain parcels behind, as you
shall see.


Summer. Nay, nay, no more; for this is all too much.

Ver. Content your self, we will have variety.
Here enter 3. Clownes, and 3. maids, singing this song, daunsing. Trip and
go, heave and hoe,
Up and down to and fro,
From the town, to the grove,
Two, and two, let us roue
A Maying, a playing:
Love has no gainsaying:
So merrily trip and go.

Will Summer. Beshrew my heart, of a number of ill legs, I never saw worse
daunsers: how blessed are you, that the wenches of the parish do not see you!


Summer. Presumptuous Ver, uncivil nurturde boy,
Think I will be derided thus of thee?
Is this the account and reckoning that thou make?

Ver. Troth, my Lord, to tell you plain, I can give you no other account: nam
quae habui, pordidi; what I had, I have spent on good fellows, in these sports
you have seen, which are proper to the Spring, and others of like sort, (as
giving wenches green gowns, making garlands for Fencers, and tricking up
children gay) have I bestowde all my flowery treasure, and flower of my youth.


Will Summer. A small matter. I know one spent in less then a year, eight and
fifty pounds in mustard, and an other that ran in det, in the space of four
or sieve year, above fourteen thousand pound in lute strings and gray paper.


Summer. O monstrous unthrift, who e're heard the like?
The seas vast throat in so short tract of time,
Deuoureth nor consumes half so much.
How well might thou have lived within thy bounds?

Ver. What talk you to me, of living within my bounds? I tell you, none but
Asses live within their bounds: the silly beasts, if they be put in a pasture,
that is eaten bare to the very earth, and where there is nothing to be had but
thistles, will rather fall soberly to those thistles, and be hungerstaru'd,
then they will offer to break their bounds; whereas the lusty courser, if he
be in a barrayne plot, and spy better grass in some pasture near adjoining,
breaks over hedge and ditch, and to go, e're he will be pent in, and not have
his belly full. Peradventure, the horses lately sworn to be stolen, carried
that youthful mind, who, if they had been Asses, would have been yet extant.


Will Summers. Thus we may see, the longer we live, the more we shall learn:
I never thought honesty an ass, till this day.


Ver. This world is transitory, it was made of nothing, and it must to nothing:
wherefore, if we will do the will of our high Creator, (whose will it is,
that it pass to nothing) we must help to consume it to nothing. Gold is more
vile then men: Men dye in thousands, and ten thousands, yea, many times in
hundredth thousands in one battle. If then, the best husband be so liberal
of his best handyworke, to what end should we make much of a glittering
excrement, or doubt to spend at a banquet as many pounds, as he spends men at a
battle? Me thinks I honor Geta the Roman Emperor, for a brave minded
fellow: for he commanded a banquet to be made him of all meats under the
Sun; which were served in after the order of the Alphabet; and the Clarke of
the kitchen following the last dish (which was two mile off from the foremost)
brought him an Index of their several names: Neither did he pingle when it was
set on the board, but for the space of three days and three nights, never rose
from the Table.


Will Summers. O intolerable lying villayne, that was never begotten without
the consent of a whetstone.


Summer. Ungracious man, how fondly he argues!

Ver. Tell me, I pray, wherefore was gold laid under our feet in the veins of
the earth, but that we should contemn it, and tread upon it, and so
consequently tread thrift under our feet? It was not known, till the Iron
age, donec facinus inuasit mortales, as the Poet says; and the Scythians
always detested it. I will prove it, that an unthrift, of any, comes nearest a
happy man, in so much as he comes nearest to beggary. Cicero says, summum
bonum consistes in omnium rerum vacatione, that it is the chiefest felicity
that may be, to rest from all labors. Now, who does so much vacare a rebus,
who rests so much? who has so little to do, as the beggar? Who can sing so
merry a note, as he that cannot change a groate? Cui nil est, nil deest: he
that has nothing, wants nothing. On the other side, it is said of the Carle,
Omnia habeo, nec quicquam habeo: I have all things, yet want every thing. Multi
mihi vitio vertunt, quia egeo, says Marcus Cato in Aulus Gellius, at ego
illis, quia nequeunt egere: Many vpbrayde me, says he, because I am poor: but
I upbraid them, because they cannot live if they were poor. It is a common
proverb, Dinesque miserque, a rich man, and a miserable: nam natura paucis
co^tenta, none so contented as the poor man. Admit that the chiefest happiness
were not rest or ease, but knowledge, as Herillus, Alcidamas, and many of
Socrates followers affirm; why, paupertas omnes perdocot arts, poverty
instructs a man in all arts, it makes a man hardy and venturous; and therefore
it is called of the Poets, Paupertas audax, valiant poverty. It is not so much
subject to inordinate desires, as wealth or prosperity. Non habet vnde suum
paupertas pascat amorem: poverty has not wherewithal to feed lust. All the
Poets were beggars: all Alcumists, and all Philosophers are beggars: Omnia mea
mecum porto, quoth Bias, when he had nothing, but bread and cheese in a
letherne bag, and two or three books in his bosom. Saint Frauncis, a holy
Saint, and never had any money. It is madness to dote upon mucke. That young man
of Athens, (Aelianus makes mention of) may be an example to us, who doted so
extremely on the image of Fortune, that when he might not enjoy it, he dyed
for sorrow. The earth yelds all her fruits together, and why should not we
spend them together? I thank heavens on my knees, that have made me an
unthrift.


Summer. O vanity it self; O wit ill spent!
So study thousands not to mend their lives,
But to maintain the sin they most affect,
To be hels advocates against their own souls.
Ver, since thou give such praise to beggary,
And have defended it so valiantly,
This be thy penance; Thou shall never appear,
Or come abroad, but Lent shall wait on thee:
His scarsity may counteruayle thy waste.
Riot may flourish, but finds want at last.
Take him away, that knows no good way,
And lead him the next way to woe and want.
Exit Ver. Thus in the paths of knowledge many stray,
And from the means of life fetch their decay.

Will Summer. Heigh ho. Here is a coil in deed to bring beggars to stocks. I
promise you truly, I was almost asleep; I thought I had been at a Sermon.
Well, for this one nights exhortation, I vow (by Gods grace) never to be good
husband while I live. But what is this to the purpose? Hur come to Powl (as the
Welshman says) and hur pay an halfepenny for bur seat, and hur hear the
Preacher talge, and a talge very well by gis, but yet a cannot make hur laugh:
go a Theater, and hear a Queens Fice, and he make hur laugh, and laugh hur
belly-full. So we come hither to laugh and be merry, and we hear a filthy
beggarly Oration, in the praise of beggary. It is a beggarly Poet that writ it:
and that makes him so much commend it, because he knows not how to mend
himself. Well, rather then he shall have no employment but lick dishes, I
will set him a work my self, to write in praise of the art of stouping, and
how there was never any famous Thresher, Porter, Brewer, Pioner, or Carpenter,
that had straight back. Repair to my chamber, poor fellow, when the play is
done, and thou shall see what I will say to thee.


Summer. Vertumnus, call Solstitium.

Vertum. Solstitium, come into the court without: peace there below; make room
for master Solstitium.

Enter Solstitium like an aged Hermit, carrying a pair of balances, with an
houre-glasse in either of them; one houre-glasse white, the other black: he is
brought in by a number of shepherds, playing upon Recorders.
Solstitium. All hayle to Summer my dread sovereign Lord.

Summer. Welcome, Solstitium, thou art one of them,
To whose good husbandry we have referred
Part of those small revenues that we have.
What have thou gaynd us? what have thou brought in?

Solstitium. Alas, my Lord, what gave you me to keep,
But a few days eyes in my prime of youth?
And those I have converted to white hayres:
I never loved ambitiously to clyme,
Or thrust my hand too far into the fire.
To be in heaven, sure, is a blessed thing:
But Atlas-like, to proppe heaven on ones back,
Cannot but be more labor then delight.
Such is the state of men in honor placed;
They are gold vessels made for servile uses,
High trees that keep the weather from low houses,
But cannot shield the tempest from themselves.
I love to dwell betwixt the hills and dales;
Neither to be so great to be enuide,
Nor yet so poor the world should pity me.
Inter vtrumque tene, medio tutissimus ibis.

Summer. What do thou with those balances thou bearst?

Solstitium. In them I weigh the day and night alike.
This white glass is the houre-glasse of the day:
This black one the just measure of the night;
One more then other holds not a grain:
Both serve times just proportion to maintain.

Summer. I like thy moderation wondrous well:
And this thy balance, wayghing the white glass
And black, with equal poyze and steadfast hand,
A pattern is to Princes and great men,
How to weigh all estates indifferently:
The Spiritualty and Temporalty alike,
Neither to be too prodigal of smyles,
Nor too severe in frowning without cause.
If you be wise, you Monarchs of the earth,
Have two such glasses still before your eyes;
Think as you have a white glass running on,
Good days, friends favor, and all things at beck,
So this white glass run out (as out it will)
The black comes next, your downfall is at hand,
Take this of me, for somewhat I have tryde;
A mighty ebb follows a mighty tide.
But say, Solstitium, had thou naught besides?
Naught but days eyes, and fair looks, gave I thee?

Solstitium. Nothing my Lord, nor ought more did I ask.

Summer. But had thou always kept thee in my sight,
Thy good deserts, though silent, would have asked.

Solst. Deserts, my Lord, of ancient seruitours,
Are like old sores, which may not be ripped up:
Such use these times have got, that none must beg,
But those that have young limbs to lavish fast.

Summer. I grieve, no more regard was had of thee:
A little sooner had thou spoke to me,
Thou had been heard, but now the time is past:
Death wayteth at the door for thee and me;
Let us go measure out our beds in clay:
Naught but good deeds hence shall we bear away.
Be, as thou were, best steward of my hours,
And so return unto thy country bowres.
Here Solstitium goes out with his music, as he comes in.
Will Summer. Fie, fie of honesty, fie: Solstitium is an ass, perdy, this play
is a gally-maufrey: fetch me some drink, some body. What cheer, what cheer,
my hearts? are not you thirsty with liftening to this dry sport? What have we
to do with scales, and hower-glasses, except we were Bakers, or Clock-keepers?
I cannot tell how other men are addicted, but it is against my profession to
use any scales, but such as we play at with a boule, or keep any hours, but
dinner or supper. It is a pedanticall thing, to respect times and seasons: if a
man be drinking with good fellows late, he must come home, for fear the gates
be shut; when I am in my warm bed, I must rise to prayers, because the bell
rings. I like no such foolish customs. Actors, bring now a black Jack, and a
rundlet of of Renish wine, disputing of the antiquity of red noses; let the
prodigal child come out in his dublet and hose all greasy, his shirt hanging
forth, and never a penny in his purse, and talk what a fine thing it is to
walk summerly, or sit whistling under a hedge and keep hogs. Go forward in
grace and virtue to proceed; but let us have no more of these grave matters.


Summer. Vertumnus, will Sol come before us.

Vertumnus. Sol, Sol, vt, re, me, fa, sol, come to church while the bell toll.
Enter Sol, very richly attir'de, with a noise of Musicians before him.
Summer. I marry, here comes majesty in pomp,
Resplendent Sol, chief planet of the heavens,
He is our servant, looks he never so big.

Sol. My liege, what crau'st thou at thy vassals hands?

Summer. Hypocrisy, how it can change his shape!
How base is pride from his own dunghill put?
How I have raised thee, Sol, I list not tell,
Out of the Ocean of adversity,
To sit in height of honors glorious heaven,
To be the eyesore of aspiring eyes,
To give the day her life, from thy bright looks,
And let naught thrive upon the face of earth,
From which thou shall withdraw thy powerful smiles.
What have thou done deserving such hie grace?
What industry, or meritorious toil,
Can thou produce, to prove my gift well plac'de?
Some service, or some profit I expect:
None is promoted but for some respect.

Sol. My Lord, what needs these terms betwixt us two?
Vpbraiding, ill beseemes your bounteous mind:
I do you honor for advancing me.
Why, it is a credit for your excellence,
To have so great a subject as I am:
This is your glory and magnificence,
That without stouping of your mightiness,
Or taking any whit from your high state,
You can make one as mighty as your self.

Autumn. O arrogance exceeding all belief!
Summer my Lord, this saucy vpstart Jack,
That now does rule the chariot of the Sun,
And makes all stars derive their light from him,
Is a most base insinuating slave,
The son of parsimony, and disdain,
One that will shine, on friends and foes alike,
That under brightest smiles, hides black showers:
Whose envious breath does dry up springs and lakes,
And burns the grass, that beasts can get no food.

Winter. No dunghill has so vilde an excrement,
But with his beams he will forth with exhale:
The fennes and quag-myres tithe to him their filth:
Forth purest mines he suckes a gainefull dross:
Green Iuy-bushes at the Vintners doors
He withers, and deuoureth all their sap.

Autumn. Lascivious and intemperate he is.
The wrong of Daphne is a well known tale:
Each evening he descends to Thetis lap,
The while men think he bathes him in the sea.
O, but when he returns whence he came,
Down to the West, then dawnes his deity,
Then doubled is the swelling of his looks;
He over loades his carre with Orient gemmes,
And reins his fiery horses with rich pearl:
He terms himself the god of Poetry,
And sets wanton songs unto the Lute.

Winter. Let him not talk; for he has words at will,
And wit to make the baddest matter good.

Summer. Bad words, bad wit: oh, where dwells faith or truth?
Ill usury my favors reap from thee,
Usurping Sol, the hate of heaven and earth.

Sol. If Envy vnconfuted may accuse,
Then Innocence must uncondemned dye.
The name of Martyrdom offense has gaynd,
When fury stopped a froward Judges ears.
Much I Will not say (much speech much folly shows)
What I have done, you gave me leave to do.
The excrements you bred, whereon I feed,
To rid the earth of their contagious fumes;
With such gross carriage did I load my beams,
I burnt no grass, I dried no springs and lakes:
I sucked no mines, I withered no green boughs.
But when to ripen harvest I was forc'st,
To make my rays more fervent then I wont,
For Daphnes wrongs and scapes in Thetis lap,
All Gods are subject to the like mishap.
Stars daily fall (it is use is all in all)
And men account the fall but natures course:
Vaunting my jewels, hasting to the West,
Or rising early from the gray ei'de morn.
What do I vaunt but your large bountihood
And show how liberal a Lord I serve.
Music and poetry, my two last crimes,
Are those two exercises of delight,
Wherewithlong labors I do weary out.
The dying Swanne is not forbid to sing.
The waves of Heber played on Orpheus strings,
When he (sweet musiques Trophe) was destroyed.
And as for Poetry, woods eloquence,
(Dead Phaetons three sisters funeral tears
That by the gods were to Electrum turned)
Not flint, or rocks of Icy cynders framed,
Deny the sourse of siluer-falling streams.
Envy enuieth not outcryes unrest:
In vain I plead, well, is to me a fault,
And these my words seem the flight web of art,
And not to have the taste of sounder truth.
Let none but fools, be cared for of the wise;
Knowledge own children, knowledge most despise.

Su^mer. Thou know too much, to know to keep the mean.
He that sees all things, often sees not himself.
The Thames is witness of thy tyranny,
Whose waves thou have exhaust for winter showers.
The naked channel playnes her of thy spite,
That laid'st her intrailes unto open sight.
Unprofitably borne to man and beast,
Which like to Nilus yet does hide his head,
Some few years since thou let'st overflow these walks,
And in the horse-race headlong ran at race,
While in a cloud, thou hid'st thy burning face:
Where was thy care to rid contagious filth,
When some men wetshod, (with his waters) droupt?
Others that ate the Eeles his heat cast up,
Sickned and did by them impoysoned.
Sleep'st thou, or keep'st thou then Admetus sheep,
Thou driu'st not back these flowings to the deep?

Sol. The winds, not I, have floods and tides in chase:
Diana, whom our fables call the moon,
Only commands over the raging may ne,
She leads his wallowing offspring up and down,
She wayning, all streams ebb in the year:
She was eclipst, when that the Thames was bare.

Summer. A bare conjecture, builded on perhaps;
In laying thus the blame upon the moon,
Thou imitat'st subtle Pithagoras,
Who, what he would the people should believe,
The same he wrote with blood upon a glass,
And turned it opposite against the new moon;
Whose beams reflecting on it with full force,
Showed all those lines, to them that stood behind,
Most plainly writ in circle of the moon,
And then he said, Not I, but the new moon
Fair Cynthia persuades you this and that;
With like collusion shall thou not blind me:
But for abusing both the moon and me,
Long shall thou be eclipsed by the moon,
And long in darkness live, and see no light.
A way with him, his doom has no reuerse.

Sol. What is eclipst, will one day shine again:
Though winter frowns, the Spring will ease my pain.
Time, from the brow, does wipe out every stayne.
Exit Sol.
Will Summer. I think the Sun is not so long in passing through the twelve
signs, as the son of a fool has bin disputing here, about had I wist. Out
of doubt, the Poet is bribde of some that have a mess of cream to eat,
before my Lord go to bed yet, to hold him half the night with riffe, raffe,
of the rumming of Elanor. If I can tell what it means, pray god, I may never
get breakefast more, when I am hungry. Troth, I am of opinion, he is one of
those Hieroglificall writers, that by the figures of beasts, planets, and of
stones, express the mind, as we do in A. B. C. or one that writes under
hair, as I have heard of a certain Notary Histions, who following Darius in
the Persian wars, and desirous to disclose some secrets of import, to his
friend Aristagoras, that dwelt afar off, found out this means: He had a
servant that had been long sick of a pain in his eyes, whom, under pretense
of curing his malady, he shau'd from one side of his head, to the other, and
with a soft pensill wrote upon his scalpe, (as on parchment) the discourse of
his business, the fellow all the while imagining, his master had done nothing
but noynt his head with a feather. After this, he kept him secretly in his
tent, till his hair was somewhat grown, and then wil'd him to go to
Aristagoras into the country, and bid him shave him, as he had done, and he
should have perfect remedy. He did so: Aristagoras shau'd him with his own
hands, read his friends letter; and when he had done, washed it out, that no
man should perceive it else, and sent him home to buy him a nightcap. If I wist
there were any such knavery, or Peter Bales Brachigraphy, under Sols bushy
hair, I would have a Barber, my host of the Murrions head, to be his
Interpretour, who would whet his rasor on his Richmond cap, and give him the
terrible cut, like himself, but he would come as near as a quart pot, to the
construction of it. To be sententious, not superfluous, Sol should have been
beholding to the Harbor, and not the beard-master. Is it pride that is
shadowed under Imberbis Apollo, a beardles Poet.
this two-leg'd Sun, that never came nearer heaven, then Dubbers hill? That
pride is not my sin, Slouens Hall, where I was borne, be my record. As for
covetousness, intemperance and exaction, I meet with nothing in a whole year,
but a cup of wine, for such vices to be conversant in. Pergite porro, my good
children, and multiply the sins of your absurdities, till you come to the
full measure of the grand hiss, and you shall hear how we will purge rewme
with censuring your imperfections.


Summer. Vertumnus, call Orion.

Vertum. Orion, Vrion, Arion; my Lord thou must look upon: Orion, gentleman
dogge-keeper, huntsman, come into the court: look you bring all bounds, and no
bandogges. Peace there, that we may hear their horns blow.

Enter Orion like a hunter, with a horn about his neck, all his men after the
same sort hallowing, and blowing their horns.
Orion. Sir, wast thou that called us from our game?
How durst thou (being but a petty God)
Disturb me in the entrance of my sports?

Summer. 'Twas I, Orion, caused thee to be calde.

Orion. It Is I, dread Lord, that humbly will obey.

Summer. How haps't thou leftst the heavens, to hunt below?
As I remember, thou were Hireus son,
Whom of a huntsman Jove chose for a star,
And thou art calde the Dog-starre, art thou not?

Autumn. Pleases your honor, heavens circumference
Is not enough for him to hunt and range,
But with those venome-breathed curres he leads,
He comes to chase health from our earthly bounds:
Each one of those foule-mouthed mangy dogs
Gouernes a day, (no dog but has his day)
And all the days by them so governed,
The Dog-daies hight, infectious fosterers
Of meteors from carrion that arise,
And putrified bodies of dead men,
Are they engendered to that ougly shape,
Being naught else but preserved corruption.
It Is these that in the entrance of their reign
The plague and dangerous agues have brought in.
They arre and bark at night against the Moon,
For fetching in fresh tides to cleanse the streets.
They vomit flames, and blast the ripened fruits:
They are deaths messengers unto all those,
That sicken while their malice bears sway.

Orion. A tedious discourse, built on no ground,
A silly fancy Autumn have thou told,
Which no Philosophy does warrantize,
No old received poetry confirms.
I will not grace thee by confuting thee:
Yet in a jest (since thou railest so against dogs)
I Will speak a word or two in their defense:
That creature's best that comes most near to men.
That dogs of all come nearest, thus I prove:
First they excel us in all outward sense,
Which no one of experience will deny,
They hear, they smell, they see better then we,
To come to speech they have it questionless,
Although we understand them not so well:
They bark as good old Saxon as may be,
And that in more variety then we:
For they have one voice when they are in chase,
Another, when they wrangle for their meat,
Another, when we beat them out of doors.
That they have reason, this I will allege,
They choose those things that are most fit for them,
And shun the contrary all that they may,
They know what is for their own diet best,
And seek about for it very carefully.
At sight of any whip they run away,
As runs a thief from noise of hue and cry:
Nor live they on the sweat of others brows,
But have their trades to get their living with,
Hunting and conie-catching, two fine arts:
Yea, there be of them as there be of men,
Of every occupation more or less:
Some cariers, and they fetch, some watermen,
And they will diue and swim when you bid them:
Some butchers, and they worrie sheep by night:
Some cooks, and they do nothing but turn spits.
Chrisippus holds, dogs are Logicians,
In that by study and by canuasing,
They can distinguish twixt three several things,
As when he comes where three broad ways meet,
And of those three has staid at two of them,
By which he gesseth that the game went not,
Without more pause he runs on the third,
Which, as Chrisippus says, infinuates,
As if he reasoned thus within himself:
Either he went this, that, or yonder way,
But neither that, nor yonder, therefore this:
But whether they Logicians be or no,
Cinicks they are, for they will snarle and bite,
Right courtiers to flatter and to fawn,
Valiant to set upon the enemies,
Most faithful and most constant to their friends;
Nay they are wise, as Homer witnesses,
Who talking of Ulysses coming home,
Says all his household, but Argus his Dog,
Had quite forgot him: I, and his deep insight,
Nor Pallas Art in altering of his shape,
Nor his base weeds, nor absence twenty years,
Could go beyond, or any way delude.
That Dogs Phisicians are, thus I infer,
They are never sick, but they know their disease,
And find out means to ease them of their grief,
Special good Surgions to cure dangerous wounds:
For stricken with a stake into the flesh,
This policy they use to get it out:
They traile one of their feet upon the ground,
And gnaw the flesh about where the wound is,
Till it be clean drawn out: and then, because
Ulcers and sores kept foul, are hardly cur'de,
They lick and purify it with their tongue,
And well observe Hipocrates old rule,
The only medicine for the foot, is rest:
For if they have the least hurt in their feet,
They bear them up, and look they be not stird:
When humors rise, they eat a sovereign herb,
Whereby what cloyes their stomachs, they cast up,
And as some writers of experience tell,
They were the first invented vomitting.
Sham'st thou not, Autumn, unadvisedly
To slander such rare creatures as they be?

Summer. We called thee not, Orion, to this end,
To tell a story of dogs qualities.
With all thy hunting how are we inriche?
What tribute payest thou us for thy high place?

Orion. What tribute should I pay you out of naught?
Hunters do hunt for pleasure, not for gain.
While Dog-dayes last, the harvest safely thriues:
The sun burns hot, to finish up fruits grouth:
There is no bloodletting to make men weak:
Physicians with their Cataposia,
r. tittle Elinctoria
Masticatorum and Cataplasmata:
Their Gargarismes, Clisters, and pitched clothes,
Their perfumes, sirrups, and their triacles,
Refrain to poison the sick patients,
And dare not minister till I be out.
Then none will bathe, and so are fewer drowned:
All lust is perilsome, therefore less vs'de.
In brief, the year without me cannot stand:
Summer, I am thy staff, and thy right hand.

Summer. A broken staff, a lame right hand I had,
If thou were all the stay that held me up.
Nihil violentum perpetuum.
No violence that lives to old age.
Ill-gouern'd star, that never boad'st good luck,
I banish thee a twelue-month and a day,
Forth of my presence, come not in my sight,
Nor show thy head, so much as in the night.

Orion. I am content, though hunting be not out,
We will go hunt in hell for better hap.
One parting blow, my hearts, unto our friends,
To bid the fields and huntsmen all farewell:
Toss up your bugle horns unto the stars.
Toil finds ease, peace follows after wars.
Exit. Here they go out, blowing their horns, and hallowing, as they came in.
Will Summer. Faith, this Scene of Orion, is right prandium caninum, a dogs
dinner, which as it is without wine, so here is a coil about dogs, without
wit. If I had thought the ship of fools would have stay de to take in fresh
water at the I Will of dogs, I would have furnished it with a whole kennell of
collections to the purpose. I have had a dog my self, that would dream, and
talk in his sleep, turn round like Ned fool, and sleep all night in a
porridge pot. Mark but the skirmish between sixpence and the fox, and it is
miraculous, how they overcome one another in honorable curtesy. The fox,
though he wears a chain, runs as though he were free, mocking us (as it is
a crafty beast) because we having a Lord and master to attend on, run about
at our pleasures, like masterles men. Young sixpence, the best page his master
has, plays a little, and retires. I warrant, he will not be far out of the
way, when his master goes to dinner. Learn of him, you deminitiue vrchins,
how to behave your selves in your vocation, take not up your standings in a
nuttree, when you should be waiting on my Lords trencher. Shoot but a bit at
buttes, play but a span at points. What ever you do, memento mori: remember
to rise betimes in the morning.


Summer. Vertumnus, call Harvest.

Vertumnus. Harvest, by west, and by north, by south and southeast, show thy
self like a beast. Goodman Harvest yeoman, come in, and say what you can:
room for the sith and the siccles there.

Enter Harvest with a sithe on his neck, and all his reapers with siccles, and
a great black bowl with a posset in it, borne before him: they come in
singing. The Song.
Merry, merry, merry, cheary, cheary, cheary,
Trowle the black bowl to me,
Hey derry, derry, with a poupe and a lerry,
I Will trowle it again to thee:
Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought Harvest
home to town.

Summer. Harvest, the Bailey of my husbandry,
What plenty have thou heapt into our Barnes?
I hope thou have sped well thou art so blithe.

Harvest. Sped well, or ill sir, I drink to you on the same:
Is your throat clear to help us to sing, hooky, hooky?
Here they all sing after him, Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest
home to town.

Autumn. Thou Coridon, why answer'st not direct?

Harvest. Answer? why friend, I am no tapster, to say, Anon, anon, sir: but
leave you to molest me, goodman tawny leaves, for fear (as the proverb says,
leave is light) so I mow off all your leaves with my sith.


Winter. Mock not, and mow not too long you were best,
For fear we whet not your sithe upon your pate.

Summer. Since thou art so perverse in answering,
Harvest, hear what complaints are brought to me.
Thou art accused by the public voice,
For an ingrosser of the common store,
A Carle, that have no conscience, nor remorse,
But do impouerish the fruitful earth,
To make thy garners rise up to the heavens.
To whom give thou? who feeds at thy board?
No alms, but unreasonable gain,
Disgests what thy huge iron teeth devour:
Small beer, course bread, the hynds and beggars cry,
Whilst thou with hold both the malt and flower,
And give us branne, and water, (fit for dogs.)

Harvest. Hooky, hooky, if you were not my Lord, I would say you lie. First and
foremost you say I am a Grocer. A Grocer is a citizen: I am no citizen,
therefore no Grocer. A hoorder up of grain: that is false; for not so much but
my elbows eat wheat every time I lean on them. A Carle: that is as much to
say, as a conny-catcher of good fellowship. For that one word, you shall pledge
me a carouse: eat a spoonful of the curd to allay your choler. My mates and
fellows, sing no more, Merry, merry: but weep out a lamentable hooky, hooky,
and let your Sickles cry, Sick, sick, and very sick, and sick, and for the
time; for Harvest your master is abusde without reason or rhyme. I have no
conscience I; I Will come nearer to you, and yet I am no scabbe, nor no louse. Can
you make proof where ever I sold away my conscience, or pawnd it? do you know
who would buy it, or lend any money upon it? I think I have given you the
pose; blow your nose, master constable. But to say that I impouerish the earth,
that I rob the man in the moon, that I take a purse on the top of Paul's
steeple; by this straw and third I swear, you are no gentleman, no proper man,
no honest man, to make me sing, O man in desperation.


Summer. I must give credit unto what I hear;
For other then I hear, attract I naught.

Harvest. I, I, naught seek, naught have: an ill husband is the first step
to a knave. You object I feed none at my board. I am sure, if you were a
hog, you would never say so: for, surreuerence of their worships, they feed
at my stable, table, every day. I keep good hospitality for hens and geese;
Gleaners are oppressed with heavy burdens of my bounty. They rake me, and eat
me to the very bones, till there be nothing left but gravel and stones, and
yet I give no alms, but devour all. They say when a man cannot hear well,
you hear with your harvest ears: but if you heard with your harvest ears,
that is, with the ears of corn, which my almescart scatters, they would tell
you, that I am the very poor man's box of pity, that there are more holes of
liberality open in haruests heart, then in a sieve, or a dust-boxe. Suppose you
were a craftsman, or an Artificer, and should come to buy corn of me, you
should have bushels of me, not like the Bakers loaf, that should waygh but
six ounces, but usury for your money, thousands for one: what would you have
more? Eat me out of my apparel, if you will, if you suspect me for a miser.


Summer. I credit thee, and think thou were belide.
But tell me, had thou a good crop this year?

Harvest. Hay, Gods plenty, which was so sweet and so good, that when I ierted
my whip, and said to my horses but Hay, they would go as they were mad.


Summer. But hay alone thou say not; but hay-ree.

Harvest. I sing hay-ree, that is, hay and rye: meaning, that they shall have
hay and rye their belly-fulls, if they will draw hard; So we say, wa, hay,
when they go out of the way: meaning, that they shall want hay, if they will
not do as they should do.


Summer. How thrive thy oats, thy barley, and thy wheat?

Harvest. My oats grew like a cup of beer that makes the brewer rich: my rye
like a Caualier, that wears a huge feather in his cap, but has no courage in
his heart; had a long stalk, a goodly husk, but nothing so great a kernel as
it was wont: my barley, even as many a nouice is crossebitten, as soon as ever
he peepes out of the shell, so was it frost-bitten in the blade, yet picked up
his crummes again afterward, and bade, Fill pot, hostess, in spite of a dear
year. As for my Pease and my Fetches, they are famous, and not to be spoken of.


Autumn. I, I, such country buttoned caps as you,
Do want no fetches to undo great towns.

Harvest. Will you make good your words, that we want no fetches?

Winter. I, that he shall.

Harvest. Then fetch us a cloake-bagge, to carry away your self in.

Summer. Plough-swaynes are blunt, and will taunt bitterly.
Harvest, when all is done, thou art the man,
Thou do me the best service of them all:
Rest from thy labors till the year renues,
And let the husbandmen sing of thy praise.

Harvest. Rest from my labors, and let the husbandmen sing of my praise? Nay,
we do not mean to rest so; by your leave, we will have a largess amongst you,
e're we part.


All. A largess, a largess, a largess.

Will Summer. Is there no man that will give them a hiss for a largess?

Harvest. No, that there is not, goodman Lundgis: I see, charity waxes cold,
and I think this house be her habitatio^, for it is not very hot; we were as
good even put up our pipes, and sing Merry, merry, for we shall get no money.

Here they go out all singing, Merry, merry, merry, cheary, cheary, cheary,
Trowle the black bowl to me:
Hey derry, derry, with a poupe and a lerrie,
I Will trowle it again to thee:
Hookie, bookie, we have shorn and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest home to town.

Will Summer. Well, go thy ways, thou bundle of straw; I Will give thee this
gift, thou shall be a Clown while thou live. As lusty as they are, they run
on the score with Georges wife for their posset, and God knows who shall pay
goodman Yeomans, for his wheat sheafe: they may sing well enough, Trowle the
black bowl to me, trowle the black bowl to me: for, a hundredth to one,
but they will be all drunk, e're they go to bed: yet, of a slauering
fool, that has no conceyte in any thing, but in carrying a wand in his hand,
with commendation when he runs by the high way side, this stripling Harvest
has done reasonable well. O that some body had had the wit to set his thatcht
suite on fire, and so lighted him out: If I had had but a Iet ring on my
finger, I might have done with him what I list; I had spoild him, I had took
his apparel prisoner; for it being made of straw, and the nature of let, to
draw straw unto it, I would have nailde him to the pommell of my chair, till
the play were done, and then have carried him to my chamber door, and laid him
at the threshold as a wispe, or a piece of mat, to wipe my shoes on, every
time I come up durtie.


Summer. Vertumnus, call Bacchus.

Vertum. Bacchus, Baccha, Bacchum, god Bacchus, god fatbacke, Baron of dubble
beer, and bottle ale, come in and show thy nose that is nothing pale: back,
back there, god barrellbellie may enter.

Enter Bacchus riding upon an Ass trapt in Iuie, himself dressed in Vine
leaves, and a garland of grapes on his head: his companions having all Iacks in
their hands, and Iuie garlands on their heads, they come in singing. The Song.
Mounsieur Mingo, for quaeffing does surpass,
In Cup, in Can, or glass.
God Bacchus do me right,
And dubbe me knight Domingo.

Bacchus. Wherefore did thou call me, Vertumnus? have any drink to give
me? One of you hold my Asle while I light: walk him up and down the hall,
till I talk a word or two.


Summer. What, Bacchus: still animus in patinis, no mind but on the pot?


Bacchus. Why, Summer, Summer, how would do, but for rain? What is a fair
house without water coming to it? Let me see how a smith can work, if he
have not his trough standing by him. What sets an edge on a knife? the
grindstone alone? no, the moist element powered upon it, which grinds out all
gaps, sets a point upon it, and scowres it as bright as the firmament. So, I
tell thee, give a soldier wine before he goes to battle, it grinds out all
gaps, it makes him forget all scarres and wounds, and fight in the thickest of
his enemies, as though he were but at foyles, amongst his fellows. Give a
scholar wine, going to his book, or being about to invent, it sets a new
point on his wit, it glazeth it, it scowres it, it gives him acumen. Plato
says, vinum esse fomitem que^dam, et incit abilem ingenij virtutisque.
Aristotle says, Nulla est magna scientia absque mixtura dementiae. There is no
excellent knowledge without mixture of madness. And what makes a man more
mad in the head then wine? Qui been vult poyein, debet axta pinyen, he that
will do well, must drink well. Prome, prome, potum prome: Ho butler, a fresh
pot. Nunc est bibe^dum, nunc pede libero terra pulsanda: a pox on him that
leaves his drink behind him; hey Rendouow.


Summer. It is wines custom, to be full of words.
I pray thee, Bacchus, give us vicissitudinem loquendi.

Bacchus. A fiddlesticke, never tell me I am full of words. Foecundi calices,
quem non fecere desertum: aut epi, aut abi, either take your drink, or you are
an infidel.


Summer. I would about thy vintage question thee:
How thrive thy vines? had thou good store of grapes?

Bac. Vinum quasivenenum, wine is poison to a sick body; a sick body is no
sound body; Ergo, wine is a pure thing, and is poison to all corruption.
Try-lill, the hu^ters hoope to you: i will stand to it, Alexander was a brave man,
and yet an arrant drunkard.


Winter. Fie, drunken sot, forget'st thou where thou art?
My Lord asks thee, what vintage thou have made?

Bac. Our vintage, was a vintage, for it did not work upon the advantage, it
came in the vauntgard of Summer, and winds and storms met it by the way, and
made it cry, Alas and welladay.


Summer. That was not well, but all miscarried not?

Bac. Faith, shall I tell you no lie? Because you are my cou^tryman, and so
forth, and a good fellow, is a good fellow, though he have never a penny in his
purse: We had but even pot luck, a little to moysten our lips, and no more.
That same Sol, is a Pagan, and a Proselite, he shinde so bright all summer,
that he burnd more grapes, then his beams were worth, were every beam as big
as a weauers beam. A fabis abstinendum: faith, he should have abstaind: for
what is flesh and blud without his liquor?


Autumn. Thou want no liquor, nor no flesh and blood.
I pray thee may I ask without offense?
How many tons of wine have in thy paunch?
Me thinks, that, built like a round church,
Should yet have some of Julius Caesar's wine:
I warrant, 'twas not broacht this hundred year.

Bacchus. Hear'st, thou dow-belly, because thou talkst, and talkst, and dare
not drink to me a black Jack, will thou give me leave, to broach this little
kilderkin of my corpse, against thy back? I know thou art but a mycher, and
dare not stand me. A voni, mou^sieur Winter, a frolic vpsy freese, cross,
ho, super nagulu^. Knockes the Jack upon his thumb.



Winter. Grammercy, Bacchus, as much as though I did.
For this time thou must pardon me perforce.

Bacchus. What, give me the disgrace? Go to, I say, I am no Pope, to pardon
any man. Ran, ran, tarra, cold beer makes good blood. S. George for England:
somewhat is better then nothing. Let me see, have thou done me justice? why so:
thou art a king, though there were no more kings in the cards but the knave.
Summer, will thou have a demi culuering, that shall cry husty tusty, and make
thy cup fly fine meal in the Element?


Summer. No, keep thy drink, I pray thee, to thy self.

Bacchus. This Pupillonian in the fools coat, shall have a cast of martins,
and a whiffe. To the health of Captain Rinocerotry: look to it, let him have
weight and measure.


Will Summer. What an ass is this? I cannot drink so much, though I should
burst.


Bacchus. Fool, do not refuse your moist sustenance; come, come, dogs head in
the pot, do what you are borne to.


Will Summer. If you will needs make me a drunkard against my will, so it is,
i will try what burden my belly is of.


Bacchus. Crouch, crouch on your knees, fool, when you pledge god Bacchus.

Here Will Su^mer drinks, and they sing about him. Bacchus begins. All,
Mounsieur Mingo for quaffing did surpass, In Cup, in Can, or glass.
Bacchus. Ho, well shot, a tutcher, a tutcher: for quaffing Toy does pass, in
cup, in can, or glass.


All. God Bacchus do him right, and dubbe him knight.

Bac. Rise up Sir Robert Tospot.
Here he dubs Will Summer with the black Jack.
Sum, No more of this, I hate it to the death.
No such deformer of the soul and sense,
As is this swynish damn'd-borne drunkenness.
Bacchus, for thou abusest so earths fruits,
Impris'ned live in cellars and in vawtes,
Let none commit their counsels unto thee:
Thy wrath be fatal to thy dearest friends,
Unarmed run upon thy foemens swords,
Never fear any plague, before it fall:
Dropsies, and watery tympanies haunt thee,
Thy lungs with surfeting be putrified,
To cause thee have an odious stinking breath,
Slauer and driuell like a child at mouth,
Be poor and beggarly in thy old age,
Let thy own kinsmen laugh, when thou complaynst,
And many tears gain nothing but blind scoffs.
This is the guerdon due to drunkenness;
Shame, sickness, misery, follow excess.

Bacchus. Now on my honor, Sim Summer, thou art a bad member, a Dunse, a
mungrell, to discredit so worshipful an art after this order. Thou have cursed
me, and I will bless thee: Never cup of Nipitaty in London, come near thy
niggardly habitation. I beseech the gods of good fellowship, thou may fall
into a consumption with drinking small beer. Every day may thou eat fish,
and let it stick in the midst of thy maw, for want of a cup of wine to swim
away in. Venison be Venenum to thee: and may that Vintner have the plague in
his house, that sels thee a drop of claret to kill the poison of it. As many
wounds may thou have, as Casar had in the Senate house, and get no white wine
to wash them with: And to conclude, pine away in melancholy and sorrow, before
thou have the fourth part of a dram of my Juice to cheer up thy spirits.


Summer. Hale him away, he barketh like a wolf,
It is his drink, not he that rayles on us.

Bacchus. Nay soft, brother Summer, back with that foot, here is a snuff in
the bottom of the Jack, enough to light a man to bed withal, we will leave no
flocks behind us whatsoever we do.


Summer. Go dragge him hence I say when I command.

Bacchus. Since we must needs go, let us go merrily.
Farewell, sir Robert Tosse-pot: sing amayne, Mounsieur Myngo, whilst I mount
up my Ass.

Here they go out singing, Mounsieur Myngo, as they came in.
Will Summer. Of all gods, this Bacchus is the ill-fauourd'st misshapen god
that ever I saw. A pox on him, he has cristned me with a new nickname of
sir Robert Tosse-pot, that will not part from me this twelmonth. Ned fools
clothes are so perfumde with the beer he powrd on me, that there shall not be
a Dutchma^ within 20 mile, but he will smell out and claim kindred of him. What a
beastly thing is it, to bottle up ale in a ma^s belly, when a man must set his
guts on a gallo^ pot last, only to purchase the alehouse title of a boon
companion? Carowse, pledge me and you dare: S'wounds, i will drink with thee for
all that ever thou art worth. It is eue^ as 2. men should strive who should run
furthest into the sea for a wager. Me thinks these are good household terms;
Will it please you to be here, sir? I commend me to you: shall I be so bold as
trouble you? saving your tale I drink to you. And if these were put in practice
but a year or two in tauernes, wine would soon fall from six and twenty
pound a tun, and be beggars money, a penie a quart, and take up his Inn with
wast beer in the alms tub. I am a sinner as others: I must not say much of
this argument. Every one when he is whole, can give advice to them that are
sick. My masters, you that be good fellows, get you into corners, and soupe
off your prouender closely: report has a blister on her tongue: open tauerns
are tel-tales. Non peccat, quicunque potest peccasse negare.


Summer. I Will call my servants to account said I?
A bad account: worse servants no man has.
Quos credis sides effuge, tutus eris:
The proverb I have proved to be too true,
Totidem domi hosts habemus, quot seruos.
And that wise caution of Democritus,
Seruns necessaria possessio, non autem dulcis:
No where fidelity and labor dwells.
Hope, young heads count to build on had I wist.
Conscience but few respect, all hunt for gain:
Except the Cammell have his prouender
Hung at his mouth, he will not travel on.
Tyresias to Narcissus promised
Much prosperous hap, and many golden days,
If of his beauty he no knowledge took.
Knowledge breeds pride, pride breeds discontent.
Black discontent, thou vrgest to revenge.
Revenge opes not her ears to poor men's prayers.
That dolt destruction, is she without doubt,
That hales her forth and feeds her with naught.
Simplicity and plainness, you I love:
Hence double diligence, thou mean deceit.
Those that now serpent-like creep on the ground,
And seem to eat the dust, they crowch so low:
If they be disappointed of their pray,
Most traitorously will trace their tails and sting.
Yea, such as like the Lapwing build their nests
In a man's dung, come up by drudgerie,
Will be the first, that like that foolish bird,
Will follow him with yelling and false cries.
Well sung a shepherd (that now sleeps in skies)
Dumb swains do love, and not vain chattering pies.
In mountains Poets say Echo is hid,
For her deformity and monstrous shape:
Those mountains are the houses of great Lords,
Where Scenter with his hundredth voices sounds
A hundredth trumpes at once with rumor filled:
A woman they imagine her to be,
Because that sex keeps nothing close they hear:
And that is the reason magic writers frame,
There are more witches women then of men;
For women generally for the most part,
Of secrets more desirous of, then men,
Which having got, they have no powerto hold.
In these times had Echoes first fathers lived,
No woman, but a man she had been faind.
(Though women yet will want no news to prate.)
For men (mean men) the skumme and dross of all,
Will talk and babble of they know not what,
Vpbraid, deprave, and taunt, they care not whom:
Sumises pass for sound approved truths:
Familiarity and conference,
That were the sinews of societies,
Are now for underminings only used,
And novell wits, that love none but themselves,
Think wisdoms height as falsehood slily couch't,
Seeking each other to overthrow his mate.
O friendship, thy old temple is defaced.
Embrasing every guilefull courtesy,
Has ouergrowne fraud-wanting honesty.
Examples live but in the idle schools:
Sinon bears all the sway in princes courts:
Sickness, be thou my souls physician:
Bring the Apothecarie death with thee.
In earth is hell, true hell felicity,
Compared with this world the den of wolves.

Aut. My Lord, you are too passionate without cause.

Winter. Grieve not for that which cannot be recal'd:
Is it your servants carelessness you plain?
Tullie by one of his own slaves was slain.
The husbandman close in his bosom nursed
A subtle snake, that after wrought his bane.

Autumn. Seruos fideles liberalitaes facit:
Where on the contrary, seruitutem:
Those that attend vponilliberall Lords,
Whose couetize yields naught else but fair looks,
Even of those fair looks make their gainful use.
For as in Ireland and in Denmark both
Witches for gold will sell a man a wind,
Which in the corner of a napkin wrapped,
Shall blow him safe unto what coast he will:
So make ill servants sale of their Lords wind,
Which wrapped up in a piece of parchment,
Blows many a knave forth danger of the law.

Summer. Enough of this, let me go make my will.
Ah it is made, although I hold my peace,
These two will share betwixt them what I have.
The surest way to get my will performed,
Is to make my executour my heir:
And he, if all be given him and none else,
Infallibly will see it well performed.
Lions will feed, though none bid them go to.
Ill grows the tree affords never a graft.
Had I some issue to sit in my throne,
My grief would die, death should not hear me groan.
But when perforce these must enjoy my wealth,
Which thank me not, but enter't as a pray,
Bequeathed it is not, but clean cast away.
Autumn, be thou successor of my seat:
Hold, take my crown: look how he graspes for it.
Thou shall not have it yet: but hold it too;
Why should I keep that needs I must forgo?

Winter. Then (duty laid aside) you do me wrong:
I am more worthy of it far then he.
He has no skill nor courage for to rule,
A weather-beaten banckrout ass it is,
That scatters and consumes all he has:
Each one do pluck from him without control.
He is nor hot nor cold, a silly soul,
That feign would please each party, if so he might:
He and the spring are scholars favorites.
What scholars are, what thriftles kind of men,
Your self be judge, and judge of him by them.
When Cerberus was headlong drawn from hell,
He voided a black poison from his mouth,
Called Aconitum, whereof ink was made:
That ink with reeds first laid on dried barks,
Served men a while to make rude works withal,
Till Hermes, secretary to the Gods,
Or Hermes Trismegistus as some will,
Weary with grauing in blind characters,
And figures of familiar beasts and plants,
Invented letters to write lies withal.
In them he pend the fables of the Gods,
The giants war, and thousand tales besides.
After each nation got these toyesin use,
There grew up certain drunken parasites,
Termed Poets, which for a meals meat or two,
Would promise monarchs immortality:
They vomited in verse all that they knew,
Found causes and beginnings of the world,
Fetched pedegrees of mountains and of floods,
From men and women whom the Gods transformed:
If any town or city, they passed by,
Had in compassion (thinking them mad men)
Forborne to whip them, or imprison them,
That city was not built by humane hands,
It Was raisde by music, like Megara walls,
Apollo, poets patron founded it,
Because they found one fitting favor there:
Musaeus, Lynus, Homer, Orpheus,
Were of this trade, and thereby won their fame.

Will. Summer. Famamalum, quo non velocius vllum.

Winter. Next them, a company of ragged knaves,
Sun-bathing beggars, lazy hedge-creepers,
Sleeping face upwards in the fields all night,
Dreamed strange devices of the Sun and Moon,
And they like Gypsies wandering up and down,
Told fortunes, iuggled, nicknam'd all the stars,
And were of idiots termed Philosophers:
Such was Pithagoras the silencer,
Prometheus, Thales, Milesius,
Who would all things of water should be made:
Anaximander, Anaximenes,
That positiuely said the air was God;
Zenocrates, that said there were eight Gods:
And Cratoniates, Alcmeon too,
Who thought the Sun and Moon, and stars were gods:
The poorer sort of them that could get naught,
Professed, like beggarly Franciscan Friars,
And the strict order of the Caponchins,
A voluntary wretched poverty,
Contempt of gold, thin fare, and lying hard:
Yet he that was most vehement in these,
Diogenes the Cinicke and the Dog,
Was taken coining money in his Cell.

Will Summer. What an old Ass was that? Me thinks, he should have coynde
Carret roots rather: for as for money, he had no use for, except it were to
melt, and soder up holes in his tub withal.


Winter. It were a whole Olimpiades work to tell,
How many diuillish, ergo armed arts,
Sprung all as vices, of this Idleness:
For even as soldiers not imployde in wars,
But living loosely in a quiet state,
Not having wherewithal to maintain pride,
Nay scarce to find their bellies any food,
Naught but walk melancholy, and devise
How they may cosen Marchats, fleece young heirs,
Creep into favor by betraying men,
Rob churches, beg waste toys, court city dames,
Who shall undo their husbands for their sakes:
The baser rabble how to cheat and steal,
And yet be free from penalty of death.
So those word-warriers, lazy star-gazers,
Used to no labor, but to lowze themselves,
Had their heads filled with coosning fantasies,
They plotted how to make their poverty,
Better esteemde of, then high Sovereignty:
They thought how they might plant a heaven on earth,
Whereof they would be principal low gods,
That heaven they called Contemplation,
As much to say, as a most pleasant sloth,
Which better I cannot compare then this,
That if a fellow licensed to beg,
Should all his life time go from fair to fair,
And buy gape-seede, having no business else.
That contemplation like an aged weed,
Engendered thousand sects, and all those sects
Were but as these times, cunning shrouded rogues,
Grammarians some: and wherein differ they
From beggars, that profess the Pedlers French?
The Poets next, slouinly tatterd slaves,
That wander, and sell Ballets in the streets.
Historiographers others there be,
And the like lazers by the high way side,
That for a penny, or a halfe-penny,
Will call each knave a good faced Gentleman,
Give honor unto Tinkers, for good Ale,
Prefer a Cobbler fore the Black prince far,
If he bestow but blacking of their shoes:
And as it is the Spittle-houses guise,
Over the gate to write their founders names,
Or on the outside of their walls at least,
In hope by their examples others moved.
Will be more bountiful and liberal,
So in the forefront of their Chronicles,
Or Peroratione operis,
They learnings benefactors reckon up,
Who built this college, who gave that Free-schoole,
What King or Queen advanced Scholars most,
And in their times what writers flourished;
Rich men and magistrates whilst yet they live,
They flatter palpably, in hope of gain.
Smooth-tounged Orators, the fourth in place,
Lawyers, our commonwealth intitles them,
Meereswash-bucklers, and ruffianly mates,
That will for twelve pence make a doughtie fray,
Set men for strawes together by the ears.
Sky measuring Mathematicians;
Golde-breathing Alcumists also we have,
Both which are subtle witted humorists,
That get their meals by telling miracles,
Which they have seen in travailing the skies,
Vain boasters, liars, make-shifts, they are all,
Men that removed from their inkehorne terms,
Bring forth no action worthy of their bread.
What should I speak of pale physicions?
Who as Fismenus non nasatus was,
(Upon a wager that his friends had laid)
Hir'de to live in a privy a whole year:
So are they hir'de for lucre and for gain,
All their whole life to smell on excrements.

Will. Summer. Very true, for I have heard it for a proverb many a time and
often, Hunc os fatidum, fah, he stinkes like a physician.


Winter. Innumerable monstrous practices,
Has loytring contemplation brought forth more,
Which it were too long particular to recite:
Suffice they all conduce unto this end,
To banish labor, nourish slothfulness,
Pamper up lust, devise newfangled sins.
Nay I will justify there is no vice,
Which learning and vilde knowledge brought not in,
Or in whose praise some learned have not wrote.
The art of murder Machiauel has pend:
Whoredom has Ovid to uphold her throne:
And Aretine of late in Italy,
Whose Cortigiana touches bawdes their trade.
Gluttony Epicurus does defend,
And books of th'arte of cookerie confirm:
Of which Platina has not writ the least.
Drunkenness of his good behavior
Has testimonial from where he was borne:
That pleasant work de art bibendi,
A drunken Dutchman spued outfew years since:
Nor wants sloth (although sloths plague be want).
His paper pillars for to lean upon,
The praise of nothing pleades his worthiness.
Folly Erasmus sets a flourish on.
For baldness, a bald ass, I have forgot,
Patcht up a pamphletarie periwigge.
Slouenrie Grobianus magnifieth:
Sodomitrie a Cardinal commends,
And Aristotle necessary deemes.
In brief all books, divinity except,
Are naught but tales of the devils laws,
Poison wrapped up in sugared words,
Man's pride, damnations props, the worlds abuse:
Then censure (good my Lord) what bookemen are
If they be pestilent members in a state;
He is unfit to sit at stern of state,
That favors such as will overthrow his state:
Blessed is that government where no art thriues,
Vox populi, vex Dei:
The vulgars voice, it is the voice of God.
Yet Tully says, Non est consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non discrimen, non
differentia:
The vulgar have no learning, wit, nor sense.
The mistocles having spent all his time
In study of Philosophy and arts,
And noting well the vanity of them,
Wished with repentance, for his folly past,
Some would teach him th'arte of oblivion,
How to forget the arts that he had learnd.
And Cicero, whom we alleged before,
(As says Valerius) stepping into old age,
Despised learning, lothed eloquence.
Naso, that could speak nothing but pure verse,
And had more wit then words to utter it,
And words as choice as ever Poet had,
Cride and exclaimde in bitter agony,
When knowledge had corrupted his chaste mind,
Discite qui sapitis non haec qua scimus inertes,
Sed trepidas acies, and fera bella sequi.
You that be wise, and ever mean to thrive,
O study not these toys we sluggards use,
But follow arms, and wait on barbarous wars.
Young men, young boys, beware of Schoolemasters,
They will infect you, mar you, bleare your eyes:
They seek to lay the curse of God on you,
Namely confusion of languages,
Wherewith those that the tower of Babel built,
Accursed were in the worlds infancy.
Latin, it was the speech of Infidels.
Logique has naught to say in a true cause.
Philosophy is curiosity:
And Socrates was therefore put to death,
Only for he was a Philosopher:
Abhor, contemn, despise, these damned snares.

Will Summer. Out upon it, who would be a Scholar? not I, I promise you: my
mind always gave me, this learning was such a filthy thing, which made me
hate it so as I did: when I should have been at school, construing Batte, mi
fili, mi fili, mi Batte, I was close under a hedge, or under a barn wall,
playing at spanne Counter, or Jack in a box: my master beat me, my father
beat me, my mother gave me bread and butter, ye all this would not make me a
squitter-booke. It was my destiny, I thank her as a most courteous goddess,
that she has not cast me away upon gibridge. O, in what a mighty vain am I
now against Horne-bookes! Here before all this company, I profess my self on
open enemy to Ink and paper. I Will make it good upon the Accidence body, that In
speech is the devils Pater noster: Nownes and Pronounes, I pronounce you as
traitors to boys buttockes, Syntaxis and Prosodia, you are tormenters of wit,
and good for nothing but to get a schoolmaster two pence a week. Hang copies,
fly out phrase books, let pens be turned to picktooths: bowls, cards and
dice, you are the true liberalscie^ces, I Will never be Goosequil, gentlemen,
while I live.


Su^mer. Winter, with patience unto my grief,
I have attended thy inuectiue tale:
So much untruth wit never shadowed:
Against her own bowels thou Arts weapons turn'st:
Let none believe thee, that will ever thrive:
Words have their course, the wind blows where it lists;
He erres alone, in error that persists.
For thou against Autumn such exceptions take,
I grant, his ouer-seer thou shall be,
His treasurer, protector, and his staff,
He shall do nothing without thy consent;
Provide thou for his weal, and his content.

Winter. Thanks, gracious Lord. so I Will dispose of him,
As it shall not repent you of your gift.

Autumn. On such conditions no crown will I take.
I challenge Winter for my enemy,
A most insaciate miserable carle,
That, to fill up his garners to the brim,
Cares not how he indammageth the earth:
What poverty he makes it to endure!
He ouer-bars the crystal streams with ye,
That none but he and his may drink of them:
All for a foul Back-winter he lays up;
Hard craggie ways, and uncouth slippery paths
He frames, that passengers may slide and fall:
Who quaketh not, that hears but his name?
O, but two sons he has, worse then himself,
Christmas the one, a pinch-back, cut-throate churl,
That keeps no open house, as he should do,
Delights in no game or fellowship,
Loves no good deeds, and hates talk,
But sits in a corner turning Crabbes,
Or coughing over a warmed pot of Ale:
Back-winter the other, that is his none sweet boy,
Who like his father takes in all points,
An elfe it is, compact of envious pride,
A miscreant, borne for a plague to men.
A monster, that deuoureth all he meets:
Were but his father dead, so he would reign:
Yea he would go goodneere, to deal by him,
As Nabuchodonozors ungracious son,
Euilmerodach by his father dealt:
Who, when his sire was turned to an Ox,
Full greedily suatcht up his sovereignty,
And thought himself a king without controwle.
So it fell out, seven years expir'de and gone,
Nabuchodonozor came to his shape again,
And dispossessed him of the regiment:
Which my young prince no little greeuing at,
When that his father shortly after did,
Fearing lest he should come from death again,
As he came from an Ox to be a man,
Wil'd that his body spoylde of couerture,
Should be cast forth into the open fields,
For Birds and Ravens, to devour at will,
Thinking if they bare every one of them,
A bill full of his flesh into their nests,
He would not rise, to trouble him in haste.

Will Summer. A virtuous son, and I Will lay my life on it, he was a Caualiere
and a good fellow.


Winter. Pleases your honor, all he says, is false.
For my own part I love good husbandry,
But hate dishonorable couetize.
Youth never aspires to virtues perfect growth,
Till his wild oatesbe sown: and so the earth,
Until his weeds be rotted, with my frosts,
Is not for any seed, or tillage fit.
He must be purged that has surfeited:
The fields have surfeited with Summer fruits,
They must be purged, made poor, oppressed with snow,
Ere they recover their decayed pride,
For ouerbarring of the streams with Ice.
Who locks not poison from his childrens taste?
When Winter reigns, the water is so cold,
That it is poison, present death to those
That wash, or bathe their lims, in his cold streams.
The slipprier that ways are under us,
The better it makes us to heed our steps,
And look e're we presume too rashly on:
If that my sons have misbehau'd themselves,
A Gods name let them answer't fore my Lord.

Autumn. Now I beseech your honor it may be so.

Summer. With all my heart: Vertumnus, go for them.

Will Summer. This same Harry Baker is such a necessary fellow to go on arrants,
as you shall not find in a country. It is pity but he should have another
silver arrow, if it be but for crossing the stage, with his cap on.


Summer. To weary out the time until they come,
Sing me some doleful ditty to the Lute,
That may complain my near approaching death.
The Song.
Adieu, farewell earths bliss,
This world uncertain is,
Fond are life's lustful joys,
Death proves them all but toys,
None from his darts can fly,
I am sick, I must dye.
Lord have mercy on us.
Rich men, trust not in wealth,
Gold cannot buy you health,
Physic himself must fade.
All things, to end are made,
The plague full swift goes hye,
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Beauty is but a flower,
Which wrinckles will devour,
Brightness falls from the air,
Queens have died young, and fair,
Dust has closde Helens eye.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Strength stoopes unto the grave,
Worms feed on Hector brave,
Swords may not fight with fate,
Earth still holds open her gate,
Come, come, the bells do cry.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Wit with his wantonness,
Tastes deaths bitterness,
Hels executioner,
Has no ears for to hear,
What vain art can reply.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Haste therefore each degree,
To welcome destiny:
Heaven is our heritage,
Earth but a players stage,
Mount we unto the sky.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.

Summer. Beshrew me, but thy song has moved me.

Will Summer. Lord have mercy on us, how lamentable it is*
Enter Vertumnus with Christmas and Backwinter.
Vertumnus. I have dispatched, my Lord, I have brought you them you sent me for.


Will Su^mer. What say thou? have thou made a good batch?
I pray thee give me a new loaf.

Summer. Christmas, how chance thou come not as the rest,
Accompanied with some music, or some song?
A merry Carroll would have graced thee well,
Thy ancestors have used it heretofore.

Christmas. I, antiquity was the mother of ignorance: this latter world that
sees but with her spectacles, has spied a pad in those sports more then they
could.


Summer. What, is it against thy conscience for to sing?

Christmas. No nor to say, by my troth, if I may get a good bargain.


Summer. Why, thou should spend, thou should not care to get. Christmas
is god of hospitality.


Christmas. So will he never be of good husbandry. I may say to you, there is
many an old god, that is now grown out of fashion. So is the god of
hospitality.


Summer. What reason can thou give he should be left?

Christmas. No other reason, but that Gluttony is a sin, and too many
dunghils are infectious. A man's belly was not made for a poudring beef tub: to
feed the poor twelve days, and let them starve all the year after, would
but stretch out the guts wider then they should be, and so make famine a bigger
den in their bellies, then he had before. I should kill an ox, and have some
such fellow as Milo to come and eat it up at a mouth-full. Or like the
Sybarites, do nothing all one year, but bid ghestes against the next year.
The scraping of trenchers you think would put a man to no charges. It is not a
hundredth pound a year would serve the scullions in dishclouts. My house stands
upon vaults, it will fall if it be ouer-loden with a multitude. Besides, have
you never read of a city that was vnderminde and destroyed by Mowles? So, say I
keep hospitality, and a whole fair of beggars bid me to dinner every day,
what with making legs, when they thank me at their going away, and settling
their wallets handsomely on their backs, they would shake as many lice on the
ground, as were able to undermine my house, and undo me utterly: It is their
prayers would build it again, if it were overthrown by this vermin, would
it? I pray, who begun feasting, and gourmandize first, but Sardanapalus, Nero,
Heliogabalus, Commodus, tyra^ts, whoremasters, unthrifts? Some call them
Emperors, but I respect no crowns, but crowns in the purse. Any man may
wear a silver crown, that has made a fray in Smithfield, and lost but a
piece of his brain pan. And to tell you plain, your golden crowns are little
better in substance, and many times got after the same sort.


Summer. Grosse-headed sot, how light he makes of state!

Autumn. Who treads not on stars when they are fallen?
Who talks not of states, when they are dead?
A fool conceits no further then he sees,
He has no scence of ought, but what he feels.

Christmas. I, I, such wise men as you, come to beg at such fools doors as
we be.


Autumn. Thou shutst thy door, how should we beg of thee?
No alms but thy sincke carries from thy house.

Will Summer. And I can tell you, that is as plentiful alms for the plague, as
the sheriffs tub to them of Newgate.


Autumn. For feasts thou keep none, cankers thou feedst:
The worms will curse thy flesh another day,
Because it yields them no fatter pray.

Christmas. What worms do another day I care not, but I Will be sworn upon a
whole Kilderkin of single Beer, I will not have a worme-eaten nose like a
Pursiuant, while I live. Feasts ere but puffing up of the flesh, the purueyers
for diseases, travel, cost, time ill spent. O, it were a trim thing to send,
as the Romans did, round about the world for provision for one banquet. I must
rigge ships to Samos for Peacocks, to Paphos for Pigeons, to Austria for
Oysters, to Phasis for Phesants, to Arabia for Phaenixes, to Meander for Swans,
to the Orcades for Geese, to Phrigia for Woodcocks, to Malta for Cranes, to the
Isle of Man for Puffins, to Ambracia for Goats, to Tartole for Lampreys, to
Egypt for Dates, to Spain for Chestnuts, and all for one feast.


Will Summer. O sir, you need not, you may buy them at London better cheap.


Christmas. Liberalit as liberalit ate perit, love me a little and love me
long: our feet must have wherewithal to feed the stones, out backs walls of
wool to keep out the cold that besieges our warm blood, our doors must
have bars, our dubblets must have buttons. Item, for an old sword to scrape
the stones before the door with, three halfe-pence for stitching a wodden
tanckard that was burst. These Water-bearers will empty the conduit and a man's
coffers at once. Not a Porter that brings a man a letter, but will have his
penny. I am afraid to keep past one or two servants, least hungry knaves they
should rob me: and those I keep, I warrant I do not pamper up too lusty, I
keep them under with red Herring and poor John all the year long. I have
dambd up all my chimnies for fear (though I burn nothing but small cole) my
house should be set on fire with the smoke. I will not deny, but once in a
dozen year when there is a great rot of sheep, and I know not what to do with
them, I keep open house for all the beggars, in some of my out-yardes, marry
they must bring bread with them, I am no Baker.


Will Summer. As good men as you, and have thought no scorn to serve their
prentiships on the pillory.


Summer. Winter, is this thy son? hear'st how he talks?

Winter. I am his father, therefore may not speak,
But otherwise I could excuse his fault.

Summer. Christmas, I tell thee plain, thou art a snudge.
And were not that we love thy father well,
Thou should have felt, what longs to Avarice.
It is the honor of Nobility,
To keep high days and solemn festiuals:
Then, to set their magnificence to view,
To frolic open with their favorites,
And use their neighbors with all courtesy,
When thou in huggar mugger spend'st thy wealth.
Amend thy manners, breathe thy rusty gold:
Bounty will win thee love, when thou art old.

Will Summer. I, that bounty would I feign meet, to borrow money of, he is
fairly blessed now a days, that scapes blows when he begges. Verba dandi and
reddendi, go together in the Grammar rule: there is no giving but with
condition of restoring: ah Benedicite, well is he has no necessity of gold ne
of sustenance; slow good hap comes by chance; flattery best fares; Arts are
but idle wares; fair words want giving hands; the Leto begs that has no
lands; fie on thee thou scuruy knave, that have naught, and yet go brave; a
prison be thy death bed, or be hanged all save the head.


Summer. Back-winter, stand forth.

Vertum. Stand forth, stand forth, hold up your head, speak out.

Back-winter. What, should I stand? or whether, should I go?

Summer. Autumn accuses thee of sundry crimes,
Which here thou art to clear, or to confess.

Back-winter. With thee, or Autumn, have I naught to do:
I would you were both hanged face to face.

Summer. Is this the reverence that thou ow'st to us?

Back-winter. Why not? what art thou?
Shall thou always live?

Autumn. It is the veriest Dog in Christendom.

Winter. That Is for he barks at such a knave as thou.

Back-winter. Would I could bark the sun out of the sky,
Turn Moon and stars to frozen Meteors,
And make the Ocean a dry land of Ice,
With tempest of my breath, turn up high trees,
On mountains heap up second mounts of snow,
Which melted into water, might fall down,
As fell the deluge on the former world.
I hate the air, the fire, the Spring, the year,
And what so e're brings mankind any good.
O that my looks were lightning to blast fruits!
Would I with thunder presently might dye,
So I might speak in thunder, to slay men.
Earth, if I cannot iniure thee enough,
I Will bite thee with my teeth, I Will seratch thee thus,
I Will beat down the partition with my heels,
Which as a mud-vault seuers hell and thee.
Spirits, come up, it is I that knock for you,
One that enuies the world, far more then you:
Come up in millions, millions are to few,
To execute the malice I intend.

Summer. O scelus inauditum, O vox damnatorum!
Not raging Haecuba, whose hollow eyes
Gave suck to fifty sorrows at one time,
That mid wife to so many murders was,
Used half the execrations that thou do.

Back-winter. More I will use, if more I may prevail:
Back-winter comes but seldom forth abroad,
But when he comes, he pincheth to the proof;
Winter is mild, his son is rough and stern.
Ovid could well write of my tyrranny,
When he was banished to the frozen Zoane.

Summer. And banished be thou from my fertile bounds.
Winter, imprison him in thy dark Cell,
Or with the winds, in bellowing caves of brass,
Let stern Hipporlatos lock him up safe,
Never to peep forth, but when thou faint and weak
Want him to aid thee in thy regiment.

Back-winter. I will peep forth, thy kingdom to supplant:
My father I will quickly freeze to death,
And then sole Monarch will I sit and think,
How I may banish thee, as thou do me.

Winter. I see my downfall written in his brows:
Convey him hence, to his assigned hell.
Fathers are given to love their sons too well.

Will Summer. No by my troth, nor mothers neither, I am sure I could never find
it. This Back-winter plays a railing part to no purpose, my small learning
finds no reason for it, except as a Back-winter or an after winter is more
raging tempestuous, and violent then the beginning of Winter, so he brings him
in stamping and raging as if he were mad, when his father is a jolly mild
quiet old man, and stands still and does nothing. The court accepts of your
meaning; you might have writ in the margent of your play-booke, Let there be a
few rushes laid in the place where Back-winter shall tumble, for fear of
raying his clothes: or set down, Enter Back-winter, with his boy, bringing a
brush after him, to take off the dust if need require. But you will never have
any wardrobe wit while you live. I pray you hold the book well, we be not
nonplus in the latter end of the play.


Summer. This is the last stroke, my toungs clock must strike,
My last will, which I will that you perform:
My crown I have disposde already of.
Item, I give my withered flowers, and herbs,
Unto dead corses, for to deck them with,
My shady walks to great men's seruitors,
Who in their masters shadows walk secure,
My pleasant open air, and fragrant smells,
To Croyden and the grounds abutting round,
My heat and warmth to toyling laborers,
My long days to bondmen, and prisoners,
My short nights to young married souls,
My drought and thirst, to drunkards quenchlesse throats,
My fruits to Autumn my adopted heir,
My murmuring springs, musicians of sweet sleep,
To murmuring malcontents, with their well tun'de cares,
Channel'd in a sweet falling quaterzaine,
Do lull their ears asleep, listening themselves.
And finally, O words, now cleanse your course,
Unto Eliza that most sacred Dame,
Whom none but Saints and Angels ought to name;
All my fair days remaining, I bequeath
To wait upon her till she be returned.
Autumn, I charge thee, when that I am dead,
Be pressed and serviceable at her beck,
Present her with thy goodliest ripened fruits,
Unclothe no Arbors where she ever sat,
Touch not a tree, thou think she may pass by.
And Winter, with thy wrythen frostie face,
Smoothe up thy visage when thou lookst on her,
Thou never lookst on such bright majesty:
A charmed circle draw about her court,
Wherein warm days may dance, and no cold come,
On seas let winds make war, not vex her rest,
Quiet enclose her bed, thought fly her breast.
Ah gracious Queen, though Summer pine away,
Yet let thy flourishing stand at a stay,
First droupe this universals aged frame,
E're any malady thy strength should tame:
Heaven raise up pillars to uphold thy hand,
Peace may have still his temple in thy land.
Lo, I have said, this is the total sum.
Autumn and Winter, on your faithfulness,
For the performance I do firmly build.
Farewell, my friends, Summer bids you farewell,
Archers, and bowlers, all my followers,
A dieu, and dwell with desolation,
Silence must be your masters mansion:
Slow marching thus, descend I to the feends.
Weep heavens, mourn earth, here Summer ends.
Here the Satyrs and Wood-nimphes carry him out, singing as he came in. The
Song.
Autumn has all the Summers fruitful treasure,
Gone is our sport, fled is poor Croydens pleasure:
Short days, sharp days, long nights come on a pace,
Ah who shall hide us, from the Winters face?
Cold does increase, the sickness will not cease,
And here we lie God knows, with little ease:
From winter, plague and pestilence, good Lord deliver us.
London does mourn, Lambith is quite forlorn,
Trades cry, Woe worth, that ever they were borne:
The want of Term, is town and Cities harms,
Close chambers we do want, to keep us warm,
Long banished must we live from our friends:
This low built bouse, will bring us to our ends.
From winter, plague and pestilence, good Lord deliver us.

WilSummer. How is it? how is it? you that be of the grauer sort, do you think
these youths worthy of a Plaudite for praying for the Queen, and singing of
the Letany? they are poor fellows I must needs say, and have bestowed great
labor in sowing leaves, and grass, and straw, and moss upon cast suites.
You may do well to warm your hands with clapping, before you go to bed, and
send them to the tavern with merry hearts. Here is a pretty boy comes with an
Epilogue, to get Enter a (...)tle boy with an Epilogue.
him audacity. I pray you sit still a little, and hear him say his lesson
without book. It is a good boy, be not afraid, turn thy face to my Lord.
Thou and I will play at poutch, to morrow morning for a breakfast. Come and sit
on my knee, and I Will dance thee, if thou can not endure to stand.


The Epilogue.
Ulysses a Dwarffe, and the prolocutor for the Graecians, gave me leave that am
a Pigmee, to do an Embassage to you from the Cranes: Gentlemen (for Kings are
no better) certain humble Animals, called our Actors, commend them unto you;
who, what offense they have committed, I know not (except it be in purloyning
some hours out of times treasury, that might have been better imployde; but
by me (the agent for their imperfections) they humbly crave pardon, if happily
some of their terms have trodde awrye, or their tongues slumbled unwittingly
on any man's content. In much Corn is some Cockle; in a heap of coin here
and there a piece of Copper; wit has his dregs as well as wine; words their
waste, Ink his blots, every speech his Parenthesis, Poetical fury, as well
Crabbes as Sweetings for his Summer fruits. Nemo sapit omnibus horis. Their
folly is deceased, their fear is yet living. Nothing can kill an Ass but
cold: cold entertainment, discouraging scoffs, authorized disgraces, may
kill a whole litter of young Asses of them here at once, that have traueld
thus far in impudence, only in hope to sit a sunning in your smiles. The
Romans dedicated a Temple to the fever quartane, thinking it some great God,
because it shook them so: and another, to Ill fortune in Exquilliis a
Mountain in Room, that it should not plague them at Cards and Dice. Your
Graces frowns are to them shaking fevers, your least disfavors, the greatest
ill fortune that may betide them. They can build no Temples, but themselves
and their best endeavors, with all prostrate reverence, they here dedicate and
offer up, wholly to your service. Sis bonus, O faelixque tuis. To make the gods
merry, the celestial clown Vulcan tun'de his polt foot, to the measures of
Apolloes Lute, and daunst a limping Gallyard in Jove's starrie hall. To make you
merry that are the Gods of Art, and guides unto heaven, a number of rude
Vulcans, unwieldy speakers, hammer-headed clownes (for so it pleases them in
modesty to name themselves) have set their deformities to view, as it were in
a dance here before you. Bear with their wants, lull melancholy asleep with
their absurdities, and expect hereafter better fruits of their industry.
Little creatures often terrify great beasts: the Elephant flies from a Ram,
the Lion from a Cock and from fire; the Crocodile from all Seafish, the Whale
from the noise of parched bones; light toys chase great cares. The greatfoole
Toy has marde the play: Good night, Gentlemen; I go, let him be carried away.

WilSummer. Is It true Iackanapes, do you serve me so? As sure as this coat is
too short for me, all the Points of your hoase for this are condemnde to my
pocket, if you and I e're play at spanne Counter more. Valete, spectatores, pay
for this sport with a Plaudite, and the next time the wind blows from this
corner, we will make you ten times as merry.

Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor vlli.

FINIS.

