THE ACTS OF THE Embassage PASSED AT THE meatinge of the Lords and Princes of
Germany at Naumburg in Thuringe concerning the matters there moved by Pope
Pius the iiij. in the year of our Lord. 1561. and the fysth day of February.

Item, The answer of the same Lords and Princes, given to the Popes Nuntio
upon the eygth day of February.

Translated out of Duch into English.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath S. Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The Summa of the matters moved by the Nuntio of Pope Pius the forth, at ye
meating of the Lords and Princes of Germany at Nau^burge in Turinge the fyfth
day of Februarij, in the year of our Lord. 1561.
The Popes Legate said. AS soon as the Popes holiness was called to the
gouenme^t of holy church he by and by, according to his Pastoral office and
Popedom, set all his thought and care how to reform, the euel and corrupt
manners of life, now used, that the fredome of the church, might once again be
restored, and all people reduced to the unity of one faith. And forasmuch as,
to the reducing of good, and putting away of evil there can be found none other
medicyne nor help, but by the kepinge of a general Council: he has with ye
mature and well adussed council of his Cardinals, by his full power and
authority given him of god, determined to hold an holy Council, at Ester, in
the city of Trient. And to the end that this may be known to al princes, that
they also may take the like care, and in like manner do their diligence in
councelling that ye Duch nation may have peace and quietness, and joining in
care with ye Popes holiness, they may together set to their helpinge hand, he
has of very love and good will which he has ever borne unto ye Duch nation,
and for ye great desire to seek their unity, sent forth us his legates yt we in
his name should prove and move every Lord severally, pray, admonish, and most
ernestly advertise, and require them, ye they will visit this general counsel,
and permit yt this his blessed care and purpose may procead and take effect.
Forasmuch as all matters therein shall be quietly mildly and peaceably handled,
and howsoever the matter falls out, yt shall be with like mildnes herd and
determined. For ye popes holiness in this, seeks none other thing, but how ye
church may again be brought to peace and tranquilitye.

And to this end the pope is is ready to give unto ye Princes a free and suer
saulfe Conducte, in all the best and in as a^ple and large manner as ever yet
has bene' given, or else may be inverted to be given. Wherefore ye popes holiness
besecheth and admonishes, that ye Princes will, all and every one send their
Ambassadors with full aucthority thither, that throw their diligence, after
the Schism (wherein are as many sundry kinds of religion as good
Imaginations, and so many so^dry gospels as teachers) be pacified, the church
may again be restored to her former beauty, one faith may be holden in all
countries, and one God of all men in all places worshipped.

What more is in our Embassage (said the Legate) it shall be declared by my
fellow Co^missioner.

Then spoke the same as here after follows. RIght Noble Princes, forasmuch as
the pops holiness has given us both one commandment, I thinck it not neadful
to repete those things that my fellow Commissioner has propounded concerning
the miserable estate of the church. For every man may openly see, to what
mysery the matter will grow, and what will be the end thereof. For one misery
springs after another, and it shall at last give an open way to the enemy of
christendom, to destroi ye common wealth It were very nedeful therefore to
prevent this mischief, this imminent peril requires speady redres this
councelleth ye good opportunity of time and goodness of Pope Pius, whose full
endeavor good meaning and diligence also is to be regarded. There was never a
better opportunity, to making of peace, nor never can there be a better the^ is
at this present, when al Christen realms are in quiet, and one pope is given
of God, who bears his singular good will and favor toward ye Potentats, and
seeks the salvation of their souls, and holly endeavors hiself to bring ye
church again to unity peace and quietness.

The answer of the lords and Princes of Germany given to the Popes Nu^tio, in
the Diet of Nau^burg in Thuring, in Febr. An 1561.
THe right high excellent and noble Lords and Princes of ye holy Romayn Empire
here present, and also Thambassadours and councellers of those that be absent
has commanded to give this answer, unto your wurds and message, done and
presented before their most honorable lord ships and Princelye graces. Namelye,
that their Noble Lordships and Princely graces doubt nothing at all, that many
men well learned, wise and fearing God, at all times and among al people of the
whole world and that of long time have wished, that the Christian church
might be brought to some better estate and stay, and even now at this time
make they devout and hearty prayer with sighing unto God that once at the last
the pure doctrine may be restored and set up, and the horible misuses, which
have been brought into the Church, may through a Christian reformacion cease and
be put away. Which desire of reformation, and prayer to God for the same
doubteles ought as well to be in the Romish Popes who so long and many years
have taken upon them with so great po^pe the name and title of the Church. But
to what purpose? Nameli, with lust to reign over other, to set kigdown and
realms at debat, and to bring in by heaps, into the church manifest and
known Idolatry, to maintain every Pope for his time their gloriouse estate
rather the^ to help and refourme the abuses of the church, which thing is
manifest to all honest and goodherted Christians, which thing also many wise
and sage men, yt other wise have joined and confederat them selves to the pope,
does themselfes acknowledge and confess.

But the forsaid noble lords and princes here present and ye Ambassadors of
the lords abse^t wonder much of what proud custom or presu^ptuouse hope pope
Pius ye iiij. presumes by this his message to summone the^ to a counsel, or to
apoit the^ to come to Trie^t. Seeing. it is not vnkno we^ both to yt pope and to
you what religion ye estates of ye auspurg confession holds and upon what
occasions they have been dryue^ and compelled to purg and reform their
churches according to ye true doctrine of ye gospel, and to separate the^selfs
from yt multitude yt with thoppression of yt truth and godly doctrine, seek
much more their own gain, then Christ's glory. For the lords and Princes
pleasur is, yt the pope and all that take his part shall perfectlye know and be
assured, yt they acknowledge not ye power or auctority of ye romish sea. And yt
they know it for an undoubted truth by ye testimony both of Gods law and man's,
yt it belongs not of right to ye Romish pope to apoint a general counsel. For
yt yt self and same person, of who^ all division and ichnine in yt church has
come, which also horribl^ ^ugneth ye open and manifest truth, should take upon
hi^ ye dignity and office of a judge, to determine ye matters in controversy, yt
common wit of man be it never so simple, and ye testimony of Gods law, does us
to understand that it is unright.

Furthermore their honorable estats and lordships ernestly say, yt their
graciouse honors ar vnfre^dly used, with this your talk and massage done unto
them: as who says to men yt know not what their faith is: but yt there are, as
many Gospels as teachers, and as many religions, as men's good meaninges. For
their high honors, have not only made a pure and clear Confession of their
faith, which they delivered to Charles the v. at Auspurg in the year of our
Lord. 1530. but also they have since yt time set furthe and declared ye same
truth of godly doctrine, and is welset forth by mani other writigs which are
every where to be seen.

But in what errors ye Romish Church is at this time drowned, and with what
abominable misuses and Idolatrish inuentio^s of men, the doctrine of ye gospel
is there oppressed, yea so far: yt it is more like an Heythnesse then a
Christian Religion, is sufficiently witnessed by the manifold complaint of all
the world. And forasmuch as the noble Lords and Princes of Duchland, no^ as
men fallen in error, not of froward and conte^nouse mind, nor nor new
fangelled lightness, but by the ernest and straight commandment of God, be
compelled to depart from the Romish church, they are purposed upon the same
ground and commandment so to continue and can not suffer that the pope shall
make or appoint any law for them. For they acknowledge none other power or
magistrate, then their Emperor Ferdinando, whose Ambassadors are here and
have declared unto us, what their hop^ and purpose is as concerning a general
council.

Lastly as concerning your own Persons, their hye honors and graces, would ye
shield be thus persuaded, that if ye had not brought this message from ye
Romish Pope, they would have welcomed you, as such as come of the honorable
Venetyan house, and have showed to you all loving and gentil inter saynment,
there by to declare in sompart their friendly good will to that honorable
regiment of Venice, and also to do you understand, that they judge you worthy
both praise and their favor for your honorable behaueour, high prudence, and
wisdom.

FINIS.

