A MOST LEARNED AND PIOUS TREAtise, full of Divine and Humane Philosophy,
framing a Ladder, WHEREBY OUR MINDS May Ascend to God, by the Stepps of his
Creatures.

Written in Latin by the illustrous and learned Cardinal Bellarmine, of the
society of Jesus. 1615.

Translated into English, By T. B. Gent.

Blessed is the man that has disposed ascentions in his heart. Psalm. 83.
Printed at Doway Anno Domini. 1616.

THE TRANSLATOR To the Reader.
AT the request of one that might command, I took in hand the Translation of
this book. The Subject thereof, is the Summum bonum or Highest Happiness of
this life: for it teaches us a compendious way by the Steps of Creatures to
ascend unto the Creator, and now on earth to be linked to him in Love, that
hereafter in heaven we may be united to him in glory. Of the Authors Worth I
will say with Salust beginning the Description of the City Carthage: De
Carthagine Silere Melius puto, Salust. In Bello Ingurth. Fol. 76.
quam parum dicere. Of Carthage I think it better to say nothing, then to
speak sparingly. But if Virtue and Truth appear best apparelled, when they
are most naked: then are they here set forth in their Hollydaie attire.
Divine and Humane Philosophy also (like the Sun and Moon in one Hemisphere)
shine here both together, and cast their beams upon all that are desirous to
receive Light or Life from their heat. If I have committed any negligence in
the action of my part. I desire thy friendly censure, and to remember that
Voces Artis (of which there are many in this book) are strangers to our
language, and cannot be made Denizens, but by prescription.

vale
It is the sweetest note that man can sing,
When grace tunes natures Key to virtues string.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND Reverend Prelate Peter Aldobrandine, Cardinal of
the holy Roman Church, Robert Bellarmine Cardinal sends greeting.
IN September last by Gods assistance, I finished as I was able, a Book Of the
ascension of the mind unto God by the stepps of his Creatures. For having
abandoned all other cares, I made choice to spend that Month by License of his
Holiness, in divine contemplation. And albeit I writ it only for my private
use: yet through the persuasions and advise of friends; I have published it,
and made it appear under the protection of your name. For no sort of men may
take more profitt thereby (if it shall profit any) then those which are most
occupied in public affairs, especially Prelates of the Church: Among whom you
are not inferior unto any; being a Cardinal, an Archbishop, and Chamberlain of
the holy Roman Church, and a Protector and President of the General
Inquisition. An other cause also why I Dedicate this book unto you, is to
leave unto the memory of posterity some Monument of your great benefits unto
me, and of my thankfulness unto you therefore. Neither do I doubt that the
smallness thereof will make it less grateful unto you: for books are not to
be esteemed by the multitude of their leaves: but by the fruitefulnesse of the
matter whereof they treat. As for this book how others will censure it I know
not: but to me it has proved more profitable then my other works: For which
cause I use not to read my other books but upon necessity: but this book I
have willingly read over three or four times, and purpose hereafter to read it
often. Although perhapps not the desert thereof, but affection makes it dearer
unto me; because I have begotten it like an other Benjamin in my last old age.
Receive therefore most Worthy Cardinal this small present from me as a
testimony of my due obseruancie toward you: And as a Monitor executing his
Charge; that when the troubles of business overmuch oppress you, and seek to
hinder you from your accustomed hours of prayer unto God: it may modestly
remember you to lay aside for a while all such affairs, and to withdraw your
mind unto those inward and usual joys, that by reading and meditating you
may see That our Lord is God, to wit, the only true, highest, and everlasting
happiness, in obtaining or loosing whereof, man's greatest felicity or misery
does consist.

The Preface of the Author.
THe holy Scripture does admonish us, to seek God diligently. For although God
is not far from every one of us, Act. 17
For in him we live, and move, and be, As the Apostle says: yet we are far
from God, so that unless we daily dispose our hearts to ascend, and make for
our selves a Ladder unto heaven, and with great labor seek God, we shall with
the Prodigal Son, Luke 15
feed Swine in a country, far off from our Father and home.

And that we may briefly declare how these things may stand together, to wit,
that God is not far from us: And yet we are far from him; we say, that God
is not far from us, because he always sees us, before whose eyes all things
are present: He always thinks of us, 1. Pet. 5
because He has care of us; He always touches us, Heb. 1
because He carries all things by the word of his power; But we are far
from God, because we see not God, neither can we see him, 1. Tim. 6
For he inhabiteth light not accessible: neither are we sufficient to think
any thing of God of our selves, ^. Cor. 3
as of our selves. Much less are we able to touch him, and cleave to him with
pious affection, unless his right hand receive and draw us unto him. And
therefore David when he had said: Psalm. 62
My soul has cleaued after thee, presently added, Thy right hand has
received me. Neither are we only far from God because we cannot see him,
nor easily think of him, nor with affection cleave unto him: but also because
being busied about temporal goods, with the which we are encompassed and
overwhelmed; we very easily forget God, and with a dry heart we scarcely with
our tongue sound his name in Psalms and sacred prayers.

This therefore is the cause, why the holy Ghost does in the holy Scripture (as
we said even now) so often admonish us to seek God: Psalm. 61
Seek God and your Soul shall live. And Seek his face always. Psalm. 104
And Our Lord is good to them that hope in him, Lamen. 3
to the soul that seeks him. Isay 49
And seek our Lord whilst he may be found. Wisd. 1 Deuteronomy 4
And, In simplicity of heart seek him. And, when thou shall seek God, thou
shall find him: yet so, if thou seek him with all thy heart.

But although this diligence in seeking God, belong unto all the faithful: yet
it most properly appertains unto the Prelates of the Church, as St.
Augustine, St. Gregory, St. Bernard and other holy Fathers do witness. For
they plainly write, that a Prelate cannot proffit both himself and others,
unless he diligently apply himself unto the Meditation of divine matters,
and the reparation of his own mind St. Augustine in his books of the City
of God says: 19 Ciu. 19
Ocium Sanctum quaerit charitas veritatis, etc. The love of truth seeks holy
rest: the necessity of Charity undertakes just business; but neither is the
delight of truth to be altogether forsaken, least the sweetness thereof being
withdrawn, the necessity of business oppress. And the same St. Augustine
speaking in his Confessions of himself, and of his frequent Meditation of God
by creatures says: Sepe ^stud facio, etc. 10. Conf. c. 40.
I often do this: It delights me, and when I can be spared from my
necessary business, I have recourse unto this pleasure. St. Gregory in his
book of pastoral Charge says: 2. par. Pastor. 5
Sit Rector etc. Let a Prelate be equal unto any in compassion, and before all
in contemplation, that through the bowels of piety be may transferr the
infirmities of others unto himself, and by the height of Contemplation in
seeking after things invisible, he may exceed himself. And St. Gregory in the
same place, brings the example of Moses and Christ. For Moses often went
into the Tabernacle and came out; He went in, that he might contemplate Gods
Secrets; he came out, that he might bear with the infirmities of his
neighbors. And Christ himself in the day time, by preaching and working
miracles, sought the salvation of his neighbors, but the night he passed over
without sleep in prayer and contemplation. For he passed (says St. Luke) the
whole night in the prayer of God. Luke 6
Many things also like unto these may be read in the last chapter of the same
book.

Moreover St. Bernard to admonish seriously Pope Eugenius who was sometime his
scholar, not to give himself wholly to action, but sometime every day to
recollect himself, and to enjoy holy rest and heavenly food, writ five books
of Consideration; in the which he does not only exhort him unto the daily
Meditation of divine things; but also does plainly teach him the manner and
method how to meditate, and by Meditation to ascend, and by ascension to unite
himself unto God in understanding and affection. Neither does he admit that
excuse which he might have pretended, and which many now a days pretend; to
wit, that the ouer-many businesses wherewith the office of a Bishop is
accompanied, would not afford him leisure enough to apply himsele unto the
mediation of divine things For none truly ought to give himself so wholly to
outward businesses, but that he may take sometime to strengthen his body with
meat drink and sleep. And if the body do duly require this refection and
rest, with how much more reason does the soul require her meat and rest?
neither can she without this refection, truly execute her office by any means,
amidst the encumbrances of so many great affairs. But the meat of the soul
is prayer, and her rest is contemplation, by the which Ascentions are framed in
the heart, Psalm. 83
That the God of Gods may be seen in Syon; as much as in this veil of tears
he maybe seen.

But we mortal men (as it seems) can find no other Ladder whereby to
ascend unto God, but by the works of God: For those who by the singular gift
of God, have (by an other way) been admitted into Paradise to hear Gods
Secrets, which it is not lawful for a man to speak; are not said to have
Ascended, but to have been wrapped. Which St. Paul does plainly confess of
himself, when he says, 2 Cor. 12
I was wrapped into Paradise: and I heard secret words, which it is not lawful
for a man to speak.

And that a man may by the works of God, that is, by Creatures ascend unto the
knowledge and love of the Creator, the book of Wisdom does teach, Wisd. 13
Romans 1
and the Apostle to the Romans, and reason it self does sufficiently confirm,
since the efficient cause may be known by the effects, and the example by the
Image: neither can there be any doubt, but that all creatures are the works of
God, and that men and Angels, are not only his works but also his Images, as
the holy Scripture teaches us.

I therefore being moved by these reasons, having obtained some small vacancie
from public affairs, and admonished by the example of St. Bonauenture, who
in the like vacancie writ a book entitled The Pilgrimage of the mind unto
God; have essayed from the contemplation of creatures, to make a Ladder by the
which we may in some sort ascend unto God. And I have divided it into fifteen
Stepps, in resemblance of the fifteen stepps by the which they went up into
the Temple of Solomon, and of the fifteen Psalms which are called Gradualles.

THE FIRST STEPP. From the Consideration of Man.
IF any one truly desire to erect a Ladder unto God, Cap. 1.
he ought to begin from the consideration of himself. For every one of us, is
both the creature and image of God, and nothing is nearer us then our selves.

Therefore not without cause Moses says: Attend tibi, Attend to thy self;
upon which two words Basil the great writ an excellent sermon. For he that
shall truly behold himself, and consider what is within him, shall find as it
were an Abridgement of the whole world, whereby he may easily ascend unto the
maker of all things.

But I at this present, intend to seek out nothing else but the four common
causes; who is my maker, of what matter he made me, what form he gave me, and
to what end he produced me. For if I seek my maker, I shall find him only
God; If I seek the matter whereof he made me, I shall find it nothing; whence
I gather, whatsoever is in me is made by God, and the whole to be of God; if I
seek my form I shall find my self to be the Image of God: If I seek my
end, I shall find that the same God is my Chief and total happiness.
Therefore I may understand, there is so great a conjunction and nearenesse of
my self with God, that he only is my maker, my author my Father, my example,
my happiness, and my All. And if I understand this, how can it be but that I
should most ardently seek him? think of him? sigh for him? desire to see and
embrace him? and detest the great blindenes of my heart, which so long time has
desired, sought, or thought of nothing less then of God who only is All unto
me?

But let us consider more diligently every particular: Cap. 2.
I ask thee O my soul, who gave thee being when as a little time before thou
wast nothing? surely the parents of thy flesh begot thee not; for what is borne
of flesh is flesh; but thou art a spirit: neither did heaven or earth, or the
Sun or stars produce thee; for those are bodies, thou without body: nor yet
could Angels, Archangels, or any other spiritual creature be causes of thy
being, for thou art not made of any matter, but created of nothing: And none
but God almighty can make something of nothing.

He therefore alone without compagnion, without help, with his own hands
which are his understanding and will, created thee when he pleased.

But perhaps not God, but creatures produced thy body, that as thy soul must
acknowledge God, so thy body must acknowledge thy parents for authors: It is
not so; For although God use the means of parents to begette the flesh, as
inferior workmen in the buylding of a house; yet is he the chief buylder,
Author, and true father both of the soul and body, and so would be said to be
the beginning of man's whole essence: For if the parents of thy flesh were the
true Authors, and as it were the Chief framers of thy body; they would know
how many muscelles, veins, synnowes, bones; how many humors, how many
turnings, and how many other things of like kind there are in man's body, all
which they are ignorant of, unless perhaps they have learned them by the art
of Anatomy.

Moreover when the body is sick, or a member withered or cut off, they could
certainly by the same art by which they made it, again repair it, if they
were the true Authors: even as those which make clockes or build houses, know
how to order and repair them. But parents know not how to do any of these
things. The conjunction also of the soul with the body, which is a special
part of the affection of man's nature, can be done by none but by a workman of
infinite power. For by what art but by divine, can a spirit be joined with
flesh in so near a bond as to be made one substance? For the body has no
proportion or likeness with the spirit. Psalm. 135
He therefore did it, who alone does great wonders.

Truly therefore does the holy ghost speak by Moses in Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 23
Nonne ipse est etc. Is not he thy father that has possessed thee, and made
and created thee? And by Job: Job. 10
With Skin and Flesh thou have clothed me: with bones and Sinnowes thou have
compacted me, And by the kingly Prophet: Psalm. 118
Thy hands have made me and formed me, and again: Psalm. 138
Thou have formed me and have put thy hand upon me. And the most wise mother
of the Machabaean children, 2 Mac. 7
I know not how you appeared in my womb: for neither did I give you Spirit
and Soul and life, and the members of every one, I my self framed not: but
indeed the Creator of the world, that has formed the Nativity of man, and
that invented the origin of all.

Hereupon surely the wisdom of God Christ our Lord said: Math. 22
Call none father to your selves upon earth: For one is your father he that is
in heaven.

By which admonition St. Augustine said to God of his son Adeodatus whom he
had begot in fornication: 9. Confess c. 6
Tu been seceras etc. Thou did make him well, but I beside sin had nothing in
that child.

Go to now my soul, if God be thy Author, and thy bodies also; if he be thy
Father, Supporter, and Nursse: if what thou art is of him: if what thou have,
thou receiuest from him: and what thou bopest thou expectest from him: why do
thou not glory in such a parent? why do thou not love him with all thy heart?
why do thou not for his sake contemn all earthly things? why do thou
suffer vain desires to ouerrule thee? Lift up thine eyes to him, fear not
thine enemies on earth, since thou have a father Almighty in heaven. With what
confidence and affection (think thou) did David say? Psalm. 59.
I am thine, save me. O my soul if thou would consider that the almighty
and everlasting God (who wants none of thy goods, and if thou perish he
loses nothing) turns not his eyes from thee, but so loves, protecteth,
directs and cherishes thee, as if thou were his greatest treasure: surely
thou would only hope in him, thou would fear him as thy Lord, and love
him as thy Father; neither should any temporal good or evil, separate thee
from his love.

Let us come to the matter whereof man is made. Cap. 3.
Truly it is most base; but it gives us thereby the greater occasion to
humble our selves, which is a virtue in this life very profitable and rare, and
therefore the more precious, and to be desired. And surely of the matter of our
souls there can be no doubt, but that it is That Nothing then the which what
can be imagined more vacant and vile? The immediate matter of the body, what is
it but menstruous blood? a thing so impure, as our eyes refuse to see, our
hands to touch, and our minds to think of. The matter whereof the first man
was made, what was it but red and barren earth, or dust and slime? Formauit
Deus, Genesis 2
etc. God formed man (says the Scripture) of the slime of the earth, and
again, God said to man: Dust thou art, Genesis 3
and into dust thou shall return. Wherefore the Patriarch Abraham remembering
his unworthiness, (...) unto God: Because I have once begun, Genesis 18
I will speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes. But yet here is not an
end of the baseness of this matter: for that dust or slime proceeded not from
an other matter, but from nothing: In the beginning God created heaven and
earth; and surely not of another heaven and earth, but of Nothing: so that
whether we consider the soul or body, it is reduced to Nothing from whence
this proud creature Man proceeded. He has nothing therefore to boast of, but
what he received from God. Truly the works of Men, which proceed either from
wit or labor, have ever somewhat of themselves, whereof if they had
understanding, they might glory against their maker. For a vessel of gold, a
chest of wood, a house of Iuory or Marble, if they could speak, might say to
him that made them; to thee I owe my form but not my matter; and more precious
that is, which from my self I have, then what I received from thee. But man
who has nothing from himself, nor is any thing of himself, can not glory in
any thing. And most truly says the Apostle: Gal. 6
If any man esteem himself something, whereas he is nothing, he seduceth
himself. And, What have thou that thou have not received? Cor. 4
and if thou have received, what do thou glory as if thou had not received?
Whereunto St. Cyprian agrees when he says: In nullo gloriandum quando nostrum
nihil est. Lib. 3 ad Quirinu^. 4.
We must glory in nothing, since nothing is ours. But thou will say, men do
many worthy works, for which they are deservedly praised, that virtue praised
may increase. It is so: but let the glory be to God not to themselves, as it is
written: 2 Cor. 10
He that glories, let him glory in our Lord. And, Psalm. 33
My soul shall be praised in our Lord. For I ask, when a man does some
excellent work, of what matter does he make it? by what virtue, and by whose
direction and help does he it? surely of a matter which God not man created,
and by that virtue which God gave unto him, and not he to himself: by Gods
direction and help also he does it, without which he could do no good. For God
does many good things in Man without Man; but Man does no good which God does
not cause Man to do, as it is said in the second Arausican Council c. 20. God
therefore does vouchsafe to use the ministry of man in doing good, the which
he could do without him, that Man may thereby acknowledge himself, more
indebted unto God, and not be proud of himself, but glory in our Lord.
Therefore my soul if thou be wise, sit down always in the lowest place;
steal not Gods glory neither in little nor in much; descend to thy Nothing
which only is thine, and all the world cannot make thee proud. But because
this precious virtue of humility was almost gone out of the world, and not to be
found either in the books of the Philosophers, or manners of the Gentiles: the
master of humility came from heaven, Phil. 2
And when he was in the form of God, equal to the Father, he exinanited
himself taking the form of a servant, and he humbled himself made obedient
unto death. And to Mankind he said: Learn of me, Mat. 11
because I am meek and humble of heart, and you shall find rest to your
souls. wherefore my soul, if perhaps thou art ashamed to imitate ye humility
of men; yet be not ashamed to imitate the humility of God who deceaueth not,
nor can be deceived: And Who resists the proud and gives grace to the
humble. Iam. 4.


It follows now that we consider the form which is the third cause. Cap 4.
And truly by how much the matter whereof man is made is more base; by so much
the form given to man, is more excellent. I omit the outward shape of his body
which surpasses all earthly living creatures in feature: yet that is not his
substantial, but accidental Form. For his substantial form, which makes
him a man distinguished from other living creatures, is his immortal soul
endued with reason and free will, which is Gods Image, made to his own likeness.

For so we read that God said when he made man: Let us make man to our Image
and likeness: Genesis 1.
And let him have dominion over the fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the
air, and the beasts, and the whole earth, and all creeping creatures upon the
earth. Man therefore is Gods Image, not because of his body, but of his soul;
for God is a Spirit, not a body. Et ibi est imago dei, etc. Hom. in exam. 10
And there is the Image of God (says St. Basil) where that is which
commands over other living creatures. But man commands over beasts, not by
the members of his body, the which are stronger in many beasts then in Man;
but by his mind endued with reason and free will; For not by that which he
has common with them does he rule them; but by that whereby he is
distinguished from them, and made like unto God.

Lift up thy mind my soul to thy example, and remember that the chief
commendation of the Image, is to be like thereunto. For although the example be
deformed (as the Devil is usually made) yet the commendation of the image, is
aptly to represent that deformed example. Therefore deformity in the example
shall still be deformity; but in the image it shall be beauty. And if the
example also be beautiful; the image shall be most precious, if it imitate (as
near as may be) the beauty thereof: the image likewise if it had
understanding, would desire nothing more, then continually to behold the
example, to fashion and frame it self to become most like thereunto.

Thy example O my soul is God an infinite beauty; 1 Ioh. c. 1
A light in whom there is no darkness; whose beauty the Sun and Moon
admire That thou may therefore imitate an example of such beauty, and desire
as much as thou can to be like him, (wherein consists thy highest
perfection, profit, honor, joy, rest and happiness) consider that the beauty
of God thy example consists in Wisdom and Holiness. For as the beauty of the
body arises from proportion of members, and an amiable color: so in the
beauty of the mind, an amiable color is the Light of Wisdom: and the
proportion of members is Justice: but by Justice no particular virtue is
understood; but that universal which comprehends all virtues. That soul
therefore is most beautiful, whose mind does shine with the light of Wisdom;
and whose will is confirmed in the fullnes of perfect Justice.

But God thy example (O my soul) is Wisdom and Justice, and therefore Beauty
it self. And because both this goodness is signified by the name of Holiness
in the Scriptures, Isay 6.
therefore in Isay the Angels cry unto God: Holy, holy, holy, Leuit. 11
Lord God of Sabbath, And God himself cries unto his Images: Be you holy,
because I your Lord God am holy. And our Lord in the Gospel: Math. 6.
Be you perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

If therefore thou desire (O my soul) as the true image of God to be like thy
example; thou must love Wisdom and Justice before all things. It is true
Wisdom to judge of all things according to the highest cause: the highest
cause is the will of God, or the law which does make known the will of God
unto men. Therefore if thou love Wisdom thou must not in any wise give ear
what the law of the flesh does teach, what the senses do esteem, what the
world does approve, what thy kinds folks persuade, and much less what
flatterers propound; but be deaf unto them all, and only attend the will of
thy Lord God, judging that wholly good, profitable, glorious, and to be desired
of thee, which is according thereunto. This is the Wisdom of Saints whereof the
wiseman writes: Wisd. 7
Above health and beauty did I love her, and purposed to have her for light,
because her light cannot be extinguished. And all good things came to me
together with her.

Moreover Justice is an other part of spiritual beauty, and comprehends all
virtues which adorn and perfect the Will, but especially Charity the Mother
and Root of virtues. Whereof St. Augustine in his last book of Nature and
grace speaks thus: Inohoata charitas, etc. De Natura and grat^a. c. 70
imperfect charity, is imperfect justice: Charity increased, is justice
increased: Perfect Charity, is perfect Justice: For, He that loves has
fulfilled the law because, Romans 13
Love works not evil: And therefore, Love is the fullness of the Law, as the
Apostle taught.

And again, He that keeps his word, 1 John 25
to wit, his commandments, in him in very deed the charity of God is perfited
as St. John speaks. Those therefore which will be like the divine example,
ought to obey him that says: Be ye therefore followers of God, Ephe. 5
as most dear Children, and walk in Love. For the son is the Image of the
Father, and the chief commendation of an Image (as we said before) is to be
like the example.

O my soul, that thou would truly understand these things, and be like thy
example in beautye of true Wisdom and Justice; then should thou please the
eyes of the Highest King: how great peace then should thou enjoy? how
would thou rejoice? how quickly would thou contemn all worldly delights?
And on the other side, if thou would consider, how greatly God is offended,
to see his Image destitute of the Light of Wisdom, and Beauty of Justice, to
be poluted, defiled, and darkened, and Man that was placed in such honor, as
to be like unto God, Psalm. 48
Now to be compared to beasts without understanding, and to become like unto
them, surely thou could not but quake, tremble, and be unquiet, until thou
had washed away all thy spots with floudes of tears flowing from deep
contrition, and spedily return to the likeness of thy most beautiful example.
And because while thou art a Pilgrim on earth, and do walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5
and not by Sight, thou do continually want the help of thy Lord God,
as well to remain in the likeness thou have already, as also daily to become
more like; that is, more bright and beautiful; Sigh therefore from the bothome
of thy heart to God, and say unto him: O holy and most merciful Lord, whom it
has pleased to make this my soul thy Image; make Perfect I beseech thee thy
said Image, increase in it Wisdom and Justice, bide it in thy secret
Tabernacle, that it be not defiled with the slime of carnal concupiscence,
smoke of worldly honor, or dust of earthly thoughts. Hitherto of the form.

There remains then the last cause, which is the end. Cap. 5
The end wherefore man was created, is no other but God himself. But because
the end is twofold, the one intrinsecall, the other external, let us briefly
consider each of them apart. The intrinsecal end of every thing is the perfect
estate to which it can come. As the intrinse call end of a palace is the
perfect sinishing thereof: for then it is said to be ended, when as nothing
belonging to the building is wanting: The intrinsecall end of a tree is the
most perfect estate which the nature thereof does require: For then a tree may
be said to have attained its end, when it spreads the boughs, brings forth
leaves, is beautified with blossoms, and soon after loaded with ripe fruit.
Man therefore who is created to a most high end, may then also be said to have
attained his end, when as his mind shall see God as he is, and in him known
all things; his will shall enjoy the chief happiness most ardently loved; and
his body being qualified with the glorious guiftes of immortality,
impassibilitie, and the like; shall obtain perpetual rest and joy. And
because the sight of God is the essence of this final happiness, by which we
which are the images of God must obtain a most perfect estate by the
resemblance of our divine example; therefore St. John writes: 1 John 3
Now we are the sons of God: and it has not yet appeared, what we shall be.
We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like to him: because we shall
see him as he is.

O my soul, if thou could conceive what this means: We shall be like to
him, because we shall see him as he is, how soon would all the clouds of
earthly thoughts be dispersed? God is most happy, and therefore most happy,
because he does always behold himself as he is, and does enjoy himself most
clearly seen, and most ardently loved from all eternity. Of this inestimable
good, he would have thee also partaker with the Angels. To this most high and
happy end he created thee, which is signified by that saying: Enter into the
joy of thy Lord, Math 25
That is, Be partaker of the joy which God himself does enjoy. And again,
Luc. 22
I dispose to you, as my father disposed to me a kingdom: that you may eat
and drink upon my table in my kingdom, That is, I make you partakers of my
kingdom, and kingly table, that you may enjoy that honor, power, and
pleasure, which I and God my Father enjoy. And who is able to conceive what is
the honor, power, pleasure and happiness of God? truly if any would but in
thought and hope ascend unto the Highness of our end; he would be ashamed to
contend for the possession of this earth, to grieve for any temporal loss, or
to joy for any temporal gain. He would I say be ashamed to be a fellow in the
pleasures of beasts, who is made a companion of Angels, and a partaker of Gods
friendship and of his inestimable delights, For all things among friends are
common.

But now the external end of every thing, is that for which it is made. The
end of a palace is the dweller therein: the end of a tree is the possessor
thereof: the end of man is only his Lord God. For of his own, and for
himself he made Man, and he keeps, feeds, and pays him his wages.
Therefore justly does he command and say: Deuteronomy. 6
The Lord thy God shall thou adore, and him only shall thou serve. But mark
diligently O my soul; The things which are made for man, are profitable to
man, and not to themselves; beasts labor for man, and not for themselves; the
fields, vineyards, and Orchards, fill the granaries, sellars, and purses of
men; neither do servants labor, sweat, and toil for themselves, but for the
profit, ease, and pleasure of their masters. But thy Lord God who wants
nothing, would have man truly serve him, and yet the profit and reward of his
service he will not have. Psalm. 85
O Lord sweet and mild and of much mercy, who would not serve thee with all
his heart if once he begin to taste a little the sweetness of thy government?
What O Lord do thou command thy servants? Take (thou say) my yoke upon
you. Math. 11
And what is thy yoke? My yoke (says he) is sweet, and my burden light.
Who would not willingly carry a yoke that does not punish but comfort, and a
burden that does not weary but refresh? Not without cause therefore does he
add, And ye shall find rest to your souls. And what is this yoke which
wearieth not, but brings rest?

Truly that first and greatest commandment; Love the Lord thy God from thy
whole h^rt. Math. 22
And what is more easy pleasant and delightful, then to love goodness,
beauty, and excellency it self, which thou art O my Lord God? Thy servant
David judged right who esteemed thy commandments, To be desired above gold
and much precious stone: Psalm. 18
and more sweet above honey, and the honey Comb. And he added. And in keeping
them is much reward. What means this O Lord? do thou promise reward to
those that keep thy commandments To be desired above gold, and more sireete
then the honey Comb? Yes truly, a most ample reward, Iam. 4
for James thy Apostle says: Our Lord has prepared a Crown of life for those
that love him. And what is a Crown of Life? Truly a greater Happiness then we
are able to conceive. For so speaks St. Paul out of Isay: 1. Cor. 2 Isay 64
Eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the
heart of Man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. Surely
therefore there is great reward for keeping thy commandments. Neither is that
first and greatest commandment profitable only to man obeying, and not to God
commanding: but also the rest of Gods commandments do perfect, beautify,
instruct and illuminate the obedient, and finally make them good and happy.
Therefore my soul if thou be wise understand that thou art created to Gods
glory, and thy eternal happiness; that is thy end, that is thy treasure and
center; if thou come to that end, thou shall be happy, if thou declyne from it,
thou art unhappy. Therefore think that assuredly good for thee, which directs
thee to that end: and that assuredly evil which causes thee to decline from
it. Prosperity and adversity, wealth and poverty, health and sickness,
honor and ignominy, life and death, of a wise man are neither to be desired
nor avoided; but if they make to Gods glory, and thy eternal welfare, they
are good, and to be desired: if they hinder it, they are evil and to be
avoided.

THE SECOND STEPP, From the Consideration of the greater world.
WE have framed the first Stepp of our Ladder of Ascension unto God, Cap. 1
from the Consideration of Man, who is called the Lesser World: Now we also
purpose to frame the Second Stepp, from the Consideration of this most great
corporal quantity, commonly called the Greater world. St. Gregory Nazianzen
writes in his second sermon of the Pasche, That God placed Man as a great
world in a lesser world; which is true if we separate Angels from the world:
For man is greater then the whole corporal world, not in quantity but in
quality: but if that Angels are comprehended in the world, as we in this place
comprehend them: then is man a Lesser world placed in a Greater world. In this
greater world therefore which conteyneth all things; many things are to be
wondered at; but especially quantity, multitude, variety, efficacy, and
beauty. All which (if by Gods assistance they be duly considered) are of great
force to eleuate the mind, and to make it become in a manner wrapped with
admiration of an infinite greatness, multitude, variety, efficacy and
beauty: and being returned to it self; whatsoever it beholds without God,
to despise as vain and of no moment.

Truly the earth is so great, that Ecclesiasticus says: Eccles. c. 1
The breadth of the earth, and profunditie of the depth, who has measured?
which may be understood; For that in so many thousand years as have passed
since the creation, as yet the whole surface of the earth (for that
Ecclesiasticus calls the breadth of the earth) is not known unto our men,
who daily have sought after it. And what I pray you is the greatness of the
earth compared to the compass of the highest heaven? It is said by Astronomers
to be as a Point, and not without cause. For we see the sun beams, so to
illuminate the opposite stars of the Firmament, although the earth be
between, as if the same were nothing at all. And if every star in the
Firmament be greater then the whole earth, (as the common opinion of wise men
is) and yet seem to us because of their almost infinite distance to be very
small; who then can conceive the greatness of heaven in which so many millions
of stars do shine? If therefore Ecclesiasticus said: The breadth of the
earth, and profunditie of the depth who has measured? What would he have said
of the Compass of the highest he even and distance thereof unto the lowest
hell? truly it is so great, that it cannot be conceived. Go too now my soul,
I ask thee, if the world be so great, how great is he that made the world?
Great is our Lord, and there is no end of his greatness. Hear Isay: Isay 40
Who has measured the waters with his fist and pondered the heavens with a
spanne? Who has poysed with three fingers the huge greatness of the earth?
Where St. Jerome says, that according to the translation of Aquila, by a fist
is understood the little finger; so that the sense is; The whole element of
water, which is less then the earth, is measured with one little finger of
God; the earth with three fingers, the heaven (which is greater then the earth
and water together) is pondered with a spanne. But this is spoken
metaphorically, for God is a Spirit, and has no hands nor fingers properly:
and the scripture by these comparisons, does sufficiently show, that God is
much greater then his Creatures; which Solomon signified more expressly when
he said: 2 Para. 6
The heaven and heavens of heavens do not contain thee. For if an other
world, or more worlds, yea infinite worlds were made, God would fill them
all. But think not my soul, thy God does so fill the world, that a part of
God is in a part of the world, and all God in all the world; for God has no
parts, but is all in all the world, and all in every part of the world.
Therefore if thou be faithful to him; although Armies rise up against thee,
thy heart shall not fear: for what should he fear who has an almighty
Father and friend? but if for thy sins thou have God an angry judge and an
almighty enemy; then have thou just cause to dread with horrible fear, and
to give thine eyes and feet no rest, until God being pleased with thy true
repentance, thou take breath in the light of his mercies.

But now who can number the multitude of things created by one God maker of
heaven and earth? Cap. 2
Who (says Ecclesiasticus) can number the Sands of the sea and drops of
rain? Eccles. cap. 1
But how many mettalls of gold and silver, brass, lead, precious stones,
Iemmes and margarites are there within the earth and Sea? how many kinds,
sorts, and Indiuidualls of hearebs, fruits, and plants are there upon the
earth? also how many kinds, sorts, and Indiuidualls of perfect and imperfect
living creatures, four footed beasts, creeping Creatures and fowls? how many
kinds, sorts, and Indiuidualls of fishes in the Sea? Who can number them?
what of the multitude of mankind, of whom it is written: Psalm. 11
According to thy highness, thou have multiplied the children of men. How many
stars also are there in heaven and Angels above heaven? For of the stars we
read in most true scripture: Number the stars if thou can; Genesis 15 Genesis 22
And in another place they are compared to the sands of the Sea, which are
innumerable. Of the Angels Daniel writes: Dan 7
Thousands of thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand hundred thousands
assisted him. And St. Thom. 1. p. q; Su. art. 3. affirms with St. Denis: That
the multitude of Angels, exceeds in number all material things. Therefore
this almost infinite multitude of things made by one God, does demonstrate that
in the divine essence there are infinite perfections. For God would be known
to man in some sort by his creatures; and because no creature can truly
represent the infinite perfection of the Creator; he has multiplied the
Creatures, and has given to every one some goodness and perfection, that thereby
may be gathered the goodness and perfection of the Creator, who in one most
simple offense includes infinite perfections; even after a sort as one piece
of gold conteyneth the value of many pieces of brass. Therefore my soul,
whatsoever thou do see or conceive, which seems to thee admirable; let it
be a Ladder to ascend to the knowledge of thy Creator, who without doubt is
much more admirable. So shall it come to pass, that Creatures, which are made
for a snare to the feet of the unwise as Wisdom teaches, Wisd. 14
shall instruct, not deceive, and direct not misguide thee from the way of
virtue. And if thou possess gold, silver and precious stones; say in thy heart,
my God is more precious, who has promised me himself, if I contemn these
things. If thou admire earthly Empires and kingdoms: say in thy heart; more
excellent is the kingdom of heaven which remains for ever, which God (who
lies not) has promised to those that love him. If pleasures and delights
begin to tickle thy carnal senses: say in thy heart; the pleasure of the spirit
is more delightful, then of the flesh, and the delights of the mind, surpass
those of the belly, for the mortal creature offordeth them, and the immortal
Creator the other; which whosoever tastes, may say with the Apostle: I am
replenished with consolation: 2 Cor 7
I do exceedingly abound in joy in all our tribulation.

Lastly, if any beautiful, great or wonderful thing be offered thee beside
thy Lord God: answer assuredly, what goodness soever is therein; the same
without doubt is much more and better in thy Lord: and therefore it is not
profitable for thee to change gold for brass, precious stones for glass,
great things for small, certain for doubtful, and temporal for eternal.

But although the multitude of Creatures is admirable, and declares the
manifold perfections of one God: yet more admirable is the variety of things
which is seen in that multiplication. For it is not hard, with one Seal to
express many figures alike, or with the same mould to print innumerable
letters: but to distinguish the forms almost infinite ways, as God did in the
creation, is plainly adiuine work most worthy of admiration. To omit those
things which are most different and unlike. In the Indiuidualls of herbs,
plants, flowers and fruits, what great variety there is? Their figures,
colors, odours, tastes, how wonderfully distinguished? And is not the like
also in living creatures that have sense? but what shall I say of men, since in
a great Army, there can hardly be found two men alike? which also is verified
in the stars and Angels: For one star differs from an other in
brightness as the Apostle witnesses in the first to the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
5 1 par q. 50 art. 4
And St. Thomas says that the Angels although they exceed corporal things in
number; yet they all differ among themselves, not only in Individual number,
but also in specificall form.

Lift up then my soul thine eyes to God, in whom are the causes of all things;
and from whom as from a fountain of infinite plenty, this almost infinite
Variety did flow.

For God could not have imprinted those innumerable forms in creatures,
without comprehending the causes of them in the bosom of his essence after a
most high and eminent manner. Not without cause therefore does the Apostle cry
out. Romans 11
O Depth of the riches of the Wisdom and of the knowledge of God! For truly
it is a Well of infinite depth, wherein the treasures of that Wisdom and
knowledge do lie hid, which could produce such variety of things. Rightly also
did St. Francis say unto God: Deus meus and omn^a. O my God and all things.
Because what goodness soever is divided and distributed among creatures, is
united in God after a more high and eminent manner. But thou my soul wilt say;
Though these things seem to be true: yet Creatures we see, we touch, we taste,
and really enjoy: but God we cannot see, touch, taste, enjoy, nor scarce
conceive, but as a thing very far from us: therefore it is no marvel though
we love Creatures more then God. But if thou be strong in faith my soul, and
do continue in hope and charity, thou can not deny but that after this
life which vanishes like a shadow, thou shall see God as he is in himself,
and enjoy him much more inwardly, then now thou do his Creatures. Hear our
Redeemer: Blessed are the clean of heart, Math 5
because they shall see God. Hear St. 1 Cor. 13
Paul: We see now by a glass in a dark sort: but then face to face.

Hear St. John: We shall be like unto him, 1 Epist. 3
because we shall see him as he is. Moreover how much of the world belongs
unto thee? Truly neither the whole nor the half, nor a third or fourth part,
nor scarce a small portion thereof falls to thy share; the which in short time
thou must be constrained to forsake: But God (in whom all things are) thou
shall enjoy for all eternity, (For God shall be all in all the Saints and
blessed without end) He shall be thy life, meat, clothing, 1 Cor, 15
house, honor, wealth, pleasure and thy All. Moreover thy sweet and merciful
God, does not command thee while thou art a Pilgrim on earth, to want
altogether the solace of his Creatures; For he made them all to serve thee: But
he commands thee to use them soberly and temperately: and give joyfully of
thy store unto the needy, having dominion over thy wealth in using it to the
glory of God. Weigh therefore most diligently, if it be not more expedient for
thee, to want the creatures in this life even as they are necessary, and in
the other, to enjoy thy Creator eternally in whom (as I have said) all things
are: or earnestly to labor in this life to purchase temporal goods, and never
to be satisfied with their plenty, and in the other also to be deprived both of
temporal and eternal. Add moreover that God is never far from those that
love him; For even in this life, he gives them greater delights then the
lovers of the world find in Creatures. It is not falsely written: Psalm. 76
I have bin mindful of God, and am delighted. And, Psalm. 36
Be thou delighted in our Lord, and he will give thee the petitions of thy
heart; And, Psalm. 101
I truly will be delighted in our Lord. And, Psalm. 85
Rejoice the soul of thy servant, because to thee O Lord, have I lifted up my
soul. And to omit the rest, when the Apostle said: 1 Cor. ^
I am replenished with consolation, I do exceedingly abound in joy in all our
tribulation, truly he meant not that Consolation came from tribulation, or joy
from sorrow; For thorns do not bring forth Grapes, nor brambles Figs: but
that to mittigate tribulations, God ever sends to his friends such pure,
clear, and solid comfortes, that temporal joys may not in any sort be
compared to them. Therefore my soul let this be with thee a sure conclusion:
Who finds God finds all: Who loses God loses all.

It follows now, Cap. 4
that from the virtue which God has given to creatures, we ascend to
understanding the infinite virtue of the Creator. There is not any thing but
has in it admirable virtue, power and efficacy. A stone or lump of earth if
it fall high, with what force does it descend? what can resist it? What will it
not break? When the holy ghost in the Apocalips described the excessive
violence wherewith the great Babylon (that is the whole company of the wicked)
shall be cast headlong at the day of judgment into hell, thus he says: Apoc.
18
And one strong Angel took up as it were a great Millstone, and threw it into
the Sea saying: With this violence shall Babylon that great City be thrown,
and shall be found no more. The water likewise which is so smooth and soft, and
runs gently upon the earth; when it is angry and swells in rivers or
brooks, bears down and destroys all things it meets with, and not only
cottages of husbandmen, but also gates and walls of cities, and bridges of
Marble have we seen broken down with it. Moreover the winds which blow so
sweetly, beat sometimes great ships against the rocks, and ouerturne aged
Oaks. I my self have seen (which had I not seen I should not have believed)
a very great heap of earth dug up by a vehement wind, and carried upon a
country village, so that a deep ditch was to be seen from whence the earth
was taken; and the whole village to which the earth was carried, was covered
and in a manner buried therewith. What shall we say of fire? how quickly does
a small fire become a great flame, consuming woods and houses as it were in a
moment?

Behold (says St. Iam. 3
James) how much fire what a great wood it kindles. What operation is there in
herbs? what virtue in stones, and especially in the Loadstone and Ambar?
Furthermore among beasts, some we see are very strong, as Lions, Bears,
Bulls, Elephants; others very witty although very small: as Antes, Spiders,
Bees, etc. And to omit the power of Angels, the virtue of the Sun and stars
which are far from us; how excellent is the wit of man whereby so many arts
have bin invented, as that we often doubt whether Nature has been by them
equalizd or surpassed.

Lift up now my soul thine eyes to God, and think what virtue and power is in
him, of whom in most true scripture it is said: E^od. 15
Who is like to thee among the strong O Lord? And, who only does great
meruailes? Psalm. 135 Tim. 6
And, The blessed and only mighty, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. For
what virtue soever Creatures have, they received from God, and shall enjoy it
so long as it pleases him. For who but God caused that neither the waters of
the Sea, Jonas 2
nor teeth of the Whale did hurt Jonas in the Whales belly? Who but God shut
the mouths of the hungry Lions that they could not touch Daniel? Dan. 5
Who but God prescrued the three children from hurt in the burning Furnace? Who
but Christ true God said to the furious winds and raging Sea: Peace, be still,
Mark. 4
and the wind ceased: and there was made a great calm. That God (who
receives not virtue and power from any other, but whose will is a power
against which none can resist) has infinite power always, and every where: in
comparison whereof all the power of men is nothing. For so speaks Isay: All
Nations as if they were not, Isay 40
so are they before him, and they are reputed of him as nothing, and a vain
thing.

Are they not fools therefore which fear the Creatures, and not the Almighty
Creator? And trust in the strength of themselves, and their friends, and not in
God? If God be for us who is against us? Romans 8
And if God be against us who shall be for us?

Wherefore my soul if thou be wise: 1 Pet. 5
Be humbled under the mighty hand of God. Love him truly, and thou shall not
need to fear what man or devil, or any creature can do unto thee. And if
perhapps thou have fallen, and provoked thy God to anger, give thy head no rest
until thou be at peace with him, Heb. 10
For it is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God.

It remains that we consider the beauty of Creatures, Cap. 5
whereof the Prophet said: Thou have delighted me O Lord in thy workmanship.
Psalm. 91
And truly as all things that God made are good, so are they all beautiful,
if they be rightly considered. But (omitting the rest) let us speak of those
things which in the judgment and opinion of all men are beautiful. Great
surely is the beauty of a green Meadow, of a well kept Garden, of a pleasant
Wood, of a calm Sea, of a clear air, of Fountains, Rivers, Cities, and of
the bright sky garnished with innumerable stars, like Iemmes. How much also
does the beauty of a tree delight us that is adorned with blossoms, or loaded
with fruit? The shapes likewise of diverse kinds of foure-footed beasts, the
flight of birds, and the sporting of fishes? What shall I say of the beauty of
the Moon and stars, but especially of that great and bright Planet the Sun
which comfort all the world at his rising? But men to whom we chiefly
speak, are delighted with nothing more then with their own beauty and
comeliness. By the beauty of women many have perished says Ecclesiasticus. We
have often seen, Ecclus. 9
and grieved, that men otherwise very wise, have bin so in love with the beauty
of women; And likewise great and honorable women brought to such folly by the
beauty of men; as they have preferred their love before their estate and
dignity, children and parents, yea their life and eternal salvation. The
examples which are read in holy Scripture of David, Solomon, and Sampson are
known, and histories are full of the like.

Wherefore my soul, if so great beauty be given by God to creatures, how
great and admirable may thou think is the beauty of God himself? For none
can give that which he has not. And if men delighted with the beauty of the
Sun and stars, though those Bright bodies (says the wise man) to be Gods;
Wisd. 13
Let them know, how much the Lord of them is more beautiful then they; for
the author of beauty made all these things. How great the beauty of God is,
we may gather, not only because it comprehends the beauty of all creatures
most eminently within it self: but also for that it being unto us invisible
while we are Pilgrims on earth, and only understood by faith of Scriptures and
mirror of Creatures; yet notwithstanding, many saints have bin so inflamed
with the love thereof, that some of them have hid themselves in Deserts, and
attended only to the contemplation thereof, as St. Mary Magdalen, Paul the
first Heremite, the great Anthony and others of whom you may read in the
religious History of Theodoret. Others, (forsaking their wives and Children,
and whatsoever else they possessed on earth) lived in Monasteries under the
obedience of others, that they might enjoy the friendship of God. Others
desired willingly with rigorous pains to end their lives, that they might come
to the sight of that infinite beauty. Hear one of them, to wit, St. Ignatius
the Martyr in his Epistle to the Romans: Let fire, gallows, beasts, breaking
of my bones, quartering of my members, brusing of my body, and all the torments
of the Devil come upon me, so that I may enjoy Christ. If then this divine
beauty not yet seen but only believed and hoped for, could kindle such a
fervent desire, what will it do when as the veil being removed, it shall be
seen as it is in it self? It will doubtless bring to pass, Psalm. 3
That being drunk with the torrent of that pleasure, we neither will nor can
one moment turn our eyes from it. And what wonder is it, although the Angels
and blessed souls which always see the face of their Father in heaven, are
not wearied or tired with that sight, since God himself from all eternity
beholding his own beauty, is fully pleased there with, and being happy by
that sight, desires nothing else; entering as it were into a Vineyard or Garden
of all delights, from whence he never shall nor will depart.

Seek that beauty O my soul, sigh after it day and night: say with the
Prophet, My soul has thirsted after thee the strong living, Psalm. 41
when shall I come and appear before the face of God? Say with the Apostle: We
are bold, 2 Cor, 5
and have a good will to be Pilgrims rather from the body, and to be present
with our Lord. Neither do thou fear to be defiled with the love of that
beauty; For the love thereof does comfort not corrupt, does purify and not
polute the heart. The holy virgin and martyr St. Agnes said truly, I love
Christ whose mother is a virgin, whose Father knows no woman; whom when I
love I am chaste, when I touch I am clean, when I take I remain a virgin. But
if thou do truly desire the uncreated beauty of thy Lord; thou must fulfill
that which the Apostle adds in that place: 2 Cor. 5
Therefore (says he) we endeavor whether absent or present to please him. If
God please thee, thou ought likewise to please God. And surely we shall
please God in the country of the living, when as we shall be illuminated with
his glory, as the Prophet says: Psalm. 114
I will please our Lord in the country of the living. But in this Pilgrimage we
are so easily poluted and defiled with the slime of sin; that the Apostle St.
James said: Iam. 3
In many things we offend all. And the Prophet David to show how few are
immaculate in this life, affirms that it belongs to Happiness, Psalm. 118
saying: Blessed are the immaculate in the way. Therefore my soul if in this
absence and Pilgrimage thou will please thy Lord, it is not enough to desire to
please him, but it behooves thee (as the Apostle says) to strive to please
him; that is, with great diligence to beware of such spots as may make thy
face deformed; and if any happen to stick therein, with like diligence to
endeavor to wipe them away. Do thou not see how women which seek to please
their husbands, spend many hours in dressing their hair, adorning their face,
and wiping away the spots of their garments? and all this they do to please
the eyes of a mortal man, who soon after must be turned to earth and ashes:
what ought thou therefore to do to please the eyes of thy immortal spouse,
who always beholds thee, and desires to see thee without spot or wrinkle?
It is needful then to strive with all thy force, Luc. 1
That thou walk before him in holiness and i^stice, and remove from thee with
speed all things that may hinder the same, not having respect to flesh and
blood, nor to the speeches and opinions of men: For thou can not please God
and the world both at once according to the Apostles saying: If I yet did
please men. Gal. 1
I should not be the servant of Christ.

THE THIRD STEPP, From the Consideration of the earth.
WE have considered the Corporal world in general: Cap. 1
Let us now consider the principal parts thereof, that from them we may erect
a Ladder to contemplate their maker.

First there is the Earth, the which although it occupy the lowest place among
the elements, and seems to be less then the rest: yet it is not less then
the water; and in dignity and worth it excels the other elements.

Whereupon we often read in holy Scripture: That God made heaven and earth as
the principal parts of the world; Genesis 1
For he made heaven as the Palace of God and Angels: the earth, as the Palace
of men: Psalm. 113
The heaven of heaven is to our Lord (says the Prophet) but the earth he has
given to the children of men. And that is the cause why the heaven is full of
bright stars, and the earth abounds with mettalls, precious stones,
herbs, trees and beasts of diverse kinds, whereas the water is stored only
with fish, and the air and fire, are in a manner empty and naked elements.
But omitting this; The earth has three things most worthy of consideration,
by which a vigilant mind may easily ascend unto God.

First the earth is the most firm foundation of the whole world, without which
we could neither walk, work, Psalm. 92
rest nor live. He has established (says David) the round world which shall
not be mooned, Psalm. 103
And, Thou have founded the earth upon the stabilitie thereof, it shall not be
inclined for ever and ever.

Secondly, the earth (like a good Nursse to men and other living creatures)
does daily bring forth herbs, fruits, grass and innumerable things of like
kind. For so God speaks: Genesis 1
Behold I have given you all manner of herb that seedeth upon the earth, and
all trees that hane in themselves seed of their own kind to be your meat: and
to all beasts of the earth.

Thirdly the earth brings forth stones and wood to build houses, and mettalls
of brass and iron for diverse uses, and gold and silver whereof money is made,
which is the instrument whereby all things necessary for the life of man are
easily procured.

And truly that first property of the earth, to wit, to be the place in which
our bodies rest; and not in the water, air, or fire; is an emblem of our
Creator, in whom only man's soul finds a place of rest. Thou have made us O
Lord (says St. Augustine) for thy self, Cib. 1 Confess. c. 1
and our heart is unquiet until it rest in thee.

Solomon as much as ever any king sought after rest in honor, wealth and
pleasure. He possessed a most ample and peaceable kingdom, so that the
Scripture witnesses: He had in his dominion all the kingdoms with him, 3 Reg.
4
from the river of the land of the Philistimes unto the border of Egypt: of
them that offered him presents, and served him all the days of his life. His
wealth also was incomparable; so that he kept forty thousand horses for
Chariots, and twelve thousand to ride upon. And as we read in the same book,
the Navy of Solomon brought gold and precious stones from Ophir in such plenty
that silver was nothing worth; and as great was, 3 Reg. 9 and 10.
the plenty thereof in Jerusalem, as stones in the streets. So many also were
the pleasures which he had provided for himself, that they may seem
incredible. For falling into the inordinate love of women, 3 Reg. 11
he took seven hundred wives as Queens, and Concubines, three hundred as
weread in the same book. But let us hear himself speak of himself. Eccle 2
I have magnified my works (says he) I have built me houses, and planted
vineyardes, I have made gardens and Orchardes, and set them with trees of all
kinds: and I have made me ponds of waters to water the wood of springing
^rees: I have possessed men servants and women servants and have had a great
family: heardes also and great flocks of sheep above all that were before me
in Jerusalem: I have heaped together to my self silver, and gold, and the
substance of kings and Provinces: I have made me singing men and singing women,
and the delights of the children of men: Cups and Gobletts to serve to pour
out Wines: and I surpassed in riches all that were before me in Jerusalem.
Wisdom also has perseuered with me; and all things that mine eyes desired, I
have not denied to them: neither have I stayed my heart, but that it enjoyed all
pleasure, and delighted it self in these things which I had prepared: And
this I esteemed my portion, if I did use my labor. Thus he, who doubtless had
as great contentment, as could be had in Creatures, For he neither wanted
kingdoms, nor wealth, nor pleasures, nor human wisdom so much esteemed; And
lastly he enjoyed peace a long time to possess so great happiness.

Let us see now if all these things could content and satisfy the desires of
his mind: When I had (says he) turned my self to all the works which my
hands had don, Eccle. 2
and to the labors wherein I had swet in vain; I saw all things vanity and
affliction of mind, and nothing to be permanent under the Sun. Solomon
therefore found not contentment in all his riches, delights, wisdom and
honors; neither could he, although he had enjoyed much more: For the soul of
man is immortal, and these things are mortal, and cannot long remain under
the Sun; neither can it be that a soul which is capable of infinite good,
should be satisfied with finite goods. Therefore as the body of man cannot rest
in the air although it be most spacious, nor in the water although it be very
deep, because the earth is the place thereof, and not the air or water: so
the mind of man is never satisfied with ayrie dignities, nor watery wealth, to
wit, with soft and deceauing pleasures, nor with the false glory of humane
knowledge, but with God only, who is the center of souls, and their only
true resting place.

O how truly and wisely did the father of Solomon say: What is to me in
heaven, Psalm. 72
and besides thee what would I upon earth? God of my heart, and God my portion
for ever. As if he should have said: I find nothing in heaven or earth, or in
any creature therein, that can give me true contentment; thou only art the God
of my heart, that is, thou only art a firm rock to my heart; for the word
(God) in the Hebrew text signifies a rock in that place. Thou therefore art
only a most firm rock to my heart, in thee only will I rest, thou only art
my portion, my inheritance, and all my good; other things are nothing, nor of
any force to suffice me one day, but thou alone wilt suffice me for ever.

Do thou not know as yet my soul, that God only is the rock whereupon
thou must rest; and that in all things else is vanity and affliction of spirit?
For they are not, but appear to be, they comfort not, but afflict, because
they are gotten with labor, kept with care and lost with sorrow. Despise
therefore if thou be wise all transitory things, least they carry thee away
with them, and abide in that unity and bond of Charity which continues for
ever. Lift up thy heart to God in heaven, least it putrify on earth: and learn
true wisdom from the folly of many, in whose names the wise man speaks
saying: Wis. 5
We therefore have erred from the way of truth, and the light of justice has
not shined to us, and the Sun of understanding rose not to us. We are wearied
in the way of iniquity and perdition, and have walked hard ways, but the way
of our Lord we have not known. What has pride profited us? Or what commodity
has the vaunting of riches brought us? All those things are passed away as a
shadow: but in our naughtines we are consumed.

Moreover, Cap. 2
a Rock is also in an other respect, an emblem of our Lord God, as the
wisdom of God did expound unto us in his Gospel when he said; Math. 7
That a house built upon a Rock should remain immovable although the rain
fell, and the floods came and the winds blew: But a house built upon the sand,
cannot stand against any of these things, but at the first storm of rain,
wind or floods, it is cast down, and the fall thereof is great.

Thy house (my soul) has diverse powers and faculties, as it were Chambers or
parlors; and if it be built upon God as upon a Rock; that is, if thou do
firmly believe in God, if all thy trust be in God, and thou be grounded in the
love of God, that thou may say with the Apostle: Who shall separate us from
the charity of Christ? Ephesians. 3 Romans 8
Then be assured that neither the spiritual wickedness which is about thee,
nor carnal concupiscence which is under thee, nor thy domestical enemies
which are on the side of thee, to wit thy kinsfolks and acquaintance, shall
ever by their temptations prevail against thee. Great surely is the force and
subtlety of the spiritual powers; but greater is the power and wisdom of the
holy Ghost, who rules in that house which is founded on God. The flesh also
fights eagerly against the spirit, and sometime overcomes the strongest:
but the love of God does overcome the love of the flesh, and the fear of God
does vanquish the fear of the world. Those also of a man's household are his
enemies, and with their perverse counsels draw his soul into the company of
sinners: But that soul which trusts she has a Lord, a Father, a brother,
and spowes in heaven; will easily contemn, and in that respect hate her
carnal friends and kinsfolks, and say with the Apostle: Luke 14 Romans 8
I am sure that neither death nor life, nor other Creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

But that soul is indeed miserable, whose house being built upon the sand,
cannot continue long: And the fall thereof will be great; because it believes
lies and trusts to a staff of Reed: Whose God is the belly, or money, or
the smoke of honor; all which things pass away and perish very speedily, and
draw the soul which follows them into eternal destruction.

It is also an other property of the earth like a good Nursse Cap. 3
plentifully to bring forth herbs and fruits for the sustenance of men and
beasts. This property directs us to our maker as to our true Nursing Father.
For not the earth, but God in the earth, brings forth all good things. So
speaks the holy ghost by the mouth of David; Psalm. 103
Who brings forth grass for be astes and herb for the service of men. And
again, All expect of thee that thou give them meat in season. Thou giving to
them, they shall gather it, thou opening thy hand, all things shall be filled
with boun^ie. And our Lord in the Gospel: Math. 6
Behold the fowls of the air that they sow not, neither reap, nor gather
into barnes, and your heavenly Father feeds them. And the Apostle, Act. 14
And truly not without testimony has God left himself, bestowing benefits
from heaven, giving rain and fruitful seasons, filling with food and joy our
hearts. Neither is that false which is said in the beginning of Genesis: Genesis 1
Let the earth shoot forth green herbs and such as may seed, and fruit
trees yiedling fruit after his kind. For although the earth shoot forth
herbs and fruit trees, yet it is by the virtue which God gave unto it, and God
by it keeps and increases them. Therefore David inuiting all creatures to
praise their maker, joins with the rest: Psalm. 140
Fruitful trees and all Cedars. And the three children in Daniel are exhorted
with all other things, to bless, Dan. 3
praise and magnify him for ever.

And if all creatures after their manner praise God, with what affection
ought thou my soul to praise him for all his benefits which thou do
daily enjoy? acknowledging in them his fatherly love which never cease to
provide all things for thee. But this is not much in the eyes of thy Lord God:
For he produces in thee as in his spiritual field, the noble branche of
Charity; For Charity is not of the world, but of God, 1 John 4
as the most beloved Disciple speaks in his Epistle. From Charity also as
from a heavenly tree, spring the white and odoriferous flowers of holy
cogitations, the green leaves of profitable words for the salvation of
Nations, and the ripe fruits of good works, by which God is glorified, our
neighbor edified, and merits increased and kept for eternal life. But woe to
those who after the manner of foolish beasts, desire to be filled with the
fruits of the earth, not thinking of their giver, nor thanking him for them:
their souls are like the earth wc God did curse, that brings forth nothing
but thorns and thistles. For what do they think in whose minds God sows not
chaste intentions, but of adulteries, homicide, sacrilege, theftes, trecheries
and the like? And what do they speak but blasphemies, periuries, reproaches,
heresies, detractions, contumelies, false testimonies and lies, which they have
learned of their father the devil? finally what fruits do they bring forth but
those whereof we have spoken, and which the Apostle calls The works of the
flesh. Gal. 6
These indeed are the thorns which first prick the mind, which brings them
forth with bitter thoughts of fears and cares: And then they prick the fame,
minds, and bodies of others with incurable wounds, whereby great hurt often
times ensues.

But leaving this; my soul if thou will be the Garden of God; take heed that
thorns and thistles be never found in thee: but with all diligence cherish the
tree of Charity, the Lilly of chastity, and the Spiknard of humility. Take
heed it never enter into thy mind to think that these branches of heavenly
virtues come from thy self, and not from thy Lord God, who is ye Lord of
virtues; Neither attribute to thy self the keeping increase and ripeness of
the fruit of good works, but as much as thou can commend them unto God.

There remains the last Cap. 4
commendation of the earth, for that in her bosom are contained gold, silver,
and precious stones: but truly the earth does not by her own virtue bring
forth such precious kinds of things, but he who by Aggeus says; Mine is the
silver, Agg. 2
and mine is the gold. O lover of men, did it please thy goodness not only to
produce stones, wood, iron, brass, lead, and such like things necessary for
the building of houses, ships, and other instruments: but also gold, silver,
and precious stones for beauty and ornament? And if thou give these things
to Pilgrims on earth, and often also to thy enemies which blaspheme thy name,
what will thou give to thy friends who shall praise thee and reign with thee
in heaven? Thou will give them doubtless not some little pieces of gold and
silver, or some few precious stones, but that City whereof John the Apostle
speaks in the Apocalips when he says: Apoc. 21
And the building of the Wall thereof was of Jasper stone: but the City it
self pure gold, like to pure glass. And the foundations of the Wall of the
City, were adorned with all precious stone: And the twelve Gates there, are
twelve Pearls.

But we must not imagine that heavenly city of Jerusalem is built or adorned
with gold pearls, and precious stones as here they are; For the holy ghost
uses these words because he speaks to us who see no better or greate^
things; but without doubt that city (which is the country of Gods elect) does
more excel all the cities of this world, then a city of gold or precious
stones does surpass all country villages made of straw and clay.

Lift up therefore my soul the eyes of thy mind to heaven, and think of what
value the riches are there; since gold, silver, and precious stones, which are
here so esteemed, in comparison thereof, are but as straw and clay. The gold,
silver, and precious stones also which we have, are corruptible, but those
which shine in that heavenly City, are incorruptible. But if thou will send
thy corruptible gold and silver by the hands of the poor unto that heavenly
City (which surely if thou be wise thou will do) then will it become
incorruptible, and be thine for ever.

For the Truth cannot lie who says; Mat. 19
Sell the things that thou have, and gine to the poor and tho: shall have
treasure in heaven. And in another place: Luke 12
Sell the things that you possess, and give alms. Make to you Purses that
were not, treasure that wastes not in heaven: Whither the thief aprocheth
not, neither does the Mothe corrupt. O incredulity of the sons of Men! Man
who is a liar promises ten for one hundred, and to repay the principal to his
creditor, and he is believed: God who cannot lie, promises to him that gives
an alms, a treasure in heaven, a hundred for one, yea eternal life; and yet
the covetous man fears and cannot easily be persuaded to believe, but had
rather hide his treasure Where rust consumes it, Math. 19
and thieves break in and steal it, then lay it up in heaven, where there is
neither rust to to consume it, nor thief to steal it.

But O unhappy man although it chance that neither thieves do steal, nor
Mothe or rust corrupt that which thou have got with labor and kept with care;
yet shall it not be thine as it might have bin, if by the hands of the poor
thou had sent it into the heavenly treasury; For experience teaches, that
the wealth which covetous rich men have gathered, comes unto prodigal
heirs, who in much shorter time waste it, then their covetous parents got it:
whose sin of covetousness remains notwithstanding for ever; Isay 66
For their worm of conscience shall not dye, and the fire of hell shall not be
extinguished. Mar. 9


Therefore my soul, let the folly of others teach thee Wisdom. Hear thy Lord
and master preaching: See and beware of all avarice: Luke 12
For not in any man's abundance does his life consist, of those things which he
possesses. The covetous man gathers and keeps to have whereby he may
maintain his life a long time, but it happens otherwise; For he dies when
as he least thinks thereof; but his wealth couetously gotten, does engender a
worm that will not die, and kindles a fire that will not be quenched. O
unhappy covetous man! why haft thou so carefully scraped together money to
prepare fuel for hell fire? Hear St. James in his last Epistle: go too now
ye rich men, Iam. 5
weep howling in your mileries which shall come to you. Your riches are
corrupt: and your garments are eaten of Mothes, your gold an^ silver is rusted:
and their rust shall be for a testimony to you, and shall eat your flesh as
fire. You (says St James) because you are rich are called and accounted happy;
but indeed ye are more miserable then the poor. And yet have great cause to
lament, for the great miseries which assuredly shall fall upon you. The
superfluous wealth you have kept, and suffered to corrupt when ye ought to
have given it to the poor: The superfluous garments you have possessed, and
rather would have the Mothes to eat them, then the poor to be clothed with
them: And your gold and silver which you would have to rust rather then bestow
it to feed them; All these things I say, will bear witness against you at the
day of judgment, and the Mothes and rust of your wealth will become a burning
fire, which shall waste your flesh for ever, and not consume it, that the fire
may not be quenched, nor the pain ended. Let us therefore conclude with the
kingly Prophet: Psalm. 143
They have said (to wit fools) that it is a happy people which has these
things, (that is to say great wealth) but indeed: Blessed is the people whose
God is our Lord.

THE FOVRTH STEPP, From the Consideration of Waters, and especially of
Fountains.
THe Water has the second place among the elements of the world, Cap. 1
and from it also being rightly considered, a stepp of Ascension unto God may
be framed.

First therefore we will consider Waters ingenerall, and after we will draw a
special Ascension unto God from Fountains. The water is cold and moist, and
has (as it were) five properties; For it washes away spots, it quenches
fire, it cools heat, it joins diverse things together, and lastly it
ascends as high, as it descends low.

These things are manifest Emblemes and resemblances of God the Creator of all.
Water does wash corporal spots: God does wash spiritual spotts: Psalm. 50
Thou shall w^sh me (says D^uid) and I shall be made whiter then Snow. For
although contrition, Sacraments. Priests, alms, and other works of piety do
wash the spotts, that is, the sins of the soul: yet they are but instruments
or dispositions; the Author of this washing is only God. Isay 43
I am (says God by Isay) I am he that take clean away thine iniquities for
mine own sake. And therefore the Pharisees who murmuring against Christ said;
Who car forgive sins but only God? Were not deceived in giving only to God
supreme power to forgive sins; but because they believed not that Christ was
God; and so they did both blaspheme and speak the truth at one time.

Neither does God only wash the spotts of the soul like water, but also would
be called water; For so writes St. John: He that believes in me as the
Scripture says, John 7
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. And this he said of the
spirit that they should receive which believe in him: for as yet the spirit was
not given: because Jesus was not yet glorified. Therefore God the holy Ghost is
living water, and thereof speaks Ezechiel: Ezech. 36
I will pour out upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all
Contaminations. But because this increated water does far excel the created
water: We will set down three differences between the washing of the one and
the other.

The created water does wash away corporal spotts, yet not all; for many it
cannot wash away unless it be helped with soape or some other means.

The increated water does wash away al^ spotts; for so we read in the place
above ^ited: And you shall be cleansed from all your Contaminations.

The created water does seldom so wash away spots but that some little sign
of them remains. The increated water does wash in such sort, that the thing
washed becomes more white and clean then before it was contaminated: Thou
shall wash me (says David) and I shall be made whiter then Snow. Psalm. 50
And our Lord says by Isay; If your sins shall be as Scarlet they shall be
made white as Snow: Isay 1.
and if they be red as vermition, they shall be white as Wool.

Also the created water does wash natural spots, which resist not the
washing: the increated water does wash voluntary spotts, which cannot be
cleansed unless the soul consent thereunto. And so admirable is the virtue of
this water, that it sweetly enters into hardened hearts, and is not refused;
because (as St. Augustine does truly teach) It self is the cause that it is
not refused. Lib. de praed. ss. c. 8.
Who can conceive O Lord how thou give faith unto the unfaithful, humility
unto the proud, and charity unto thine enemies, that he who once breathed
forth threats and slaughter, and persecuted thee in thy Deciples, being
changed on the sudden, most willingly suffered for thee and thy Church
threats, and persecutions? Far be it from me to diue into thy secrets, for I
had rather seele then search after the force of thy grace. And because I know
that water of thine to be A voluntary rain, Psalm. 57
separated to thine inheritance as the Prophet said; Therefore I humbly beseech
thee, let me be found in thy inheritance, and let the dwe of thy grace descend
into the earth of my heart, that it remain not like earth without water to
thee, for so barren it is that of it self it can think no good. But to
proceed.

Water quenches fire; Cap. 2
and the heavenly Water, that is, the grace of the holy ghost does strangely
quench the fire of carnal lust. Fasting and bodily afflictions avail much
also if they be used as instruments of grace, otherwise of themselves they are
of small force; For love is the chief among the affections and perturbations
of the mind, which rules all and is obeyed by all. Love will not be forced;
and if it be stopped one way, it breaks out an other way. Love fears
nothing, dares any thing, and vanquisheth all thing.

Lastly, Love yields only unto greater lone. So fl^shly love which follows
the wealth and pleasures of the world, yeildeth only to the lou^ of God, and
the water of the holy ghost distilling into the heart of man, quickly cools
the heat of concu^^scence. Witness St. Augustine, who being long accustomed
to lust, thought it impossible to want the company of a woman; yet beginning to
taste the grace of the holy ghost he cried out in the ninth book of his
confessions: 9 Cons. c. 1.
Quam suaue etc. O how sweet was it to me on the sudden to want the pleasures
of tr^flles, and what before I feared to loose. I now rejoiced to firsake. For
thou the true and chiefest Happiness did cast them from me: Thou did cast
them from me, and did enter for them more sweet then any pleasure, but not to
flesh and blood: more brigh then any light, more inward then any secret: more
high then any honor: but not to those that are high i^ themse^ues.

Water also quenches thirst; Cap. 3
and only the water of the holy ghost can quench the manifold and almost
endless desires of man's heart. So the truth speaking to the Samaritan woman
plainly taught: Every one (says he) that drinks of this water, Ioh 4
shall thirst again: but he that shall drink of the water that I will give
him, shall not thirst for ever. Indeed so it is: The eye is not filled with
seeing, neither is the ear fulfilled with hearing. For the mind of man is
capable of infinite good, and all creatures are finite. But he that begins
once to drink of this divine water wherein all things are, seeks after no
more. And of this we have spoken before, were we treated that the rest of our
souls is in God only as in their proper center.

Water joins diverse things together: Cap. 4
as many graynes of corn to make one loaf, and many pieces of earth to make
one brick. But more easily and more vnsepeperably does the Water of the holy
Ghost make Act. 4
many men to be of one heart and one foul, as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles of the first Christians, Act. 4
upon whom the holy ghost did next after the Apostles descend. And our Lord
being to Ascend to his father; commends that unity which the water of the
holy ghost causes saying: Ioh. 17
And not for them only do I pray, but for them also that by their word shall
bele^ue in me: that they all may be one as thou (Father) in me and I in thee,
that they also in us may be one. And a little after: That they may be one as we
also are one. I in them, and thou in me: that they may be consummate in one.
To which unity the Apostle also exhorts us in his Epistle to the Ephesians
saying: Be careful to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
Ephe. 4
One body and one spirit: as you are called in one hope of your vocation. O
happy union which makes many men one body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10 1 Cor. 6
governed by one head, participating of one bread, drinking of one Cup, and
living by one spirit of God, is made one spirit with him. What can his servants
more desire then to participate not only of all their masters goods, but also
by the inseperable bond of love to be made one with the Almighty? All which is
wrought by the grace of the holy Ghost, when as living water it is devoutly
received, and diligently kept in the heart.

Lastly the water ascends as high, as it descends low. Cap. 5
And as the holy ghost came from heaven to earth, so that heart in whom he is
received, Ioh. 4
Is made a fountain of water springing up into life everlasting as our Lord
said to the Samaritan woman, that is, man borne again of water and the holy
Ghost, who has the same spirit dwelling within him, causes his merits to
ascend, from whence grace did descend.

Therefore my soul being taught and incited by these passages of Scripture,
say often to thy heavenly Father with deep sighs: Give me this water which
washes clean all spotts, quenches all fire of Lust, colleth all heat of
thirst, and makes me one spirit with my God, that (being in me a Fountain of
water springing up into life everlasting) it may cause in me merits to ascend
thither whereas I hope to live for ever. Not without cause did the Son of God
say: If you then being naught know how to give good gifts to your children,
Luke 11
how much more will your Father in heaven; give the good spirit to them that
ask him? And he says not, that he will give bread, clothes, wisdom charity,
or life everlasting: but the good spirit, for in it al things are contained.
Cease not then O my soul daily to admonish the Father of the promise of his
son, saying with great devotion and assured hope to obtain. O holy father, not
in mine own justification do I pray unto the^; but in the promise of thy
only begotten Son. For he has said unto us How much more will your Father
in heaven, give the good Spirit to them that ask him Surely thy Son is the
Truth, he deceaueth us not; Fuifill therefore the promise of thy Son who has
glorified thee upon earth, Ioh. 17 Phil. 2
and was obedient to thee unto death, even the death of the Cross. Give the
good spirit to them that ask it of thee. Give the spirit of thy love and
fear; that thy servant may love nothing but thee, and his neighbor in thee;
nor fear but only to offend thee. Create a clean heart in me O God: Psalm 50
and renew a right (...) in my bowels. Cast me (...) from thy face: and thy
holy spirit take not from me. Render unto me the joy of thy salvation, and
confirm me with a principal spirit.

Now I come to the resemblance which Fountains of water have with God; Cap. 6
for from them also may the mind be elevated to consider his wonderful
works. And not without cause is God called in holy scripture A Fountain of
life, Psalm. 35 Eccle. 1
And, A Fountain of living water. And that he is the Fountain of Being; Hier.
2
We gather by these words of God to Moses: I am which am, Exodus 3
he which is has sent me to you. All which, the Apostle seems to have
included when he says: Act. 17
In him we live, and move, and be. For in him we are, as in a Fountain of
being; In him we live, as in a Fountain of life; And in him we move, as in a
Fountain of Wisdom, Wisd. 7
because Wisdom is more moveable then all moveable things: and reaches every
where because of her cleanness as it is said in the book of Wisdom.

A fountain of water with us has this property, that Rivers spring from it;
and when they cease to flow from their fountain, they are soon dried up: but
the fountain depends not of the rivers; for it receaueth not water from them
but from it self, and gives it unto others. This is a true resemblance of the
divinity; For God is the most true fountain of Being: because he received his
Being from no other thing; but all things received their being from him. God
received his being from no other thing, because his essence is to be, and his
being is his existence; so that, it cannot be conceived or caused but that God
has been always, and always shall be. Other things may be for a time, and
for a time not be: because existence does not necessarily belong unto their
offense. For example: It belongs to the essence of a man to be a reasonable
creature: and therefore he cannot be a man unless he be a reasonable creature:
and if existence belonged also to the essence of a man, he should then always
exist: but because it belongs not to his essence; therefore he may exist and
not exist. God then is the Fountain of Being because his essence includes
actual existence for ever, as is signified by those words I am: Which am.
Exodus 3
That is, I am essence it self, and receive not my Being from any other thing;
for to me only my essence is my existence. Therefore eternity and
immortality is proper unto God only as the apostle says: To the king of the
worlds immortal, 1 Timothy 1 1 Timothy 6
only God, And, who only has immortality. For all other things receive in
such sort their essence from God; that unless they do always depend one him,
and be preserved by him; they presently cease to be. Whereupon the same Apostle
says: Heb. 1
Who carries all things by the word of his power.

Therefore O my foul admire and reverence the infinite goodness of thy maker,
who maintains and preserves all things so lovingly, although he needs not
their service. Admire and Imitate also the patience of thy said maker who is so
merciful upon the unkind and the evil, Luke 6
that he feeds and preserves those which blaspheme him, and deserve to be
brought to nothing. Let it not therefore seem much unto thee, to bear
sometimes with the infirmities of thy brethren, and (as thou art commanded) to
do good to those that hate thee.

But the being a Fountain, does not only consist in not receiving being from
an other Fountain, and in giving being unto other things; For the water both
of Fountains and Rivers with us is of the same kind; and albeit that
fountains receive not their water from other fountains; yet they have a cause
of their being, to wit, vapors, which also have other causes successinely,
until we come unto God the first cause. But God thy maker (my soul) is not of
the same kind with creatures; but infinitely surpasses them in dignity,
nobility, and excellency. He also is truly and properly the Fountain of
Being, because he does not only not receive his being, from an other fountain
of being, but also, for that he has no cause at all. A Fountain of created
water (as is said) is not derived from any other water; but from an other
cause: but the increated Fountain of Being has not my thing before himself,
depends not of any thing, wants not any thing, nor can he hurt by any
thing; but all things depend of him, 2 Match. 8
and he can Destroy the whole world with a beck as says the valiant
Machabaeus.

Admire this eminency (O my soul) this beginning, without beginning, this
Cause without Cause, this essence that is infinite, unlimited, immense and
absolutely necessary, in comparison whereof, all other things are but casual.
And of this perhaps the Truth said: But one thing is necessary. Luke 10
Adhere therefore to him only, serve him only, and delight in his love only.
Despise all other things for his sake; or else be not troubled with too much
care about many things, (since one thing is necessary which only is enough
for thee and al others) but let thy care be never to fall from his grace,
studying always and every where how to please him.

God also is most truly called a Fountain of life, Cap 7
because he has life in himself, and is life eternal it self: He is the
true God, 1 Ioh. 5
and life eternal says St. John; and all things that live, receive life from
that fountain, which when it shall cease to give them life, They shall fail,
Psalm. 103
and shall return into their dust as the holy Prophet David says. It is
proper unto living creatures to beget their like. God also begott a Son most
like unto himself: Ioh. 5
For us the Father has life in himself: So he has given to the Son also to
have life in himself, as St. John witnesses in the Gospel: But the Father
has life in himself because he is the fountain of life: and the Son has
life in himself, because the Father has given him the same life which he
has, whereby the Son also is the fountain of life; yet the Fountain of life
of the Fountain of life, as God of God, and light of light. Who can declare or
conceive what the life of God is, and what this Fountain of life is from
whence all things that live in heaven or earth draw drops of life? The life
which we in this banishment know, is no other but The internal beginning of
Motion. For those things we say live, which move themselves after some manner.
And therefore the water of Rivers is commonly called running or living water,
because it seems to move of it self; And the water of Ponds standing or dead
water, For that it is not moved but by the Winds, or some other external
force.

Thy God O my soul most truly lives, and is the Author and Fountain of
life. For often does he in holy Scripture inculcate this saying: Number. 14
Live I says our Lord, And the Prophets often repeat: The Lord lives, the
Lord lives. And in Hieremie God complains of the people saying: Hier. 2
They have forsaken me the Fountain of living Water; and yet he is not moved
either by himself or by any other: I am God (says he) and am not changed. And
again, Hier. 16 Malae. 3 Number. 23
God is not as the son of Man that he may be changed. We sing also very often
in the ecclesiastical hymn: O God which do preserve the strength of things,
and (thy self being immovable) do successively divide the day and night etc.

So that if God beget a son, he begets him without mutation: and if he
see, hear, speak, love, pardon or judge; he does all without mutation: And if
he create and preserve; or destroy and dissipate, and again renew and change;
yet he works resting, and changes without being changed. How then does he
live if he move not? And how does he not live if he be the Fountain and author
of life? This knot is easily untied. For to live it is absolutely enough, that
the thing which lives work of it self, and be nor moved by an other. But
life for the most part in Creatures is the Internal beginning of motion,
because Creatures are imperfect, and have need of many things to perform the
actions of life: But God is Infinite perfection, and has need of nothing
without himself, and therefore he works of himself and is not moved by any
other. Creatures need mutation to engender, and be engendered, because they
engender without themselves, and the thing engendered must be changed from a not
being to a being: But God begot a son within himself. And within himself
produces the holy ghost; neither ought the Son or the holy Ghost to be changed
from a not being to a being, because they receive that being which was always;
and they receive it not in time but from eternity.

Creatures need the Motion of Augmentation, because they are borne imperfect:
but God the Son is borne most perfect, and God the Holy ghost is breathed and
produced most perfect. Creatures need the motion of alteration to attain
diverse qualities which they want: but God wants nothing, for his essence is
of infinite perfection. Creatures need local motion, because they are not
every where: but God is wholly every where. Moreover Creatures need many things
to see, hear, speak and work; because their life is poor and imperfect: but
God needs nothing without himself to see all, hear all, speak to all, and
to work all; For he (as is said) is life it self, and the Fountain of life.
And that we may put an example in ihe action of seeing. A man to see, needs a
seeing power, which is distinct from the soul which properly sees; he needs
an object, that is a colored body distant from him; he needs the light of
the Sun, or of some other bright body; he needs a Medium, that is a
perspicuous body; he needs a sensible Species or form to be carried from the
object to the eye; he needs a corporal orga^ to wit an eye furnished with
humors and fleshy tunicles, he needs sensitive spirits, and opticke synowes
by which those spirits must pass; he needs a proportionable distance; And
lastly he needs the Application of the seeing power or faculty.

Behold how many things men and other living Creatures want, to perform one
action of life: But God who truly has all life in himself, needs nothing.
His infinite essence does include power, form, object, light and all other
things. God of himself, by himself, and in himself, sees all things which
are, have bin, or shall be, and euedently knows all things which may be. And
before the world was made, God saw all things, so that by the creation of
things there came nothing but was before known unto him. What then shall thou
be my soul, when thou shall partake of that life? Is it much that God
commands thee, when he would have thee spend this corporal, animal, poor
and imperfect life for himself and thy brethren, to obtain life eternal? And
if he command not much when he commands this life to be contemned, how light
and little ought it seem to thee, when he commands thee to bestow thy dead
riches upon the poor, to abstain from lust, to renounce the Devil and his
pompes, and with true devotion of heart to sigh after that life which only is
true life.

But it is time now to Ascend as we may unto the Fountain of Wisdom. Cap. 8
A Fountain of Wisdom the word of God on high says Ecclesiasticus: Eccle. 1
And he says On high, because the Fountain of Wisdom does plentifully flow
upon the holy Angels and blessed souls in heaven; but unto us that inhabit
this Desert and Pilgrimage; Wisdom her self descends not, but a certain
vapor or shadow thereof.

Wherefore my soul seek not after higher things then beseems thee. Prou. 25
Do not search the Majesty, least thou be oppressed of the glory. Admire his
Wisdom of whom the Apostle speaks: Romans 16
To God the onelywise. Congratulate those blessed spirits which drink of the
fountain of Wisdom; And although they do not comprehend God, which only is
proper unto God; yet they behold the face of God without Vtyle or
interposition; and being irradiated with the brightness thereof, they judge
truly of all things, not searing in that Meridian light of Wisdom, the
darkness of errors, blindness of ignorance, or cloud of opinions. Seek
after that happiness, and that thou may assuredly attain to it, love our
Lord Jesus Christ withal thy heart, Col, 2
In whom be all the treasures of the Wisdom and knowledge of God; For he has
said in his Gospel: Ioh. 14
He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. And what means (I will manifest my self to him)
but that I will manifest to him the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge which
are in me? Truly every man does naturally desire knowledge: and although
carnal concupiscence does now in many, lull as it were this desire a sleep:
Yet when this corruptible body shall be laid aside, which now dulleth the
soul; then will the fire of this desire break forth more then any other.

How great will thy Happiness be then my soul, when as thy Lover and beloved
Christ shall show thee the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God? But
lest thou be frustrated of so great hope; endeavor to keep the commandments
of Christ; Ioh. 14
For he said: If any love me, he will keep my word; and he that loves me not,
keeps not my words. And in the mean while, have thou that Wisdom which
holy Job describes saying: Job. 28
The fear of God that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, understanding. And
what goodness soever thou see in Creatures, acknowledge it to be derived from
God the fountain of goodness, that here in the Rivers of Creatures thou
may begin to taste of that Fountain, as St. Frauncis did. Whereof read St.
Bonauenture in the life of St. Francis the ninth Chapter.

THE FIFTH STEPP. From the Consideration of the air.
THe element of Air may be to men a notable document in manners, Cap. 1
if the nature thereof be considered: For it not only teaches them Moral
Philosophy, but also declares the mysteries of Divinity, and eleuateth the
mind unto God, when as the manifold commodities thereof are pondered, which by
Gods Ordinance it affoordeth unto mankind.

aspiration or breathing and thereby preserves the life of man, and of
terrestrial living Creatures.

Secondly, it is so necessary for sight, hearing and speech; that without it,
(though nothing else were wanting) none could see, hear, or speak.

Lastly,

If men would understand, that the soul needs her Aspiration or breathing as
much as the body, many should be saved which now perish.

The body needs continual breathing, because the natural heat wherewith
the heart boyleth, is so tempered by the longues which draw in the cool air
and cast out the hott, that life is thereby preserved; without which it could
not be. Whereupon it is commonly said: That those things which breath, do
live; And those things which breath not, live not. And thou my soul, (that
thou may by Gods grace live a spiritual life) do also want thy continual
breathing, which is performed by sending forth warm sighs in thy prayers to
God; and receiving from God new grace of the holy ghost. For what else do those
words of the Lord import. It behooves always to pray and not to be weary? Luke
18
But that thou must always sigh and receive a new spirit, that the spiritual
life be not quenched in thee. Which thing he repeateth when he says: Watch
therefore praying at all times. Luke 21
And the Apostle confirms the same in his first Epistle unto the
Thessalonians saying: 1 These. 5
Pray without intermission. With whom agrees St. Peter the Apostle in his
first Epistle when as he writes: 1 Pet. 4
Be wise therefore and watch in prayers. For true wisdom wills us, to ask
Gods help at all times, which at all times we stand in need of. Our heavenly
Father knows indeed what we want, and is ready to give us abundantly,
especially if it belong to our eternal salvation: but he will give it us by
means of prayer; for that is more to his honor and our proffit, then if he
should give us all things when as we sleep and do nothing.

Therefore our most liberal Lord does exhort and urge us to ask when he
says: Luke 11
Ask and it shall be given you: Seek and you shall find: knock and it shall
be opened to you. For every one that asks, receaueth; and he that seeks
finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. And what is chiefly to
be asked, and what without doubt shall be granted, he declares a little after
saying: If you then being naught know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your father from heaven give the good spirit to
them that ask him? This good Spirit therefore is chiefly to be daily asked;
which doubtless will be given us if it be well asked; whereby we may breath in
God, and by breathing in him preserve our spiritual life. So did holy David
who said in the psalm: Psalm. 118
I opened my mouth and drew breath. That is, I opened my mouth craving with
inexplicable sighs, And I drew the most sweet breath of Gods spirit, which
has cooled the heat of my concupiscence, and strengthened me in every good
work. which being so, who can say that they live to God who in whole days,
months, and years sigh not after him, nor breath in him? Not to breath is an
evident sign of death; therefore if to pray be to breath, it is an evident
sign of death not to pray. The spiritual life whereby we are made the sons
of God, consists in charity; See (says St. 1 Ioh. 3
John in his Epistle) what manner of Charity the Father has given us, that we
should be named and be the sons of God. And who is there that loves, but
desires to see the thing he loves? who desires any thing and asks not,
when he knows that for asking it shall be given him? Therefore, who so does
not daily pray to see the face of his God; desires not to see him: if he
desires not to see him he loves him not: if he loves him not, he lives not.
What then follows, but that we account them dead to God, although they live
to the world, which do not give themselves to prayer. And yet such are not
said to pray and thereby to breath and live, which with their corporal voice
pray only: For prayer is defined by the learned to be an elevation of the
mind unto God, and not of the voice into the air.

Therefore my soul deceive not thy self, thinking thou do live to God
unless thou seek God withal thy heart, and sigh after him day and night. Say
not that thou can not for other business; give thy self to prayer and
spiritual exercises. For the holy Apostles were most busied, but indeed in the
work of God and salvation of souls, so that on of them said: 2 Cor. 11
Beside those things which are outwardly: my daily instance, the carfulness
of all Churches. Who is weak and I am not weak? Who is scandalized, and I am
not burnt? And yet the same Apostle beside the often commemoration of his
prayers, writes unto the Philippians: Philip. 3
our conversation is in heaven. For in the midst of business, in desire he
was in heaven, else would he not have said: Call. 2
With Christ I am nailed to the Cross And I live not now I: but Christ lives
in me.

It is an other property of the air to be the Medium or means whereby colors
and soundes come to our eyes and ears, Cap. 2
without which we could not see, hear, or speak. Wherefore we ought greatly to
thank God that it has pleased him to beautify our nature with so singular a
benefit. We ought also to admire the wisdom of our maker in a work of so
great subtilitie; For although the air be a true body, and so great that it
fills almost an infinite space; yet it is neither seen nor felt, by reason
of the incredible raritie thereof. The ancients did wonder at the smalnesse of
a line which Apelles had drawn with a pencill; but that line was seen and
touched; and therefore not to be compared with the thinness of the air, which
covers and compasses all, and yet is seen of none. And it is the more to be
wondered, that the air being so thin a body, yet being divided, it closes
again together, with meruaylous facility, and remains as if it had never
bin divided. Truly it is not possible for an Artizen so to amend a Spiders
broken cob web, or the rent of a very thin Veyle; but that the former renting
will appear. It is also most worthy of admiration, and only belongs to the
wisdom of God, to cause innumerable kinds of colors to pass together
without confusion through the same part of the air. For he who shall stand in
a high and open place in the evening when the moon shines, and behold the
heaven full of stars, and fields full of flowers, with houses, trees,
beasts, and other things of like sort; cannot deny but that the Species or
forms of those things are contained in the Air next unto him altogether
without confusion. But who can conceive this? For how can it be that so thin
a body should contain together such variety of forms? And what if at the same
time and place, Birds sing, Instruments of music play, and Waters falling
make a noise, are not those soundes or Forms of Soundes received altogether,
with so many colors or forms of colors in the same Air? Who does these
things O my Soul but thy Maker, Who only does great wonders?

And if his works are so wonderful how much more wonderful is he himself?
An other commodity also the air affoordeth by reason of the exceeding raritie
thereof; For it helps the motion of all things that re^^^oue from place to
place. We al know with what labor ships are towed through the waters albeit
they are liquid and easily divided. For sometimes neither Winds nor Oars
suffice, but the strength of horses and Buffaloes must be added. And if
perhapps a way be to be made through hills and Mountains although but short;
yet in how long time and with what labor is it performed? But in the air
horses run, birds fly, and arrows and Darts are shot with great facility
and speed: men also go up and down about their business and move their
feet, arms, and hands, upward, downward and on either side; And yet the air
though it be every where and of a corporal nature, hinders them no more then
if it were a spirit or nothing at all.

Lastly, Cap. 3
the air gives place to every thing, changes it self into every form, and
is divided and broken for the commodity of men; so that, it may seem to teach
them humility, patience and charity. It represents likewise unto them, the
incredible sweetness and exceeding bounty of the maker thereof. Recollect
therefore thy self O my Soul, and diligently consider that thy Lord God is
always present with his Creatures, and always works with them; and which is
a token of Infinite sweetness, cooperateth with the nature of every one, as if
he should say with his Apostle: To all I became all things that I might save
all. 1 Cor. 9
Necessary Agents he causes to work necessarily; Voluntary Agents
voluntarily; and free Agents freely. He moves and helps the Fire to ascend,
the Earth to descend, the Water to run into steep places, the Air to pass
which way soever it is driven, the Stars to move always circularly:
Herbs, Shrubbes and Plants to bear fruit according to their nature: Beasts
of the earth, Fishes and Fowls to do such things as their Kinds does require.
And if the Sweetness of God appears so plainly by cooperating with his
Creatures in the works of Nature, what shall we think of the works of
Grace? Truly God has given Man free will, yet so, that it is ruled by his
Commandments, terrified by his punishments, and allured by his benefits. 1 Timothy 2
God would have all men to be saved, Yet his will is that they also should
have a will thereunto; and therefore he does so sweetly prevent, incite, lead
and direct them, that it is admirable to consider. These are the inventions of
Gods Wisdom whereof Isay speaks: Isay 12
Make his inventions known among the people. Wicked men sometime he does
vehemently terrify, sometime lovingly expect, sometime mercifully admonish, as
he thinks most agreeable to there natures and conditions. Hear how
mercifully God dealt with the first sinner. Adam (says he) where art thou?
Genesis 3
Who answering, I heard thy voice in Paradize, and I feared because I was
naked, and I hid me; God mercifully replied: Who has told thee that thou wast
naked, but that thou have eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat? And Adam being admonished by this pious correction, did
repent, for the Scripture says: She (the wisdom of God) kept him that was
first made of God Father of the world, Wisd. 10
and she brought him out of his sin. Hear again how mercifully God
corrected the Children of Israel by his Angel, and provoked them to
repentance: Judge. 2
The Angel of our Lord went up (says the Scripture) from Galgal to the place
of weepers, and said: I brought you out of Aegipt, and have brought you into
the Land, for the which I swear to your fathers: and I promised, that I would
not make frustrate my covenant for ever: Only so, that you should not make a
league with the Inhabitants of this Land, but should overthrow their Altars:
and you would not hear my voice: why have you done this? And when the Angel
of our Lord spoke these words to all the Children of Israel: they lifted up
their voice, and wept. And the name of that place was called the place of
Weepers, or of tears: and there they immolated hoastes to our Lord. And that
it was a great and general lamentation, and a sign of true repentance; the
(...) name given to that place bears perpetual record; For it was called the
place of Weepers, or of tears. What shall I say of the Prophets? They every
where teach and proclaim that God desires not the death of sinners, but that
they would be converted and live. Ezech, 18 Hier, 3
It is commonly said (says God by Hieremy) if a man put away his wife, and she
departing from him, marry another man, will he return to her any more? But
thou have committed fornication with many lovers: Nevertheless return unto me
says our Lord and I will receive thee? And by Ezechiell: Ezech, 33
Thus you have spoken, saying: Our iniquities, and our sins are upon us, and
in them we fade away: How then can we live? Say to them, live I says our
Lord God: I will not the death of the Impious, but that the impious convert
from his way, and live. Convert, convert ye from your most evil ways: and
why will you dye O house of Israel? But to omit the wicked, none can express
the more then fatherly or motherly love which our Lord shows to those that
fear and hope in him. David in the Psalms says: Psalm. 102
According to the height of Heaven from Earth: has he strengthened his mercy
upon them that fear him. And after: As a Father has compassion of his
Children, so has our Lord compassion, on them that fear him. And again: The
mercy of our Lord from everlasting, and unto everlasting, upon then that fear
him. And in another place: Taste ye and see that our Lord is sweet: Psalm. 33
Blessed is the man that hops in him. And again: Psalm. 72
How good is God to Israel, to he^ that are of a right heart? That is, who can
express the great goodness, mercy and sweetness of God unto righteous
souls? Isay. 49
God also faith by Esaias: Can a Woman for gether Infant, that she will not have
pity on the Son of her womb? And if she should forget, yet will not I
forget thee. And ^teremy in his Lamentations: Lamen. 3
Our Lord is my p^rtion, said my soul: therefore will I ex^cct him. Our Lord
is good to them that hope in him, to the Soul that secketh him. It is good to
wait w^h silence for the salvation of God.

If I should set down moreover what the Apostles say in their Epistles of the
love of God toward the righteous, I should never make an end. Let that stand
for all which St. Paul has writ in the beginning of his last Epistle to the
Corinthians: 2 Cor. 1
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercyes,
and God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation: That we also
may be able to comfort them, that are in all distress. He says not God is a
comforter, but most full of all comfort: Nor that he comfort us in some
tribulation, but in all tribulation: Nor that we may be able to comfort them
that are in some distress, but in all distress. So that he could not more
set forth the mercy of God, to those whom he loves and by whom he is
beloved.

But to conclude, it shall not be amiss to set down the words of St.
Prosper, in which he declares the mercy of God not only to the righteous, but
also to the wicked to make them righteous: Lib, 2, de voc: gentium. c. 26
Gratia omnibus iustificationibus principaliter praeeminet etc. Grace (says
he) does chiefly excel all iustifications, by persuading with exhortations, by
admonishing with examples, by terrifying with dangers, by incyting with
miraclet, by giving understanding, by inspiring counsel, by illuminating the
heart and induing it ^ith the affections of faith. But ^^t man's will is to^red
and adjoined thereunto Which therefore is incite^s by the former help^s, that
it should coop rate with the divine work in it self, and b^gin to use for
merit, what from heavenly seed it conceived f^r exercise, proceeding from
self inconstancy if it decay and from the assistance of grace if it increase;
which assistance is given unto all by innumerable ways either secret or
manifest; and that it is refused of many, proceeds from their wickedness:
But that it is received of many, is a work of Gods grace and man's will. Thus
he.

Go too now my soul, Cap. 4
if thy maker be so Sweet and merciful; suffering Sinners with incredible
benignity to convert them; and comforting the righteous, that they may
increase the more in virtue: Ought not thou to bear meekely with thy
neighbors, and to become All things to all men, 1 Cor. 9
that thou may gain all unto thy Lord God? Thank with thy self, to what
high excellency the Apostle does exhort the^ when he says: ^ph^. 5
Be ye therefore followers of God, as (...) dear Children: And walk (...)
Love, as Christ also loved us, and delivered himself f^r us an oblation and
host to God in an odor of sweetness. Imitate God the Father who makes his
Sun to rise upon good and bad, Mat, 5
and raineth upon just and unjust. Imitate God the Son, who taking humane
Nature, spared not his own life to deliver us from the power Of darkness and
eternal damnation. Imitate God the holy Ghost, who infuseth plentifully his
most precious guiftes into us, to make us being carnal, to become spiritual.

THE SIXTH STEPP, From the Consideration of the Fire.
THe Element of Fire is so pure and noble, Cap. 1
that God himself would be called fire as Moses and St. Paul witness saying:
Our Lord is a consuming Fire. Deuteronomy, 4 Heb, 12
And when God first appeared unto Moses, he appeared in a flame of Fire
burning a bush and not consuming it: Exodus 3
Our Lord appeared (says Moses) in aflame of Fire, out of the midst of a bush:
And he saw that the bush was on fire, and was not burnt. And when the same God
came to give the Law unto the people, he came in the form of fire. For so
speaks Moses: Exo. 19
All the Mount Sinai smoaked: For because our Lord was descended upon it in
Fire. According to the similitude of which mystery, when as the new Law was to
be promulged; the holy Ghost appeared unto the Apostles in fiery tongues. Act.
2
Those spirits also which are most near to God in Heaven, are called
Seraphins, that is to say Fiery, because they are more inflamed with the Fire
of Divine Love, then other Angels. Which being so, it is not a thing difficult
for us, from the element of Fire, and the nature and properties thereof, to
frame a step by which through prayer and meditation we may Ascend unto God.
For surely it is more easy to Ascend with Elias in a Chariot of Fire; then of
Earth, Water or Air to make a Ladder.

Let us therefore consider the properties of the Fire. The fire is of such a
nature, that in diverse things it works after a diverse, and often after a
contrary manner. Wood, Hay, and stubble it burns presently: Gold, Silver, and
precious stones it makes more pure and bright: Iron which of it own nature is
black, cold, hard and heavy; the Fire so changes into contrary quallities,
that forthwith it becomes white, hot, soft and light; yea to shine like a
star, to burn like fire, to melt like water, and to be so light, that the
Smith may easily move and remove it as he pleases.

All these things do manisestly agree unto Almighty God. For Wood, Hay, and
stubble according to the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
signify Evil works which cannot endure the fire of Gods Judgment. 1 Cor, 3
And truly it is incredible how greatly all sin displeases God who is a Most
pure Fire; and with what zeal he consumes and destroys it, if by repentance
it may be destroyed, that is, If the sinner be in state to repent: But if he
be not capable of repentance, (as the Devils are not, nor men after this life)
then is Gods wrath turned upon him: For to God the impious and his impiety are
odious alike says the wise man. Wis, 14
And how exceeding great this hatred is the Devil can witness, who sinned once,
and being a most noble Angel, Greg. lib. 32, moral c, 24, alias 18
and (as St. Gregory says) Prince of the first Order, and the most excellent
of Gods Creatures; was notwithstanding presently cast down from Heaven,
deprived of all beauty and supernatural grace, changed into a most deformed
monster, and condemned unto eternal punishment. Our Savior Christ can
witness, who descended from Heaven to destroy the Works of the Devil, to wit
sins, Ioh. 3
and therefore he is called The Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of
the world. Ioh. 1
But who is able to declare or conceive what our Savior suffered to destroy
the works of the Devil, and perfectly to satisfy the justice of God? Who
when he was in the form of God, took the form of a Servant: Being made
poor for us when as he was rich. He had not where to repose his head, albeit
he made Heaven and Earth. He came into his own, Phil. 2 2 Cor. 8 Luke 9 Ioh,
^ 1 Pet, 2
and his own received him not. Who when he reviled, did not revile; When he
suffered, he threatened not, but delivered himself to him that judged him
unjustly. Who himself bare our Sins in his body upon the tree. Phil, 2 1
Pet, 2
He humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
By whose stripes we are healed. Lastly he was mocked, spitten on, whipped,
crowned with thorns, and being crucified with exceeding ignominy and pain, he
rendered up his life, to destroy the works of the Devil, and to wipe away our
sins. The Law of God can witness, which prohibiteth and punishes all sin; yea
leans not one idle word unpunished. Mat, 12
How greatly then does God abhor enormious crimes, that cannot endure one idle
word? Psalm. 18
The Law of our Lord is imaculate, the precept of our Lord lightsome detesting
sin and darkness; for between light and darkness, 2 Cor. 6
justice and iniquity, there can be no society. Hell also can witness which
God has prepared for sinners, who when as they had time, neglected or refused
to be washed with the blood of the immaculate Lamb. For it is just that they
who have committed Eternal sins, should have eternal punishments. But what
and how great the pains of Hell are, is horrible to think. Whereof we will
speak more in the last step.

Therefore my soul, since Gods hatred is so great against sin, if thou love
God above all things thou ought also to hate sin above all things. Take
heed they deceive thee not, who use to extenuate or excuse sin. Look also
that thou deceive not thy self with false reasons; for if sin displease thee
not both in thy self and others, thou love not God, and if thou love not
God, thou art undone. Again, if thou be not ungrateful unto Christ, how
greatly may thou reckon thy self indebted to his love, labors, blood and
death? Who has washed thee from sin, and reconciled thee to his father. And
shall it then be grievous unto thee, to suffer somewhat for Christ, or for his
sake by his grace to resist sin even unto blood? Lastly, if thou can not
patiently endure the Hell of eternal fire, surely thou ought not patiently
to endure sin, but As from the face of a Serpent fly from it, Eccle. 21
and from every light occasion or suspicion thereof. Endeavor therefore all
thou may to hate sin above all things, and to love God above all things.

The fire also destroys not but perfecteth and purisieth gold, Cap. 2
silver and precious stones; For (as the same Apostle does there declare) those
mettalls signify good works which are approved by the fire of Gods
judgment: 1 Cor. 3
These works God does approve because they are his guiftes; And when he
crowns our merits (says St Augustine Con. 2. in psalm, 70 he crowns his
guiftes. For they are done by his commandment, asistance and power, and by the
law and precepts which he has appointed.

Gold also signifies the Works of Char^^: 1 Ioh. 4
and how can the works of Charity but please God, since God himself is
Charity? Silver signifies the works of Wisdom, Dan. 12.
to wit of them that instruct money unto justice. And they also are very
pleasing and acceptable unto God: For the Wisdom of God says: Mat. 5
He that shall do and teach: he shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven. Precious stones are the works of a continent soul, of which
Ecclesiasticus speaks: Eccle. 26
All Weight is not worthy a continuent soul. And that is the cause why in the
office of the Church, the Gospel of One precious Pearl found is read in the
praise of holy virgins. Math. 13
And how greatly the purity of virginity is pleasing to God, may be
understood by the Prophet Esaias, who by Gods appointment and in his name
prophesied unto such Eunuchs as have gelt themselves for the Kingdom of
heaven; Math. 19
I will give unto them in my house, and with my walls a place, Isay 56
and a name better then Sons and Daughters: An everlasting name will I give
them which shall not perish. Which place St. De Sanct virg. c. 21 and 24
Augustine in his book of holy virginity, excellently declares to be
understood of holy virgins of either sex. And these three sorts of works by
the consent of Doctors, are rewarded with Crowns of Gold in the kingdom of
heaven. For Crowns of gold, to wit certain rewards beside eternal life, are
given to Martyrs, Doctors, and virgins. To Martyrs for their excellent
charity, Ioh. 15
because Greater love then this no man has, that a man yield his life for his
friends. To Doctors for their excellent wisdom, of whom Daniel speaks: Dan.
12
They that iustruct many to Justice, shall shine as stars unto perpetual
eternities. To virgins for their invaluable chastity; for which cause the
virgins in the Apocalips are said to sing a New song that no man else could say:
Apoc. 14
These are they (says St. John) which were not defiled with women. For they
are virgins, and follow the Lamb whether socuer he shall go.

Neither shall the charity of Martyrs, wisdom of Doctors, and purity of
virgins only be approoned by the fire of Gods judgment, and fully rewarded:
but also all other good works done in charity, shall be esteemed as vessels
of gold, and endure that d^^ine fire and receive their reward. For to them
will our Lord say at the day of Judgment: Mat. 25
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you the Kingdom prepared from the
foundation of the world.

You who have given bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, lodging to
strangers, clothing to the naked, and comfort to the sick, and such as are in
prison. And the same Lord promises also that Whosoever shall out of charity
give a cup of cold water, Mat. 10
only in the name of a Disciple he shall not lose his reward.

Do ho^ understand O my soul how great is the difference of Works? And what
then can be more fond and miserable, then having time and place wherein (if
thou be wise) thou may easily gather gold, silver and precious stones to
seek rather with great labor after wood, Hay and stubble? O that thou were
wise and understood, Deuteronomy. 32
and would provide for the last things, when all these Works shall be
examimned and tried in the fire of Gods judgment; and the former shall be
praised and crowned; but the latter shall be burned to smoke and ashes.

Why do thou now choose that which doubtless thou will repent to have
chosen? And why do thou not now for thy profit dislike, what hereafter thou will without profit condemn? And if perhapps thou see it not now, for that the
veyle of things present is drawn before thine eyes, that they cannot behold
the clear and simple truth; Pray unto God, and with great devotion say unto
him with the blind man in the Gospel: Luke 18
Lord grant that I may see, and with the Prophet: Reveal mine eyes: Psalm. 118
and I shall consider the marvelous things of thy Law. For truly it is
marvelous, that works done in Charity, become Gold, Silver, and precious
stones: but such as are not done in Charity, are turned to wood, hay and
stubble. Cap 3


Let us now consider the other property of the sire For hitherto we have
learned from it what God does with those that depart out of this life with
evil works, or in good works persevere unto the end. Now by another
resemblance, taken also from the fire, we may understand what God works in
those whom he calls from sin to repentance.

A sinner is like Iron, which so long as it is kept far from the fire, is
black, cold, hard and heavy: But if it be put in the fire, it becomes white,
botte, soft and light. Every sinner wants inward light, and walks in
darkness, and therein resembles the blacknes of Iron. For although he seem
skillful in humane science, and excel in understanding and judgment therein;
yet is he blind in judgment of the true good and evil, and more miserable
then any blind man. For a blind man sees nothing, and therefore goes not
without a guide: but a sinful man thinks that he sees what he sees not; or
sees one thing for another; judging good evil, and evil good, great little,
and little great, long short, and short long: And therefore he is ever deceived
in his choice. So speaks the Apostle of the Panim Idolaters: Ephe. 4
Having their understanding obscured with darkness, by the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Therefore our Lord himself
also in the Gospel does so often reprove the Scribes and Pharisees saying:
Math. 15 23
They were blind, and guides of the bilnde. And the Prophet Isay speaking to
the Jews of his time says: Hear ye deaf, Isay. 42
and ye blind behold to see, to whom he prophefieth, that Christ should come
and open the eyes of the blind: And speaking of the new Testament in the
person of God he adds: Isay 43
Bring forth the blind people, and having eyes: the deaf and he has ears.
Moreover the wicked after this life will confess that this is true, when their
punishments shall begin to open ye eyes of their minds, which their offenses
had shut: Wis, 5
We therefore (say they) have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
justice has not shined to us, and the sin of understanding rose not to us.
Neither is it to be meruayled, although they are blind which are auerted from
God in understanding and will, For God is light, 1 Ioh. 2
and no darkness is in him. Whereupon the same Apostle concludes: He that
says he is in the light, and hates his brother: is in the darkness even
till now. And a little after: He that hates his brother: is in darkness, and
walks in the darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because darkness
has blinded his eyes.

Neither is it the only cause of blindness in sinners for that they are
turned from God Who is light, but also because Their malice has blinded them,
Wisd. 2
as the wise man speaks: For love, hatred, anger, envy, and other such like
passions of the mind, which are comprehended under the name of Malice; so
blind the mind that it cannot see the truth; and they are as colored
spectacles with make white things seem red; or else so framed, yt they make great
things seem small, and small things seem great, things far off seem near,
and things near seem far off. He that is in love, thinks the thing he
loves most fair, profitable, good and necessary, and before all other
things to be procured. Again, he that hates the same thing, iudgeeth it most
deformed, unprofitable, evil and hurtful, and before all other things to be
forsaken. But if this black and deformed Iron be put into the fire, that is,
if the sinner begin to auert from sin, and convert himself to God according
to that of the Prophet: Come ye to him, Psalm. 33
and be illuminated, then he begins by little and little to receive light,
and to see the truth in that light, according to the saying of the same
Prophet: In thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 35
And then breaking in pieces the colored spectacles of passions, and taking
the Chrystaline of pure Charity; he will esteem eternal things great, and
temporal things small and of no moment, as indeed they are.

Then he shall clearly see that no created beauty is to be compared with that
light of Wisdom and Truth which is God and in God. So that he may cry out
with St. Augustine Serote amaui, Lib. 10, conf, cap, 77.
etc. Late have I loved thee O ancient beauty but new to me, late have I
loved thee.

And because Christ says: Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
deliver you, he that is so illuminated with the light of Truth, and freed from
the bonds of concupiscence, covetousness, ambition and other passions, may
rejoice with the Prophet and say: Psalm. 115
Thou O Lord have broken my bonds: I will sacrifice, to thee the Host of
praise and I will invoke the name of our Lord.

Moreover the fire does not only make Iron that is black to become bright; but
also that is cold to become hot, yea so fiery and burning, that it seems to
be fire it self. Great is our Lord, and great is his power, which causes a man
that is cold by nature, and fearful to speak, or to undertake any difficult
thing: So soon as he is heat with the fire of Charity, to become as bold as
a Lion that terrifieth all with his roaring, and to whom nothing seems
difficult; so that he may say with the Apostle St. Paul who was greatly
inflamed with this fire: I can all things in him that strengthens me. Phil. 4


But let us speak particularly of this efficacy of the fire; And first let us
breifely treat of the efficacy of words and then of the efficacy of deeds.
There are at this day many preachers of Gods word in the Church, and ever have
bin. What then is the cause that notwithstanding the exhortations and
exclamations of so many men, so few are converted?

Truly in great Cities and Towns every day in the Lent, twenty, thirty, or
forty Orators declame: and yet when Lent is done, there appears almost no
change in the manners of the Citizens and Townsmen. The same vices, the same
sins, the same coldness, the same loosnesse is still seen. I find no other
cause hereof, but that for the most part, learned, eloquent, and copious
sermons are preached: but the foul is wanting, the life is wanting, the fire
is wanting; and to be short; that great charity is wanting which only can
animate and quicken the words of (...) speakers, and inslame and change the
hearts of the hearers. Neither say I this, but that many Preachers have
lowdnesse of voice, and action of body: for Gunnes without either bullet or
stone make a great noise when they are discharged, but to no purpose. That
which is desired, is, that they would show great zeal to God and the gaining
of souls, not faynedly but truly, not streyned but naturally flowing from the
fountain of the heart. Saint Peter was ignorant of Rhetoric; he only was
expert in guiding his Boat, and in casting and amending his Nets: yet so
soon as the holy Ghost descended upon him in fiery tongues, and replenished
him with fervent Charity; he presently began to speak so powerfully,
fervently, and effectuously in the midst of the City Jerusalem, that with
one Sermon he converted many thousands to believe and do penance. Act, 2
Yet we read not that in his Sermons he used much straining of the voice, or
wearisome motion of the body.

Saint Bonauenture reports, that St. Francis was unlearned, and that he
never studied the Art of Rhetoric; yet when he Preached to the people, he
was heard as an Angel from Heaven. Cap. 2, vit. St. Fr.
For his words (says he) were like burning Fire inflaming the heart. And as
it is related in the Chronicles of the Minors cap. 30. when once after dinner
he spoke on the sudden a few words to the people; they were all so moved to
repentance, that the same day seemed Good Friday. Whence proceeded so great
fruit from so few words? Truly because that holy Preacher was Like aburning
coal, Eccle. 48
and his word as a burning torch, as Ecclesiasticus writ of Eltas. We have the
written Sermons of St. Vincentius, St. Bernardine, and some other Saints,
which scarce any will vouchsafe to read, because of the exceeding plainness of
Style which is found in them: And yet we know that by their preaching many
thousands of men have been converted to God, and themselves were ever heard
with incredible concourse and attention; because indeed their plain and simple
words, proceeded from fiery and zealous hearts.

More over the efficacy of this Divine fire is showed as much in deeds, as in
words: God determined by St. Peter the Apostle to subdue Rome the chief City
of the Empire and Lady of Nations unto himself.

He determined also to send the rest of the Apostles, some into Ethiopia, some
into India some into Scythia, some into the farthest part of Britany, to
destroy by them the Idols of the world, to erect the standard of the Cross, to
change Laws and customs, and to overthrow the tyranie of the Devil. If any
one had foretold these things unto the Apostles, when they fished in the Lake
of Gensareth; or when they fled away and hidd themselves at our Lords Passion;
they would have seemed dreams, or old wives tales: And yet soon after, all
these things came to pass, and by no other force, but by the Fire of Charity,
which the holy Ghost enkindled in their hearts: 1 Ioh. 4 1 Cor. 13
For Charity casts out Fear, suffers all things, hops all things:
Thinks all things possible, and cries out with the Apostle: Phil, 4
I can all things in him that strengthens me. So that we see by the work and
labor of these men only armed with Charity, Idolatry was in short time
extinguished throughout ye world, Churches every where founded to the honor of
Christ, and the Standard of the Cross without army of soldiers or provision of
war erected in all kingdoms.

The fire also has a property to make hard Iron so soft, Cap. 4
yt it may easily be attenuated and extended into plates, and brought to any
form. Fire has great power over Iron; but the power of God over the
obstinate, and obdurate hearts of men is far greater. Here St. B^rnard in his
books of Consideration: Lib. 1. c 2
Solum est cordurum etc. It is only a hard heart (says he) that abhors not
it self, because it feels not. What then is a hard heart? It is that which
is neither cut with compunction, mollified with piety, nor moved with Prayers.
It cares not for threats, by punishments it is hardened: It is ungrateful
for benefits, incredulous to counsel. And after: It is that which neither
fears God, nor Man. All which to be true Pharao can witness, who the more he
was punished by God, the more he was hardened, and the more Gods mercy appeared
in remoouing his punishments, the more was he animated to despise and contemn
God. But when our Lord is pleased to enkendle one spark of the fire of his
true love in a hard heart; presently it waxes soft and melts like wax; so
that no obstinacy (though never so continual and obdurate) can hinder it; And
of a heart of stone, it becomes a heart of flesh; Psalm. 147
For when the spirit of our Lord blows, Waters will slow from the frozen
Snow. We have an example in the Gospel, Luke 7
of that woman that was a Sinner in the City, whom neither the admonitions of
her Brother, reprehensions of her Sister, honor of her Family, nor her own
shame could move to abstain from sin; And yet one beam of Christ peircing
her heart, and there enkindling a spark of Divine love, did so strangely alter
her; that being a Noble woman, she blushed not in a public Feast to cast her
self at Christ's feet, All weeping with her tears to bathe them and with her
hair in steed of a towell to wipe them, oftentimes most lovingly to kiss
them, and with a most precious and odoriserous ointment to anoint them,
signifying thereby, that from thenceforth she bequeathed her self and all that
was hers, unto the service of Christ. Therefore she heard that saying of our
Savior: Many sins are forgiven her, Luk, 7
because she has loved much. But it shall not be from our purpose to set
down another example also of late time. William Duke of Aquitane, lived in the
time of St. Bernard; a man most wilful and obstinate, In defending Anacletus
the Scismatical Pope against Innocentius the lawful. He banished all the
Catholic Bishops out of his Country, and took an oath that he would never
be at peace with them; and because all men knew him obdurate in wickedness
and cruelty, and terrible for his pride; there was none that durst admonish
him. It pleased God by his servant Bernard to visit the hard heart of this
man, and to kindle a great spark of Diniue love therein. Presently of a Lion
he became a Lamb, humble of proud, and most obedient of most obstinate. For
at one only word of St. Bernard, he friendly embraced the Bishop of Poyters,
and with his own hand placed him in his Chair. And (which seems to surpass
all admiration) demanding of a certain Hermit remedy of soul for his sins
past; He was commanded by the same Hermit, to wear a coat of Brass next his
skin, so buckled, that it could never be put off, and presently he obeyed and
it was so done: And being sent by the Hermit to the Pope for absolution, he
went; But the Pope suspecting that he did not heartily repent; or else
desirous to try his patience; commanded him to go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
to demand absolution of the Patriarch of that City: Without delay he
undertook that journey, and fulfilled the Popes commandment.

Lastly of a potent Prince, he became an humble Monk; So that in that age,
there was scarce any found to surpass him in humility, patience, poverty,
devotion and piety. This (indeed) is the change of the right hand of the
heighest, Psalm. 76
this is the force of the Divine fire, against which no heard heart can resist.

There remains the last property of the Fire, which is to extenuate heavy
things, and cause them easily to mount aloft. And this is the cause why men
that burn not with ye fire of Divine love, are heavy of heart, and to them the
Prophet said: Psalm. 4
How long are you of heavy heart? Why love you vanity, and secke lying? This
also is the cause why The body that is corrupted burdeneth the soul as the
wise man says. Wisd. 9
And an heavy yoke upon the Children of Adam, from the day of their coming
forth of their mothers womb, until the day of their burying, Eccle. 40.
into the mother of al says Ecclesiasticus. And what this heavy yoke is,
which in this mortal body so burdeneth the soul, the same Author declares a
little after when he adds: Fury, Eu^y, Wavering, Fear, Anger and such like,
commonly called the Passions of the mind. These so depresse the mind of Man,
that it beholds nothing but earth, to which it cleaves in such sort that it
cannot ascend to seek God nor speedily run the way of his Commondements. But
when the fire of God begins from above to inslame it; forthwith those
passions begin to deminish and be mortified, and this heavy burden to wax
lighter; And if the heat increase, it will so unburden the ha^t, that it may
fly up like a Dove, and say with the Apostle: Our conversation is in heaven.
Phil. 3
And being also dilated by this fire it may say with David: Psalm. 111
I have run the way of thy commandments, when thou have delate^ my har^.
Truly since our Savior said? Luke 12
I came to cast fire on the earth: and what will I but that it be kindled? We
have seen many so enlightened therewith, that they have wholly forsaken the love
of honor, pleasure, and wealth, and have said to Christ ascending into heaven:
Draw us after thee.

This has caused so many Monasteries to be erected, so many deserts to be
inhabited, so many companies of virgins to be instituted, who did not only
with ease run the way of the Commandments; but also ascended into the way of
Counsels To follow the Lamb whethersoeuer he shall go. Apoc. 14


O Blessed fire which gives light, and wastes not, and if it waste, it
wastes but the peccant humors that lise be not extinguished thereby. Who will
cause me to be inflamed with this fire which with the light of true Wisdom
expels the darkness of ignorance, and blindness of an erroneous
conscience? And which changes the coldenesse of slothe, indeuotion, and
negligence into the heat of love? That it never suffer my heart to be hardened,
but with the heat thereof to be mollified and made devout; And that it take
from it the heany yoke of earthly cares and desires; that with the wings of
holy contemplation (wherewith Charity is nourished and increased) it may be so
lifted up, that I may say with the Prophet: Make joyful the soulc of thy
servant, Psalm. 85
because to thee O Lord, I have lifted up my Soul.

THE SEVENTH STEPP, From the Consideration of Heaven, to wit of the Sun,
Moon and Stars.
WE shall not labor much in this place from the consideration of Heaven, Cap. 1
to frame for our selves a Stepp to contemplate God; for we have the kingly
Prophet going before us, who in the Psalms says: Psalm. 18
The Heavens show forth the glory of God, and the ^^^mament declares the
works of his hands. And because there are two seasons to wit the day and night
in which we may from the consideration of heaven, ascend unto God with the
wings of contemp^ation, of the first he writes in the same Psalm: He put his
Tabernacle in the Sun: Psalm. 18
and himself as a Bridegroom, coming forth of his Bride Chamber. He has
rejoiced as a Giant to run the way, his coming forth from the top of
heaven, and his recourse even to the topp thereof: neither is there, that can
hide himself from his heat. Of the latter, he writes in an other psalm;
Psalm. 8
I shall see the heavens, the works of thy fingers: The Moon and the Stars,
which thou have founded.

Let us begin with the first season. Of the Sun which daily we behold, the
holy Ghost by the mouth of David sings four praises; First that it is Gods
Tabernacle. Secondly, that it is exceeding beautiful. Thirdly that it always
runs most swiftly without stay. Fourthly, that by giving light and heat,
the virtue thereof especially appears. By reason of all which, Ecclesiasticus
has written: Eccle. 4
A meru^^lous instrument, the ^orke of the Highest. Great is our Lord that made
it.

First, then God has put his Tabernacle in the Sun, as in a most noble
creature; for that among all corporal things, he has chosen the Sun as a
Princely Palace or divine Sanctuary to dwell in. God truly fills heaven and
earth, Hier, 33
And the heaven, and heavens of heavens contain him not; but yet he is said to
dwell there cheifely, whereby working merua^lous things he shows greater
signs of his presence. 2 Par, 2
And because the Hebrew text says, He has p^^ a Tabernacle for the Sun i^
them, to wit, in the heavens: We gather by this place of the psalm an other
excellency of the sun which does not contradict the former. The Sun is a
great thing, for which God has prepared a most spacious, beautiful, and noble
Palace; for he would have heaven it self to be the palace of the Sun, that
it might therein freely walk and work: and the Sun to be the Palace of
himself who rules all. As therefore we know the great excellency of the
Sun, because that heaven is the Tabernacle thereof, So we may know the great
excellency of God, because the Sun is his Tabernacle; A marvelous
Instrument doubtless, then the which there is nothing among corporal
creatures more to be admired.

Moreover David to declare by things known, the excellent beauty of the
Sun; compared it to a Bridegroom coming forth of his Bride-chamber. For men
never adorn themselves more, or seek more to show their comeliness and
beauty, then when they are bridegroomes; for then they exceedingly desire to
please the eyes of their spowes, whom they most dearly love. But if we were so
near the Sun as to descerne what and how great it is, we should not then
need to use the resemblance of a Bridegroom, to conceive the incredible
beauty thereof. Truly the beauty of colors depends of light, and the light
failing, the beauty of colors soon fades away. Nothing therefore is more
beautiful then light. For which cause God (Who is beauty it self) would be
called ^^ght. God (says St. Ioh.) is light, 1 Ioh, 1
and no darkness is in him. Among corporal things also, there is nothing
brighter then the Sun, and therefore nothing more beautiful then it. The
beauty of things below and specially of men, fades in short time, but the
beauty of the Sun is never altered or diminished but at all times with equal
brightness shines unto all. Do we not see how all things as it were rejoice
at the rising of the Sun? Men go about their businenesse cheerfully, the
winds blow sweetly, the flowers open, the herbs spring up, and the birds
sing pleasantly. Whereupon the old blind Tobias when the Angel said unto him
Joy be to thee always, Tob. 5
Answered; What joy shall be to me which sit in darkness and see not the
light of heaven?

Consider then my soul, and think with thy self; if the Created Sun^e does
so rejoice every thing at his rising, what will the increated Son do (which
is without comparison more beautiful and bright) when to the clean of ha^t he
shall rise not to be seen for a time but for all eternity? And how sorrowful
and unhappy will that hour be to the wicl^ed, when they shall be sent away to
be buried in eternal darkness where neither the increated nor created Sun
shall ever shine? How great joy then shall that soul have to whom the Father
of Light shall say: Enter into the joy of thy Lord. Mat. 25


Afterward the same Prophet does extol the course of the Sun, Cap. 2.
which also is very admirable: He has rejoiced (says he) as a Giant to run
the way. Psalm. 18
A Giant truly if he extend his steps, according to the greatness of his
body, and run as fast as his strength will afford, will in a short time
pass a long way. And indeed the Prophet having compared the Sun unto a
Bridegroom, thereby to declare the Beauty thereof; after also compares it to
a Giant, that by that resemblance he might in some sort show the most speedy
course thereof. But albeit he had not compared it to a Giant, but to the flight
of Birds and Arrows, or to the Winds and Lightning; yet should it have bin
far from the thing indeed. For if that be true which with our eyes we see,
to wit that the Sun in four and twenty hours, passes about the whole
compass of his Orb: And if the compass of the Suns Orb, exceeds almost
without comparison the compass of the Earth: And if the Compass of the Earth
contains about twenty thousand miles: all which is most true: It must then
needs follow, that the Sun every hour runs many thousand miles. But why
say I every hour, nay every quarter of an hour, yea almost every minute. For
whosoever shall observe the rising or setting of the Sun, in an open Horizon,
as at Sea, or in a plain field; shall perceive the whole body of the Sun to
ascend above the Horizon in less space then the eight part of an hour; And
yet the Diameter of the Suns Body, is much greater then the Diameter of the
Earth; which notwithstanding contains seaue^ thousand miles. I my self being
once desirous to know in what space of time the Sun set at Sea: At the
beginning thereof, I began to read the Psalm Miserere, and scarce had read
it twice over, before the Sun was wholly set. It must needs be therefore, that
the Sun in that short time in which the Psalm Miserere was twice read over,
did run much more then the space of seven thousand miles. Who would believe
this unless certain reason did demostrate it? And now if any should say
moreover, that this body, which is so swiftly moved is much greater then the
whole Earth, and that the motion thereof is performed, without ceasing or
wearines, so that (if God should so command) it might continue for all
eternity: Surely if he were not insensible, he could not but wonder at the
infinite power of God. Truly therefore writes Ecclesiasticus: That this is a
meruai^ous Instrument, the work of the Highest, and great (doubtless) is our
Lord that made it.

There remains also the efficacy of the Suns light and beat, Cap. 3
whereof David speaks: Neither is there that can hyde himself from his heat.
This one bright body being placed in the midst of the World, gives Light to
all the Stars, to all the Air, to all the Sea, and to all the Earth, and
with his quickening heat causes all Plants, Corn and Trees throughout the
world, to budde, blossom and bear fruit: and under the earth, it also
produces all kinds of Metals. Therefore St. James in the beginning of his
Epistle compares the Sun to God: Iam, 1
Every best gift (says he) and every perfect gift, is from above,
descending from the Father of Lights, with wheme is no transmutation, nor
shadowing of alteration. The Sun indeed, is the Father of corporal Light;
as God is the Father of spiritual Light; Yet in three things there is great
unlikeness between God, and the Sun.

First the Sun needs continual Transmutation, to give light and heat to
the whole World; but God is wholly every where and necdeth no transmutation. And
therefore Saint James says: With whom there is no teansmutation.

Secondly the Sun (for that it always changes places) causes by turns day
to some, and night to others, shining to one people, and fetting to another:
But God is never changed, and yet is present with every one, and therefore St.
James adds: There is with him no shadowing of alteration.

Lastly (which is the chief) from the Sun (the Father of corporal Light)
all things proceed which grow on Earth: And those things are good; Yet not
excellent nor perfect, but small, temporal and transitory, and which make not
men good, because they may be abused, as they are by many to their destruction.
But from God (the Father of Spiritual light) Every best gift, and every
perfect guist, does descend by which the ^possessors thereof are made better
and more perect; These guises none can abuse; and whosoever perseuereth in them
unto the end, shall come to that true Happiness which is defined to be A state
of all good things perfectly united together.

Seek therefore my soul What these best guiftes, and perfect guifees are,
which come from above and descend from the Father of Light; and when thou have
found them, endeavor all thou can to keep them. But thou shall not need to
seek far, for the Sun does demonstrate them sufficiently unto thee. The
Sun by his light and heat (which are the Guiftes of the Father of Corporal
light) produces all things: So also The best guistes and perfect guiftes
which are, from above, and descend from God the true Father of Light; are the
Light of Wisdom, and Heat of Charity. The light of Wisdom (which makes us
truly wise, and leads us to the Heavenly fountain of Wisdom) teaches us
to contemn things Corporal, and esteem things Eternal; It teaches us: 1 Timothy, 6
Not to trust in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God. It teaches
us not to make this banishment our Country, nor to love this Pilgrimage; but
to endure it. Lastly it teaches us to hold this Life in patience, which is so
full of dangers and temptations, and death in desire, because: Blessed are the
dead that dye in our Lord. Apoc. 14
The order of true charity, is to love God without end, who is the end of all
desires: And to love other things so far forth as they shall be needful to
obtain that Happiness. Truly there is not any among the Children of men, who
will proceed so absurdly in the cure of his body, as to love a b^tter Potion
better then his health; For he knows that the one is the end, and the other
is but the means to obtain that end. How then comes it to pass, that so
many who would be accounted wise, keep no measure in heaping together riches,
in following the pleasures of the flesh, and in getting degrees of Honor, as
if in these things consisted the end of Man's desire: But in loving God, and in
seeking after eternal Happiness, they are content with so little, as if it
were the means to the end, and not the end of all other things? Truly the
reason is, because they have the Wisdom of this World, and not the Wisdom
which is from above, descending from the Father of Light. And because their
love is not orderly, therefore it is not true love, which cannot be but
orderly; for they are full of Covetousness, which is not from God, but from
the World. Thou therefore my soul whiles thou art a Pilgrim from thy Country,
and among enemies which oppugn true Wisdom and Charity, and call subtlety
Sapience, and covetousness Frugality; Sigh from the bottom of thy heart to
the Father of Light that it would please him to cause those hest guifes and
perfect guiftes, to wit the light of true Wisdom, and the hea^e of orderly
Charity to descend into thy heart, that being replenished with them, it may
ruune without stumbling in the way of Gods Commandments, and come to that
Country where they drink of the Fountain of Wisdom, and live by the milk
of Charity,

I come now to the Night season, Cap. 4
in which the Heaven by the Moon and stars makes us a stepp to ascend unto
God. For so speaks David: Isal. 8
Because I shall see thy Heavens, the work of thy singers: The Moon and the
Stars, which thou have founded. If we could see Heaven it self, the Prophet
would not have said (declaring in a manner what before he set down) The Moon
and the Stars, which thou have founded. For then doubtless we should have an
excellent Ladder to ascend unto God. We know there were some who defined the
Nature of the Heavens, by the motion of the Stars, to be a Fifth essence,
simple, incorruptible, and always circularly moving; And we know there have
bin others also, who would have Heaven to be the Element of Fire, not moved
circularly, and in some parts corruptible. But we seek not after opinions;
but certain knowledge, or Doctrine of faith, that we may frame thereby a
firm Ladder to know God. We will therefore from the Moon and stars which we
see, erect a Ladder with the Prophet, as we have done already from the Sun,
the Fountain of Corporal light.

The Moon has two properties, which may help us to Ascend unto God. First
the nearer it comes to the Sun, the lighter it is in the higher part next
to Heaven, and the darker in the lower part next to Earth: And when it is under
the Sun, and joined therewith; then is it wholly light toward Heaven, and
dark toward Earth: Again, when it is opposite against the Sun, it shines
at Full to the inhabitants of the Earth, and has no Light in the higher part
toward Heaven. This property of the Moon may teach men how careful they
ought to be of their nearenesse, subjection, and conjunction with God the
Father of Light. The Moon signifies Man, the Sun, God. When the Moon is
opposite against the Sun, then with her light borrowed from the Sun, she
only beholds the Earth, and turns her back as it were to Heaven: Therefore
she then appears very beautiful to the Inhabitants of the Earth; but very
deformed to those in Heaven: Even so, Men when they are far from God, (as yt
prodigal Son that departed from his Father, and went into a far Country) then
do they abuse the light of reason, which they received from him, to behold the
earth only, and are altogether occupied in getting ye wealth thereof. And then
of the children of this world, they are accounted wise, and happy: But of the
heavenly Citizens they are esteemed Poor, Apoc. 3
and blind, and naked, deformed and miserable. Again when the Moon is under
y^ Sun or very near it, she then shines in the higher part, and only
beholds Heaven, turning as it were her back to the Earth and vanishing from
ye eyes of men. Even so, when a sinner begins to return unto virtue, and to
be truly subjected unto God (the true Sun of Souls) by Humility, and joined
unto him by Charity: then will he fulfill that which the Apostle advises: Col,
3
Seek the things that are above, where Christ is sitting on the right hand of
God, and mind the things that are above, not the things that are upon the
E^rth. And then shall he be despised by fond Worldlings and accounted a dead
man. For indeed he is dead to the world. And his life is hid with Christ in
God. But when Christ shall appear, his Life: Then he also shall appear with
Christ in Glory, as the same Apostle says in that place.

And this is the cause (as St. Epist. 19 c. 4, 5, 6
Augustine in his Epistle to Ianuarius has noted) why the Pasch of our Lord
neither in the old or new Law, could be rightly Celebrated until the full
Moon were past, to wi^t, until the Moon which at the full is opposite,
begins by conversion, to return to conjunction with the Sun. For God by
this celestial Planet would show, how by the Passion and Resurrection of
Christ, Man that was opposite unto God by his iniquity, should begin to return
unto God, and by the merits of Jesus Christ, seek to unite himself unto his
grace.

But thou my soul, if perhapps by Gods grace thou find thy self subjected in
true humility unto the Father of Light, and joined unto him in fervent Charity,
do not imitate sooles who Are changed as the Mo^ne, Eccle, 27
but emulate Wise men which remain^ as the Sun, as Ecclesiasticus witnesses.
For the Moore increafeth quickly, and decreaseth. But if thou be wise abandon
not grace once received, depart not from it; for nothing can thou find
better in any place: Neither know thou having once lost it, whether thou
shall return to it any more; for he that promised pardon and grace unto the
penitent, has not promised the Gift of repentance, or a long life unto thee.
Therefore thou may without fear, turn thy back to the Earth, and behold
thy Sun. R^st, delight, and remain in him. Say with the Apostle St. Mat. 17
Peter: It is good for us to be here; Epist. Ad Com.
And with the Martyr Ignatius: It is better for me to live with Christ, then to
rule the Earth. Care not what they think of thee which love the world; for he
is not approved whom the world commends; but whom God commends

The Moon has also an other property, Cap, 5
which God is accustomed to use toward his elect. For the Moon gonerneth the
night as the Sun the day says Moses in Genesis, Genesis 7
and David in the Psalms; Psalm. 135
but the Sun shines all day long; the Moon sometime in the night casts a
great light, sometimes a small, and sometimes none at all. So God (like the
Sun) always shines upon the holy Angels, and blessed Souls, which enjoy
perpetual day, (For theresh all be no night there says St. John in the
Apocalips) but in this night of our Pilgrimage and banishment, Apoc. 21
2 Cor. 5
In which we walk by Faith, and not by Sight, And Attend to holy Scripture, as
to a candle shining in a dark place, as St. Peter says in his last Epistle; 2
Pet, 1
God (like the Moon) does sometime visit and illuminate our hearts: and
sometime leaves us in the darkness of desolation.

Yet thou ought not my soul to be too sorrowful, albeit thou enjoy not the
Light of consolation; nor rejoice too much, if shortly after thou breathe in
the Light of comfortable Devotion; For God is as the Moon, and not as the
Sun, in the night of this world. Neither does he only appear unto us poor
and imperfect creatures, sometimes as a Moon full of the Light of Consolation
and sometimes without Light leaving us in the dark night of Desolation: For
the Apostle St. Paul the vessel of election, who was rapt into the Third
Heaven, 2 Cor. 12
and heard secret words, which is not lawful for a man to speak, says
sometimes: 2 Cor. 7
I am replenished with Consolation, I d^e exceedingly abou^d in joy in all our
tribulation, And sometimes he sigheth and lamenteth saying: Rom, 7
I see another Law in my members, repugning to the Law of my mind, and
captiuing me in the Law of sin, that is in my members. Unhappy man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death. 21 Cor. 1
And in his last unto the Corinthians: We will not have you ignorant Brethren
concerning our tribulation which has happened in Asia, that we were pressed
above measure, above our power, so that it was teadious unto us even to live.
And thus (as St. John Chrysostom notes) God deals with all his Saints; Hom.
8 in Math.
to wit not suffering them to have continual tribulations, nor to enjoy
continual consolations; but in an admirable variety of prosperity and
adversity to spend as it were their lives. Thus much of the moon.

The Stars also are numbered among the ornaments of heaven, Cap. 6
of which Ecclesiasticus says: The glory of the stars is the beau^y of
heaven: but he presently adds: Eccle. 43
Our Lord illuminating the world on high. For all the beauty of the Stars,
Sun and Moon, proceeds from God the Father of light; neither does the
Sun by day, or Moon and stars by night give light; but it is Our Lord that
dwells on high, who by the Sun, Moon and stars gives light to the world.
For it is he who as the Prophet Baruch speaks: Baruch, 3
Sends forth light, and it goes, and has called it, and it obeys him with
trembling. And the stars have given light in their watches, and rejoiced, they
were called, and they said, here we are: and they have shined to him with
checrefulnesse that made them. By which words, the infinite power of God is
signified, who did in a moment produce and cause to work bodies so great and
beautiful. And to shine to him with cheerfulness that made them, is with
such readiness to obey their maker, as if in obeying him they were greatly
pleased and delighted. And surely it is a thing much to be meruayled; that the
stars moving so speedily and continually, and some performing their course
so slowely, and some so swiftly in their several orbs: yet they always keep
such measure and proportion together, that from it arises a most sweet and
pleasing harmony. Whereof God speaks in the book of Job when he says: Job.
38
Who shall declare the manner of the heavens, and the harmony of heaven who
shall make to sleep? This is not the harmony of voices or soundes heard with
corporal ears, but the harmony of proportion in the motions of the stars,
heard only with the ear of the Heart. For all the stars of the firmament
pass with the like speed about the whole compass of heaven, in four and
twenty hours; And the seven Planets or wandering stars, are moved some
swifter and some slower; So that the stars of the Firmament seem to bear
the plain song (to speak after the vulgar manner) and the Planets to modulate
a sweet and continual kind of Descant. But these things are above us, and
this Harmony is heard only by them that are in Heaven, and understand the
reasons of these motions. The stars also keep a just measure always in
turning ^ound; and therefore they seem to dance continually in ^eauen like
honest virgins skillful in that art.

But thou my soul ascend a little higher if thou can, and by the great
brightness of the Sun, the beauty of the Moon, the multitude and variety
of the other lights, the admirable harmony of heaven, and delightful dancing
of the stars; Think what it will be to behold God above heaven, to wit That
Sun that inhabiteth light, 1 Timothy 6
not accessible; to behold the virgin Queen of heaven, who being fair as the
Moon, rejoices the City of God. To behold the quires and orders of Angels
which being more in number, and brighter then the stars, adorn the Imperial
heaven. To behold the souls of Saints among the companies of Angels, as
Planets among the stars of the Firmament. And lastly, to hear the songs of
praises, and that eternal Alleluia with concording voices most sweetly to
resound in the streets of that City. Then shall it come to pass that
neither the beauty of heaven will seem great unto thee, and the things below
heaven (which are small, short and of no value) will be rejected and contemned.

THE EIGHT STEPP. From the Consideration of the reasonable Soul.
WE have hitherto passed only through corporal things, Cap. 1
whiles we intended from the contemplation of creatures to ascend unto the
Creator. And now we find the soul of Man (surpassing the dignity of all
bodies) to be in the lowest rank of spiritual substances between whom and
God, there are no other but the Hierarchies and Orders of Angels.

The soul of man carries such a resemblance with God the maker thereof; that
truly I know no way more easy for a man to ascend unto the knowledge of God,
then from the consideration of his own soul. And therefore he is inexcusable
before God if he knew not God; since from the knowledge of his own soul, he
may by Gods assistance without difficulty attain thereunto.

First therefore the soul of Man is a spirit; for so the holy Fathers expound
those words of Genesis: Gen, 2
Our Lord God formed Man of the sl^me of the earth, and breathed into his face
the breath of life; And that of Tobias: Command my spirit to be received. ^ob. 3
And Ecclesiastes: Let thedust return into his earth, Eccl, 12
and the spirit return to God who gave it. For albeit the word (spirit) agree
also to the wind, whereof it is said in the psalm: The spirit of storms,
Psalm. 148 Ioh. 3
And in the Gospel: The spirit breaths where he will, and thou hear his
voice: Yet there is no doubt but that the Spirit of storms is a body which by
reason of the exceeding raritie thereof, does nearer immitate a Natural
spirit, then any other body whatsoever: but the soul of man is a true spirit,
not a body; neither is it produced out of matter, but created of God. Whereof
among Catholics there is no controversy.

Here then begins the excellency of the soul, and her resemblance with
God. For God is a spirit (says our Savior) and they that adore him, Ioh. 4
must adore in spirit and verity. But although God is a spirit, and the soul
of man is also a spirit; yet God is a spirit uncreated, the soul a spirit
created: whereupon it follows that there is an infinite difference between
that spirit which is the soul, and that spirit which is God. As therefore the
soul may rejoice for being a spiritual substance, excelling thereby the
heavens and stars in nobility of Nature; so ought she also to be humbled
unto God her Maker, because she is made of nothing, and without him of her
self is nothing.

Secondly, Cap. 2
the soul of Man is a simple spirit, and therefore immortal; for it has
nothing within it self that can dissolve it, or cause it to dye: but as it
has this privilege above the souls of brute beasts which dye with the
body; so it ought likewise to admire and reverence the excellencye of the
Creator, who is not only immortal, but also eternal. For there was a time
when the soul of man was not; and by the will of God only it took beginning,
and may likewise (if God so please) be reduced to nothing, although in it
self, it has no cause of corruption. Therefore the Apostle said of God: ^
Tim. 6
Who only has immortality; for he only can by no power, chance, or reason
be dissolved, because he is the Fountai^e of life.

Thirdly, Cap. 3
the soul of Man has the light of understanding; for it not only decerneth
colors, senttes, tastes, soundes, hot, cold, hard, soft, and other such like
things which lie open to the senses of the body: But also judges of
substances, and of general and universal Notions as well as of particular:
Neither knows it only things present; but also coniectureth of things to
come, and mounteth by discourse above the Heavens, penetrateth the depth,
searches out causes by effects, and from causes runs back to effects.

Lastly by the light of reason it ascends unto God who Inhabiteth Light
inaccessible, And of this Light St. 1 Timothy 6
John says in the Gospel: Ioh. 1
It was the true Light, which lightneth every man that comes into the World.
Psalm. 4
And David in the Psalms: The Light of thy countenance O Lord is signed upon
us. And, Psalm. 31
Do not become as Horse and Male which have no understanding.

This is a great dignity of the soul, whereby man is made like to God, and
unlike to Beasts.

And from hence we may and ought to consider the Infinite eminency and
sublimitie of God. For the soul is endued with the light of understanding; but
God is Light and Understanding. The soul discourses from the Cause to the
effect, and from the Effect to the cause, and with great labor gets
knowledge: God sees all things at once perfectly together. The soul
understands things which are, and therefore her knowledge depends of
things: God by his Understanding causes things to be, and therefore their
existence depends of his knowledge. The soul in some sort coniectureth of
things to come: God sees always all things to come, as plainly as things
past or present.

The Soul wants many things to exercise the gift of understanding: As
Object, Species, Fantasy, and the like: God wants nothing, for his Essence
is to him all things.

Lastly the Soul while it is in the body, cannot see God nor Angels, or it
self, or any substance truly, though it be Corporal; many things also it
knows not and is deceived, coniecturing much by opinion, and comprehending
little by demonstration. But God knows all things without conjecture or
error, Heb. 4
for All things are naked and open to his eyes as the Apostle speaks in his
Epist. Heb, 4
to ye Heb. If man then esteem his knowledge so much, that the Apostle says: 1
Cor. 13
Knowledge puffs up, how ought he to admire the knowledge of God, in
comparison whereof, all knowledge of man is ignorance.

Fourthly there is another kind of knowledge in the soul of man, Cap 4
with consists not in speculation but in action. Whereupon so many books of
virtues and vices, so many Laws, ordinances, Institutions and exercises, have
bin written by Philosophers, to attain the knowledge how to live Well. By all
with, an admirable light of reason is discovered to be in man, whereby he far
excels Beasts. But all thesethinges are nothing in comparison of the Law
eternal which lives in the mind of God, from whence as from an euerslowing
Fountain, all Laws and Ordinances have sprung. For there is one Lawmakers and
Judge, God, says St. Iam, 4
James in his Epistle. He is Truth, Justice, and Wisdom: By whom Kings
reign, Pro. 8
and the makers of Laws decree just things.

Thou shall never therefore find out the skill how to live Well, until thou
be admitted into the school of Christ, Who only is the true Master: Mat, 23
By his word and example thou shall learn that Justice which abounds above
the justice of the Scribes and Pharistes, or of the Philosophers; the end
whereof is: Charity from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and a Faith not
fained. 1 Timothy 1


Fifthly the Soul of man has a third kind of Knowledge, Cap. 5
which consists in making things ingeniously. And truly Spiders know also
how to make their cobwebs, Birds their nestes, Bees their honey, and Foxes
their holes: But these Creatures by Instinct of Nature, do the same things
after one and the same manner: But the soul of man by reason and judgment,
has invented innumerable Arts, by which it governs, and rules by force all
other living Creatures.

Neither can Birds escape by flight, Fishes by swimming, Lions and Bears by
strength, Horses and Mules by fierceness, nor Stagges and Goats by swiftness.

For even Children take birds, with snares and birdlime; and Fishers with
hooks and nets, catch fishes. And Men by wit and art, include and carry
Lions and Bears, into Iron cages: take wild Boares and Staggs in Toils, or
kill them with Iauelyns, and tame Horses, and Mules, with the bridle, and make
them fit to be ridden on.

What shall I say of the Art of Navigations? How great light of Wit shined in
the soul of Man, when it taught great Ships being heavily laden, not only
to run through the Maine with oars like feet, but also to fly with Sails
like wings? What of Agriculture? Who will not wonder at man's wit, to behold
the Corn fields, Vineyards, Orchardes, Gardens, Fish Ponds, and springes of
Waters brought to irrigate and moysten them? What of Architecture? Who will not
admire the Palaces, Temples, Cittyes, Arches, Towers, Amphitheaters,
Pyramides, and Pillars of stone? I omit the Arts of Painting and Engrauing, by
which the Countenances of men, and other things, are so lively expressed in
colors or marble, that sometimes they are taken for true, and not for painted
or engraven. I will say nothing of other Arts invented by man either for
necessity, profit or pleasure, for they are so many that scarcely they can be
numbered.

Give thanks therefore O my soul to God, that it has pleased him to make thy
Nature, so far different from the nature of other living Creatures: And lift
up the eyes of thy mind unto thy said Maker, in whom is the true fountain of
that Wit and Wisdom, which created all things. From thence did slow all the
W^tt which is derived unto thy Nature. And if thou do admire Man's wit,
because it has learned how to tame wild Beasts by industry and Art: admire
Gods wisdom much more, whom not only all living Creatures but also all
things without life serve and obey. And if it seem much to thee, yt Man has
invented the Arts of sailing on the seas, tilling the fields, and building
houses: much more let it seem to thee, that God has built the Heavens, Earth
and Seas, and all things which are in them. And lastly if thou wonder at ye
lively painting in colors, or ingrat^^ing in stone. Why do thou not wonder at
the skill of thy Creator, who of clay made a true living man, and of the ribbe
of a man a true living woman? Add also that Man can do nothing without God:
but God does all things alone without help of any other.

Sixthly Man's soul has Free Will, Cap. 6
in which it is like to God and Angels, and chiefly differs from other
Creatures. This is a great and admirable excellency. But the Freedom of Will
in God is so great, that the Freedom of the soul being compared thereunto,
scarce seems a shadow thereof. The Freedom of man's will is weak, and prone
to choose things evil and hurtful: The liberty of Gods will is most strong,
and can never fail or be inclined to evil.

For as to dye is an Infirmity of a Mortal body, and not to dye an Ability of
a Glorified body: So to sin is an infirmity of Free Will; and not to sin
will be an ability of the same Free Will, when God shall hereafter in Heaven
give us that by Grace, which he always has by Nature. Our Free Will also is
free indeed potentially to will, and not to will; or actually to will and not
to will: But it cannot do what it will, or not do what it will even in it
self, and much less in others. Hear the Apostle lamenting in his Epistle to
the Romans: Rom, 7
Not the good which I will, that do I, but the evil which I will not, that I
do.

And which of us all, but finds this true by experience. I would pray with
attention to God, and I command my imagination not to wander about, and cause
me to think of other things whiles I pray: And yet I cannot keep it in
order, but when I least suspect, I find my self deluded by it, and omitting
my prayers, I fall to muse on other matters. I would not be molested with lust,
nor angry out of reason, and by Freewill I command the concupiscible and
irascible powers which are in me, to obey reason, and not to be seduced by the
bodily senses: And yet reason is not obeyed, nor that done which I would, but
that which I would not.

But of all other things it is most admirable and miserable, that the mind
commands ye body, and it presently obeys, it do^mandeth it self and it
disobeyeth. Lib, 8. con, cap. 4
Vade hoc Monstrum? Whence is this strange thing (says St. Augustin^) the
mind co^ma^deth the hand to move, and it does with such speed, that the
comman meant can hardly be discerned from the execution thereof, and it is the
mind, and the hand a body: The mind commands the mind to be willing, and
it is the same thing, and yet it does it not. But it wills not fully, and
therefore it does not fully command. It is not therefore any strange thing but
an infirmity of the mind, whith does ^ot fully rise, being lifted up by
truth, and kept down by custom. But the free will of God is joined with
absolute power; for of him it is written: He has done all things whatsoever
he would, And, Psalm. 113
There is none that can resist thy will. Esther 13
Wherefore my Soul if thou be wise, do not boast of the force of thy free
will, until thou come into the freedom of glory, where thy Heavenly Physician
will cure all thy infirmities, and fill thy desire with all good things. And
in the mean while sigh daily, and say unto God with the Prophet: Psalm, 26
Be thou my helper, for sake me not. Not coldly also, and for custom sake, but
with attention, and from thy heart, repeat at the least seven times a day: O
God intend unto my belpe, Psalm. 69
Lord make have to help me.

Seauenthly, Cap. 7
Man's soul has a reasonable will, which not only has power to desire good
things present, particular, and corporal, as beasts do: but also good things
absent, universal, and spiritual, which are known by the light of faith or
reason, until it come to the Highest Happiness which is God. This makes the
soul capable of virtues, and especially of Charity the Queen of virtues.
Brute beasts indeed have the love of Concupiscence; but the love of
friendship they know not.

But thou my soul art by God made capable of Charity (the Chief of all
Guiftes) whereby God remains in thee and thou in him. For God is Charity, 1
Ioh. 4
and he that abides in Charity, abides in God, and God in him. And if the
Happiness of a created will be so great, what may we think of the Happiness
wherewith the increated will is filled? Only the will of God is capable of
infinite love, wherewith the infinite goodness of God is worthy to be loved.
Neither does his will want virtues, or needs to be directed by his
understanding; for they are all one, as Wisdom and Charity in God is the same
thing.

Eighthly, Cap. 8.
the soul of Man is in the body; but far otherwise then the souls of brute
beasts in their bodies. The souls of brute beasts are material, and
extended according to their bodies: so that a part of it, is in a part of their
body, and the whole, in their whole body. But the soul of Man (because it is
an indivisible spirit) is after an admirable manner Whole in all, and whole in
every part: so that, albeit it fill all the body, yet it occupies no place in
the body: And when the body grows, the soul grows not; but begins to be
where before it was not. And if a member be cut away, or withered; the soul is
not deminished, nor withered, but cease to be in that member where before it
was, without hurt or mutilation. This is a true resemblance of Gods existence
in Creatures. For God is an indivisible spirit: and yet he fills all the
world and every part thereof. Neither does he occupy any place: But is Whole
in all, and whole in every part of the world: And when any creature is
produced, God begins to be in it, and yet he is not moved: And when any
creature is by chance destroyed, or dies: God is not destroyed or dies: but
cease to be in it, without local mutation.

Thus far then, God and the soul agree: but in many things, God (as it is
meet) does far excel. For the soul (before it can move and govern the
body) must become the form of the body, and be so united unto it; that of the
soul and body is made one Man. But God, needs not become the form or soul
of the world: Neither of him and the world, is one Compounded substance made:
For his immencitie is such, that he is every where: his indivisible unity
such, that he is wholly every where: And his omnipotency such that he works
every where.

Moreover, although the soul be said to be in all the body: yet it is not
properly but in the parts which have life; and therefore it is not in the
humors, in the hair, in the nails, or in dried and dead members: But God is
in all things both corporal and spiritual without exception; neither can it
be that any thing exist wherein God is not. The soul also is but in her own
body which is narrow and straight, and where all the parts are continued
together: But God is in this universality of things, although it be very
great, and the parts thereof not continued together, but contiguous and
adjoining. And if more worlds were made, God should be in them all: for of him
it is written: 1 Par. 6
The heaven and heavens of heavens do not contain thee. And albeit new
heavens and earthes were multiplied without end God should fill them all, for
no place can be where he should not be.

Ninthly, the soul of Man (beside those things which are said) has also in
it an obscure image of the Blessed Trinity; because it has a power to
remember, to understand, and to love: and also for that the mind does by the
understanding Form a word: and from the mind and the word proceeds love:
For that which is known by the mind and represented by the Word as Good, is
forthwith by the Will loved and desired. But God the Father did after a more
high and divine manner begett God the Word, and God the Father, and God the
Word, becathed our God the h^ly Ghost, the hu^ng Fountain of all chasts lone.

And therefore the mystery of the Trinity does surpass all natural
knowledge; neither can a learned Philosopher attain thereunto without
supernatural light. For the soul of Man produces a Word, and a love which
are not substances, but accidents; and therefore no persons: But God the Father
did beget the word consubstantiall to himself: And the Father and the word,
breathed out the holy Ghost consubstantiall likewise to them both. Therefore
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are truly three persons. The soul
of Man also, produces a Word which continues not long: and the Will produces
a love which lasts not long: but God the Father did beget The Wordeternall,
and the Father and the Word did breath out the holy Ghost eternal, For God
cannot be without his Word and Spirit. Furthermore the soul of Man, by one
Word represents but one thing: and therefore it multiplyeth the words not
only of the Mind, but also of the mouth. The will of Man likewise must
produce many acts of Love, if it will love many things: but God with one Word
speaks all truth, and with one Act of love, loves all good things.

Tenthly and lastly, Cap. 10
the soul of man whiles it is in the body; is not seen, heard, moved, nor
scarce conceived to be there: and yet from it all good things are derived to
the body: as sense, motion, speech, subsistence, beauty, strength and the like;
For how could a man see, hear, speak, walk, subsist, and be strong, fair,
and amiable, unless his soul were in him? And why does he not after he is
dead, see, hear, speak, and move, but because his soul is departed, from
whence these benefits proceeded? Even so, thy God O my soul, whiles he lives
in thee by his Grace, makes thee to see what Faith shows thee, and to hear
what he speaks in thee: That thou may walk in the Way of the
Commandments toward the Heavenly Jerusalem, and speak in prayer to God,
and in good exhortations to thy neighbor, and subsist perseuering in good
works, and be strong in battle against thy invisible enemies, and thereby
become beautiful in the eyes of the invisible God and his Angels.

But take heed least Gods grace departing from thee, (which is the life of thy
soul) thou fall into the losses of the First death: And from it be carried to
the second death, from whence is no Resurrection.

O that thy God would open the eyes of thy mind, that thou might behold the
beauty of a Soul, that is united to him in Charity? What place he prepares
for it? What joys he promises it? How lovingly he looks on it? And with
what longing, it is ezpected by the Angels and blessed Souls? Then would
thou not endure that so great beauty should be blemished with the least spott.
And if it should so happen, thou would endeavor to wash it away with
floudes of tears. For so did St. Francis (as Saint Bonauenture reports) who
although he could not follow the immaculate Lamb without some spot;
endeavored notwithstanding to purge and cleanse his soul with daily shewers of
tears, from all spots of offenses whatsoever. Again, if thy God would open
thy inward eyes, that thou might see the deformity of a Sinful soul, how
it slinketh like a rotten carcass, and how both God and his Angels reiuse to
look thereon, although perhaps it dwell in a beautiful body very pleasing to
ye eyes of men: surely thou would be so affrighted, that by no means thou
would become such a one, nor long continue in such estate.

THE NINTH STEPP. From the Consideration of Angels.
WE are come to the highest Stepp of Ascension unto God, Cap. 1
from created substances. For if we speak only of Natural perfection; there
is no created substance higher then that of Angels. First therefore we will
consider Angels according to their excellency of Nature: Secondly according to
their sublimity of Grace: And lastly according to the Offices which they
execute.

For it is not our meaning to enter into a full Disputation about Angels; but
only to touch such things as may help us, to eleuate ou^ minds to God. If
an Angel then be compared unto Man's reasonable Soul; it may fitly be called a
perfect Soul, even as the soul may be called an imperfect Angel. For so of
man spoke the Prophet by reason of his Soul when he said: Thou have minished
him a little less then Angels. Psalm, 8
An Angel is a Perfect Spiritual Substance: the Soul an Imperfect Spiritual
Substance, because it is the Bodies Form and but one part of Man. Therefore an
Angel is all Spirit; Man partly Spirit, and partly flesh; or partly an Angel,
and partly a beast. As if one should say; An Angel is all of gold; Man partly
of gold, and partly of clay. The Prophet then said truly: Man is minished
little less then Angels. And it is also true, that the soul of man, because
it is a part of man, is little less then an Angel. Whereupon it follows,
that an Angel is more like to God, then a man or his soul; for God is a
Spirit, and not a Body or Form of of a body.

And yet notwithstanding this resemblance of an Angel unto God; God is a
spirit infinitely excelling the dignity of an Angel. For God is a Spirit
uncreated, eternal, immense Almighty, only Good, only Wise, only High. If
then my soul thou will confess, that thou do with reason admire the Nature
of Angels: How much more ought thou to admire and reverence the Nature of
God, who without all comparison excels them?

Neither in Nature or substance only may an Angel be called a perfect M^n,
Cap. 2
and Man an imperfect Angel: but also in knowledge and understanding. For man
(because he uses ye ministry of his senses and discourses from effects to
causes, and from causes to effects) understands with l^bour, and by degrees
attaineth unto knowledge: whereupon he oftentimes doubts, oftentimes is
deceived, and seldom finds out the Truth: But an A^gell beholds a^ once the
effects and causes together, sees the Substance with the Accidents, and
spiritual things with corporal.

Man therefore, whiles he is a P^grim on carth, in understanding is not a
little less, but much less then Angels: So that albeit he excel in Wit,
and in the study of Philosophy: Yet in comparison of an Angel, he may truly
be accounted a Child or sucking Infant.

Not untruly therefore spoke yt Prophet of us mortal Men: O^^ of the mouth of
Infantes, Psalm. 8
and Sucklings, thou have perfited praise. Hear what the wise Solomon judged
of our Wisdom, wherewith we are so puffed up. All things are hard (says he)
Man cannot explicate them in Word. Bccle. 1 Bccles. 3
And again, God has delivered the World, to their disputation; that man
cannot find ^he Work, which God has ^rought from the beginning to the end.
If all things then are hard, and which man cannot explicate: And if man
understand nothing in this visible world, from the first Creature to the last,
I say nothing so perfectly as that he is able to explicate the Nature,
Propertyes, Accidents, and secret virtues thereof: Into what errors shall he
fall, if he undertake to search out the things which are above Heaven,

Therefore if thou be Wise my soul, follow the knowledge of Salvation and
Wisdom of Saints, which consists in fearing God and keeping his
Commandments; Delight more in prayer, then in Disputation; and in edifying
Charity, then in proud knowledge. For that is the way which leads unto life
Eternal, where we little ones shall he made equal with Angels which always
see the face of their Father which is in Heaven. Luk, ^0 Mat. 18


There is also a third thing wherein Man's soul is not a little less, but much
less then Angels, to wit, in the power and command over Bodies. For Man's
soul moves the body by commaundment of the Will: but other Bodies it cannot
so move: And it moves the body by Progressiue motion upon the Earth: but
cannot suspend it upon the Water, cleuate it above the Air, or carry it
whether it will: But Angels only by Force of Spirit, and commaundment of
Will, eleuate heavy bodies, and carry them whether they lift. So an Angel
took up Abachue, Dan. 14
and in a very short time carried him to Babylon to bring Daniel his ^inner,
and recarried him again to Palistine. A man also cannot fight in spirit only
with his enemies, but with his hands and weapons: but an Angel by power of
spirit, without hands or weapons can encounte^ and overcome a whole army of
men. So one Angel ^^ew at once a hundred, fourscore and five thousand
Assyrians. 4 Reg. 19
And if Angels can do these things, what can the Lord and maker of Angels do?
He truly made all things of nothing, and can reduce all things to nothing.

Man's soul moreover can by the art of paynting with industry and labor make
the image of a man so lively that it may seem to live and breath: But an
Angel can without labor of hands or instruments, almost in a moment of time
assume in such sort a body Elementarie, that wise men will judge it to be the
true body of a man, because it can walk, speak, eat, drink, be touched,
handled and washed. So Abraham prepared meat for the Angels, Genesis 18
and washed their feet: For as the Apostle declares: Ieb. 13
He received Angels to harbor thinking they had been men. Which also happened
to his nephew Loath, when he received two Angels as strangers into his house.
Genesis 19
The Angel Raphael in like manner remained with young Tobias many-dayes
walking, speaking, eating, and drinking as if he had been a man indeed: yet
notwithstanding being after to depart he said: I seemed indeed to eat with
you, and to drink; Tob. 12
but I use an inu sible meat and drink, and suddenly he vanished from their
sight.

Surely it is admirable, and proceeds from great power, so to frame a body on
the sudden as that it may seem to differ in nothing from ye living body of a
Man: and again at pleasure on the fodaine so to dissolve the same body that
nothing thereof remain. If then the power of Angels be so great, how great is
the power of the maker of Angels who gave them that power? Truly as the
knowledge of Angels and men, being com^ared with the knowledge of God is
ignorance: and as the justice of Angels and men, being compared with the
justice of God is injustice: so the power of Angels and men being compared
with the power of God is infirmity. Therefore it is truly said: Romans 16 ^uke
18 1 ^^m. 6 Cap 4.
Our God only wise, only good, and only migh^ie.

Lastly, if we consider the place of Angels and of men; we shall find man's
soul in that respect also, Not a little less, Heb. 2
but much lessened under A^gells (I willingly use that word which the Apostle
v^ s^th, For God has app^inted a place on earth for the soul of man: and in
heaven to wit in his Palace a place for Angels. Psalm. 113
For the heaven of heaven is to our Lord: but the earth he has given to the
children of men.

Whereupon our Lord in St. Math, 24
Matthew calls them The Angels of heaven. And in St. Luke he says: There
shall be joy in heaven upon one sinner that death penance, Luke 15
And a little after: There shall be joy before the Angels of God, upon one
sinner that does penance. God also has so tied the soul to the body, that it
cannot without it remove from place to place: but Angels are not tied to any
body: but have power given them to p^sse from heaven to earth, and from earth
to heaven or whether soever they will with very great speed; so that Angels
being next unto God in dignity of Nature; do also in some sort by their
celerity, immitate his vbiquitie. For God is every where by immensitie of
Nature, and therefore needs no change of place: Angels by swiftness of
motion pass so speedily from place to place, and so exhibit their presence in
cuery place, that they seem after a sort to be every where.

But my soul if thou will hear the Lord of Angels; there is no cause why thou
should envy that Angels have so high a place and so vnsatigable a motion:
For not only thou my soul, when thou art loosed from the body, shall be
equal unto Angels: but when thou shall return unto thy body which Christ Will
corfigure to the body of his glory: Phil. 3
with that body shall thou possess heaven as thy owne-house, and it being made
spiritual shall without labor or weariness be presently there wheresoever
thou (the soul) shall will and command it. 1 Cor. 5
Thy Lord does not deceive thee, who says in his Gospel: Ioh. 14
In my Fathers house there be many Mansions. And, I go and prepare you a
place. And, If I go and prepare you a place: I come again, and will take you
to my self, that where I am, you also may be. Father I will that where I am,
Ioh. 17
they also man be with me, and that they may see my glory which thou have given
me. But thou art not ignorant where Christ is, and what body he has. For thou
do confess every day and say: On the third day he rose again from the dead,
he ascended into heaven; thou know also that his body after the resurrection
did sometimes enter in among his Disciples the doors deing shut, ^ch^ ^o L^k. 24
and departed from them not walking but vanishing; that is, he transferred his
body from them so speedily as if it had been a Spirit and not a body. But if
thou secke after this glory; thou must first Consigure thy body, Phil. 3
to the body of the humility of Christ, And then Christ will configure thy
body to the body of his glory. For Christ suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2
leaving us an example that we may follow his stepps says St. Peter the
Apostle. And what are his Stepps? Who (says he) did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth: Who when how^s reuyled, did not reuyle, when he
suffered be threatened not. There are two Stepps of Christ, which if thou tread
not, tho^ shall loose thy way to heaven. First do not but suffer evil:
Secondly, Do good, and here expect no good. Or (which is the sum of all)
Love thy neighbor for Gods sake, not for reward of man: and for friendship,
not for lust.

Let us now come to the dignity of Angels according to Grace. Cap. 5
Truly in this also Man is lessened more then a little less then Angels. For
God so created Angels in the beginning, that at the same instant he made their
Nature, and infused in them grace, as St. De Cin, lib, 12 c, 9
Augustine witnesses in his books of the City of God. And then so soon as
by the first conversion of their minds to God, they adhered to him by love
(the reprobate Angels falling) they were crowned with beatitude and glory.
Therefore their Pilgrimage was very short; but their Mansion in heaven
eternal: If yet, that short space, which passed between their creation and
beatitude, may be called a Pilgrimage. But we in our creation received grace
with our nature in our first parent, and not in our selves: therefore by his
fall we al fell. In whom (as the Apostle speaks Romans 5.) all sinned. For
although by the Mediator of God and men Christ Jesus, we are reconciled to God;
yet we are condemned to continual banishment, and whiles we are in body, we are
Pilgrims from our Lord For we walk by says and not by sight. 2 Cor, 5
And it much afflicts pious men and such as sighafter heaven, that we are
here conversant among our cruel ene^^ies, where there is danger, lest being
circumuented and taken by them, we be at leugth excluded from the possession of
our most sweet country. Hence proceeded these words: Psalm. 119
Woe is me that my soiourning is prole ged: I have dwelt with the inhabitants
of Cedar; my soul has been long a so^ourner. But although ^n this we are
less then Angels: yet Gods mercy does greatly comfort us; for that it has
pleased him of our kind to exalt Christ above all the Angels of heaven, as
also his Blessed Mother. Many men likewise being inferior to An^els in the
guists of Nature, have surmounted some of them in the guiftes of grace and
equalled the Highest.

Truly St. John Chrysistome expounding the Epistle to the Romans, Hom, 32
doubts not to place the chief Apostles Peter and Paul whereas the Seraphins
do fly and gloryfie God. Which also is pious to believe of St. John baptist
and others.

Add moreover, that as the good Angels after their first merit entered into
glory, so the evil Angels after their first sin, were condemned to
perpetual punishment. Men ought not therefore to complain of a longer space,
since they may therein often ^mend, and by repentance ^rocure pardon for their
offense.

It now remains that we speak somewhat of the offices of Angels. Cap. 6
Angels have five Offices. The first is always with Hymns and songs to
praise their maker. And that we may understand how much God esteems this
ministry, we must consider that the highest Angels are appointed for this
Office; who being as it were, the first singers in that Quire, all the other
Orders of Angels follow with incredible exultation.

Hear what the Prophet Isay says: Isay. 6
I s^we our Lord sitting vpor a high thr^ne and e^uated, and those things that
were under him, filled the Temple Seraphins stood upon the same: six wings to
one, and six wings to the other, with two they covered his face, and with two
they covered his feet, and with two they fl^we. And they cried one to in
other, and said: Holy, h^ly, holy, the Lord God of hosts, all the earth is
full of his glory. Here thou hear the name Seraphin, which are the Chief
of the Heighest Order: Thou see them cover his face and feet in sign of
reverence, as if they durst not behold his face or touch his bare feet: ^hou
see they fly continually whiles they sing: which signifies their desire to
approach still nearer unto God: which two things are needful for those who
desire to please God; that while they sing his praises, they love him with
reverence and reverence him with love. This the Prophet David declares saying:
Psalm. 2
Serve our Lord in fear: and rejoice to him with trembling. From hence thou
may learn my soul with what veneration God is to be served, since the
chief Angels in heaven which always behold his face, dare not
(notwithstanding their high estate and long familiarity) but reverently fear
him whiles they praise him. And what will thou Dust and Ashes answer at the
day of judgment, when thou shall be reprehended for thy drowsinesse and
distractions in a work so divine that thou wast not worthy to be employed
therein? Learn therefore from henceforth (being taught by such a President) to
praise thy God with fear, reverence, atention, vigilancye and love.

An other Office of Angels is to offer up the prayers of men to God; And to
commend them also by their suffrage: For so speaks the Angel Raphael in the
book of Tobyas When thou did pray with tears, Tob, 12
and did bury the dead, and left thy dinner, I offered thy prayer to our
Lord. And in the Apocalips John saw an Angel standing before the Altar with a
golden Censer: Apoc, 8
And there were (says he) given to him many incenses, that he should give of
the prayers of all saints upon the Altar of gold, which is before the throne
of God.

And in this truly the great mercy of God does also appear. For he was not
content, first by his Prophets and after by his son and his Apostles to
exhort us to pray: but also promised to give whatsoever we should ask: Ask
(says he) and it shall be given you. Luke 11
And in an other place: Ioh, 15
If you shall ask my Father any thing in my name, he will give it you. And
beside this promise he also added A reward to those that ask: Math. 9
But thou (says he) when thou shall pray, enter into thy Chamber, and having
shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret: ^and thy father which sees thee
in secret, will repay thee, to wit areward, beside the things which thou did
ask. For so our Lord speaks in that place, of prayer and A^mesdeedes saying:
Thy Father which sees in secret will repay thee.

Neither is God content with this demonstration of fahterly love: But has
appointed the Angels as masters of Requests to take charge of the prayers and
petitions of the poor, and to present and read them in his sight, that no one
of their Petitions may be forgotten. What Prince in the world did ever promise
rewards to those that came to demand of him mercy or justice? And yet those
which come to the Princes of the World are men and the Princes themselves also
are men made of the same molde, and subject to the same Almighty God. But
albeit it may seem much to reward those that ask: yet ought it not seem much
to give them free access, to appoint faithful masters of Requests to keep
their petitions, and to offer them up and solicit their speedy dispatch.

The third Office of Angels is to be sent as Ambassadors to denounce such
things as God will have denounced, especial concerning our Redemption and
salvation. So speaks the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb. 1
Are not all (the Angels) ministering Spirits: Sent to minister for them which
shall receive the inheritance of salvation.

We read also in many places of the old Yestament, Gen, 18
how Angels appeared to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and manyfested to them
such things as God would have manifested. Dan, 9
We find likewise in the new Testament that the Angel Ga^riel was sent as an
Ambassador from God to Zachary and to the virgin Mother of God. Luke 1
Luke 2
Angels also were sent to the shepherds, to St. Joseph, and after the
Resurrection of our Lord to the women that stayed at the Sepulcher, Ioh, 20
and after the Ascension, Math 28 Act, 1
to all the Disciples. But if any ask, why God (who is every where, and can
easily by himself speak in the hearts of men) sends notwithstanding his
Angels? I answer, because men may understand that God regards their affairs,
and that all things are governed and ordered by him. For otherwise they might
persuade themselves that Gods inspirations did proceed from their own
discourse and counsel: But when they see or hear that Angels are sent by
God, and the things which the Angels foretold, to come so truly to pass;
they cannot doubt but that God foreseeth man's affairs, and does cheisely
direct and dispose such things as appertain to the salvation of his Elect.

The fourth Office of Angels is to protect men both in particular and
ingenerall. For it pleased the mercy of God to commend unto his strongest
servants the custodye of the weaker. And to appoint them as Tutors over
Children, Gardians over Infantes Patrons over Clyents, shepheardes our sheep,
Physicians over sick folks, Defendors over Orphans, and such as cannot defend
themselves but under the wings of the more mighty.

Of the protection of particular men David witnesses: He has given his Angels
charge rf thee, Psalm. 90
that they keep thee in all thy ways. And Christ himself is also a faithful
witness hereof: See (says he) that you despise not one of these little ones,
Math, 18
for I say to you, that their Angels in heaven always do see the face of my
Father which is in heaven. Touching their protection also of Provinces and
kingdoms Daniel witnesses: Dan. 10
Who calls the Guardian Angel of the kingdom of Persia, the king of Persia,
and the Guardian Angel of the Kingdom of Greece, the King of Greece, And the
Guardian Angel of the Children of Israel, he calls by his name Michaell.
Apcc. 2
Saint John likewise in the Apocalips writes of the Angels Gardians of
Churches and makes mention Of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna,
and of others.

Therefore in every Kingdom, there are two Kings; the one a visible Man, the
other an invisible Angel: And in every Church there are two Bishops; the one a
visible man, the other an invisible Angel: And in the universal Catholic
Church there are two chi^fe Pastors appointed under Christ our Lord, the one a
vifible man, the other an invisible Angel, which we beleene to be St.
Michaell the Archangell. For ^s the Synagogue of the Jews in times past: So
now the Church of the Christians, does reverence him for her Patron.

Do thou not see my soul, how careful that Majesty (who needs nothing of
ours) is of us his poor servants? What could he do more to manifest his
great love then he has done? He has loaded us with Benefits, to make us to
stay wallingly with him: He has guarded us with a Watch, that we should not
Fly from him, and he has appointed over us Protectors, least we should be
carried from him? What would he do, if we were his Treasure, as indeed he is
our only Treasure.

Therefore my soul yield at last to his Love, and being overcome therewith;
Mancipate and give thy self wholly by an irreuocable vow unto his service: Let
not things which are seen move thee: but think of and sigh after the things
thou see not: 2 Cor. 4
For the things that be seen are Temporal: but those that be not seen^ are
Eternal.

The fifth, and last Office of Angels, is to be as armed Captains or Soldiers
to work^ Revenge upon Nations and Cotrection among the people. They were
Angels which burned the Infamous Cittyes, Gen, 19
with fire and brimstone. Which killed the First begotten throughout all Egypt.
Exodus 12
Which at one Assault destroyed many thousand Assirians. 4 Reg. 19
And they shall be Angels which at the day of Judgment, Mat. 13
Shall separate the evil from among the just, and shall cast them into the
Furnace of Fire.

Let good men therefore love the holy Angels as their Countrymen: And let
wicked men dread their power, which are the Executioners of Almighty Gods
wrath, from whose hands none can deliver them.

THE TENTH STEPP, From the Consideration of Gods essence, by the similitude of
a Corporal quantity.
WE have ascended by created sustances as high as we can: Cap. 1.
And yet we are not come to know God so perfectly, as by Specularion even in
this Veil of tears he may be known. It remains then that we consider if
by the Dimensions of a Corporal quantity, which we know; we may ascend unto
the Breadth, Length, Height, and Depth of Gods invisible essence. For among
Creatures, those are said to be great, which have four great Dimensions. And
God in the Psalms, and in many other places, is said To be Great, and his
greatness without end. Psalm 47
Truly St. Bernard (a man excelling in contemplation) in his books of
Consideration which he writ to Pope Eugenius, framed from these Dimensions
certain steps to know God: Yet was he not the first Inuentor of a Ladder
of this kind: but he learned this manner of Ascension, from the Apostle who
was rapt into the third Heaven. For so speaks the Apostle in his Epistle to
the Ephesians: That you may be able to comprehend with all the Saints, Ephe, 3
what is the Breadth, and Length and Height, and Depth. For if any one consider
attentively, he shall find indeed, that there is nothing without God sound and
substantial: But all is small, short, base, vain and superficial: But in God
His immensity is true breadth: his Eternity is true length: his Omnipotency is
true height: and his Incomprehensibility is true depth.

But for him that desires to Ascend, and to find what he seeks: It is not
enough to consider these things lightly: but he must Comprehend: That you may
be able (says the Apostle) to Comprehend with all the Saints, what is the
Breadth, and Length, and Height, and Depth. He surely ^o^h comprehend, who
considers attentively, and is so fully persuaded by the Truth, that selling
all he has, he makes have to buy the Treasure he has found. And the
Apostle added (With all the Saints) because the Saints only comprehend these
things; or for that none comprehends them as he ought, unless he become a
Saint.

Neither does St. Augustine contradict what we have said; who in his Epistle
to Honoratus writes, Epist 120 cap, 26
That the Apostle describes the Cross of Christ, by the breadth, length,
height, and depth thereof. The breadth of the Cross, was where his hands were
nailed, the length to which his body cleaued, the height where his title was
written, and the depth was fastened and hid in the earth. I say St. Augustine
does not contradict our meaning but rather much confirm it: For the Cross of
Christ is the way to obtain true breadth, length, height and depth. For
although to the eyes of men, the Cross seem small, short, base, and of no
depth: Yet the arms thereof have bin extended from East to West, and from
North to South: that is the glory thereof has reached to the Highest Heaven,
which (like a key) it has opened for the Elect: and has pierced to the lowest
Hell, which from the same Elect it has shutt for ever.

Let us begin from the essence, Cap. 2
and then pass on to the Attributes. The Essence of God, may many ways be
said most Broad. First in it self, because it is truly Insinite, and
comprehends all the perfections of Creatures, which are or may be, without
end. For whatsoever is, shall be, Or may be, is without doubt contained in God,
In a most eminent manner.

Creatures therefore are Good with an addition: As a good Man, a good Horse, a
good House, a good Garment and the like: but God is All good. For when Moses
said: Show me thy Glory. God answered: Exodus 3
I will show the all Good.

If one had a thing at home, that contained all the Senses objects in the
highest perfection; so that he should never need to go abroad, because he had
at home as many delights in that one thing, as any sensual man could desire;
should not that thing be very precious? And if moreover that thing contained in
it self, such abundent wealth of all sorts, as any covetous man could wish,
wear it not the more precious? And again, if that thing should bring as much
honor and dignity to the possessor thereof, as any ambitious man could
imagine, would it not now seem vnualewable? And further if that thing sufficed
to satisfy not only the desires of men but also of Angels (who exceed men in
desires as they excel them in knowledge) what would thou say? Yet
notwithstanding should the goodness of that thing be far inferior to the
goodness of God; which is so great that it suffices to satisfy the Infinite
desire or rather Infinite capacity of God.

For God never goes out of himself, because he has All good things within
himself: and before the world was made, he was as rich and as happy as he was
afterward: for nothing was made by him, but was from everlasting after a most
eminent manner in him. Do thou understand my soul, what happiness thou
shall enjoy in heaven, if thou love God on earth? And what happiness thou
shall loose if thou love him not? For then God will give himself, to wit, All
good to those that love him, Math. 25
when he shall say: Good and faithful servants enter into the joy of your
Lord. Cap. 3


God also is immense because he fills all creatures. Hier, 23
I fill heaven and earth says our Lord: And, Psalm, 12.
If I shall ascend into heaven (says David) thou art there, Psalm. 128
if I descend into hell thou art present. I add also, if I shall go above
heaven, or under heaven, or out of heaven, I shall not be aloue, because thou
art there; neither can I be any where but in thee and by thee Which carriest
all things by the word of thy power. Heb, 1
Moreover God by his immensitie not only fills all bodies, but also all
spirits; For how else could he search the heart unless he were in it? and how
could he hear the Prayers of the heart, unless he gave ear to them? And how
could the Prophet say: Psalm. 84
I will hear what our Lord God will speak in me. unless God did put his
mouth to the ears of the heart? Happy therefore is that soul which loves God:
there God dwells: For he that abides in Charity, 1 Ioh. 4
abides in God, and God in him.

Neither, does God fill all things with his presence only, but also with his
glory. For the Seraphins cry: Isay. 6
That the earth is full of his glory. And David adds: O Lord, Psalm, 8
our Lord, how merueylous is thy name in the whole earth? Because thy
magnificence is elevated above the heavens, as if he should say: Thy name,
fame, and glory has not only filled all the earth with admiration: but also
has ascended and is elevated above the heavens. Ecclesiasticus says likewise:
Eccle, 42
Full of the glory of our Lord is his work. For there is no creature in heaven
or on earth; but continually prayseth God. Psalm, 148
For which cause, David in the Psalms, and the three Children in Daniel do
inuit all creatures to praise and magnify their maker: Dan, 3^.
albeit they were not ignorant, many creatures to be of such a nature that they
could not hear what they said: but because they knew that all Gods works were
good, and with their beauty therefore praised their maker; they rejoiced in
them, and exhorted them to do as they did.

And truly whosoever has inward eyes may see that all Gods works are as
Censcers sending up an odor of the sweetness of his glory. And who so has
inward ears, may hear them (as it were a consort of all kind of Musical
instruments) praising God and saying: He made us, psalm. 99
and not we our selves. For although there are of the wicked which curse and
blaspheme the name of God: yet they also are enforced even against their wills
to praise God, as the work does the Worke-man: because in them likewise Gods
power does merueylously appear whereby he made them, his goodness whereby he
preserves them his mercy whereby he expects and inuiteth them to repentance,
And his justice whereby he condemns them to punishment.

There are many truly in the world, which hear not these voices of Creatures,
albeit they cry without ceasing: but there are innumerable Angels and holy men
which hear them, and are delighted therewith; and they also with Hymns and
songs continually praise their maker. But to proceed.

The length of Gods essence is his eternity, Cap. 4
which neither has beginning of duration, nor ever shall have end; but is
always the same without any change. Psalm, 101
Thou art (says David) the selfsame, and thy years shall not fail. Tobyas
also, Tob, 13 1 Timothy 6
and after him the Apostle calls God; The king of worlds, because he only
was before all worlds and is not subject to worlds; but rules and governs
them. Other things have beginning and end, and never continue in the same
state: Or else they have beginning without end or change of substance; yet if
their maker please, they may cease to be. Eternity therefore is proper to God
only: Nor was there ever any Prince so proud, that among his many other
Tytles, durst arrogate to himself the title of eternal, except perhaps in an
other se^ce: As Constantius, who was called eternal Emperor, because he was
not Emperor for a certain time, but for term of life.

But thou my soul, may be numbered among both kinds of Creatures; For thou
have a body which began to be when it was conceived and borne; and by degrees
it grew to that stature which God appointed; then it began to decrease; and
shortly by death it shall cease to be. Therefore it never wholly continues in
the same state, but is every hour subject to change. Of thy body the Prophet
spoke this sentence, resembling it to Hay: In the morning as an herb he
shall pass, Psalm, 89
in the morning he shall flourish and pass: in the evening he shall fall, be
hardened and withered. For in the morning, to wit, in Childhood, Man's body
flourishes like an bearbe, and soon after follows youth: In the Noone-tyde
of youth, it flourishes, and soon after follows old age: in the evening of
old age it falls by death, and in the grave it is hardened, withered, and
turned to dust.

Behold therefore O my soul how far thy body is from eternity: But thou
wast created in time, where as before thou wast nothing; and therein thou ^rt
far unlike thy eternal Creator: but being created, thy duration is endless,
wherein thou do resemble thy Creator. And because whiles thou art in the
body, thou changest often from vice to virtue, and from virtue to vice: And
according to the state in which thou shall be found at thy departure from the
body, thou shall be judged either to reign for ever with God; or for ever to
be tormented with the Devil: therefore thou ought to have a very great care
to eschew vice, and to follow virtue. Take heed then least thou be seduced by
the allurements of thy flesh, to the everlasting perdition both of thy self
and it: Gal, 5
but rather Crucify it, with the vices and concupiscences thereof, that thou
may hereafter live eternally, and thy flesh may rise in glory, and in glory
remain with thee for all eternity. But although the Angels and souls of
Saints, are to be partakers of eternity in that high and happy Union with
God, by his beatifying vision and love, which union shall continue for ever
without change: yet may they alter and change their thoughts, affections, and
places after diverse manners; therefore they shall always reuere^tly admire
Gods eternity above them; in whom can be no change of thought, affection, or
place: for he wants nothing, but has all things present, which in eternity
of time, he might by diverse changings have procured. Therefore eternity is a
length without end, no less proper to God then the breadth of his immensitie.

It follows then, Cap. 5
that we consider the Height of God, of whom it is said: Thou only the
Highest. Psalm, 82
For God is most heigh in excellency of Nature. Other things are the more
heigh and excellent, the more pure they are, and more free from matter. This is
evident first in corporal things: For the Water is higher then the Earth,
because it is more pure, and for the same cause, the Air is higher, then the
Water, and the Fire then the Air, and the Heaven then the Fire.

The like also we find in Spiritual things; for the understanding is higher
then the sense; because the sense has a Corporal organ, which the
understanding needs not. Likewise the understanding of Angels, is higher then
man's: Because Man's understanding needs the help of Imagination and
Fantasy; which Angels need not: and among Angels, they are the Highest,
which understand most by fewest Forms.

God therefore who is A pure Act, needs neither Organ, nor Imagination, nor
Form, nor the presence of any Object without himself; for his essence is to
him all things: Neither can he have any thing, which he has not always
actually had; and to have Always actually, is always to be a Pure and simple
Act: Therefore the Nature of God is most high, and which cannot by any means
have an equal. For which cause he who said: I will be like to the Highest;
Isay 14
was suddenly cast down from Heaven into the lowest Hell, as Esaias does
describe. And Christ our Lord says of him: Luke 10
I saw Satan as a lightning fall from Heaven.

God also is most High, for that he is the first and Highest efficient,
exemplar and final cause of all things. He is the highest efficient cause,
for that there is no Creature which has any working virtue but from God: but
God receives not from any other.

Again, no cause can work unless it be moved by God: but God is moved by no
other. Moreover among Creatures such causes are said to be highest, whiah are
universal, and of whom particular causes depend; As the Heavens, and Angels
which move the Heavens: but God made both the Heavens and Angels. He therefore
is the first and highest efficient cause. And he is the first exemplar cause:
for he made all things according to the Ideas or Forms, which in him self he
has.

Lastly, he is also the first Final cause; For he created all things for
himself, Pro. 16
to wit for manifestation of his glory, as the wise man says in the Proverbs.

Moreover, God is most high, because he sitteh in a most high Throne. I saw our
Lord (says Isay) sitting upon an high Throne and elevated. Isay, 6
A seat has two uses, the one to Judge, the other to rest in; let us then
consider each of them apart.

First, God has a most Throne, because he is the Highest Judge. For Abraham
said unto God: Genesis 18 Psalm. 81
Thou do judge all the Earth. And David: In the mids he judges gods,
That is, God judges the Judges themselves, who in the Scripture are called
Gods. And St. James says plainly: Iam, 4
There is one Lawmakers and Judge. That is to say, God only is the true
Lawmakers and Judge: For he only gives Laws to all, and receives them of
none: Judges all, and is judged of none. Moreover, God is not only a Judge;
but also a King: And therefore he judges not like a Judge appointed by a
King; but as the highest commanding King.

For which cause he is called the King of Kings, Apoc, 19
And, A great King above all Godds, ^sal 94 psalm, 75
And terrible to the Kings of the earth, Because he transferreth Kingdoms
and Empyres from one Nation unto another, and Takes away the spirit of Princes
when he pleases.

Neither is God the Highest King and Judge only: but also an Ab^olute Lord,
which is ye highest title of all.

For Kings are not such absolute Lords over their Subjects, as that they may
when they please, deprive them of their goods and lives.

Whereof King Achab can be a witness, 3 Reg, 21
who would have had Naboths vineyard: yet could not but by the treachery and
calumny of his wife: For which cause they both miserably perished: But God is
an Absolute Lord whom all things do serve, and yet he serves none: and as
can (if he so please) reduce all things to Nothing, because he made them all
of Nothing.

Think therefore my soul, what great fear and reverence we worms of the
Earth owe unto him, that sits upon the Highest Throne. If I be the Lord
(says he by ye Prophet Malachie) where is my Fear? Mal, 1
And if the Highest Angels of Heaven serve him with fear and trembling, what
ought we frail mortal men to do, who dwell on the earth with beasts? But to
some it may seem strange why God who is most high, loves not creatures yt
therein resemble him; to wit the high and lofty: but the humble and poor: For
so speaks God by Isay: To whom shall I have respect, Isay, 66
but to the peore little one, and the contrite of Spirit, and him that
trembles at my words? Psalm, 12
And Dauid^ Our Lord is high, and beholds the low things. Yes surely God
loves high and lofty Creatures if therein they resemble him: But then they
must be high in Deed, and not in appearance. God therefore loves not the
Proud which are elate and puffed up: not truly high. But he loves the
humble, and such as tremble at his words, and exalts them; And they are high
indeed whom be exalts. Those therefore that are humble: are High: To wit
humble in their own eyes, and high in the eyes of God.

If one had seen (not only with his bodily but also with his mental eyes
illumiminated by God) the rich Glutton clothed in purple, sitting at his table
furnished with all kinds of costly meats, attended with many servants
diligently doing their offices: And at the same time had likewise beheld poor
Lazarus, half naked and full of sores, sitting at the rich man's gate, and
begging to be filled with the crummes that fell from his table: He truly should
have seen the rich man whom the world accounted most happy; to be in the eyes
of God and his Angels, as vile and abominable as the dung and dirt of the
earth: Luke 16
For that which is high to men, is abomination before God, says our Lord in
the same place, where he describes the rich Glutto^.

But on the other side he should have seen the poor dejected Lazarus, to be
esteemed and enobled in the eyes of God and his Angels as a precious Margarite
which in the end proved true? For Lazarus (as the beloved of God) was carried
by the hands of Angels into Ahrahams bosom: And the rich man (as hateful to
God) was dragged by the Devils into the Hell of Fire.

But why speak I of Lazarus? There is none higher with God, then our Lord
Jesus Christ, even according to his humanity: And yet neither in Heaven or
Earth, is there any to be found more humble then he. So that he said most
truly: Learn of me because I am meek and humble. Math, 11
For as that most holy soul, does know more perfectly then all other, the
Infinite height of the Divinity: So it does more perfectly know the baseness
of a Creature which is made of nothing: And therefore (being also it self a
Creature) it is most humbled and subjected to God, and by him exalted above all
Creatures.

The like we may also say of blessed Angels and souls of holy men. For there
are none more humble then those which possess the highest places in Heaven:
Because they being more near to God; do more clearly see how great the
difference is between the greatness of the Creator, and smalnesse of the
Creature.

Therefore my soul love humility, if thou desire true glory. Immitate the Lamb
without spott, Immitate his virgin mother, immitate the Cherubins and
Seraphins: all which the higher they are, the more humble also they are.

Neither has God only a most high Throne, Cap. 7.
because he judges all: but also because he rests more then all, and makes
them to rest upon whom he sits. Gods most high Throne is his most high rest:
For although he governs the whole world in which are continual conflicts and
wars of elements, beasts and men: Wisd. 1^
yet he judges with tranquillity (as it is said in the book of Wsdome) and
always enjoys most high rest. Neither can any thing trouble his quietness,
and the contemplation of himself, wherein he takes eternal delight.
Therefore he is called the king of Jerusalem, which is to say, the vision of
peace. But his peculiar Throne is upon the blessed Angels: therefore it is
said: He that sits upon the Cherubins: Psalm, 79 and 98
For God is said to sit rather upon the Cherubins then upon the Seraphins; For
the Cherubins signify multiplicitie of knowledge; and the Seraphins heat of
love: And rest follows Wisdom: but care and anxietie follows love unless
it be accompanied with Wisdom. Therefore the soul of a righteous man is also
called The seat of Wisdom. Isay 66
Moreover when Isay says: Heaven is my seat, And when David says: Psalm, 113
The heaven of heaven is to our Lord: by the heaven of heaven is understood the
spiritual heavens which dwell upon the corporal beauens, to wit, the blessed
Angels as St. Augustine says in his exposition of the hundred and thirtieth
Psalm. And these heavens God makes to rest so admirably: that it is a peace
which passes all understanding. St. Bernard in one of his Sermons upon the
Canticles; Ser. 23
sets down a very fit similitude to declare this rest in these words:
Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia, etc. God being quiet, quieteth all things,
and to behold his quietness, is to rest. We see a king after daily suites of
causes heard before him; to dismiss the company, to avoid the troubles of the
Court, and to go at night into his priny Chamber with a sewe whom he
familiarly loves: thinking himself the more sure, the more secret he is: and
being the more pleasant, the more quietly he beholds those few whom he
loves. Thus he. Whereby he plainly declares that God shows himself unto
blessed souls not as a judging Lord; but as a familiar friend. And truly the
familiarity which God also shows in this life to pure and chaste minds is
incredible. For of him it is said: My delights to be with the children of men.
Prou. 8 Prou. 3
And his talk is with the simple.

Hence was it, that all the Saints (albeit they suffered pressures in the
world) had notwithstanding peace in their hearts where God dwelt: therefore they
seemed, and were indeed always joyful and quiet. For to them the Truth said:
Ioh, 16
Your heart shall retoyce and your joy no man shall take from you.

There remains the fourth part of dimension which is called depth. Cap. 8
The depth of Gods essence is manifold. First the Divinity is in it self most
deep, solid, and substantial: Not like a gilded wedge, which has gold
only in the outside, and within is brass or wood: but like an endless wedge
of gold: or rather like a mine of gold so deep that by digging it can never
be emptied. So is God incomprehensible: For as a Mine of gold without bottom
can never be emptied with digging: so God, (whose greatness is without end)
can never be so perfectly known by any Creature, but that there still
remains more to be known: and God only comprehends that depth; who only
has an infinite understanding. Depth also belongs to God in respect of
place. For as he is most high and above all: So he is most deep and under all.
Who (as the Apostle says) Carries all things by the word of his power. Heb. 1
God therefore is as the foundation and roo^e of a house, Act. 17
In whom we live and move and be. So that Solomon said most truly: Heaven and
the heavens of heavens cannot contain thee. ^ Reg. 8.
For God rather contains the heavens and all things under them: because he
is both above the heavens, and under the earth. Furthermore Gods depth is his
inuisibilite. For God is Light: but inaccessible: he is truth: but most secret.
Psalm, 17
Thou have put darkness thy Covert (says David) And, Isay. 45
verily he is God hidden (as I say speaks.) St. Augustine seeking God on a
time, sent his eyes as messengers from earth to heaven; And all things
answered; Lib. 9 co^^ c. (...) lib. 10 c. 6. and in psalm. 26. and 28
We are not him whom thou seek; but he made us. Wherefore not finding God by
Ascension through outward things; he began to Ascend through inwrard things;
and from them he learned that God was more easily to be found; for he knew
that the soul was better then the body: and the inward sense then the outward
sense: and the understanding then it. Whence he gathered: that God (who is more
inward then the understanding) was better then the understanding. Therefore
whatsoever we understand or conceive; is not God: but some other thing less
then God: for he is better then we can conceive. Go too then my soul, if thou
art better then thy body to whom thou give life; because it is a body and
thou a spirit: and if the eye of thy body cannot see thee, because it is
without and thou within: So think likewise, that thy God is better then thou
art: because he is a spirit more high and inward then thou: For thou dwell
as it were without: but he resideth in his most profound and secret Tabernacle.
But shall thou never be admitted thither? God forbid: Thy Lord does not lie who
says: Math, 5
Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. Nor his Apostle who
said: We see now by a glass in a dark sort, 1 Cor. 13
but then face to face. Nor St. John the Evangelist who writ: We know that
when he shall appear, 1 Ioh, 3
we shall be like to him, because we shall see him as he is. How great then
will thy joy be; when in that secret and sacred Sanctuary thou shall see and
enjoy that light, beauty, and goodness it self? Then shall it plainly
appear how vain, transitory, and of small moment the goods of this earth
are; wherewith men being inebriated, forget the true and everlasting. But if
thou thirst indeed after the living God, And if thy tears be breades unto thee
day and night whiles psalm. 41
it is said where is thy God? Be not slow to cleanse thy heart whereby thou
may see God; Be not weary to dispose ascentions in thy heart until the God of
Gods shall be seen in Syon. Psalm, 83
Neither wax thou cold in the love of God, and thy neighbor, 1 Ioh. 3
nor love in word and in tongue, but in deed and truth. For that is the way
that leads to life everlasting.

THE ELEVENTH STEPP, From the Consideration of the greatness of Gods power, by
the similitude of a corporal quantity.
GReat is our Lord, Cap. 1
and there is no end of his Greatness. For he is not great only because
Omnipotency is his higth; infinite wisdom his depth; incomprehensible mercy
his breadth; and justice like a rod of iron his length; but also for that these
Attributes are infinite in breadth, length, higth and depth.

And to begin from his Power, or rather his Omnipotency: The breath of Gods
power consists in extention to infinite things.

First it is extended to all things made: for there is nothing from the
greatest Angel to the least Worm, or from the highest Heaven to ye lowest
Hell, which was not made by ye power of God: Ioh. 1
All things (says St. John) were made by him: and without him was made
nothing. And after, The world was made by him.

Secondly it is extended to all things that shall be made. For as nothing has
bin made but by him: so likewise nothing shall be made but by him. So speaks
the Apostle: Romans 1.
Of him and by him, and in him are all things.

Thirdly it is extended to all things that may be made. So speaks the Angel:
There shall not be impossible with God any word. Luke 1
And our Lord himself says: Math, 19
With God all things are possible.

Fourthly, it is extended to the destruction of all things made. For as God
could by a floude of Water destroy at once all men and other living creatures
upon earth, except a few, which it pleased him to preserve within Noah's Arc:
So be can by a floude of Fire at one time destroy not only all Men and other
Creatures found living at the l^st day: but also all Trees, Cittyes and other
things upon Earth. The day of our Lord (says Saint Peter the Apostle in his
last Epistle) shall come as a Thief, 2 Pet. 3
in the which the Heavens shall pass with great violence, but the Elements
shall be resolved with heat, and the Earth and the works which are in it
shall be burnt.

Great surely is the breadth of Gods Power, and which none can sufficiently
admire: unless he could number all the Creatures which God has made, shall
make, or can make. And who is able so to do, but he whose knowledge is
Infinite? This Power also may seem the greater, when we imagine how great a
thing it is, to destroy things made so many ages in one moment, or as Judas
Machabaeus says: To destroy with one beck. Match, 8
Let us therefore say with Mases: Exodus 15
Who is like to thee among the strong O Lord?

The length of Gods Power is seen by continual cooperation with all things
made, Cap. 2
and yet neither is, nor ever shall be wearied. For it cannot be lessened,
weakened, or decayed by any means, because it is truly eternal; or rather
the true eternity of the Divinity. Some wonder how the Sun, Moon and
Stars, can move so long time with such speed from East to West, and return
again to their courses without any intermission. And surely it were much to be
wondered at: but that we know they are carried by God Almighty; Who carries all
things by the word of his Power. Heb, 1


Others wonder how it can be that in Hell the fire is not consumed which
burns everlastingly, nor the bodies of those wretches dissolved, which are
for ever scorched in those flames. And this may be thought not only admirable
but also vnpossble, were it not that God (who is Almighty and Everlasting)
causes that fire so to burn that it is never quenched; and so preserves the
bodies of those wretches in that fire; that they are always tormented and
never consumed.

Others wonder moreover, how God Carries and sustaineth all things, and yet
is not wearied with so huge a burden. For a strong Man, Horse, Ox, or
Elephant, can carry a great weight a little while: or a very great weight a
very short while: But to carry a most great burden an everlasting time without
weariness, surpasses the strength of any Creature.

But indeed they had cause to wonder, if the Power of God were in Weight and
Measure, as the power of Creatures is.

But since his power is Infinite, it is no marvel if it can bear a great
burden an infinite time without weariness. Let us say therefore with the holy
Prophet Moses: Exodus 15.
Who is like to thee among the strong O Lord.

The Height of Gods power consists chiefly in two things. Cap. 3
First in that it only has made Most high things.

Sublunary things God made in the first Creation: yet may they by Action of
Creatures be engendered, altered or corrupted: For the Elements are in part
mutually changed, Herbs and Plants spring from the Earth, Beasts are bred
of Beasts, Fishes are engendered in the Water, clouds and rain in the Air,
and Cometts in the Fire.

But the Heavens and Stars (which are ye highest bodies) God only created,
and he alone does so preserve, that no creature has power, to make change,
alter or corrupt them.

I shall see (says the Prophet) thy Heavens, Psalm, 8
the works of thy Fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have founded. For
he that is most High, has kept the highest works for himself only; he began
to frame them from their foundation, and has brought them to their perfection.

He also by his Infinite power created, preserves, and for ever will
preserve, things Spiritual (as Angels and the souls of men) which are his
noblest and highest works from death. For Creatures have no part in doing
these things; neither can they (all joined together) Create or destroy one
Angel or one soul.

Secondly the height of Gods power is seen in Miracles which as St. Tract. 24
in Ioh.
Augustine teaches: Are works beside the usual course and order of Nature,
whereat the very Angels and Nature her self does wonder. Which of the Angels
did not wonder, to see the Sun and Moon which run their course so
speedily, stand still at the commandment of Iosue? Ios. 10
And that we may not think it fell out casually (for none can imagine how a
thing so unusual could be done by a mortal man) the holy Ghost says: Our
Lord obeying the voice of a Man. ^^dem.
For Iosue did not properly speak unto the Sun and Moon, which he knew
could not hear his commandment: but he prayed to God; as if he should say:
Thou Sun (by the commandment of God) against Gabaon move not: And thou
M^one, against the valley of A^alon. And our Lord obeyed the voice of a Man,
That is Caused those Lights to obey the voice of a Man. For often times in holy
Scripture God is said to do those things whereof be is the Cause that they are
done. As in Genesis when our Lord said to Abraham: Now have I known that thou
fear God: Genesis 22
the meaning of those words is: Now have I caused, that both thy self and
others know that thou truly fear God.

The like also was that work (signifying the height of Gods power) at the
Passion of our Lord: When the Moon which was very far distant from the
Sun; approached with incredible speed unto the Sun; and Ecclipsing it three
hours, Math. 27
caused darkness upon the whole earth, and after with like speed; returned to
the place from whence she came: All which St. Denis (in his Epistle to St.
Policarpe) does witness that he saw and observed. And this truly is a wonder
contrary to the former, though no less strange; For it is as unusual, and as
much above the whole power of Nature, to make the Moon run her course more
speedily then she is accustomed, as it is to make her stand still.

I omit the giving sight to the blind, the raising of the dead, and many such
like miracles, which God has done, and does by his Prophets, Apostles, and
other his faithful servants; All which do cry, Who is like to thee among
the strong O Lord?

But I cannot omit that chief and greatest Miracle, which God shall show at
the day of Judgment; when all the dead shall rise together: albeit the bodies
of many of them have been burned to ashes, and scattered in the Winds; or
devoured by beasts, and changed into other bodies; or buried in fields and
Orchards, and altered into sundry herbs.

Which of the Angels but will wonder, to behold in the twinkling of an eye,
so many Millions of Millions of Millions of men, at the commandment of the
Almighty, to take again their bodies, albeit they have lain hidd for many
ages, and after diners manners have been dispersed and consumed? This therefore
is the higth of Gods power, in regard whereof it may likewise be said: Who is
like to thee among the strong O Lord.

There remains the depth Cap. 4
of his power, which seems to me to consist in the manner which God uses in
making things. For who can conceive how something is made of nothing? They
could not sound this depth, who held it for a certain and approved Principle:
That of nothing, nothing is made. And we also in this believe what we see not:
but we belecue God who cannot lie. I say we believe that heaven and earth, and
all things that are therein, were created by God, without anyprecedent matter
whereof they were made. But how this could be done, is a thing too deep for us
to find out. Moreover, God did not only make all things of nothing, but also
in nothing; to wit without precedent space or place to contain them in: which
is hard to understand, especially in corporal things. And therefore this depth
also is not to be founded. Take away (says St. Augustine in his Epistle to
Dardanus) the distances of plaeces from bodies, Epist. 57
and they shall be no where, and because they shall be no where, they shall not
be. If therefore, nothing was before God created heaven and earth, where did he
place heaven and earth? Truly not in Nothing: And yet they are created, and
placed in themselves, because he so would and could who can do all things,
although we cannot conceive how they are done. This did God himself signify,
when (declaring his omnipotence to holy Job) he said: Job. 38
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? tell me if thou have
understanding, who set the measures thereof, if thou know? Or who stretched
out the line upon it? Upon what are the foundations thereof grounded? Or who
let down the corner stone thereof? And that we might understand these works
of Gods omnipotence to be most worthy of all praise, our Lord himself
presently adds: When the morning stars praised me together, and all the
sons of God mode inbilation: To wit the Holy Angels which were created
together with heaven and earth; and are as it were spiritual stars so bright
that they may be called the sons of God; when they saw heaven and earth
created of nothing, and placed in nothing; and yet to be most firmly founded
upon their own stabilitie; with wonderful admiration and iubilation, they
praised the omnipotency of their maker. Neither is it less profound to
understand, how God by the only command of his will, did erect such huge
buildinges. For we know that in edifices less without comparison, how many
instruments, inginnes, and workmen Architeckes want. Who therefore can conceive
how by Will only (which never goes out of the thing that wills) so great
and manyfold works could be made? God said (but to himself for the word of
God is in God and is God) He said (I say) commanding and expressing the
commandment of his will: Gen, 1 Ioh. 1
Be Heaven made, and heaven was made: Be earth made, and earth was made: Be
light made: Be a Sun made: Be stars made: Be Trees made: Be Beasts made: Be
Men made: Be Angels made: And all things were made. Add also that the same God
can if he will destroy all things with one beck as we read in the books of ye
Machahies. 2 Match, 8
It is likewise a depth vnsoundable how God made all these great and manifold
things consisting of so many parts and members in a moment? Nature and Art
with us require a long time to perfect their works. We see herbs are sown
long before they grow: and oftentimes many years pass before trees take
root, extend their boughs, and bring forth fruit: Beasts likewise carry
their young ones long within them: and after they seed them long also before
they grow great. I will say nothing of Art; for experience shows, that our
Artizans can bring nothing to perfection, but in a competent time.

How great therefore is the power of God which in a moment has brought so
great things to perfection? But I dispute not, whether God in a moment made
heaven and earth, and all things therein; or whether he spent six whole days
in the first Creation of things. For I undertake not to clear doubts: but to
frame Ascentions unto God from the consideration of things. That then which I
affirm and adm^re, is, that every particular thing was made in a moment by the
Omnipotent Creator. For of the earth, water, ayte, and fire there is no doubt,
as also of the Angels; but that they were created altogether in a moment. Of
the Firmament, and division of waters; it is likewise certain, that all was
don by ye powerful word only of the speaker, saying: Gen, 1
Be a Firmament made amidst the waters, and that in a moment: For it follows:
And it was so done. Upon which place St. Hom, 4. in Genesis
John Chrysostom says: He only said and the work followed. And the same
Author upon those words (Let the earth shoot forth green herbs And it was so
done) says; Hom. 5 ^n Genesis
Quis non obstupescat cogitans, etc. Who would not wonder to think, how at the
word of our Lord, the earth should shoot forth sundry flowers, and adorn her
face as it were with an admirable embroyderie? You might have seen the earth
which before was without form, on the sudden to become almost as fair as the
heaven. And after upon those words (Be there Lights made) thus he speaks: He
only sa^d, and this admirable element was made, I mean the Sun. What if you
add that in the same moment, and with the same word, the same Creator made the
Moon and all the Stars? Also upon those words (Let the waters bring forth)
thus he speaks: Hom. 7
What tongue can sufficiently praise the maker? For even as when he said to the
earth, Let it shoot forth, and presently there appeared great plenty of sundry
hear^es and flowers: So here he said, let the waters bring forth, and forthwith
so many kinds of Fowls, and creeping creatures were made, as no tongue can
rehearse. Who (therefore) is like to thee among the strong O Lord?

Thou do now plainly understand O my soul, Cap. 5
how great the power of thy maker is, whose breadth is infinite; whose length
is eternal, susteyning and governing all things without weariness: whose
higth does things which seem impossible, and are so, but to him only: whose
depth makes things in such sort, that the manner thereof surpasses the
understanding of any Creature: For he makes them of nothing, and in nothing,
without tools and without time, only hy his word and commandment: He said
(says the Prophet) and they were made, Psalm, 148
he commanded, and they were created. Whence thou may gather if thou be
wise, how much it imports thee to please and not offend him, and to have him
thy friend, and not thy enemy: For being offended with thee, he can in a
moment deprive thee of all Good, and fill thee with all Misery: neither is
there any that can deliver thee from his hands. If being ^aked and alone, thou
should meet with thy mortal enemy, who assailed thee with a sharp Sword
what would thou do? how would thou sweat, look pale, and tremble? and
casting thy self on thy knees beg for mercy? and yet he is a man; so that
perhaps thou might escape by flight; or by struggling wrest the sword out
of his hand, and deliver thy self from death.

But what will thou do when God is angry? From whom thou can not fly, for
he is every where; whom thou can not resist, for he is Almighty; and whom
thou can not delay, for he works in a moment by his command only. Not
without cause said the Apostle: It is horrible to fall into the hands of the
living God. H^b. 10


But on the other side if thou please God, and have him thy friend who is more
happy then thou? For he can if he will, and he will if he be thy friend, give
thee all good, and deliver thee from all evil. It is also in thy power whiles
thou live here, to offend and make him thine enemy; or to please and make
him thy friend.

For God first by his Prophets, and after by his Son and his Apostles, does
in the holy Scriptures continually inuice sinners to repentance, and the
righteous to keep his Commandments; that he might thereby have them both to
be his friends; or rather his dearly beloved children and heirs of his
everlasting Kingdom.

Hear Ezechiell: Live I says our Lord God: Eze. 33
I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious convert from his way
and line. Convert, convert ye from your evil ways: and why will you dye O
house of Israel? And after: The impiety of the impious shall not hurt him, in
what day soever he shall convert from his imptety.

And as Ezechiell speaks, so do Esaias, Jeremy, and the other Prophets also:
For the same Spirit spoke alike in them all.

Hear the Son of God also beginning his Sermon: Math, 4.
Jesus (says St. Matthew) began to Preach and to say, do Penance for the
Kingdom of Heanen is at hand.

Hear the Apostle St. Paul speaking of himself and his fellow Apostles in his
last Epistle to the Corinthians: For Christ (says he) we are Legates, 2 Cor. 5
God as it were exhorting by us. For Christ we beseech you, be reconciled to
God. What more plain? What more pleasing? The Apostle does beseech us in the
name of Christ to be reconcyled to God, and to please and not offend him: Who
can doubt of Gods mercy if he truly return to him? For he receives them as a
most lo^uing Father receives his prodigal Son which return unto him. Luke.
15


And when we are returned and pardoned; what does he more require of us to
continue his children and friends, Mat. 19
but to keep his Commandments? If thou will enter into Life keep the
Commandments says our Lord. And least perhapps thou should say, that
without Gods assistance the Commandments cannot be kept: Hear St. Augustine
in his Exposition of the Psalms, Aug. in Psalm. 56
where speaking of the hardest commandment, to wit of spending our lives for
our brethren, he says thus: Non imperaret hoc Deus etc. God would not command
us to do it, if he judged it impossible for man to do. And if considering
thy weakness, thou faintest under the Commandment; take comfort by the
example: for the example concerns thee much: He who gave the example, is
present also to give the aid. Ser. 16. de Pas. Dom
And, That every word may stand in the mouth of two; Hear St. Leo: Justly
(says he) does God require us by his command, because he does prevent us
with his aid.

Why then do thou fear O my soul, to enter into the way of the
Commandments, since he runs before thee, who by the mighty help of his
grace; Makes crooked things become straight, Isay. 40
and rough ways plain? For by this preventing Aid, The yoke of our Lord is
made sweet, and his burden Light; Math. 11
And Saint John the Apostle says: His Commandments are not heavy. 1 Ioh, 5


But if they seem heavy to thee; think how much more heavy the torments of
Hell will be: and do not (unless thou be senseless) seek to try them.

Often think with thy self and never forget, that now is the time of Mercy,
and after of Justice: Now of Freedom to sin: after of intolerable torments
for sin: Now may a man easily compound with God, and with a little labor of
repentance, obtain a great pardon, and with a short sorrow, redeem eternal
lamentation.

Now also with every good deed proceeding from Charity obtain the Kingdom of
Heaven: After, not for all the wealth in the world, procure one drop of cold
water.

THE TWELFE STEPP. From the Consideration of the greatness of Gods Wisdom by
the Similitude of a Corporal quantity.
WHo so will attentively consider the breadth, length, Cap. 1
height, and depth of Gods wisdom, may easily understand how truly the
Apostle writ in his Epistle to the Romans: Romans 16
God the only Wise.

And to begin from the breadth: Gods Wisdom is most broad because he knows
all things distinctly and perfectly. Neither does he know their substances
only; but also their parts, propertyes, virtues, accidents, and actions.
Hence are these words: Job. 14
Thou indeed have numbered my Stepps. And, Our Lord does respect the ways of a
man, and considers all his steps.

Wherefore if he number and consider all his steps, much more does he the
good or bad actions of his mind? And if God has numbered the hayres of our
head; Math. 10
much more does he know all the members of our bodies, and all the virtues of
our minds: And if he know the number of the Sea sands and drops of rain,
as is gathered out of Ecclesiasticus: much more may we believe he knows the
number of Stars and Angels? Eccle, 1
And if all the Idle words of men shall be judged, Math. 12
as our Lord himself does witness: His ears doubtless do hear at once,
all the words of Men whether they be corporal or mental.

How infinite then is this Breadth of wisdom which comprehends at once all
things that are, have been, shall be, or may be? Neither does the Divine
mind become more base, by the knowledge of so many particular inferior
things, as the foolish Wisdom of some Philosphers supposed: for perhaps we
might think so, If God did borrow his knowledge from things as we do: But
since he beholds all things in his own essence; there is no danger of
baseness.

Albeit, it be much more noble to borrow Knowledge as Men do, then altogether
to want it as Beasts do: Even as it is better to be blind, as sensitive
living creatures may be: then without blindness to be unapt to see, as stones
are. Neither are the other members of the body more noble then the eyes, for
that they cannot be blind: But the eyes are more noble because they can see,
although they may also be blind, as St. Augustine does truly teach in his
books of the City of God. Lib. 12 Cap. 1
Thou ought therefore to be careful my soul, always and every where; what
thou do, what thou speak, and what thou think, since thou can not do,
speak, or think any thing, but God sees, hears, and knows it. And if thou
dare not do or speak any evil (although thou never so much desire it) when
thou think a man sees or hears thee; how dare thou think such things
when God beholds thee and is offended with thee? Esto a nemine, etc. Aug. Ep
109
Suppose no man see thee (says St. Augustine) yet how will thou escape him who
looks from above, from whom nothing is hid? And St. Basil in his book of
Virginity speaking to a Virgin shutt up alone in her Chamber, does exhort her
to reverence that Spowse who is every where with the Father and holy Ghost,
accompanied with innumerable multitudes of Angels and souls of holy Fathers:
For there is none of them (says he) but sees all things every where. lib.
de. virg.
O happy should thou be my soul, if thou were always in this company: how
perfectly should thou lead thy life? How diligently would thou avoid all
lightness and wandering? For so indeed our Lord said once to Abraham: Gen, 17
Walk before me, and be thou perfect: That is, think that I always see thee,
and without doubt thou shall be perfect.

The length of Gods Wisdom is manyfested by the knowledge of things to come.
Cap. 2
For his sight is so sharp that he saw from all eternity what shall be in
the last times, and for ever after: Then which length nothing greater can be
imagined. Psalm, 138
Thou have understood (says David in the Psalms) my Cogitations far of. And
a little after: Thou have known all the last things, and them of old. To wit,
all things to come, and all things past. The books of the Prophets are full
of most true and plain Predictions, which not they themselves; but (as Zachary
says) God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prephets, Luke 1
that are from the beginning. This Prophesying therefore and foreseeing, is
proper to God only, as God himself says by Isay: Isay 41
Show what things are to come hereafter, and we shall know that ye are Gods.
And to consider a few things of many: Isay speaks in this manner: Isay, 45
Thus says the Lord to my Christ Cyrus, whose right hand I have taken, to
subdue the Gentyles before his face, and to turn the backs of Kings, etc. In
which words the Monarchy of the Persians is foretold; and Cyrus the first
King of the Persians, is called by his proper name: The reason also is set
down why God would exalt Cyrus, to wit, because he should release the
captivity of Babylon: All which things were fulfilled about two hundred
years after. Daniel likewise, Dan, 2
by the similitude of a great Statua, the head whereof was of gold, the breast
of silver, the belly and thighs of Brass, the feet partly of Iron, and
partly of earth; does plainly prophecy of the four Monarchies of the
Babilonians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans; and in the time of the last
Monarchy, of the kingdom of Christ, to wit, of the Christian Church which
should be greater then all those kingdoms. And afterward he so plainly
describes the wars of the successors of Alexander the great; Dan. 11
that some Infidells thought those things were written after those wars were
ended. Luke 19
And to omit the rest; Christ himself (in St. Luke bewailing the destruction
of Jerusalem) does likewise describe all things so plainly and particularly,
as if he had been to declare it as already past, and not as then to come: I let
pass innumerable other Predictions, whereof (as I have said) the books of the
Prophets are full. But Astrologers, and all such South sayers that will seem
to be as it were Gods Apes, are vtte^ly to be rejected: For it cannot be that
they should foretell the truth in things that happen casually, and especially
by election; unless perhaps some time by chance: For seeing the will of God
does govern and ouerrule all causes both necessary, casual, and free; and can
when he pleases hinder inferior Causes: None can foretell the truth in any
thing; but whom God shall be pleased to manifest his said will unto, as often
times he did unto his Prophets. And this is so certain, that the Devils would
be accounted Gods, chiefly because they founded Oracles, and foretold things
to come as St. Augustine does witness in his books of the City of God. Lib.
18 Cap. 24
But that excellent Doctor of the Church in his book of the Deuination of
Devils; does plainly show, that their Deuination (...) as false as their
Divinity. For they foretell nothing plainly, but what themselves are to do,
or which being else where already done; they by the swiftness of their Nature;
report to those that dwell far off, as a thing to be done, or by their long
experience conjecture it to be done. After which manner, Mariners also are
accustomed to foretell many things of the winds, husbandmen of the weather,
and Physicians of diseases. And when the devils are asked of things to come
which they know not: they use to answer by circumstance of words and
equivocation. And when those things prove false; they lay the fault on their
interpreters or Southsayers. Therefore our Lord only (whose Wisdom is
endless) sounds true Oracles, and foretells the truth in all things to
come both casual and by election.

Gods wisdom also is most high, Cap. 3
and far above the wisdom of men or Angels. Higth of wisdom is known by
the Higth of the object, power, form, and Act. The Natural and proportionable
object of Gods wisdom is his divine essence, which is so high, that it
surpasses the understanding of men or Angels. And therefore the highest
Angels cannot ascend to see God, unless they be listed up by the light of
glory. For which cause God in the holy Scriptures is called invisible: 1 Timothy, 1
To the King of worlds immort^ll, invisible only God. Says the Apostle in his
first Epistle to Tymothie; And after he affirms also: 1 Timothy, 6
That God inhabiteth light not accessible. Power likewise which is in us an
accident; is in God a divine substance and therefore higher without comparison
then in us. The Form also is the higher the more it does represent: and
therefore those Angels which have fewer and more universal forms, are said to
have most knowledge. How high then is Gods wisdom, which has no form but his
own Essence, which being simply one, suffiseth alone for God to behold
himself and all creatures which are made, shall be made or may be made? That
wisdom moreover is said to be most high, which knows most by fewest Acts:
But God with one eternal sight, perfectly knows himself and all other
things. Therefore the Wisdom of God is most high. Lift up now thine eyes O my
soul, and behold how far thy knowledge is inferior to the knowledge of thy
maker: For thou by many Acts discoursing to and fro, can hardly know any
one thing perfectly: But thy Maker does by one Act perfectly and distinctly
know himself and all other things. Yet thou which now art in darkness,
may (if thou will endeavor) ascend so high by the wings of faith and
Charity; that after the laying aside of this mortal body: 2 Cor. 3
Being transformed from glory unto glory, in the light of God thou may see
God the light: Psalm, 35
And being made like to God, thou also with one eternal sight may behold God
in himself, and thy self and all other creatures in God. For what does he not
see (says St. Gregory in his Diologues) lib. 4 Cap. 33
who sees him that sees all things. How great then shall be that glory,
pleasure, and plenty, when being admitted to that inaccessible Light, thou
shall be partaker Of all the good things of thy Lord?

The Queen of Saba, when she heard the Wisdom of Solomon, and saw the
excellent Order of the servants of his house, was so astonished, that (as the
Scripture says) She had no longer spirit but Cried out, Blessed are thy men, ^
Reg. 10
and blessed are thy servants, which stand before thee always, and hear thy
Wisdom.

But what is the wisdom of Solomon, to the Wisdom of God who Is the only
wise, yea Wisdom it self? And what is the Order of his servants to be
compared with the Nine orders of Gods Angels, Romans 16
whereof Thousands of thousands minister to him, Dan, 7
and ten thousand hundred thousands assist him? Surely if thou could savor
these things but a little; thou would most willingly do or suffer any
thing that thou might enjoy God. Be thou humbled therefore in the mean
while under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5
that he may exalt thee in the time of Visitation. Subject thy understanding to
Faith, that thou may be exalted to Vision: Subject thy will to obey the
Commandments, that thou may be exalted into the liberty of the Glory of the
chidren of God: Romans 8
Subject also thy flesh to patience and labor, that being glorified, God may
exalt it to eternal rest.

It remains that we consider the depth of Gods Wisdom, Cap. 4
which seems chiefly to consist in searching of Hearts and Reins: To wit
in the knowledge of men's thoughts and desires, especially which are to come,
whereupon we read: 1 Reg. 16
Man sees those things which appear, but our Lord beholds the heart. And,
2 Paral. 6
Thou only have known the hearts of the sons of Men. And, Psalm. 138
Thou have understood my cogitations far off, my pathe thou have searched
out, and thou have foreseen all my ways. Hier. 17
And, He knows the secrets of the heart. And, The heart of Man is perverse,
and unsearchable, who shall know it? I the Lord that search the heart and
reins.

Which place the seauenty Interpreters have translated, The heart of Man is
deep and unsearchable. And St. Jerome expounding this place does truly note,
that Christ is proved to be God, because he saw the hearts of men, which none
but God can see. Mat. 9 Luke 6 Mar. 2
And Jesus seeing their thoughts. But heeknew their cogitations. Why think
you these things in your hearts?

Every thought therefore and desire of man, (although it be present and really
exist) is so deep; that neither Angels, Devils, or men can penetrate to the
knowledge thereof: but yet a thought or desire to come, is much more deep: For
not only are men and Angels unable to penetrate it: but also the manner how
God (who only knows it) comes to the knowledge thereof.

This did David seem to signify, when he said: Psalm, 138
Thy Knowledge is become merueilous of me. For that (Of me) in the Hebrew
phrase signifies Before me, or above me; so the sense is, Thy Knowledge is
more marvelous, then I am able to understand how it is. And therefore he
adds: It is made great, and I cannot reach it; that is, It is listed above my
knowledge, and I cannot by any means ascend to the understanding thereof.

He speaks of the knowledge of Future thoughts, because he said before: Thou
have understood my cogitations far off, and thou have forescene all my ways,
Therefore he adds concerning the foreknowledge of those Cogitations and
ways: Thy Knowledge is become marvelous of me, it is made great and I cannot
reach to it.

Some one perhaps will Answer, and say: That God sees these thoughts to
come in his Eternity, in which all things are present; or in the
Predetermination of his will: but if it were so, then should not this knowledge
be merueilous. For we also know what we intend to do hereafter, or what we
have now in hand.

But the Scripture says that God searches the Heart and Reins, and there
sees what man thinks or desires, or what he will think or desire
hereafter. And it is very admirable how God by searching the Heart and reins,
can see y^ there which yet is not, but depends of the freedom of the Will
whether it shall be there or not.

As therefore it belongs to the height of Gods power, to make something of
nothing, and to call those things which are not, as those things which are:
So likewise it belongs to the depth of his Wisdom by searching the Heart and
Reins, to see that there which as yet is not, as if it already were, because
doubtless it shall be.

But because I undertake not to dispute questions, Cap. 5
but to stir up and cleuate the soul to God; be thou therefore stirred up my
soul, and Lift thy self above thy Lamen. 3
self, as Jeremy exhorts.

Think of the profound depth of Gods Wisdom which searches the secrets of
the heart, and sees there many things which the heart it self sees not.

O blessed Peter when thou said unto our Lord: Though I should dye with thee,
Mat. 26
I will not de^re thee, Surely thou spakest not with a double heart, but truly
and sinceerly as thou did think; Neither did thou see that frailty in thy
heart, which thy Lord saw in it when he said: Before the Cock crow twice,
thou shall deny me thrice. For thy most skillful physician saw the infirmity of
thy heart which thou saw not, and that was true which the physician
fore-tolde, and not that which the patient boasted. Thank therefore thy
Physician, who as he foresaw and fore-tolde thy disease: so by a powerful
medicine inspired from above into thy penetent soul, he soon cured it.

O Good, o pious, o most wise, and most mighty Physician: Psalm, 18
From my secret sins cleanse me. How many sins have I which I do not
bewail, nor wash with tears because I see them not?

Give me thy grace wherewith thou searchest hearts and reins: And my cuill
thoughts desires, and works which I see not (thou which see them) show me;
and looking back mercifully upon me; produce in me a Fountain of tears, that
while time serves they may be cleansed and washed away by thy grace, Amen.

THE THIRTEENTH STEPP, From the Consideration of Gods practical Wisdom.
WE have considered ye speculatiue Wisdom of God: Cap. 1
Let us now consider his practical wisdom, which also we may call Effectiue.
This Wisdom has her Breadth, Length, Height, and Depth.

The breadth is known by the Creation, the length by the Preservation of
things created, the height by the work of Redemption, the depth by Providence
and predestination

And to begin from the Creation, Psalm, 103
God has made all things in wisdom, as it is said in the Psalm: Ecclus, 1
And has powered her out upon all his works as Ecclesiasticus writes. As
therefore by the Creation of all things of nothing, we know the power of
their Maker: So likewise by the admirable work-manshippe which we behold in
every one of them, we wonder at the wisdom of the same Maker. Wisd. 11
For he has disp^sed all things in me^sare, and number and weight as the wise
Man says. And with this savor God has season^^ al^ things, that thereby we
may (...) to know (...), a^^able, and des^^^able W^sdo^^ it self is. All
creatures therefore have a certain measure, number and weight: First to
distinguish them from God; who has no Measure, because he is immense: nor
Number because he is most perfectly and simply One in Essence: Nor Weight
because his prise and value exceeds all estimation.

Secondly, for that they are good and beautiful as Moses truly said: Gen, 1^
God saw all things that he had made, and they were very good. All things
therefore have that Measure which is needful for them to obtain the end for
which they are made, in such sort, that there can be no addition or
substraction therein, but forthwith the thing becomes deformed, unprofitable,
and less good then before. Eccle, 3
God made all things good in their time (says the Preacher) We cannot add
any thing, nor take away any from those things which God has made that he may
be feared. God therefore has given to the heaven a most large Measure, that it
might contain all things below within the compass thereof: To the air much
less then to the heaven: yet greater then to the earth and waters which make
one Globe enclosed round about by the air. To an Elephant he has given a
great measure of body, that he might be able to carry great burdens, and
Castles full of men. To a Horse a body somewhat less, because he is to carry
but one ryder. Birds he has made small, that they might hang their Neastes
upon the boughs of Trees. Bees and Antes the least of al, that they might ^ide
themselves in their Hiues, or in holes of the earth. The like we may say of
Number, God has made but one Sun, because one Sun suffised to give light
to the whole earth, and with his brightness to make the day. He made also but
one Moon, because one Moon suffised to give light in the night: Yet would he
have many stars, that when as the Sun and Moon were both absent (as at
their comunction it happens) they might in some sort put away the darkness
of the night. Neither has he only assigned a necessary Number to all things
ingenerall, but also has appointed to each thing in particular such Number of
parts, that there can nothing be added or taken away. God has given a man two
eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet, one nose, one mouth, one breast, one
head: And he has appeared a very beautiful and comely creature: Change this
order: Let a man have one eye, two noses, one ^are, two mouths, one hand, one
foot, two breasts, or two heads, and nothing can be more unseemly, or more
deformed.

Moreover God has given Weight, to wit that estimation to every Creature as
the Nature thereof does require. By the name of Weight or price we understand
such qualities as make things good and precious: And they are in number three:
Necessary parts that nothing be superfluous or defecture: Commensuration or an
apt proportion of parts: And an external amiable color of the body, with
such internal virtues as shall be profitable and necessary for diverse actions.
But it is merueylous to consider what virtue God has given to sundry very
small and slender Creatures, that as his power is in great, so his wisdom
might be seen in small-thinges. Who can conceive what virtue is in a grain of
Mustard-seede? which is the least of all seeds, so that the eye can hardly
discern it: and yet so great a tree lies hidden therein: That the Fowls of
the (...) come and dwell in the branches thereof as the Truth speaks in the
Gospel. Math 3
Neither is this proper to Mustard seed only; but common to all other seeds
in whose virtue lies hidd the roots, st^mms, branches, leaves, blossoms and
fruit of great trees.

Truly if we did not know this by experience, we should not easily persuade
men, that from so small a seed, so many sundry great things could ever
spring. Who likewise would imagine that an Ant, a Ghat, a Hea, and such small
c^^atures, had seete which speedily move, a head, a heart, inward and outward
senses, and prudence and judgment after their manner although very imperfect?
Who also would suppose that in these and such like small creatures there should
be such force to pierce and enter the quick flesh that they become not only
very troublesome to men, but also to Elephantes and Lyona whom they terrify?
Great therefore is our Lord, and great is his Wisdom both in great things and
in small.

The Prince of Physicians (although an Ethnicke) did sometimes wonder at the
cunning workmanship which God has wrought in a man's hand; Gal inlib depart.
and cried out in praise of the Maker. What ought thou then O Christian to
do, who see that not only the bodies of men and other living creatures; but
also the heavens, the stars, the Angels and the immertall soul^s of men, are
made with incredible Wisdom by the same most w^se Creator?

Moreover the length of his Practical wisdom appears in the prese^^ation of
things, Cap. 2
as the breadth thereof in their Creation: but especially of such as are
corruptible.

First then if any one will but consider how God nourishes and causes
herbs, plants, beasts, and the bodies of men to grow, and preserves them
to the uttermost; he cannot but with astonishment wonder at Gods Wisdom. For
with earth and water he nourishes herbs and plants; and causes that the
nourishment does pass from the root to the stock, and from the stock, it is
drawn up by a certain virtue to the boughs, leaves, and fruit: so that it
^unneth into every part after an admirable manner. Men likewise and some
beasts he nourishes with herbs, Aples and with the flesh of beasts, and
causes the nourishment to enter and pass through all parts of the body with
such facility and delight as may seem incredible. God deals like a learned
and gentle Physician; who tempereth his medicines in such sort, that the
Patients may receive them not only easily but also willingly. For meats
doubtless are Medicines, which unless men receive often, they cannot escape
death. But God our most loving and skillful p^isition, has first given a taste
unto meats, that they may be taken with delight; then he has multiplied them
with infinite variety, to take away yerksomnesse: And lastly after diverse
alterations in the mouth, stomach, liver and heart, he changes the meat into
so thin a juice, that it passes without s^ission or pain through all the
veins and pores of the body unto all the parts of the flesh, bones, and
synnowes, even when we sleep and feel it not. The Philosophers wonder at the
Wisdom of Nature when they consider these things. But what Wisdom can there
be in things without life sense and reason? Therefore not the wisdom of
nature bur the wisdom of God is to be admired, who made nature, and found out
the way how these merueilous things might be done. Hear the wisdom of God
speaking in the Gospel: Math, 6
Consider the Lillies of the field how they grow: They labor not, neither do
they spinne, and God does so clothe etc. Therefore not the wisdom of Nature,
but God makes the Lillies to grow, and as it wear clotheth them with so
comely garments. Which also may be said of the nourishment and growth of all
living creatures as the Apostle witnesses saying: 1 Cor, 3
Neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters: but he that
gives the increase God.

And if the Wisdom of God does feed, nourish and preserve Plants and Beasts
in this mortal life after so admirable a manner, think if thou can O my
soul how God does feed the minds of Angels and Men in eternal life? For on
Earth we are fedd with earthly meats, albeit they are seasoned by Gods
Wisdom: But in Heaven, Wisdom it self is the meat and drink of those that
live for ever.

O Happy should thou be, if thou could thoroughly understand what it is:
God shall be all in all; 1 Cor, 15
what (I say) it is that God the chief Happiness shall be to all the Saints,
meat, drink, cloth, life and all things whatsoever. Surely thou would
loathe all things present, Coloss. 3
and only Mind and seek the things that are above.

But let us proceed. It also resembles a Miracle, that for the preservation
and continuance of Man's life; God has given to very small things, a very long
and continual motion without intermission. Men take great pains to make the
wheels of a Clock run by force of weights four and twenty hours.

How great then is the Wisdom of God, who causes the nourishing Faculty to
work without ceassing so long as men, beasts, or trees do live? And the
longues and pulses to move continually seauenty years and more. For of
necessity the ^ourishing facultye must work, and the longues and pulses must
move from the first entrance into life, until the end thereof. Those
therefore that live until sourescore or ninety years of age, must of
necessity have their longues and pulses move all that while. And before the
sloud when men lived nine hundred years, their longues and pulses (which are
things very small and soon out of temper) wrought nine hundred years without
rest or intermission. Truly, they that wonder at these things and do not
reverence and adore Gods Wisdom in them, are doubtless deprived of all light
of Wisdom.

Moreover, albeit Gods Wisdom can without the labor of men and beasts and
without the ministry of the Sun or other secondary causes, produce and
preserve herbs and trees, so that all living creatures might have meat in
readiness: yet it pleased him to use the service of secundary causes, and the
labor and industry of men and of beasts, that none might be idle; but that
every one might exercise their strength.

He would also that among men some should be rich, and some poor, that they
all might have occasion to love virtue, and to be tied together in the bond of
Charity.

For the rich may therefore use Mercy and Liberality: and the poor, Patience
and Humility. The Rich also need the labor of the Poor, to till their
fields, to feed their Cattle, and by diverse trades to provide such things as
every one has need of.

The Poor again want the help of the Rich, to give them money and means to
provide for themselves meat, drink, cloth, and other necessaryes. Neither is
there any canse why the poor should complain of Gods Wisdom: For God (who
knows all and loves all) has given to every one what he foresaw, to be
most convenient for them, to obtain everlasting life.

As earthly Physicians command some of their Patients to be let blood: and
others to drink wine, eat flesh, and use recreation. Many poor folks
doubtless shall now be saved, who if they had bin rich, had perished eternally.

And although the rich may also be saved, if they seek to be rich in Good
works, and give that willingly which they received of our common Lord, not to
hide but to bestow: Yet it cannot be denied, but that poverty is a safer,
plainer, and shorter way to heaven, then wealth. Our heavenly master does not
deceive us who says: Amen I say to you, Math, 6
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again,
Blessed are ye poor: for yours is the ^ingdome of God: Luke 6
and woe to you that are rich, because you have your consolation.

Neither does the Apostle deceive us, who in his first Epistle to Timothy
says: 1 Timothy, 6
They that will be made rich, fall into tentation and the share of the devil,
and many desires unprofitable and hurtful, which drown men into destruction
and perdition. And what our Lord and his Apostles taught by word, they
confirmed also by example. For our Lord says of himself: Luke 9
The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the air neastes: but the Son of Man
has not where to repose his head. And the Apostle says of himself and his
fellow Apostles: Until this hour, 1 Cor, 4
we do both hunger and thirst, and are n^ked, and are beaten with buffets, and
are Wanderers. That is, have no bouse of our own. Neither ought we to doubt
but that ye wisdom of Gods Son and of his Disciples chose the plainest and
safest way unto life: But because, Eccles, 1
the number of fools is insinite. Few choose this way willingly; but many
declyne from it with all their affection and power.

Lastly the length of Gods wisdom is seen, in that as it is it self
eternal, so it has engrafted in all things a most lively instinct to
preserve themselves, and to prolong their life and being as long as they can.
We see men, (when they perceive themselves to be in danger of their lives)
endeavor their utmost, and spare no cost or labor to preserve the same. We
see beasts to sight, and strive even above their strength with those that over
master them, rather then they would loose their lives. We see a burning candle
when it is almost out, raise up it self two or three times, and send forth a
great flame, that it may seem to strive as much as it can, not to go out. We
see drops of water hanging some-time upon wood or stone to become round, and
to hold themselves together as long as they can, least they fall and perish.

We see heavy things against nature to ascend, and light things to descend
least Vacuitie should happen, whereby they being severed from the rest of
things, could not be preserved. But the love which God has given to parents
toward their young is so admirable, that it may seem incredible. We see the
Hen feed her Chickings, and fast her self; and though she be weak and
seeble, to sight most eagerly against the Kytes, Dogs, and Foxes. And what
labors and throws women willingly endure to bring their children into the
world, and after up in the world, we all know. The cause of this is the
Council of Gods Wisdom, who to maintain this propagation as a shadow of his
Eternity; has en^rasted in brute and wild beasts, and in all hu^ing
Creatures that have sense, a most vehement love toward their young ones.

For seeing there are many kinds of Beasts and Fowls which men seek to
destroy either for gain, as Hares, Bores, Stagges, Thrushes, Quayles,
Partriges, and almost all kinds of Fishes: or least they should do hurt, as
Wolves, Foxes, Serpents and other without number the like: Many of those kinds
of Creatures should have perished long since; If Gods wisdom had not by this
Love provided for their preservation and propagation.

If then the Natural love of all living things to this short and troublesome
life be so great, what ought our Love to be to the Blessed and eternal Life? O
blindness and folly of Man.

All things strive even above their strength to preserve this short life which
is but a Shadow of eternity: and Man that has reason will not strive (I say
not above but according to his strength) for the Eternity of a most happy
life. All things by instinct of Nature fear and eschew temporal Death above
all Evil: And man who is endued with reason and taught by Faith, does neither
fear nor eschew Eternal death, as he does Temporal evils.

Truly therefore said the Preacher: Eccle, 1
The number of Fools is infinite. And truly also said the Truth in the
Gospel: Math 7
How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leads to L^fe: and few
there are that sinde it.

The Height of Gods Practical Wisdom is seen in the work of our Redemption.
Non satisbar etc. Cap. 3
Conf. lib. 9. cap. 6
I was not filled (says St. Augustine) with thy adm^rable sweetness, to
consider the height of thy Council touching the salvation of Mankind.

And surely it was a most high Council by the Ignominy of the Cross to
repair all the damages which the Craft of the Devil had caused by the sin
of the first man; and so to repair them, that the work repaired became more
beautiful, then it was before the reparation.

Four Evils were caused by the sin of Adam. Injury to God by his Pride and
Disobedience: the punishment of him, and of all Mankind by the loss of Gods
grace, and of eternal Happiness: The sorrow of the Angels to whom the Injury
done to God, and the misery fallen to Man did very much displease: The triumph
of the Devil and of all the wicked Spirits, who rejoiced to see Man overcome
and cast down by them.

All these Evils the Wisdom of God by ye mystery of the Cross took away,
and turned them to greater good: so that, not without cause the Church sings:
O happy fault which had such a Red^emer. For if a Tailor could by putting in
some other costly piece, so amend a precious new garment rent and torn, that
it should appear more beautiful and precious then it was before, it might
truly be called a happy renting which gave occasion to such mending.

Adam therefore being waxen proud by the crast and envy of the Devil; sought
to be like God, and broke his Commandment; And so after a sort took unto
himsel^e Gods honor.

But Christ the second Adam, Humble! phil. 2
himself made obedient unto death; And restored unto God much greater honor
then the first Adam by his pride and disobedience had taken away. For Adam was
a mere man, and if he had obeyed, it had bin in a small matter. For what
great matter had it been for our first Parents to have abstained from the
Fruit of one forbidden Tree, having plenty of many more excellent? Therefore
their sin was the greater, in that their obedience was in a thing easy and
of no labor to perform.

But Christ was God and Man, and humbled himself to obey God his Father in a
thing most hard and laborious, to wit, in the death of the Cross, which was
full of pain and ignominy.

Wherefore if we consider the eminency of the person, and the depth of his
Humility and Obedience, nothing can be imagined more to Gods honor and glory,
nor more meritorious then that Humble obedience of Christ. For which cause our
Lord said most truly in the Gospel: Ioh. 17
I have glorified thee upon earth. For Jesus Christ did glorisie God his Father
with unspeakable glory before the Augells of heaven and before all the Souls
of the Prophets and others to whom these things were known. And if the Angels
at Christ's birth for the humility of the Crib did sing: Glory in the Highest to
God. Luk, 2
With greater joy did they sing it for the humility of the C^^sse.

Moreover, Man if he had not sinned, had obtained at the most but to be equal
with Angels: but now by the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, man kind
has obtained, that a Man being exalted above Angels, sitreth at the right
hand of God and is become the Lord both of Angels and of men. For so of Christ
writes St. Peter the Apostle in his first Epistle: B^ing gone into Heaven, 1
Per. 3
Angels and Potestates, and powers s^b^^cted to him. And his f^llow Apostle
St. Paul to the Philippiaes: P^al. 2
For the which thing God also has exalted him, and has given him a name which
is above all names: that in the name of Jesus every Knee bow of the
coelestialls, terrestrialls, and infernalls. Therefore the Son has glorified
the Father after an unspeakable manner by the humility of his Passion; And the
Father has also after an unspeakable manner glorifiedthe Son by exalting him
unto his right hand: Which glorification has in such sort redounded unto all
mankind; that truly they are most ungrateful which acknowledge not so
infinite a benifite, and give not God thanks therefore. Yea not only Christ
God and man: but also his blessed Mother is exalted above all the quires of
Angels, though she be not God, but a humane Creature. Wherefore men having
received more glory then they should have had if the first man had not sinned,
may justly cry out: O happy f^ult which had such a Redeemer. Moreover, as the
holy Angels were made sorrowful for the Fall of the first man, as for ye
grievous mishap of their younger brother: so likewise they were made glad
through the Copious Redemption wrought by Christ. For if there be joy in ^eauen
Before the Angels, Luke 15
upon one sinner th^^ does penance, how much greater may we believe was the
joy before those Angels, when they saw Gods justice fully satisfied by Christ
a man for mankind, and by the key of the Cross the kingdom of Heaven opened
to all believers? Neither may we suspect that the holy Angels did repine
because God had exalted Christ a man, and the Blessed virgin above them: For
there is no envy in the Angels, but they are full of most fervent charity; And
Charity enuieth not, ^ Cor, 13
is not puffed up, is not sorrowful for another good: but rejoices with all
the righteous for their happiness no less then for her own. The Church
therefore truly sings: Mary is assumpted into Heaven, the Angels rejoice It
says not are sorrowful: But the Angels rejoice to se^ the Virgin mother of
God exalted above the Quires of Angels, to the Heavenly Kingdoms.

The Angels know also that God has done it most justly, who does all things
in perfect Wisdom and Justice: and their will is so united to Gods will by the
inseparable bond of Love; that whatsoever pleases him, pleases them likewise,
and can never displease them.

But the Devil who triumphed for a time, because he had overcome and cast
down the First man: became after more sorrowful for ye victory of Christ a
Man, then he was joyful before. For by ye victory of Christ it was brought to
pass, that now not only men as Adam was; but also women and children insult
and triumph over the Devil. It had been no dishonor to the Devil to have
been overcome by Adam in Paradise, when he had no ignorance nor infirmity,
but was armed with original justice, which did in such sort subordinate his
sensual part unto reason, that it could not rebel, until his mind first
rebelled against God. But for the Devil to be now overcome by a mortal man
that is a Pilgrim, and subject to ignorance and concupiscence, is a uery great
dishonor. And yet he is so overcome by the grace of Christ that many have
triumphed in chastity, patience, humility, and charity, although, he cease
not daily to cast his fiery Darts of tentations and persecutions. And herein
the Highth of Gods wisdom is exceedingly to be admired. For God foresawe that
the contempt of temporal riches, of fl^shly pleasures, and worldly honors
(Which are the snares of the devil and drown men into destruction and
perdition) was behoouefull for mankind against the deceites of the devil; 1 Timothy, 6
What therefore did he to make them forsake these things and to love their
contraries, to wit, chastity, poverty, humility, patience and contempt of
the world? Himself descended from heaven, and taking the form of a servant,
made this bitter Medicine (which was behoouefull for man that was sick) become
so pleasant and sweet by his example, that many men now love fasting, better
then feasting, poverty then riches, virginity then Wedlock, martyrdom then
daintiness, to obey then to command, and to be humbled then to be exalted.
For who seeing God inshape of man to be poor, humble, patient, contment, and
(which is most merueylous) nailed to a Cross, and willingly shedding his
precious blood to die for mankind, will not be encouraged to follow him?

This was the high invention of Gods wisdom whereof Is^y prophesies saying:
Isay, 12
M^^k his inventions known among the people. Yet notwithstanding, this high
wisdom of God seems solly not only to the wise men of this world (as the
Apostle says in his first Epistle to the Corinthians) but also to carnal and
fensuall men, 1 Cor. 2
who believe in Christ but refuse to follow the steps of Christ, whom the
same Apostle calls: ^hil. 3
The enemies of the Cross of Christ.

But thon O my soul endeavor to suck honey out of the rock and Oil out of
the hardest stone; that is, wisdom out of folly, the wisdom of God out of the
folly of the Cross; search diligently and attentively who he is that hangs
on the Roode, and why he so hangs; Psalm, 98
and when thou have found it is he That sits upon the Cherub^ns, yea, Heb. 1
Who sits on the right hard of the majesty in the high places, thou shall
soon understand that he hangs not there for his offenses, nor because of his
weakness or the power of others: but voluntarily through his fervent desire
to satisfy Gods justice for the sins of all the world; for the honor and
glory of God the Father: for the eternal salvation of the Elect: And as the
Apostle speaks: Ephe, 5
That he might present to himself a glorious Church; not having spott or
wrincle. And lastly for thy sake, Because he love thee, and delivered himself
for thee, Gal, 2
a sacrifice and oblationt. God into the odor of sweetness: When as (I say)
thou shall find these things most true: Love from the bottom of thy heart
such a Benefactor: Seek to follow him, and begin to thirst fervently after the
glory of God, and the salvation of all nations, but especially after the
beauty and glory of the whole Church and thine own eternal salvation.
Begin thoroughly to hate iniquity, and to thirst after purity of heart and
perfect justice, that at length thou may also desire to be partaker of thy
Lords Cross in tribulations and afflictions; that hereafter thou may rise
with the just to glory, and not with the wicked to punishment.

There remains the depth of Gods practical wisdom which consisieth in his
pronidence, predestination, and indgements. Psalm. 35
For it is written: Thy judgments are great depth. First then Gods providence
is very admirable, because he governs all Creatures immediately, and
directs them to their ends: Wis, 6
^e (says the wise Man) has equally care of all, that is, God without
exception has care of all, Math, 10
so that A Sparrow shall not fall upon the ground without Gods providence as our
Savior says: Truly one chief Pastor may govern all the Christian world by
general providence: but not by particular, which comprehends every
Christian; and therefore he calls many Bishops to take part of the Charge:
And one king may govern many Provinces ^^y general providence, but not by
particular which concerns every subject, and therefore he has many
vizeroyes, Deputies, and Presidentes. But God has as much care of every one in
particular, as of all ingenerall, and of all in general as of every one in
particular. Luke 12 Math. 10
A Sparrow is not forgotten of God. The hairs of our head are all numbered by
him, and not one of them shall perish. Psalm. 146
The young Ravens being forsaken of their Parents are not forsaken by God.

How safely therefore may thou rest my soul in the bosom of such a Father?
Although thou were in darkness? Among the mouths of Lions and Diagons? Among
innumerable legions of spirits? Cleave only therefore to him in true love,
holy fear, certain hope, and assured faith. Neither does Gods providence take
care of things present and particular: but Reaches from end to end mightily,
Wis, 8
and disposes all things sweetly. For which cause God is called The King of
worlds: 1 Timothy, 1
For he has appointed the Order of worlds, and disposed the successions of
Kingdoms, and the changes and variety of seasons from all eternity. To God
nothing can happen strange, unlooked for, or unthought of: Wis, 9
But the cogitations of mortal men are fearful, and our prouidences
uncertain as the wise man says. For of things to come we have but uncertain
conjectures: but God knows all things to come as certainly as things past
and present, and disposed in his mind before the making of the world, the
order and succession of all things. Therefore our holy Mother the Church does
publicly and securely affirm: That Gods providence erreth not in the order
and disposition of things.

But because the reason of Gods providence is most secret, Psalm, 35
And his judgments are great depth, it comes to pass, that some seeing many
evils to be committed among men and left unpunished: fall to believe that
either human affairs are not governed by Gods providence, or else that those
evils are done by the will of God. Both which opinions are wicked; but the
latter is the worst as St. ^ib. 1. de Ord. c. 1
Augustine writes: And such run into the downfall of these errors, who
behold Gods providence in part, and in part behold it nor. For whereas they
ought to expect the end of things which at the day of judgment shall be made
manifest unto all: they judge rashly before the time, and are greatly deceived.
Therefore the Apostle cries out in the Epistle to the Corinthians: Judge not
before the time, 1 Cor. 4
vatill our Lord do come, who will lighten the hidden things of larkenesse,
and will manifest the Council of hearts. Saint Augustine declares this by an
excellent similitude: Si quis in vermi^ulato pauimento etc. If one (says he)
should behold in a chequered Pauement the workmanship only of one small
piece thereof; he might blame the Workman as ignorant of order and
composition; to wi^t, because he sees but one little parcel of the work; but
the greatest part he sees not. But if he saw all the parts and their
cohaerence: he would doubtless very much commend both of the work and the
Workman.

Even so many see the wicked pro^^^^, and the ^ghteous punished and (...): but
they know not what God does reserve hereafter for the iniquity of the wicked,
or for the patience of the righteous: and therefore they blaspheame with them
which in Job said: God walks about the Poles of Heaven, Job, 22
neither does he consider our things.

And with others which in Malachy say: Every one that does evil is good in the
sight of our Lord, Mal. 2
and such please him.

Saint Augustine uses also another similitude taken from Verses. For if when
one hears an heroycall verse, he should say in the beginning or in the midst
thereof, that the verse was not good, he might justly be reprehended of folly:
for he should expect until all the sillables were sounded; and then he might
find fault therewith if it pleased him not: Even so, they are most fond who
dare discommend the most orderly providence of God, before the whole course
thereof be run out.

Therefore my Soul if thou be wise, endeavor all thou can that Evil be not
done, for so does God command thee: but why he suffers evil to be done leave
it to his Judgments, which may be Secret but never unjust.

But although the Reason of Gods providence in governing humane affairs is
very deep: Cap. 5
yet the reason of his Eternal predestination and reprobation is deeper
without comparison. For why, God fills many of the wicked with temporal
goods and leaves their sins unpunished in this life: And again, why he
suffers many Innocents to be pressed with poverty and to be unjustly
afflicted, tormented and killed, we cannot truly search out the particulers:
but we may assign some probable general cause. For God often causes the
wicked to abound with temporal goods, to reward some of their good moral
works, albeit be will not give them eternal life: or to allure them thereby
to be converted from their sins, and be brought to the hope and desire of
eternal benefits. Sometimes also be punishes not their sins in this life,
because he will sufficiently punish them in Hell. But the righteous he
suffers to be afflicted with poverty, ignominy, and diverse other vexations,
as well to purge their light sins in this life: as also to reward their
patience, humility, and other virtues with greater glory in Eternal life. Mal.
1
But why God loved lacob and l^ted Esau before they diel either good or evil
who can tell? And this is that which the Apostle wonlieth at in his Epistle to
the Romans. Romans 9
For they were twins, Brothers borne of the same Father and Mother: and yet
God by predestination loved the one, and by reprobation hated the other. And
least perhaps some might say that God foresaw the good works of the one,
and the evil works of the other: the Apostle preuenteth this answer saying:
This was done that the purpose of God according to election might stand.

And he alleges the words of God in Moses: I will have mercy on whom I have
mercy: Exodus 33
and I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy.

Who also will not wonder, that one should persevere a long time in good works
as Judas the Traitor, and at the end of his life give over and perish: And
another to continue a long time in evil works as the good Thief, and at the
end of his life be converted and go into Paradise? But thou will say: Indas
betrayed Christ, and the Thief confessed Christ. It is true: but could not
Christ have lookedon Judas as hoe looked on Peter? Luk, 22
And inspired Judas with that powerful Grace which no hard heart can refuse?
And could not Christ have given Faith and repentance to both the Thieves which
were hanged with him as he did to one of them: or suffer them both to dye in
their sins, as he suffered the one of them? Who likewise can tell the reason
why God takes away some, Wisd. 4
least Malice should change their understanding as the wise man speaks of
Enoch: And many he takes not away, but suffers them to fall from virtue to
vice, and to end their days th^^in? What shall we say of whole Nations, some
whereof are very soon, others very long before they be called unto the Faith
without which none can be ^aned? For he that believes not it already judged.
Ioh. 5
And as the Apostle speaks: Rom, ^0
Every one whosoever shall innocate the (...) of our Lord, shall be saved. How
then shall they invoke in wh^^ they have not believed? O^ how shall they
believe him whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? but how shall they preach unless they be sent?

These are therefore most high and deep Secrets which the eternal Father has
hid in the Depth of his Wisdom, whereat the Apostle wondereth but declares
them not when he says: Rom, 11
O depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the Knowle^ge of of God: how
incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways vns ^^chable? For who has
known the mind of our Lord? or who has bin his Counceller? This only is
lawful for us to know: That in God there is no iniquity: And that at the last
day there shall be none but shall ^^ely say: Psalm, 118
Thou art just O Lord and the Judgment right.

Moreover this Secret is profitable to us all: for hereby it comes to pass,
that the wicked shall not despair of their salvation, nor the righteous
presume thereof. Good men also shall not be hopeless of the conversion of the
wicked, but pray for all, and carefully seek their salvation. And again none
(how good and holy soever) shall have occasion to be proud, but with Fear and
trembling work their salvation. Phil. 2


And thou my soul (having considered all these things) Labor by good works
to make sure thy vocation and election, as St. 2 Pet. 1
Peter the Apostle does admonish thee in his last Epistle. But what those good
Works are which make sure thy Vocation and Election, St. 1 Ioh. 3
John the Apostle teaches thee when he says: My little Children let us not
love in word nor in tongue: but in deed and truth. For Charity is a virtue
with which none shall be damned, and without which none shall be saved. And it
is showed by the Works, to wit, when one does give alms to the poor, or
forgive his enemies, for the true love of God and his neighbor; and not for
hope of temporal teward; or for inordinate love to the Creature.

And because it is not enough to begin well: Math. 10
But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved: Therefore the
Apostle says: Labor, That is, attentively, carefully, and diligently follow
the business of your Eternal salvation.

And truly there is no sign more probable of Gods election, then when a m^n
(being more careful of his salvation then of any other thing) prays
continually unto God for the gift of true repentance, true humility, perfect
charity and perseverance unto the end: and not being content with prayer only,
stnueth also all he can to seek and find The Kingdom of Heaven and the
justice thereof. Math, 6
As our Savior does exhort.

THE FOVRETEENTH STEPP, From the Consideration of Gods mercy.
THe holy Ghost does in holy scripture merueylously commend the mercy of God;
Cap. 3
in so much that he doubts not to extol it above all Gods works: For so
faith the Prophet David: Psalm. 144
Orr Lord is sweet to al^: and his commiseratiors are ever all his works. we
shall easily deicerne the greatness of the divine at tribute, if we consider
s^^ewhat attentively, the br^a^^h, length, higth, and depth, thereof. The
breadth of Gods mercy is seen in that he only can take away all miseries, and
from all creatures he takes away some for the love he bears them, and not
for any profit to himself. Creatures indeed can take away some miseries: as
bread hunger, drink thirst, clothes nakedness, knowledge ignorance, and so
of the rest: but no creature can take away all miseries.

Moreover, there are some miseries the greater, the more secret and inward they
are, which God only can remedy. Such are the subtle decreates of the Devils
who are many, mighty, and much incensed against us. Such also are the errors of
our mind and conscience, which we in our selves see not: But oftentimes are
deceived, thinking our selves very sound when as indeed when we are very sick.

Who can deliver us from these miseries, but only our Almighty physician? And
he also does often mercifully deliver us from them without our knowledge: for
which cause we all may justly be said unkind to God, as our Lord himself does
witness when he says: Luke 6
That his heavenly Father is Beneficial upon the unkind and the evil. For we
scarcely know the least part of Gods benefits, and therefore we thank him not
for them with such devotion and humility as we ought. Creatures moreover
cannot take away all miseries but only a few: nor from all but from a few:
but God can take away all miseries from all: and albeit he do not so; yet
there is none but is in some sort partaker of his mercy.

Truly therefore says the Prophet: Phil. 32
The earth is full of the mercy of our Lord. The Church also in her prayer
says: O God to whom it is proper to have mercy, etc. For he can take away
misery properly who wants misery: and he can take away all unseries from
all, who wants all misery: And that is God only, who is a pure Act whose
Effence is Happiness.

O my soul if thou could conceive what the life of thy God is, which is
exalted above a I misery and is Happiness it self: How ^^weuldest thou sigh
from thy heart to be in the b^some thereof, that of thee it might also be said:
Psalm, 90
There shall no evil come to thee; and scourge shall not approach to thy
Tabernacle. But thou will say: If God can take away all miseries from all
things, why does he not, since he is The Father of mercies to wit a most
merciful Father? 2 Cor. 1.
Why are there so many miseries in mankind, under the government of the Father
of mercies? Why also is it faid: The earth is full of the mercy of our Lord,
And not econtra, The earth is full of all misery? God truly can take away all
miseries: yet he only takes away those which his wisdom judges fit to be
taked away. But his wisdom judges it not expedient for men that all should be
taken away: For it is mercy sometimes not to take away some misery that
greater mercy might afterward be showed.

The Apostle prayed thrice to our Lord That the prick of the flesh might be
taken from him, 2 Cor, 12
and he was not heard, Because power is persited in infirmity. God took not
from Lazarus the misery of poverty and sores, Luk, 16
that with greater mercy he might be carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. And how should the rich exercise the works of mercy if none were
poor, hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, Pilgrimmes and imprisoned? And if there
were not tentations nor combats with devils, where were the crowns of virgins
and confessors? If also there were no labors and dolors where were the Crown
of patience? And if there were no persecutors where were the Crown of
Martyrs? Therefore it is true, that in this banishment the earth is full of
miseries (For sins only are great miseries) And it is also true that The
earth is full of the mercy of our Lord: because the conversion of sinners, the
merittes of Saints, and other almost infinite benefitts of God both spiritual
and temporal, are nothing else but the great and continual mercies of God our
Creator. Let us therefore ^iue thanks to ^^m. That is its (...) our
Tribulation (...), 2 Cor. 1
so also by his (...) our (...) does (...): Psalm. 35
Lord by mercy is in heaum (...) David. For there shall be mercy without
misery, because mercy shall take away all miscrie whatsoever.

The length also of his mercy is Longanimitie or patience which the Scripture
uses to join with mercy as a part thereof. Cap. 2
For so speaks David: Psalm, 102
Our Lord is pitiful and merciful: Long suffering and very merciful. And
again Our Lord is pitiful and merciful, Psalm. 144
pattent and very merciful. Truly the Longaminitie and patience of God toward
mankind is admitable: the like whereof we find neither in masters toward
their servants, nor in parents toward their children, albeit they both are men.
And first God is long suffering toward sinners, expecting them with vncredi^le
patience, sometime from their first childe-hoode to their last old age,
permitting them to blaspheme his name, and to break his Law; And in the mean
while Being beneficial to them from heaven, Act. 14
giving raynes and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness as the Apostle speaks. And what master or parent is there among men
so merciful and gentle, who seeing himself a long time injured and contemned
by his servant or child, would not at length put them out of his house? Yet is
not the mercy of God overcome by the malice of men: But he does patiently, not
willing that any perish, 2 pet. 3
but that all return to penarce as St. Peter affirms in his Epistle. And the
wise man says: Wisd. 11
Thou have mercy on all O Lord dissembling sins for repentance.

Moreover, this patience seems yet greater in that many sinners being by Gods
grace brought out of the lake of misery, Psalm, 39
and from the mire of dreggs, and of the children of darkness made the
children of light, and called from the guiltiness of eternal death, to the
adoption of the children of God and hope of heaven: fall notwithstanding back
again oftentimes to their former uncleanness and unthankfulness. Yet are
they not forsaken by the longanimitie of God; but most lovingly expected and
invited to repentance: And if they truly repent: as Prodigal sons they are
received by their most merciful Father to the kiss of peace, Luke 15
and to their former dignities. St. Peter demanding of our Savior if he should
forgive his brother offending against him until seven times? Math, 18
He answered: I say not to thee until seven times, but until scauentie times
seven times.

For that course which he uses in forgiving oftences, the same would he have
us use also: but he has set down no certain time for recontiliation but the
term of this life. As long as a sinner lives although it be an hundred years
or more and often falls back: yet is he received and pardoned by his most
merciful Father. For there is no repentance to late with the mercy of God, so
it be truly from a contrite heart: Yet none ought to abuse Gods mercy and
defer their conversion from day to day, because none knows at what day or
in what hour he shall dye, and appear before the Tribunal of the most just
Judge. Yea rather all ought by this so great and incredible goodness of God to
come unto repentance: For if God be so merciful to sinners that often fall:
What will he be to those which having once tasted the Sweetness of his grace,
can never after by any temptations be separated from it?

There is also another Longanimity of God exceeding admirable and amiable,
which he uses in suffering the offenses of the righteous. For albeit God of
his infinite mercy has made us of slaves his children and friends, and of
persons condemned to eternal death, heirs of his Kingdom: yet such is our
ingratitude that daily we render him evil for good.

For if Saint James the Apostle said: Iam, 2
In many things we all offend, what may we say, which are so far from the
Apostles perfection? Behold we speak in prayer to God, and on the sudden
we are carried away by the imagination to think of other things, and to turn
as it were our backs to God.

What master in the world would suffer his servants which stand in his
presence and speak to him, to turn away on the sudden, and neglecting him
to prattle with their fellow servants? What shall I say of idle words? Of
vain thoughts? Of fruitless works? Of excess in eating, drinking, sleeping
and playing? Of negligence in holy things? Of omission of brotherly
correction? And of innumerable other such like wherein we daily All offend? And
yet our God Is sweet and mild, Psalm, 85
and of much mercy to all that invoke him. He suffers these Follyes and
rude inciuilities (as I may call them) in his children, which truly Men will
not suffer in men. This St. Austen notes in his Treatise upon the eighty three
Psalm. August. in psalm, 83
expounding those words: O Lord thou art sweet and mild, where he bewaileth
man's infirmity concerning the distractions of his mind in time of prayer, and
magnifieth the mercy of God in suffering so many iniuryes of his servants. But
he knows whereof we are made, and therefore deals with us as a mother does
with her child, whom she cherishes and nourishes although perhaps it
strike her. But albeit God suffers so many of our offenses without breaking ye
bond of love, or depriving us of the right of our inheritance: yet will he not
leave them unpunished at ye day of Judgment, when as we must render to him an
account for Our idle words, unless he find them purged before by tears,
prayers, or some other kind of satisfaction. And least thou my soul perhaps
may think these offenses light, and therefore deceive thy self and neglect
to amend them: Hear what Saint Bonauenture writes in the life of St. Francis.
In eius vit c. 10
Grauiter se putabat offendere etc. Greatly (says he) did he think he
offended, if being at his Prayers his mind wandered after vain fantasies.
When any such thing happened, he spared not Confession but forthwith made
satisfaction. This course he practiced so often, that seldom was he troubled
with those molestations. O^ce in a time of Lent he had made a little Basket, to
pass away some short vacation without being altogether vnocupied; which
coming to his mind when he said his Hours, did somewhat distract it:
Wherefore being moved with zeal of Spirit, he burned the basket s^^ing: I
will sacrifice it to God, whose Sacrifice it hindered.

Therefore distraction of mind in time of Prayer and praising God, is not so
small an offense as many imagine: but great is the Mercy and Longanimitie of
God, in that he is no more angry, nor presently punishes us therefore.

Next follows the Height of Gods Mercy, Cap. 3
which is taken from the cause moving God to mercy. And truly it is most
High, and exalted above all the Heavens according to that of the Psalms: Lord
thy mercy is ^n Heaven, Psalm. 35
And, Mercy shall be built up for ever in the Heavens. ^sal. 88


Some men have mercy of other men, because they need their help: and this
indeed is the lowest degree of mercy: for it goes not beyond private
commodity: After which manner we also have compassion of our Horses, Dogs,
and Cattle.

Others have mercy by reason of Consanguinity or friendship, to wit, because
they are their Children, Brothers, Familiars, or Friends: and this degree is a
little higher, and begins to have the Form of a virtue.

Lastly others have mercy because they are their neighbors, to wit men as they
are, made by the same God, and of the same molde. And therefore they respect
not whether they be their friends or enemies, good or evil, countrymen or
strangers: but they take compassion of all whom they know created according to
Gods Image: and this is the highest degree of mercy to which mortal men can
ascend

But God has mercy upon all things, because they are his Creatures: and
especially upon men because they are his Images: And more especially upon the
righteous, because they are his Children, heirs of his Kingdom, and coheyres
of his Only begotten Son.

But if thou ask why God created the world? Why he made man to his likeness?
Why he justifies the wicked, and adopteth them to be his Children, and heirs
of his Kingdom? Nothing can be answered, but because he so would? And why
would he so, but because he is Good. For Goodness is liberal, and does
willingly bestow it self.

Mercy therefore is built up in Heaven, Psalm, 88
and from a most high habitation, to wit, from the Heart of the Highest, she
descended to the Earth and filled it, as was foretold by the Prophet: Psalm, 32
The earth is full of the mercy of our Lord.

Lift up now my soul the eyes of thy mind to that most high fountain of
mercy.

Consider the absolute purity thereof, not mixed with any intention of private
commodity. And when thon hear the Master of all, exhorting and saying: Luke
6
Be ye therefore merciful, as also your Father is merciful; endeavor all
thou can to have compassion of thy fellow servants, with that pure affection
wherewith thy Heavenly Father has compassion of us. If thou forgive an injury,
forgive it with a true heart, and commit to perpetual forgetfulness every
offense: For Our Father forgets our offenses as the Prophet Ezechiell
writes, Ezech. 18
And As far as the East is distant from the West, Psalm. 112
does he make our iniquityes far from us, as David speakteh. If thou give an
Alms to the poor: make account thou do rather receive then give: Because
he lends our Lord that has mercy on the poor. Pro. 19
Give it therefore with humity and reverence, not as an Alms to the poor: but
as a gift to a Prince. If thou suffer any discommodity to benefit thy poor
neighbor: think yet how sarre thou come short of thy Lord, who to benefit
thee gave his blood and life. So shall thou without hope of earthly reward, and
without any motion of vain glory, merely for the love of God and thy neighbor
profit in the virtue of mercy.

It remains that we consider the Depth of Gods mercy: Cap. 4
For as the height thereof appears chiefly in the cause, so the Depth thereof
is seen especially in the effect. That mercy therefore is not said to be
deep, but rather shallow and superficial which descends but to words
only: That deeper, which comfort the needy not only with words, but also
with deeds. That most deep, which not only with words and deeds conforteth
them: but also endures labors and dolours for their sakes. God therefore
(whose mercy is infinite) has been merciful unto us after all these
manners. For first he sent us letters of comfort, to wit, the holy Scriptures
whereof the Machabies speak: Match. 12
We have for our comfort the holy Books that are in our hands.

Neither does he speak to to us by letters only; but also by the Sermons of
Preachers Which are Legates of Christ, 2 Cor, 4
and by inward inspirations promising us his help and protection. I will hear
(says David) what our Lord will speak in me, Psalm, 84
because he will speak peace upon his people, and upon his Saints, and upon
them that are converted to the heart.

Secondly, the benefits of Gods mercies against our manifold miseries both
spiritual and temporal are so many, that they cannot be numbered. For every
where He crowns us in mercy, ^sal, 102
and commiserations. That is, he compasses us about every where with the
benefits of his mercy.

Thirdly, Gods mercy deseended by the mystery of the holy Incarnation, to
labors and dollours, to hunger and thirst, to ignominyes and reproaches, to
stripes and wounds, and to the death of the Cross to redeem us from our
sins, and from eternal death due unto us therefore. Is there any greater
depth to which Gods mercy did descend? Yes surely: For he did all these things
not of duty but out of Love. Iay, 53
He was offered (says the Prophet) because himself would. For who compelled
the son of God Who thought it no robbery, phil. 2
himself to be equal to the Father, but ^e exiranit^d himself, taking the
form of a servant? 2 Cor, 8
To be made poor for us, that by his poverty we might be rich? Phil, 2 ^
To be humbled unto death, even the death of the Cross to exalt us? Truly
love only compelled him, mercy only constreyned him. It also descends yet
farther. For he would in the work of our salvation bestow on us honor and
glory. That division which the Angels made seemed very fit: Glory in the
highest to God, Luk, 2
and in earth peace: honor be to God, and profit to men: But Gods mercy would
have all the profit to be ours, and part of the glory to be his, and part of
it to be ours. For he would give us his grace, whereby we might work our
salvation: Not that the merit of Christ suffised not; but to communicate with
us the praise and glory of our own salvation. Whereupon it is said in the
Gospel; Math. 20
Pay them their hyre. And the Apostle glorifieth saying: 2 Timothy, 4
There is laid up for me a Crown of Justice.

Lastly, Gods mercy is most deep, because it exceeds the affection of
Fathers and Mothers, which is the greatest we can find on earth. Hear the
Prophet Isay: Isay 49
Can a woman forget her infant that she will not have pity on the son of
her womb? and if she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. Hear David:
psalm, 102
As a Father has compassion of his children; So has our Lord compassion on
them that fear him. And lest thou might say; there are some parents whose
Love sometime changes into hacred, David says further of Gods mercy and love
toward his Children: The mercy of our Lord from everlasting upon them that
fear him. Of which continuance, the Apostle also certifieth us in his last
Epistle to the Corinthians where he calls God: The Father of mercies, 2 Cor, 1
and God of all Consolation. God therefore is not only a father to those that
fear him: but a most merciful Father: For he takes away such miseries and
afflictions from his Children as he judges expedient to be taken from them:
and therein he shows himself to be the Father of mercies: And gives them
unspeakable comfort to suffer those, which he judges not expedient for them
to be taken away: And therein he shows himself to be The God of Consolation.
But the Apostle says: (Of all Consolation) for two causes.

First because God comfort those that are his, in all kinds of tribulations,
which truly the world cannot do: for oftentimes it understands not the
causes of tribulations: Even as Jobs friends Were heavy Comforters as he
calls them, Job, 16
because they knew not the cause of his grief, and therefore applied the
remedy where they ought not: or else for that the tribulation is sometime so
great, that no earthly consolation can equal it. But God the almighty and most
skillful Physician, can cure every infirmity, and therefore the Apostle says:
Who does comfort us in all our tribulation. 2 Cor. 1
Moreover, he is called the God of all Consolation; because he comfort so
fully, that it were better to suffer tribulations with such a comforter, then
to want them both together, as it happened to a young man called Theoderus, (a
confessor in the Persecution of Julian the Apostata) who being tortured ten
hours together with such cruelty, and change of executioners as in no age is
reported the like: Sung notwithstanding all that while with great joy the
psalms of David: and when it was commanded he should be let down; he began
to be sorrowful, because of the great comfort he received by the presence of
an Angel whilst he was in torturing as Ruffinus writes. lib. 10. hist, c, 36
2 Cor. 7
Wherefore it is no marvel if the Apostle say: I am replenished with
consolation: I do exceedingly abound in joy in all our tribulation. And in the
beginning of his Epistle: 1 Cor, 1
Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we also may be able to comfort
them that are in all distress.

What think thou O my soul of this so ample, continual, pure, and infinite
mercy of our Lord, who needs nothing of ours; and yet out of the abundance of
his love is so careful of his servants, as if of them depended all his
Happiness? What thanks therefore will thou give him? What can thou ever
do, not to be ungrateful to so great mercy? Seek therefore all thou can to
please him. And because it is written: Luke 6
Be ye merciful, as also your Father is merciful. And, Have mercy on thine
own soul leasing God, Eccle, 30
Begin diligently first to find out the miseries of thy soul: For the
miseries of the body are plain to the eye, so that it is needless to put a
man in mind of them: For if the body be but one day without meat and driuke,
or one night without sleep, or by a fall or wound be hurt; it presently cries
out and complains, and is with great care looked unto. But the soul fasteth
whole weeks from her meat, and is sick with wounds, or perhapps dead: and
none takes care or compassion of her. Visit therefore thy soul often:
examine all her powers whether they be well, and profit in the knowledge and
love of true Happiness: or whether they be sick with ignorance, or languish
with diverse desires. Also whether the mind be blinded with malice, or the will
infected with envy and pride. And if thou find any such thing: Cry unto our
Lord; Psalm, 6
Have mercy on me because I am weak. Seek spiritual physicians, and apply
fit remedies. Take compassion likewise of other souls, whereof an infinite
number perish, although Christ dyed for them.

O my soul, if thou did truly know the price of souls, to wit the
precious blood of the son of God; and also the great slaughter which is made
of them by the infernal Wolves and roaring Lions the Devils: Surely thou
could not, but from thy heart take pity on them: and by thy prayers to God,
and by all other means seek to deliver them.

Lastly also take compassion on the corporal necessities of thy neighbors not
in Word and tongue only, 1 Ioh. 3
Math 5.
but i^ deed and truth, having in mind the saying of our Lord: Blessed are
the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.

THE FIFTEENTH AND LAST STEPP, From the Consideration of the greatness of Gods
justice by the similitude of a corporal quantity.
GOds justice in holy scripture is taken four ways: Cap 1
First for justice ingenerall, which conteyneth all virtues, and is the same
with Sanctity or probitie. So in the psalms: Our Lord is just in all his
ways, psalm. 144
and holy in all his works.

Secondly, for truth or fidelity. So in another psalm: That thou may be
justified in thy words. Psalm. 50


Thirdly, for justice distributing rewards: so in the last Epistle to Tim
th^e: There is laid up for me a Crown of justice, 2 Timothy, 4
which our Lord will render to me in that day, a just judge.

Lastly, for justice punishing sin. So in another psalm; He shall rain
snare upon sinners, Psalm, 10
fire and Brimstone and blast of storms, the portion of their cupp, because
our Lord ^s just, and has loved justice. The greatness therefore of Gods
justice will appear to us, if we consider the (...) thereof ingenerall; the
length thereof, to wi^, his truth and (...) the higth thereof, distributing
rewards in heaven: and the depth thereof, punishing the wicked eternally in
Hell. And to begin from the breadth; That is called justice ingenerall among
men, which disposes a man to behave himself well in all actions according to
all laws. And in this all virtues as we^l Theological as Moral are
comprehended. There is also another virtue called Charity which conteyneth all
virtues in her bosom, and commands and directs all their acts unto their
ends. Which although it be a particular Theological virtue: yet it may truly
be called likewise justice ingenerall. For it disposes a man to behave
himself well toward God and his neighbor, and in so doing he fulfilleth all
laws. So speaks the Apostle: Rom, 13
L^ue works no evil. And, He that loves has fulfilled the law, And, Love
is the fullness of the Lave. St. Augustine also in his book of Nature and
Grace says: Imperfect Charity is va^erfect ^^stice, Charity increased is
justice increased: great Charity, is great Justice, perfect Charity, is
perfect justice.

Moreover, in God are all virtues without any imperfection: and in lieu of them
which may praesuppose imperfection; there is something much better and more
excellent: for which cause he is most truly called The only good, and one^y
holy. Faith therefore is not in God a Theological virtue, because Faith is of
those things which are not seen: But God sees all things. Neither is their
hope in God: because hope is an expectation of things to come: but God
expects nothing; for he possesses all things from eternity. Neither is
there in God repentance for sin: because God cannot sin. Nor Humility; for
Humility keeps a man that he ascend not vainly above himself, but continue
in his estate; but God has nothing above himself, because he is most High.
Yet Charity (the Queen of virtues is in God most ample and truly infinite.
For he loves himself infiintely, because himself only perfectly knows,
the insinite goodness of his Essence. He loves also all things he has made;
so speaks the Wife man: Wisd. 1
Thou honest all things that are, and hate nothing of those which thou ^^st
made. For God by his wisdom knows how to separate evil from good, to wit,
defect from nature, even in the Devils and in the most wi^ked; And he loves
nature which he made, and hates defect which he made not. Furthermore there is
such true Charity in God, that himself would be called Charity, as St. John
speaks when he says; God is Chrritie. 1 Ioh. 4
But our love being compared with Gods love is exceeding small For many things
we love not, because we know them not: Many things also which we know, we
love not, because we decerne not in them good from evil: many good things
likewise we love not well, and therefore not with true charity, because we are
naught and follow rather lust then love. And we love God imperfectly, not only
because we love him not so much as his goodness does deserve (which neither
the Angels do) but also because we love him less then we ought, and less
also then we might if we did with more attention and diligence give our selves
to prayer and Meditation.

This Queen of virtues in the Lord of virtues is accompanied with singular
magnificence, infinite liberality, incredible benignity and humility,
admirable patience and longanimitie, most abundant mercy and piety,
everlasting truth and fidelity, perfect justice, and most unspotted sanctity,
so that The S^arres are not clean in his sight; Job, 25
And the Seraphins being astonished ^ive, Holy, holy, holy, Isay 6
the Lord God of h^stes.

O my soul if thou did consider these things attenti^ely, with what fear
and membling would thou serve God in thy devotions and prayers (...) And
especially at the holy Altar, with what reverence and humility would thou
offer up to the eternal Father his only begotten Son, in the sight of
Angels, for the health of the quick and dead?

But let us go on. Cap. 2
The length of Gods justice is manifested by the truth and fidelity thereof:
Our Lord is faithful in all his words says the Prophet, Psalm, 144
That is, The promises of God which were declared many ages since by the
Prophets, never were, nor shall be frustrate: but more firm and stable then
heaven and earth. Luke 16
For so says our Lord: It is easier for hearten and earth t^ pass, then one
tittle of the law to fall.

And our Lord means by the Law, not only the truth of his Commandments,
but also of his promises: For whatsoever he has commanded must be observed,
or punishment follows: and whatsoever he has promised is by eternal truth
established and performed. Where upon he also says: Math, 5
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass. And Isay: I^^y 40
The word of our Lord abides for ever. And David: Psalm. 110
All his Commandments are faithful: Confirmed for ever and ever. Rom, 3
And the Apostle: But God is true, and every man a Liar. And It is vnp^ssible
for God to lie. Heb. 1


The reason of which sayings is, because being Wisdom he cannot be deceived:
being goodness he cannot deceive: and being Omnipotency he cannot sail: But
men, although they be wise, good and mighty: may be deceived, and deceive:
because they neither know all things, nor can perform all things as they
will: they also that are good when they promise; may soon after become evil,
and not fulfill their promise.

Therefore if thou be wise my soul, trust only in God; cleave only to him,
and upon him cast all thy care.

Walk thou carefully with thy Lord God, Mich. 6
and he will be careful of thee: Take heed all thou can, least thou offend
his Justice, and his mercy will always so defend thee, that thou shall not
need to fear what man or devil can do to thee.

The Height of Gods justice is seen in giving the reward of Heaven, Cap. 3
which God (as the Highest and most just Judge) has prepared for them that
have lived righteously.

And first, we shall decerne the Greatness of his Justice, if we compare God
as a Judge, with men that are Judges.

Secondly, if we compare rewards with rewards, to wit ye rewards which God
will give with those which men use to give. Men that are Princes, Prelates or
Judges and have under them subjects or servants, for the most part, give not
for many causes just Rewards to those that deserve them. For either they
cannot through want of ability give to all according to their deserts: or they
know not all their deserts: or they know not their true worth which depends
upon the sincerity and affection of their minds: or through covetousness and
malice, or some other perverse inclination they will not justly reward their
just labors: Or lastly, they are either prevented by death before they can pay
the recompense which they owe: or they to whom it is due, depart out of this
life before they begin to taste the fruits of their travails: But God gives
the righteous not only just rewards for their good works, but also above
their deserts. Math. 10
For what desert can be more base and obscure, then to give a cup of cold water
to one that is a thirst? And yet for it also has God promised a reward. And of
the large rewards which our Lord has promised Saint Luke writes: Good
measure, Luke 6
and pressed down, and shaken together, and running over shall they give into
your bosom. Neither is it to be feared least God should want any thing to give
for reward unto the righteous, since he is the Lord of all things, and can by
his word only, increase and multiply them without end.

Nor is it to be doubted, lest perhaps he be deceived in the true number and
value of their deserts: since he is most Wise and beholds all things;
searching the Hearts and reins of his well deserving servants to see with what
mind, intention, zeal and diligence they do all things. Neither may it be
thought, that God has an ill meaning to defraude his children and servants of
their due recompense, because he is faithful in all his words.

Lastly, neither can he dye, because he is more immortal then any thing
whatsoever: so that there is no danger lest by prevention of death they should
be thereof deprined.

Certain therefore it is that all the good works of the righteous are with
lustice rewarded. Wherefore it is most safe to have to do with God in matter
of labor and Reward: and dangerous to trust in men, and to expect from them
true recompense for desert.

Let us now compare rewards with rewards, things Celestial and Divine,
with things Terrestrial and Humane.

O blindness of Men.

What I pray you can men render to those who labor all day, watch all night,
and hazard their lives for them in battle? What can they render but small,
base, and abject things, which shall continue but a short time? But God
rend^eth great, high, and eternal things: Yet are the other desired, and
these contemned. St. John Chrysostom in his four and twentieth Homily upon
St. ^athew: Compares the Palaces, Cittyes, and Kingdoms of this world which
men so admire, unto houses of clay which Children make with great labor: but
by those that are elder, they are laughed at: And often times also when the
father or master sees his children to neglect their books, and give
themselves too much to those tryfles: he throws down all with his foot, and
destroys in a moment, what they with great care, had a long time bin making:
Even so, the great Palaces, Towers, Castles, Towns, Cittyes and Kingdoms of
mortal men, are but as houses of clay, in comparison of Celestial and
Eternal riches, and are laughed at by the blessed Angels which behold them
from above, and oftentimes they are by our heavenly Father and Master,
ouer-throwne in a moment, that we may there by understand how vain and of no
moment all these things are. Which albeit few do now observe, yet at the day
of Judgment all shall see, when as the seeing thereof will little avail them.
Saint Hillary in his Comentary upon the tenth Chapter of Saint Matthew says;
That the day of Judgment will reveal how all these things were vayde.

But let us declare somewhat more particularly, what these heavenly rewards
are, which many now contemn in respect of earthly rewards.

First, in the Kingdom of Heaven, there shall be all good things that can be
desired: for all yt live there shall be happy: And happiness is defined to be A
heap of all good things perfectly gathered together.

Therefore the goods of the mind shall be there, to wit, Wisdom and virtues:
the goods of the body, to wit, beauty, health and strength: And external
goods, to wit wealth, pleasure and glory.

Moreover all these things shall be in a most high, perfect, and excellent
degree: For God who has showed his Power in creating the world of nothing: and
his wisdom in the order and government thereof: and his Love in the Redemption
of mankind by the mystery of the incar^ation and Passion of his Son: will
then show his glory and liberality in rewarding those which have tryumphed over
their enemy the Devil.

(...) there God shall not be (...) only: (...) himself who is the (...) of
Causes, and the first (...) Highest ^uth: through which most beautiful vision
the ^^^les of Sai^t^s shall shine so bright that St. John speaking of that
future Glory says: 1 Ioh. 3
We shall be li^^ unto him, because we shall see him as he is. From this high
Happiness shall proceed most fervent Love, whereby they shall always adhaere
unto God in such sort, that they neither will nor can be separated from him.

So then the soul with all her powers, shall remain in a most happy estate:
And the body shall shine as the Sun as our Lord himself does witness^ (...)
the ^^st (...) the (...): Meth. 15
And (...) of; the health (...) be immortality, and the strength impassibility.
Lastly that which now is a Natural body, 2 Cor, 5
shall then be a Spiritual body, that is to say, so obedient to the Spirit,
that it shall exceed the Winds in Ag^litie, and penetrate the Walls through
Subtilitie. Moreover, their Wealth there shall be to want nothing, because with
God and in God they shall possess all things. Mat. 24
For over all his g^^ds shall he appoint them.

Of their Pleasure what shall I say, since it is written: They shall be
inebri^ted with the plenty of thy house: Psalm. 35
and with the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them drink? What mind
can conceive what pleasure it is to enjoy the chief Happiness? To see beauty
it self? To taste sweetness it self? To enter into the joy of our Lord, that
is, to be partakers of that pleasure which makes God happy? The honor and
glory of Saints exceeds all eloquence. For amidst the Theater of the whole
world, of all men and Angels, the Saints shall be praised by God and as
Champions crowned, and (which is the highest honor of all) they shall be
placed in Christ's throne as partners of his kingdom. For so we read in the
Apocalips: Apoc. 3
He that shall overcome, I will give him to sit with me in my throne, as I also
have overcome, and have sitten with my Father in his throne. At this height of
honor the Prophet wondered when he said: Psalm. 13
But to me thy friends O God are become honoralle exceedingly: their prine
palitie is exceedingly strengthened. And now if to this multiplicitie and
excellency of good things we add eternity as an unspeakable Adiunct, who can
conceive the greatness of this heavenly selicitie? And yet what we now cannot
conceive in thought, we shall prove in deed, if by our pious, righteous and
sober life, we shall at length arrive unto that happy country. For those goods
indeed shall continue for ever, which now with momentary labors Christ's
servants purchase by his grace. What say thou O my soul to these things?
Had thou rather immitate the sportes of children in making houses of clay
then enjoy an everlasting kingdom? Had thou rather (which I abhor to
think) be delighted with the pleasures of beasts, then come to the ineffable
delights of Angels? Let thy mercy O Lord auert this from the soul of thy
servant. Rather pierce my flesh with thy fear, ^psal, 118
and let the obedience of thy law be more sweet to me then hunny or the hunny
Comb: that crucifying my flesh with the vices and concupiscences thereof I may
aspire to the spiritual and eternal pleasures of thy Paradise. Grant to thy
servant O Lord to follow the steps of thy Christ, who being meek and humble
of heart When he was reuyled, 1 Pet. 2
did not revile: when he suffered he threatened not. Grannt that I may live
soberly, righteously, and piously in this world, that with some confidence I
may expect The blessed hope, Tit, 2
and aduent of the glory of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

It remains that we consider Cap. 4
the justice which God will use in punishing sinners in Hell. Wherefore if we
mark with attention and diligence; we shall indeed understand that it is most
true which the Apostle teaches in his Epistle to the Hebrews: It is horrible
to fall into the hardes of the living God. Heb. 10
For (to follow that method we observed in Justice rewarding the merits of
Saints) God the just judge will punish all sins though never so small, as
for example: an idle word, for so we read in the Gospel: Every idle word that
men small speak, they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.
Math, 12.
Men truly leave many offenses unpunished, either because the offenders
resist, or fly away: or because they know not whether they be done or not: or
perhapps not sufficiently proved by witnesses whether they be done or not: or
else because they will not punish them, being either corrupted with bribes,
oppressed with fa^o^^s, or depraved with their own malice. But God is
Almighty: therefore none can resist his power: He is every where: therefore
nothing can be hid ^^d from his sight. Whether shall I go (says David) (...)
thy spirit? Psalm, 138
And whether shall I fire from thy face? If I shall ascend into heaven, thou
art there; If I descend into hill, th^^ are present: He is most wise: and
therefore knows every thing though never so secretly hidden in the heart.
Neither does he need witnesses to prove offenses, since men's consciences shall
be against them as a thousand witnesses.

Lastly, no bribes can corrupt his justice, since he wants no goods of ours.
Certain therefore it is that no sin whatsoever can escape Gods justice,
unless it be first purged by repentance. For as his mercy in this life is
great in pardoning: so his justice after this life will be severe in punishing.
Of the time of this life the Prophet Isay speaks: Iay, 49
In time acceptable I have heard thee, and in the day of salvation I have
helped thee. Which the Apostle expounding in his last Epi^stle to the
Corinthians says: 2 Cor, 6
Behold now is the time acceptable, behold now the day of salvation. Of the
time to come after this life, the Prophet Sophontas cries out; That day a day
of wrath, Sophon, 1
a day of tribulation and distress, a day of calimitie and misery, a day of
darkeresse and mist, a day of Clo^de and Whirle-winde, a day of the Trumpet and
sound.

Neither shall all sins be punished only; but so horribly punished, that
scarcely can any living man imagine it. For as no eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor heart of man conceived what God has prepared for those that love
him: so no eye has seen, no^ ea^^ has heard, nor heart of man conceived, what
God has prepared for those that hate him. The punishments o^ (...) in hell
shall be vety many, very (...), and very (...), mixed with no (...), and (watch
does (...) miserie^) (...). I say they shall be very many because every power
of the ^^^le, and every sense of the body shall be tormented. Weigh the words
of the highest judges sentence, set down in the Gospel: M^^ 2^
Get y^^ (...) from me (...) to (...) G^t (...) away (says he) that is depart
ye from the company of the blessed, being for ever deprived of the sight of
God, which is the highest essential happiness and last end for which ye were
created. You cursed, that is, Hope not hereafter for any benediction: for ye
are deprived of the life of grace, and all hope of salvation: the water of
wisdom, and dew of divine inspirations shall not hereafter rain upon you:
the beams of heavenly light shall not hereafter shine upon you: the grace of
repentance, ye flower of Charity, nor the fruits of good works shall not grow
in you. Luke 1
The Orient from o^ high, shall never from henceforth visit you. Neither shall
ye only loose spiritual and eternal goods, But also corporal and
temporal: ye shall have no riches, no delights, no comfortes: but shall be
like the Fig Tree, Math. 21
which being cursed by me withered presently from the root all over. Into
Fire, That is, Into the furnace of burning and vnquenehable fire, which shall
not consume one member alone, but all the members together with borrible
punishment. Everlasting, That is, into a fire which is blown by the breath of
the Almighty, and therefore needs no fuel to make it always to burn:
that as your fault shall still remain, so your punishment shall for ever
endure. Therefore the Prophet Isay most truly exclaimeth: Which of you can
dwell with devouring fire? Isay 33
Which of you shall dwell with everlasting heates? As if he should say, there
is none that can patiently endure it: but with impatience, indignation, and
desperation they are compelled to bear it against their wills. And he adds:
Cap, 66
Their worm does not dye, and fire is not extinguished; which words our Lord
repeateth often in St. Mar, 9
Mark For there shall be the Worm of conscience, and remembrance of this
life; wherein they might easily if they would, have escaped those punishments,
and obtained eternal joys. And least some might think that the damned
receive some comfort by walking or removing from place to place, hear what our
Lord himself says: Math, 22
Bind his hands and feet, and call him into utter darkness: There shall be
weeping and g^^shing of teeth. Therefore those wretches having their hands and
feet bound eternally, shall always lie in the same place without the light of
the Sun, Moon, or Stars, burning in flames of fire, weeping, lamenting and
gnashing their teeth through rage and desperation. Neither shall they only
suffer most grievous pains, but also extreme want disgrace, ignominy and
confusion. For in a moment they shall loose their Palaces, Fields, Vineyards,
Cattle, Clothes, Gold, Silver, and precious stones: and be brought to such
misery, that with the rich glutton they shall desire a drop of cold water,
Luk, 16
and shall not be heard. Moreover, those proud and vain glorious men, with in
this life would suffer no disgrace: But preferred their honor and estimation
before all things whatsoever: shall in that Theater of all mankind, and of
all the Angels (then the which a greater never was nor shall be) see all their
offenses revealed, although they were done in darkness, and kept in the closet
of their hearts: As Treasons, Theftes, Inc^sts, Sacrilege and the like. For
as the Apostle says in his first Epistle to the Corinthians: When our Lord
shall come to Judge the world, he will lighten 1 Cor. 4
the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the
hearts, and then the praise shall be to every man of God.

And then without doubt the dispraise shall also be to every wicked and
unrighteous man of God. But the disgrace and confusion of the wicked in that
Theater shall be so great, that St. Basil in his exposition of the three and
thirtieth Psalm doubts not to say: That it shall be the greatest of all
punishments: especially to Hypocrites, and to the proud and vain glorious
which accounted honor as a God, or rather as an Idol in this world. But if
these things which we have said of the loss of all goods both Celestial and
Terrestrial, and of most insufferable dolours, ignominies, and disgraces, were
to have end, or at least some kind of comfort, or mittigation, as all miseries
in this life have; they might in some sort be thought tolerable: But since it
is most certain, and undoubted, that as the happiness of the blessed shall
continue for ever without mixture of misery: so likewise shall the unhappiness
of the damned continue for ever without mixture of comfort: Truly therefore are
they most blind and (...) which endeavor not all they may, through any
tribulations, dangers, infamy and death (which the Apostle calls Momentary
and light) to come to the Kingdom of Heaven and happiness thereof. 1 Cor, 4


And if perhaps any one wonder why God who is most merciful: Cap. 5
has appointed such terrible and continual punishments for men's sins, which
are soon passed over, and seem not to be so great: Let him hear St. Auste^
in his books of the City of God: Lib. 14 cap. 15
Quisquis h^^sm^di d^mnationem etc. Whosoever (says he) thinks this
condemnation too rigorous or unjust, knows not truly how to measure iniquity
in sinning, where there is such facility of sinning. And after: For who can
sufficiently declare how wicked a thing it is, not to obey in a matter so
easy, commanded by so great power, and threat^ed with so great pu^^shment. St.
A^gustine speaks of Adems sin: but the same reason holds in all sins. For
if we balance it truly and not deceiptfully: we shall find that every
mortal sin is exceeding great in 3. respects.

First it is a dreadful thing that the Creature should not obey the Creator,
seeing the dignity of the Creator is infinitely distant, from the baseness of
the Creature. The Creature is also by nature the servant, and the Creator is by
nature ye Lord; and whatsoever the creature has it receives from the Creator:
but the Creator receives nothing from it.

Secondly although the commandments of the Creator were heavy: yet ought the
Creature to obey them: 1 Ioh. 1
But his Commandments are not heavy. And our Savior says: That his yoke is
sweet, Math. 1^
and burden light. How great an offense then is it for worms of the earth not
to obey their Creator in so easy a matter?

Thirdly if God had not threatened the punishment of eternal death unto
sinners: Men might herhapps have excused their sins: but seeing he has so
often and so plainly threatened it by his Prophets and Apostles, what sinner can
excuse his co^tumacy?

Lastly, if the sin of the damned were not eternal, we might marvel why
the punishment thereof should be eternal: but seeing the abstinacy of the
damned is eternal, why should we wonder if their punishment be also eternal?
And this wilful obstinacy in wickedness wc is both in the damned and in the
Devils: I say this perverse will which is in them auerted from God the chief
Happiness, and shall so for ever remain: makes holy men more to fear a
mortal sin, then Hell fire.

Hear what Edinerus an Englishma^ writes of St. Ansclme in the 2. book of
his life: My Conscience (says he) hears (...) witness I lie not: That we
have often heard him (An^^^me) to protest by the testimony of truth, That if
he might corporally behold of one side the horror of Sin, and of the other
side the pains of H^^l, and that of necessity he must be drowned in one of
them, he would rather choose Hell then Since. Another thing he used likewise
to say, which to some perhaps will seem as strange as the former: To wit,
That he had rather have Hell without sin, then the Kingdom of Heaven with
sin. If this holy man did both speak and feel these things, for that
(being illuminated by God) he knew sin was more grievous then the pains of
Hell: how much more will God (who penetrateth the malice, uncleanness, and
perverseness of sin to the bottom) truly judge, that the punishment which he
has appointed from all eternity for sin, is most due thereunto.

Therefore O my soul be not deceived, be not seduced: be not like to those,
Tim. 1^
Who say they knon God, but by their deeds deny him, For many have faith in
habit, but not in act, like a sword in a scabbard. For if they did actually
believe, a^^ believing did seriously consider that God is faithful and just,
and has indeed prepared most grievous and everlasting punishments without any
mixture of comfort for the wicked: It could not be that they would do ye
things they do And drink (as it is said in the book of Job) iniquity as
water; Job. 15
To wit, so easily, so merrily, and so without fear commit many great sins, as
if rewards and not punishments were due unto sinners. But believe thou I say
most assuredly, and believing often remember, that God is in this life The
Father of mercyes, 2 Cor. 1
and ready mercifully to pardon the sins of all that truly repent: and ye
after this life he will become The God of Revenge, Psalm, 93
and execute the punishments he has prepared for them, and by his Prophets and
Apostles commanded to be Preached, and committed to writing for ye Memory of
posterity.

And in so doing it will come to pass, that being lifted up as it were with
two wings, to wit, the Fear of most intolerable punishments, and Hope of
most great rewards: thou may pass over this life with safety, and come unto
the rest of life everlasting.

Amen, Amen:
Laus Deo qui dedit velle and perficere.
The faults escaped in printing we trust the gentle Reader will of his
courtesy easily amend and pardon.

FINIS.

