NEWS FROM THE LOW-COVNTREYES.

OR THE Anatomy of Caluinisticall Calumnyes, manifested In a Dialogue between
a Brabander, and a Hollander.

Upon occasion of a Placcart, lately published in Holla^d, against the
Jesuits, Priests, Friars etc. by those that there assume unto themselves, the
Title of The High-Mighty-Lords, the States etc.

Translated out of the Netherland Language, into English. By D. N.

M.DC.XXII.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO HIS FRIEND.
SIR, you shall please to understand, that this present year of our Lord 1622.
came forth a Placcart in Holland* there published by the authority of the
States* wherein the Iesuytes are accused of no less crime the^ to be the
murderers of Princes. Against which placart came forth soon after an answer
made dialogue-wise, under the title of The Anatomy of Caluinisticall Calumnies.
And seeing this accusation of the Iesuytes to be the murderers of Princes, is
made by such as are known to be no friends to Princes, I was desirous to see
what could be said against it. And finding this answer to conteyne very
serious matter, and so many proofs for the manifesting of this accusation to
be but a mere Calumny, I considered with myself that every man, in reason and
charity, is obliged to prefer truth, and to excuse the falsly-accused.
Heerupon I resolved to enforce so much time out of my other affairs, as to
translate it into English, and chiefly for your sake* because I know you to be
a man curious, and desirous to penetrate into the truth of things, and not
contented to be carried away with vulgar noyses wherewith Idiots are soon
satisfied. This when you shall have read it, I leave unto your own judgment to
censure, and my self still to remain at your comaund.

From the Low-Countreyes, the last of July 1622. Your ever loving friend D. N.

THE WRITER OF THIS DIALOGVE IN THE NETHERLAND LANGVAGE, UNTO his friend.
MY Very especial friend. I could not leave to let you understand, that being
aryued here in Cullen, this present month of April, about my affairs,
certain merchants came to lodge in the same Inn where I am loged, that also
intend to take their journey to Franckford Mart, among these a Merchant of
Brabant, and a Merchant of Holland, having one night supped together at the
table whereat myself among others was present, they chanced after supper to
fall into discourse: which seeming unto me to be worth the writing I have taken
pains to pen it, and here I now send it you, supposing you may be as much
pleased with reading it, as my self and others were with hearing it, when we
willingly sat up late in the night to that end.

It was then occasioned by this means. When (according as the custom is, when
men from different places happen to meet together) we began to ask one
another what news there was stirring abroad. The Brabander demanded of the
Hollander what news there was in Holland? The Hollander as som-what
dissembling, said he knew of no news there.

Heerupon said the Brabander. When a reformed Brother coming out of Holland,
knows no news, it is a sign that the brethren there have no news to their
liking.


The Hollander. It is your pleasure so to say: but when there is no news, then
can none be told.


The Brabander. Then must I tell you what news I hear out of Holland. It is
told me that your Holland-States, of what trades soever they have been
heertofore, they do now all of them practice Pressing-worke.


The Hollander. What mean you by that? I understand not what you say.


The Brabander. Then are you more fortunate then many thousands, that both
know it well, and feel it well, by reason that their very hearts are in effect
pressed out of their bodies, through the intolerable and unsupportable
taxations which are laid upon them, in so much that many do now begin to say,
God be with the good Duke of Alua, that demanded no more but the tenth penny
of our goods.

And that which is yet more grievous is, that of these most grievous exactions
no end appears, but to the contrary they do daily increase more, as though
they were but in their beginnings, which falls out in a fit time for the
common people, when things are so good cheap, especially food and fuel, that
the price is double as much as but a while since it was, and where traficke so
flourishes, that merchants, marryners, and artifices, are forced to keep more
holy days, (or rather play-dayes) then are set down in the Almanacke.


The Hollander. Concerning Trade, it may be compared unto the tide, which ebbes
and flows. If it be not so good now as it has been, we must have patience
until it mend. And as for the exactions, they are not ordained without reason
by our High-mighty Lords the States, who well know what they have to do.


The Brabander. They know it well, and the poor commons feel it well: you
comfort your selves with patience upon hope of amendment of traficke, but the
patience is much more certain, then the amendment.

I agree with you in opinion that the exactions are not ordained without
reason, for lawless necessity is the reason, and need it is that enforces
them. And therefore your high-minded Lords the States, that well know their
heavy charge, their great debts, and their small in-comings, must consequently
well know what they do, and happy it were that they also well know, wherein
they do not well.


The Hollander. I note your words very well, you call our High-mighty Lords the
States, The High-mynded Lords the States: you ought not so to abuse, and
mis-name our Lords, and Land-rulers.


The Brabander. I see not wherein I abuse or misname them, because in very
right and reason the title of High-mynded, far better befitteth them, then
High-mighty, for Lowness they have enough, but Highness none at all, except
in their minds, which agrees but ill with such as live so low that they should
sit under water, if they did not hemme themselves from it with walls of earth.
Being then such as they are, and dwelling so low as they do, the High-nesse of
their minds appears the more in that they will needs assume unto themselves
the title of High-mighty, or High-powerfull Lords and States.


The Hollander. They assume unto themselves this title, in regard of their
authority.


The Brabander. Whence have they authority?


The Hollander. From God.


The Brabander. Have they heretofore been Princes, or subjects?


The Hollander. Our Country was sometime belonging unto the King of Spain,
but so is not now.


The Brabander. God has commanded that subjects must be obedient unto their
Kings and Princes. Show me where God has granted a privilege unto the States
of Holland, to relinquish and reject all obedience unto their lawful and
sovereign Lord the King of Spain; and to band against him in public
rebellion, and to assume unto themselves the Princely authority belonging unto
him.


The Hollander. We have obtained our freedom by the sword.


The Brabander. Put the case that now in our intended journey to Frankford
(where by the leave of God we mean to go) we should happen to be set upon by
thieves, who with their swords should hurt and wound us, and take our money and
goods from us; I demand of you whether they ought lawfully to possess it as
their own, because they got it by their swords.


The Hollander. I am not obliged to shape you an answer to every tryfling
question you may ask me.


The Brabander. And I am of opinion that no man is obliged to answer unto any
question, whereunto he is not able to answer. But yet I know that if such
robbers by the high-way-side should fall into the hands of Justice, they
should not be freed from the hands of the hangman by excusing themselves, that
our money and goods belonged unto them, because they had gotten it from us with
their swords.


The Hollander. Let it be, as be it may. Our high and mightfull Lords and
States General of the United Netherlands, have power and authority: and
because at the beginning of our discourse you asked me for News, know now that
these our Lords and States, have lately published a Placcart, wherein, in spite
of all that are against it, they have showed that they have authority.

This Placcart conteyneth a prohibition, that no Iesuytes, Priests, Friars, or
other ordained persons of Romish profession, shall come into these united
Provinces, or being there, may still remain and continue.

Moreover that no man shall send any children to school, or to remain in any
Cittyes, Places, Universities, or Schools under the command of the King of
Spain, in the enemies Countries or in other Colleges of Jesuits. And that no
gatherings or collectio^s of money, gold, silver, coined or uncoined, or of
other goods, or wares shall be made, to, or for the benefit or behoof of any
Churches, Hospitalls, Spiritual, or other Colleges, or Conuenticles.


The Brabander. In this title of a Placcart, published by authority of such as
have not any authority all, I note three points.

1. The first is, the prohibition or forbidding of Priests and Iesuytes the
Country.

2. The second is, that no children may go to School in any place under the
command of the King of Spain, or in Colleges of Iesuytes.

3. The third is, that no money may be given to the use or benefit of any
Churches, Hospitals, Spiritual, or other Colleges.


The Hollander. So it is, and so enacted and established in the assembly of the
aforenamed High-mighty Lords the States general, in the Earles-Hage the six
and twentieth day of February, in the year of sixteen hundredth and two and
twenty, and there printed by Hillebrand Iabobson, sworn printer unto the
High-mighty Lords the States general.


The Brabander. Heerby I am brought to understand that this Placcart of the
High-minded Lords the States is printed in the Earles-Hage, Ergo, There is an
Earl to whom this Hage appertains, and this Earl notwithstanding that he
is lawfully issued and descended, and consequently the true heir unto those
ancient Earls, that have governed there; yet is he of new States which are no
Earls, wholly thurst out, who have now made thereof a States-Hage, but must
nevertheless suffer it to continue the name of an Earles-Hage in memory of the
true claim, which the Earl and owner thereof has unto it.

Here then is this Placcart printed by Hillebrand Iacobson, sworn Printer
unto the High-minded Lords the states: whereby may be noted, that this sworn
Printer unto those States, is not to leave out any lie that they shall please
to give him in any Placcart of theirs to print, for fear of being found
perjured.


The Hollander. The Lords the States do give him no lies to print.


The Brabander. Do they punish him when lies are found printed in their
Placcarts?


The Hollander. He is not punished, because no such lies are found.


The Brabander. They that know not a lie from a truth or will not know it, find
it not; but they that can discern untruths from truths, can find them out,
albeit they stand in established Proclamatio^s of highly named Netherland
States. And surely, this must needs prove a more lucky Placcart then many
forgoing have proved, if no lies were to be found in it, and especially where
there is mention made of Iesuytes, and Ecclesiastical persons.


The Hollander. Indeed the Iesuytes in this Placcart are called a pernicious
and murtherous sect* and that they of this sect and other priests, Friars, and
spiritual, or religious named persons, of the Romish Religion do endeavor to
bring the good inhabitants of these united Netherland Provinces, by means of
their falls doctrine and Idolatry, to an auersion from their lawful Superiors,
to the murdering of Princes and Potentates, and to instruct them in all kinds
of treason against them, thereby to prefer the Tyranny and absolute
Domination of the King of Spain, and his adherents in worldly, and of the Pope
of Rome and his dependants, in spiritual causes.


The Brabander. Have I not ghessed right? I see now that this Placcart will not
for lack of lies make any foregoing Placcart ashamed: for here they fall so
fast one upon another, that I had need of some breathing time to note them.

The Iesuytes are here named a pernicious and murtherous sect, which is a
shameful lie.

That the Iesuytes and other Priests, and spiritual named Persons, of the
Romish religion, do seek to bring the inhabitants through their false
doctrine to Idolatry, is a blasphemous lie.

That they seek to bring these inhabita^tes to an auersion from their lawful
superiors, is a needless lie, for the Caluinian Preachers, and the States
themselves, have already done the same.

That they seek to bring them to the murdering of Princes and Potentates, is
a Devilish lie.

That they instruct them to all kind of treason against Princes and Potentates,
is a horrible lie.

That they seek, in these Countries to prefer the Tyranny of Spayn, is a
villainous lie.


The Hollander. It is not enough to say that these are all lies, but they must
be proved so to be.


The Brabander. How else? Have you but the patience that I may have time to do
it.

Seeing then, that the Iesuytes are here put in the first place, and called by
the Epithere of a pernicious and murtherous sect, and that they, and other
spiritual persons, do seek to procure the murdering of Princes and
Potentates: this also being a common slander and Calumny which daily rydeth on
the serpe^tine tongues of your Holland Caluinian Ministers. It is then needful
to examine and call into consideration what murders of Princes and Potentates,
have happened in Christendom in this age of ours, and since the time that the
order of the Jesuits by Saint Ignatius de Loyola was founded.

The number of Princes and Potentates, that have come to such violent and
unfortunate ends, I find to have been eight.

The first of these was the most Reverend and Illustrious Lord, Melchior Zobel
Bishop of Herbipolis, and Duke of Franconia in Germany. This Prince was cruelly
murdered, as he was going from the bridge, over the river of Main, from the
City of Herbipolis or Wirtzburge, to the Castle where he held his Court or
Residence, which Castle is near unto the said City. His murder was caused by
a Gentleman of the same Country of Franconia, called Grumbagh. What kind of
Jesuit this Gentleman was, rests in consideration, for Catholic he was not,
but a professor of the new pretended reformation, and so were also the actours
which he employed in committing of the murder.

The second in this unfortunate number was Henry, King of Scotland by his
marriage with Mary Queen of Scotland, Father to his Majesty King James, now King
of England and Scotland etc. This Prince was a Catholic, and was murdered by
a conspiracy of Caluinists, and by Caluinists which thereunto were employed he
is thought to have been strangled. These then must needs have bin
Caluinisticall Jesuits, as well those I mean that were of the conspiracy, as
the executors of the fact, for there was not one Catholic among them.

The third was James Earl of Murray in Scotland, bastard Brother unto Mary
Queen of Scotland before named. He was a rebel and a persecutour of the
Queen his Soueraygne, and Sister by the Fathers side: He forced her to fly
into England, and Tyrannically usurped the Government of her Kingdom, until
the time that a Gentleman named Hamilton slew him with a gun, in the town of
Lithquo, when being on horsbacke he was acco^panyed with many Gentleman that
came with him to make his entry into that town. Hamilton notwithstanding
escaped and fled into France. The Earl was in religion Caluinist, and so was
Hamilton also that slew him. It may be that he afterward in France became a
Catholic. If the Holland Caluinists will make a Iesuyte of him, then must he
have been a Caluinisticall Jesuit when he committed the fact; for
Catholike-Iesuite he never was.

The fourth in this number was Francis Duke of Guyse. This valiant Prince
serving the King of France against his rebels, was by one John Poltrot, who
came behind him, shot through the body with a pistol, as he was on horseback
in his journey: and it is worthy the noting that this Poltrot being well horst,
and having discharged his pistol upon the Duke, put spurs to his horse and
made a way with all speed possible; and having ridden the whole night, and not
otherwise weening but that he was many miles from the place where he committed
the murder, was in the morning apprehended near unto the place where the deed
was done. If this Poltrot must now be made a Iesuyte, he must then be a
Geneuian Iesuyte: for Geneua was his school, and Beza the Caluinian Rabbin,
his schoolmayster that instructed him, to murder this Prince.

The fifth in this number was William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, who being in
open rebellion against his lawful Soueraygne Lord, King Philip second of
Spain, the which by all the laws of the world is Crimen laesae maiestatis,
was at Delfe in Holland slain with a pistol by one Baltazar Gerard, alias
Seragh a Burgundian. Of what religion this Prince was, there is no certainty,
but Baltazar, that slew him was a Catholic: that he was a Iesuyte was never
known, but if Caluinistes have gotten the skill to make him a Iesuyte eight
and thirty years after his death, who in his life was never any, it may be
registered for a Caluinisticall miracle.

The sixth in number was Mary Queen of Scotland, Mother unto his Majesty that
now is King of Scotland and England etc. This Princess being an absolute and
soueraygne Queen, and being enforced by her rebellious subjects, fled into
England, upon hope and promise to be by Queen Elizabeth succored. She was
with the Queen of England in good peace and amity, and was by her through her
letters inuyted for her more defense and safety to come into England; but so
soon as she was there arrived, she was laid hands on, and detayned as a
prisoner, directly against all right and reason, and so detayned about the
space of twenty years. In all which time, Queen Elizabeth did never so much
as once vouchsafe to see her, or hear her speak. In the end when she accepted
of the means that was offered her for the escaping out of her unjust
imprisonment, she was murdered with an axe, by the hands of the common
Hangman; which most foul and great murder was committed to the everlasting
dishonor and shame of false Justice, because it was done under the cloak and
color of true Justice: for she being an absolute and Sovereign Princes of
herself, was no subject unto Queen Elizabeth, or unto her laws, and yet
notwithstanding she was condemned as a criminal subject. A most Tyrannous
example, of very murder, and injustice, unto all ensuyng posterity. And most
contrary to the doctrine of Caluinists that will have Princes subject to no
authority or power upon earth, but only unto God, unless they can here make a
God of Bull the Hangman.

This act does the more remain to the greater shame of the actors, because upon
the committing thereof, great bonfyers were made in the streets, and the belles
rung, in manner of a triumph, for joy of obtaining some great victory.

This Queen was a Catholic. The Hangman that murdered her was a Caluinian
Protestant, whose hands had been imbrued in the blood of diverse Iesuytes and
Priests, in the reign of the foresaid Queen Elizabeth. If Holland Caluinistes
will now make a Iesuyte of of him, he must then be a Gewse-reformed Jesuit,
and that can be no great disreputation unto them, seeing that Master Paul
Bafous a hangman in Liuonia or Liftland, left his office of hangmanship, and
turned preacher of the Word, according to the Holland reformation.

Upon the death of this holy Queen, the Calumnies of Caluinists raised against
Iesuytes, are contradicted in the ensuing Epigramme.

OUR Caluinists of Jesuits complain,
That they of Kings and Princes killers be,
But if heerin they did not falsely feign,
They must some such, the world let know and see:
But since so much as one they do not show,
To what end then serves this Calumniation?
To seem to hate for sooth Prince-killing so,
As having thereof no imagination.
And that mean while they heerof others tax,
They as unseen, may bring them to the axe.
The seventh in this number is Henry the third King of France, who after he
had caused Henry Duke of Guyse and his brother the Cardinal to be muthered,
was murdered himself by one Iacques Clement a lacobin or Dominican Friar.
This King was a Catholyke and so was also the Friar that killed him. If our
Holland-Gewses will now make a Iesuyte of him that dyed in the habit of a
Dominican Friar (for he was presently killed by those that then were about the
King) they can do more then the French Hugenots, who would as feign have had
him a Jesuit as the Holland-Gewses would, but they must notwithstanding be
contented to let him be a Dominican Friar, as he lived and dyed.

Here can I not omit also to note, that if so be, that for this fact of Jacques
Clement, the Caluinists should give unto the Friars of S. Dominikes order the
name of a Pernicious and Murtherous Sect, or that they sought to bring subjects
to the murdering of Princes, and Potentates, they had in all truth done the
Religious men of this Order much wrong: for there can be no reason that a whole
order should bear the blame, and reproach of the fault, that one of the same
order has committed, and wherein the others were innocent. How much less
reason can then be found, that the Jesuits (of whose order no one was ever
known that ever killed Prince or other person) should of slanderous Gewses be
calumniated with the name of a murtherous sect, and to be stirrers up of the
inhabitants of Holland to the murdering of Princes and Potentates: which were
a greater pity, for the inhabitants of Holland to do, considering that
Princes and Potentates are not among them in so great abundance, unless the
meaning of the Placcart should be, that the Jesuits and Priests, did intend
to employ the inhabitants of Holland to go and murder Princes and Potentates
in other Countries

The eight and last of this unfortunate number and rank, was Henry the fourth
King of France, who was murdered by one Francis Rauaillac: and if so be the
Holland Gewses will make of him a Jesuit also, yet the administers of Justice
in France, which are as farseeing as those of Holland, and have thoroughly
informed themselves of this man's condition and state of life, and done their
uttermost endeauours to come to the full knowledge of all that might concern
the matter of the Kings death, could never find that he so was. And yet the
sharp-sighted states of Holland, that can look further into milstones then
other men* can better discern who are the murderers of Princes and
Potentates, in other Countries, then the officers of Justice themselves, in
whose hands they happen to fall, that commit such criminal facts.


The Hollander. But can there no Princes else be found that have been killed or
murdered since the Jesuits have had there beginning, then only these you have
named?


The Brabander. I know not of any more, but of this number of eight. Marry
here by the way is to be noted, that five of this number have been murdered by
Caluinists, and three by Catholics: King Henry 3. King Henry 4. both Kings of
France, and William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, by Catholics: Melchior Zobell
Bishop of Wirtzburge and Duke of Franconia, Henry King of Scotland, James Earl
of Murray, Francis Duke of Guyse, and Mary Queen of Scotland by Caluinists.
And if things had succeeded according to intentions, Caluinists had, had the
honor to have had six of these eight to have been murdered by them: for
William Prince of Orange, before named, was in very great possibility to have
been murdered by a Protestant also, and I wot not how many Zeland States with
him, to have borne him company in the air, when he and they should have been
blown up together with gunpowder, whereof I may take occasion to speak more
anon. In the mean time behold whether in this odious business of Prince
killing, Caluinists have not the precedence by odds, Notwithstanding they cry
out so loud, and so falsely upon Jesuits, giving the^ the name of a pernicious
and murtherous sect, when themselves in this foul fact, fall foulest of all
that therein are to be touched, and the Jesuits not found to be touched at all.

Let all the world now judge, to whom it is, that the odious Epithete of
Prince-killing is best befitting, either to Jesuits or Calumists. Who might
not laugh at this mad accusation, and think that reformed Holland-Gewses are
turned fools, not knowing what they say? They seem through the vehemence of
their malice to be become blind, and give occasion themselves of the
manifestation of their own shame which before lay undiscovered. What strange
kinds of Jesuits have here been found, among the murderers of Princes and
Potentates? The Holland Gewse-reformed brethren may here see what comes of
lying. That their preachers continue their lying in their pulpits I can in some
sort tolerate; the poor fellows have charge of wife and children, their
preaching is their trade to live by, and to mayntaine their families. But the
worshipful Lords the States to lie, and to publish lies in Printed Placcarts,
that indeed is somewhat to gross: you may please to excuse me for being so
free with your Lords and States, Because He that speaks what he should not,
Must hear for his answer what he would not.


Me thinks they that practice lying, should in reason become more cunning,
then to make lies that are so gross and palpable, and do indeed bring credit
and reputation to Jesuits, and shame unto themselves that spread them: for
always it is found that when any one is accused and afterward found innocent,
the accuser is cursed and hated, and the false accused pittyed, beloved, and
believed.

These Caluinian Calumniatours will seem by calling Jesuits and Priests the
murderers of Princes and Potentates, as if they (poor innocent souls) were
become great Care-takers for Princes and Potentates safeties. This surely is a
very suddainly-growne-vp affection: they were not wont to be so, for me thinks
it is not so long ago that Princes can have forgotten, that at such time as
their subjects rebelled against them, the good Holla^d-Gewses were always
readier to assist their rebels against them, then them against their
rebels. I must needs acknowledge some reason why it so should be, and that
is, that simile gaudet simili, and if at this day any Princes find this to be
true, themselves know it best: But further to manifest their good affection to
Princes, we are to note that it has not only been showed in the five
aforenamed, who they murtherously have bereft of their lives, but also in some
unto whom even after their deaths they have showed indignity and villainy, as
unto William the Conqueror King of England who was buried at Cane in Normandy*
where the French-Hugenotes in their Rebellion in the year 1562. under conduct
of Chastilian, when they took this town, and spoiled the Churches, they brake
open the tomb of this great Co^querer, and threw his bones about the streets.

At Orleans, where they also committed their Church-robbery and Sacrilege, they
brake open the tomb of King Lewys the eleventh, and burnt his bones.

The bones of John Earl of Angolesme Father to King Francis the first of
France, who for his virtue and devotion devotion was reputed as a Saint, they
suffered not to rest in his sepulcher, but threw them out. This hate may have
proceeded of two causes, the one because he was a Prince, the other (and
posible the greatest) because of his Sanctity, for to the bones of Saints or
holy me^ have Caluinists showed so great hatred, that at Towers they took the
bones of the holy Bishop Saint Martin, and the bones of the holy Saint Francis
of Paula, and joining unto these bones the body of a dead Ass, they burnt all
three together, to the end Catholics should not save any part of the bones or
ashes for relics, and yet to make more sure work, they did cast all the
ashes into the river of Loire.

They would also have broken down and wholly destroyed the Abbey of S Denis in
France, withal the tombs of the Kings of France that there are buried, but
that the Prince of Condy who then was their chief, was feign to prevent it, by
appointing a Guard about the Abbey, which he did in regard that he was
descended from some of the Kings that there lie buried.

The Caluinists of Scotland have destroyed the Tombs of the Kings of that
Country, as well in the Abbey of Dunfermeling, as in the Abbey of the Holy
Cross.

In Bruxelles, when the Caluinian Gewses had their domination there, they
opened the vault in the Church of S. Godula, where some of the Dukes of Brabant
were buried; and brake open the leaden chests, and threw out their bones.

These are acts of Caluinian reformed lovers of Princes, that not only rebel
against them, and murder them, but when they are dead endure not that their
bodies may quietly remain in their sepulchers. Are not these good testimonies
of the great affection, that these reformed brethren bear unto Princes and
Potentates? Surely Kings, Princes, and Potentates, may take notice, of the
great change in these fellows, who so suddenly are become so great
Care-takers for their safties. But because there is no appearance that Princes
and Potentates will send their Ambassadors into Holland, to thank them for
their care; it seems they can smell, it is but a dissembled care, and that
they do not heerin give credit, unto those reformed, or deformed Brethren.


The Hollander. I see not for all this, that Iesuytes are welcome to all
Princes and Potentates.


The Brabander. They are welcome to all those that best know them, but it is no
wonder that such as are misinformed by lying-teachers, and have no good
affection to Catholic religion, have an auersion from Jesuits, for they
neither know them, nor yet come to hear any right report of them, from the
mouths of those that truly know their piety, and virtuous conversation. But to
the end you may know whether the greatest Princes of Christendom do know and
respect them or no, I will here for the better knowledge of the ignorant, and
in opposition to those that out of a resolved malice do calumniate them, make
it briefly to appear, in what account and reputation they stand with those
aforesaid Princes: that thereby their Caluinian Maligners, and all others, may
see what they have profitted by their so loud barking against them, in
Placcarts, in pulpits, in pamphlets, and all kind of detraction.

Yet with protestation before God, that I do this, and have resolved to do it,
wholly of my self, without being thereunto desired, moved, or counseled by any
Jesuit in the world, or being a Jesuit my self.

Let us then begin with his Holiness, Gregory the Fifteenth, now Pope, at this
present, who chose for his Confessor Cardinal Bellarmyne of the Society of
JESUS.

The Emperor Ferdinand now reigning, has to his Confessor a Jesuit.

The most Christian King of France has to his Confessor a Iesuyte.

The victorious King of Polonia, has to his Confessor a Jesuit.

The Ecclesiastical Princes Electors, with the Duke of Bauaria, and almost all
the Catholic Princes and Prelates of Germany, have to their confessors
Jesuits. And so have in like manner the greatest Prelates and Princes of Italy.

And albeit his Catholic Majesty of Spain has no Jesuit to his confessor,
but a Friar of the Dominicans according to an ancient custom, of some former
Kings of Spain; yet is he very much affected to the Jesuits, of the which one
was confessor to his mother; and his Brother and Sister have unto their
Confessor a Jesuit called Father Ieronimo de Florentia, whom King Philip the
third, of glorious memory, Father unto the present King Philip the fourth,
caused to come unto him for his consolation in his greatest sickness, and to
remain with him till he gave up the Ghost.

So have also many of the greatest Prelates and Princes of his Court, Jesuits
to their Confessors. In like sort have the principallest Prelates and Princes
in the Court of the Emperor, in the Court of the King of France, and in the
court of the King of Polonia etc.

Are the Jesuits murderers of Princes and Potentates, and have the greatest
Princes and Potentates of all Christendom, no more fear of them, then to
admit them daily in their presence? To make choice of them as of those
especial persons unto whom they reveal the secrets of their souls and
consciences? This is no sign that they beliue Caluinists, and hold Jesuits
for Prince-killers, but a manifest token, that they hold Caluinists for false
accusers, and Jesuits for true servants of Christ, whose great learning and
understanding, accompanied with true religious devotion, with a well tempered
discretion, and all kind of virtue, these Princes own experience has
sufficiently taught them to discern. I will never desire Caluinists to cease
from calumniating Jesuits: they do hereby make themselves the more known
unto Catholic Princes and Potentates for malicious Calumniatours. Caluinists
cannot teach Catholic Princes to know Jesuits, because they are sure they
know them better then Caluinists can know them, and Caluinists better then
otherwise they should, by their calumniating them.

Here stands it also to be noted, that some Princes who have disposed
themselves to abandon the world, and to serve God in religious state of life,
have become Jesuits. As the Duke of Gandia in Spain, Aloisius Gonzaga, son
and heir unto Ferdinand Marquis of Castillion, the Duke of Bouino in Italy.
And now of late Charles of Lonayne Prince, and Bishop of Verdune, Prince of the
Empire, and Cousin to his Majesty of England, with sundry other great and noble
persons. Now is it in all reason to be considered that if such noble Men and
Princes, who for no other respect then the mere love and service of God,
entered into this Society, should not therein have found the devout and godly
life of these Fathers, with such exercise of learning and virtue, not to be in
all respects conform to the good opinion, which they had conceived thereof,
before they came among the^, there can be no doubt, but they would have departed
from the^, albeit they had made proof of their conversation for some years
together, for that this Order does not oblige profession to be made at the end
of one years probation, but allows an unlimited time of more years.

Considering with my self what great persons in this our age (notwithstanding
all slanders that calumniating adversaries have raised against Jesuits,
Priests, and Friars etc.) have abandoned the world, religiously to serve God in
poverty, chastity, and obedience, in sundry Orders, and that a Duke has been
seen to become a Capuchin in Paris, and the Brother of a Duke to become of the
same austere order in Bruxelles, I was moved to think that it may belong
before we may see a Gewse or Caluinian Duke, or Prince become a Minister,
albeit that condition of life obliges not to the making and performing of any
such vows, or to any austerity at all, but to live with ease, in the Gospel
of free liberty. There is a proverb in the Netherland language, that Herman
did in time get on his dublet, after he had been seven years drawing on of one
sleeue; but I suppose Hermans dublet might wholly be gotten on, and quite worn
out, before a man might see, such persons moved by the great piety they might
observe in Ministers, to enter with them into the service of the Word.

But to return unto my precedent purpose, me thinks it were not here
impertinent to see, and consider what cause there may be found of the great
hatred which Caluinists bear unto Iesuytes (and not Caluinists alone but all
other Sectaryes,) for albeit they bear il will and hatred unto all Catholics,
and especially unto all Ecclesiastical persons; yet is it manifest unto all the
world that the Jesuits of all others have the precedence in the malice of
Caluinists. And seeing something there may seem to be, that is singular in
these religious men, more then in others I have the more endeauored to discern
what this may be, and three things I have observed.

1. This first is, that there was never any Order in the Catholic Church, that
in so short a space has dispersed it self so far over the world, to make
the name of Jesus Christ known unto heathen and Pagan people.

2. The second is, that there was never any Order that in so short a time, has
written so many learned books, as well in divinity, as in all other laudable
sciences.

3. The third is that there was never any Order, that in so short a time has
had so great a number of Martyrs, as well by the persecution of Pagans, as
Apostata Christians.

As for their exercises of devotion, labor in preaching, hearing of
confessions, instructing and bringing up of youth in learning, without any
recompense of their parents, making of attonements where there is dissension
and discord, readiness at all hours of the day and night, to visit the sick,
and to consolate their souls, is not now needful here to be spoken at large:
but when I well consider their manifold deeds of Devotion and Charity, I
remember the words of Christ unto the Jews, when for his good deeds they
would have stoned him to death, I have wrought many good works among you: for
which of those will you stone me?

Envy is the deadly enemy of virtue and of wel-prospering. The Jesuits thanks
be to God, do go well forward in all their works of piety; and for these,
Sectaryes will stone them: and being themselves the actual murderers of
Iesuytes, it is no marvel that they seek to rob and tak away the good name
and fame of those, whose lives they let not to take away: nor is it any wonder,
that they to color their own tyrannous murdering of Jesuits, give out that
Iesuytes are murderers of Princes and Potentates: As if themselves did put
Jesuits to death, thereby to save the lives of Princes and potentates which
Jesuits would else bereave them off. But what love Caluinists, and principally
Holland-Gewse-Caluinistes do bear unto Princes, themselves do now adays, the
longer the more, make better known unto the greatest Princes of Christendom,
then they can make known unto them, that Jesuits are murderers of them, and
of Potentates.


The Hollander. I must confess, that you have here manifested unto me much
more then before I ever knew, or heard of. But yet, notwithstanding that it
cannot be perceived, that the Jesuits have had any hand in the deaths of any
of the eight Princes here by you mentioned, it should seem they have had
knowledge of intentions of murdering Princes, as of Queen Elizabeth of
England, King Henry the fourth of France, before he was murdered by Rauaillac,
his Majesty that is now King of Great Britayne, by the gunpowder Treason, and
his Excellency Prince Maurice in Holland.


The Brabander. For the first, concerning Queen Elizabeth of England, if we
well consider her abandoning of the Catholic Religion, which at her coronation
she swore to maintain, and that being a woman, she took upon her supreme
authority in Ecclesiastical causes (which your Caluinian deuines in Holland do
affirm to be Idolatry either in man or woman) ordayning also by her Statutes,
that those who should deny to confess her Ecclesiastical authority upon their
oaths, should suffer death as traitors: That she deposed and put from their
places, the Catholic Bishops and Prelates, casting some in prison and forcing
others to fly the realm.

That she ordained a forfayture of twenty pounds a month, for not coming to
her Caluinian-protestant Church-seruice, with other lesser forfaytures for
Catholics of less means, who in regard of their consciences absented
themselves from the said service; by means whereof the prisons every where
became so replenished with Catholics, that new prisons must be made for the^,
because the old could not conteyne the number.

Moreover the putting to death of so many Catholic Priests, as also the
putting to death, and ruyning of some Gentlemen, and others that had harbored
them.

The question now is whether Gewses or Caluinists being to the contrary so
treated by any Prince that had sworn to maintain their Caluinian religion,
they would with patience endure it? Who can believe this? Seeing they have not
let to rebel against their Princes and Sovereigns that have intruded no
innovation, or change in religion upon them, as against the Kings of Spain,
and France, and against Mary Queen of Scotland: who I say can believe this,
when it is apparent that the very groundwork and foundation of Caluinian
religion is laid and settled upon rebellion, as to all the world it is manifest.

This Queen Elizabeth was so severe and cruel, that she let not to burn
alive some of our contrymen, being Netherlanders, and not her borne
Subjects, for their Anabaptisme; and caused some Puritans which are directly
concurring in religion with the Caluinists of Holland, to be hanged, and others
to fly the realm, and live in exile, because they had sought both by writing
and preaching, to bring the religion of England to the just form and fashion
of that of Geneua, and Holland. Punishing then, the Anabaptists as heretics,
and the Puritans as seditious, she has not let to use a greater cloak and
color for her persecuting of Catholics, and this was, to cause to be given
out at diverse times, that they meant to kill her.

She employed among other for one of her spies, sometime in France, sometime in
Italy one William Parry, This Parry coming upon a time out of Italy, supposing
to get more credit and favor, came unto her and told her, that at his being in
Italy where he bare himself as a Catholic (having leave so to do) he there
demanded of a Iesuyte, if it should be a deed well done to kill the Queen,
and that the Iesuyte answered yea, and that thereupon he had promised the
Iesuyte to do it. Parry being then demanded, if he had not in his trauayles
abroad, been acquaynted with one Father William Criton a Scottish Iesuyte (who at
that time was prisoner in the Tower of London) he answered yea. Being then
demanded if he had asked the same question of the said Father Criton, he
answered he had, but that Father Criton had dissuaded him from it: he thought
belike that if he had answered yea, he should have been brought face to face
with Father Criton, who might have convinced and shamed him, and therefore he
thought it easier for him to belly a Iesuyte that was absent, then one that was
present. Father Criton within a while after was deliueret out of the Tower, and
the rather for that he was a Scotsman and no borne subject, howbeit he was
bannished out of the Country. Parry, because of his services in matter of
spiery, solicited to have a place and office that now was fallen vaca^t: the
place was given to another, Parry grew malecontent, and cast out words of
murmuration. The Earl of Leycester loved him not, he was known and discovered
among the Catholics for a spy, and that he had brought diverse principal
Catholics in trouble: and being thus discovered he was grown out of date, and
unable to do services of the same kind, as he had formerly done; Parry was
apprehended, and charged he had an intention to kill the Queen: in fine he was
hanged, and this was at last the reward he got for the good offices he had
done. The reason why he was hanged, seems to have been, that if they had let
him live, and not given him living according to his desire, he might have
discovered many secrets: he wrote a letter unto the Queen out of the Tower,
wherein among other things he said unto her: Pity poor Parry, and relieve him,
for life without living is not fit for him.

It is no custom that a criminal offender, and in so heinous a matter as the
murdering of a Prince, shall not only write to be set at liberty, but to be
provided of means to live by. He knew well that they knew, that the counsel
which he said was given him by a Jesuit in Italy, was but an invention of his
own head for the more convenient persecuting of such, as might be found to
have received Iesuytes into their howses (of the confiscation of whose goods
Parry might have had his share) but it so fell out, that Parry played
wily-beguyle himself. For when he came to the gallovves, and savv how the
matter went, he grew so ill contented, that he plainly said, that the Queen
after his death would say, that she had lost the best keeper of her park.

Some years after the death of Parry, one Edward Squyre was also hanged, who
as it was given out, did mean to poison the Queen and Earl of Essex, (who
afterward by the said Queen was put to death.) This Equire came out of Spain,
and said that a Iesuyte there had cou^selled him to poison the Queen, and the
Earl. The poison he said was delivered him in a bladder in Spain, and there
with he should anoint the saddle whereon the Earl should ride, and the chair
wherein the Queen should sit. This must have been a very wonderful poison, that
a chair and a saddle being but anointed therewith, it would kill those who
should sit in the one, and ride on the other.

Who cannot think this to be a most palpable lie? how must he then speed that
must bring this forcefull poison in a bladder (if any bladder could contein it)
and anoint it on the chair and on the saddle? But the lying foolish knave that
came with this tale in his mouth, upon hope of reward, because he would not
perform the business, but discovered it, was notwithstanding rewarded at
Tiburne with a halter, which was held necessary, because it might be thought
the Queen had much reason to sustain the quarrel of the Hollanders; seeing
Spain so much hated her, that murderers were sent from thence for her
destruction: for Squyre was ouerborne by the force and torment of the rack, to
intend and mean the thing indeed that himself came to reveal, and so was
hanged, notwithstanding he was a good Protestant.

As concerning the constant and glorious Martyr Father Edmund Campian, who with
others (to wit thirteen in number) was condemned for having in Rome, and
Rhemes conspired the Queens death, as a couple of most false witnesses
affirmed, is as shameful and unjust a matter, as ever any did pass by way and
course of Justice: for after these false witnesses, had taken their oaths,
that these thirteen persons had at Rome, and Rhemes on such and such days, of
such and such months, of such a year, conspired the Queens death, one Master
Thomas Lancaster a Gentleman, and one Master William Nicolson, being there
present, and both credit-worthy persons, did offer to prove by diverse
witnesses, that some of these thirteen persons had not been out of England that
year, wherein the false witnesses had sworn they conspired the Queens death in
Rome, and Rhemes: and that they had not bin out of England in some years, both
before that year and after it: and the prisoners themselves protested at the
Bar, on their souls, that in all the days of their lives they had never been
all together at one time in one place, but only there that very day. And
albeit the protestation and offer of proof made by the two persons before
named, had been sufficient in all law and justice throughout the world to have
discovered these false witnesses, and to have caused them to have had their
deserved punishment, yet proceeded the Judges forward in injustice, and
condemned Father Edmund Campian, and almost all the rest to death, as being
culpable of that conspiration, whereof by these false witnesses they were
accused. But at this we need not wonder if we consider what the Justice was of
this Queen, who let not to make a law, directly contrary to the law of God
and all the world, that one witness only should be sufficient, for the
condemnation of a man to the loss of life and goods, if it were in a case
concerning herself: which without all doubt may cause wonderful injustice in a
country where such persidious people are enough to be found, as for reward
will not make scruple to take any oath, against whosoever it be, let the cause
be what it will: and the more in the cause of the Prince, whereby hope of
favor and greater reward, is given. But because the history of this glorious
martyr, and of those others also that were with him condemned, is published to
the world in Print in the Latin tongue, I shall not need in this matter further
to enlarge my self.

That King Henry the fourth of France was hurt by one John Chastell at Paris
who meant to have killed him some years before he was killed by Rauaillac, is
known to all the world. This Chastell, had sometime been a scholar in the
schools of the Iesuytes, Ergo say the Hugenotes, the Iesuytes instructed him
to murder the King. Surely a very fair conclusion: Many youths go to other
schools, whereof some come afterward to commit criminal offenses, as treasons,
murders, thefts, and the like; is it not a good argument and great reason,
that for this their School-maisters must be punished or defamed?

The fact of Chastell came to be judged and looked into by certain Politykes,
and great enemies of Jesuits, and in a fury the Iesuytes were commanded out
of Paris, a Piramide was erected in memory of this fact, and in accusation of
the Jesuits, the Jesuits patiented this Calumny, until times daughter might
be admitted to have audience: which in the end so came to pass, that this King
(thanks be unto God) unto whose view the Jesuits had been by their Hugenotes
and Politic backe-friends so ugly painted out, and described, received at
their hands so great satisfaction of their innocence, that he not only caused
the Fathers of this Society to be received again into Paris, and caused the
scandalous Piramide to be raced down to the ground; but by many benefits done
by him unto these Fathers, besides the erecting for them the fairest Church and
College they have in all France, he showed himself their very great
affectioned and true Friend: yea he made choice of the^, to be the preceptors
and scoole-maisters unto his own Children, to declare unto the world that he
held them not for evil instructors of youth, as they had been unjustly reported
to be. Who can desire greater testimony of these Fathers acquyting, from this
great calumny?

Let us now come unto his Majesty the present King of great Britain,
concerning the acculation of Father Henry Garnet in the matter of the
gunpowder treason. This treason was without all doubt, a most wicked intention
of some Catholics, that with patience would not endure the persecution which
so many of their Catholike-brethren had so long, and so patiently endured, and
as the good Christians in the persecutions of the Roman Emperous also did. But
who wotteth, whether this might not be a device, first practiced in the subtle
brain of the Secretary, Sir Robert Cecil, who by some subtle device might get
it put into the heads of some Catholics, as well as the Secretary Sir Francis
Walsingam had before, that employed one Polie a favgned Catholic, to draw those
Gentlemen into the conspiracy of delivering out of durance Mary Queen of
Scotland his majesty's mother that now raygneth: by which means of those
Gentleman came all to lose their hues, and that good Queen also. But let that
be, as be it might. One of those Catholics that was privy to the said powder
treason, confessed on the torture, that he had in confession given Father
Garnet knowledge of the matter. He said not that Father Garnet was one of the
conspirators, or that he animated him, or any of them unto it, but to the
contrary, that he had earnestly diswaded him from it. They were put to death:
Father Garnet was apprehended; he was accused to have been privy to the treason*
and that he had not discovered it. Father Garnet answered that he might not in
any sort utter ought that was revealed unto him in confession, for secrecy of
all that which is uttered in confession must ever be an inviolable precept in
the Catholic Church: for the priest that should do the contrary is to be
degraded, and to be shut up, and put to penance all the days of his life.

But Father Garnet declared that he was so earnest in forbidding him to commit
this foul fact, that he denied to give him absolution, unless he would desist
from this intention: what could the Father have done more, if the conspiracy
had been against the Pope himself?

Thus then was this innocent Father put to death, not for that he was a
conspiratour or actour in this treason, but because he would not violate the
strong seal and obligation of the holy Sacrament of Confession, which no
Priest upon earth can be licensed to do.

It happened at such time as the Caluinian-Gewses had usurped through their
rebellion, the government of the City of Antwerp, that a Spanish merchant
there dwelling named Iaspar de Enastro, having understood that King Philip the
second of Spain, had declared by sentence, that William of Nassaw Prince of
Orange, of whom he was the Lawful sovereign Lord, was fallen in crimen
laesae maiestatis* for his public rebellion against his beforenamed
Soueraygne, and did thereby deserve to suffer death, and that he had put the
execution of the said sentence in the hands of any such person or persons as
would undertake it: He thereupon counseled and persuaded a young fellow that
was his servant, called John de Iauregny borne in Biscay, to perform this act.
But when this Iauregny was ready to go about it, the aforesaid Enastro his
master, got himself out of the way. Iauregny with a pistol shot the Prince
of Orange through the checkes, whereof he dyed not, but Iauregny was presently
killed by some of the Prince his servants: heerupon enquiry being made, it was
understood that Iauregny did use to go to confession to one Father Antonius
Timmerman, a religious man of the order of S. Dominicke. This Religious man was
apprehended and asked what John de Iauregny had uttered unto him in Confession.
The Religious Father well knowing the strict commandment of the Catholic
Church, that nothing that is uttered in confession must be revealed, made
answer that he knew not; because that he indeed did know nothing, concerning
this man's confession that he might utter. His examiners then caused him to be
hanged by his thumbes, with weightes fastened to his toes, to force him by this
torture to reveal unto them what had by Iauregny been revealed unto him in
confession; but the Reverend and resolute Father, would in no sort violate
therein the law and commaundment of the universal Church of God, but always
while he hung in this great torment, he called upon God, saying out of the 140.
Psalm, Keep o Lord my mouth and my lips, that I sin not with my tongue.
Heerupon they sentenced him to death, and to the dividing of his body into
four quarters: which death and martyrdom he constantly endured.

Of the beforementioned Powder Treason, was also accused Father William
Baldwine, of the SOCIETY of JESUS. This Father as he travailed in Germany was
by Frederike the fourth, then Palsgraue of the Rhene, apprehended near unto
Franckendale, and by him sent prisoner unto the Ambassador of his Majesty of
England, then resident at Duyseldorp in the Country of Cleue. And worthy it is
to be noted, that on the very same day that this Father was delivered into the
hands of the English Ambassador at Duyseldorp, the said Palsgraue dyed at
Heydelberge, and so came to taste of death himself, sooner then the Father,
which he intended to send to the slaughter.

The Father was carried into England, where after he had remained prisoner many
years in the Tower of London, and not the least point in the world could be
proved against him concerning the aforesaid Treason, (notwithstanding that in
some printed books it was published that he was culpable) he was at last
delivered out of prison, and dismissed the Realm.

Concerning one Peter Pan, said to be sent by the Iesuytes of Ipres in Flanders
to kill Prince Maurice in Holland, the matter has been thoroughly examined, and
the Calumny raised against those Fathers sufficiently refuted in a Printed
book, wherein is also set down an attestation of the Magistrates of Ipres (of
whence this Peter Pan was) wherein this accusation is showed to be false. Peter
Pan was known to be a fellow that was frantike, but the madness of his brains
could not free him out of the hands of the Holland-hangman: for the Justice of
Holland found it wisdom, to put this poor fool to death.

I trust I have here clearly declared, how the Jesuits have by their
Caluinian enemies been most falsely calumniated: and albeit that themselves do in
such cases recomend their cause to God, disposing themselves to bear with
patience all iniuryes, for the love of CHRIST JESUS, notwithstanding they well
know how false they are: yet my self even of zeal unto truth and equity,
could not omit to utter thus much, upon the occasion now given.

The custom of giving out, that Jesuits and Priests do intend to murder
Princes, was first taken up in England and put in practice by some of Queen
Elizabeth's Caluinian Counselors, who to have the better color to persecute
Catholics, whom they feared might increase to fast, as also to make them the
less compassionate of the people, did seek to make them odious by ordinarily
giving out that they went about to kill the Queen. But that the said Queen and
her Counselors themselves did not believe this, reason makes manifest: for
when is it found that a Prince or Ruler fearing that for some certain
notorious cause he is in danger to be killed by any of his subjects, will
notwithstanding continue the same cause, yea and daily more and more increase
it, as this Queen did her persecution* how can this agree with reason of State?
for through continuance and increase of persecution, those that are persecuted
do commonly also increase: and it might fall out that among the number of the
persecuted, for all do not always endure with like patience, some might be
found, that being driven to desperate terms might attempt some such thing (for
as the Philosopher says, the fly has her spleen) but the patient suffering
for religion is especially taught, and recomended by Catholic teachers, and
the contrary by others of contrary Religions, and especially Caluinists, of
whose hot and reuengefull spirits the world has already had testimony enough.

Father William Criton the Scottish Iesuyte before named, being before some of
Queen Elizabeth's Counsel, a little before his departure out of the Country,
said upon occasion concerning this matter: My Lords, you use here a manner of
giving out among your subjects, that Jesuits and Priests do go about to kill
your Queen; but in very truth, if we intended any such thing, she could not
live: for you must understand, that there are a multitude of people of the
Catholic religion, that have wholly abandoned the world, and have chosen to
live in all strictnes and austerity, sequestring themselves from all worldly
pleasures, desiring and indeauouring nothing more then to leave this world, and
to live with God in his Kingdom of heaven. Among these men that so little
respect the world diverse may be found, who being persuaded that it were so
meritorious a deed before God, that he who should deliver the world from an
enemy and persecutor of the Catholic religion, and therefore loose his life,
should straightwayes enter into the eternal joys of heaven; without all doubt
this matter would not be left unattempted. The counselors hearing this had
little to say to the contrary.


The Hollander. To say the truth, I must needs confess I have here heard much
more the^ I supposed could be said. I do now well perceive a man can never come
to the true understanding of what stands in controversy, before he have heard
both parties.


The Brabander. I have first recounted, what Princes and Potentates have been
murdered, or made away in our days; and after that, I have spoken of
intentions or meanings to make away Princes: It rests that I now speak of
the intentions of Gewses, or Caluinian reformed Brethren, about the murdering
or making away of Princes; those innocent wolves I mean, that have had their
hands in the blood of five of the eight Princes before named, to the end we
may also see how pure and unspotted they are in their good meanings and
intentio^s, to have put that business in further practice.

First then it is a thing clear and notorious that the Hugnenots of France had
a resolved purpose to have murdered the most Christian King Francis the
second, with his mother, and sundry of the nobility, in the City of Amboise.

It is also most certain that a Zeland Gewse or Caluinist, meant to have blown
up William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, with some of the Holland and Zeland
States, with gunpowder, in the Towne-house of Flushing, if it had not been
discovered by him that assisted him to convey the powder into the seller or
vault of the said Towne-house. And had this succeeded according to the purpose
of the author thereof, Baltazar Gerard, that afterward killed the said Prince
of Orange, had saved his life, and his labor, and the Gewses reformed Brethren
had, had the honor of murdering six of the eight Princes before named.

When I consider this Prince, and these intentions of his death, me thinks it
must needs be a great sign, that he was not in the favor of God, since as
well Caluinists, as Catholics, went about to kill him.

Heerto may also be added the Earl of Gowry in Scotland, a Caluinist also. The
history is public in print, how he meant to have killed the King, whereof
yearly memory both in Scotland and England is continued, on the fifth day of
August, for his Majesty's delivery.


The Hollander. You make me almost ashamed of my self, to consider that our
people in Holland do make such exclamations against Iesuytes and Priests, and
are showed to be in those foul facts faulty themselves, and the Iesuyts and
Priests whom they accuse, not faulty at all.


The Brabander. I am well content, and think my labor well bestowed, when I
find my self to have to do with such as will affoard place unto truth and
reason, before passion and partiality.

But here are you also to understand that, that which I have said, concerning
the clearing of the Jesuits of this Calumny, does also serve for the clearing
of other Catholic Priests, and spiritual persons, that secretly remain in
Holland, and in the adjoined Provinces, or in any place else, where they are
feign to remain in like manner, who have not any charge, nor can have any
charge to commit, or endure others to commit such foul and evil facts, but are
to meddle in matters concerning their Priestly function, as in administration
of Sacraments, and instruction of Catholics in all piety and virtue.


The Hollander. The Placcart says notwithstanding, that the Iesuytes and
Priests do seek to bring the good Inhabitants of these Provinces with their
false doctrine, to Idolatry, to an auersio^ from their Lawful Superiors, and
to the murdering of Princes and Potentates, to prefer thereby, in these
Countries the Tyranny and absolute domination of the King of Spain etc.


The Brabander. Here have we again a whole heap of Calumnyes together:
Jesuits and Priests are here accused for falfe doctrine and Idolatry.

Of intending to bring the good Inhabitants of these Countries to an auersion
from their lawful Superiors.

To the murdering of Princes and Potentates, and to the furthering of the
tyranny and domination of the King of Spain.

Let us now upon examining of these points, see what may be said, with truth
and reason.

Concerning the false doctrine wherewith Caluinists do accuse Jesuits and other
Catholic Priests: That is, that among other points, which they hold contrary
to their heresies, that God is not so unjust and tyrannical, that he does (as
Caluinists affirm) take young infants even from the breasts of their mothers,
and undeservedly cast them into the everlasting fire of hell.

The true doctrine then according as Caluinists do teach* is, that God so does;
and the doctrine of Jesuits and Priests which Caluinistscal false, is that God
is so good, so just, and so merciful that he does not so.

Concerning their Idolatry, this especially is, as Caluinists affirm, that
they believe and teach* that the body of Christ is really present in the
Sacrament of the Altar, that they adore it, and pray unto it, and that in their
Churches they have Images. Now must I demand of you, from whence it proceeds
that Catholics believe the real Presence of Christ in this Sacrament?


The Hollander. I know it is true that Christ at his last supper taking bread,
and blessing it, said unto his Apostles, take and eat: This is body: but for
all that, he did not so mean it.


The Brabander. But withal you confess that the cause of this belief comes
from the very mouth of Christ himself: if it come from the mouth of Christ,
then takes it not original from the mouth of any Pope. Christ must have lied
when he said it was his body, if it were not his body; or Caluinistes must now
lie, in saying it is not his body, notwithstanding Christ said it is.


The Hollander. Neither of both do lie, Christ meant that it was the figure, or
sign of his body.


The Brabander. Where is it written, that Christ meant it so?


The Hollander. Our Preachers do so interpret it.


The Brabander. I perceive your Preachers will not only take upon them to
reform the Catholic Church, but they will also reform Gods word it self,
and make it utter that which therein is not to be found.

But show me where it is written that above 1500* years after Christ had said
it was his body, and that all Christians throughout the world did thereupon so
beliue it to be; he would then send new teachers into the world, to reform
this ancient Faith, with teaching Christians to believe, that it was not his
body, and that he did not so mean as he spak, when he instituted this
Sacrament.


The Hollander. The oldest Christian faith was, that it was not the body of
Christ, and therefore our teachers do call themselves the reformers of religion,
because they reform and bring religion to the first and most ancient manner:
for if this were not so, they could not appropriate unto themselves the name of
reformers of religion.


The Brabander. They give themselves the name of Reformers, but with their
appropriating this name unto themselves, they oblige themselves in the sight
and judgment of all men, of understanding, of the whole world, and in all
honor and reason, if they will be accounted worthy to be believed, clearly to
demonstrate two things.

The first is, that they are expressly sent from God to reform religion: for if
so be that a reformation was needful, the^ was it also needful that God should
thereunto send and employ fit persons, that must be men of great holiness, and
have power from himself, to make it appear to the world, that they were sent
from him.

The second is, that they must be able to stop the mouths of all others, that
at the same time should also appear in the world, pretending reformation of
religion as well as they, albeit in diverse different manners, setting the^ at
defiance, and chalenging to combat with them, with the weapon of the Word, as
long as they dare.

If men of understanding seem to embrace your Caluinian reformation without
seeking such requisite satisfaction therein as here is noted, they can be no
other then Politikes, whose motive is their own particular temporal end, or
matter of state, and not matter of religion.

But whereas you say that the most ancient Christian belief was, that the
real presence of Christ was not in the Sacrament; whereas the words which
Christ spoke and wherhence this Faith is derived, is the most ancient cause of
this belief:

There is then to be considered, if the Apostles themselves when Christ said,
Take and eat this is my Body, did so believe it to be or not: but certain it
is that they all believed it, unless it were the false traitor judas: for if
they had doubted thereof, the had without all doubt demanded or proponed some
question unto him about it, as well as when he said, that it was as easy for a
camel to pass through the eye of a needle, as it was for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven for them, they straight ways demanded of him, who
could then be saved? Whereupon he answered them, that with God all things are
possible. Is it possible with God that a camel, or the cable of a ship, can go
through the eye of a needle? Then can the body of Christ be in the Sacrament.
But the Apostles among sundry other great miracles which they had seen our
Savior do, whereof we find some written (though many of them were left un
written) did also see him work some great miracles in his own body, when he
so altered the natural course thereof, that he did sundry things therewith
above the course and possibility of nature: and therefore it is no wonder that
the Apostles, were all silent, and without reply believed the words of Christ,
which they knew to measure by his power.

There is also to be considered, that if so be the first Christians, to wit
those of the primitive Church, have believed as Caluinists now do, that the
body of Christ is not really in this Sacrament, or that this Sacrament is but a
figure, sign, or token of the body of Christ, how and when began the belief
in the world, that the body of Christ was really there? Through whose ordayning
was it so to be taken and believed? By whom was it taught? By whom was it
written? At what time was it that Communion-tables were taken out of Churches,
and Altars erected there in their places?


The Hollander. That know I not.


The Brabander. Nor no man else. But all Christendom knows where, when, and by
whom, Altars in Churches have been broken down, and Communion-tables there
brought in: No less to be seen and noted to all the Christians of the world,
must it needs have been, if in any foregoing age since the time of Christ,
Communion Tables (if they had been in Churches) had been carried out, and in place
thereof, Altars had been builded, and Mass then begun to have been said at them,
and Christians then first taught that the real Presence of Christ was to be
believed to be there.


The Hollander. Verily you do now tell me much.


The Brabander. I will yet tell you more, howbeit but in brief: for I will
leave these matters that Concern controversies in religion to be debated more
largely and learnedly by Catholic Deuines, but that which I have to tell you
is this: That besides the Catholic Christians of the Roman Church, there are
great numbers of Christians of the Greek Church: There are many Christians of
the Abissine or Ethiopian Church: There are Christians of Malabar in the east
Indies which were at first converted by Saint Thomas the Apostle, with sundry
other sorts of ancient Christians as well in Asia as in Africa: for the Apostles
themselves have been in those Countries, and first preached among their
ancestors, and brought them to the faith. These do differ in some points and
ceremonies one from another, and also from the Church of Rome, but all these
Christians can show out of their Ecclesiastical Annals and Church histories,
that they have had Mass even from the very time of the Apostles, and have
always believed that the body of Christ was really in the Sacrament of the
Altar: and albeit that these are sequestered from the Church of Rome, and all of
them who unto that Church have not reconciled themselves, are by the same
holden for Schismatikes; yet will they all bear witness for the Church of
Rome against all our European new and different sectaries, that they do all of
them falsely belly the said Church, in affirming those things to be corruptions,
which they take upon them to reform.


The Hollander. Do they affirm that the Apostles themselves have first
planted the Mass in their Countries?


The Brabander* All of them with one consent do resolutly affirm it,
assuredly knowing that the Mass has not had among the^ any other original.


The Hollander. I have in Holland both read and heard something, but this that
you now tell me did I never read, nor hear before: but how is it then, that the
Apostles have not mentioned this in their writings?


The Brabander. The Apostles well knew that they had no need to write that,
which they instituted and taught to be daily in use among Christians, seeing it
could not then be forgotten, and therefore needed not for the preventing of
oblivion, to be putit down in writing.

Of the greatest number of the Apostles we have no wrytings at all, and those
that wrote, have left many things unwritten, as well concerning Christ himself,
as concerning their own selves, not having written, when or by whom
themselves were baptized, nor whether they were baptized or no, and yet were
they without all doubt baptized. They knew that Christ had promised to send the
Holy Ghost unto his holy Catholic Church, to teach the said church all truth,
and to remain therewith to the end of the world, what necessity was there then
for them to put down all things in writing, whereas their express charge was
to go over all the world, and preach, and baptize, and this may well be the
cause that but five of the twelve Apostles of christ have written, and those
but briefly neither; and the other seven not at all, or not whereof we have
any notice. But never will I believe, that any of the Apostles that have
written, have ever intended, that their wrytings above fifteen hundredth years
after their deaths, should then first come to be truly interpreted by a John
Calvin, or such like, who in our miserable days have afflicted the whole
Christian world.


The Hollander. You have here told me so much, and with so clear appearance of
truth that I stand wondering thereat, and by Gods grace I will not leave, to
reflect well upon it.


The Brabander. Your Gewses-reformed, will also make Catholics Idolaters, for
having of Images in their Churches. They may make Moses an Idolater also, who
notwithstanding he forbad the making of Idols, erected Images in his temple,
for he well knew the difference between the one and the other.

The Heathenish Idols, against which the sacred Scripture inueygheth, so much,
the Heathen did offer sacrifice unto, which is the highest and greatest honor
that is done unto God himself. The belyers of Catholics may put on their
spectacles to see what sacrifice, or Godly honor is done by them unto Images,
albeit they be Images of Christ, of his blessed Mother, and of his Saints, not
of the Gods of the Heathen, which were all Devils.

No Catholics offer sacrifice to any Images: no Catholics pray to any Images,
for so to do were not only a most grievous offense unto God, but a great folly
and madness in humayne creatures. A dog will never run at a carved or painted
hare. Do Sectaries ween that Catholics have less sense then brute beasts?
can they not understand as well as unreasonable beasts that they are things
without life? Catholic Christians have them in use, for memory of God and of
his Saints, and in reuerencing them, the reverence is meant and referred unto
those they represent: as when at hearing the name of JESUS, we do not
reverence the sound, but our thoughts are straightwayes by that sound
transported to Christ himself, as by the sight of his Image they also are. But
your Caluinian pulpit-fellowes, to seduce and bring the people in false
conceyts of Catholics* will perforce make them Idolaters, and belie them, in
despyte of truth. But let us now proceed to to the rest.


The Hollander. So I pray you do, for I have heard enough of this wrong-named
Idolatry.


The Brabander. Concerning the point that Jesuits and Priests, do go about to
bring the good inhabitants of these united Provinces to an auersion from their
lawful superiors, is in troth, as good a jest to be laughed at, as it were,
that a thief having cut a purse, should cry out among the people to look well
unto their purles, for being cut by the Cutpurses. The Gewses themselves of
Holland have long since brought the inhabitants of those parts to have an
auersion from their lawful Superiors; and now they say, that Iesuytes and
Priests do go about to do it, as though it were not by themselves done already,
and as though the present rebellious Usurpers of superiority there, were true
and lawful Superiors. But what goodly fellows will here be lawful
superiors? Does this lawful Superiority belong unto them, because they have
by fraud and violence made themselves the masters of Cittyes and Provinces,
and chased the lawful superiors away? Why was not then John Buckleson, the
Tailor of Leydon, a lawful King of Munster in Westphalia, when in like sort he
had chased the lawful Superiors thence? And why have your Holland-States by
strong and forcible opposition hindered the Arminians from making themselves
masters of some Cittyes, that so they might become the lawful Superiors in
them, as well as they in others?

But how greatly are the poor Hollanders all the world over pittyed, because
the King of Spain does so much trouble them, to put them out of their lawful
superiority? They have understood that Catholic religion obliges to the
restitution of ill gotten and detayned goods, and therefore they are in fear,
as if they also knew that they are the unjust detayners of that which belongs
unto another. But considering that Caluinists or Gewses, that have the power
and authority in their hands to make restitution, are not such as go to
Confession to Jesuits or Priests, they may therefore have the less fear.

As touching the murdering of Princes and Potentates, there has already
sufficiently been spoken: but it seems by the words of the placcart that the
Iesuytes and Priests do seek to bring the good inhabitants of Holland to
become the murderers of Princes and Potentates; as if Iesuytes and Priests
went into Holland, to seek to make provision of murderers among the good
inhabitants there, to the end they might employ them where need should be, in
the murdering of Princes and Potentates, in other Countries; as though none
else for such purpose could be found more fitting, then among the good
inhabitants of Holland.

That they there should also further the Tyranny and domination of Spain, are
two lies. No subjects of the King of Spain are by him tyrannized, neither have
the Jesuits or Priests in Holland meddled, or have had charge to meddle in
matters of State or Government, as things being out of their profession.

The Hollanders cry out, and take on very much about the Tyranny of Spain: but
if it were so, that the King of Spain had no subjects out of Spain but only
Hollanders, the Hollanders might perhaps be better believed: but he has other
subjects also in Europe, and out of Spain, and of several nations.

He has Portugeses, Neapolitans, Sicilians, Milaneses, Burgundians, Germans,
Walons, and Netherlanders, that are not under Holland government. And which of
all these Nations is it, that lives not now in a more free and better state,
then in former times under the comaund of their particular Kings, Princes and
Lords? And where among all these different nations is there any one found,
that is so Tyrannized over at this day, as are the subjects of Holland, with so
great and so intolerable exactions and taxations.

And whereas they have always made profession, to leave people to the liberty
and freedom of their consciences, they do notwithstanding forbid some of their
good inhabitants upon great pains, the exercise of their religion according as
their consciences do require, which they deny not unto Anabaptists, nor Jews.

They cry out, and take on about the Tyranny of Spain, to make the inhabitants
afraid of a faygned Tyranny, that in the mean time they may the better go
forward, as unseen, with their own true and great Tyranny indeed.

No children may be sent to school in any places under the comaund of the King
of Spain, or in Colleges of Iesuytes etc. Belike there is no good
Gewses-Latin, or caluinian-reformed sciences there taught.

Neither may any children of Holland be sent to school in any enemies
Country: but this being observed I do scarsly see where any youth of Holland
may out of Holland be sent to school; seeing the Hollanders have behaved
themselves so well, and do so continue to behave themselves, that they make all
the world their enemies.

All collections of money, gold, silver, goods etc. for, or to the use of any
Churches, Hospitailes, Spiritual or o^^er Colleges or Conuenticles, are
pro^^bited.

Heerby may be perceived that they (...) ^etayne memory of their Churchrobbing.
They know Catholic religion teaches to make restitution of ill gotten or
wrongfully detayned goods, and now they fear that some of their good
Inhabitants Iesuyts or Priests to have some scruple in conscience about the
restoring again of some such goods, and therefore they have held it necessary
to settle their consciences in quiet, by prohibiting them to come among them;
and so not to come to know that for any Church-robbing they ought to make
satisfaction, nor yet to extend any charity instead thereof to any Hospitalls,
spiritual or other Colleges etc. for the worth-full Superiors of Holland,
have occasion inogh to use money, gold, silver, and other goods themselves, or
can find occasion to make use thereof, rather then it should, by collections,
be transported out of those provinces to other places.


The Hollander. When I well consider of all that you have here recounted, I am
not far from believing, that it may all be true, but in Holland we may not
speak so.

The Commons in Holland are made believe that all things are there as they
ought to be, that they do well, and also prosper well.


The Brabander. Those nevertheless in Holland that bear the heavy burden of
those great taxations, must needs feel the contrary. And they that do not y^^
feel it though, do stand in good po^^^^^lity to feel it better: for the
States without all doubt, will from hence-forward be more and more careful to
employ all their understandings, so to inure their subjects to the burden of
pressures and taxations, that they shall not easily by any Apoplexies loose
their sense of feeling.

Here will I make an end, for it is now late enough to go to bed.


The Hollander. I thank you much for your discourse, I will not forget to
think upon it. And therefore think not I pray you, that your words have been
uttered to deaf ears.


The Brabander. Then I hope I have not strawed Roses before swyne, but have
showed reason to reasonable creaturess.


The rest of the company who with silence had listened to that which was spoken,
did give thanks to the Brabander for his discourse; and so every man went to
his rest. And heerewith will I also rest from writing for the present: and
recomending my self unto the continuance of yours good favor* leave you to
God.

From Cullen the eight of April 1622. Yours, unto whom my handwryting is
sufficient to let you know my Name.

FINIS.

