THE DEVICE OF the Pageant: Set forth by the Worshipful Company of the
Fishmongers, for the right honorable John Allot: established Lord Mayor of
London, and Mayor of the Staple for this present year of our Lord 1590.

By T. Nelson.

London. 1590.

The Speech spoken by him that rides on the Merman, viz.
ATtend my Lord, and mark the tale I tell,
Whose form you see is monstrous, strange and rare.
Before a manlike shape, behind a fishes fell,
this strange disguise does make full many stare,
And since they prease to know why I come here,
Let them be still, the cause shall soon appear.
WIthin this common wealth (my Lord) all those ye live in awe
Do seek each-daie for to perform and keep the stablisht law,
Yea such do keep ye sabbath day in reverence as they ought
And fish dais too as well as flesh, which many set at naught
Yet if the same were well obserude, flesh seldom would be dear,
And fish abound at each man's board more plenty in each year,
Then Englands store would be increast with butter, cheese and beefo
And thousands set to work for fish, that now beg for relief.
This shape so strange, show they are strange, and do digres from reason
That shun in eating fish and flesh, to keep both time and season,
Which fault reformd, our common wealth would flourish in such wise,
As never any did behold the like with mortal eyes.
The speech spoken by him that rides on the Unicorn.
OH worthy City now rejoice in Christ,
for through his grace with peace he has thee bless
He sends thee still such godly magistrates,
as daily seeks to keep thee from unrest.
Muse not my Lord, to see the Sun does shine
on Englands peace, who sits in princely throne,
It does presage her Sun shine still shall last,
and make her foes afeard at every blast.
So long as peace directed is by truth,
and Gods pure word received as it ought,
So long the Lord will bless this little land,
and make it flow with plenty in each place.
Rule now my Lord and keep this City well,
reform abuses crept into the same,
So shall your fame eternizde be for aie,
and London still preserved from decaie.
And I that do support the Goldsmiths arms,
which long in love to you have bin united,
Will do my best to shadow you from harms,
and find the means your loves may be requighted.
Fame sounding a Trumpet says.
THe blessed peace which England does possess,
and so has done this thirty two years space.
I Fame am sent and chargde to do no less,
with trumpets sound, but spread it in each place.
That all may wish with hearts which do not feign,
our royal peace in England still may rain.
The peace of England.
I Represent your peace and chiefest good,
that every hour does pray for your defense,
I sit as shadow for that royal blood,
whose life is pure, and still has this pretense,
That whilst she lives even with her heart and might,
she seeks in peace for to defend your right.
Wisdom on one side supporting the State, says.
Wisdom supporteth still the public state,
Wisdom foreseeth ere it be too late.
Policy on the other side supporting the State, says.
YEa policy preuents each traitorous fact,
And does perform full many a famous act,
Both Policy and Wisdom will not cease,
Each night and day for to preserve this peace.
Gods Truth.
GOds sacred truth lo here I represent,
whom Englands peace does still maintain in place,
I bring you comfort for your souls content,
which Englands peace does willingly embrace:
And for her sake by whom Gods truth does stand,
the God of heaven does bless this little land.
Prudence and virtue shades our peace each day,
chaste is her life, and therewith rests content,
In vain delights she shuns to run astraie,
her virtues are most rare and excellent.
Long may she live still to preserve this peace,
Lord still I pray her health and joys increase.
Plenty.
THis famous fleece does so adorn our land,
which daily does with milk and honey flow,
That Fame does make all nations understand,
like peace and plenty never man did know,
For wool and lead, for tin, corn, beer and beef,
Of Christian nations England is the chief.
Muse not to see this famous fleece does stand
upon a wool pack, fixed at peaces feet,
The reason is, as you may understand,
worthy John Allot for his place most meet.
Is Mayor of London and the Staple too,
And will perform in both what he should do.
Loialtie and Concord.
Faithful and loyal are her subjects seen,
Concord unites them still in loyal bands,
Their tender hearts is linked to our Queen,
and concord craves no other at their hands,
Thus loyalty and concord does agree,
That London still therein shall famous be,
Ambition.
AMbition still p^^t up with hate and pride,
Does daily seek to work sweet Englands fall,
He never rests, but seeks each time and tide,
How Englands peace might soon be brought in thrall.
And common wealth plungde into civil broiles,
That foreign foes might triumph in our spoils.
Common wealth.
OUr Senates grave and worthy magistrates,
Shall still endeavor to maintain our peace,
By banishing ambition from our gates,
And seeking means this peace may never cease:
Yea virtue so by him aduanst shall be,
That vice shall fly and not be seen in me.
Science and Labor.
SCience still seeks those things we daily wish,
and Labor toiles to bring us flesh and fish,
Yea Science sure does practice every day,
that Labor might keep England from decaie,
Science and Labor still preserues man's health,
and are chief props of this our common wealth.
Richard the second.
Help Walworth now to dant this rebels pride.
Ask what thou will thou shall not be denide.
Jack Straw.
Jack Straw the rebel I present, Wat Tyler was my aid,
Hob Carter and Tom Miller too; we all were not afraid,
For to deprive our sovereign king, Richard the second namde,
Yet for our bad ambitious minds by Walworth we were tamde,
He being Mayor of London then, soon danted all our pride,
He slew me first, the rest soon fled, and then like traitors did.
Common wealth.
I Represent sir William Walworths place,
A fishmonger, and Mayor of London twice,
I slew Jack Straw, who sought my kings disgrace,
and for my act reapt honors of great price,
First Knight was I of London you may read,
and since each Mayor gains knighthood by my deed.
Yea for that deed to London I did gain,
this dagger here in arms given as you see,
I won my company this creast which does remain,
this to my self and my posterity.
Thus did the King with honors me adore,
and Fame her self still laudeth me therefore.
It is to be understood that sir William Walworth points to the honors
wherewith the king did endue him, which were placed near about him in the
Pageant.

The first was the dagger given in the shield to the City of London, the
second was the Creast given to the Company, namely two arms bearing up a
crown, and the third was to the said Walworth and his posterity for ever, two
arms bearing up a millstone, showing thereby that the said sir William Walworth
performed a matter so impossible, as it is for a man to hold up a millstone
between both his arms.

Time.
Time serves for all things,
Time runs fast,
We crave your patience, for the time is past.

FINIS.

