THE NATVRE OF MAN. A learned and useful Tract* written in Greek by Nemesius,
surnamed the Philosopher; sometime Bishop of a City in Phoenicia, and one of
the most ancient Fathers of the Church.

ENGLISHED, And divided into Sections, with briefs of their principal
CONTENTS: BY GEO: WITHER.

LONDON: Printed by M. F. for Henry Taunton in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. 1636.

TO HIS MOST LEARNED AND MUCH HONORED Friend, John ^^den ESQUIRE.
SIR,
I Am not careful to annexe your other Titles: for they are not so much honor
to you, as they are honored by you; and your bare Name sounds more honorably
in my judgment, then that which the breath of others can add unto it.

I have made bold therefore (though without your knowledge) to send abroad with
your Name prefixed, this ancient Greek Father, newly taught to speak English;
that he may receive your approbation where he well expresses his meaning,
and your correction hereafter where he proves defective; For, I presumed you
might by this means be provoked to the perusal thereof, notwithstanding your
many studies.

Your Candor, and singular humanity, make me confident in this attempt; For
though my Author be a stranger to most modern Students, you (from whom no such
Worthy is obscured) are his familiar acquaintance; and in whose Name could I
have more properly brought this Ancient among my Countrymen (to be entertained
with respect) then in yours, who are the truest lover of Antiquities; and he,
who has best showed the right use of them to this Age?

I think not you to be any whit honored by this Dedication; but, that I have
rather magnified my self in making it an occasion to signify that I have so
noble a Friend. Yet without all such respects, I have done this, merely to
content my self, in that which I thought could not justly discontent you; and,
to say truth, having a long time loved your person, and honored your worth, it
is now an ease, and a delight to me, to express it by this occasion.

And, you have not been precious to me without cause: For, I being one of
those, who preposterously, begin to write before they learn, you might justly
enough have reputed me worthy of contempt only, when I was first presented to
your acquaintance. Nevertheless, (perceiving, it may be that the affections of
my heart were sound, though the fruits of my brain were defective) you
vouchsafed me a friendly, and a frequent familiarity: whereby I got
opportunities both to rectifiemy Judgment, and increase my Understanding in
many things.

Were the same humble affability in those, (whom a less degree of knowledge
has vainly puffed up, to the corrupting of them into that, which is worse then
Ignorance) they might have been more beloved; and perhaps, more wise men then
they are. To amend them and to encourage others to the like Virtue, I have
testified this of you, and in that, shall perchance, add somewhat to your
honor.

I have lately confined my self to my rustic habitation, in that part of this
Kingdom, which is famous for the best of those meats, wherewith the Poet
Martial invited his friend: Pallens Faba, cum rubenti Lardo: yet it has not
made me so mere a Corydon, but that I relish the delicates of the MUSES; and
retain some ambition to be continued in your esteem. And, SIR, wheresoever I
am, you shall ever be remembered, and beloved of

Your unfeigned friend, and true Honourer, GEO: WITHER.
From my Cottage, under the Beacon hill near Farnham. May 23. 1636.
A PREFACE to the Reader, concerning the Author of this Book; touching the
Contents thereof, and the Translation of the same, etc.
COnsidering how many profess Knowledge, few have attained the right way of
it: and, those few are so much employed in laboring to keep the Truth from
being smothered among the heaps of impertinent Volumes; and compelled to spend
so much time in weeding out Heresies, and in discovering the fallacies of
Error, that they cannot so improve themselves and others, as else they might.

Upon the Foundations laid by the Prophets, and Apostles, many sacred
Buildings, were with comely uniformity erected by the Primitive Doctors of the
Church; and, in every future Generation somewhat was, now and then, added (by
the Worthies of their times) according to the first Patterns; and upon such
occasions or necessities, as required the same, to the continuing and enlarging
of Divine knowledge.

But, we in this last Age have blinded the same with confused Opinions; and
heaped upon them so many tedious Commentaries, so many false Glosses, and
needless Treatises; that Students half outrun their course, before they can
pass through that Rubbish, which obscures from them the directest Paths, and
fairest monuments of Truth. Yea, some of our later Paper-works are so
plaistered, glazed, painted, and sophisticated, according to the vanity of our
newfangled-humours: and, othersome, are so durtily slubbered over, sutably to
the homeliness of our moderne-fancies: that the first insinuates a false
belief, or a superstitious faith, to the disadvantage and dishonor of ancient
simplicity: the later, a profane neglect of all Piety and good order.

A good means (as I conceive) to prevent such inconveniences, is to bring into
more frequent view, the Writings of these Ancients who lived so near to the
Apostles, that they cannot be justly suspected, as favorers, or parties to the
factions of these later Ages. For, many of them, are (if not altogether
unknown) very rarely perused, by reason of the numberless Novelties, which
have wearied the Presses, and filled the Libraries of Europe.

Or, if an Ancient Piece, be accidentally discovered in this Wilderness of
Inventions, (by our Students of the later Editions) they seldom bring it,
honestly, to light: But, either mangle it, as they please; or steal as much of
it, as is generally plausible to trim, and stuff out those Volumes, by which
they purchase an undue opinion of being learned. The rest, they endeavor to
rake up again in obscurity; that their Theft may be hidden: Or, (which is
worse) that those Truths which they understand not, (or favor not) may be
weakened.

For this cause, it well became us to revive, now and then, those Ancients,
whose wisdom is useful to moderate our controversies. Some, have already
labored happily in this way. And, I (who may well enough be reputed among such
as have increased those Treatises, which keep more profitable Books from being
frequently perused) do now desire to make some satisfaction for the same: and,
to that end, have published in English this Tract of Nemesius. who was one of
the Champions of the Christian faith, whose Labors have been famously
profitable in former times.

Though few are, now adays, acquainted with him, you shall find him among the
most ancient Greek Fathers: And, this Tract of his (which is pertinent to every
member of mankind capable of Book-knowledge) was heretofore so well esteemed,
as to have been twice interpreted, out of Greek into Latin, (viz.) by Georgius
Valla Placentinus, and Nacasius Ellebodius, of whose interpretations I have
made use.

This Author was as honorable in his generation, as those that are more
voluminous, and more frequently named: for, he was not only so eminent for his
Natural Philosophy, as to be called (by way of excellency) NEMESIUS the
Philosopher; but, so good a Moralist also, and so expert in the Laws of the
Roman Empire, that, the most Reverend, learned and devout Father GREGORY
Nazian: (among whose Poems are Verses written to this NEMESIUS) has highly
magnified him, both for his Learning, and uprightness: and left it witnessed,
likewise, that he was dignified with a Presidentship in Cappadocia.

When those Verses were first written to our Author, he had not embraced the
Christian Faith. For, he was by them invited thereunto: And their invitation
seemed to have taken so good effect, that he became a happy Believer; an
eminent Champion in the Christian Warfare; a Bishop of a City in Phoenicia,
about the times of the Emperors VALENS and THEODOSIUS.

Some have doubted whether he were the same Nemesius mentioned by GREGORY;
only, because he was a Lawyer and a Temporal Magistrate: But questionless
he that was once an Infidel, and afterward a Believer, might as well have
been, also, a Divine, and a Bishop, after he had exercised the Functions of a
Lawyer and a Judge; seeing it is no new matter, that they should execute a
double-calling, who have received a double portion of the Spirit.

For, in all Ages, (since Princes became Nursing-Fathers of the Church) it has
been usual for Emperors, Kings, and other Free States, to make use of their
Gifts, in Temporal Iudicatures, and in other public Affairs, of whose
Wisdom, and Faithfulness, they had experience in Ecclesiastical
Governments: yea, and it was no strange thing for men of say professions, to be
called from common Affairs, to assume sacred Orders.

And (though some are undiscreetly offended thereat) it is not only both
convenient and comely, that Ecclesiastical persons (who neither desire, nor
ambitiously affect such Employments) should be, sometime, invited and
authorized by their Sovereigns, to join unto their spiritual charge, an
industrious care of the temporal welfare. But it so happens otherwhile,
also, that this double Authority, (though it double the employment) proves so
far from being over-burthensome, or a hinderance to the due execution of the
first single calling, that he upon who^ it is conferred, is thereby the better
enabled to manage both for the general advantage: And we find this double
calling, to have been so often, so commendably, and so successefully practiced
in the most flourishing times, both of Jewish, and Christian Commonweales; that
it may be still warrantably imitated, so often as Sovereign power shall be
pleased therewithal.

Our Nemesius (whose manifold employments, and gifts of the Spirit, have
perhaps, occasioned this digression, to some good purpose) embraced the
Christian Faith, and received his Episcopal dignity (as it seems by
circumstances) long after his Presidentship: For, as by the words of GREGORY
may be collected, he had given fair testimonies both of his Prudence and
Uprightness in that Office, before his Conversion: and his faithfulness in the
emploiment of that single talent; first vouchsafed, by the Common grace, was
rewarded with a large increase, through the special favor of GOD, as the
sequel has declared.

The Authors whom he names (none of them having lived since the Emperors
aforementioned) are a probable argument of his Antiquity; and so likewise, is
the scope of this Treatise, and his manner of handling the same: For, according
to this command, When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren; the learned
Converts of the Primitive Church, endeavored to fortify their Profession
(against the many heathen Philosophers who did then oppose it) by turning the
weapons of those enemies of Christianity against themselves; even by fooling
their carnal wisdom, in their own logical reasonings; and by the
Principles of their own Philosophy. And in this performance, our Author was
both faithful and painful; as will appear by the following Tract, worthy to
be preserved and perused in all generations.

For in what age, will the knowledge of the humane nature be impertinent, or
to what person of that kind? nay, what knowledge, save the knowledge of GOD is
more pertinent? Or, how can GOD be well known, by him, that knows not
himself? It is that knowledge which this Book teaches; and in my opinion the
ignorance of rightly knowing our own nature is one maine cause of the many
absurdities, and unreasonable controversies which distract these times, yea,
the ignorance thereof is a principal cause that so many wickedly blaspheme
GOD, and unthankfully accuse him (without cause) of being niggardly toward
them in the Talents of nature; and in requiring that of them, which he has
not given them ability to perform.

Hence arises it also, that some consequently, and some directly make our good
GOD the Author of all sin; and MAN, not properly an agent, but a patient only
in committing evil. From this Ignorance, likewise it proceeds, that we
neither husband the gifts of nature (which is Gods common grace) nor endeavor
as we ought to do, according to that ability which we have received: whereas,
if we knew what were given into our power, and what not; I think we should not
so often, (as many of us do) foolishly deny our essential property; but
believe and work, according to Sanctified reason.

Though our original Nature were so depraved by our first parents fall, that
we lost our Well-beeing; yet we lost not our Naturall-beeing, nor those
Faculties, which made us capable of being renewed by special grace, when it
should be tendered unto us. Though we fell very low, and were in a Downfall, in
which we should never have left sinking; and from which we could never have
raised our selves, by any power remaining in our selves; yet we were not at the
lowest by our Grandfathers offense. For, the mercy of GOD, even JESUS CHRIST,
stayed us from falling so low, as we had else tumbled; and from loosing
absolutely our Rationality, or any thing essential thereunto, by that
Transgression.

Yea, though the Will, and every other Power of the SOUL were so maimed and
bruized by the first Adam, that, like a broken Watch, their motions would have
been still worse and worse, till they had utterly perished; and should never
have moved rightly of themselves, (nor by any other means) unless the second
Adam, had, at least, benefited us without our own righteousness, as much as
the first Adam harmed us, without our personal sin: yet, no man lost by the
first Transgression, so much, as he may lose by his own fault.

By the first sin, we lost, indeed, our light, but not our eyes. And
therefore, when GOD sent the light of MANKIND into the World, he reprobated
those, only, who rejected it. And why? not because they saw it not; but
because they loved it not. For, that they saw it, is manifest by that place,
which said, It enlightens every one which comes into the world. Yea, the
reprobate Jews could not deny but that they saw it; for, our Savior told them,
that, if they could have truly denied to have seen this Light, they should
not have had their sins imputed unto them: which, (under correction) I take to
be the meaning of his words.

Now, if they saw it, we may truly infer that they received of his
fullness, that common grace, and the preservation of every natural faculty, so
far forth, as might have enabled them, to become the sons of GOD; whereas, by
the neglect of that single Talent, they became losers of more then Adam lost
them; even to lose the right use of their natural faculties, and to be of a
Reprobate sense; having eyes, that see not: ears, that hear not: and hearts
as void of understanding, as the beast that perishes. And, all this comes to
pass through want of considering, what is taught in this Book, even for want
of knowing what power we have given us, and how we are to exercise that power.

Let no man, therefore, despise this means of Instruction, nor prejudicately
conceive (because it may have some expressions unsuitable to their opinions)
that NATURE is here magnified above GRACE, or in any measure equalled
thereunto: or, that any power is thereto ascribed, derogating from the free
mercy of GOD. Far is it from our Authors intention: and for ever, far be it
from me, to become an instrument of publishing such Doctrines. There is not (in
my judgment) one syllable in this Tract, which tends not to the glorifying
of GOD's Grace to Mankind. For, whatsoever is ascribed to man, as being
primarily in him by nature, is acknowledged to be the gracious gift of GOD:
That which is affirmed to be left in him, since the fall, is confessed to have
been justly forfeited, and yet preserved in him, by the free Grace of the same
GOD: The good effects of all those Faculties, which are affirmed in man's power,
were not (in my understanding) so much as thought, by this Author, (nor are
they so conceived by me) to be wrought at any time without the continual
assistance of the holy Spirit: neither is the natural power of man, or the
excellency of his nature, here set forth for man's own glory, or that he should
arrogate anything to himself: But, that GOD's first and second GRACE
vouchsafed unto us, might the more manifestly appear. And that it might not be
only said, but made evident, also, that the sin and unhappiness of every
man, is of himself, and not of GOD: all which is employed (though not directly
expressed) by the scope of this Book.

They affirm in effect, this blasphemy, that every sin is GOD's, (though in
word they profess never so violently against it) who will not allow that MAN
(as this Treatise declares) has some things naturally in his own power. For,
unless that be granted, he should have as little sin, as righteousness of
his own: and beasts or blocks might as well be reputed righteous, or sinful,
and as justly be termed Reasonable-creatures, as men: yea, and many other
absurdities are believed and occasioned, by the ignorance of that, which is
here taught.

Besides that, which is the maine scope of this Book, diverse brief testimonies
of ancient Truths (lately suspected of novelty) are here and there,
occasionally inserted; yea, and to some in these days, that which was the
prime intention of this Discourse is, yet, as pertinent as when it was first
written: For, there are not only as many still ignorant of their own Nature as
heretofore; but, the same Stoicall Divinity, here opposed, and confuted, is, in
some branches, so largely sprouted up again, that, they are supposed to be
ancient and orthodoxe principles of Christianity; and so are they cried up by a
multitude of modern voices, that few believe, Antiquity ever mentioned ought in
contradiction to what they fancy to be the Truth.

To make it appear otherwise, this Father of the Church speaks now in
English, what he spoke in Greek much above a thousand years past: And
therefore, though it were true (which as yet, I believe not) that some of the
later times have as learnedly handled the same subject; yet, because the
noblenes of Truth, is other while suspected, when her Pedigree is obscured, I
thought it not in vain, to help to discover her Antiquity, by the publication
of this Author.

You have him (if I am not much deceived) according to his Genuine sense,
though not every where grammatically interpreted; for that were but to play the
part of a Pedant. And because a show of tediousnes, might make the same less
profitable, I have not only caused him to speak as briefly and as plainly to
the meanest capacities, as I possibly could, (which is not easy in a Subject
of this nature) but to prevent wearisomenes, and render it the more useful, I
have divided the longest Chapters, into equal Sections; and before every
Chapter and Section, summed up the principal Contents of the same. Which will
be easefull unto those who have not leisure to read out long continued
Discourses; especially when they have some speedy occasion to collect the
Testimonies of Antiquity.

Now that I may every way (as much as in me lies) keep my Nemesius from being
either misconceived, or misreputed; I beseech my common Readers, to be very
heedfull in the perusal of him, least through want of understanding in
themselves, they censure him to be an Author not Intelligible, (as it has
pleased them to censure a learned writer now living) for such half witted
people, as are neither capable of the mysteries of Nature, nor of such terms,
as may properly express them, should learn to know, before they presume to
censure: which will never be attained, without humility and some diligence.

Let them please to be heedfull also, when this Author speaks in his own
person, and when in the person of others: for, sometime he brings in
Arguments, and continued disputes, out of Ethnic Philosophers, (with all their
circumstances, to confute their fellows; and if it be not well observed when
he so does, some heathenish proposition, (interlaced therewith) may be
wrongfully taken for his opinion: And, perhaps also a well meaning expression
may be misunderstood, contrary to the mind of the Author, by a little
obscurity in the Text, or by want of heeding, how his intention may be
discovered in other passages of the same Book.

Nemesius has heretofore suffered in this kind, even by no worse men, then his
two Latin Interpreters; and one of them has charged him with being of their
opinion, who believed the Transmigration of Souls, whereof he was no way
guilty, as may be made probable, not only by sundry expressions in this Tract;
but by those words also, from whence this misconceit arose; they being
interpreted, as I understand them.

They are to be found about the beginning of the seventh Section of the second
Chapter, and speak to this effect. Iamblicus (says he) has affirmed in his
Book called MONOBIBLON, that the changing of Souls never happens from men to
unreasonable creatures, nor from unreasonable creatures to men: but from
Beasts, to Beasts, and from men, to men* and in so saying, he has not only
conjectured very well of Platoes opinion, but of the Truth it self.

By these last words, Nemesius has seemed to justify the opinion, both of
Iamblicus, and Plato, touching Transmigration of Souls. Now this clause I have
understood as if it said thus, rather: And in so saying, he has not only well
guessed, but in my judgment expressed the very truth of Platoes opinion. Let
the learned judge, whether the Greek words will not well enough bear this
Version (though not in a strict Grammatical sense) especially since the
context proves his opinion concerning the Soul to be the same which is
generally believed among Christians, for my part, till I see more cause to
suspect the contrary, I shall always so conceive of it.

That which is mentioned by another concerning his opinion touching the Souls
preexistence before the Body, is not a matter of faith, or so precisely
decided, as that he or we are (for ought I know) obliged, to be peremptorily
for it, or against it; and therefore I my self have not yet so much thought
upon it as to resolve which way to incline: or what to answer for him. If any
man can assure me whether part is without error, that will I embrace; and I am
persuaded so would Nemesius have done, if any man could have proved unto him
that his opinion was erroneous, in that point; which if others believe of him,
(as they have no just cause to the contrary) no more needs to be spoken of
this matter.

If any be offended that he argues philosophically, rather then by proofs of
Scripture, and cites Moses not as a Divine Prophet, but a Wiseman; Let them
consider, that he had such to contest withal, as neither believed the
Scriptures, nor ascribed more unto Moses, or any other, then the
Reasonableness of their affections seemed to deserve; The alleging of
Scripture, therefore, to such men, had been to cast pearls to swine, and more
to the derision, then to the honor of his cause. This course was practiced by
the Apostles themselves; To the Jews and believing Gentiles, they brought the
testimony of the Prophets: but to Unbeleevers, they cited their own Poets, or
convinced them by Reason.

Had our Author argued with Christians, the holy Scriptures only, should have
been Judges of their Controversies: For he himself says, Cap. 2. Sect. 7. To
us the Doctrine of the divine Scriptures are all-sufficient, etc. but against
those who embrace not the Scriptures (as we Christians do) we must prove by
Demonstration, etc.

In these times, there be many, who though they deny not the letter of the
Scriptures, yet they do as bad (or worse rather) for they deny the true sense
of them, and make interpretations according to their own lusts and fancies. To
these also, the holy Scriptures are impertinent proofs, till by some reasonable
Demonstrations we can make them understand and confess their true meaning: And
some of these have so long, and so violently professed against Reason, as
unusefull in the consideration of the Divine mysteries, that there is little
hope either to work upon them by a rational dispute, or to convince them by
divine Authority, till GOD shall forgive their denial and abuse of his common
graces, upon true repentance for the same; and restore the Understanding which
is worthily darkened by that sin: and for enlightening whereof, this Treatise,
may perhaps become helpful.

Other things might be here declared, to prevent prejudice, and to show forth
the use and profitablenesse of this Book: but lest they make this Preface
over-large, I will here conclude, and commit all to Gods blessing.

Geo: Wither.

PErcurri Librum bunc Denatura hominis, in quo nihil reperio sanae fidei, aut
bonis moribus contrarium.

THO: WEEKS, R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.

NEMESIVS of the Nature of MAN.
CAP. 1.
SECT. 1.
I. The Definition of MAN: A quaere touching the Understanding; and the
opinions of Plotinus, Apollinarius, Aristotle and Plato concerning the SOUL and
BODY of MAN. II. MAN partaking in somewhat with every Creature, is a medium
knitting together the whole Creation, and a manifestation of the Unity of the
CREATOR of all things. III. The Agreement, and comely order of GOD'S Works, of
all which MAN is the true Epitome.

GOod men, (and of those not a few) have defined Man to consist of an
Understanding Soul and a Body; and so true is this Definition, that it may
seem he could not otherwise be, well, defined. Yet, when we term him an
Understanding soul, it may appear doubtful to some, whether the Understanding
coming to the soul (as one distinct thing comes to another) did beget
Understanding in the Soul; Or, whether the Soul does naturally contain in it
self this understanding, as the most excellent part thereof; and, as being the
same to the Soul, which the Eye is to the Body.

There be some, (and of this opinion is Plotinus) who thinking the Soul to be
one thing, and the Body another, do therefore affirm, that MAN is composed of
these three, a Soul, a Body, and Understanding. Of this mind also was
Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicea: For, having laid this, as the Foundation of
his own opinion, he made the rest of his Building agreeable to the same
Groundwork.

Others there are who divide not the Understanding from the Soul in this
manner; but suppose rather, that the Understanding is a principal of the
Souls essence. Aristotle conjectures that a certain potentiall understanding
was made together with MAN, which might become actual in time; and that the
understanding which comes to us from without, (and whereby we acquire an
actual knowledge) pertains not to the natural Essence of the Soul; but,
assisteth in the knowledge and speculation of things: By which means it comes
to pass, that very few, or none, but men addicted to the study of wisdom, are
thought capable of this Actual understanding.

PLATO seems to affirm that MAN consists not of a double essence; that is to
say, jointly of a Soul and a Body: but rather, that he is a soul, using (as it
were Instrumentally) such a Body: and perhaps by fixing the mind upon that
only, which is the most excellent part of Man, he seeks to draw us to such a
serious consideration of our selves (and of the divine nature) as might win us,
the better, to pursue virtue, godliness, and such good things as are in the
Soul: or else by persuading that we are (essentially) nothing else but soul,
he would, peradventure, allure us to renounce the desires of the Body, as
things not primarily pertinent to MAN as MAN; but, chiefly belonging to him,
as he is a living creature; and so, by consequence appertaining to him as he is
a Man, in regard Man is a living-creature.

And it is indeed confessed (not much otherwise) of all men, that the soul is
far more to be esteemed then the body: and that the body is but as it were an
Instrument moved by the soul, as is evident in death. For if thereby the soul
be divided from the body it is immediately as much without motion, as a
Workmans Tools when he has cast them aside.

creatures void of life; and that he is partaker also of life, as those
living-creatures be, which are unreasonable: and that he is endowed likewise
with understanding, as are Creatures reasonable. With inanimate creatures Man
partakes in this, that he has a Body, and in his mixture of the four
Elements. He agrees with Plants, not only in that which is aforementioned,
but in having also both a nourishing and a feeding-power. His coherence with
unreasonable Creatures (over and above all the former particulars) is, in
having a certain voluntary motion, appetite, anger, and a power enabling him
to feel and breathe: for all these are common both to Men and unreasonable
creatures. Furthermore, he communicates with Intelligent incorporeall Natures,
in reasoning, understanding, judging, and in pursuing virtue and a good life,
which is the chief end of all virtues.

These things considered, MAN stands in such a Being as comprehends the
sensible and intelligible Nature. In respect of his Bodily powers, and of his
Bodily substance (which is subject unto sense) he agrees both with
living-creatures, and with things void of life. In respect of his Reasonable
part he communicates with Substances which are bodilesse (or spiritual) as
has been said before: For, GOD the Creator of all things, has seemed by
little and little so to collect and knit together sundry differing natures,
that all created things should become ONE And indeed, it will be a manifest
proof unto us, that there is but One Creator of all things, if we well
consider how fitly he has united the substance of individual things by their
particular parts; and all the several species (thorowout the world) by an
excellent sympathy.

For, as in every living creature he has joined the parts insensible with
such as have sense in them (as bones, fatt, hair, (and other insensible parts)
to the flesh and sinews (which are sensible) compounding the Living-creature
both of sensible and insensible portions; and declaring that all these together
make but one living-creature: Even so he has joined one to another, every
particular species which was created, by ordering and compounding that
agreement and disagreement which is in their natures; In so much that things
inanimate do not greatly differ from Plants which have in them a vegitative
and nourishing life; neither are Plants wholly differing from sensible living
creatures void of reason; nor are those unreasonable creatures so alienated in
all things from creatures endowed with reason, as that they have no natural
alliance or similitude, whereby they may be linked one to another.

For even in stones (which are inanimate creatures, not having in them, for the
most part, so much as a vegitative life) there is otherwise a certain power,
making them to differ from each other even in their stony properties: but the
Loadstone seems very far to exceed the nature and virtue of other stones, in
that it both attracts Iron thereunto, and also detaineth it (being so
attracted) as if it would be nourished thereby. Neither does it exercise this
virtue upon one piece of Iron alone; but, by that one piece, linketh fast
another, and imparteth his own power to all other pieces which are contiguous
thereunto: yea Iron draws Iron, when it is touched by the Loadstone.

Moreover, when the CREATOR passed from Plants to living-creatures, he rushed
not (as we may say) all at once, into things whose nature is to remove from
place to place; and, to such as are endowed with sense: but, he proceeded,
rather, by degrees, and by a natural and most comely progression. For, the
Shell-fishes called Pinnae, and Vrticae, are so made as if they were certain
Plants, having sense in them For, he fastened them in the Sea with roots, and
covered them also with shells as with bark. And, as therein he made them to
participate with Plants; so, he gave them likewise (in some measure) the
feelingsense, which is common to living-creatures. They agree with Plants in
being rooted and fixed, and they communicate with living-creatures in their
feeling In like manner the Sponge (though it be rooted in the Rocks) is of it
self, opened and contracted, according as the passenger approaches toward it,
or departs from it. And therefore, Wise men have anciently termed such things
(...), in English, Life-plants, if by a new word I may so name that which is
partly a living-creature, and partly a Plant.

After the Fishes called Pinnae, he proceeded unto those, which (being unable
to pass far from their station) do move only to and fro within some certain
space, such as are the most part of those, which have shells, and are called
the bowels of the earth. He went further, and added (in the like manner,)
something to every thing in particular (as to some things more senses; and to
some other, more ability to remove themselves from place to place;) and, came
next to those unreasonable-creatures which are more-perfect. Those, I call
more-perfect-creatures, which have obtained all the senses, and, can also
remove themselves to places far distant.

And when GOD passed from unreasonable-creatures to MAN (a Creature endowed
with Reason) he did not perfect him in himself, (and, as it were, all at once;)
but, first, ingraffed into some other living-creatures, certain natural wiles,
sleights, and devises for the saving of themselves, which, make them seem to
be almost reasonable-creatures: And, having done all this, he, then, brought
forth MAN, which is, indeed, the true Reasonable-Creature.

The same Order (if it be well considered) will appear in the Voice, which
from the noise of Horses and Oxen is brought, by little and little, from one
plain simple sound, unto the voices of Crows and Nightingales, (whose voices
consisting of many notes, can imitate what they are taught) and, so, by degrees
it is terminated in the Articulate voice of MAN, which is distinct and perfect.

Furthermore he made the various expressions of the Tongue to depend upon the
Mind, and upon Reason; ordaining the speech to publish forth the motions of
the Mind: And, in this wise, by a sweet Musical proportion, he (collecting
all things together) incorporated all into ONE; as well, things Intelligible, as
things visible, and, made MAN as a means thereunto.

SECT. 2.
I. Why MAN was first made, and why he has in him somewhat of the Nature of
all Creatures. II. MAN is the Bounder between visible and Intellectual things,
and becomes either an Earthly or Spiritual MAN, according as he is inclined to
Good or Evil. A distinction between the Goods of the Mind and Body; and
between the life of MAN as he is Man, and as he is merely a living creature.
III. The opinion of the Hebrews touching the mortality and immortality of MAN.

THese things considered, Moses in expressing the Creation of the World, did
very properly affirm that MAN was last made. Not only, because all things
being made for MAN, it was most convenient, that all such things ought first to
be provided, which were necessarily pertinent to his use; and that he who was
to have the use of them, should afterward be created: But, in respect both
intellectual and visible substances, were created, it seemed also convenient
that One should be made, by whom those two Natures should be so united
together, that the whole World might become ONE; and be in it own self so
agreeable, that the same might not be at variance, or estranged from it self.
Even to this end, was MAN made such a living-creature, as might join together
both Natures, and (to sum up all in a word) therein was manifested the
admirable wisdom of the universal CREATOR.

Bounds between the Reasonable-nature, and that which is Irrational; if he
incline to the Body, settling the maine part of his affection upon corporal
things; he chooses and embraces the life of unreasonable-creatures; and, for
that cause, shall be numbered among them, and be called (as Saint Paul terms
him) An earthly MAN, to whom it shall be thus said, Earth thou art, and to
Earth thou shall return: yea by this means he becomes (as the Psalmist
affirms) like the Beast which has no understanding. But, if he incline rather
to the Reasonable part, and contemning Bodily lusts and pleasures, shall make
choice to follow that blessed and divine life which is most agreeable unto MAN,
he shall, then, be accounted a Heavenly MAN, according to that saying; Such as
the earth is, such are they that are earthly; such as the heavenly are, such
are they that are heavenly: and indeed that which principally pertains unto
the Reasonable-Nature, is to avoid and oppose Evil, and love and follow that
which is Good.

Of Good things some are common both to the Soul and to the Body (of which sort
the Virtues are) and these have a relation unto the Soul, in respect of the use
which it makes of the Body, being joined thereunto.

Some good things pertain to the soul only, by it self, (so that it should not
need the help of the body) as godliness, and the Contemplation of the nature
of things: and therefore so many as are desirous to live the life of MAN as he
is a MAN, (and not only in that he is a living creature) do apply themselves
to Virtue and Piety. But we will anon show distinctly what things pertain to
Virtue, and what to Piety, when we come to discourse of the Soul and of the
Body: For, seeing we do not yet know what our Soul is in respect of the
substance thereof, it is not yet convenient for us to treat here, of those
things that are wrought by it.

The Hebrews affirm that MAN was made from the beginning, neither altogether
mortal, neither wholly immortal, but, as it were, in a state between both
those natures, to the end that if he did follow the affections of the body, he
should be liable to such alterations as belong to the body; But if he did
prefer such good things as pertain to the soul, he should then be honored
with Immortality For, if GOD had made MAN absolutely mortal from the
beginning, he would not have condemned him to die after he had offended;
because it had been a thing needless to make him mortal by condemnation, who
was mortal before. And on the other side, if he had made Man absolutely
immortal, he would not have caused him to stand in need of nourishment; for,
nothing that is immortal needs bodily nourishment.

Moreover, it is not to be believed, that God would so hastily have repented
himself, and made Him to be forthwith mortal, who was created absolutely
immortal: For it is evident that he did not so in the Angels that sinned, but
(according to the nature which they obtained from the beginning) they remained
immortal, undergoing for their offenses not the penalty of Death, but of some
other punishment. It is better therefore, either to be of the first mentioned
opinion touching this matter; or, else, thus to think, that MAN was indeed
created mortal, but, yet, in such wise that if he were perfected by a
virtuous and pious progression, he might become immortal: that is to say, he
was made such a One, as had in him a potentiall ability to become immortal.

SECT. 3.
I. Our Author shows why the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil was
forbidden; and, that it was, at first, expedient for MAN to be ignorant of his
own Nature. II. MAN by the Transgression, attained that knowledge of himself,
which diverted him from the way of perfection and Immortality. III. The
Elementarie c^mposition and nourishment of Man's body: The reasons also why it
needed feeding, clothing, curing etc. and why MAN was made a Creature sensible,
and capable of Arts and Sciences, etc.

IT being inexpedient, rather then any way helpful, for MAN to know his own
nature, before he came to his perfection, GOD forbad him to taste the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil: For there were, and doubtless as yet there are
very great virtues in Plants; but at the first, (in respect it was in the
beginning of the worlds Creation) their virtues being (before the curse) pure
and void of all mixture, had in them a strong operation; and it is not
therefore strange that there should be (by Gods providence) the taste of a
certain Tree, that should have a power given to engender in our first parents,
the knowledge of their own nature.

The cause why God would not have MAN to know his own nature, before he had
attained to perfection, was this: lest he knowing himself to stand in need of
many things, should (as by the sequel we find it manifest) labor only to
supply the wants of his Body, and utterly cast away the care of his Soul; and
for this cause did God forbid him to taste of the fruit of knowledge of good and
evil.

By disobeying this Commandment, MAN attained to the knowledge of Himself, but
thereby fell from the state of growing to perfection, and busied himself in
taking care for such things as the body needed: For (according to the words of
Moses) as soon as he had eaten, He knew that he was naked, and immediately
sought about to get a covering for his nakedness: whereas, till then, God kept
him as it were in a Trance, and in such case that he knew not himself.

When he fell away from the state of growing to perfection, he fell also from
his immortality, which by the mercy of his Creator he shall recover again at
the last. In the mean time it was granted him that he should eat flesh
(whereas before his fall, God willed him to be content with such things only
as grew out of the earth, all which he had provided for him in Paradise) yea
the first means of growing to perfection being become desperate, it was
permitted him to feed as he would.

Now, seeing Man consists Body (as of one of his parts) and seeing every
(inferior compound) body is composed of the four Elements, it is necessary
that such things should happen unto him, as the Elements are subject unto; That
is to say, Cutting, mutation and flowing. By mutation I mean mutation in
Quality; and I term it Flowing when he is emptied or purged of such things as
are in him. For a living creature has always his evacuations, both by such
pores as are manifestly seen, and by such also as we see not; whereof I shall
speak hereafter.

It is necessary therefore, that so much should be taken in again, as was
evacuated; seeing else, the living creature would perish through defect of what
should re-enter to supply the want: And (if the things evacuated be either dry,
or moist, or spirits) it is as necessary that the living creature should have a
continual supply of dry and moist nourishments, and of spirits.

The meats and drinks which we receive, are made of those Elements, whereof we
also are composed: for every thing is nourished with what is agreeable and like
unto it, and (in diseases) we are cured with what is contrary (to the disease.)

There he some of the Elements which we sometime receive into our Bodies
immediately of themselves; and sometime use means unto the receiving of them;
as for example, we sometime receive water of it self; sometime we use Wine and
Oil, and all those that are called moist fruits, as means to the receiving of
water. For wine is nothing else but a certain water coming from the Vine, and
so or so qualified. In like manner we partake of Fire sometime immediately, as
when we are warmed by it; sometime also by the means of such things as we eat
and drink: for all things contain in them some portion of Fire, more or less.
We are in like case partakers of Air: either immediately when we breathe it,
and have it spread round about us, or draw it in by our eating and drinking; or
else by means of such other things as we receive into us.

But as for the Earth, we seldom or never receive it immediately, but by
certain means. For, we eat the corn which comes of the earth. Larks, Doves,
and Partridges feed oftentimes upon the earth; but Man usually feeds on the
earth by the means of feeds, fruits, berries, and by the flesh which proceeds
from things nourished by the Earth.

And forasmuch as God respecting not only a decency, but also the furnishing
of us with a very quick sense of feeling, (in which man exceeds all other
living creatures) he has clothed us neither with a tough skin as Oxen and
other beasts, that have a thick hide; neither with large thick set hair, as
goats, hares, and sheep; neither with scales, as fishes and serpents; neither
with hard shells, as Tortoises and Oysters; neither with a more fleshie bark,
as Lobsters; neither with feathers, as birds; and therefore (wanting these
coverings) it is necessary we should have Raiment, to supply that in us, which
nature has bestowed on other living creatures.

These are the causes why we stand in need of nourishment and clothing: And
not only for the same ends are our houses become necessary; but also that we
may escape the violence of wild beasts, which is none of their least
commodities.

Moreover (by reason of the distemperature of qualities in the humane body)
Physicians and their art are likewise needful, that thereby (as often as
occasion requires) those things which are rent asunder, may be fastened again
together for the preservation of health. And whereas the alteration consists
in the quality, it is necessary that we bring the state of the body to a just
temperature by the contrary Quality: For, it is not the Physicians purpose (as
some think) to cool the Body which has been in a heat, but to change it
into a temperate estate; seeing if they should cool it, the disease turns
(not to health, but) to the contrary sickness.

Now in regard of Arts and Sciences, (and by the necessary use which we have
of such things as they accomplish) it so comes to pass that we need the
mutual assistance one of another, and by that need which we have each of
other, many of us assembling together in common, do thereby the more
conveniently bargain and contract for such things as may serve to supply the
necessities of life.

This meeting and dwelling together, was anciently termed by the name of a
City; by the near neighborhood whereof, men received aid and profit by each
others arts and labors, without the discommodities of long and far Travail.
For, Man was naturally made to be such a living creature, as should be
sociable, and delighted in neighborhood. And forasmuch as men could not
otherwise be so conveniently provided of useful things; it is evident that the
study of Arts, and the necessity of traffic were the first occasions of
erecting Cities.

SECT. 4.
I. Of the two Privileges which MAN has obtained above all other Creatures,
(viz.) to be capable of the Forgivenes of sins, and Immortality: the Justice
and Mercy of GOD in vouchsafing the pardon of sin of MAN, and denying the
same to Angels. II Man only is a creature capable of learning Arts and
Sciences: A Definition of Man, and Reasons justifying every branch of that
Definition. III. The World was not made for the Angels, nor for any other, but
MAN only. To him was committed the government of the Universe, with a
limitation to use, not abuse the Creatures.

THere are also two Privileges which Man has specially gotten above all
other. One is, to obtain pardon by Repentance; the other is that his body
being mortal should be brought to immortality. This (privilege) of the body,
he gets by means of the soul; and the privilege of the soul, by reason of
the body: Yea, among Reasonable creatures, Man only has obtained this
Peculiar, that God vouchsafes him the pardon of sin upon repentance; For
neither the Devils nor the Angels are vouchsafed pardon, though they do repent.

Hereby the most exact Justice, and admirable mercy, of GOD is both fully
proved and evidently declared: For, good cause is there why pardon should not
be granted to Angels, though they do repent; because there is nothing in
them, which naturally allures or draws them to sin; and in regard also that
they (of their own nature) are free from all passions, wants, and pleasures of
the body.

But MAN, though he be endowed with Reason, yet he is also a bodily living
creature, and therefore his wants (in that he is such a living creature)
together with his passions, do often blind and captivate his reason. And
therefore (when he returns again by repentance, and applies himself unto
virtue) he obtains mercy and forgiveness: For as it is proper to the Essence
of MAN to have the ability of laughing (because it agrees to man only, to all
men, and ever to man) so (in respect of those things, which proceed from the
grace of God) it is proper unto Man above all Creatures endued with Reason, to
be delivered, by Repentance, from the accusation and guiltiness of all those
things wherein he has formerly transgressed. Yea, this Grace is given to MAN
only; to all men; and ever to man, during the continuance of his life in this
world, and no longer: for after Death there is no more Forgiveness.

Some there be who give a reason why the Angels could no more obtain pardon
by repentance after they had fallen; and it is this that follows. The Fall of
Angels, was (as they affirm) a kind of Death unto them; and God vouchsafed
them the tender of a pardon before their utter falling away, when like account
was to be made of them, as is made of Men during this life: But because they
accepted not the grace offered, they received afterward (as a just reward)
punishment everlasting without pardon. And hereby it plainly appears that such
as refuse Repentance, do reject that which is a special good gift of God, and
peculiar to MAN.

This also is one of the things proper and peculiar unto MAN, that of all other
living creatures only the body of MAN should arise again after Death, and
aspire to Immortality. This privilege the body gains in respect of the
immortality of the soul; as likewise the soul obtains the other (that is
to say, pardon after Repentance) in respect that the Body, is weak and
troubled with many passions.

It is a thing proper also, Arts and Sciences, and to work according unto such
Arts: For which cause they who define him, say thus; MAN is a living Creature,
induced with Reason, mortal, capable of Consideration and Science.

He is termed a living-creature, in that he is a substance having life endued
with sense: for, that is the definition of a living-creature.

He is said to be endued with Reason, that he may be distinguished from
unreasonable-creatures.

He is called mortal, to make a difference betwixt him and the
Reasonable-creatures, that are immortal.

And, this clause [capable of Consideration and Science] is added thereunto,
because we come to Arts and Sciences by learning of them; having in us
naturally a certain potentiall ability to receive both understanding and Arts;
but, not actually attaining them save by study and practice.

There be some, who say that this last clause was lately added to the
Definition; and, that it had been good enough without the same, were it not,
that some bring in their Nymphs, and other petty Deities of those kinds, who
are said to live long, and yet not to be immortal; And to distinguish MAN from
those, these words, Capable of consideration and science were judged needful;
because, none of that sort are thought to learn any thing; but, to know
naturally, whatsoever they are said to know.

The Jews are of opinion World was made for MAN (even immediately for his
sake) as Oxen with other beasts for tillage, or to bear burdens; and, as
grass was made for the Beasts. For some things were made for their own sakes;
and some for the sakes of others. All reasonable-creatures were made for their
own sakes: Vnreasonable-creatures and things without life, were ordained for
others, not for themselves.

Now, if such things were made in respect of others, let us consider for whom
they were, indeed, created. Shall we think they were made for the Angels?
Doubtless, no wise man will say that they were made for their sakes; because,
the things made for the respect or sake of another, must concern either the
making, or the continuance, or the recreation of those things for which they
were made: For, they are made either in respect of the propagation and
succession of their kind; or of their nourishment; or to cover them; or to
cure them, or for their better welfare and rest.

Now the Angels need no such things; for, they neither have any succession of
their kind, neither want clothing, bodily nourishment, nor any thing else: And,
if Angels have no need of such things, it is then evident that no other nature
having place above the Angels; can have need of them; because by how much
higher the place of it is, so much the less need has it of supply or
assistance from another.

This being so, we must seek out a Nature which is endued with Reason, and yet
needs such things as are aforementioned; and what other nature can be found
of that sort, if MAN be passed over? Surely none: And if no other can be
discovered, it follows by good reason that both things void of life, and
unreasonable-creatures, were made for the sake of MAN; and if they were
ordained for him (as it is evident they were) then, that was likewise the cause
why he was constituted the Governor also of those creatures.

Now, it is the duty of a Governor, to use those things which are put under
his government, in such manner and measure as need and conveniencie shall
require; and not to abuse them untemperately, or to serve voluptuously his own
delicate Appetite. Neither ought he to bear himself tyrannously or ungently
toward those whom he governes. For, they that so do (yea and they that use
not mercifully, their unreasonable-cattell) are therein great Offenders;
neither performing the part of a Governor, nor of a just man, according to
that which is written, The just man has compassion upon the life of his Beast.

SECT. 5.
I. It is here proved, that neither things without-life, nor the unreasonable.
creatures, were made for themselves; First, by arguments taken from the
consideration of the nature and use of things without life. II. It is proved
also by considering those creatures, which are void of reason, and which are
(for the most part) very serviceable to MAN. III. And lastly, it is proved by
considering those things which seem to be rather harmfull then profitable to
Mankind.

BUt some perhaps will say, that nothing was made inrespect of another but
every thing in respect of it self. Therefore, distinguishing first between
things inanimate and those that have life, let us observe whether things void
of life are likely to have been created only for their own sake.

For if those things were made in respect of themselves, how, or upon what
should living-creatures feed? we see that Nature out of the earth produces
food both of fruits, and of plants, to every living-creature, some few
excepted, whose feeding is upon flesh; yea, and those creatures which are
nourished by eating flesh, do feed on such beasts as are sustained by eating
the fruits of the earth: For, Lions and Wolves, feed on Lambs, Goats, Hearts,
and Swine. Aegles also, and all sorts of Hawks, devour Partridges, Doves,
Hares, and such like; which are fed with what springs out of the ground.

Moreover, the nature of those Fishes which devour one another, does not so
extend it self to all fishes, that they do generally devour the flesh of one
another; but it breaks off in such as eat weeds and such other things as
grow in the water. For, if all sorts of fishes had been inclined to eat the
flesh of one another, so that no kinds of them could feed on any thing else,
but on the flesh of themselves, verily they could not have long continued (no
not for a small time) but would have been utterly destroyed, some of them each
by other, and the rest for lack of meat.

To the intent then, that it might not so happen, certain Fishes were so made,
that they might abstain from the flesh of the rest, and feed (if I may so
term it) on the grass of the Sea, that, by them, the other sorts of fishes
might be preserved. These fishes feed upon weeds; other fishes feed upon them;
Those, again, are food for other greater fishes. So, by the feeding on such
fishes as last of all do eat the weeds of the Sea, (which come of the slimie
waters) the substance of the rest of the fishes is successively continued.

Having reasonably demonstrated, that the Plants were not created in respect of
themselves, but in regard of the nonrishment and nature both of Men and of
other living-creatures, it will be thereby manifest that such things also, were
made in respect of Man and other living-creatures, which are means and causes
of the increase and preservation of those interior things: And if that be so,
it will be as apparent that the motions of the stars, the firmament, the
seasons of the year, the showers, and all such like things, were made in
respect of those things without life aforementioned, and to the end that
nourishment being continually administered unto them, the nature of such fruits
might be perpetuated, and that Men and living-creatures also (for whom those
were ordained) might be preserved, by them.

whether the nature of unreasonable creatures, was made in respect of it self,
or for MAN's cause: and sure, it cannot but be very absurd, to affirm that
things incapable of understanding, and living only by an instinct of Nature
(yea, things grovelling toward the earth, and by their very shape declaring
their bondage) should be brought into the world for their own sake. Much might
be spoken to prove the contrary, even so much as would spin out this one point
to the length of a Treatise, if I should handle the same at large, and
therefore I will briefly mention in this place, those things only which are of
greatest weight.

By seriously considering (as it were in a glass or image) those things which
are without us by such things as are within us, we should make a plain
demonstration hereof; yea, and by considering the very substance of the things
themselves, which are in question. For, if we ponder in our mind that part of
our selves, which is irrational, and the parts thereof (I mean appetite and
anger, which are ordained to serve the Reasonable-part) we shall there see,
that Reason rules, and that the unreasonable-parts, are ruled; that Reason
commands, and that the other are commanded, and serviceable to such uses, as
Reason will have them to be subject unto; if MAN preserve that condition which
does naturally appertain unto him.

Now then, if our part which is reasonable does bear rule over our
unreasonable-parts, which are within us; seems it not much more probable,
that our reasonable-part should have dominion over such unreasonable-things as
are without us? and that such things were ordained to serve our necessities?
especially seeing it is according to the law of Nature that the unreasonable
should be subject to the reasonable, as has been declared by those things
which are in our selves?

This may be further manifested, by considering that diverse creatures are made
even fit for the necessary services of MAN. For, Oxen and all bearing cattle
are naturally fitted for the tillage of the earth, and for bearing of burdens.
Sundry other beasts of the field also, and many fishes and souls, for dainty
feeding, yea, and singing-birds for our delight and recreation.

do not always serve to such pleasing uses, but that there are some which may
seem rather to harm and destroy man; it is to be considered that when those
things were created, the special end of whose creation was at first for man's
service; all other things which might be otherwise useful were then created
also, that in the Creation there might be no defect, or want of such things
whereof there might be afterward any use.

Neither were such things as are now accounted harmfull, exempted utterly from
the profitable fruition of man; but, he by reason, does, or may, fruitfully
employ to his advantage, even the most venomous things. For, he uses
poisonous creatures to the curing of such harms as come by those, and other
venomous beasts, and to the curing of many infirmities other ways occasioned.
Such are the confections called (...) (whereof our Triacle is one sort) which
reason has invented, that by their own power those things might be made to
co^quer themselves, and procure health and safety (as it were) from conquered
enemies.

Man has also many other things of great virtue given unto him by his Creator,
which being contrary to those mischievous things, have in them a power to
withstand or qualify their virulent operations; to remedy their hurts; and to
defend him from their secret assaults. One thing serves to one use, other
things to other uses, and God has so provided that all things should be
helpful for the benefit and preservation of Man, yea and some things there be
which are serviceable no way else.

SECT. 6.
I. He shows why the creatures are now harmfull to MAN, seeing all things
were at first created for his benefit: Exemplary demonstrations intimating how
this mischief might be remedied. II. A brief Elogium in praise of the
excellent nature and prerogatives of MAN. III. This chapter is concluded, with
a short exhortation, that a thankful use be made of the high favors
vouchsafed unto MAN.

THat which has been formerly said touching the harm which MAN receives
sometimes from the unreasonable-creatures, has respect only to the present
condition of Mankind in this life; for, if we look back to the first time
which was long ago, we shall find that none of the irratinall-creatures durst
to be offensive unto MAN; but, that all of them were subject unto him,
faithfully serving and obeying him, so long as he did master his own passions,
and subjected his unreasonable-parts to the part-reasonable. And when he gave
the reins to his own affections, not subduing them to reason, but suffered
himself to be over-mastered by the brute desires which were within him; it was
very just, that (as it has since happened) he should be overawed by the
wilde-beasts, and by such other harmefull things as are without him.

For, after MAN had sinned, then began those beasts to be hurtful unto him,
which had else been serviceable; as may yet appear true by those who have
lived a supereminent life, and thereby prevented the mischievous assaults of
such creatures. Of this, Daniel and Paul are exemplary witnesses: for, neither
could the Lions find power to seife the one; nor the Viper to fasten upon the
other.

These things considered, living-creature? Behold, he binds together in
himself things mortal and immortal; and knitteth up in One, things reasonable
and unreasonable. In his own nature, he bears the image of all creatures,
and from thence is rightly called A little world. He is a creature, of whom God
has vouchsafed to take so much regard, that all created-things both present
and to come, were for him created. He is that creature also, for whose sake GOD
became MAN, and who shaking off his corruption, finisheth it in a never-ending
immortality.

Yea, he is that creature, who being made after the image and likeness of GOD,
reigns above the heavens, living and becoming co^versant with CHRIST the
son of GOD, who sits above all power and authority; and no eloquence may
worthily publish forth the manifold preheminences, and advantages which are
bestowed on this creature.

He passes over the vast Seas; he rangeth about the wide heavens, by his
contemplation, and conceives the motions and the magnitudes of the stars. He
enjoyes the commodities both of sea and land: He contemns the fury of
wild-beasts, and the strength of the greatest fishes. He is learned in every
science, and skillful in Artificial, workings. He communicates by writing,
with whomsoever he pleases, though they be far distant; and is nothing hindered
therein by the absence of his Body. He foretells things to come: he rules
all, subdueth all, and enjoys all things.

He talks with Angels, yea, and with GOD himself. He has all the Creatures
within his Dominion; and keeps the Devils in subjectio^. He searches out the
nature of every thing, and is diligently studious in the knowledge of GOD. He
was borne to be the house and Temple of the Holy Ghost; and he acquires the
fruition of all these privileges by Virtue and Piety.

But lest it may be thought, of some, that we proceed unskilfully, in setting
forth so largely the praises of Man; (whereas we should rather have contented
our selves to proceed with a Discourse touching the nature of MAN, according to
our first purpose) we will break off our speech, in this place; though we are
not ignorant, that by setting forth his pre-eminence and privileges, we have
not improperly prosecuted our intention to declare the Nature of MAN.

And, now, seeing it is heavenly plant; let us not deface or shame our Nature,
neither let it be truly said that we are unworthy of such gifts: nor let us
foolishly deprive our selves of so great Power and Glory and Blessedness, by
casting away the fruition of Joys that shall be everlasting, for the seeming
possession of imperfect pleasures, which will endure but a while: But, let us
preserve, rather, this nobility of ours, by doing good, by abstaining from
evil works, and by a good-zeal, intent or purpose; For to such endeavors, (if
we seek it by prayer) God always lends his assisting hand.

Thus much concerning these matters: And now seeing it is the received opinion,
that MAN consists of Body and Soul we will follow the same Division; treating
first of the Soul, and therein pass by those questions which being over
subtle, and difficultly understood, cannot be intelligibly expressed to many
capacities.

CAP. 2.
SECT. 1.
I. The several and different Opinions of the Ancients concerning the SOUL, as
whether it be a Substance; whether corporeal, or incorporeall, whether mortal
or immortal, etc. II. The confutation of those who affirm in general that
the SOUL is a corporeall-substance. III. Confutations of their particular
Arguments, who affirm that the SOUL is Blood, Water, or Air.

EXceeding great variance is discovered among the old Philosophers in their
discourses of the SOUL; insomuch that almost all of them differ one from
another in that matter. Democritus and Epicurus, and the whole sect of the
Stoics do peremptorily affirm that the SOUL is a Body; and those very men
who affirm the SOUL to be a Body, dissent one from another in declaring the
Essence of it.

The Stoics affirm, that it is a certain Blast, hot and fiery. Critias holds,
that it is blood. Hippon the Philosopher, will have it to be water, Democritus
thinks it is fire; and his opinion is, that the round Forms of
indivisible-bodies or Atoms being incorporated, by air and fire, do make up
the Soul. Heraclitus conceives that the Soul of the whole frame of the World is
a certain breathing out of the vapors, from moist things; and, that the Soul
which is in living-creatures, does proceed both from exhalations without
themselves, and from exhalations, also, within them; and being of the same
kind, of which they themselves are.

Again (on the contrary part) there are almost innumerable disagreements among
them who say that the SOUL is not a Body, or Bodily-substance. Some of them
affirm that the SOUL is a substance and immortal; Some, that it is without a
Body, and neither a substance nor immortal.

Thales, who was the first of that opinion, held that the SOUL was always in
motion, and had that motion from it self. Pythagoras thought that it was a
NUMBER moving it self. Plato affirmed that it was a substance (to be conceived
in mind) that received motion from it self, according to NUMBER and HARMONY.
Aristotle taught that it was the first continuall-motion of a BODIE-NATURALL,
having in it those Isntrumental parts, wherein was possibility of life.
Dinarchus took it to be an Harmony of the four Elements; not a Harmony made of
sounds, but as it were a tunable temperature and agreement, of hot and cold,
moist and dry things, in the Body. But, it is without doubt that all the best
of these do agree in this, that the SOUL is a substance; Aristotle and
Dinarchus excepted, who affirm that it is no substance at all.

Besides all these, some were of opinion that there was but one and the same
SOUL belonging to all things; which was by small portions distributed to all
particular things; and, then gathered into it self again: of which opinion
were the Manichees and certain others. Some likewise imagined the Souls were
many, and of differing sorts; Some affirmed that there was both one universal,
and many particular SOULS; and therefore it cannot be, but that my Discourse
must be drawn to a great length, seeing I am to disprove so many opinions.

Soul is a corporeal essence, it shall be sufficient to allege that which
has been heretofore delivered to that purpose by Numinius the Pythagorist, and
by Amonius the Master of Plotinus, who thus affirm:

All Bodies, being by their proper nature mutable, and such as may be utterly
dispersed and divided into innumerable parts (and having nothing remaining in
them which may not be changed and dispersed) have need of something to close
them in, to bring them together; to knit them into one; and (as it were) to
hold them fast united: And, this we say is done by the SOUL.

Now if the SOUL be corporeal, (let it be what Body you please) yea, though it
be a body consisting of the most thin and subtle parts, what will you say
holds that together, as that knitteth the Body in One? For, as we declared
before, every Bodily thing has need of some other thing to fasten the parts of
it together; yea the Body of this SOUL, that knits together our visible BODY,
(if we should grant the same to be a corporeal SOUL) and the next to that
also, infinitely, it would still have need of some other thing to knit and
fasten its own parts together, until an incorporeall-essence were found out.

If they answer, as the Stoics do, that, there is a certain motion
pertaining unto Bodies, extending both to the inward and outward parts of the
Body: That the motion tending outward, effects the quantity and the qualities
of the Body; and, that the motion tending inward, is cause both of uniting the
body and of the essence thereof; we will then ask them (seeing every motion
does proceed from some power) what kind of power it is, which that motion
has? in what consists it? and what gives essence thereunto?

If this power be a certain matter (which the Greeks call Hylen) we will
use the same reasons against them, which we objected before. If they say it is
not matter, but a material thing, (for matter and material things thus
differ; That which has matter in it, is called a material thing) we then
ask them, whether that which has matter in it, be likewise matter, or void of
matter? If they say it is matter, we demand how it can be both material and
matter? If they answer, that it is not matter, then they must grant it to be
void of matter, and if it be void of matter, we will easily prove it to be no
Body; because, every body has matter in it.

If they allege that Bodies have the three Dimensions in them, and that the
SOUL extending it self through the whole Body, has in it also the three
Dimensions, and therefore must necessarily be a Body; we will then thus answer
them; It is true, that all BODY'S have in them the three Dimensions, but every
thing having the three Dimensions is not a BODY. For place, and Quality which
in themselves have no Body, have accidentally, a Quantity if they be in such
things as have magnitude.

In like manner the SOUL in respect of it self, is utterly void of the
Dimensions; but, accidentally it has Dimensions; because the Body (in which it
is) having in it the three Dimensions, we so conceive it, together with the
Body, as though the Soul also had in it the three Dimensions.

We argue further, and say thus: Every Body has his motion either from without
it self, or from within. If the motion be from without it self, it must then
be void of life: if it be from within it self, it must be endued with life:
now, it is absurd to say that the SOUL is either endued with life, or without
life (one of which must necessarily be affirmed, if the Soul be a corporeal
substance) therefore the soul cannot be a corporeal Essence.

Again, the SOUL, if it be nourished, it is nourished by that which is void of
Body (for, knowledge is the nourishment thereof) but, no corporeal essence is
norished by things bodiless, therefore, the SOUL cannot be a Body. Xenocrates
thus concluded this argument: If (said he) the SOUL be not nourished, it
cannot be a corporeal-substance; because, the Body of every living-creature
must be nourished.

Thus much in general, bodily thing. Now, we will treat particularly against
them who are of opinion that the SOUL is either Blood, or Breath; because, when
either Blood or Breath is taken away, the living-creature dies.

We will not say (as some well accounted of have written) that, part of the
SOUL falls away when any part of the blood fails, if the SOUL be the Blood:
for, that were but a slender answer. In those things which have every part of
like nature with the whole, the part remaining is the same with the whole:
Whether the water be much or little, it is every way perfect water. In like
manner, gold, silver, and every other thing, whose parts do not essentially
differ from each other, are still the same, as is before said: And even so, that
part of blood which remains (of what quantity soever) may be called the SOUL
(as well as the whole quantity) if the blood be the SOUL.

We, therefore, will rather answer them thus: If that be rightly accounted the
SOUL, upon whose taking away, the death of the living creature ensues; then,
should it needs be, that phlegm, and the two chollers must be also the SOUL,
seeing, if any one of these fails, it brings the living-creature to his
death. The like falls out in the Liver, in the Brain, in the Heart, in the
Stomach, the Reins, the Entrails, and in many other parts, whereof if you
bereave a living-creature, it will immediately perish.

Moreover, there are many things without blood, which have life in them,
nevertheless; as some smooth and gristly fishes; some also of a softer kind,
to wit, Sepiae, Teuthides, and Smyli (as the Greeks call them) and Lobsters,
Crabs, Oysters, and all shel-fish, whether they have hard or soft shells. Now
if these things have a living-Soule in them (as we know they have) and yet are
void of blood, then it plainly follows that blood cannot be the SOUL.

Against those who say that water is the Soul, many things may be said to
disprove their opinion, though water helps to quicken and nourish all things;
and though it be (as they say) impossible to live without water.

We cannot live without nourishment, and therefore if their assertion be
true, we may as well affirm that all nourishment in general, and every
particular nourishment is the SOUL. And whereas they have said that no
living-creature can live without water, we find the contrary to be probable;
for it is written of some Aegles, and of Partridges, that they live without
drink.

And why should water be the SOUL rather then air? Seeing it is possible to
abstain from water very long, whereas we can hardly live a moment without
breathing the Air.

And yet, neither is Air the SOUL: For, there are many creatures which live
without breathing the Air; as all Insectae (riveted creatures) such as Bees,
Wasps, and Ants; as also all bloodlesse creatures, all those which live in the
waters, and such as have no Lungs. For, none of those things that are without
Lungs can breath Air. The proposition is true also, if it be converted, There
is no creature having Lungs, which does not breath air.

SECT. 2.
I. The arguments of Cleanthes the Stoic (affirming the SOUL to be
corporeal) are here confuted logically and by demonstration. II. Chrysippus
(intending to maintain the like opinion) is here, likewise answered, and his
Fallacies discovered. III. A confutation of their Tenet also, who affirm that
the SOUL is an Harmony.

SEeing certain reasons of some account, are divulged by Cleanthes the Stoic,
and by Chrysippus (to prove the SOUL a corporeal. substance) we will here
deliver somewhat in answer of them; and it shall be the same which the
Platonists have thereunto replied heretofore.

Cleanthes composeth a syllogism in this manner;

There is (says he) a likeness between us and our parents, not in respect
of the Body only, but in regard also, of the SOUL, as in Passions, Manners,
and Affections: now it pertains to a body to have in it likeness and
unlikenesse; and likeness and unlikenesse cannot belong to things void of
Body; Therefore the Soul is a bodily-thing.

It is here to be observed, first, that he proves things universal by things
particular (which is not allowable by the Rules of Logic.) Next, whereas he
says that likeness and unlikenesse cannot pertain to any thing void of
body, it is false. For we know that Numbers, which have their side-numbers
answering in proportion, are like one to another, as the side-numbers to six
and to four and twenty. The side-numbers to six are two, and three: The side
numbers to four and twenty are four, and six. Now, there is like proportion
of two in respect of four; and of three in respect of six: For they have a
double proportion, each in respect of other; four being twice as much as two,
and six twice as much as three. Thus it appears that Numbers are like unto
Numbers, and yet Numbers are no bodily thing.

Likewise, Figures (in Geometry) are like unto Figures, so many of them as
have both their corners equal, and their sides which enclose their
equall-corners, answering one another in proportion: and even the Platonists
themselves will confess, that such Figures are no Bodily-things.

Moreover, as it is a propriety in the predicament of Quantity, that a thing
should be equal, or unequal; So, also, it is a propriety in the predicament
of Quality, that things should be like, or unlike. Now the predicament of
Quality is an Incorporeall thing; Therefore, a thing incorporeall may be like
unto another thing, that is incorporeall.

Cleanthes, thus frames another Argument: No Incorporeall thing (says he) can
suffer together with a thing corporeal; neither can a bodily-thing, suffer
with such a thing as has no body; but, things corporeal, only, may suffer one
with another. Now it is evident, that if the body be diseased, and wounded, the
SOUL suffers grief with it; The Body suffers also with the SOUL; for, when
the mind is afflicted by shame, the Body blusheth, and when the mind fears,
the body looks pale. Therefore the SOUL is a corporeal thing.

One of his Assumptions is false; and he takes unto himself that which no man
grants. For whereas he says, that no Incorporeal thing can suffer with a
thing having a body; what if this be true only in the SOUL? This is as if we
should argue thus; No living-creature moves the upper jaw; But a Crocodile
moves the upper jaw; Therefore, a Crocodile is no living-creature. The major of
this proposition is false; because, in saying, No living-creature moves the
upper-jaw, he takes as granted that which is denied: for, behold the
Crocodile both moves his upper-jaw, and is also a living-creature. The like
arguing uses he, who says, that Nothing, void of body, suffers together
with a bodily-thing; for, he takes unto himself, in his negation, that which
lies in question.

But, if we should grant (for argument sake) that no Incorporeall-thing, does
suffer together with a thing-corporeall; yet, that which is inferred thereupon,
is not fully confessed, (to wit) that the Soul suffers with the Body, if it
be sick, or wounded: For, it is yet in controversy whether it be the Body
only that suffers pain; which having taken sense from the Soul, leaves the
same insensible of sufferings; or whether the Soul be grieved together with the
Body. The former opinion has hitherto been most generally received among
learned men; and therefore, Cleanthes ought not to have made his propositions
of things in question; but, of such only as are quite out of doubt: for in
doing otherwise he in vain labors to demonstrate that, for which he
contendeth.

And yet (to make the fashood of his Assumption more evident) it might be
proved, that some things void of body, do suffer together with such things as
have body: For, Qualities being things-incorporeall, do suffer with
corporeall-things when they are altered: yea, both in the corruption of the
body, and in the Generation of the same, the Quality thereof suffers change and
alteration therewith.

Chrysippus thus argues. Death is a separation of the Soul from the Body:
Now, nothing void of body is separated from a body; because, a thing
incorporeall cannot be touched (or laid even along) by a corporeall-thing: But
the Soul touches, and is equally touched by the body: and is also separated
from the same: Therefore the Soul is a corporeall-essence.

Among these propositions, this is true, that death is a separation of the soul
from the body: But, this, that a thing void of body cannot touch a body, is
false, if it be generally spoken; and true, if it be affirmed of the soul. It
is false; because, a Line which is an incorporeall-thing does evenly touch a
corporeall-essence, and is also separated from the same; as also whiteness.
Yet, in the Soul it is true; by reason the Soul does not (so) touch the Body.
For, if the Soul should (so) touch the body, it must needs follow that it must
be laid (as it were) along by it. And if that be so, then it lies along by the
whole body (that is, by every part of the same) which is impossible. For, how
can a wholebody, lie along by every part of another body?

Or, if it should be that the Soul so touched the Body; then, the whole
Creature should not have life: For, if it (so) touched the same, it would
indeed consequently follow, that the Soul were a corporeall-essence; but, then,
the thing made alive, should not have life in it, throughout every part of the
same. And, contrariwise, if the whole living-creature has life in it, then the
Soul neither touches the Body, neither is it a bodily-thing. But, the whole
living-creature has life in it; therefore, neither does the Soul touch it;
neither is the Soul a bodily-thing; and, being a thing void of body; is,
nevertheless, separated from the body, (contrary to the proposition of
Chrysippus.)

It is manifest, by what Soul is no corpreall-substance: it now remains that
we prove the same to be a substance. And, because Dinarchus defines the Soul to
be an Harmony; And Simmias, contradicting Socrates, affirms the same;
comparing the Soul to an harmony, and the body to a Harp; we will here set
down the same confutations of them, which we find in Plato's Dialogue called
Phaedon.

One of them is taken from what Plato had proved by things granted: For, he had
demonstrated that when we do learn, we do but call to mind things that were
ingraffed formerly in us: And therefore, taking this unto him (as a thing
granted) he thereupon confirms his Argument in this manner;

If (says he) the learning of things be nothing else, but the recalling of
them to mind; then, our soul had a being, before it was in the form of MAN:
Now, if it were a Harmony, it was not before the body, but came after it, when
the body was harmoniously joined together. Such of necessity must the
composition be, as the things are whereof the composition is made: For,
composition is a certain common joining together of those things, which are
compounded, having a harmony in the same: and, it cannot be otherwise, in
reason, but that the Harmony must follow, and not precede those things whereof
it is compounded.

These matters considered, this saying, That the SOUL is an Harmony, is
contrary to this other saying, That, the learning of things is the recordation
of things: But the opinion concerning recordation (as is aforesaid) is true;
even in their judgment who affirm the SOUL to be an HARMONY; therefore the
SOUL is not a Harmony, according to their own Principle.

Again, the SOUL is a part repugnant to the body; and is in stead of a Ruler,
exercising a government over the same. But Harmony neither exercises any
government over the Body, neither is any way repugnant thereunto; therefore,
the SOUL is not an Harmony.

Moreover, one Harmony may be more or less Harmony then another, according as
it is slackned or stretched forth, (we mean not to be understood as if we
spoke of the very nature of Harmony; seeing it is impossible there should be
intension and remission, in the very nature thereof,) but we mean Harmony as
it consists in joining together of the notes: For, if a shrill and a
base-sound, being matched together, shall afterward be made more slack, there
will be a diversity in the Harmony, by reason of joining together of the
notes, more or less reached forth, though they retain the same nature in the
greatness of the sounds: But one SOUL is not more or less SOUL then another;
therefore, the SOUL cannot be a Harmony.

Futhermore, the SOUL in that it receives contraries succeeding one another, is
a substance and a subject: But, Harmony is a Quality, and in the subject Now
the predicament of substance is one thing, and the predicament of Quality is
another; therefore, the SOUL and Harmony are two distinct things. It is indeed,
no absurdity, to say that the SOUL has Harmony in it; howsoever, it follows
not that the SOUL is therefore an Harmony: Because, though the SOUL has
virtues in the same, it cannot be thereupon inferred that the SOUL is virtue.

SECT. 3.
I. It is here declared, that the SOUL is not (as Galen implicitly affirms) a
Temperature in general. II. It is here proved also, that the SOUL is no
particular temperature or quality. III. And it is likewise demonstrated, that
the SOUL is rather governesse of the temperatures of the Body, both ordering
them, and subduing the Vices, which arise from the bodily-tempers.

GAlen, has determined nothing peremptorily of the SOUL; yea, he himself
affirms plainly, in his writings of demonstration, that he has delivered
nothing precisely of the same: But, it may be collected by some of his
expressions, that he could be best pleased to affirm that the SOUL is a
temperature.

For, he says, that the diversity of manners follows the temperature of the
Body, and confirms his opinion by certain collections out of Hippocrates:
Wherein, if he delivered that which he truly thinks, then, doubtless, he
believes also, that the SOUL is mortal: not the whole SOUL, but that only
which is irrational; for, he makes a doubt concerning the reasonable soul,
as his words declare.

Now, that the temperature of the Body cannot be the SOUL, it may be made
evident by these reasons: First, every body, as well that which has life in it,
as that which is void of life, is made of the temperature of the four Elements
(for, the temperature of these Elements make all Bodies) And if the SOUL be
the temperature of the body, there can be no body with out life: For, if the
Soul be the temperature, then, every body has life in it, because every body
has his temperatures. And if every Body has life in it, then there is no body
void of life: So, consequently, neither stone, nor timber, nor iron, nor any
other thing can be without life.

But he did not mean, temperature of the body was the SOUL; but rather, that
some such, or such a temperature. We, then, demand what temperature it is
which makes a living-creature, and stands instead of the SOUL? For, let him
name what temperature soever he can devise, we will find him out the like in
things without life.

There are (as he himself has declared in his Book entitled OF THE
TEMPERAMENTS) nine temperatures; eight distempered; and one in good temper; by
which (as he likewise affirms) every man is tempered, whose temperature
keeps a mean. But by the other distemperatures other living-creatures are
composed (every one according to the several kind thereof) with a certain
intension and remission, to the more and to the less. Yea, and all the nine
temperatures are found also more or less in things void of life; as he
himself has taught, in his book of simple-medicaments.

Moreover, if the SOUL be a temperature, then is the SOUL subject to
alteration; for, the temperatures are altered according to the diversity of
Ages, Seasons, and Dyets: And, if the SOUL be altered, then we have not at all
times the same SOUL; but, a Soul varied according to our temperatures;
sometime the soul of a Lion, sometime of a Sheep, and sometime of other
creatures, which were absurdly affirmed.

Again, our temperature does not oppose it self against any lusts of our
bodies, but rather helps to provoke them, or effect them, for, it is that which
stirs up the desires: But, the SOUL bends it self against those desires;
therefore our temperature is not the SOUL.

Furthermore, the temperature is a quality; and a quality may be in the
subject, or absent from it without the destruction of the same subject: Now, if
our temperature be our soul, it will then follow (by the reason
aforementioned) that the soul may be separated from the body (which is the
subject thereof) without the destruction of the same. But, this is universally
known to be false; therefore, the SOUL can be neither temperature nor quality.

None will imagine it more possible to change that which is of the essence of a
living-creature, into the contrary thereof, and yet preserve the
living-creature, then, in fire to change the nature of heat into coldness, and
yet still continue the fire. But it appears plainly that our temperature does
alter into the contrary; (and that such as Galen was are they, who change our
temperatures, by their art of Physic. Therefore the soul (which is the
essence of a living-creature) cannot be the temperature.

Neither is the Soul a quality of the body: For, the qualities of every body
are subject to sense; But the soul is not subject to sense, but to
understanding only, and therefore it is not a Quality.

We know that this good temper of blood and spirits, accompanied with flesh
and sinews, and such other things, is strength. And, that the good temperature
of hot and cold, dry and moist things, is health. And that the measurable
proportion of the members, with a fresh color, is cause of the beauty which is
in the Body. Now, if the soul be a certain harmony, of health, and strength,
and beauty; It must needs follow that Man as long as he has a Soul in him,
can neither be sick, nor weak, nor deformed.

But, we see by often experience, that even while the living-soule continues
in them, many men are deprived, not only of one, but of all these good
temperatures; insomuch, that the very same man is deformed, and weak, and sick
all at once. Therefore, the soul is not the good temperature of the Body.

Some will ask, perhaps, (if the soul be not the temperature of the body)
that men are vicious or virtuous, according to their natural constitutions and
complexions* and they may demand also, whether these things proceed not from
the te^perature. We answer, that they do indeed proceed from the bodily
temperature: For, as there be some naturally healthful, or sickly, by reason
of their constitution; So, othersome, naturally abounding in bitter choler,
are froward; and some other cowardly, or leacherous, (more or less according
to their complexions.)

But, there be some, who overcome these natural inclinations, and by getting
the victory over them, do evidently manifest, that these temperatures may be
suppressed. Now, that which overcommeth is one thing, and that which is
overcome is another thing: Therefore, the temperature is also one thing, and
the soul (which is the vanquisher and orderer of inclinations proceeding from
the temperature) is another thing, and not the same.

The body being an instrument which the soul uses, if it be well fitted for
the same, is a helper unto the soul; and she the better uses it to her own
contentment. But, if it be not every way framed and tempered for the soul's
use, it becomes her hinderance, and much ado has she to strive against the
unfitness of her instrument. Yea, so much, that if she be not very wary and
diligent in rectifying the same, she her self is perverted as well as the
instrument; even as a musician misseth of true music, when his harp is out of
tune.

The soul therefore must be careful of the body, and make it a fit instrument
for her self: which may be done by ordering it according to Reason, and by
accustoming the same to good manners; as in Harmony, otherwhile slackning, and
sometime winding up, according as necessity requires: By the neglect whereof,
she her self, may else (as it often happens) become as faulty, and as
perverse as her Instrument.

SECT. 4.
I. The SOUL is not a perpetual motion as Aristotle affirms: He shows what
(...) is, and the defects of Aristoles judgment concerning the SOUL. II. The
Body has not in it self a possibility to live, before the SOUL comes unto
it, as Aristole has also affirmed. III. The SOUL is neither unmovable of it
self, nor accidentally moved, nor bred in the Body; as the fore said
Philosopher has delivered.

ARistotle affirming that the Soul is (...) a perpetual motion, is
nevertheless to be accounted among them, who say that the SOUL is a quality.
But, first, let me make it appear what Aristotle means by (...), (which is
to say) a perpetual motion.

He divides a substance into three parts: The first is matter (which is as it
were the subject) and this matter is in it self nothing, but a generating
power, out of which another thing may be formed.

The second part of the Essence, is form, (or special kind) by which the
matter is brought unto a certain form.

The third part, consists both of matter and form united together, and
endued with life: The matter being a thing in possibility only, and the form
an actual thing considerable two ways. That is to say, either as you consider
of a science, or of a contemplation according to the science; as a habit; or,
as working by that habit.

It is considerable as a science; because, in the very substance of the Soul
there is a kind (as we may call it) both of sleep and of waking. This waking
is analogically answerable unto contemplation; and sleep represents the having
of this habit, without any working thereby.

The Science, is, before working according to that science; and Aristotle calls
the form it self (...), that is, the first continued motion: The working
according to this form, he names (...) the second continued motion. As for
example:

The eye consists of a material subject, and of a certain form. This
material subject, is in the eye it self; even that which contains the sight
(I mean the matter of the eye) and this matter is equivocally called the eye.
But the form and continual motion of the eye is the operation whereby it
sees: A whelp before he can see though he has neither of the two motions
aforementioned, has yet, an aptness to receive such a motion: Even in such
manner we must conceive of it in the SOUL. When sight comes to the welp it
perfects the eye; and when the SOUL comes unto the Body, it perfects the
living-creature.

So then, in a perfect living-creature, neither can the SOUL be at any time
without the Body, neither the Body without the Soul: For, the SOUL is not the
Body it self; but, it is the SOUL of the BODY: and therefore, it is in the
Body, yea, and in such a kind of body: for, it has not an existence by it
self.

Aristotle first calls the possible (inferior) part of the soul, by the Name
of the soul, severing the Reasonable-part from it, whereas he should have taken
the whole soul of Man together, and not have given his judgment of the whole,
by a part, much less by the weakest part there of.

Aristotle has affirmed body has an aptness to live, even before the soul
comes unto it: For he says, that the body has in it self a possibility to
live.

Now, the body which has in it self a possibility to live, must first be
actually a body, before it receives that form: For, such a body is a matter
void of all qualities. Therefore it is impossible that the thing which is not
actually it self, should have in it an aptness whereby another thing may be
made of it.

If it be a body, and has in it self, no other being, but in possibility
only; how can that which is a body but in possibility, have a possibility of
life in it self? Though in other things, it is possible, that a man should have
somewhat which he never uses; yet in the soul it is impossible: For, the soul
does not cease to work, even in them that are asleep; but, a man, even in
sleeping, is nourished, and grows. and sees visions, and breathes, which is
the chiefest symptom of life.

It is hereby very plain that a Thing cannot have the possibility to live, but,
it must needs have life actually in it: For, indeed, it is nothing else but
life which does principally form the Soul, (it is planted together with the
Soul) and it is in the body by participation.

If therefore any man shall affirm, that Health answers proportionably to
Life; we will reply that in saying so, he tal keth not of the life of the SOUL
but of the body, and so uses a sophistical reasoning: For, the
corporeall-substance does receive contraries one after another; but, in the
substance, which is the form, that cannot be possible; Because, if the
difference, which is the Form, should be altered, the living creature would be
altered also.

It is not therefore, the substantial form, which receives contraries; but
the substance which is the subject; that is to say, the bodily-substance: And
therefore also the Soul cannot be, by any means, the continued motion of the
body; but must be a substance all perfect within it self, and incorporeall;
for that it receives contraries one after another, (as vice and virtue)
whereof the very Form, by it self, is not capable.

Furthermore, Aristotle Soul being a continued-motion, unmovable of it self,
is moved accidentally; and, that it is not unlikely we should be moved by an
immovable thing; because we see by common experience, that beauty being a
thing unmovable does nevertheless move us.

But, though Beauty, which is unmovable in it self, may move us, (as he
says) yet, the Beauty so moving us, is a thing by nature, apt enough to be
moved, and not such a thing as is altogether unmovable. Therefore, if the body
had any selfe-motion, it had not been any absurdity to say it should be moved
of that which was immovable: But, it is impossible that a thing of it self
immovable, should be moved of that which is also immovable How then should
the body attain unto motion, except it receive it from the soul? seeing it
cannot have any motion from it self?

It appears, therefore, that when Aristotle went about to declare the first
breeding of Motion, he showed us not the first, but the second. For, if he had
moved that which of it self is not moved, he had then made the first-motion.
But, if (otherwise) he move that which is moved of it self, he discourses how
the second-motion comes.

From whence then is the first motion procured to the body? If he say the
Elements are moved of themselvess; in regard some of them are naturally light,
and some heavy; It is not so: For, if levity and weightinesse were kinds of
motion; then, light and heavy things would never leave moving. But, they cease
from moving when they have attained their proper place. Therefore, lightness
and heaviness are not causes of the first-motion, but qualities of the
Elements.

If it were granted (that lightness and heaviness were causes of the
first-motion) how can the Qualities of Reasoning, of Judging, and of holding
Opinion, be wrought by heaviness and lightness? If they be not effects of
these; neither are they effects of the Elements; and if not of the Elements,
then also not of the Bodies.

Beside, if the soul be moved accidentally, and the body of it self; then
should the body be moved of it self, although it had no soul; and if that were
possible, then it might be a living-creature without a soul. But, these things
are absurd; and absurd therefore is the former opinion.

Moreover, it is likewise untruely affirmed, that every thing which is moved
naturally, is moved also violently; and that whatsoever is moved violently, is
moved by nature. For, the World being moved naturally, is not moved violently.
Neither is it true, that such things as are moved naturally, do rest naturally
also: For, the World, and the Sun, and the Moon, are naturally moved, and
yet cannot rest naturally: In like manner being naturally inclined to a
perpetual motion, they cannot rest naturally: For Rest is the destruction of
the Soul, and of every thing which is given to perpetuall-motion.

It is herewith considerable also, that there is as yet no solution made unto
that which was objected in the beginning of this Chapter, (viz.) how the body
(whose nature is to be easily dispersed) can be knit together, (if it be not by
an Incorporeall-substance).

SECT. 5.
I. The SOUL is not a Number according to the opinion of Pythagoras; nor as
Xenocrates understands it. II. The error of Eunomius in adding to his
definition of the Soul, these words, created (or engendered) in the Body; and
the absurdity thereupon ensuing. III. The difference between the Works of
Creation, and Providence, etc. and the error of Apollinarius touching the
generation of Souls.

PYthagoras, whose custom it was, by a certain kind of Comparison to liken
God, and all other things to NUMBERS, defined the soul, also, to be a number
moving it self. Him, Xenocrates imitated; not as though the soul were number;
but, for that it is in things numbered; and in such as are multiplied; and, for
that it is the soul which discernes things; and, because, likewise it puts
(as it were) upon every thing, certain forms, and distinctions.

(For, it is the SOVLE that separates one form from another, and shows how
they differ; both by the diversity of their Forms, and by the multitude of
their number; thereby causing things to be contained in number: And, therefore,
between the soul and numbers, there is some affinity.)

He himself has born witness of the soul that it is moved of it self: And,
that it is not a number, we may thus prove; Number, is in the predicament of
quantity; But, the soul is not in the predicament of quantity, but in the
predicament of substance; Therefore, the soul is not a number. Yea though they
would never so feign, that number should be a substance accounted among things
comprehended in understanding, it will be proved otherwise, as it shall
hereafter be declared.

Again, the SOUL has all his parts continued one to another; but, so has not
number; Therefore the SOUL is not a Number. Again, a number is increased by
putting more and more unto it, but, the Soul takes no such increase. Again, a
number is either even or odd; but the SOUL can neither be termed even nor odd.
Again, the SOUL has motion of it self; but a number is undoubtedly
unmovable. Again, a number remaining one and the same in nature, is able to
alter no quality that belongs unto numbers: But, the Soul remaining one and
the same in substance, does change his qualities, altering from ignorance to
knowledge, and from vice to virtue; therefore (all these particulars
considered) the SOUL is not a number.

These were the ancient Philosophers opinions concerning the SOUL. But Eunomius
defined it to be a SVBSTANCE void of body, and created in the body, agreeing
therein both with Plato and Aristotle. For, he took these words, a substance
void of body, out of Plato; and these, created in the body, from Aristotle: not
considering (though he was otherwise very quick witted) that he endeavors to
knit those things into One which can by no means be united together.

For, every thing that is engendered both bodily and in time, is corruptible and
mortal. To this the doctrine and judgment of Moses is agreeable. For, in
describing the Creation of things subject unto sense, he did not therein
deliver in express words, that the nature of things intelligible were then
made. But, some (though othersome are not of their opinion) insisting upon
conjectures, are of that mind.

Now if any man suppose that the SOUL was made after the body; because it was
put into the body, after the same was fashioned, he erreth wide from the truth.
For, neither does Moses say, that the SOUL was at the same time created when it
was brought into the body, neither does any reason persuade thereunto.

Eunomius therefore, might as well have said that the Soul is mortal, as does
Aristotle, and the Stoics, as affirm it is engendered in the body. For, if he
will say the soul is an incorporeall Essence; he should have refused to say
that, it was created in the body; lest he give men occasion to think the
soul mortal, and utterly void of Reason.

Beside, it seems by his opinion, that the World is not yet replenished; but,
is at this present (as it were) no more then half perfected, and stands every
day in want of some additions. For, there are every day added unto it, at the
least five times ten thousand intelligible substances. And (which is most
unreasonable) he seems to believe, that when the number of souls is
finished, then the whole world shall be dissolved, and the last not come to
light before the day of the general resurrection.

What can be more contrary to reason, then to imagine that the world shall be
destroyed, as soon as it is fully furnished? It were like the play-games of
little children so to do. For when they have made any works or devises upon
the sands, they usually tread them out again as soon as they have done them.

Now if any shall hereunto souls are now made by Providence and not by
Creation; and that there is no new substance brought into the world (whenever
any body is replenished with a soul) nor any other Essence, but the same
multiplied, by Providence, which was before; doubtless, they know not the
difference between Creation and Providence.

For it is the special work of Providence to preserve the substance of
corruptible living creatures, by breeding them one of another. I mean, here,
all such corruptible living-creatures as are bred by generation, and excepting
those which are generated by some rotten-matter; for, the succession of such,
is preserved, (by the same providence) by generating them of some other
putrefaction.

But the chief operation of Creation is, to make things of nothing. If,
therefore, the SOULS be made one of another: It will also follow, that they are
corruptible, like those other creatures, which are made successively one of
another, according to their kinds. If contrariwise, the SOULS be made of
nothing; then their making comes by Creation; and in so affirming, we deny
that place of Moses: God ceased from all his works. But both of these opinions
are absurd; Therefore, the Souls are not now made. For, that saving of the
Scripture; My Father works, etc. by the judgment even of Eunomius himself,
is to be understood not of the works of Creation, but of Providence.

Apollinarius held opinion that Souls were engendered one of another, as Bodies
are; and that the SOUL proceeds by succession from the first Man, unto all men
descending from him, according to the bodily succession; therein dissenting
both from those who conceive them to have been from the beginning (as it were)
stored up; and from those also who think they are daily created. For, in
contradiction to these tenets, they affirm, that by them God is set on work
with Adulterers when they beget children. And they further say that these words
of Moses, God ceased from all his works, etc. should be untrue, if God
continues to create Souls.

In answer hereunto, we have already showed, that all things are mortal which
have a successive generation one of another: For, therefore only they generate
and are generated, that the race of corruptible things might be preserved. And
therefore, Apollinarius, must either deny the successive generation of Souls;
or by holding such a generation, he must (consequently at least) necessarily
affirm that the Soul is mortal. Whereas he mentions children borne in
Adultery; let us leave that unto the Divine Providence, whereof we are
ignorant. But, if we may presume to conjecture ought of the Divine Providence,
it may be conceived that God very well knowing a child so begotten may be some
way profitable, permits such a body also to be furnished with a Soul, as
has been testified unto us by the child which was begotten of David on the
wife of Vrias.

SECT. 6.
I. The opinion of the Manichees concerning the SOUL, and the absurdity and
contradictions thereof. II. The judgment of Plato touching one general SOUL,
and many particular SOULS; The office of the SOUL; and the difference between
things that live, and Living-creatures, is here also declared. III. Of the
Transmigration of SOULS according to the various fancies of the Grecian
Philosophers.

NOw, it follows that we examine the opinion of the Manichees concerning the
SOUL. For, they say truly, that the SOUL is a substance, both immortal and
incorporeall: But, they add also, that there is but one only Soul for all
things; and that it is parted, and (as it were) peecemeal distributed unto all
particular bodies, as well to bodies inanimate, as to those which are endued
with life.

They affirm likewise that some bodies receive the same in more ample sort,
and some in a less measure. Things endued with life in a larger proportion;
Things void of life, in the less; And, heavenly things in the most abundant
manner; and that the particular souls, are portions of that soul which is
universal.

Now, if they had affirmed the soul to have been so divided, as that it had not
been divided into parts, but after some such sort as one voice is divided to
the ears of many hearers, the error had been the more tolerable. But, their
opinion is, that the very substance of the soul is divided into parts; and
(which is most harsh) they will have it to be accounted properly among the
Elements, and to be distributed together with the Elements, in the making up of
bodily-things; and for the collecting of them again into one, when they are
dissolved, as water is divided into certain portions, and then mingled again
all together.

They are of opinion, likewise, that (after the dissolution of their bodies)
the pure souls, being light, do ascend unto the light, and that souls which
have been defiled by the material substance (in which they resided) do pass
into the Elements, and from the Elements depart again into Plants, and
living-creatures. And though they do thus mangle the substance of the soul, by
their fancies making it in effect both corporeal and subject to perturbations,
they say nevertheless, that it is immortal.

But, in these things they contradict themselves: For, first, they say that the
souls which have been defiled, do return back to the Elements, and are
mingled and tempered one with another; and contrariwise, in the passing of
souls from body to body, they say that punishments are inflicted on them
according to their offenses, joining and separating again the nature of them,
(as occasion serves.)

They hold likewise, that when it is light, shadows are dispersed; and when
all is covered with clouds, that the shadows are gathered together; which
cannot possibly come to pass in an intelligible Nature. For, if a Man should
grant that shadows are dispersed and gathered again; we must then count
shadows among things subject unto sense.

Plato is of opinion that there is both one general soul, and many particular
souls. One soul for the whole world altogether, and other souls for
particular things: In such manner, that the whole world is endued with a proper
soul of its own, even with that soul which belongs unto the whole world; and
so also, that particular things are endued with their proper souls, even with
the soul, which is peculiar unto every one of them.

The soul (says he) which pertains to the Universe is stretched forth from
the center of the Earth to the uttermost limits of the Heavens, (not as though
he conceived such a stretching forth as is enclosed in Place, but such an
extension rather as is conceived in our understanding.) And he says, that
this is the SOUL which turns about the whole Globe, and which holds in, and
binds together all such things as have bodily shape. For (as has been
already declared all corporeal substances have need of somewhat to hold them
together; and that is done by the SOUL, which gives unto every thing the form.

For, every thing that lives, has a proper life of his own, and every thing
that is corrupted has his proper corruption, (say the Platonists.) So long as
it is held, and knit together, they term it a Body; and, when it is
dissolved, they say it is corrupted or destroyed.

They affirm, also, that all things live; but, say not that all things are
living-creatures. For, they distinguish Plants from things inanimate, for that
they increase and are nourished by a nourishing and vegitative power. They
distinguish the living-creatures, void of reason, from plants, by sense; And
the rational from the irrational, by reason.

Thus, though they affirm generally, that all things live; yet they
distinguish the nature of every living-thing. Such things as are utterly void
of a sensible life, do live (say they) an habitual life, and are held
together by the general Soul of the World, which keeps them in their proper
Being, and undissolved. This, they hold also to be the Soul which governs the
world; and, that, it sends into every particular thing such particular Souls,
as were before, made for them by the CREATOR. Yea, and they say to, that the
Creator gave unto it certain Laws, whereby it should order this whole world,
(which Laws they call DESTINY) and that the same Creator vouchsafed thereunto
a sufficient power to supply such things as are necessary for Man: whereof we
shall treat more at large in our discourse of Destiny.

Greek Philosophers who affirm the Soul to be immortal, are of opinion that
the SOUL passes from body to body: But they differ in setting down of what
sort of souls they mean it.

Some understand it of one sort only; that is to say, of the Reasonable-soul;
affirming that it passes into Plants, and into the bodies of
irrationall-creatures: Some of these think this transmigration was but at
certain appointed Revolutions of Time; and some of them imagined the time to
be casual and uncertain. Some other understand it, not of one sort of souls
only; but of the Irrational, as well as of the Rational: and some again,
understand it of many sorts of souls, even of so many, as there are diverse
kinds of living-creatures.

The Scholars of Plato have been somewhat singular in this opinion. For,
considering Plato said, that the souls of such as were furious, and angry, and
given to rapine, were clothed with the bodies of Wolves and Lions; and that
their souls who spent their lives in wantonness, took upon them the bodies of
Asses and such like beasts: Some understand him as though he had meant Lions
and Wolves and Asses as the bare words do signify. Some perceived that he
spoke figuratively, and by the names of those beasts, understood the conditions
or qualities of those creatures. For Cronius in his book entitled Of the
renewed generation (for so he terms the transmigration of SOULS from Body to
Body) will have it understood of none but reasonable-Soules: Yea and Theodorus
(one professing the doctrines of Plato) in his book which affirms, that one
SOUL comprehends all the species, is likewise of the same mind; And so is
Porphyrie.

SECT. 7.
I. The singular opinion of Iamblicus, touching the Tra^smigration of Souls.
II. Every BODY has a SOUL convenient for the same. III. The brute creatures
do nothing according to Reason, but by-naturall instinct* IV. The judgment of
Galen concerning diversity of Souls, and a recapitulation of the several
things proved and disproved in this Chapter, concluding the Soul to be both
immortal, and incorporeall.

BUt, Iamblicus running a contrary race to these men, says that we must
understand, that the soul is of the same sort that the living-creature is; and
that there be diverse kinds of SOULS. He has affirmed in his book called
MONOBIBLON; that the changing of SOULS never happens from Men to
unreasonable-creatures, neither from unreasonable-creatures to Men, but from
beasts to beasts; and from Men to Men. And in so saying he has not only well
guessed, but in my judgment expressed the very truth of Plato's opinion: As by
many other of his Arguments may be showed; but, especially by these that follow.

No one of the motions of reason (says he) manifests it self in unreasonable
creatures: For, neither Arts, nor Learning, nor Consultations, nor Virtues, nor
any other thing belonging to an intelligible nature, can be found in them.
And, therefore it is plain that they have no part of the reasonable-Soul.
Though in Infants, which are very young, there is altogether an
unreasonable-motion; yet we say they have a Reasonable-Soule; because, when
they come to years, they show forth the works of reason. But, in the
unreasonable-creature, which, at no age, gives any token of Reason, the
Reasonable-soule would be superfluous; because, the force of Reason would be
altogether, and at all times, useless unto him.

All men have agreed unanimously, that God made no superfluous creature; which
being true, it cannot be that a Reasonable-soule should be so superfluously
bestowed, as to be placed in cattle, and wild beasts, which cannot exercise
the same; lest it might be objected as a fault in the Creator, to give an
unfit SOUL to the Body: For, it is not the part of a good workman (or of one
who knows the order and method of working) so to do.

Now, if any shall object, that there is in beasts, a certain hidden habit of
reason, whereby they are moved; and that their shape makes them incapable of
artificial works, as the want of a man's fingers, depriveth him of means to
practice many Arts, wherein he is experienced, it makes nothing to the matter:
For, the same absurdity still remains; implying that God applies SOULS unto
some BODIES, which are so unfit, and superfluous, that they are hindered,
throughout all the ages, of those creatures, from their operations.

Beside, they confirm their propositions, by things unknown, and such as are
not confessed: For, who allows this fancy, that, beasts have in them a motion,
according to an hidden habit of Reason?

It is therefore better to Body, is fitly applied thereunto: That beasts also
have nothing more, according to any hidden habit of reason, then does outwardly
appear in their natural and simple actions; That every sort of
unreasonable-creatures is moved likewise according to a proper instinct of their
own, to such uses, and to such works as they were ordained unto, from the
beginning: and, that the shapes of their Bodies are likewise very fitly
accommodated for such purposes

Moreover, the CREATOR, because he would not leave them utterly void of help
in their necessities, has placed in every one of them such an understanding as
is natural, though not reasonable. In some he has placed a wiliness
representing Art, and having a shadow of Reason; partly for their better
avoiding of snares and dangers, which may betide them, and partly to make all
creatures to be the more naturally knit one to another; as has been said
before.

Now, that the brute-creatures reason in doing these things is evident in this,
that every living-creature of one kind, does the same things, and all of them
in one, and the same manner. Their practices differ not in multitude, but in
this only, that some use them, perhaps more, and some less; for all the whole
kind of them, practice the same wiles.

Every Hare does use the same subtleties, every Fox is alike crafty, and every
Ape imitates alike. But, it is not so with Man; For, his actions are infinitely
various, because, Reason being a certain thing which is free; and men having
also many things in their power, their workings are not one and the same, as it
is in every kind of irrational creature. For beasts have their motion only
by nature; and such things as are in a creature naturally, are in all of the
same kind. But, the actions proceeding from Reason, are after one sort in one
man, after another sort in another, and not necessarily the same in all men.

But, if they should say that man's SOUL is driven into the Bodies of beasts,
for a punishment of those faults which i^ had committed, when it was formerly
in man while he lived: This demonstration of theirs (contrary to the rules of
Logic) proves former things, by such as come after: For, why should
reasonable SOULS be cast into the Bodies of beasts which were made before man?
can you say they had offended in the Body of man before they had entered at all
into man's body?

Galen, that admirable Physician seems to be of the former opinion, and to
suppose that in every several kind of living-creature there is a sundry kind
of soul: For, in the beginning of the first book of that Tract which he wrote
Of the use of the parts; he says thus. Though there be many parts of a
living-creature, some greater, some less, (and some that cannot be divided
into any other kind) every one of them is useful some way to the SOUL: For,
the Body, is the instrument of the soul, and the parts of living-creatures,
differ much from one another, because there is difference in their SOULS.

Again, somewhat after that in the same book, he adds these words, speaking
of an Ape. Oh, thou that art so witty in finding faults I Nature can tell thee
that it was convenient a ridiculous shape of Body should be given to that beast
whose SOUL was ridiculous. By this it may sufficiently be declared, that Galen
thought a diversity of SOULS was planted in those creatures which were of
diverse kinds. Thus much of these matters.

Seeing we have corporeal essence, nor a harmony, nor a Temperature, nor any
other quality; it will necessarily follow, that it is a substance incorporeall.
All confess there is a SOUL; and if it be neither a Body, nor an accident, it
is mannest that it is a substance without a body; and no such thing as cannot
stand by it self without a subject: For such things may without the
destruction of the subject be either in the same, or absent; but if the SOUL be
separated from the body, that body must of necessity be destroyed.

We may use the same reasons to prove the Soul immortal: For, if it be
neither a body, whose nature is subject to dissolution and destruction, as is
aforesaid; nor a quality, nor a quantity, nor any thing subject to corruption;
then it must needs be immortal.

There be many other demonstrations, both in Plato, and others, illustrating
the immortality of the SOUL, but they are full of obseurity, and can hardly be
understood, or borne away by those who have been trained up in the same
sciences.

To us the doctrine of the divine Scriptures are all-sufficient, to prove the
SOULS immortality; and bear a full credit in themselves, because they were
inspired by God. But, against those who embrace not the Scriptures, as we
Christians do, we must prove by demonstration, that the SOUL is no such
thing, as is subject to corruption. If it be no corruptible thing, it must
needs be incorruptible; and consequently immortal. And therefore, to that
purpose let this be sufficient.

CAP. 3.
SECT. 1.
I. Of the uniting of the SOUL and BODY, and whether their Natures be altered,
or confounded by their union. II. The mystery of the SOUL and BODY'S union
illustrated by considering things conceivable in understanding, and by a
similitude taken from the Sun. III. Of the admirable proprieties of the SOUL;
and how it is properly or improperly said to be in the BODY, or in Place, etc.

OUr purpose is now to enquire, how between the SOUL and a lifelesse-body there
may be a perfect union: For, the possibility of this thing appears somewhat
doubtful; and, it is much the more doubtful, it Man consist not of these two
parts only, but of understanding also (as a distinct thing) which is the
opinion of some. But, the greatest doubt of all, arises in this respect, that
all those things which concur unto the making of one essence, are joined all
together in the making of that one; seeing all such things as are united to the
making up of another thing, are (usually) so altered that they remain not the
same they were before, as it shall plainly be declared in our Treaty of the
four Elements.

How then can the BODY being united unto the SOUL, remain still a Body? or,
how can the SOUL being incorporeall, and having a substance of his own, be
united with the BODY, and become a part of the Living-creature, preserving
still his own proper substance, without corruption and confusion?

It seems to be no way else possible, but that the Soul and the Body must by
their union one with other, either become altered one with the other, or
corrupted with each other, as the Elements are; or else, (to avoid those
absurdities) that they should not be truly united; but, be so joined only as
Dauncers are in their dance, or lie one by the other as Counters in a sum,
or at best be so mixed, as wine and water.

But, we have already declared in my Treatise upon the SOUL, that the Soul
cannot be laid (as it were) along by the Body; because, if it should be so,
that part only of the body should have life in it, which joyneth near unto
the soul; and that the part which the soul touches not, should be without
life.

Moreover, we cannot say, that two sundry things placed one beside the other,
(as two pieces of timber, two iron wedges, or such like) are one and the same
thing. And as for such a mixture as is made of wine and water, we know it
corrupts both the one and the other; for there does remain neither pure water,
nor pure wine, after such a mixture.

Yet this mixture of wine and water, is but (as it were) a laying of them one
beside another, though our senses be not able to apprehend the same, because
they are hindered from perceiving it, by the thinness of the parts of those
things which are mixed. For, the wine and water may be separated again the one
from the other, by a sponge dipped in oil, or by paper, either of which will
suck away the pare water from the wine. But, indeed, it is utterly impossible
to separate sensibly one from the other, those things which are exactly united.

If therefore, the parts of MAN be neither united, nor placed one beside the
other, nor mixed together, as aforesaid; what reason should move us to say,
that one Living creature is made of these two parts, a Soul and a body?

It was the consideration hereof, which partly moved Plato to imagine that this
living-creature did not consist of Soul and Body; but, that he was a Soul
having the use of the Body, and to whom the Body served as a garment. But, even
in affirming that, he occasioned as much doubting; for, how can the Soul be
one with what is but his garment, seeing a Coat, is not all one with him that
wears it?

But Amonius, who was Plotinus thus dissolved this question: even by affirming
that intelligible things have such a nature as may both be united unto such
things as are capable of them (and after the manner of such things as are
corrupted together in their uniting) and yet remain as truly without confusion
or corruption, when they be united, as those things do, which are but laid
along one by another.

It is true that Bodily-things being perfectly united together, must of
necessity suffer alterations by their union, and be changed in every one of
those parts which concur thereunto; because, they are thereby changed into
other Bodies, as are the Elements making compound bodies; or as nourishment,
being changed into blood; or as the blood when it is converted into Flesh, and
other parts of the Body.

But things intelligible, may be united, and yet no alteration of the
substance thereupon ensue. For, it is not agreeable to the nature of
intelligible-things, to be altered in substance; but, either it departs
away, or is brought to nothing, and so can admit no alteration.

The SOUL is immortal and therefore cannot be corrupted, or brought to
nothing; for, then it could not be immortal. It is also life it self; and
therefore cannot be changed in the mixture: For, if it should be changed in the
union, it should be altered from being life any more; and what should the SOUL
profit the Body if it gave not life thereunto? All these arguments considered,
it must be concluded that the soul is not altered by being united unto the Body.

Having thus proved that the substance of intelligible-things cannot be
altered; it follows necessarily thereupon, that as they are not corrupted by
their union with other things; so likewise, the things whereunto they are
united remain uncorrupted; and that in the union of the SOUL and Body there is
neither any corruption or confusion of the one or of the other.

That they are nevertheless perfectly united, is manifested by this, that
either of them partaketh of that which chances to the whole living-creature:
For, the whole man grieveth as one creature, if any cause of grief happen to
the one part or the other, (to the SOUL or to the Body.)

And, it is as plain, that they remain united without confusion, in that the
soul being separated (after a sort) from the Body when we be asleep (and
leaving the body lying in manner of a dead Corpse, and only breathing into the
same, as it were, certain vapors of life, least it should utterly perish)
does work by it self, in dreams, whilst the Body sleeps; foreseeing
things to come, and exercising it self merely in things intelligible.

The like happens when the mind is very seriously occupied in co^te^plation,
and enters into the consideration of intellectuall-things. For, even then the
soul endeavors by all possible means to be separated from the body, and to
be alone by it self that it may thereby ascend to the knowledge of things.

For, being without body, it separates it self from the whole body, as things
which are therewithal corrupted; and yet remains uncorrupted as those things
also do wherein there is no confusion: And keeping it self one and alone,
changes that wherein it abides, by the life which is contained in it self;
and yet is not changed by the same.

For, as the Sun, so soon as it appears, changes the air into light; so
making it light some, and so diffusing it self with the air, that it is
united with the same, and yet not confounded therewith: Even so, the soul being
united with the Body, remains without confusion therewith; differing in this
only, that the Sun being a Body, and circumscribed within the compass of
Place, is not himself in every place where his light is, but (as fire in the
wood, or as the flame in a candle) is confined to a certain place.

soul. For, being void of all Body, and not contained within the limits of any
place, it passes all and whole, through it own whole light, and through the
whole Body, wherein it is; neither is any part of it illuminated thereby,
wherein it is not fully and wholly present. Neither is it in the body as in
some bottle or other vessel, nor compassed in by the same; but the Body is
rather in the soul, and is thereby held in and fastened together.

For, intelligible things (such as the soul is) are not hindered by bodily
things; but, enter, and pierce, and pass through every corporeal thing, and
cannot possibly be contained within the circumference of a bodily-place.
Things intellectual, have their being in places also intelligible; yea they
are either in themselves, or else in such intellectual things, as are above
themselves.

The soul is otherwhile in it self; as, when it reasons or considers of
things; and otherwhile in the understanding; as, when it conceives any thing:
And when it is said to be in the body, it is not said to be there, as in
place; but, to be as it were in a certain relation to the body; and to be
present with it in such a sense, as, God is said to be in us.

For, we say that the soul is bound (as it were) by a certain disposition and
inclination, as the lover is to his beloved: not bound in place, or as bodies
are bound; but by the habitual bands of affection. And indeed, seeing it has
neither magnitude, nor massinesse, nor parts, how can it be enclosed by a
special place? Or within what place can that be contained, which has no
parts? Where place is, there must needs be a massinesse; because place is the
Bound which compasses another thing; and has it being in respect of that
which it encloseth.

Now, if any man shall thereupon conclude, that his soul is in Alexandria, and
in Rome, and in every place; let him know, that even in so saying, he
includes a Place. For, to be in Alexandria, or generally to be here, or there,
or any where, pertains unto a place; whereas the soul is no where (no not in
the body) as in a place; but habitually; because, (as is aforesaid) it cannot
be contained within a place.

For this cause, when things intellectual have any habitual inclination to a
place, or to such things as are in place; we turn the word from his proper
use, and say abusively, that such a thing is there, or there; by reason of the
operation which it there has; taking the name of place, for the inclination,
or working in a place. And, whereas we should rather say, it there works, we
say, There it is.

SECT. 2.
I. Of the union of the Godhead with the Manhood, how far forth it has any
similitude with the union of the Soul and Body; and wherein it is unlike
thereunto. II. Arguments taken from Porphyrie, confuting himself, and others,
who deny the possibility of an union between the Godhead and the Manhood, and
a disproofe of the opinion of the Eunomians concerning that union. III. He
proceeds to treat of the union of the soul and body; and shows that as it was
merely, of Gods good pleasure, to unite the Godhead to the Manhood; So it was
also agreeable to the Nature of God, that this union should be without mixture
or confusion.

THat which is last aforesaid, agrees more plainly and in more special manner
to that union, which is between GOD the WORD, and the Manhood; by which
union, the two Natures being united, remained nevertheless without confusion;
and so, also, that the divinity was not comprehended by the Humanity: And, yet,
this uniting is not altogether such, as is between the soul and the body: For,
the soul being in the number of multiplied things, suffers (after a sort) with
the Body, in such things as happen thereunto, and by reason of their mutual
necessities, and conversation together, both holds it in, and is also held in,
by the same.

But, GOD the Word being himself nothing altered, by that union, which unites
the divinity and humanity together (nor by that communion which the soul and
body have with each other) imparts his Godhead unto them, without
participating of their frailties; and becomes one with them, still remaining
in himself the same thing which he was, before such an uniting.

This is a strange and mysterious temperature and uniting: For, He is tempered
with them, and yet he himself continues utterly without mixion, without
confusion, without corruption, and without change: Neither suffering any thing
with them; but, only helping, and furthering them: nor being corrupted nor
altered by them; but, greatly increasing them, without any diminution in
himself; because, he is altogether without mutation, without confusion, and
without possibility of changing.

Hereof may Porphyrie Adversaries are the most undeniable proofs which may be
brought against themselves.) This Porphyrie in the second Book of his mixed
questions uses these words.

It is not, then (says he) to be judged a thing impossible, that some ESSENCE
should be assumed to the perfiting of another ESSENCE, and be part of that
ESSENCE, perfecting also the same, and yet remain still in it own NATVRE,
both being ONE with that other thing, and yet preserving the UNITY of it self:
yea, and (which is more then this) changing those things wherein it is, by the
presence thereof, and making it so to work as it self works, and yet
nothing altered in it SELF.

Now, Porphyrie spoke these things of the uniting of the SOUL and body: and if
his reason hold good, in the SOUL, in regard it is an incorporeall substance,
it holds true much rather, in GOD the Word, who is verily without body, and
also utterly void of composition. And this does mafestly shut the mouths of
them who endeavor to contradict the uniting of the Godhead and the Manhood,
as many of the Grecians have done; Jeasting, and deriding at it, as impossible,
improbable, and absurd, that the Divine-nature should be joined in a
temperature and an unity with our mortall-nature; for, it is here discovered,
that they may be opposed in this argument, by the testimony of such as are in
most esteem among themselves.

The opinion of some (especially of the Eunomians) is this, that GOD the Word
is united to the body not in substance, but by the powers of either (Nature:)
For it is not (say these) their substances which are united and tempered
together; but the powers of the BODY are tempered with the Divine powers.

Now, they affirm (according to Aristotle) that the Senses are the powers of
the body (meaning of all the body as it contains the instruments thereof) and
therefore, in their judgment, the Divine powers being tempered with the
Senses, is cause of that uniting: But, we shall never be persuaded to grant
unto them that the Senses are certain powers of the body: For, we have
already manifestly declared, what things belong properly to the Body, what
things to the SOUL only; and what to the SOUL and body both together: And, we
thereupon concluded, that the Senses, which work by the instruments of the
Body, are to be reckoned among those things which are proper to the SOUL and
body joined in One.

These things confidered, reason, we should affirm (according to the nature
of incorporeall-things) and as is aforesaid, that these Essences of the soul
and Body are united without confusion; and in such manner, that the more Divine
nature, is nothing impaired by the inferior nature; but that only the
inferior nature is profited by that which is Divine.

For a nature which is purely incorporeall, can pass without stop through all
things, whereas nothing has passage through that: By passing through all
things, it is united; and in regard nothing passes through the same, it
remains void of mixture, and without confusion.

It is not rightly affirmed therefore (though many excellent men be of this
opinion) that no reason else can be given, why the union, whereof we have
treated, should be after such a manner, but, only, because it pleased God it
should so be: For the very nature of the things is cause thereof.

We may justly say, that it came to pass merely by GOD's good pleasure, and
choice, that the SON should take a Body unto himself: But, it comes not
merely of the good pleasure of GOD (though it be also his good pleasure it
should be so) but of the proper nature of the Godhead, that when it is united,
it should not be confounded with the Manhood.

We will speak nothing of the degrees of souls, nor of their ascending and
descending, mentioned by Origin. For we find in holy Scriptures nothing
warranting the same; neither are they agreeable to the doctrines commonly
received among Christians.

CAP. 4.
SECT. 1.
I. Of the Body, and of the mediate and immediate composition thereof. II. Of
those parts of a living-creature, every portion whereof takes the name of the
whole; and of those parts which take not the name of the whole. III. MAN only
has every part belonging to the Body of a perfect LIVING-CREATVRE whereas all
others are defective in some of the parts; and many in the Situation of them.

RIghtly may we affirm that every corporeal Essence is a composition
proceeding from the four Elements, and made up of them. The bodies of
living-creatures having blood in them, are co^pacted immediately of the four
humors, Blood, phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy: But the Bodies of such as are
without blood, are made of the other three humors, and of somewhat in them
answering proportionably unto blood

We call that immediately, when any thing is made of the selfsame things
without any other thing coming between them: As the four humors are made of
the four Elements; and those things are compounded of the four humors, which
consist of like parts, and are parts also of the body (that is, things having
such parts, every part of which parts, may be called by the same name which is
given unto the whole; as when every part of the flesh, is called flesh.)

Melancholy, is likned to Earth, Phlegm to water; Blood to Air; Choler to
Fire; and, every thing which is compounded of the Elements, is either a Mass,
or Moisture, or Spirits.

Aristotle thought that the bodies of living-creatures were made immediately of
Blood only; because the seed is engendered of blood, and all the parts of a
living-creature nourished thereby.

But, because it seemed somewhat absurd to imagine that both hardest bones, and
the tenderest flesh and fatness, should proceed all of one thing; It pleased
Hippocrates to affirm that the bodies of living-creatures, were immediately
compacted of the four Elements; the thick and sollid parts of the more
earthly Elements, and the soft parts, of such Elements as are softest.

Oftentimes, all the four humors are found in the blood; whereof we have
experience in Phlebotomy: For, sometime a certain phlegm like whey does abound
in it; otherwhile Melancholy, and sometime, again, Choler. Whereupon, it
comes to pass that all men seem in some sort, to agree with one another.

Now, of the parts of living-creatures; parts there be, every portion of which
parts has the same name which is given unto the whole part: Othersome there
are, which cannot be called by the same name whereby the whole is called. As
for example; Every part of the Brain is called Brain; In like manner of the
sinews, of the marrow, of the bones, of the teeth, of the grissells, of the
nails, of the thin muscles that bind the Joints together, of all the skins
(throughout the body) of the strings (which are in the bloody flesh) of the
hairs, of the flesh, of the veins, of the arteries, of the pores, of the fat,
and of those four which are in manner of Elements, yielding matter out of which
the things aforesaid are immediately made, pure Blood, Phlegm, Melancholy, and
Choler. Except from these, the Muscle, which is compounded of those thinner
Muscles which knit our joints together, and of the strings which are of the
nature of sinews.

The parts of the body, consisting of portions, whereof every one takes not
the name of the whole; are these that follow; viz. the head, the breast, the
hands, the feet, and such other members of Man's body. For, if you divide the
head into several parts, every part of it is not called a Head: but if you
divide a sinew into several portions, every portion of it shall have the
denomination of a sinew; and so shall it be likewise, if you divide (or
subdivide) a vein or flesh.

Every whole thing, whose several parts have not the same name with the whole,
is made of such things as impart the name of the whole to the parts, when they
are compounded together; as the head is made of sinews, and flesh, and bone,
and such like, which are called the isntrumental parts.

The definition therefore of such things as the Greeks call (...), that is,
things which consist of like parts, is thus made; They are things whose parts
are like both to the whole, and to each other; (as flesh, brain, etc.) and by
the word like, in this place, we mean the same with the whole; for a piece of
a man's flesh, is as truly flesh as the whole mass.

living-creature, has not all the parts of a body; but, some of them are
defective in one part, and some in others; for, some lack feet, as fishes, and
Serpents; Some have no head, as Crabs and Lobsters, and certain other
water-creatures; and because they want a head, the seat of their sense is in
the breast.

Some living-creatures have no Lungs; namely, all such as breath no Air; some
are without a bladder, as birds, and all such as void not urine. And creatures
which have thick shells, are destitute of so many members, that some of them,
have but few appearances of being living-creatures.

There be also some living-creatures, which although they have such things as
are in our bodies, yet seem to want them. As the Stag which seems to have no
choler, because he has it not in one place, but so dispersed abroad in his
entrails, that it is no where apparent.

But, MAN has all the parts of a living-creature; every part also, perfect;
and all in so goodly order, that it could not possibly have been better
composed.

Beside their want of some parts, there is likewise among other
living-creatures, much difference in the situation of the parts. For, some
have their dugs in the breast; some, on their bellies; and some under their
thighs: Some again, have two dugs; some four; and some have more. Nature
has so provided (for the most part) that the number of dugges is answerable to
the number of young-ones which every creature brings forth at a time. But let
him that would be more exactly informed of these things, read the hystory
which Aristotle has written of living-creatures.

For, it pertains not unto the discourse which I now purpose, to treat at
large of such things; but, only to point at them, or, to speak briefly of them.

CAP. 5.
SECT. 1.
I. Of the four Elements: of their simple and mixed Nature; of their four
qualities, Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness; of their contrarieties, and of
the means of uniting them into one body. II. Of the Circular motion, and
changeableness of the Elements one into another; and a reason why God made
them of such a nature. III. The opinion of Aristotle, concerning the nature of
the Air, etc.

Go we now on, to the Elements, which are consequently to be next handled in
this Treatise. An Element of the world, is a most small part in the composition
of bodies. They are these four; Earth, water, air, and fire, and if you begin
at the lowest, and so pass to the highest body of them, they are placed in
such order, as I have named them.

The bodies of these Elements, are the first bodies, and simple bodies, in
respect of other bodies: And every Element is of the same kind, with those
things, whose Element it is. For, principles (as matter, form, and privation)
are not of the same kind with the things which are made of them: But, an
Element is necessarily of the same kind.

Now, it is manifest that these four, Earth, water, air, and fire are the
Elements; and it is as evident that the (four first) qualities (that is to
say) Hot, cold, moist, and dry, be in those Elements, in the highest degree,
both potentially and actually also. And, yet, there is not one of these
Elements, which we can discern by our senses, to be altogether void of
temperature, and mixture with some other Element: For indeed, all those which
we are sensible of, are in a sort somewhat counterfeit, and participate each
of other, more or less; even when in their mixture, their several natures
continue most apparent.

Moreover, every one of these Elements, has two coupled qualities, which
constitute the species, or nature of it. For, EARTH is dry and cold; WATER is
cold and moist; AIR is hot and moist; and FIRE is hot and dry. Yet, these
qualities, by themselves, cannot be Elements: For, qualities are void of body;
and of things incorporeall, things corporeal cannot be made.

Neither is it possible, that other bodies should be actually Elements, which
have not actually each of these qualities in the highest degree: For, if those
things which have these qualities, more or less, should be Elements, there
would be an infinite number of Elements; and we should never be able to
discern the Elements of each particular thing: because every thing has some
quality in it, more or less.

It follows therefore necessarily, that every Element is a BODY and a
simple-body; and such a one as has actually in it, in the highest degree,
these qualities, HEAT, COLD, MOISTURE, and DRYNESS: because, of all qualities,
these only and no other do make a whole change in the whole substance.
Whiteness coming near unto a Body cannot make it white through and through (as
we say) neither can such a change be wrought by any other thing; whereas Heat
or cold, can warm or cool a body, not only superficially, but quite
throughout the same.

Those Elements are accounted contraries, which are directly contrary to one
another, in both their qualities. Thus WATER is contrary to FIRE: For, water is
cold and moist; and Fire is hot and dry. In like manner, EARTH is contrary to
AIR: For, Earth is cold and dry; and Air is hot and moist.

And, forasmuch as things which are so repugnant, could not be fitly joined
one unto another, without a middle-band ordained to knit them together: The
wise Creator has placed water as a mean between the Earth and the Air (which
are contraries) induing it with her two qualities, cold and moist, that being
the medium between those, which extremely differ, they might be united
thereby: For, by reason of the cold, it agrees naturally with the earth; and by
means of moisture, it is fitly joined unto the air.

Again, in the middle between the water and the fire, (which are also
contraries in themselves) he has placed the air, which by his moist-qualitie
does very well accord with water, and with fire, by the quality of heat.

Thus, God has linked every one of them each to other (as in a chain) by
placing between things contrary, such other things as may both unite the said
contraries to themselves, and to such things also, as are bound one to another
by them: Yea, (which is an excellent kind of band) he has joined together
every one of the Elements, by the one of his qualities to that which went
before; and by the other to that which followed after.

For example, the water, being cold and moist, is joined unto the earth (which
if you begin at the lowest, and ascend, is next beneath it) by his coldness;
and by his moisture, to the air which is next above it. The air likewise by
the moistnes of it, is joined to the water, which is next beneath it; and by
heat, to the fire which is above it. The fire also by the heat thereof, is
joined to the air which is beneath it; and by dryness to the earth; to which,
being the lowest, it declineth it self (as it were in a circular motion.) The
earth by coldness, is united to the water; and by dryness to the fire, which
declineth toward it.

Elements, should not have only an inclination to ascend and descend directly
upward and downward; but incline also to a circular motion: God bowed them (as
it were) and made the two extreme Elements, fire and earth to turn one toward
the other. For, the fire if it lose heat, is no longer fire; but becomes
earth, as is manifestly proved by thunderbolts, which being thrown down and
cooled, are converted into stones: For, every thunderbolt consists of stone
and brimstone, The stone is (as it were) the brimstone overbaked,) Brimstone is
(as it were) fire cooled: and no more actually hot, but, having a near
possibility of heat; and being also, actually dry: For, the Elements only, have
the qualities actually; whereas, all other things have them but in possibility,
except they come near unto some Elements.

But, to the end, that neither the Elements should fail, nor the Bodies which
are to be compounded of those Elements, the Creator did providently devise,
that they should be convertible, both one into another; and also, into
compound-bodies: and that the compound-bodies should be again resolved into
their Elements. By which means, it comes to pass, that they are continually
engendered one of another, and perpetually preserved from being wasted.

For, Earth being first dissolved into a mirie moistness, becomes water.
Water being thickened and congealed, becomes earth. Water also, being heated
and resolved into vapors, vanishes into air. Air being collected and
condensed, is turned into water. The same air being dried changes into fire.
Fire, if it be quenched, and water also if it be evaporated, become air: For,
air is the quenchings of fire, and the moisture arising from water being
heated; even by both of these is the air generated: For, experience does show
us, that whenever fire is quenched, or water heated, air is increased
thereby: Therefore air is naturally hot; and cooled by being situated so
near unto the water, and the earth; which cool the lower parts thereof, as
the fire heateth also the upper parts of the same. And this happens unto the
air by reason of the softness thereof; and the easiness which it has to
receive impressions, makes it quickly depart from its proper nature, and very
apt to be changed.

Aristotle is of opinion that there be two sorts of air; one like unto
vapors, and generated by the exhalations of waters: The other, smoakie, and
bred out of the fire, when it is quenched. The air which comes of smoke, he
conceives to be hot; and that also which proceeds from vapors, when it is
first bred; but, in continuance of time, that air (as he says) cools, by
little and little; until it is converted into water.

This supposition of Aristotle's, that the air is of two sorts, was by him
devised, that he might escape some absurdities which he knew not otherwise how
to avoid; and that things which are somewhat high, and far distant from the
earth, might seem hot, and that such as are very low might seem colder.

SECT. 2.
I. Of the uniting of the Elements into a natural body; what manner of
composition it is, and why those bodies are again resolved into Elements. II.
Plato's opinion concerning the Element of earth; as also, concerning the other
three Elements. III. Of the division of the Elements according to the Stoics:
The opinion of Aristotle, touching a fifth body, out of which he thinks the
heavens were made; and of the contrary opinion of Plato.

NOw, all Bodies are made by the conjunction of these four Elements, both the
Bodies of Plants, and of living-creatures also: to the composition of which
bodies, nature draws together the purest parts of those Elements. These are
called by Aristotle, natural bodies; being compounded, not by heaping of the
Elements one upon another; but by tempering all together (throughout the whole)
so much of every Element, as is in the Body, in the uniting thereof; and by
making of them one certain BODY, differing from what they were, before that
composition.

For, they are so united, that impossible it is to sever them, or to see Earth
by it self, or Water alone, or Air, or Fire, distinctly from the rest;
because, one entire thing, and a thing differing from the Elements, is made by
the tempering of all four of them together; As a medicine, consisting of four
Ingredients, being once made up, is a thing differing from those Ingredients.

But, yet the composition of a natural body is not in all things like those
artificial composures: For, the Elements do not make the bodies, by the
situation of the thinnest parts, one by another, as it falls out in a
medicine, compounded of four ingredients; but, it is effected, rather, by
altering themselves, and by uniting of all into One.

All Bodies are again resolved, also, into these Elements; by which means it
comes to pass, that all the Elements remain continually unwasted, and are
kept sufficient for the making of all things, in regard they neither are
diminished, nor abound. And from hence arises this general proposition, That,
the generation of one thing is the corruption of another; And the corruption of
one, the generation of another; not referring (this perpetuity) to the Soul, as
is aforesaid, but to the Body only.

Plato is of opinion that the three other Elements are changed one into each
other, and that the Earth remains altogether without mutation; as may appear
by his comparing of the firmness of figures, consisting of streight-lines,
with every Element.

To the Earth he compares the figure called a Cube; because of all other
figures that is least moveable. The figure Icosaedron, which is hardliest moved
of all the rest, (and consisting of twenty bases) he likeneth unto water. The
Pyramide, whose motion is easiest of all the rest, he resembles to fire. And
Octaedron, (the figure consisting of eight bases) he compares unto the Air,
whose motion is easier then that of the water, and more hard then fire.

By these figures, he endevors to prove demonstratively that the three other
Elements are changed one into another, but that no change happens to the Earth:
For, (says he) three of these figures, that is to say, the Pyramide, the
Octaedron and the Icosaedron, are made of Triangles, whose sides are unequal,
whereas the Cubicall figure is made of Triangles, whose sides are equal: now
things which are made of Triangles whose sides are unequal, being dissolved
and meeting together again, may be changed into another; but, the
Cubicall-figure being dissolved cannot be changed into any other; because it is
made of equall-sided- Triangles, whereof none of the other three can be made.

In like manner none of the other figures can be changed into a Cube. And, for
these reasons it is necessary that the Bodies formed of these species, and the
species whereof they are formed, should in respect of one another be such as
they were.

And, yet, the Earth remains not altogether impassible; but, is divided by
bodies, having thinner parts then it self; being after a manner altered from
Element to Element, and yet not changed into those things which do divide it:
For, when it is recollected again unto it self, it recovereth the state which
it formerly had, as appears by it, in the water.

For, if you cast a little earth into the water, and stir it often up and down,
that earth dissolves into water; but, if you leave stirring of the same, the
water settles, and the earth sinks to a residence: The like is to be thought of
the whole earth: and this is not a changing, but a dissevering of such things
as were mingled together.

Plato affirms that the earth is also severed by the sharpness of the fire,
and being so dissolved is elevated and carried away in the fire: So likewise in
the mass of the Air, when Air dissolves it; and, in the water, when it is
dissolved, in the water.

Moreover, Plato mentions another division of the Elements, affirming every
one of them to have three Qualities. The fire to have sharpness, rareness,
and motion; The Element which is directly in the extreme thereunto, (that is
to say) the earth, to have dullness, thickness, and rest: So, in respect of
these Qualities, the earth and the fire, be clean contrary to each other;
whereas, they were not so, by those two qualities, whereof we had formerly
spoken.

He holds likewise, that, by qualities taken from the two extremes, those
Elements were made which are in the middle between these two: For (says he)
two qualities (to wit) rareness and motion, being taken from the fire; and one
(that is to say) dullness, being assumed from the Earth, Air is thereof
composed, whose effecting Qualities, are rareness, motion, and dullness. In
like manner, two Qualities are taken from the earth, namely, dullness and
thickness; and one from the fire, (to wit) motion, whereof proceeds water,
which gets also his form, by thickness, dullness, and motion.

Therefore, the same that sharpness is in respect of dullness, the same is
fire in respect of air: such as rareness is, in respect of thickness, such
is air in respect of water. That which motion is, in respect of rest, that
water is, in respect of earth. Look what fire is, in respect of air, the like
is air in respect of water. And as air is in respect of water, so is water in
respect of earth. For, it is the nature of things having a plain thin ground,
to be held together by one medium; (that is to say) by a proportion between
them; whereas, firm and sollid Bodies are not kept fast together, but, by two
mediums.

There are, yet other qualities ascribed unto the Elements. Namely, to the
earth and water, WEIGHTINESSE, whereby they do naturally incline downward;
and to air, and fire, LIGHTNESS, whereby they are naturally given to mount
upward.

Stoics have moreover, another way of dividing the Elements; for, some they
affirm to be active, and some passive. By active they mean the more stirring
Elements, such as are the fire and the air: By passive they understand the
duller Elements, that is to say, the earth and water.

But Aristotle, besides these Elements, brings in a Fifth BODY, which he
terms Aethereall; and this be fancies to be a BODY having in it a circular
motion; because, it pleases him not to say that the heavens are composed of
the four Elements: And he calls the Fifth, a Body moved circularly; because,
it is (as he imagines) carried circularly round about the earth.

Plato is of another opinion; and affirms directly, that the heavens are made
of fire, and of earth. His words are these: Every bodily shape which is made,
must be visible and subject unto touching; but, nothing can be visible without
some fire in it; not subject unto touching without some firmness; nor can any
thing be firm, without earth: And thereupon in the beginning, God caused the
body of the whole world to be composed of earth and fire. Now it is not
possible that two things alone should be made to unite and agree well
together, without a third, which must be as it were a band between them, to
bring them both together; and of all bands, that is the chief which can most
perfectly bring into an unity, both it self, and such things as are united by
the same. And this, the nature of proportion does best perform.

By the band here mentioned, he intends the two middle-Elements, taken
according to the proportion, whereof we spoke before.

SECT. 3.
I. The opinion of the Hebrews, and of Apollinarius touching the making of the
heavens and of the earth. II. Arguments out of Hippocrates against Thales,
Anaximenes, and Heraclitus, who say that there is but one only Element. III.
The body being an instrument for the soul, is made fit for the operations
thereof.

THe Hebrews, in their opinions concerning the making of the heavens and the
earth, differ so much from all others, that but few have conceived thereof as
they do: For they affirm that they were created of no fore existing matter;
according to Moses, who said, In the beginning, God made the heaven and the
earth.

But, Apollinarius thinks that God made the heaven and the earth, of the depth
of waters. For, Moses in his description of the worlds creation, does not so
make mention of the depth of waters, as if it had been created; but, in Job
these words are to be found; He made the depth of waters. Therefore, he
affirmed, that all other things were made out of that, as out of a matter
common to all.

He does not say that this depth of waters, was never made; but, that it was
laid down by the Creator, as a foundation, before any other bodily-thing was
made, that other things might be made thereof: For, the very name of depth,
declares the infiniteness of the matter.

And indeed, whether it be this or that way taken, it is not much material;
For even by this opinion also, God is confessed the sole Creator of all things;
and that he made every thing of nothing.

Now, there be some one only Element; either Fire, or Air, or Water, (For
Thales affirms that fire only; Anaximenes that air only; and Heraclitus,
with Hipparchus Metapontinus, that water only is an Element) against whom it
shall be sufficient to allege what Hippocrates has said in that behalf.

If (says he) MAN were composed but of one only thing he could never feel
any grief; For, he being but One thing, nothing could procure pain unto him;
or if he should feel any grief, there could be but one thing which might
heal him: For, that which feels grief, must needs be in a mutation with
some sense: And, if there be but one Element, there can then be nothing
whereinto the living-creature should be changed: And if it were not altered,
but continued settled in the same state, it could not possibly feel pain,
though it were never so sensible.

He says further: It is necessary that the thing which any body suffers
should proceed from some other thing: but if there be but one only Element,
there can be no quality, beside the quality of one Element, whereby the
living-creature may be afflicted: And, if neither can be changed nor suffer
any thing, how can it be grieved?

After he had thus declared the impossibility thereof, he supposes,
nevertheless, the same to be granted; and thereupon thus infers. Grant
(says he) it could suffer grief, and then it will follow, that there is but
one thing only which can cure the same; but experience has taught us that
there is not one thing only, but many things to cure every disease; and
therefore Man cannot be one only entire thing.

It may be further proved, that there are four Elements, by the reason
wherewith every one of them endeavors to confirm his own opinion (who
affirm that there is but one only Element.)

For when Thales affirmed that water only was to be accounted an Element, he
endeavored to show that all the other three were made of it; saying that the
faeces of it become earth, the thin parts become air, and that the thinnest
parts of that air are turned into fire.

Anaximenes, holding opinion that air only is an Element; goes about to prove
likewise, that all the rest of the Elements are made of air.

Heraclitus and Hipparchus Metapontinus affirming that there is no Element but
fire, use likewise the very same demonstration, to make their argument seem
reasonable.

Now, it will become evident by the reasons which these men give to justify
their assertion; that every one of them is an Element: For by some it is
demonstrated, that all other Elements are made of the fire; by another, that
all the rest are made of water; and by a third that they are all of air; which
make it plain that all the Elements are changed one into another (by their
general consent, who otherwise disagree.) And if they can all be changed one
into another, it will necessarily follow that they must all be Elements;
because which of the four soever shall be taken, it will appear that even
that is made of some other.

The Body (which is composed of these Elements) being an instrument for the
SOUL, is divided together with the powers of the same: For, it was framed to be
convenient and fit for them, in such manner, that no power of the SOUL should be
hindered through the Bodies defect. And therefore to every power of the SOUL,
there are proper parts of the Body assigned, for his operation; as I will more
particularly declare in the following Chapters.

The SOUL exercises the part of an Artificer; the BODY is as it were his
instrument: It is also the matter wherein the actions are conversant; and the
effect which is wroght thereby, is the action it self. The matter is as the
woman, the act is that which is conversant about her; either whoredom, incest,
or lawful copulation.

The powers of the Soul, are divided into these three; fantasy, judgment,
and memory.

CAP. 6.
I. Of the fantasy, or imagination; what it is; by what Names expressed; and
by what instruments it works. II. Of the seats and nature of the senses; and
why being but four Elements, there are five senses. III. The definitions of
sense, according to Plato and others; and distinctions between such faculties
in the Soul, as are appointed to bear rule* and to obey.

Express we will in the next place, such things as concern the fantasy or
imagination. The faculty of imagining, is a power of that part of the soul
which is void of Reason, and works by those instruments wherein the senses
are placed.

The thing subject to imagination, is that whereabout our imagination is
conversant, and may be called imaginable, as that which is felt is termed
sensible.

Imagination it self (called (...)) is a passion of that part of the soul
which is irrational, procured by something which is subject to our
imagination. A vain imagination (called (...)) is a void passion in the parts
of the soul which are destitute of reason, being procured of no certain thing
whereof an imagination should arise.

But, the Stoic Philosophers do set down those four in this manner; The
imagination it self, (...); The thing whereby the imagination is moved, (...);
A void drawing away of our imagination, (...); And that which moves our
imagination to be vainly drawn away, (...).

Imagination is a passion representing unto us both it self, and the thing
moving our Imagination; For, when we see some white thing, there is engendered
some passion in the Soul by the reception thereof. Even as there is some
passion begotten in the seats of the Sense when it feels any thing; So, there
is then something engendered in the Soul when it conceives any thing; and it
receives an Image or impression of the thing understood.

The fancy or the thing whereby Imagination is moved, is, any sensible-thing,
which has caused the Imagination; as it may be some white thing, or any other
object which may move the SOUL.

The Fantastic or void drawing away of our Imagination, is a needles (or
causuall) seducing (or distracting) of the Imagination, without any certain
thing which may move the same.

The Fantasme or thing it self, whereby we are idely drawn away, is the very
attraction whereby we are attracted, according to our vain Imagination; which
falls out in those that are Mad or Melancholy. Between these Opinions there
is no difference, but only, in the alteration of some Names.

The Instruments of the Imagination, are the former Panns of the brain; The
Vital spirits, which are in them; The sinews proceeding from the brain; The
nerves moistened by the Vital spirits, and the very frame of the places,
wherein the Senses are seated.

There are five seats for senses; but all are properly but one sense, which is
the SOUL it self, who, by the seats of the senses, discernes all such things as
fall out in them. It discernes, or takes knowledge of an Earthy nature. by
that sense, which is most Earthie and Bodily, namely the Touching: It
perceives perspicuous (or bright shining things) by that sense which is most
perspicuous, that is to say, the sight: It judges such things as are pertinent
to air by that seat which is ordained for the air; for the very substance of
the voice is air, or the smiting of the air: and it receives every taste by a
certain quality of the instrument of the sense of tasting; which attracts, by
its waterish and spongy nature.

For it is the nature of every sensible thing, to be discerned by some thing
which has a nature like unto it: and by this reason it should seem that there
being only four Elements there should be no more but four senses.

But, because there is a kind of vapor, and certain smells which have a
middle-nature between air and water; the parts whereof are somewhat thicker
then air, and thinner then water (which appears by them who are sick of a
heaviness in the head, by rhumes, and stoppings; for they drawing the air by
respiration, have no feeling of the vapor, by reason the fatness of the odor
is hindered by obstructions, from approaching the sense) therefore, a
fifth-seat of the sense, namely, smelling, was provided by nature, that no such
thing as may be brought unto our knowledge, should be hidden from the sense.

Yet the sense is not an alteration, but the discerning of alterations: Indeed
the seats of the sense are altered, and the sense discernes this alteration.

name of the sense, and of the seats of the sense are confounded. But, sense is
an apprehending of those things which are subject to sense: Yet this seems
not to be the definition of sense it self, but of the workings of the sense;
And therefore some define it thus:

Sense is a certain intellectual spirit extended from the principal part of
the mind, unto the bodily instruments. It is thus also defined: Sense is a
power of the soul, which takes hold of sensible things; and the seat of the
sense, is the instrument whereby it lays hold on such things as are sensible.

Plato says thus; Sense is that wherein the Soul and the body communicate
together concerning outward things: For, the very power it self belongs unto
the soul; but, the instrument pertaines to the body; and both together take
hold of such outward things as may be offered to imagination.

Some things in the soul were ordained to serve and be commanded; othersome to
rule and bear sway. The part which has in it understanding, and knowledge, was
ordained to rule. Those which appertain to sense, and to the motions by
appetite, as also, our ability of speaking, are made to serve and be at
command: For, our voice, and our motion by appetite, are obedient to reaon,
most speedily, and almost in a moment of time.

For, we Will and are moved together, and at once; so that we need no time to
come between our Will and our motion, as we may see in the moving of our
fingers. Some natural things are placed under the command of Reason, as those
which we call perturbations.

CAP. 7.
SECT. 1.
I. Of the sense of sight, and the opinions of Hipparchus, of the
Geometricians, of Epicurus, and Aristotle concerning the same. II. The opinions
of Plato, and of Galen, touching the same sense; and of the cause of seeing.
III. The opinion of Porphyrie also touching that sense.

WE find that this word fight has a diverse signification; for* sometime it
signifies the seat of the sight; and some time the power of the sense (it
self.)

Hipparchus affirms that the beams being shot forth from the eyes, take hold
(as it were) of outward things with the farthest ends of them (even as if a man
should lay his hand on them) and presents (or yields) those things, whereof
they have so taken hold, to our sight.

But the Geometricians describe unto us Figures (which are called Cones) broad
at the first and growing to a narrow top, made by the meeting of the
eye-beames* in one point. And they hold opinion that the beams of the
right-eye, being darted forth to the left-side, and the beams of the left-eye
toward the right-side, the Figure CONOS is made by the uniting of them in one;
and that thereby it comes to pass that the sight comprehends many visible
things together, at one view; and then more exactly perceives them, when the
beams are met closely one with another.

And this is the cause, that oftentimes, when we look upon the pavement we see
not a piece of money lying plainly visible thereupon, though we settle our
eyes upon the same with diligence: For, until it so fall out, that the beams
meet in that very place, where the money lies, we still overlooke the same;
but then, we presently attain the sight of it, as if that had been the
beginning of our looking for it in that place.

The Epicures think that the shapes of such things as appear unto us, are
brought to our eyes.

Aristotle is of opinion that it is not a bodily shape which appears, but a
certain quality rather conveyed from things visible, unto the sight, by an
alteration of the air which is round about.

Plato says, that the sight is caused by the meeting of all the several
brightnesses together (that is to say) partly by the light of the eyes, which
flowing out some part of the way into the air, which is of like nature with it
self; partly by that which is retorted back again from the bodies which are
seen; and partly by the force of that which is extended out together with the
fierynesse of the eye, affecting the air which comes between them; and easily
spreading every way, or turning to any side.

Galen agreeing with Plato, speaks of the sight (here and there in some
places of his seventh book of the agreement of parts) much to this purpose If
(says he) any part or power, or quality of bodies that are visible, should
come unto the eye, we could not know the quantity of the thing seen. For, if a
very great mountain were the object, it were quite contrary to reason, to
imagine that the shape of so huge a thing should enter wholly into our eyes:
yea, and the spirit belonging to the sight, being darted forth could not be
able to collect together so much vigor, as would be requisite to comprehend
the whole visible object.

It remains therefore that the air, wherewith we are encompassed, is after a
sort such an instrument unto us when we see, as the nerve which belongs unto
the sight is to the body; and some such thing seems to happen to the air,
which encloseth us round: For, the bright shining Sun having touched the upper
limits of the air, distributes his power into the whole air: And the splendour
which is carried through the sinews called the optic nerves which belong unto
the sight, has his essence of the nature of the spirits: This falling into the
air which is dilated round about us, makes an alteration even at the very
first injection, and shootes forth very far: yet so, that it contains it
self undispersed, until it happen upon a reflecting body.

For, the air is such an instrument unto the eye, to discern visible objects,
as the sinew is unto the brain: and look in what case the brain is, in
respect of his sinew; in like case is the eye in respect of the air, after it
is quickened by the bright shining of the Sun.

Now, that it is the nature of the air, to become like unto those things which
enter into it, appears manifest by this, that whenever any bright thing, (be
it red or blew, or of the color of silver) shall be conveyed through the
air, when it is light, the color of the air will be changed according to
that thing which is carried through the same.

But, Porphyrie in his book senses, affirms, that neither the making of the
Figure Conos, neither any shape, nor any other thing, is cause of our seeing,
but only this; that the soul her self meeting with such objects as are
visible, does perceive and know, that all those things which are seen, be
contained in her self; because it is she only which holds them together, to
their preservation. For, (as he says) whatsoever is in the world, is nothing
else, but the soul holding together diverse bodies.

And it were not untruly said, that the soul comes to the knowledge of it
self, by the view of every thing which is in the world; if his opinion be
allowed: for according to his tenet, there is but one soul for all things, even
the reasonable-soul.

SECT. 2.
I. Of the proper object of sight, and of such other means and circumstances
as are useful in seeing. II. Though color and shape are only the proper
objects of sight; yet by cogitation and memory, it comes to the knowledge of
other qualities in the thing seen. III. Of such senses as are conversant about
things at a distance; and in what cases the sight erres, or needs the aid of
other senses.

THe sight sees by straight lines; but it feels first and principally the
colors of things; and together with the^, discerns also the body that is
colored, the magnitude, the shape, the place, wherein it is; the distance, the
number, the motion, and the rest thereof; as like wise, whether it be rough, or
smooth, or unequal, or even, or sharp, or dull, or what element is
predominant therein; and whether it be waterish, or earthy; moist or dry.

Yet that which is the proper object of this sense, is color only; for we no
way attain the knowledge of colors but by our sight: and as soon as we
behold the color, we therewithal do immediately perceive also the colored
body; the place wherein the visible object abides; and the distance, which is
between the se^r and the thing seen.

Look in how many senses we receive the knowledge of b^dily things; even in
so many we come to the knowledge of a place, together with the body; as it is
in touching, and tasting: but these two, feel them only when they are joined
near unto the body (except in those things which we shall speak of anon)
whereas the sight, beholds things at a great distance.

Now in that the sight lays hold of such things, as are visible, when they be
far off, it must necessarily follow that it receives a sight only of the
distance of things: and it is then only capable of the magnitude of things,
when it is able at one view to comprehend the thing which appears; but
whenever the visible body is too large to be apprehended at one aspect, then
the sight needs memory and cogitation to assist it.

For, the sight beholding so great an object by peece-meale (and not at one
whole view) must necessarily pass from one part thereof to another; and in
that passage, so much only is apprehended by the proper faculty of the sight,
as is present in view; the rest which was viewed before, is kept by the memory,
until our understanding has brought together, both that which was before seen
and that which is present likewise, in our sight.

Moreover, sight apprehends the magnitude of bodies two manner of ways;
Sometime by it self alone; and sometime again by the aid of memory and
cogitation: But by it self alone, it never takes notice of the number of
things visible if they exceed three or four; seeing the number of them cannot
not be discerned at one attempt; neither can it lay hold on the motions of
things; neither on Figures which have many corners, without it have the help
of memory and cogitation to assist it.

For sight is not able to bring together, five or six or seven, or more,
without the help of memory; neither can it bring together figures that have
six, eight, or many corners. The motion also that comes by passing from one
great thing, to another, has in the same, some what preceding, and somewhat
following after; and wheresoever things are found to be some first, some
second, and some third; there memory only is the preserver of them together:
But these qualities, high and low, equal and unequal, rough and smooth,
sharp and dull, be communicable both to the touching, and to the sight; for
that they only can discern of place; and yet they stand in some need also of
our understanding.

For, that thing only which moves the sense by one only attempt, is wrought by
the sense alone (without the help of memory and cogitation:) but, such things
as are felt at diverse times are not wrought by the sense only, but by the aid
of memory and cogitation, as is aforesaid.

Such is the nature of sight, that it can pierce even unto the bottom of
transparant things; and first, and specially of the Air: For it can pass
quite through it. Secondly, it can pass through water when it is clear;
insomuch that we may see fishes swimming in the same: And; (though somewhat
more hardly) it passes through earth, being of a glassie or such like
transparant nature. Yet, this is always to be supposed, that these things must
be enlightened, when they become the proper object of sight, without the aid of
any other assistant.

But let no man be so deceived, as to imagine that the sight may of it self
discern hot things; because when we see fire, we know that it is hot; for if
you refer that speech to the first function of sight, you shall find that when
the sight first beheld the fire, it perceived nothing but the shape and color
thereof. After that, we coming to touch it, and thereby knowing the same to
be hot, our memory preserves in us the knowledge which we first gained by the
touch: and ever since; when we behold fire (though we see nothing in it but
the shape and color) our understanding by the help of memory, conceives the
hear of the fire to be in the same, as well as the things which are properly
seen.

The like may be said of an apple; For seeing the whole form thereof
consists not only in the color and the shape, but in the smell also and in
the taste; it follows not that it is the sight only, whereby we know the same
to be an apple (because we saw the shape and color of it) for, our memory had
preserved in our understanding the experience which we had formerly collected
from the smell and taste; and these being added unto that, whereof the eye took
notice, perfited our knowledge.

Therefore, when we think an apple made of wax to be a true apple, it is our
understanding which erreth, and not our sight; for the sight failed not to
inform rightly, so much as pertained unto her sense; when it perceived the
true color and shape of an apple.

Now, these three senses, sight, hearing, and smelling, are conversant about
things at a distance, and such as are not joined close unto them by means of
the air coming between them. But the taste cannot possibly feel any thing but
that whereunto it is nearely joined; and the touching takes part of both: for
sometime we touch things bodily, without any intermedium between us and them;
sometime again, we touch them with a staff betwixt us, and the things touched.

Moreover, the sight has now and then, want of some other of the senses to
witness unto it the certainty of that which it perceives, when things are
artificially wrought to deceive the sight; as it falls out in painting: For,
it is the painters cunning to deceive the eye, with counterfeit shadowings,
either of an Embost or hollow*worke, as the nature of the things requires: To
the discerning whereof, the sense of touching is especially useful, and
sometime of the taste and smell also; as appeared in the example of the apple
made of wax. Yea, and otherwhile (at no great distance) the sight it self
makes some things appear unto us to be that which they are not: For, if a
town which is foure-square be but a pretty distance from us, it will seem
unto the sight to be round.

The sight erres likewise, when we look through a thick air, or through
smoke, or some such things as otherwise trouble the sight by the thickness
thereof. In like manner, when we see things in the water, being stirred; for in
the Sea an Oar seems broken when it is whole.

So is it also when we look in or through some transparant* body; as
looking-glasses, or other glasses and the like things; or when the visible
object is moved swiftly: For, a swift-motion so distempers the sight; that
those things are thereby made appear to be round which are nothing so, and
those to be fixed, which are moved.

The same happens, when the mind is busied about other matters; as when a
man (purposing to meet his friend) passes by without heeding him whom he went
to meet, (though he met him in the way) by reason he had his mind busied with
other thoughts: But, indeed this is not properly an error of the sight, but of
the mind: For, the sight beheld his friend, and gave warning; but the mind
heeded not that which was brought unto it.

Finally, the sight needs four things for the clear discerning of all
visible objects, namely; A whole and sound seat for that sense; a
proportionable measure of motion; a fit distance; and the air to be pure and
clear.

CAP. 8.
I. Of the sense of touching; why the seat of it is in all parts of the body,
and why every living-creature enjoyes that sense, whereas many are defective in
other of the senses. II. Of the proper objects of this sense; and of such as it
has in common with other senses. III. In which of the senses Man excels;
and in what senses, other creatures excel him.

IT was by the Creator of the world, so ordered, that he made the seats of all
the other senses twofold, and confined them to a certain circuit of place in
some parts of the body; For example, he has made two eyes, two ears, two
passages for the sense situate in the nostrill; yea, and he has planted in
every living-creature, as it were, two tongues. In some they are evidently
parted, (as in serpents) and in some other, they are joined and united, as in
men: And for this cause, he made only two former-pans of the brain, that the
sinews which serve for the senses, being sent down from either of these
braine-pans might make the seats of the senses to be twofold.

Now, he made them twofold, in respect of that exceeding tender love which he
bare unto us; that when the one of them took harm, the other which remained
might preserve the sense. And yet, though most of the seats of the other senses
perish, the living-creature may be alive: but as soon as the sense of touching
is extinct, the living-creature does instantly perish.

For only the sense of touching, among all the rest of the senses is common to
all livingcreatures; and every living-creature is endued therewith; whereas all
of them have not every one of the other senses; but some have these, and some
have others, (except those which we call the more perfect creatures, and they
indeed have all the senses.)

Now, seeing the living-creature loses life by the loss of this sense; the
Creator has allotted unto the sense of touching, not one part of the body
only; but almost the whole body of the living-creature: For, except the bones,
and the horns, and the nails, and the binding-sinewes, and the hairs, and
certain other such like things, each part of the body is partaker of the sense
of touching

Thereupon it has so happened that the seat of every sense has two senses in
it; one of such things as are properly the object of every particular sense,
and another in respect of the sense of touching: For the sight discerns
colors, and yet is partaker both of hot and cold things; participating of heat
and cold as it is a body, and discerning of colors, as it is the sense of
sight. The like may be thought also of the taste, of the smelling, and of the
hearing.

It may hereupon be questioned how the touching can be spread over the whole
body, seeing that the senses proceed from the former brainepans: for indeed the
sinews come down from the brain, and being dispersed into every part of the
body, do there occasion the sense of touching. And some were of opinion
(because the hair stands up as it were, with a sudden horror, when the foot is
casually pricked with a thorn) that the grief, or at least, the feeling of
the grief, ascended up unto the brain, and was there felt. Which being true,
it might then be concluded, that there could be no grief in any part of the
body, that were wounded, but in the brain only.

It were better therefore to make this answer, that the sinews (which be
dispersed as aforesaid) are the brain it self. For, they are a certain
portion of the brain, containing in them the vital spirits, and diffusing
them throughout the whole body of the living-creature, in such manner as fire
is contained in burning-iron: And wheresoever such a sensible-sinew is planted,
it makes the part wherein it is ingraffed to be partaker of sense; and to be so
qualified, that it may feel things. Neither were it improperly spoken, to say
that not the passion, but rather a certain partaking of the grief, and a
denunciation of the same is conveyed up to the brain, where all the sinews
have their beginning.

sense of touching are hot, cold, soft, hard, slimy, stiff, heavy, and light:
For, by touching only, we attain the knowledge of these things; whereas these
next following are common both to the touching and the sight, (to wit) sharp,
dull, rough, plain, dry, moist, thick, thin, high, low, yea, and place it
self. So likewise is magnitude (when it can be comprised within one attempt
of the touching) fogginesse, clearenesse, roundnesse, (if it be but in small
things) as also the shape of other figures; yea, and it fooleth likewis the
motion of bodies coming near unto it, being assisted by memory, and
understanding.

Moreover, it is sensible of number, as far as two or three, but no farther;
and those things must also be of no larger magnitude, then may easily be
comprehended by the touch. And these are better discerned by sight then
touching; as are also such things as be equal or unequal (they being of the
same kind with smooth and rough things) for unequality being mingled with
hardness, causes a roughness; and equalness added unto thickness, makes a
smoothness.

By that which we have here delivered, it is evident that the senses
communicate each with other in many things: and that if one sense err, the
error if it may be rectified by some other senses; As we perceive in
Pictures: For, the sight beholds things as if they stood out from the rest of
the piece, as the Nose and such other parts of the Picture; but, by the sense
of touching, the error of the sight is discovered.

As the sight uses at all times the air for a means to behold all things; So
the sense of touching feels some things by a staff (or other instrument) as
by a mean; (to wit) hard, soft, and moist things. being aided by
understanding, and the discourse of reason.

In the sense of touching tasting, Man excels all other living-creatures;
and the beasts excel him, in the other three senses: for there be diverse
creatures that do surpass man in some one of the other three senses; but a
Dog excels him in every one of these three, hearing, seeing, and smelling,
as appears by hounds which hunt by foot.

The whole body (as we said before) is the seat wherein the sense of touching
is placed; but in man the inside of the hands, and the tops of the fingers, are
the principal seats there of, and were appointed by our Creator, not only to
lay hold on things; but to be exact instruments also, serviceable to the sense
of touching. And the cause why the skin of them is somewhat thin; why certain
muscles are laid under them throughout the inside; and why there grows no
hair on them (whereof the muscles are cause) is by reason they should the
better feel and take hold on small things.

Such hands as are hardest, are the more strong to hold things; and such as are
softest are most apt for exact touching. In like manner, the sinews which are
hard, be fittest for motion, and those which are soft, more convenient for
feeling; for the sinews also are instruments of touching; yea and the chief
instruments of that sense.

CAP. 9.
I. Of the Tasting; by what ways, on what matter, and with what instrument it
works. II. The names of the simple qualities pertaining to the taste. III. Of
the compound qualities belonging to the same sense, etc.

THat the sight beholds things by direct lines; that the senses of hearing and
smelling attain the knowledge of their objects, as well diverse other ways, as
by direct lines; and that touching and tasting do neineither by direct lines,
nor by any other means become sensible of their proper objects, but then
only, when they come near to such things as are subject to their sense
(except in such cases as are before expressed,) we have already declared.

The matter whereupon the taste works is the humors, or Juices which are
tasted. The instruments of tasting, are the tongue (chiefly the very tip of the
tongue) and the roof of the mouth: For in these are dispersed the sinews
descending from the brain, and they denounce to the principal part of the
soul, what that taste is which they have received.

qualities pertaining to the taste, and which are found in the Juices, are
these. Sweetness, sharpness, tartness, a binding bitterness, a bitterness
less binding, a quality bringing a bitterness by drought and heat; saltness*
fatness: For these are the qualities which taste discerns; and it is in
respect of these qualities that the water is said to be void of qualities;
because if you taste water, it offers none of these qualities to your sense;
whereas, if you have respect to other qualities, as cold and moisture, they are
ingraffed therein. The two bitternesses differ from each other in their being
more or less astringent.

These aforenamed are simple-qualities which belong unto the sense of tasting;
but the compound-qualities, are infinite; in regard there is a proper taste
belonging to every living-creature, and to every plant. There is one taste in
swines flesh, another in Goats flesh, and when we would know what flesh it is
which comes to be tasted, we distinguish the same by the quality of the taste,
which could not be done except there were a diverse quality in every thing that
is tasted.

Now because those things are infinite, and utterly diverse one from another,
we cannot comprise or distinguish them under particular terms: For even in
those things, wherein some one of the simple qualities bears rule, there is a
plain difference of that which is the object of taste. For, though in dry figs,
and in grapes, and in the fruit of the Palm, there is one predominant quality,
to wit, sweetness, yet in every one of them the taste discernes a difference.

CAP. 10.
I. Of the Hearing; of the object of that sense; of the instruments thereof;
and of such living-creatures as move not their ears.

HItherto of the taste. The sense of Hearing is employed about voices and
sounds; and in them it discernes the shrilnesse, the baseness, the softness,
the harshnesse, and the loudness.

The instruments thereof are a soft kind of sinews which proceed from the
brain; the form of the ears; and chiefly that part of them which is grisly:
for the grisles are fitted for sounds and noises.

Only Man and the Ape, are thought to have ears unmovable, and all other
living-creatures to have moveable ears.

CAP. 11.
Of the Smelling; of the instruments thereof; of the matter whereupon it lays
hold; and of the difference which is between the vapors, or fumes, from
whence the Smell arises.

EVery one of those places which are seats of the senses (as we have said
before) takes hold of such things as are the proper objects of their senses, by
means of a certain likeness and agreeableness which is between them and
their sensible objects; and therefore the Smelling (though it be first begun
by the nostrils) is perfected at the bounds of the former-braine-pans, which
having a natural affinity with vapors, do the more easily take hold of them.

And yet, whereas the brain in all other senses, sends down sinews into the
seat of each sense to be serviceable unto the sense therein placed; it so
deals not with our sense of Smelling; for the bounds of the brain it self,
are in stead of the sinews, and the brain receives immediately such vapors,
and fumes, as are yielded up unto it. Of which vapors, the most general
difference is in this, that some of them have a good smell, some an evil sent,
and some, that which is neither very good, nor very evil, but in a mean
betwixt both.

The good smell arises from humors exactly concocted: The evil sent, is when
they are ill concocted, or not at all; and the middle smell, is when they are
concocted after a midling manner.

CAP. 12.
Of the Cogitation; of the things thereunto pertaining; and of the instrument
whereby it works, etc.

RIght briefly, and according to our ability, we have spoken of the imagining
faculty of the soul; of the instruments thereof, and of those things wherein
they agree or differ.

To the cogitation these particulars are generally pertinent; the judgment of
things, a consent unto them, a refusal of them, and a desire unto them; But,
those which are specially pertinent, are consideration, virtues, knowledges,
the reason of arts, deliberation, and choice.

This is that part whereby we attain the foresight of things to come, in
visions or dreams; and therein only, the Pythagorean Philosophers (following
the Jewish opinions) think true prophesying consists.

The instruments of cogitation, are the middle-pan of the brain, and the
vital spirits, which are in it.

CAP. 13.
I. Of the memorative part of the Soul, and the definition of memory according
to Origin and Plato. II. The difference betwixt remembering of things contained
in sense and of things contained in understanding; as also what recordation is.
III. Of the instruments of the memory; and demonstrations evidently showing
where the fountains of the senses, of the cogitation, and memory are to be
found.

THe seat of memory, which the Greeks call Mnemoneuticon, is the cause and
storehouse both of memory and recordation, or remembrance.

Memory (as Origin says) is a certain appearance left in the mind, by some
sense which had wrought actually before. Plato takes it to be a preservation
of things both felt and considered: For, the mind takes hold of things which
are subject unto sense, by the seats of the sense, and thereof is opinion
begotten. But, it lays hold on things intelligible by understanding; and
thence arises consideration. And when the mind retains the Prints both of
things in opinion, and of those also which are in consideration, we then say,
that it remembers them.

Plato does herein mean, by the name of consideration, not the principal
consideration; but a certain cogitation: For things contained in sense, are
remembered by themselves; but, things contained in understanding, are
accidentally remembered. The remembrance of things thought upon by us, does
remain in us upon the heed of some appearance which was before in our
imagination: And we remember those things which are properly contained in our
understanding, in respect that we have learned them, and heard them; but as
for their substance, we have no memory thereof.

For indeed, the apprehending of things contained in understanding, proceeds
not from any preceding imagination; but comes to us by learning, and by a
natural notion.

If we be said to remember such things as we saw, or heard, or knew heretofore,
by some occasion or means: This word heretofore (having relation to the time
past) makes it plain, that such things as are made and destroyed again, and
such as have their being in time, are comprehended in memory; and that our
memory consists of things absent, but is not procured (or moved) by those
absent things.

Recordation (or remembrance) called by the Greeks Anamnesis; is when
forgetfulness has interrupted our memory; for it is a recovering of memory,
which was lost, when it failed by forgetfulness.

Memory is lost, either altogether (and for ever) or else, for a space only;
and when it fails but for a space, we call the recovery thereof remembrance.

But there is another kind of recordation, which is not occasioned by the
forgetfulness of such things as proceed from sense or understanding; but from
the forgetfulness of those things which we have even by natural notions. By
natural notions (or things naturally conceived) I mean such as every man has
in him without any teacher; as that there is a God. This Plato calls a
recordation of Idea's; and what is meant by Idea's I will hereafter show.

Such things as appear unto the imagining part, are from thence conveyed unto
the cogitation; and the cogitation, or discoursing part (when it has once
apprehended such things and judged of them) sends them to be stored up in that
part of the soul, wherein memory is resident.

instruments used by the memory, are the hinder braine-pan, called by the
Greeks (...), and (...), and the vital spirit there placed.

But seeing we have affirmed, that the beginnings and roots of the senses, are
the former pans of the brain; The seat of the cogitation, the middle pan; And
of the memory, the hinder-pan; it will be necessary for us to prove evidently
that these things are so. Lest we seem to give credit to that which has been
spoken, without any reason to be rendered for the same.

A plain demonstration thereof may be taken from the parts themselves; for,
if by any means the former braine-pan be hurt, the senses are much hindered;
but the cogitation remains sound. If only the middle-pan be harmed, the
cogitation is maimed; but the seat of sense keeps the senses whole. If any
hurt befall both to the former and middle-pan, both sense and cogitation decay.
If the hinder-pan be only disordered, the memory alone perishes, and neither
sense nor cogitation receive harm. But if the former, the middle, and the
hinder braine-pans be all together out of order, the party so disturbed is
maimed, in sense, in cogitation, and memory, all at once; and the whole
living-creature is in danger of destruction.

This is made evident also by many diseases, and accidents which are symptoms
of diseases, and especially in frantic men. For in some of them their
cogitation only is hurt, and their senses are preserved whole.

Such a frantic man, is mentioned by Galen, who being in a place wherein a
wool-winder was at work by him, rose up, and taking certain glass vessels
which he found in the room, ran to the window, and asked such as passed by,
whether they would have such or such glasses cast down unto them, calling
every vessel by the right name: And when they who stood below said they would
have it so, he threw them all down, one after another.

Then he asked them whether they would have the wool-winder thrown down
also; they (thinking he had but jested) replied yea: whereupon he took up the
wool-winder and hurled him headlong from a high place.

This man had his senses whole enough; for he knew which were the
glasse-vessels, and which was the wool-winder; but his cogitation was diseased.

Others there be, who deluded by a vain imagination, suppose that they see
such things as indeed are not seen; whereas in other things, they are not
without the direction of reason. In such as these, the former braine-pans are
only diseased, and the middle-pan uncrased; For, by those diseases which follow
every part, the course of their operation is accordingly hindered; and the
living-creature is hurt in respect of that operation, to the working whereof the
part diseased is naturally serviceable. As for example, if the feet be hurt,
our walking is hindered; for that is the work whereunto the foot serves.

CAP. 14.
I. Of the Reason, from whence we have the denomination of
reasonable-creatures. II. Of our speech, and of the several instruments
thereof.

HEre is one division of the powers of the soul, (together with which, there
are some parts of the body likewise divided) whereunto is added another
division, and after another manner* For the reasonablepart of the soul is
divided into reason which is unexpressed in us, and that which is uttered by
our speech.

The reason unexpressed (or settled in us) is a motion of the soul engendered in
that part of the mind, wherein consists our discourse of reason, without any
utterance by voice: Thereby oftentimes (although we say nothing) we thoroughly
resolve, and set down with our selves, the whole reason of a thing; and
otherwhile discourse in our dreams: And it is chiefly in respect thereof that
we are called reasonable-creatures; yea much rather in this respect, then for
that which is uttered by our speech.

For albeit some are deaf and dumb from their births, or lose their voices by
sickness and diseases, yet reasonable-creatures they are, nevertheless.

reason is by the voice in the variety of tongues; and the instruments used in
the voice are many; namely, the muscles which are in the middle of the sides,
the breast it self, the lungs, the winde-pipe, the throat, (and in all these,
those parts especially which are grisly) the returning sinews, the cover of the
windpipe; yea, and all the muscles which move these parts, are instruments of
our speech.

The instruments of our various utterance are the mouth: (for therein the
speech is molded and fashioned) and the tongue and the wesil-pipe (which are
there in stead of that wherewith we smite the strings of a Lute or such like
instrument) the roof of the mouth also, which is as the belly of the Lute,
that receives and gives back the sound. The teeth, and the various openings of
the mouth, do stand in stead of strings: yea, and the nose also does somewhat
further the plainness, and the pleasingness of speech, as appears in those
that sing.

CAP. 15.
I. Another division of the soul, being threefold. II. An eightfold division
thereof according to Zeno. III. A fivefold, and twofold division of the soul
also according to Aristotle.

Unto those aforegoing, there is added yet another division of the soul, into
the powers, the kinds, and parts thereof; namely, into a vegitative power,
which is the same whereby plants (and such like) do grow; and this is called
also a nourishing, or passive power, secondly into a sensible power; and
thirdly into that whereby it exercises reason.

Zeno the Stoic assigns soul eight parts; the reasonable part is the first
and principal: the five senses make up six, the faculty of speech the
seventh, and the eighth he affirms to be that power whereby things are
engendered one of another. But Panetine the philosopher (contradicting this
opinion) affirms that the uttering of our speech is a part of the motion which
is in our appetite; and that the power of ingendring is a part of nature, not
of the soul, wherein he has said very truly.

Aristotle in his Physics has divided the Soul into to five parts; namely,
that which is vegitative, sensitive, movable in place, that which belongs to
appetite, and that which is intellective.

He calls that vegitative, which nourishes, increases, breeds, makes, and
forms bodies; for under the name of vegitative he comprehends the entire
faculty of growing; calling the whole after the name of that part thereof which
is the chiefest therein, and from whence all the other parts of the growing
power have their essence.

This is Aristotle's opinion in his Physics; but in his Ethics he makes but a
twofold division of the Soul; that is to say, into parts rational, and
irrational. Of the reasonable-part I have already treated; now therefore I will
speak of that which is unreasonable.

CAP. 16.
I. Of that unreasonable part of the soul which contains the appetite: of
concupiscence also; of anger, and of their several instruments. II. Of the
diverse acceptations of this word affection, and the definition of an affection,
and of an operation or act. III. The difference between an operation, and an
affection or passion, etc.

SOme hold opinion that irrationality, or to be void of reason is an entire
thing by it self, as though there were a soul void of reason, which were not a
part of the rational soul: and for these causes they think so;

First, for that it is found alone by it self in unreasonable living
creatures; For thereby it seems unto them to be perfect of it self, and no
part of the reasonable soul. Secondly, they so imagine, because it appears
unto them one of the greatest absurdities which may be, to affirm that a power
void of reason should be part of a Soul endued with reason.

However, Aristotle affirms it to be both a part, and a faculty of the
reasonable soul, dividing it in to two parts, (as I said before) and calls
those two by this one common name, the appetitive-faculty: To which belongs
also the motion of our appetite; for appetite is the beginning of motion, as
appears in every living creature having a desire to something; for their
desire causes them to move forward, according to their appetite.

This unreasonable part of the soul does either disobey, or obey reason: And
that part which is obedient unto reason, is divided into two parts,
concupiscence, and anger.

The instrument of the concupiscence by which it comes into sense, is the
Liver. But the instrument of anger is the heart, which being a hard part
receives a strong motion, and is ordained for a hard service, and for great
resistances; whereas the Liver being a tender entrail, is made the instrument
of tender concupiscence.

These things are said to be obedient unto reason, because nature has ordained
them to obey reason, and to be moved, as reason commands, in all such men as
live answerable to that which nature (originally) requires. And these are
certain affections, which constitute our Essence, as it has life in it; For
life cannot be maintained without these.

affection has diverse acceptations, we must first distinguish the variety of
significations which it has: for either it pertains to the body, as when it
is sick or ulcerated, in which cases we say it is so or so affected, or else it
belongs to the soul, of which we now speak, and whereunto concupiscence and
anger do pertain. But universally and generally, in respect of the entire
living creature consisting of both parts, it is called an affection, and
follows either, in grief or pleasure.

For grief does follow our affection, but the very passion or affection it
self, is not grief: for if that were true, then wheresoever passion were
found, there should be grief also: but things void of life may be patients and
suffer, yet feel no grief. Therefore it is not necessarily consequent, that
whenever we are affected unto a thing, we should also be grieved, but then
only when we feel the thing which happens unto us. Yea, and that which
falls unto us must be a thing of such moment likewise, as may be perceived
by our sense.

But this is the definition of such affections as are in the soul. An affection
is the motion of our power of appetite, subject unto sense, provoked by the
appearance of some good or evil. Or else it may be defined thus: An affection
is a motion of the soul, void of reason, supposing either some good or some
evil thing.

Affection in general is by some thus defined; Affection is a motion in one
thing, by the commotion of another. The operation (or action) is a motion
working that which is wrought. And therefore anger is an operation of that part
of the soul wherein anger is; but it is an affection of both parts of the
soul; and beside that, of all our body, when our body by reason of anger is
violently drawn thereby to any furious act: for this motion chanced in one
thing, by the commotion of another thing, which was the definition of an
affection.

An operation (or action) affection; when it disagreeth from nature; for the
operation is a motion according to nature, but the affection is repugnant unto
nature: And therefore, an operation when it is not moved according to nature,
is called an affection, whether it be moved of it self, or of some other: As
for example, the motion which is from the heart in the pulses, is an operation;
but that unseasonable appetite, subject unto sense, provoked by the appearance
of some good or evil. Or else it may be defined thus: An affection is a
motion of the soul, void of reason, supposing either some good or some evil
thing.

Affection in general is by some thus defined; Affection is a motion in one
thing, by the commotion of another. The operation (or action) is a motion
working that which is wrought. And therefore anger is an operation of that part
of the soul wherein anger is; but it is an affection of both parts of the
soul; and beside that, of all our body, when our body by reason of anger is
violently drawn thereby to any furious act: for this motion chanced in one
thing, by the commotion of another thing, which was the definition of an
affection.

An operation (or action) affection; when it disagreeth from nature; for the
operation is a motion according to nature, but the affection is repugnant unto
nature: And therefore, an operation when it is not moved according to nature,
is called an affection, whether it be moved of it self, or of some other: As
for example, the motion which is from the heart in the pulses, is an operation;
but that unseasonable motion which comes by fears or fevers, is an
affection or passion. For that great panting proceeds from the heart it self
unnaturally; and from thence also comes naturally the moderate beating of the
pulses. Therefore it is no marvel if one and the same thing be called both
an affection and an operation. For in respect they be certain motions
proceeding from the passible part of the soul, they be a kind of operations;
but in this respect, that they pass measure, and are not agreeable to nature,
they are not operations, but affections.

Thus you see the motion of that part of the soul which is irrational, to be
an affection in both significations; and that nevertheless, every motion of
the passible part is not called a passion (or affection) but those which are
most vehement, or which (at least) proceed so far, that they may be felt. For,
those which are small, and which cannot be felt, are not to be called
affections (or passions) while they are in that degree; because there must be
a convenient quantity (or magnitude) to make it a passion.

And for this reason, that clause; whose motion is perceived by sense, is
annexed to the definition of an affection; even because small motions, whereunto
the sense is not privy, do not make an affection, as I said before.

CAP. 17.
I. Of the concupiscence, and of pleasure and grief, which are the two parts,
whereinto the same is divided; and of another fourfold division thereof. II. Of
the means whereby evil affections are engendered, and the means also how they
might be cured.

THat part of the soul, which (as we have said before) is irrational, and yet
obeys reason, is divided into these two; namely, the concupiscible, and
irascible part. The coNcupiscence is again divided into pleasure and grief:
For if our concupiscence attaines to that which is desired, it breeds a
pleasure, and if it misseth of the same, it engenders grief.

This desire may another way be divided into four parts, the concupiscence it
self being one of the four. For of those things which are; some be good, some
evil, some present, and some expected; and after this manner, if two be
multiplied, the parts in the division of the concupiscence will be four: For
you shall there find things good, things bad, things present, and things
expected.

Now good expected, is this desire: Good when it is present, is pleasure. Evil
when it is looked for, begets fear; when it is present, it brings grief.
If therefore you have respect to good things, therein consists pleasure and
desire; but if you respect evil things, of them proceed fear and grief. And
for these considerations, some have divided affection into these four parts;
desire, pleasure, fear, grief. We call those things good and bad, that are
either so indeed, or else reputed to be such.

Evil affections are engendered mind, by these three things; Evil education,
unskilfulnesse (or ignorance,) and by an evil constitution of Body.

For, if we be not well educated, even from our childhood, so that we may
learn to master our passions in the beginning, we soon fall into an
immoderation almost incurable. By reason of ignorance also, a certain perverse
judgment is fostered in the reasonable part of our soul, which makes us think
evil things to be good; and good things to be evil. And by means of an ill
complexion (or constitution) of body, somewhat is likewise occasioned to our
harm; For they in whom choler abound are inclined to fretfulnesse; and they
who exceed in heat and moisture, are prone to lasciviousness.

We must endeavor therefore, to cure an evil custom by enuring our selves
to good customs; we must remove ignorance by learning knowledge; and we must
labor to rectify the evil constitution of our bodies, by such bodily things,
as may so much as is possible help to bring it into a mean temperature; which
may be effected by a good diet, by exercise, and by physic, if need be.

CAP. 18.
SECT. 1.
I. Of the pleasures both of mind and body; their variety, and different
natures. II. Of such pleasures as are to be pursued by good men, and which are
properly accounted pleasures. III. What pleasures (according to the opinion of
Plato) are true or false pleasures: how good pleasures are named; how defined
by some Philosophers; and what defects are in their definition.

RIghtwell may pleasure be divided into corpereall and mentall-pleasures: For,
some belong only to the mind, as to be delighted in knowledge; or in the
contemplation of things. Others are called corporeall-pleasures, because they
proceed from the conjunction of soul and body, and they are the pleasures which
we have in eating, drinking, carnall-copulation, and the like.

There is no pleasure proper to the body alone: For they that seem to be such,
are passions rather then pleasures; as certain cuttings, and flawings,
qualities pertinent to the temperature of the body: For, all pleasure has
sense joined with it, and (as we have showed before) all sense belongs to the
soul.

There be diverse kinds of pleasure: Some are good, some naught; some false,
some true; some pertain to the mind only; some depend upon knowledge; some
belong to the body, and are judged by the sense.

Among pleasures tried by sense, some be natural, and some not so. To that
pleasure which is in drinking, the grief which comes by thirst, is opposed;
but to the pleasure which arises from contemplation, there is nothing
opposite; And by these things it is manifest that the name of pleasure has
many significations.

Among those which we call bodily or corporeal pleasures, some are both
necessary and natural; and without them it is impossible to live; such are the
pleasures which we take in eating and drinking what is competent, and in
necessary clothing. Some are natural, but not necessary pleasures, as natural
and legitimate copulation: For though this be necessary for the preservation
of the whole kind; yet it is not so necessary to the life of any one man, but
that he may live in his virginity without it; but some pleasures are neither
necessary nor natural; as drunkenness, lasciviousness, and feeding in
excess.

For these neither assist in propagating the succession of our kind, as
lawful copulation, neither become profitable for the maintenance of our life;
but are (on the contrary) harmefull unto us.

God, must pursue those pleasures only which are both necessary and natural.
But he that will content himself in the second order of virtues, may take in
hand both the forementioned pleasures, and therewith such also as are natural
but not necessary; observing a convenience in measure, manner, time, and place,
the rest he must by all means eschew.

Those pleasures are generally to be accounted good, which are neither
entangled with grief, nor occasion repentance, nor procure other harm, nor
depart from the mean, nor draw us from good works, nor bring us into bondage.
But those are properly pleasures, which are in some sort exercised in the
consideration of God, and of knowledge and virtue: And these are to be placed
among those pleasures which ought earnestly to be pursued, above all the rest
which are profitable unto us; not because they are pertinent unto our being (or
for the continuation of our kind) but for that they constitute our wellbeing,
and make us to be honest, to be lovers, and beloved of God, and to have the
utmost perfection of man; which perfection consists in the soul and
Understanding.

These pleasures are neither the remedies to avoid diseases, as eating,
drinking, and those other which do supply our wants; neither have they any
grief at all, preceding them, following them, or contrary unto them; but are
pure, immixt, and free from every material composition, because they pertain
only to the soul.

plato's opinion of pleasures, there be some of them false, and some true.
Those are false, unto the procuring whereof, sense and a false opinion is
needful; and such also as have grief annexed unto them. True pleasure is that
which pertaines to the soul only, even the soul by it self, together with
science, understanding, and prudence; and such pleasure as is pure without any
mixture of grief, or subsequent repentance at any time.

Some call such pleasures as ensue upon contemplation, and good actions, not
passions, but sweetnesses; and others call them Joy, as by a proper name.

They define pleasure to be a generation into a nature subject unto sense. But
this definition seems to agree only to corporeal pleasure: Seeing by that
pleasure, the wants of our body are supplied and cured, together with such
griefs as we sustained by those wants. For when we be cold or thirsty, we are
delighted in the warmth, and in the drink, whereby that grief is cured, which
proceeded from cold and thirst.

Therefore these pleasures are not good naturally or of themselves, but
accidentally: for, as to be in health, is good naturally and by it self,
whereas to be healed, is but an accidental good, so these pleasures are only
accidentally good; because they are but remedies for the curing of other
things. But the pleasure taken in contemplation is good naturally, and of it
self; because it is not used in respect of any want.

Hereby it is plain, that all pleasure is not ordained to supply wants; and if
this be true, that cannot be a good definition, which defines pleasure to be A
generation into a nature subject unto sense; for it comprehends not all
pleasure; but leaves out the best, even the pleasure that is in contemplation.

SECT. 2.
I. A definition of pleasure according to Epicurus, and another definition
equivolent thereunto. II. A definition of pleasure according to Aristotle. III.
Of the sundry sorts of pleasures; of their operations; of such as are proper to
man as he is man; and of such as are common to him, with other
living-creatures.

EPicurus the Philosopher defines pleasure to be The taking away of every thing
which may grieve a man: and in so defining it he says the same thing with him,
who affirms it to be A generation into a nature subject unto sense. For he
says that our deliverance from that which grieveth us is pleasure: But seeing
no generation consists of the same proprieties, with those things which proceed
thereof, we must not think that the generation of pleasure, is pleasure; but,
some other thing beside pleasure. For the generation it self is conversant
about ingendring; but of all things which are begotten, there is nothing which
is at once in begetting, and perfectly begotten; seeing it is evident that the
acting and the finishing of an act, are distinct things, perfected by degrees.
But that which takes pleasure is delighted all at once; therefore pleasure
cannot be a generation.

Furthermore, every generation is a making of things which are not formerly in
being; but pleasure concerns such things as have their being already;
therefore pleasure cannot be a generation. Again, generation may be said to be
speedy or slow; but so is not pleasure said to be.

Moreover, of good things, some be the habit, some the operation, and some the
instruments. The habit, as virtues; the operation, as the action agreeable to
virtue. Again, the habit is as the faculty of seeing; the operation, as the
seeing it self; and the instruments whereby we work, as the eye, riches, and
such like.

Now all the powers of the soul which are conversant about good or evil
things, are the faculties of some habits or other. Therefore, if pleasure be a
good thing, and not an evil thing; these are the only things in which it can
be conversant. But it cannot be a habit; neither is it as a virtue; for then
it could not be so easily changed into grief, which is contrary thereunto:
neither as it is contrary to privation; seeing it is impossible that a habit,
and a privation, should meet in the same subject; as pleasure and grief may.
For there be some who take pleasure, and are grieved both at once; as they who
are gently scratched when they itch; therefore pleasure is not a habit.

Neither is pleasure an instrument; For instruments are ordained in respect of
other things, not in respect of themselves, now pleasure is not for any other
thing, but for it self only, and therefore it cannot be an instrument.

Pleasure must be therefore an operation; and indeed Aristotle defines the same
to be an operation of a habit that is agreeable unto nature: but by this
definition, felicity should be pleasure, (seeing felicity is such an
operation as he defines;) and so his definition is false.

Therefore Aristotle thus corrects his definition; pleasure (says he) is
the end of the operations of a living-creature, which are void of encumbrance,
and agreeable to nature: So pleasure may be, as it were, wrapped up, and
coexist, together with felicity; but felicity cannot be pleasure.

Now every operation is not a motion; for some operation is practiced without
motion, such was the operation which God used in the first creation; for the
first mover of all things is unmovable; such also is the operation of
contemplation, which man uses; for it is exercised without motion; because the
subject of contemplation is always one and the same; and the mind of him that
contemplates, always firmly settled upon that object of contemplation.

If then, the pleasure that is in contemplation (and which is the greatest, the
principal, and the only true pleasure) be exercised without motion; it is
plain that such pleasures as have the fewest motions, are by so much the
better, and the greater, as their motions are the fewer.

Pleasures, together with operations are diversely distinguished; for there be
so many pleasures, as of their operations: when the operations are good, the
pleasures are good also; and if the operations be naught, such are the
pleasures.

That there be sundry sorts of pleasure in respect of every sense, it is very
manifest; for there be many pleasures both in touching and tasting; and great
diversity also in the pleasures of the sight, of the hearing, and of the
smell: and the purer senses are they which keep the farthest distance from
their objects, which delight them, as the slight, the hearing, and the smell.

There be two sorts of the operations of the mind, the one in practice, the
other in contemplation; and therefore it is evident, that there are two sorts
of pleasure which follow these operations; and that those which follow the
contemplation are more pure, then those which follow the practice.

The pleasures of the mind (or understanding) are proper to man as he is man;
but they which pertain to the sense, are common to him with other
living-creatures, in respect of his being a living-creature.

Now seeing it is thus, and that some are delighted with such pleasures, as
pertain to sense, and others with some other pleasures; those pleasures only
are to be accounted good of their own nature, which are judged good, not of
evil men, but of good men: For in doubtful matters, every common fellow is
not a competent judge; but he that is both skillful, and regulateth himself
according to the rule of (undepraved) nature.

CAP. 19.
I. Of Grief, and the several kinds thereof; and how far a good man may be
subject thereunto II. Excess chances only in bodily pleasures, not in those
which are mental.

ALL Grief is of one of these kinds; namely, astonishing grief, called by
the greeks (...), care; termed (...), envy and pity.

Astonishing grief, is that which bereaveth us of the use of our voice; care
is a grief burthenous unto us. Envy is a grief, springing from the welfare
of other men; and pity is a grief arising from the adversity of others.

Every grief is evil in respect of it own nature* for albeit a good man be
sometime grieved, when he sees good men oppressed, or his children or his
country spoiled, he grieveth not for the sorrows sake, as if it were good in
it self to grieve; but for a respect unto other circumstances: He that is a
delighted in contemplation is not moved God. And he that is otherwise a good
man, is moved by the circumstance of grief in such a mean, as never brings him
into subjection thereunto; but rather subdues them unto himself.

If you make the comparison between an evil thing, and a good thing, grief
is then contrary unto pleasure, which is used measurably; but if the comparison
be between evil and evil, grief is the contrary to an immoderate pleasure.

Excesses happen only in the pleasures of the body: For the pleasure which is
taken in contemplation, (even when it is in the highest degree, and has
attained unto perfection) admits no excess; neither is there any grief set in
a contrariety thereunto; nor does it serve to cure any preceding grief.

CAP. 20.
I. Of Fear, and the six parts thereof; with their definitions and
differences. II. The cause of fear, and the instrument of that grief.

NExt grief (in general) we will describe Fear, which is divided into six
parts; Sloth, Bashfulnesse, Shame, Amazedness, Carfulness, and Terror.

Sloth is when we fear lest we should be compelled to work. Amazedness is a
fear which arises in us when some huge and unusual thing appears Terror is
a trembling, or shuddering, occasioned by some dreadful object. Carfulness
is when we fear losing that which we have, or of missing that which we
desire; for by the fear* of these things, we are brought into a careful
agony. Bashfulnesse is the fear of some rebuke or disgrace; and is a very
honest passion. Shame is a fear begotten in us upon the remembrance of some
evil which we have committed: And where this is found there is remaining some
hope of goodness and amendment.

And this is the difference betwixt bashfulnesse, and shame, he that is ashamed
is troubled through fear of such things as he has done; but he that is
abashed fears lest some reproach may befall him: But the old writers use the
words indifferently, calling shame bashfulnesse; and bashfulnesse shame.

The cause of fear is a when they are frighted.

The instrument which this grief uses, is the belly (or mouth of the stomach)
For there the biting is first felt: And Galen in his third book of
Demonstrations, writes to this purpose;

When men are grieved (says he) choler flows plentifully into the stomach,
which causes a biting; and that grief, and biting never cease until they
have vomited out the choler. They feel this biting underneath the gristle
which is in the middle of the breast; which gristle is like a sword, and
thereof is called (...), but the heart lies much higher. For the Stomach is
placed under the midriffe, and the heart above it.

The old writers did use also to give the name of the heart to the mouth of the
stomach; as namely, Hippocrates; and Thucidides, when he talks of the
plague. His words be these, And when it came with some strength unto the heart,
(meaning the stomach) it made it give up; and there came from it as many
purgations of choler, as have been named of the Physicians. For, that which is
turned up, and forced to vomit, is the mouth of the stomach, and not that bowel
which we call the heart.

CAP. 21.
I. Of Anger, and of the names and nature of the three several parts thereof
Choler, Wrath, and Fury. II. The true office and use of anger.

SUch a heating of the blood, about the heart, as is caused by an exhalation of
choler troubling the same, is termed Anger, and therefore it is named also
choler, and wrath: And sometime it is a desire of revenge; for if we have
been injured, or but suppose our selves injured, we are then angry; and that
passion is usually mixed, both of anger, and of a desire which we have to be
revenged.

Anger is of three sorts or species. The first is called by the greeks (...)
and (...); for it is but the first heat, or beginning, (as it were) of anger,
and may be named in English choler, or an angry displeasure. The second is
(...), so called of the greek word (...), which implies a delaying. or
tarrying, or a thing-laid up in memory, and means a continuing, or
inverterate anger. The last is (...), derived of a word signifiing to lie in
wait; and is a revenging anger, waiting opportunities of revenge.

Anger, is appointed to when any thing is done wherewithal reason may justly
be displeased, anger immediately takes hold thereof (as she ought to do) if
reason, and anger keep their limits and natural course.

CAP. 22.
Of that irrational part of the Soul, which is not obedient unto reason.

LEt us now speak of that part of the soul, which is not subject unto reason:
For having declared that part which is obedient unto reason, we shall in good
order proceed to those faculties which are disobedient thereunto; namely the
faculty of nourishing, of ingendring, and of the pulses.

The faculties of nourishing, and ingendring are termed natural; and the
faculty of the pulses, is called vital.

CAP. 23.
I. Of the nourishing power of the soul, and the four faculties thereof. II.
Of the several evacuations. III. Of the several instruments, of nourishment,
and of the particular offices of those instruments.

ALL the natural faculties of the nourishing power, are these four; an
attractive appetite, a retentive power, a distributing, and an expulsive (or
avoiding faculty: for every part of the living-creature, does naturally draw
unto it self such nourishment, as is convenient for the same: when it is
attracted, it preserves it: when the same is kept a due time, it changes the
same into it self; and then expels whatsoever proves to be superfluous.

These are the faculties which order the nourishment of the parts of the body;
and by these it grows to an augmentation both in breadth and height.

The ways or passages, superfluities be avoided, are, by the belly, by urine,
by vomits, by sweats, by the mouth, by the nostrils, by the ears, by the eyes,
by breathings out, and by invisible pores, and unknown passages.

All the first evacuations are manifestly preceived, as that excrement called
the eare-waxe, by the ears; the tears and the gum (which we call the
spethyme) by the eyes; and that moisture also which makes bleare-eyed: the
out-breathings likewise, by which a sowltry heat is evaporated from the heart.
But by those which we call unknown passages, there breathes out (insensibly) a
moisture over all the body, wherewith many humors are evacuated, from the very
depth and drawing together of the arteries; and they are conveyed through the
skin where it is rarefied.

instruments of the nourishing faculty, are the mouth, the stomach, the belly,
the liver, all the veins, the intrailes, both sorts of choler, and the reins.

The mouth prepares the food beforehand for the belly, dividing it into small
parts, by the teeth and tongue: for in chewing the tongue is very helpful in
gathering the meat together, and in applying it unto the teeth; and as the
women which grind corn, thrust the grains unto the millstone with their
hands; so the tongue is as it were a hand to assist in the chewing of our meat.

The food being thus wrought beforehand, is conveyed into the belly by the
stomach; which is a place not only ordained to feel what we want, but to be
a passage-way also, to convey the meat unto our bellies: for the stomach rises
up when we eat or drink, and (drawing unto it that which we swallow down)
sends it into the belly.

When the belly has received the same; it severs that which is profitable for
nourishment, from that which is woody, stony, or unfit for nutriment. That
which is good, is there changed into humors; which are thence carried up to the
liver by veins ordained for that purpose, and which are as it were certain
rivulets to convey it thither.

These veins are in the liver, in the manner of roots, drawing thither from
the belly, the juice of our food, even as the roots of plants draw nourishment
from the earth: And the belly may be resembled unto the earth, which
ministers nourishment unto the plants: The veins like roots, carry the humor
from the belly, from the intrailes, and from the great doubleskin, which
fastneth our bowels, unto the back, unto the gates and to the bunches of the
liver.

The liver it self may be compared unto the stem or body of the plant. The
veins which issue by diverse ways from the hollow vein, springing from the
flatt parts of the liver; are like springs, and boughts. After the liver has
received the humor from the belly, it both concocts it, and makes it also like
unto it self: for the liver consisting of such flesh as has a near alliance
unto blood, easily converts that humor into blood.

This blood is cleansed by the spleen, by that bladder which receives the gall;
and by the reins: for the spleen attracts unto it all the dregs of the blood,
and is nourished thereby. The bladder (called the gall) which receives the
choler, draws unto it self, the sharpness which remained in the juice of
our food. The reins, do as it were strain out that thin humor which is like
whey, and the sharpness also which temaineth in that humor: After all which,
the blood becoming pure and good, is distributed for a nourishment unto all
other parts of the body, by such veins as are dispersed abroad into every
member.

By this means every part of the body drawing blood unto it, retains and
converteth so much thereof as is proportionable, into it own substance; the
rest it sends to the next part, and so to the next, that it may yield
nourishment unto them.

Thus, all the body is in every part nourished, and has growth and continuance
by the blood, which is distributed from the liver: And this part is termed
irrational, and said not to be obedient unto reason; because that which it
performs, is not executed according to our choice (or as we our selves will)
but naturally; and according to it own nature.

CAP. 24.
I. Of the pulses, and of their offices. II. Of the excellent and useful
disposition of the sinowes, the veins, and arteries; and of the several
fountains of these. III. Of the mutual benefit and assistance also, which
these three are to each other.

THe motion of the Pulses is called a vital power: For, having beginning from
the heart (and especially from the left portion thereof, which is called the
place of the spirits) it distributes unto every part of the body, an ingraffed
and a vitall-heat, by means of the arteries; even as the liver distributes
food by the veins.

If therefore the heart be inflamed above the due measure which nature does
require; the entire living-creature is forthwith brought into an unnatural
heat: and is in like manner cooled, if the heart be cooled beyond a just
proportion; because the vitall-spirit is dispersed from the heart by the
arteries, into every part of the body.

vein, the artery, and the sinew, be so divided, that they go all together,
proceeding from the three principal parts, which govern the entire
living-creature.

From the brain, which is the fountain both of motion and of sense, proceeds
the sinew. From the liver, which yields a beginning to the blood, and the
nourishing-faculty, comes the vein, which is the vessel wherein the blood is
carried. And from the heart, which is the root of our vitall-faculty, comes the
artery, which is that vessel wherein the spirits are conveyed.

These three accompany vein administers a certain nourishment of blood to the
sinew, and to the artery. The artery imparts natural heat, and vitallspirits
to the vein, and therefore it is not possible to find either an artery
altogether void of a thin kind of blood: or a vein without spirits, of a
vapoury nature.

The artery is forcibly opened and contracted again, with a certain harmony
and proportion; having the beginning of that motion from the heart. And when it
is opened, it sucks and draws a thin kind of blood, from the veins that are
near unto it; which blood being resolved into exhalations, becomes a
nourishment to the vitall-spirits: when it is closed again, it empties the
sowltry heat which is in it, by certain invisible pores, throughout the body;
even as the heart sends from it self, the sowltry heat which oppresses it, by
evaporations, both at the nostrills, and the mouth.

CAP. 25.
I. Of the propagating, or generating faculty, and how far the same is in
man's power. II. The instruments of propagation, and their offices. III. The
opinions of Aristotle, Democritus, and Galen; concerning the seed of the Woman.

EVen the faculty of generation pertains also to that part of the soul,
which is not obedient unto reason. For we yield seed in our dream (or sleep)
whether we will or no; and our desire of copulation is so natural, that the
desire is moved in us, even against our wills. But the act it self is indeed,
and without question, in our own power, and pertains to the mind; for it is
brought to pass by those instruments which are serviceable to the
naturall-appetite; and to abstain from our appetite, or to master the same, was
(by God) naturally placed in our power, (and may be so continued, if timely
endeavor has not been omitted.)

potentiall generation, are first the veins and arteries: For in these the
first humor (that is not fully perfected into seed) is engendered, and the blood
there changed, even as milk in the dugs. And forasmuch as they were first made
of seed, this humor is a nourishment unto those vessels; and the veins and
arteries, do concoct the blood into a moisture, like unto seed, that they
might be nourished thereby: And when they have due nourishment, that serves
for generation which remains.

For it is first carried up into the head by a large circuit, and from thence
brought down again, by two veins and two arteries. Therefore, if a man cut
the veins which are about, or near the ears, it makes the living-creature
unfit for generation.

Of these veins and arteries, is compacted that folded skin, which rises like
a swollen vein, in the Cod, and where this moisture (coming near unto the
nature of seed) falls into either of the Testicles.

There is one vein, and one artery full of seed: In these it is perfected, and
is driven forth by the folded seminall vein, which is behind the Testicles,
by a wind.

That wind proves that an artery sends it forth; and that it is carried by a
vein, may appear by those who are overmuch addicted unto Venerie: For they
that use carnall-copulation overmuch, thereby wasting their seed, and that
seminall humor, which comes near unto the nature of seed, (if they further
provoke themselves) pure blood is then strained from them.

Women have the same men have: this only is the difference, men have them
outwardly, and they inwardly. But Aristotle and Democritus were of opinion that
the seed of the woman, is no way useful in the generation of children. For
they conceive that which proceeds from the woman to be a sweating of the
place, rather then any seed of generation.

But Galen condemning Aristotle's opinion, affirms that women have their seed
also, and that the mingling of both seeds together is the cause of conception;
and thereupon (says he) their accompanying together in that act is termed
(...), a copulation.

Yet he judges not the seed of the woman to be so perfect as the man's; but to
be moister, and somewhat less concocted, and as it were a nourishment unto the
seed of the man. Of that seed, those parts are composed which are about the
utmost places of the womb, and which is called (...) (skin wrapped about the
skin wherein the infant lies) and ordained for a vessel to receive the
superfluities of the child.

In all sorts of living-creatures, the Female takes the male when she may
conceive; and such as are able to conceive at all times (as hens, doves, and
women) are at all times desirous to accompany the male: But women only accept
of the males company when they have conceived; for all other creatures usually
reject the male after conception. As for hens, they are daily trodden, because
they do lay almost every day.

Women, as they be at their own liberty in other things; so they are at
liberty also to accompany with men after conception; whereas living-creatures
void of reason, are governed not of themselves, but by nature; admitting such a
measure, and such times, as are dictated unto them, by a natural instinct.

CAP. 26.
This Chapter mentions other divisions of the faculties belonging to a
living-creature.

DIvision is made of those faculties which pertain unto a living-creature in
another manner: For it is affirmed that some faculties are mental, some
natural, and some vital.

They which are mental are in our own choice and election; they which are not
in our election, are natural, and vital. The faculties belonging unto the
mind are two, the motion of appetite, and of sense.

To the motion of our appetite, these faculties are appertaining; Progression
from place to place, the motion of the whole body, speech and respiration: For
it is in our power to do, or to omit these things. But the natural, and
vital faculties are not in our power; for they go forward, nill we will we;
as the faculty of nourishing, of growing, and of propagation: all which are
natural faculties, and so does likewise the faculty of the pulses, which is
vital.

As for the instruments (of these faculties) mentioned by others, we have
already treated of them, we will therefore speak of the instruments of those
things which belong unto our appetite (or choice)

CAP. 27.
I. Of the motion proceeding voluntarily from us: of the place where it
assumeth beginning; and the instruments which it uses. II. The wise providence
of the Creator, in uniting together things natural and mental, etc.

THe motion which belongs to our assent (or choice) and proceeds
voluntarily from us, takes beginning from the brain, and from the marrow of
the chine, which is it self a part of the brain.

The instruments thereof are the sinews that spring from these, the ligaments,
and muscles. The composure of these muscles, is flesh, and the strings in the
blood; which are like sinews and grisles wrapped up together, with
sinewie-strings. And some are of opinion, that they are sensible; because that
sense proceeds from the sinews, where withal they are folded up.

The grisly-end of the muscle is compounded both of a ligament, and of certain
small sinews; yet this grisly-end differs from a sinew in this, that every
sinew has sense in it, and is round, and somewhat tender, and assumeth also
his beginning from the brain: whereas this grisly end, is more hard, sometime
also flat, having likewise his original from the bone, and is in it self void
of sense.

The hands are an instrument, ordained to lay hold of things, and so convenient
for the exercise of arts, above other members, that if the hands, or but the
fingers only should be taken away, we are made unapt for almost every art. And
therefore man only received hands from his Creator, because he only is endued
with reason, which makes him capable of arts.

The feet are instruments ordained for going; for by them we remove and pass
from place to place. And man can sit firmly without a prop, because he only
makes two rightangles by the bowing of his legs; the one inward, the other
outward.

Whatsoever things therefore (in man) are moved by sinews, and muscles, belong
to the mind; and he has a free liberty in the use of them; Among these (as
we have already showed) the senses and the voice are to be accounted; and
therefore this has been hitherto a discourse, probably setting forth, as well
those things which are mental, as those which are natural.

Creator according to his exceeding wise for-sight, has folded up things
mental with such as are natural; and things natural, with such as appertain
unto the mind. And whereas the avoiding of superfluities belongs to the
expulsive faculty (which is counted one of those that is natural) that we
might not behave our selves filthily in avoiding our excrements, without
regarding the time, the place, and such other circumstances as are comely; he
has appointed the muscles to be as it were Porters, to order our evacuations;
and of things which were of themselves merely natural, he has made them to
be mental, and such as depend upon the rule of the mind. And thereupon, when
we are provoked unto any evacuations, we are able (if cause be) to contain
them very often, and very long.

Certain sinews which be soft and sensible, are sent down both from the
middle-pan, and also from the two former pans of the brain: Other sinews
which are harder, and serve us for motion, proceed from that brain-pan, which
is in the hinder part of the head, and from the marrow of the back.

Among these, those are the harder which come from the spinall-marrow: and of
them, those are the hardest of all, which proceed from the lowest parts of the
marrow of the back: For by how much farther the marrow of the chine descends
from the brain; so much the more hard is the chine-marrow of it self, and the
sinews also which do spring from the same.

And as we have received the senses double; so the sinews have a twofold
springing also from us. For every joint of the chine sends forth a couple of
sinews; one issuing toward the rightside, and another toward the left; yea,
and almost our whole body is divided also into two parts, the one on the right,
and the other on the left side. Thus likewise are our feet, our hands, the
seats of our senses, and other parts divided.

CAP. 28.
I. Of respiration; of the instrument, of the use, and of the causes of that
faculty. II. Of the composure and use of the Lungs, and of such other parts as
are assisting to respiration. III. Of those parts of a livingcreature, which
are made for themselves alone; for others, and for themselves; or altogether
for others.

HERE we will treat of respiration, which is also a work belonging to the
mind: For by the muscles the breast is opened, which is the principal
instrument of respiration. Our sighing also, and our thick drawing of breath,
when any great sorrow happens unto us, is an evidence, that the operation
hereof belongs unto the mind.

Moreover, the variations, and alterings of our breathing, whenever need
requires, are in our power: For if we be grieved in any part serviceable to
respiration, or in such parts as are moved by the motion of any of these; as
the midriffe, the liver, the spleen, the stomach, the small-guts, or the
lowest-gut, we then breath short and thick. We breath short, that we may not
over-vehemently smite the grieved part; we breath also thick, that the often
breathing may supply what is wanting in the length of our blast.

When our leg is wounded, we set it forth very leisurely in our going; which
is done to the same end, for which we breath short; and therefore as to go
from place to place belongs unto the mind, so does also this operation of
respiration. But although we should rest and not go at all it were possible
for us to live a long time, whereas it were impossible for us to hold our
breath the tenth part of an hour, without death; because the natural heat
which is in us, would be choked up and quite extinct by a sowltry fume. For
it is as if a man should cover a fire within a small vessel, having no vent;
which would be immediately stifled and quenched by it own fume.

For this cause it is very necessary that when we are asleep, our soul should
work nevertheless in this part; because if it should be idle therein (though
for a very small time) the living-creature would perish: And in this it is
again manifested, how the endeavor of the mind and of nature are knit
together.

For the mind exercises respiration, by an artery which is a natural
instrument; and it is always in motion, that neither it own work, nor the
work of the other arteries may be intermitted. This not being perceived by
some, (to wit, how the mind and nature join together in this work) they
supposed respiration to be only a natural faculty.

Three things cause respiration, the use, the power, and the instruments. The
use is twofold: one for the preservation of our natural heat, and the other
for the nourishment of the vitall-spirits.

The preservation of our natural heat consists both of drawing in, and
breathing out of air, For the drawing of the breath does not only cool, but
(in a mediocrity) stirs up heat also. The breathing out of the air, drives
away the foggy heat which is about the heart (whereas nourishment of the
vitall-spirits, is respiration only) for the heart is dilated abroad, and a
certain portion of air is attracted thereunto.

The power (which is a cause also of respiration) is that which it has from
the soul: for it is the mind which moves the instruments of respiration, by
means of the muscles (and especially by the breast) wherewith our lungs, and
the sharp arteries (which are also a part of the lungs) are moved.

For that part of the sharp artery, which is gristly, is the instrument of the
voice; the ligaments thereof which are like skins, are instruments of
respiration: and that which is composed of both together (which is the
forementioned artery) is the instrument both of respiration, and of the voice.

are a composition folded up together, and consisting of these four, a sharp
artery, a smooth artery, a vein, and of a spumie flesh; which flesh does fill
up all the void places of the folded skin, as it were a moist bed, (or the
herb Sleve) both of the two arteries and of the vein; so that it becomes
both a seat for them, and a band keeping them together.

The flesh of the lungs, does naturally co^coct the spirits; as the liver
concocts the humor which comes from the belly: And as the liver, with his
utmost edges or skirts, spreads it self about the belly, because it needs
heat, so the lungs enclose even the very middle of the heart; because it
needs some cooling by respiration.

To the sharp artery the gristle of the winde-pipe is immediately joined, being
compounded of three great gristles, whereunto the throat is annexed, and which
are continued unto the mouth and nostrils, by both which, we draw the air that
is without us. From the mouth it ascends by a bone like unto a sieve, or like
a sponge, which is full of holes, that the brain may not be harmed, if there
be any excess in the qualities of the air, or if too much wind should enter
into it at once.

Here has also the Creator placed the nose both for smelling and respiration,
according as he has ordained the tongue, for the voice, for the tasting, and
for chewing.

Thus the most principal parts, serving both for the very being of the
living-creature, and for the necessary uses of this life, are divided together
with the powers of the mind: and if any thing has been formerly omitted, it
may be understood by that which is now expressed.

Now as it falls out in all some are made only for their own sakes; some for
themselves and others also; some only for the sakes of others; and that some
things fall out accidentally, together with such things as are made; Even thus
you shall find it to be also in the parts of a living-creature.

For all the forenamed instruments, of those three principal things which
govern the living-creature, are made for their own sakes: For those things
are especially and principally made which are named according to their proper
nature; and are engendered in the wo^b even of the seed it self, as the bones
are.

But the yellow choler is made both in respect of it self, and some other
thing; For it helps concoction, stirs up to the avoiding of excrements,
and (in that respect) is in some sort, one of the parts that serves for
nourishment. Moreover, it ministers unto the body a certain heat, as does our
vitall-faculty; and in respect of all these things, it seems to be made for
it own sake: But in that it purges our blood, it seems after a sort, to be
made in respect of the blood.

The spleen also helps concoction; and that not a little: For being tart, and
of a sharp astringent nature; it binds the belly by pouring out into the
same, the avoidance of a black moisture; Yea, it strengthens it also;
assisteth concoction, and purges the liver: For which causes, that part also
seems to have been ordained in respect of the blood.

The reins likewise are a purgation for the blood, and a cause of the desire
which we have to carnal copulation: For the veins, which (as we have declared
before) do fall down into the cods, pass along by the reins; and from thence
carry with them a certain sharpness, which provokes lust, even as a certain
sharp moisture which is under the skin, procures an itch. And look how much
the flesh of the stones, is tenderer then the other skin of the body; by so
much the more, (being tickled by that sharpness) are they stirred up to the
ejaculation of seed.

These things therefore and such like, are made both for their own sakes, and
also in respect of other things. But the kernels, and the flesh are only
ordained in respect of other things. For the kernells do serve to carry up and
underprop the vessels, that they may not be broken when they are lifted up, or
stretched forth with any violent motions. And the flesh was made to be a
covering to the other parts; that it might cool the living-creature in the
summer, by being as it were, a morning dew thereunto, and that it might in the
winter be as it were a quilt of wool to the parts of the body.

The skin was ordained as a covering, both for the tender flesh, and all those
parts that are inward. The flesh is of a nature hardened like a scar, by reason
of the air which compasses it about, and by means of those other bodies
wherewithal it is conversant.

The bones are an undersetting to the whole body, and especially the chine of
the back, which is termed the foundation of a living creature.

The nails are most commonly used to scratch withal, by every living-creature
(which has nails) and they are also for sundry particular uses, to diverse
living-creatures. For they are given to many for a defense; as to those which
have crooked talons; and they be as it were an instrument to execute anger.

Many have them both for a weapon of defense, and also for a strengthening to
their feet, as horses; and all such as divide not the hoof. But nails are
bestowed on men, not only to scratch themselves withal, and that they might
by so doing, disperse the sharp moisture which is under the skin: but that they
might also take the firmer hold of small things. For by help of them a very
small thing may be taken up; because their meeting one against another at the
very ends of the fingers, enables to the taking of firm hold.

The hairs grow out accidentally with other things, by the meeting together of
such fumy vapors as ascend out of the body; and yet the Creator made not their
accidental generation, without some profitable use; for they serve both to
cover and beautify living-creatures: They are a covering for goats and sheep;
they are an ornament unto men; and they are both a covering, and an ornament to
Lions.

CAP. 29.
I. Of things done voluntarily, and against our will. II. Of the definition of
an action; and of the circumstances which accompany, and follow an action. III.
Of the marks both of a voluntary, and involuntary action.

I Have often made mention of things done voluntarily, and by constraint, of
which somewhat must be now expressed, lest errors may be occasioned through want
of an exact knowledge of these.

But he that undertaketh to discourse of things done voluntarily and against
our will, must in the first place set down some assured rules, and certain
tokens, whereby it may be well discerned whether the thing done, be
(unquestionably) voluntary, or against our will.

Seeing therefore that every voluntary thing consists in some action; seeing
moreover, that all those things which are said to be done against our will,
consist in action also (as shall be anon declared) and seeing likewise, some
think that the thing which is done against our will, consists both in action
and passion; we will (before we proceed further) define what an action is.

An action is the actual reason.

After all actions, there follows either praise or dispraise. Some actions
are exercised with pleasure, and some with grief. Some are to be chosen by
the doer, and some are to be avoided. Of the^ which are to be chosen, some are
at all times to be made choice of; some at one time rather then at another. The
same circumstances are considerable in such actions as are to be eschewed
also; and this moreover is observable, that some actions are pitied, some
pardoned, some hated, and some punished.

willingly done; namely, that praise or dispraise always follow them; that
they are done with pleasure; and that the actions are to be chosen by the
doers of them, either at all times, or at those times in which they are done.
The notes of involuntary actions are these; They are vouchsafed pardon; or they
are pitied, or they are done with grief, and they are not done by our own
choice. These things being thus defined and ordered; we will first speak of
such things as are done against our will.

CAP. 30.
I. The definition of an involuntary act. II. The solution of certain
questions concerning mixed actions, and an advise what is to be done, when we
know not what action to choose. III. Things done by inconstancy, by
intemperancy, or anger, are not to be reputed things done against our will.

SUch things as are done against our will, are either done by constraint, or of
ignorance. The beginning of those actions which are done against our will, by
force, is without our selves; that is, some other thing, and not we our selves
is the cause thereof: and therefore this is the definition of that thing which
is done against our will, by force. It is an action not having the beginning
thereof in him which does it; and he which is forced thereunto does nothing to
further the same of his own will. We mean, in this place, by the beginning,
the cause-effecting the thing done.

questioned, when Shipmen cast their lading into the sea, when they are
endangered by a tempest; (or when a man is contented to suffer or do some
dishonest thing to save his friend or his country) whether these actions may be
said to be done against their will, or no. And according to this clause added
to the definition (He that is forced, does nothing to further the matter of
his own will) these actions do seem to be voluntary; because to the executing
of such things, the actors do of themselves move their isntrumental parts,
even of their own accord.

Such is their case who cast their lading into the Sea; and theirs who offer
themselves to abide any shame or danger to bring to pass a greater good, as
did Zeno, who bitt off his own tongue, and spit it out into the face of
Dionysius the tyrant, because he would not utter unto him what was to be kept
secret; or as did Anaxarchus the Philosopher, who chose to be tormented unto
death, by being rolled up together like a wheel, rather then he would
disclose the secret of his friend unto Nicareon the Tyrant.

Therefore, generally, when a man either chooses a less evil, through fear
of some greater evil; or, when a man accepts the less Good, in hope of a
greater Good, (which he cannot otherwise attain according as he would) that
thing which in such cases he does or suffers, is not utterly against his
will: for he does or suffers by his own advise, and choice; and such things
are to be made choice of at that time, though they be not to be chosen of
their own nature.

These are mixed actions, partly voluntary, and partly against our will: For,
they are voluntary in respect of the circumstances; but they are involuntary,
in regard of the actions themselves; and were it not for the circumstances, no
man would make choice of doing such things.

Moreover the praise or dispraise which follows such actions, declare them to
be voluntary: for neither praise nor dispraise follow such things as are done
absolutely by constraint.

It is not easy to discern what things are to be chosen before others, in
some difficult cases: But for the most part, we must choose rather to abide
grief, then commit any shameful act; as did both Joseph, and Susanna; and yet
this holds not always. For doubtless Origin fell grossly when he chose to
sacrifice unto Idols, rather then to undergo that dishonestie which the
Aethiopians would have put upon him.

We see therefore, that the discerning of such things is not easy; and we
find also, that it is very hard for them that have chosen, to continue in that
which they have resolved upon; because perils to come do not so amaze or
discourage us, as those torments which are presently inflicted.

It so happens oftentimes, that they who have chosen well, do depart from
their own choice by persecution; as it has happened unto some, who when they
should have suffered martyrdom, fell back from their stout and resolute
beginnings, by being through tenderness unable to endure the trials, and the
torments of adversity, when they were inflicted upon them.

falling away from a well chosen resolution, or an intemperate lust, or an
angry rage, are to be accounted among such offenses as are to be judged
things done against our will; by reason there is an efficient cause of those
actions without our selves: For though the beauty of an harlot made them that
saw her to rush into the execution of an intemperate lust; and though such as
are furiously angry, were so provoked thereunto by another man, that the first
beginnings thereof may be truly affirmed to have been without themselves; yet
the actors of such things do work by themselves, and by their isntrumental
parts: for which cause their actions come not within the definition of things
done by constraint; even in regard they offered unto themselves the occasions,
and beginnings of those actions; and suffered themselves to be easily
incaptivated by passions, through an evil conversation.

Therefore all they who do such things, are worthily reprehended, as men
voluntarily given to evil: and the evil is manifested to be voluntary, when
they delight also in the deed; because every thing done by constraint, has
grief annexed thereunto.

Thus much of things done against our will, by force; we will now treat of
such involuntary actions, as are done through ignorance.

CAP. 31.
I. Of things done against our will, through ignorance; and of those actions
which are, or are not altogether involuntary. II. The definition and marks of
things done quite against our will; and the difference between things done
through ignorance, and those which we do being ignorant. III. A catalogue of
such particulars, the ignorance whereof makes an action to be involuntary.

BY ignorance many things are done by us, whereof we rejoice after the deed: As
when a man kills his enemy at unawares (or against his will) and yet is glad
that he is slain. These, and such like things, are neither accounted
voluntary, nor altogether involuntary.

Some things also are done through ignorance, for which we grieve after they
are done: And those are usually called things done against our will, after the
doing whereof we become grieved for the act. And by this it appears that there
be two sorts of things done by ignorance; the one not volu^tary, and the other
quite against our will.

It is our purpose therefore, to treat at this time of such things as are
altogether against our will: because that which we call not voluntary (as
aforesaid) may rather be reduced to those things which are voluntary in regard
it is mixed of both.

For though it has a beginning by constraint, yet the end is voluntary;
because by the event, that becomes voluntary, which was first against our will.

Therefore a thing done against our will, is defined in this manner; That is an
involuntary act, which is not only against our will, but has also grief and
repentance annexed thereunto. Moreover, it is one thing to do an act through
ignorance, and another thing to do it, being ignorant: For if that thing which
caused the ignorance be in our power, we do it being ignorant; but not by
ignorance.

For example, he that is accustomed unto drunkenness, or to anger, and in his
wrath or drunkenness, commits an evil; he has (indeed) drunkenness, or
anger, as a cause of those things which are done by him: But nevertheless
those things were voluntary (for it was in his power not to have been drunk
(or so enraged) and therefore in not suppressing those inordinate appetites,
he himself was cause of his own ignorance; and may in that regard be said to
have done that evil being ignorant; but cannot be truly said to have done it
through ignorance: Neither is his act to be accounted as done, by constraint,
but voluntarily; for that cause he who does commit such things is justly
reprehended by good men: Even because his drunkenness (which occasioned that
act) being voluntary, makes the act which was thereby occasioned, to be
voluntary also.

But we are said to do things through ignorance, when we our selves gave no
cause of that ignorance; and when the deed was by chance. As if a man should
shoot in an usual shooting place, and happen to hit and slay his father
walking thereabout.

It is plain by that which is aforesaid, that the actions of such a man are
not to be accounted as done against his will, who is ignorant of such things
as it behooveth him to know; or which reputes evil things to be goo: For this
ignorance proceeds from his own wickedness; and as his actions are vicious,
so his ignorance also is to be accounted as a vice, for which he is worthy of
reprehensio^. And reprehension is due only to those things which are
voluntarily done.

For the ignorance of general (or universal) things; or of such as are in
choice, is not accounted to be a thing involuntary; but the ignorance of
particular things only, is esteemed such: For we may be ignorant of particular
things against our will. But of universal things, our ignorance is accounted
voluntary; because such an ignorance cannot be in us without our own fault;
except we are madmen, or Idiots.

This being thus determined, particulars are of which we speak; and they are
the same which the Rhetoricians call the parts or circumstances of things done.
(To wit) WHO, WHOM, WHAT, WITH WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, in WHAT MANNER, for WHAT
CAUSE, (To which may be added according to our English game used for an
exercise of wit, WHAT FOLLOVVED, or the event of that which was done.)

The persons are either he who did it, or he to whom the thing was done; as if
the Son should smite his Father at unawares. The thing done, is the action it
self; as if I intended to to give one a little blow on the ear, and thereby
struck out his eye. The instrument; as when one flings a very stone, and
thinks it but a pommy stone. The place; as when at the turning of a lane two
meet, and one unexpectedly overthrowes the other. The time; as if in the night
a man should kill his friend, supposing him his enemy. The manner; as if he
should give one a small blow, without any great violence, and yet thereby slay
him (for he knew not that one could have dyed by so small a stroke.) The cause;
as if one should minister a medicine for a cure, which might prove deadly and
kill his patient.

Of all these particulars together, no man can be ignorant, except he that is
mad (or a very Idiot.) But whosoever is ignorant of the most of these, or in
the principal of them, is accounted to do things through ignorance. And the
principal among such circumstances, are; Wherefore it was done; and What was
done. That is to say; the cause, and the matter it self.

CAP. 32.
I. Of things done voluntarily; and the definition of such actions. II. Whether
things which have a natural course, as concoction, and the like, may be termed
voluntary, etc. III. They who acknowledge not those actions to be voluntary,
which proceed from the passions, do thereby take away the morall-vertues, etc.

OF those things which are done by constraint, there being two sorts; the one
done through ignorance, and the other by compulsio^; the thing which is
voluntary, does on the contrary answer unto these two, and is neither done by
compulsion, nor through ignorance.

That action is done without compulsion, whereof the beginning was in the doers;
and an action is void of ignorance, when none of those particular
circumstances, are unknown, in which, and by which, the deed consists: And
therefore we join both together, and thus define it;

That is voluntary, whereof the beginning is in the doer, who knows all those
particular circumstances, wherein the deed consists.

natural things (as our concoction, and our growth) be to be accounted
voluntvry: but, we answer (as is before showed) that such things are neither
voluntary, nor of constraint* because both voluntary things, and such as are by
constraint, are esteemed among such things as are in our power; but our
concoction, and our growth are not in our power: therefore though we are
ignorant of the particular circumstances; yet for that they are not in our
power, they are neither to be accounted things voluntary, nor of constraint.

But it has been declared before, that things done of wrath or concupiscence,
are voluntary; For when these passions are moderated, they are commended who so
govern them; and such as offend in them, are for the same reproved, or hated.
Moreover, pleasure or grief ensue upon the doing of them; and the beginnings
of these actions also, was in the doers themselves, because they were made able
so to have governed their appetites, that they might not have been lightly
transported by them, if they had endeavored according to their power.

By practice and custom such passions may be corrected; for if it were true,
that they were absolutely by constraint, then doubtless neither
unreasonable-creatures, nor infants, do any thing voluntarily, (but by
constraint; because they are moved by their appetite.)

But that is not so, for we see them go to their food of their own accord
without any compulsion thereunto. It is they themselves which make speed unto
it of themselves; yea, and not of ignorance, as well as not of compulsion: For,
they know their food; they are glad of it, when they see it; they presently
have toward it upon sight thereof, as unto a thing known; and are grieved if
they miss of the same.

By this, a voluntary thing is assuredly known from that which is involantary;
even by the delight which follows the obtaining that which is desired; and by
the grief which follows, if the desire be made frustrate: for even beasts do
voluntarily covet; yea, and are voluntarily angry also, in regard anger has
some pleasure annexed thereunto.

He that will not acknowledge be voluntary, whereunto we are moved by anger, and
a vehement appetite; even he takes away the morall-vertues; seeing they
consist in a mediocritie in respect of passions. If our passions be of
constraint; then they also are forced actions which are done according to
virtue; because the doing of them belongs to our passions. But no man will
account that to be of constraint, which is done by reason, by choice, by our
own motion, by our own desire, with a knowledge also of the particular
circumstances and by having the very beginning of the action in our selves,
which are evident proofs that the thing done is voluntary, as has been
formerly declared.

And now seeing we have in many places made mention of our choice, and of such
things as are in our power, we will next discourse of such things as are in
our choice.

CAP. 33.
I. Of such things as are in our choice, and what difference there is beewixt
them, and things voluntary. II. Choice is neither the concupiscible, nor the
irascible appetite, nor will, nor opinion, nor consultation. III. The
definition of choice, and about what it is conversant.

OF our Choice, the question may perhaps be asked whether it be not all one
with that which we call voluntary; because every thing done by choice is
voluntary. To which we answer, It is not so; for they are not termini
convertibiles, which they should be, if a thing done by our choice, and a thing
voluntary were all one.

The thing that is voluntary, is larger then that which is by choice; for all
choice is voluntary; but every thing that is voluntary, is not done by choice;
as appears in children, and in unreasonable-creatures, who do many things
voluntarily, but not by choice.

Though our friend comes upon us unexpectedly, and so well contenteth us with
his coming, that we are glad of it, yet we cannot say that it came to pass by
our choice: and though he that casually finds treasure, did willingly enough
hit upon it, because it was a profitable booty; yet he did not deliberately
think upon such a thing before, therefore it may be from these things
concluded, that a thing voluntary, and our choice is not all one.

appetite and our choice all one. For our appetite is divided into these three,
desire, anger, and will. Now, that our choice is neither anger, nor the desire
of a thing, it is made evident by this, that man does therein not agree with
irrationall-creatures; whereas he does agree with beasts in coveting, and in
anger: And if in these last mentioned he agree with beasts, and differs from
them in having a choice of things; then it is manifest, that our choice is one
thing, and that our desire and our anger are other distinct things.

The same is proved by incontinent men, who are overcome by their lust, and
prosecute the same contrary to their own choice and judgments; For even the
incontinent man's judgment disliketh his lust (and makes choice of better
things) whereas if his choice and appetite were all one, neither of them would
be contrary unto the other.

That choice and will are not all one, may be proved by this; that our Will
does not agree unto all things, whereunto our choice (or judgment) does
assent. For we have a will to be in health, or to be rich; but to be in health,
or to be rich is not in our choice.

Our will has place even in things impossible; but our choice consists in
those only which are in our power. We may say that we would be immortal, but we
cannot say, that to be immortal is at our choice. For our will extends unto
the end it self; but our choice can reach no further then to the means which
are in possibility to attain that end: and there is between them the same
proportion which there is between the thing subject unto our will, and that
thing wherabout we enter into consultation; for the subject of our will is the
end of that which we would have, and our consultation, is about the means,
whereby we may accomplish that end.

We choose those things only which may be effected by us; but our will
extends unto such things as are not in our power to accomplish; as when would
that such or such a Commander should obtain the victory.

It is then well enough proved that our choice is neither the concupiscible,
nor the irascible appetite, nor our will; and as well by the same arguments, as
by other also, it may be made manifest; that it is not opinion. For opinion
extends not only to things which are in our power, but to things eternal.

Moreover, we say that an opinion is either true or false; but to say our
choice is either true or false, is an absurd saying.

Opinion concerns likewise universal things; but our choice is conversant in
particulars: For, our choice is of things to be undergone, (enjoyed or done)
which are particular things.

Neither is our choice all one with our consultation: For consultation is an
advising about such things as are to be done (suffered or enjoyed) and that
thing is to be chosen which in consultation is preferred: yea, our
consultation debates of things yet in question, whereas our choice reaches to
that which is already concluded most worthy.

We have hitherto declared choice is not; and we will now show you what it is.

Doubtless choice is a thing mixed of consultation, judgment, and appetite;
being neither the one nor the other, but a certain compound of these. For as
we say that a living-creature, is a compound of soul and body; and neither a
body by it self, nor a soul alone; but a thing made up of both together; even
so say we also of this our choice.

It is plain by the very Etymology thereof, that it is a certain counselling,
or consultation, with an approbation of some one thing before the rest; and
that it is not altogether the same with consultation: For we are then only
accounted to have made choice, when one thing is taken before another. And no
man prefers any thing in choice, before he has consulted, neither accepts
before he has judged.

And seeing we are not willing to execute or admit of all these things, which
we well approve of; then that which is preferred after consultation, is in
choice; and contained under our choice, when it takes an appetite thereunto.
Hereupon it necessarily follows also, that our choice is conversant in the
same thing about which our consultation is employed.

Out of all which it may be concluded, that our Choice is an appetite,
consulting of such things as are in our power; or a Consultation with an
appetite unto those things which are in our power. For, when we choose, we
desire that which was preferred, after our consultation.

But seeing we have said that choice and consultation, are conversant about
the self-same things; we will declare next, what it is, about which this
consultation is occupied; and about what things we consult.

CAP. 34.
I. Of consultation, and wherein it differs from a question. II. The definition
of consultation, and as illustration thereof, by showing what things are not
proper subjects of consultation. III. Of the proper objects of consultation;
and of such other things as are pertinent thereunto.

KEeping close unto our chief purpose, we think it best (before we declare
about what things we consult) to determine wherein a consultation differs from
a question. For a consultation and a question is not all one; though he that
consults calls things into question by his consultation; but they differ very
much. For we seek and ask, whether or no the Sun be greater than the
earth: but no man says I consult whether the Sun be greater than the Earth.

A question is more general, and as it were genus to consultation; and the
nature of it extends further; For, every consultation is a kind of
questioning; but every question is not a consultation, as has been formerly
declared.

Our consideration is conversant sometime in consultation; as when I consider
whether I should go to Sea, or not: and sometime it is conversant in debating
things in the mind: as when I consider the liberal sciences; for it is not
proper to say we consult of the Sciences. But the use of these words without
distinction, has made many to ^^re, and to conceive tho^ things to be the
same, which are very different. Which difference being now discovered, we will
proceed to declare what the things are whereof we consult.

We consult then of those things which are in our power; even of such as may
be brought to pass by us; and whose event is not manifest: That is, such as
may fall out diverse ways.

We define it to be of those things which are in our power, because our
consultation is only of those things which are to be undertake^ by us; which
things are in our power: For we do not consult of that kind of Philosophy,
which is called contemplative; neither of GOD; nor of things which fall out of
necessity (by necessity I mean those things which fall out always after one
manner, as the Circuit of the year.)

Neither do we consult of those things which are not always permanent, and
yet fall out to be always alike, as of the rising and setting of the Sun.
Neither of those things which fall out naturally; yet not always alike, but so
for the most part only; as; that a man of sixty should have gray hairs; or
that a man of twenty should begin to have a beard.

Neither consult we of those things which chance naturally, but sometimes
thus, and sometimes otherways, and not after any certain time or measure; as
of showers, and droughts, and hail: Neither is consultation of those things
which do fall out by chance, and seldom, one while more, and another while
less: For in respect of these things, this clause was added, that the thing
(consulted of) should be in our power.

The definition says further, that it must be of things which may be done by
US. Because we do not consult of all men; neither of every thing, but of those
which are in our power to consult of: For we consult not how the common wealth
of our enemies may be governed; nor of them who dwell very far from us, (albeit
this be a thing which may be consulted of among themselves.)

Neither do we consult of all things that may be done by us; nor of all
things that are in our power. And therefore these words, which have an uncertain
end were added to the definition: for if the thing be manifest, and confessed,
we deliberate no more thereof.

Neither is there any consultation of such works or actions as are according to
Science, and Art: For, all their principles are determinately known, except a
few Arts which are termed conjecturall, as Physic, and the art of Exorcising,
and of governing.

For, we do not only consult of these things; but of such also as are under
our hand, and may be executed by us; they having such an uncertain end, that
the success may be as well that, as this.

But it has been declared that our consultation is not of the end; but of
things which tend unto the end: For our consultation is not of being rich, but
of the means how to be rich.

To speak all in brief; consult of those things only which are doubtful,
and may be either so, or not so: and of those things we must also treat, that
in our discourse nothing be wanting which may make things evident.

Those qualities are called faculties, whereby we are enabled to the
performance of any thing. For, whatsoever we do, we have the faculty of it;
and those things we cannot perform, whereof the faculty is not in us.
Therefore our action depends upon our faculty, and our faculty upon our
essence: yea the action proceeds from our faculty, and our faculty from our
substance, and is in our substance And as I said before, these are three things
depending one upon another. The thing able; the faculty by which it has
ability; and the thing which is to be done.

The thing able to do it is a substance. The faculty is that whereby we have
ability to do it. The thing to be done, is that, whose nature may be practiced
upon, by our faculty.

Of things that may be done, some are necessary, and some contingent. Those
are termed necessary which cannot possibly be hindered; or those, the contrary
whereof is unpossible: And that is contingent, which may be hindered, or whose
contrary may possibly fall out.

For example; It is necessary that a man should breath as long as he lives;
for it is impossible a man should live and not breath. It is contingent that
there should be rain to day; for it is possible that this day it should not
rain, which is contrary to the other.

Again, things contingent are said to fall out sometimes often, sometime
seldom, and sometimes indifferently, in this manner or in that. They are
frequent, as to have gray hairs at three score; they are seldom, as not to
have gray hairs at that age: And they are indifferent; as it is equally in our
choice to walk, or not to walk; or simply to do any act, or not to do it.

Now our consultation is of those things only which may indifferently come to
pass, or not come to pass; and a thing is said to fall out equally or
indifferently, when we may in like sort, do as well the contrary thereof as
the thing it self: For, if we could not do both equally, we should not
consult thereof. Because no man consults either of things confessed, or
impossible. For if we were able to do but one of those things which are
contrary; that should be received without ambiguity; and the contrary should
not, because impossible.

CAP. 35.
I. of destiny, and of the absurdities, impieties, and blasphemies which follow
their opinion, who ascribe the cause of all things to the motion of the
Stars, or fatal necessity. II. Of them who affirm that some things are both
necessitated by destiny, and yet in man's power. III. An examination of the
opinion before mentioned.

OUr opinion is that they who ascribe all things which are done, to the motions
and constellations of the Stars, do not only oppose the vulgar notions of
humane reason; but teach also (in effect) that all governance in commonweales,
are to no purpose. For indeed, laws are in vain, and judgments superfluous,
because they punish innocent men, without cause.

If their opinion be true, it is also a thing unreasonable to reprehend or
praise any man: yea, if every thing come to pass by destiny (or by an
inavoidable decree) our prayers are foolish, and ineffectuall bablings; and
there is neither place nor use for providence or piety.

Moreover (if this were true) what account is to be made of man? or what is he
more then an instrument serviceable to the motions of the superior bodies?
Seeing, as they affirm, he is moved by the celestial influences not only to
the performance of all bodily actions; but to every thought also which is in
his mind.

They that are of this opinion do generally take away (together with such
things, as should be left in our power) the nature likewise, of all contingent
things; and in a manner subvert and destroy the whole world; making the Stars
injurious homicides, and cuckold-makers, or at least the causers of all
adulteries and murders.

Nay God who is the Creator of the stars, is (by this blasphemous opinion)
made to bear the blame of all which is ill done, rather then the stars;
because he made them such as should necessarily, and inavoidably, bring, and
lay evils upon us.

Thus, their absurdity extends not only to the subversion of commonweales;
but makes God also to be the author of all sin; and the cause of all
mischiefs: Which absurdity and blasphemy is both impossible for them to and
intolerable for us to hear.

things may be in our power, and that there may be destiny also. For, some
things (say these) is given by destiny to every thing that is made, as to the
water to cool; to every plant to bear such fruit as is according to its
kind; to a stone to sink downward; to fire to mount upwards; and to
living-creatures to accept or to be desirous of things agreeable unto them. And
when nothing (without us, or belonging to destiny) opposes it self against
that which we endeavor; then it becomes perfectly in our power to proceed; yea
and then (say these) we shall assuredly effect it.

They who affirm this are Chrysippus, Philopater, and many other men of great
sufficiency and esteem among the Stoics, and all which they have said (what
show soever it makes of somewhat else) proves nothing but this; that all things
are done by destiny.

For though they have attempts are given unto us by destiny; and that they are
sometimes hindered by destiny, and sometime left at liberty; yet (the matter
being well observed) it is plain that all things are done by destiny; even
those things (for ought they have yet said) which they would pretend to be in
our own power. And we will use against them no other arguments, to declare
the absurdity of their opinion, then such as they themselves have made use of.

As long as the same causes continue, it is necessary (as they themselves have
said) that the selfsame events should always fall out; and it is impossible
that a thing should chance sometimes in one manner, and sometimes in another
fashion, when that thing is decreeed from eternity how it shall come to pass.

If this be so, as they have said, it is inavoidably necessary, but that the
endeavor of a living-creature, should in all respects and altogether fall out
in that one manner, which is agreeable to the uncha^geable course of destiny;
because the selfsame causes (do continue and) bear rule in it. And if our
appetite and our endeavor, does follow fatal necessity; where then is that
thing which (they say) is in our power; seeing the thing that should be in our
power, must be free?

It is free; if (notwithstanding the continuance of the same causes) it be
still in our power, to endeavor, or not to endeavor. But if our very
endeavoring of a thing, be subject unto a fatal necessity; it is plain,
that even those things which belong to our desire and appetite do fall out by
destiny, although they be done by us, according to our nature, our desire, and
our judgment.

For if it were possible that the same thing should not come to pass which did
come to pass (by the course of destiny) then that proposition of theirs would
be false, which affirms that, as long as the same causes do continue about
any thing, it is necessary that the self same effects should ensue.

The like shall happen also to unreasonable-creatures, and to things without
life: For, if they say our appetite is in our power; because we have it of
nature, (and for not other respect) why should they not say as well that fire
has burning in its own power (seeing fire burns naturally) according as
Philopater has in some sort affirmed in his book of destiny.

These arguments considered, we may affirm, that those things which we do
(being compelled thereunto) by destiny, are not things in our own power. For
we may as truly say, that the harp, the flute, and all other creatures that
are unreasonable, or void of life, have in themselves a power to do some
things that we do by the use of them; which were absurdly affirmed.

CAP. 36.
I. Of their opinion, who say that all was fore-appointed by destiny; and yet
that the effects of destiny are prevented by prayers. II. A quaere, how prayer
only, should be in our power, when all other things are foredecreed. III. Of
the inequality, and injustice, of this fained destiny.

FRom these, we will proceed to examine the opinion of the Egyptian wise men,
who say that the destiny proceeding from the constellations has true effects;
and yet may be prevented by prayers made for the averting thereof.

For they teach that there be certain means ordained whereby men may pacify
the Stars, and mitigate their force: and that there are other powers,
superiors to them, which are able to change or govern them: and that prayers,
and supplications unto the gods for pacification, were devised to that purpose.

We will show you, that in saying thus, they place destiny among contingent
things: Now contingent things are indefinite; and indefinite things are
unknown: therefore by these men's opinion, all divination is overthrown: and
that especially which is by casting nativities, whereof they make most account
of all other, as of a thing forceably and infallibly true.

If they tells us that the events of the figures (which they set) are very
manifest, and well known to those who are skillful; and that God has hindered
the same, when the figure has not effect according to his proper virtue; we
will reply, that it is absurd to account prayer, and the service of the gods
only, to be in our power; and no other thing.

For we will make this quare, and ask them how it come to pass, that all
other things (which are to be done or accepted by men) should depend upon such
or such a constellation, or affection of the stars; and that prayer only
should be in our power? For it is not only doubtful whether this thing it
self be so; but as doubtful also, for what cause, and upon what necessity it
should be.

If there be an art, and an orderly way whereby men may attain to those
pacifications, which may hinder such things as are effected by destiny: It may
be questioned, whether all men may attain this method, or some few only. If
all may aspire unto it, then there is a possibility, by that means to give
their destiny an utter overthrow, as soon as all have learned that art, which
prevents and hinders the effects thereof.

If some only may attain this means, and not others; we would willingly know
what manner of man, and who he is, that shall determine of this thing. For if
destiny it self be the cause, that some serve GOD, and some do not so; even
that will be another proof, that all things are done by destiny, whereas it
appeared by their opinion before mentioned, that our praying, and honoring of
the Gods, is in our power, not only no less then destiny; but much more also.

Now if it be not destiny but some other thing which is cause thereof, then
that thing shall rather be destiny: For all the force of destiny consists in
this, that we either may or may not obtain that which we petition for in our
prayers. If we may, then is destiny of no force; and if we may not prevail by
prayer, then all is subject unto destiny: and it will so fall out, that in
some, all things are done by destiny, and that in some other, destiny effects
nothing at all (because prayer is prevalent for some and not for others.) And
this is evident, that whosoever determines hereof, he is the chief destiny:
and so it will be another way declared, that all things are done by destiny
(mediately or immediately)

unjust, whether it be destiny or some other divine power: Seeing the way of
serving the gods is not equally and worthily distributed. For why should one be
judged worthier then another? Seeing all are the instruments of destiny; and
seeing no man does any thing by a foreintended purpose of his own: or, rather,
seeing there is no man which has any thing left unto his own choice
(according to their doctrine.)

For in things which are so done, none is either just or unjust; and therefore
neither worthy, nor unworthy of favor: and whosoever makes his division
unequally (in things of such nature as these) to them, whose case is alone, he
(even whosoever he be) is unjust.

CAP. 37.
I. Of those who affirm we have power to choose what is to be done; and that
the event of our choice depends on destiny. II. Providence and not destiny
orders the event of things. III. The strife between reason, and lust is made
void, if all things be done by destiny

NOw they who affirm, that the choice of those things which are to be done,
is in our power, and that the event of the things chosen depends on destiny
(which is the opinion even of the wisest of the Grecians) their judgment, is
partly right, and in some part erroneous: For, whereas they place in our power
the choice of things to be done, and yet allow not the events of the same
things, to be altogether at our dispose, they do very rightly: but in that
they attribute them unto destiny, they do not well* and their error shall
easily be discovered.

For first they impute imperfection unto destiny, in saying it has some part,
but not all power: And secondly, they err in making it a sequel to our
Judgment, in saying, that the work of destiny follows our choice. For, if
that be so, then destiny seems not to move us; but rather to be moved by us:
And then, Man is to be preferred, as having a greater power then destiny;
because he makes it, by his choice.

Providence is causer of the event of things; because it is wrought rather by
providence then destiny; and seeing it is the property of Providence, to
distribute unto every one, that which for every one is most expedient. By this
means also, the event of the things which are chosen, do fall out sometime in
one manner, and sometime in another, according to that which is most expedient.

If destiny be (as the Stoics define it) A certain concatenatio^ of causes
which may not be avoided; or a fast knitting together of causes which may not
be altered, and brings to every thing (and conveyes to and fro) such effects
only, as are according to the motions, and necessity of destiny it self; and
not such effects rather, as are most expedient: What will they say then, of
such as are blockish, and so foolish that they cannot direct their own choice?
whether comes it of destiny or no, that they are such?

If it proceed not of destiny; then fools, and blockheads, are without the
compass of destiny; and if they have their blockishnesse by destiny, then does
it necessarily follow that our choice also is not in our power: for if the lack
of choice be contained under destiny; then it must needs be, that the faculty
of choosing, and the thing to be chosen, must be contained under destiny. And so
they run back again to them who affirm, that all things are done by destiny.

The strife likewise, reason, and lust in the continent, and incontinent man,
is to no purpose, if all things be subject unto destiny: For, if it be
determined by a fatal necessity, that such a thing must be done and that such
a thing must not be done, what use is there of that strife in us (which is
aforementioned?)

But if it be not only fatally determined, that we shall do such a thing;
but so ordered also, that we shall do it thus, or thus; what else do they
affirm, who are of this opinion, from this, that even our choice is in the
number of those things which are subject unto destiny? For, it is our will and
our choice which opposes our lust, getting the victory in the continent, and
which is overcome in the incontinent. And so, that which they first proposed,
as their opinion, is overthrown; and by that means our choice shall in no
case be in our own power.

CAP. 38.
I. Of Plato's opinion concerning destiny; and how he agrees or dissents from
the truth. II. Of the force of prayer, and of the power which the Godhead has
over destiny. III. The opinion of the Stoics touching the destruction, and
restoration of the world, when the planets return to the point, in which they
stood at the Creation.

EXamine we will in this Chapter, the opinion of Plato concerning destiny; for
he speaks of a twofold destiny; one in substance, and another in operation.

He calls destiny in substance, a certain life, or soul, belonging to the
whole world together; and destiny in operation, a certain divine law, by an
inevitable decree, which he calls (...), a holy decree, that cannot be
escaped; and he says it was given by the first and highest God, unto the soul
of the world, for the universal garnishing of all things; and for the
governing of all things which are made.

That which he calls destiny in operation, he terms also Providence. For
whatsoever is done by destiny, is done also by Providence; though (on the
contrary) all things which are done by Providence, are not effected also by
destiny.

For, this divine law (which he says is both Providence and destiny)
comprehends all things in it self; some of purpose, and othersome not of set
purpose. It comprehends the chief, or antecedent causes (which are as it were
principles) even of purpose; as our condescending unto any thing; our
judgment, and our appetite, of desire. But whatsoever follows like things of
necessity, is beside purpose; and that choice of things, to be done, which is
in our power, is of purpose.

Now after those things be determined, which are in our power; upon the
self-same things (as it were beside purpose) follow, says he, the works of
destiny. As for example; It is in our power to set sail; and we have purposed
so to do; but says he, when it is determined that we will put to sea, other
things may follow thereupon, namely, the suffering of shipwreck; which was not
purposed at all.

Therefore, he calls those things beside purpose, which follow, and are
conseque^t to those things (that is to say) to those beginnings, and actions
which are purposed by us. So then the principal things, and such as are in our
power, be done of purpose: whereas the things that follow upon them, are
beside our purpose; and not in our power; but such as necessarily follow.

For the affirms not that things effected by destiny, are determined from
eternity; but they happen afterward, when things which are in our power have
gone before. And hereunto agree those common sayings; That the fault is in the
chuser, and God is blameless: that, there is none to over-master virtue; and,
that there be divinations. For all this intends nothing else, but to show,
that our choice, and some actions according to our choice, are in our power;
and that their events, with such things as happen afterward upon the^, should
necessarily pertain to destiny.

That this is not truly affirmed, appears by what is formerly expressed. And
yet when he calls destiny the Ordinance and will of GOD, making all things
to be subject unto Providence, he differs not much from the divine Scriptures,
which teach that Providence alone, is the governesse of all things.

But he dissenteth far from them, when he says that the events do
necessarily ensue upon those things which are in our power. For we say that
things wrought by Providence are effected, not as necessary, but as contingent:
because, if they followed of necessity, then the greatest part of our prayers
would be in vain; and according to his opinion our prayers would be
availeable for nothing, but to procure prosperous beginnings to our actions, or
to petition that we may choose what is best. For after we have preferred one
thing before another, all our praying should be fruitless, because all things
by his opinion ensue of necessity, which do afterward follow.

But we affirm, that prayer is forcible even in respect of those events. And
we say, that it is in the choice of Providence, whether we shall suffer
shipwreck or no (when we have purposed to set sail) and that nothing falls
out so necessarily, but that it may either be so, or not so, as GOD pleases.
For, he is not concluded under any necessity; neither is it lawful to say,
that his Will is confined by fatal necessity; seeing he is the Creator of
necessity it self.

It is he who laid that necessity upon the stars, by which they are
constrained to keep the same course. It is he that set bounds unto the Sea,
and who has appointed a necessary limitation to universal* and general
things; which if they will call destiny, because in all respects, and
altogether it so falls out of necessity; as that in succession all things
which are made should also be destroyed (and the like) we will not much
contend about the same; because we will not contest for the bare names.

But GOD himself is not only without the compass of all necessity; but he is
also the Lord and maker thereof: For, in that he himself is the absolute power
of all things; and a nature wherein all power is comprehended; he does nothing
as one subjected either to the necessity of nature, or decree of Law. But all
things are in his hand, to do, or not to do; even those things which were
otherwise necessary.

And that this might plainly be declared, he stayed once the courses of the
Sun, and of the Moon, which are moved of necessity, and keep always one
constant motion: thereby showing, that nothing done by necessity does confine
him; but that according to his power all things are contingent.

Yet he made such a day but once (as we find it in holy Scripture) that he
might only set forth his power, and not dissolve that strong law which was
made by him at the first, that the motion of the Stars should be necessary.

So likewise, he did preserve some from death, as Enoch, and Elias, who were
naturally mortal, and liable to corruption; that by all these things we might
perceive his power and his will to be irresistible.

But the Stoics have Planets have wheeled about unto the same point, both in
longitude, and latitude, wherein every one of them stood at the Creation, they
shall within a certain limitation of time cause all to be set on fire, and
destroyed. And then (as they also affirm) the world beginning anew, shall be
restored unto the state wherein it was before.

Yea, they say further, that forasmuch as the stars shall have again the same
course; every thing that was in the former circuit shall come to pass again
without any alteration. Socrates shall be as he was again, and Plato, and
every particular man; having the same friends, and the same Citizens; and that
the like things shall befall every one; yea, that every man shall take in hand
the same work which he formerly wrought; and that every City, Village, and
field shall be brought to the like state again: And that the whole Universe
shall be restored unto the former condition again; not one time only, but as
often as the revolutions of the Planets do come about to the same point, which
revolutions they think shall be infinite and without number.

They say also, that the gods are not subject to this corruption; and that when
they have observed one whole revolution, they know by that circuit, all things
that shall come to pass in every succeeding round. For, there shall be (as
they dream) no new thing; but every thing which was before, shall be reacted
after one and the same sort, without any alteration in the least thing.

And some have said, that from this restoration, the Christians took occasion
to conceive the resurrection: but the were much mistaken; for the Christian
verity does assure us, that the Resurrection shall be perfected but once, and
not according to the revolutions of the Stars.

CAP. 39.
I. Of freewill. II. Of those who deny freewill; To what causes they must of
necessity ascribe al things; and what may be inferred thereupon. III. The many
absurdities which will follow, if it be denied that man has freewill.

MAny are of opinion, that there is nothing at all in our power; and therefore
the discourse of freewill; namely of that which is in our power, does first
occasion this question; Whether any thing be in our power or no: Then a second
question, to wit, What those things be which are in our power; or wherein
freewill consists: and thirdly, it gives occasion to inquire, Why God our
maker, made us with freewill.

That we may discourse orderly of these things, we will speak first to the
first question; and prove that there is something in our power, even by the
confessions of those who have denied the same.

necessity, or destiny, or nature, or fortune, or chance is the cause.

But the proper work of GOD, is either substance or Providence. The work of
necessity is in the motion of those things which are always of one sort. The
work of destiny, is in those things which are to be perfected by it of
necessity; for in it, things are effected of necessity. The works of nature
are generation, augmentation, corruption, plants, and living-creatures. The
work of fortune is in things that are very rare, and unexpected.

For they define fortune to be the concurrence, and meeting of two causes,
which had their beginning from our will and choice, and yet produce in the end
somewhat else then was intended by the thing done. As when he that is digging
of a ditch, finds treasure: For neither he who there laid the treasure, had
any purpose it should be so found; neither had the finder any intent to dig for
treasure; but the purpose of the one was to take it thence when he himself
thought fit; and the intention of the other was to make a ditch; and there fell
out another thing beside those which were purposed by them.

The works of chance are such as befall unreasonable, and inanimate creatures,
without nature, or art.

Now if a man be neither the cause, nor beginning of his own actions, under
which of these may we contain the things which are done by him?

It is not lawful, nor comely to ascribe unto GOD those actions of men which
are unclean, or unjust. Neither may we ascribe them to necessity; because they
cannot be truly accounted among those things which continue always after one
manner. Nor may we impute them to nature; for the works of nature, are
living-creatures and plants. Nor to fortune, for the actions of men are not
rare or unlooked for. Nor belong they to chance; because things casual belong
to inanimate and irrational creatures.

Therefore it remains undeniable, that the man himself which works, and
acco^plisheth such, or such things, is the beginner of his own actions, and
has freewill.

consultation is superfluous in him; for to what end is deliberation, if he
have no action in his own power? But it must needs be a very absurd thing to
affirm that to be superflous in man, which is best, and most honorable in
him.

If then he do consult, he consults about the doing of some thing; for all
deliberation does concern the execution of some action.

Moreover, of whatsoever things the faculty of doing the same, is in our power;
the acting also of those things, and the exercising of that faculty is in our
power. But, a faculty to work according to the virtues, is in our power;
therefore the virtues also, are in our power.

Now that the faculties to work according to virtue are in our power, it is
very elegantly declared by Aristotle where he treats of the moral virtues.
That says he; which we learn by practice, we practice when we have learned
it: For while we learn to master our pleasures, we become temperate; and when
we are temperate, we become the masters of our pleasures.

We may argue also in this manner: It is confessed of all, that practice and
the exercise of things are in our power: But practice bears sway in habits;
for custom is as it were a purchased nature. If then practice rule the habit,
and if practice be in our power, then the habit also must be in our power:
yea, and the actions also, whose habits are in our power, (and which are
effected according to those habits) must be in our power also; because the
actions are conformable to the habits.

He then which has the habit of justice, will do just things; and he that
has a habit of injury, will do injurious things. Therefore God has given us
a power to be just or unjust.

Our counselling also, and our exhorting of one another, do declare that there
be some things in our power; for no man does exhort us not to be hungry, or
not to thirst, or to fly in the air; because these things are not in our
power. Therefore it is manifest, that those things whereunto our exhortations
do serve, are in our power.

Moreover, if nothing be in our power, then our laws are superfluous; but
every nation uses some laws naturally, as knowing, that they have power to
do such things as their laws injoyne: And many nations have ascribed the
making of their laws to the gods (as the inhabitants of Crete, to Jupiter; and
the Lacedaemonians to Apollo) therefore the knowledge that such things are in
our power is naturally dispersed among all men.

The like may be inferred upon the praises, or dispraises which follow those
things of which we make choice of; and of all those other circumstances
(aforementioned) which disprove that all things are done by destiny.

CAP. 40.
I. Of such things as are in our power; and wherein our freewill consists.
II. A reproof as well of them who conceive that man's freewill extends to
every thing; as of those who deny him to have any freewill at all. III. The
beginnings, or choice both of good and evil things, are in our power, but not
their events: that so, neither divine Providence, nor humane faculties, might
be superfluous.

EVidently enough appears it, that some things are in our power, and that we
have some actions at our dispose. It now remains that we declare, What things
they are which be in our power.

We say in general, that all things which we do voluntarily be in our power;
because it could not else be truly verified that the things were done
voluntarily, which were not in our power: and because generally all those
things whereupon ensues praise or dispraise; and those also wherein we use
exhortation, or law, are in our power; as is before declared.

But things which are properly in our power; are all such things as belong unto
the mind; and those whereof we may consult. For our consulting of them does
imply, that it is in our power to execute that which is proposed and consulted
of. And we have declared in the former part of this treatise, that
consultation, and deliberation, fall out in such things only as are
contingent: and that such things only are contingent, which may fall out either
this way, or that way, or in a contrary manner.

It is our mind which makes choice thereof; and it is the beginning of our
action; and those are contingent things, which are in our power: To be moved,
or not to be moved; To attempt, or not to attempt; To desire things
unnecessary, or not desire them; To lie, or speak truth; To give, or not to
give; To rejoice in such things as we ought, or not to rejoice; and all such
other things like unto these, wherein consist the works of vice and virtue: For
herein consists our freewill.

The Arts also are accounted among such things as may alike fall out, or not
fall out: For, every Art brings forth such things as may both be done, and left
undone; and such things also, as have the beginning in the doer, and not in the
things themselves, which are done: But neither those things which are eternal
(and in that respect, things of necessity) neither any other things which are
done of necessity, can be said to be done by Art.

Nor is any of those things said to be done by Art, which are contingent, and
may be done otherwise, if they have their efficient cause in themselves; as in
living-creatures, and in plants, which are made by nature, not by Art. If
therefore the efficient cause of things made by Art, is without themselves;
then who is cause of the things made by Art, but the Artificer which made them?
And if the making of them belong unto him, then is he the beginning, and cause
of his own actions. And therefore also, the working according, to Art, and
virtue, and all actions of man's mind, and of reason, are in man's power: and
what actions they are, I have declared already.

freewill in every thing which we do or possess, are therefore offended at
this opinion; and not without cause. But, some there be, having more
acuteness, who bringing this text of Scripture to refute us (namely, The ways
of man are not in his own hand) say thus unto us.

Good friends, how is the will of man free, seeing his way is not in his own
hands? and seeing the thoughts of men are so vain, that they cannot bring to
effect those things which they have devised?

Many such like things they object, not knowing in what sense, we speak of
freewill. For we affirm not that it is in our power to be rich, or poor, or
always in health, or of a strong constitution of nature; or to rule; or
generally to have those good things, which we count as instruments to work
things by; or such as are called the gifts of fortune; neither do we account
those to be at our dispose which have their event from Providence: But we
affirm those actions only to be in our power, which are according to vice, or
virtue; as also, our motions or choice of things; or else such things whereof
we may do the contrary, as well as the things themselves.

For a certain will or choice goes before every action* and not only the
deed, but the affection also is condemned; as may plainly appear in that place
of the Gospel, which says, He who looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery already with her in his heart. And we read that Job
sacrificed unto God, for such offenses as his children might commit in thought.
For indeed the beginning, either of sin, or of doing uprightly is in our will;
whereas the doing of the thing it self, is otherwhile permitted by Providence,
and otherwhile hindered.

For, seeing there are our power, and a Providence beside; it is necessary that
such things as are done should be done by them both: Because, if they were
done by either of them alone, the other should be to no purpose. Therefore in
regard all actions are mixed, it will sometime happen that they shall be in our
power; another while, that they shall be as providence alone directs; and
sometimes again, both according to Providence, and as we would also.

And whereas likewise there is sometimes a general, and sometimes a particular
Providence; it is necessary that the same should fall out in particular things,
as it does in things general. For if the air about us be dry, our bodies are
dried also, though not all alike. And if a mother be given to riotous fare, or
a distempered diet; even thereby shall her children become distempered in body,
and perverse in such things as they attempt.

It is plain therefore, by what has been said, that men may fall into a
distempered estate of body, either by the general diste^perature of the air;
or by the diet of parents; or when they spoil themselves by their own
voluptuousness; and that they may be distempered sometime by such occasions as
take their beginnings from themselves; in such manner, that Providence shall not
altogether be the cause of such things.

If then, the Soul shall yield her self to be overswayed by the temperature of
the body, and give place to wrath, or lust; or be pressed down by outward
things, as poverty; or lifted up, by riches, or the like: if any evil comes
to the same thereby; it so happened thereunto by the self-will of that Soul.
Seeing, if she had not voluntarily yielded her self to those distemperatures,
she might have overcome them, and been in good case. For through well ordering
the affections of the mind, by a convenient diet, and a good conversation, she
might have altered that temperature, rather then have been perverted thereby.

This is manifest by the example of such as are in a good condition, and that
all such as are not in a good estate, do sin voluntarily (and not by
constraint:) And that it is in our power, either to consent, and yield our
selves unto our bodily distemperatures, or to resist, and overcome them.

Nevertheless, there be many who pretend these distemperatures to be the
cause why we do such or such things; and so impute their wickedness, not unto
their own will, but to necessity. And therefore they conclude (though very
absurdly) that the virtues also, are not in our power.

CAP. 41.
I. Of the cause why man was made with free will; and that if it had been
otherwise, he had neither been capable of the contemplative, nor practike
faculty, nor been a reasonable creature. II. Of the mutability of men and
Angels: and of the causes thereof; and of some inferences thereupon proving
freewill. III. It is not through any natural defect that men are vicious, but
by their own will: And it is here shown also, that man without freewill,
could neither have any vice nor virtue.

SOmewhat remains to be declared, whereby it may be manifest why man had
freewill bestowed upon him.

We affirm, that immediately, together with reason this freewill entered into
us; and that together with nature, there is ingraffed into created things a
mutability, and alteration; especially in those things which are a subject made
of matter. For there is a mutation even in the very beginning of every thing
which is made; and all making proceeds from an alteration of the material
subject.

This is evident to any man who considerately beholds the plants, and
living-creatures, which have their abiding either in the earth, in the water,
or in the air: For there is in all those a continual mutability.

Moreover, that our freewill enters into us, together with reason, has been
made plain enough by those things which we have said, to prove that some thing
is in our power; as will appear to them who have heeded what was delivered to
that purpose. But because the sequel of this treatise, does for some respects
require the same; perhaps it will not be impertinent to repeat some part of
that which was formerly declared.

Our reason is divided into contemplation, and practice* Contemplative reason,
is that which concerns (universally) the nature of things, as they be
really; and active reason, is that whereby we deliberate of things, and sets
down the right way of putting them into execution.

The contemplative part is called the mind (or the principal part of the
soul) and the active part is termed reason. The one is likewise called
wisdom, and the other prudence.

Now every one that deliberates, does for this cause deliberate, even for that
the choice of such things as are to be done, is in his power; and to the intent
that he might by deliberation, make choice of that which is most worthy; and
that after he has so chosen, he might execute the same.

It is therefore necessary, that he which deliberates should have power over
his own deeds: for if he have not power over his own actions; his
consultation will be fruitless also unto him. And if these things be so; it
will follow, by a necessary consequence, that wheresoever reason is planted,
there is likewise freewill. For either he is no reasonable-creature; or else,
if he be a reasonable-creature, he has power over the beginnings of his own
actions; and in having that power, has also freewill.

It has been declared material subject, have a mutability in them; out of
which (together with what has been said before) it may be inferred, that
there must, of necessity, be in man both freewill, and mutability. Mutability,
because he is made of matter; and freewill, because he is endued with reason.

Whosoever therefore finds fault with God, for that he did not so make man at
the first, that he might not fall unto vice, but gave him his own choice:
Surely, those men are not aware, that they reprove GOD for making man
reasonable, and not rather an unreasonable-creature.

For one of these two is unavoidably necessary. Either man should have been
made void of reason; or else being endued with reason, and exercised in action,
he must have in him freewill. Yea, and thereupon it follows also of
necessity, that every nature endued with reason, has freewill, and is mutable
of his own nature.

But those natures have especially a mutability in them which are made of a
material subject; as well in respect that they were made, as in regard they
were made of matter: whereas those natures which were not made of matter (as
the subject) have mutability in them, but in one respect only; namely, in that
they were made.

Moreover, so many of those immateriall natures as were conversant in earthly
matters, and intermedled with such inferior things, as are to be done, by
reason of communicating with men; by so much they became more mutable then
others (of that immateriall nature) And so many of them as directed the
excellency of their nature, to approach near unto God, with an inclination to
love him; and to enjoy a blessed estate in the minding and fruition of him; so
bending themselves inward, and unto GOD only, that they wholly estranged
themselves from outward, and material things. Those (by that means) became so
familiar with contemplation, and with GOD, that they still remain without
mutation. Having a freewill, in that they are endued with reason; and yet are
not now subject unto alteration, for the forementioned causes.

And this need not be wondered at. For even those men also, which give
themselves to contemplation, and sequester themselves from the inordinate love,
and meddling in worldly affairs, do and may attain unto an immutable
condition, (and unto an estate of grace, from which there is no falling away.)

Now I do suppose, that this (with what was formerly said) has sufficiently
proved, that in the beginning, all the reasonable creatures were created in so
excellent a condition, that if they had remained such as they were made, they
should have been void of all vice, and that their vitiousnesse (who have been
corrupted) came unto them by their own will. For it so falls out, that they
who remain in the condition wherein they were placed by their creation, are
settled in a most blessed estate.

Of incorporeall natures, Angels alone have been altered: yet not all of them:
but some part; even so many only, as creeping doneward departed from that
inclination which they had to supreme things, and the contemplation of GOD.

It is made plain by the things before proved, that the powers of our will are
mutable; because we are of a mutable nature: And yet no man can blame GOD, as
if he were the cause that we are evil, in regard the faculties are mutable,
which he gave unto us.

For vices consist not in our faculties* but in habits; and our habits depend
upon our will* and it is therefore the fault of our will, that we are evil,
and not (originally) of our nature. But our meaning shall be more plainly
understood by this that follows.

We have said hereto fore, that a faculty is a power whereby we are able to
put in execution whatsoever we do. And in all the faculties belonging to our
choice, the self-same concerns both the contraries (as for example) there is
the same faculty of lying, and of speaking truth; one and the same faculty of
temperance, and wantonness.

But it cannot be, that in contrary things there should be the same habit; as
in wantonness and temperance; or in lying, and speaking truth; because of
contrary things, the habits are contrary. For the habit which concerns
temperance, belongs to virtue: but all intemperance is of vice; and therefore
the vices do not depend upon the faculties, which are in us; but upon our
habits, and our will: And it is not a faculty, which makes us wantons, or
liars, but our will. For if we would, we might speak the truth, and not lie.

Seeing then, vice is not a faculty, but a habit; God is not cause of our
naughtiness, which gives us the faculty; but a habit (is cause thereof) which
being in us, proceeds from our selves, and by our selves, and for our selves.
For if we would endeavor thereafter, we might instead of an evill-habit,
attain unto the contrary thereof.

Now a faculty does herein differ from a habit; all faculties are natural, but
habits are procured by use. Yea; and here also they differ; our faculties are
in us without teaching, and our habits are gotten by learning, and custom. If
therefore the faculties that are in us, be natural, and without teaching; and
the habits gotten by use and learning; then it cannot be that our (original)
nature should be the cause our wickedness; but rather our evil education,
whereby we have gotten an evil habit.

For that our habits come unto us by custom, it has been already declared;
and that our faculties are in us by nature, it is evident by this; that all men
have the same faculties (except those which are someway maimed or lame.) And
that the habits are not natural, is as evident by this, that all have not the
same habits; but some of them habits of one sort, and some of another: whereas
things that are natural, are found in all.

CAP. 42.
SECT. 1.
I. Of Providence; and first, that there is a providence, and for what good
causes, both Jew and Christian ought to believe it. II. The same is illustrated
to heathen men, by arguments and demonstrations agreeable to their knowledges.
III. Proofs thereof, by things also generally confessed.

IT is already sufficiently proved, that man has freewill; as also wherein his
freewill consists, and for what cause he was created with freewill.

Now forasmuch as every one who purposes to murder a man, does not always
put the same in execution; but sometime fulfilleth his murtherous intent, and
sometime not, because his purpose being hindered, has not effect according
thereunto: And whereas we have said that providence is cause thereof, and not
destiny; It follows consequently, after the Tract of things which are in our
power, that we speak next of Providence.

We will divide our discourse into three parts; the first, proving that there
is a Providence; the second, showing what Providence is; and the third, What
things belong unto Providence.

As for the Jews, unless they be mad, they cannot be ignorant that there is a
Providence, knowing the wonders which GOD wrought in Egypt; and hearing of
those things which happened unto their Fathers in the wilderness; wherein most
manifest visions of Providence appeared more clearly unto them, the^ by those
things which we now see with our eyes. And they had also many evide^t proofs
that things were done by Providence, both in their Prophets, and in their
Babylonish captivity, which leave not any just occasion for them, to be
doubtful of the same. As for the Christians; they have not only all those
things which happened unto the Jews, to preach unto them that there is a
Providence; but also that admirable work of Providence, above all other most
divine, which contains in it that exceeding great favor toward man, which
passes common belief; I mean, that GOD should take unto him a Body for our
sakes.

But seeing we must heathen men. We will therefore endeavor to prove there
is a Providence by such other things as are also in credit with them. And that
there is a Providence, may be proved by those arguments whereby we prove that
there is a God.

For concerning the continuance of things* and especially such as are subject
to generation, and corruption; and the situation, and order of all things that
are, being always preserved after one manner; and the course of the Stars
nothing altering at any time; and the circuit of the year, and the return of
the season of the year; and the equality both of the night and of the days of
the year, so that either of them is both increased and diminished in the same
proportion of time: how might all this continue under so conformable a
government, if it had none to rule it by his Providence?

Moreover, the punishments which follow sin; or (which is of more import) the
detecting of murders, and offenses themselves, which are often bewrayed (when
there is no witness of the deed) by some circumstances; do show that there is
a Providence.

Both the Scriptures of the Hebrews, and the writings of the Heathen, are full
of stories to this purpose. Of this nature is that which is written of Susanna:
and in profane books, there is a story to the same purpose of Ibicus the Poet.

For, when this Poet was murther^d by certain ruffians, where none were in
presence, either to assist him, or bear witness of the assault which they
made upon him; he seeing Cranes not far from him, cried out and said, oh ye
Cranes, be you revengers of this murder.

And so it fell out, that when the Magistrates of the City where he lived,
endeavored to seek out the committers of that murder, and could not find
them: The people being assembled together into a common place for that intent;
the Cranes flew over them; whereupon the murderers espying them, laughed
outright, and said, lo, where they fly that should revenge the death of
Ibicus: which being overheard by one that sat next unto them, and declared to
the Magistrates, the said murderers were thereupon examined, and confessed the
fact.

There be very many of such like things, recorded by ancient writers, which if
a man should collect together, would enlarge this Treatise to an infinite
length.

And though all offenders be not descried; but, that some do quite escape the
public stroke of Justice; yet let no man for that cause deny that there is a
Providence. For the Providence of GOD, takes care of men, (and brings the^ to
repentance) not one way alone; but after diverse and sundry manners.

Furthermore, the composure, and proportionable knitting together of those
bodies, which are subject unto generation, and corruption, and there being kept
always alike (according to their several kinds) is not the least argument
proving that there is a Providence, seeing the great care (and wisdom) of
divine Providence is very manifest in every part of the body; as they who will
take pains to peruse them, may learn out of those many Treatises, which are
made upon that subject. Yea, the varieties which are in the colors of
living-creatures, and their keeping always the same comely mixture and
proportion, are proofs of a Providence.

And among such things Providence, is that universal consent of men in all
times, and of all nations, that we ought to serve GOD, both by Prayers, and
Oblations. For if there were not a Providence to govern the affairs of this
world, who would pray? or to whom should we make our petitions?

Moreover, that earnest desire which is in us, to do good unto others (and
which they naturally, and very diligently endeavor, whose minds are not
perverted) is a plain demonstration that there is a Providence. For having
received a benefit which we are not able to recompense, we are the more
desirous to be somway helpful to them, who are not able to requite us for the
same.

If Providence were taken away, then every man should be permitted to be
injurious, according to the power he has to do wrong. There would also be no
giving of alms, nor any fear of GOD among men; and therewithal virtue and
piety would be quite rooted out. For if GOD had not a provident care of every
thing; neither did punish evill-doers; nor encourage those that were
well-disposed nor defended innocents from oppression; Who would worship GOD? or
who would serve him, that could be no way profitable unto them?

If there be no Providence, all prophecies, and the foreknowledge of things,
are likewise overthrown. But even those things which happen out before our
eyes, almost every day, are manifestations of the same: For, GOD often
appears unto us in our necessities (by supplying our wants in an unexpected
manner) many have been cured of their infirmities, by that which has been
revealed unto them in dreams; many predictions of things to come have been
truly uttered in all ages. And many who have embrued their hands in innocent
blood, or committed such like heinous offenses, have been horribly terrified
night and day.

From the goodness of God, his Providence may also be inferred; for he is the
most excellent Good; and as he is good, he is inclined to be good and
beneficial to others; and if he be inclined to be beneficial to others, he is
inclinable also, to have a Providence over others.

What need I speak here of those works which belong unto the Creation? of
their proportion? of their harmony? of their situation? of their order? or of
the use whereunto every thing serves in the whole world? seeing all things may
evidently appear to have been perfected in such manner, that nothing should
have been in good plight, if it had been otherwise then it is now: and that
nothing can well be added, nor any thing be conveniently wanting in any of
those things which were made thorowout the world: For, both by wisdom, and
providence, all things therein were created in a comely and perfect manner.

SECT. 2.
I. Of the difference between Providence, and Creation; and of their distinct
works. II. Of the wonderful Providence of GOD, in the manifold, and unlike
visages of men. III. The same Providence is illustrated by the great diversity
of colors whereby the several species of every kind of living-creatures are
distinguished.

BUt we will defer the full explanation hereof, until we shall have occasion
to speak of the Creation, lest we should fall into that oversight whereinto
those writers have slipped; who extol GOD's creation instead of his
Providence; when his Providence was their Theme. For though indeed Creation
gives us an occasion to treat of Providence; yet so great is the difference
betwixt them, that they are far from being one.

It is the work of Creation to make well those things which are made; but it
is the part of Providence to conserve and take care for such things. And these
two are not always altogether in one; as we may perceive by those men who are
coversant in arts and mysteries. For, some when they have made a thing well,
give over there, and take no more care for the thing which they have made; as
Carpenters, and Painters, and the makers of other handy-craft works: and some
other, do no more but provide, and take care for the preservation of those
things which are under their charge; as heardmen, and shepherds.

These things considered, it will become us, when we treat of Creation, to show
that all the things which were made, were exceeding well-made: and to declare
when we come to speak of Providence, that God was diligent in the preservation
of those things which he had well created.

By this providence it comes to pass, that men beget men, that beasts are
engendered of beasts; and that every thing springs from his own, and not from
any strange seed. And whosoever shall aver, that every thing (after it is
once made) proceeds forward as in a certain race; he cannot choose but confess
also, that after a thing is created, there must be always a providence to
govern the same. For in that the thing created proceeds on in a course, it
is even thereby manifested, that together with creation, there was laid a
foundation of providence, to whom belongs the governing of al things after they
are created: and he says (in effect) that he which first made all things, and
he which governes them by his providence, when they are made, is but one, and
the same GOD.

Whosoever beholds the visages of men, to be so many thousands, and yet to
differ so much from each other, as that no one is like any of the other in all
respects; he cannot choose but admire the work; and if he well consider the
cause of it, shall easily find that it is divine providence by whom so many
different, and distinct features and countenances, were brought forth.

For if our visages should be all of the same form and moulding without any
alteration, how great a confusion would there follow? In how much darkness and
ignorance should man be kept? None should know his familiar acquaintance, from
a stranger, nor be able to discern a wicked enemy from an honest friend; but
all things would be confounded together in one mass, according to the opinion
of Anaxagoras.

Moreover, if this had been so, there had not been any cause why men should
have been forbidden to company with sisters or mothers: neither would many have
refrained from theft, rapine, or from offering any open violence or injury to
others, if they could but contrive their present escape: For though afterward
they were seen, none should be able to distinguish them from other men.

Neither could any law be executed; nor any common wealth well ordered; neither
could fathers or children know each other; neither could any thing pertaining
to humane affairs be well, or orderly affected; because men should be as it
were blind, not discerning between man and man; and be no way helped by their
eyes, except it were in discerning the age or quantity.

This benefit we gain by providence, that it prevents these inconveniences and
confusions, by making a variety in the visages of men, always, in all places,
and at all times. And it is a strong argument also to prove that this
providence extends unto every particular; in that every particular man is
known one from another, by his portraiture, by his proportion, by his visage,
and by his voice.

For man's visage is not providence has added another distinction for our more
advantage; even the diversity of colors also, to the intent that the weakness
of our nature might be assisted diverse ways: And I suppose likewise, that
many of those living-creatures, which in their general kind, have in
appearance but one shape (and color) as Dawes and Crows; yet there may be
certain visible differences, whereby they might be distinguished by good
heed; and whereby they discern each other when they should couple together.
For though many Dawes and Crows be gathered together in one place; yet in
their coupling, they discern each other; and every male and female know their
own mate.

But how could they know each other, if every one of them had not some proper
distinction in the shape; which (though not easily perceived by us) might be
well enough discerned by the^, through a natural instinct; they being
creatures of one kind?

Lastly, the signs, and oracles, and sooth-sayings, and wonders, which are
from above (for now I direct their discourse to heathen philosophers) and which
(as they affirm) do by their own force make good the events of such things
as are declared by them, have (no doubt) their significations, by the virtue of
providence; and have thereby also, a true effect, according to the same
significations.

CAP. 43.
This Chapter declares, what Providence is; and that it is necessary and
convenient the Creator, and ruler of all things should be One.

VEry plainly may it be manifested that there is a providence; both by
arguments already produced, and by others which we shall have occasion to
mention hereafter: we will now therefore, declare what providence is.

Providence is a heedfull provision for all things, proceeding from GOD. Some
thus define it. Providence is the will of GOD, whereby all created things
receive a government fit for them.

Now if Providence be the will of GOD, it is necessary that all things should
be ordered as reasonably, as excellently, and as decently as the nature of the
Godhead requires; which is after so good and perfect a manner as that nothing
may possibly receive a better order: For neither is it a thing of good
consequence nor agreeable to decency, that one should make things, and another
take the care of their preservation and government; seeing it were but an
argument of weakness to have it so.

Many types and expressions of that which we have said, are ingraffed in
living-creatures: For every thing which breeds ought, provides food also for
the thing bred thereby; and man provides for all other things also, belonging
to the life of him whom he has begotten, so far forth as his ability does
extend. And all creatures which make not provision for their young, do
therefore not make it, because their weakness is a hinderance thereunto.

Therefore it is truly declared, that GOD is he whose Providence concerns
all: and that Providence is the will of GOD.

CAP. 44.
SECT. 1.
I. It is here showed wherein providence consists; Plato's opinion concerning
the same, and how far his tenet is allowable. II. The opinions of the Stoics,
of Democritus, Heraclitus, and Epicurus, touching Providence, and the
absurdities ensuing. III. The opinions also of Aristotle, Euripides, and
Menander; and the refutation of them.

SInce we have showed that there is a Providence, and also what it is; we will
now declare, in what things, that providence bears sway; whether in things
universal, or things particular, or in both.

Plato affirms that it has government both of universal, and particular
things; and he divides his discourse of providence into three parts. The first
he calls the providence of the first and supreamest GOD, and that this
providence is especially over the IDEAE (that is, the most beautiful forms of
things:) and in the next place, over the whole world in general, as, over the
heavens, the stars, and all general things; even over the predicaments of
substance, quantity, and quality, with such like: yea, and over all things
which are especially contained under those predicaments.

His opinion likewise is, that the providence of a second degree of gods, which
(as he conceives) turn about the Sphaeres; has rule over the ingendring of
all the baser living-creatures, and of plants, and of all things which are
subject unto generation, and corruption. Yea, and Aristotle himself ascribes
the ingendring of such things, to the Sun, and unto the Zodiac circle.

That which according to Plato's opinion, is the third providence, has
predomina^cie over the events and ends of those things which are begun or
perfected by us; as also over the course and condition of man's life; and over
all those natural and material things; and over such as are called instrument
all things, whether they be good or evil. And the principal agents in this
providence, he supposed to be certain Angels (or spirits) ordained to be
always conversant upon the earth, and to have the charge over those things
which men do.

But he affirms that the second and the third providence also, have their
whole essence from the first; so that all things are in effect, governed by the
power of the chiefest God, who ordained the first, the second, and the third,
to be employed in the well-ordering, and governing of things.

Now this is praise worthy in Plato, that he refers all unto GOD, and
affirms all providence to depend upon his will. But whereas he says there is
a second providence, committed unto those which turn the heavens about (as he
has said) we commend him not in so affirming. For (if any such were) that
which they performed, is not a work of providence; but rather, a work of
necessity, whereunto they were destinated. For, let them be figured how they
will, it must necessarily follow, that things must both be done as they were
done; and that they might not be in any other manner then they are. And I have
already showed, that nothing done by providence, is subject unto necessity.

Stoic Philosophers (who defend as an undeniable truth, that there is a
destiny, necessitating all things, and that some things are also in our power)
do leave no place at all for providence; and indeed they overthrow (as is
before declared) by affirming there is destiny, so much of their own opinion,
as averrs that things are in our power.

Democritus, Heraclitus, and Epicurus, are of opinion that there is no
providence either of universal, or of particular things. And Epicurus has
expressed his meaning to this purpose.

The nature (says he) which is blessed and incorruptible; neither is of it
self troubled with any business; neither occasioneth any other to be
troublesomely employed: and therefore, neither is angry for any thing; nor
favors any thing; because all such like things, do betoken weakness. Yea
the gods cannot be angry, in regard anger never chances unto any, but when
something succeeds contrary unto their will, which thing cannot at any time
happen unto the gods.

The opinion of these men is conformable to the principles which are devised by
themselves. For, it is no wonder if they hold opinion that there is no
providence to govern any thing, who affirm that the world was made by
hap-hazzard. For how should those things which had no Creator, have any
providence to preserve or govern them? Seeing it is plain that such things
must be confusedly carried to and fro, by hap-hazzard, which were made by
chance, and at adventure, in the beginning.

We must therefore withstand them in their first opinion, as we have done
already (and so disprove the same) that it may be well manifested there is a
providence. And for that cause we will refer the confutation of these men,
unto a fitter opportunity; and proceed to examine the opinion of Aristotle; and
others, who say that particular things are not governed by any providence.

For Aristotle in the Nichomachus, has covertly delivered that particular
things are governed by nature only. For, nature being (says he) divine, and
ingraffed in all things which are engendered, does naturally administer a way
unto each, to choose which is most expedient for it, and to avoid such things as
are hurtful thereunto. And (indeed) every living-creature (as we have showed
heretofore) makes choice of such nourishment, as is agreeable unto it;
earnestly pursuing what is convenient for it; and naturally knowing what cures
are pertinent unto the diseases thereof.

Euripides, and Menander, have in some places affirmed, that the principal
parts of the mind, which is in every man, does by providence govern each man,
and no GOD at all. But the mind is conversant in those things only which are
in our power; and they are either in actions which may be done, or in the arts,
or in contemplation: Whereas providence is busied in things which are not in
our power; as to be rich, or to be poor; to be in health, or to be sick;
wherewith neither the mind, nor nature, (as Aristotle himself holds
opinion) have any thing to do, in that sense.

For the works of nature are evident: and if a murderer be sometime
punished, and sometime let go without punishment, here is that pertinent
either to the mind, or unto nature (as it is unto providence?) except some
will affirm that things belonging to nature, and unto the mind, are pertinent
unto providence; and that things which follow upon the choice of the mind, and
operations of nature, do afterward belong unto destiny; which being granted,
all that should be in our power, would be quite overthrown.

But the matter is not at that point. For (as has been already declared)
every thing belonging unto the mind (whether it be for practice or
contemplation) is all in our power. Neither do all things which are contained
under providence, belong to nature; though every thing belonging to nature, is
governed by providence. For many things wrought by providence, are not the
works of nature; as I have declared in discovering the murderer; neither is
nature in all points, the same with providence, though it be (as indeed it is)
a part of providence. And therefore these men do ascribe the providence over
particular things both to nature, and unto the mind.

SECT. 2.
I. Of their absurd opinion, who affirm that GOD has care of universal, but
not of particular things. II. The error of the vulgar, concerning blessedness;
and of their causeless, and impious reprehension of GODS Providence. III. Of
the blasphemies which must consequently follow the denial of GODS Providence,
over particular things.

THere be some who affirm, that God so provides for the continuance of all
things which he has created, that nothing shall fail which he has made;
and that his providence extends to this thing alone, without regarding
particulars, which are left by him to succeed as mere casualty shall bring them
about.

Hereupon (as they conceive) it comes to pass, that so many injuries, so
many murders, and (in brief) that so much wickedness, and oppression is
increased among men: yea, thereupon it comes (say they) to pass, that some
of them are punished, some unpunished, and that little or nothing is performed,
either according to right reason, or the Canons of Law.

For, how (as they think) can it be possible that God has care of any thing,
when as neither law, nor true judgment bears sway? but where the contrary
has rather the chief rule? and where the best men are for the most part
wronged, oppressed, and plunged into innumerable afflictions; while Tyrants and
wicked men are advanced to offices, to powerful dignities, to riches, and to
all such things as are well esteemed of in this life?

But they who speak in this manner, are not only ignorant of many other
things, that are expressed in our discourse of providence; but estranged also
to the immortality of the soul: For, supposing the soul to be mortal they
shut up all things belonging unto man within the compass of this life; and
(judging perversely of those things which are good) they imagine that such as
abound in riches, and bear great sway by the places of authority, and vaunt of
other such like temporal (or material) commodities, are the only blessed and
happy men.

But of the virtues of the mind (which exceed by many degrees all bodily and
external things) they make no account at all. Howsoever those commodities are
the best, which belong unto the best things. And in that respect, virtue as far
surpasses riches and health, and such like, as the soul is more excellent
then the body: And therefore also, virtue as well alone, as together with other
things, makes a man to be blessed.

Virtue with other things is considered according to a finite amplitude, as a
thing of two else, or the like; but alone, and by it self, it is considerable
according to an indefinite circumscription, as a heap. For if from a heap
(which is a thing having an indefinite circumscription) you may take away two
bushels (which is a finite quantity) two bushels is indeed taken from the
heap: yet that which is left continues still to be an an heap.

In like manner, if from virtue (considered in its own indefinite amplitude) you
take away all the good things that are bodily or external (which are but
finite things) and leave the virtue only, (which is an indefinite good) the
blessedness remains still entire; because virtue, even of it self, is
perfectly sufficient to blessedness. And therefore every good man is blessed
(though no external good be left him) and every wicked man is miserable,
though he has all those things happened together, which are called the goods of
Fortune.

The multitude not knowing blessed, who have all things at will, for their
bodily delight, and abound in riches; and they can often find fault with
providence which governs our affairs, not with respect unto those things
only which are apparent unto us, but with regard unto those also, which are
according to the foreknowledge of GOD.

For GOD foreseeing, that it would be expedient for him to be poor, who is
now honest and good, (and that riches coming fast upon him, would corrupt his
mind) does keep him in that poverty, which is most convenient for the chief
good of that man. And in regard God foresaw also, that the rich, man would be
grievous to others in the want of riches (by committing robberies, murders,
and other great outrages) he suffered him to enjoy riches.

Poverty has been many times profitable also, in making us to bear the loss
of our children with more contentedness; and in preventing the vexations which
might happen by wicked servants; and perhaps their lives would have been more
bitter to us then their deaths, if our children had lived to be wicked; or if
we should have had false and thee-vish servants. We foreseeing nothing that is
to come; but beholding only the things present, cannot judge rightly of that
which may fall out; but unto GOD all future things are as evident as those
which are present.

Thus much we have spoken against those who have presumed to blame GODS
providence; and against whom this part of Scripture may well be applied, Shall
the clay say to the potter, why have thou made me thus? For it is an arrogance
to be abhorred, that he who dares not find fault with an earthly Lawgiver,
should prescribe laws to GOD, and object against the works of his providence.

But we will forbear to meddle further with such extravagancies, (or to speak
more properly, with such impieties) and proceed in disproving them, who say,
that particular things are not governed by any providence, and yet allow that
universal, and general things, are governed by a providence. For no man can
allege more then these three causes, to prove that there is no providence of
God over particular things.

Either it must be because GOD knows not that it is good to take care for
such things; or because he will not; or because he cannot. But nothing is more
estranged from that blessed Essence, then ignorance, and unskilfulnesse: For It
is knowledge, and science, and wisdom it self. Nay, there is none among men,
so ignorant (if he be in his wits) but knows, that if all particular things
should be destroyed, the general things could not possibly consist; seeing
universal things, are made up of particulars. Yea, all the particular things,
and the general things are equal, and converted, and destroyed, and preserved
together. If therefore particular things perish, the universal will also
perish. And there is no reason why we should imagine that all singular things
could escape destruction, if no care were taken of them from above.

Now whereas to avoid this objection, they grant that GODS providence extends
to this only; that individualls shall be providently preserved, so far forth
as may conduce to the preservation of general things; they have said enough
(though they be not aware thereof) to prove that there is, also, some
providence over individualls. For (as they themselves have said in effect) GOD
by preserving the species, preserves also the kinds.

SECT. 3.
I. Of the unreasonablenesse of their opinion, who think that God despises to
take care of particular things. II. Of Gods undeniable ableness to govern
individualls; and of the capablenesse which particulars have of the divine
providence. III. Man's readiness to call upon God in sudden extremities (as it
were by natural instinct) is an argument of providence.

SOme there be who (although they confess that GOD is not ignorant how to
provide for particular things) do affirm, that he will not assume the care of
them. Now every one that will not do a thing; either will not do it, because
of sloth, or else for that it is not comely for him so to do.

No man will be so mad as to impute sloth to GOD; For sloth is bred of these
two; pleasure, and fear; and every one that is slothful, is thereby drawn
away by the love of some ease (or pleasure) or else discouraged by fear: and
to co^ceive either of these to be in GOD, were an impious absurdity.

If they that will not be so profane to lay slothfulness to GODS charge,
shall say it is undecent for GOD, and unworthy the majesty of so high a
blessedness, to descend so low and unto such vile and small things (or to be as
it were profaned by the absurdities, and obscenities of those material things
which depend upon the will of man; and that therefore he will not take upon
himself the government of such matters) they (not heeding it) impute unto GOD,
in so saying, two very faulty things, pride, and impurity.

For either the Creator despises to take on himself the government and
administration of individualls through haughtiness: (which is most absurd to
affirm) or else through fear of being defiled, as they speak. And that is no
less absurd then the other. For if they know the nature of the Sunne-beams to
be such, that they can exhale naturally all moisture, even from dung-hills when
they shine upon them, and that neither the Sun, nor his beams are any whit
contaminated, or defiled thereby, but keep nevertheless their own purity:
how can they conceive that GOD should be polluted, by those things which are
below? Surely these cannot be the conjectures of men, that have any knowledge
of what is pertinent unto the nature of GOD.

For the Godhead is untouchable, uncorruptible, not possibly to be
contaminated, and above all alteration: But pollution and such like things are
the works of change, and betoken alteration.

artificer (of what art soever) and especially a Physician, taking care of
general things, should heedlesly pass over things particular? without caring
to show his art in them (though things of the least consequence) seeing he
cannot choose but know that every part stands in some stead unto the whole?
much more absurd were it for any man to be of opinion; that God who is the
Creator of all, should be more unskilful then an artificer; and what else can
be alleged, if he be willing, but that he cannot take the care of
particulars? And what can be affirmed more manifestly repugnant to the nature
of GOD, then to say he is weak, and lacks ability to do well?

For two other causes, GODS providence is by some judged not to be exercised in
particular things. The one is, because the nature of God (as they think)
serves not thereunto; the other is, for that they conceive particular things
to be incapable of his providence.

But that it is agreeable to the nature of GOD to govern by his providence,
they themselves (who have denied it) do implicitly confess, when they affirm
that his providence rules universal things; especially seeing the inferior
things are not able to mount up, unto such as are much above them; whereas the
power of those which are superior, descends even unto the lowest, (even to
things insensible) for their preservation: yea, all things depend upon the will
of GOD, and draw from thence, their continuance, and well-being.

And that the nature of individualls (though infinitely multiplied) is capable
of being governed by Providence; it is plain by those living creatures which
are ordered by Rule and Authority. For, some of them, as Bees and Ants, and
diverse others, which being assembled together, are continued under certain
Captains (or guides) whom they obediently follow: But this is best perceived
if we look into the government of commonwealths* and the conversation that is
amongst men: For it is plain, that it admits the administration and care, both
of Lawgivers, and also of subordinate magistrates; and how can that which is
capable of such things, be unfit, to receive an orderly government from the
providence of the Creator?

providence over particular things, even that the knowledge thereof is
naturally ingraffed in men: which is evident, when we are brought to any great
extremity; for we then sly immediately unto GOD by prayer, as if without
teaching, it were naturally written in our hearts, that help were to be sought
of GOD.

Nature except it have been taught, cannot of it self lead us unto that, the
doing whereof is not according to nature: neither does it move us to fly
thither for assistance, where none is to be had: yet when any great affliction,
or fear suddenly oppresses us; we cry out unto GOD before we be aware; and
before we have had time to bethink our selves what we have to do. Now, every
natural consequence, is a forcible evidence admitting no contradiction.

SECT. 4.
I. Of the occasion and grounds of their error, who thought there was no
Providence ruling individualls. II. How men ought to behave themselves in the
search of Gods providence, which is beyond their comprehension. III. Of Divine
permission, and the manifold species thereof.

THe occasions and ground of their error who say there is no providence over
particular things, are these. First, they conceived the soul to be mortal,
and that it perished with the body. And secondly, because these men could not
comprehend by their understanding and reason, how there should be any
providence ruling individualls.

But that the soul is not mortal, and that all things pertaining unto man,
are not shut up within the compass of this life, it appears (even to heathen
men) both by the opinions of the wisest among the Grecians, who taught the
transmigration of souls from body to body; as also by the places which they
affirmed to be allotted out, unto the Souls departed, according to their good
or evil course in this life; and by those punishments wherewith souls are (as
they hold) punished by themselves, for the offenses they have committed.

For these things, although they be erroneous in other circumstances and
respects; yet in this they are true, and their authors do all agree therein,
that the soul remains after this life, and shall come to Judgment.

governance which providence has over particular things; which indeed we
cannot, as is employed by this text: How unsearchable are thy judgments, and
thy ways past finding out! Let us not thereupon conclude, there is no such
providence: For no man ought to affirm there is neither sea, not sand, because
he is ignorant of the limits of the Sea, and of the number of the sands: seeing
by the same rule, they might as well say that there is neither man, nor any
other living-creature, because they know not the number either of the men, or
of the living-creatures.

Particular things are to us infinite: Things which are unto us infinite, and
also unknown unto us; and therefore, though universalls may be (oftentimes)
comprehended by our understanding, yet individualls are not possibly
comprehensible thereby.

There is in every man a double difference; one in respect of other men; and
another in respect of himself: yea, there is in every man great differences,
and alterations even in respect of himself. Every day; as, in the manner of his
life; in his actions, (or affairs) in his necessities, in his desires; and in
all things which do happen, or pertain unto him.

It is not much otherwise with an irrationall-creature; for according to the
manifold necessities, and occasions thereof, it is very speedily carried hither
and thither; and soon altered again as other opportunities require.

These things considered, that Providence which is able to keep a continual
course with every one of those infinite and incomprehensible particulars (which
are so differing also, so changeable, and of so many fashions) must needs be
such a Providence as is agreeable to all, and every one of those individualls:
and extended more infinitely then those things are, whereunto it should reach.

And if this Providence must be so fit, and so infinite in regard of the
infinite difference of individualls: no doubt but the reason and method of this
Providence is as infinite; and if it be infinite, it cannot possibly be
comprehended by us. And it becomes not us to deny that gracious providence
which governes all things, because our ignorance is unable to comprehend it.
For those things which we suppose to be amiss, are known well enough unto
the wisdom of the Creator, to be well ordered.

Because we are ignorant of their occasions, we causelessly judge many things
to be imprudently done; and that which chances unto us in other things, by
reason of our ignorance, falls out also in the works of providence; for we
do after the same sort co^ceive of those things which belong to providence;
receiving by obscure likelihoods, and by conjectures, certain forms or
shadows of the works thereof, by such things as we have seen.

We say therefore, that Gods permission; and this permission is of many sorts:
For he sometime permits that even the just man shall fall into misery, to
declare unto others, that virtue which is concealed as in Job.

He does also permit some absurd things; that by the act which appears to
be absurd, some great and wonderful matter may be brought to pass, as the
salvation of men by the Cross.

He permits likewise the blessed Saints to be afflicted for another end; as
that they might not fall from a sincere conscience, and that the loftiness of
the mind might be abated; as when St. Paul was buffetted by Satan.

Sometimes also, one man is rejected, and left as desolate for a time; that
others considering his case, might be instructed, and amended thereby. As in
the example of Lazarus and the rich man; for, when we see any man afflicted,
our hearts are naturally touched therewith, according as Menander has very
well expressed: By seeing others feel the Rod,
We tremble with a fear of GOD.


Otherwhile, again, one man is afflicted for the glory of another; and neither
for his own sin, nor the sin of his Parents: as, he that was blind from his
birth, for the glorifying of the Son of man.

It is permitted also that some should be persecuted, to be a pattern of
constancy unto others; and that when their glory is exalted, others might be
encouraged to suffer in the like case, in hope of the glory to come; and for
the blessedness which is expected after this life; as in the Martyrs, and in
those who have yielded up their lives for their Country, for their kindred, or
for their masters.

SECT. 5.
I. One may otherwhile be afflicted for the good of another, without infringing
the Justice of divine Providence. Why holy men suffer bitter deaths and
persecutions. II. Death, or sufferings are no disadva^tages to good men;
neither are the unlawful actions of the wicked, justifiable, though Providence
convert the^ to good ends.

NOw, if any one think it against reason, that one man should be afflicted for
the amendment of another; let him know that this life, is (not the perfection
of man's happiness) but a place of wrestlings, and of striving for mastery, in
respect of Virtue: And the greater the labors and sufferings are, the more
glorious Crown of Glory shall be obtained: because the recompense of Rewards,
is according to the measure of Patience.

Saint Paul was contented to undergo the manifold afflictions and tribulations
which he suffered, that he might obtain the greater, and more perfect Crown of
a Conqueror: (which he himself confesses to be more then all our sufferings
can merit) and therefore the works of Providence are justly and very decently
performed.

A man may the better allow this to be so, (and conceive that GOD governs all
things, so well and so fitly, that the nature of each thing cannot more desire)
if he do but propose unto himself the believing of these two things which are
generally confessed among men: namely, that GOD, only, is good and wise: For,
in that he is Good, it is agreeable unto his goodness to employ his providence
over all things; and in that he is wise, he has a regard to perform them
wisely and exactly: because, if he used not his Providence, he could not be
good: and if he did not use it well, he could not be wise.

He therefore, that gives his mind to consider discreetly of these matters,
will not misesteem of any thing which is wrought by divine providence; neither
speak evil thereof without due examination: but rather accept of all things,
as exceeding well performed: and marvel at their admirable decency and
perfection, though the ignorant multitude judge according to a false
appearance: For in conceiving otherwise, we bring upon our heads (besides the
guilt of blasphemy) great blame for our sottish presumption.

all things are done well, we justify not the naughtiness of men, or of such
evil works as are in our power to do, or leave undone; but, we speak it of
the works of Providence which are not in our power. For, if any man object and
say, How falls it out that holy men are put cruelly to death without desert?
why, if they were unjustly condemned, did not Gods just providence hinder those
murders? and if they deserved to be so put to death, why are not they without
blame who caused them to be slain?

To this we answer, that the murderers of such men were injurious in slaying
them; and that they which were so slain, were slain either for their desert, or
their profit Sometime deservingly, for evils committed by them in secret: and
sometimes for their profit: Gods providence, thereby preventing either future
sins, or worse mischiefs to come; and in those respects it was good for them
that their life should be shortened. Thus was it with Socrates, and the Saints.

But, they who slew these men, did not slay them for any such cause; neither
was it lawfully done; but out of the corruption of their own minds, and for
gain and robbery: For, the Act is in man's power; but what shall follow upon the
Act, (as whether we shall be slain or no) is not as he will: neither is any
death evil, except for sin only, as is manifest by the death of the Saints.

But, wicked men, although they die in their beds on a sudden, and without
pain, do nevertheless die an evil death, which brings them unto an evil
burial: I mean, to be buried in their sin; yet whosoever kills any man
murtherously, does wickedly in so doing.

If he kills any one for that which deserves death; he is then to be
accounted among hangmen and executioners. If it be for the gaining of some
profit by them that are slain, he is to be reputed among cruel and wicked
murderers.

The like may be said of them who murder their enemies, or oppress them by
extreme servitude, or use any manner of inhumane cruelty, against them whom
they have overcome.

They also are as little to be justified, who seek the enriching of
themselves, by extorting other men's goods: for, though it may be expedient for
those, from whom they were extorted, that they should be deprived of them; yet,
they which wrested away more then their own, were unjust, in so so doing. For,
they take them out of a covetous desire of those good, and not for that it was
expedient for them, who^ they dispossessed of such things.

Glory be to God.
FINIS.

