CHRIST'S TEARS OVER JERUSALEM. Whereunto is annexed a comparatiue admonition
to LONDON.

A JOVE MVSA.

By Tho. Nash.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Thorp. 1613.

TO THE MOST HONORED, AND VIRTUOUS beautified Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Carey.
EXcellent accomplished Courtglorifying Lady, give me leave with the sportiue
Sea Porposes, preludiatly to play a little before the storm of my Tears: to
make my prayer ere I proceed to my sacrifice. Lo, for an oblation to the rich
burnisht shrine of your virtue, a handful of Ierusalems mu^maniz'd earth, (in a
few sheets of waste paper enwrapped,) I here (humiliate) offer up at your
feet. More embellished should my present be, were my ability more abundant.
Your illustrate Ladyship ere this (I am persuaded,) has beheld a bad flourish
with a Text pen: all my performance herein is no better. I doubt you will
condemn it for worse. Wit has his dregs, as well as wine, Divinity his
dross. Expect some Tares in the Treatise of Tears. Far unable are my dim
Ospray eyes, to look clearly against the sun of Gods truth. An easy matter
is it for any man, to cut me (like a Diamond) with mine own dust.

A young imperfect practitioner am I in Christ's school. Christ accepts the
will for the deed. VVeake are my deeds, great is my will. O that our deeds
only should be seen, and our will die invisible. Long has my intended will
(renowned Madam,) been addressed to adore you. But words to that my resolved
will, were negligent servants. My woe-infirmed wit, conspired against me with
my fortune. My impotent care-crazed style, cast off his light wings, and betook
him to wodden stilts. All agilitie it forgot, and graueld it self in gross
braind formalitie. Now a little is it revived, but not so revived, that it has
utterly shook off his danke upper mourning garment. Were it effectually
recured, in my soule-infused lines, I would show that I perfectly lived, and
in them your praises should live: whereas now only amongst the dead I live in
them, and they dead all those that look upon them. That which my Teare-stubbed
pen, in this Theological subject has attempted, is no more but the
course-spun web of discontent: a quintessence of holy complaint, extracted
out of my true cause of condolement.

Peruse it judicial Madam, and something in it shall you find that may
pierce. The world has crowned you for Religion, piety, bountihood, modesty,
and sobriety: (rare induments in these retchlesse days of security.) Diverse
weldeseruing Poets, have consecrated their endeavors to your praise. Fames
eldest favorite, Master Spencer, in all his writings hie prizeth you. To the
eternizing of the heroycall family of the Careys, my choicest studies have I
tasked. Then you, that high allied house, has not a more dear adopted
ornament. To the supportiue perpetuating of your canonized reputation, wholly
this book have I destined. Vouch safe it benign hospitality in your Closet,
with slight enteruiew at idle hours: and more polished labors of mine ere
long shall salute you. Some complete history I will shortly go through with,
wherein your perfections shall be the chief argument. To none of all those
maiesticall wit fore-stalling worthies of your sex, my self do I apply but
you alone. The cunning courtship of fair words, can never ouer-worke me to
cast away honor on any. I hate those female braggarts, that contend to have
all the Muses beg at their doors: and with Doves, delight evermore to look
themselves in the glass of vainglory, yet by their sides, wear continually
Barbary purses, which never open to any but pedanticall Parasites.

Divine Lady, you I must and will memorize more especially, for you recompense
learning extraordinarily. Pardon my presumption, lend patience to my
prolixitie, and if any thing in all please, think it was compiled to please
you. This I avouch, no line of it was laid down, without awful looking back
to your frown. To write in Divinity I would not have adventured, if ought
else might have consorted with the regenerate gravity of your judgment. Your
thoughts are all holy, holy is your life: in your heart lives no delight but of
Heaven. Far be it I should proffer to unhallow them, with any profane papers
of mine. The care I have to work your holy content, I hope God has ordained,
to call me home sooner unto him.

Varro says, the Philosophers held two hundred and eight opinions of
felicity: two hundred and eight felicities to me shall it be, if I have
framed any one line to your liking. Most resplendent Lady, encourage me,
favor me, countenance me in this, and something ere long I will aspire to,
beyond the common mediocritie.

Your admired Ladyships most devoted. Tho. Nash.

To the Reader.
NIL nisi flere libet; Gentles here is no ioifull subject toward, if you will
weep, so it is: I have nothing to spend on you but passion. A hundred
unfortunate farewels to fantastical Satirisme: In those veins here-to-fore
have I misspent my spirit, and prodigally conspired against good hours. Nothing
is there now so much in my vows, as to be at peace with all men, and make
submissiue amends where I have most displeased.

As the Title of this Book is Christ's Tears, so be this Epistle the Tears of
my pen. Many things have I vainly set forth, whereof now it repents me. S.
Augustine writ a whole book of his Retractations. Nothing so much do I
retract, as that wherein-soeuer I have scandalized the meanest. Into some
spleanatiue veins of wantonness, heretofore have I foolishly relapsed, to
supply my private wants: of them no less do I desire to be absolved then the
rest, and to God and man do I promise an unfeigned conversion.

To a little more wit have my increasing years reclaimed me then I had
before: Those that have been perverted by any of my works, let them read
this, and it shall thrice more benefit them. The Autumn I imitate, in sheading
my leaves with the trees, and so does the Peacock shead his tail. Buy who
list, contemn who list, I leave every Reader his free liberty. If the best
sort of men I content, I am satisfiedly succes-full. Farewell all those that
wish me well, others wish I more wit to.

Tho. Nash.

CHRIST'S TEARS OVER JERUSALEM.
SInce these be the days of dolor and heaviness, wherein (as holy David
Psalm. 9. 16
says,) The Lord is known by executing judgment, and the axe of his anger is
Mat. 3.
put to the root of the Tree, and his Fan is in his hand to purge his Floor:
I suppose it shall not be amiss to write something of mourning, for London to
harken counsel of her great Grandmother Jerusalem.

Omnipotent Savior, it is thy Tears I intend to write of, those affectionate
Tears, which in the 23. and 24. of Matthew thou weptst over Jerusalem and her
Temple; Be present with me (I beseech thee) personating the passion of thy
love. O dew thy spirit plentiful into my ink, and let some part of thy divine
dreariment live again in mine eyes. Teach me how to weep as thou wepst, and
rent my heart in twain with the extremity of ruth. I hate in thy name to
speak coldly to a quickwitted generation. Ratlier let my brains melt all to
ink, and the floods of affliction drive out mine eyes before them, then I
should be dull and leaden in describing the dolor of thy love.

Far be from me any ambitious hope of the vain merit of Art: may that living
vehemence I use in lament, only proceed from a heauen-bred hatred of
uncleanness and corruption. Mine own wit I clean disinherit, the fiery
Clouen-tongued inspiration be my Muse. Lend my words the forcible wings of the
Lightnings, that they may pierce unawares into the marrow and reins of my
Readers. New mint my mind to the likeness of thy lowliness: file away the
superfluous affectation of my profane puffed up phrase, that I may be thy pure
simple Orator. I am a child, (as thy holy Jeremy said) and know not how to
speak; yet, On nia possum in Ierem. 1.
eo qui me comfortat, I can do all things through the help of him that
strengthens me. The tongues of Phil. 4.
Infants it is thou that make eloqnent; and teach the N^d. 10.
heart understanding. Grant me (that am a Babe and an Infant in the mysteries
of Divinity) the gracious favor to suck at the breasts of thy sacred
Revelation, to utter something that may move secure England to true sorrow and
contrition. All the pours of my soul (assembled in their perfectest array)
shall stand waiting on thy incomprehensible Wisdom, for Arguments, as poor
young Birds stand attending on their Dams bill for sustenance. Now help, now
direct: for now I transform my self from my self, to be thy unworthy Speaker
to the World.

IT is not unknown, by how many and sundry ways God spoke by Visions,
Dreams, Prophecies and Wonders, to his chosen Jerusalem, only to move his
chosen Jerusalem wholly to cleave unto him. Visions, Dreams, Prophecies and
Wonders, were in vain: This gorgious strumpet Jerusalem, too to-much presuming
of the promises of old, went a whoring after her own inventions; She thought
the Lord vnseparately tide to his Temple, and that he could never be divorced
from the Arc of his Covenant; that having bound himself with an oath to
Abraham, he could not (though he would) remove the Law out of Jude, or his
Iudgement-seat from Mount Silo. They erred most temptingly and contemptuously;
for God even of stones (as Christ told them afterward) was able to raise up
children to Abraham. But what course took the high Father of Heaven and Earth,
after he had unfruitfully practiced all these means, of Visions, Dreams,
Wonders and Prophecies? There is a Parable in the 21. of Matthew, of a certain
Householder that planted a Vineyard, hedged it round about, made a Wine Press
therein, and built a Tower, and let it out to Husbandmen, and went into a
strange Country. When the time of fruit drew near, he sent his servants to
the Husbandmen to receive the increase thereof. The Husbandmen made no more a
do, but (his Servants coming) beat one, killed another, and stoned the third
Again he sent other Servants, more then the first, and they did the like unto
them. Last of all, he sent his own Son, saying: They will reverence my
Son, but they handled him far worse then the former.

The Hous-holder that planted the Vineyarde and hedged it round about, was
Isreal's merciful I^hou^h, who in Israel planted his Church, or his Winepresse:
made it a people of no people, and a Nation beyond expectation. Long did he
bless them, and multiply their seed on the face of the earth, as the sand of
the Sea, or the stars of heaven: from al their enemies he delivered them, and
brought their name to be a byword of terror to the Kingdoms round about
them; Their Rivers ouerflowed with Milk and Honey, their Garners were filled
to the brim: every man had wel-springs of Oil and Wine in his house, and
finally, there was no complaint heard in their streets.

The time of fruit drew near, wherein much was to be required of them to whom
much was given: he sent his servants, the Prophets, to demand his rent, or
tribute of thansgiuing at their hands. Some of them they beat, others they
killed, others they stoned, and this was all the thanksgiving they returned.
And then he sent other Prophets or Servants more then the first, and they did
the like unto them: yet could not all this cause him proceed rashly unto
revenge. The Lord is a God of long patience and suffering: nor will he draw out
his sword unadvisedly in his indignation. Still did he love them, because once
he had loved them, and the more their ingratitude was, the more his grace
abounded: he neglected the death of his servants, in comparison of the
salvation of them he accounted his Sons. He excused them himself unto
himself, and said: Peradventure, they took not these my servants I sent, for
my Servants, but for seducers and deceivers, and thereupon entreated them so
discourteously: I will send my only natural Son to them, whom they (being my
adopted Sons) cannot choose but reverence and listen to. This his natural
Son was Christ Jesus, whom he sent from Heaven to persuade with these
Husbandmen: He sent him not with a strong power of Angels, to punish their
pride and ingratitude as he might: He sent him not roially trained and
accompanied like an Ambassador of his greatness, nor gave he him any Commission
to expostulate proudly of injuries, but to deal humbly, and meekly with them,
and not to constrain but to entreat them. He sent his own only Son alone,
like a sheep to the slaughter, or as a Lamb should be made a Legate to the
Wolves. When he came on earth, what was his behavior? Did he first show
himself to the chief of these Husbandmen the Scribes and Pharisees? Did he
take up any stately lodging according to his degree? Was he sumptuous in his
attire, prodigal in his fare, or haughty in his looks, as Ambassadors wont to
be? None of these: Instead of the Scribes and Pharisees, he first disclosed
himself to poor Fishermen: for his stately lodging, he took up a Cribbe or a
Manger, and afterward the house of a Carpenter: His attire was as mean as might
be, his fare ordinary, his looks lowly. He kept company with Publicans and
sinners, the very outcast of the people; yet in their company was he not idle,
but made all he spoke or did preparatiues to his Embassy.

If any Nobleman (though never so highly descended) should come alone to a
King or Queen in Embassage, without pomp, without followers, or the apparel
of his state, who would receive him, who would credit him, who would not
scorn him? It was necessary that Christ (coming thus alone from the
High-commaunder of all Soueraignties, the controller of all Principalities and
Powers) should have some apparent testimony of his excellency. According to
the vanity of man, he thought it not meet to place his magnificence in earthly
boast, as in the pride of shame, which is apparel, or in the multitude of men
after him, for so met wicked Esau his Brother Jacob. but in working miracles
above the imagination of man, and in preaching the Gospel with power and
authority; Whereby, after he had thoroughly confirmed himself, to be the
owner of the Vineyards true Son, and that these ill Hus-bandmen the Jews,
should have no credible or truth-like exception left them, (that they took him
for a counterfeit or colorable practiser:) he went into their chief
assemblies, and there (to the Highpriests and Heads of their Sinagogues)
freely delivered his message, declared from whence he came, gently expostulated
their ill dealing, desired them to have care of themselves: told them the
danger of their obstinacy, and wooed them (with many fair promises) to repent
and be converted. All this prevailed not, they set him at naught, as they
rejected his Fathers other Servants the Prophets: Wherefore his last refuge
was, to deal plainly with them, and explain to the full what plagues and
wars were entering in at their gates, for their disloyalty and doggednesse.
In the 11. of Matthew, he pronounces grievous woes to Corazin and Bethsaid^: in
diverse other places he intermixeth curses with blessings, tempers Oil with
Vinegar, tears with threats: denounces sighing, and in his sighs wel-neere
swoundeth: even as a Father constrained to give sentence on his own Son. In
the 13. of Luke, he tells how often he had been an intercessor for the
repriue of their punishment. The Husbandman which is my Father (says he) has
come many years together to a Fig Tree in his Vineyard, to demand fruit of
it, and found none. What has hindered him from cutting it down but I, who
have took upon me to be the dresser of the Vineyard: and desired him to spare
it this year, and that year, and I would prune it, dung it, and dig round
about it, and then if it brought not forth fruit, let him deal with it as he
pleased. Almost this 30. year have I pruned it, dung'd it, digd round about
it: that is, reproved, preached, exhorted with all the wooing words I could,
endeavoring to mollify, melt, and pierce your hearts, yet all will not serve;
my prayers and my pains, in stead of bringing forth repentance in you, bring
forth repentance in my self.

As I said before, no remedy, or sign of any breath of hope, was left in their
Commonwealths sinne-surfetted body, but the malady of their incredulity,
ouer-maistred heavenly physic. To desperate diseases must desperate Medicines
be applide. When neither the white-flagge or the Red which Tamburlaine
advanced at the siedge of any City, would be accepted of, the black-flag was
set up, which signified there was no mercy to be looked for: and that the
misery marching toward them was so great, that their enemy himself (which was
to execute it) mournd for it. Christ, having offered the Jews the white-flag
of forgiveness and remission, and the red-flag of shedding his blood for them,
when these two might not take effect, nor work any yielding remorse in them,
the black-flagge of confusion and desolation was to succeed for the object of
their obduration.

This black-flagge is waued or displayed in the 23. of Matthew, where directing
his speech to his Disciples and the multitude, against the Scribes and
Pharisees that were the Princes of the people, he first urges the infamous
disagreement of their lives and their doctrines: which that it should breed no
scandalous back-slyding in the hearts of his Hearers, he inserteth this caution,
Do as they say, not as they do. And to like effect says S. Augustine, August.
tom. ^0. hom. 5.
Sermo Dei proferat eum peccator, proferat eum iustus, sermo Dei est,
inculpabilis est: The Word of God, be it preached by Hypocrite or Saint, is the
Word of God, and not to be despised or disanuld. Next this, he pronounces
eight terrible woes against them, for their eight-folde hypocrisy and
blindness: Besides other fearful comminations wherein he threatens, that all
the righteous blood which was shed from the time of Abel the righteous, unto
the blood of Zaccharias the Son of Barrachias, that was slain betwixt the
Temple and the Altar, should come upon them, should call and exclaim on their
souls for vengeance, slain the sky with cloddred exhalations, interrupt the
Sun in his course, and make it stick fast in the congealed mudde of gorie
Clouds; yea, dim and ouer-cast God sitting in his Throne, till he had took
some astonishing satisfaction for it.

Then on the sudden starting back, as ouer-examining the words he had said,
and condemning himself (in his thought) for being so bitter: he presently
vveepeth and excuses it in these terms, that it was not his fault but
theirs, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee. That is, which are guilty of all the accusations my
Father in this time would not in pity lay against thee: yea, feared to be
cruel in once suspecting of thee, though now they are proved, How often would I
have gathered thy Children together, as the Hen gathers her Chickins
together under her wings, and ye would not? How often would I have reuokt,
reduced, and brought you into the right way, But you would not? Therefore your
habitation shall be left deso- So that in these words most evidently you see,
he cleereth himself, and leaves them inexcusable.

The more to penetrate and enforce, let us suppose Christ in a continued
Oration thus pleading with them.

Jerusalem the Daughter of my people, I am sore vexed and compassionate for
thee, Jerusalem the midst of the earth, the mother of us all, in the midst of
whom I have wrought my salvation: Jerusalem that for all the good seed I have
sown in thee, affordest nothing but stones to throw at my Prophets, thou that
slayest whom I send to save thee, and imprisonest any man that wishes thy
peace; thy sins are so great, that when I look on thee, mine eyes can scarce
persuade me that thou stand, but that thou art sunck down like Sodom, and
entombed in Ashes like Gomorra. O let me pity thee, for I love thee
impatiently. A thousand shapes of thy confusion muster before mine eyes, and
the pains on the cross I am to sustain; cannot be so great pains unto me,
as to think on the ruin and massacre that is already travailing toward thee.
Famine, the Sword and the Pestilence, have all three sworn and conspired
against thee: Thou (one poor city) by these three vnreleming enemies shall be
overcome. Ehu, quantus equis, quantus viris adest sudor? Alas, what huge sweat
and toil is at hand for Horse and Man?

Here do I weep in vain, for no man regards me, no man wayleth with me;
Here do I prophecy, that my weeping in vain, shall be the cause of a
hundred thousand Fathers and Mothers weeping in vain. O that I did weep in
vain, that your defilements and pollutions gave me no true cause of
deplorement. Often wished I, that I might have said to mine eyes and ears they
li^e, when they have told me what they have seen and heard of thy treasons. I
wished that I might be as wretched as the damned, so my senses therein were
deceived. I am not deceived, it is thou that deceiuest thy Savior, and deceiuest
thy self to cleave unto Satan.

Satan, refrain thine odious embraces, the bosom of Jerusalem is mine: touch
not the body contracted to me; Improbe toll manus, quam tangis nostra futura
est, she will touch him, he stretches not out his hand to her, but she
breaks violently from me, to run rauishtly into his rugged arms. Alas! the
one half of my soul, why will thou back-slide thus? I love and can have no
love again: I love thee for thy good, thou love him that flatters thee for
thy hurt. What less thing then to believe and be saved? How can thou believe
and wilt not hear? Thy prayers are frivolous unto God, if thou deniest to
hear God: He must first hear God, that will be heard of God. I have heard
quietly all thy vpbraidings, reproves and derisions: as when thou saydst I was
a drunkard, and possessed with a devil, that I cast out devils by the power of
Beelzebub the Prince of the devils: that I blasphemed, was mad, and knew not
what I spoke; Nor was I any more offended with these contumelies, then when
thou calledst me the son of a Carpenter. If I give ear to all your
bitterness, will not you vouchsafe me a little audience when I bless you.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that stonest, and astoniest thy Prophets with thy
perverseness, that lendest stony ears to thy Teachers, and with thine iron
breast, dravvest unto thee nothing but the Adamant of Gods anger, what shall I
do to mollify thee? The rain mollifieth hard stones, O that the stormy
tempest of my Tears raight soften thy stony heart. Were it not harder then
stone, sure ere this I had broken and bruised it, with the often beating of my
exhortations upon it.

Moses struck the Rock and water gusht out of it, I (that am greater then
Moses) have strooken you with threats, and you have not mourned. O ye heavens,
be amazed at this, be afraid and utterly confounded: my people have drunk out
of a Rock in the Wilderness, and ever since had Rockie hearts. Yet will the
Rocks tremble when my Thunder falls upon them. The Mason with his Axe hewes
and carues them at his pleasure. All the thunder of judgments which I spend on
this stony Jerusalem, cannot make her to tremble or refrain from stoning my
Prophets. Should I rain stones upon her, with them she would arm her self
against my holy ones. Little does she consider, that all my Prophets are
Ambassadors, and the wronging of an Ambassador amongst mortal men, is the
breaking of the law of Nations; which breach or wrong, no King or Monarch but
(at his corronation) is sworn to revenge. If earthly Kings revenge any little
wrong done to their Ambassadors, how much more shall the King of all kings,
revenge the death and slaughterdom of his Ambassadors? The Angels in heaven, as
they are the Lords Ambassadors, (in regard of their own safety) would
prosecute it, though he should ouer-slip it. The devil that uses daily to
solicit the Murderers own conscience for vengeance against himself, will
he spare to put the Lord in mind of his ancient decree, A murderer shall
not live. God said unto Cain, The voice of thy brother Abels blood, cries to
me out of the earth: that is, not only Abels own blood, but the blood of all
the sons that were to issue from his loins, cry unto me out of the earth. It
is said in the 6. of Genesis, whosoever shall shed human blood, his blood
shall be shed likewise. Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, much more life for
life shall be repayd, and this equity or amends, the veriest Beggar or
contemptiblest creature on the earth (cut off before his time) shall be sure
to have. If I do them right, that in their own enmities lavish their lives,
shall I let their blood be trodden to durte under foot, and be blown back
by the winds into the crannies of the earth, (when it offers to sprinkle up to
heaven) who in my service spend their lives. At my head Jerusalem threw stones
when she stoned my Heralds. Who stabbeth or defaceth the picture of a King, but
would do the like to the King himself, if he might do it as conveniently.
Every Prophet or messenger from the Lord, represents the person of the Lord,
as a Herald represents his Kings person, and is the right picture of his
royalty.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, what thou have done to the least of my Prophets, thou
have done unto me likewise: My Prophets thou have stoned, me likewise thou
have stoned, and with-stood. The very stones in the street shall rise up in
judgment against thee.

By the old Law, he that had blasphemed, reviled his Parents, or committed
adultery, was stoned to death by the Prophets and Elders; Thou have blasphemed,
reviled thy (spiritual) Parents, committed adultery with thine own
abominations: and lo, contrariwise thine Elders and Prophets thou stonest to
death. Can I see this and not rise up in wrath against thee? For this shall
thou grind the stones in the Myll with Sampson, and whet thy teeth upon the
stones for hunger: and if thou ask any man bread, he shall give thee stones
to eat. The dogs shall lick thy blood on the stones like Iezabels; and not
a stone be found to cover thee when thou art dead. One stone of thy Temple,
shall not be left upon another that shall not be thrown down. The stone
which thy foolish Builders refused, shall be made the head stone of the corner.
Your hearts (which are Temples of stone) I will for-sweare for ever to dwell in.
There shall be no David any more amongst you, that with a stone sent out of a
sling, shall strike the chief Champion of the Philistines in the for-head; And
finally, you shall worship stocks and stones, for I will be no longer your
God. O Jerusalem Jerusalem, all this shall be-tide thee, because thou stonest
the Prophets, and killest them that are sent unto thee.

The Fathers have eaten sower-Grapes, and the Chyldrens teeth are set on edge:
your Fathers took hard courses against the Prophets, killed those I sent unto
them; And if you had no other crime, but that you are the sons of them that
killed the Prophets, it were too to sufficient for your subversion, but you
yourselues have stoned the Prophets, and killed those I sent unto you, not
only you your selves, but your sons (for this) shall be put to the edge of
the Sword.

The blood-thirsty and deceitful man shall not live out half his days. Who
strikes with the sword, shall perrish with the sword. He that but hates his
brother is a homicide. What is he then that slays his Brother? Nay more, what
is he that slays Gods Brother? Not one that believes in me, and does my will,
but is my Brother and Sister. In slaying them that are sent to declare the will
of God, you resist the will of God, and are guilty of all their damnations
which are yet unconverted, whom living, their preaching might have reduced. The
violating of any of the Commandments is death, Thou shall not kill, is one of
the principal Commandments: your fault at the first sight deserves
Hellfire. What do you but proclaim open war against heaven, when you
destroy or ouer-throwe any of the Temples of the holy Ghost? (which are men's
bodies.) They are the Tabernacles which the Lord has chosen (by his Spirit) to
dwell in. But the bodies of my Saints and Prophets (which you slay and stone)
are no triuiall ordinary Tabernacles, such as Peter my Disciple, would have had
me to make in the Wilderness, for Moses, Elias and my self, but Tabernacles
like the Tabernacle at Jerusalem, where I have ordained my name to be
worshipped. Their words as my words I will have worshipped; Their heads are the
Mounts from whence I speak to you in a holy flame, as to your forefathers
wandering in the desert.

I have told you here-to-fore they are the Salt of the Earth, with whose
Prayers and Supplications, if this mass of sin were not seasoned, it would
savor so detestably in Gods nostrils, he were never able to endure it. They
are the eyes and the light of the world, if the eye lose his light, all the
whole body is blind; and hence it came that they were surnamed Seers, for they
only foresaw, prayed, and provided for the people. I tell you plainly, if it
were possible for you to pluck the Sun out of Heaven, and you should do it,
and so consequently leave all the world in darkness, you should not be liable
to so much blame as you now are, in killing them I send unto you. They are your
Seers, your Prophets (your chief Eyes) which you have slain, destroyed and
put out.

Was Caine a Vagabond on the face of the earth for killing but one Abel? ten
thousand just Abels have you slain, that were more near, and ought to have
been more dear to you then Brothers, and shall I not destitute your
habitation for it, and scatter you as vagabonds through-out the Empires of the
world? As you have made no conscience to stone my Prophets, and slay them I
sent unto you, so shall the strange Lords that lead you captive, and they
amongst whom many hundred years you shall soiurne, make no conscience to cut
your throats for your treasure, and give a hundred of you together, to their
Fencers and Executioners, to try their weapons on for a wager, and win
maisteries with deep wounding you. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, deep woes and
calamities have thou incurd, in stoning my Prophets, and slaying them I sent
unto thee. How often would I have gathered thy children together when they went
astray? How often would I have brought them home into the true sheepfold when
I met them straying? I came into the World to no other end, but to gather
together the lost Sheep of Israel. You are the flock and Sheep of my
pasture, when I would have gathered you together, you would not hear my voice,
but hardened your hearts. You gather your selves in counsel against me, every
time I seek to call you or to gather you. Deny if you can, that I sent not my
Prophets (in all ages) to gather you: That with my Rod and my staff of
correction, I have not sought (from time to time) to gather you? that by
benefits and manifold good turns, I have not tryde (all I might) to tie you,
or gather you unto me. Lastly, that in mine own person, I have not practiced a
thousand ways to gather you to repentance and amendment of life. If you should
deny it, and I not contradict it, the devil (my vttrest enemy) would confirm
it.

Let me speak truly and not vauntingly, (although it be lawful to boast in
goodness) such has always bin my care to gather you, that I thought it not
enough to gather my self, but I have prayed to my Father, to join more
Labors and Gatherers with me, to reap and gather in his Harvest. How often
have I gathered the multitude together, and spoke unto them. When the people
were flocked or gathered unto me out of all Cities and had nothing to eat, I
fed them myraculously with five Barlie-loues and two fishes. I would not have
showed the wonders of my Godhead, but to gather you together. The first
gathering that I made, was of poor Seafaring men, whom I have preferred to be
mine Apostles.

Would you have been gathered together when I would have had you, you had
gathered to your selves the Kingdom of Heaven, and all the riches thereof. Now
what have you gathered to your selves, but ten thousand testimonies in the
Son of Gods testimony, that he desired and besought you to suffer your selves
to be gathered by him, and you would not? Soldiers that fight scatteringly,
and do not gather themselves in rank or battle array, shall never win the
day. If you knew how strong and full of stratagems the devil were, with how
many Legions of lustful desires he comes embattailed against you: that
secret ambushes of temptations he has laid to intrappe you, then would you
gather your selves into one body to resist him: then would you gather your
selves to gather in prayer to with-stand him: then would you gather for the
poor, which is, to gather for Soldiers to fight against him. E^eemosyna a
morte liberat, et non patitur hominemire in tenebras, Alms deeds deliver a
man from death, and keeps his soul Tob. 4. 10.
from seeing confusion. As water quenches fire (says the Wiseman) so alms
giving resists sin. And if it resists sin, it resists the Devil which
is the father of sin.

All my Fathers Angels stand gathered together about his Throne; No bread is
made, but of grains of Corn gathered together: no building is raised, but of
a number of stones glued and gathered together. There is no perfect society or
City, but of a number of men gathered together. Geese (which are the simplest
of all fowls) gather themselves together, go together, fly together.

Bees in one Hiue hold their consistory together. The stars in Heaven do
shine together. What is a man, if the parts of his body be disparted, and not
incorporated and essentiate together? What is the Sea but an assembly or
gathering together of waters, and so the Earth, a congestion or heaping up of
gross matter together? A Wood or Forest, but an host of Trees encampt
together? A general Counsel or Parliament but a congregation or gathering
together of special wise men, to consult about Religion or laws? O what a good
thing is it (says David) for Brethren to live or be gathered together in
unity.

If there were no other thing to ratify the excellence of it, but the evil of
his diameter opposite, which is division or distraction it were infinitely
ample to establish the title of his dignity. Nor David, nor all the evils of
division, nor all the instances of Angels, Bread, buildings, Societies, Geese,
Bees, Stars, Men, Seas, counsails, Parliaments may conform these ungracious
degenerates. They will not only not gather themselves into order, (which I
their Captain might exact at their hands) but scorn to be directed, mustered,
and gathered by me, when with the myldest discipline I offer to marshal them.
Sorry I am Jerusalem, that my kindness and conuersing with thee, has left thee
without any cloak or cloud of defense.

It shall not be laid to thy charge, that thou were ignorant, and foolish, and
knew not how to gather thy self into my family or household the Church: but
that when thou might have been gathered or called, thou refusedst, and
contemned; neither shall it be imputed that thou wentest astray, but that
going astray, thou reuiledst and strookest at him that would have gathered or
brought thee into the right way. Ah woe is me, that ever I opened my mouth to
call thee, or gather thee, for now (by opening my mouth, and thou stopping
thine ears when I opend it) I have opened and enwidened Hell mouth, to swallow
thee and devour thee. I took flesh upon me, to the end that Hell (not
Jerusalem) might perish under my hand. The vanquishment of that ugly nest of
Harpies, has been reserved as a work for me, before al beginnings; Now know
I not which I may first confound, Hell or Jerusalem, since both know me, and
have armed their foreheads against me.

Blessed is thy land, O Jerusalem, for I was borne in it. Cursed is thy Land, O
Jerusalem, for I was borne in it. Borne I am to do all Countries good but
thee. Thee I came principally to do good to, but thou resistest the good I
would doethee; Thou interdicts and prohibits me with reproaches and threats,
from gathering thee, and doing thee good. Of my birth thou reapest no benefit
but this, that I shall come at the last day to bear witness against thee.
Blind and inconsiderate, what will thou do to thine Enemy, that thus
entreatest thy Friend? that thus reiectest thy Redeemer? O were thy sin
(though not to be defended) yet any way excusable, it were somewhat. Why did I
ever behold thee to make thee miserable, and mine eyes thus miserable in
beholding.

I might have beheld the innocent Saints and Angels, that would never have
angerd me, but reioiced me: the Cherubins and Seraphins would incessantly have
praised me; I should not have prayde them to execute my will, (for they would
have done it with a beck:) much less have solicited them as I do thee, to
consent to save thy self. I should have but said the word to the senseless
Planets, and it had been done: to thy Children (more senseless then the
Planets) can I not say that word, which not only they will refuse to do, but
deride. For this shall thine Enemies gather themselves about thy City, and
smite thee: the Angels shall gather thee to the Lake of fire and Brimstone,
thou shall then gather thy brows together in howling and lamentation; And (as
Jeremy said) The carcasses of thy dwellers, Ierem. 9.
shall lie as the dung in the Field, or the handful after the Mower, and none
shall there be to gather them up. All this had thou prevented, if thou
would have permitted me to gather thee. I saw into thy frailty and
infirmity, that thou were not able to gather thy self, I took compassion on
thee, because thou were like sheep which had no Sheep-heard. I forsook all my
immortal pleasures, and mind-rauishing melody, to descend and make thee mine,
to come and gather thee to the glory prepared for thee, The greatest work was
this purpose of thy gathering, that ever was undertaken in Heaven or Earth.
Thus did I argument with my self, to salve thy imperfections of the not
gathering thy self. The Horse tameth not himself: the Cammel tameth not
himself: the Ox tameth not himself: the Bear, the Lion, the Elephant,
tame not themselves. Then why should I require, that Man shauld tame, recall,
bridle, bring under, or gather himself? But as the Horse, the Ox, the
Cammell, the Bear, the Lion, the Elephant, require Man to tame them: so it is
requisite that GOD should tame Man, that God alone should gather him unto him.
Content I was to take upon me that unthankful office of taming or gathering,
but thou were not content to be so tamed or gathered.

It did not irke me so much that thou were untamed, or ungathered, as that
(knowing thy self in that case,) thou were unwilling to be tamed and gathered.
Thou could not despair of mine ability to tame thee and gather thee; for if
man tameth the beasts he never made, shall not I gather thee, alter thee, and
tame thee, that made thee? Easy is my yoke, and my burden is light: I would
not have tamed thee, or tempted thee above thy strength; only I would have
curbd or reaned thee a little to the right hand, kept thee from swallowing in
sin with greediness. Suppose (as the tamer of all Wild-beasts) I had some-time
used my whyp or my goade; had it been so much? Your Horses which you tame and
spur, and cut their mouths with raining, and finally kill, with making carry
heavy burdens many years together: you will not give so much reward to (when
they are dead) as burial, but cast them to the Fowls of the air, to be
deformedly torn in pieces; I (having tamed thee, and gathered thee home unto
me, enfeofe thee with indefinite blessedness, (being dead a space) restore to
thee, not only thy flesh (in more purity,) but the just number of thy hayres,
install thee in eternity with mine Angels, where thou shall neuer-more need to
be gathered, or tamed, where there shall be no adversity or tribulation that
shall exercise or try thee, but eternal felicity to feed thee: and that
without any care, forecast, or plotting on thy part, (such as in the
maintenance, or earthly weal is wont.) I shall be to thee all in all, thy
riches, thy strength, thine honor, thy Patron, thy prouider. Yet all this hope
cannot move thee to consent to be tamed or gathered unto me.

My voice which cries, Return, Return: Whether wanderest thou long strayer,
is trouble-some and hateful unto thee, thou can by no means digest it: it
is thy Adversary in the way, which since I have warned thee to agree with, and
thou have refused, it shall draw and hale thee unto judgment, the Judge
deliver thee to Death his Sariant, the Sariant to the devil, (convicted souls
Iaylor:) thence shall thou not escape till thou have paid the utmost farthing.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, why should thou gather and entangle thy self in so
many inevitable snares, when (by gathering thy self under my wing) thou may
avoid them? What have I required of thee, but to gather thy self, and agree
with my voice thy Adversary? Nothing but that thou would have a care of thy
health and well-doing. A thing which thou (in reason) not I, ought to exact and
require of thy self: yet I, (as I were thy Guardian or Ouer-seer, and thy
Father Abraham dying had bequeathed thee wholly to my trust) follow thee, haunt
thee by my Spirit, daily and hourly importune thee to remember and gather thy
self. How often have I (to this effect) chidingly communed with thy soul and
conscience?

Sinful Jerusalem, why deferst thou to gather thy self, and agree with my
voice in the way? Yet thou may agree, yet thy way is not finished, yet thy
Adversary walks by thee. Why do thou proroge till thy wretched life be at
his ways end? Is there any other life, any other way, (when this way of woe is
ended) wherein thou may agree with thine Adversary? The Judge, the Sariant,
the prison, thou must then awaite, and despair of opportunity ever after, to
agree or be gathered to grace: but look to be gathered like grass on the
house top, and thrown into the fire. Promise not unto thy self too many
years travailing in the way: Think not that thou shall ever live: thy way may
be cut off ere thou be aware: a thousand casualties may cut thee off in the
way. But how long or how short so ere thy way be, my voice (thine Adversary)
like thy shadow still haunteth thee, still treads on thy heels, still calls
and cries out upon thee to gather up thy accounts and agree with it. Shamest
thou not (vild image of carelessness) so long to be called on for so light a
matter? so long to live at variance with so mighty an Adversary? It is all one
as if thou should owe an earthly Judge money, (who has the Law in his hand)
and brave him, and deny to come to composition, saying: If I owe it you,
gather it or recover it as you can. How think thou, is there any earthly
Judge would spare thee or for-beare thee as I have done? My voice, as it is my
voice, is thy friend, but as thou abusest it, (turns thine ears from ii, and
wilt not agree with it) it is thine Adversary; It wishes thee well, and thou
wishest thy self ill; It bids thee crouch and stoop to the Prophets I send,
and thou stonest them; It bids thee pity the Widow and the fatherless, and
thou oppressest them; It bids thee repent thee of the evil thou have
committed, and thou doublest it; It bids thee gather and gird up thy loins
close, and take the staff of Stedfastnes in thy hand, that if the flesh and
the devil assault thee in the way, thou may encounter them coragiously.
Instead of girding and gathering up thy loins, thou vnloosest them to all
licentiousnes; For the staff of stedfastnes, thou armest thy self with the
broken Reed of inconstancy; and for incountering and contending with the flesh
and the devil, most slauishly thou kissest and embracest them.

So thou thy self (I altogether loath) make my voice thy enemy. No friend so
firm, but by often ill usage may be made a foe. No marvel thou make me thy
foe, that art a foe to thy self. He that loves iniquity, hates his own
soul: he that hates his own soul, can never love his neighbor; insomuch
as there is no man living, that can love another better then himself. If then
his ^est love to himself, be to hate himself, his love to his neighbor must
be a degree lower, there is no remedy. The Law commands, Love thy neighbor
as thy self: And he fulfilleth the Law by hating his neighbor as himself. I
say unto you, He that hates his neighbor, is guilty of the breach of all
the commandments: whence it necessarily arises, that he which loves not
his own soul, is guilty of the breach of all the commandments.

Soule-hating, Apostata Jerusalem, that would never be gathered into any
compass of good life, I here accuse thee as a Homicide of thine own life, as
a transgressor of all the commandments, in hating thy self. The most
vnfortunatest is my fortune of any that ever loved, to love those, that not
only hate me, but hate themselves.

O Jerusalem, not the Infidell-Romanes, which shall invade thee, and make thy
City (now cleped a City of peace) a shambles of dead bodies, tear down thy
Temple, and set up a brothel*house in thy sanctuary, not they (I say) shall
have one drop of thy blood laid to their charge, not one stone of thy Temple
or Sanctuary, testificatory against them; Thy blood shall be upon thine own
head, whose transgressions, violently thrust swords into their hands. Thy
Temple and thy Sanctuary shall both cry out against thy security for
sacriledg. The Arc, wherein the Tables of covenant are laid, shall have the
Tables taken away, and in sted of them, a black Regester of thy misdemeanures
laid in it: yea, my Father (if all witnesses should fail) would stand up and
article against thee himself, how thou have driven him (with thy detestable
whoredoms) out of his consecrated dwelling place. O that thou knew the time
of thy visitation! O that thou would have been gathered together! O that
thou would have had a care of thy self, had care of me! I must be
slaughtered for thee, and yet work no salvation for thee. One cross alone
(cruel Jerusalem) is not able to sustain the weight of thine iniquities: ten
times I must be crucified ere thou be cleansed.

For sin I came to suffer, thy sin exceeds my suffering; It is too
monstrous a matter for my mercy or merits to work on. It wounds me more with
mediating on it, then all the Spears or Nails can wound ^e, that are to
pass through me. I would quite renounce and for-sweare mine own safety, so I
might but extort from thee one thought of thine own safety. Careful am I for
thee careless. Again, this renueth my unrest, that I, which am the Lord and
Author of life, must be the Author and Euidencer against thee of death. If
thou had never seen the light, thy walking in darkness would have brought
thee no waylement. Ignorantia, si non excusat a toto, saltem excusat a tanto:
Ignorance excuses the half, if not the whole. Thou have not half an excuse,
(hence is my tears) not a quarter, not the hundredth part of a quarter, not a
word, not a sigh, not a syllable. Never did I look on such a manifest unmasked
leprous face, on a prisoner convicted so mute. Sore am I impassioned for the
storm thy tranquillity is in child with. Good Jeremy, now I desire with thee,
that I had a Cottage of wayfaring men in the Wilderness, where I might leave my
people and live, for they be all Adulterers, and a band of Rebels.

A Tormentor (that abiureth commiseration) when he first enters into the
infancy of his occupation, would collachrimate my case, and rather choose to
have been tortured himself, them torment me with ingratitude as thou do.
More and more thou addest to my unease, and acquainst mine eyes with the
infirmities of anguish; Having no sin before, thou have almost made me commit
sin, in sorrowing for thy sins. Yet though I have sounded the utmost depth of
dolor, and wasted mine eye-bals well-neere to pinnes-heads with weeping, (as a
Barber wastes his Ball in the water,) a further depth of dolor would I sound,
mine eyes more would I wast, so I might waste and wash away thy wickedness. So
long have I wasted, so long have I washed and embained thy filth; in the clear
streams of my brain, that now I have not a clean Tear left more, to wash or
embaline any sinner that comes to me.

The fount of my tears (troubled and mudded with the Toade-like stirring and
long-breathed vexation of thy venomous enormities,) is no longer a pure silver
Spring, but a miry puddle for Swine to wallow in. Black and cindry (like
Smiths-water) are those excrements that source down my cheeks, and far more
sluttish then the ugly oous of the channel. It Is thou alone (vlcerous
Jerusalem) that have so fouled and soyled them. In seeking to gather fruit of
thee, I gather nothing but stayning Berries, which embrued my hands, and almost
poisoned my heart. Never would I mention this or moan me, if thou had not
embrued or brawned thine own hands, (not in Berries) but in blood: and more
then (almost) poisoned thine own heart.

What talk I of poison, when it is become as familier to thee as meat and
drink. Thou have used it so long for meat and drink, that true nourishing
meat and drink thou now take for poison. Consuetudo est altera natura:
Custom has so engrafted it in thy nature, that now, not only poison not
hurts thee, but fostereth and cherishes thee. What-soeuer thou art is poison,
and none thou breathest on but thou poysonest. With Athenagoras of Argus, thou
never feel any pain when thou art stung with a Scorpion; Thou have no sting
or remorse of conscience. Thy soul is cast in a dead-sleep, and may not be
awaked though Heaven and Earth should tumble together.

For discharge of my duty, and augmentation of thine everlasting malediction,
since Tears, threats, promises, nor any thing will pierce thee, here I make a
solemn protestation, what my zeal and fervent inclination has been (ever
since thy first propagation) to win and weane thee from satan, and
notwithstanding, thou stonedst my Prophets, and slewest them I sent unto thee:
I still assayed to revoke thee, and bring thee back again to thy first image,
not once, or twice, or thrice, but I cannot tell how often, I would have
gathered thee, even as a Hen gathers her Chickins under her wings, butthou
would not. Blame me not though I give thee over, that have given me over:
long patience has dulled my humor of pity. No sword but will loose his edge
in long striking against stones.

My lean withered hands, (consisting of naught but bones) are all to shiuerd
and splinterd in their wide casos of skin, with often beating on the Anuile
of my bared breast. So penetrating and eleuatedly have I praid for you, that
mine eyes would tayne have broke from their anchors to have flowne up to
Heaven, and mine arms stretched more then the length of my body; to reach at
the Stars. My heart ran full-butt against my breast to have broken it open,
and my soul flutterd and beat with her ayry-winges, on every side for
passage. My knees cracked and the ground fled back. Then (O Jerusalem) would I
have rent my body in the midst (like a grave) so I might have buried thy sins
in my bowels. And had I been in heaven as I was on Earth, the Sun should have
exhalted from thee all thy trespasses as meteors, which the clouds his
Cofferers receiving, might foorth-with have conduited down into the Sea, and
drowned for ever.

Fools be they that imagine it is the Winds, that so toss and turmoile them
in the deep, they are no winds but insurrectiue sins, which so possess the
waves with the spyrite of raging. I drowned all the sins of the first World
in water, all the sins of the first World now welter, souse, and beat
unquietly in the Sea, whither the World of waters was with-drawne when the
Deluge was ended; And as a guilty conscience can no where take rest, so no more
can they in the Sea, but embolning the billows up to the air, with roaring
and howling darte themselves on every Rock, desiring it to ouer-whelme them:
and because they know they can never be recovered, with the same envy which is
in the devils, they seek to drown and ramuerse every ship that they meet. If
happily there be a calm, it is when they are weary of excruciating
themselves. I that was borne to suppress and tread down sin under foot,
in the night time, (when that sinne-inhabited element is wont to be most
lunaticke) walk on the crests of the surges as on the dry land.

Another cause why the Sea so swells, and barketh of late more then ordinary,
is, for when I sent the devils into the Heard of Swine, they carried them
headlong into the Sea, where they drowned and perrisht them: and then loath to
come to land to be controlled and dispossessed again by me, they entered and
inhabited the Sea Monsters, such as the Whale, the Grampoys, the Wasser-man,
whom they have suborned and inspyred to lie in wait for Ships-wrack. Sin
takes no rest but on earth, and on earth no rest in the night, but the day. The
night is black like the devil, then he may boldly walk abroad like the
Owl, and his eyes nere be dazeled. Solus c^m solo he may confer with his
subjects, tempt, terrify, insinuate what he will. He knows that God has
therefore hid all other objects from man's sight in the night, that then he
should have no occasion to gaze elsewhere, but full leisure to look into
himself. In which regard, least he should look into him self, and so repent,
he will not let him see with his own eyes, but lends him other eyes of
despair or security to see withal. If of security, then either he persuades
him there is no God, and that Religion is but subtle Lawgyuers policy, (to
keep silly fools in awe with scarecrowes:) or that if there be a God, he is a
wise God, and like a wise Counsailer, troubles not himself with every vain
twittle twattle, of this man, or that man, but considers wherefore we are made,
and bears with us thereafter.

Yea (which is horrible) he sootheth him up, that if God would not have had
him sin, he would neuerhaue given him the parts or the means to sin
with. If he be a whore-maister, he remembers him how Abraham went in to his
maid Hagar: How Lot committed incest with his Daughters: How David lay with
Berseba, and slew Vrias: And how I (my self) would not let the woman that had
committed adultery be stoned to death, but bid her go home to her house in
peace and sin no more. If he be a drunkerd, Noah was drunk, the forenamed
Lot was drunk, and David (mentioned before likewise) made Vrias drunk; Yet
all these were This was long after Christ's tears over Jerusalem.
men that God delighted in.

If he be a periurd person, why Peter for-swore himself thrice, Joseph swore
by the life of Pharao, David swore, God do so and so to me, if I leave to Nab
ill yet ere night, one to piss against the walls. Yet when Naballs wife
Abigall (unwitting to her husband) brought him a little refreshing, his humor
was pacified, his oath was dispenst with. A great many more allegations has he
to this end, which here to recite, were to weapon presumption, and save the
devil a labor in seducing. Murder, theft, (what not) has his texts to
authorize him. Nothing does profit, but perverted may hurt, Scripture as it
may be literally expounded, and sophistically scande, may play the Harbinger as
well for Hell as Heaven, and sooner feeds Despair then Faith. Has not the
devil his Chapel close adjoining to Gods Church? Is he not the ambitious Ape
of GODS Majesty? And as he has his Tabernacle (O Jerusalem) in thy Temple, so,
has not he his Oracle or Tripos in his Temple at Delphos, with as great (if
not greater) sacrifices, oblations and offerings then are in Gods Temple? Will
he not take upon him to work miracles, cure diseases, and be an Angel of
light, that is, preach the Gospel as I do. Speak I in thunder or visions,
he speaks in thunder and visions. Eclipse I the Sun and Moon, he will
Eclipse Sun, Moon, and stars. Send I one good-Angel out, he will send out
two ill. In conclusion, in any thing he will imitate me, but humility; and by
humillity only, my Children are known from the devils. Pride is that by which
the devil holds his kingdom, he had nere been a devil, if he had not been
too proud to be an Angel. Envy breeds pride, and pride breeds envy: There is
none can vp-hold envy, but he must vp-hold pride, nor can true pride live, if
it has nothing to envy at; If it have nothing so great as it self to aim at,
there is no man under it has any pride or prosperity, but it enuies and aims
at.

The Sun, though it can endure no more Suns but it self, yet it can take
in good part to have more Planets besides it self, but pride can endure no
Superiors, no equals, no ascendants, no sprigs, no grafts, no likely
beginnings. Any thing but virtue it can tolerate to thrive, and that it is
too-to afraid of. Mark a Tyrant when you will, and he first extirpates the
adherents to virtue. Virtue is thrice more inuocating for honor then ambition.
What was the devils first practice in Paradise, but to destroy virtue in Adam,
and so by steps to destroy him, by destroying virtue in him? Whom slew Caine,
but his just or virtuous brother Abel? He was afraid the comparison of his
iustnes or virtue, would make him incomparably ugly in Gods presence. Whom
hated Esau and laid wait for, but his upright brother Jacob, because by his
virtue he had ouer-reacht him in the blessing of his byrth-right (Did not Saul
persecute David, only because GOD loved him? So through-out the whole course
of the Scriptures, Virtue purchases Envy, and her possessors never escape
briery scratches.

But as before, so once more I will assertionate, Virtue has no enemy but
pride. I my self have no enemy but Pride which is the Summun genus of sin,
and may well be a conuertible name with the devil, for the devil is naught
but pride, and pride is an absolute devil. But for pride, Jerusalem ere this
had gathered it self under my wing: Forsooth she disdained to be taught and
instructed by such a meane-titled man as I. But for pride of despising the
preaching of Noah, the first World had not been deluged. But for pride, there
had been no transslation of Monarchies. If Pharao had not been so proud that
he would not let your forefathers go, (but kept them in despite of me,) I
had never plagued him as I did.

The reason I deceived you Hierosolomites and Jews, (in not coming in pride
unto you, in not taking the majesty and triumph of mine eternity,) was, because
I would not partake with the devil, in the pomp and glory of this World,
which is proper to him. Did not he (presently after the first brute of my
Gospel) hoyse me up unto an exceeding high mountain, and showed me all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the glories of them, and said, All these will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me? When I came to Abraham in his
Tent, and to Lot in Sodom, accompanied with another Angel, I took upon me no
pompous shape. It is debasement and a punishment to me, to inuest and enrobe my
self in the dregs and dross of mortallity. I would resemble the similitude of
the meanest, to gather the meanest unto me.

I came to call sinners to repentance, poor sinners, beggarly sinners, blind
sinners, impotent sinners, as well as rich sinners, noble sinners, potentate
sinners, to repen tance. With me there is no respect of persons, the Kings
blood attainted of conspiracy against me, is more base then the caytiues or
pesants. What was Abraham, (but that he honored me,) I should out of his
loins multiply a Monarchy. There is no cripple or lazer by the highway side,
but would have honored me more then the progeny of Abraham, if I had but
bestowed the thousand part of the propitiousnes I have bestowed on the progeny
of Abraham. Shall a man call any cripple or Beads-man unto him; to give alms
to, and he will not come at him: but contemptuously cast his kind profer
behind him. I have called you (that often have been Beggars and Beads-men unto
me, for blessings,) and humbly supplicationd you, to accept of my largess I
lauisht, but you cryde, Auaunt hypocrite, thy proferd ware is odious, we will
have nothing to do with an Innouater.

What has immortality to do with mucke? Had my Father no employment for me,
but to send me to scrape on a dunghill for Pearl, where nothing will thrive
but Toade-stooles? Was thought-exceeding glorification, such a cloyance and
cumber unto me, that I must leave it: as Archesilaus ouer-melodied, and
too-much melowed and sugared with sweet tunes, turned them aside, and caused his
ears to be new relished with harsh, sower and unsavory sounds? O no, when I
left Heaven to live on earth, I left perpetuall-springing Summer, to sleep on
Beds of Ise, in the Frozen-zone, the throne of Winter. My super-aboundant
love to men on earth, was all the solace I proposed to my self on earth. Vbi
cuiusque animus est, ibi animat: where amans mind is, there his mirth is.

Mirth was to me no mirth, whiles thou were not gathered unto me. No more then
I have gatherd thee, can I gather thee: As a Hen gathers her Chickins, so
would I have gathered thy Children. The Hen clocketh her Chickins, I would
have clocked and called them by my preaching; The Hen shieldeth them, and
fights for them against the Puttocke, I would have shielded them, and secured
them against that sly Puttocke satan. I would have fought for them, with
hell, the devil, and al infernality. The Hen; after she has clocked and
called her chickins, keeps them warm under her soft down, walleth them in
with her wings, and watches for them whiles they sleep. After I had called
you (my children or chickens) under my wings, which is, into my Church I would
have been a stronger wall unto you, then the wall of the Tower of Babell,
which (as Writers affirm) Herodot.
was the eight part of a mile thick, I would have set an Angel (with a fiery
sword) in your gate, to keep out your enemies; Still would I (with the heat
and warmth of my Spirit) have cherisht and encreast the strength and growth of
your faith, and keep it from being dead and cold; My vigilance should have
sentineld for all your sleeps: neither the terror by night, nor the Arrow of
temptation that flies by day, should have frighted you. Satan (whom you now
hold for such a subtle underminer) should have been your fool, and your
iestingstocke, and a feare-bugge to your Babes only. All things should have
prosperd and gone well which you had taken in hand. Happy is that man that
sits in the shadow of the wings of the almighty: unhappy are you, that
have rather sought to dwell in the shadow of death, then under the shadow of
the wings of the Almighty.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest my Prophets and stonest them I sent unto
thee: How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickins under her wings, but you would not. What is more
tender then a Hen over her Chickins? So tender and more (O Jerusalem) have I
been over thy Children, yet would they never tender themselves, but tend and
bend all their courses to ruin. Never could I get them to flock under my
Wing, or come under my roof. Who takes charge of him, that in a Town of war
will not come into the Town, but lie wilfully without the walls? No charge
do I take of any that will not come within my walls, be gathered under my
wing, but live out of the Church. Knew you what a fearful thing it were, to
live (as Out-lawes) from the wings of my Church, to let riches, promotion, or
any worldly respect hinder you, from being gathered into the unity of my body,
and communion of Saints, you would undoubtedly forsake all and follow me.

All those that repaired not in time into Noah's arc, the waters ouertooke and
drowned. Those that gathered not Manna in the morning it did them no good.

Those that made excuses, and came not to the wedding when they were bidden,
the King sent forth his Warriors, and destroyed them, and burnt up their
Cities. Senseless stones are more obedient unto Gods voice then you, for the
stony-walls of Jericho (after God had summoned them by his Priests sounding
their Trumpets seven times) at the third sound they prostrated themselves
flat. Not the third, or the fourth, or the fifth sound, have you with stood, but
five hundred solemn summons and sounds; No judgment that (in your ears) I or
any can sound, can make you fall prostrate or humble your selves. Still you will
live as runnagates and banished men, from Gods jurisdiction, you hadrather the
devil should gather you up then he.

I have piped, and you have not daunced, I have lamented, and you have not
mourned: The days will come, when I shall be taken away from you, and then you
shall wish (in vain) that you had danct after my pipe, and borne a principal
part in my Consort of mourning. Let all successions and Cities, be warned by
you, how you neglect Gods calling: let every private man be admonished by you,
how he neglects Gods calling. By benefits, by sickness, by outward crosses,
signs and wonders he calls men: To day if ye will hear my voice, harden
not your hearts: That is, at this present when I call you, harken to me. Who
does not harken at the first, let him look to be hardened. Pharao, for he
would not at the first voice or message let the children of Israel go, his
heart was hardened.

God when his voice will not be heard, permits the devil to go and try if
his voice will be heard; if they hear the devils and not his, then has he
where-withall to convince them. Jerusalem has heard the voice of God, crying
out loud in her streets and hie places, unto her to gather herself: Her
streets, and al her hie places, are filled with the echoes of Gods voice. The
stones of her Turrets have been so moved with it, that they have opened their
ears, and received his echo into them, and that the Crier might know they
attended the words which he spoke, they (ecchoing) repeated them again. The
very echo of the walls and the stones, shall echo unto God for sharp
punishent against you; And let any but read or rehearse this sentence, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
the Hen gathers her Chickins, the echo shall replye, But they would not.
They would not. Thou would not indeed. And no damnation have thou but thou
would not. I offered thee peace, but thou would not: I offered thee to
repent and be baptized, but thou would not: I offered thee (if thou labourdst
and were laden) to ease thee, but thou would not: I offered thee to ask and
thou should have, but thou would not: To knock and it should be opend, but
thou woldst not. Great evils shall thou endure, for thou would not. Great
evils did I say? alas little evils, compared to the evils I must endure only
for these 4. words, But thou would not.

Heu melior quanto sors tua, sort mea est. My body shall find a Sepulcher,
but my sorrow never any: for thou would not. For ever I must mourn what thou
for ever must suffer, for thou would not. This will be thine utter
impeachment, that the very Samaritans (whom thou accountest Infidels) received
and acknowledged me, but thou would not. That the unclean spirits, departing
out of men, cryde and confessed me to be the Son of God, but thou would not.
And lastly, that the Spirit of God himself, (discending on my head like a
Dove) gave testimony of me, yet thou would not.

Clamor Sodomorum multiplicatus est: The cry of thee Jerusalem, (the second
Sodom) that thou would not, in Genesis 19.
Gods ears is doubled. To what Nation shall I now preach or appeal, since my
elected people (that should harken to me) have answered me they would not?
Niniuie repented at the preaching of Jonas, but Jerusalem at the preaching of
her Jesus, she would not. I offered to wash her feet with the waters of my
tribulation, and heal every disease and malady she had, with them, as I healed
the leprosy of Naaman with the waters of Jordan: but over the waters of my
Tears and tribulation, she passes Psalm. 65.
on drie-foote, as once they past over Jordan. The river of God is full of
water, Jerusalem, were thine eyes the rivers of God, they would be full of
water. The Snow on thy Mountains, by the Sun is resolved to water, the Son
of GOD has sought to resolve thy snow-colde heart into water, but he could not,
for thou would not. Over thy principal gates, and the doors of thy Temple,
let therefore this for an Emprese be engraven: A kind compassionate man, who
grieuing to see a serpentine Salamander fry in the fire, (so pitteously as it
seemd) cast water on the raging flames to quench them, and was by him stung to
death for his labor. The most or word thereto, ATNOLVISTI, but thou would
not. As who should say, thank thy self though thou still burnest: I would have
rid thee out of the fire: but thou would not. By stinging me (mortally)
thou disturbest me.

On thee Salamander-like Jerusalem, have I cast the cool water of my tears,
to keep Hell fire (if it might be) from seeding on thee, and inwrapping thee:
but thou (delighting like that chilly Worm to live in the midst of the
furnace, or as the foolish Candle-flie, to blow the fire, with the beating of
thy wings near unto it that must burn thee,) have spit thy poison at me when
I sought to preserve thee. More agreeing is it to thy nature, to fry in the
flames of thy fleshly desires, (which is but a short blazd straw-fire, to tinde
or inkindle Hellfire,) then to live temperately qualefied, midst Insulae
fortunatae the fortunate Islands of Gods favor. For this shall thou be consumed
with fire. Thy house shall be left desolate unto thee.

Hitherto with Ieschaciabus thou have had naught but a plaster of drye-figges
laid to thy byle, thou have been chastised but with wanton whips, but lo,
shortly (the time comes) thou must be scourged with Scorpions: a hook shall be
cast into thy jaws, and a chain come through thy nostrils. I now but foretell
a storm in a calm, but when the Leuiathan shall approach, (that with his
neesings chaseth Clouds,) and you shall see lightening and thunder in the
mouths of all the four Winds: When Heaven (in stead of stars) shall be
made an Artillery-house of Haile-stones, and no Plannet reuolue any thing but
prostitution and vastity, then shall you know what it is, by saying you would
not, to make your house unto you be left desolate.

With the foolish builder you have founded your Palaces on the sands of your
own shallow conceits: had you rested them on the true Rock they had been
ruine-proof: but now the rain will rough-enter through the crannies of their
wavering, the Winds will blow and batter open, wide passages for the pashing
shoures: With roaring, and buffetting lullabies, instead of singing and dandling
by-os they will rock them clean over and over. The only commodity they shall
tithe to their owners, will be (by their ouer-turning) to afford them Toombes
vnaskt. Great shall be the fall of thy foolish building (O Jerusalem) like a
Tower ouer-topt, it shall fall flat, and be laid low and desolate.

In the Haven of Ioppa, shall ariue as many ships, as would make a
Marine-cittie, in bigness no less then thy self. The Helle-spont by Xerxes,
was never so surchargd as it shall be. All Galile (from the land of Nepthali
upwards) shall be but a quarter for their Pioners, and a couch for their
baggage. From Jerusalem to the plain of Gibeon, (which is fifty miles
distance) the infinite enemy, will depopulate and pitch his Pauillions. Man,
woman, child, he shall vnmortalize and mangle. Oxen Sheep, Cammels, idely
engore, and leave to putrify in the open Fields, only to raise up seed to
Snakes, Adders and Serpents. The Mount Tabor, (whose height is thirty furlongs,
and on whose top is a plain, twentythree furlongs broad) shall have all the
starre-gazing Towns (on it situate) iustled headlong down from the height
of his forehead, and breaking their backs with their stumbling rebutment,
tumble in the air, like Lucifer falling out of heaven into Hell. Yea, their
Firmament-propping foundation, shall be adequated with the Valley of
Iehosaphat: whose sublimity (whiles it is in beheading,) the Sky shall resign
all his Clouds to the Earth, and light-wing'd dust, dignifie it self by the
name of a meteor. From that blind-dispersed night of dust, shall many lesser
Mountains receive their lofty mounting: and part of it (being wind-wafted into
the Sea) insert floating Islands midst the Ocean.

None shall there be left to fight the battles of the Lord, but those that
fight the battles of their own ambition. By none shall the Sanctuary be
defended, but those that would have none destitute it or defloure it but
themselves. The feast of Tabernacles, the feast of sweet Bread, and the feast
of Weeks, shall quite be discalendred. Your Sabaothes and New-moones, shall
want a Remembrancer; Your Peace Offerings and continual Sacrifice, (a
thousand, two hundred, and ninety days, as Daniel prophesied,) shall be put to
silence. The abomination of desolation, shall advance it self in your Dan.
12.
Sanctum sanctorum. Upon your Altars (in stead of oblations) your Priests shall
be slaughtered. Not so much as the High-prieste,) the vnder-god of your City,)
but shall be hanged up (es a sign) at the door of your Temple.

The particularity of your general fore-spoken woes, would work in me a
Tympany of Tears, if I should portrayture it. I have pronounst it, and your
House (vnrepriueable) unto you shall be left desolate. The resplendent eye-out
brauing buildings of your Temple, (like a Drum) shall be ungirt and unbraced:
the soul of it, which is the (forenamed) Sanctum Sanctorum, clean shall be
strypt and unclothed. God shall have nere a Tabernacle or retyring place in
your City, which he shall not be undermined and desolated out of. The Sun and
Moon (perplexed with the spectacle) shall fly farther upward into heaven, and
be afraid, least (when the besiegers have ended below) they next sack them
out of their sieges and circuits, since they have had God (their
common-Creator) so long in chase.

Jerusalem, ever after thy bloody hecatombe, or burial, the Sun (rising and
setting) shall enrobe himself in scarlet, and the mayden-Moone, (in the
ascension of her perfection) shall have her crimson cheeks (as they would burst)
round balled out with blood. Those ruddy inuesturings, and scarlet habilements,
from the clowde-climing slaughter-stack of thy dead carkases, shall they
exhalingly quintessence, to the end thou may not only be culpable of
gorging the Earth, but of goring the Heavens with blood: and in witness against
thee, wear them they shall to the worlds end, as the liueries of thy wayning.

Not Abraham's sons are you, but the sons of blood, for in nothing you
imitate Abraham, but that he (having no more save one only son) would have
sacrificed him: so GOD having no more but one only Son, you lyein wait to
crucify and sacrifice him. For thine own destruction (disgraded daughter of
Syon) thou lie in wait, in laying wait for me: that which I hunger and
thirst after, is thy salvation in my destruction. I am enamoured of my Cross,
because it is all ages blessing: not a nail in it but is a necessary Agent in
the Worlds redemption.

Holy Cross, Adams of spring, only holiness, I grieve that upon thee I can
spend none of my Godhead as well as my Humanity, to glorify the more this great
exploit. For the desolating and disinheriting of hell have I that reserved,
none but the God of heaven may lead captivity captive, and return Conqueror
from that dungeonly Kingdom. Strange it is (o Jerusalem) that I should be able
to conquer and forage hell, and yet cannot conquer, or bring under thee to my
obedience. To speak troth, (as in my lips is no guile) thou art not worthy to
be conquered, or have the host of thine affections subdued by me, that have
admitted of a baser conqueror, which is the devil, after whom I can succeed
with no honor.

The Romans (not I) shall conquer thee, and leave thy house desolate unto
thee: who being Heathens, and not knowing God, are a degree of indignity
inferior to the devil, for he knows God, and with fear and trembling
acknowledges him. Would thou with fear and trembling have fled to me for
refuge against the devil and the Romans, when I would have gathered thee,
both the Devil and the Romans (at one instant) had been subdued to thine
hand. But under my standard thou would not, thou scornedst to gather thee,
therefore shall thy house be left desolate unto thee: therefore shall Gods
house be left desolate unto thee. Maiesticall Temple, on whose Pinnacle once I
was tempted, thou and I (one after another) must perish, for no fault of our
own, but for the sins of this people.

No profit but disprofite, shall the scattered ashes of thy obsequies bring
unto them, nor shall they, like the ashes of me the true Phoenix, live again:
never shall thy body (like mine) be raised again. Raced and defaced shall thou
be, as thou had never been. Happily Caves for wilde-beasts (many years
together) thou may afford, but the Lord of Hosts shall abandon thee, the
King of Israel shall abjure thee. By Herod (a man of blood) thou were last
builded, and in blood shall thou be buried. O let me embrace thee while thou
yet stand, and I am not translated: hereafter (perhaps) nere may I have the
opportunity to embrace thee. This present hour that is granted, I will put out
to Usury. On thy Alablaster outside, with scalding sighs and dimming kisses,
a greater dew will I raise, then lies upon sweaty Marble a little before rain.

Me thinks these stones look shining and smyling upon me, Jerusalem frowns
like a Shee-beare seeking her whelps. These stones start not out of their
assigned places, but still retain their imposed first proportion: from me (her
foundation) long ago has Jerusalem started, out of those limits and bounds I
assigned her has she started, her order she has broken; my building she has
subverted; no form or face of my workmanship is visible in her. But yet, were
nothing but her face and outside deformed, it were somewhat, her inside is
worst of all: her Heart, her Lungs, her Liver, and her Gall, alare carioniz'd
and contaminated with surfeits of selfewill. Her own heart she eats, and
disgesteth into the draught with riot and excess.

Poor Temple, long might thou stand, and not have a stone of thee disquieted
till the Judgment day, if those to whom thou belongest, were not ten-times
branded in the forehead for Reprobates, not with the mark of the Lamb, but
the Lion, who (roaring) seeks whom he may devour. Distressefully am I divided
from thee; my soul (when it shall be divided from me) will not endrench me
in so much dolor as thou do. The zeal of thee distraughteth me, and some
essential part of my life seems to forsake me and drop from me, when I
think of thy diuastation. Nothing so much does macerate and mad me, as that
all the sky-perfuming prayers, and profuse sacrificatory expenses of fulhand
oblationers, should not have force to uphold thee. Desolation, for no debt of
sin shall thou extend on this Temple, that thou have to extend against it,
extend against me, for it is my Fathers habitation. It will but augment his
indignation against this City, and do thee no good to drive him out of house
and home, and reserve him no sanctified mansion upon earth. Let there be one
peculiar Treasury of supplications and vows undestroyed and vnpillaged.

O Father, be this House more high-pryzed to thee then Paradise; More worship
and adoration have thou had in it then in Paradise. There thou setst a
fiery-armed Gardant to repulse insolent inuaders: set some garisonment before
the gate of thy Tabernacle, to oppugn the dispossessors of thy Diety: thou
can not hear me, I pray for them whose sins sue against me. Thou have
decreed (in thy secret judgment) There house shall be left desolate unto
them: Thou have decreed I shall be left desolate on the Cross, and cry, Eloi,
Eloi, lamasabachthani, vnayded or unregarded. Willing am I to execute thy will,
only let me not in vain give up the Ghost, but some souls of this
Panther-spotted Jerusalem, may be extraught to joy with me.

O that mine arms were wide enough to engraspe the walls of Jerusalem about,
that in mine amorous enfoldment, (unawares) I might whyrle her to Heaven with
me. Why should I not drive all Israel before me to the great felicity, as a
Sheepeheard before him drives his flock to the fat Pastures? I shall never
drive you before me, you will drive me before you (with murder and violence) to
immortality, and your selves not one foot follow after. Pol me occidistis
amici, you whom I thought to bind to me as friends, have foe-like betrayed me.
Because I am humble I may not please you: Because I am Christ the just,
therefore you will design me to the Cross unjustly. Est mihi supplicij causa
fuisse pium. Would God there were no other exclamatory crime then this to be
objected again thee. Yet have I suffered of thee nothing but fear. More then
fear am I (within these few days) to entertain at thy hands.

Slay me thou shall, because I have vouchsafed to live. with thee; and doom me
an unworthy end, in leiu of my dear love. Tu mihi criminis author, no
imputation of scandale shall I have, but the heavy burden of thy abuses. Thou
shall be my vninocence, and whole sum of delinquishment: thy right hand of my
death shall be arraigned. Hoc prohibete nefas, scelerique resistite vestro. Not
the profane idolatry of the Gentles, in my sides shall delue so deep, as thy
stiff-necked transgressions. Less do I deplore my death then thy life: and a
thousand times have I wished and desired, that thou had only occasion to
repent my death and not thine own other misdeeds. Repent yet, and I will repent
me of the pronouncement against thee. Should I not so have pronounst and
denunciated against thee, thy blood would have been chapter 3.
required at my hands. Therefore is my people led captive, (says the Lord by
Esaias) because they know me not. Your ^5.
pretense of vnknowledge, orignorance, is already counterpleaded: you shall not
say, Woe be to me that I never tasted the milk of understanding; but (with
Job) banne the time that ever you sucked the breasts. At my breasts Jerusalem
have thou not sucked, but bit off my breasts, when thou stonedst the Prophets: O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that stonest my Prophets, and killest them I sent unto
thee: How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickins under her wings, but thou would not? Therefore shall
thy House be left desolate unto thee.

Here ebb the springtide of my Tears, Eyes from this present prepare your
selves to be recluses. I came not to shed Tears but Blood for Jerusalem,
Blood for Jerusalem will I shed, to atone for her shedding of innocent blood;
So that let her yet turn unto me, her atonement is made. I will corroborate
my Cross Giantlike, to vnder-beare the Atlas burden of her insolences. With
my Nazarite tresses, to my Cross will I bind her crossing frowardness and
contaminations. Not a nail that takes hold of me, but I will (expressly)
enjoin it to take hold of her deflectings and errors. Death, (as ever thou
hopest at my hands to have thy Commission enlarged,) when thou killest me,
kill her iniquities also: let thy deep entering Dart obliuionize their memories.

Of man (as of me) thou killest but the body only, kill the body and the soul
both of her unbounded sinnegluttony. I will pay thee largely for thy pains.
Whereas before, thou never tookst any but the subjects prisoners, now thou
shall have the King himself surrendered to thy cruelty. Thou shall enrich thy
style with this title, I Emperor Death, the Lord of all flesh, the killer of
the King of all Kings, etc. Deal well by Jerusalem, how ever thou dealst with
me: Let not her Soul be left desolate, though her City be left desolate unto
her.

Even the High-priestes that shall bind mine hands, and adiudge my body to be
scourged, deal mercifully with, cut them not off suddenly, but give them a
space of repentance. Let them be crowned with eternity, though they crown me
with Thorns, their crowning me with thorns I take for no trespass, for they
cannot prick me so ill with those briars, as they have prouokt me with their
sins. Nor shall the Gall and Vinegar they give me to drink, be so bitter
unto me as their blasphemies. Forgive them Lord, they forget what they do.

Further I may not proceed, except I should detract from my Passion to add to
my Tears. He that can weep with more soule-martyrdome then I, let him take
upon him to wash (in my steed) the earths Ethiopian face. Every vain of me let
it burst, to feed the Lake of Gehenna, before Gehenna gather springs from the
heart of Jerusalem. Not the least hair of my body, but may it be as a pegge in
a vessel, to broch blood with plucking out, so in the droppings of that blood
Jerusalem will bathe her self. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that stonest my
Prophets, and killest them I sent unto thee, ten thousand times adieu: I would
never have bid thee adieu, or been divorced from thee, but that thou thy self
have divorced thy self. Heaven no heaven have thou made unto me, by endless
performing thy obits. If my crimson Tears on the Cross, may more prevail
with thee, so it is, or else in vain I descended, or else to thy pain I
descended.

Discende into the closet of thine own conscience, and enquire how often I have
come thither, and called upon thee to gather thee. Examine thy heart and thy
reins if I have not secretly communed with thee by night, to convert and be
turned unto me. Thou never with drewst thy self and were solitary, but my
Spirit was reproving and disputing with thee. At length shall I obtain of thee
to remember and gather thy self? Though thou will not in respect of me, (whom
thou should respect) yet in respect of thine own benefit, remember and
gather thy self, enter into meditation of thy lamentable estate: But hear thy
Physician though thou intendest not to be ruled by him. Understand the nature
of thy disease, which is the first step to recovery. Relieve my languor, by
being less retchles of thy invisible aspiring infirmity. Glance but half a
kind look at me, though thou can not resolve to love me; by half a look my
love may steal into thine eyes unlooked for. Thy sight is no way misspent or
impaired, by casting away one askance-regard on any.

The Sun shines as well on the good as the bad: God from on high, beholds
all the workers of iniquity, as well as the upright of heart. It behooves thee
to try all spirits, let my Spirit be one of those (all) which thou bring to
the Touchstone. I do not will thee without trial, on my bare report to be
directed by it, but when thou have tried it, and sifted it to the uttermost,
then as it approues it self, to entertain it. Upon vn-certaine experiments,
(having the least protence of gain in the^,) men will hazard and venture many
thousands: try once an experiment to gain heaven with; venture or hazard but a
few indifferent good thoughts of me. I say I am thy Messiah, and am come to
gather thee, condemn me not rashly, but awaite and see the end of my gathering
whereto it sorts. Search the Scriptures and the Prophets, whether I be a liar
and impostor or no. I would give thee leave to hate me, so thy hate would make
thee industrious and sedulous, to hearken out and enquire whence I am. Were I
notorious guilty, and vn-examined, and unheard, you should sentence me, you
should give to me amongst men an opinion of innocence: being not guilty, you
make your judgments guilty, of knowing I am not guilty, in proceeding against
me without circumstance or proof. I speak all this while to the wind, or as
a disconsolate prisoner that complains himself to the stone-wals.

God is moved and mollified (though he be never so incensed) with often, and
vn-slacked intercessions; Gold (which is the Sovereign of metals) bends
soonest, only Iron (the peasant of all) is most inflexible. Jerusalem with
nothing is moved, therefore must her Tabernacle be removed, therefore must
her House be left desolate unto her. Often, importunatly, violently, eagerly
have I intercessioned unto her, to gather herself unto me: I have kneeled,
wept bitterly, lift up mine hands, hung upon her, and vowed never to let her
go, till she consented to retire herself into my tuition, and answered
pleasingly to my petition. Never did the Widow in my Parrable, so follow and
tire the wicked Judge with fury-haunting instancy, as I have done her. No where
could she rest but I have alarumd in her ears, her pride, murder and
hypocrisy, and with dismal crying, and vociferatiue inculcating unto her,
drawn my throat so hic into the roof of my mouth, that it has quite
swallowed up and ensheath'd my tongue, and threatend to turn my mouth out of
his office.

I have cracked mine eye-strings with excessive staring, and steadfast
heauen-gazing, when with fast-fortified prayer, and eare-agonizing invocation,
I have distressed my Fathers soul for her; so that (enraged) he has bid me
out of his sight, chid me, rebukt me, and impatiently said as he said unto
Moses, Let me alone, that I may wreake mine anger on her, and consume her.
None of these may overcome her, the blood of my Prophets, and the
hundred-voyc't clamor of her multiplied mutinies against Heaven, are far
louder before my Father then I, they out-throate me, and put me down I
cannot be heard, even as one that howles puts down him that sings. Me would
not Jerusalem hear, when with sweet songs I have allured, cluckt, and wooed
her to come under my wings: therefore will not my Father hear any man that
once names her. When I pray for her, her sins fall a howling that I should
not be heard.

My wings, her gray headed sturdy disobedience has now clean vnpinioned and
broken, so that (though I would) I cannot gather her. Besides, she has steeled
my soft impressiue heart, and mirmidoniz'd mine eyes, that they shall never
give grief a Tear more alms. Poor Hens, there is nothing so tender as you
are over your Chickins, but had you as I have, none but Kites and Kistrels to
your Chickens, such as fly against the wind as soon as they are borne, and
gather themselves in Arms against you when you offer to gather them, you would
learn of me, to leave off to be so tender.

To desolation (Jerusalem) must I leave thee, desolation that takes his
watchword from thou would not: Desolation the greatest name of vengeance
that is, Desolation which has as many branches of misery as Hell belonging to
it, Desolation the utmost arrow of Gods indignation. I cannot in terms
express the one quarter this word Desolation contains. David in the depth of
his despair of Gods mercy, said; He was left as Desolate as the Pelican in
the wilderness, or the Owl on the house top. This is the Desolation of the
Pelican in the Wilderness, that when she has her bowels unnaturally torn
out by her young ones, (into the world tirannously entering,) and they leave her
in the extremity of her torment, and will not deigne her (for all her dear
travel) one comforting aspect of compassion, to herself (twixt living and
dying,) herself she complains. Blood and tears equally she spends, and as
her womb is rent out with ungrateful fruitfulness, so now her heart she rents
out with selfe-gnawing coffeehouse, and dies, not decayed by age, but
destroyed by her of spring.

The mellancholy Owl, (Deaths ordinary messenger,) that nere weildeth his lazy
leaden wings but by night, and in his huge lumpish head seems to have the
house of sleep built, then is most solitary and desolate, when (restrained
from tuning his own private disconsolations to the dark gloomy air,) he is
sent to sing on a desolate house top, a doleful dreary ditty of destiny, Alijs
que dolens sit causa dolendi. Jerusalem, even as the Pelican in the
Wilderness, so (by thine own progeny) shall thou have thy bowels torn out;
by civil wars shall thou be more wasted then out-ward annoyance. Those whom
thou most expectest love of, shall be most unnatural to thee. Not only tears
shall they constrain thee to weep, but blood, and urge thee to rent out thine
own heart, in ruing their irreligiousnesse. As the Owl on the housetop,
euer-more howlingly, calls for some Corse, and is the first Mourner that comes
to any funeral, so (Jerusalem) shall thou howling, sit like the Owl on thy
high places and house-tops, and tune nothing but lays of ill-lucke and
desolation, and funeral Elegies of thy for-lorne ouer-throw. Thus shall thou
sing; Sodom is sunk and I must succeed.

God promised he would neuer-more drown the world in water, but me he has
drowned in blood. All the Eagles of the field, feed their young ones with my
yong-mens carcasses. Mine old Sages and Governors strew the streets with
their white hairs like strawes, their withered dead bodies, serve to mend
Highways with, and turn standing quagmires to firm ground, (ram'd full of
their Corses.) My Virgins, and Matrons, in steed of painting their faces ruddy,
color them with their kins-folkes gore. Happy is that wife, which may entombe
her slaughtered Husband in her Well or Cesterne. Happy is that Sister, that
(for strewing herbs) may scatter her discheueld Mayden-haire, on her dead
Brothers truncke.

Even, as there be many Fowls that eat up their own Eggs, so the Children
are feign to feed the Mother; The Infant which she travels with nine months
in her belly, once again hunger thrusts into her empty famisht body. The
Babes in conception, (being half entered out of the womb, and but with one eye
beholding the miseries of their Country,) return crying back again whence they
came, and choose rather to tumble forth stil-borne, then view the World in such
hurlyburly.

So exceeding are mine adversities, that after successions which shall hear of
them, will even be desolate and exiled from mirth with the hearing. Adams fall
never so woe-enwrapped the earth, as the relation of them shall. Christ the
Son of God, (all men's Savior but mine,) fore-prophesied I should thus be
left desolate, but I believed it not, therefore is my desolation unlooked for
come upon me, therefore am I made a scorn to the Gentiles of confusion.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, all this might thou have avoided, I never sought
the death of a sinner, my death thou have sought, for I labored to save thee.
Save thy self as well as thou may, for I have forsaken thee, to desolation
have I resigned thee. If in this world thou endurest thy punishment patiently,
(and can purge thy soul by repentance,) in my world of Joy I shall be ready
to receive thee; otherwise, I have nou^ht to do with thee, thy Soul as thy
House be left desolate unto thee.

HERE do I confine our SAVIOVRS collachrimate Oration, and putting off his
borrowed Person, restore him to the Triumphancy of his Passion. Now privately
(as mortal men) let us consider, how his threats were after verified in
Ierusalems ouer-ture.

Should I write it to the proof, weeping would leave meno eyes: like tragic
Seneca, I should tragedize my self, by bleeding to death in the depth of
passion. Admirable Italian teare-eternizers, Ariosto, Tasso and the rest, nere
had you such a subject to roialize your Muses with, Of a late destruction of
Jerusalem, Tasso thou wrot'st, wherein thy Godfry of Bulloine the destroyer,
bears the chief part of honor. A counterfeite Melpomene (in comparison of
this) was thy Muses Midwife, when that child of Fame was brought forth. Let no
man think to enter into this History as he should, but a consumption of sorrow
will cut him off ere he come to the end. God forbid I should be so Luciferous
passionatiue-ambitious, to take upon me the full blast of this
desolatiue-trumpet of Jerusalem, a weak breath or two I will writhe into it,
and with a hoarse sound, (such as fitteth farre-spent languorment) manifest as
it were in a dead-march, her untimely interment.

Forty years were expired after our Lords lifting up into Heaven, when the
Temple-boasting Jews, (elate in their own strength) began to pretend a
wearines of the Roman regiment, and coueted to reign entire Lords, over the
Lords that reigned over them. Eleazer, the Son of Anani the High Priest, was
the first that seminariz'd this hope of signiorizing and freedom amongst them.
Proudly he controlled Agrippa and all the other Lieftenants, drove them from
their dignities to Rome to seek succor and rescue, and swayed over the
multitude, as the King and Father of their lives. In the meane-while, the
Element was ouer-hung with prodigies. GOD thought it not enough to have
threatened them by his Son, but he emblazond the air with the tokens of his
terror. No Star that appeared but seemd to sparkle fire. The Sun did shine
all day, as it is wont at his Evening going down. The Moon had her
pale-siluer face iron spotted with freckle-imitating bloud-sprinklings: and for
her dim frosty circle, a black inky-hood embayling her bright-head.

Over the Temple (at the solemn feast of the Passover) was seen a Commet
most coruscant, streamed and tayled forth, with glistering naked swords, which
in his mouth, (as a man in his hand all at once,) he made semblance as if he
shaked and vambrasht. Seven days it continued, all which time, the Temple was
as clear and light in the night as it had been noonday. In the Sanctum
sanctorum, was heard clashing and hewing of Armor. Whole flocks of Ravens,
(with a fearful croking cry,) beat, fluttred, and clasht against the
windows. A hideous dismal Owl, (exceeding all her kind in deformity and
quantity,) in the Temple-porch built her nest. From under the Altar, there
issued penetrating plangorus-howlings, and ghastly dead-mens groans. A goodly
young Heyfer, haled thither for a burnt offering, being knocked down and ready
to be dressed, miraculously calued a Lamb.

The sacrificing knives that diu'd into her entrails, would afterward by no
means be cleansed, but from her blood (as from man's blood) took unto them an
unremovable rust. In the feast of Weeks, in the inner receite of the Temple
was heard one stately stalking up and down, and exclaiming with a terrible
base hollow voice, Migremus hinc, Migremus hinc, e Templo emigremus: Let us go
hence, Let us go hence, out of this Temple let us hie us. What should I
ouer-blacke mine Ink, perplex pale Paper, rumatize my Readers eyes, with the
sad tedious recital, of all the prognosticating signs of their ruin. Stories
have lost and tired themselves in this Story. Should I but make an Index to any
one Writer of them, it would ask a Book alone. Some few abreuiated
alleagements I will content my self with, and so pass on-ward to more
necessary matter.

Above, and besides, the Prophetical apparitions, in, over, and about the
Temple, in the City there happened no less note-worthy praedictions. The East
gate thereof which was all iron, and never wont to be opened under twenty men
together, (the dry rusty creeking of whose hooks and gymmes as it was in the
opening, might be heard a mile off,) now, of the own accord, burst wide open,
and being open, was twice more hard then before to be shut. A base mechanical
fellow there was, sprung out of the mud of the Communalty, who for four years
together before the wars begun, went crying up and down, Woe to Jerusalem
and the Sanctuary thereof, Woe to every living thing that breaths therein,
The wars once entered, he got him on the walls, and often re-iterating his
stale-worne note, add thereunto, Woe, and thrice woe to my self, and with
that, start a stone out of an Engine in the Camp and stopped his throat. Many
monstrous birthes at this instant were brought forth: in diverse places of the
City sprung up founts of blood. The Element every night was embattailed with
Armed men, skirmishing and conflicting amongst themselves; and the Imperial
Eagles of Rome, were plainly there displayed to all men's sight. A burning sword
also was set forth, visibly bent against the City. The strangest and
horriblest tempests of thunder and lightning had they that ever was heard of.

The Earth left to be so friutfull as it wont. No season but it exceeded his
stinted temperature. Every thing rebelled against kind, as thinking scorn to
accommodate themselves to their uses, that had so rebelled against the Lord.
For all this, there was no man that would gather himself, no man that would
depart from the ill work he had in hand. Ambulabant vt caeci quia Domino
peccauerunt. Their eyes were ouer-filmed or blinded, because they obeyed not
their Maker.

NOw is the time that all Rivers must run into the Sea, that whatsoever I
have in wit or eloquence, must be drayned to the delineament of wretchedness.

The Romans like a drove of Wild bores, root up and forage fruitful
Palestine. That which was called the Holy Land, is now unhallowed with their
Heathen swords. Wherefore you Pilgrims, that spend the one half of your days
in visiting the Land of Promise, and wear the plants of your feet, to the
likeness of withered roots, by bare-legd processioning (from a far) to the
Sepulcher, vngainefully you consume good hours, for no longer was Judea a Land
of Promise, then her Temple stood. Vespasians invasion has profaned it: a
Mount of dead bodies over that Sepulcher is raised, which you perigrinate to
adore; that Sepulcher you see, is but a thing built up by Saracens to get money
with, and beguile votiue Christians. They delude your superstition, and make it
their tributary slave.

No Hog-sty is now so pollutionate as the earth of Palestine and Jerusalem. Our
Saviors steps are quite unsanctified in them, and trodden out of sent, by the
irruptiue ouer-trampling of the Romans. A new story of flesh-manured earth
have they cast upon it, and made it no more the walk of Saints and Prophets,
but a poisonous nurcery of Beasts of pray and Serpents.

O God, enlarge mine invention and my memory, sincerely and feelingly, to
rehearse the disornamenting of this mother of Cities.

Understand that before the arrival of Vespasian, there were in Jerusalem
three factions. Eleazers, which was the fundamentiue and first, Iehochanans
next, and Schimeons the last. Eleazer and Iehochanan, the vngodliest that ever
God made, Schimeon except, (and he might well have been Schoole-maister to
Cain or Judas,) he was such a grand Keysar of cut-throtes. From the noblest of
the Jews descended, but his Nobility ere he came to it, by his degenerate
conditions he forfeited. A man he was that made a mockery of all Laws and
Religion, and any thing which Authority forbad, most greedily would embrace:
thinking, as the best Pastures are hedged in, the best Orchards wald about, the
best Metals hutcht up, so there was nothing excellent but was forbidden, and
whatsoever was forbidden, was excellent. For malice or hatred, he would not
stab or murder men so much, as against he had just occasion to stab or murder,
to keep his hand in ure. He held it as lawful for him, (since all laboring
in a man's vocation is but getting,) to get wealth as well with his sword by the
High way side, as the Laborer with his Spade or Mattocke, when all are but
iron; besides, as there is none has any wealth which he gets not from
another, so deemed he it as free for him as another, to get from other men;
concluding, as there no better tittle to a Kingdom then conquest, so there is
no better claim unto wealth, then by the conquest of a strong hand to compass
it. Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, no sin, but he would defend and offend
in.

For the multitude of these and other his abominations, banished he was, and
longer in Jerusalem might he not roust: wherefore no possibility had he to
prevent beggary, or redeem his estate, but by proclaiming (in all places where
he came) the trade he professed: The Tenure of his Proclamation was this. That if
there were any, that had dudgen-old coughing miserly Fathers they could not
endure: If there were any that had repining victual-scanting Masters,
tyrrannizing neuer-thelesse for their work: If there were any, that were
Creditor-craz'd, and dead and buried in debt, and knew not which way to rise
out of it, let them repair to him, and till Doomes-day they should have a
protection. Yea, if there were ever a good fellow that loved a Harlot as his
life, would have Letters Patent to take purses, had a desire to kill and not
be hanged, would swear and forswear for single-money, and had not so much as
a crum of conscience to put in his pottage, let him or them what ere, resort
under his standard, and their humors should be maintained.

Twenty thousand of these dreggy lees of Libertines hiu'd unto him in a moment,
whom he cleped the Flower of Chiluary: for they feared no man, and cared
neither for God nor the Devil. With them he burnt the green Corn in the
fields, plucked down Barnes and Storehouses, stubd up Orchards and Vine-yards,
and made desolate havoc where ever he came.

To Jerusalem (after much slaughter and spoil) with this his Outlaw Army he
reached, and there enter-leagued himself with Eleazar and Iehochanan. The first
thing after their joining they did, was the displacing of the Sanhadrtn, which
were the Judges, and threescore and ten Elders, and sharing the government
equally amongst them. Then the Sacrifice they silenced, put the High Priest to
death, and converted the Temple to an Armory. Long could they not agree, but as
Empery admits no mate-ship, so did they envy one another, made heads against
one another, mutually skirmisht with one another. Their enemies were without,
but within lurkt the plague that went through stitch.

Twenty thousand in one day, the internal civil sword eat up. The Edomites let
in by Iehochanan, of the welthiest Citizens, slew eight thousand and five
hundred in one night. Here begins the desolation Christ prophesied, within and
without vengeance bestirreth her; within it raged most, for within sin
reigned most. Let me suddenly wax old and woe-wrinkle my cheeks before
their time, by describing the deplored effects of their sins within. First,
for the desolation of their ceremonial Religion, something I have said
already, but the sum of all was this, that if any Priest approcht near the
Altar, the blood of him and his offering was blended together. The reverent
Ephods were made the slaughter-mens Aprons: many venerable Levites they bound
to the Altar by the hair of their beardes. The Vessels of the house of the
Lord, they put to vile uses. Not any consectated thing but they arrested and
made booty of. Young children, whom their mothers led in their hands along with
them, to the Temple to offer, (inhumaine to be told,) they took and merciless
cast into the sacrificatory flame, and on the same Altar (after they were
consumed) most sacriligiously ravished their Mothers. Some men (whom they could
not otherwise draw into their danger) they would inuit to treaty in the
Temple, saying; There is the Tabernacle of the Lord, there is the Arc of his
presence, there if we should draw our blades, it were abomination
vn-remissible. Why distrust you us? suppose you us to be without GOD? carry we
not the covenant of our Father Abraham in our loins as well as you? By him
that owes this Temple we swear, and all mystical riches thereof, you shall
depart thence vnmolested. Who so on their oaths, or their words affianst them,
were sure to wash the pauement with the best juice of their breasts.

Not only those that came to offer, but those that but offered to kneel in the
Temple, they ran through. The Marble flore of it they made so slippery, with
their vnrespited, and not so much as Saboth-ceased bloodshed, and
bowel-clinging fat of them that were slain, that a man might better swim
then walk on it. The place without the City where they carried their dung,
and buried the entrails of Beasts, half so pestilently stunck not, as that
stuncke with dung-hils of dead-bodies. The entry of the Court of the Lord, was
changed to a standing Lake of blood. The silver gates of the Temple, no more
were gates for devout worshippers to enter in at, but slimy floodgates for
thick iellied gore to sluice out by. Who has seen a Vaulte under a Church
full of dust-died sculs, and rusty dead-mens bones, might (after that gross
stream of gore a little was turned aside, and the blood dried up,) rightly
allude the Temple thereunto: for now it was no more a prayer-prospering House,
but a pudly Vault of dead-mens bones, and cast out bodies kneaded to dirt. Her
Alablaster walls were all furred and fome-painted, with the bespraying of men's
brains dung out against them. Her high roof was mingle-colourd with mounting
drops of blood, that se^'d by soaking into it, to seek for passage to heaven.

The siedge growing hot, the seditious hearts somewhat quailed, and then they
made show as they would correct themselves, as they would renounce their
tumultuous tyranies; And whereas lately before, they had deprived the
High Priest both of life and office, now (dissemblingly remorsed) they would
needs in all have, in his room set up another, and by lots he should be
chosen. The lot fell upon a Plowman, or Carter, one Pani the son of Peniel,
and he (not-with-standing his ignorant baseness, and base rudeness) as in a
mockery, was instal'd in that dignity.

It is not my intent to run a right out-race, through all the accidents of
their reprobation, only that which I lay down, is to show how infallibly
Christ's words were fulfilled, as touching their ten times merrited
desolation. Judge all those that have sense of misery, ere they have occasion
to use it in discerning their own miseries, whether this were not desolation or
no. The Lord at one time visited their City with those four capital plagues,
Fire, Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword. First for fire, thus he visited it:
There were a thousand and four hundred Storehouses, filled up to the top with
victual, Corn, Wine, and Oil, sufficient to maintain two hundred thousand
men for twenty years, all which by the Seditious was set on fire, and consumed
in one day. Diverse gorgeous buildings they enflamed to smoke out their rich
owners, and many goodly streets end-longs to the very earth they encindred: for
nothing but to have more room to bicker in.

Every corner of Jerusalem, had a voice heard in it as in Ramah, of weeping,
mourning, and great lamentation. Scarce could one friend in commoning hear
another, for the howling, wringing of hands, sobbing and yelling of men, women,
and children. Here lay they half dead, bayting and bathing in their wounds,
and roaring and eare-rentingly exclaiming, for some melting-hearted man, to
come and rid them out of their lingering living death, and slay them outright.
The sons, daughters, and servants of the Elders thus unjustly massacred, went
crying up and down the City like madmen, with eyes and hands to heaven
extended, Justice Lord, Justice Lord, Justice, against the unjust depriuers of
our friends and maintainers.

This was the Seditious order, that if there were any man noted to be of more
wealth then other, him they picked a quarrel against, and accused of treason to
their Sanctuary, and sending letters to the Romans. False witnesses they had
in pay a Camp royal. Schimeon would not see them vnproudied in that case. Not
only he that mourned, but he that did not seem to rejoice at the Martyrdom of
those just men, was dismissed the same way. Not a few (in their minds benumbed
with the massacrous monstrousness of this quick Marshal-law) made themselves
graves, and went into them alive. The channel of Jordan was so ouer-burdened
and charged with dead carcasses, that the waters contended to wash their hands
of them, and lightly leapt over their banks, as shunning to mix themselves
with so many millions of murders: but after many days abstinence from their
proper intercourse, (observing they must live for ever banished from their
bounds, except they made some riddance of them,) they recollected their liquid
forces, and putting all their wauy shoulders together, bare the whole shole of
them before them, as far as the Sea of Sodom.

Had there been at that time a Red Sea new to be created, the blood (that like
a River from a Mountain foot, flowed forth of Jerusalem) would have made it
rich in surges, and sufficient to wrack many ships. Even as Jordan, so the
Brook Cedron, and the waters of Schiloim in like sort were choked. As dead
Cats and Dogs into Buts of Sack and Muscadine are thrown, (for their fiery
strength to feed on,) so into Wels and Cesternes were dead Corses (innumerable)
thrown, for their black waters to feed on. From the fury of the Sword, let
me descend to Famine and the Pestilence, the two latter plagues of Jerusalem.

In giving them suitable phrase, had I the command of a thousand singular wits,
I should bankroute them all in description. Pluck up a good courage mine
infant pen, and wearily struggle (as well as thou may) through this huge
word-dearthing task.

The Storehouses burnt, the siege hard plied, the waste of victuals great, the
husbanding of them none at all: there fell such an infestuous insatiable famine
amongst them, that if all the stones of Jerusalem had been bread, and they
should have tired on them, yet would they have been behind hand with their
appetite. Their watery wesands were like to leap out of their mouths for
meat, and in their crawling up to seek passage, ready to have been seaz'd on
by their jaws for sustenance. Like an ouer-hanging Rock eaten in with the
tide, or Death that is nere picturd, but with an upper chap only, so did their
propendant breast-bones imminent-ouer-canopy their bellies.

So many men as were in Jerusalem, so many pale rawbone ghosts you would have
thought you had seen. Even through their garments their rake-leane ribs
appeared. Their sharp embossed Anckle bones, turned up the earth like a
Plow-share, when in going their feet swarued. The empty Air they would catch
at in steed of meat, like as a Spaniell catches at a fly; the very dust they
gnasht at as it slew, and their own arms and their legs they hardly for-bare.
Their teeth they would grind one against another, to a white powder like
meal. The durty moss on the pentisses of their houses, they gnawde off most
greedily. Not a weed sprung up, but (ere it aspired half to his growth,) by
them it was weeded and rauenously rauncht up. All the bushes and boughs,
within, or round about Jerusalem, were hewed down and feld, for men (like
briute beasts) to brouze on.

Within twelve mile compass of the City, where there were wont to be the most
Elizian-like gardens, and flower-gilded fields under heaven, what for the
Romans and them, was there not now left a crop of any Gourde or green thing.
The Sedetious and the Soldiers would come running into the Citizens houses,
and taking them by the bosoms, cry aloud, Give us meat, Give us meat by the
Lord we will have meat: rob, steal, run into the Tents of our enemies for
meat for us, or we will make meat of you and your children. Men's Cellars and
Garrets for meat they searched. If there were but the blood of any thing spilt
on the ground, like hungry dogs they would lick it up. Rats, Mise, Weafels,
Scorpions, were no common men's iunckets.

In the beginning of this scarcity, had any but a dish full of Corn left to
send to the Mil, they were afraid to send it, for fear they should set all
Jerusalem together by the cares for it. Wherefore in their low under earth
Vaults, they digd lower Caves, which covering with bordes, and formally pauing
over, there they eat their Corn vnground (closely,) because they would not be
circumuented.

Exceeding rich Magnificos stole victual one from another, and would lie in
wait a whole week together to intercept but a chypping. The Father stole from
the Son, and oftentimes tore the meat out of his mouth; the Son could
scarce refrain from biting out his Fathers throate-boule, when he saw him
swallow down a bit that he died for. The Mother lurcht from them both, her
young weaned Children (famisht for want of nourishment) sastned their sharp
edged gums on her fingers, and would not let them go, till she plucked the
morsel out of her own maw to put into theirs. He that then had had a
Kingdom, would have given it for a crust of bread.

Not a Butterfly, Grasshopper, Worm, Neuet or Canker, but was persecuted, and
sought out to satisfy emptiness. You should have seen a hundred together,
fighting and scrambling about a dead Horse. Sometimes they would send their
children far out of the City to gather roots and herbs, thinking that the
Romans carried more honorable minds then to execute their utmost on them: but
all was one, for they spared neither young nor old. Many Noblemen, eat the
Leather of their Chariots as they rid. Miriam a Matron of great port, and of
high lynage descended (having her receipt of digestion almost closed up with
fasting) after she had sustained her life a large space, by scraping in chafe
and muck-hils for beasts dung, and that means forsaking her, she had no other
refuge of fosterment, she was constrained (for her lives supportance) having
but one only son, to kill him and roast him.

Mothers of London, (each one of you to your selves) do but imagine that you
were Miriam, with what heart (suppose you) could ye go about the cooquery of
your own children. Not hate but hunger, taught Miriam to forget mother-hood.
To this purport conceit her discoursing with herself.

It is better to make a Sepulcher for him in mine own body, then leave him to
be lickt up by ouer-goers feet in the street. The wrath of GOD is kindled in
every corner of the City, Famine has sworn to leave no breathing thing in
her Walls; without the Walls, the Sword more usurps then Famine. Our enemies
are merciless, for we have no eyes to see our own misery. Not they alone
besiedge us, but our sins also. Fire and Famine afflict us. We have
where-with-all to feed Fire and Famine, but not wherewith to feed our selves
and our children. My son, my son, I cannot relieve thee, I have Gold and
Silver to give thee, but not a pairing of any repast to preserve thee. My son,
my son, why should I not kill famine by killing thee, ere Famine in
excruciating thee, kill me. O my dear Babe, had I in every limb of me a
several life, so many lives as I have limbs, to Death would I resign, to
save thine one life. Save thee I may not though I should give my soul for
thee. The greatest debt I have bound thee to me with, is by bearing thee in my
womb: I Will bind thee to me again, in my womb I Will bear thee again, and
there bury thee ere Famine shall confound thee: I will vnswathe thy breast with
my sharp knife, and break open the bone-walled prison where thy poor heart is
locked up to be pined; Those Chains and Manacles of corruptiue bowels
(wherewith thy soul is now fetterd,) will I free it from. I will lend Death a
false key to enter into the closet of thy breast.

Even as amongst the Indians, there is a certain people, that when any of
their Kins-folkes are sick, save charges of Physic, and rather resolve
(unnaturally) to eat them up, then day-diuersifying Agues, or bloudboyling
surfets, should fit meal feed on them: so do I resolve, rather to eat thee
up my son, and feed on thy flesh royally, then inward emperishing Famine
should too untimely inage thee. Would God, as the men of Ephraim were not able
distinctly to pronounce Shibboleth, so I could not distinctly pronoune this
sweet name of My son: it is too sweet a name to come in slaughters mouth.
Though David sung of mercy and judgment together, yet cannot I sing of cruelty
and compassion together; remember I am a Mother, and play the murdresse both at
once. O therefore in my words do I strive to be tyrannous, that I may be the
better able to enact with my hands. Sildome, or never, is there any that does
ill, but speaks ill first. The tongue is the encouraging Captain, that (with
danger-glorifying persuasion,) animates all the other corporeal parts to be
ventrous. He is the Judge that doomes and determines; the rest of our
faculties and powers, are but the secular executioners of his sentence. Be
pressed mine hands (as Iaile-garding officers) to see executed, whatsoever your
superior tongue-slaying Judge shall decree. Embrawne your softskin'd enclosure
with Adamantine dust, that it may draw nothing but steel unto it. Arm your
selves against my son, not as my son, but my bed-intercepting Bastard, begotten
of some strumpet. My heart shall receive an iniunction imaginarily to
disinherite him. No relenting thought of mine, shall retain you with repentant
affectionate humors.

I will bloud-shot mine eyes, that all may seem sanguine they look on. Some
dead man that is already slain, I Will anatomize and embowell, the more to flesh
my fiagers in butchering. Ratifide it is, (bad-fated Saturnine boy,) that thou
must be Anthropophagiz'd by thine own mother. Thou were once the chief pillar
of my posterity, and the whole reliance of my name: Well I hoped thou should
have revived and new grafted thy fathers fame; I expected Jerusalem should have
had a strong prop of thee. And if at any time it were war-threatned, thy right
arm should have re-tranquiliz'd and reioyc't it: that the yong-men in their
merry-running Madrigals, and sportiue Base-bidding Roundelayes for thee, should
have honored me: That the Virgins on their loud tinternelling Timbrils, and A
Balla^ French, i^ song tha^ sang dan^
Ballad-singing daunces, should have descanted on my praises.

Mine age of thee expected all life-expedient necessaries. My sight put not on
yeares-dimnesse so soon as it would have done, only trusting thou should
seal it up when Death had dusked it. My beauty-creasing cares, and
frowne-imitating wrinkles, were wholly buried in the monumentall grave, which I
(misdeeming) deemed thy sword might dig me. All these my airy-bodied
expectations, Famine has dispersed. I must enter thee, thou can not entombe
me. Thy little soul to Heaven must be sent, to intelligence the calamity of
Jerusalem: God will have pity of thee, and (perhaps) pity Jerusalem for thee.
He surely will melt in remorse, and wither up the hand of his wrath, when in
his ears it shall be clamoured, how the desolation he has laid on Jerusalem,
has compelled a tender-starued mother to kill and eat her only son. And
yet his own only Child Christ Jesus, (as dear to him as thou to me, my
son) he sent into the world to be crucified.

O sorrow conceiving Mothers, look to have all your children crucified, to
have none of them remitted, since our Husbands have been so hardy, to lay
harmfull hands on the Lord of Life. Can GOD be more griefe-yeelding, with the
loss and life-famishing of our innocent children, then he was at the giving
up of his own only Son. That one deadly deed has obdurated him, and made him
a hard God to all Mothers. Famine, the Lord has sent thee to heap a second
curse upon Mothers. Never shall it be said, thou tookst from me my Son, his
Fathers Faulchion shall send him to sleep with his Fathers. Neither shall his
death be recorded as my crime in Heavens Iudgement-booke, when I but only rid
him (that is as good as dead already) out of the tedious pain of dying.

I have no meat (my son) to bring thee up with; I have no ears to give idle
passage to the plaints of thy pyning. The enemies without and within, shall
divide thy blouds-guilt betwixt them. Amongst the rablement shall thou not
miscarry; I Will bear thee in my bosom to Paradise: Thy tomb shall be my
stomach, with thy flesh will I feast me. This shall be all the child's tribute
I will require of thee, for the six years life I have given thee, to cherish
me but six days, and rather then Famine should consume me, to consume thy
self in my sustenance. The fore-skinne of original sin shall thou clean
circumcise, by this one act of piety. Return into me, and see the mould
wherein thou were cast. As much pain in thy conception endured I for thee, as
I will put thee to in thy departure. By nature we all desire to return to the
soil from whence we came, were thou of age to plead thine own desires, I
know they would be accordant with mine. I am thy Mother and must desire for
thee, I love thee more then thou can thy self, therefore cannot my desires
endamage thee. Into the Garden of Eden I will lead thee, but one gap broke open
thy entrance is made. More shall thou terrify the seditious by the
constraintment of thy quartering, then if Jehovah out of a clowd should speak
to them.

It Is not thou, but I, shall be counted opprobrious. Lo there goes the woman,
shall they say, that has slyced and eaten her own son. I am content to
undergo any shame to abash and rebuke their faces. Sword, how ever I have
flatterd thee, look for no direction from mine eyes: for though with my hands
I outrage, with mine eyes I cannot. Mine eyes are womanish, my hands are
manly. Mine eyes will shed tears in steed of shedding blood: they will regard
pitiful looks, the white skin, the comely proportion; the tender youth, the
quiet lying like a Lamb, my hand beholds none of these: and yet it is my
right hand, which should do every one right, much more mine own child. Right
will I do thee (noble infant) in righting thee from the wrongs of Famine. Nere
shall the Romans have thee for their Ward. Thus, thus, (like blindfold
Fortune) I right thee, mine eyes being veiled.

At one stroke (even as these words were in speaking) she beheaded him, and
when she had done, turning the Apron from of her own face on his, that the
sight might not afreshly distemper her, without seeing, speaking, deliberating,
or almost thinking any more of him, she sod, roast, and powdered him: and having
eat as much as sufficed, set up the rest.

The Seditious smelling the savor of a feast, (which at that time was no
ordinary matter in Jerusalem) roughly (in heaps) rusht and burst into the
house, saying: wicked woman, thou have meat, and traitorously concealest it
from us: we will tear thee in pieces if thou sets not part of it before us.

With some few words of excuse before them, what she had brought, entertaning
them in these, or like, terms.

Eat I pray you, here is good meat, be not afraid, it is flesh of my flesh,
I bare it, I nursed it, I suckled it. Lo; here is the head, the hands and the
feet. It was mine own only son I tell you. Sweet was he to me in his
life, but never so sweet as in his death. Behold his pale perboyld visage, how
pretty-pitteous it looks. His pure snow-moulded soft flesh will melt of it
self in your mouths: who can abstain from these two round teatlike cheeks?
Be not dainty to cut them up, the rest of his body have I cut up to your hands.

Crauens, cowards, recreants, sit you mute and amazed? Never entered you into
consideration of your cruelty before? It is you that have robbed me of all my
food, and so consequently robbed me of my only Son. Vengeance on your souls,
and all the descending generations of the seed of your Tribes, for thus
mirrouring me for the Monarch-monster of Mothers. No Chronicle that shall
write of Ierusalems last captivity, but shall write of me also. Not any shall
talk of Gods judgment on this City, but for the cardinal judgment against
it, shall recite mine enforcement to eat mine own child. I am a woman and
have killed him and eat of him. My womanish stomach has served me to that,
which your man-like stomachs are dastarded with. What I have done, you have
driven me to do; what you have driven me to do, now being done you are daunted
with. Eat of my son one morsel yet, that it may memorize against you, ye
are accessory to his dismembring. Let that morsel be his heart, if you will,
that the greater may be your conuictment.

Men of war you are, who make no conscience of tearing out any man's heart for
a morsel of bread. Most valiant Captains why for-beare you, is not here your
own diet, humane blood? Here is my sons breast, pierce it once again, for
once you have pierced it with Famine. Are not you they that spoiled my house,
and left me no kind of cherishment for me and my son? Feed on that you have
slain and spare not. O my son, o mine only son, these Seditious are the
devils that directed the sword against thy throat. They with their armed
hands, have crammed thy flesh into my palate: Now poison them with thy flesh,
for it is they that have supplanted thee. Renowned is thine end, for in
Jerusalem is none has resisted Famine but thou. Me thou have fed, thy self
thou have freed. It Is thou only that at the latter day shall condemn these
Seditious. Excuse me, that only what I could not choose committed. I did all
for the best. The best remedy of thine vnrepriueable perverse destiny was
death: therefore I devoured thee that fowls of the air might not rent thee.
For sauce to thy flesh, have I infused my tears, who so dippeth in them, shall
taste of my sorrow.

The Rebels hearing this, were wholly metamorphiz'd into mellancholy; yea, the
Chiefe-tanes of them were ouer-clowded in conceit. Was never till this ever
heard from Adam, that a woman eat her own Child. Was never such a desolation
as the desolatian of Jerusalem.

As touching the Pestilence, some short peroration is now to succeed. Of it
there died more then a hundred thousand during the time of the siedge. Out of
the least gate of Jerusalem, (which was that toward the Brook Cedron,) were
carried forth to burial, a hundred fifteen thousand, a hundred and eight
persons: all which were of the Nobles, Gentlemen, and substantialest men of the
Jews. Many fled to Titus, who when they came to meat, could eat none of it,
but dyed with the very sight thereof. Of those that fled, a great number
swallowed up their Gold and their Jewels, which (being clearly escaped) they
sought amongst their excrements. But when by the Aramites, and Arabians, (Titus
mercenary Soldiers) it was perceived, they slew them outright, and ripped their
bowels for their gold, and so left them to the Eagles and Ravens. Two thousand
by this couetise slept their last. The Princes of the Jews, (which Titus as
submissioners and succour-suers had received to mercy,) he straightly examined
on their allegiance and fidelity, how many were dead in the City since he
first beleagured it: and the number was given up, (namely of such as were
carried forth at all gates to be buried, and were slain in battle,) seven
hundred thousand, five hundred, seventy and five, besides many thousands that
in the streets and Temple lay unburied, and were cast down into the Brook
Cedron. The whole Bil (when the siege was concluded) came to eleven hundred
thousand, all which in fourteen months misfortuned.

Sixeteene thousand Titus led prisoners to Rome, (those omitted which under
Eleazers conduct perished.) The Sanctum sanctorum was set on fire, and the
Priests therein smothered. All the Antique buildings were burnt and beaten
down. Of David, Solomon, or the old Kings of Israel, was there no Trophy
remaining, no stone but discituate. Jerusalem was left, not as Jerusalem, but a
naked plot of ground; And as it was said of Priams Town, Iam seges est, vbi
Troia fuit, now is that a Corne-field, that was erst called Troy: So that is
now a Mount of stones, that in years past was entitled Jerusalem.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, what shall I say to thee more but Christ foretold thy
House should be left desolate unto thee: and lo, as he foretold it is fallen
out.

Of all thy gates that were plated over with silver, is there not so much as
one nail remaining. Thy streets were paued with Marble, and thy houses ietted
out with Iaphy and Cedar: that pauement, those houses, thy habitation (like
dust engraven Letters) is quite abrased and plowed up. Thine enemies on thy
Sanctury took compassion, (beholding the glory of it) thou took'st none. Titus
(an Infidel) understanding the multitude of thy prophanations and contumacies,
was afraid (having entered thee) to stay in thee, saying: Let us hence, least
their sins destroy us. Nothing thou feared'st, in Old-wiues fables thou
beleeued'st: with Th'almudisticall dreams (that thy Temple after her
destruction should be built up in a day) thy self thou deludest. And whereas
thou had a Prophecy that thy Sanctuary should not be prostituted, till out of
thy quarters sprung a Monarch of the whole Earth, thou were blinded, and
wantedst the sense, in Vespasian to pick out his expletement. For he, coming
into Judea but as a subjected General to the Roman Empire, by his own
Soldiers (against his will) was there consecrated Emperor: and so out of thy
dominions, or quarters, departed he, leaving his son Titus behind him to
sack thee.

See with how many deceits thou art circumuented, for calling Christ a
circumuenter and deceiuer. For stoning him and his Prophets, and using such
great in-iustice Math. 27. 25.
to S. James (his Cosen according to the flesh,) Josephus, and Eusehus agree
all those plagues were laid upon thee. But to the imprecation ascribe I it
rather, wherewith when Pilate washed his hands, thou cursedst thy self,
saying: His blood be upon us, and our children. Inhumane policy another cause I
conjecture. Thoulers Eleazer, a private man, take the sword of thy freedom
into his hands vnauthorized; Thou suffredst him (unpunished) to resist the
Roman Provincial Plorus: Ill did thou therein, for in government, (though
it be to resist public violence,) it is not safe to suffer a private man to
undertake Arms as general. The reasons, hereafter, I will open in some other
discourse, treating wholly of those matters.

The chief reason of thy confusion, was the ripeness of thy sins, which
were seeded for want of Gods putting his sicle into them. Jerusalem, If I were
to describe Hell, some part of thy desolation description would I borrow, to
make it more horror-some. Eleven hundred thousand, for these few words, but
thou would not, most wretchedly lost their lives. If but one line (thy House
shall be left desolate unto thee) included all this, what does the whole
Scripture include? Not a piece of a line in it that talks of the Lake of Fire
and Brimstone, but by a hundred thousand parts more imports. It is a quiver
of short Arrows, which never show their length till they be full shot out, a
ball of Wilde-fire round wrapped up together, which burns not but cast forth, a
close winded clue, conducting those that deal unadvisedly with it, into the
Minotaurs Laborinth of pain everlasting.

I would wish no man to be too mild in expounding it. It has more edges to
smite with then it shows: It is not sely in operation, though it be simple in
appearance. Jerusalem, not all thy seventy Esdrean Cabalizers, who
traditionately from Moses received the Laws interpretation, could ever rightly
teach thee to divine of the crucified Messiah. The Scripture thou made a
too-to compound Cabalisticall substance of, by canonizing such a multifarious
Genealogy of Comments.

Hitherto stretches the prosecution of thy desolation. Now to London must I
turn me, London that turns from none of thy left hand impieties. As great a
desolation as Jerusalem, has London deserved. Whatsoever of Jerusalem I have
written, was but to lend her a Looking-glass. Now I enter into my true Tears,
my Tears for London, wherein I crave pardon, though I deal more searchingly
then common Soule-Surgions accustom: for in this Book, wholly have I
bequeathed my pen and my Spirit, to the prosternating and enforrowing the
frontiers of sin. So let it be acceptable to God and his Church what I write,
as no man in this Treatise I will particulerly touch, none I will semouedly
allude to, but only attaint vice in general.

Pride shall be my principal aim, which in London has plat-formed another
Sky-vndersetting Tower of Babell. Jonathan shot five Arrows beyond the mark,
I fear I shall shoot fifteen Arrows behind the mark, King. 19. 22.
in describing this high-towring sin.

O Pride, of all Heauen-relapsing premunires the most fearful: thou that ere
this have disparradiz'd our first Parent Adani, and vnrightuouz'd the very
Angels, how shall I arm mine elocution, to break through the ranks of thy
bily stumbling blocks. After the destruction of Antwerpe, thou being thrust out
of house and home, and not knowing whither to betake thee) at hap hazard
embarkedst for England. Where hearing rich London was the ful-streamed
wel-head, unto it thou hastedst, and there have dwelt many years, begetting
sons and daughters. Thy sons names are these, Ambition, Vainglory,
Atheisine, Discontent, Contention. Thy daughters, Disdain, Gorgeous-attire,
and Delicacy. O had Antwerpe still flourished, that thou had nere come hither
to mis-fashion us, or that there were any City would take thy children to
halfes with us.

Thy first son Ambition, is waxt a great Courtier, and makes him wings of
his long Furies hair, to fly up to Heaven with: he has a throne raised up
under his heels in every start-vp he treads on. His back bandieth colors
with the Sun. The ground he thinks extremely honored and beholding to him,
if he bless it but with one humble look. Nothing he talks on but kentals of
Pearl, the conquering of India, and fishing for Kingdoms. Fame he makes his
God, and men's mouths the limite of his conscience. So many greater as there
are then himself, so many griefs he has. The devil may command all his
heart and soul, if he will rid him but of one rival. He that but crosses
him in the course of his ascension, either kills him outright, (if he be
above his reach) or is sure (kill he not first) in the end to killed by him.

Poor men he looks should part with all their goods, to have him but take
knowledge of them; He seeks to get him a Majesty in his frown, and do
something to seem terrible to the multitude. Even courtesy and humility he
peruerteth to pride, where he cannot otherwise pray. Has no child of pride
so many disciples as this tip-toe Ambition. Why call I him Ambition, when he
has changed his name unto Honor? I mean not the honor of the field,
(Ambitions only enemy) which I could wish might be ever, and only,
honorably, but Brokerly blown up honor, honor by anticke fawning fidled up,
honor bestowed for damned deserts.

Of this kind of honor is this Elfe (we call Ambition) compacted. Yet will I
not say, but even in the highest noblest birth, and honourablest glory of
Arms, there may be Ambition. David was ambitious when he caused the people to
be numbered. Nebuchadnezzar eat grass for his Ambition. Herod was Ambitious,
when in Angelical apparel he spoke to the people. The truest image of this
kind of Ambition was Absalom.

Julius Caesar amongst the Ethnicks surmounted, who when he had conquered
Gallia, Belgia, this our poor Albion, and the better part of Europe, and upon
his return to Rome was crowned Emperor, in the height of his prosperity, he
sent men skilled in Geometry, to mesure the whole world, that whereas he
intended to conquer it all, he might know how long he should be in
ouer-running it. Letters had they directed to all Presidents, Consuls, Dukes,
Palatines, Tetrarchs, and Judges of Provinces to assist them and safe conduct
them. Their Commission was not only to measure the earth, but the Waters, the
Woods, the Seas, the Shores, the Valleys, the Hills, and the Mountains. In this
discovery thirty years were spent, from his Consul-ship, to the Consulship of
Saturnius, when God-wot poor man, twenty years good before they returned, he
was all to be-poyniarded in the Senate house, and had the dust of his bones in
a brazen vrne (no bigger then a bowl) barreld up, whom (if he had lived) all
the Sea, and Earth, and Air, would have been too little for.

Let the ambitious man stretch out his limbs never so, he takes up no more
ground (being dead) then the Beggar. London, of many ambitious busy heads,
have thou beheld the rising and down falling. In thy stately School are they
first tutord in their Art. With example thou first exaltest them, and still
lifts them up, til thou have lifted up their heads on thy gates.

What a thing is the heart of man, that it should swell so big as the whole
world. Alexander was but a little man, yet if there had been a hundred Worlds
to conquer, his heart would have comprised them. Did men consider whereof they
were made, and that the dust was their great Grandmother, they would be more
humiliate and dejected; Of a britler metal then Glass, is this we call
Ambition made, and to mischaunces more subject. Glass with good usage may be
kept and continue many ages. The days of man are numbered, threescore and ten
is his term, if he live any longer, it is but labor and sorrow.

Glass fears not sickness, nor old age, it gathers no wrinkles with
standing. It has not so many that scoute and ly in wait for his end as
Ambition: for he (as all mankind) is continually liable to a million of
mischances; besides, a legion of diseases lingering about him. Admit none of
those meet with him, Time with his Sicle will be sure not to miss him. A man
may escape a sickness, a blow, a fall, a wild-beast: he cannot escape his last
destiny. External dangers (such as these be) every one is circumspect and
careful to avoid; Not any one ponders in his thought, how to avoid the death
that grows inward.

From the rich to the poor (in every street in London) there is Ambition, or
swelling above their states: the rich Citizen swells against the pride of the
prodigal Courtier; the prodigal Courtier swells against the wealth of the
Citizen. One Company swells against another, and seeks to intercept the gain
of each other: nay, not any Company but is divided in it self. The ancients,
they oppose themselves against the younger and suppress them and keep them
down all that they may. The young men, they call them dotards, and swel and
rage, and with many oaths swear on the other side, they will not bekept under
by such cullions, but go good and near to out-shoulder them.

Amongst their Wives is like war. Well did Aristotle in the second of
Phisickes, call sins Monsters of nature, for as there is no Monster
ordinarily reputed, but in a swelling or excess of form, so is there no sin
but is a swelling or rebelling against God. Sin (says Augustine) is either
thought, word or deed, opposite to the eternal will of God. Then if all sins
be opposing themselves against God, surely ambition (which is part of the
devils sin) cannot but be the cherrishing of open enmity against God: and so
immediate I conclude, that so many ambitious men as are amongst us, so many
open enemies God has.

Ambition is any puft-vp greedy humor of honor or preferment. No puffing or
swelling up in any man's body but is a sore, when the soul does swell with
ambition, both soul and body (without timely physic of repentance) will
smart full sore for it. Humility was so hard a virtue to beat into our heads,
that Christ purposely came down from heaven in his own person to teach it us,
and continued thirty years together, nothing but preaching and practicing it
here upon earth. The foolish things of the world, (says Paul) God chooses,
and not the hauty or ambitious in conceit. God might 1. Cor. 3.
have chosen Kings and Emperors, or the Scribes and Pharisees to be his
Disciples, but foolish Fishermen he chose.

In worldly policy he used a foolish course to win credit to his doctrine: but
foolish is the worldly policy, that only from the devil borrowes his
instance. Christ chose them, whom the devil scorned to look so low as to
tempt, in whose hearts he had not yet laid one stone of his building. They were
the only fit men to receive the impression of his Spirit. Whether it be a
blessing or no, given to all Fishermen (for the Apostles sakes) I know not,
but surely there is no one trade (in their vocation) lives so faithfully and
painfully as Fishermen, that in their apparel or diet less exceed. He that
should have told the devil. Christ would cast his nets amongst Fishermen, he
would have laughed him out of his coat for a cockscombe. What reason, what
likelihood was there, was he borne in a Fisher-towne? was he allied either by
the Father or the Mother to Fishermen, Nay, how should he come almost in all
his life to hear of a Fisherman? Tush, tush, he will be altogether in the
Temple amongst the Doctors, the Highpriests and the Elders: them will I ply,
and way-lay against him.

To their unbelief I will lend arguments. They have the seeds of ambition
rooted in their hearts already. I will put in their heads, that he comes to
destroy their Law and their Temple, and turn them all out of their stately
chaires of authority: and this (I think) will tickle them thoroughly against him.

Simple devil, Christ deceived thee, and only in this he deceived thee, that
thou imaginedst his pride and ambition to be like thine, and never lookst for
him amongst Netmenders. I dare swear for thee, thou would have sooner sought
for him amongst Carpenters. But when thou foundst how thou were ouer-reacht, I
think thou rann'st to them (from one to another) with cap in hand, to request
them to betray him. And every one shook thee off churlishly but Judas, and on
him had thou not had power, but that he carried the purse. It is a hard thing
for him that carries the purse, (that has money and gold at command) not to
be moved with ambition.

Peter, James and John, had you been any thing but beggarly Fishermen, and
that you had ever lived but a hungerd and cold by the Seaside, or once come
into the great Towns where Ambition sits in her Majesty, and bewitcheth all
eyes, (before Christ met with you,) the devil had caught hold of you. For your
sakes all other of your profession shall fare the worse. Beware Fishermen, the
devil owes you an old grudge, he takes you for dangerous men. Till your
predecessors the Apostles so went beyond him, he never suspected you, he never
tempted you: now he will sooner tempt you, and be more busy about you then
Kings and Emperors.

Those that will shun Ambition, (for which the wrath of God hangs heavy
over this our City,) must with-drawe their eyes from vanities, have something
still to put them in mind where of they are made, and whether they must. My
young nouice (what ever thou be) not yet crept out of the shell, I say unto
thee as the Prophet said to the King of Israel, Cave ne eas in locum illum,
nam ibi insidiae sunt: Beware thou come not in that place, for there thou art
beset; So beware thou come not to the Court, or to London, for there thou
shall be beset. Beset with ambition, beset with vanity, beset with all the
sins that may be. The way to know Ambition when it inuades thee, is to
observe and watch thy self when thou first fallest into a self-love: if
self-love has seized on thee, she will stand on no mean terms, nor be
content to live as a common drudge. None (in any case) must stand in her light,
the Sun must shine on none but her. Whatsoever a man naturally desires, is
Ambition. Quod habere non vis est valde bonum, quod esse non vis hoc est bonum.
There is nothing is not Ambition, but that which a man would not have, or would
not be. Having food and clothing, (as Paul wills 1. Tim. 6.
us) let us be content: what more we require to content, is Ambition. What more
then the contented blessed state of an Angel the devil gap't after, was that
which cast him out of Heaven. We are sent in warfare into this world, to bear
arms and sight it out with the devils chief Basso, Ambition. Under Christ's
standard we march, he is our Leader, small is his Army, and but a handful in
comparison of the others: his outward pomp simple, his provision (in sight)
slender or none at all.

If upon these cousiderations (as distrusting his providence,) we shall grow in
mislike with him, and revolt to Ambition his enemy, and betray him, shall we
ever look him in the face more, or will he ever after acknowledge us? O no, not
only he shall forsake us, but that rich brauing Basso, Ambition: (like a wise
Prince that will trust no Traitors.) As soon as ever they are come near him,
down the hill they climbed up to him, shall he headlong reuerse them.

Even in this dilatement against Ambition, the devil seeks to set in a foot
of affected applause, and popular fames Ambition in my style, so as he incited
a number of Philosophers (in times past,) to prosecute their ambition of glory,
in writing of glories contemptiblenesse. I resist it and abhor it, if any
thing be here penned that may pierce or profit, heavenly Christ (not I) have
the praise. London look to Ambition, or it will lay thee desolate like
Jerusalem. Only the ambitious shaking off the yoke of the Romans, was the bane
of Jerusalem. The dust in the streets (being come of the same house that we are
of, and seeing us so proud and ambitious,) thinks with her self, why should
not she, that is descended as well as we, raise up her plumes as we do. And
that's the reason she borrowes the wings of the wind so often to mount into the
air: and many times she dasheth her self in our eyes, as who would say, Are
you my Kinsmen and will not know me? O what is it to be Ambitious, when the
dust of the street (when it pleases her) can be Ambitious.

The Jews ever when they mourned, rent their garments, as it were to take
revenge on them for making them proud and Ambitious, and keeping them all the
while from the sight of their nakedness. Then they put on Sackcloth, and that
Sackcloth they sprinkled over with dust, and ouer-whelmed with ashes, to put
God in mind, that if he should arm his displeasure against them, he should but
contend with dust and ashes: and what glory or praise could they afford him?
Shall the dust praise thee (says David) or those that go down to the pit
glorify thee? Besides, it signified, that whereas they had lifted themselves
above their creation, and forgot by whom and of what they were made, now they
repented and returned to their first image; In all prostrate humility they
confessed, that the breath of the Lord, (as easy as the wind disperseth dust)
might disperse them, and bring them to nothing. Did Ambition afford us any
content, or were it ought but a desire of disquiet, it were somewhat.

O Augustine, now I call to mind the tale of thy conversion, in the sixth
Chapter of thy sixth book of Confessions, where describing thy self to be a
young man, puffed up with the Ambition of that time, thou were chosen to make an
Oration before the Emperor, in which, (having toyled thy wirs to their highest
wrest,) thou thought to have purchased Heaven and immortality.

Coming to pronounce it, thy tongue (like Orpheus strings) drew all ears
unto it: the Emperor thou exceedingly pleasedst, because thou exceedingly and
hyperbolically praisedst. Admiration encompast thee, and commendation stro^e to
be as eloquent as thou in thy commendation. But what was all this to the
purpose, the Bladder was burst that had so long swelled, wind thou spents, and
naught but wind thou gainedst. For good words, good words were returned thee:
like one that gave Augustus Greek verses, and he for his reward gave him
Greek verses again. The heaven thou dreamedst of, being attained, seemed so
inferior to thy hopes, that it cast thee headlong into hell; Home again (in a
melancholy) with thy companions thou returnedst, where by the way in a green
Meddow, thou espiedst a poor drunken Beggar (his belly being full) heighing,
leaping and dancing, fetching strange youthful friskes, and taking care for
nothing. With that thousighedst, and entredst into this discourse with thy
companions.

O what is Ambition, that it should not yield so much content as beggary?
Miserable is that life where none is happy but the miserable. Travel and care
for wealth, riches and honor, is but care and travel for travel and care. Mad
and foolish are we, who watch and study how to vex our selves, and in hunting
after a vain shadow of felicity, hunt and start up more and more causes of
perplexity. This Beggar has not burnt candles al night a month together as I
have done, he has made no Oration to the Emperor to day, and yet he is merry:
I that have poor'd out mine eyes upon books, and wel-ny spit out all my brain
at my tongues end this morning, am dumpish, drousy, and wish my self dead: and
yet if any man should ask me if I would willingly die, or exchange my state
with the Beggar, I fear I should hardly condescend. Such is my ambition, such
is my foolish delight in my unrest.

He having but a little money, and a few dunghill rags clouted together on
his back, has true content, I (with my grievous heart-breakings and painful
complots,) have laid to ouer-take it, and cannon. He is iocund, I am ioylesse:
he secure, I fearful. There is no learning or Art leading to true felicity,
but the Art of beggary. Ungrateful knowledge, that for all the bodywasting
industry I have used in thy compasment, have not blessed me so much as this
Beggar. I having thee, he wanting thee, is preferred in harts-ease before me.
No delight or hearts-ease received I from thee, for I have spoke not to teach,
but to please. Vild double-fac't Oratory, that art good for nothing but to
fatten sin with thy flattery, that call it giving immortality, when thou
magnifiest vices for virtues, and challengest great deserts of Kings and
nobility for dissembling: here I renounce thee as the Parasite of Arts, the
whorish painter of imperfections, and only Patroness of sin.

To this scope (reverend Augustine) tended thy plaintiue speech, though I have
not expressed it in the same words: but the operation in thee it brought forth,
was that from the meditation of beggarly content, thou wadedst (by degrees)
into the depth of the true heavenly content. O singular work contrived by
weak means. O rarely honored beggary, to be the instrument of recalling so
rich a soul. O faithless and perverse generation, (says Christ unto us as
he said to the Jews,) how Math. 17
long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you, ere my miracles work in
you the like meditation. All of you are ambitious of much prosperity, long life
and many days for your bodies: none of you have care of the posterity of your
souls.

There is a place in the I Will of Paphos where there never fell rain: there is a
place within you called your hearts, where no drops of the dew of grace can
have access; Your days are as swift as a Post, yea swifter then a Weauers
shuttle, they fly and see no good thing: yet fly you swifter to hell then
they. Veniunt anni vt eant, (says Austine) non veniunt vt stant, years come
that they may travel on, and not stand still: passing by us they spoil us,
and lay us open to the tyranny of a cruel enemy, Death. O if we love so this
miserable and finite life, how ought we to love that celestial and infinite
life, where we shall enjoy all pleasures so plentiful, that Ambition shall have
nothing ouer-plus to work on.

Here we labor, drudge and moyle, yet for all our laboring, drudging and
moyling, cannot number the things we lack. We are never long at ease, but
some cross or other afflicts us. As the earth is compassed round with
waters, so are we (the inhabitants thereof) compassed round with woes. We see
great men die, strong men die, witty men die, fools die, rich Merchants, poor
Artificers, Plowmen, Gentlemen, high men, low men, wearish men, gross men, and
the fairest complexiond men die, yet we persuade our selves we shall never
die. Or if we do not so persuade our selves, why prepare we not to die? Why do
we reign as Gods on the earth that are to be eaten with worms? Should a man
with Zerxes, but enter into this conceit with himself, that as he sees one
old man carried to burial, so within threescore years, not one of all our
glisteting Courtiers, not one of all our fair Ladies, not one of all our stout
Soldiers and Captains, not one of all this age throughout the world should be
left, what a dampe and deadly terror would it strike. Temples of stone and
Marble decay and fall down, then think not Ambition to outface death, that
art but a Temple of flesh. Dives died and was buried, Lazarus died and was
buried, brasen-fore-head Ambition, thou shall die and be buried. King or Queen
what-euer, thou shall die and be buried.

Alas, what mad hare-brain'd sots are we, we will take up a humor of
Ambition which we are not able to uphold, and know assuredly (ere many years)
we must be thrown down from: yet come what will, (at all auentures) we will
go through with it; We will be Gods and Monarchs in our life, though we be
devils after death. Over and over I repeat it double and treble, that the
spirit of monarchizing in private men, is the spirit of Lucifer. Christ said to
his Disciples, He that will be greatest amongst you, shall be the least: so say
I, that he which will be the greatest in any state, or seeks to make his
posterity greatest, shall be the least; The least accounted of, the least
reverenced, (for none that is getting ambitious, but is generally hated.) His
posterity (though he establish them never so) shall not hold out. Fools shall
squander, in an hour, all the avarice of their ambitious wise Auncesters.

Ambition, on the sands thou buildst, regard thy soul more then thy sons and
daughters: let poor men gleane after thy Cart, cast thy bread upon the Waters.
Thy greedines of the World, teaches the devil to be greedy of thy soul. He
accuses his spirits and vpbraideth them of sloth by thee, saying: Mortal men
in these and these many years, can heap together so many thousands, and what
is it that they have a mind to, which they get not into their hands: but you
Drones and Dormise, (that in celerity and quicknes should out-start them,) ly
sleeping and stretching your selves by the harth of helfire, and have no care
to look about for the increase of our Kingdom. Heaven gate is no bigger then
the eye of a needle, yet ambitious worldly men (having their backs like a
Cammels, bunched with cares, and betrapped with bribes and oppressions,) think
to enter in at it.

Ambition, Ambition harken to me, there will be a black day when thy Ambition
shall break his neck, when thou shall lie in thy bed as on a Rack,
stretching out thy ioints: when thine eyes shall start out of thy head, and
every part of thee be wrung as with the windchollick. In midst of thy fury and
malady, when thou shall laugh and trifle, folter with thy tongue, rattle in
thy throat, be busy in folding and doubling the clothes, and seratching and
catching whatsoever comes near thee: then (as the possessed with the
Calentura,) thou shall offer to leap, and cast thy self out of the top of
thine house, thou shall burst thy bowels and crack thy cheeks in striving to
keep in thy soul; When thou should look up to Heaven, thou shall be
ouer-looking thy Will, and altering some clause of it, when thou should be
commending thy spirit.

In thy life have thou sought more then what is needful, therefore at thy death
shall thou neglect that is needful. Ambition, (like Jerusalem) thou know
not the time of thy visitation: for thou have sought in this world to gather
great promotions unto thee, and not gather thy self under Christ's wing, Thy
house shall be lest desolate unto thee.

A special branch of this Ambition is Avarice, as riches or couetise there is
nothing that so engenders Ambition. Every Tree, every Apple, every Grain,
every Herb, every Fruit, every Weed has his several worm: the worm of
wealth is Ambition, the spur to Ambition is wealth. Ambitions self we have
displaid sufficiently, his supporter we will now call in question. Dificile
est, (says an ancient Father) vt non sit superbus qui dives, toll superbiam,
diuitiae non nocebunt: It is a very difficult thing for him not to be proud or
ambitious that is rich, take away his ambition, his riches never hurt him.

Riches have hurt a great number in England, who if their riches had not been,
had still been men and not Ti^nists. Riches as they have renowned, so they have
reproched London. It is now grown a Proverb, That there is no merchandise but
usury. I dare not affirm it, but questionless, Usury cries to the children
of Prodigality in the strects: All you that will take up money or commodities,
on your Land or possibilities, to banquet, riot, and be drunk, come unto us and
you shall be furnished: for gain we will help to damn both your souls and
our own. God in his mercy never call them to their audit. God in his mercy rid
them all out of London, and then it were to be hoped the plague would cease,
else never.

Jeremy says, Woe be to him that builds his house with unrighteousness, and
his chambers without equity, whose eyes Iere. 22
and whose heart are only for covetousness, and to shed innocent blood. The eyes
and the heart of Usurers, are only for covetousness and to shed innocent blood.
More Gentlemen by their entanglement and exactions, have they driven to
desperate courses, and so consequently made away and murdered, then either
France, the Low Countries, or any foreign siege or Sea-voyage this 40. years.
Tell me (almost) what Gentleman has been cast away at Sea, or disasterly
souldiouriz'd it by Land, but they have enforst him thereunto by their
fleeeing. What is left for a man to do, being consumed to the bare bones by
these greedy Horseleaches, and not having so much reserved as would buy him
bread, but either to hang at Tiborne, or pillage and reprizall where he may.
Huge numbers in their stinking Prisons they have starued, and made Dice of
their bones, for the devil to throw at dice for their own souls.

This is the course now a days every one takes to be rich: being a young
Trader, and having of old Mumpsimus (his auaritious Master) learned to be
his Crafts-maister, for a year or two he is very thrifty, and husbandly he
paies and takes as duly as the clock strikes, he seems very sober and precise
and brings all men in love with him. When he thinks he has thoroughly wrung
himself into the Worlds good opinion, and that his credit is as much as he
will demand, he goes and tries it, and on the Tenter-hookes stretches it. No
man he knows but he will scrape a little Book courtesy of, two or three
thousand pound (perhaps) makes up his mouth. When he has it all in his hands,
for a month or two he revels it, and cuts it out in the whole cloth.

He falls acquainted with Gentlemen, frequents Ordinaries and Dicing-houses
daily, where when some of them (in play) have lost all their money, he is very
diligent at hand, on their Chains, or Bracelets, or Jewels, to lend them half
the value: Now this is the nature of young Gentlemen, that where they have
broke the Ise and borrowed once, they will come again the second time; and
that these young foxes know, as well as the Beggar knows his dish. But at the
second time of their coming, it is doubtful to say whether they shall have
money or no. The world grows hard, and we all are mortal, let them make him
any assurance before a Judge, and they shall have some hundred pounds (per
consequence) in Silks and Veluets. The third time if they come, they shall have
baser commodities: the fourth time Lute strings and gray Paper; And then I pray
pardon me, I am not for you, pay me that you owe me and you shall have any
thing.

When thus this young Usurer has thrust all his pedlary into the hands of
nouice heirs, and that he has made of his 3. thousand, nine thousand in
Bonds and Recognisances, (besides the strong faith of the forfeitures) he
breaks, and cries out amongst his neighbors, that he is undone by trusting
Gentlemen; his kind heart has made him a beggar: and warnes all men (by his
example) to beware how they have any dealings with them. For a quarter of a
year or thereabouts, he slips his neck out of the collar, and sets some grave
man of his kindred, (as his Father-inlaw or such like,) to go and report his
lamentable mischaunce to his Creditors, and what his honest care is to pay
every man his own as far as he is able. His Creditors (thinking all is
Gospel he speaks, and that his state is lower ebbed then it is,) are glad to
take any thing for their own: so that whereas three thousand pound is due, in
his absence al is satis-fied for eight hundred, (his Father-inlaw making them
believe he lays it out of his own purse.)

All matters thus underhand discharged, my young Merchant returns, and sets
up fresher then ever he did. Those Bonds and Statutes he has, he puts in suit
amain. For a hundred pound commodity, (which is not forty poand money,) he
recouers by relapse, some hundred pound a year. In three Terms, of a
banqrout he wexeth a great landed man, and may compare with the best of his
Company. O intolerable Usury not the Jews (whose peculiar sin it is,) have
ever committed the like.

What I write is most true, and has been practiced by more then one or two. I
have a whole Book of young Gentlemen's cases lying by me, which if I should set
forth, some grave Auntients (within the hearing of Bow-bell) would be out of
charity with me. How ever I fly from particularities, this I will prove, that
never in any City (since the first assembly of societies) was ever suffered
such notorious cosonage and villa ny, as is shrouded under this seauentie-fold
usury of commodities. It is a hundred parts more hateful then Connycatching:
it is the Nurse of sins, without the which, the fire of them all would be
extinguished, and want matter to feed on.

Poets talk of enticing Sirens in the Sea, that on a sunny-day lay forth their
golden trammels, their Iuory necks, and their silver breasts to entice men,
sing sweetly, glance piercingly, play on Lutes rauishingly; but I say, There is
no such Sirens by Sea as by Land, nor women as men: those are the Sirens, that
hang out their shining Silks and Veluets, and dazzle Prides eyes with their
deceitful haberdashry. They are like the Serpent that tempted Adam in
Paradise, who whereas God stinted him, what trees and fruits he should eat on,
and go no further, he enticed him to break the bonds of that stint, and put
into his head what a number of excellent pleasures he should reap thereby; So
whereas careful Fathers send their children to this City, in all
gentleman-like qualities to be trained up, and stint them to a moderate
allowance, sufficient (indifferently husbanded) to maintain their credit
every way, and profit them in that they are sent hither for: what do our
covetous City blood-suckers, but hire Pandars, and professed parasiticall
Epicures, to close in with them, and (like the Serpent) to alienate them from
that civil course wherein they were settled. It Is riot and misgouernment, that
must deliver them ower into their hands to be devoured.

Those that here place their children to learn wit, and see the world, are
like those that in Afric present their children (when they are first borne)
before Serpents: which if the children (they so present) with their very sight
scare away the Serpents, then are they legittimate, otherwise they are
Bastards. A number of poor children and sucklings (in comparison) are in the
Court, and Innes of Court, presented to these Serpents, and stinging
Extortioners of London, who never fly from them, but with their tail wind
them in, and suck out their souls without scarring their skin. Whether they
be legittimate or no, that are so exposed to these Serpents, I dare not
determine, for fear of envy; But sure legitimately (or as they should) they
are not brought up, that are manumited from their parents awe, as soon as they
can go and speak.

Zeuxes having artificially yainted a Boy carrying Grapes in a Hand-basket, and
seeing the Birds (as they had been true Grapes) come in flocks and pecke at
them; was wonderfully angry with himself and his Art, saying: Had I painted
the Boy (which was the chief part of my picture) as well as I have do the
grapes, (which were but a by accident belonging to it,) the Birds durst never
have been so bold; So if Fathers would have but as much care, to paint and
form the manners of their children, (when they come to man's estate) as they
have well to proportion out triflles, (to instruct and educare them in their
triuiall infent years,) sure these ravenous Birds, (such as Brokers and
Usurers) would never fly to them, and pecke at them as they do.

O Country Gentlemen, I wonder you do not lay your heads together and put up a
general supplication to the Parliament, against those privy Canker worms and
Catterpillers. Which of you all but (amongst them) has his Heir cosend,
fetched in, and almost consumed past recovery; Besides, his mind is clean
transposed from his original, all deadly sin he is infected with, all
diseases are hanging about him.

If one tice a Prentise to rob his Master, it is felony by the law; nay, it
is a great penalty, if he do but relieve him and encourage him, being fled
from his Masters obedience and service: and shall we have no Law for him that
ticeth a son to rob his Father? Nay, that shall rob a Father of his
son, rob God of a soul? Every Science has some principles in it, which
must be believed, and cannot be declared. The principles and practices of usury
exceed declaration, believe them to be lewder then pen can with modesty
express; enquire not after them, for they are execrable. De rebus male
acquisitis, non gaudebit tertius here is, Ill gotten goods never trouble the
third heir. Every plant (says Christ) my heavenly father has not planted,
shall be rooted out. Plant they never so their posterity with the revenues of
oppression, since God has not planted them, they shall be ruined and rooted
out. As they have supplanted other men's posterity, so must they look to have
their own posterity supplanted by others.

Augustine in the fourth Chapter of his second Book of Confessions, pitifully
complains how heynously he had offended when he was a young man, in leading
his companions to rob a Peare-tree in their next neighbors Orchard: Amaui
perire O Domine, (he exclaimes) amaui perire, amaui defectum turpis animae et
desiliens a Firmamento: malitie me caeusa nulla esset nifimalitia: I loved to
perish (O Lord,) I loved to perrish, in my ungraciousness I delighted (foul
of soul that I was) and quite slyding from the Firmament: of my malice there
was no cause but malice. Of the stealing and beating down of a few Pears,
this holy Father makes such a burdenous matter of conscience, as that he
counted it his utter perrishing and back-slyding from the Firmament: Usurers
make no conscience of cosoning and robbing men of whole Orchards, of whole
fields, of whole Lordships; Of their malice and theft, there is some other
cause then malice, which is Avarice.

If the stealing of one Apple in Paradise, brought such an universal plague to
the world, what a plague to one soul will the robbing of a hundred Orphans of
their possessions and fruite-yards bring? In the Country the Gentleman takes in
the Commons, racketh his Tennaunts, undoes the Farmer. In London the Usurer
snatcheth up the Gentleman, gives him Rattles and Babies for his ouer-rackt
rent, and the Commons he took in, he makes him take out in commodities. None
but the Usurer is ordained for a scourge to Pride and Ambition. Therefore it is
that Bees hate Sheep more then any thing, for that when they are once in their
wool, they are so entangled that they can never get out. Therefore it is that
Courtiers hate Merchants more then any men, for that being once in their
books, they can never get out. Many of them carry the countenances of Sheep,
look simple, go plain, were their hair short, but they are no Sheep, but
Sheep-byters: their wool or their wealth, they make no othervse of but to
snarle and enwrap men with. The law (which was instituted to redress wrongs
and oppressions,) they wrest contrarily, to oppress and to wrong with. And yet
that's not so much wonder, for Law, Logique and the Swizers, may be hired to
fight for any body; and so may an Usurer (for a halfepeny gain) be hired to
bite any body. For as the Bear cannot drink but he must byte the water, so
cannot he cool his auaritious thirst, but he must pluck and bite out his
Neighbors throat.

Bursa Aua^os est diaboli, the Usurers purse is Hell mouth. He has Hydropem
conscientiam (as Augustine says,) a dropsy conscience, that ever drinks and
ever is dry. Like the Fox, he uses his wit and his teeth together, he never
smyles but he seazeth, he never talks but he takes advantage. He cries with
the ill Husbandman, (to whom the Vineyard was put out in the Gospel,) This is
the heir, come let us kill him, and we shall have Math. 21.
his inheritance. Other men are said to go to Hell, he shall ride to Hell on
the devils back, (as it is in the old Morrall) and if he did not ride, he
would swim thither in innocents blood whom he has circumuented. No men so
much as Usurers, coueteth the devil to be great with; He is called Mammon,
the God or Prince of this World: that is, The God and Prince of Usurers and
Penny-fathers. Nay more, every Usurer of himself is a devil, since this word
Demon, signifies naught but Sypiens, a subtle worldly Wiseman.

When a Legion of devils (in the Land of the Gargisens) were cast forth of two
men that came out of graves, they desired they might go into hogs or swine,
(which are Usurers,) many of those Hogs or Swine, they tumbled into the Sea:
many of our hoggish Usurers the devil tumbles for gain into the Sea. Usurers
(with the draffe of this world) so feed and fatten the devils, that now they
almost pass not of possessing any man else. The Jews were all Hogs, that
is, Usurers, and therefore if there had been no divine restraint for it, yet
nature it self would have dissawded them from eating Swines-flesh, that is,
from feeding on one another. The Prodigall-childe in the Gospel, is reported
to have fed Hogs, that is, Usurers, by letting them beguile him of his
substance.

As the Hog is still grunting, digging and wrooting in the mucke, so is the
Usurer still turning, tossing, digging, and wrooting in the muck of this world;
like the Hog he carries his snoute euer-more down-ward, and nere looks up to
Heaven.

Christ said, It was not meet the childrens bread should be taken from them
and given unto dogs, no more is it meet, that the childrens living and
substance should be taken from them and given unto Hogs. Paul says, We must
not do evil that good may come of it: there is no evil which a hoggish
Usurer will not do, so that goods Rom, 3.
or profit may come of it. They will be sure to verify our Saviors words,
The poor have you always with you: for they will make all poor that they
deal with. Suchvnnaturall Math. 27.
dealing they use toward their poor brethren, as though they came not
naturally into the world, but like those that were called Caesares, quasi caesi
ex matris vtero, they were also cut out of their Mothers womb, when they
came into the world. For this O London! if (like Zaccheus) thou repentest not,
and restorst ten fold, Thy house shall be left desolate unto thee. The cries of
the fatherless and widdowe, shall break of the Angels Hosannas and Alleuiahs,
and pluck the stern of the world out of Gods hand, till he has acquitted
them. Oppression is the price of blood, into your Treasuries you put the price
of blood, which the Jews that killed Christ feared to do. You having many
flocks of sheep of your own, and your poor Neighbor but one sely Lamb,
(which he nursed in his own bosom) that Lamb have you taken away from him,
and spared far better Fatlings of your own.

By your swearing and forswearing in bargayning, you have confiscated your
souls long ago. There is no religion in you but love of money. Any doctrine is
welcome to you, but that which beats on good works. The charity and duty that
GOD exacts of you, you think discharged, if in speech you neither meddle nor
make with him: the charity to your Neighbor, you conjecture only consists
in bidding good-euen and goodmorrowe. Beguile not your selves, for as there is
no Prince, but will have his Laws as well not broken, as not spoken against,
so will God revenge himself, as well against the breakers of his Laws, as
against those that speak against them.

It is not your abrupt Graces, God be praised, Much good do it you, or
saying: we are naught God amend us, Sir I drink to you, that shall stop Gods
mouth: but he will come and not hold his peace; He will seatter your treasure
and your store, and leave you nothing of that you have laid up, save the
Kingdom of heaven and the righteousness therefore. Rich Usurers, be counseled
betimes, surcease to inritch your selves with other men's loss. Hold it not
enough to fall down and worship Christ, except (with the Wisemen of the East)
you open your treasures, and present him with Gold, Mirhe, and Frankincense.

Bring forth some fruits of good works in this life, that we may not
altogether despair of you as barrayne Trees, good for nothing but to be hewne
down and cast into Hellfire. Palce fame morientem quisquis pascendo seruare
poteris: Ambro, de offici.
si non paun is fame accidisti: Feed him that dies for hunger: Whatsoever thou
art that can perserue and do not, thou art guilty of famishing him. Christ
(at the latter day) in his behalf, shall up bray de thee, When I was hungry,
thou gave me no meat, when I Math, 25.
was thirsty, thou deniedst me drink: Depart from me thou accursed. Erogando
pecuniam auges iustitsam, by laying out thy money thou increasest thy
righteousness. Again, Nil dives habet de diuitiis, nisi quod ab illo postulat
pauper. A rich man treasures up no more of his riches, then he gives in
alms.

My Masters, I will not dissuade, but give you counsel to be Usurers: Put
out your money to usury to the poor here on Earth, that you may have it a
hundred fold repayd you in Heaven. As it is in the Psalms, A good man is
merciful and leandeth, he gives, he disperseth, Psalm. 112.
he distributeth to the poor, and his righteousness remains for ever.

So that we see, by that which we give we gain and not loose, and yet what
do we give, but that we cannot keep? For giving but back again what was
first given us, and which if we should not give, Death would take from us, we
shall purchase an immortal inheritance that can near be plucked from us. With
half the pains we put our selves to in purchasing earthly wealth, we may
purchase Heaven.

Wealth many times flies from them that with greatest soilicitude and greedines
seek after it. For Heaven, it is no more but seek and it is yours, knock and
it shall be opened. With less sure (I assure you) is the kingdom of Heaven
obtained, then a suit for a Pension or office to an earthly King, which though
a man has 20. years followed, and has better then three parts and a half of
a promise to have confirmed, yet if he have but a quarter of an enemy in the
court, it is casheird and non-suted. God will not be corrupted, he is not
partial as man is, he has no Parasites about him, he sees with his own
eyes, and not with the eyes of those that spoke for bribes. He is not angry,
or commands us to be driven back when we are importunate: but he commands us
to be importunate, and is angry if we be not importunate. In the Parable of
the godless Judge and the importunate Widow, he teaches that importunity
may get any thing of him.

So in the similitude of the man that came to his friend at midnight, to desire
him to lend him three loaves, and his friend answered him. His door was shut,
his children Luke 21.
and servants in bed, and he could not rise himself to give them him: at
length (he still continuing in knocking, and that for him, neither he not his
might rest) to be rid of his importunity, (not for he was his friend) he rose
up, and gave him as many as he needed. How much more shall our GOD give us
what we ask, that asks no other treuage at our hands for giving, but
asking and thanksgiving. We must hunger and thirst after righteousness, and we
shall be satis-fied. Hunger and thirst makes the Lion to rore, the Wolves to
howl, Oxen and Kine to bellough and bray; and Sheep (of all Beasts the most
selie and timorous,) to bleate and complain; Can man then (that in spyrite and
audacitie exceeds all the beasts of the field) hungering and thirsting after
righteousness hold his peace? Would God ever have encouraged him with a
blessing to hunger and thirst, but that the extremity of hunger and thirst,
might drive him to the extremity of importunity and prayer. I cried unto the
Lord (says David) and he heard me: He did not coldly, bashfully, or formally
only, cry to the Lord, as not caring whether he were heard or no, but he
cried unto him with his whole heart: even to the Lord he cried, and he heard
him. Ezekias cried unto the Lord, and he heard him. The blood of the Saints
under the Altar (as all blood) is said to cry unto the Lord for vengeance. Thy
brother Abels blood has cried unto me, said God to Caine. The prayer of the
fatherless Genesis 4.
and Widow, (which God hears above al things) is called a cry.

Usurers, you are none of these cryers unto God, but those that hourly unto
God are most cryde out against. God has cryde out unto you by his Preachers,
GOD has cride out unto you by the poor; Prisoners on their deathbeds have
cride out of you: and when they have had but one hour to intercessionate for
their souls, and sue out the pardon of their numberless sins, the whole part
of that hour (saving one minute, when in two words they cryde for mercy,) have
they spent, in crying for vengeance against you. After they were dead, their
Coffins have been brought to your doors in the open face of Cheapside, and
ignominious Ballads made of you, which every Boy would chaunt under your nose:
yet will not you repent, nor with all this crying be awaked out of your dream
of the Devil and Dives. Therefore look that when on your death-beddes you
shall lie, and cry out of the Stone, the Strangullion and the Gout, you shall
not be heard, your pain shall be so wrestling, tearing, and intolerable, that
you shall have no leisure to repent or pray: no nor so much as lift up your
hands, or think one good thought. Even as others have cursed you, so shall you
be ready to curse God, and desire to be swallowed quick, to excorse the agony
you are in.

As the devil in the second of Job, being asked from whence he came, answered,
From compassing the earth, so you being askd at the day of judgment, from
whence you come, shall answer; From compassing the Earth, For Heaven you have
not compast or purchased, therefore shall Hellfire be your portion. Every man
shall receive of God according to that in his body he has wrought. If in your
bodies you have done no good works, of God you shall receive no good words. The
words of God are deeds, he spoke but the word, and Heaven and Earth were made.
He shall speak but the word and to hell shall you be had. Good deeds derived
from faith, are Rampires or Bulwarks raised up against the devil: he that
has no such Bulwark of good deeds to resist the devils battery, cannot
choose but have his soules-citty soon raced.

Good deeds are a tribute which we pay unto God for defending us from al our
ghostly enemies, and planting his peace in our consciences. In stead of the
ceremonial Law, burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, (which are ceased,) God has
given us a new Law, To love one another: that is, to show the fruits of love,
which are good deeds to one another. The Widows Oil was increased in her
Cruse, and her Meal in in her tubbe, only for doing good deeds to the prophet
of the Lord. Few be there now-a-dayes, that will do good deeds but for good
deeds, that is, for rewards. If seats of justice were to be sold for money,
we have them amongst us that would buy them up by the whole sale, and make
them away again by retaile. He that buys must sell, shrewd Alcumists there
are risen up, that will pick a merchandise out of every thing, and not spare to
set up their shops of buying and selling even in the Temple: I would to God they
had not sold and plucked down Church and Temple, to build them houses of
stone. God shall cut them off that enritch themselves with the fat of the
Altar.

Oues pastorem non iudicent, (says an ancient writer,) quia non est Discapulus
supra Magistru^, multo minus deglubent. Let not the Sheep judge their
shepherd, because the scholar is not above his master, much less are they
to pluck from their master the Shepherd: to shave or to pelt him to the bare
bones, to whom (for feeding them) they should offer up their fleeces. Diis
parentibus et Magistris, says Aristotle, non potest reddi equiualens: To the
Gods, our Fathers, and our Schoolemaisters, can never be given as they
deserve. He was an Ethnic that spoke thus, we Christians (only because he
has spoke it,) will do any thing against it: From God, our Parents and our
Schoole-maisters, (which are our Preachers,) say we can never be plucked
sufficient. To make our selves rich we care, not if we make our church like
Hell, where (as Job says) vmbra mortis, et nullus ordo est, there is the
shadow of death, and confusion without order.

O Avarice, that breaks both the Law of Moses and the Law of Nature, in
taking usury or in-comes for Aduousons, and not letting the land of the Priests
be free from tribute: those to whom thou leauest that ill gotten usury or
tribute, shall be a prey to the irreligious. Job. 15.
Fire shall consume the house of bribes.

No Cart that is ouer-loden or crammed too full, but has a tail that will
scatter. Beware least Hogs come to gleane after your Carts-tayle: that your
heirs come not to be Wards unto Usurers, for they will put out their Lands
to the best use, of seauen-score in the hundred, and make them serve out their
wardship in one prison or other. The only way for a rich man to prevent
robbing, is to be bountiful and liberal. None is so much the thieues mark as
the Miser and the Carle. Give while you live (rich men) that those you leave
behind you, may be free from Cormorants and Catterpillers. If there be in your
bags, but one shilling that should have been the poores, that shilling will be
the consumption of all his fellows: one rotten Apple marreth all the rest, one
scabbed sheep infects a whole flock.

Even as a Prince out of his Subjects goods, has lones, dismes, subsidies and
fifteenes, so God out of our goods, demands a lone, a tenth, and a subsidy
to the poor. Lo, the one half of my goods (says Zaccheus) I give to the
poor. Is not he an ill servant, that when his Master shall into his hands
deliver a large sum of money, to be distributed among the needy and impotent,
shall purse it up into his own Coffers, and either give them none at all, or
but the hundredth part of it? Such ill servants are we. The treasure and
possessions we have, are not our own, but the Lord has given them us to give
to the poor, and spend in his service: we (very obsequiously) give to the
poor only the mould of our treasure, and will rather detract from Gods
service, then detract from our dross. No where is pity, no where is pity,
our House must needs be left desolate unto us.

The Idolatrous Gentiles shall rise up against us, that bestowed all their
wealth on fanes and shrines to their gods, and presents and offerings to their
Images; To the true Image of God (which are the poor,) we will scarce offer
our bread-parings. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus, was two hundred years in
building by all Asia. There was none that obtained any victory, but built a
Temple at his return, to that god (as he thought) which assisted him. Not so
much as the Fever quartan, but the Romans built a Temple to, thinking it some
great God because it shook them so: and another to ill fortune, in Exquillijs,
a Mountain in Rome, because it should not plague them at Cards and Dice. No
Fever quartanes, ill fortune, or good fortune, may wring out of us any good
works. Our devotion can away with any thing, but this Pharasaicall
almes-giuing.

He that has nothing to do with his money but build Churches, we count him
one of God-almighties Fools, or else (if he bear the name of a wiseman) we
term him a notable braggart. Tut, tut, Almes-houses will make good stables,
and let out in Tenaments, yield a round sum by the year. A good strong bard
hutch, is a building worth twenty of those Hospitals and Almes-houses; Our rich
Chuffes, will rather put their helping hands to the building of a prison, then
a house of prayer. Our Courtiers lay that on their backs, which should serve to
build Churches and schools. Those Preachers please best, which can fit us with
a cheap Religion, that preach Faith, and all Faith, and no Good-works, but to
the household of Faith.

Ministers and Pastors (to some of you I speak, not to all,) it is you that have
brought down the price of Religion, being covetous your selves, you preach
nothing but covetous doctrine: your followers seeing you give no alms, take
example (by you) to hold in their hands to, and will give no alms. That Text
is too often in your mouths, He is worse then an Infidel that prouides not
for his wife and family. You do not cry out of the Altar, cry out for money to
maintain poor Scholars, cry out for more living for Colleges, cry out for
relief for them that are sick and visited: you rather cry out against the
Altar, cry out against the living the Church has already.

It were to be wished, that order were taken up amongst you, which was
observed in S. Augustines time: For then it was the custom, that the poor
should beg of none but the Preacher or Minister, and if he had not to give
them, they should exclaim and cry out of him, for not more effectually moving
and crying out to the people for them. Had every one of you, all the poor of
your Parishes hanging about your doors, and ready to rent your garments off
your backs, and tear out your throats for bread every time you stird abroad,
you would bestirre you in exhortation to charity and good works, and make your
selves hoarse, in crying out against couetise and hardness of heart.

London, thy heart is the heart of covetousness, all charity and compassion is
clean banished out of thee: except thou amendest, Jerusalem, Sodom, and Thou
shall sit down and weep together.

From Ambition and Avarice, his suborner, let me progress to the second son of
Pride, which is, Vainglory. This Vainglory, is any excessive pride or
delight which we take in things unnecessary; Much of the nature is it of
Ambition, but it is not so dangerous, or conversant about so great matters as
Ambition. It is (as I may call it) the froth and seething up of Ambition.
Ambition that cannot contain it self, but it must hop and bubble above water.
It is the placing of praise and renown in contemptible things. As he that
takes a glory in estranging himself from the attire and fashions of his own
Country. He that takes a glory to wear a huge head of hair like Absalom. He
that takes a glory in the glistering of his apparel and his perfumes, and
thinks every one that sees him, or smells to him, should be in love with him. He
that takes a glory in hearing himself talk, and stately pronouncing his
words. He that takes a glory to bring an oath out with a grace, to tell of
his cosonages, his surfetings, and drunkenness, and whoredoms. He that (to be
counted a Caualeir, and a resolute brave man) cares not what mischief he do,
whom he quarrels with, kills or stabbes.

Such was Pausanias that killed Philip of Macedon, only for fame or vainglory.
So did Herostratus burn the Temple of Diana, (whereof I talked in the leaf
before,) to get him an eternal vainglory. The Spaniards are wonderful
vainglorious. Many Soldiers are most impatient vainglorious, in standing
upon their honor in every trifle, and boasting more then ever they did. They
are vainglorious also in commending one another for murders and braules:
which (if they weighed aright) is the most ignominy that may be. By a great oath
they will swear, he is a brave, delicate, sweet man, for he killed such and such
a one: as if they should say, Caine was a brave delicate sweet man, for kiling
his brother Abel. He was the first that invented this going into the field, and
now it is grown to a common exercise every day after meat. Many puny Poets
and old ill Poets, are mighty vainglorious, of whom Horace speaks: Ridentur
mala qui componunt carmina verum. Gaudent scribentes et se venerantur and
vltro. Si taceas laudunt quicquid scripsere beati. They are of all men had in
derision (says he) that bungle and bodge up wicked verses: but yet they do
honey and tickle at what they write, and wonderfully to themselves applaude and
praise themselves; and of their own accord, (if you do not commend them) they
will openly commend themselves, and count their pens blessed whatsoever they
invent. Many excellent Musi^ians are odd fantastic vainglorious. There is
vainglory in building, in banqueting, in being Diogenicall and dogged: in
voluntary poverty and devotion. Great is their vainglory also, that will
rather rear themselves monuments of Marble, then monuments of good deeds in
men's mouths. In a word, as Paul says, Non est Domine in quo gloriaripossim,
sed in Cruce Domini Jesus Christi: There is no true glory, all is vainglory,
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. The jews vainglory and
presumptuous confidence in their Temple, was one of the chief sins that
plucked on their desolation. In that Chapter where our Savior gave judgment
over Jerusalem, how bitterly did he inueigh against the hypocrisy and vain
glory of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Let us examine what this hypocrisy and vainglory was he inueighed so
against, and see if there be any such amongst us here in London.

First, he accuses them, Of binding heavy burdens and too grievous to be
borne, and laying them on other men's shoulders, and not moving them with one
finger themselves. That is as much to say, as States of a Country should make
burdenous Laws, to oppress and keep under the Communalty, and look severely
to the observation of them, but would keep none of them themselves, nor will
not so much as deigne with one finger to touch them.

Secondly, The did all their works to be seen of men, So do they that will
do no good work, but to be put in the Chronicles after their death: so do
they that publicly will seem the most precise iusticiaries under heaven, but
privately mittigate their sentence for money and Exodus 23.
gyfts, which blind the wise, and subvert the words of the just. The especial
thing Christ in the Pharisees reproves that they did to be seen of men, was
the wearing of their large Philactaries. Those Philactaries (as S. Ierom Ierom
on the 23. of Matthew.
says) were broad pieces of Parchment, whereon they wrote the ten
commandments, and folding them up close together, bound them to their
fore-heade, and so wore them always before their eyes, imagining thereby they
fulfilled that which was said: they shall be always immoucable before thine
eres. That which they had always vaine-gloriously before their eyes, that have
we always vaine-gloriously in our mouths, but seldom or never in our hearts.
Never was so much professing, and so little practicing, so many good words, and
so few good deeds.

The third objection against the Pharisees, was, That they loved the highest
places at feasts, the chief seats in assemblies, and greeting in the
Marketplace: Which is as much to say, as that they were arrogant, haughty
minded, and insolent: that they had no spyrite of humility or meekness in
them; They were besotted with the pride of their own singularity, they thought
no man worthy of any honor but themselves. By intrusion and not standing on
courtesy, they got to sit highest at Feasts, and be preferred in
Assemblies: which appears by that which follows some few verses after: For
who soever will exalt himself, shall be brought low, and whosoever will
humble himself, shall be exalted. Which infers, that they did intrude or
exalt themselves, and were not exalted other-wise: therefore they should be
humbled or brought low. Diverse like Pharasies have we, that will proudly exalt
themselves.

After this, our Savior breathes out many woes against them. First, For
shutting up the Kingdom of heaven from before men, and neither entering
themselves, nor suffering those that would to enter. Next, For devouring
widows houses under pretense of long prayers. Thirdly, For compassing Sea and
Land to seduce. Fourthly, For their false and fond distinction and
interpretation of oaths. Fifthly For tithing mynt and Anise seeed and commin,
and leaving weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and fidelity,
foreslowed: for straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel. Sixthly For
making clean the outside of the cup or the platter, when within they were
full of bribery and excess. Seauenthly For they were like unto whited toombes,
which appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's bones, and
all filthiness. Eighthly, For they built the Toombes of the Prophets, and
garnisht the sepulchers of the righteous, whose doctrine they refused to be
ruled by. Which of all these eight woes but we have incurred.

Peculiarly apply them I will not, for fear their reference might be
offensive: but let every one that is guilty in any of them, apply them
privately to himself, least every child in the street apply them openly to
his reproof.

London look to thy self, for the woes that were pronounced to Jerusalem, are
pronounced to theee. Thou transgressing as grievously as she, shall be
punished as grievously. Fly from sin, take no pride nor vainglory in it: for
pride or vainglory in sin, is a horrible sin, though it be without
purpose to sin. Ah what is sin that we should glory in it? To glory in it
is to glory that the devil is our father. Does the Peacocke glory in his
foul feet? Does he not hang down the tail when he looks on them? Does the
Buck (having be filtht himself with the female,) lift up his horns and walk
proudly to the lawnes? O no, he so hates himself) by reason of the stinch of
his commixture,) that all drouping and languishing into some solitary Ditche he
with-drawes himself, and takes soil, and batheth till suck time as there fall
a great shoure of rain, when being thoroughly washed and cleansed, he posteth
back to his food.

Of the Peacock, of the Buck, nor any other bruit beast can we be taught to
loath our filth, but (contrary to nature,) far worse then brute beasts, we
are enamored Aug. lib 3. de lib. arbit.
of the favor of it. Omne vitium eo ipso quod vitium est, contra naturam est.
Every vice as it is a vice is contrary to nature. Takes the devil a vainglory
or pride that he is exiled out of heaven? No, he rueth, he curses, he enuies
God, men and Angels, that they should live in the kingdom of light, and he
in the vallie of darkness.

What cowarde is there that will brage or glory he was beaten and disarmed. If
we had the wit to conceive the baseness of sin, or from what abject
Parentage it is sprung, we would hate it as a Toade, and fly from it as an
Adder. Not without reason have many learned Writers, called it Bestiall, for it
is all derived and borrowed from Beasts. Pride and inflammation of heart, we
borrow from the Lion, avarice from the Hedghog, luxury, riot, and sensuality
from the Hog: and therefore we call a leatcherous person, a boarish
companion. Envy from the Dog, Ire or wrath from the Wolf, gluttony or
gurmandise from the Bear, and lastly sloth from the Ass. So that as we
apparraile our selves in Beasts skins, in self same sort we clothe our
souls in their skins. But if we did imitate ought but the imperfections of
Beasts, (or of the best Beasts, but the worst Beasts,) it were somewhat: if
we had any spark or taste of their perfections, we were not so to be
condemned. We have no spark, no taste, we are nothing but a compound of
uncleanness.

Let us not glory that we are men, who have put on the shapes of Beasts.
Thrice blessed are Beasts that die soon, and after this life feel nohell;
Woe unto us, we shall, if we appear to God in the image of beasts, and soon
redeem not from satan the image of our creation he has stolen from us. O
singular subtilty of our enemy, so to sweeten the poison of our perdition, that
it should be more relishsome and pleasant unto us, then the nectarized
Aquacaelestis of water-mingled blood, sluced from Christ's side. We glory, in
that we are in the highway to be thrown from glory: We will not hear our
Folders or Sheepehearps, that would gather us to glory. Our Lord rode upon at
Ass when he governed the laws, under the Law (in comparison of us,) we are
the vnbroken-Colt, (including the Gentiles,) which he commanded (with the
Ass) to be brought unto him. This thousand and odd hundred years has he
been breaking us to his hand, and now, (when he had thought to have found us
fit for the saddle,) we are wilder and further of then ever we were. We
kick and winche, and will by no means endure his managing. Wherefore (though
utterly wearied with both) better he esteems of his old obstinate slow Ass,
the Jews, (which therefore he cast off, for they had tired him with continual
beating,) then of the untoward Colt, (us the Gentiles) that will not be bridled.

Ambition and vainglory, make us bear up our necks stiffly, and bend our heads
backward from the reyne, but age will make us stoop thrice more forward, and
warpe our backs in such a round bundle, that with declyning, our snoutes shall
dig our graves.

England thou needst not be ambitious, thou needst not be vainglorious, for
ere this thou have been bowed and burdned till thy back cracked. As the
Israelites were ten times led into captivity, so seven times have thou been
overrun and conquered. In thy strength thou boasts, God with the weak
confounds the strong. The least lifting up of his hand, makes thy men of
war fall backward. Say thou art walled with Seas, how easy are thy walls
overcome? Who shall defend thy walls if the civil sword waste thee? With
more enemies is not India besette then thou art. Ungratefully has God given
thee long peace and plenty, since whereas war can but breed vices, thy peace
and plenty has begotte more sins, then war over heard of, or the Sun
has Atoms.

Yet learn to leave of thy vainglory, that God may glory in thee. Learn to
despise the world, despise vanity, despise thy self, to despise despysing, and
lastly, to despise no man. If you be of the world, you will affect the
vainglory of the world: if you be not of the world, look for no glory but
contempt from the world. It lies in your election to draw lots, whither you
will be heirs of the glory eternal, or enjoy the short breath of vainglory
amongst men.

The third son of Pride, is Atheism, which is when a man is so timpaniz'd
with prosperity, and entranced from himself, with Wealth, Ambition, and
Vainglory, that he forgets he had a Maker, or that there is a Heaven above
him which controules him. Too much joy of this world has made him drunk. I
have read of many, whom extreme joy and extreme grief has forced to run
mad; so with extreme joy runs he mad, he waxes a Fool and an Idiote, and
then he says in his heart, There is no God. Others there be of these
soulebenummed Atheists, who (having so far entered in bold blasphemies, and
Scripture-scorning ironies against God, that they think, if God be a God of
any justice and omnipotence, it cannot stand with that his justice and
omnipotence, to suffer such despite unpunished,) for their only refuge,
persuade themselves there is no God, and with their profane wits innent
reasons, why there should be no God.

In our Saviors time there were Saduces, that denied the Resurrection; what
are these Atheists but Saducaean sectaries that deny the resurrection? They
believe they must die, though they believe not the Deity. By un means may they
avoid what they will not admit. Io the very hour of death, shall appear to
them a God and a devil. In the very hour of death, to Atheistical Julian,
(who mockingly called all Christians Gallileans,) appeared a grizly
shaggy-bodied devil, who for all (at his sight) he recantingly cried out,
Vicisti, Galilaee, vicisti. Thine is the day, thineis the victory o man of
Galilee, yet would it not for-beare him or give him over, till it had stripped
his soul forth of his fleshie rind, and took it away with him.

Those that never heard of God or the devil in their life before, at that
instant of their transmutation, shall give testimony of them.

This I assure my self, that how-euer in pride of mind, (because they would
be different in paradoxisme from all the world,) some there be that fantasy
phylosophicall probabilities, of the Trinities vnexistence, yet in the inmost
recourse of their consciences, they subscribe to him, and confess him.

Most of them, because they cannot grossly palpabrize or feel God with their
bodily fingers, confidently and grossly discard him. Those that come to God,
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.
They coming against God, believe that he is not, and that those prosper best,
and are best rewarded that set him at naught. The heavens declare the glory
of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work, one generation tells
another of the wonders he has done: yet will not these faythlesse
contradictours, suffer any glory to be ascribed to him. Stoutly they refragate
and withstand, that the Firmament is not his handy-worke, nor, will they
credit one generation telling another of his wonders. They follow the
Pironiks, whose position and opinion it is, that there is not hell or misery but
opinion. Impudently they persist in it, that the late discovered Indians, are
able to show antiquities, thousands before Adam.

With Cornelius Tacitus, they make Moses a wise provident man, well seen in
the Egiptian learning, but deny he had any divine assistance in the greatest
of his miracles. The water (they say) which he struck out of a Rock in the
Wilderness, was not by any supernatural work of GOD, but by watching to what
part the Wild-asses repaired for drink.

With Albumazar, they hold that his leading the Children of Israel over the
Red Sea, was no more but observing the influence of Stars, and wayning season
of the Moon that with-draweth the Tides. They seek not to know God in his
works, or in his Son Christ Jesus, but by his substance, his form, or the
place wherein he does exist. Because some late Writers of our side, have sought
to discredit the story of Judith, of Susanna and Daniell, and of Bell and the
Dragon, they think they may thrust all the rest of the Bible (in like manner)
into the Jewish Thalmud, and tax it for a fabulous Legend.

This place serves not to stand upon proofs, or by confutation to confirm
principles: neither dare I with the weak drop of my wit, offer, to uphold
the high Throne of the Godhead, since he that but stretched out his hand to
underprop the Arc falling, was presently stricken dead O Lord, thou have ten
thousand stronger pillars then I am. I am the unworthiest of all wormereserued
wretches, once to speak of thee, or name thee. My sins are alwaie before me.
Princes will not let those come before them with whom they are displeased. I am
afraid the congealed clouds of my sin, will not let my prayers come near
thee. O favor thy glory though I have displeased thee with folly. I will not
be so vnweaponed-ieopardous, to overthrow both thy cause and my credit at
once, by ouer-Atlassing mine invention. That which I undertake, shall be only
to throw one light Dart at their faces from a far, and exhort all able pens
to arm themselves, against thine Atheistical maledictours.

Of Atheists this age affords two sorts, the inward and the outward; The
inward Atheist is he, that deuours widows houses under pretense of long
prayers, that (like the Panther) hides his face in a hood of Religion, when he
goes about his prey. He would profess himself an Atheist openly but that
(like the Pharisees) he fears the multitude. Because the multitude favors
Religion, he runs with the stream, and favors Religion: because he would be
Captain of a multitude. To be the God of gold, he cares not how many gods he
entertaines. Church rites he supposes not amiss to busy the Common-peoples
heads with, that they should not fall aboard with Princes matters. And as Numa
Pompilius in Rome, and Minos in Athens, kept the people in awe, and thrust what
tyrannous laws they list upon them, (the one, under pretense he did nothing
without conference of the Nymph Egeria, the other, under color he was inspired
in a certain hollow Cave by Jupiter,) so he makes conscience and the spirit
of God, along side-cloake, for all his oppressions and policies. A holy look
he will put on when he means to do mischief, and have Scripture in his
mouth, even whiles he is in cutting his neighbors throat.

The propagation of the Gospel, (good Saint-like man) he only shootes at,
when under suppressing of Popery, he strives to ouer-throwe all
Church-liuings. So that even as the Gospel is the power of God, to salvation,
to every one that belieueth, so is it in him the devils power of beguiling and
undoing, to every one that belieues him. He it is that turns the truth of God
to alie, and builds his house by hypocrisy, that has his mouth swept and
garnished, but in his heart a whole legion of devils.

The outward Atheist, (contrariwise) with those things that proceed from his
mouth, defiles his heart; He establishes reason as his God, and will not be
persuaded that God (the true God) is, except he make him privy to all the
secrecies of his beginning and government. Straightly he will examine him where
he was, what he did before he created Heaven and Earth; how it is possible he
should have his being from before all beginnings? Every circumstance of his
providence he will run through, and question why he did not this thing, and that
thing, and the other thing, according to their humors?

Being earthly bodies, (unapt to ascend,) in their ambitious cogitation, they
will break open and ransack his Closet: and if (conveniently) they may not come
to i^, then they will derogate and deprave him all they can. Little do they
consider, that as the light which shined before Paul, made him blind, so the
light of Gods invisible mysteries, (if ever it shine in our hearts,) will
confound and blind our carnal reason.

Philosophies chief fullness, wisedoms adopted Father next unto Solomon,
insatiable Art-searching Aristotle, that in the round-compendiate bladder of
thy brain, conglobedst these three great bodies, (Heaven, Earth, and the wide
world of Waters,) thine Icariansoaring comprehension, tossed and turmoiled but
about the bounds and beginning of Nilus, in Nilus drowned it self, being to
seely and feeble to plunge through it.

If knowledges second Solomon, had not knowledge enough to engraspe one River,
and allege probability of his beginning and bounding, who shall engraspe or
bound the heavens body? Nay, what soul is so metaphusicall subtle, that can
humorously sirenize heavens soul, JEHOVAH, out of the concealements of his
Godhead? He that is familiar with all earthly states, must not think to be
familiar with the state of heaven. The very Angels know not the day nor hour
of the last judgment: if they know not the day nor hour of the judgment,
(which is such a general thing,) more private circumstances of the Godhead
(determinately) they are not acquainted with; And if not Angels, (his
sanctified attendants) much less are they revealed to sinners. Idle-headed
Atheist, ill would thou (as the Romans) acknowledge and offer sacrifice to
many gods, that wilt not grant one God. From thy birth to this moment of thine
unbelief, reuolue the diary of thy memory, and try if thou have nere prayed and
been heard, if thou have been heard and thy prayer accomplished, who has heard
thee, who has accomplished it? Will thou ratifidely affirm, that God is no
God, because (like a Noune substantive) thou can not essentially see him,
feel him, or hear him.

Is a Monarch no Monarch, because he reareth not his refiant throne amongst
his utmost subjects? We (of all earthlings) are Gods utmost subjects, the last
(in a manner) that he brought to his obedience: shall we then forget that we
are any subjects of his, because (as a among his Angels) he is not visibly
conversant amongst us? Suppose our Monarch were as far distanced from us as
Constantinople, yet still he is a Monarch, and his power undiminished. Indeed
so did our Fathers rebel, and forgot they had a King; when Richard cuer de
Lion was warring in the Holy Land, his own brother king John, forgot that he
had a brother, and crowned himself King. But God is not absent, but present
continually amongst us, though not in sight, yet as a Spirit at our elbowes
every where, (and so delight many Kings to walk disguised amongst their
subjects.) He treads in all our steps, he plucketh in and lets out our
breath as he pleases, our eyes he opens and shuts, our feet he guides
as he lists.

It Is nothing but plenty and abundance that makes men Atheists. Even as the
Snake which the Husbandman took out of the cold and cherisht in his bosom,
once attained to her lively heat again, and grown fat and lusty, singled him
out at the first, whom she might (ungratefully) enuenome with her forked
sting; So God having took a number of poor outcasts, (far poorer then
poor frost-bitten Snakes,) forth of the cold of scarcity and contempt, and
put them in his bosom, cherisht and prosperd them with all the blessings he
could, they (having once plentifully picked up their crummes, and that they
imagine (without his help) they can stand of themselves,) now fall to darting
their stings of derision at his face, and finding themselves to be as great as
they can well be amongst men, grow to envy and extenuate their Maker.

A servant that (of nothing) is waxt great under his Master, if his Master
look not to him, proves the greatest enemy he has; Ef^soones he will draw all
men from him, and underhand disgrace him, to engrosse all in his own hand.
None are so great enemies to God, as those that (of small likelihoods) have waxt
greatest under him, and have most tasted the gracious springs of his
providence. Often have we seen a Beggar promoted, forget and renounce his own
natural Parents: no marvel then, if these mounted Beggars forget, and will
not acknowledge God, their common Parent, and foster-Father.

I cannot be persuaded any poor man, or man in misery, (be he not altogether
desperate of his estate,) is an Atheist. Misery (mauger their hearts) will make
them confess God. Who hears the thunder, that thinks not of God? I would
know who is more fearful to die, or dies with more terror and afrightment,
then an Atheist. Discourse over the ends of all Atheists, and their deaths, for
the most part, have been drunken, violent, and secluded from repentance. The
black swttie visage of the night, and the shadie fancies thereof, assertaines
every guilty soul there is a sinne-hating God.

How can Bellows blow, except there be one that binds and first imprisons
wind in them? How can fire burn if none first kindle it? How can man breathe,
except God puts first the breath of life into him? Who leads the Sun out of
his Chamber, or the Moon forth her clowdy Pauilion but God? Why does not the
Sea swallow up the Earth, (when as it ouer-peeres it, and is greater then it,)
but that there is a God that snaffles and curbes it.

There is a path which no Foul has known, neither Job. 28.
the Kytes eyes seen: the Lion himself has not walked in it, nor the Lions
whelps past thereby. Who then knows it, who is there to trace it? Has the
vast azur'd Canopy nothing above it, whereunto it is perpendicular knit, then
why do not all things wheel and swerve topsie-turuy? Why break not thunder
bolts through the Clouds in stead of thrids of rain? Why are noy Frost and
Snow incessantly in Arms against the Summer?

The excellent compacture of man's body, is an argument of force enough to
confirm the Deity.

O why should I but squintingly glance at these matters, when they are so
admirably expiated by ancient Writers? In the Resolution most notably is this
tractate enlarged. He which peruseth that, and yet is Diagoriz'd, will never be
Christianiz'd. University men that are called Diagoras primus De. (...) ^gans.
to preach at the Cross and the Court, arm your selves against nothing but
Atheism, meddle not so much with Sects and foreign opinions, but let Atheism
be the only string you beat on: for there is no Sect now in England so
scattered as Atheism. In vain do you preach, in vain do you teach, if the
root that nourishes all the branches of security, be not thoroughly digd up from
the bottom. You are not half so well acquainted, as them that live continually
about the Court and City, hom many followers this damnable paradox has: how
many high wits it has bewitched. Where are they* that count a little smattering
in liberal Arts, and the reading over the Bible with a late Comment,
sufficient to make a Father of Divines? What will their Disallowed by Atheists.
disalowed Bible, or late Comments help them, if they have no other reading to
resist Atheists? Atheists if ever they be confuted with their own profane
Authors they must be confuted.

I am at my wits end when I view how coldly, in comparison of other Countrymen,
our Englishmen write. How in their books of confutation, they show no wit or
courage, as well as learning. In all other things Englishmen are the stoutest
of all others, but being Scholars, and living in their own native soil,
their brains are so pesterd with full platters, that they have no room to
bestirre them. Fie, fie, shall we because we have Lead and Tynne Mines in
England, have Lead and Tin Muses? For shame bury not your spirits in
Biefe-pots. Let not the Italians call you dul-headed Tramontani. So many Dunces
in Cambridge and Oxford, are entertained chief members into societies, under
pretense, though they have no great learning, yet there is in them zeal and
Religion, that scarce the least hope is left us, we should have any hereafter
but blocks and Images, to confute blocks and Images. That of Terence is
oraculiz'd, Patres aequum censere nos adolesentulos, ilico a pueris fieri
senes. Our Fathers are now grown to such austerity, as they would have us
strait of children to become old-men. They will allow no time for a gray
bearde to grow in. If at the first peeping out of the shell, a young Student
sets not a grave face on it, or seems not mortifiedly religious, (have he
never so good a wit, be he never so fine a Scholar,) he is cast off and
discouraged. They set not before their eyes, how all were not called at the
first hour of the day, for then had none of us ever been called. That not the
first son that promised his Father to go into the Vineyard went, but he
that refused and said he would not, went. That those blossoms which peep
forth in the beginning of the Spring, are frost-bitten and die, ere they can
come to be fruit. That religion which is soon ripe, is soon rotten.

Too abortiue, reverend Academians, do you make your young plants. Your
preferment (following the outward appearance,) occasioneth a number of young
hypocrites, who else had never known any such sin as dissimulation, and had
been more known to the Commonwealth. It is only ridiculous dull Preachers,
(who leap out of a Library of Catechismes, into the loftiest pulpits) that
have revived this scornful Sect of Atheists. What Kings embassage would be
made account of, if it should be delivered by a meacock and an ignorant? Or if
percase he send variety of Ambassadors, and not two of them agree in one tale,
but be divided amongst themselves, who will harken to them? Such is the
division of Gods Ambassadors here amongst us, so many cow-baby-bawlers, and
heauy-gated lu^berers, into the Ministry are stumbled, under this College, or
that Halls commendation, that a great number had rather hear a iarring
blacke-sant, then one of their balde Sermons.

They boldly will usurp Moses chair, without any study or preparation. They
would have their mouths reverenced as the mouths of the Sybils, who spoke
nothing but was registered; Yet nothing comes from their mouths, but gross
full-stomackt tautologie. They sweat they blunder, they bounce and plunge in
the Pulpit, but all is voice but no substance: they deaf men's ears but not
edify. Scripture peradventure they come off thick and three-folde with, but
it is so ugly daubed, plaistred and patcht on, so peeuishly speckt and applied,
as if a Botcher (with a number of Satin and Velvet shreds should clout and
mend leather doublets and Clothbreeches.

Get you some wit in your great heads, my hottespurd Deuines, discredit
not the Gospel: if you have none damme up the Oven of your utterance, make not
such a big sound with your empty vessels. At least, love men of wit, and
not hate them so as you do, for they have what you want. By loving them, and
accompanying with them you shall both do them good and your selves good; They
of you shall learn sobriety and good life, you of them, shall learn to utter
your learning and speak moouingly.

If you count it profane to arte-enamel your speech to empeirce, and make a
conscience to sweeten your tunes to catch souls, Religion (through you) shall
reap infamy. Men are men, and with those things must be moved, that men wont
to be moved. They must have a little Sugar mixed with their sour Pills of
reproof, the hooks must be pleasantly baited that they bite at. Those that
hang forth their hooks and no bayte, may well enough entangle them in the
weeds, (enwrap themselves in contentions) but never win one soul. Turn
over the ancient Fathers, and mark how sweet and honisome they are in the
mouth, and how musical and melodious in the ear. No Orator was ever more
pleasingly persw^siue,, then humble Saint Augustine. These Athists with whom
you are to encounter, are special men of wit. The Romish Seminaries, have
not allured unto them so many good wits as Athis^. It is the superaboundance
of wit that makes Atheists: will you then hope to beat them down with fus^y
brown-bread dorbellisme? No, no either you must strain your wits an Ela above
theirs, and so entice them to your preachings, and ouer-turne them, or else
with disordered hayleshotte of Scriptures, shall you never scarre them.

Skirmishing with Atheists, you must behave your selves as you were converting
the Gentiles. All antique histories you must have at your fingers-end. No
Philosophers confession or opinion of God: that you are to be ignorant in.
Ethnicks, with their own Ethnic weapons you must assail. Infinite laborinths
of books he must run thorough, that will be a complete Champion in Christ's
Church. Let not sloth-fauoring innovation abuse you. Christ when he said you
must forsake all and follow him, meant not you should forsake all arts and
follow him.

Luke was a Physician and followed him. Physicians are the only vpholders of
humane Arts. Paul was a Pharisie and brought up in all the knowledge of the
Gentiles, and yet he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Though it pleased our
loving crucified Lord, during his residence here upon earth, miraculously to
inspire poor Fishermen, and disgregate his gifts from the ordinary means, yet
since his ascension into heaven, meanlesse miracles are ceased. Certain means
he has assigned us, which he has promised to bless, but without means no
blessing has he warantized.

When the devil would have had him of stones to make bread, he would in no
kind consent: no more will he consent of blocks and stones in these days to
make distributers of the bread of life. What are Asses that will take upon them
to preach without gifts but bread made of stones? Even as God said unto Adam,
He should get or earne his bread with the sweat of his brows, so they that
will have heavenly bread enough to feed themselves and a family (which is a
congregation or flock,) must earne it, and get it, with the sweat of their
brows, with long labor, study, and industry, toil and search after it.

No one Art is there that has not some dependence upon another, or to whose
top or perfection we may climb, without steps or degrees of the other.
Human arts are the steps and degrees Christ has prescribed and assigned
us, to climb up to heaven of Arts by, which is Divinity. He can never climb
to the top of it, which refuses to climb by these steps. No knowledge but
is of God. Unworthy are we of heavenly knowledge, if we keep from her any one
of her hand-maydes. Logique Rhethorique, History, Philosophy, Music, Poetry,
all are the handmaydes of Divinity. She can never be curiously dressed, or
exquisitely accomplished, if any one of these be wanting.

God delights to be magnified in all his Creatures, especially, in all the
excellentest of his creatures. Arts are the excellentest of his creatures, not
one of them Psalm. 148.
but descended from his Throne. What says David? Praise the Lord Sun and
Moon, praise him ye bright stars, praise him heaven of heavens, and waters
that be above the heavens. That is praise the Lord Metaphusicall Philosophy,
which art conversant in all these matters: Into the majesty and glory of the
Sun and Moon, thou see, the bright Stars predominance and moving, thou
know the heaven of heavens, and waters that be above the heavens (in part
though not at large) thou comprehendest: therefore praise him in all these.
Take occasion (preachers in your sermons) from the wonders and secrets these to
include, to extol his magnificent name, and by human arts abstracts to
glorify him. Praise ye the Lord (thus David proceeds) ye Dragons and all
deepes, Fire, Hayle, Snow and vapors, stormy winds and tempests execute his
word. Mountains and hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars, Beasts and
Cattle: creeping things and fethered fowls, Princes and Judges of the world,
young men and Maidens, old men and Children, praise ye the name of the Lord.

So that it is lawful to execute his word, that is in preaching of his word by
similitudes and comparisons, drawn from the nature and property of all these,
to laud and amplify the eternity of his name. Christ he drew comparisons from
the hayres of a man's head, from Vineyardes, from Fig Trees, from Sparrowes,
from Lillies and a hundred such like. We (in this age) count him a Heathen
Divine, that alleges any illustration out of human Authors, and makes not
all his sermons concloutments of scripture.

Scripture we hotch-potch together, and do not place like pearl and Gold-lace
on a garment, here and there to adorn, but pile it, and dung it up on heaps,
without use or edification. We care not how we mispeake it so we have it to
speak. Out it flies East and West; though we loose it all it is nothing, for
more have we of it, then we can well tell what to do withal. Violent are the
most of our pack-horse Pulpit-men in vomiting, their duncery. Their prechings
seem rather pestilentiall frenzies then any thing else. They writhe Texts like
wax, and where they envy, Scripture is their Champion to scold, and though a
whole month together so they should scold they would not want alegations to
cast in one another teeth. Non fuit sic a principio, I wis it was not so in
the Primitive Church but in our Church every man will be a primate, every man
will be Lord and King over the flock that he feeds, or else he will famish
it: This is erring from my scope of the true use of scripture I am to talk.

Scripture if it be used otherwise then as the last seal to confirm any
thing, if it be triuially, or without necessity, called unto witness, it is a
flat taking of the name of God in vain. The phrase of Sermons as it ought to
agree with the scripture, so heed must be taken that their whole Sermons seem
not a banquet of broken fragments of scripture: that it be not vsd but as the
corner stone to close up any building; That they gather fruit and not leaves,
proofs and not phrases only out of the Bible. As in battle we use the
weapons and Engines of al Nations so embattelling our selves against sin, we
must use the weapons and arts of al Nations. Scripture must be reserud as the
last volley of the victory. It is the great Ordnance which must play upon our
enemies, in the end and chief hazard of the fight. If we refuse with
Demosthenes to reserve alour weighy arguments til the latter end, like the
Frenchmen, we shall fight valiantly at the first, but quail in the midst.

Scripture is the chief power of GOD to salvation. Generals in a pitched field,
will not thrust forth their chief power first. By little, and little, they
will train, their enemy out of order with light onsets. He that will ascend,
must from the low valleys creep up. higher and higher; with one caper or
iumpe, is not the Mountain of Theology to be sealed. This is it I contend,
that Stars have their thrones of illumination allotted them in the Firmament,
as well as the Sun and Moon: that humane writers have their use of reproving
vices, as well as the Scriptures. It is an easy matter to praise God, in that
wherein he has placed the especial state-house of his praises. He which out
of the barrainest, and barest parts of his Lords dominion, shall accumulate and
leuy to his Treasury, a greater tribute then he has out of his richest
Provinces, shall he not (of all other) do him the most remunerablest service?
Malicious and maleuolent are they, that will exclude any one Art, or Athenian
or Roman Author, any one creeping worm or contemptible creature, from bearing
witness of God.

Paul alleged diverse verses out of Heathen Poets, as out of Epemenides,
Aratus, Menander, Theocritus: nay, what place is it in the Scripture, where the
holy Ghost does not stoop himself to our capacities, by humane Metaphors and
similitudes. Our Atheist we have in hand, with nothing but humane reasons will
be rebutted. Vaunt you ye speak from the holy Ghost never so, if you speak
not in compass of his five senses, he will despise you, and floute you. He
hearing every one (that in the Pulpit talks affectedly, coldly, crabbedly or
absurdly,) say, He talks from the mouth of God, makes both am obloquy of Gods
mouth and the Ministry. But ill shall his scoffs prosper with him; When he
thinks he has won the greatest prize to his wit, in putting down God, God in
judgment shall arise and reprove him. At the day of death, and at the day of
judgment, he shall reprove him, sight-killingly with his clusterd brows, and
clowde-begetting srownes, he shall teach him, both that he is, and what he is.

Reverend Ecclesiastical Fathers, and other specialltitled Church substitutes,
you it concerns, your kingdom (by these Atheists) is called in question, in
calling Gods kingdom in question. Prosecute with all your authority, these
Prophirtan deriders. Imitate the Athenians, who committed Anaxagoras to prison,
and but for Pericles, had put him to death, for writing but a book of the
Moons eclipses, after by them she was received for a Goddess. If they so far
pursued the disgrace of a feigned Goddess, be you twice as zealous, in
revenging the disparagement of the true and everliving God.

Proclaim disputations, threaten punishments, be vehement in your Sermons:
whatsoever you write or speak, intend it against Atheism. Atheism has
oouer-spread us, our ouer-throw, your ouer-throw it will be, except (in time)
you prevent it. Fall England, farewell peace, woe-worth our Weal and
tranquillity, if Religion bids us farewell. Our house shall be left desolate
unto us, for Christ of us is left desolate and forsaken.

The fourth son of Pride, is Discontent, which whomsoever it thoroughly
enhabiteth, it carries clean away to extremes. If it light on a poor man
that has no means to prosecute it, it cutteth him off presently. If on a man
of puissance, (be he not more then motherwitted circumspect,) to him and his
family it is no less fatal. Generally it is grounded on pride, as when a man
takes unto him a mind above his birth or fortune, and is not able to go
through with it. When he has resolved to prize him self thus great, and so
great, and some man (as proud as himself) comes and vnder-bids him, and
out-braues him. And thirdly when on just demerrits hec has builded but mean
hopes, and those not only die in the dust, but his iustdemerits, indignly, draw
unto him unjust hatred. For such is great men's manner, any one that is
troublesome to them, or that they were indebted to, and cannot well recompense,
they come to hate deadly.

There is a discontent proceeding from a natural melancholy humor, or caused
by surfeit or misdiet. Some by ouer-studdying come to be discontent and dogged.
I have known many, whom shrewd or light huswiues to their wives, unthrift
obstinate children, suits in Law ouerruled by letters from above, have caused
to languish and droope away in discontent. The fruits of discontent are
bannings, cursings, secret murmurrings, outrage, murder, injustice, all which
are high treasonous trespasses against God.

The devil is the father of Discontent, One of the greatest miseries of the
damned, shall be discontent. No thing so much provoke God to judgment as
discontent. He destroyed the children of Israel whiles the meat was in their
mouths, in the Wilderness, for murmurring or being discontent: their discontent
was said to afflict him. Many a time and often have they afflicted me even from
my youth up, says David, in Gods person, speaking of their repining at the
waters of strife. Therefore whosoever is discontent with any cross or calamity
the Lord lays upon him aflicteth God, and must look for speedy confusion.
Nothing in this life reuengeth he so much as it. Hence it is so many stabbe,
hang, and drown themselves, and thereby endaunger their own souls beyond
mercy. It is the grieuousest sentence God can pronounce against man, as to be
his own Executioner: whereby it appears, that Discontent is the grieuousest
sin that man can commit.

When did you ever hear of any but the discontented man, that offered violence
to himself? What is the sin against the holy Ghost, (which Augustine
concludes to be nothing, but Desperatio morientis, to give up a man's soul in
despair,) but a special branch of discontent. Wherefote did our Saniour
thunder forth such a terrible woe against the causers of offense, or
discontent, but that it was the most heinous scourge-procuring transgression of
all others?

Jonas the Lords anointed Prophet, for he was discontent, and grudged when he
should have been sent unto Niniui, had a torment like hell (for the time)
inflicted upon him. In the Whales belly, full of horror, despair, stinch and
darkness, three days and three nights he was shut. Hardly can God abstain from
throwing any man down into Hell, that is vpbraidingly discontent. As the merry
man (of all other,) best thriueth in that he goes about, so the discontented
man (of all other,) is most fore-spoken, and unlucky in his enterprises. Few
discontented men shall you observe, that give up the ghost in their beds.

There is a Discontent contrary to Pride, which is most pleasing to God: which
is, when a man grieves, and is disco^tent, because he cannot choose but sin and
rebel against God. Also when he is wearied, and discontent with the vanities of
the world. So was the Preacher, when he cried, Vanity of vanities, and all
thing is vanity.

There is a tolerable Discontent likewise, which David and Job had, when they
complained that the Tabernacles of Robbers did prosper, and they were in safety
that prouokt God. But so little of this true discontent is there in London,
that (almost) there is no content in it, but in robbing and provoking God. Sin
is no sin, (says an ancient Father,) except it be voluntary, and we take a
content in committing it. Who is there that oppresses, commits adultery, is
prodigal, swears or forsweareth, but takes a content in committing it?
There we place content, where we should take up discontent, and there are we
discontent, were we should repose our whole gladness and felicity. We are
discontent, if we hear our sins ripped up sharply. We are discontent, if we
be detained in the service of God, but half an hour extraordinary. We are
discontent, if we be constrained to give to the poor. Every man here in
London, is discontent with the state wherein he lives. Every one seeks to
undermine another. No two of one trade, but as they are of one trade, envy one
another. Not two conioined in one office, but overthwart and emulate one
another, and one of them undoes what the other has done.

The Court is the true kingdom of discontent. There Pride reigning most,
Discontent cannot choose but be a hanger on. No conspiracy, or war (civil or
outward) but first springs from discontent. What makes a number of our wanton
wives in London, conspire the deaths of their old doting husbands, but the
discontent of a death-cold bed? Discontent makes Heretics. Discontent is the
cause of all the Traitors beyond Sea. Discontent, caused Ierusalems house to be
left desolate unto her. Discontent (O London,) will be thy destitution, if thou
take not the better heed.

The fifth Son of Pride, is Contention, which being the youngest son he
has, is harder to be yoked or kept in, then any of the other four. It is ever
in Arms, never out of brabblements. Look what Ambition, Vainglory, Atheism,
Discontent, shall consult or devise, it enacteth, and goes through with. It is
the Lawyers living, the Heretics food, the Swizers house and Land. No Crown
but he challenges a share in. No Church but he will be of. On words,
amphibologies, equivocations, quiddities and quantities, he stands. He hunteth
not after truth, but strife. He coueteth not so much to overcome, as contend.

These two little words, Ex and Per, (as Cornelius Agrippa has observed,) held
the Greek and Latin Churches play, many years together; they litigiously
debating, whether the holy Ghost proceeded of the Father and the Son, or not
of the Son, but of the Father by the Son. So this word Nisi in this sentence,
Nisi manducaueritis carnem, set all the Counsel of Basil in an uproar. This
word Donec, as, Joseph non agnouit vxorem suam donec, Joseph knew not his wife
until, caused the Antidicomariatans, and Eludians, to deny the perpetual
virginity of the Virgin Mary. With a thousand such errors, Contention raises
his Kingdom.

Our Divines in these days, (though they yet retain many contentions of the
old Churches,) have found out certain new ones of their own. They contend
about standing and sitting, about forms and substances, about prescription and
confusion of prayers. They argue, An ater sit contrarius albo, whether it be
better to wear a white Surplesse, or a black gown, in ministering the
Sacraments? Which is like the conflict in Rome, betwixt the Augustine Friars
and the vulgar Chanons, whether Augustine did wear a black Weed upon a white
Coat, or a white Weed upon a black Coat. Like the Geometritians, they square
about points and lines, and the utter show of things. As, this point is
too-long, this point is too-short, this figure is too-much affected, this line
runs not smooth, this syllogism limpeth. As Preachers, they labor not to
speak properly, but intricately. In stead of Bread, they give the children of
their Ministry, stones to throw at one another: and in stead of Fish, Serpents
to sting one another. In the 13. of Matthew, the Sower that went forth to sow,
scattered some seed by the highway side, which the Fowls of the air peckt
up: not unlike to them, whose Hawks and Field-sports, peck up all the seeds of
Christianity that should be sown in their hearts; and a million of others,
whose eyes the Fowls of the valley pecke out, before the seed of salvation
can have any rooting in their souls.

Other seed the Sower scattered amongst stones, and the Sunn e arising, it
withered for want of earth, resembling these stony streets of London, where
nothing will spring up but oppression, avarice, and infidelity. Other seed he
dispersed amongst thorns, and the thorns crept aloft and choked it. To those
thorns I compare these thorny Contentioners, that choke the Word of God, with
foolish controversies, and frivolous questions. Even as the spirit led our
Savior aside into the Wilderness to be tempted, so are there wicked spirits
of Contention amongst us, that lead men aside into the woods and solitary
places, to be tempted. Let any (be he the veriest block-head under heaven,)
raise up a faction, and he shall be followed and supported. Englishmen are all
for innovation, they are clean spoiled if once in twenty years, they have not
a new fashion of religion. Sometimes Vitia sunt ad virtutem occasio, Contention
is the occasion of seeking out the truth: but our Contentions (for the most
part) are the seeking to prove truth, no truth, after she is once found out:
and preferring probability before manifest verity. We will not try her by her
Peers, (which are the best expositors,) and ancient Fathers, but by the
literal Law, either not expounded, or new expounded, without any Quest of
Church, decretals or Cannons.

Were it not that in reproving Contention, I might hapely seem contentious, I
would wade a little farther in this subject. Yet it were to no end, since fire
the more it is stirred up, the more it burns: and heresy, the more it is
stird and strove with, the more untoward it is. Naught but sharp discipline is
a fit disputant with snarling Scismatiques. The Israelites, for they rooted not
out the remnant of the Gen^ile Nations from amongst them, they were as goades
in their sides, and thorns in their nostrils: so if we root not out these
remnants of Scismatiques from amongst us, they will be as goades in our sides,
and thorns in our nostrils. Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vt pereat vnitas:
It is better that some few perish, then unity perish.

London, beware of Contention, thou art counted the nursing-mother of
Contention. No Sect or Schism but thou affordest Disciples to. If thou be
too greedy of innovation and contention, the sword of invasion and civil
debate, shall leave thy house desolate unto thee.

Now come I to the Daughters of Pride, whereof Disdain is the eldest.

Disdain is a vice, in comparison of which, Ambition is a virtue. It is the
extreme of Ambition. It is a kind of scorn, that scorneth to be compared to
any other thing. None are more subject unto it then fair women, for they
disdain any one should be held as fair as they. They disdain any should go
before them, or sit above them. They disdain any should be brauer then they,
or have more absolute pens entertained in their praises then they. This woman
disdains any but she, should carry the credit of wit: another, that any should
sing so sweet as she; a third, that any should set forth the port and majesty,
in gate and behavior like unto her. Only for disdain and pre-eminence, their
Husbands and their Loves, they draw sundry times into neuer-dated quarrels.

Such disdain and scorn was betwixt the wives of Jacob, Rachel and Leah,
because the one had children, and the other none. Such disdain was betwixt
Sarah and Hagar. There was a disdain of shouldring amongst the Disciples, who
should be greatest. Joseph's Brethren, disdained their Father should love him
better then he did them. Dives disdained Lazarus. In London, the rich disdain
the poor. The Courtier the Citizen. The Citizen the Countriman. One Occupation
disdaineth another. The Merchant the Retayler. The Retayler the Craftsman. The
better sort of Craftsmen the baser. The Shoemaker the Cobbler. The Cobbler the
Carman. One nyce Dame, disdaines her next neighbor should have that furniture
to her house, or dainty dish or devise, which she wants. She will not go to
Church, because she disdains to mix her self with base company, and cannot
have her close Pue by her self. She disdaines to wear that every one wears,
to hear that Preacher which every one hears. So did Jerusalem disdain Gods
Prophets, because they came in the likeness of poor men. She disdained Amos,
because he was a keeper of Amos. 1.
Oxen, as also the rest, for they were of the dregs of the people; But their
disdain prosperd not with them, their house for their disdain, was left
desolate unto them.

London, thy house (except thou repents) for thy disdain, shall be left
desolate unto thee.

The second Daughter of Pride, is Gorgeous attire. Both the Sons and
Daughters of Pride, delight to go gorgeously. As Democritus set up his brazen
shield against the Sun, to the intent that (continually gazing on it,) he
might with the bright reflection of his beamy radiation, fear out his eyes,
and see no more vanities, so set they their rich embroidered suits against the
Sun, to dazzle, daunt and spoil poor men's eyes that look upon them. Like
Idols, not men, they apparel themselves. Blocks and stones by the Panims and
Infidels, are ouer-gilded, to be honored and worshipped: so ouer-gilde they
themselves, to be more honored and worshipped.

The women would seem Angels here upon earth, for which (it is to be feared)
they will scarce live with the Angels in heaven. The end of Gorgeous attire,
(both in men and women,) is but more fully to enkindle fleshly concupiscence,
to assist the devil in lustful temptations. Men think that women (seeing them
so sumptuously pearled and bespangled,) cannot choose but offer to tender their
tender souls at their feet. The women, they think, that (having naturally
clear beauty, scorchingly blazing, which enkindles any soul that comes near
it, and adding more Bauines unto it of lascivious embolstrings,) men should
even flash their hearts, (at first sight,) into the purified flames of their
fair faces.

Ever since Euah was tempted, and the Serpent prevailed with her, women have
took upon them, both the person of the tempted, and the tempter. They tempt to
be tempted, and not one of them, except she be tempted, but thinks her self
contemptible. Unto the greatness of their great Grandmother Euah, they seek
to aspire, in being tempted and tempting. If not to tempt, and be thought
worthy to be tempted, why die they and diet they their face with so many drugs
as they do, as it were to correct Gods work-manship, and reprove him as a
bungler, and one that is not his crafts Master? Why ensparkle they their eyes
with spiritualized distillations? Why tip they their tongues with Aurum
potabile? Why fill they up ages frets with fresh colors? Even as Roses and
flowers in Winter, are preserved in close houses under earth, so preserve they
their beauties, by continual lying in bed.

Just to Dinner they will arise, and after Dinner, go to bed again, and lie
until Supper. Yea, sometimes (by no sickness occasioned) they will ly in bed
three days together: provided every morning before four a clock, they have
their broths, and their cullises, with Pearl and Gold sodden in them. If
hapely they break their hours, and rise more early to go a banqueting they
stand practicing half a day with their Looking-glasses, how to pierce and to
glaunce, and look alluringly amiable. Their feet are not so well framed to
the Measures, as are their eyes to move and bewitch. Even as Angels are painted
in Church-windowes, with glorious golden fronts, besette with Sunne-beames, so
beset they their foreheads on either side, with glorious borrowed gleamy
bushes; which rightly interpreted, should signify beauty to sell, since a bush
is not else hanged forth, but to inuit men to buy. And in Italy, when they
set any Beast to sale, they crown his head with Garlands, and be-deck it
with gaudy blossoms, as full as ever it may stick.

Their heads, with their top and top gallant Lawnebaby caps, and Snow-resembled
silver curlings, they make a plain Puppet stage of. Their breasts they embuske
up on hie, and their round Roseate buds immodestly lay forth, to show at their
hands there is fruit to be hoped. In their curious Antick-wouen garments, they
imitate and mock, the Worms and Adders that must eat them. They show the
swellings of their mind, in the swellings and plumpings out of their
apparrayle. Gorgeous Ladies of Court, never was I admitted so nere any of you,
as to see how you torture poor old Time with spunging, pynning and pounsing:
but they say his sicle you have burst in twain, to make your Periwigs more
elevated arches of.

I dare not meddle with ye, since the Philosopher that too intentiuely gazed
on the stars, stumbled and fell into a ditch: and many gazing too immoderatly
on our earthly stars, fall in the end into the ditch of al uncleanness. Only
this humble caveat let me give you by the way, that thou look the devil come
not to you, in the likeness of a Tailor or Painter; that how ever you disguise
your bodies, you lay not on your colors so thick, that they sink into your
souls. That your skins being too white without, your souls be not al black
within.

It is not your pinches, your purles, your floury iaggings, superfluous
enterlacings, and puffings up, that can any way offend God, but the puffing up
of your souls, which therein you express. For as the biting of a bullet, is
not that which poisons the bullet, but the lying of the Gunpowder in the dint
of the biting: so it is not the wearing of costly burnisht apparel, that shall
be objected unto you for sin, but the pride of your hearts, which (like the
Moath) lies closely shrouded amongst the thirds of that apparel. Nothing else
is garish apparel, but Prides ulcer broken forth. How will you attire your
selves, what gown, what head-tire will you put on, when you shall live in Hell
amongst Haggs and devils?

As many iagges, blisters and scarres, shall Toades, Cankers and Serpents, make
on your pure skins in the grave, as now you have cuts, iagges or raysings,
upon your garments. In the marrow of your bones snakes shall breed. Your
morne-like crystal countenances, shall be netted over, and (Masker-like)
cawle-visarded, with crawling venomous worms. Your orient teeth, Toades shall
steal into their heads for pearl; Of the ielly of your decayed eyes, shall
they engender them young. In their hollow Caves, (their transplendent juice so
pollutionately employed,) shelly Snailes shall keep house.

O what is beauty more then a wind-blowne bladder, that it should forget
whereto it is borne. It is the food of cloying-concupiscence living, and the
substance of the most noisome infection being dead. The Mothers of the iustest
men are not freed from corruption, the Mothers of Kings and Emperors are not
freed from corruption. No gorgeous attire (man or woman) have thou in this
world, but the wedding garment of faith. Thy winding-sheete shall see thee in
none of thy silks or shining robes; To show they are not of God, when thou
go to God, thou shall lay them al of. Then shall thou restore to every
creature, what thou have robbed him of. All the Leases which dust let out to
life, at the day of death shall be returned again into his hands. In skins of
beasts Adam and Eve were clothed, in naught but thine own skin, at the day
of judgment shall thou be clothed. If thou be more deformed, then the age
wherein thou diedst should make thee, the devil shall stand up and certify, that
with painting and physicking thy visage, thou so deformedst it; Whereto God
shall reply, What have I to do with thee, thou painted sepulcher? Thou have so
differenced and divorced thy self from thy creation, that I know not thee for
my creature.

The print of my finger thou have defaced, and with Arts-vanishing varnishme^t,
made thy self a changeling from the form I first cast thee in; Satan take her
to thee, with black boiling Pitch, rough cast over her counterfeit red and
white: and whereas she was wont, in Asses milk to bathe her, to engraine her
skin more gentle, plyant, delicate and supple, in bubling scalding Lead, and
fatty flame-feeding Brimstone, see thou incessantly bathe her. With glowing hot
yrons, sindge and suck up that adulterized sinful beauty, wherewith she has
branded her self to infelicity.

O female pride, this is but the dalliance of thy doom but the intermissiue
recreation of thy torments. Th greatness of thy pains I want portentous words
t^ portray. Wherein soever thou have took extreme de light and glory, therein
shall thou be plagued with extreme and despiteous malady. For thy flaring
frounzed Periwigs, low dangled down with love locks, shall thou have thy
head side, dangled down with more Snakes then ever it had hayres. In the
moulde of thy brain, shall they claspe their mouths, and gnawing through
every part of thy scull, ensnarle their teeth amongst thy brains, as an Angler
ensnarleth his hook amongst weeds.

For thy rich borders, shall thou have a number of discolored Scorpions rould
up together, and Cockatrices that kill with their very sight, shall
continually stand spirting fiery poison in thine eyes. In the hollow Cave of
thy mouth, Basiliskes shall keep house, and supply thy talk with hissing when
thou striuest to speak. At thy breasts (as at Cleopatras) Aspisses shall be put
out to nurse. For thy Carcanets of pearl, shall thou have Carcanets of
Spiders, or the green venomous flies Cantharides. Hels torments were no
torments, if invention might conceit them. As no eye has seen, no ear has
heard, no tongue can express, no thought comprehend, the ioies prepared for
the Elect, so no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no thought can comprehend,
the pains prepared for the rejected.

Women, as the pains of the devils shall be doubled, that go about hourly
tempting, and seeking whom they may denoure, so except you soon lay hold on
g^ce, your pains in hell (above men's) shall be doubled, for millions have you
tempted, milions of men (both in soul and substance) have you devoured. To
you, half your husbands damnation (as to Euah) will be imputed. Pride is your
natural sin, that woman you account as common, which is not coy and proud.
Woman-head, you deem nothing else, but a disdainefull maiesticall carriage.
Being but a ribbe of man, you will think to overrule him you ought to be
subject too. Watch over your paths, look to your ways, least the Serpent
(long since) having ouer-maistred one of you, ouer-maister all of you, one
after another. Banish Pride from your Bours, and the lineall discents of your
other sins are cut off, you will seem Saints and not women. But for you, men
would nere be so proud, nere care to go so gorgeously. Nere fetch so many
newfangles from other Countries, you have corrupted them, you have tempted
them, half of your pride you have divided with them. No Nation has any
excess, but they have made it theirs. Certain glasses there are, wherein a
man sees the image of another, and not his own: those glasses are their eyes,
for in them they see the image of other Countries. and not their own. Other
Countries fashions they see, but never look back to the attire of their
forefathers, or consider what shape their own Country should give them.

Themistocles put all his felicity, in being descended from a noble lineage.
Simonides, to be well-beloued of his people or Citizens. Antif^ines, in
renown after his death. Englishmen put all their felicity in going pompously
and garishly: they care not how they impouerish their substance, to seem rich
to the outward appearance. What wise man is there, that makes the cas^ or cover
of any thing, ritcher then the thing it self which it contains or covers?
Our garments, (which are cases and couers for our bodies,) we compact of Pearl
and gold, our bodies themselves are naught but clay and putrefaction.

If (as the case or cover of any thing, keeps it from dust or from soyling,) so
our costly skinne-cases, could keep us from consuming to dust, or being
sin-soiled, it were somewhat: but they (contrariwise) resolve into dust, they
are no Armours against old age, but such as are harmed by old age. They wear
away with continuance, even as Time does wear and fore-walke us; Our souls
they keep not from sin-soyling, but are the only instruments, so to soil and
sin-eclipse them. They are a second flesh-asisting prison, and further
corrupting weight of corruption, cast on our souls, to keep them from soaring
to heaven.

Deck our selves how we will, in all our royalty, we cannot equalize one of
the Lillies of the field, as they wither, so shall we wanze and decay, and our
place no more be found. Though our span-long youthly prime, blossoms forth
eye-banqueting flowers, though our delicious gleaming features, make us seem
the Sons and Daughters of the Graces, though we glister it never so in our
worme-spunne robes, and gold-florisht garments, yet in the grave shall we rot:
from our redolentest refined compositions, air pestilenzing stinkes, and
breath-choking poysnous vapors shall issue.

England, the Players stage of gorgeous attire, the Ape of all Nations
superfluities, the continual Masquer in outlandish habilements, great plenty
scanting calamities, art thou to await for wanton disguising thy self against
kind, and digressing from the plainness of thine Auncesters. Scandalous and
shameful is it, that not any in thee, (Fishermen and Husbandmen set aside) but
live above their ability and birth; that the outward habit, (which in other
Countries is the only distinction of honor) should yield in thee no
difference of persons: that all ancient Nobility, (almost,) with this
gorgeous prodigality, should be devoured and eaten up, and up starts inhabit
their stately Palaces, who from far have fetched inthis variety of pride to
entrap and to spoil them. Those of thy people, that in all other things are
miserable, in their apparel will be prodigal. No Land can so infallibly
experience this Proverb, The hoode makes not the Monk, as thou: for Tailors,
Seruing-men, Make-shifts and Gentlemen, in thee are confounded. For the
compasment of bravery, we have them will rob, steal, cosen, cheat, betray
their own Fathers, swear and forswear, or do any thing. Take away bravery,
you kill the heart of lust and incontinencie. Wherefore do men make themselves
brave, but to riot and to revel? Look after what state their apparel is,
that state they take to them and carry, and after a little accustoming to that
carriage, persuade themselves they are such indeed.

Apparel, more then any thing, bewrays his wearers mind. All sorts covet in
it to exceed. Old age I exclude, for that couets naught but gold couetise. None
(in a manner) forecast for their souls, they suffer them to go naked, with no
good deeds will they cloth them. They let them freeze to death for want of the
garment offaith: they famish and starve them, in not supplying them with
ghostly cherishment. O soul, of all humane parts the most diuinest and
soueraignest, of all the rest art thou the most despicable and wretched? Not any
part of the body but thou consultest and carest for. To every part is thy care
more available then thy self. Impart but the tenths of it on thy self, be not
more curious of a wimple or spot in thy vesture, then thou art of spotting and
thorow-stayning thy deere-bought Spirit, with ten thousand abominations.
Whiles the good Angel of mercy, stirs about the blood-springing Poole of
expiation, haste thou to bathe in it. Thou can not bathe in it effectually,
unless thou strip thy self clean out of the attire of sin. All gorgeous
attire, is the attire of sin.

The frail flesh wherein thou art invested, is nothing but a sin-battred
Armor, with many strokes of temptations assaulted and bruised, to break into
thee and surprise thee. Watch and pray, that thou be not supprised. In vain is
thy prayer against sin, except thou watchest also to prevent sin. We here in
London, what for dressing our selves, following our worldly affairs, dining,
supping and keeping company, have no leisure, not only not to watch against
sin, but not so much as once to think of sin. In bed, wives must
question their husbands about housekeeping, and providing for their children
and famile. No service must God expect of us, but a little in Lent, and in
sickness and adversity. Our gorgeous attire, we make not to serve him, but to
serve the flesh. If he were pleased with it, why did they ever in the old Law,
(when they presented themselves before him, in fasting and prayer,) rentit off
their backs, and put on course Sackcloth and ashes? No lifting up a man's self
that God likes, but the lifting up of the Spirit in prayer.

One thing it is for a man to lift up himself to God, another thing to lift up
himself against God. In pranking up our carcases too proudly, we lift up our
flesh against God. In lifting up our flesh, we depresse our spirits. London,
lay off thy gorgeous attire, and cast down thy self before God in contrition
and prayer, least he cast thee down in his indignation into hellfire.

Grievously have thou offended, and transgressed against his divine majesty, in
turning that to pride, which was allotted thee for a punishment. His
workmanship thou have scorned, and counted imperfect without thine own
additions put to it. Thou have contended, to be a more beautiful Creator and
repolisher of thy self, then he. His own workmanship thou have made him out
of love with,, by altering and deforming it at thy pleasure. There is no
workman, that regards or esteems his own workmanship, after it is
translated and transposed by others. Except thou quickly vndoest and
with-drawest all thy ouer-working, he will (in wreakfull recompense that thou
have so disgraced him,) alter thee, deforme thee, translate thee, transpose
thee, and leave thy house desolate unto thee.

The last Daughter of Pride, is Delicacy, under which is contained, Gluttony,
Luxury, Sloth, and Security. But properly, Delicacy is the sin of our London
Dames. So delicate are they in their diet, so dainty and puling fine in their
speech, so tiptoe-nice in treading on the earth, as though they walked upon
Snakes, and feared to tread hard, least they should turn again. Their
houses, so pickedly and neately must be trickt up and tapistred, as if (like
Abraham or Lot,) they were to receive Angels. The floare under foot,
glisteringly rubbed and glased, that a Jew (if he should behold it,) would
suspect it for Holy ground.

Nothing about them, but is wealth-boastingly, and elaborately beautified:
only their souls they keep poor and beggarly. Job scrapt his sores with a
potshard, if they have any sore, or noisome malady about them, they will
ouer-gilde it, and make it seem more amiable then any other part of the body.
Their habitations they make so resplendent and pleasurable on earth, that they
have no mind to go to heaven. Into heavens pleasures they cannot see, for
their eyes are dazzled with terrestiall delights. Those that will have their
hearts thoroughly enflamed, with the ioies of the world to come, must place no joy
in this world, nor frame to themselves any object that may too much content.
They must have something evermore to amate and check their felicity, and with
Macedon Philip, to remember them of mortality.

Delicacy is naught but the art of security, and forgetting mortality. It is a
kind of Alchimical quintessensing a heaven out of earth. It is the exchanging
of an eternal heaven, for a short momentary, imperfect heaven. Blessed are
they, that by pining and excruciating their bodies, live in hell here on earth,
to avoid the hell never ending. Many of the Saints and Martyrs of the Primitive
Church, when they might have spent their days in all affluence and delicacy,
and lived out of gunshot of misery, have notwithstanding, took unto them the
contemptiblest poverty that might be.

They have abandoned all their goods and possessions, and in the Wilderness
conuersed with penury and scarcity, to beat down and keep under their
rebellious flesh. Some of them have drunk puddle water, and fed on the
lothsomest things that might be, to bring their affection out of love with this
transitory infelicity: Some of them have grated and rawed their smooth tender
skins, with hair shirts and rough garments, that they might live in
incessant smart, and take no ease or rest in this life, where no rest or ease
is to be taken up but only a watch-mans lodge, to soiourne in for a night: or
such a house as the Moath builds in a garment.

Others all naked, on sharp shreds of broken flint, and fragments of of
potsheards, have spread their weary limbs, that lust in their sleep might not
assail them. Holy S. Jerome, in the Desert thou builts thee a Cell, to live
out of the haunts of concupiscence, where parched and broiled in Summer, with
the raging beams of the Sun, and quiuering and quaking in Winter, all riueld
and weather-beaten, with the sharp driving shours, and freezing Northern-winde,
thou drunkest no kind of liquor, but the Ice-chilled water from the cold
Fountain, nor eats any meat but tough dried roots. On the bare ground thou
lodgedst, and with abstinence and want of sleep, lookedst pale and wan. This
did thou to mortify thy insurrectiue mass of corruption. This did thou to
teach mortification and sobriety, to these licentious times of ours.

No course do we take to mortify the Law of our members: all mortification,
we censure by the name of superstition, our fasts are no fasts, but
preparatiues to Evening feasts: our mourning is like the mourning of an Heir,
who then laughes inward, when he weeps most outward. It is not prayer alone
may kill the old man in us, either it must be sanctified and assisted with
fasting and abstinence, or it cannot cast out a spirit of such might. It is
heavenly policy as well as humane policy, to weaken our enemy before we fight
with him. We must weaken our enemy and Gods enemy, the flesh, with abstinence
and fasting, before we fight with him, or else he will be too strong for us.

Physicians minister Purgations before they apply any Medicine. Surgions lay
Corsiues to any wound, to eat out the dead-flesh ere they can cure it.
Abstinence and fasting, are as Corasiues to eat out the dead-flesh of
gluttony, drunkenness, and concupiscence in our loins, which so proiected and
eaten out, Christ is that kind Samaritan that will come and bind up our wounds,
and carry us home with him, to his house or Kingdom everlasting. Thus much of
Delecacy in general, now more particularly of his first branch, Gluttony:
which if any Country under heaven be culpable of England is.

All our friendship and courtesy, is nothing but gluttony. Great men show their
state and magnificence in nothing so much as gluttony. The birth day of our
Savior, his Resurrection and Ascension, we honor only with gluttony. How
many Cooks, Apothecaries, Confectioners; and Vintners in London, grow pursie
by gluttony? Under Gluttony, I shrowde not only excess in meat, but in
drink also. Our full platters and our plentiful cups, unapt us to any exercise
of Christianity or prayer. We do nothing but fatten our souls to Hellfire.
Our bodies we bumbast and balist with engorging diseases. Diseases shorten our
days, therefore whosoever englutteth himself, is guilty of his own death and
damnation.

Qui diligit epulas (says Solomon) in egestate erit. Prou. 21 Ierom. ad
Eustoch.
He that loves dainty fare, shall feel scarcity. Venture maero aestuans
dispumat libidinem. The belly abounding with wine and good cheer, vomiteth
forth lust. Gluttony were no sin, or not so heinous as it is, did it not
pluck on a number of other heinous sins with it: or that we so engorging our
selves, infinite of our poor brethren, hungerd and starved not in the streets,
for want of the least dish on our Tables. Very largely have I inueighed against
this vice elsewhere, wherefore here I will trusse it up more succinct; Text
upon Text I could heap, to show the inconvenience of it. In London I could
exemplify it by many note-worthy specialties, but in so doing, I should but lay
down what every one knows, and purchase no thank for my labor.

To my iourneys end I haste, and descend to the second continent of Delicacy,
which is Lust, or Luxury. In complaining of it, I am afraid I shall defile good
words, and too-long detain my Readers. It is a sin that now serves in London,
in stead of an after-noones recreation It is a trade, that heretofore thriued
in huggermugger, but of late days, walks openly by daylight, like a
substantial grave Merchant. Of his name or profession, he is not ashamed: at
the first being asked of it, he will confess it. Into the heart of the City is
uncleanness crept. Great Patrons it has got: almost none are punished for it
that have a good purse. Every Queen vants her self of some or other man of
Nobility.

London what are thy Suburbs but licensed Stews. Can it be so many
brothel-houses, of salary sensuality, and six-penny whoredom, (the next door
to the Magistrates) should be set up and maintained, if bribes did not bestirre
them? I accuse none, but certainly justice some-where is corrupted. Whole
Hospitals of ten times a day dishonested strumpets, have we cloistred
together. Night and day the entrance unto them, is as free as to a Tavern. Not
one of them but has a hundred retayners. Prentises and poor servants, they
encourage to rob their Masters. Gentlemen's purses and pockets, they will diue
into and pick, even whiles they are dallying with them.

No Smithfield ruffianly Swashbuckler, will come off with such harsh hell-raking
oaths as they. Every one of them is a Gentlewoman, and either the wife of two
husbands, or a bedde-wedded Bride before she was ten years old. The
speech-shunning sores, and sightircking botches of their unsatiate
intemperance, they will vnblushingly lay forth, and iestingly brag of, where
ever they haunt. To Church they never repair. Not in all their whole life
would they hear of God, if it were not for their huge swearing and forswearing
by him.

I am half of belief it is not a reasonable soul, which effects motion and
speech in them, but a soul imitating the devil, who (the more to despite God,)
goes and enliueth such licentious shapes, and (in them) enacteth more
abomination and villainy, then he could in the euillest of evil functions,
which is, in diuelling it simply. I wonder there is any of these sher etayling
bodietraffiquers, which when a man comes to try them, will easily credit him
to be a man, and not rather suspect him to be a forme-shifting devil, disguised
in man's likeness. Utterly are they given over to the devil, and he is their
God, since they serve him and not God. With many of their mercenary
predecessors, in the proportion of men, have devils had carnal copulation. A
guilty conscience has occasion to distrust every thing.

Satan would think it a dishonor to him, if he should not tempt and win
unto him, those whom weakwitted man can tempt and win unto him. Never will
they resist Satan's temptations, that cannot resist the temptations of a
fleshly tongue. In a damnable state are you, Oye excrementall vessels of lust.
In selling your bodies to sin, you sell them to the devil, and with a little
money he buys them at your hands from Christ, that paid so dear a price for
them. Half a Crown or little more, (or sometimes less,) is the set price of
a strumpets soul. The devil needs never to tempt her, when for so small a
value he may have her. We hate and cry out against them, that like Turks and
Moors sell their Christian brethren as slaves: how much more ought we to hate
and cry out against them, that sell themselves and their souls unto sin as
slaves? Those skinplaistring Painters, (of whom in the ^reaty of gorgeous
attire we dilated) do not so much alter Gods image, (by artificial
ouer-beautifying their bodies,) as these do, by debasing themselves to every
one that brings coin.

Ere they come to forty, you shall see them worn to the bare bone. At twenty
their lively color is lost, their faces are sodden and perboyld with French
surfets. That color on their cheeks you behold superficializ'd, is but sir
John whites, or sir John Red-caps livery. The Alcumist of quicksiluer, makes
gold. These (our openers to all comers,) with quickening and conceiving, get
gold. The souls they bring forth, at the latter day shall stand up and give
evidence against them. The devil to enfranchise them of hell, shall do no more
but produce the mis-begotten of their loins. Those that have been daily
fornicatresses and yet are unfruitful, he shall accuse of ten thousand
murders, by confusion of seeds, and barrayning their wombes by drugges. There
is no such murder on the face of the earth as a whore. Not only shall she be
araigned and impeached, of defeating an infinite number of Gods images: but of
defacing and destroying the moulde, wherein he has appointed them to be cast.

To whom much is given, of them shall much be required. God having given them
excellent gifts of beauty and wit, requires at their hands excellent increase
of the^, which when he shall find contrary, he will convert the excess of his
graces and gifts, to the excess of scourges and curses. Tell me you dissolute
harlots, what increase do you render to God of your wits, or your beauties, but
wantonness? The unworthiest are you of life, of any that live. All your life
time you do nothing but spoil others, and spoil your selves. You mar your
minds and your beauties both at once, by putting them out to bad uses. What are
you but sinks and priuies to swallow in men's filth?

If God (as in Esaias) should ask our watch man the devil, Esaias 21.
Custos, quid de nocte? Watchman what see thou? what see thou in London by
night? He would answer, I see a number of whores making men drunk, to cosen
them of their money. I see others of them, sharing half with the Baudes their
Hostesses, and laughing at the Punies they have lurched. Others meeting with
their cuturse Paramours in the dark, to whom they deliver what they have been
getting all day from a dozen. I see reuelling, dancing, and banqueting til
midnight. I see a number of wives cockolding their husbands, under pretense of
going to their next neighbors labor. I see Gentlewomen, baking in their
painting on their faces, by the fire, and burning out many pounds of Candle in
pinning their treble rebaters, when they will not bestow the snuff of a light
in looking on any good Book. I see theft, murder and conspiracy, following
their business very closely. What would you have more? Those whom the Sun
sees not in a month together, I now see in their cups and their iolitie.

Well conceited was the Italian, who writ the Supplication to Candlelight,
earnestly desiring her by writing, to disclose unto him, the rare secrets she
saw in her Emperie.

One judgment day is scarce enough for God, to take the confession alone of
Candlelight. He had need of a night judgment as well as a day, to endite the
sinners of the night.

Provident Justices, to whom these abuses redress appertains, take a little
pains to visit these houses of hospitality by night, and you shall see what
Courts of good fellowship they keep. Hoyse up Baudes in the Subsidy book,
for the plenty they live in, is princely. A great office is not so gainful, as
the principalship of a College of Curtizans. No Merchant in riches, may
compare with those Mercha^ts of maiden-heads, if their female Inmates were not
so fleeting and uncertain. This is a trick amongst all Baudes, they will feign
themselves to be zealous Catholics: and whereas they dare not come to Church,
or into any open assembly, for wonring and howting at, they pretend
scrupulosity of conscience, and that they refrain only for religion. So if
they be imprisoned or carried to Bridewell for their baudrie, they give out
they suffer for the Church.

Great cunning do they ascribe to their Art, as the discerning (by the very
countenance) a man that has Crowns in his purse: the fine closing in with the
next Justice, or Aldermans deputy of the ward: the winning love of neighbors
round about, to repel violence, if happily their houses should be enuirond, or
any in them prove unruly, (being pilled and pould too unconscionably.) They
forecast for back-doores, to come in and out by vndiscouerd, Sliding windows
also, and trapboords in floars, to hide whores behind and under, with false
counterfeit panes in walls, to be opened and shut like a wicket. Some one
Gentleman generally acquainted, they give his admission unto, fans fee, and
free privilege thence forward in their Nunnery, to procure them frequentance.
Awake your wits, grave authorized Lawe-distributers, and show your selves as
insinuatiue subtle, in smoking this Citty-sodoming trade out of his
starting-holes, as the professors of it are in underpropping it. Either you do
not, or will not descend into their deep iugling legerdemaine. Any excuse or
unlikely pretext goes for payment. Set up a shop of incontinencie who so will,
let him have but one letter of an honest name to grace it. In such a place
dwells a wise woman that tells fortunes, and she (under that shadow,) has her
house never empty of forlorn unfortunate Dames, married to old husbands.

In another corner, enhabiteth a Physician and a Coniurer, who has corners and
spare Chambers to hide cation in, and can conjure up an vnphisicall drab at all
times. In a third place, is there a gross pencild Painter, who works all in
oyle-colours, and under color of drawing of pictures, draws more to his shady
Pauilion, then depart thence pure vestals. Lodge these Baudes any suspicious
Gentlewoman, and being asked what she is, (be she young and brave,) they will
answer, that she is an Esquires or Knights daughter, sent up to be placed
with I wot not what Lady or Countess. Be she of middle years, she is a
widow that has suits in Law here at the Term, and has been a long
Counsaile-table petitioner. Be she but ciuily plain, and in her apparel
cittizinizd, she is the good-wiues Niece, or near kinswoman.

Thus have they euasions for all objections, and are never (lightly) brought in
question, but when they break and jar with their neighbors. Monstrous
creatures are they, marvel is it fire from heaven consumes not London, as
long as they are in it. A thousand parts better were it to have public Stews,
then to let them keep private Stews as they do. The world would count me the
most licentiat loose straier under heaven, if I should unrip but half so much
of their venerial machauielisme, as I have looked into. We have not English
words enough to unfold it Positions and instructions have they, to make their
whores a hundred times more whorish and treacherous, then their own wicked
affects (resigned to the devils disposing,) can make them. Waters and receipts
have they to enable a man to the act after he is spent, dormatiue potions to
procure deadly sleep, that when the hackney he has paid for lies by him, he
may have no power to deal with her but she may steal from him, whiles he is
in his deep memento, and make her gain of three or four other.

I am weary of recapitulating their roguery. I would those that should reform
it, would take but half the pains in supplanting it, that I have done in
disclosing it. Repent, repent, you ruins of intemperance, recover your souls
though you have sudded your bodies. Let not your feet be fast locked in the
mire of pollution. Meditate but what a brutish thing it is, how short lasting,
and but a minute contentiue. If you should lend it (from the beginning to the
ending,) but suitable descriptionate politure, or if with your eyes, you could
but view the meeting of venoms, I know it would work in some of you an
abiuring dislike.

Consider but what loathsome things are engendered of the excess of it, and how
the soul (which was made to mount upward,) in the heat of it descends
downward. Sin enough of your selves (women) have you, you need have no sin
put into you. Your flesh of the own accord, will corrupt faster then you would,
though you corrupt it not before his time, with inordinate carnal sluttishnes.
Make not your bodies stinking dungeons for diseases to dwell in: imprison not
your souls in a sink.

To you men, this admonition I will give, be prodigal any way, rather then give
a whore an earnest penny of her perdition. Solomon says, Qui nutrit scortum
perdit substantiam, He that keeps a harlot, squandreth his Prou. 29
substance. Paul says, Qui fornicatur in corpus suum peccat, 1. Cor. 6
He which commits fornication, sins against his own flesh. In the Acts
it is said, Abstinete vos a fornicatione, Abstain from fornication, In the
Epistle to the Acts 15
Galathians, The works of the flesh, are adultery, fornications, etc. In the
Epistle to the Ephesians, No whoremonger, Ephesians. 5
adulterer, or covetous person, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
Hebrews the 13. Adulterers God will judge. Deuteronomy the 23. There shall not
be a harlot of the Daughters of Israel. Matthew the tenth, Whom God has
joined, let no man separate. An adulterer goes betwixt, or separates whom God
has joined. Cum cetera possit Deus, Ierom super A^os.
etc. When God can do all things else he cannot restore a Virgin after she is
defloured. Laesa pudicitia, says Ovid, deperit illa semel, Chastity being once
scarred, is never salued.

Agamemnon defiling Brisis, his wife Clitemnestra played false with Egistus in
the mean time. On the other side, Ulysses shunning the enchauntments of
Circes, the sweet descant of the Sirens, and immortality of Calipso, to live
with his constant wife Penelope, she (notwithstanding all the gallant troops
of Grecian woers enticements, that in her house kept a standing court a long
time,) kept her self chaste for him 20. years. Solon ordained that the
adulterer should be put to death. The tale of Selcucus and is son his stale, I
have made my book too great already, only in displaying the sins of London.
Whosoever they be that have souls, and would in no means have them miscarry,
let them remember that of S. Augustine, In pollutione anima fit tota caro, In
adultery or fornication, the soul is made all flesh, and is wholly employde in
impouerishing and debilitating the flesh. Quidam dixit olim, dives eram dudum,
sed tria me fecerunt nudu^, alea, vina, venus, tribus his factus sum egenus.
There was a man said late, he was in rich estate, but 3. things have undone
him, froward Dice, Wine, and Women: only from these three things, all his
confusion springs.

The third deriuatiue of Delicacy is sloth, of which I will say a word or two,
and so shake hands with all the Sons and Daughters of Pride. Security the
last deuident of Delicacy, it includes in it: for Security is nothing but the
effect of sloth, therefore will I handle both under one. It is a sin which is
good for nothing, but to be Dame Lecheries Keeper when she lies in. He or she
that is possessed with sloth, is slow in good works, slow in coming to
Sermons, slow in looking after thrift, slow in resisting temptations, slow
in defending any good cause. And of these fore-slowers it is said, Those that
be neither hot nor cold, I will spue them out of my mouth. Reu. the 3.

There is a certain kind of good sloth, as to be slow to anger, slow to
judgment, slow to revenge. But there is a sloth unto judgment, which is also
an il sloth. As when a poor man's cause hangs so long in Court ere it can be
decided, that through the Judges sloth he is undone with following of it. There
is a sloth also in punishing sin, as when Magistrates will have their eyes put
out with gifts, and will not see it, but wink at it, till they be broad waked
with the general cry of the Commonwealth. There is a sloth of Souldioury, as
of those that come from the wars, and will not fall to any thing afterward,
but cosen, beg and rob. There is a sloth of the Ministry, as of those that
after they be Beneficed, will never preach. Does the wild Ass bray, says Job,
when Job. 6
he has grass, or loweth the Ox when he has fodder? No more do a great sort
of our Divines after they have living. They have learned to spare their tongue
against they are to plead for greater preferment. So have a number of Lawyers
learned to spare their ears, against golden Advocates come to plead to them.
They cannot hear except their ears be rubd with the oil of Angels: they
must have a spur to prick on an old dog, a few Spurrials to remedy deafnes.

Others there are (though not of the same order) that can never hear, but when
they are flattered, and they cry continually to their Preachers, Loquere nobis
placentia, Loquere nobis placentia. Speak to us nothing but pleasing Esaias 30
things, and even as Archabius the Trumpeter, had more given him to cease them
to sound, (the noise that he made was so harsh,) so will they give them more to
cease then to sound, to corupt them then to make them sound feed their sores
then to launch them. The noise of judgment which they pronounce, sounds too
harsh in their ears. They must have Orpheus melody, whom the Ciconian women
tore in pieces, because with his music, he corrupted and effeminated their
men. Guide says, There are certain devils that can abide no Guide in musics.
music, these are contrary devils, for they delight in nothing but the music
of flattery. Moving words please them, but they hear them but as passion in a
play, which makes them rauishtly melancholy, and nere renteth the heart. The
delicacy both of men and women in London, will enforce the Lord to turn all
their plenty to scarcity, their tunes of wantonness to the alarums of war,
and to leave their house desolate unto them.

How the Lord has begun to leave our house desolate unto us, let us enter
into the consideration thereof with our selves. At this instant is a general
plague dispersed throughout our Land. No voice is heard in our streets, but that
of Jeremy, Call for the mourning women, Ierem. 9
that they may come and take up a lamentation for us, for death is come into
our windows, and entered into our Palaces. God has stricken us but we have not
sorrowed, of Ierem. 5
his heauiest correction we make a jest. We are not moved with that which he
has sent to amaze us: As it is in Ezechiel, They will not hear thee, for they
will not hear Ezech. 3
mei So they will not, nor cannot hear God in his visitation, which have
refused to hear him in his Preachers. For your contempt and neglect of hearing
Gods Preachers, even as S. John Baptist said, There was one come into the world
more mighty then he, that carried his fan in his hand, So say I, there is one
come into the world, more mighty then the word preached, which is, the Lord in
this present visitation: He carries his fan in his hand to purge his Floor.
All the chafe of carnal Gospellers, that are blown from him with every wind
of vanity or adu^sity, he shall purge from amongst you.

A time of springing and growing have we had, now is our merciful Father come
to demand fruit of us. The fruit of faith, the fruit of good works, the
fruit of patience and long suffering. If he find no fruit on us, he will say to
us as he said to the Fig Tree, on which he found nothing but leaves, Never
fruit grow on thee henceforward. And incontinent it withered, and incontinent
Mat. 21. 19
Death shall seize on us. From the mouth of the Lord I speak it, Except in time
you convert, and bring forth the fruits of good life, the Kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing Mat. 20. 19
forth worthy fruits thereof. With the two blind men that sat by the Highway
side, when Christ came from Jericho, we have cried a long time, Lord have mercy
upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, O Son of David, have mercy upon us: and lo,
our eyes have been opened, the light of the Gospel has appeared unto us; But
(like those blind-men) after our eyes were opened, after the light of the
Gospel has appeared unto us, we have refused to follow Christ.

You Usurers and Engrossers of Corn by your hoording up of gold and grain,
till it is mould, rusty, Moatheaten, and almost infects the air with the
stinch, you have taught God to hoord up your iniquities and transgressions,
till mouldinesse, putrefaction and mustinesse, enforces him to open them, and
being opened, they so poison the air with their ill savor, that from them
proceeds this perilsome contagion. The Land is full of adulteries, and for
this cause the Land mourns. The Ierem. 23.
Land is full of Extortions, full of proud men, full of hypocrites, full of
murderers. This is the cause why the Esaias 24
Sword deuoureth abroad, and the Pestilence at home. Wicked deeds have
prevailed against us. How long (says Jeremy) shall the Land mourn, and the
herbs of every Ierem. 12
field wither, for the wickedness of the Inhabitants that dwell therein? Our
Land mournes for the sickness, the herbs of the field have withered for want
of rain, yet will no man depart from his wickedness. Post over the Plague to
what natural cause you will, I Positiuely affirm it is for sin. For sin
(said the Lord by the forenamed Jeremy,) I will smite the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Ierem. 21
and man and beast shall die of a great pestilence. I will bring a Plague upon
you, that whosoever hears of it, his ears Ierem. 19
shall tingle. Either take away the cause, or there is no removing of the
effect.

London, thou art the seeded Garden of sin, the Seathat sucks in all the
scummy channels of the Realm. The honestest in thee, (for the most,) are either
Lawyers or Usurers. Deceit is that which aduanceth the greater sort of thy
chiefest; Let them look that their riches shall rust and canker, being wet
and dewed with Orphans tears. The Lord thinks, it were as good for him to
kill with the Plague, as to let them kill with oppression. He beholds from on
hie al subtle conueiances, and recognisances. He beholds how they pervert
foundations, and will not bestow the Bequeathers free alms, but for brybes, or
for friendship. I pray God they take not the like course, in preferring poor
men's children into their Hospitals, and converting the impotents money to their
pryuate usury.

God likewise beholds how to beguile a sely young Gentleman of his Land, they
will crouch cap in hand, play the Brokers, Baudes, Apron-squires, Panders, or
anything. Let us leave of the Proverb which we use to a cruel dealer, faying:
Go thy ways, thou art a Jew: and say, Go thy ways, thou art a Londoner. For
then Londoners, are none more heard-hearted and cruel. Is it not a common
proverb amongst us, when any man has cosend or gone beyond us, to say, He
has playde the Merchant with us? But Merchants, they turn it another way, and
say, He has played the Gentleman with them. The Snake eats the Toade, and the
Toade the Snaile. The Merchant eats up the Gentleman, the Gentleman eats up
the Yeoman, and all three do nothing but exclaim one upon another.

The head of Daniels Image was of beaten gold, but Dan, 2. 23
his feet iron. Our head or our Sovereign is all gold, golden in her looks,
golden in her thoughts, in her words and deeds golden. We her feet or her
subjects, all iron. Though for her vertuee sake, and the prayers of his
dispersed Congregation, God prorogeth our desolation for a while, yet we must
not think, but at one time or other, he will smite us and plague us. He shall
not take away our sin, because we will not confess with David, that we
have sinned: or if we do so confess, we hold it full satisfaction for it,
without any reformation or amendment. In this time of infection, we purge our
houses, our bodies and our streets, and look to all but our souls.

The Psalmist was of another mind, for he said, O Lord I have purged and
cleansed my spirit. Blessed are they that Psa. 76. Math. 8.
are clean in heart, how ever their houses be infected. There were the^ in
the heat of the sickness, that thought to purge and cleanse their houses, by
conueying their infected servants forth by night into the fields, which there
starued and dyed, for want of relife and warmekeeping. Such merciless
Canibals, (in stead of purging their spirits and their houses,) have thereby
doubled the Plague on them and their houses. In Grayes-Inne, Clarkenwell,
Finsbury, and Moorefieldes, with mine own eyes have I seen half a dozen of
such lamentable outcasts. Their Brethren and their Kinsfolks, have offered
large sums of money, to get them conveyed into any out-house, and no man
would earne it, no man would receive them. Cursing and rauing by the Highway
side, have they expired, and their Masters never sent to them, nor succourd
them. The fear of God is come amongst us, and the love of God gone from us.

If Christ were now naked and visited, naked and visited should he be, for none
would come near him. They would rather forswear him and defy him, then come
within forty foot of him. In other Lands, they have Hospitals, whether their
infected are transported, presently after they are stricken. They have one
Hospital, for those that have been in the houses with the infected, and are
not yet tainted: another for those that are tainted, and have the sores risen
on them, but not broken out. A third, for those that both have the sores, and
have them broken out on them. We have no provision but mixing hand over head,
the sick with the whole. A halfe-penny a month to the poor man's box, we
count our utter impouerishing. I have heard Trauailers of credit avouch, that
in London, is not given the tenth part of that alms in a week, which in the
poorest besieged City of France is given in a day. What is our religion, all
avarice and no good works? because we may not build Monasteries, or have
Masses, Dirges, or Trentals sung for our souls, are there no deeds of mercy
that God has enioined us?

Our dogs are fed with the crumbes that fall from our Tables. Our Christian
brethren are famisht, for want of the crumbes that fall from our Tables. Take
it of me rich-men expressly, that it is not your own which you have purchased
with your industry: it is part of it the poores, part your Princes, part your
Preachers. You ought to possess no more, then will moderatly sustain your
house and your family. Christ gave all the victual he had, to those that
flocked to hear his Sermons. We have no such promise-founded plea at the day
of al flesh as that in Christ's name we have done alms-deeds. How would we with
our charity sustain so many mendicant orders of Religion, as we heretofore
have, and as now at this very hour beyond Sea are, if we cannot keep and
cherish the casual poor amongst us? Never was there a simple liberal
relieuer of the poor, but prospered in most things he went about. The cause
that some of you cannot prosper, is, for you put out so little to interest to
the poor.

No thanks-worthy exhibitions, or reasonable pensions, will you contribute to
maymd Soldiers, or poor Scholars, as other Nations do, but suffer other
Nations with your discontented poor, to Arm themselves against you. Not half
the Priests that have been sent from them into England, had hither been sent,
or ever fled hence, if the Crampe had not held close your purse strings. The
livings of Colleges, by you are not increased, but diminished: because those
that first raised them, had a superstitious intent, none of us ever after, will
have any Christian charitable intent.

In the days of Solomon, gold and silver bare no price. In these our days,
(which are the days of satan,) naught but they bear any price. God is
despised in comparison of them. Demas forsook Christ for the world: in this
our deceasing covetous world, Demas has more followers then Christ. An old
Usurer that has not an heir, rakes up thirty or forty thousand pounds
together in a hutch, will not part with a penny, fares miserably, dies
suddenly, and leaves those the fruits of niggardize to them that never thank
him.

He that bestows any thing on a College or Hospital, to the worlds end shall
have his name remembered, in daily thanksgiving to God for him: otherwise he
perrisheth as the Pellitory on the wall, or the weed on the house top, that
grows only to wither; Of all his wealth no good man reaping any benefit, none
but Canckers, prisons, and bard Chestes, live to report he was rich. Those
great bard Chestes he carries on his back to Heaven gates, and none so
burdened, is permitted to enter.

There is no Male of any kind, has appearance of breasts but man, and he
having them, gives no suck with them at all. Such dry-nurses are our English
Cormogeons, they have breasts, but give no suck with them. They have treasure
innumerable, but do no good with it. All the Abbey-lands that were the
abstracts from impertinent alms, now scarce afford a meals meat of alms. A
penny bestowed on the poor, is abridged out of housekeeping. All must be for
their children that spend more then all. More prosperous children should they
have, were they more open handed. The Plague of God threatens, to shorten both
them and their children, because they shorten their hands from the poor. To no
cause refer I this present mortality but to couetise.

Let couetise be enlarged out of durance, the infected air will vncongeale,
and the wombes of the contagious Clouds will be cleansed. Pray and distribute
you gorbellied Mammonists: without prayer and distribution, or almost thinking
of God, have you congested those refulgent masses of substance. With the
destribution of them, (if you look for salvation,) your souls must you
ransom from Belial. And fortunate are you, if with long intercessions and
prayers, you may get your ransom accepted of. Nothing of all your dross
(going down into the earth) shall you take with you: you shall carry no more
hence Nisi parua quod vrna capit, but a Coffyn and a winding-sheete.

They have slept their sleep, says David, and all the men of riches, have
found none of their treasure in their Psalm. 75
own hands after their sleep was ended Poor men, to you I speak, (for
rich men have their Country Granges to fly to from contagion,) humble your
souls with fasting and prayer. Elias and Moses, by their fasting and prayer,
were filled with the familiarity of God. Entreat the Lord that he would pass
over your houses, as in Egypt he past over the houses of the Israelites
firstborne: Beseech him, with the Gergazens, (into whose Heardes of Swine the
devils were sent,) to depart (with his heavy judgments) out of your quarters.
Though he seems a little to sleep, (as when he was on the Sea with his
Disciples, and the tempest arose,) yet if you awake him with your out crying
prayers, as the Apostles did, saying: Lord save us. Lord save us, or we
perrish, he will command the winds and the Sea, control the contagion and
the sickness, and make a calm ensue, heal every disease and languor amongst
you.

In the day of my trouble, (says the forenamed prophetical King,) I sought
unto the Lord, my sore ran and ceased Plalm. 77.
not in the night, my soul refused comfort. I did think upon God, and was
troubled, I prayed, and my spirit was full of anguish. Let us seek unto the
Lord in like sort, let our souls refuse comfort, let us think upon him and
be troubled, let us pray, and fill our spirits full of anguish, til such time as
he turns our affliction from us. If we be not thus troubled, if our spirits
be not possessed with anguish, but we make a sport and flea-biting of his
fearful visitation, and think (without our prayers) the season of the year
will cease it, he will send a rougher stringed scourge amongst us, a
desolation that shall furrow deeper in our sides, and root out the memorial
of us.

If (says the Apostle to the Hebrews,) they escaped not which refused him that
spoke on earth, much more shall they Heb. 12
not escape, that turn away from him that speaks to them from heaven. Now it
is that God speaks to us from heaven, now if we turn away from him, or will
not turn to him there shall not one of us escape.

In the time of Gregory Nasianzene, (if we may credit Ecclesiastical
records) there sprung up the direfullest mortality in Rome, that mankind has
been acquainted with: scarce able were the living to bury the dead, and not so
much but their streets were dug up for graves; Which this holy Father (with
no little co^miserate hart-bleeding) beholding, commanded all the Clergy (for
he was at that time their chief Bishop) to assemble in prayer and
supplications, and deal forcingly beseeching with God, to intermit his fury
and forgive them. For all this not any whit is abated, he took no pity on
them. Therewith that reverend Pastor, (entranced to hell in his thoughts for
the distress of his people,) caused all the Citizens, young and old, to be
called forth their houses, and attend him in a howling procession. Up and
down the streets, from one end of the City to the other he led them, and
Preachers (as Captains over multitudes) were set to direct and encourage them
in their Inuocations and Orizons. Four days together in this fervent exercise
he detained them. In those places where the mortality raged most, a stand
would he make half a day, and with reiterated solicitings, and prostrate
voyce-crazing vehemency, break open a broad clowde-dispersing passage, to the
throne of mercy.

The four days concluded, and that with their bellowing clamors, and
breast-embolning sighs, they had enforced a sufficient breach in the
Firmament, there appeared a bright sunne-arraied Angel, standing with a
reaking bloody sword in his hand, in the chief gate of their City, which
(they coming near) in all their sights, on his arm he wiped and put up: and
(in that very instant) throughout the City, the plague ceased. Some
(peradventure) may take exceptions against the certainty hereof, but if we will
authorize any thing in the Roman or Ecclesiastical histories, we must
ascribe truth as well unto this. I would see him that could give me any other
reason but this, of the building of the yet extant gate and Castle of S.
Angelos, on both which, the Angel with his sword drawn is artificially
engraven. True, or not true, the example can do no harm: We will not be too
hasty to imitate it.

In stead of humbling our selves after this manner, and wearying God with our
cries and lamentations, we fall a drinking and bousing, and making iestes of
his frowning castigation. As Babes smyle and laugh in their sleep, so we
(surprised with a lethargy of sin,) do nothing but laugh and jest in the
midst of our sleepie security. We scoff and are iocund, when the sword is
ready to go through us. On our wine-benches we bid a Fico for ten thousand
Plagues.

Him as a timorous milke-soppe we deride, that takes any antidote against it.
Upon the point of Gods sword we will run as he is in stryking: rush into
houses that are infected, as it were to outface him. My son (says the
Apostle,) despise not the chastisement of the Lord. The ^eb. 12, 5.
Lords chastising we think to escape, by despysing it. Quod in communi
possidetur ab omnibus negligitur. That which is dispersed, of all is despised.
Est tentatio adducens peccatum, et tentatio probans fidem. There is a
temptation leading to sin, and a temptation trying our faith. The temptation
of this our visitation, has both led us to sin, and tried our faith. It
has led us to sin, in that it has hardened our hearts, and we have not
humbled our selves under it as we should. It has tried our faith to be a
presumptuous and rash faith, and that it is built on no firm foundation.
Blessed is the man, says Job, whom God corrects. Cursed are we, for God
corrects us, and we regard it not. Ieb, 5, 17.


As the holy Ghost wills us, not to despise the chastising of God, so he
would have us not to faint when we are rebuked of him, and therefore he gives
a reason, For whom the Lord loves, he chastises, and he scourges every
son he receives. As there be drunken despysers of Gods present chastisement,
so are there them that faint too much under it: that think it lies not in the
Lords power to restore them: that no prayers or repentance may repriue them;
that imagine, (since GOD in this world has forsook them;) he will for ever
forsake them. Thus they argument against themselves, He that denies us a small
request, of the prolongment of a few earthly days, he will surely stop his
ears, when in a greater suit (for the life eternal) we shall importune him.

O no, foolish men you err, though long life on earth be a blessing, yet it
follows not by contradiction, that GOD curses all those whose days he
shortens. Many except their days were shortened, would never be saved. Many in
their prime and best years, are raught hence, because the world is unworthy of
them, and they are more worthy of heaven, then the world. The good King Josias,
was taken away in his youth. Our Savior was taken up in his best youthly age.
Others fortheir sins, the Lord by untimely death punishethin this world, that
they may be absolved in the world to come. A large account of them shall he
demand, to whom he lends long life. Whom God chastises or cutteth off, he
loves, half his account he cutts off. Every son he scourges that he
receives.

Has GOD chastised or scourged such a man by the sickness, he is not a greater
sinner then thou who^ he has not chastised, but he loves him better then
thee, for in his chastising, he has showed more care over him then he has
over thee. Few men defamed with any notorious vice, can I hear of, that have
dyed of this sickness. God chastises his Sons and not bastards. No Sons
of God are we, but bastards, until we be chastned. The He. 12, 8, (...)
Fathers of our earthly bodies, for a few days chastise us at their pleasure,
but God chastises us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
The Fathers of our earthly bodies, though they beat us and chastise us, yet
cannot (for all the pain they put us to,) enfeofe us in glory perpetual: for
how should they do that for us, which they cannot do for themselves? Only
because they are to benefit us with a little transitory chafe, they tyrannise
and reign over us: and therefore more austere are they to keep us in
obedience, for we should not (after their death) lauishly mispende the labors
of their parsimony.

The guerdon they give us, (for all their inflicted sorrow and smart,) is that
which they must leave in spite of their hearts, and cannot themselves keep any
longer. They give us place, that in selfsame sort we may give place to
others. But God our Redeemer, Chastiser and Father, corrects us, that we may
receive no corruptiue inheritance, (such as in this life we receive, by the
wayning of our earthly Fathers,) but a never failing inheritance, where we
shall have our Father himself for our inheritance.

O what a blessed thing is it to be chastised of the Lord! Is it not better (O
London) that God correct thee, and love thee, then forbear thee, and forsake
thee? He is a just God, and must punish either in this life, or in the life to
come. Though thou considerest only the things before thee, yet he being a
loving foreseeing father for thee, and knowing the intollerablenesse of the
neuerquenched Furnace (which for sin he has prepared,) will not consent to
thine own childish wishes, of winking at thee here on earth, (where though he
did spare thee, thou should have no perfect tranquillity,) but with a short
light punishment, acquitteth thee from the punishment eternal, and eternally
incomprehensible tortorors.

When Preachers threaten us for sin, with this adiunct eternal, as pains
eternal, eternal damnation, eternal horror and vexation, we hear them as
words of course, but never diue right down into the bottomless sense. A
confused model and misty figure of Hell have we conglomorate in our brains,
drowsily dreaming that it is a place under earth, incessantly vomiting flames
like Aetna, or Mongibell, and fraughtfull of fire and Brimstone, but we never
follow the meditation of it so far, (were it nothing else,) as to think what
a thing it is to live in it perpetually.

It is a thousand thousand times worser, then to be staked on the top of
Aetna or Mongibell. A hundred thousand thousand times more then thought can
attract, or supposition apprehend. But eternally to live in it, that makes it
the hell, though the torment were but trifling. Signified this word eternal,
but some six thousand years, (which is about the distance from Adam,) in our
comprehension it were a thing beyond mind, inso much as we deem it an
impatient spectacle, to see a Traitor but half an hour groaning under the
Hangmans hands. What then is it, to live in threescore times more grinding
discruciame^t of dying, a year, a hundred year, a thousand year, six
thousand year, sixty thousand year, more thousands then can be numbered in a
thousand years; so much imports this word eternal, or for ever.

Though all the men that ever God made, were hundred handed like Briareus, and
should all at once take pens in their hundred hands, and do nothing in a
whole age together, but set down in figures and characters, as many myllions
or thousands as they could, so many millions or thousands could they never set
down, as this word of three sillables Eternal, includes, an Ocoan of yncke
would it draw dry to describe it. Hell is a circle which has no breakings of,
or discontinuing. Hence blasphemous Witches and Coniurers, when they raise up
the devil, draw a ringed circle all-about him, that he should not rush out
and oppress them: as also to humble and debase him, in putting him in mind by
that circle, of the eternal circle of damnation, wherein God has confined and
shut him. What dullards and blocke-heads are we, that hearing these terms of
hell and eternal, so often souned in our ears, sound them so shallowly, or if
we sound them as we should, are no more confounded with them? It should seem we
are not too much terrified with them, when for an hours pleasure, (which has
no taste of true pleasure in it,) we will dare them both to their utmost.

Fowls of the air, though never so empty stomackt, fly not for food into
open Pit-fals. Quae nimis apparent retia vitat a^is, Too open snares, even
simple birds do shun. No Beast of the Forest, spying a gin or a trap laid
for him, but eschewes it. We spy and foresee the Pyt-fal, the Net, the
Ginne, the Trappe, that satan (our old entrapper) lays for us, yet wilfully
we (without any flattering hope of food, without any excellent allurement to
entice us, or hunger to co^straine us,) with full race, will dart our selves
into them. Yea though Christ, from the skies, hold out never so moving lures
unto us, all of them (Haggard-like) we will turn tail to, and have to the
iron fist, that holds out naught but a knyfe to enthrill us.

O if there were no heaven, me thinks (having that understanding we ought,)
we should forbear to sin, if it were but for fear of hell. Our Laws, with
nothing but proposed penalty, from offending cohibite us, they allow no reward
to their temperate obseruants: Gods Laws, (proposing both exceeding reward
and exceeding penalty,) are every day violated and enfringed. Either we
suppose him, not able to execute his Laws, or that (like one of Romes Epicure
Emperors,) he more favors their breakers then obeyers: aduauncing men sooner
for oppugning then observing them. Far is he from that mad-braine fondness,
of his Laws he is not only not careless, but jealous and zealous, and to the
fourth generation pursues their neglecters.

None of them he pardons, though for a space he may respite. If he delayeth or
respiteth, his delaying or respyting, is but to fetch up his hand hyer, that he
may let it fall on them heavier. His deferring, is the more to infer. Of no ill
payment shall he complain, that has the wages of his wickedness held from him
in this world, to receive them by the whole sum in Hell. Could the least and
sencelessest of our senses, into the quietest corner of hell, be transported in
a vision but three minutes, it would breed in us such an agasting terror, and
shyuering mislike of it, that to make us more wary of sinne-meriting it, we
would have it painted in our Gardens, our banqueting houses, on our gates, in
our Gallaries, our Closets; our bed-chambers.

Again were there no hell but the accusing of a man's own conscience, it were
hell, and the profundity of hell to any sharp transpercing soul, that had
never so little inckling of the joys of heaven, to be separate from them; to
hear and see tryumphing and melody, and Tantalus like, not be suffered to
come near them, or partake them; to think when all else were entered, he
should be excluded. Our best method to prevent this excluding, or seperating
from Gods presence, is here on earth (what so ever we go about,) to think we
see him present. Let us fancy the firmament as his face, the all-seeing Sun to
be his right eye, and the Moon his left, (although his eyes, are far more
fiery pointed and subtle,) that the Stars are but the congemmed twincklings
of those his clear eyes, that the winds are the breath of his nostrils, and
the lightning and tempests the troubled action of his ire: that his frowns
bring forth frost and snow, and his smiles fair weather: that the Winter is
the image of the first world, wherein Adam was vnparadized, and the
fruitfostering Summer, the representation of the seed of woman's satis-fying,
for the unfortunate fruit of life which he plucked. Who is there entertayning
these divine allusiue cogitations, that has not God unremovable in his
memory. He that has God in his memory, and aduaunceth him before his eyes
euer-more, will be bridled and plucked back, from much abusion and
bestialnesse. Many sins be there, which if none but man should ouer-eye us
offending in, we would never exceed, or offend in. In the presence of his
Prince, the dissolutest misliuer that lives, will not offend or misgouerne
himself: how much more ought we, (abiding always in Gods presence,) precisely
to straighten our paths? Hard is it when we shall have our Judge an
eye-witnes against us. There is no demurring, or exceptioning against his
testimony.

Purblind London, neither can thou see that God sees thee, nor see into thy
self. How long will thou cloud his earthly prospect, with the misty night of
thy mounting iniquities. Therefore has he smitten thee and struck thee,
because thou would not believe he was present with thee. He thought if
nothing else might move thee to look back, at least thou would look back
to thy striker. Had it not been, so to cause thee to look back and repent,
with no cross or plague would he have visited, or sought to call thee. He
could have been revenged on thee superaboundantly at the day of thy
dissolution, and souls general Law-day, though none of thy children or
allies, by his hand had been sepulchred. His hand I may well term it, for on
many that are arested with the Plague, is the print of a hand seen, and in the
very moment it first takes them, they feel a sensible blow given them, as it
were with the hand of some stander by. As Gods hand we will not take it, but
the hand of fortune, the hand of hot weather the hand of close smouldry air.
The Astronomers, they assign it to the regiment and operation of Planets. They
say, Venus, Mars, Saturn, are motives thereof, and never mention our sins,
which are his chief procreatours. The vulgar menialty conclude, therefore it
is like to increase, because a Hearnshaw (a whole afternoon together,) sat on
the top of Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill. They talk of an Ox that told the
bell at Wolwitch, and how from an Ox, he transformed himself to an old man,
and from an old man to an infant, and from an infant to a young man. Strange
Prophetical reports (as touching the sickness,) they murter he gave out, when in
truth, they are naught else but cleanly coined lies, which some pleasant
sportiue wits have devised, to gull them most grossly. Under Master Dees
name, the like fabulous diuinations have they bruted, when (good reverend old
man) he is as far from any such arrogant preciseness, as the superstitious
spreaders of it, are from true peace of conscience.

If we would hunt after signs and tokens, we should ominate from our
hardness of heart, and want of charity amongst brethren, that Gods justice is
hard entering. No certainer conjecture is there of the ruin of any kingdom,
then their reuolting from God. Certain conjectures have we had, that we are
revolted from God, and that our ruin is not far of. In diverse places of our
Land, it has rained blood, the ground has been removed, and horrible deformed
births conceived. Did the Romans take it for an ill sign, when their Capitol
was strooken with lightning, how much more ought London, to take it for an ill
sign, when her chief steeple is stricken with lightning? They with thunder
from an enterprise were disanimated, we nothing are amated. The blazing
star, the Earthquake, the dearth and famine some few years since, may
nothing afright us. Let us look for the sword next to remembrance and warn
us. As there is a time of peace, so is there a time of war. No prosperity
lasts always. The Lord by a solemn oath bound himself to the Jews, yet
when they were obliuious of him, it pleased him to forget the covenant he made
with their forefathers; and left their City desolate unto them. Shall he not
then (we starting from him, to whom by no bond he is tide,) leave our house
desolate unto us? Shall we receive of God (a long time) all good, and shall we
not look in the end, to receive of him some ill? O ye disobedient children
return, and the Lord shall heal your infirmities. Lie down in your
confusion, and cover your faces with shame. From your youth to this day, have
you sinned, and not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God. Now in the age of
your obstinacy, and ungrateful abandonments, repent and be converted. With one
united intercessionment, thus reconcile your selves unto him.

O Lord our refuge from one generation to another, whither from thy sight shall
we go, or whether but to thee, shall we fly from thee? Just is thy wrath, it
sends no man to hell unjustly. Rebuke us not in thine anger, neither chastise
us in thy displeasure. We have sinned we confess, and for our sins thou have
plagued us, with the sorrows of death thou have compast us, and thy snares have
ouertooke us: out of Natures hand, have thou wrested the sword of Fate, and now
slayest every one in thy way. Ah thou preserver of men, why have thou set us up
as a mark against thee? Why will thou break a leaf driven to and fro with the
wind, and pursue the dry stubble? Return and show thy self marvelous upon
us. None have we like Moses to stand betwixt life and death for us. None to
offer himself to die for the people, that the Plague may cease. O dear Lord,
for Jerusalem did thou die, yet could not drive back the plagues destinate
to Jerusalem. No image or likeness of thy Jerusalem, on earth is there left but
London. Spare London, for London is like the City that thou louedst. Rage not
so far against Jerusalem, as not only to desolate her, but to wreak thy self
on her likeness also, all the honor of thy miracles thou loosest, which thou
have showed so many and sundry times, in rescuing us with a strong hand from
our enemies, if now thou becommest our enemy. Let not worldlings judge thee
inconstant, or vndeliberate in thy choice, in so soon rejecting the Nation thou
have chosen. In thee we hope beyond hope, We have no reason to pray to thee to
spare us, and yet have we no reason to spare from prayer, since thou have wild
us. Thy will be done, which wills not the death of any sinner. Death let it
kill sin in us, and reserve us to praise thee. Though thou kilst us, we will
praise thee: but more praise shall thou reap by preserving then killing, since
it is the only praise to preserve where thou may kill. With the Leaper we
cry out, O Lord if thou will, thou can make us clean. We claim thy
promise, That those which mourn shall be comforted.

Comfort us Lord, we mourn, our bread is mingled with ashes, and our drink
with tears. With so many Funerals are we oppressed, that we have no leisure
to weep for our sins, for howling for our Sons and daughters. O hear the
voice of our howling, withdraw thy hand from us, and we will draw near unto
thee.

Come Lord Jesus, come, for as thou art Jesus, thou art pitiful. Challenge some
part of our sinprocured scourge to thy Cross. Let it not be said, That thou
but half satisfiedst for sin. We believe thee to be an absolute satisfier
for sin. As we believe, so for thy merits sake, we beseech thee let it
happen unto us.

Thus ought every Christian in London, from the highest to the lowest, to pray.
From Gods justice we must appeal to his mercy. As the French King, Frauncis
the first, a woman kneeling to him for justice, said unto her: Stand up woman,
for justice I owe thee, if thou begst any thing, beg for mercy. So if we beg
of God for any thing, let us beg for mercy, for justice he owes us. Mercy,
mercy, O grant us heavenly Father for thy mercy.

Luctus monument a manebunt.

FINIS.

