THE TOCSIN, OR, WATCH-BELL: Sent TO THE KING, QVEENE Regent, Princes of blood,
to all the Parlaments, Magistrates, Officers, and loyal Subjects of FRANCE.

Against the book of the Popes temporal power, not long since set forth by
Cardinal BELLARMINE Jesuit.

By MEMNONS Statue.

With the permission of the best Genie of France. And done into English by I.
R.

Notate: Verbae
Signate: Mysteriae
Ecce enim mysterium vobis dico.
LONDON, Printed for Edward White the younger, and are to be sold at the little
North door of Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne. 1611.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE LOYAL Hearted Subjects of ENGLAND.
AS the Author of this small Treatise testifies himself to be a true hearted
subject to the Crown of France, by composing it; J will likewise (in emulation
and imitation of his fidelity) approve my self to be no less to the Crown of
England, by translating it. For since this bloody book of Cardinal Bellarmine
(ambitiously arrogating to himself the Title of the Popes Temporal power)
though particularly sent to France, is nevertheless meant, and does concern
all other Kingdoms, Soueraignties and free States whatsoever; I thought in
honor to God, in allegiance to my Prince, in love to my Country, and in
duty to all, J was bound to dispoile out of his French habilements, and to
suit in our English attire this judicious and compendious Treatise, which so
worthily opposes and impugneth it. Come, nay then run, if not fly hither, you
loyal hearted English men, and as the choice of the wisest, chiefest and
loyallest hearted French have already, so in religion, in zeal, in discretion
and justice do you now commit and sacrifice to the fire both Bellarmines
book, and the thought, much more the practice of those irreligious, usurping
and sanguynat speeches and positions therein contained, tending to the
disgrace, prejudice, and destruction both of our Kings and Countries; yea for
ever (in your hearts and souls) not only spit at, but defy the wrongful,
tyrannical, Jesuiticall and Diabolical pretense of this (Sophistical
traitor, and treacherous Sophister) Bellarmine, who (as subtlely as
inueterately) aims, not to reach at, but to take off the Crowns of Kings,
and (iniustlie) to place them upon the heads of Popes; yea to trample their
Scepters and Regal Ornaments under their feet, and to bring their Dominions
and subjects, both into a woeful desolation and a miserable subjection and
slavery.

For alas, shall we permit to see, or live to permit that our Royal Kings of
England (not inferior to any, but equal with the greatest Kings of the world)
should now (through our negligence) be made homagers, subjects, nay slaves unto
Popes (Gods mortal enemies, and our deadly professed foes) as was our King
John, the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, the King of Navarre, and Earl of
Toulouse, etc.)

No, no, illustrious and generous Nobility, judicious and faithful privy
Counselors, learned and upright Judges, reverend and religious Prelates,
valorous and warlike Gentry, incorruptible and watchful Magistrates, faithful
and vigilant Officers, obedient and loyal Commons; join all in one, yea, let
every mothers son (if occasion require) with an vnanime consent, Viua Voce,
cheerfully and courageously, with Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, and
Canons roaring, denounce War to that Cardinal, nay to that Pope, nay to that
devil, which presumes or durst presume to deprive either our King of his
sovereignty, or our Country of her independencie: yea next and immediately to
the zeal of the glory of God, let us be zealous and watchful, watchful and
courageous, courageous and resolute, for the security and preservation of King
JAMES our dread Sovereign, and his heirs for ever; and for the conservation
and maintaining of the Sovereignty, both of his Crown and Kingdom of
England, the Paradise of the world, and our sweet native Country.

And the more to incite, and powerfully encourage you in the performance of
this your religious and sworn duty; I have translated, published, and here
present you this Tocsin, (or Watch-bell) that when you chance to sleep in
your beds of security, it may arouse and awake you to stand upon your guard,
with Swords drawn, Muskets charged, Match lighted, and hearts eagerly
sharpened and animated to destroy and confound the Pope and his adhaerents, and
to subvert and overthrow all other hostile enemies whatsoever, which shall
either incroach upon our Temporalitie, or attempt to deprive us of our
Sovereignty; to the end that neither the fame and renown of our deceased
triumphant and victorious warriors (which has heretofore spread it self to
the farthest and remotest parts of the world, and is for ever characteris'd
upon the neuer-dying Records of immortality) may not deservedly taunt and tax
us with the scandalous imputation of cowardice, nor our posterity hereafter,
revile and curse us for leaving them inheritors and heirs, only to
Tyrannical slavery, and Presbyteriall servitude: from the which God of his
mercy preserve and defend both our selves and them. And hereunto let all the
loyal hearted subjects of King James clappe hands, and say Amen, Amen.

By I. R.

THE TOCSIN OR, WATCH-BELL.
FRance, it is high time (without delay) that this Tocsin (or Watch-bell) sound
shrilly in the hearts of all thy people, to awake and give the Alarm to all
those which ought to defend thee; since Cardinal Bellarmine the Jesuit (as
impudently as unjustly) has chosen the right of thy Kings minority, to give
the assault to thy Sovereignty, and to fix the Petard to the gates of thy
Majesty, hitherto inuiolated.

He has watched the time that thy Hercules Henry the great, was translated to
a better Kingdom then thine, to leave the Supreintendency thereof ill assured
to the young King his heir, the Regency uncertain to the Queen Regent, the
succession doubtful to the Princes of blood, the authority decrepit and feeble
to the Parliaments, the care voy de of honor to the Magistrates, the loyalty
without assurance to the Officers, the obedience without fidelity to the
Subjects, and the peace without continuance to our neighbors. For this book
published of late in Rome, under the title of The Popes Temporal power, has
performed all, yea far worse then all this.

This proud Cardinal in his book, depainteth us Popes, as if each were a
Cyrus, that is to say, inflamed with a desire, both to have and to command
all: but our Queen Mary shall be to them a Tomiris, which authorized and
encouraged in the right of her son, shall not only cut off the complots of
those Usurpers, but also the intrusion of all others whatsoever. An act both
just and necessary, since it is not done in contempt of the Apostolic
authority, but contrariwise, to exempt us from that bondage whereunto this
Cardinal through his book would bring us: yea, and which he would cause to
steal in to the buddes of the Flower-deluces, thereby to yoke and curb the
free necks of the Kings of France, which more justly then all other Kings of
the world may say, Filij Abrahae sumus and nemini seruiuimus vnquam. A
judicious personage of this Kingdom, as soon as he saw the diabolical
parricide committed and perpetrated upon the sacred person of our late King
Henry the Great, and the Queen mother declared Regent, he said, that she
would be unto our young King, as the branch of the Plane tree, or as the Storke
is to yer young ones, from whom she keeps off all infection and venom.

And now it is that France expects of the said Queen Regent, the fruits of
the aforesaid prediction. For if ever deadly poison spread it self over the
Crown of France, it is now through this Cardinals Book, which endeavors
that the Majesty and sovereignty of the Flower-deluces, should temporally be
made subject unto Popes. But alas, great Queen, what pity, nay what grief
would it be to you, (you being the Tutrixe both of King and Kingdom)
negligently to permit all France to be impoysoned through one only book?

Impia nam Pietas posset sic vestra videri. For may it please your Majesty to
consider, that in France there are a great number of false hearted French men,
unto whom the perusing of this book is as dangerous as the foam of a mad
dog, when it falls on any part of a man's body, being already either
diseased or vlcerated.

But he which has written it (Madam) is a Cardinal: and if the consideration
thereof take place in your generous heart, it will befall you as it did
sometimes unto King Demetrius, (whom Historians have surnamed the indiscreet
Prince) because after having a long time laid a siege, yea, sweated before the
town of Rhodes, and employed both his blood and treasure, to become Master
thereof; he nevertheless at last did lose both the honor and fruit of his
victory; for the respect which he bare unto a naked picture of Protogenes,
which he very ardently loved, and desired to conserve; and so desisted from
battering that part of the town, where that table was: by which quarter of the
town he might easily have surprised and taken it.

In the self same manner (you Madam) unto whose children the precedent Kings
of France have (for the space of twelve hundred years) with much care and
travel, reduced the Crown thereof to all Sovereignty, and acknowledging to
hold it of none but of God (though otherwise most religious) have both daunted
and brought to reason, the Bonifaces and Iulies (authors of ambition, and
bladders puffed up with the wind of vain glory) are now brought to lose the
liberty of the King your son, if you incline and bend your self to admire
the dignity of this Cardinal; who is to be esteemed no other then a vain
picture in respect of the matter whereof he treats: unless courageously you
sacrifice not to the fire, the rod wherewith this impudent Cardinal does
employ his best endeavors, to scourge the Sovereignty of France.

When question is to assault a strange City, or a Castle esteemed impregnable,
none undertake to attempt it without great and notable preparatiues: so this
Cardinal has long since both premeditated and propens'd to assault the
sovereignty of the Crown of France; which cannot be won without good and
valable conditions. For it is a Cat that cannot be surprised without gloves:
But sift we more narrowly their proceedings.

First at Rome they watered and mollified the Majesty of his chief court of
Parliament (esteemed at all times the Paladium of France) in the water of the
pretext of Religion; contradicting and censuring his ^rest, so religiously and
justly given against that Parricide Castle; and since perceiving that France
was thereof become insensible, and as it were sick of a Lethargy, because she
had swallowed down this sweet and sugared pill of Respect and Piety, toward
the Sea of Rome, (as the royal Dolphin, king of fishes, who having eaten the
sweet fish Pompilia, does with the sweetness thereof become so drunk, that all
his senses are benumbed, and as it were surprised with a Lethargy; so as
falling upon the Sand of the shore, he there dies, and is devoured of the
birds of the air) they resolve to advance further, and continuing to allure
him with the sugar of the same devotion, they definitiuely determine wholly to
exterminate this independent Monarchy, thereby to make him the prey and
benefice of all those Sophisters and flatterers, whom the Pope pleases to
replenish and surfeit.

But as the poor Dolphin amidst his pangs of death, (of all his natural
faculties) has still his eyes open to behold his misery: right so, Lethargique
France, at least before thou die, retain thy sight that thou may see the
misery wherinto the book of this Cardinal will bring thee.

Cardinal, a splendant and glorious name: but unto who^? why only unto
ignorant people, as the deceit of the Fowler dasleth the eyes of Larkes and
Linits with the reflex of pieces of a Looking-glass, which they represent
them, but never dasleth the eyes of generous Lions, which are not affrighted at
the removing shadow of a light Ensign, nor at the apparition of a nocturnall
Ghost.

And who will not repute thee feeble, and tax thee of cowardice generous
France, Lion of all Crowns (as the Lion is King of all beasts) if the respect
of a Red Hatte should have power to stop the course of thy independency? It
is reported of the Lion, that with the sound of his voice he assembleth all
beasts to appear before him; and therefore thou French Lion, assemble,
require, and inuit all the Potentates and Princes of Christendom, to see the
fraudulency of this second Meneclides, who insensibly would throw effeminatnes
into the spirits of Princes, of purpose to make them become, not tributaries,
but subjects to a Priest: to a Priest worthy indeed to be beloved, as long as
he maintains himself Priest of the world, and Lord or King of his own
territories, without extending his shoe in Idumea; and striving that those
which in temporal matters are but strangers to him, should nevertheless in
that regard be as homagers and subjects unto him.

In Idumeam extendam Calciamentum meum, mihi alieni genae subditi sunt. We
read of the Trozenians, that in Hercules Clubbe they heretofore saw an Olive
branch marked with repose and security: and France I say unto thee, that out of
thy resistance, as of a warlike weapon, will spring up thy conservation and
peace. And although at first it seem somewhat strange unto thee, to see a
Cardinals book publicly burnt by a common hangman; I nevertheless advertise
thee, that this thy anger will prove unto thee as the sweetness of most
medicinal herbs, as the taste of the most effectual Antidots, which are
sharp in the palate, and distasteful in the mouth; but works strongly with
nature, and exceedingly nourishes and comfort the whole body.

Caesar, that renowned Caesar had never conseru'd his dignity, if he had not
considered what it was to have passed the river Rubicon with his Army.

And France thou shall never uphold thy Sovereignty, if thou found the passage
of the profound Amelyte river of negligence; upon the banks of which thou have
a long time slept, and as it were thy self at ease, stretched to receive the
filth of the first which attempteth to blemish thy incomparable beauty.

And if the Naramones seeing the South wind had dried up all their Cesternes
(in battle array) resolved to seek out his Origin, thereby to fight and be
revenged of him: O France, France, what ought thou to do against the
pestiferous wind of this Cardinals book, which attempteth to dry up the
perpetual source of thy Crown and Kingdoms Sovereignty?

Steneleides Ephore of Lacedemonia counseled the Spartans, to bear to the
gates both the weapons and wounds of those which violate their liberties: but
at the ^^st I am not so bloody, nevertheless did occasion require, I would not
be the last for so good a subject. But France, I with Publius the Syrian
content my self to advertise thee, that the injury first received and not
revenged, draws on a second, and that this second will soon bring thee a
third, if thou wink thereat and dissemble it under the cloak of Religion.

Briefly I tell thee, that this Cardinals book is the same to thee that Epeus
horse was to the Trojans, that is to say in good French, he will be thy ruin:
for in his entrails he hides a thousand sharp weapons, to subvert the
Majesty of thy Kings, and consequently to metamorphose thy tranquillity into a
combustion. I have read that Pythagoras adored the Altars of Apollos Temples in
Delos, because they were never sacked nor ruinated: and I believe likewise that
the world will reverence France, because she was never brought under the yoke
of subjection and slavery.

But alas poor France, thou now remembrest not, that as aunciently for
sacrifices the quietest beasts were soonest done to death and immolated: so
likewise at present thy excessive piety to the Sea of Rome, proves to be the
chiefest cause of thy destruction.

Cardinal Bellarmine should have addressed himself to the King of Spain, to
have practiced these pranckes in his Dominions, for he has showed us how we
should bear ourselves. For when Baronius (likewise Cardinal) wrote a Treatise
of the Sicilian Monarchy: this King which for Sicilia is the elected and
feuditorie heir of the Popes, so well ordered his affairs, that the most
audacious durst not presume to publish what the said Baronius had written of
that matter. Many countries subject to his obedience, yea, and his Officers
bore themselves so bravely in the discharge, that neither the Pope nor
Cardinal has since reaped any benefit thereof; yea and will or nill, they
were forced so to content themselves both within Italy, as also in Kingdoms
which yearly contribute many hundreds to the Church of Rome And yet we in
France are afraid of our shadows. If there be reply made, that the king of
Spain has as just cause to except at this Book, as the king of France; in a
word, I answer, that the quality of the estates of these two kingdoms are very
much different, and that Rome has not rounded France in the ear as she has
done Spain. The wiser sort understand me, Et ecce mysterium quod vobis dico.

But now, what will the adversaries of the Roman Religion say, seeing that the
Sea of Rome, which was heretofore the tree of life, is now become an Oleander
and a Vgh tree, whose contagious shadow kills those which think to repose
themselves under the sweetness of their branches.

O deceitful verdure of religion, which like that of the North Sea, do cover
by the fair green passages of the holy Scriptures wrested, the shelues and
rockie places where all the Lordships of the world ruin themselves, and suffer
shipwreck.

No, no France, it is no longer time to dissemble: for as Pyndarus violated the
peace contracted betwixt the Greeks and Trojans, through the leueling of one
arrow at Menelaus, so this Cardinal through the arrow which he has shot forth
against the liberty of France (the which he has not exempted from the Popes
bondage) induces us to esteem the familiarity of the Sea of Rome, to be full
of fear and suspicion.

I have heretofore heard the Abbot of Boys Oliuier report (being a person
sufficiently known for the good offices which he daily performs, both to the
Church of Rome, and his King) that this present Pope Paulus Quintus, is very
affectionately addicted to France, and that this Cardinal Bellarmine is a man
very devout, and of a most innocent life and conversation. But now I begin to
suspect and doubt the fidelity of this Abbot; for the book now published by
Bellarmine, and approved and authorized by the Pope, does apparently testify
the contrary. For does his Holiness love France? why then permits he that
this Cardinals book set it on fire? and if the Cardinal himself be a devout
and innocent man, why gives he not to France that which he owes? I mean by
separating and distinguishing it from other kingdoms (which for the most part)
are feuditory and tributary to Popes.

I will yet further tie my self to the relation of this Abbot (for he is
known to be a Prelate so sincere and faithful, that he will rather die then
speak one thing and think another) and will rather believe that a great part
of this fault proceeded thorough the negligence of the kings intelligencers at
Rome, and namely of Monsieur de Marquemont, Auditor of Rota, which has yearly
great pensions from the king, and nevertheless was not so well advised to
discover the imprinting of this book: whereof if he had certified Monsieur de
Breues (his Majesty's Ambassador) he would so powerfully and valably have
conferred with the Pope, that his Holiness weighing his allegations and
reasons (at least) if he had loved France, would have prevented the impression
thereof; and the Cardinal, were he so devout and innocent, would himself have
abhorred the publishing thereof: especially since both the one and the other
well knew what trouble this unnecessary book would occasion in all
Christendom. And as for us (respecting our Kings minority wherein it was
published) we can say no other then Scorpius insidias illa sub caute tetendit.

Those amongst us which esteem themselves cleerer sighted then others, think
that the publishing of this book is a trick merely invented by the society
of Jesuits, purposely to replunge France in the miseries, from whence the late
deceased King had miraculously withdrawn it: esteeming that sect to resemble
frogs, which are never well before they are in the mire. Which if it be so,
the Jesuits may properly be paralleled to the trees of the Forest Lytania,
which inuit travelers to come and repose themselves under the delectable
shadow of their branches, and then being set down, instantly fall on them and
kill them; for all their speeches are nothing but of peace, of matters of
state, and of the dignity of France, (which indeed draws many of their side
and faction) so as if in the mean time they sell us, we shall be cunningly
deceived: but my comfort is, that there is a great difference and distance
betwixt the sale and delivery of us.

I say if this come to pass, to avoid their enteprises it were better we
surprised them: for otherwise it will befall us, as it did the Mariners of the
Lake of Laumont (in the Province of Escouie) in Scotland, which as long as the
said Lake was tempestuous they pass without danger, but being calm they
always endure shipwreck. And alas, who has better and fitter means to annoy
us then the Jesuits, who confess the King, importunately solicit the Queen,
live as companions with Monsieur the Chancellor, and Monsieur Villeroy? of whom
through their dexterity they may obtain many things, which may tend to our
ruin, as advice and agents to those which employ them thereunto.

I am not ignorant that their speeches and books are more sweeter then the
Sirens songs, and that many good spirits (pricked forwards with the spur of
Religion) throw themselves headlong into the Sea of their acquaintance,
morefully to participate of their harmony: But I know likewise that as the
wind sprung up which conducted Butes out of danger, and saved him in Lybia: so
the wind which at present blows against them in France, has drawn many
excellent spirits forth the Sea of their captivity, and has fortunately
brought them to the port of happiness.

For considering more narrowly why they are so applauded, and with a
circumspectious eye beholding the form of their comportments yea and not only
in their faces, but in their lives and doctrines, yea in their very hearts and
actions; they affirm they have found nothing but death for life, evil for
good, the loss of the Church for her preserving, and the loss of the estate
for his conferuation.

As for me, if such they are, I am of opinion, that there was never spell nor
charm more stronger and powerful, then that wherewith they practice. For when
I do see a Sillery and Villeroy, (both spirits shining with brightness, and
on all sides enuitoned with piercing sights, which as two Argus, have rather
their heads in their eyes, then their eyes in their heads) to be so enchanted
and lulled asleep with the dissembling songs of those treacherous Mercuries;
which perceive not that in shutting their eyes to their practices, they both
close up and finish the days of their own honor, and eclipse the splendour of
the dignity of France their dear mother and sweet Country, which has so
honorably imparted them the choice of her chiefest dignities, and yet of whom
they will ravish her chiefest Io (to wit) her independency and sovereignty,
whereof this great Jupiter in Bellarmines book does demonstrate himself
desperately enamoured.

I am besides my self, and believe all and more too, which antiquity has
reported of Circes the Magician.

This Capitolian Jupiter durst never have assaulted our French Hercules in the
face, but when he perceived his back turned, then hesent this courageous
canker Sophister Bellarmine, sweating with the blood of Princes, to wound him
in the heel. But courageous, courageous, the wound is not yet mortal: for (
(Iolaus) the inflexible Parliament of Paris will cure him: yea and so manage
and operate, that this Ixion which thought himself cock-sure, to have embraced
our French Juno, shall in stead thereof only embrace a cloud, from whence shall
issue Centaures, that shall go through all countries, blessing those which will
receive them, yet nevertheless shall not be entertained in France, which was
never ordained to be Augeas stable.

And as Thereon King of Spain, knocking at the gate of Hercules Temple, was
with his whole Fleet miraculously consumed by a clap of lightning from heaven:
right so this book beating at the Sovereignty of France, shall iudicially be
consumed to cynders, together with all his Sophistical reasons. This being
incident and fatal to France, that as never vicious person entered into the
Temple of Vulcan on mount Aetna, but was by the guardians thereof destroyed and
rent in pieces: so there was never any ill affected to the Flower-deluces,
which heretofore has published their impostures, but by the vigilancie of the
Parliaments have been both defaced and burnt. And although the late troubles
have opened the doors of France, and so let in some indiscreet and pernicious
books: as sometimes forrainers came and cast ancre in Diomedes Islands, wherein
the habitation was only permitted to the Grecians, because there were certain
birds which Diomedes brought thither, which would not endure that any others
should peaceably reside there, except those which were of Diomedes country: so
as if they found any forrainers or strangers there, those careful birds would
violently fall on them, picking and tearing their faces, yea and biting their
arms and breasts, and never forsake them until they had slain them. In the
same manner in this Kingdom are careful and watchful Parliaments and
Magistrates, which our Kings have established, that will never permit that the
enemies of the state should violate their privileges, or infringe their
authority. And although for a time either through importunity or protection of
great personages, they wink as if they saw nothing, and so permit them to
inhabit amongst us: Nevertheless they will never tolerate themlong to dwell
peaceably amongst us, but will closely and violently pursue them, until they
have both extenuated and exterminated them, yea and never weary themselves to
bite and sting them continually, but prove as faithful as the dogs being
Porters of Mineruaes Iliadnes Temple in Dulia, which by a natural instinct
always bit those which came to profane the Temple: yea although they were
brought in by her Priest, which under color of religion was deceived by those
detestable prophaners.

It is reported that the Lisards crooked teeth, having once taken hold, cannot
be removed without breaking them. Let us therefore break the crooked teeth of
this Lisard Bellarmine, to the end he leave us in our ancient liberty and
freedom.

It agrees well with Rome to have a Pantheon wherein to adore the generality
of Gods; but France can serve only one Master. And to speak truly, the
causes which concern the Temporalitie of France ought not to be censured, much
less decided in the Consistory of Rome. For were that tolerated, it were the
direct way to put in practice the cousenage of subtle Ithacus, who before the
Grecian army, would plead the process of generous and ingenious Palamedes, to
the end the sub^^ller to depose and stone this innocent Prince, and
notwithstanding all this while to cloak treason with a dissembling show of
justice and equity, resembling the Popes which oueruaile their usurpation with
the scarf of Religion.

But if Jupiter inflamed with choler, commanded the River Acheron to remove and
descend into hell, because the water thereof refresht the Tytans his mortal
enemies, which rebelled against him. So what Judge is there in France which
will not be cheerful, yea willing to controlle, yea consound such Stationers
Libraries, and running Book sellers, which cause seditious and pernicious
pamphlets to alight on the hearts of those which are enemies and rebels, to
their Prince and country, to encourage and harden them in the execution of
their wicked plots and proiects?

Eneas (surnamed the Pious) threatened with a cruel death those Ruteloys, which
furnished his enemy Turnus with armor and weapons; and the Corcyriens burnt the
city of Cillena, because the Helenians being Lords thereof, had aided the
Corinthians their enemies: and shall our Judges wink at the assistance and
aid which these Booke-sellers give the enemies of France, by dispersing and
selling this book of Bellarmine, which most secretly and dangerously they sow
and distribute?

No France, no: if the Jesuits participate of this wickedness, entertain
them no longer as companions and friends: for being advanced and risen through
the favor which thou have bestowed on them, they use thee as the Scythian
slaves did their Masters; esteeming themselves worthy to aspire to their
nuptial beds: so the Jesuits believe they may both sport and do what they
please with the Sovereignty of France. But once curb and correct them with the
whip, and thou shall see they will take heed to offend thee. For I cannot more
properly compare them then to the beasts Teuterydes, which fear and fly at
those which assault them, and vehemently assault and follow those which permit
them to repose and rest in peace.

Anciently, wise Ulysses conceived an extreme horror, when his servant
Eumenius informed him, what theft and riot the lovers of his wife Penelope
committed and acted in his house. But now King, Queen Regent, Princes, Judges,
Magistrates, Officers, and commons of France, would we might be showen the
dangerous Maxims of this Cardinals book, and the spoil of subversion, which
it pretends to do in France; if you, I say, foresee not and procure the
suppression and extirpation thereof: yea, be ye all inflamed thereat with just
anger; for there is therein included and comprehended such dangerous positions
and bloody propositions, that it is to be feared, they will occasion the Kings
Palaces and Cities to resemble the Cities and Palaces of Adonia, wherein was
nothing heard but cries and sighs, nothing seen but lamentations and tears.

Judicious Queen, let not the apparent and dissembling remonstrances of a
Nuncio, deceive your vigilance: For herein your Majesty may please to remember
the Egyptian fable of the Crocodile, who upon the shores of Nylus having
surprised a child from his mother, cried out as he bore him away, I will
render him thee again, if thou can define what I think: the mother bitterly
weeping, answered, I define thou will not render him me, therefore restore him
me, for I have defined aright. The Crocodile replied, If I restore him thee,
then thou have lied, I will therefore keep him both for thee and me. So when
the censure of the Arest of Parliament was complained of, and made known to
our Bride and Lord the late King; what promises did the Popes Nuncio make him,
that he would cause it to be both remedied and revoked? yea what sugared
speeches gave he to Monsieur Chancelier and Monsieur Villeroy, who only
hindered, and withheld that the Court of Parliament imposed and bent not their
authority against it? and which of all those fair promises has he since
accomplished and performed? No, no, he well knows the humor of the French to
be sensible in new wounds, and forgetful when they are become more aged, and
when they should seek for revenge thereof: he believes that amongst us he
which has time, has life: or to say more properly, He which is reprined is
pardoned. And so much will he now likewise do to prevent the burning of
Bellarmines book: but when the shame and fear thereof is past, you shall
never obtain the honor of the liberty of France, whereof this book will
deprive you; yea his promises will vanish away as smoke, knowing well that as
Denis the tyrant had rather permit himself to be pulled and drawn down from
his Throne, then to mount upon a furious and warlike horse: so the Popes (his
Masters) have determined never to abandon their pretension, which they have of
the Sovereignty of France, or to see themselves reduced and brought to an
authority purely Apostolic and Sacerdotall; except by mere force of the
faithful Officers of Kings, Potentates and Princes. It is an Axiom (Madam)
incident to all Ambassadors, whereon depends either the glory or the interest
of the Princes their Masters.

Turpe est vinci, sed non cessisse Decorum. And to arrive to a Cardinalship,
there is no directer way, then effectually to occasion Kings to submit
themselves to the authority of Popes, which falsely apply and attribute to
themselves this verse of David's Psalm: Ador abunt eum omnes Reges terrae,
omnes gentes seruient ei. Which nevertheless belongs not properly to any of
them, but on the contrary to Jesus Christ.

And for Cardinal Bellarmine, he well knows that he has not always taught
that which in his book he now teaches, concerning the Sovereignty of Popes
over Kings. For were not Sixtus the fifth dead, he would make him wedde the
prison of the Inquisition, because he then taught more conformable to the
truth then he now does.

But seeing this Cardinals book now in the hangmans hand, ready to be
converted into ashes; I would willingly demand of him the sense of the same
demand which Cyrus made unto Craesus, whom he had vanquished and taken in
battle.

Bellarmine, who has called thee without reasonable motives, to war against
the temporal Sovereignty of France? And I answer my self (if his book could
speak it would answer for him) The advancement and security of the
Sovereignty of France, the augmentation of her honor (but without thought
thereof) and for ever the eclipsing of the renown of my author, with the
eternal banishment of all his Aahaerents from the Territories of the
Flower-de-Luce: of which says the Evangelist, Solomon in all his majesty was
never so maiesticall as it is.

When Antipater would have reduced the Lacedaemonians to his subjection, they
said unto him, Use us as Citizens, worthy of Lacedemonia, and let our truce be
as prejudicial unto us as it pleases thee, so f^rre forth as it redound not
to our shame.

So France says at present to the Pope: Use me as France, which has
temporally made thee what thou art; and on that which is spiritual, extend thy
authority as far as thou can: but beware, make not this Crown thy slave,
which (in many parts of Italy) has made thee King. Otherwise thou must needs
believe, if thou durst undertake it, that (as Augustus said to those which
dissuaded him from hating Cassius and Brutus, the murderers of his adopted
father Caesar) God which has esteemed our King Jews the twelfth, worthy the
Scepter of great Henry his father, will make him as worthy a successor of his
valor, to conserve the crown which he has left him, free from all domination,
except that of heaven.

For France resembles precious stones, the least crack or hair which is in
the luster of her Sovereignty causes her to be no longer France, and makes
the valuation of her worth to be exceedingly debased and diminished.

Bellarmines book for a time will be but a small pepin (or kernel) but with
growth of years he will grow to be a very thick Forest, full of trees and
branches; and if it be not in time lopped and pruned, it will finally ouertop
and beat down the fruit of the French trees life, and infect it as the
Salamander which lurketh in the hollow of some fruit tree; and so through his
extreme coldenesse, does by little and little cause him to wither and die.

When Jupiter gave the marvelous rod unto Mercury his Messenger, he
accompanied it with shame to bear it unto human persons (immediately after
Epimetheus had framed man.) But I think that Jesus Christ the true God was no
less careful when he gave authority to Popes, to accompany them with modesty,
in bearing themselves discreetly toward men.

I know well that as the Egyptians made Virgins to sit on Lions, so the divine
providence of God has placed Ecclesiastical authority above temporal: but
so, as Popes ought always to remember that this spiritual authority is
without issue or earthly production, as a Virgin which has no children: yea
and ought no more forget that Kings are Lions. And as it is easy for a Lion at
one fastening of his teeth to crush in sunder the bones of a Virgin, if she
affright him: so it is easy for Princes to bound up Popes in their limits, if
they once presume to anger them in any thing which concerns their temp
oraltie; for therein consists their force and power. A good Christian both
indeed and name, named Prudence, said, Non eripit mortalia, qui Regna dat
caelestia.

Would not Popes in these days resemble Aaerons rod, which void of leaves,
moth eaten and dry, did neuerthesse in one night budde forth and become
green, in such sort, that the next morning the children of Israel perceived
not a branch without leaves, not a Troncke deprived of humidity, and separated
from his sap: but contratiwise a tree greenly flourishing and laden with
fruit. This present time wherein we live is not literally the season of the
Israelites; but spiritually of the Jews, which miraculously retain this rod
by miracle, but make no use of the virtue thereof: since it was put into the
Arc of the Covenant, as faith Sjt. Paul to the Hebrews, chap. 9. it was never
employed nor used, that we read of in Scriptures.

There are no more Predericks in the world: besides it is long since, that Juno
Nucerene was extinguished, the which in the wars of the Cymbrians, in the
turning of a hand made her withered rod flourish.

And the Popes deceive themselves, to think that they alone can make the
harmony of the Church, wherein there must likewise be Kings and Princes; as
said Zeno, hearing the Musician Amebeus playing on his instruments, that the
entrails, sinews, and bones of beasts, yea wood laid by, accordant number,
and arrang'd by equal proportion, make a pleasant and complete harmony.

It is reported of Dragons, that they rot by always eating of their tails,
and yet without eating any other flesh then their own, they cannot again
become young. So who will believe that the Popes for fear of rotting will not
circumference themselves within the circle of their power, but to become again
young, they desire to eat the power of the Princes of the world?

Alas, must it so fall out, that I a Roman Catholic should see the Popes
reproached, and that in permitting the publishing of this Cardinals book,
wherein France is used as the basest country of the world? They have forgotten
that it is that holy Abicoboes and mountain of refuge, that stone of defense,
which Mahomet in his Alcoran, not knowing notwithstanding the sense of his
word, said to be built by the hand of the Almighty, for the sure and
inexpugnable guard of his Jerusalem, to wit the Church. Yea, yea, as said
Hanniball to Antiochus (but to another purpose) speaking of the forces of Syria
toward the Romans: there are but too many Doctors in France, capable to
resist Bellarmine, although copious and abundant in allegations; yea there are
in France enough to feather him, and more then enough to fear him.

Cur spolieris erit, non cur metuaris ab host. O wise Villeroy (under the
branches of whose fanour and greatness, lurk all those of the Roman faction,
which would wound our country) see thou not that the confused light of this
Bellarmine, sent amidst the cloud of the variableness of France does presage
our tempest? and that the fire of his breath, falling upon the poopes of our
vessels, is the prognostication of the turbulency of our waters? But I foresee
that in the end, the tempestuous storm of these waters will bear down the
Arc of their irregular power of Rome, so far, that it will finally fix and
establish it upon the tops of the mountains of Armenia, where it cannot
possibly any longer annoy the Kings of the earth.

He which foundeth this Toosin (or Watch bell) wise Villeroy, is one which has
long admired thee, which knows very much of thy proceedings, and who daily
weepeth at the diminution of the honor of our native country: to the security
and preservation whereof, thy too too great inclination to Rome gives terrible
assaults and advantage.

But whereof should we fear? the Clergy of France is rich. But now the question
is of the dignity of the Crown of France, which some endeavor to annihilate
and extinguish: and therefore who can hinder us with Themistocles, neither to
put distinction of wealth, places nor persons, against the rash assertions of
Bellarmine, which seek thereof to deprive us? and who can justly reprove us,
if with the Syracusans we holily use our weapons, consecrated to the Temple of
the Olympian Jupiter, especially since it concerns the defense of our liberty.

And if as said Publius Curulius, it was lawful to sell those trees which were
most devoutly consecrated to Apollo in the I Will of Coee, to build ships for
the wars: doubt not Holy Father, but that the Church of France, use both Fer
feathers and her treasures to revenge her self of the wrongs which Bellarmine
in his book has offered to the crown of France: and as the Athenians saved
themselves by the precious stones of the monuments of their deceased: so we
likewise will stone this Bellarmine to death with the stones of great Henry,
our late Kings tomb; during whose life, if he had published that which he has
since written, that invincible King would personally have gone and fetched him
out of Rome, and so in expiation of his irremissible offense, have immolated
and sacrificed him upon the Altar of the Sovereignty of France.

O Bellarmine, the war is now denounced betwixt France and thee: and remember
that we will use thee as the Argeans did the Spartans: for whether thou recant
living, dead, or otherwise, as long as France is France, not such as thou
would have it to be, but such as God has established it: thy name amongst
the French shall be as horrible and detestable as that of Erostratus in
Ephesus, who endeavored in one hour to sack and raze down all which rich
Asia had erected and built in two hundred years.

And if thou desire that thy other books (indeed profitable) and thy name
(formerly honorable) should remain and live with us, we say unto thee, as the
Romans said to Pyrrhus, which entreated them for truce: first forsake the
liberty of France, whereon thou have set foot and intruded, and then motion us
for peace. Otherwise nor thou, nor thine shall ever have repose in France, since
thou have watched the time of our mourning to make us slaves, as did those
wicked slips of war (detested of old Jacob) viz. Simeon and Leuy,) which
destroyed the Sichemites in their greatest miseries and calamities.

Cursed Tarentula, lo we denounce thee war, and will no longer use thee as a
Cardinal, because thou have not used us as free French men, the first borne of
the Church. Do thou imagine to lull us asleep, thereby to bring our most
sensible members into a Lethargy? But what speak I? thou art a Jesuit, and
therefore can not do otherwise: Simia semper Simia, etiam si paurpura
vestiatur.

O felonious Jesuits, which resemble the Nubian Marmorike, that grows about
the body of man purposely to destroy it. Sarcophanges of Troade, which will
inhabit alone, and destroy all others that dwell near you: Combustible
Pyraustes which by the rays of your books, dart forth a thousand incendies
and fires into Kingdoms: envious Demons, Telcbnes or Alastors, which to
deceive the simple Commons of France, cover your selves with the thick cloud
of religion, and exhausting the water of stinking Styx, power it out on our
heads; not only of purpose to engender a thousand mischiefs, but also to make
us forget the wholesome Antidots and remedies, which great Henry has
administered to our miseries. But alas, your water resembles the water of the
fountain of Tellos, which is so thick that it cannot be intermixed with
wine, no more then can your hellish and King-killing Doctrine agree with the
French.

For although you seem fair in your conuersations and books, yet God
preserve our Sovereign Monarchy from being wraped and inuelloped, either in
your positions, or in your exterior appearance; as a Historian said, that the
rich walls of Babylon (that seventh wonder of the world) were never ouerspread
or touched with Iuy. For as an expert Mason (of all things) ought not to
beautify his building with that ruinous herb, because in stead of
strengthening it, it will destroy it. So a politic Prince ought in no wise
permit or tolerate the sect and society of Jesuits to reside in his
Dominions, what color of Religion, of spiritual fruit, or of salvation of
souls, soever they propose him; because it is to wedde his estate to the utter
ruin and manifest destruction thereof, in respect they undertake too much, and
busy themselves too much with the affairs of the State.

Know we not by experience, that as the most orientest pearls, by the long and
often touching them with lead, are converted into dust and earth, so the souls
of the most resolutest and purest subject becomes either silent, perfidious
or disloyal through their long fequenting and familiarity with the Jesuits?
which have for their traditiue and rule (like unto Philip King of Macedonia,
who desirous to make peace with the Grecians, required their chiefest Orators
to estrange them from them;) that immediately as soon as they come near great
personages, they might by their tongue and art so contriue it, that their most
loyal and faithfullest servants should be withdrawn from them, to the end
that futurely without danger according to his desire, he might the better plot
and manage his proiects, without being discovered.

For proof whereof, how many excellent men has father Cotton caused to be
removed from the Court, to the end he might domineere alone? Great Cardinal
Perron (the lamp of learning) speak and say freely, how often has this
Sparrow-Hauke assayed to out-soare you; yea to outbraue and eclipse you near
the deceased King? Renouned Portingall, how many elbow-thrusts has this
impudent given your reputation? thereby to separate you from your King, which
never advanced you because of the malicious importunity and importunate malice
of this Harpy, which would ingrosse up al for himself and his adherents. And
thou, O sweet spirit, golden tongue, the ornament of our time Fenouillet, how
many times have you been assaulted by this Ismaell, which could not endure
that (near the King) your pure cloquence should obscure his Comedian style,
whom you being a Bishop (nay a worthy Bishop) esteem no more then a poor
ignorant Priest. And thou Coeffeteau, so nearly inward with this hunter of
Benefices, Priories, and Court preferments, has not the purity of thy pen
been so far suspected and enuyed by him, that he sought to tie thee to live
by the price of blood, which is established to purchase a field to bury and
interre those pilgrims which concur to the Church? And as for thee Valladter,
with thy desultory method of writing, thou have affrighted this Courtier, which
has brought thee to thy last extremity. As for the Bishops of France, he
has always been their plague, yea they know the complants which they have
made of him, so far as in their Synod to suspend him a Diuinis. But there was
none but the Abbot of Boys which has repulsed and repelled his assaults; yea
and forced him to hearken to reason, and become tractable and conformable;
seconded by the judicious assistance of the Popes Nuncio, which soon perceived
that this masculine and vigorous spirit, was not of the mind nor metal to
adore Cotton, Belsabub, God of the flies of the Court; which has always his
Altars imbrued and tainted, with the blood of the Oxen and Bulls of the
Church, to wit, of her most learned and excellentest Preachers. It is not long
since, that to imprint in the heart of our young King, he should make use of
none but the Jesuits, and reject and cast off all others: this iugler reported
his Majesty, that the King of Polonia (being a magnanimious and heroycke
Prince) had with his own hand over thrown and slain the great Duke of
Muscouia, because, quoth this tale-teller, the said King had with him four
Jesuits, which never forsook him: as if the shadow of these four lesuites
represented him the presence of Aymons four sons, which heretofore made
Charlemaine so renowned and feared. And yet notwithstanding this fable, it is
apparently known, that this aforesaid Polonian King (which by the means of
these four Jesuits, this liar has made so victorious) has been himself
both vanquished and slain.

Briefly as we read that Jupiter with one small chain, very easily drew all the other Gods after him, and himself could be drawn by none of them: so the
Jesuits in their Troublexiue of Gretzerus, report and write (Being a barrel
of wine, and a filthy lodge stinking of lies and blasphemies) that this Cotton
is the Kings Master; that his Majesty hears no other Masses then his, and
that he governs the Queen Regent; and yet the learned Prelates of France
well know that he himself is a puny, and in effect nothing. For otherwise
great Cardinal Perron the Kings spiritual Master, and great Almoner, and the
prudent and grave Bishop of Bayone his first Almoner, and the rest of the kings
Almoners, (amongst whom there are personages, always ready not only to
dispute, but convict him, and render him all the days of his life their
scholar) should be highly debased and blamed: and his Majesty's Chaplains
appear not to be much employed and busied.

But notwithstanding this, I see not that either the king or Queen govern or
rule the Jesuits, and that for all the multitude of Benefices and favors
bestowed upon them, they cannot yet draw them to love them, much less to live
as good subjects, and contain themselves in peace, without innouating some
things amongst us: but rather I see they alone think to draw all France to
them, and believe themselves able at one blow, yea and with high wrestling now
in the kings minority, to obtain that, whereof during the life of great Henry,
they durst not presume to have dreamed. For hardly had this great king shut his
eyes (and God knows if by their means, because he at Rome pursued the
reparation of the injury done to his Majesty, in censuring the Arest of his
Court of Parliament, and threatened Cotton, that unless he changed maxims, he
would dispatch him:) yea no sooner, I say, had great Henry given his last adieu
to this world, but they built a Citadel in the suburbs of St. Germans,
(without that either the king or Queen knowing at whose expense and charge
(whereunto some peradventure contributed, which were least doubted of) with
strong and crafty force and policy endeavoring to violate the authority of the
Parliament of Paris, that thereby they might be permitted to open their
College in despite, and maugre the whole body of the University. As if to
overcome all, they thought it sufficient to allege they were Jesuits, as the
Temple of Trophonius built in Mnatinea needed no other stay then the thread of
a Spiders web.

Already through their confidents they enjoy the principal offices both of the
Parliament and politic authority, esteeming by means hereof, during the Kings
minority, so to secure and inuellop themselves in the state, that through their
intelligences it will be lawful for them to divert and turn it as they
please. But I will give them an advice, which if they are wise, may perchance
much stead them: and this it is; Vindekint Duke of Saxony, heretofore a sworn
enemy to France, in the reign of King Charllemaine, seeing the King to be gone
in person to the wars of Spain, addresses himself to a certain Prince of
Denmark, and solicited him to invade France, in respect the King was absent,
and his kingdom left desolate for a prey. But the Danish Prince better
instructed in the conduction of the affairs of France, replied, No, no; reject
(Sir) those simple opinions, and deceive not your self: for the kingdom of
France is never unprovided of his guard. It is I confess a prey; but (I assure
you) a subtle dangerous prey, which destroys and ruineth those which attempt
to surprise it.

In like manner it is true, that our king is a Minor, yea I acknowledge it: but
it is also true that the Magistrates of France are very quick sighted, and
marvelous resolute and vigilant in his Majesty's affairs. And amongst these
Magistrates there are civil Lieutenants, which cannot dissemble any thing
indamageth or preiudiceth France: in respect whereof the Jesuits are not yet
arrived where they desire, nor have not stricken the mark whereat they aim;
yea I know a certain Magistrate which heretofore reposed upon the vigilance of
the late king, without removing or stirring for any matter which past in Paris,
that now watches day and night to keep king Jews the thirteenth from danger;
whom God preserve and protect. Yea and I persuade my self, considering it was
a Iaye, which by his cries has discovered the assault which Bellarmine has
given France: that it may likewise be true, that a Goose by his voice has
heretofore saved the Capitol of Rome, from the surprising of the French: and I
believe also that the Jesuits with all their snares and nets, shall never
surprise this Iaye; to whom France ought to contribute and afford an yearly
memory (as at Rome they yet remember the Geese which guarded and preserved the
Capitol:) because thorough his cry so effectually and fitly made, he has
awakened and aroused France from her slumber, wherein through this Cardinals
wicked book, she was on the point to lose the life of her liberty.

Ha ye Jesuits, what presage is this for you, that birds pick and war at
you? Peruse, I say, the fortieth chapter of Genesis, what was the dream of
Pharaohs Baker; and thereunto add this other place of Scripture: Speak not
evil of the King in secret, for the birds of the air will reveal it, and the
news thereof: and so applying all this together, fear the discovery and
torment thereof.

It may be you think that as Dragons cannot obtain to be Dragons, before they
have caten a Snake; so likewise you cannot become the most furious and
redoubtable of the world, before you have swallowed down and devoured France.
But let me certify you, that this book of Cardinal Bellarmine has awakened
us from our Lethargy, and has brought us to the knowledge why the Popes Nuncio
favored us so much: and not many months since was so afraid, lest the
Preachers would have stirred up the Parisians to have expelled and banished you
the City. For as an Arest of the Court of Parliament is of small efficacy and
power, without Serieants or Pursuyuants to execute him; so were Bellarmines
book of small or no virtue, were you not in France (under color of religion
and conscience) to put in practice the execution thereof. For the mask is
taken off, and we are advertised at our Ladies Church in Paris, if any one
deceive us.

No, no France, think not that when question was to suppress the sellers and
distributers of Cardinal Baronius his book at Naples, written against the
Sicilian Monarchy, that then the Popes Nuncio remained silent or idle with his
arms a cross: for there are many hundreds now present, which then saw his
goings and commings, yea which ouerheard his threatenings. But as those which
dwell at the foot of the mountains of Egypt, are deaf by reason of the
cataracts and sluices of Nylus; so the Magistrates of Naples seemed to be deaf,
and gave no occasion of laughter to the Court of Rome, which triumph when they
see people tremble, and fear at the threatenings of their Nuncios, and feed
them selves with this vain vanity, that they do so stand in awe of them.

Ha, ha, Citizens of Paris, send your children to the Jesuits schools to be
trained up by them for good French men, (as Archelaus, who sent Xenophons
children to Lacedemonia to learn the Majesty of Sparta) and you shall see what
doctrine they will imprint in their hearts and spirits. And this is the lesson
which came from Rome, that the youth of France should be taught by them at the
opening of their schools. But rush, this instruction came too soon in the
morning: for it finds the College doors not yet open: wherefore it is
pity, being she was so lately borne (for the ancient Christians knew not the
name of those Jesuits) lest before the College be open to cover, she should
take some Rheum or Catarre, and so we should have need to apply some vstions
and cupping to warrant her from all diseases, thereby to prevent that she
infect not others.

You Sirs (to wit) you Jesuits, you have been principally assisted by women
in the managing and conduction of all your actions, as also by those which have
finished the production thereof. For without the favor and assistance of such
people, your affairs had gone still backewards. But now since your mask is
discovered, that by Bellarmines book you teach that France is no longer
France, to wit, Sovereign and independent, the very women themselves will both
overthrow and vanquish you, (as the women of Lacedemonia, who in battle array
discomfited the Messenians, which came to sack and raze their City) and if
there were but the Marchioness of Verneull, the Countess of Moret, and the
holy Beaue your Agent in the world, they have too much tasted the odoriferous
smell which the Flower-de-luces yields, to permit them to wither by your
breathings (I say not contagious breathes) for the word had almost escaped my
tongue. And you Lord of Varrane, and Ladies of Garenne: who had there been of
your trade if France had been no Sovereignty? For had it pleased the Pope that
you should have been banished the Court, and that it had not been performed;
the King then without the Sovereignty of France was disposable to the Popes
pleasure, and consequently then unable to do you good or assist you. Whereby
it manifestly appears, that it is the Sovereignty of France, which has
assisted you, nay enriched you and placed you at your ease and pleasures. In
respect whereof, you then ought and are bound to maintain and defend it. I say
further that the Marchionesses of Guerchuille, and Maignelet, Ladies of greater
respect, and far higher renown then the former, would before the others,
have incited the very dogs against the Jesuits, as soon as they had heard the
tenor of this Cardinal Bellarmines book: and the Bishop of Paris, whom I
believe to be a loyal French man, will die with grief, if his approbation of
their innocence, have any way advanced so infamous a crime, as to endeavor by
writing to ravish and deprive France of her independent sovereignty, unto whom
both he and his owe all, both their wealth and honor. And for the Duke of
Espernon, he has so far experience in the destruction of King Henry the
third, his most dear and debonaire master, what misery and desolation this
opinion and unjust position has occasioned, that makes Popes the Sovereigns
of the kings of France; that I durst believe he well acknowledges, that to be a
true French man, he loses not the essence of a good Catholic. I come now to
Monsieur President Siguier, which notwithstanding he has been the kings
Aduocat and Lieutenant civil of Paris: and therefore well knows with what
balances Magistrates ought to weigh such drugges: yet I most assuredly know,
that of late he has vowed to a man of good respect and fame, that it were
profitable, if the Jesuits be permitted to live in France, they should swear
to observe the French Maxims, or else that they should be exiled and banished
France. But there is another scruple, to wit, that the Protestants will rejoice
to see the Jesuits pursued: which nevertheless does not astonish me, that we
fear to annoy them which by their books and actions seek to deprive us of
our liberty, and have no compassion of us, whilst the considerations which
nearly concern them, withold and restrain us: but of two evils let us
always choose the least. The Protestants laugh to see the Jesuits pursued, and
the Jesuits en devour to make us the Popes bond-slaues, who at their pleasures
should lift up and throw down our Kings, when, and as often as they list. Let
us therefore give the Protestants leave to laugh, and in the mean time let us
defend our selves from the Jesuits: for the one imports us more then the
other. And as for me, I had rather (because we cannot do otherwise) that the
Protestants should laugh to see Catholics pursue the Jesuits, then that the
Jesuits should triumph to have the means and audacity (through one book, yea
and without shot of Musket or Pistol) to make the Crown of France slave and
bondsman to the Pope.

And for you of the Clergy, you have cause to rejoice, in that your pension is
ill bestowed on the Neophyte Pelletier (for so Cotton styles him) in respect
thereby you entertain him, which (to his power) endeavors with Rapsodies,
and unapt Apologies, to cover the shame of these Jesuits, being the enemies of
your country: who was borne in Valoine in low Normandy, whereof (as some
report) Judas which betrayed his Master and our Savior Christ was native.

But father Coeffeteau (of the order of Iacobins) the once great Mynion of the
Jesuits, has reaped profit thereby: who (as a second Themistocles, seeing
that the love which the Persians bore him, and all the royal entertainment
which they showed him, was but only to serve themselves of him, to the
overthrow of the Athenians and Greeks: the which he at last perceiving, made a
show to sacrifice to their victory, and so sacrificed himself for the good of
his country, by excessiuely drinking of the blood of the Bull.) Right so I say
this valiant Coeffeteau deeply conceiting and considering whereunto tended the
courtesy, and intimate familiarity of the Jesuits, and at last perceiving
they meant to make use of him, as the chief of the faction, against the
liberty of France, he very wisely makes semblance to sacrifice to the Roman
victory, through his acquaintance with the Popes Nuncio; he discovered this
Cardinals pernicious book, and the author thereof to the Commissioner
L'Angloys, whereby he has made himself both memorable and remarkable, and has
(undoubtedly) approved himself to be a loyal hearted and true French man,
contrary to the nature of the water of the Cephuscen fountain, which no sooner
is poured into a narrow vessel, and lost his running current, but is instantly
transformed into green ye, and so by little and little obdurating is changed
into flint stones. For the inward friendship which since the Kings death the
said Coeffeteau has borne and vowed the Jesuits conditionally they should
make him a Bishop, has not made him insensible of his countries wound, but
the love thereof has caused him to produce and bring to light the book and
the matter which it contained, as also those which had of them, which the
politic Magistrate has found out and seized; and so has delivered them up
to the Presidents of the high Court of Parliament, which will soon perceive
that this detestable pamphlet is like those huge Pageants, erected at Rome
against the Carmenien feasts, which represented Chariots of triumph, that
withinside were only full of straw and hay; being as combustible as the matter
of this Cardinals book, which by his title vaunteth himself a Giant, but in
effect (as will appear by his refutation) will prove but a collection and
heap of screeds and fragments of I know not what profane authors unbound and
torn.

Now if France desire to know what I am that have sounded this Tocsin, I
answer I am Memnons Statue, erected not in Thebes of Egypt, but in Paris of
France: and as Memnons old Statue at the rising of Apollo was no sooner warmed
with his beams, but he gave so marvelous a cry, as made the Citizens to
concur together: so at the rising and apparition of the least fire
whatsoever, which pretends to burn France, I will no sooner be therewith
warmed and touched, but I will cry out Alarm to stir up all the world to
the dispelling and extenuating thereof. And put the case I am therefore
persecuted and tormented, I notwithstanding will never cease to sound and ring
out my Tocsin as loud as I can, no more then did Memnons Statue when it was
half dismembered, and rent in pieces by Cyrus.

Thus Reader, whatsoever thou art, thou see what I am: but if thou art a
loyal hearted French man (as Pythagoras by the measure of Hercules foot could
imagine the greatenesse of his whole body) so by this small Treatise conceive
thou the greatness of my love to France: the which if it be either tried or
provoked by the King or Council (without departing from my obedience, faith
and communion of the Church of Rome) shall produce very terrible effects: not
believing nevertheless that which is reported at Rome, that they are either
Lutherans or Caluinists, which give unto God that which is Gods, and will not
also take away some things from Kings to give to Popes, not yet to bow their
knees, humbly to reverence the Jesuits, Reddite que sunt Caesaris Caesari, and
quaesunt Dei Deo. Otherwise we must conclude, that all Magistrates of the
Crown of Spain, and of the renowned Commonwealth of Venice, which diminish
not a-any thing from their sovereignty to please the Pope were todos Lutheranos
(all Lutherans:) which no man of judgment will report, much less affirm. And
so farewell without farewell.

FINIS.
AN EXTRACT OF THE REGISTERS OF THE Court of Parliament of PARIS: Against the
book entitled, Tractatus de Potestate summi Pontificis in temporalibus,
aduersus Guilielmum Barclaium, auctore Roberto Sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae
Cardinali Bellarmino.



Imprinted at London by William Stansby. 1611,

AN EXTRACT OF THE REGISters of the Court of PARLIAMENT.
Seen by the Court, the great chamber of the Tournelle and Edict, assembled,
the book entitled Tractatus de Potestate summi Pontificis in temporalib'
aduersus Guilielmum Barclaium, auctore Roberto Sanctae Ecclesiae Roman
Cardinali Bellarmino, imprinted in Rome by Bartholomew Sanet, the year 1610
the conclusions of the Kings Attorney General, all heard and considered.

The said Court has and does prohibit, and defend all manner of persons of
what quality or condition soever, upon pain of Crime De Laese Majesty, not to
receive, retain, communicate, imprint, cause to be imprinted or sold the
aforesaid book, containing a false and detestable opinion, tending to the
subversion of Sovereign powers, ordained and established by God; stirring up
of subjects against their Princes, withdrawing of their obedience, provoking
them to set violent hands upon their royal persons and estates, and to
trouble the repose and tranquillity of the Weal public. Inioyning and
commanding also all those which have copies of the aforesaid book, or know who
possesses them, speedily to reveal and declare them to the Ordinary Judges;
that according to the requests of the said Attorney General, perqursition may
be made, and execution done upon the offenders, as reason shall require.

Also the said Court has and does make the like prohibition, and defense, upon
pain of the aforesaid penalty, to all Doctors, Divines, Schoolmasters or
others, not to confer, dispute, write, or teach, either directly or indirectly
in their Schools, Colleges, or any other places, the aforesaid proposition.

Ordained likewise by the said Court, that this present Arest shall be sent to
the Bayliffes and Shrieffes of this Kingdom, to be read, published,
inregistred, kept and observed according to the tenor and form thereof;
inioyning also the substitutes of the said Kings Attorney General, to be
careful to see the execution thereof: and to certify the Court monthly of
their diligence therein.

Given in Parliament the six and twentieth of November. 1610.

SIGNED. DV TILLET.

THE EXTRACT OF AN AUTHOR, which has written the history of our time.
A Great number of French were Leaguers, under color of Religion, until the
Duke of Feria (the Spanish Ambassador) discovered and took off the King his
Masters Mask, when in the assembly of the pretended states in Paris, he
demanded the Kingdom of France in propriety and succession for a daughter of
Spain; contrary to that which is written in sacred Scripture, Let not the
Lillies spinne. And then it was that the chief President (in danger of his
life) pronounced that good and notable Arest the eight and twentieth of July,
1593, whereby upon pain of death it was defended to mention or speak of
transporting the Crown to any other unless to the true heirs thereof;
declaring all matters tending to the prejudice of the Salique law: and all
other fundamental laws, appertaining to the crown of France, to be of no
power, value, force or virtue. And exhorting the Duke of Mayene, to employ his
authority of Lieuetenantship, that under color of Religion the Crown of
France might not fall into the possession of a stranger, contrary to the laws
of the Kingdom in that behalf extant and provided.

THE APPLICATION thereof, made by MEMNONS Statue.
A Great and notable number of Catholics, under color of religion adhaered
with the Jesuits until now Cardinal Bellarmine, taking off the mask and
discovering the reason why the Pope his Master, so sharply insisted for the
reestablishment of the Jesuits in France, when thinking they had assuredly
opened their College in Paris, he under color to answer a certain person of
Hercles, sent the form of that which the said Jesuits should teach our youth
concerning the Sovereignty of the Crown of France, which he brought in
subjection to the Popes pleasure; against that which is written of the Lilleyes
Quae non laborant, they are no villains, hired servants nor slaves. And then
it was when (with danger of his life) the starve of Memnon sounded, and rung
out this shrill sounding Tocsin, being the seventeenth of November, 1610. Which
upon pain to be declared Felons and Traitors, dissuaded al loyal hearted
French men, neither to speak nor teach any way, or for any cause whatsoever,
that Popes can temporally dispose of the Sovereignty of France: declaring all
books tending to the prejudice of the French fundamental Maxims, to be
wicked and Diabolical, and exhorting the Bishops of Paris, N.N.N. of
Guerchville, Maignelet, the Marchioness of Verneul, Countess of Moret N. and
others to whom it appertains, to employ the honor which they enjoy to be
borne in France; as also their goods, to the end that under color of Religion,
the Sovereignty of France (against the laws of God and the kingdom) fall not
into the hands of Priests: and particularly admonishing the Sieurs N.N. no more
to affright and daunt the Magistrates which watch for the good of the French
Monarchy: nor by artificial impiety to abuse the authority which they have
near the person of the Queen Regent, to the great prejudice of the Princes of
blood, Lords, loyal Officers, and faithful subjects of the Crown: which as
much as in them lies they disgrace and cast down, to the end they may
domineere and govern alone after their own humors. Otherwise if after this
admonition they neglect to take heed, the Statue of Memnon shall reveal many
packets of secrets: and they shall see that Mordocheus although poorly
apparelled in Canuasse, shall preserve both King and State, yea and discover and
reveal the treacherous complors of those two Teresh and Bigthon: For France is
now weary, and resolved no longer to endure their iugling tricks, and
sleights of Legier Du. Main.


