A DISCOVRSE WHETHER A NOBLE MAN BY BIRTH or a Gentleman by desert is greater
in Nobility.

AT LONDON Printed by Peter Short, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the black Bear. 1600.

Who so will seek by right deserts t'attaine
unto the type of true Nobility,
And not by painted shows and titles vain,
Derived far from famous Auncestrie,
Behold them both in their right visnomy
Here truly portrayed, as they ought to be,
And striving both for terms of dignity,
To be advanced highest in degree.
And when thou do with equal insight see
the ods twixt both, of both the^ deem aright
And choose the better of them both to thee,
But thanks to him that it deserves, behight:
To Nenna first, that first this work created,
And next to Jones, that truly it translated.
Ed. Spenser.

Here do thou bring (my friend) a stranger borne
To be indenized with us, and made our own,
Nobility, whose name indeed is worn
By many that are great, or mighty grown:
But yet to him most natural, best known,
To whom thou do thy labors sacrifize,
And in whom al those virtues best are shown
Which here this little volume does comprize.
Whereon when he shall cast his worthy eyes,
He here shall glass himself, himself shall reed:
The model of his own perfections lies
Here plain described, which he presents in deed:
So that if men can not true worth discern
By this discourse, look they on him and learn.
Sa. Danyel.

G. Chapman to the Author.
ACcept thrice Noble Nennio at his hand
That cannot bid himself welcome at home,
A thrice due welcome to our native strand,
Italian, French, and English now become.
Thrice Noble, not in that used Epethite,
But Noble first, to know whence Noblesse sprung,
Then in thy labor bringing it to light,
Thirdly, in being adorned with our tung.
And since so (like it self) thy Land affoords
The right of Noblesse to all noble parts,
I wish our friend, giving the English words,
With much desert of Love in English hearts,
As he has made one strange an Englishman,
May make our minds in this, Italian.
Ex tenebris.
MY artlesse Muse (if any muse at all)
Couched in rude, in base, in home attire,
Not fitting thoughts, or actions that aspire,
But led by love, and graced principal
In this, she once was handmaid unto skill,
Would (if she durst her stem to raise so hie)
Blazon thy laud, who of Nobility
So much have showed, and therein dipped thy quill.
But sith thy zeal to Honor Nennio
Whom thy desires have brought from foreign soil,
Has been one cause of this thy taken toil,
Vnwaited on with praise thou may not go.
For lookers on that do partake thy pleasure,
Must of thy virtue find the precious treasure.
Ang. Day.

A Treatise of Nobility, written by the famous Doctor, and worthy knight, Sir
John Baptista Nenna of Bari.
The first Book.
IT is a natural instinct in all living creatures, which causes them to avoid
such perilous encounters, as do most commonly cross them in this life: Of the
which we have greatest occasion to beware, when they are most dangerous, and
noisome. Which was the reason, that remaining with my brother in the learned
city of Antenor, not so much to the intent to get the knowlegde of some new Art
as to learn the courteous and good behavior of the place, being assailed with
a pestilent mortality, in the year 1528. we endeavored as much as in us lay
(setting our study aside) to save our lives (to which opinion the most agreed)
and so we departed from thence, and came to the ancient city that Iapiges the
son of Daedalus builded, situate in the fertile country of Pouglia, near
unto the waves of the Adriatique Sea: Which place of abode was far more
pleasing to us then any other, in regard we were there straightwaies
entertained of our dear parents, and in possession of our own substance, from
the which we had been a long time secluded. But the season drawing near, in
the which the earth begins to cloth it self again; this dangerous
mortality followed us even unto out own country, being besides (without any
pity) afflicted, with cruel and sharp wars, by the mighty invasion of the
Frenchmen. We being then brought to this extremity, to issue forth, seemed by
the wars to be forbidden us; and to forsake each others company, by reason of
the sickness, seemed not the best. Wherefore that we might in some sort
discharge our selves of those heavy cares, which did always oppress our
pensive imaginations, we thought it best with choice of delights (albeit we
reaped small profit by them) to pass this wearisome time.

As we led this kind of life, I was one day against my will surprised with a
dead sleep, in the which it seemed unto me, to be entered into a deep and most
obscure valley, where from a far off, there came toward me a troup of young
ladies, all of them of very venerable regard. In ye midst of which (as their
queen) there marched a lady, apparelled all in cloth of gold, set forth with
most costly Jewels. After her there followed another, far stricken in age, yet
worthy of great estimation, whose garments were of a sanguine color, having a
troop of noble knights going before her, some of them carrying in their
hands ancient privileges, others trophies, and triumphs of their victories.
Behind these I perceived another lady of sovereign authority, whose eyes did
seem as sparckles, and her countenance more lively then any I had ever before
taken notice of, albeit she was very old: Sometimes her body seemed not to
surpass the common stature of women, and otherwhiles on the sudden you would
have thought yt she had exceeded the height of heaven: She held in her hands a
roial scepter, and was attended on (with great reverence) with a discreet, and
learned company. To conclude, she seemed unto me to be a most worthy lady, of
a mild aspect, and wonderful view: before her marched the first three, as
less worthy, who as she went had on her head a crown, as the mark of a
mighty queen; her garments were distinguished with diverse yellow, crimson, and
green colors. And in as much as from her princely countenance, did proceed a
shining light, I might easily perceive al those things: and me thought yt
turning toward me, she said unto me.

Young man, the burden of thy thoughts, and the misery of the life thou
leadest, are not hidden from me: wherefore to ease the one, and remedy the
other, depart from this place, and take some new help unto thee, to the end
thou may at the last purchase a more sure, and virtuous estate of life.
Scarce had she uttered these words, before I heard a rude and fearful voice,
which said unto me: Pack hence, and be careful of thy safety.

Being much amazed at that voice which had even pierced my heart, and with my
spirits loosing my natural color; at one instant breaking off both my
dream, and sleep, I awaked: and after that I had a little called my wits
together, I pondered often in my unsettled imagination, what those things might
signify I lately dreamed on.

Considering then with my self the truth of her words, and how much man is
rather bound to follow virtuous actions then vain pleasures, which I had
addicted my self unto: I undoubtedly determined, to follow her faithful
counsel, and utterly to abandon that kind of life, which by the ill
disposition of time, I was forced to lead. Wherein notwithstanding, fortune
seemed not greatly to favor me: for much time ouerpassed not, before that the
war being in some sort appeased, all our company together with the ladies
and others (some being tied together by kindred and alliance: others by knot of
friendship) as well to avoid the scorching heat, as the frequentation of much
company in so contagious a season; transported themselves to a Grange of ours,
seven miles distant from the town. There by reason of the conueniencie of a
fair house, and of a most pleasant and wonderful delightful garden, we
still remained, spending the time continually in such sports and pastimes, as
the season of the year, the place and the company did require.

It happened on a day, that as Fabricio, and Possidonio (two young gent. of our
company) walked abroad, they espied a noble lady coming toward them, whose
name was Virginia, accompanied with an honorable train, who was going right
toward the city: whom when they were come near unto, they entertained with
such reverence, as was due unto her, and besought her to make stay in that
place, and to dine with us: She seeing her self constrained by their earnest
entreaties, remained there with them, and was courteously received of this
pleasant company. After she had refreshed her self together with other
ladies, she took view of the house, garden, and that which was most worthy to
behold, the Gentlewomen, who alvvaies accompanied her foot by foot, unto the
place where the tables were covered for dinner: every one of us being served
in very decent and good order, and having store of good and delicate meats, and
most excellent wine, we passed out dinner very merrily, not without many
pretty quips. In the end it pleased this noble Lady (not without great sorrow
of the whole company) to depart from us, and having with most gentle speech
taken her leave of the gentlemen and gentlevvomen, she in like sort went her
way, after she had thanked them all; which notvvithstanding, the two young
gentlemen who first invited her, did still accompany her: but after they had
gone some pretty distance from us, she would not suffer them to pass any
further, but staying herself and turning toward them, she spoke unto them
after this manner. The gracious intertainment, the noble exercise, and pleasant
abode of this frolic company, have this day bound my heart unto them in such
sort, that I shall never lose the remembrance thereof. Whervvithall taking a
rich gold ring curiously wrought forth of her bosom, she said: And to the end
that you may be as mindful of me, as is lawfully permitted, I do bestovv this
ring upon him that is the most noble of you two, whom I incharge to wear it
in remembrance of me.

The conclusion of her speech, and her departure were at one instant, leaving
the ring in his hands, who when she gave it did not so willingly accept
thereof. Howbeit Possidonio* as one descending of an ancient and noble family,
being besides endued with great riches, claimed the gift: but Fabricio, who
reckoned himself nothing inferior to the other in nobility (albeit that his
ancestors were not of so noble blood, nor himself blessed with so great
wealth) he pretended with great vehemency, that the ring belonged unto him,
because that from his youth, he had been virtuously raised to that substance
he possessed, and thereby become wise, prudent and well conditioned. So soon
as they were returned to their company, they straightwaies declared the cause
of their variance, showing them the ring, which was framed in circle wise: on
the one side whereof there was the picture of a young lady apparelled like a
nymph, who held in her hand a royal Crown, in such sort as if she would have
set the same upon some bodies head, round about the which was written in
Latin Dignus coronabitur ipsa, Let the most worthy be crowned herewith.

On the other side was the pourtraiture of a gallant young man crowned
therewith, who held in his hand a green bough not much unlike unto an Olive
branch, about the which was ingraued, Victor, and merito coronatus; I am
crowned herewith as the conqueror, and that by desert.

But by reason the controversy between these two young Gentlemen, did grow
more and more, who by occasion thereof arrived there unawares, they were all
of one opinion (to the end, that whereas this pleasant company were met
together only for their recreation, that enmity and hatred might not grow
thorough this sudden accident) to boult out the troth of this their doubt,
they should one after another set down their reasons, and afterward stand
to the judgment of a third person.

A Gentleman called Nennio, (one of the company) was indifferently chosen by
them, for that purpose, who after he had heard the reasons debated on both
sides, should by his wisdom, give judgment and sentence, from which they
promised they would not appeal, but friendly rest satisfied therewith. Albeit
that the burden thereof seemed heavy to Nennio, yet did he willingly sustain
it, considering that peace on all sides would follow thereby.

And because that on either part the discourse was entertained with no less
profit, then pleasure, with pretty subtle arguments, and witty conclusions,
I determined (asvvell to avoid the heat of the season, as to keep me from
idleness) with my pen (such as it is,) to set them down in vvriting.

A great part of the day was already ouerpassed, and the sun in his declining,
when as both the Gentlemen and ladies by common consent did descend to the most
pleasant place of the garden, where we sat orderly in circle-wise upon the
thin grass, which under the shadowy-sweet-smelling trees was defended from the
parching heat of the sun beams. Possidonio, as one desirous to be the first
that should enter into the listes, was set in a place somewhat higher than the
rest; who after he saw us all equally attentive, and that our ears seemed as
it were ready to hear him, gave this beginning unto his speech.

Fabricio, If I knew thee to be of that force, that thou were able to impugn
the least of my reasons, how weak soever they may seem to be, I should
imagine my self to be in far greater danger then I am. But contrarily, it
cannot any way sink into my thought, by what means thou art able to resist
them, nor with what reason that carries with it a resemblance of troth, thou
art able to arm thy self against me.

Wherefore in my opinion it were far more fit, and more commendable before so
worthy an audience (to the end the minds of the assistantes might be more
intentive) to discourse of some other question more doubtful then this we are
to entreat of, it rather becoming thy estate and condition, even at the
beginning to keep silence: and yet it may be, that this discourse likes thee
better, that thereby thou may set forth the ancient and honorable stock of
thy predecessors, and their great large riches and revenues. Howsoever it be,
that thou may not take me to be out of the matter, I will return to our
disputation.

Worthy Gentlemen, the doubt which this day is happened amongst us, is not
unknown unto you (if so it be that we ought to call it a doubt) for surely a
more easy controversy did never rise amongst men. We shall soon see if
Fabricio be more noble then I am, or whether I am more honorable then he is.
He might with more reason make a question, whether the day be more cleerer
than the night, or the sun more hot then the Moon: and perhaps there might
be greater cause to doubt thereat, the baseness of his birth, and the
worthiness of my blood being more then sufficiently known unto you. But
seeing it is your pleasure that we shall discourse thereof, I will willingly
yield, being more constrained thereunto to satisfy your desire then forced by
reason, not distrusting any whit of obtaining the victory.

It lying then upon me (loving Gent.) to prove unto you that I am a noble man,
yea far more noble then Fabricio: I will first show you what nobility is,
which if we do rightly understand as we ought, I doubt not but that our
controversy will be finally determined without any further debating of the
matter. I affirm that to be true nobility (for Fabricio, thou can not vary
from the opinion of all men) which of long time has been left by the
predecessors unto the successors, as a hereditarie gift, the name whereof is
as well imprinted in them, as the form of the body; in as much as he that is
borne of a noble family, so soon as he is brought forth into the world, is
esteemed amongst the number of noble men, which is no less apparent then true;
for as much as if we consider any noble man whatsoever, surely those that
descend from him, shall be reckoned amongst such as are noble men.

Who is he so void of reason, that does not account those as noble men, who are
descended of the stock of the Sforsi, of these of Ests, of the Gonsagui, and
of a number of other most noble races? Surely, no man. He then is a Noble
man, who is issued of a noble family. Let us then consider whether I or thou,
are sprung of noble parents, to the end that the most noble of us both may be
known. Tell me I pray thee, and take no scorn to let me know, whether thy
ancestors were Noblemen, or not: nay whether they were so much as reckoned
amongst gent. which surely I believe thou art not able to show me. If then no
Nobility was left thee by thy auncesters, how do thou now take that
boldness upon thee, to give thy self the title of a nobleman? By what means
do thou seek to intrude thy self into the company of Gentlemen? What hope
have thou to be adjudged the more noble? Surely I know not how I should
persuade my self therein: but contrarily, you cannot make any doubt, but that
this nobility was left me by my predecessors, for both my grandfathers, and
their great grandfathers and their issue, have still as it were from hand to
hand, maintained themselves in the order of noblemen: for so much as they have
always showed themselves worthy men at Arms, and many of them have been
lords of Castles and of Towns, albeit that envious fortune has bereft them of
the greater part of this substance. I will not further enlarge my discourse, to
reckon up what my predecessors have been, being certain that they are no
less known unto you, then to my self.

Wherefore it may well be concluded, that I being the successor of right
Noble men, and thou borne of base parentage, that I am a Noble man, and thou
art not; and so consequently the ring which this day was given by the Lady
Virginia, belongs unto me, as to the most noble of the two. Now see Fabricio
how by little and little, I have made it manifest, that thou art deceived. Yet
if so it were that thou should deny my conclusion, which is most true in it
self, I would so forciblie work, that thou should of necessity be
constrained to yield thereunto. For if they who do expose their lives to a
thousand dangers, as it were men banished from their own houses, the space of
many years, in the service of their king, their country, or other princes, to
purchase to themselves a glorious name everlastingly, did consider that so
soon as they should depart this life, their renowm and their glory should die
with them, and not remain to their children, and posterity; he might surely be
accounted foolish that would take pains, or endure any travel or disquiet:
but they waighing that this name which they did get amongst bloody battails,
did not only adorn their own persons (which should indeed be but a small
thing) but likewise all their whole stock after them, they did not against
their will, but of their own accord enter into such toil, and labor. Whereby
it follows of necessity that we conclude, that the selfsame renown, and
the selfsame Nobility, that was in their ancestors whatsoever it be, is
tra^sferred to their posterity: Because that naturally we have no better
instrument, nor more perfect means, by which the glory and Nobility which is
in men, may endure long, then their children and posterity: by them nobility
is preserved, by them the generositie of families is lively maintained.
Hitherto the words of Possidonio were continued, with a wonderful attention and
without any interruption: when Fabricio turning himself toward him spoke
after this manner. Pass on no further Possidonio, for I intend to answer thee
to that thou have thus far discoursed, and thou shall understand whether this
nobility which we seek for, does remain in blood, or not: and then thou
may at leisure proceed, for as thou shall frame thine arguments, so will I
likewise answer thee. At which offer Possidonio paused, but the company would
not suffer that Fabricio should intermeddle to answer Possidonio his discourse,
until he had ended that which he should be able to allege in his defense.
Wherefore silence being made, Possidonio proceeded after this manner.

You see moreover (worthy Gent.) what operation nature affoordeth to the
innobling of man. For if we consider the gifts which it lends in the
generation of man, you shall find them wholly assembled in our favor.
For So Much as first it yields to this, that the ingendring of children is
permitted to man, by means of his own blood; and after that it has brought
them forth into the world, it labors to cause them to be like unto those,
whose natural blood is dispersed in their bodies: herehence proceeds ye
excessive love which the father naturally bears to his son, which to speak
the troth surpasses all other loves in this world; as is best known unto
them that have made trial thereof; the engendered being deemed a part and member
of the ingenderer.

Now whosoever he be that is begotten of a gentleman, and consequently of Noble
blood, who will once deny but that he is part of ye begetter? Surely no man.
Why then the worthy nobility of them, no otherwise then their own blood, is
dispersed in their children, as in a part of themselves. And namely add
heereunto ye natural resemblance of the father, which oftentimes denotes
cleerlie in their posterity, the gracious countenance and good members, not
only of the father, but even of the auncesters likewise. Herehence afterward
it comes, that as it were, even the very manners, and lively spirits with
many of their worthy provvesses, are transfused into their children.

And of this the valiant deeds of Scipio the great may make thee assured, which
as I have often heard, and I believe thou know right well, were not unequal
to the prowesses of his father Cornelio. The like have I understood of the
other Scipio: and if these were not of themselves sufficient, I could allege
many other modern examples. But you may be easily persuaded herein, by that
which we see every day, that vvhilest we are children, we do so retain
within our selves, the childish conditions, which are learned of our fathers,
or of any other whatsoever, that growing afterward to greater age, they
remain so fast fixed in our hearts, whether they be good or evil, as if we
had been taught them by nature her self: and according to the diversity of
men, we do learn diverse sorts of manners, for a husband man his son (or
to speak generally) a Hosier his child, or such like, will not be of the same
behauior and value, as a gent. his son, because there is more care had in ye
one, and the other is rudely brought up. Whereby it is easily gathered, that the
manners and prowess of the father is conveyed from him unto the children, and
so consequently his nobility. Seeing then that nature does in the creation of
man yield blood and resemblance, whence this fatherly love does spring, to whom
shall this sort of Nobility which we term of blood be left, but to a man his
own children? surely not unto strangers, which even nature it self would
withstand.

Possidonio passed on no further being in his discourse interrupted by Madame
Cassandra (a wife and beautiful lady of the company) who having a little
called her wits together, set upon him after this manner.

If it be not lawful for Fabricio at this time to answer thy discourse,
Possidonio, yet shall he hereafter have time, and memory sufficient to
satisfy thy reasons. In whose behalf likewise I do not seek to say any
thing: and if I should, surely he should be but badly defended by me. But that
which I intend is as strongly as I can to maintain those reasons which make for
us women: for without making any mention of the^, you have slightly passed
over them. In your last speech (if so be that I did well comprehend what you
said) you gave us to understand, that who so is engendered of the blood of a
noble man, is nobly borne: In as much as nature has granted thus much unto you,
that children are engendered by means of your blood: whereunto you added the
resemblance of the father, and his great love toward his children, which are
all gifts of nature.

Now, if we will by a more true mean consider the truth of thy speech, I
persuade my self that these gifts which thou call gifts of nature, being
more proper to the woman the^ to the man (as may easily be showed) that in the
Nobility of man, the Nobility of the mother ought rather to be considered
then the Noblenes of the father. Who is so ignorant (at least if this Nobility
which thou speak of consists in blood) that the blood of the woman is no
less sought by nature to engender children, then the blood of the man? Nay
rather much more on our side, because, as you know, the child once conceived,
is by the space of many months nourished in our womb, with our own blood, and
sometimes two years after it is borne: whence it appears that children
receive a greater quantity of blood of the mother then from the father. I will
forbear to speak of ye pain of our body, the danger we are in, in child
bearing; the anguish, and labor we sustain to bring them up: al which things
may evidently prove unto you, yt the love of the mother is far greater toward
her child the^ the fathers is: yea and sometimes likewise the child will as well
resemble the mother, as the father: all which is most manifest.

I say then, that if I would know if one be a gent. which is the mark you
shoot at, I will have recourse unto the quality of his mother, whether she
were a gentlewoman, and not unto the condition of his father, whether he were a
gentleman, as you lately did argue: which may with reason be believed. But you
men make laws as you list, and draw your reasons as likes you best, setting us
silly women aside, as if we were none of the number of the world: but if it
were lawful for us to be present at your counsels, peradventure matters would
go otherwise, and so many things would not pass for current (as this should
have done) as they do.

Herewithall the lady Cassandra held her peace, and all the ladies did highly
commend that which she had spoken in their favor, when as Possidonio, not
determining to reply any thing unto her words, spoke after this manner.

Madame, as for me it is all one, whether we take the blood of the father, or
of the mother: for I not only both by my fathers and mothers side, come of
noble blood; but my grandfathers, grandmothers, great grandfathers, and great
graundmothers, were on both sides of most noble descent, as is not unknown
unto you.

The wise lady did not rest contented with Possidonio his answer, as if he had
spoken smallie to the purpose, when as master Dominico, one of my brethren,
determining to satisfy her demand, taking the matter upon him, said unto her.

Madame, I persuade my self, that if it were lawful for you women to be
present at our counsels, as you say, that your virtues would equal the
Amazonian ladies, who banished their husbands, took upon them the government
of the kingdom, and disposed thereof at their pleasure, defending with their
sword the feminine liberty. Of the same mind was Valasqua queen of the
Bohemians, who conspiring with the principal ladies of that kingdom,
effected the same thing: but I believe you are not now a days of so haughty a
courage. Howsoever it be, I would not have you believe, that you are any ways
defrauded of your right, in that you propose, nor in any other thing in the
world, but rather where any favor or aid may be given you, both the law,
and the law makers, are ready therein: and you ought to be persuaded, that
men do not make laws as they list, as you do imagine: for sometimes women
(when as laws made by men, have not been pleasing unto them) they have
boldly opposed themselves against them. As on a time at Rome a general law
being made, it was scarsely kept twenty years: and it was this, that no
woman should apparel her self in diverse colors, nor wear any ornament of
gold that did exceed the weight of half an ounce, with such other like
matters, by which the lascivious and licentious life of women, was restrained:
for the principal ladies of Rome being assembled together, without any regard
or shame, not without great danger of sedition in the city, they did break
this law. Now then to satisfy you in that which lately you alleged for the
defense of women, in the midst of this disputation: I say, that I do not
deny that in engendring of children, more quantity of blood does abound on
your side then on ours, because that so soon as the creature is conceived in
your body, it is nourished therewith. But you ought to know Madame, that the
men of the world have established this law for firm, that in the Nobility
of man, the condition and nobleness of the father is considered, and not of
the mother: for it is manifest, that when as in a subject of perfection many
degrees do concur together, we take the name of the most worthy, and that
of most power. As for example, we see in the most renowned majesty of our
lady and mistress, whose life being adorned with all worthiness, and
replenished with a most singular providence of honesty and holiness, is not
only bruted in our country, but through all the world, she is lawfully
duchess of our city, and of a large extent of land* Princes of many other
places, and most worthy queen of Polonia, and yet we term her not by the
title of Duchess, or Princes, but always call her queen, as the name of most
worth, and most power. Now who doubts but that the man, is far more
worthy, and of greater might then the woman? Peradventure Madame you will
deny this. Surely you cannot, because this is no law which we men have made,
as you believe, but his law that has made both man, and woman: when as he
taking displeasure against our first mother, said, man shall always bear rule
over you. It is then no wonder if we seek the condition of our father, as
more worthy and excellent for the ennobling of man, then our mothers estate.

Moreover, consider one of these images, and behold likewise this stone which
is near unto it, of the which there may easily another image be framed, which
of these two will you deem more worthy, the image or the stone? surely in my
opinion the image. Now a woman is no other thing then as it were that stone,
that is to say, a simple matter, and man is as the form or fashion, and like
as for the perfection thereof the matter does covet the form, so does a woman
for her perfection desire a man. We will then conclude, that a woman is so much
less worthy then the man, as the matter is of less estimation then the form;
or as that which suffers, is less worthy then that which does. Hereof it
follows, that we ought to be called after the name of the man as the most
worthy. So that this proposition is true, that in nobility, we have only to
consider, the nobleness of the father.

M. Dominico having ended his talk, the lady being well advised, replied
nothing thereunto, as though she had been thoroughly satisfied therewith, when
as Possidonio following on his enterprise, began to speak after this manner.

Gentlemen and ladies: The force which nature gives to this nobility is so
great, that we see it does not only preserve the same in man, but likewise in
other living creatures, not partakers of reason, yea even in plants, as we may
see in horses, dogs, trees, and in other things. For if I desire a fair horse,
or a good dog, or if I intend to graft any excellent fruit, I will first of al
seek out the most noble horse, the best hunting spaniell, and the most
excellent tree of that sort which I can possibly find, because it will never
fail to prove like unto that which has engendered it, or to the plant. And
every kind (to which nature has given virtue to bring forth fruit) produces
it like, and not disagreeing to it self, as we may see every where: whence it
comes to pass that man cannot engender any other thing then man. Wherefore
if thou grauntest unto me Fabricio (and impossible it is but thou should
yield thereunto) that if I be descended of a noble family, it must needs follow
(if we will not gainsay the law of nature) that I am a noble man.

Possidonio paused a while from his discourse, or else made some stay to
bethink himself how he might further proceed to fortify his enterprise,
and to trouble his enemy, or rather clean to stop up the passage, that he
might without any outrage obtain the desired victory; when as Madam Laura
(the youngest amongst the ladies, though no less endued with wit and virtue
then the rest, being besides of a quick capacity) turning toward
Possidonio, with a womanlike bashfulnesse, opened her coral lips, and began to
speak in this sort.

Possidonio and Fabricio, I know not whether it may become me or no, to
entermeddle with your disputations, which perhaps are not fit for ladies,
especially for me which have so little to say: but being rather covetous to
learn, then desirous to contradict any of you, if it may be lawful for me, I
will speak that which comes into my remembrance, least otherwise I should be
blamed for a lady of no sound judgment, and full of presumption.

Fabricio immediately gave this answer. God forbid Madame, nay rather your
virtue thereby will appear more clearer, replenished with most sound judgment,
and not as you say, worthy any blame. For albeit it is not so beseeming for
ladies to discourse of this argument, as it is delightful to hear the^;
notwithstanding it shall be a thing lawful, and permitted both for your self, the
rest of these ladies, and any of the gentlemen, to entermeddle and speak what
so shall come into their minds, whether it be in doubting, answering,
reproouing, arguing, or resolving of any thing, either on the one side or of
the other, according to every man his best judgment. For So Much as the truth
of this controversy ought to be drawn from us all, albeit that Possidonio,
and my self in mine own defense are chosen to yield our reasons.

Possid. having showed himself conformable to Fabricio his will, the lady Laura
after a long continued speech, with a womanlike voice, added that which
follows.

This is no small matter, that having demanded leave for my self only, I have
obtained it for the whole company. For the which I do give thanks unto you
both: which being said, she turned again toward Possidonio, and spoke unto
him in this sort.

It seems unto me Possidonio, that the scope of thy last words did tend to
this end: that in as much as man cannot engender any thing else but man, that
thou being descended of noble parents, art for that cause a noble man, which in
my judgment cannot in any wise be well concluded. For albeit that a man cannot
beget any other thing then man, yet it follows not that ye same qualities
should remain in the children which are in the parents; and so consequently he
yt is born of a noble man, albeit that of his father he receive his being, and
the form of his body, yet shall he not receive nobility therewith, which is
as a quality, which either may be, or not be in the subject.

Nay contrarily Madame, quoth Possidonio, he which is borne, receives in like
manner the self same qualities: because that if a man be white, the child shall
likewise be participant of his whitenes: if he be black, he shall be partaker
of his blacknes: In as much as whosoever gives the essence or being, he gives
likewise that which follows the essence, which is manifestly proved in our
selves, and the Ethiopians.

The young lady stood at a stay, it may be not knowing how to frame a reply.
Wherefore Possidonio having a little taken breath, followed on his discourse in
this manner.

Gentlemen, by that which may be gathered by the words which I have spoken, you
may perceive that nobility in man is given him of nature, and infused in his
blood; wherefore like as the laws of nature are stable, and firm, so likewise
nobility in the family of man through his blood, by which it is continued, is
permanent and durable.

Here M. John Francisco, one of the company taking the speech upon him, said
in this sort. The force of nature is so great in the procreation of children,
that very seldom, or almost not at all, there is any difference between the
father and the child, as I will make manifest unto you, by a tale or history
(if so you please I call it) by which you may know the mighty power of Nature
in the nobility of man.

There was a gallant and noble lady, who dwells not far from hence (whose
name for the respect I bear unto her, I will not manifest) married to a worthy
knight, by whom she conceived, and did bear a fair young son. And as it
happens very often, not so much in regard of the opportunity which these
ladies have, as in respect that for the most part they live daintily and
idly: it chanced (whether it were through love, or of her own free will) her
husband perceiving nothing thereof, that she joined hirselfe to one of her
servants, so that in succession of time she brought forth two children. Now
these growing further in age, the eldest did so far exceed his other
brethren (for so were they all esteemed by the father) as the supposed father,
did surpass the true father: for as he waxed bigger, so did he grow comely of
personage, and quick of wit, whereas the other were very fools, and
blockheads; and the eldest of them did continually exercise himself in worthy
and valorous actions, he desired to learn to be virtuous, he took pleasure
in horses, to run at the ring, and in all other honorable kinds of exercise,
which by reason of his age he was able to undergo, but the rest showed
themselves as base, and far from doing any virtuous action: and indeed he did
no less shine amongst them, then the sun amidst the rest of the planets; the
folly and cowardice of the other two, was so great, that the common report
did run every where, that like as in behavior and wit, they did differ from
the other, so likewise they had another father: and their slothfulness
(besides that there was no resemblance between him and them) imprinted so
great a belief in the husband, that he constrained his wife to confess the
troth unto him, and in the end she being no less forced by experience, then by
nature it self, she opened the whole secret unto him.

And besides the Lady I speak of, I know yet two other women, who although
they be descended of base parentage, yet are they fair and gracious to
behold, who not contenting themselves with their husbands, as ill disposed
women are wont to do, did when opportunity served them, and do still, take
their pleasure with young men of Noble blood, bringing forth fruit answereable
to their voluptuous pleasure: and this I know for troth, that by them they have
brought forth most noble children, whereas of their husbands they have had
most clownish creatures, so that even in beholding their natural form, and
the constitution of their body, they do give sufficient testimony thereof. By
this you may see how nature shows her power in the nobility of blood; seeing
from the same womb is borne (by reason either of the noble or ignoble seed) a
gentle and divine spirit, and another abject and base. And as concerning that
Madam Cassandra, which you alleged even now: answer might be made unto you
besides that which already is said; That albeit in the generation of mankind
there abounds more blood on the woman her part, greater dangers, and greater
labors, yet notwithstanding we ought to have regard unto the dignity of the
man, and not of the woman: for as concerning this matter we will compare the
woman to the earth, which brings forth fruit according to the seed it
receives.

Hereunto master Dominico again taking the speech upon him said, These
examples of yours M. John Fra^cisco, do bring into my remembrance the success
of Romulus and Remus, who descended of the ancient royal stock of the
Siluit, and were as histories do report, being little ones, by the
commandment of their uncle Amulius, cast into the river Tyber, on the ba^ks
whereof Faustulus master of the kings sheep did find them, who knowing who
they were gave them to Laurencia his wife, that she might bring them up; who
notwithstanding was called a she Wolf, because she did willingly yield her
body as common amongst the shepherds.

Now these children being brought up in Faustulus his flock, and growing in
age, they did not intend the keeping of the beasts, nor the leading of a
country life, but first giving themselves to hunting, afterward to set upon
thieves, who were often endamaged by them, they began to show the valor which
was in them. And as fit occasion fell out, Faustulus declared ye whole matter to
Numitor, who before was banished out of the kingdom by his brother Amulius,
which he having understood, immediately his mind gave him that they were his
nephews, and comparing the time with their age, and considering their
countenance, he verily affirmed, that they seemed not to be clownes, nor of
any base birth, but as if Nature had certified the troth, he knew that they
came of the blood Royal, and so accepted them for his Nephews: now whosoever
will know what valor they were of, let him read further of them.

You may then see master John Francisco, how nature does manifest the power
of Nobility of blood: for albeit they were nourished amongst shepheardes, yet
was not their bringing up a hinderance to their natural virtue. Master
Dominico had not so soon ended his talk, but Possidonio taking the speech
upon him, followed on his discourse in this sort.

Gentlemen; henceforward let us forbear to bring so many reasons, as nature
does afford us for the Nobility of blood, for surely time would not suffice to
aledge all that may be said in that behalf; and let us a little weigh that
which the common brute and opinion of men does generally d^em and beleeu
thereof I wuld lern this of thee Fabricio, what Town, what Castle, and what
village it is, where thou shall not find this a general and common custom, to
call and account those noblemen, who are borne of a noble stock? Surely (as I
believe) no place in the world. Nay rather so soon as they are brought forth,
they are reckoned amongst the number of those that are reputed noble, and men
do not without reason attribute unto them such privileges as the country
yields, sustaining likewise such labor and travail for the service and
creation of them, as it behooves them to undertake.

This is a general custom, which we do see is put in practice every where.
And tell me I pray thee, if thou do so much regard me; if thou did
desire to understand or know whether one were a gent. or not, were it not
sufficient for thee to hear that he is of the stock of Saint Seuerini, of
the Carraccolli, or of the Carrafi, which are accounted most honorable amongst
the noble families of Italy? Surely if thou dooest not swerve from common
equity; thou must of force be constrained to confess the troth.

Now I desire that even thou thy self may conclude, and judge whether of
the two is the most noble, seeing that my house is as well known unto thee as
thine own and that it is sufficiently manifest which of them both being
named, is reputed the most noble. It may be thy heart will serve thee, to auerre
that it is thy family that is so renowned in this City. I do not believe
except thou were mad, that any such folly would possess thee, yet do I
persuade my self, that thou would not be ashamed, with thy sophistical
arguments, to make men deem, that white is black: yet know this, that it is an
hard matter to resist the troth, and though I had not set upon thee with any
other weapon then this last, it were sufficient to make thee stark dumb But to
pass on further, my force will serve me to assail thee yet more fiercely; for
albeit thou tokest me to day unprovided, yet have I other weapons to set upon
thee vvithall.

Gent. I having hitherto manifestly proved unto you, both by nature and common
custom, that he is noble, whom nature has brought forth of Noble parents: I
will now with no less true, then pregnant reasons, confirm the same unto
you. I do affirm, and it is not a thing to be doubted of, that if any man or
woman, did commit any act, that shame and reproach followed thereof; not only
the said parties, but all their posterity are spotted with shameful infamy,
which we do evidently see every day: as for example, in a thousand places
you shall find such as are murderers of their own wives, or have laid violent
hands on their own flesh, or been executioners of their own sisters, and
such like: Only to repair the insupportable dishonor which follows the
fact, which either the wife, daughter, or sister may have committed in giving
them selves in pray to others, it does like a pestilent mortality, which by
bad government enters into a town, spread it self all over, and infect all
those that are of that stock. Now contrarily I say, if any man by his worthy
prowess, and lawdable actions, does aspire to great honor, surely all his
posterity ought to be partakers of that honor, nay they are not partakers
thereof, but it ought wholly and entirely to remain with them. For it should be
against reason, whereas infamy and dishonor should by reason rather be
extinguished, that they should have a larger scope to extend themselves in
man's posterity then renown and glory of man.

My predecessors then, having been men worthy of glory, prosperous in
renown, deserving honor, and consequently capeable of all Nobility; it
follows of necessity, that all their renown, glory and honor, and their
Nobility rests in me, as their successor. Shall we say the like of thy
predecessors Fabricio, that there remains only in thee, their worthiness
and Nobility, whatsoever it was? Tell me if thou have any such reason in thy
brain? But let us yet proceed further, and I will yet allege unto thee
another reason, to persuade thee more firmly in that which we seek after.

Suppose a father has two children, valiant knights, and replenished with
great learning, by which they make themselves worthy of honor, the father
himself notwithstanding, being neither of valor nor learning; thou can not
deny me, but yt for all this the childrens honor and renown redoundeth
likewise to the father; for it is a common proverb, that the sons greater
estimation, is the fathers greater honor. From whence we see, that good
fathers who have care of their children, strain themselves in such sort, to
bring them up, as that thereby they merit high reputation.

By greater reason then (not passing, but therein following the order of
nature) the worthiness and greatness of parents, is transferred unto their
children, as a part, and substance of themselves: by which reason I may
necessarily conclude, that this worthiness, greatness, and nobility, which
has been in my ancestors, remains now in me, who am a part and very
substance of them. Possidonio pausing a little to gather breath; master Peter
Anthony my brother, desiring to have some part in this discourse, began to
speak in this manner.

Seeing that the Lady Laura (with a natural grace) has obtained leave of you,
that it is lawful for us to intrude our selves into your disputation, not only
in doubting and resolving, but also in arguing; I will allege without passion
or partiality against any one party, that which falls into my remembrance
fit for this purpose: and if it strengthen thy side Possidonio, I promise
thee Fabricio, I will do the like for thee, as far as my memory will serve
me, and my understanding will afford me matter. Whereunto Fabricio answered.

Spare not to speak freely what so it likes you, for you cannot do me a
greater pleasure, then in arguing to allege such reasons, as shall be in
favor of the victory on Possidonio his behalf, and contrary to my opinion,
for so much as with little labor I shall refute them. So much the more
willingly (quoth master Peter Anthony) both my self and others, will
hereafter speak that which shall seem best unto us, especially, before the
troth be by this your disputation discovered.

There was then in times past, in the famous City of Rome this law (amongst
others) held in great reverence, least that the memorable renown of a valiant
knight should with his life take end, that the Images of those who had
overcome the enemies host, and conquered Kingdoms, not before brought into
subjection, should be engraven and set in the most public place of the
City; under which a remembrance of their acts was written, which yet at this
day we see in many places.

And that was done to the end (as I may say) to prevent nature in yt it could
not give; which was to make them immortal by perpetual commendation, as also
to the end that their successors pricked forward with the desire of like
glory and renown (like as valorous horses at the sound of the trumpet) might
not fear the labors of the body, much less the dangers of life, to avoid and
to repel from their country all adverse accidents hurtful to the same and to
purchase for it, all triumphant and prosperous dignity that might be for the
avail thereof.

In troth the Images and triumphs inflamed men's boldness, and gave them great
courage, and these eternal remembrances, did move the hearts of men: who are
naturally desirous of honor and glory. For it was a thing ordained among the
Romans at a certain prefixed time, in festival manner to visit these
bodies, and behold these Images. What more greater glory and greater triumph
may be desired in this world of any living man? Surely the heart cannot wish,
nor the tongue demand any greater.

Appliable to this purpose I say, that if these men in remembrance of their
singular virtue and great courage, did attribute such great honor to images,
whether they were marble or metal, how much more did these owe to the living
children, I believe no less, but rather more; in as much as a fained form of
man, is less to be esteemed then that which represents him truly. Which may
be apparantlie discerned by any whosoever, though but of small judgment.

For what occasion did the common wealth of Rome set in government the Camilli,
Fabii, Scipiones, Emilij, Catones and others, but for the glory and renown of
their predecessors? See we not the same observed this day among modern
princes? It follows then reasonably, that this grace and nobility which is in
the predecessors, does deservedly remain with the children.

Scarce had master Peter Anthony ended his discourse, when Possidonio pursued
his speech after this manner.

It should be surely a foolish thing, to believe that it remained with these
immovable and fained images, and not with their children. For what profit are
they able to bring unto the commonwealth? surely none (besides the example
which by them is left to posterity) but the offspring of noble men may yield
and lend great help unto it daily as we see continually. For as much as if
we look into the estates and commonwealthes of the world, which are governed
diversely: shall thou find Fabricio that the rule and managing of them is
granted to any other, saving to those that are reckoned to be noble? And if
you demand of whence this proceeds. I would answer thee in my opinion, it
arises of no other cause, then that the predecessors of him that is noble,
having submitted not only his goods, but life also, to a thousand dangers and
hazardes for his country, it should be great ingratitude, (nay rather might we
judge it cruelty) if that so soon as they received their last mortal wound,
they should slip out of remembrance, or that it should deny them the reward
worthy their labors. Whereupon, that they may not incur so great note of
inhumanitie, the government of commonwealthes ought to be given them, as good
means to preserve them. And as they which do represent the dead members of
their predecessors.

Master Dominico added hereunto: we do not only see this used in our time,
as in the rich and well ordered city of Venice and elsewhere, we may perceive
that the government and administration of the estate is given unto gentlemen,
but as I have often read, the like was done in time past. In the city of Rome
at that time more renowned then any other, the Senators were held in great
estimation of Nobility. And if they were accounted in the order of Senators,
and consequently of true noble men which were descended of Senators: We will
then say, according to the former reasons, that the Children and issue of
noblemen are true and perfect noble men. These last words were scarce ended,
when as the lady Camilla, whose natural whiteness tempered with a vermillion
color, hiding her self as if she had somewhat been ashamed, her face burning
like fire, and turning toward master Dominico, in whom she put great trust,
with a woman's voice said thus.

It seems unto me that this day you are all opposed to Fabricio, seeing that
you cease not together with master Peter Anthony, to allege new reasons for
Possidonio: but beside that he himself in answering them can refute them al,
I will not forbear to pay you in such sort as you know.

Madame (quoth he) hereafter I will take heed, seeing that you are not pleased
that we should entermeddle in this discourse, to the end that this day, I do
not against my will incur a penalty, which I am not able to bear.

These last words gave occasion to the company of laughter: whereupon
Fabricio, without any farther stay, said:

Madame, let every one of them allege the most pregnant and strong reasons
they can, for I shall not want courage sufficient to confute them all: do not
you know that the glory of the conqueror is so much ye greater, as the force
of the vanquisher does exceed: which was the cause that Possidonio laughing
more at Fabricio his speech, as making small account thereof, then at the young
Lady, followed on after this sort.

We do not only find this to be true in the government of Cities and
Provinces, but likewise in Bishoprics, Cardinalshippes, and such other. Thou
shall not see Fabricio (and if it happen, it is very seldom) that these
offices and dignities are bestowed upon any other then gentlemen. By which
thou may well consider what help and profit those do bring unto us, which
are borne of Noblemen, more then the fained images of the Romans held by them
in great observance, for an everlasting remembrance.

Consider beside those reasons already recited, that with Princes, Kings,
Emperors, Popes and in any place of estate, the noble man by blood goes
foremost, and he which is nobly borne is only honored, and to him only,
the place fit for his nobility, is by good right always granted.

M. John Francisco, with a good grace added hereunto.

We do not only see this in use among Princes, but also among private persons,
that Noble men are preferred before other: especially, when they meet at
banquets, where they are more honored, and served with more attendance.

Master Dominico taking the speech upon him again said, I have yet other
reasons to allege in the favor of Possidonio, but that I fear to incur
this day her disgrace, which I would not: The lady Camilla, having by threats
forbidden that, which graciously you had granted. To whom in anger she
answered; And what would you say more, then that you have already spoken?
Madam, quoth he, I would say that:

The great Architect of heaven and earth intending to send his only beloved
son into the world to cover his divinity with our humanity, to the end to
free man, who was miserably wrapped in sin (For scarce had he been framed by
his creator, but he immediately showed himself disobedient toward him, and
that by subtle deceit of him, who rebelling against his maker, was with his
copartners banished the heavens, and is eternally condemned to the depth of
hell) This divine word, to become man did not choose those parents in this
world, which were of an abject and base family, but his will was, to descend of
the royal blood of David. He was surely most meek, humble and poor, in that
he loved al these things and preached the same to others, yet notwithstanding,
he would not be born of a mean and base blood as I said. If then this
nobility of blood, was esteemed of the son of God, man incarnate, how much
more ought we who are his followers, deem it a thing to be beloved and
reverenced? surely very much. Do we not read likewise, that Herod Ascalonita
the son of Antipater, of base lineage, being chosen king of Judea by Octauian
the second Emperor, he made a decree, that all the books wherein were written
the noble and great generations of the twelve Patriarchs should be burned, to
the end yt he being not found there written among the^, by succession of time
might easily be credited, that because he was king of Judah, was descended of
the blood Royal (I mean of the stock of Israel) from whence the Patriarchs
were derived, which he infinitely desired, to the end that he and his
successors might be always reputed in the number of noble men?

Do not we read likewise of Equitius, who being the son of a bondslaue and
made free, did feine himself to be the son of the most renowned Tiberius
Gracchus? What shall I say of him that took upon him that boldness, that with
a marvelous subtletie, he persuaded the people of Rome that he was the son
of Octauia, sister of the Emperor, and of Marcus Antonius, and that he was
descended of the royal blood? And of that Barbarian, sprung of base parentage,
who in regard of the natural resemblance which he did bear to Ariarat king
of Cappadocia, already slain by Marcus Antonius; took upon him the courage
to say that he was king Ariarat, by which means the Cities of Asia, yielded
the kingdom unto him.

You may see how great a number there was of those, who not contenting
themselves with their base birth, have sought (as many do at this day) to
ennoble themselves in the worthy families of other men. We may then well
conclude, that there is no small number, but contrary the greater part of the
world do run after this nobility, to make themselves worthy of glory, and
leave a memorable renown unto their posterity.

You may see then Madame Camilla, whether I have had any thing to say in the
favor of Possidonio, and whether I have not stopped up Fabricio his passage.
Whereunto she answered, that which thou have stopped he will easily break
through, and find means to bind thee surely. Some such words passing
between them, Possidonio followed on his discourse, after this manner.

Surely, fair ladies, there is no man in ye world, which does not desire and
reverence nobility of blood, that exalts those that possess it, even unto
the clouds. Yet will I not recount unto you from point to point, all that may
be said in favor thereof. Wherefore it is now high time, that I draw near
the matter, and that I bring this my discourse to certain true effects. And
surely in a few words, I may conclude, that he being Noble, who is borne of
Noble Parents, as I said; there need not be any doubt whether the ring given
by the noble Lady, belongs to any other then to my self, who am the most
Noble. My ancestors Fabricio, were of no base house, I am not descended of any
obscure parentage: but contrarily, there are many ages that their renown has
shined amongst men, and there is none of you that is ignorant thereof, for there
are already many years passed, wherein they have exposed themselves to do
their princes service. Ought the aid that they have continually yielded them,
be of no account? Inasmuch as they have valiantly fought against their enemies,
and courageously opposed them selves against all hazardous dangers, not flying
from any labors in the world.

They have not made any account, neither of heat, nor cold, nor of all the
encumbrances, which did cross them: and we are not ignorant how many
troublesome broils they have freed our City from, and what assistance they
have yielded thereunto. Which the ornaments of their victories do
sufficiently declare, which may be seen in many places of the city. I could
(if there were any such necessity therein, as there is not) show you many
ancient privileges which they have received of ancient kings, by which it
may easily be perceived of what estimation they have been, and whether they
were reputed amongst noble men, or not. I forbear to speak of the armories of
our house, in the which there is no figure, nor mark, which has not been
granted by some king or other. What will thou that I say farther? truly it is
irksome to me to reckon up any more.

Thou see what matter I might bring in on the behalf of Nobility, and
worthiness of my ancestors, albeit that I have to day alleged as it were
nothing at all. This is the principal part of Nobility, to be able before
men, at large to display the famous prowesses of his ancestors, whose glory
and renown, to the end that it may live eternally, does remain in their
posterity. Wherehence I might rightly affirm, that all their honor, glory,
magnificence, and nobility rests in me. And to conclude, I may term my
self as a part of those noble personages, from whom so great Nobility is
proceeded.

In my countenance appears their honorable looks, and all their glory, as
in him who is their lawful heir, shines in me. This is then that kind of
Nobility, which amongst men causes a man to be renowned and honorable:
albeit there is another sort of Nobility (as some will have it) of so great
power, that although a man be not descended of noble blood, yet does it
notwithstanding cause him to be esteemed honorable. And that is it (worthy
company) (as I think) whereon Fabricio, when he will endeavor his best to
speak what he can for his Nobility, will most of all extend his discourse
upon: for he will have no other prop, nor stay, to keep himself on foot, I
mean, that he will wholly rest himself upon learning, and therewithal make
his resistance. Wherefore it shall not be from the purpose, unto that which I
have spoken, to add these few words, by the which I doubt not, that without
any great trouble unto you, but that I shall show you, what Nobility learning
can bring unto man, when I shall have set down what I shall think thereof:
which, it may be, shall not be far out of the way, and you may judge how
greatly Fabricio shall be deceived.

I say then (worthy company) that not only he is a noble man (as some do
believe) who draws his beginning from a noble stock, as by that I have
already discoursed you may have understood: but likewise he is esteemed
amongst noble men, who albeit he be not descended of noble blood, yet giving
himself unto learning, does gain some credit and reputation amongst men. And
this kind of Nobility (if notwithstanding we ought to term it so) certainly
is recommended, as a thing no less good then laudable: but I do flatly deny,
that they do attain to perfect Nobility, except they receive therewith this
Nobility of blood. Yet I will say, and it may be it is not far from the
truth, that learning is rather an ornament of Nobility then cause thereof.
And will say more, according unto my opinion, that it gives a certain
facility, or rather a beginning unto man, to become honorable, but it does
not indeed make him noble, as peradventure Fabricio, thou did persuade thy
self.

Forasmuch as if in any matter we consider learning merely in it self,
without any other quality, or ornament that is required in Nobility, we
shall find that it does not make him honorable, that possesses it, but he
shall be like unto a fair precious stone, set in the midst of some base and
vile metal: and like as a small candle does give but a slender light unto
those that behold it, I say very small, in regard of a great Torche: So does
this kind of Nobility shine, in regard of that other which I lately spoke of.

And be not thou over hard of belief herein, for I shall very easily prove
this unto thee. Imagine such a one in thy mind, who is graced with good
manners, learning and knowledge, but in bad apparel, as there are many such;
and likewise another, void of learning, but in brave attire fit for a
gentleman, and that they be both unknown unto thee: what answer would thou
make, if my self or any other should demand of thee, which of these two were a
gentleman? Surely as I think, thou would say the last of them, and
whosoever has any sound judgment would not think otherwise; and this
proceeds of the insufficiency of learning: for as I have said unto you, it
is not of it self sufficient, at one instant to bring forth the effects of
nobility.

I say then that there wants somewhat else, and it is riches, which are an
ornament, or rather a part of nobility, which if thou do conioine with
learning, it may be that then I will believe that he that possesses both, is
become noble; for then two causes do concur together, neither of the which of
themselves, would be sufficient. He then that will be accounted noble, ought
above al things especially to abound in wealth. O how many learned men have I
known in my time, who contemning these goods (for so are they rightly
called) have been, and are yet vilely despised themselves. Do thou think
Fabricio, that now I tell thee troth? Now I can but imagine what courage thou
can have, seeing the ground more and more to sink under thy feet, what
leaning stock will thou have, when as that vvhereon thy mind did most of all
settle it self (following thy false opinion) does least of all serve thy
turn? Learning will not much help thee, wherefore thou may boldly put thy
trust in somewhat else; for in thee there is no nobility at all to be
considered. Yet to the end that thy heart may not be ouercharged with
melancholy, I will grant thee thus much, that thou art become noble thorough
learning, which being supposed as true, arguing in this sort, I may say unto
thee. It is a matter manifest which can in no sort be denied, that dame Nature
does both in dignity and perfection, far surpass industrious art, seeing it
does only in the operation thereof force it self, to imitate nature. Now this
sort of nobility, which thou would have in thy self, is not natural, but
artificial, because as I have said unto thee, thou art not noble by nature,
but ennobled by the exercise of learning, and so consequently noble by Art.

But yet this is not sufficient Fabricio, I will yield thee many other
reasons, to show thee that I am more noble than thou art, although that there
were Nobility in thee. Thou can not in any sort deny me, that as often as
two equal things do strive together, but that all honor and reverence is
attributed to the most ancient: if then both of us be noble, as I have already
granted thee, and do again yield thee, ought not I to be adjudged more noble,
as he which descends of more ancient nobility, or contrarily thy self,
who art but an vpstart Gentleman?

Surely if thou leanest unto the truth, thou can not say otherwise. But God
knows what occasion thou have now to rejoice, seeing that without taking any
further pains, I have granted thee that thou art a Noble man: alas, I
believe this thy mirth will be but small, being intermingled with so great
sorrow. So that not only the ground will fail under thy feet, but likewise
the breath in thy mouth, nothing remaining for thee hereafter to say.

Thou shall see that indeed hereafter quoth Fabricio, (taking the speech upon
him with a good grace, stretching forth and wagging his right hand at
Possidonio, in a mocking manner) yea thou shall well perceive whether the breath
will fail in my mouth, as thou say: for you shall well feel of what force
those new fables are, which thou have this day set to sale in favor of this
thy nobility, and should yer this have well perceived it, if it had been
lawful for me to answer thy arguments as I am well furnished with matter.

Thou can do no less, quoth Possidonio, with a smiling countenance, then
call them new fables, seeing that they do so newly torment thee: but thou shall
find them true histories against thy self.

Fabricio replied I know not what, at which instant the lady Aurelia, graced
with beauty, and the gifts of nature, who until that time had attentively
noted and passed under silence the words of Possidonio, turning her self
toward him, with a woman's voice said thus unto him.

Holding this thy last conclusion as true Possidonio, to wit, that honor and
victory ought to be given to the most ancient, I would gladly understand, if
the same question which is this day between you two, did happen between 2.
young men equal in Nobility of blood, to whither of the two thou would give
the price and victory?

Mary to him Madam (quoth Possidonio) whose Nobility as I lately said, were
most ancient.

To which she replied, but how will thou know, whether of the two were more
ancient, for that seems a hard matter for me to discern?

Madam (quoth Possidonio) it is a very easy thing: for therein we ought to
follow the common opinion of men of the country, when ye same cannot otherwise
be determined by privileges, or other lawful means.

M. Peter Anthony added hereunto. Many years ago, Madam, sentence is given
in determination of that which you do demand; and as I think not only your
ladyship, but all that are here present have read thereof.

Whereunto the lady Laurelia said. We never studied these your disputations,
which in regard that we are women, are as far unmeet for us, as the
handling of weapons.

Peter Anthony replied, I do not speak from the purpose Madam. I say that
many years since, a question fell out between two noble young men of
Florence, to wit; whether of them were the better Gentleman, and of more
ancient nobility in that city: of the which, as every man was affected, some
men did prefer the one of them, some the other: Finally, it was adjudged that
the Baronesi (of which house one of the Gentlemen were) were the most ancient
gentlemen, not only in Florence, but in all the world.

And how may that be credited (quoth the lady Aurelia) or concluded by any
firm argument?

Mary, quoth he, it was confirmed with a most forcible reason. For So Much as
all they who were issued of the blood of the Baronesi, some of them had a very
long and thin face, others extremely broad, some a long nose, others very
short; this man one eye greater then his fellow, that other one eye lovver
set then another, and besides all this, their bodies very deformed, in respect
of other men. Which thing gave the judge good cause to think, that they were
made by nature in that season, when she began first to frame men, and so they
were the most ancient, and most noble: vvheras other men were made, when as
she knevv better how to fashion them; who being not so ancient, were not
consequently so Noble. So that Madame, if you desire of two young men, or of
many, to know which of them is the most noble, look which of them is most
deformed, for he is surely descended of the most ancient stock, and so the most
noble.

Truly now I remember (quoth the lady Aurelia) to have read the story as
you report it.

This new and vvitty argument of nobility, with the good wit of the judge,
was with a pleasant laughter recommended of the whole company, which when
it was ceased, Possidonio began again thus to follow on his discourse.

Seeing that my tales are of no force, as Fabricio lately said, I know not
truly how I should persuade my self, upon what he will lay any
foundation, on the which he may rest, nor with what reasons he shall be able
to uphold himself: in as much as if we speak of blood, he cannot compare with
me; as a thing he never came near, as he will freely confess unto me: if of
learning, I will not begin again to discourse any more thereof: for I have
frankly spoken thereof what I think, and you may judge as well as my self,
whether it makes for him, or not. It may be he groundeth himself upon riches.
Surely it should be an open folly to think so, much more to speak it. If then
he be not to be compared unto me, neither in blood, nor in riches; from
which two things, true and perfect nobility does spring: and if learning be
of no moment in matter of Nobility; it may well appear how his judgment is
more then deceived, and his will more then obstinate. And to the end that none
of my reasons may go without due proof; I will make this manifest unto you
likewise, to wit, that I surpass him as far in riches, as in Nobility of
blood, as I have heretofore concluded. Which of you gentlemen, are ignorant,
that if the least part of my wealth were set on the one side, and all that he
has heaped on the other, that mine would not far exceed the value of his?
which I doubt not but you will judge superfluous for me to declare, being a
matter clear enough of it self. Yet seeing we are entered therein I will not
forbear to speak thereof.

Consider then (worthy Gentlemen) that if the great wealth and substance which
is so much desired of mortal men, be not wholy united in me, yet at ye least
I possess the greater part of it. For if we talk of stately Palaces, I am
owner of such as cause those that do behold them to wonder, and they are
especially furnished with rich and precious stuff. If of pleasant Gardens, I
have many of them, which do abound in all that which is beautiful to the eye,
and delightful to behold. I will not reckon up unto you, the fruitful fields,
nor the shadovvy woods, from the which all that which is necessary for the life
of man, may be gathered; for thanks be to God, I have sufficient store of
them: less will I tell you what flocks of sheep I possess: for it may be if I
should speak of them to others, I should not be believed. I will likewise
forbear to declare of the gold and silver, which is always in my treasorie:
and finally I refuse to speak of many other particularities, which my self
am ashamed to rehearse, and that because they are as well known to your
selves, as to me. I think it likewise very superfluous, to open unto you, what
great feasts, rich apparel, pomp, chiualry, music, songs, and al other
manner of pleasures, sports, and feastings, which matters are no less
necessary then honorable, to personages truly honorable, as things which do of
themselves, show themselves, and are well known of you to be continually
observed by me. Now to the end you may judge aright, you ought to consider,
what and how great, Fabricio his wealth is.

Scarce had Possidonio given end to the sound of his last words, when as
Fabricio moderately and suddenly smiling, I know not vvhereat, and
afterward shaking of his head, he spoke in this sort.

Truly Possidonio, thou do this day lay a great burden upon thy shoulders;
if thou do undertake to show others my wealth or goods (as thou termest
the^) for so much as not only that small time of the day which remains, no not a
whole day would be sufficient to reckon them up. Wherefore pass on further,
and toil not thy self about that, thou need take no care for: for if thou will, I will yield unto thee, not only that thou art rich above any other, but
that all the riches of the world be in thy possession.

I am very certain Fabricio, (quoth Possidonio) that the troth does force thee
to grant it me. Wherefore this my proposition gent. is true, that I do not
only far surpass him in blood, but in riches likewise. And now vvilt thou
yet have the heart to undertake to shevve us yt thy Nobility is greater? For I
possessing all the ornaments that are to be desired of mortal men, I cannot be
persuaded, that thou have any courage left to speak any more thereof. Wherefore
it would well become thee to hold thy peace, and to yield, that thy reasons
which are of no force may give place to mine. It were then best for thee, not
to charge so heavy a burden upon so vveake shoulders, for having to day
without varying from the troth, alleged so many worthy and excellent deeds
of my ancestors, and made account of such great abundance of riches, wherhence
the perfection of Nobility does spring, I would but know what thou have to
say? It may be thou will inform us of the brave combats and valiant battles of
thy ancestors? Or show us what fair palaces and plesa^t gardens thou have?
Wherefore if as thou deemst thou have any sound judgment in thee, endure not any
more that this matter be further discovered; but hence forward pronounce that
sentence against thy self, which we attend from the judge: which being said,
he paused a little, and then followed on his discourse in this sort.

I would here end my discourse, fair Ladies, were it not that I have yet to
say, that riches are an ornament and part of nobility, which if it were not a
trouble unto you, I would most willingly prove.

It cannot be troublesome unto us (quoth one of the Gent.) casting up his eyes
into the sky, seeing that the sun is as yet above the tops of the trees.
This answer pleased likewise the rest of the company, to the end Possidonio
might follow on his discourse; wherefore taking the speech upon him, he
continued in this manner.

Ought not we, gentlemen, to esteem of the grace and ornament which riches do
bring to Nobility? Unto the which it happens like as to a garden, which besides
all other dainties, is bewtified with diverse flowers which nature does bring
forth: which ornament the night by the darkness thereof does hinder: nay it
persuades sometimes, that it is rather an obscure valley then a garden, and
yet does it still remain the same: it is then the cleerenesse of the day that
makes it show fair and joyful. Even the very same may be said of riches: For
if a man who is issued of noble blood and high descent, wants them, it wholly
darkneth the sunshine of his nobility: whence it proceeds that he is no
more accounted noble, but one of the vulgar sort. We will then affirm, that
riches necessarily are the cause of all ornament of nobility.

And this needs not to seem strange unto you, for experience (from whence
we take all this assurance) may make us full certain thereof: For if we
consider all those that are borne of any worthy family (and as I am grieved to
think thereon) surely we shall find many of them, who are constrained to
maintain life and soul together (as they say) to plough the ground, or
otherwise forced thorough contemptible poverty, to serve other men, or else to
avoid misery, against their wills to take some other unfit calling upon them.
And any man may of himself judge the general occasion, of so insupportable a
mischief, which proceeds from no other cause then for want of riches. But
this evil should seem but a small moment, if it were not cause of a far
greater: Seeing that from thence does spring blemish in blood, diminishing of
renown, increase of infamy, a general dishonor of a man's house, and finally
not only loss of Nobility, but therewithal of life it self. Who will
afterward presume any more to call such a one by the title of a gentleman?
Such a one I say, who for want of wealth and riches, has derogated from
Nobility, in using some base trade and vocation? But what shall I say more, he
becomes thereby in the end the fable of the world, and as a miseserable
wretch, is pointed at by the common sort, and made a laughing stock. Does it
seem unto thee Fabricio, that these things are worthy to be accounted of?
surely no, but they are rather to be preferred before a man's own life. And
this I only speak in that which concerns the commodity of private persons:
but what shall I say of general or public estates? whereof we see at this day
so many go to ruin, for there are very few commonwealthes, or communalties,
as we do term them, which do not for want of that which is necessary, sincke
to the ground on every side. How many Palaces, how many Churches, how many
Cities, do there daily fall to the ground, as ruinous, which because the
estate of men cannot sustain them, cannot be vpheld? What shall I say of this
king, or of that Prince, who being not of ability to resist the force of the
enemy that assayleth them, for want of supply of money, do leese their
kingdoms, their powers, and their crown? you should not hear of so many
overthrows, you should not see so many slaughters: neither should you round
about you feel so many cruel acts, if they did abound in wealth: you may
then henceforth judge, whether riches be an ornament, and part of Nobility, or
not? And like as when they fail, they are cause of great inconveniences (yea
of more then I have this day acquainted you withal) So likewise where they
abound, they do bring with them honor, and glory: For thereof first of all
does arise a glory far exceeding al other, as that which proceeds of
liberality, which likewise gives as great renown and honor to a gentleman,
as can possibly be spoken of. And who is so ignorant that knows not, yt
without wealth such a glory of liberality, cannot show forth it self, as
does issue therefrom? Surely all men may well perceive it. Do not the ancient
stock and families, conserve themselves in their nobility, by means of
riches? does not the nobility of yt man extend it self the more, who does
liberally give help to his friends, or to any other that has need of succor?
does not their nobility increase, with their lordlike garments, their great
and rich banquets, their great number of servants, their fair horses, their
pleasant gardens, and such other things? Thou can not deny this Fabricio.
Now tell me what man is he that can easily effect these things, if he want
wealth? Surely it is a thing not to be believed. Riches do drive all sadness and
sorrow from the mind: they expel all melancholy thoughts from the
imagination: they keep the body from wearisome labor: they increase sweet
friendship: they cause in man waighters of honor and renown, and finally they
are the occasion of all high fame and glory. Who is he then so void of reason,
who hearing these things so conformable unto truth, does not judge riches, not
only to be an ornament of Nobility, but an inseparable part thereof? Which
thing you may the better consider, by that which experience teaches, seeing
that no man can mount up to any degree of virtue, or nobility, but riches
must open the gap, and make the way. Who will deny, but that it had been
impossible for so many noble men and knights, as we daily see, to have made
any entry to virtue and nobility, but by their riches, much less to have ever
come either to ye end, or midst thereof? O how many fine wits, and men of great
understanding have there been, and are yet in the world, who employing their
whole study in matters belonging to their house (which they would not have
done, but have taken another course, if they had wherwithal to maintain the^
selves) who have ended their lives miserably, whereas nature had made them apt,
and fit, to learn some worthy virtue* If then riches are the beginning, and the
middle of every laudable action, as I have plainly made demonstration: it
follows necessarily, that this nobility which is conjoined with wealth, is ye
sovereign good, and consequently that he who is endued with this nobility, is
chiefly noble: now Fabricio, as I have showed heretofore, being deprived
hereof, his Nobility whatsoever it is, is lame and faulty, and consequently,
is not true nor absolute. But I will not now further enlarge my speech on his
subject, least in the end I should seem troublesome unto you: in as much as it
is a matter more then manifest, that riches do stead a man more in nobility,
then I am able to speak of. Wherefore in few words to end my discourse, and
bring it to the last conclusion, it may clearly appear unto you, that true
and perfect nobility does consist in blood, and riches: which seeing it is so,
as I have with no less strong then true reasons proved a great while: it
follows that I am true, and prefectly noble, as one in whom, all those parts
are sufficiently assembled, and consequently the ring given, does belong unto
me, as to the most noble.

Possidonio having spoken in this manner, turned himself toward Nennio,
proceeding farther in this wise.

Thou can not, Nennio, be of any other opinion: for thou know well what is
fit to be done, and have always been pleased to follow the steps of a just
Judge, albeit there needed not a man of that wisdom to decide this question
(if any doubt ought to be made thereof) being of it self most apparent, and out
of all doubt: for it had been an easy matter for a man of a slender capacity,
to decide this controversy, especially having understood so many reasons as
have been alleged by me. Amongst the which (that I may now come to final
conclusion) I remember yet this one; I consider her estate from whom this
variance did arise, to be noble, as is not unknown unto you: I weigh likewise,
that her gift is precious, rich, and worthy a noble man. Finally, I regard the
words she uttered in giving it, her will being, that in remembrance of her,
the most noble of us two should possess it. What occasion should move her to
give it unto the most Noble? Surely no other, but that she was honorable, and
the present likewise fit for a person honorable: I being then descended of a
most noble stock, and having all the parts which are required in a perfect
noble man, and the same qualities being in her, it remaimaineth, that the rich
jewel be given unto me, and not to him who is not worthy of such a present.
What contentment should she receive, being a lady of great honor, if one that
were inferior to her in calling, should remember her? Truly none at all;
because her will (agreeable unto reason) was that she should be had in
remembrance of a man of worth and of honor. Let Fabricio then leave the
pursuit thereof, and not suffer any more words to be made of the matter, nor
stay (if he regard his credit) until sentence be given: for I do certainly
assure you, that if the gracious, and gentle lady Virginia, had given the ring
unto the most unworthy, as she gave it to the most noble of us both (which was
never her intent) I would without any contradiction have yielded it unto him,
and without any manner of question with mine own hands, would have hanged the
same about his neck. Let him not then be obstinate, or opiniatiue, to debate
the matter when there is no cause, especially when nothing else then detriment,
and shame can redound thereof. I will now Nennio, make an end of my speech,
and leave the matter wholly in your hands, being certain that you will
determine thereof in such sort, as shall be conformable unto Justice, and that
you will in no wise oppose your self against the will of the noble lady.

Here Possidonio ended his discourse, which he continued all the while the
sun did show upon the earth, until the evening: Wherefore we being risen
from our places, with a general consent we referred Fabricio his discourse
until the next day, both because time would not have sufficed, and it would
likewise have been over troublesome unto us, by reason of Possidonio his long
speech.

Thus we coming forth of ye garden, some of the young gentlemen and ladies, did
highly commend that which Possidonio had related unto us. But whether he had
spoken well or no, we being entered into the house, our horses (according to our
daily custom) were presently made ready. And we being mounted on them, two of
our servants amongst ye rest, went along with us: of the which one of them led
two grayhoundes, and two braches in his hand, and the other carried a faulcon:
as we were upon the way, we had not rid past a mile, before we had view of a
young phesant which did fly somewhat aloft: At the which letting the faulkon
fly, extending her wings in the air, she wrought so high a pitch, yt you
would have thought she had touched ye sky, and as she made her point to
stoop, her head toward the earth, and her train toward the sky, the
phesant took a thick hedge for covert, which was the cause that the faulcon
leesing the sight thereof, seemed as it were ashamed thereat. Immediately one of
the young men, let fly another faulcon, which he carried on his fist, having
first sprung the phesant from her covert, which as one afraid had not made any
great flight, but the faulcon presently seized on it. In the mean time whilst
we continued this hawking, the two grayhoundes, which followed us were let run
at two hares, and as we gallopped after, they being spent, yielded to the
mercy of the dogs. Wherefore coming to their succor, as well contented
with our prey, we returned home, because supper time drew near.

After that we had a little taken breath, we set our selves to supper with
great delight, under the fresh shadow: which being ended, the garden being
fair, delightful, and pleasant, there was not one of us that was minded to
depart from thence. Wherefore, some of us being risen from the table, went to
sport our selves in the allies: Others sitting still, played at chesse, and at
tables, so long as they were permitted by day light. Afterward, we sat all
together on the thin grass, which was very cool, passing the time in
pleasant and merry talk, until it seemed a fit hour to go to bed. Wherefore
every one rising, went to take his ordinary rest.

The second Book.
THe ancient Poets by their fables do set down, that Jupiter being at the
marriage of Peleus invited all the Gods and goddesses thither, except Eris the
goddess of discord; whereat she being grievously offended, with great
industry she framed ye golden apple, and disdainfully threw it on the table,
where Pallas, Juno, and Venus were set, round about the which was written, Let
this brave and rich apple be given to the fairest. From hence (because each of
the goddesses did deem her self, to be both fair and gracious) did arise a
sudden quarrel. Jupiter would not determine which of them should have this
gift, the one being both his sister and his wife, the other two his daughters:
but sent them to receive their judgment of Paris the son of Priam, who to
the end he might give a right sentence, gave commandment that they should
severally the one after the other, present themselves naked before him. Pallas
showing her self, promised him that if he did judge that she was the fairest;
she would make him the only famous man for learning in the world: June, the
most rich: and Venus offered him the enjoying of the fairest lady in the
world: in regard of which promise, he gave her the golden apple, from whence
afterward did proceed the destruction of Troy.

Now let us consider what fruit may be gathered by the shadow of fables,
especially of this which I even now recited. For indeed under those vailes we
may receive no less pleasant then profitable instruction. For so much as by
this fiction, the Poets do mean this, that in the procreation of man, the
celestial bodies do meet together, and according to their diverse powers, do
diversely bring forth sundry effects in our bodies. Into the which discord does
not enter, least the body already created should wholly perish.

Howbeit after that man is once framed, and that he has attained to that age,
that he begins now to discourse within himself, what kind of life he
were best to follow as the most noble in account amongst men: whether that
which is grounded upon knowledge, which the Philosophers were wont to call a
contemplative kind of life: or otherwise, yt which guides a man that addicteth
himself only to worldly matters, which they term active: or else that which
consists wholly in pleasure, which they name delightful. Then straightvvaie
discord enters: of which three sorts of lives, Sovereign Jupiter will not
give sentence which is the best, least that in approving the one, he should
condemn the other two; and so the life of man should rather be constrained
then free, but he leaves them to the judgment of man, to the end that he may
as pleases him, tie himself to that kind of life that shall best like him; it
may be, showing us thereby, the free choice which is granted to us by him. Of
the which notvvithstanding he that is carried away to follow the delightful
kind of life, does bring unto him self unspeakable detriment. If then a man
in his young years, did enter into consideration of these three manner of
lives, and by reason did discourse which of them were the most noble, and did
tie himself thereto: I doubt not, in that small number of years we have to
live, but we should take a far better course, and that the life of mortal
men should be more pleasing and accepted before God, and more settled and
prosperous for men: whereas now we see the greater part, to sink and drown
themselves, making choice of that which is worst.

For if we enter into a general consideration of all men living, truly we
shall find the number of those to be very small, who follow the
contemplative life, as more noble then the other; but very many who with an
ardent desire do embrace, either the active, or delightful: which two are so
much less worthy then the other as the body is less noble then the mind. Of
which two parts nature has framed man, the one being subject to corruption,
the other eternally dureable.

These kind of men see not (as having their inward eyes veiled) how much more
worthy desert it is, to follow those things that are incorruptible, then in
vain to labor after the pleasure of the flesh, which is but (as it were) of a
days continuance. For which cause, the custom of those that live in that
sort, is greatly to be blamed, seeing that man does wholly take delight in
those things (as if it were a natural matter) which bring him intolerable
loss, albeit at the first show they seem pleasant and delightful to the
body.

Which opinion Possidonio did wholly lean unto yesterday, for grounding
himself upon those two kinds of life, he did sufficiently set forth the
sweetness that is felt in them. But Fabricio, far differing from him in
judgment, will this day endeavor himself to show, that the contrary
thereof is the troth, as he who follovving a contemplative kind of life, does
hold this as most certain, that true and perfect nobility, does consist in
the virtues of the mind. But to the end that I seem not my self, to speak
that for him, which he determines to relate, I intend henceforth to give
place to his own words.

Every star was now hidden in the sky, fearing the clear light which the
sun did more and more spread upon the earth, when as we being risen to
exercise our bodies, we mounted on horseback to take the fresh air, and as
our discourse led us from one matter to another, in the end we perceived that
we had rid further then we determined: wherefore turning back, we pased
softly homevvards; where the tables were covered for dinner: and after we had
first walked a turn or two in the garden, in the end we placed our selves at
the table: and after that we had satisfied hunger, and sat a while, we
marched to that place where Possidonio discoursed the day before, to hear what
Fabricio had this day to speak for himself, who being fresh and lusty
having called us al together, we compassed him round about. And when he
perceived we were all in a readiness, and that we were silent, he gave with
great courage, this beginning unto his speech.

Most worthy gentlemen, Silence should (in my opinion) hereafter better become
me, if I would regard the words which Possidonio uttered yesterday, both at
the beginning and likewise at the end of his long genealogy; or else it were
best for me to seek some matter more doubtful then that he discoursed of.
Which I would willingly do, if he had made show of his own Nobility, and
not other men's: or spoken of any thing else, then of the greatness of his
stately palaces, and of the abundance of his great wealth. Wherefore to the
end I may declare unto you, how far forth these things make for Nobility; nay
rather how far they are opposite, and clean contrary thereunto: I had not
need to be dumb to day: but I will rather speak that (without passing the
limited bounds) which shall come first into my thought, and I shall judge to be
true: and, as I think, I shall perchance open those things unto you, which it
may be, were never uttered by any other, concerning true, and perfect Nobility.

Now our question being strange, and no man (as I believe) having so perfectly
discoursed thereof, I hope you will give attentive ear unto me: which if you
do (as I doubt not but you will) strength will settle in my heart, from the
which my mind will take encouragement, my memory become constant, my will more
ready, and my voice more apt to speak.

The cleernesse of Possidonio his blood (worthy gentlemen) is so great, by that
which he has in many words long debated, that considering which is ye most
noble of us two, there is no doubt, but he is more worthy than my self, and
that our controversy, is rather superfluous, then necessary. But for so much as
undoubtedly I hold the question to be superfluous and out of doubt, as this
is, whether a reasonable creature be more noble then a brute beast; or a man,
more noble and more perfect then God: I will not forbear to declare unto you
how weak his weapons are, and to shevve you plainly the slightness of his
words, that you may know by degrees, into what manifest error he is
unadvisedly fallen. Wherefore it lying upon me this day to persuade you,
that true and perfect Nobility in man consists not in blood (for it should
be a mere folly to think it, much more to speak it) but in the mind, and
consequently that this nobility which consists in me, because it proceeds
from the mind, is true and perfect; it were first expedient for me to allege
some of my reasons, and afterward in answering his arguments, to rid my self
clean from them. But you shall hold me excused if I take a contrary course,
for upon good ground I will first of all begin with the last, that I may the
sooner dispatch the matter, and afterward by sound arguments strengthen my
side the more.

Possidonio yesterday, by the conclusion of his discourse intended, that true
and perfect nobility is derived from blood, and riches, and for the sure
grounding of this his conclusion, in arguing he let fly many darts and
arrows, with which he had thought to have given me my deaths wound: but
surely they were all so weak, that with one only blovv (if so it were that I
intended not particularly to answer to every point) you shall see the^ fall
presently to ye ground: yea some of them will sharply pierce himself, as by
his first argument I will manifestly prove unto you.

For in the very entry of his discourse, he going about to show what this
Nobility is; he affirmed, that that was true nobility, which is left by the
ancestors to the successors: and going about to prove that he was noble,
he said, that his predecessors had been brave and valiant men at Arms, and
well thought of, of the kings whom they had served: but I heard no word that
they themselves were descended of any noble stock (whereby if you do well
weigh the matter) you may perceive the uncertainty of his speech: for so much as
he did then affirm, the nobility of his ancestors to consist, not in blood as
he said, but in acts of magnanimity, and in virtue, which is easy to be
credited, as that which proceeds from the virtues of the mind. I say it is a
foolish thing to hold, that nobility is left us by our ancestors, for if that
were true, it should necessarily follow, either that we should be all noble,
or else not one at all; seeing that in perfect nobility, if we ought to have
consideration of blood, as thou say Possidonio, we shall surely find (if we
do not fly from the true opinion of Naturalistes, and do give credit to that
which is approved) that one man only was the common predecessor of all men
which have bin born, until this day, and are hereafter to come into ye world,
whose name was Adam.

I reason then thus (if so be that thy opinion does hold any thing of the
troth) that if Adam was noble, why then we are all noble, as all they shall be
likewise who are to come into the world: but if he were ignoble, and base, we
are so likewise, and so by consequent, I am in like estate of nobility, or
baseness of birth, as thou art. For even as the pain of his offense, which
was death, extends it self even unto us, and shall likewise stretch to as
many as ever shall be borne hereafter; even so in like manner, his nobility,
or baseness, ought to extend it self to all his posterity. Do thou think
Possidonio that this is a good consequent? Surely I believe so.

Wherefore now thou may perceive, how much nature, whereon yesterday thou
did ground thy self for the most part, does make for this thy nobility;
in as much as it has brought us al into the world after one sort, and there is
no distinction at all in nature; whereof (if I do call it to mind before I
have ended my discourse) I will speak somewhat, but now let us proceed further.

How true is this other reason, that nobility is lest as an hereditarie
gift? Surely, when as I do enter into imagination of such foolish toys, I
cannot hold my self from laughter. For who is there amongst you that did ever
see, that Nobility was left by will unto men's children, as though it were
framed of some material thing, which might by the last testament be left unto
them, as riches are, which is surely a ridiculous thing? Neither is it of that
quality as other things are, which albeit they be not palpable, yet are they
left unto us as hereditarie: and surely thou may seek long enough in thy
grandfathers wills, before thou should be able to find any such Nobility
left thee by any of them.

Of what power this thy other argument (wherein you intendest, that no better
instrument, nor more perfect means is given us by nature, by which the
nobility of man is long conserved, then children and such as do descend of
them) is sufficiently manifest of it self. For if that did proceed according
unto troth: why did thou then set the two Scipios as an example unto us?
what is now become of their posterity? where are their successors? Surely
they are already clean worn out.

But for so much as their nobility did not consist in blood, but in the virtues
of the mind, therefore their glorious worthiness and lawdable renown is not
dead, nor will ever be extinguished in their posterity. How many are there who
are dead without children, whose glory and renown does nevertheless live
until this day? I cannot reckon up the great number of them. We ought not then
to consider in true Nobility, as thou say, either the predecessors or
successors, but only the virtue of man, which causes him to live eternally,
as we may well say of the Scipios, and other worthy emperors.

Now in proceeding farther, thou wentest about to prove, that in considering
the operations of Nature, that like as the blood is infused in the birth of
children, even so is nobility. Of what weight that is, I leave thee to
consider, as a matter that has not truth in it: from whence that which has
been said already, may be again auerred, to wit, that we being all descended
of Adam our first father, if his blood was noble, this his nobility was by him
infused into al his children, and so from hand to hand into all his posterity.
Thou did add hereunto, that we do not only regard the blood, but the
countenances and lineaments of the parents in their children.

In truth I cannot imagine to what purpose thou do utter so many words in
vain. For albeit this be true, that the very countenance and lineaments of
the ancestors remain with their posterity: does that prove their Nobility,
and greatness of courage? No truly: For it consists in the virtues of the
mind, whither the sight of our outward eyes cannot pierce, and not in the
lineamentes of the body, except you will say that one member is more noble
then the other, which question at this time we are not to dispute of. Thou
wentest about to make us believe likewise, that not only the members, but even
the manners, and the prowess of parents, most commonly is transfused into the
children. Surely Possidonio, I affirm that those are noble, who do follow the
good parts, and generositie of their ancestors, as the Scipios did, which may
serve as the only example in the world for virtue and value. But we do not
esteem those to be noble, who descending of true and perfect noble men, do
lead a loose and wicked life: As afterward the son of Scipio of Afrique
did: who for his dissolute living, being in ye field called Campus Martius,
with his white gown, al spotted with vices, to demand the Pretorship of the
people: he had never obtained it, had it not been through the favor of Cicereus
in times past, his fathers Chauncellor: Albeit that afterward his parents
considering, that they might reap dishonor and reproach thereby, they laid a
block in his way, that he never attained to any such dignity, and did
forcibly take the ring from his finger, wherein his fathers picture was
engraven, deeming him unworthy, to be partaker of his fathers glory, and
Nobilite: so that afterward he was accounted amongst men ignoble. What honor
was the son of Q. Fab. the great, worthy of, from whom Q. Pompeius (because he
lived a ruffian like life) took away the liberty to spend his own goods
freely? Surely none at all. It stood him in no steed, that his father had
been the general of the Roman armies.

What Nobility did the son of Clodius deserve, who giving himself over to
the love of a common woman, lead his life in that sort, that he was worthy
of all shame, and dishonor? The ancient Nobility of his father, was of no
importance unto him. Now thou may see Possidonio, how well thou know what
power consists in blood, touching ye nobility of man, which that you might
exalt unto the skies, thou were not ashamed to compare it, with the Nobility
of horses, dogs, and other things. You may now perceive gentlemen what a
wonderful thing Possidonio his Nobility is, seeing that it is equal to the
Nobility of beasts.

Did thou think Possidonio, therewithal to get the victory of me? Are
these the strong weapons, against the which no force could prevail, as thou
did make us believe? Truly amongst dogs we do not seek out the most
noble, but the best and most valorous: and so likewise of horses and other
things, as (agreeable to the matter) thou did reckon up. Then their
Nobility, does not consist in seed as thou say, but in the goodness and
worthiness of them.

Fabricio gathered his strength together, as if he had been careful how he
should have proceeded, when as the Lady Laura, who had with great attention
marked his words, addressing her speech unto him, said after this manner.

I would willingly understand Fabricio, how thou will answer that which
he affirmed, that the thing engendered according unto Nature, does not only
receive of the ingenderer, his essence or being, but his qualities in like
sort, and all that which follows the essence, concluding thereby that a
Noble man cannot engender any thing else then an Honorable personage, which
I did deny.

I will not Madame (quoth Fabricio) make any other answer thereto, then that
which was alleged by you, to wit, that this quality, to become Noble, may
either be, or not be: and it follows not of necessity, if the father be a
Noble man, that the son be likewise Noble.

Yea but (quoth the Lady Laura) he replied I know not what, by which it
seemed unto me, that that which I had affirmed, could hardly be concluded.

Yes right well (quoth Fabricio) For albeit he argued, that like as white, or
black is transfused into the children, even so is Nobility. I say that his
similitude is not worth a rushe: In as much as blackness, or whiteness, are
demonstratiue dispositions of the body; but Nobility is a hidden property of
the mind, in regard yt it proceeds of virtue: So that a painter may by art
easily alter either the whiteness or blackness of man: but he can never paint
forth with his pensill, the nobility of the mind, as being a thing not
subject unto the sight of bodily eyes. Like as it happens with fire, the
flames whereof may well be drawn, but the heat can not in any wise be
painted. Wherefore I say, it is no good conclusion, that what so gives the
essence, or being, gives likewise that which follows the essence, which
holds true concerning the disposition of the body, but not of the qualities
of the mind. Do we not see commonly diverse parents, who for the most part do
engender children, of the which some one proves apt to learn virtue, and to
be instructed in good manners, and another prone to follow all manner of vice?
you see then Madame, what diversities do proceed of these resemblances, which
were well understood by you master John Francisco. Wherefore this tale that
you inserted in the midst of Possidonio his discourse, ought to breed no
wonder: For albeit it happen in some women, as you gave us yesterday to
understand, you may find the clean contrary in others. And whereas the birth of
Romulus, and Remus cannot be hidden: I say M. Dominico, that their value, and
virtue did manifest their Nobility, and not the temper of their bodies. You
may now Madame discover his follies, which thou thy self Possidonio could
not discern, when as thou wentest about to persuade us, that man does receive
from the ingenderer the qualities of the mind. But what great folly is this?
wherefore did thou not as well affirm, that a holy personage, or a man
well seen in natural causes, or experienced in Divinity, could not engender
any other, then a saint, a good Naturaliste, or a divine; all which are
qualities consisting in the mind? Which if it should come to pass, the
world should be well replenished with holiness, with wisdom, with
experience, and thou should then be one of that number. But as that cannot
happen, so likewise I say, that it cannot follow, that one noble man, does
engender a noble child, nobility being a quality of the mind, even as
wisdom, experience, and other virtues of like sort are. And now how can
thou have the heart to expect the victory, concerning the controversy in
question, seeing I have showed by degrees, thy manifest errors?

But let us yet proceed to thy other reasons, against which I need not take
any stronger weapons, they being as weak as the other I have overthrown.
Albeit that this seems to carry some force with it, which we see is commonly
used in all parts of the world, that such as are borne of noble parents, are
so held: if thou had spoken otherwise, and said in steed of this, they are
Noble men, they are in deed called so, it had not been amiss. For it is true,
and it cannot any ways be denied, that whosoever is descended of Noble blood,
we call him a Noble man; but generally I deny this to contain a truth.

Tell me I pray thee, if he that is borne of a christian, be straightwaies a
christian? Surely no. But even as it is not only necessary for him that
intends to be a right and true Christian, that by birth he do descend of
christian parents, but likewise that he receive baptism, and keep the
Commandments of Christ: So it is not sufficient for a noble man, to come of
Noble blood, as a thing that makes little or nothing in matter of Nobility:
but that he observe that which is requisite for the attaining of perfect
Nobility, to wit, that he become Noble thorough the virtues of the mind.
Besides that, I might add hereunto, that this thy consideration is far from
the purpose, in as much as the prize was not given to him that should only
bear the name, but to him that should in effect be the most noble of us two.

Albeit that thou might reply hereunto Possidonio, as thou have already
affirmed, that if they that descend of Noble men were not noble, then they
should not enjoy the same privileges that Noble men do. Whereunto I would
answer, that the bad custom of men, therein is much to be blamed: Forasmuch
as they do not employ their discourse to that, whereby the truth may be made
manifest, but only giving credit to the bare name, they do argue in such
manner: So that if we turn our back to the truth, and give our minds to follow
the lying opinion of the rude vulgar sort, which for the most part, do fall
into great errors, thy saying then shall be true. Thou see now Possidonio, of
what force thy arguments are.

But I will pass over to the rest, and come unto that, by which thou did
seek to prove, that if the infamy of a man, be sufficient to blemish his
whole stock, that the glory and worthiness thereof ought by great reason,
extend it self to all his posterity: whereupon thou did consequently
infer that thy ancestors being noble, thou must needs be so. Although that
this reason seem apparent; yet in answering thereunto, I might say (and
therewithal if I list not perticularly to pass through the rest of the
reasons, resist whatsoever thou have alleged) that we do not now debate of
the Nobility of our ancestors, but we are to prove which of us two is the
most noble, and so by consequent show what our nobility is, and not set forth
the honor of other men. And herein I will yield unto thee, that if we were both
equal in Nobility of the mind, that perhaps in regard of the antiquity of
thy predecessors, you might be more noble then my self.

But judge now what these high praises, and commendations of thy predecessors
do avail thee, and to what great purpose they were yesterday alleged by
thee? For thou did with no less readiness, dexterity, and good grace
recount them, then they who from the top of some high tower do with a loud
voice tell the wonderful miracles of ancient holy fathers, or from some
scaffold in the market place recite out of the old Romans, the cruel wars
of the Giantes, or the furious love of some Orlando. But to let that pass, how
well this thy glorious speech did become thee, I will proceed to this argument,
where thou did say, that like as the honor of the son, did extend to the
father, much more did the fathers glory stretch unto his children. It is true
Possidonio, yet it follows not, that if the son by his own virtues be made
noble, that the father is any way partaker thereof, or made noble thereby: For
if the son were very expert in feats of arms, or skillful in matter of
learning, surely he should want his senses that would affirm, that the
father did participate either in the experience of the art Military, or in
Science with his Son, they both being gifts of the mind, wherein as I have
often times said, true and perfect Nobility consists: from the which, it
can very hardly be transferred from one body to an other, even as thou
did vainly persuade thy self. These are thy sophisticate reasons
Possidonio, which being resisted by the truth, thou may perceive what force
they are of.

Fabricio having hitherunto continued his speech, he pawsed a while, and
afterward proceeded in this manner.

Worthy Gent. M. Peter Anthony knowing as well as my self the slenderness of
Possidonio his arguments, which he heaped the one on the others head, he could
not withhold from taking part with him, and amongst other things to allege
this reason in his behalf: that forasmuch as amongst the laws of the Romans,
there was one, which commanded yt the image of every worthy knight, should be
made and set in some public place, which in festing manner, they did with
great iolitie visit. We may argue, and say, that if the Romans did owe such
honor unto images, much more was due unto the living children, because they
were but an imitation of nature, whereas nature her self was apparent in the
children. Now if this your reason (M. Peter Anthony) had as much force in it,
as it shows; I doubt not but it would appale me, and give so great courage
unto Possidonio, that you might easily persuade him, he were well worthy to
have one of these images erected for him. And although that I should frame no
other answer thereunto, then I did to the last, yet should I be still upon a
sure ground. Nevertheless, I will use such reasons in disproofe thereof, as I
did to ye former. For if thou say that their children whose images are
erected to ye common view of al men, do participat with their fathers virtues;
then I do affirm that thy allegation is true: but if therein they differ, then
this their nobility, and reputation is not transferred to them.

So likewise if the children of those who were represented by those images, had
been worthy of such honor, surely the Romans, who wanted no good counsel,
would willingly have granted it: it follows then that the honor was not
done to the image, whether it were of Marble, or metal, but to the worthy
memory of his virtues, whose lineaments the image did lively set forth, which
could not be well executed in ye person of their child, being made in regard of
their own proper virtue, and not in respect of any thing belonging to another.

Besides that, there are and have, been diverse persons, who being descended of
valorous and vvorthie parents, have with shame darkened their brightness, as
we have already affirmed. And had it bin reasonable that the wise Romans,
should have honored those in such a manner, in regard of their ancestors?
Surely no. And what would thou say Possidonio, if these men should lauishlie
reckon up the worthy deeds of their predecessors, or if they should publicly
show their images? would thou indeed judge them to be noblemen? God forbid,
nay so much more base ought they to be deemed, that they having before their
eyes the trodden paths, which do manifestly show them the way to become
noble, they take a clean contrary course.

What does then the worthiness of blood prevail, when as it is obscured by
dishonest conditions? And what annoyance does the baseness of blood bring,
when it is honored by noble virtues? Surely, none at all. For in perfect
nobility, the obscurenesse, or worthiness of blood is not to be considered.
But let us proceed further: thou did enter into the government of cities,
and the administration of divine offices, saying that they were noble: if I
knew that this thy argument made any thing to the purpose, I would willingly
answer it, as I have done the rest; but I will say nothing herein, but that
thou thy self understand not, what thou did say: for let us yield it to
be true; what does follow thereof? Art thou I pray thee any of those
governors? Thou see Possidonio, how easelie thy strong reasons are resisted.

And art thou ignorant, that many men oftentimes do come to the degree of a
Cardinal, or of a bishop, who have no great store of gold in their cofers? In
former age there was no regard had, neither of blood, as thou would have
it, nor of gold or silver, but unto a man adorned with virtue, whose life
deserved praise. As it fell out on a time in the Consistory of Cardinals, who
being assembled in the Conclaue, to choose a new Pope in his room that was
dead, two were in election to be preferred to that dignity, the one of them
being descended of royal blood, the other of a mean family. Many of the
Cardinals, in regard of the noble descent of the one, would advance him unto
the popedom: and many in respect of the deserts and holy life of the other,
desired to place him in that high estate, the one company of Cardinals opposing
themselves against the other.

The latter alleging, that they sought to establish and create the successor
of Peter, a Preacher, the son of a Smith, not the son of Caesar Augustus. In
the end, they having no respect to the worthiness of blood, but to the
perfection of both their lives, the last for his Sovereign virtues (they
contemning the great nobility of the other) attained to the popedom.

Moses did the like, who might have left his children the principality and
dignity, but he made choice of Joshua, who was not of his blood, to denote and
signify thereby, that it is not blood, but the life of man that is to be
considered therein. Of which opinion amongst others, was the Emperor Elius,
who would not permit, that his son should be chosen Emperor after him:
saying that the Empire did demand a man worthy thereof, and not blood.
Virtue then, and not nobility of blood, makes a man of desert. How many
Popes have there been, who have not been of any noble stock, but issued of
very poor parents: as Felix the third, whose father was a priest of a base
lineage: Gelasius, Agapites, Theodorus, Siluerius, and many others attained unto
the Popedom, albeit they were descended of a base stock. Yet was not their
blood so obscure, but their virtue of as great worth, which made them merit
so high a dignity. And there has not been only Popes borne of very mean
parents, but likewise kings and Emperors, and other valiant captains.

Tullius Hostilius was borne of low degree, who in his young years was a
shepherd, and was afterward advanced to the government of the Roman
Empire, and was the third king of the Romans. Tarquinius Priscus was the
son of Demaratus, a merchant banished out of Corinth his native Country, and
notwithstanding he became the fifth king of the Romans.

Seruius Tullius, who was borne in most base estate of servitude, was the sixth
king of the Romans. Dioclesian Dalmat. borne in Salone, of a poor stock,
became Emperor of Rome. Likewise Maximinus the emperor, borne in Thracia, did
descend of very mean parents. Martius Rutilius was by blood a Plebeian (that
is one of the common people) and yet created Consul five times, he triumphed
over the Falisqui.

Cornelius Cossus was also by birth a Plebeian, he manfully killed Laertes
Tolomeus duke of the Fidenati, whose riches and spoils he consecrated to
Jupiter Feretrian at Rome, obtaining therein the second place, he triu^phed
also over many nations. Gneius Flauius, his father was a bondsman, and yet he
was created Praetor at Rome. Terentius Varro, and M. Perpennus Consuls, Lucius
Volumnus, and Mamercus Dictators. Q. Publius Philon, Praetor, all these did
spring of mean parents. But their apparent virtue, and singular value was so
great, that thereby they gave great aid unto the Roman common wealth.

The Sovereign Orator Demosthenes amongst the Grecians, was borne of one by
occupation a Cutler, scarce known amongst men: And Euripides that most famous
Poet, his mother was an herb wife. Socrates who was by the judgment of
Apollo, the wisest man in the world, drevv his beginning from a Mason.
Xenophon was borne in Archeas, a village by Athens, of one Grillus of base
estate. But the obscurenesse of their blood, and of infinite others which I
might rehearse unto you, have lightened the world, and exalted their name even
to the skies. Of the which some of them by force of Arms, others by virtue of
the mind, are become famous and honorable. You may by this well discern, if a
Plebeian, or one borne of base estate, may arise to great nobility and
renown, and judge, whether the nobility of blood, or the virtue of the mind
be required in those that bear public offices.

Here master John Francisco, not permitting Fabricio to pass any further,
said unto him after this manner. I do not think Fabricio, that that which thou
have answered unto Possidonio his two former arguments, does wholly confute
them; seeing that he did not ground himself in such extremity, as it seems
thou take it: for if the virtues of children did equal their fathers
perfections, they should likewise deserve to have images erected for them, not
if they were altogether unequal and contrary unto them, which neither he, nor
I, did make any doubt of, as thou did affirm of the sons of Q. Fabius, and
of Claudius, which was no part of our meaning. Neither should thou consider
these two so great extreamities, but take the mean between them, and then
perhaps we may understand the troth of that which he said, to wit, that they yt
do descend of noble men, ought to be had in great estimation, and consequently
be partakers of the nobility of their parents: whereby he meant (and that not
indirectly) to infer, that for the remembrance of their ancestors, the
government of Cities and divine offices, were deservedly bestowed upon them.
And although that a bishop or any other, be well stored with gold, do not we
see them oftentimes likewise descended of a noble house? Master John Fra^cisco
paused here, when as Fabricio answered immediately.

I deny not, but that in such manner of men of the middle sort, there is some
part of nobility or reputation, which proceeds from their ancestors, but I
intending to prove, what true and perfect nobility was, that which I
affirmed unto you may be well concluded: for these of the middle sort thou
talkest of, are not true and perfect noble men, but such as do represent the
nobility of others: and what difference there is between that which is troth,
and that which does only represent it, there is none of you but may easily
understand.

As touching the other point wherein thou say, that ye most part of bishops
and cardinals, are of noble descent:

You know right welmaister John Francisco, that the son of God made no
scruple, to choose S. Peter who was come but of mean parentage, and himself a
simple fisher: Neither did he of his infinite goodness disdain to receive into
the apostleship men of base estate, as most part of the apostles were, who were
worthy of heavenly grace, as a reward of their holy life, and constant faith.
To how many miserable men, to how many poor souls, to how many beggars, has
the son of God vouchsafed to give the kingdom of heaven? Truly honor of
blood, is not considered therein, but Nobility of manners, and pureness of
faith: for with God we are all equal, and there is no difference of persons
before him, but in as much as one excels another in goodness, and as well the
noble man as the beggar shall be judged, whether he be righteous or a sinner.

It is then the life of man, adorned with good conditions, and with loyal
faith, which does conioin us with God; and a depraved life which does separate
us from him, and not the nobility of blood, or the worthiness of our
progenitors. Wherefore if you rest satisfied herewith, I will with your good
leave return to my former enterprise.

You have thoroughly satisfied me (quoth master John Francisco) and therefore
you may hold on your course, and take what leisure you list.

Fabricio, gave this further entrance into his discourse, If my memory serve
me well Possidonio, unto thy former reasons thou did add, that with popes,
emperors and kings, he which is of noble blood takes the chief place, and is
honored more then others. Suppose the case that this were true, as it is not,
yet art not thou any of them. But where do thou find, that he which is borne
of noble blood, has such prehemine^ce? Truly there is no such matter. Surely
the Church of Christ, should shine maruellously, if it were only lightened
with the beams of noble men, and empires should be well maintained, and
kingdoms become better, if they were governed by their counsel. Thou art
deceived Possidonio, for I say not, if men of noble blood, but such as are
excellent in virtue, and experienced in knowledge, did depart and leave the
service of princes, there would be no government at all. Who do rule, who do
manage, who do maintain the world, but wise men, and such as are endued with
wisdom, whether they be noble by blood, or of mean birth? These have ye
chiefest places, these men are honored, and not men nobly borne, void of
virtue, and deprived of knowledge.

Now do I return to you master Dominico, who to strengthen Possidonio his
weak side with a subtle manner of argument, you reasoned, that if this nobility
of blood, was so highly esteemed of the son of God, man incarnate here on
earth, in as much as he was borne of the virgin Mary, who descended of the
royal stock of K. David, how much more ought it to be affected, and
reverenced of us: I am certain that you have no such belief, as he which
knovveth the troth, as well as the best of us; but did you not allege that
which came into your mind in favor of Possidonio, rather to anger the lady
Camilla, who did still threaten you, that you might be put to silence, then in
any intention you had to gainesay me? I verily believe it.

And in troth likewise, if I were only to satisfy you, I would pass it over
with silence, as a matter superfluous: but because I intend to confirm
Possidonio his belief, and these Ladies, I say that the Lord of heaven, did
not choose the virgin Mary to be his mother, only because she was borne of
the royal stock of King David, but in regard of the Sovereign excellency of
her virtues, of her humility, and patience.

For what Lady was there ever so graced of God, as to be saluted by the spirit
of an Angel, and called sul of grace, blessed, and exalted above all other
women, except the most glorious virgin Mary? which she may thank her
humility and pureness of heart for, and not her nobility only. You may see
then, that the nobility of Mary was not considered of God, but her humility
and sincerity of spirit. You did afterward Master Dominico following on your
matter, tell us the manifest folly of Herod Ascalonita, whereunto I need not
answer any thing else, but that some madness entered into his mind, in such
sort to execute his foolish fantasy. What shall I say unto you concerning the
temeritie of Equitius, and the presumption of others, alledaged by you, who
being descended of base blood, did seek to ennoble themselves in the worthy
families of other men? Surely if you consider their end, you shall find, that
they received condign punishment for their foolish conceit, some of them being
banished, others dying in prison, others hanged, as a recompense of their
unadvised enterprise. Wherefore we ought not to set their follies before us as
examples to follow. Besides, they sought not how to ennoble themselves, as you
affirm, but to succeed in the kingdom and patrimony of those, whose
successors coulourably they pretended themselves to be. But why did you not
bring him for an example, who was more familiar with god then any other mortal
man, who did not vaunt himself, that he was descended of the blood royal, but
did deny that he was born of Pharao his daughter; desiring rather to be
persecuted, as one of the people of God, then to take upon him the glory of the
royal blood, and to possess the riches of Egypt?

And Gordius the father of Midas, who is reported to be the richest king that
ever was, who from the estate of a husbandman, became king of Phrigia, and
between the limits of the lesser, and the greater Asia, built a City called
Gordium, where he consecrated a temple to Jupiter, in the which not being
ashamed of his obscure birth, neither forgetting his base calling, he offered
the plough sharde, which many times he had tilled the ground withal, and the
harneis he was wont to couple his oxen together to the yoke, to the end that
in all ages it might be manifest to all men, what vocation he had been of: Such
examples ought in deed to be recommended unto us, and not those recited by you.

How weak then (worthy Gent.) the reasons are, that Possidonio yesterday with
many words set forth, you may already partly judge: as I will better approve
unto you by the sequel of my discourse. Forasmuch as speaking of Nobility, he
was forced to descend unto virtue, whence true and perfect Nobility is derived,
whereof he discoursed I know not what, but he made such large flightes a far
off, as the first Faulcon did yesternight about the phesant: the reason was,
because he perceived that the clear light thereof did overmuch bleare his eyes.
Wherefore, like as the warrier, who finding himself ouermatched with weapons,
which he cannot weild, leaves them to take others, which he may manage with
greater facility: Even so fell it out yesterday with Possidonio: For having
armed himself with virtue, and knowing not how to use it, he had his sudden
recourse unto riches, he skirmished so lively with them, that he has not
only thereby made himself more noble then I am, but then any other man
likewise. But now I being come to prove what force those weapons have, I doubt
not but I shall make it manifest, that they are far more weak, and of less
defense then the other.

He grounded himself upon two propositions, the one was, that a learned and
virtuous man, has no nobility in him (as if that learning served to no
purpose, to make a man noble) if he want such riches as are required to be in a
gent. because they are no less necessary in nobility then blood is. The
other was, that declaring what goods were, he forced himself to prove that
they were riches.

Now before I enter into the first proposition, I will make manifest unto you,
what truth is in the last, to the end you afterward may with more ease know
the verity of the other. Thou would then Possidonio, have riches to be
goods, thou deceiuest thy self greatly: for if they were goods, they would
cause the man that possesses them to become better, and more perfect then he
is; for such is the property of that which is good: but riches do not effect
this: For if these certain goods, did make a man more perfect, we must of
necessity conclude, that man should be less perfect, then the thing by which
he is made more perfect, which if thou grauntest for true, it should follow,
that gold, silver, precious stones, trees, and other living creatures deprived
of reason (for these things, and such like are riches) should be more perfect,
and more Noble then man, which should be too great a folly to think, much more
to utter. We will then conclude, that riches are no goods.

Moreover, it is a matter very evident, that of a good thing can nothing
follow but that which is good: but of these thy riches, what good may ever
ensue? Nay rather all venomous branches do spring from that root: They are not
then good, but the cause of all evil. Which may evidently be seen by the
unbridled desire Marcus Crassus did bear unto riches, which was the cause
that he robbed the temple of Jerusalem, and not only of his own death, but of
Marcus his son, and ye ruin of the Roman armei. For he being chosen Consul
by the Romans against the Parthians, and conducting the army, he came into
the Province of Judea, and being at Jerusalem, he took from the holy temple
of Solomon 8000. talentes of gold, and took away a golden beam, which
amounted to the weight of 300. pound, to the which the precious vailes of the
temple shining with a wonderful beauty, and incredible art, were hanged: and
to be short, he took all the ornaments which were of any value. He passing
with this pray into Parthia, being more bent to pillage, and to heap up gold*
then to overcome the enemies, in the end was driven to that necessity, that
with small ado, he was the cause of his sons death, and the discomfiture of
the army: the Romans being then sore beaten, and villanously murdered by
that people, his own head, and his right hand, was cut off, and presented to
Herod king of the Parthians, who in as much as in his life time he had so much
bin affected to the love of gold, to the end that after his death he might
glut himself therewith, Herod caused gold to be melted, and poured into his
mouth. Likewise the riches of Ptolomy king of Cypres, were cause of his death:
For he understanding that the Romans were determined to bring his kingdom
into the form of a Province, and take possession of his great treasor, he
thought to drown the^ in the sea, rather then they should come into the hands of
his enemies: but his mind being buried in his treasor, ye miserable wretch
could not endure to see them lost in yt sort, but rather made choice (after
that Cato Portius was to that end sent into Cypres by the Senate) to take away
his own life by poison, then to drown his wealth in the sea: So that it cannot
be denied but that riches are the cause of all evil: For besides the mischief
I have already recited that comes by the greedy desire of them: we see
(which my tongue has horror to tell) that the father is the murderer of his
son, the brother of the brother, and one friend of another. I will not to this
purpose allege thee any examples, either out of ancient, or modern
histories, being a thing that thou may now a days hear out of the mouth of
every man, and a matter so manifest, that every where we have tidinges thereof.
Men do on all sides set upon each other, and are in war continually for this
pelf.

We see in every place, abominable treasons, and conspiracies, to attain
unto riches. This is not all that may be said thereof, but much more: for the
rich man is always in fear, that being pursued by some envious person, he be
not at sometime, or other murdered. If he eat, he fears poison: if he walk
abroad, terror attends on him: he quaketh at the name of war: he stands
in dread of water, of air, of fire: and to conclude, he is never without
fear. And this happens, because he knows, that riches vanish away as
lightly as the smoke before the wind, what shall I say more?

The rich man is always a thirst, with an unquenchable drought, as he that is
tormented with a quotidian ague. For if he be wealthy, he coueteth still to
possess more: so yt the whole world cannot suffice to glut his greedy desire.
Who is then so unadvised to term such a one rich, who (miserable man) is no
otherwise tormented then Tantalus, who sitting in the midst of fresh and
clear running streams, sees most pleasant and delightful fruit round
about him, and his heart burning to eat and drink of them, and yet he cannot.

God forbid that such a one should be called rich, but rather poor and needy
above all other men. Surely if riches were so necessary, the wise Athenians
would never have decreed, and ordained for a law, that whosoever became rich
within their City, should for ten years space be banished Athens, esteeming
it to be far more profitable to void the City of such persons, then to let
them remain there. The Athenians knew well what infections, riches do bring
with them: which was the cause that as some plague, they banished them out of
Athens. Now thou see Possidonio, what good these thy goods do bring.

Fabricio, proceeded in like manner to the handling of his other arguments;
when as M. Peter Anthony, as it were taking the word out of his mouth, said
thus unto him.

Truly Fabricio, that which thou have spoken of riches, has brought me into a
great doubt: For hearing what thou have discoursed thereof, on the one side it
seems unto me to be true: and yet on the other side, I am persuaded it is not
wholly so. Forasmuch as every day, and in all places, the most part of mortal
men do, some after one manner, some after another, give themselves to the
getting of gold and silver: yea not only the base and vulgar sort, but
likewise men of great credit, and reputation, old and young men, and those that
are most wise in worldly matters. Others careless of their own life, do
endeavor to enrich themselves, upon the senseless waters of the sea, and do
daily scour the coasts of the East countries, the shores of the west parts,
and from North to South, and South to North, and leave no place untouched,
where they may enrich themselves: Others to that purpose do follow bloody
battles; and some men do manfully labor both night and day to get wealth.
These men in woods, and mountains, those in valleys and plains: Others seek
to come by riches by dangerous robberies: Others by devilish usury. Wherefore
if as thou say, riches were cause of so great evil, surely no man that
loves his welfare, would against his will purchase his own bane, with so many
cares, and intolerable disquiet. So that I seeing so strong reasons on both
sides, it is hard for me, nay a thing impossible to bolte out the truth.

It is an easy matter to resolve this thy doubt, (answered Fabricio,) For
ancient authors have left us in writing, that riches (whosoever first had the
sight thereof) is a thing most deformed, wearing on the natural visage
thereof, a masque of most fine gold, denoting thereby, that it is fair in
appearance, but foul within: wherefore they who travel so many Countries, and
take such pains to seek it, are enamoured with the outward show, which
blinds the eyes of the understanding: so that they can hardly discern how
hurtful the inward deformity thereof is. Which makes man who is forgetful
of himself, to addict his mind thereto. Which Paulus Emilius perceiving, when
he overcame Perseus king of Macedonia, and gloriously triumphed over him; he
did not only forbear to touch the infinite treasure of the king, but
likewise to see it, although he might have been possessor of a wonderful
booty.

Pompey the great having taken by force the temple of Jerusalem, whereof I
lately made mention, found there an inestimable treasure, and did not only
abstain from taking the spoil thereof, as Marcus Crassus did afterward, but
also from touching it, as he which knew well what hurt riches did bring. And
he who beforehand knows the secrets of man, as he who made them, that by
the apparent beauty of riches, man would easily contemn true and eternal
treasure, has often put us in mind, in his infallible doctrine, that here on
earth man should not heap up riches, as a corruptible thing, and subject to a
thousand hazardes.

M. Peter Anthony knew not well what to reply to his answer, which pleased
him above measure, showing that he was thoroughly satisfied therewith. Wherefore
Fabricio, following on his discourse proceeded in this manner.

Gentlemen; besides that riches are goods, Possidonio would have them
conjoined to Nobility by such necessity, that if any noble man whatsoever
were deprived thereof, he should no more be accounted noble amongst men. His
meaning is then, that so long as a noble man enjoys wealth, he shall be
honorable, and afterward be of base account: O foolish opinion and deceitful
belief! Do not thou consider Possidonio, that this thy Nobility is light
as the wind, and depends of Fortune, even as he who being on the maine sea,
has lost both stern, and sail together at a clappe?

Forasmuchas if those small number of soldiers which are now left to guard the
town, did spoil thy treasure: surely thou should in one instant, leese
both thy wealth, and thy nobility. And as often as this were true, that riches
did make a man noble: it should necessarily follow, that an usurer or a thief
being borne a gentleman, should become more Noble then he was before, by
means of his substance, which he should gain unlawfully, which how far it
disagreeth from the truth, I need not further to manifest unto you. This is
the great glory which riches brings to Nobility; of the which Possidonio,
thou would that liberality should proceed, wherein thou art as much
deceived, as in that which has already been spoken of, because true
liberality springs not from riches, but from the love of the mind. Which
Philip of Macedonia (that I may not further enlarge my discourse, to persuade
you therein) did manifestly prove, when he seeing Alexander his son
ouerlauishe to certain Princes of his kingdom, whose love he sought to win
unto him by liberal gifts, in aduising him like a father, he wrote unto him,
that he ought not to hope for any faithfulness in those friends, who are
purchased by presents, which when we want to send, then do they fail us
likewise: but that he ought to gratify them with love, and sincerity of
heart, wherein true liberality consists. This king was well acquainted, of
what efficacy liberality which proceeds from riches, was. Thou see then
Possidonio, that the Nobility which yesterday thou did affirm to be true
and perfect, is now frail, vain, and none at all. I say then, that it is
neither the stately palaces, nor pleasant gardens, nor fertile fields, nor
well fashioned apparel, nor abundance of gold or silver, as things which
have no stabilitie in them, which do make a man Noble, but virtue which
shines in the mind.

There does the perfection of nobility remain: there the bright glory of man
does give light. Nay let wars spring amongst mighty Potentates, let floudes
of waters fall from heaven; let the rivers and the Sea both together swell; let
the fire be kindled in these riches which thou call goods: for all this,
this kind of Nobility will never shrink, nor become less, because it is
incorruptible; which the philosopher, no less replenished with nobility, then
wisdom, may easily persuade thee; I mean Bias, who seeing Priene his country
utterly brought to ruin, and many bearing away their substance from thence,
and he being asked why he did not carry part of his goods with him,
answered; I always carry all my riches with me: and truly he did charge his
mind, not his shoulders with them as others do, and his wealth was not
discerned with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes of his mind.

But now that I have sufficiently answered the reasons which thou did
allege in the behalf of riches: for by this which I have said, thou may
imagine how they make for thee; now I say it shall not be from the purpose, if
I return to the other proposition, which I left unspoken of; to wit, that in a
learned and virtuous man, there can be no nobility, if he want riches which
are required in a gentleman; because that learning is of it self vain to
ennoble any man.

What Possidonio, do thou affirm that learning is a vain thing in nobility,
and that science and knowledge are vain? Dooest thou hold that that is vain
which does infuse the true light into nobility? O wonderful vndiscreetnesse,
full of mere folly! O most erroneous opinion worthy of all blame! But why do
I so much marvel, if a blind man cannot discern the right way? Well, thou
shall before we depart from hence well perceive, what force learning and
knowledge are of, in nobility. And truly if they had not been worthy great
estimation, Philip the Macedonian king, whose force and power was known to all
Greece, would not so soon as he had a son borne, have written to Aristotle
the only learned and wise philosopher, in that sort he did. Know thou
Aristotle, that I have a son born unto me, for the which I render immortal
thanks unto the Gods, not so much for that he is borne, as because his birth
has happened in the days of thy life, for as much as I hope that being
instructed, and trained up by thee, he will prove a worthy successor of us
and our kingdom. Weigh with thy self how the mind of a good prince was full
of joy, because his son was borne in his time, whose knowledge and learning,
did not only with the sound thereof fill all the world, but even pierce the
clouds. He being a good father did desire to adorn his son with learning and
science, as treasures of far more inestimable value, then his nobility; his
kingdom and riches were, the greatness and the Nobility of his Son, when
as Alexander the Great was scarcely borne unto him.

And Alexander himself having understood, that Aristotle his master had
published his works abroad, especially those which did entreat of natural
causes, he was much offended therewith, and said; Wherein shall we excel other
men, if those Sciences whereof we make profession, are common to every man?
Surely I had rather pass other men in learning, and knowledge, then in riches,
and in Lordly dominion. O words most worthy of so great a Prince, who
preferred knowledge before all things in the world.

This was he, who going from Corinth to visit the Philosopher Diogenes in his
tubbe, enuyed his glory, saying unto him, that if he had not been Alexander,
he would have desired to have been Diogenes: and that not because of the
worthiness of his Nobility, but in regard of his great learning and wisdom;
which would never have happened that Alexander should have desired, being not
that which he was, but to have been Diogenes.

You may now see what power learning is of Possidonio; what force the Sciences
have: for if Alexander the great, the ruler of all the East part of the world,
did so much love and affect them, as I have given you to understand, it is not
to be believed that they are vain in the ennobling of man. And Paulus Emilius
having overcome Perseus, king of Macedonia, as I lately told you, took only
out of all his treasure, two books, to instruct his children withal: thereby
likewise you may perceive, how far greater the estimation of learning then of
riches is, and whether they bring not greater glory to a noble man then it
does. Whereby thou may understand, that in arguing vainly yesterdaie thou
did allege such things as were not worthy the recital.

But I will not (gentlemen) particularly call to mind every several argument,
which he heaped together. For he might allege many more, which
notwithstanding by the answers I have already made, would be soon
ouerthrown, as reasons nothing at al savoring of troth. Tell me Possidonio,
do thou indeed judge thy weapons to be of as great force as thou did
believe? Alas, how foolish is this thy opinion, and thy self more sottish if
thou yet remain therein.

Well, I hope by this resistance that I have made, yt I have hitherunto
satisfied you in every point.

Yea but (quoth the lady Laura) with a feminine readiness: where have you forgot
that which he said, when as he granted (if my memory serve me well) that thou
were likewise a man of honor, but in regard that his nobility is more ancient
than thine, he is to be judged to be ye most noble. Thou must not leave that
behind thee. thee; for methought he spoke very aptly to the purpose,
concerning that matter.

You do well Madame, to put me in mind of that (quoth Fabricio) which had
clean slipped out of my remembrance. And I marvel not though his speech did
please you, because women cannot so well discover the falsehood of arguments.
For albeit that his proposition were true, that of two equal things
concurring together in one subject, the most ancient ought to be preferred:
yet notwithstanding it shall have no pre-eminence, if the nobility of both
issue out of one fountain. But what shall we say, if the one spring of a more
perfect and worthy object then the other? Shall we deem it more noble, only
because it is more ancient? Truly no, Madam.

The like ought to be considered in us two, for albeit that he be descended of
a more ancient and noble family, we ought to have regard unto that which is
most proper to perfect nobility. As we may plainly see in those two images,
which are there before you, and are wonderful pleasing to the sight of those
that behold them; yet does the one draw a kind of desire more then the
other, because it is made more approaching unto life, wherein the excellency
and perfection of them does consist, although the other be of greater
antiquity. Now the nobility of the mind descending of a far more excellent
and noble object (as before we depart from hence I will show you) then the
nobility of blood: we ought not then to have recourse unto the antiquity, but
to the perfection and excellency thereof. Do you now think Madam, that
Possidonio did speak so well as you believed? But does not that which I have
answered thorowlie content you? Surely I am in good hope it does. But this your
gentle remembrance, puts me in mind of that which Possidonio did handle
afterward; when as he said, that in as much as nature is more perfect than art,
his nobility being natural, and mine artificial, he concluded his nobility
to be more worthy and more perfect, and consequently, that he was the more
noble.

But Possidonio, like as thy other arguments were all disagreeing from the
troth, even so is this. For suppose the case that nature be more perfect then
art, it follows not that thy conclusion is true: for so much as nature having
equally framed us all, she fashioned the mind of man pure and clean equally
in all men: but like as a white paper is apt at the first, to receive the
impression of whatsoever thou will write therein, if thou fillest the same with
virtuous and good works, then it is good and precious; if with bad and vicious,
then is it hurtful and nothing worth: Even so the mind of man, is apt by
nature to receive either virtue, or vice: if thou train it up in virtue, it
will become virtuous and Noble; but if thou dispose it to vice, dooest thou
think it will ever become noble, albeit it descend of a Noble stock? No
surely. Thus then we do give the price of nobility, not unto nature but unto
art; and so thy nature shall not be more perfect then my industry, as thou
did conclude.

Thou did persuade thy self Possidonio, that I should want breath: but
do not thou perceive, how thy brags yesterday, are to day overthrown, so
that thou have no more to say.

Now it is apparent unto you all how great Possidonio his follies are, and of
all other that do follow his erroneous opinion, who deeming themselves noble
by blood; and having no notable virtue to commend themselves, do fill their
bodies with wind, feed their mind with smoke, and fly higher in the air then
ever Icarus did, for surely in their countenances is seen nothing else, but
wind, smoke, and light matters, by the which they are in no wise to be
accounted true and perfect noble men.

By this I well perceive, that thou have no other arguments to maintain thy
nobility, seeing that to finish and end thy discourse, thou did so lauishly
brag of the great wealth and riches: which indeed seem no less then the name
Possidonio does import; for in my judgment it signifies nothing else, then to
be possessour of all. Thou did run out at randon, in extolling thy brave and
stately palaces, thy fair and pleasant gardens, thy fields, thy flocks of
beasts, thy sumptuous bankets, thy pomp, thy chivalry, and a thousand other
vaunts, which did not only make thee worthy of so small a ring, as that we are
at variance for, but of a royal crown. O extreme sottishnes of men, which
live at this day! The best is, that thou art not the only man, that art thus
persuaded of thy self; for it may be thou art the least of that opinion of
such as are soldiers of that band. Every where there are such fools, who
enjoy no other contentment in this world, then to reckon up their noble
descent, who build castles in the air, and seek to be commended for that
which they neither have, nor deserve: they exalt themselves with their own
mouth, even to the skies, feeding themselves with a vain name, taking little
thought of the substance and effect.

But in as much as this great wealth, which thou did so stand upon, makes
no more to thy purpose, then if thou had reckoned up the riches of Midas,
or of Marcus Crassus, leaving them now behind me, and sailing over this thy
windy and swelling sea, it is now high time, that I frame my course in a calmer
water. Upon the which setting forward with more leisure, I will pass on my
navigations so far, as I shall think expedient.

Worthy gentlemen, if we do consider that which has been spoken this day, we
shall find that Possidonio yesterday preached unto us, not his own nobility,
but the honor of his predecessors; telling us of the great combats, the
worthy exploits, the trophies, the victories of his great grandfathers, the
privileges, the spoils, the images, the portraitures, and much other such
light stuf, which was nothing to our purpose. And surely it seemed unto me,
that I heard them who are wont in open streets to set forth the praises of
other men, but to be able to say nothing in their own commendation. But
insomuch as we have to consider, which of us two is the most noble, from
henceforth setting aside the nobility of our auncesters, because the ring in
question was not given unto him who should derive his nobility from most
ancient predecessors, but to the most noble of us two; denoting thereby the
proper nobility belonging to our selves, and not yt which belongs to other
men: It seems unto me a thing very convenient (for I think for all his
weapons I need not fear any danger, but that I may walk whither I list) by
little and little, to enter into the fruitful field of virtues and sciences; and
to make it certainly known unto you (yt true and perfect nobility of man, does
neither consist in antiquity of blood, nor in wealth, but in the virtues of the
mind) when I shall have alleged such reasons as my slender capacity, and ye
small time which is left me, will will give me leave, albeit that to persuade you
in this point, the reasones already rehearsed may seem sufficient.

Whereunto Fabricio added some other words, and after he had a little taken
breath, and called his wits together as one half weary already, he gave this
beginning to his future discourse.

Most worthy gentlemen. It was his pleasure, whose will does move the heavens,
to create and frame all things we see in this world, to a certain and due
end. The sun (which for the most part does shine unto us, and from the which
lesser stars do take their light) principally to show unto us the
magnificence of his glory; and next for the profit of man. Likewise he created
the earth, the water, the air, the fire, and other living creatures, for the
use of man. But man himself was formed for God, that soueraign and infinite
good and not for any other thing here beneath on earth.

We know also by those motions we do feel in our selves, that man is never
thorowlie contented, albeit he have under his power and dominion, whatsoever
he may especially wish or desire in this world: for though some one delight
to have children, or riches; or great offices, dignities, and honor, and that
fortune do favor him in all his demands, yet is ye desire of his mind never in
rest, but he still longs couetously more and more, after something or other,
because there is not here on earth any stability, nor the end of any infinite
good.

But man by the intellectual knowledge of his understanding, gaining the
infinite grace and excessive love of him, who in himself is the infinity of
goodness, his mortal desire is staid, and rests it self; like unto a stone
which being cast on high, never rests until it come to the bosom of the
earth, which is the last end of the rest thereof. Now I say, that he is most
perfect, and noble, who approaches nearest unto this last end. Forasmuch as if I
desire heat, surely how much the nearer I shall draw nearer unto the fire, by
so much shall I attain unto my desire. Then to see who is ye most noble, and
most perfect of us two, we ought to consider, which of us approaches nearest
unto the end he was made for: For without doubt he shall be deemed the most
noble, and not he who is descended of most noble blood. And as you know, that
no man can attain unto any end, but by some means: The means we have to
come thereunto, is virtue, which has residence in the soul, and not in the
body: and God made the soul unto his likeness, and not the body where it
remains, which in it self does only resemble brutish beasts. If then
Possidonio, thou do enrich this thy body, with apparel, and with wealth, if
thou do fill it with dainty fare, and leauest thy soul without the
ornament of virtue, and good conditions: surely thou do not adorn thy self
with perfect Nobility, as degenerating from the determinate end thereof. For
man being framed of body and soul, his will shall either incline to the body
or the mind: If to the body, because it was framed of earth, which draws
downwardes, he cannot comprehend, nor desire any other thing but terrestrial,
and earthly matters. If to the mind, because it is nothing but a celestial
spirit, he cannot covet after any other thing, then to mount on high, where
al perfection consists, and disdain frail things which are on the earth.

But man ought to govern himself according unto reason, not according as the
body, but as his soul guides him; the one being subject unto corruption, the
other made to live eternally.

Likewise, the ornaments of the soul, as that is immortal, even so are they,
and those that set forth the body are corruptible, as the body is. Forasmuch as
both the internal and external goods of the body, which consist in a just
proportion of members, in health, in force, in riches, in procreation of
children, in building of palaces, and such other things, are al frail and
transitory, in as much as to day they have their being, and in a moment are
brought to the ground; whereas contrarily, the goods of the soul are durable,
perpetual, and eternal. You see then how much the soul is far more perfect
and noble then the body. Wherefore, if thou desire to please the body, and I
determine to serve and obey the soul, I shall have so much advantage of thee
in nobility, as the one excels the other: as if I should say. Those things
that do set forth the soul, are virtues which a man does irreuocablie pour
into his mind, for virtue is a firm abiding affection of the mind, which
causes whosoever is possessed therewith, to deserve great praise. And
whenever it is not constant, it loses the name of virtue, seeing that this
stabilitie of affection by continual use, and practice, is changed into an
habitude.

Some of these virtues do consist in good manners and behavior: others in the
understanding. The former do consist in a mean, between two extremes: the
latter, neither in extremity, nor in a mean: as prudence, science,
intelligence, and wisdom. Other some which by ancient writers are called
moral virtues, are so many appetites, and desires as come into our mind. For
if so be that I am naturally addicted unto women, or some other above measure
desirous of dainty fare: Or else, if when reason commands, I do abstain
from looking on a woman, or that other, from his meat, surely both of these in
us is a vice. Virtue then considering the middle of these extremes, with a
strong bridle ouerruleth these inordinate appetites, which a man can hardly
withstand at the first assault, because he cannot so well at the first temper
the natural motions of the flesh, nor refrain the insatiable desire of the
belly.

The like I may say of diverse and sundry desires of man, which cause him to
fall into abominable vices. Now if Virtue did not oppose it self against
vice, I doubt not but our estate should wholly resemble, if it were not worse
then the life of beasts void of reason.

There are besides other vices, which man being overtaken withal, persuading
himself they proceed from virtue, he falls headlong into them. As if I
should extremely thirst after honor and dignity: And thou should show thy
self over liberal in spending thy goods; If this man should rashly thrust
himself into the midst of a fray. In these unbridled appetites, albeit they
seem good, because that to be placed in honor, to be liberal, and a man of
courage, have the appearance of good things, yet notwithstanding they are
vicious, and ought to be avoided. Forasmuch as my desire leans to ambition,
thine to prodigality: and the rash courage of the other, to foolish
hardiness.

Likewise who so uses the contrary of these, is no less worthy of blame;
For if I being worthy, did disdainfully refuse a place of dignity: Or thou
did withholde thy hand over straitely in the distributing of thy goods
where need were; and the other being urged by his enemies, did play the
coward: Surely both the former and the latter sort of men, which tie themselves
to those extremes, are vicious, and ought to be avoided: as in like manner he
is, who does either hide, or debar his companion of those things, which in
reason he may afford him. Wherefore to moderat this my unbridled desire of
the flesh, or his inordinate feeding, there comes a virtue, named Temperance,
which by reason does appease, and ouerrule the unruly appetites of man. How
greatly is Philoxenes to be blamed, who being enchanted by the desire of
eating, wished above all other things, that his neck were as long as the neck
of a crane* that he might feed with the more pleasure: and Semiramis queen of
the Assyrians, who so dissolutely abandoned her self unto the pleasures of the
flesh, that being deprived of all sense and understanding, she sought
carnally to couple her self with her son Ninus? Surely very much, as they
who in guise of men did live intemperately like beasts. This virtue does not
only temper those delights, which are common with us and brute beasts: but
it does likewise appease sorrow, from whence does spring gracious modesty,
inuiolate continency, moderate sobriety, honest chastity, and other good
works.

In like manner to temperate his furious temeritie, who inconsideratly thrusts
himself amidst his enemies, or his faintness of heart, who being assailed by
his adversary, does fly from him: Fortitude does step in place, a worthy
virtue, which obtains the mean between foolish-hardinesse, and fear. The
rashness of Phaeton gave him courage to govern his fathers chariot, although
he altogether wanted skill thereto: and encouraged Icarus to fly in the air.
Which makes me affirm that the valiant man ought to dread no danger, no not
death it self, nor any other thing when need requires, having due
consideration of the place; the time, and the manner how he enterpriseth any
thing: but he ought to fear that, which if he should not dread, would cause
him to be contemned, as dishonor, envy, the chastity of his wife, and such
other things, as who so fears is honest, and jealous of his reputation.
Likewise that ought to be feared which passes the force of man, for he is no
less worthy of reprehension, who dreadeth that which he ought to fear, then
he who fears that which he ought not to dread. As we read of Artemon the
Grecian, who was so fearful, that he never stirred not so much as out of his
house, but two of his servants continually held an iron buckler over his
head, fearing least something should fall upon him: or if any thing did fall,
that he might be the better defended from it: and if at any time he went
abroad, he was carried in a litter well covered. This virtue then does cause men
to expose themselves with consideration to such dangers as do happen, and
patiently to suffer labor and sorrow, which is a far harder matter for a
man to do, then to abstain from pleasure. Heerehence does spring
magnificence, which is so much commended, tolerable patience, firm
perseverance, and magnanimity of courage. But to bridle the evil disposition
of him, who after a tyrannical sort does occupy that which by right does
belong unto another his equal: therein Justice does offer it self, which is a
virtue far more excellent then any other, being either universal, or
particular.

Universal justice is that, which within it self does contain the two
foresaid virtues, and is far more noble then they are, by Justice good laws
are observed, which do dispose men, and make them fit to do good actions, and
upon deserved penalty do prohibit men from wickedness.

This virtue does contain the use, and habitude of other virtues, wherefore by
good reason it is called perfect, and universal, especially inasmuch as if
temperance be good, that shall only be profitable for him that possesses it;
and so I may say likewise of Fortitude: but Justice is common, and universal
to al men, and as a virtue descended from above, it shines as a heavenly
light. Particular Justice, no less to be commended then other virtues,
consists in equity (for we ought in the same manner to account both of
commodity and discommoditie) and in the observation of faith in things
promised. Now of this virtue does proceed the observation of laws, truth,
piety, obedience, and likewise liberality, which holding the middle between
spending and saving, does restrain the vice of prodigality, and
covetousness: For like as the prodigal man is careless in getting, and
lauishe in giving: So the covetous man is over careful in heaping up riches,
and too nigardly in spending. Neither is the auaritious man far unlike to the
miserable ambitious person, between whom, and this other who despises honor
being worthy thereof, there comes a virtue considering the mean, of the
which arises magnanimity of courage.

I could bring you infinite examples fitting this purpose, which I do
forbear, least my speech should be over long, intending likewise to return to
discourse of intellectual virtues: and first of all to show you, that some of
the foresaid moral virtues, cannot be without prudence, which consists in
those things, which are subject to change, being sometimes after this
fashion, sometimes after another: Herehence proceeds counsel, and election.
As for example, if thou should offer unto me many good things, and many
evil things, counselling me, whether of them should be especially, either of
the good more profitable, or of the evil things more hurtful: Thorough
prudence I would make choice of that which were most commodious, and least
dangerous, thereby ordering things present, remembering things past, and
foreseeing things to come. On Prudence, reason, understanding, and discretion
attends. Thorough Science, which consists in firm, and true things, we
know, and understand the conclusion, whereunto it aspireth, leaving the
principles to be considered of by intelligence: For in searching out, if God
be the Sovereign good, knowing it thorough Science, I seek to understand what
God is. Afterward by Wisdom I comprehend the principles, and that which
proceeds of them: whereof by good right, it is named the true knowledge of
divine and humane things.

The virtues of the mind being then the ornament of the soul, which is the
subject of the said virtues, they are (as I said) the means to attain unto
the end we shoot at. He shall be then most Noble, he shall be most perfect,
and amongst mortal men most renowned; which being adorned with the virtues I
have recited, shall approach nearest unto this Sovereign, and infinite good. We
see that the water is more noble then the earth, the air then the water, and
the fire then the air, because it is nearer thereunto then any of the other
Elements.

The like is to be observed in the orders of Angels, which are divided into
three Hierarchies, and the Hierarchies into so many Thrones: Inasmuch as that
is the most worthy Hierarchy, which approaches nearest unto the creator of
heaven. Now the Seraphins (as being nearest unto God, forasmuch as no
Angelical spirit does not contemplate more immediately his divine essence
then they do) and the Cherubins with the Thrones which are seated in the first
Hierarchy, do exceed in perfection, and nobility, the Government, the
Principalities, and the powers, which are in the second Hierarchy. These are
more noble then the third, as being further off from the divine presence, in
the number whereof are, the Virtues, the Archangels, and Angels. To speak more
plainly unto thee Possidonio, take me for example a Prince in Sovereign degree
of nobility, whose children have issue, I demand if his children their issue
shall be accounted as noble as his own: Surely no, because they are a descent
farther off from the Prince (from whom their nobility proceeds) then the
first issue from him: and so we ought to esteem of the lower degrees. If then
^ossidonio, thou do approach nearest unto the end whereunto we were framed,
thy mind being so highly qualified with virtues, as I have briefly recited to
thee: I will then yield up my interest touching this controversy, without
debating ye matter any more: in regard of any nobility of blood derived from
thy ancestors, which makes as much for true nobility, as the light of a
candle near unto the clear sunshine: But if I prove unto thee, that I do
come nearest unto this end, wilt not thou grant me, that I am more noble then
thou art, and that the victory belongs unto me? Surely thou can not say any
thing to the contrary. I will sufficiently declare unto thee, that I come
nearest thereunto having graced my life with virtues, which are the only
means to attain unto it.

Fabricio having spoken in this manner, and somewhat taken breath after his long
discourse, turning himself again toward the company, with a plyant voice,
proceeded on this manner.

You see most worthy gentlemen, that by the very matter of this discourse, I
am constrained fully to lay open my life unto you, and consequently such
virtues as are in me, and not other men's. Wherefore this small speech will
necessarily turn to my praise and commendation, contrary to my pretended
purpose, because that true nobility, consisting (in my opinion) in the proper
virtues of the mind, as I did most plainly prove unto you; I cannot declare,
and much less make you understand, whether I am noble, or not, except I
recount them unto you: for this respect (and God knows how willingly) I had
rather that hereafter some other should take the matter upon him for me, as
likewise because I would not that any should girde at me therefore: which in
friendly manner I beseech you may not be denied me, seeing that I am
constrained thereunto, and that it lies upon me vainly to set forth mine
own praises, and to tax another man. Howsoever it happen, trusting in your
virtues, I will freely embolden my self, with the greatest brevity that I can,
to set forth my praises unto you.

I then being in my childish years, after that my tung began by little and
little to untie it self, instructed in precepts of virtue, I say I began to
adorn my life, and my mind with such qualities, as were fittest for my tender
age: and likewise my young mind being capeable of understanding, my memory of
retaining, and my wit apt for learning, I gave my self to the pleasant study
of humanity; where I did not only lay up in my memory the remembrance of
many fables, and many histories, but likewise the knowledge of man's life, by
the which I might easily discern for the ornament and duty of my life, what
way was to be avoided, and which was to be followed. And longing further to
attain to the knowledge of the Arts and Sciences, and not only of them by
which we do discern that which is false, from the troth; and of those other
by which we are made partakers of the understanding, both of matters natural
and heavenly: but especially desiring to embrace moral philosophy (which if
we vvil give credit unto Cicero and others) wise Socrates, leaving the
study of natural philosophy, as less profitable to co^uerse one with another
in this world, brought from heaven to earth) I was constrained to leave my
Country, and my parents, to travail thither where all liberal exercises
are maintained, every dull wit is instructed, and every hard understanding
softened. There did I beautify my understanding, and my mind with knowledge
and virtue, in so large measure as I need not now to declare unto you.

By this means Possidonio do I believe, that a man becomes renowned and
noble. By virtue accompanied with worthy sciences, the mind of man is made
noble and excellent. Virtue is that which tempereth a man that is of a mild
nature, graceth him with honest and courteous conditions, makes him prudent
and wise, and finally of a mortal man, immortal. That is the only means by
which we attain to the perfect knowledge of him, who is the last end and
mark we aim at.

I say virtue is that wherewith the soul being beautified, does cause us to
approach to the end we were made for, and consequently makes us partakers of
the light thereof. He that is a true noble man does not shine, (neither ought he
to show himself by means of any other beams,) then those that spring and
grow from virtue.

Now thou may be able hereafter to know Possidonio, from whence true
Nobility of the mind does proceed, and to perceive likewise, if learning is
vain or rather necessary, yea and the Sciences themselves, for the advancement
of nobility. Now thou may understand, how much learning is to be esteemed
above riches, by those that are perfect noble men. But besides the examples I
have already alleged, I will yet moreover give you to understand, how highly
it has been accounted of by other men of old time.

For as much as only by the Poet Euripides his going to Syracusa, the
Syracusans who had under their power many Athenian prisoners, they gave them
all their liberty, because they had learned without book many verses of
Euripides who was an Athenian by birth. Be you now the judge, what greater
gift they might have presented to the Author of these verses.

And divine Plato being by Denis the Tyrant, called from Athens into Sicilia,
which voyage he made by Sea, he no sooner set foot on land, but he was by him
received in a triumphant chariot, and after that manner he entered the city.

Surely Denis did not this honor neither to the wealth of Plato, nor to the
worthiness of his blood, but to his deep skill and virtue. Alexander of
Macedonia, having given Darius King of Persia the overthrow, amongst the
kings treasure he found a most precious little casket, enriched with gold
and precious stones, wherein the Persian K. was wont to preserve his most
precious and odoriferous ointmentes: but Alexander, put neither ointment nor
precious Jewel, nor any of his treasure therein, but the poetical works of
Homer the Grecian, imagining he had not in all his tresure, a jewel of greater
value, which did better deserve to be locked up there.

The reason hereof was not because Homer was born of any noble stock, or that
he had been of great wealth (for scarce was any man of so low estate in
regard of riches) but in respect of his divine knowledge and virtue. If then
the true estimation of man, proceeds from virtue and knowledge, who dare
then affirm, that they do not make him noble, who is virtuous, of good
behavior, and wise, albeit he be not descended of any noble blood? Surely he
should be a wicked person, vicious, and foolish, that should judge otherwise.
For he whom thou do call and deem to be noble, has only the appearance of
a noble man: but those I speak of are noble indeed, in as much as their
understanding is made noble, the which does afterward send forth the light
thereof, for the ornament of our life. If thou art of this making Possidonio, I
will judge thee a perfect Noble man, but not in regard thou art only descended
of a noble stock.

And truly both thy actions, and theirs likewise, who at this day do vaunt
them selves of the nobility of their blood, are wholly disposed and ready to
follow the vanities and pleasures of the body, which last but for a while,
and not the service of the soul which is eternal and everlasting. Blood then
avails nothing to true and perfect nobility; and how little it makes for
thee, I have already declared: for that which the vulgar sort esteems
nobility of blood, has no other good thing in it self, but a facility, and
slight to make one Noble. O how many are there, whom this nobility of blood,
being considered in man without any other quality, of noble, makes them base!
For it is nourished with ignorance, fed with pride, increased with audacitie,
lives with temeritie, ruled with lightness, brought up in theftes,
robberies, wantonness, violence, blasphemy, evil speech; and to conclude,
continued in vanity, which is an enemy to knowledge, a traitor to virtue, and
contrary to true nobility.

Imagine now Possidonio, how noble and perfect this thy Nobility of blood is,
thorough the which thou persuadest thy self, thou have attained to the highest
degree of Nobility that may be imagined, whereas thou art lowest of all other,
whereinto the foolish opinion of the vulgar sort does easily cause thee to
fall: for so much as without any difference at all, they call those Noble men, who
have but only a shadow of Nobility, as well as they, who are true noble men.
Consider how light and careless the miserable belief of mortal men is, and
how it is openly deceived. I say then Possidonio, that thou art not noble, and
that in thee can no marks of true Nobility be seen, but rather a shadow,
or to say the troth, a mere and bare name of Nobility. Which if it be so, as I
have made manifest unto you (and surely it is so, and cannot be otherwise) I
may say in arguing after this manner. That by how much the effect is far more
perfect, and more commendable then the name of any thing whatsoever; by so much
I am, and so do deem my self more noble then thou art: and how far the
effect excels the name, is evident of it self. For as much as if I desire
rather effectually to be learned, then so taken, as I know thou couetest to be
rich, then to be called wealthy.

Whereby thou may now well perceive, in what case thou art, albeit yesterday
thou were of belief, after thou had recited so many fables for proof of
thy nobility, that I should have nothing to speak against thee this day, but
thou may hereafter judge better whether I had any thing to say or no: for to
go thorough with that which offers it self to be spoken herein, much more
time then is now left unto us wuld not suffice to handle the matter. Wherefore
I will proceed further.

Now considering (gracious gentlemen) that which Possidonio intended
yesterdaie, when as he said, that he is a true and perfect noble man, because
he is descended of noble parents. Suppose the case that his proposition were
true, yt whosoever is borne of a noble stock is a noble man, if I did deny
that he were issued of noble family, what could he say unto me? Tell me
Possidonio; if so be I should deny that thou were engendered of noble blood,
what would thou answer me? what certainty would thou give me thereof?
Surely thou would long go groping in the dark before thou could
ascertaine me thereof, and would never be able to prove it with sound
reasons, by which I should be constrained of necessity to believe it. If then
we are not certain of thy birth, it follovveth that thy nobility ought
rather to be called credible then certain.

Wherefore I may very well say thus much. That even as a certain and true
thing, is far more perfect then that, which we only believe to be
certain: So is my nobility far more certain than thine, because it is to
be believed indeed, and not to be presumed only, that I am noble, in regard
that the true essence of nobility remains in me.

Thou would then say perhaps (quoth one of the young Ladies, who was
offended with the last words of Fabricio, because she was a kinswoman unto
Possidonio) that he is not his fathers son, seeing there is no more
certainty of his birth then thou affirmest? Truly Fabricio thou art fallen into
a great error. As though we knevve not what house he is come of? Thou
should not so openly allege that which is false to prove thy arguments
as pleases thee, for it does ill become thee: and now I hold that which
Possidonio affirmed for troth, and that thou would with thy subtle
Sophistry make us believe, that white is black.

Scarce had the young Lady ended her words, but all the company began to
laugh, with such earnestnes, that their hearts were sore therewith; and she
imagining that they mocked her demanded saying. But I pray you vvhereat do you
laugh? Suddenly the Lady Aurelia answered, who would not laugh to hear thee
say so simply that Possidonio is not his fathers son, as though he could be
begotten without a father?

The young lady half angry, and with shame dying her cheeks with vermillion,
like unto the morning rose, said only, I know well enough what I mean;
whereunto Fabricio answered smilingly.

I know he is his fathers son, but I am not certain whether he were his
father, whom all we do imagine, or no: and it is to no purpose to say, that his
father called him son, or any such like tales, for that can in no wise make
me assured thereof.

We may then (quoth she, not regarding their laughter) by this reason, say the
like of all that are here present.

It is true Madam (quoth Fabricio.) Alas poor soul that I am (quoth she) ever since
I was borne, I have hitherunto bin sure who was my father, and likewise held my
mother for an honest woman, and now thou make a doubt thereof.

How great laughter began again amongst them al, both men and women, you may
easily conjecture; but after they were all quiet, Fabricio proceeded on
further in this manner.

Madam, I will grant unto you, that Possidonio is descended of noble parents,
and consequently that his nobility is certain: yet is not that nobility more
praise worthy which a man obtains by his own labor and travail, and
thorough his own virtues, then that he receives from others? Surely not a
little. And whether of the two will thou judge to be more noble, either thy
self Possidonio, or thy predecessors, who were the beginners and first
founders of this thy Nobility? For they were most valiant men at Arms, and as
thou did yesterday conclude, and I do grant thee, they were pleasing, and
well accepted of their Princes: now surely will thou judge thy self more noble
then they, who dooest only represent their nobility, I believe that without
any contradiction, thou will give them the upper hand. You may see now, how
much more the nobility which any man does purchase unto himself, is far
more perfect then that which he takes from his ancestors. Mine being of that
sort, without doubt it is more perfect and more noble then thine. If I would
henceforward strike the sails of my ship, and cast anchor to stay my self,
without passing any further, I should think I were arrived at the wished
haven, and hitherunto to have made as much way as is necessary for our
enterprise: but seeing the western wind blows on me with a pleasant gale, and
that the sea is calm, and affoordeth me a prosperous navigations, my heart will
not suffer me as yet to strike sail, but I will by little and little put out
further.

The great Monarch of heaven, and good guide of the earth (worthy gentlemen)
having here beneath in this world created all things, it pleased him in the
end amongst all other living creatures, which he had framed, to form one, who
being the most perfect, and most noble of all others, should have the dominion
of all other things he had before created, and to him (albeit that he was
made and framed of earth, as the scriptures do witness) he gave reason, by
which he should rule, and govern himself. Men were borne, and so they are yet
at this day, as some do believe, with equal minds, with equal powers, and
with equal virtues. Because nature, as well to the rich as to the poor, to
the noble man, as to the peasant, to the mighty as to the weak, has given
reason and understanding, and brought them all naked into the world. And who
is he, how poor, abject, and miserable soever, who at his first beginning, had
not a mind, like unto the mind of every Prince or king? Surely no man. We will
say then, that nature whereof thou did make such great brags, yesterday,
does not bring forth one man better, or more noble, then other.

Now all men being equal by birth, virtue was that which first of all did
distinguish them, and made a difference between man and man, because that
whosoever showed himself most familiar, and devout toward her, was called
noble, and the rest remained ignoble. And whosoever he was that did first of
all invent this word Nobility, he denoted thereby a singularity, and
separation from other men. For Nobility is as much to say, as a note or mark,
and a noble man, as a man more noted, and known, then any others. By reason
whereof, man having by his the height and value of his courage, made proof of
many laudable actions, and worthy works, he comes to be separate from the
vulgar sort, and known more plainly, whereupon it pleased the first inuenter,
to term this separation, and this knowledge, Nobility. And to say the truth,
it was not without apparent reason: for if we look into the effect and
substance of this Nobility, we shall find that therein which I have recited.
Forasmuch as Nobility is no other thing (without intermedling with yt which
Possidonio alleged yesterday: For I have this day proved how true that is) I
say Nobility is nothing else, but an excellency, by the which things that are
most worthy, do take place before those that are less worthy. We see amongst
the planets (for his perfect excellency) ye sun is more noble, and has
pre-eminence above al other planets, being of less worth: Amongst stones the
diamond: amongst metals, gold: amongst greater stones, the Phorphir. Even the
like is in man: for he is more noble and worthy then other, who is most
excellent and perfect amongst them: which excellency and perfection, is derived
from the nobility of the understanding, and not from the body, to separate man
from brute beasts, as I said before. Well may you perceive by this, that virtue
in man is that which makes him Noble and excellent, and causes him to be
preferred before others, and not blood, nor riches, as thou did affirm
Possidonio. And even as man is far more excellent and noble then any other
living creature; so by this excellency and virtue of the mind, one man is
more worthy, and more excellent then another. Now if he is noble who with his
own virtues has made the excellency which is in himself manifest, what
excellency have thou ever showed to be in thee, tell me what greatness, and what
virtue is in thy mind? And who knows not this, that without great labor, a
man cannot attain to any worthy action, or laudable deed. Believe not
Possidonio, that remaining continually idle as thou dooest and pampered in
daintiness, that thou art like ever to prove a noble man, which thou did
yesterday declare in reciting the lives of thy predecessors, which did never
spare neither cold, nor heat, nor fire, nor travel in the world, to the end
they might not only take ye name of Nobility upon them, but the effect
likewise, and having taken it, keep and conserve it. By such means man may
advance himself, and become noble and renowned amongst others, and not by
blood. Writers report more of the virtue which Julius Caesar showed in Germany
and France, then of his birth. Neither do they so much write what blood
Octauius Augustus was come of, as they have done of ye overthrow he gave to M.
Antonius, and Cleopatra, near to the mountain Actium in Epire, and of other his
worthy actions, by which he brought into his subjection al Spain toward the
West, the Tartarians and the Sarmatians toward the North, the Indians toward
the East, the Parthians, ye Armenians: Tygranes king of the Medes, the
inhabitants of Bosphorus and of Propontis, and those of either side the Rhin,
and of the Danube, with infinite other nations: Of Pompey the great, the son of
Pompey, Strabo does recite his triu^phs* especially yt which he had in Affrique
against Domitia^. The deliverance yt Brutus freed his country from, when he
did drive from thence Tarquin ye proud, with his successors, was cause that he
was named the father of the Roman liberty: the like is said of ye other
Brutus. Fabius Maximus was likewise rightly called the defender of the
commonwealth, when he bridled the fierce courage of Anniball of Carthage. The
wonderful overthrow, that Claudius Nero gave ye Carthaginians, when he
presented Asdrubal his head to his brother, do cause us to remember him; not ye
blood nor the generosity of his ancestors.

The great value of Horatius, who gave the people of Rome their liberty, when
as he alone standing on the bridge, did resist the Tuscanes. The glorious
Trophies, and many victories which Camillus the great obtained against the
Falisci, are recommended unto us: especial^y those which in his exile he had
against the Gauls, who had forcibly taken and burned the city of Rome.
Likewise in this his expedition he gloriously vanquished the Volsci, the
Latins, the Equi, the Erinqui, with other Nations. Of Tyberius Gracchus, who
also subdued the Gauls. Of Paulus Emilius, who conquered the Gauls that dwelt
on both sides the Alps. Of Paulus Emilius his son, who having brought
Liguria into subjection, ouerthrewe, and took Perseus king of Macedonia. Of
Marcus Claudius Marcellus, who surmounted and slew Viridimarus king of the
Gauls. Of al these there is nothing spoken of their Nobility, or of their
blood, or of their descent.

The wonderful deeds which both the Scipiones did, as well in Spain, as in
Affrique, and Asia, for the which the one was called Scipio Africanus, the
other Asiaticus, do clearly manifest their renown while the world does
stand in every place, and not their family. The value of L. Martius, who
succeeded those two, against Gisgon and Magon, gathered the Roman army
together, which was all broken, and valiantly overcame the enemies. Likewise
the virtues of Scipio Nasica, were such, that besides the victorious triumphs
he obtained over his adversaries, he was rightly judged by the Senate, to be
the worthiest of the Romans, and that not in regard that he was descended of
the most noble stock of Rome. And if I would so far forth enlarge my
discourse, as well I might concerning this matter by true, and no fabulous
examples: surely neither time, nor my tongue would serve me to express them.
Thou may see then Possidonio, that so many ancient trumpets as do resound
in the world, do not set forth neither the worthiness of blood, nor the
antiquity of lineage, nor the rich palaces of so many worthy knights, but
their notable virtue, their wonderful prowess, and their singular greatness
of courage. The blood of that divine Plato, or of learned Aristotle, or of wise
Pythagoras, of Socrates, of Diogenes, of Xenophon, of Demosthenes, of Thales
Milesius, of Chilon the Lacedemonian, of Pittacus, of Bias, of Cleobulus, of
Periander, whose wisdom did beautify Greece, nor of other Philosophers, by
whose learning the secrets of Nature have been opened unto us, was not so
glorious and renowned, as their virtue, of great fame. What do we hear of
the birth of Homer the Grecian, or of Virgil of Mantna? What of that eloquent
Cicero? What of the offspring of famous Titus Liuius of Padua? of M. Varro? Or
of Crispus Salustius? What of the stock of Pliny of Verrona? and of all they,
who by their learning are at this day renowned in the world? Truly nothing at
all. But of their divine skill, their art and virtue, all men have written and
spoken. Therehence proceeds that excellency by the which one man is to be
preferred before another. From thence springs that dignity, which causes
one man to be distinguished and known from another: Therehence proceeds
that true knowledge which makes a Noble man: from thence grows that
separation and division between man and man, causing the one to be esteemed
Noble, gentle* and accomplished, and the other ignoble, abject and vile. To
conclude, from thence true nobility has his beginning.

You may see now Possidonio, of what small account blood is in matter of
Nobility. It is then necessary for him, whosoever he be that desires to
become Noble, to beautify his mind, with good and virtuous actions. I say his
mind, which is as ready and apt to take the impression of Nobility, as a
fair looking glass, which does as well receive the beautiful form of fair
Ladies, as the ill countenance of ill favored women, so the mind of man is
prepared to receive, either Nobility, or baseness. For as it adorneth it
self either with good or bad conditions, so does it present them unto them.

Consider a man whose mind is just, courageous, temperate, prudent, pitiful,
charitable, and loving, graced with all virtues: and another whose mind is
unjust, unconstant, lavish, foolish, cruel, wicked, hateful, and disgraced
with all vice: wilt not thou judge the first, more noble and perfect (albeit he
be not descended of some noble parents) then the latter?

And what if some times the first were but meanly apparelled, and the latter
did wear costly garments, will thou say that he were more noble, of more
account, and worthy of more estimation? no surely as I think: for I persuade
my self, thou have now changed thy opinion: And that thou will not fall into
that error which many do, who believe that he ought to be more esteemed and
more honored then others, who is well apparelled. For if thou did put
costly raiment upon a porter or some such fellows back, perhaps he would
seem a far more proper man, then a great many such gentlemen: and yet I
hope you will not say he is a noble man. For example hereof, take Diogenes
the prince of the Senicall sect, who went always barefoot, with an old patched
cloak on his shoulders, and in this manner was he found in Crania, by Alexander
the great when he went to visit him: as we said of late. Such a kind of
habit did not give commendation either to his wisdom, or his nobility.
Epaminondas that famous Prince, and leader of the Thebane armies, did always
wear an old worn gown: which because he did never use any other, he caused
it oftentimes to be mended, whilst in the mean time he kept his house. You
may now know hereafter, that true and perfect Nobility, is derived from no
other fountain, then the virtues of the mind, and not from the worthiness of
blood.

Here Fabricio paused a while, and afterward followed on his discourse in
this manner.

Consider Possidonio, that poor apparel does not defraud a man of his
demerites. And like as we have concluded, that true Nobility descends from
the virtues of the mind, and not from the dignity of blood: So then we will
yet conclude, that it does not work his effect, no not in riches. Forasmuch as
if we would maintain this opinion of thine, that riches are not only an
ornament, but rather necessary to the bringing forth of perfect nobility; it
should follow that poverty, should make a man base and abject, and as an
enemy of true Nobility, it ought to be banished: but he is greatly to be
blamed who is of this opinion: Forasmuch as poverty is not to be contemned,
nor eschued, for such is the passion it brings us, as is the mind that
receives it. For if the mind of man be addicted to yt which is contrary unto
it, that is unto riches, it breeds no delight, nor pleasure, but cruel
bondage, and infinite labor, and as a traitor to rest and quietness, does
miserably afflict the thoughts of man.

And of this belief art thou Possidonio, for because thy mind longs after
riches, thou perswadest thy self that poverty is cause of all mischief,
whereas in deed the evil arises of thy unbridled affection, which is buried
in riches, and not of poverty. But if the mind of man be not drowned in
riches, poverty shall be very pleasant, and delightful unto him, and his
mind shall be joyful, and at liberty.

Democritus, being nourished with poverty, gave as a gift unto the common
wealth of Athens his infinite wealth, imagining he might far better follow
his study, with poverty, then seruilie subject himself unto riches. Like
unto him were Diogenes, and Anaxagoras.

What shall I say of Phocion of Athens, especially worthy all honor and
glory; who albeit he had twenty several times been Emperor of the
Athenians: yet did he in such sort love poverty, that the Ambassadors of
Alexander the great coming unto him, and bringing as a present, a great
quantity of gold, they found his wife kneading of dowe, and himself drawing
water, whereby they deemed him to be very needy, and yet notwithstanding he
did refuse so rich a gift; esteeming that to live with poverty, did bring
greater tranquillity unto man, then to possess great treasure. Surely more
joyful, and worthy of greater glory, was the life of Aristides the Athenian,
with his well-beloved poverty, then the condition of Callias his fellow
Citizen, with his abundant wealth.

And tell me Possidonio, what vileness did the poverty of Quintus
Cincinatus, and Attilius Serranus, men of excellent Virtues, bring unto them?
Who tilling the ground, and sowing their corn, were worthily chosen by the
Senate to be the conductors of the Roman army: and those selfsame hands
which did guide the plough, became rulers of chariots of triumph.

The apparent poverty of M. Curious, a man of singular value, was no reproach
unto him, but rather made him worthy of eternal glory, who after he had
triumphed over the Samnites and the Sabines, returned to his poor cottage
which was not capable of his greatness, whither the ambassadors of the
Samnites bringing unto him a great sum of gold to make their pacification
with the Romans, they found him sitting before the fire upon a country
stool, eating in a wooden dish: and nevertheless he sent back their
treasures after them, saying, yt he desired rather in his poverty to command
over those that were rich, then to become rich himself; words well beseeming
his magnanimity of courage.

Equal to this man in poorness, and stoutnesse of mind, was Fabricius
Lucinus, who likewise refused the guiftes of the Samnites: neither yet were the
treasures of Pirrhus king of Epire, which were offered unto him, with the
fourth part of his substance, sufficient to make him loose one jot of his
value, albeit he was very poor. So manifest was Attilius Regulus his poverty,
that he could no more govern the empire in Affrike, because at Rome his
children had not wherewithal to maintain themselves.

But tell me Possidonio, do thou deem that these men for all their poverty
were not noble? God forbid, nay contrary, the singular virtue of their mind,
made them most noble. Whereby thou may plainly perceive, that if nobility
may remain with poverty, and poverty with nobility, together in one
subject, why did thou yesterday persuade the contrary; esteeming that
poverty could as well agree with Nobility, as fire and water together? And
that his felicity is greater (if so be man can attain to any on earth) whose
mind rests contented with poverty, then his happiness, who has attained to
the height of worldly wealth, and lordly authority: the disposition of
Alexander the great may serve for proof, who commanding over the greater part
of the world, because Anaxagoras told him that there were many worlds, he
lamented greatly in his presence, that he had not fully as yet conquered one.

And Apollo may serve for witness hereof, who being demanded by Giges king
of Lidia, a prince of mighty power and wealth, if there were any man on earth
more happy the^ he was, by Oracle made answer, that Aglaus Sofides the poorest
man of all Arcadia was more happy, because even until his latter age he had
lived with contented poverty, with a mind full of quiet. By the which we may
understand, that poverty brings no reproach unto nobility, and consequently
that riches are not the ornament, nor any necessary part thereof.

If then, worthiness of blood be not necessary in matter of nobility, as with
most evident reasons, and many plain examples of diverse, who albeit they were
descended of noble and royal blood, were yet judged ignoble, (as this day I
have plainly showed unto you) and if riches, how infinite soever, do not give
any grace or ornament thereunto (as by the examples of many Noble and valiant
Captains I have showed unto you) what manner of Nobility is then in
Possidonio? Of what estimation shall we account him? And if that poverty
brings no contempt to the greatness of perfect nobility, but contrarily does
exalt it: and that likewise the baseness of blood of our predecessors, is no
let unto us to become noble, as not only by most pregnant proofs, but also by
manifest examples of so many Popes, kings, Emperors, Consuls, Pretors, as by
my discourse you have heard, I have caused you this day to understand, who
although they did descend of base parents, yet did they nevertheless by their
deserts, mount up unto the sovereign degree of nobility: It follovveth
necessarily, that my nobility is far more worthy, and far more perfect
then Possidonios is.

And if these examples be not sufficient wholy to move you, at the least
let the example of Ventidius Bassus persuade you, who drawing his birth from a
base and poor stock, was in his young years taken with his mother by
Pompeius Strabo, when he brought the Ascolains into subjection, and before his
Chariot was with other bondmen led captive thorough Rome: but he growing
into further age, that he might the better have wherewithal to maintain his
estate, he gave himself to buy Mules, and with them to carry travelers by
the way; by means whereof, he passed with Caesar into France, where he
began to show the greatness of his courage, he having during the Civil
Wars many matters imposed upon him of no small importance, and did execute
them all with great magnanimity, and great admiration.

For which his virtues, he was not only entertained into Caesar his
friendship, but moreover, had great office bestovved upon him, being first
made Tribune of the people, and afterward Praetor. And albeit that in that
time he was with M. Antonius judged an enemy of the Romans by ye senate, yet
notwithstanding having made his peace, he did not only obtain the office of
a Praetor, but he attained likewise the degree of High Prelate, and afterward
was advanced to the dignity of a Consul. This was that Ventidius, who being
by M. Antonius made General of the East provinces, put the Parthians to
flight which were descended into Syria, and three sundry times gave them great
overthrows, and was the first who in Rome triumphed over the Parthians. And
after his death, was honorably buried by the Romans. What was his birth? what
was his estate? what were his riches? who did of a bondslaue make him free?
who exalted him to so great nobility? and to so great wealth? surely it was
not the antiquity of ye blood of his ancestors, nor his great wealth, but the
virtue of his mind. O worthy virtue which possessing the minds of men, do
exalt them even to the skies!

Consider (Gentlemen) what let and reproach, the base birth of Ventidius, was
unto the glory of his Nobility: Consider I pray you, if his issue from so
mean a place, was any hinderance unto him, to rise to so high honor. And
believe not Possidonio, that at this day there is any limited end set, by
which a man may become noble; for even as the noble families which at this day
are in the world, have had a beginning to make them noble; so may the
ignoble without any let, attain thereunto.

I may then conclude, that the baseness of my blood, nor the want of wealth,
are no let nor hinderance unto me to become noble. The worthiness and virtue of
man is that which makes him noble. It makes him rich, it exalts him unto
the skies, and finally of a bond man, it sets him free. Wherefore
Possidonio, I need not fear though my ancestors, as thou did yesterday
affirm, were scarce known, because I doubt not but that that virtue and
learning whatsoever it be, that is in me, is of force sufficient to make those
noble who shall hereafter issue from me, if so it be to be believed, that any
nobility resideth in blood.

Does it now seem unto thee, that I have with my sophistical arguments showed
white for black, whereof thou were so much afraid; or made thee understand the
very troth it self? And to the end, I may more strongly persuade thee, thou
must know this, that he is far more noble, who being borne of base parentage,
has beautified his mind with virtue and good conditions, then he that is
descended of a noble stock, being as well qualified as the other.

This perhaps may seem strange unto thee Possidonia? yet will I make it very
plain. For no man will deny of any thing whatsoever, but the reward ought to
counteruaile the pain that is taken: now he which is borne of base parentage
takes far more labor to become noble, then he that is descended of noble
blood: therefore he ought to receive a greater recompense. That his labor is
greater, cannot be denied. For he that is borne of noble blood, is always in
the path to become noble, and is not put to that pain, to attain to the
perfection of nobility, as he is, who is born of no noble stock, in as much as
the one finds the way open and free, whereas the other finds it full of
rocks and thorns. Now both of them having attained thereunto, who will deny
me, but that his nobility ought to be more esteemed, whose father was but a
mean man, then the other? Surely not any man. Are these fables Possidonio?
Does it as yet seem strange unto thee? I hope not.

Howbeit I will proceed further, and say. That he ought to be more worthy of
praise, who gives himself unto all worthy enterprises, not being forced nor
constrained by any man, then he that addicteth himself unto such laudable
actions by force and compulsion. Now he that is by blood noble, is rather
forced then otherwise by his own virtues, to set forth his nobility, least
that his fathers nobility do basely take end in him self, but rather that by
him it may be maintained and conserved in his successors: whereas he which is
born of no noble stock, is far more noble, and far more worthy of praise, then
he which is borne a Gent. although both of them be equal in virtue. Have thou
capacity to comprehend this reason Possidonio? Thou may now consider, if I
use any sophistry, as thou did doubt I wuld; for surely these are most
manifest reasons, which I allege for the troth, the which notwithstanding is
manifest and clear of it self.

Fabricio went still forward in his discourse, when as M. Peter Anthony
interrupting him, and turning toward him said.

This thy conclusion should be very great Fabricio, if it were as true as it is
apparent, and as it seems thou do affirm it for troth: For so much as that
part is always of most force and strongest (which cannot be denied) where two
reasons do concur together then where there is but one. Now he that is of noble
blood, and innobled by his virtues, has in him two sorts of nobility, the one
of blood, the other proceeding of virtue, which cannot be in him, whose father
was no noble man, albeit he be esteemed equal in virtues unto the other:
wherefore his nobility shall not be so puissant and mighty. Which thou thy
self did affirm for true, when as to dissolve this argument (if my memory
serve me well) where Possidonio went about to prove that the magnificence and
glory of a man, ought by reason to extend it self unto his successors, thou
did confess, that if you were both equal in virtue, Possidonio his nobility
should be greater then thine: whereas contrarily in this thy new conclusion,
thou do not only make them equal, but the one in a higher degree, then the
other: wherefore we ought to conclude, that he that is borne of noble parents
is far more noble. And likewise I cannot easily gather how this thy last
reason does well hang together, by which thou would prove that he is vvorthie
of greater honor, who without any necessity, does employ himself in virtuous
actions, then he that is forced thereunto. For this thy maxim is true, that of
every worthy enterprise a man's recompense ought to be so much the greater, as
the detriment and hurt which may come unto him in executing thereof. Now who
so is borne of noble blood, is worthy greater blame and dishonor, when he does
not maintain the nobility of his fore fathers, then the ignoble by birth:
therefore in co^seruing it, he ought to have greater reward. By which reasons
these thy two last conclusions, do in my judgment remain somewhat the weaker.

You take no small matter upon you M. Peter Anthony, answered Fabricio, if you
seek to boult out the troth of these your 2. propositions: for on both sides
there may be spoken sufficiently; the troth whereof I would gladly know, if it
were so necessary unto our purpose, or if it were not so late. It cannot be
late (quoth M. Peter Anthony) yes (quoth ye whole company) and so late as we shall not
have time to mount on horsback. How quickly is time slid away (quoth M. Peter
Anthony) you may see Possidonio, how you make the hours sooner to pass away
then we thought for: as for me, I did verily believe we might have stayed
here a good while, but seeing it is so, we will for this evening let our riding
alone.

I do not care much for riding abroad answered Fabricio, let us follow on our
purpose, and there withal tur-towards Possidonio, he said. Worthy gentlemen,
whatsoever thing is on earth, man judges it either good, or evil, or holding
a mean betvveene both. I demand then Possidonio, in which of these three
qualities thou would place true nobility? Not in the evil I trow, for then
nobility should be evil. Nor in the mean, for then should it be sometimes good,
and sometimes bad. We must then necessarily conclude, that it ought to be
placed in that which is good. Consisting in that which is good, it must either
be in the goods of the body, of fortune, or of the mind. If we say that
nobility consists in the goods of the body, as to be fair, to be in
health, or in the goods of Fortune, as in riches: it should then follow, that
beauty, health, or riches ceasing, which 3. things are subject to corruption,
nobility would soon decay. We are then constrained to conclude, yt it
consists in the goods of the mind, which are virtues, as long since I
affirmed. Besides we have to consider, whither nobility consists in riches,
or in man. If thou say Possidonio, that it consists in riches, besides
that which I have long sithence alleged, it should further follovv, that
look which way a man's wealth were carried, they being most noble, thither
shuold his nobility go, which ought in no wise to be uttered. We must then
conclude, that it remains in man. Being in man, it is either by nature, or by
purchase. If by nature, it follows that we are all equally noble; in as much
as one man (as I said unto you) was the beginner of all humane nature, of whom
we are all descended, but that falls not to be considered of. We will then
say that it is gotten. But how is it purchased? surely by the proper virtues of
the mind, and not by any other means. These are the reasons Possidonio, which I
do allege in the behalf of true nobility, do they not seem to be true?
Surely I cannot possibly make the troth more plain unto thee, then I have
done to day.

But seeing the sun begins more and more to hide it self, I cannot as I
would, follow my pretended purpose: Howbeit I will rest satisfied with that
which I have effectually spoken hitherunto: for I was not by any necessity
constrained to say so much. It only remains for me Possidonio to tell, to
whom the ring ought to be adjudged, which I would willingly do, but that I know
Nennio to be a judge sufficient for a greater disputation then ours. And he may
well in the wisdom of his understanding discourse of the perfect quality, and
noble condition of the lady Virginia, by whom the ring which we desire was
given. For she being most accomplished with virtue, of most noble behavior,
most worthy for her honor, it avails thee nothing to equal thy self unto
her in considering thy Nobility of blood, or the quantity of thy treasure:
(for thou may have well understood how much they make for Nobility.) Nennio
will likewise weigh her gentle words when she said: Let the most noble of you
two take the ring, by the which she did affirm that there was Nobility in
both of us, and yet that one was more noble then the other, and to the most
noble she gave it.

In thee the Nobility of blood concurring, caused by thy predecessors, in me
the Nobility of mind, wrought by my own virtues: It shall be an easy matter,
not only for Nennio, but for any other of any common capacity to decide a
matter of so small moment. Howsoever it be, it seems now unto me high time,
to end my discourse: and albeit I could not utter all that concerning this
matter, which came into my conceit, and which might well have been said:
nevertheless I will leave off, as having contented my mind and quieted it
especially reposing my self upon the just judgment of him, who to morrow, or at
any other time when he shall see good, may determine this our controversy. Of
whom I have had that reputation, and so do still hold him, that although I had
not alleged the one half of these reasons, yet had they been sufficient, to
come to the knowledge of the truth of this our disputation. And moreover,
whosoever does well consider what has been spoken yesterday, and this day, on
both sides, he shall find nothing else, but an unbridled kind of life, to
combat with a moderate living; Ignorance with knowledge; dissoluteness with
modesty, virtue and honesty to fight against their contraries: and whether of
those two sides do bring most ornament, and Nobility unto man, is easily to
be judged.

They all knew, that Fabricio was come to the end of his discourse, and that he
had nothing else to say: wherefore we all arising from our places, we went to
take the air, not on horseback, because the time was spent, but on foot,
along the pleasant garden. And after that every one with his friend, had
uttered his opinion concerning Fabricio his discourse, we parted each from
other, some this way, others that way: In the end we all of us except two, who
still walked in the garden, the sweetness whereof we all enjoyed, met under
the fresh gallerie. These stayed not long before that against their wills,
they gave us occasion of no small pastime: For on the one side of the garden,
there was a wood so thick with high green trees, that scarcely you could
have planted one more there.

This thicket, where it joined to the garden, it was environed with a deep
ditch, which was dry without water: and on the other side closed in with the
garden wall. Within there were nourished many wild beasts, and toward the
garden, there was a little draw bridge to enter into it.

These two young men, drawing down the bridge, went in and simply left the
bridge down as they came forth, immediately for fear of those that entered the
wood, there issued out two young kids, and a heart. And if the garden gates had
not shut of themselves, ye beasts had been lost: which one of the servants
perceiving, he so dainly called one of his fellows, who brought a brase of
dogs with him, which he let slip at these wild beasts; we being moved with
the cry of ye dogs, and noise of the hunters, we looked out at the windows
which were next the garden, where we might see this war already begun, which
was pursued with an infinite pleasure of us all. For we might see them run
with great svviftnesse, the beasts flying, and the dogs follovving, but ye
chiefest sport was, the many turnings in the garden, and the crooked alleies,
by which the beasts did fetch many a skip, and turn to save their lives, from
the deadly pinching of the dogs. And after they had some 3. or 4* times rounded
the garden, the heart, ye bridge being yet clean down, and the gate open,
with a light skip, got into the thicket again; the kids follovved, and the
dogs after, which one of the servants perceiving, he drew up the bridge, least
they should come out again. But longing after the sport, we came down, with
each of us a cudgel in our hand, you may guess what these beasts did (vvherof
there was great store in the vvood) when they savv ye dogs follovv them. They
ran every way, sometimes through ye thickest places, sometimes right forth: and
vvhilest we were intentive after this sport, we might espy 3. servants
coming out of ye vvood with the 2. kids, the heart* and 2. young hares, which
had been slain in this war. Wherefore imagining this pray to be sufficient
after the ordinary rate, after yt commandment was given to take up the
dogs, who were not yet out of breath: we came forth of the wood, and shortly
after sat down to supper according to our woonted order, where we supped
very pleasantly, the wind blowing very freshly upon us: after supper we
fell in talk of this sudden hunting, which fell out unlooked for. Wherein we
continued, until the stars were seen in the sky, having beforehand taken
order that Nennio should the next day follow with his discourse at the same
time that Possidonio, and Fabricio had done theirs, and then we entered into the
house, where after we had walked a little, seeing it a fit hour to go to bed,
the torches being lighted, we were brought every one unto his lodging.

The third Book.
AS often as waighing with my self I consider, how great the weakness is
which nature yields unto man, I cannot surely imagine whence it should
proceed, that al men what soever do oftentimes feel a certain motion of
blood, which spreads it self about the heart, when as they do only call to
mind but the very name of Nobility, which they possess, and that much more,
when they are told thereof by some other. Nay there are some, who without
measure coveting that title, do puff up their minds, esteeming that to be
the greatest favor of all other. Other some there are (without doubt of a more
damnable opinion) who are mounted up to that height of pride, by the only
remembrance likewise of that name, having no thought to the difficulty of the
effect thereof, that they do verily persuade themselves (such is the
de^eiueable belief of mortal men) that the whole world is at their
commandment, and surely they deem themselves to be equal to no other, then to
God himself, and by this conceit they being led away, they despise all
virtue* Surely this does draw me into great doubts: For as I say, if I enter
into consideration of man's weakness, and do weigh whereof he is made, I see
nothing therein, but vile filthiness. And nature did not only give this unto
man at his first creation, but likewise in the dissolution of this mortal
life, it made the same far worse. Seeing that the weak and frail members of
man, as it is evident of it self, so soon as the spirit is separated from the
body, how soon they are changed into worms, into earth, and loathsome smells:
O miserable life of man, and of short continuance! But in truth this ought to
be smally regarded (although it be a great argument of ye frailty of man) if we
did note not only in the beginning, and the end of the life of man, but even in
the midst thereof, matters of greater wonder, because we see that all things
under the heavens, do make continual war each one against themselves, and
all together bid most cruel battle against man alone. The air oftentimes,
is assailed with darcke clouds, with flashing lightning, and threatening
thunder, and all these are ordained to vex man. The water against the fire.
The fire against the water, and both together do fight against man. Moist
things against dry things, and dry things against moist, and both most and
dry war against man. The South strives with the North and the other winds,
and all of them together blowing with great impetuositie, in the depth of the
swelling seas, with great force do often deceive ye vain affections of man.
What shall I say more? One man does conspire against another. If then the life
of man be after so strange a manner, wrapped in so many miseries, and in so many
dangers; I cannot well imagine what cause he has to wax so proud, with this
title of Nobility, which is given him. And as for my self, I know not else
what I should say unto you, but that such men being on high lifted up with a
superfluous desire of glory, do let themselves be carried away with their vain
appetites, like unto a bird which flying in the air has no assurance. O
foolish Nobility, if so we ought to call it, or rather deceitful shadow. For
we are not able to comprehend what aid this Nobility (no less desired then
reverenced of mortal men) may bring us: for as much as it neither brings
wisdom, nor knowledge, incomparable gifts, which are sent us from God,
neither does it make us more just, or more prudent, which are qualities that
consist in the soul. It may be that it is an aid unto the body? No surely in
my opinion, for it does not give neither greater beauty, nor greater strength,
nor greater grace thereunto: by all which reasons we may easily gather into how
great error these manner of men do so foolishly fall. Yet will I not say, but
that sometimes Nobility, is cause of great good, as it is indeed, when it is
true Nobility: but that which at this day bears sway in ye most part of men,
is not only cause of any good, but contrarily of great evil. For if we would
without imagination, pass through all the Cities that are in the world, we
should find very few, or it may be none at al, where there are not factions, and
divisions between gent. and the common sort, from whence afterward do bud
hatred, quarrels, and so many murders as we may hear of every where. Amongst
many histories, I might here recite to you, how ye people of Rome, by reason of
ye discords which did arise between ye Patriciens and them, often abandoned ye
city, and made their abode in ye hill called Mount Sacro, until Meneuius Agrippa
made peace betwixt the^. Experience hereof has not bin only seen in foreign
cities, of which I could bring you infinite examples, but even in our own,
within these few years: I say then, that as one sort of Nobility is the cause
of evil, so is the other of good. Howsoever it be, I do wholly refer my
self to the judgment of Nennio, who this day shall take upon him the whole
discourse: And it may be by good means he will agree (as it is commonly his
custom) the disaccording opinions of Possidonio, and Fabricio, which by the
two former books, you may have particularly understood. And so much the more
it will delight us to hear him, as their opinions do seem unto us to be
clean contrary, by means whereof likewise we shall hear the determining of
the question propounded: wherefore inasmuch as I purpose not to intermingle my
words with his, tempering my speech hereafter, I will endeavor without
diminishing any word, orderly to set down that which he discoursed, as much as
the meannesse of my wit, will give me leave.

By this time there was no star seen in the sky, because the sun had
already chased the moist shadow of the night from of the earth, and with his
shining brightness, every part of our hemisphere was enlightened, and the birds
merrily chirping from the top of the green branches, gave good witness, that
the morning was come, when as both men, and women, being risen, after prayers
was ended, mounted on horseback, and being entered into delightful meadows,
they softly paced on treading the green grass under their feet, until it
seemed unto them high time to draw back again.

Wherefore they being returned, and shortly after set at table, they fed
together with great mirth, and contentment, and dinner being don, some went to
play at eschets, others at tables, and some to take their rest, as seemed best
unto the^. But the middle of ye day being come, they assembled themselves after
their accustomed manner in yt place whereas Possidonio and Fabricio had the 2.
former days, made their discourse. And by this time Nennio being ready, they
sat down without order round about him: who beholding the company, and
seeing them all attentive, without any further stay, gave beginning to his
discourse in these words.

I did consider how hard a thing it is, to lay a heavier burden on a man's
back then his forces are able to bear; in as much as it sildome happens but
that the one of them does thorovv weakness fall to ye ground. And therefore
I feared greatly, that the like this day should not happen to my self.
Seeing that if I do on the one side weigh the deapth of the question that is
propounded, or the difficulty of those things that might thereupon be spoken:
or on the other side the weakness of my understanding, the feeblenes of my
memory, together with my young years, certainly not I only, but every
one may in himself judge the inequality of these things.

Whereupon it might easily come to pass, that I my self, contrary to my
intent, and you, should remain unsatisfied, and the matter whereupon we are to
discourse, should not be sufficiently opened unto you. But sitting in the
midst of so loving a company, where there are men of better wit, and grauer
judgment then my self; and being moreover constrained by you, by my judgment
to make peace between these two champions, I dare not refuse so weighty a
matter, though my forces be ouerweake, because I assure my self, that where I
shall show my self feeble or vvanting, that you will take order to add a
supply thereunto, and if so be that I fail, you will hold me excused, and
impute it to my young years. And if you hear any good thing come from me, I
doubt not but you will give me favorable hearing. Wherefore my courage taking
strength from this ground, I will not judge it inequall unto the burden which
I bear, and under his favor who favorably gives succor unto mortal men, I
will by little and little begin my discourse.

Worthy company. The two opinions which were these two days now past at large
related, by Fabricio, and Possidonio, are manifest unto you, which you have well
understood how different they are. For the one proves Nobility to consist in
blood, and in riches, and the other in the virtues of the mind. He denying
blood and riches, to be any thing necessary: the other, that learning and
knowledge needed not therein. In this wise they did enlarge their discourse,
alleging and reproving many arguments, which both the one and the other side
did make show unto the hearers to be probable: so that scarsely it may be
discerned, which of them draws nearer the troth. Yet to boult out the troth
of this controversy, before we pass any further, to show what that true
nobility is which we seek for, which can very hardly be done, because it is of
so many different kinds. One sort thereof is derived from the glory of the blood
of our ancestors, accompanied with riches, of the which Possidonio spoke
sufficiently the other day. An other sort proceeds from the virtues of the
mind, and of this Fabricio discoursed yesterdaie, with as great sharpness of
wit as need to be. Of these two mingled together, and concurring in one
subject, is produced another sort, which I will name compounded nobility. To
these two may be added another kind which is called civil nobility. Before
then yt we come to determine our disputation, we will first see the substance
of every one of these sorts of nobility, and I will begin with that which
Possidonio defended.

Nobility of blood (worthy Gentlemen) is no other thing but a certain quality
which is derived from the blood of our ancestors, and continued in their
lavvfull posterity, and by how much it is more ancient, by so much is it
accounted more worthy amongst the vulgar sort: and albeit there be diverse
degrees of this nobility of blood (the one of great men, in the number of which
are those that are simple barons: the other of greater personages, as Earls,
Marquesses, Dukes, and such like, a third in the highest degree of supremacy
above the rest, as of kings and Emperors) yet notwithstanding I will only
entreat of the most inferior degree; to wit, of the nobility of those, who
possess neither Earledomes, nor Baronies, as it fell out in the disputation
betvveene Possidonio and Fabricio, leaving all the other unspoken of.

But like as a man can hardly stay his feet upon a turning wheel, so with
as great difficulty may he make any abode upon this nobility, by reason that
on what side soever I turn my self, I shall find it more wavering and
inconstant, then the leaf which without any stay, is tossed and blovvne here
and there with the wind.

For so diverse and of many fashions is the belief of men, touching the
beginning and observance thereof, that we can scarsly discern whether it be
Nobility, or rusticity.

Insomuch as that manner of life, which we see is used by our gentlemen to
conserve themselves in their nobility, and which the vulgar sort does repute
to be good, it may be in some other city it will not be accounted rusticity,
the customs being different, and theirs Nobilitye: and the like estimation
will we hold of others.

We see that in the famous and lordly city of Naples, that merchandise is
separated from the exercise of noblemen, they agreeing therein with the
Thebanes, who in like manner did despise merchandise, and by public decree did
ordain, that no merchant should execute any public office, within the city
of Thebes, except he had left off the trade of merchandise the space of ten
years: Which is clean contrary in the rich, and magnificent city of
Venice, where not only those of the baser sort, but noblemen likewise, and
such as are of the number of their Senators, do use merchandise, for the which
they expose their lives to a thousand dangers, and wel-nigh coast the whole
world. The worthiness of the blood of their predecessors, makes a distinction
between the noble and ignoble, and not their manner of vocation.

You may see how that kind of life, which is accustomed amongst the noble men
of Venice, is reputed rusticitie and vile amongst the gentlemen of Naples, who
hold their nobility as good, whereas the Magnificos of Venice do esteem
theirs perfect, and the Neapolitans bad. What conformity do we find between
the gentlemen of Rome, and the Florentines: or between those of Millan, and
the gentlemen of Genoua? Surely such as the former. And how manifestly the
means to conserve the nobility of stately France, do differ from that of
renowned and noble Italy, I think there are few which do not know it:
For So Much as the gentlemen of France and of other countries, do live upon their
lands, and hold it for rusticitie to dwell in towns, and contrarily in
Italy, we leave the country for clowns to inhabit, and gentlemen do
commonly dwell in towns. It is a wonderful thing to consider that if a man
do turn his thought into any part of the world whatsoever, he shall find no
country inhabited with men where this nobility of blood, and this difference
between noblemen and those of the baser sort, is not: and yet notwithstanding
scarce is there any nation, who both in the beginning and in the conservation
thereof, do agree the one with the other. For some do deem him noble (and none
other) who honors himself with the beams that do shine from his
ancestors, placing true nobility only in blood.

Some do affirm that he is only noble, who is endued with great riches,
albeit he have no spark of noble blood in him. Others say, it consists
jointly in blood and riches. Others make themselves and their posterity noble,
in following the war, applying the same with all their endeavor, albeit (in the
opinion of some men) they do descend but of base parentage. Besides, some do
hold for certain, that this true nobility consists in those, who do wholy
dispose themselves in the service of kings and princes, and of such as depend
of them, as if the true glory of nobility did spring from thence.

This especially is observed amongst noblemen, and showed by great train of
servants, by rich and stately apparel, and by a certain liberal kind of
life in all their actions. Others do deem that he lives most nobly and most
Lordlike, who besides the properties aforesaid, has great store of horses to
serve him. There are yet others, who do affirm that to keep hounds and
Hawks, and such sorts of beasts, and every day to be a hunting, is an exercise
and life above all other most fit for a Gentleman.

Others do deem, that they maintain their nobility well, in living idly, and
using nothing else but gaming. Some do think, that they lead a very honorable
life if they live honestly and moderately. Some imagine that Nobility is to
live in the country, as I said unto you, some to dwell in a town. Some
think it to consist in merchandise; others are of a contrary opinion, that a
noble man ought not to use the trade of marcha^dize. But who can reckon up the
diverse sorts of nobility? seeing that not only amongst diverse nations we
find, how different this nobility of blood is, as well in the beginning
thereof, as in the use thereof: but even amongst those of the same country.
For albeit that in France, and elsewhere, such is the custom, as I have
related unto you: notwithstanding in Gallia Belgica in the province of Lionois,
in Gascoine, and about Narbonne, and in other places in France, there are above
three hundred sorts of life, for the conservation of their nobility, not
conformable the one with the other. We see likewise the very same in the
people of Spain, because the inhabitants of Arragon do not equally observe
the same means to maintain their nobility as those of the kingdom of
Grenado, of Castillia, of Catalonia, of Biscay, of Navarre, or of Gallicia do,
much less they of the kingdom of Portingall.

What conformity is there between the Britons, the Normans, and the Fleminges?
What agreement between either the high or low German, and the inhabitants
of Saxony? Surely none at all, because the nobility of one Nation is diversely
distinguished from an other. And if we will enter into discourse of the
inhabitants of the higher and lower Hungary, of England, of Austria, of
Bauaria, of Valachia, or of the great and lesser Polonia, of Russia, of
Muscouia, of Lithuania, we shall not find amongst those Nations, no nor scarce
particularly amongst themselves any certain means from whence the Nobility of
blood does spring: nor any certain manner of life, amongst the gentlemen which
does agree together.

And not only in the west and Northren parts, but likewise in the Easterly
and Southerly, we see they do use such diversity of nobility. For So Much as
those of that country we call Greece, do esteem the life of their Gentlemen,
to be the true and proper life fit for Gentlemen: whereas the Inhabitants of
the Greek Islands do judge it but bad.

What resemblance of Nobility is there between the people of Syria, of
Capadocia, of Armenia, of Mesopotamia, of Media, of Persia, of Parthia, and of
a number of other provinces? and returning to those who dwell in the parts of
Afrike, we find that they hold this nobility in great account, but the
qualities and the means which they use to conserve it, are different: because
the people of Mauritania are not conformable amongste themselves: nor the
people of Getulia, nor of Libia Cirenensis, nor likewise they who dwell in
Egypt, or in both the provinces of Aethiopia* or in the habitable countries
of Arabia, or of India, amongst whom (albeit that in other respects they be a
monstrous and cruel nation) yet have they this diversity of nobility.

But why do I thus reckon up the habitable parts of the World? For to
conclude, you shall find this diversity of the beginning and exercising of
Nobility of blood so great, not as there are whole nations, but as there are
people and Towns in the world.

And that I may not wander into places so far off, we may see the same in
Italy, where there is no town which I can name unto you, which is conformable
unto another, in the first original and use of this nobility: if then the
beginning and exercise thereof, be not one and the same, but different in
every place, how is it possible for me to tell which is the best and most
commendable sort thereof? Yet have I the heart to conclude this necessarily,
that there is no certainty in the beginning and use of this kind of nobility,
for if there were, it should carry with it constantnesse and stabilitie, from
the which it should take beginning, and by the which it should equally
conserve it self in every country.

Scarce was Nennio come to the conclusion of his discourse, when as master
Peter Anthony, turning toward him, said merrily unto him after this manner.

Nennio, if thou bear any respect unto me, stay there; for albeit that it
has been very pleasing unto us, to hear of so many fashions of nobility, and
of so many diverse customs, as those of the countries which thou did allege:
yet notwithstanding this thy last conclusion which thou did necessarily
gather, does not follovv so easily as I think. For although that at Rome, at
Venice, at Naples and elsewhere, the customs be changed (as thou say) and
the manner of nobility, yet does it not follow for all that, that there is no
certainty thereof.

For in Naples it is certain, and this sort of nobility which is accustomed
amongst the gentlemen, is most constantly maintained there; so likewise at
Venice, at Rome, and in every other place. And it is to no purpose to say that
they are contrary, for neither at Naples, nor elsewhere, shall thou find any
contrariety in the observance of their nobility. Likewise if so it were, it
would follow that the one should be nobility, and the other rusticity: by which
thou may certainly judge, that there is certainty in this nobility. As for
example, we see that at Venice, the same laws, or the same statutes, are not
observed, which are at Naples and at Rome; for they do vary, as they may best
fit and agree with the places: and yet do they seem clean contrary the one
to the other: howbeit amongst the laws and statutes of Venice there is no
contrariety, although they agree not, but are clean different from those of
Naples. Shall we therefore say that they are not al laws? yes surely that
they are: Even so may we say of all these kinds of Nobility, which albeit
that either they do seem, or are indeed contrary the one to the other, yet
do they not leave the name of Nobility.

M. Peter Anthony had no sooner ended his speech, but Nennio replied after
this manner.

This certainty of Nobility, which you would have M. Peter Anthony, if we
consider thereof in a separate place by it self, as it seems you do, that
is true which you say: Whereas I affirm, that in the whole world, there is no
certainty of Nobility, for the great diversity that is therein, by the which
you may easily discern which is either more or less perfect, then the other:
forasmuch as we find not any one sort of nobility, above mentioned, which
brings an approved reason for the beginning thereof, or that the life and
exercise of noblemen be reasonably grounded upon any certain foundation: but I
find them to consist in observation without any ground, whereof I can give
you no other reason, but that the vulgar sort have after their own will so
appointed it, the like whereof does not happen in laws, which although they
seem or do differ the one from the other, they do all notwithstanding carry
a reason for their ground: so that this your similitude can hardly hold, this
nobility being without any certain principle, and without any determinate
means.

M. Peter Anthony made no other reply unto his answer, as if he had been
thoroughly satisfied therewith: wherefore he preparing to follow on his discourse:
M. Dominico breaking off his speech, said thus.

Albeit that in the defense of Nobility of blood (worthy gentlemen) many
reasons have been produced the other day, both by Possidonio and our selves, by
the which we went about to prove, that it was true and perfect, to the which
Fabricio afterward to show that his Nobility, and not that which Possidonio
held for, was true and perfect, did with subtle reasons bravely make answer
thereto, and by his arguments force himself to persuade us, that such kind
of Nobility was not any way to be held of any account. Yet notwithstanding,
before we pass any further, and before you give any judgment thereof
Nennio: I will not forbear in confirmation of the first opinion of Possidonio,
with new reasons, which now come to my remembrance, to show you, that the
Nobility of blood, conjoined with riches, as a special gift coming from God,
ought not only to be had in estimation, but likewise to be reverenced. And if
it seems unto thee Fabricio, that in alleging new reasons, I should renew
the enterprise begun, letting the discourse of Nennio, let not that displease
thee* for it is not meet that any of our reasons should cause the judge to be
silent, whose wisdom I am sure will thoroughly resolve thereof, though we
propose sundry arguments which shall happen into our remembrance, whether it
be against thee, or in thy favor.

It shall please me well that thou return to discourse of the nobility of
Possidonio: for if I be permitted to answer as well as thou to propound, I
doubt not, but that I shall refute thy arguments as I have done the rest, and
that thereby the conceit of the judge, shall be more resolved, and the end of the
discourse sooner brought to pass. Say on then that, which thy memory will
give thee leave. M. Dominico proceeded in this manner.

The great Prophet David, having upon his resounding harp, with sweet accents
song a divine dittie to the praise of his mercy, who was his creator, he
afterward framed another, in the which by the prophet it is manifestly seen,
that the Nobility of blood in man is permitted of God, which with his own
seed is transfused unto his lawful heirs, when as he says in these words:
That powerful and abundant shall his seed be on earth, and that honor,
glory, and riches, shall be in his posterity. You see how they honor the
glory of man, which is no other thing then that which we term Nobility,
continued in his posterity. Thou see likewise Fabricio, how that riches are
joined together with Nobility: for the Prophet does in such sort offer them
jointly together, that it seems that the glory and Nobility of man should
be altogether imperfect, if it were deprived of riches. Whereunto
notvvithstanding thou would in no wise consent. And it would avail thee
nothing if thou would say, that ye prophet was lifted up into a heavenly
contemplation, he could not offer temporal, but spiritual and eternal
riches, and so we ought to take this text alleged spiritually.

For if we vvoulde understand it in this manner, it should be plain against
his meaning, not so much in regard, that he says expressly, he ought to be
powerful on earth, and mighty in the seed of man, and not in heaven, as for
that in the same song he afterward pursues spiritual goods, which man may
obtain; so that necessarily we ought to understand it of temporal goods.

Likewise it appears manifestly by the same scripture (which as you know
ought in no wise to be transgressed) that nobility does descend from our
ancestors. And likewise I remember to have read in that book (wherein the
heavenly instructions of the life of man are divinely handled) a text which
shows plainly, that the glory and nobility of the son, does depend of the
honor of the father, who if he be deprived thereof, the son likewise shall be
dishonored. Thou see how the nobility, and ignobilitie of man descends
from his ancestors, as Possidonio affirmed.

And in another place the same author charitably does admonish us, that we are
to praise no man before his death, because he is known in his children,
intending thereby, that the honor and glory of man, remains with his
posterity after his departure out of this life. Truly Fabricio, these are
authorities, which can hardly be avoided, besides the which I could yet
allege an infinite number like unto these.

M. Dominico was no sooner come to the end of his speech, but Fabricio like
unto a brave warrior, who left nothing untried, which might serve for
resistance, and his own defense, opposing himself against him, said thus.

These your authorities, M. Dominico, are not so hard to be withstood, as it
seems at the first they are: for if we rest upon the litterall sentence, I
do not deny but the prophet understands that which you say, but I know that
you are not ignorant, that it is necessary for us that are christians, to
expound the holy scripture, not according unto the sound of the words, least
we easily incur the like blame which the obstinate Jews (against their wills)
fell into, but according to the spiritual sense. King David then (intending by
his comfortable song, to persuade man that he should be happy if he feared God
in his commandments) what blessings did he offer him? Children, honor, and
riches, perhaps, but not certainly: for the reward of those who fear God,
is to abound in earthly things.

But how many Priests and Monks are there which are deprived of children,
and of the honor of the world? How many are there, who in hermitages do live
an austere kind of life? How many begging Friars are there, wanting wealth?
And how many are there, who have vowed their chastity to God for the belief
they have in him? Certainly the number is infinite. And notwithstanding, they
have been judged worthy of Gods favor, and numbered amongst saints. So I do
judge him to fear God more, who holds his virginity dear, and offers the
same unto him with a free heart. Who flies from the honors and vanities of the
world, and distributeth his goods to the poor. The works of mercy then, are
the seed of the merciful man, and of him that fears God, and not his
children, which seed shall be mighty on earth as is promised. And he who for the
fear of God, shall despise the honor and riches of the world, without doubt he
shall obtain celestial glory with eternal riches:

In like sort ought we to understand the last authority alleged by you, which
seems to intend, that man is known in his children: for hardly shall we know
him that departs this world, without leaving any issue. We shall know him
indeed in his children, that is to say, by his fruits, for if he has sown
good fruit, in this mortal life, we may certainly judge, that he shall
receive better fruit in the life to come. To the other text I answer: that
the author in his book, discoursing of precepts (no less full of Divinity
then comfort) admonishes us (amongst other things) that we take good heed,
that we boast not of our fathers shame, because our glory depends on the
honor of our father. Intending thereby (according unto reason) to teach us, yt
who so mocketh his father, mocketh himself. And that is true in it self, but
not that which the sound of his words shows unto us.

Master Dominico did perceive that Fabricio had nothing else to say in his
defense, and did willingly receive his answer, which he had made on the
sudden, which was so much the more pleasing unto the company, as forsaking
the exposition of the letter, he drew near to the sense of the troth. But
Nennio (as one to whom the troth of their propositions and answers was
well known) was not pleased that any of them should intermeddle in answering
and replying. Wherefore passing on further, he entered in this manner to his
discourse again.

Howsoever it be Fabricio, this nobility of blood, by the vulgar sort is held
in the highest estimation above any other: for so much as they do repute those
to be true Noblemen, who are descended of a noble family, so that if any
mention be made amongste them of Nobility, they understand not nobility of
mind, but nobility of blood. Which makes great in favor of Possidonio, for
this word Noble, being simply spoken by the courteous Lady, seeing that we
are in doubt thereof, we ought to take it as it is received by the common voice.

But that I may no longer intertaine you here with Possidonio, we will pass
on with Fabricio, to the other sort of nobility, for the which he has plaide
the stout warrior.

That is not like unto the former esteemed of any worth, by the vulgar sort,
but by men of learning, and such as are well brought up, it is highly
accounted of, and greatly reverenced, and it consists in the virtues of the
mind.

For nobility of the mind, is no other thing, but a shining brightness which
proceeds from virtue, which makes them famous and Noble that are possessed
therewith, of the excellency and perfection whereof how amply Fabricio did
discourse, is well known unto you: for in discoursing thereof yesterday, with
such arguments as came into his mind, he entertained us until the evening.
And surely I find it neither so diverse, nor so changeable, nor so unconstant
as the other, but it is always, and every where, after one fashion, certain
and stable. It only takes beginning from virtue, and with good and virtuous
actions is conserved. Whereupon some do call it perfect nobility, because it
stands in need neither of blood, nor of the riches of other men.

How may that be (quoth one of the Ladies of the company) who with a witty
readiness opposed her self against him) that it needs not riches, seeing
that they are not only necessary unto the nobility of blood, but to this
likewise, whereof you speak, as it seems unto me.

For as Possidonio did the other day relate unto us, no man can attain unto
any degree of virtue or nobility, except riches do make a breach and way
unto him.

And who knows not, that if any wise or learned man, for want of wealth went
ill apparailed, that he should not be accounted as a noble man? You may see
then how riches are necessary unto the Nobility of the mind.

The young Lady having ended her speech, Nennio made this answer unto her.

Put case Madam that it were true, that a man cannot attain unto virtue or
nobility, without riches, notwithstanding I speak not of the means to become
noble: for according as you consider them, riches are nothing else, but the
means by the which the will of man is put in execution: but it is of nobility
it self, that I talk. For after that man has innobled his mind with virtue,
and driven from thence all vice, what need has he of riches? What hurt
receives he if he cover not his body, if it be not set forth with gorgeous
apparel? it may be Madam, that a mean, honest, and modest attire, does not
only amongst the better sort of men, but even amongst the common people, give
no less grace to one that is become noble, in this manner, then an imbrodered,
lascivious, and laced garment, does set forth your noble man of the other sort.

So that if we will effectually comprehend the true essence of man, and with a
right eye consider his qualities, he should cast off all his ability, deprive
himself of honor, forsake the goods of fortune, lay aside his costly
apparel, and so we ought to behold naked, not his body, but his mind, of what
calling soever he be of, as Diogenes and others did, of whom Fabricio did
speak yesterday. Thus shall we know whether he be noble, or ignoble; good or
evil, if in regard of his Nobility, he has need of that which is his own, or
of that which other men possessed: when we see him not vainlie set forth with
fair apparel, and rich pomp, we shall deem him noble: for if a stock, in
form of a man, were clad with them, should we judge it noble? whosoever
would think so, had no judgment of a man. Which wise Themistocles did
plainly teach us Madam, who being asked to whom he would give his daughter to
wife, whether to a man adorned with virtue, but poor; or to a rich man
destitute of virtue: he said, I had rather a man wanting wealth, then riches
that had need of a man. I say then, that riches are to no use unto him, whose
mind is endued with nobility, so that he be not wholly deprived of them; for
he should rather want meat, then apparel. But returning to our purpose, I
do consider, that he in whose reverence all living creatures do humbly bow
themselves, having created the earth, only in giving it being, he bountifully
beautified it with diverse plants (as we may see every where) unto the which
(besides their being) he gave nothing else but life.

Afterward he created those living creatures, which we call brute, or
unreasonable, the which do far and near walk in the sea, in the earth, and
in the air, and to them he gave life and sense.

Finally, God framed man unto his likeness, to whom he granted not only
being, life, and sense; but he added reason thereunto, which is a peculiar gift
unto man. Man being then partaker of all these qualities, in which of them
shall we place true Nobility? certainly not in being, nor in life (for that
should be common with the earth and with the plants.) Much less in sense (for
then should we make brute beasts noble.) Wherefore we will then necessarily
say, that true and perfect nobility of man, consists only in that part,
which makes man different from beasts; and that is reason, by the which he is
called a reasonable creature, and the other unreasonable, as I said unto you.
He then who leads this mortal life swaruing from reason, is not to be
accounted nor called Noble, albeit that he descend of noble blood: For albeit
he has the outward shape of a man, being deprived of the most Noble part,
which God has given unto man (I mean reason) he remains without doubt to be
reckoned amongst unreasonable creatures, and to be compared unto beasts: which
being not partakers of reason, do lead their life according as their sense
teaches them. And who knows not this, that man casting away so noble a gift,
can never attain unto the sovereign Nobility of his last end? He then that
submits the operations of his mind unto reason, and knows well how to
distinguish it from sensuality is a right and perfect gentleman.

M. Peter Anthony taking the speech upon him, said thus: Seeing that it is
lawful for us with new reasons to fortify either side of the defendants, I
will not forbear to let you hear, that which I have called to mind, in favor
of Fabricio, which being said, he proceeded in this manner.

Hereby worthy gentlemen, is showed the excellency of the nobility of the
mind, that one thing is more noble and excellent then another, by how much the
subject thereof is excellent and Noble: Now the subject of this Nobility, is
far more noble and worthy then the nobility of blood, because it proceeds
of virtues: therefore the nobility of the mind is much more excellent and
noble then the nobility of blood. And not only in consideration of the
subject, it is more perfect then the other, but likewise in the regard of the
object, because it is always seen to remain in a more worthy and virtuous
object; that is to say, in a man well borne, prudent and wise. Whereas the
other may be in a most vile object. Forasmuch as if of noble blood, a foolish,
or mad child be engendered: notwithstanding amongst the vulgar sort, he is
accounted one among^t noble men. How many are there sprung of a worthy
family, who become robbers in the high way, murderers, thieves, slaunderers,
and finally enemies to themselves? Ought we to account such noblemen, because
they descend of noble parents? God forbid, for considering the vileness of
their mind, they ought to be judged not only ignoble, but more base and abject,
then any other unreasonable creature, although that the common sort being
deceived, do hold them in the rank of noblemen. What nobility shall we
account that woman to be of, who drawing her nobility from a worthy stock,
does repute her self noble, and notwithstanding making small account of her
honor, does villanously give her body and life in pray, to delight those to
whom she ought not to have yielded?

What Nobility is there in those children, who in their swaddling cloutes
descended of a noble stock, are no sooner come into the world, but they are
esteemed of noble blood, and yet are neither capable of virtue nor reason?
surely none at all. You may then perceive, in considering both the subject, and
the object of the nobility of the mind, how great likewise the excellency,
and the perfection thereof is. And to proceed further upon this matter: I
find that even Fortune sometimes has her part in this Nobility of blood,
co^ioyned with riches: for if my self and you were ^orne of a Noble family,
and those of base parents, or that we be by birth rich, and they poor,
what glory, what Nobility, what praise, ought we to attribute to our
selves? and what profit, or what fault, (or rather what defect) are we to
impute unto them? Truly none at all; seeing that they have committed no
offense, and we are not advanced through our riches. The glory then, and the
fault ought to be attributed unto fortune, who governs worldly matters, as
it pleases her, and not unto us: whereas the Nobility of the mind, is not in
subjection, nor slavery; but free, and out of all human peril: and he
which by his own virtues, becomes noble, shall have the honor, and the
glory thereof, and not fortune, nor his ancestors, nor any other whosoever.

Here M. Peter Anthony broke off his speech without saying any more. Wherefore
Nennio taking the discourse upon him, said thus.

Certainly to fortify this side, concerning the nobility of the mind, no
less delightful, then true reasons do still offer themselves; as amongst
others, that which I now remember: forasmuch as I esteem that he ought to be
adjudged perfect, who has no need of any other: now the nobility of the
mind is of that sort, therefore it is perfect. The like whereof cannot be
said of the Nobility of blood: for if it were perfect, it should have no need
of riches, which (according to thy saying the other day Possidonio) are not
only an ornament, but a part of Nobility. Which is more then true: for now
adays, a man can hardly converse amongst gentlemen and great Lords, but that
he shall be mocked of every one, if he be not rich, and has not vvherevvithall
to spend of his own, or at the least if he be not well clad in apparel:
which things are in this our age not smally set by. It follovveth then, that
blood is not sufficient of it self alone, to make a perfect nobleman. And we
cannot with reason name that perfect nobility, which proceeds from thence,
as being subject to that which is very inco^stant. Wherefore we will say, that
if the noble man by birth wants riches, he shall likewise want nobility:
which conclusion Possidonio thou did affirm in thy discourse to be true.
And in truth it is come to pass at this day, when as the noble born does
exercise some craft, or handiworke, that is vile and derogating from
nobility: But how poor soever a man is, that is born of noble blood, I would
not judge that he should become ignoble, through poverty, albeit that he had
not the same renown, and reputation, with men of this age, as he that is both
noble and rich. Herehence it comes, that many descending of a high lineage,
giving themselves to some vile exercise, have darckned, and wholly lost their
nobility, so that they are no more esteemed of the blood of Noble men, but
reckoned amongst the common sort. Herehence it proceeds likewise, that
amongst many being of one family, some are reputed noble, and others ignoble.
You may see then, how corporal and base exercise, does bring contempt unto
the nobility of blood, and convert it into his contrary. We must then
conclude, that virtue only is necessary therein. For a noble man by blood, who
is deprived of virtue, is made no otherwise, then as a sepulcher of white
marble, enriched with fine gold, which at the first show is pleasant to the
sight of those, that behold it: but considering afterward the rotten body, and
filthy stinch, that is within it, it seems unto them hideous and horrible.
Such a one is he who is descended of noble blood, for at the first sight he
seems gracious, and pleasing, but looking afterward to the foul corruption
of his manners, and to the default of the gifts of his mind, by which he should
become worthy, neither this grace, nor the pleasure which was found therein,
is any more seen, but in steed thereof baseness, and deep contempt.
Whereof he may be called noble in appearance by the which the common people
(whose eyes are blinded, that they cannot see the truth) do lightly judge,
and hold him as a noble man, which is far different from him, whose mind is
fraught with virtues, because that he holds not an appearance of true
Nobility, but the very essence thereof.

Nennio made no stay, but still followed on his discourse, when as the Lady
Camilla who was desirous to hear an end of their controversy (which it may
be she gathered by the last words uttered by Nennio) turning toward him,
with a pretty grace, according to her wont, and yet with somewhat a hasty
spirit, she said these words unto him.

Thou concludest already Nennio, that Possidonio is he that shall loose the
wager, seeing that his nobility is apparent, and not true.

You are very hasty Madame (quoth Nennio) to desire to hear the sentence
before time require, and before the rest of the company: for in that discourse
which now we do make to approve, or disallow of the two sorts of Nobility,
both the one and the other opinion is fortified, as you may have understood,
with more pregnant reasons, so much there wants that I intend not as yet so
soon to descend to the determining of the question, seeing that we have so
great time left us. Let it not then displease you to stay a little, and to
hearken unto me.

Both to stay and to hear you likewise, shall please me well, answered the
young Lady: but yet it seemed unto me that you intended as much as I said
unto you.

Nennio replied: Madame, I pray you have patience a little, and be attentive
unto my speech, until I have ended it: for I doubt not, but you shall with
the rest be satisfied with my judgment. The young lady being appeased, Nennio
taking the discourse upon him, began to speak in this wise.

Nobility of blood indeed is apparent, but he which is deprived of virtue, is
hardly esteemed to shine amongst men, with the glory of his blood only,
which commonly brings forth ignorance, whereupon follows afterward
contemptible pride. For so soon as the light of man's understanding is occupied
with ignorance, whereby it is let, that it cannot enter into the truth of
things, man cannot consider, that any is more wise, or more learned then
himself, but becomes proud, in such sort that thorough ignorance, he is
made bold, insolent, and rash, easily contemning all manner of virtue, of
science, and of manners, groping in the dark, like unto a blind man.

Of which company it seems, that the world at this day, is but too
plentiful, seeing that every where ye shall find those who foolishlie deem
themselves to be mounted to the highest degree of Nobility, whereas indeed,
they are at the lowest step thereof, in that they have no care to innoble
themselves any further, but wretchedly despise all those, who do learn any
science, and do follow virtue, and they disdain men of noble conditions, and
consequently those who are more worthy then themselves. Of these I inte^d to
speak, who waxing proud of their blood, have the eyes of their understanding
blinded with a gross and thick veil of ignorance, who vvoulde judge the
Lord God, if he were to descend upon earth again.

O foolish sect of mortal men! I cannot truly imagine to what end they lead
so miserable a life, not tasting of the sweetness of virtue, from whence
springs all Nobility. Were it not far better for man that might taste
thereof, and will not, that he were deprived of life? yes surely. If then they
live without any reason, what difference shall we make between them, who
esteem themselves chief amongst other noble men, and the baser sort of men,
nay rather between them and beasts? I can hardly find it. For all do
equally follow the service of the frail flesh, setting aside eternal
things.

Ought these men to wax proud in this sort, who conuersing with wise
courtiers, or with other men deserving estimation, where they discourse of
knowledge, of history, or of any other vvorthie virtue, do become worse then
beasts, and sometimes do resemble images of Marble?

As it happened the other day, that being in company with certain Lords
(with some of you that are here present) where there were men of great
learning, and skill: and amongst them some of those who brag so greatly of
their Nobility, we discoursed a great while both of hautie, and mean
matters: and intending to pass the middle of the day, in iestes and disportes,
we set abroche certain tales, which seemed so much the more pleasing unto us,
as they were far from the truth: but these noble men did maruellously wonder
at them: As the tale of the ape of India, yt played so well at chesse, and this
other, that in the midst of the river Tabor men's words do freese, and
afterward thawe when they come to the fire. Every one that had any quick
capacity, invented some fable or other, but these noble Lords (who feared to
set their foot on ground, and to put off their hatte for marring their hair)
being present there in company (as I told you) were in the like taking,
(understanding of such great wonders) as the people when they heard the holy
friar preach unto them, the fasting, virginity, simplicity and holiness, of
the blessed soul of sir Chapellet: and two of them harkened to our tales with
like attention, as Callandrine did, when he understood the discourse of the
wonderful virtues of Elitropa: I was very desirous at that time, to add unto
the former stories, the miracle which happened to Callandrine himself, when he
was gotten with child by his wife, which made them all to stand amazed.

Many other pleasant tales we told, which being ended, some one of the company
said, yea it is true, I remember it well, and it was about that age of the
world, when as Oxen did speak, which he had no sooner said, but one of these
great Noblemen did ask him, saying: Then oxen spoke in times past. Whereunto
the other being a young man of a sharp wit said, yes sir; but might we
understand their speech, quoth the noble man? yes my good lord, quoth he, and
they oftentimes sung in company with men, and that with so sweet melody, that
their music seemed to surpass the harmony of the religious Nuns of Agnus
Dei of Padoua. I cannot well tell you how great the laughter was, which was
continued so much the more, that in laughing he was so amazed, that for a long
time he held his mouth awry, wondering greatly at those things he had heard.
Truly the ignorance of them is so great and gross, that it depriueth them of
their understanding, that it makes them like unto brute beasts: as by an
example which happened the other day, I will better give you to understand. For
coming to church with certain of my friends to hear mass, one of these
worthy lords (whose name for some respect I will not utter) sat next unto me,
even at the very instant when they lifted up that which they call the body of
Christ, and he hearing that I said Adoramus te Christ, he demanded of me what
these words duramus te Christo signified: but I understanding his demand
answered him fitly to the purpose: afterward he asked me what the
sacrament which the priest lifted up with his two hands, and the chalice did
signify, and what was the cause that when he lifts it up, we use to beat
our breaste and our mouth with our hand: many such foolish questions he asked
me, more fitter for Paganes and Sarasins, then for Christians. In regard of
the which, if before I accounted him for half a man, I now held him no better
then a beast. And if you ask me if he were a child, I answer, that though
his demaundes were childish: yet did he exceed all of us in age.

Do you believe that he is (I say not only a Gentleman but that which is
more) a Christian, although that his head was washed with the holy water of
Baptism? Do you repute him a Gentleman, because he is descended of Gentlemen?
God forbid that he should so much as be accounted a man.

Neither will I yet keep secret from you, that which happened of late
(although in Honor I should not declare it unto you) for one of these
Noblemen intending to cause a gown of Satin to be made for his Wife, he
brought the Tailor into the house where the stuff lay ready upon the table;
and as the Tailour was about to chawlke out the compass of it, the
Gentlemanne (whose name I will not discover or make known) causing his Wife to
stand up, said unto the Taylour? Sirrah, where will thou begin to take
measure of her, before, or behind: the Tailour who was more discreet then
the Nobleman, perceiving his foolish demand, said unto him; my Lord, I must
begin to take measure on the sides: the Lady was ashamed thereat, and holding
down her head, blushed to see his folly.

Now do you think that such men are to be called Noble, although that they
descend of a noble stock, and that their apparel is thick laid on with
lace? I should rather judge them deprived of nobility: you may see into what
manifest ignorance nobility of blood causes a man to fall, whereof afterward
pride is engendered.

Here Nennio paused a while, and afterward proceeded further in this sort.

Yea? this nobility of blood is not only cause of pride, and ignorance, but of
insufferable evil, and inevitable loss. How often has there been cruel war
between the people of Rome? How many Nations has been raised in arms? How
much blood has been shed through the continual dissentions which grew
between the noble men and the common people? Surely very much, for the pride
of noble men against the comminaltie, was grown to that height, and the desire
which they had to increase their wealth, by the occupation of that which
belonged unto other men was so great, that the common people oftentimes did
remain in more safety in waging war abroad, then they did in peace with the
nobility at home, who handled them as their capital enemies, by which actions
they had not only brought the common people of Rome to extreme poverty, but all
Italy: whereof did follow civil war, and that because they did usurp
both the goods and lands of the co^minaltie: whereof did spring the law
Agraria, which did forbid, that no man, whether he were noble, or of the
common sort, should hold more land then a pair of oxen could plowe in five
hundred days: and that the enemies lands should be divided amongst the people.
Which law did so displease the nobility, that they conducted their armies
even to the extreme limits of Italy; and Tiberius Gracchus (succeeding as
Tribune of the people) to favor that law, the Roman liberty was clean
overthrown. For thereof did arise such great hatred, that they came to arms,
and to blood, without measure: whereupon the people reposed themselves upon
Marius, and the nobility upon Scilla; who after most cruel war remained
conqueror.

And the same disdaines, and inward enmity, renewing betvveene the Nobility and
the communaltie, in the time of Caesar and Pompey, the one making himself the
leader of Marius his side, the other taking part with Scilla as their chief
conductor: whereof did follow infinite and cruel slaughters, Caesar in the
end being victorious, who was the first tyrant of Rome.

What shall I say of the bloody butcherie, which follovving after the sudden
death of Asellius (Praetor of Rome) who was set in that authority to reform
the insatiable vsuries which were so increased in the city, by the rich and
mighty, that the people entered into despair, and with great fury did break
down the Images of Scilla, and of Pompey, which were so hateful unto them?
Grievous likewise were the dissentions, which did spring in the famous City
of Athens, between the noblemen and the people, during yt which Cassandra was
established by the nobility, chief of the faction against the comminalty,
Polipercon being their leader: who not without great slaughter did drive
Cassandra into Macedonia, so that the people as conquerors remained at
liberty. Whereupon they did condemn the principal persons of the contrary
faction to death, and did banish others the city, amongst who^, Demetrius
Phalerius was one, and Phocion that great captain of theirs: who (albeit that
his virtues were judged worthy of al humane glory and praise) yet came he to be
so hateful unto the common people, that even until his death they denied him
burial.

How grievous the hatred is which grows by wicked oppressions, made by the
nobility against the comminalty, they only do know who have made trial
thereof. That which happened unto Fabius, being Consul, may make good proof
hereof, for he extremely oppressing the people, had in such sort inflamed
their grievous hatred against him, the Roman army buckling with their
enemies, and holding the victory for certain and undoubted, the soldiers
rather resolved to deprive themselves of the victory, then to give him cause
of triumph. Far worse then this happened to Appius Claudius, (a capital
enemy of the people) for he holding the Consulship in the war against the
Volsques; the soldiers rather gave him triumph of dishonor then of victory,
turning their backs to their enemy. And here I will declare unto you the end
of this Appius Claudius, who was wont to call a most vile prison which was in
Rome, the habitation of the Roman people, but the name was not agreeable to
the effect, for by the appointment of the Tribune of the people, he was shut up
in that prison amongst thieves, and murderers, and there put to death. But why
do I speak only of Appius Claudius, seeing that it has always remained as
a natural and hereditary instinct to that family, with mortal hatred to
pursue the commons, so that the chiefest of that house, were in continual
dissension with the officers that were for the people.

By this you see, that the Nobility of blood, is not only cause of pride and
ignorance, but of most cruel slaughters and mortal hatred.

Nennio gathered this last conclusion of his speech, and afterward he followed
on in this manner.

The nobility of blood (most worthy gentlemen) besides the calamities before
spoken of, does engender a kind of envy, that still gnaweth in the hearts of
noble men: for they seeing some amongst the common sort, deservedly advanced to
honor and dignity, through their singular value and virtue, immediately there
arises in their heart intolerable envy, which does eat and consume them, as
the sun does the snow. Of such vigor was the envy which increased in the
hearts of the Roman nobility, when as they saw Gn. Flauius, whose father was a
Libertine, created Praetor of the people, in regard whereof, they laid away
their golden rings, and their trappings of their horses, which were marks of
nobility, which they were wont to do, when they were sad and sorrovvful. And
on a time the same Gn. Flauius being Praetor, going to visit his colleague who
was sick, he met there many gentlemen of Rome, amongst the which one of them
(in regard he was born of base parentage) moved not himself to do him honor
as Praetor, and their superior, whereof he made no account, but commanded that
the chair wherein the greatest and most worthy officers of Rome were carried
through the city, should be brought unto him, and afterward caused it to be
placed before the gate of the palace, to the end that none of the gentlemen
should issue forth, but they should even in despite see him set in that chair,
into the which none of them did ever ascend. Envy likewise did cruelly afflict
the hearts of the Roman nobility, when as they savv Ventidius Bassus, of
whom Fabricio did speak yesterday, of a base hackney man, to be mounted to the
dignity of a Tribune, to the degree of Praetor, to be created Summus Pontifex,
and finally to be made Consul, in such sort yt they made verses upon the
baseness of his birth.

But do I say only that the noble men are envious over the common people,
when as it does with great vehemence find place even amongst themselves? Envy
was the cause of the horrible wars which did grow between Cornel-Scilla,
Marius, and Cinna, which were most noble men: betvveene Caesar and Pompey, who
were Patriciens of Rome (of whom I did make mention of late) and of many more
worthy Roman Consuls, of who^ the ancient histories are repleat.

Envy, which did proceed from the nobles, did bring Pompey after his Empires
and triumphs, to remain in his house, or in his Grange, he seldom daring to
show himself publicly abroad. Q. Metellus showed the hatred which he did
bear unto Q. Pompeius, when as he savv that after he had brought both of the
countries of Spain into subjection, Pompey succeeded him, which was most odious
unto him. For he licensed the greater part of the soldiers to depart, caused
the victuals to be spoiled, the weapons of the army to be broken, did forbid
that any man should give the Elephants meat: and to conclude, left not any
thing wherewith Pompey might defend himself against the enemies.

So great was the envy which possessed the mind of Cato of Vtica, because that
Caesar had in Egypt defeated the partakers of Pompey, who were fled into Afrike
after his death, that he slew himself in Vtica. Envy likewise moved
Themistocles that valiant captain, to persecute that worthy and just
Aristides, both of them being noble men of Athens. But why do I so enlarge my
discourse, to recount to you so many ancient histories.

Turn your eyes (if you so please) upon every town, and every place of the
world, inhabited by noble men, and those of the common sort; and you shall
find no place exempt, where there is not rooted amongst noble men one with
another, amongst the nobility and the comminaltie, hatred, persecution, envy,
ambition, ignorance, and pride. These are the fruits which nobility of blood
do give to the mind, which likewise does not bring any other grace to the
body, because it neither makes them more fair nor more lively, nor more
strong, nor more witty, nor more advised, nor more apt then other men who are
borne of base blood: for so much as therein nature works equally, and not the
nobility of blood.

Certainly (quoth Master John Francisco) it seems that it brings forth
in all places, not only unsavory fruit, but most venomous and noisome.

A bad root (answered M. Dominico) cannot produce good fruit: now nobility of
blood being brought into the world of a malicious root, what goodness can it
yield? Surely none at all.

M. Io. Fra^cisco said, what is that root so dangerous and venomous, whence
nobility of blood proceeds?

I would tell you (quoth he) but that I should displese Nennio, in interrupting
him.

It shall not displease me, answered Nennio, to hear you, so that you do
promise me, to tell us from whence the root of this Nobility of blood does
proceed, upon which condition it shall please me well to have your opinion, so
that you may boldly go forwards: that being said, M. Dominico turning himself
toward M. John Francisco, began to speak in this manner.

It is an evident matter, that the great Architect of the world, created man,
pure, simple, not spotted with vice, and perfectly good, but it is not to be
believed that he made him either noble or ignoble: Man then himself was the
inuenter and beginner of this Nobility. He being cause thereof, Nobility
began in the first age, to be noted in those (and they were esteemed Noble)
who either by force or fraud, did surmount others.

Cain the first man who was borne in the world, did overcome his brother Abel
and slew him, and he was the first who by deceit and cruelty did usurp the
name of Nobility, in that thorough furious audacitie, he brought other men
into subjection, whereupon he was equally honored and reverenced by them, and
reputed honorable, more then any other. After him did succeed Enoch Irad, and
others, who descending from Cain (that proud murderer and usurper of other
men's goods, and so consequently noble) they were likewise esteemed noble. But
Seth the third brother of Cain (a just and good man, and ye first in the world
who called on the name of God) he was not so much esteemed, and reputed amongst
men, but was adjudged of a soft nature, abject and vile, with all his
posterity: and by this means, nobility took beginning.

By succession of time, it pleased the great governor of heaven, and of earth,
for the wickedness which were generally committed on the earth, corrupted by
man, who made no account of God, to destroy the world, by the opening of
waters, of fountains, of the depth, yea of the water gates of heaven: which
he would not first close up, or stop, before that every living soul was
destroyed except Noe, who was so highly in his favor, with the family of those
that did descend of Seth the ignoble. Of this Noe afterward, amongst others,
did Cham descend, who showed himself vnreuerent, and wicked toward his
father; Nemrod did succeed, of his Line a man very mighty, and puissant, and
full of wickedness. He gave the first beginning to the accursed vice of
Tyrannous dominion, and by Tyranny he ruled the kingdom of Babylon, of Arad,
and others: Whereupon through his might and tyranny, being become king, he was
adjudged most noble. Now great men grew to such temeritie, that they
constrained those, who at that time were rude and gross, not only to repute
them as noble, but to adore them as Gods.

Hereupon their heirs and successors were in a manner esteemed as Demy-Gods.
And so the opinions of the first men (who to make a nobleman, did ground
themselves upon murder and cruelty, and in tyrannising over the people) did
as it were from hand to hand, in such sort extend their dominion, that we may
truly conclude, that Nobility of blood proceeds even from the first age of
the world, from this general root.

The generations of men being increased in the world, and kingdoms possessed,
it was the pleasure of kings and princes, that they who did most of al content
them and fitted their humors best, should be separated from the common people,
in giving them especial privileges, graces, and preheminences, which were not
granted to the vulgar sort: Wherefore, they and their successors were held by
the first people of the world, as men well pleasing God, and because they were
severed from the multitude, and reverenced more then others, they were called
Notable, which is as much as Noble. And for this cause the men of ye world,
being extremely desirous of honor, and of glory; and seeing that such was the
means to become noble, many (to the end they might obtain this glory of
nobility) did seek to become pleasing unto kings, and Princes. Some in
showing themselves cruel murderers of their enemies, others in boldly
ransacking the people, others to gratify their prince, did give them either
their wife or their daughter in pray: some to delight him, did feed him with
dishonest pleasures, others with flattery, with treason, with money, and with
other horrible wickedness, and wretched devises, to win his favor, by the
which they did afterward obtain privileges of Nobility for themselves, and
their posterity. This is the birth M. John Francisco, this is the beginning,
from whence the Nobility of blood did first spring, this is the pathe, this is
the means, by the which they did so easily mount up to the soueraign degree of
Nobility. From hence it grew, from hence noble men had their creation. And if
we would enter into consideration of the behavior, the customs, the manner of
life of Noblemen of this age, surely we should find them wrapped in
vanities, in robberies, in cruelties, in treasons, in wantonness, in gaming,
and many other mischiefs; so hard a thing it is for them to shake off this
their first nature. And so strong was the opinion of men, to place nobility in
cruelty, in robbery, in wrong, that not only they did repute those noble, who
were most fierce, and most faithless, but even amongst unreasonable creatures,
they did hold, and do yet at this day, account those most noble, which are
most cruel, most ravenous, most to be dreaded, most fierce, most horrible,
and most hurtful to mankind. As amongst birds, the Eagle, the Grifon, the
Faulkon: amongst beasts of the earth, the Lion, the Dragon, the Tiger, the
Leopard, the Bear, the Wolf, the wild Boar, the Serpent: amongst the fish
of the Sea, the Whale, the Dolphin, and such like. Ancient men of that age, did
believe, the very same of trees: for the most unfruitful, and those that did
bring least commodity unto man, they did not only esteem them most Noble,
but they did even consecrate them unto the Gods. As the leaued Oak to Jupiter,
the green Laurel to Apollo, the high Cipresse, to Pluto, the blooming Mirhe
to Venus, the embracing Iuie unto Bacchus, and others unto other gods.

We see the ensigns which by antiquity have been attributed unto the gods,
that they do even show their cruelty, their force, and violence, forasmuch
as they give thunder to Jupiter: to Mars a Lance, a Triple forke to Neptune; a
sharp axe unto Bacchus, to Hercules a clubbe, to Saturn a Sieth, which use
has extended it self unto noble men, because they have chosen in their
shields the most cruel and fierce beasts, which can be imagined: for this man
bears in his arms the ravenous Eagle, that other the fierce Lion, some one
the strong Bull, another the Lion, and the Eagle together: some the fearful
Bear, others the Hind, some Castles, others mountains, this man a Tower,
that man a Hill, some Chains, some Fire, all being hurtful instruments unto
man: and this only to show their proud minds, and hawtie thoughts. By this
then we may see, even at this day, not only how perverse and wicked the
beginning of nobility is, but even the life and mind of noble men.

Master Peter Anthony taking the speech upon him said: Yea but I have seen in
many places the arms of noble men, which did neither denote fiercenes nor
cruelty, but were only beautified with roses, violets, flowers, stars,
croissants, and some of them were only distinguished by diverse colors.

True it is (quoth Master Dominico) but those arms ought not to be adjudged
neither so ancient, nor so noble, neither do they set forth such warlike, and
worthy actions as those I spoke of.

You may now see Madam Camilla, whether I had any thing to say, or no, against
the nobility of blood, albeit the other day, you did judge me to take part
with Possidonio, and did threaten me, because I did in favor of nobility of
blood, allege some reasons against Fabricio.

Certainly (quoth she) you are this day worthy of your hire, and in reward
of that which you have spoken, the penalty you did incur the other day shall
be forgiven you.

I shall then (quoth Master Dominico) live assured, and out of all suspicion,
seeing that you do absolve me. Without passing any further, Nennio entering
again into his discourse, proceeded in this manner.

Albeit that rule, and tyranny over other, Master Dominico, gave cause in those
first ages (as it does yet at this day) that the Lord, and the tyrant, be
reverenced of the people, and by that means become noble, yet we ought not to
believe, that nobility is only grown by that means, for I do find that
many, and diverse have been the causes of the beginning thereof.

Men being greatly multiplied upon the earth, and nations divided after that
renewing of the world, their life was licentious, and lawless, and the greater
part of them did increase, inclining to evil, whereof murders, violence, and
robberies did grow on every side, and there was no bridle for the wickedness
of man. Whereupon all men were molested, and troubled, whether they were good,
or bad: For the establishment then of some means to restrain these loose
people, to the end that good men might live assured, and the wicked be
punished according to their deserts, men did join together and did choose for
their Prince, amongst those that were good, the most wise, the most prudent,
the most just, and of most understanding, to whom they did submit themselves,
and gave full power to punish outrageous excess, and wicked deeds, which
might here after happen, and condignlie to recompense good men.

From thence man was first called noble, (that is to say notable in virtue
above others. And the most part of the men of that age, growing rude of wit,
gross of understanding, without judgment, and without any ornament of life,
they who in understanding, in judgment, and in politic virtue, did surpass
others, were separated from the ignorant people, and so consequently made
noble: whose issue (that they might not degenerate but conserve themselves in
the reputation, and nobility of their ancestors) did strive to follow their
steps and virtue. VVhereupon they were enrolled in the register of noblemen,
and from thence by succession it comes, that nobility did descend to their
posterity.

It happened often that towns were oppressed by tirants, assieged by
potentates, and the people extremely oppressed: Wherefore a law was made, that
whosoever could deliver the common wealth from so many oppressions, he and his
successors, should be numbered amongst noblemen: and by this means, many
showing the generositie and value of their courage, became noble in this manner.

You see three mighty causes, from the which nobility did spring, by the which
it does clearly appear, that it descends from the virtues of the mind,
riches likewise has been the cause to make men noble. Moreover many in
becoming tyrants, and violently bringing others into subjection, have made
that the original of their nobility, as by you M. Dominico has been said.
These are the principal beginnings of nobility, from hence noblemen did first
spring: so that the virtues of the mind, tyranny, and riches, were the first
means and way to attain to nobility.

The company was so intentive to hear, and their memory and understanding so
settled upon Nennio, that they had almost lost the remembrance of themselves
when as suddenly the heard they trampling of horses, galloping of coursers,
knocking and opening of gates, wherefore our senses being awaked, our backs
turned, and we looking toward the garden gates, infinitely desiring to know
who they were, we might see two of their servants who brought us certain
word of other company that were newly come, who had expressly taken their
journey thither, to visit us, whereof some of them were straightly joined unto
us by kindred, others by friendship: who had brought their hounds with them,
to pass the rest of the day merrily with us, in hunting. But after they saw us
sitting circlewise round about Nennio, under the shadow of sweet smelling
orange trees, after they had saluted us, not without some wonder, they
demanded what the cause might be, that we sat round about in that fashion,
and what play we were at, but seeing nothing about us fit for any pastime, it
may be (quoth they) you are set to tell tales. Wherefore we having in as few
words as we could, told them the success of the matter in question, and how
that the two days before were spent in the same discourse, with a singular
contentment of the whole company: They understanding the matter we entreated
of, did as it were envy us, and were not a little discontented that they had
not been there at the beginning. So they changing their former determination,
and little caring for hunting, it pleased them better to stay with us, then to
withdraw us from our enterprise begun, and almost ended, they contenting
themselves with the conclusion, and end of the question, to remedy that which
they had lost in hearing the beginning, and midst thereof. Wherefore they
being set and placed amongst us, as conveniently as they might, we turned our
looks, our ears, and our minds toward Nennio, who seeing us set in as good
order as we were before, without any further stay added these words following
unto his former speech.

If the noble men which do live at this day, Master Dominico, do use such
violences, such theftes, such lasciviousness, and other such mischiefs, as
you allege, they are not worthy of life: and as for me, I will judge them
the most vile, infamous and reproachful persons which ever lived on earth,
although they did descend of most noble parents. For the worthiness of their
blood is obscured and clean defaced by their evil conditions, whereby may
be gathered, that the worthiness of blood (though at the first it gives a
good impression, and adds grace to a true and perfect noble man) yet is it
not sufficient to make him perfectly noble. It is then necessary (to grace
the nobility of blood) to adorn his life with worthy and valorous actions,
and to endow himself with qualities fit for a gentleman.

Master John Francisco said, and what are those qualities and conditions,
which do set forth a gentleman, and do make him perfectly noble?

They are (quoth Nennio) these, to follow virtue and to fly vice.

Whereunto Master John Francisco replied, and what are those virtues, and those
vices?

Nennio answered, I esteem it a superfluous matter to declare it unto you, you
knowing them right well, as one in whom all virtue shines, and vice takes no
place.

But to satisfy your mind herein, I say that the qualities and ornaments
which are requisite for the conservation of nobility, to bring a gentleman to
sovereign perfection are many, but I will discourse of those unto you which
seem unto me to be most necessary. A gentleman borne of noble blood ought to
be entirely good, and therewithal he ought in like manner to be wise,
prudent, just and temperate, advised in all his actions, according as the
degree of his nobility does require, he ought to be courageous and gracious,
but especially of a sharp wit, quick judgment, and good understanding: in
his discourse honest, eloquent, and modest, in as much as in any action
whatsoever modesty brings great ornament unto man? Let him carry gravity
with him, which brings credit, and reputation amongst men. Let him yet be
respective, reverent, gentle, and courteous, for by that means he shall
become pleasing, and amiable to all men, and the brightness of his nobility
shall thereby shine and increase much more. Let him seek to please others in
all lawful matters, wherein a general good will may be gotten. Let him do
his endeavor to spread abroad a good reputation of himself, and to imprint a
good opinion of himself in the minds of men. Which he shall easily bring to
pass, if besides those matters I have spoken of, he do take heed to
abstain from those things, which do not only wholly take away, but in any
thing blot or diminish his credit. Let him not be ambitious, proud, arrogant,
high minded, nor discourteous, because that such kind of behauior is wont to
breed lothsomnes, hatred, evil will, and disdain. Let him not be vaineglorious,
in praising himself, nor too much affected in his actions. Let him avoid the
evil speeches of other men. But why do I thus reckon up particularly that
which belongs unto him, seeing that every man ought of himself to know that
which defraudeth him of honor, and renown, and that which does increase it.

Here Nennio paused a while, which Master Peter Anthony perceiving, taking the
speech upon him said thus.

I would wish Nennio, that thou would now show unto us what exercise and
conversation a gentleman having these parts in him, shall use.

Nennio answered, that may easily be gathered from those precepts I have
given: for if he be good, his conversation and exercise likewise shall be
good.

Yea but I could wish, that thou would be pleased, to discourse more
particularly thereof.

Whereunto Nennio said. It is certain that the value and excellency of man,
proceeds either from learning, or arms: For the name, the glory, and the
nobility likewise, of so many worthy men, and so many valiant knights, should
long since have been extinguished, with their body, if their mind had not
been graced either with arms, or learning. To the end then, that he that is
borne of noble blood, may become excellent, and valorous amongst noble men, he
ought wholly to addict himself thereto, and employ his whole mind and study
therein. But I will not particularly seek in every point to handle the
qualities fit for a gentleman nobly borne, for besides that time would not
suffer me to do it, he may supply that which wants in considering those
means I have above rehearsed: only I will not forbear to advertise him of
this, that in all his actions he ought to consider the end, and to govern
himself in them with honest mediocrity, showing his worthiness with discretion,
and good judgment: and that he take good heed unto his conversation, for men
will judge him to be such as his conversation is, and if he keep company with
wicked and bad persons, he shall be reputed as they are. These are the true
qualities, these are the right exercises, which he that desires to become
perfectly noble, ought to observe, although he be not descended of noble
blood.

But me thinks we have staide very long upon these two sorts of nobility.
Wherefore to the end I may withhold you no longer: I will pass on to the other
kind thereof. Nennio having thus spoken he paused a while, as if he would have
refreshed himself, and afterward proceeded in this wise.

We have worthy gentlemen, as I think, sufficiently discoursed of the force
virtue, and worthiness, of the nobility of blood, conjoined with riches: and
likewise of the greatness, and of the effects and power of the nobility of the
mind, and therewithal handled the original of them both. But because there
are many who are adorned with these two sorts of nobility, from thence
proceeds that compounded or mixed nobility, which I did speak of in the
beginning of my discourse, which is nothing else but a certain quality which
proceeds from the worthiness of the blood of our ancestors, graced with good
conditions and lawdable virtues issuing from the mind. He then that is
possessed with this kind of nobility exceeds him far both in nobility and
worthiness, who is only noble by blood, or by virtue, as one in whom both
blood and virtue do jointly concur together. Which I intending to persuade
you, I need not allege any reasons unto you being sufficiently manifest of
it self, that it contains more excellency, and glory, then both the former:
Albeit that thou Fabricio, did endeavor yesterday, with no less pregnant,
then apparent arguments, to show that the contrary is true, to wit, that he is
worthy of more dignity, who only is become noble of himself, by the nobility
of the mind, then he that was renowned both with the mind, and with blood,
which is not so true, as thou did affirm it to be. And as for me I would
answer, that which should be fit unto these thy arguments were it not that
Master Peter Anthony had on the sudden plaide my part therein.

I who harkened unto all these things with no less attention then the rest,
did in the midst of this discourse, call to mind the dream, which was the
occasion that I forsook that kind of life I led before I came to this place.
In the which dream (that I may put you in mind thereof again) it seemed unto
me first that I did see a company of youthful Ladies, in the midst of whom,
as their queen, did march one, richly decked with gold, and precious stones.
After her I saw another band of knights follow, with their ensigns in their
hand, who had with them a Lady apparelled in sanguin color. After these
followed this Lady, whose authority was so full of reverence, who was attended
on with a company no less learned, then wise. To conclude, it seemed unto me
that I saw an other Lady, so much more worthy then the rest, as the end
excels the midst, as by my former discourse I recited unto you. I do now
consider by the qualities of this last queen (whose brightness was such that if
it were possible for me as well to see the same waking, as I did perceive it
sleeping, the light of my eyes would surely be dimmed) that she did
resemble no other thing, then true nobility, which man desiring to obtain, to
become noble, he had need to have the three former means recited by me, to
wit, that he participate of the grace of the first queen, which I did behold,
(which was riches) and that he do descend of the other ancient Lady (which
did denote nobility of race) afterward it behooves him to follow the third
(I mean virtue) which is more necessary then any the other means: and so
having the^, without all doubt he shall easily come unto this last queen
(which represents nobility it self and the perfection thereof.) And of such
necessity is the means of virtue, to attain unto the last degree of true
nobility, that the ancient Romans did easily believe, they could not
obtain honor, (that is to say, nobility) without virtue: which two they
did reverence as goddesses, and builte unto them two temples, to their praise,
which were so conjoined together, that there was no man could enter into the
temple of honor, except he did first pass thorough the temple of virtue: to
show thereby, that no man ought to be honored nor judged noble, if he
obtained not this nobility by the means of virtue. Wherefore I come now to the
conclusion of Nennio, who judged acccording to troth, that how noble so ever a
man be, either by blood, by riches, or by virtue only, that he becomes far
more renowned and noble if conioyntly he enjoy riches, nobility of blood, and
virtue.

Nennio confirming this again, after he perceived I had nothing else to say,
he proceeded in this wise.

Certainly I will not only name him noble, but most noble, neither will I call
it perfect nobility, but most perfect.

I do not think that this compounded nobility can be most perfect (quoth
Master John Francisco) as it were opposing himself unto Nennio his speech, if
it do spring of the two former, one of them (to wit nobility of blood) being
not perfect, according to your own saying, but the other is; how ca^ it be
then, that an imperfect thing, conjoined with that which is perfect, can make
that most perfect, which springs of the conjunction of these two: surely I
can scarslie be persuaded therein.

True it is answered Nennio, I said as much as you affirm, but yet I did not
deny, but that nobility of blood was a kind of nobility exalted by the
vulgar sort. The nobility of blood then, and nobleness of the mind, when
they concur together in one subject, surely both the vulgar sort, and men of
wisdom, will hold such a one to be most noble. And like as we judge him to
be rich, who has great store of gold and silver, notwithstanding we will
hold him to be more wealthy, if thereunto you add jewels and precious stones.
The very like happens unto him, who being borne rich, and of noble blood,
has his mind fraught with good conditions, and virtues, for he ought to be
adjudged most noble and his nobility most perfect.

You see then (worthy gentlemen) that noble men of whom we speak, are of three
sorts, as I have long since given you to understand: howbeit the rest of men
are not wholly to be accounted ignoble, and base. For there are some who though
they be not descended of any noble stock, yet are they very wealthy, and
those amongst their fellow citizens, in the city where they dwell, are had in
great estimation. So it seems unto me that we may well say, that men
(speaking only of the qualities of such as are noble, or ignoble) in what place
soever, ought principally to be divided into three companies. One of the which
is of those, whose estate does contemptibly consist in the most vile and most
abject place, who since they were first borne into the world, have employed all
their labor and industry to the careful government of bruit beasts
deprived of reason, to the tillage of the ground, and to al other corporal
labor necessary for the use of man, whereby their life ought rather to be
termed servile then free. The second and mean condition, is of those that are
not noble, which yet are of degree worthy of estimation and honor, in which
company, are comprehended such, who though they are not of noble blood, yet at
the least they do come of a honorable and honest family, which degree and
estate is of no small account and reckoning amongst men. In times past in the
city of Rome (famous and renowned more then any other place in the world)
there were noble men, and others not noble, under which two estates not only
the rule, and government of the city did consist, but of the whole Empire,
and the simple people had no less authority and power then the patriciens to
make and publish laws, by which they were to be governed. And that is not only
used in foreign cities, but even in ours, the government whereof is equally
in common with the gentlemen, and the people.

The third sort is of noble men, whose condition has been largely entreated
of these two days: and these manner of noble men are likewise divided into
three companies, as I this day with a long discourse showed you.

Nennio, as one desirous to come to the end of his speech, was ready to
proceed farther, when as M. Peter Anthony turning toward him said in this
wise. Let us a little stay here, for if my memory serve me well, besides these
three sorts of nobility, which thou have very well opened unto us, there is
yet another, unless I have not well marked thy words which thou did utter
this day in the beginning of thy discourse, by which (besides that sort of
nobility which thou did call compou^ded) there is that kind, which is called
civil nobility: wherefore it were not amiss that with the former thou did
likewise open this unto us.

Whereunto Nennio, without any further stay answered. I was likewise coming to
the speech thereof, and let not my last words move you at all where I said
that nobility is divided into 3 sorts, in the which this other which seems a
4 is comprehended, for I do place it in the same degree with nobility of blood,
and therefore it is not necessary that I add it unto the former as a fourth
degree of nobility. It is called civil, as coming from thence from whence al
ciuility proceeds, to wit from kings and princes. And it is no other thing
but a certain dignity given by the prince, which many times does not end in the
person of him to whom such honor was granted, but extends it self for ever
unto his posterity, according as it pleases the prince. And the conformity
between civil nobility, and nobility of blood is so great, that if we look
narrowly into the first beginning (in case any certainety thereof may be
known) surely it appears it depends of nobility of blood. For the king
having by his privileges created you and all your descendants noble by civil
nobility, such opinion and reputation remaining of you with those of our city,
who doubts but in succession of time your posterity shall be adjudged noble of
blood, and not of civil nobility? Surely not any man. Which may be gathered
by that which Master Dominico and I said before, speaking of the nobility of
blood.

One of my brethren opposing himself unto Nennio his speech, and as it were
taking the words out of his mouth said.

I believe that it is not yet confessed that a king, or an Emperor can make a
noble man. For an Emperor, a king, or a prince may well make some courtier
rich, or any other, and bestow some office upon him; but I do not think for
all that, that he can make him noble. And it is to no purpose to say, as well
you may; that in as much as he is the Sovereign glory, and far more noble
then any other, that therefore he may make men honorable and noble. For
suppose that thou were most just, most wise, and most prudent: and that I did
desire to be made just, wise, and prudent by thee, could that possibly be
done? Truly all the whole world together, could not bring it to pass, if by
nature my mind were not apt to learn such virtue: for they are gifts of the
mind, and consequently not easy to be transported from one body to another. I
will then say that a prince, albeit he be most noble, yet can he hardly make
another noble.

Of which opinion the Emperor Gismond was, who being earnestly entreated by
one of his loyal and faithful courtiers, borne of base parentage, that he
would vouchsafe to make him noble: he answered, I may make thee free, and rich,
but noble I cannot make thee; as being a gift not under his command, but in
the power of nature.

So soon as my brother had declared his opinion; Nennio purposing to answer
his objection, began to say thus.

Understanding that nobility consists in the virtues of the mind, as you
do, it may easily be yielded unto, that an Emperor or a Prince cannot make
another man noble: but taking it in that sort as I did give it you, it were
surely no small fault to say, that unto him to who^ so large authority is
granted in this world, to establish and abrogate laws at his pleasure, this
far less power should be denied. Does not he create Earls, Marquesses,
Dukes, and such like, who by such dignities are made most noble? Yes surely, He
may then far more easily make one noble: not that he is able to endow him
with justice, with prudence, with wisdom, and other virtues of the mind: but
yet this he may do, that he shall be esteemed and reputed in the rank of
gentlemen, and be numbered amongst them. And this favorite of the Emperor
Gismond did seek nothing else of him when he craved to be made noble, then
that, whereas he was not reckoned amongst noble men, nor such account made of
him amongst men, and that he did not enjoy the like freedoms that noble men
did, that thorough his royal privileges, and favor, he might have power to
take place amongst noble men, which without doubt he might have granted unto
him. But Gismond understood him not in this manner, but in that sort that you
take it, and therefore his request was denied. How many do we see that have
been made knights in all kingdoms both by the Emperor and other princes of
the world? Many surely. Who is there then that does not judge them noble since
the king will have it so? If he grant for ever to him and to his successors
such prerogatives as noble men have, such freedoms and marks of honor as are
fit for them? Who dare account him and his successors for other then noblemen?
Truly no man. Thus you may see how the prince may make an other man noble,
giving his favor and dignity to whom it pleases him. The dignity of a doctor
is equal unto the degree of a knight which he obtains as a reward of his
virtues, and is no less esteemed and reverenced then the other.

The Lady Cassandra seeing that Nennio did somewhat take breath to refresh
himself after his long discourse, raising up her self as she leaned upon one
of her sides, and turning toward him, she said in this wise.

Nennio, if I did well understand your speech you formerly concluded, that men
of skill and learning are of the troop of such as are noble by nobility of the
mind, and now it seems that you would have them be in place equal to
knights, which are by you put in the company of those who are noble by civil
nobility, and civil nobility differs as much from the nobility of the mind
as noblenes of blood does, by your own saying, wherefore I do not see how this
may well pass without control.

Whereunto Nennio presently answered, we have not yet spoken ( Madam) of the
dignity that learned men (...) obtain by their skill, but only showed that
lear^^^ ^^d vertous men are perfectly noble. Whereupon to the end that they
might every where be exalted and reverenced, the princes of the world have
worthily ordained, that this dignity by the which they are called Doctors,
should be added to their perfect nobility, that is to say, that by the means
of the sciences they have learned they may bear the laurel, not that the same
does make them more noble or perfect: and here hence it is, that whosoever has
attained that dignity, if likewise with his science and virtue he be adorned
with good conditions, he shall not only be enobled with the nobility of the
mind, but likewise with civil nobility, which is in the same degree that
nobility of blood is, as I said unto you. Howbeit do not persuade your selves
that every man of skill and learning is made a perfect gentleman only by
virtue of his science, for if he be vicious and wicked, fraught with bad
conditions, although he be one of the learned men in the world, he shall be
held so much the more base and ignoble. Whereupon I conclude, that these
dignities of knights and Doctors, do march in this last troop of civil
nobility.

But whether of these two dignities is most excellent and noble (quoth the
Lady Cassandra) that which the Doctors do purchase by their learning, or
knights by arms?

Madam (quoth Nennio) you propounde a great question, peradventure no less
doubtful then that we now discourse of, and if we have been debating of that
matter three days, as much time at the least would be required (if not more)
for the well opening of this matter.

Is it so doubtful said she, or do you make us believe so, to spare your
labor? If that be the cause, I do in courtesy enjoin you before we depart
from hence to resolve herein.

Whereunto Nennio replied, Madam, It is truly even as I tell you, that not
only that small time that is left us of this evening, but two or three days
would scarce suffice to determine thereof: As for my self, I would willingly
burn all these torches to night, if I might come to a resolution thereof. For
nothing should seem painful unto me that might bring you pleasure, and
contentment, and though it should, yet would I so endure it, as it should
seem but a pastime unto me.

I give you great thanks (quoth she) of your ready mind to do me pleasure,
as indeed to say the troth, you have always showed no less in effects, then
your gracious words have imported.

But yet let me entreat, if so it please the rest of the company (as I doubt
not but it will) that some other day be appointed to entreat thereof: For such
kind of discourses do bring with them such delight, that for mine own part, I
could be contented at all times to hear them.

Nennio said hereunto. If you were as careful to command me Madam, as I am
ready to obey you, I doubt not but in time, you would cease to command me.
Wherefore when opportunity shall serve, I will provide to set my self in a
readiness, to determine this other question which you have propounded, as well
as my ability will give me leave.

It were good (quoth the Lady Laura) to hear and see the end of this question
which you have set a broach Mada^, but it is not greatly material nor does not
much co^cern this our discourse: wherefore my opinion is, that before you make a
final end of the controversy you have in hand, that like as you 3 have showed
only what nobility is amongst you men: so you would take the pains Nennio, to
declare the nobility of women, least we should seem to be smally accounted
of, or altogether forgotten by you. Wherefore let it not displease you, to let
us understand your opinion therein, for I am certain it will add both grace,
and ornament to your former speech.

It cannot do less (answered Nennio) then add both grace and ornament
thereto, for whatsoever man does, should of it self have but a bad grace, if
you women did not with your pleasant company, and entertainment make it more
delightful. But you shall understand ( Madam) that we have not forgotten you
as you suppose, for in this our discourse although we have brought in no
examples of women, yet does it hold for them, and whatsoever has been spoken
of us, may be said of you, albeit not without some little difference, as in few
words you shall hear.

We have in your nobility most (honorable Ladies) to consider the salfesame
three qualities, which we have considered in the nobility of man, to wit,
nobility of blood, of the mind, and compounded nobility. The Original of the
first descends of the same beginning from the which the nobility of man does
proceed; from the father, and not from the mother; as Master Dominico did very
aptly declare unto you the other day in answering the Lady Cassandra, who went
about to prove that in the nobility of man, because it is derived of blood,
the mothers nobility, and not the fathers ought to be considered, and therefore
I need not any longer to stay thereupon, being true, and plain of it self.

The second which is the nobility of the mind, ought likewise in women to be
considered in the virtues of the mind: For they ought to set forth themselves
with gentle conditions, good behavior, gracious humility, simple pureness,
worthy honesty, commendable chastity, gifts fit, and proper for Ladies, which
make them to be esteemed, praised, honored, pleasing, full of virtue, and most
noble. What grater ignobility, or baseness can be attributed unto Ladies borne
of noble blood, then contemned dishonestie, unchaste pudicity, disloyal
thoughts, wandering imaginations leading to ill customs, and finally a life
without any consideration? Not any in my judgment.

So likewise a Lady cannot if she would seek the whole world, find any
better means to become noble, and excellent, then the gifts above mentioned.
And therefore we may well conclude, that a Lady not borne of any noble blood,
but beautified with good conditions, ought far to be preferred before her,
whose birth is noble, and renowned, and by her inordinate behauior becomes
base, and infamous, because her natural nobility is by her loosenes utterly
lost. Likewise women are ennobled by their wisdom, and learning. The
knowledge of the sciences turned to the great glory and commendation of
Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi, of Lelia, and Hortensia, the daughters of
Lelius, and of Q. Hortensius, of Proba Valeria of Rome, and of infinite others.
But weapons are not so fit for women: For albeit that Penthesilia, Artemisia,
Semiramis, Camilla, Cleopatra, Talasqua, the Amazonian Ladies, and many others
did use them valiantly, yet were they mighty Queens, and puissant in arms, of
whose estate and nobility, I intend not to speak. To proceed further, I do
altogether equal composed nobility, both of the man and woman, and therefore I
need not stand any longer thereon.

As concerning civil nobility, it is diverse ways purchased by women, and not
as men do attain thereunto. For as much as any woman though she be not noble
by birth, yet may she become noble, by the inseparable knot of marriage, if she
join her self in matrimony to a noble man: for divine marriage being of so
great virtue, does of two bodies, make one flesh; so that she is made noble by
the nobility of her husband, enlightened with his beams, clothed with his
dignities, enioieth his privileges, receives with him the same preheminences,
and in her are noted all such graces as her husband has: and by the power of
marriage a woman does forsake the name of her own family, and takes the name
of her husbands house; and she does not only take the name, but retains the
other qualities of her husband. So that if a woman be only naturally borne, I
mean that if she be borne illegitimate, she becomes legitimate if she be
joined in marriage with a husband lawfully borne, because as I said she
receives from her husband the same qualities he enioieth.

Seeing it is so (said the Lady Aurelia) that a woman borne of no noble blood,
being joined in marriage with a gentleman, becomes noble, what shall we say to
the contrary hereof, if a gentlewoman do mary with one of the common sort,
shall he be made noble by the nobility of his wife?

No surely (quoth Nennio) but rather the nobility she had before is clean
quenched.

That is great wonder answered the Lady, and I know not how that should come
to pass, that the woman should receive nobility from the man, and not the
husband by his wife. Surely it seems a very strange thing unto me. But like as
in all other things you men are wo^t to keep us silly women as low as you can,
to the end you may prevail in all your enterprises, eue^ so do you in this.

Whereunto he presently answered. You women are always angry, and
mistrustfull, persuading your selves, that in matters of the world, especially
in such as do concern you, we do proceed as we list, having no regard of
you at all, but I say that you are all in general greatly deceived. Do not you
know Mada^, that the husband is the governor, the guide, and the head of his
wife, and not the wife of her husband? Certainly he is; and even as the head is
the most: worthy member of the body, so it is no wonder if the husband as the
head, does ennoble the wife, as his member. Now the husband being the principal
captain, the wife who follows him, is therein to follow the nature of her
principal head: but this happens not co^trarily, for the^ the course of nature
should be clean changed. If the^ the nature of the husband be noble, without
doubt ye woman, albeit she be ignoble by birth, she shall by him be made noble:
if he be abject, and base, although she be descended of noble family, she shall
likewise be ignoble. And to declare this more plainly unto you Mada^, you
cannot deny, but that the children that come of an ignoble father, though the
mother be noble, shall be reputed amongst the common sort: and those that are
begotten of a noble father, albeit the mother be ignoble, yet shall they by the
people be held in the ra^cke of noble men. Likewise we see al men set up the
fathers arms, and not the mothers, in their houses, at burials, in the church,
and else where. And not only this has place in their armories, but the son
takes the name of his fathers house, and not of the mothers, which is manifest
to al men. You may see then, that you have no cause to be offended with us,
when as your self may give judgment in this matter. And you know right well,
that the son is not to follow the honor, nor dignity, the greatness, ye
conditions, nor the nobility of the mother, but of the father

Yet do I not deny but in the birth of man, some beams of nobility do shine
from the mother, which together with the nobility of the father, does make it
more pleasing, and delightful, not that of it self it is sufficient to make a
man noble, as you may have understood.

But because I have this day farther enlarged my discourse, then my meaning was
(so that we cannot longer stay thereon, because that time does more and more
force our departure from hence, and to take our recreation in some other
place,) I will set apart all other reasons and doubts of nobility, which
might happen in our discourse, and come to the determining of the matter in
question.

You have heard (vvorthie gentlemen) these three days, a discourse of
nobility, no less pleasing to the ears, then delightful to the
understanding. Of the which in the two first days discourse, are gathered two
opinions.

The one, that true nobility consists in blood and riches, and not in virtue
only: the other, that it consists in the virtues of the mind, and not in
blood, nor riches. And albeit that they seem clean contrary, the one to the
other, by that which Possidonio, and Fabricio related (who were rather carried
with affection then reason, which is not to be wondered at, seeing that they
being guided with passion of mind, each of them did seek the defense of his
own matter and not any other man's:) notvvithstanding I do not judge them
clean contrary: for if they were, one of them should be nobility, and the
other should not, which I vvoulde not for any thing affirm, it being a
matter resolved, that a great part of men (whereof I have reckoned up a good
portion) do judge, repute, and hold him to be noble, who is engendered of
noble blood, and I likewise (for many reasons before alleged) do take part
with them, although that thou vventest about yesterdaie Fabricio very
subtillie to prove that such a one was not noble: And that thou on the other
side Possidonio, were very earnest to maintain for certain, that virtue did
not make a man excellent, and noble, and that learning was but vain in matter
of nobility, wherein thou were far deceived: proouing moreover that riches
was the sovereign good of man; and Fabricio that they were occasion of all
evil. Certainly both of you did show, that being drawn with the passion
of the mind, each of you did speak your pleasure: for indeed they are not of
themselves neither good, nor evil, but a mean between both, and such, as by
use we do make them. For if we bestow them badlie, they are surely evil;
if we spend them well, I see no cause why they should be evil. They are
not necessary unto true nobility, yet do they bring some aid thereunto, in
as much as there is no virtue in the world, nor any dignity, that can be gotten
without these means, especially in this age, as of late I said unto you.

And he that desires them to the intent he may be a help unto others, is
not to be blamed, so that this his affection do not surpass a certain te^pered
mediocrity.

But leaving all these discourses apart, and intending ( Possidonio, and
Fabricio) to come to the conclusion of our speech. God knows whether it
grieueth me, or not, to give sentence this day, because I am certain* that
the pronouncing thereof cannot be, without the disquieting of the thoughts,
vexing of the heart, and grief of mind unto one of you.

Nevertheless (quoth both of them, with a willing mind) speak freely for
all that: for it may be, we shall depart from hence with more love, and
kindness, when we have heard the determinate end of our disputation, then when
we came hither; like as in wrestling, of necessity one of us must needs take
a fall.

Whereunto Nennio answered: you did both of you promise me so much, before I
did receive the charge of so heavy a burden. But howsoever it fall out, that I
may commit no error, I will this day show my self conformable to the opinion of
the Emperor Gismond, who being reprehended by some of his familiar friends,
because he did advance men of base birth, yet adorned with virtue, and not such
as were borne of noble blood: He answered. As for me, I will exalt such as
ought to be preferred before any other men living, and those from whom true
nobility proceeds: which opinion because it agrees with reason I intend to
follow. Wherefore I say, that like as it is a thing worthy greater
commendation, to build a new palace, to stoare it with moueables, and to
inhabit it, then it is only to dwell therein: so is he worthy of far more
greater glory who of himself becomes noble, then he who is simply borne
noble: and for this cause therefore (and many more, no less pregnant, then
true reasons heretofore alleged,) I judge, and determine this: that the
nobility of the mind, is far more true, and far more perfect, then the
nobility of blood conjoined with riches: and consequently thou Possidonio,
being noble by birth only, and Fabricio by the virtues of his mind, as has a
long time been proved unto you, I say that he is famous with more height and
perfection of nobility, and so likewise worthy of more honor and glory then
thou art. And therefore give the victory of the question in controversy,
together with the prize, unto thee Fabricio, as to the most noble.

Nennio having spoken in this wise, he held his peace, and Fabricio having
yielded him due thanks for his just sentence, with very good words, without
any longer stay, with a good grace he took the ring, and turning toward
Possidonio, he spoke unto him in this manner.

I will never permit but that thou likewise shall be partaker of this sentence
Possidonio, for if it has been favorable unto me, it shall likewise in part
be pleasing unto thee, and therefore the Ring shall remain with thee, which
yet thou shall not wear in remembrance of the Lady Virginia who gave it, but
of me. So he extending his hand gave him the ring, and albeit that oftentimes
he refused it, yet in the end being constrained thereunto by the company,
he took it in sign of brotherly friendship.

Scarce were these last words ended, and the ring given by Fabricio, accepted
of by Possidonio, but all the Ladies with a cheerful countenance did rise
up from their places, to shevve themselves after the fashion of women, that
they were glad and well pleased with Fabricio, all their voices being heard, but
the Lady Camilla was louder then any of the rest, reioicing cspeciallie at his
victory, who being likewise risen, and with a quick and speedy pace,
marching toward the green Olive trees of the garden (for she knew right in
what estimation the leaves thereof were, and how much worthy of commendation he
was, who was deservedly crowned with them) having broken some branches of them
she suddenly made a garland of them interlaced with flowers, such as young
maidens are wont to make: and therewithal (with her own hands) she crowned
Fabricio, using these speeches unto him with a womanly voice. Thou shall we
are it in sign of victory.

We likewise being risen from our places, and being met together in the
galleries, and standing at the windovves which looked toward the garden, from
whence a sweet gale of wind did blow, we still did discourse amongst our
selves of that which had passed, and especially of the determining of the
disputation, and of the victory purchased by Fabricio: All of them equally
commending no less the ready liberality of Fabricio, in bestowing the ring
upon Possidonio, then his good mind in accepting thereof: who albeit he had not
gotten the victory in this controversy, yet in debating the matter with
Fabricio, he alleged no weak reasons thereby to have become conqueror.

Thus we remained there until supper time approached, when as the tables being
covered, under the fresh air, after that we had supped with great contentment
of us all, we passed the rest of the night in sport and pastime, until it was
time to go to bed. And before we departed from thence, we all with one consent
gave order, how we should spend ye next day following* which albeit it was
passed in honest and pleasant exercise, yet did I not determine to enter into
any further discourse thereof. That which has bin spoken this day (being the
last) in reverence of him who governs al things, and who by his heavenly
will has hitherto been my guide, and conductor, shall at this time be
sufficient.

FINIS.

