A PROCLAMATION made by the States of the united Netherlands, touching the
defense of the safeguard of the enemy, the breaking of the quarters with the
enemies soldiers, which undertake to come over the waters and bogs in the
parts of Freesland, Omlanden, Drente, and Westerwoldingerland, or Lordship of
Wedde.

Faithfully translated out of Dutch.

Also a Copy of a Letter, to the honorable Lords, the States, bearing date
the 21 of March, 1599. Touching the victory achieved by the Prince Maurits
before Emmericke.

I W
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near to the Exchange. 1599.

The Copy of a Letter.
To the honorable Lords, the States, dated the 21 of March, 1599. touching
victory achieved by the Prince Maurits before Emmericke.
MOst honorable Lords,
his princely excelencie writes from Arnham the 19 of this present month, to
have visited all the bordring cities, and have fortified the same: To have had
intelligence, that the Cardinal being come toward Gelder, the Admirant was
travailed to meet him. That his princely excellency had found good to surprise
the castle of Zeuenter, with two housen. That the princes soldiers in
Zeuenter not without great difficulty, after three vollies of demy-cannons had
yielded up the fort. That the Count Lodowicke was mean while sent with the
horsemen near Emmerick, as supposing that the garrisons would come out to
assist the aforesaid places, as indeed it happened: for they perceiving some of
our horsemen hold a great pace, as if they had shunned the city. The Earl of
Busquoy, Governor of Emmericke (whose wife amongst others went to Spain
with the Archduke Albertus to fetch the Infanta) with a great troop of the
garrison, came out of the city to pursue our horsemen, which they did a great
way beyond the ambush, insomuch, that being enclosed, the said Earl and two
captains with many officers were taken, and very near a hundredth drowned.
Also thirty soldiers were set at liberty, for the which the Earl has
promised ransom, his person is vvounded, but (according to his excellencies
vvriting) not mortally: declares, that the enemy makes daily great
preparation to come into the field. God be praised for this good beginning.

A Proclamation made by the States of the united Nether-lands, touching the
defense of the safeguard of the enemy, the breaking of the quarters with the
enemies soldiers, who undertake to come over the waters and bogs in the parts
of Freeseland, Omlanden, Drenthe, and Westerwoldingerland, or Lordship of Wedde.
THe general States of the united Nether-lands, to all those which shall see
or hear these present greeting. Whereas we are informed, that the enemy
with a neuer-heard barbarous presumption, deceit and wickedness (as if all
what he list to do were lawful) against all divine, natural, and humane
laws, against all faith, honor, oath, and belief, having most lamentably and
cruelly oppressed, pilled, and infused the feeble, unarmed, and guiltless,
neutrall cities and towns, yea of his best and vvell-vvillingest friends, and
finally are ranged to the borders of these united Provinces, where although he
was by the means of our might, and arms, through the wise and valiant conduct
of his excellency, next God, repulsed, and disapointed of his enterprise, yet
cease not by letters, messages, threats, and othervvaies, to procure diverse
of our countries and inhabitants of these united Provinces, as Freeseland,
Omlanden, Drente, Oldampt, Westervvoldingerland, or Lordship of Wedde, to come
under his contribution, under color of his safeguard, as if he (who in such
faithless, wicked, and cruel sort had behaved himself toward these poor
good neutrals, yea his own friends) would behave himself faithfully and
meekely toward our inhabitants his enemies. And being that we are well
assured, that he intends nothing else, then that having by these his
adulations allured and enticed by little and little our good inhabitants to his
devotion, in the end with all cruelty and tirannie to handle them, and
therefore think it most expedient, by all possible means to prevent it. So it
is, that by deliberation of the counsel of estate of the aforesaid united
lands, we have interdicted and defended expressly by these presents, on pain
of our highest disgrace and displeasure to be held as enemies, and without
any favor to be immediately punished. All towns, villages, places, and
quarters of Freeseland, Omlanden, Drente, Oldampt, and Westervvoldingerland,
together with the Officers, Magistrates, and inhabitants of the same, high and
low, noble and ignoble, as well in general as particular, in any manner
whatsoever not to take or receive of the enemy any safeguard, or under
pretext of the same to yield, accord, or pay the enemy any contribution, great
or small, or to harbor or hide any of the enemies soldiers, or to receive
any message by mouth or letters of the enemy, and much less to hold any
correspondence by mouth or vvritings with him. But to the contrary, ordain,
will, and command expressly all the aforesaid towns, villages, places,
quarters, and inhabitants, without delay to furnish and prepare themselves
upon the needful places to keep good watch, and by all needful and due order,
either by sound of bells, horns, or beacons, to assemble themselves; and
jointly to vvithstand, pursue, and kill, or at least, take prisoners all such
foe-like soldiers, as shall presume, or dare to come over the waters and
bogs into these territories. To which end we likewise declare, ordain, and
command, that henceforward no quarter shall be held with such enemies or
foe-like soldiers: Which keeping of quarter we have for that cause
altogether and wholy deposed and renounced, as by these presents we yet
depose and renounce the same. Upon pain, that whosoever henceforward shall
be found to have kept quarter with the said foe-like soldiers, or to have in
any sort showed them any favor or kindness, that those shall at the instant
be stayed, and immediately without any favor punished as the foe-like
soldiers themselves. And to the end, that every one may acquit himself with
more courage and zeal toward his enemy, we have agreed, and agree by the
presents, for an honor and recompense to every one, be he soldier or no
soldier, the sum of fist y 100 shillings of English money.
guldens for every foe-like souldior, which by any henceforward shall be
killed (upon good proofs) or at leastwise taken prisoner. As also in like
manner we agree and promise the sum of five and twenty Fifty shillings
English money.
guldens, to each and every one whosoever, that shall surely, truly, and
without fraud accuse any one to the contrary of our express commandments,
which shall have received any safeguard, paid any contribution, to have
harbored or hid any of the aforesaid soldiers, to have by mouth or by
vvriting held any correspondence with the enemy, or that having taken any
enemy, shall have without, or upon ransom, let him go. And to the end, that
none may pretend ignorance of these our express ordinances, We desire our
beloved States of Freesla^d, the city of Groningen, and Omlanden, or their
deputies, and all others to whom it does belong and appertain, immediately to
cause proclamation and publication hereof to be made in every and each city,
place, and quarter, where it shall be needful. As also earnestly requesting
the noble Lord, the Earl William Lodowicke of Nassau, governor of Freeseland,
the city of Groningen and Omlanden, etc. will and command expressly all
cheefetaines, knights, captains, commanders, and common soldiers, horse and
foot, by water and land, also all officers, justices, and inhabitants, unto
whom this in any sort may touch or belong, to govern themselves according to
the tenor hereof, and inuiolably to accomplish and keep the contents of the
same, upon pain of the pains above named, for that we have found the same to
be most expedient and necessary for the good of the Land.

Given in S Graven Haeghe, the twentieth of March. 1599. Fr. Duyck. V.
By the commandment of the Lords, the general States of the united
Netherlands.

And by the counsel of estate of the same.

Christopher Huygens.



From the Haghe, the 21 of March, 1599.
Those of Arnhem have since reported, that above 150, which in the skirmish
thinking to save themselves through the water, were drowned, and that amongst
them were some with gold chains. Those of Emmericke repent themselves already
to have without any need taken the Spaniards in, which was against their
promise.

FINIS.

