A True and perfect Relation of the News sent from Amsterdam, the 21. of
February, 1603. Concerning the fight of five Dutche ships in the East Indies,
against the Portugal Fleet, consisting of eight great Gallions, and 22.
Galleyes both great and small: whereof was Admiral, Don Andreas Fartado Mendosa.

Whereunto is added also, the Voyage and Navigations of the said five Dutche
ships and others, in the Isles of East Indies, and of their coming home.

printer's device of Thomas Creed, featuring the personification of Truth
being scourged by a hand from the clouds (McKerrow 299) VIRESSIT VULNERE
VERITAS
T C



Imprinted at London by T.C. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at the
little shop joining to the Exchange. 1603.

A TRVE AND particular relation of the News sent from Amsterdam, the 21. of
February, Anno. 1603. Stilo nouo, concerning the fight of five Dutche ships,
in the East Indies, against the Portugal Fleet, consisting of eight great
Gallions, and 22. Galleyes, both great and small: whereof was Admiral Don
Andreas Fartado Mendosa.
SIr, I have hitherto signified unto you those News (which I had heard of
sundry persons) brought by the Pinnace from the East Indies, but now,
forasmuch as the Master of the Pinnace himself (called Cornelis Schontein)
arrived here yesternight, certifying us of all by word of mouth, therefore I
have written unto you more certainly and particularly thereof. To wit. That the
five ships which sailed and departed hence, in the year 1601. on the 23. day
of April (whereof was Admiral Wollfert Hermans,) arrived in the straight of
Sunda, on Christmas day, in the said year 1601. where they were advertised
and warranted by a small Chinish Ship, that before Bantam lay a Portingall
Armade or Navy, containing eight great Galleons, and 22. Galleyes, great and
small, which had lain before the Town a day or two.

The said Dutche Admiral caused his said five ships to cast Anchor, and took
counsel together for their better resolution in their business. And because
you may know what, and how many ships they had in company to attempt such,
and so great an enterprise, I will rehearse and set down their names, and
burden of the same.

One ship of the burden of 520. tons, called Guelderland. One ship of
the burden of 400. tons, called the Sealand. One ship of the burden of
240. tons, called Vtrecht. One ship of the burden of 120. tons, called
the Watchter. One ship of the burden of 50. tons, called the Dove.
Their resolution was, that they should assail and fight with the said Armade
or Navy with their Ordinance: In handling whereof, our men apter, and far
better practiced then the Portingalles, determining so to chase them from their
siege: whereupon they set sail, and the next day early in the morning, they
began to fight with the Portingales ships, and so with great force and
resolution on both sides, they maintained this manner of fight with their
Ordinance, not only the same whole day, but 6. or 7. days after, until the
first day of January in the year 1602. and took the same time from the said
Portingales, two Galleyes, and three Galleyes which were wonderfully battered
and briused with the shot of our five ships.

After that they themselves had set them on fire, suffering them to drive down
the River upon our ships, meaning thereby to hinder or rather to burn our
ships, but God be praised they effected no hurt at all.

Finally, the Portingalles seeing no good issue like to fall on their side,
left their siege of Bantam, and departed to the I Will of Ambona, on the one side
whereof, they have a Castle, which they strongly fortified, and have cut down
all the Cloves Trees, and pulled them up by the roots, or at the leastwise
destroyed as many of ye trees as they could, committing likewise a most great,
wicked, terrible, and cruel murder upon the poor inhabitants of the same
I Will, the right nature and condition of Tyrants, which are accustomed to use
cruelty upon poor disarmed men and naked creatures, when they dare not
defend, nor revenge themselves upon their enemies. This is the great credit
which this victorious Don Andreas Fartado Mendosa with his Armade or Navy has
gotten.

Truly, it is only the Lord God which gave so great courage and magnanimity
to the hearts of our people, with so small a power of weak men to assail and
overthrow so great and mighty a Fleet in comparison of ours, to which
merciful, loving, and omnipotent God, be all laud, praise and glory. Amen.

Our ships remained nine days at Bantam, providing themselves of all
necessaries, where they were welcome, and with great joy and gladness,
received both great and small, the reason thereof was, because they thought
that the Portingalles were determined to come upon them, or at least to build a
Castle upon an I Will, hard by Bantam, but the Lord has confounded their
desseignes.

Our said ships being appointed to make their voyage to Banda and Terrenata,
for the remainder of the old account, furthered their voyage toward the same
Isles, where they found and saw the cruel actions of the Portingalles, as
committed by the said Portingall Fleet in the I Will of Aubona, and were
departed thence to Intidor, where they also have a Castle. And howbeit the I Will
of Aubona is situate between Terrenata and Banda, yet notwithstanding our
ships separated themselves, the better to furnish their lading, whereof two
directed their course for Banda, and three for Terreneta, where they found our
Factor or Commissioner Francis Verdoes in good health, being in great favor
with the King there, who showed him all courtesy and kindness, but he had not
any great store of Cloves, by reason that the year had been very unseasonable
and unfruitful, and yielded but small increase, as the like had not been seen
in many years before. They laded such small store of cloves as they found
there, and sailed with the three ships from thence toward Banda, to the
other two, where they also found our Factor or Commissioner Adriaen Veen, in
good health, where one of the two ships was already fully laden with
Nutmegges and Maces, also they laded there the ship called Guelderland, (which
had been in Terrenata) and the small Pinnace the Dove, with which three ships
the Admiral Wollfert Hermans is now coming home. The Pinnace (being a little
on the other side of Capo de buona Speranza) straied, having lost the company
of the other two ships, the Guelderland and Zealand, which we also daily do
expect: They sailed with these three ships from Bantam, on the 25. day of
August. The other two ships, Vtrecht and the Wachster, under the command of
the Viceadmirall Hans Bauwell, sailed from Bantam toward Terrenata, to the
end to stay there for the new increase of cloves, meaning therewith to lade
the said ships.

Jacob van Neck, with his two ships, to weete the Amsterdam, and Der Goude, who
we thought should have had their lading of Cloves in Terrenata, and had bin
there long before the other ships, has effected nothing, by reason of the
great scarcity of commodities. And whereas right over against, or hard by the
Castle Tydoro, there lay two Portingalles ships, and one Magelane ship called
the Faith, which they had taken before, the said Van Neck purposed to drive the
said two Portingall ships from thence (I think at the request and instance of
the King of Terrenata,) but his enterprise succeeded not very well, for he lost
8. or 9. of his men, whereof Nicholas Cornelison Master of the ship Ter Goude,
was one, and he himself lost three of his fingers of his right hand: he sailed
from thence toward a place called Patana, situate after Cuda or Malaua, where
he procured half lading for one of his ships with Pepper, and was purposed to
return to Terrenata, or at leastwise send thither the ship Ter Goude, to the
end to lade her with the great increase of the new Cloves.

The Admiral Jacob Van Heemskercke, who likewise sailed out of these Countries
on the 23. of April, 1601. is arrived at Bantam with six ships, and the
seventh (being the Viceadmirall, loosing the company of the other ships about
the line) has been in Achein, and has laden there some small store of Pepper,
wherewith he sailed toward Bantam, where he found his company of these seven
ships, (five being fully laden) departed from Bantam homewardes, the 11. of
May, in the year 1602. which was long before these three came thence, they
must be as we think in the I Will of S. Helena, because they would not willingly
fall upon those coasts in the winter season: the Lord grant them a
prosperous voyage and safe arrival.

The Admiral Jacob Van Heemskerke, is sailed further off with the two other
ships toward the Isles, to the end to seek out Negotiation.

Of the two ships which went toward China, there is no news, but only that
at Bantam was a speech which is not good: to wit, That those of China should
have hanged 15. or 16. of our people which went there a shore, but thereof is
small certainty, we hope that the matter shall not be so badde.

Of the ships of Zealand is no certainty, but only that there was a flying
speech of two ships which were seen in the Isles, and therefore it is
supposed that the two ships of Zealand were there.

Of the English and French ships we have no news at all.

The five ships which sailed and departed from Bantam toward these
countries, on the 11. of May, 1602. are these following. Amsterdam, Horn,
Enckhuysen, the black Lion, the green Lion.

FINIS.

